APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R00010003001 1 -6
FOR OFFICIAL USE (MY

JPRS L/8308

6 March 1979

SEISMIC REGIMALIZATION OF EASTERN SIBERIA
AND ITS GEOLOGICAL AND GEOPHYSICAL FOUNDATIONS

U. S. JOINT MUCATIONS RESEARCH SERVIG

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NILY
NOTE

.ms publications contain intonation priaarily fro- foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
trans-issions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and uterial enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as (Text)
or [excerpt] in the first line of each itea. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate hov the original intonation was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was smsrised or extracted.

Unfuiliar naaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or news preceded by a ques-
tion snark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. ‘riaas within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, vieus or attitudes of the 0.5. Govern-ant.

COMIC" U95 AND "W110” maniac murmur 0?
MATERIALS 3!me nun! mom TIMI 013588me
01' THIS PUBLICATIO!‘ 8! RESTRICTED mmxcw. 08! MY.
knee-tee.
.TPRS L 8308

W warm
I“!

Lune-nun.

sumc WIONAIJJAIIW 0! man: 8182!“ AND ITS
czowcxw. AND WSW“. mums

’- W.

V. P. Solonenho editor

Dene—en Meta ale-n a! ﬂute
Joint Publ icetioee Ieeeereh Service

1000 North Glehe Iced
Arlington, Virginie 22201

  
   
    
  

IMO.“
6 March 1979

   

   

 
   
  
 
   
   
 
 

It 'mdm‘wbom

  
 
 

  

“We“
snsmcustmz IMONIIOVMPII VOﬂ‘OCIICOY sum 1 £00 czomco-czonzmttsme
0810091. Novoeihirek. 1977

“MW.“

    
   
   

  

Thie report conteine e description of the reeulte of my yeere of couple:
eeieeogeologieel. eeinie end geophyeieel etudiee of leetetn Siberie eieed
et eetehliehing e heeie for upping ite eeinic i'egionelieetion. The genetic
cleeeiiicetiou oi the reeiduel eeie-ogenic detomtione of the earth's cruet
end the fueduentele of the peleoeeienogeologicel ”chad—determination oi

the locetion end inteeeity of powerful. eerthquekee—ere preeented. A etudy

ie eede of the problem of predicting eerthquehee. the eeienic resionelizetion
end the peculieritiee of the eeuiieetetion of eerthquekee tinder pemtroet
conditions.

 
   
     
   
       
  
 

  

mils-um em

 
   
    

USSR Penetroet
hetero Siherie Tectonic ntreee
Seie-olou Yoreceeting
Berthquekee

 
 

.W'm

  
 
  

 
   
  

‘ww
l’or official Use Only. Limited

ﬁsher of Copiee Available Free JPRS.

it he" Gena-e In"
UNCLASSIFIED

  
   
 
 

“MM ecu-each.» maximum
M nut-”o
”tam
FOR OFFICIAL 08! out!

JPRS 1/8308
6 March 1979

SEISMIC REGIMLIZATIM 0F EASIER?! SIBERIA
MD ITS GEOLOGICN. AND GEOPHYSICAL FOIMDATIONS

Novosibitek 8318!!!me DAYONImVANm vos'rocmlor 813181 I
860 GBOIoOGO-GBONIZIGIBSKM osuow in Russian 1977 signed to
press 21 Nov 77 pp 1-30‘

[Book edited by V.P. Solonenko, Izdetel'etvo 'Neuke', 1,000 copies]

FORMED. V. P. 801ml»

m1.

CHAPTER II.

CHAPTER III.

CWR IV.
am V.

CW VI.

CHAPTER VII.

Courears PAGE

Sets-ogeutc Detonation: and the Peleoeeteuogeologtcel
Hethod. V. P. Solouenb 3

Structural-Tectonic Restouellzetion of the Precenozoic
Dene-en. V. V. ltbhyev, R. A. Kumhtn. S. D. nul’lno.
V. s. Klara-amnion, H. c. Den'yeoovlch. V. H. Zhuktn.

s. V. Leuochkin, A. D. Abelekov 60
mic Chetecteriettce of the Leteet Structure.

Yu. A. um: 76
Necheniu of Latest Tectonic Hovaente, Yo. A. tutu 83

”echo“. of Center. and Tectonic Streu Held.
L. A. Maurine. N. V. Solomko 92

Energy classiﬁcation of htthqueku. A. V. Solonenko.
V. H. Kocbethov 106

Sttong Earthquakes. V. P. Solomko. V. s. thmekikh.
It. A. Karo-bin. S. D. nul'lno. V. K. Zhilkin.

H. c. De-‘yenovtch. S. V. untochldn. A. D. Abelekov 123

-.- [I-ossn-Bpoool

FOR 0??!an 082 GIL!
m ONICIAI. USE ONLY

comm: (Continued)

am VIII.

m IX.

CIIAPTBRX.

CHAPTER XI.

CHAPTER XII.

CONCLUS I“!

BIBLIOGRAPRY

Analysis of thc Bpiccatnl Field. Seismic Activity.
5. I. Oolwctckiy

Sciuic Vulnerability of the Bayhl Region.
8. I. Goiuctclriy

Earthquake Vorecuting

Pcculicriticc of the Develop-cat of the Seismic Proccu
by the Observation. of Veal: Barthqucku (in Oonncction
vith the Search for Diagnostic Attributes of Strong
Earthquaku). N. S. Borovik

Inns-Range Porccuting of the Sciuic Activity
According to tho Geophysicn onto, H. R. Nova-010v.
Yu. A. Zorin

Ncotcctonicc cod Scimtcctonicc. V. P. Soloncako.
s. o. Khil'ko. H. c. Du'ycnovich. I. A. Kumhin.
S. V. Lunchkin, V. V. litany", V. 8. Khrouwokikh

Scinic Regimliution

Description of Scinic Regions. 5. D. Khil'lro,
V. P. Soloncnko, a. A. Kurushin. V. V. Nilwhycv,
V. s. IOwr-ovckikh. H. G. Da'ycuovich. S. V.
Latochkin

Pcculicriticc of thc Sciatic Hanifutatim Under
Pcmfroct Conditions. V. P. Soloncnko

.. 5 -
m OFFICIAL USE OIL!

Page

221

253
269
269
280

290

370

383
390
395
$21900 MIONALIZATIOII 0P “STERN SIBBRIA

AND ITS GEOLOGICAL AND GBOPIIYSICAI
FOUNDATIONS

SBYSHICHESKOYE MYONIROVANIYB VOSTOCHNOY

sun! I 200 GBOUJGO-GFDPIZICIIESKIYE
03m
m OFFICIAL USE OIL!

Annotation

[Text] A description is presented of the reallts of nany
years of couples asis-ouological, sei-ic and geophysical
studies of lantern Siberia aimed at establishing a basis
for upping its seinic regionnlisation. The genetic
classification of the residual sei-ogenic detornstions of
the earth's crust and the “Mountain of the paleoseisuo-
geological nethod—deteninstion of the location end
intensity of poveriul earthquakes—ere presented. A study
is node of the problens of predicting earthquakes. the
seismic regionalisstion and the peculiarities of the
saniteatation of earthquakes under pen-frost conditions.

The book is designed for a broad class of specialists in
the fields of seisaogeology, seismlogy, regional geo-
physics and engineering geology. It can be used by the
design organisations.

Foreword

The latest official up of the seisnic regionalization of Eastern Siberis
was eonpiled in 1962 (V. Solonenko, 1963s, 1968a). Since that tine broad
data have been nccuulnted which directly or indirectly reveal the condi-
tions of the unitestation of earthquakes in Eastern Siberia. prilarily in
its nost eeiauically active part - the Beykal rift zone.

In order to establish the geological and geophysical basis for the seismic
regionalization. a colprehensive analysis use made of the seissological,
geophysical and geological date. It deaonstrnted that it is far fro-
alveys possible free this group of dsta to obtain a unique or close to
actual estinste of the possible seismicity level of one region or another.
Therefore in the proposed paper certain contradictions are unavoidable.

the elisination of which will been-e possible after sunny years of instru-
ment observstions.

1

P0! ORIGIN. US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moreover. the seismic events in 1962-1975 confirm the seismic regionaliza-
tion map of 1962: it did not require theoretical reworking. that is, the
effectiveness of the procedural principles on which it was based -- the
joint analysis of the seiaaological. geophysical. aeiamogcologicsl and
paleoaeiamogeological data -- was confirmed.

This paper was written. on the one hand. as a section of the All-Union

theme of Seismic Regionalization of the Territory of the USSR. and. on the
other hand. as a development of the theme of Seismic Regionalizotion on
Palcoaeiamogeological Principles.l which was entrusted to the Institute

of the Earth's Crust by the State Cosnittee of the Council of Ministers of
the USSR on Science and Engineering in 1958. Accordingly. a special section
has been set aside in the monograph on the paleoseiamogeological method
which must not be considered as an index of the basic role of this method

in seismic regionalization. The objective solution of this complex problem
is possible only on the basis of complex seismological. seismogeological

and geophysical data not contradicting. but reinforcingedch other. There-
fore. not only aeiamogeologiate. but also co-workera from all of the
laboratories of the geophysics division of the Institute of the Earth's
Crust participated in this work: the Seismogeology Division (V. P. Solonenko.
S. D. Khil'ko. V. S. Khromovakikh. R- A. Kuruahin. V. V. Nixolayev.

H. G. Dag'yenovich. S. V. Lastochkin). Regional Seismicity (S. I. Colonetskiy),
Seismology (V. H. Kochetkov. L. A. Hisharins, A. V. Solonenko), Geophysical
Studies of the Earth's Crust (Yu. A. Zorin. H. R.Novoaelova). and Engineer-
ing Seismology (0. V. Pavlov. N. Ye. Zarubin). In addition to the mentioned
reponsible executive agents. the work was also participated in by

A. D. Abslakov. h. S. lorovik. K. I. Bukina. L. G. Yevstigneyeve.

V. N. Zhilkin. L. R. Leont'yeva. G. Ye. hyl'nikova. P. A. Novomeysksya.

A. D. Sarapulov. R. u. Semenov. N. V. Solonenko. V. I. Tatsrnikovs,

A. A. Tret'yak. Ye. V. Fomina and A. V. Chipisuhov. The earthquake magni-
tudes were redetermined by V. V. Kislovaksys (the Institute of Earth

Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences).

 

1
Not only the seismic regionalization of Eastern Siberia on paleoseismo-

geological principles was investigated. but also a test of the applicability
of the paleoseismogeological method under the conditions of compression of
the earth's crust. The latter was done in the example of the Greater
Caucasus where special studies were made in 1970-1972. the results of

which are especially discussed.

2

roe OFFICIAL US! 0111.!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER I. 581890631116 DEPORHATIONS AND THE PALEOSEISMGBOLOGICAL METHOD
"Experience is the ultisste basis for knowing‘the world."

-- Roger Bacon. OPUS HANS

In practice. the lost important result of seisnological research is

determination of the location and possible recurrence rate of powerful.
especially saxieal earthquakes.

The prediction of the exact ties of an earthquake. its location and intensity
could have inestisable significance. however. the solution of this problem.
if it will ever in general be solved. is a setter of the indefinite future.
An earthquake is s geological process. Based on the physics of earthquakes
and on changes in the earth's crust in connection with then. that is. on

the consequences of seissogenic processes and not the cause of then. with-
out taking into account the nonco-ensurable nature of the geological and
human the scales. it is possible easily to accept what one likes as reality.

The causes of strong earthquakes are in general unknown to us. It is
possible to sake assumptions about then which are sore or less substantiated
by the geophysical data. The systes on which alsost all seisnological
developeents are based. the fracture-earthquake. is decapitated. In reality.
this is only the consequence of deep processes which cause a stressed state
in large volumes of the earth's crust or the tops of the upper nsntle in

the earth's crust. and discharge of the basic part (but not all) of the
secuulated excess energy takes place by love-ant of the blocks of the
earth's crust. pri-srily. the lost contrasted. along the fractures but

far from exclusively along than.

Seimstlttsticelinstrment data widely used in recent years for various
types of forecasts (the recurrence rate of earthquakes. seismic activity.
snxim earthquakes. seissic vulnerability. and so on). having unquestioned
high significance. frequently do not provide reliable solutions to the
problems. Being objective fro. the beginning. when processing these data.

in order to agree with nacroseislsic statistics. they sust be subjected to
subjective sorting (for emple. sftershoclrs.groups. earthquake swarms.

and so on lust be excluded fro- the processing). Here. especially for the

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
POI OPPICIAL USE ONLY

highly activo regiona.it is usually ispossible to say where the aftershocks
and and the normal seismicrsgimeu is established.

Auto what the normal seismic regisen ia-this is also unknown. It would be
possible to use this term to refer to the combination of frequency and

energy class of the earthquakes which would make it possible to obtain the
true recurrence rate of powerful earthquakes and their ssximum intensity on
the recurrence rate graphs. However. for this purpose it is necessary to have
reliableseismostatiatical data available for the intracontinental seismic
regions for no less than 500 to 600 years and even for the most seismically
active zone. no less than 150 to 600 years.

Horeovor. the complex paleoseismogeological and scismological studies in the
aaykal rift tone demonstrated that the "normal" seismicresilen is only an
episode in the activity of the specific aeismogenic structure. It usually
develops with respect to the following stages: 1) (nonsandatory) -- fore-
shocks: 2) powerful earthquakes; 3) active seismic activity (aftershocka);

A) decrease in seismic activity; 5) prolonged (a minimus of ten and sometimes
hundreds of years) calm; 6) degeneration of seissic activity; 7) short-term
(years. perhaps the first decades) eels; 8) first or second stages again.

The “normal" seismic regimen is possible only for part of the tine interval

of the sixth stagr and the duration of the stages (with the exception of

the second. short-term one) is known only approximately or it is unknown.
Therefore the determination of the recurrence rate of powerful earthquakes.
to say nothing of their upper level. by the short-term instrument obs rva-
tions for specific seisnogenic morphostructures is a hopeless matter. If
for the regions with significant ssismostatistical data for hundredsofyears.
and even for one or two thousand years the seismological methods can give

a more or less correct estimate of the practically important aeissicity
parameters, in order to estimate the seismic danger of previously uninhabited
and seisaically (instrumentwise) uninvestigated territories. the seissogeo-
logical methods are the most important. The history of their development

is prolonged. but we cannot dwell on it here.

The nest papular at the present tine are the historical-structural method
(Gorshkov. 1969; Belousov. 1956; Petrushevskiy. 1955. 1957). seismotectonic
(Gubin. 1950. 1953. 1960). tectonophysical (Gzovskiy, 1957. 1963;

Gtovskiy. et al.. 1958. 1960. 1973) and paleoseismogeological methods
(Florcnsov. 1960b; Solonenko. V.. 1959. 1962b. 1963s. b. 1966. 1970a. b.
1973 o-c). Each of these areas is a component part of a united seismo-
geological or. more correctly geological and geophysical method of

1In a significant seisnogenic zone with respect to area (tens to hundreds
of thousands of square kilometers) with sany more or less like seismogenic
morphostructures. naturally averaging of the seissicregimen takes place.
and by the recurrence rate graphs it is possible to obtain a more or less
correct idea of the recurrence rate of the powerful earthquakes (but not
their upper level) for the zone as a whole.

6

FOR OFFICIAL US! Oil?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

predicting the location. intensity and recurrence rate of powerful earth-
quakes. and each has its advantages and disadvantages.

The historical-structural method which is fruitful when analyzing the global
or regional laws of seismic sanifestationa during seismic regionalisation
frequently encounters insurmountable difficulties. which one of the founders
of the sethod notes: "During the experiments clearly defined restrictions
were discovered with respect to the possibilities of the historical-
structural analysis for purposes of seismic regionalization. It was estab-
lished that it is possible to find relations between seismicity end geologi-
cal peculiarities only in a generalired form" (Petrushevskiy, 1976. p 69).

The possibilities of the saismotectonic method are essentially limited to
seissostetistica. In order to forecast the force of the shocks. "extrapola-
tion of the recorded seismicity from one zone to another. neighboring.
like zone" is required (Gubin. 1971. p ll). For proper estimation of the
maximum possible earthquake intensity. reliable eeismoatatisticaldateareueeded
for hundreds of years. The latest studies (partially using the pseloseismo-
geological method) indicate that for a specific seismically dangerous area.
even in the most seismicelly active zones. a long time is needed to accumu-
1te the energy for earthquakes of the highest force for these zones, llO
years at Huroto. 160 years at Xanto (Sassa. 1951: Sigimura. 1968), 150 years
in the Anatolian fault zone (Ambraeeys. 1970), 600 years in Alaska
(Hansen. et al.. 1966; Plefker, 1968). The information for these time
intervals (they must. of oeurse. be taken as average. provisional data)
can be obtained only for individual ancient cultural centers, and at that
with significant gaps during the social-political upheavals. pandemics and
other disasters, and they do not encompass the uninhabited or sparsely
inhabited areas, they are meager for the territories where religious
prejudices prevented the accumulation of data (for example. in the lands
of the Buddhist-Machayanalamaiets).

The tectonophysicel method initially was of interest in that it offered the
possibility of predicting earthquakes or narrowly local zones. One of the
most important elements of the method -- analysis of the quantitative
expression of vertical movements of the earth's crust - originally gaVe
hopeful results (Gzovskiy. et al.. 1958), but on being used in adjacent
regions. serious difficulties occurred (Gzovskiy. et al.. 1960), and when
trying to use it to explain the regional seismicity, the author.

(Gzovskiy. 1963) case into contradiction with the actual data (Florensov.

discovered sore and sore clearly that the signs of vertical and horizontal
movesents of the earth's crust in the active areas frequently change
(Solonenko, V.. 1973a). In Japan at Cape Huroto, the history of sudden
uplifts during disastrous earthquakes and systesatic subsidences between
them has been traced for several centuries. In Alaska, between disastrous

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

earthquakes subsidence of up to 11 mm per year takes place. and the
instantaneous heaving during the earthquake not only has compensated for
this subsidence. but in the last 2500 years it has resulted in uplift at
an average rate on the order of 10 am/year (Plafker. 1968' .

It is no accident that in their latest paper. H. V. Csovshiy and

A. A. Nikonov (1973) give a very careful estimate-of the possibilities of
determining the seismicity levels with respect to the rates and the gradients
of the rates of movement -- the most important function of the tectono-
physical method: "The relations of seismicity to tectonic movements

reflect only the most general statistical laws. and they cannot be sufficient
for engineering estimates of seismic danger" (p 54). The effort to improve
the method as a result of using data on mountain shocks and the isolation of
four types of movements with respect to seismicity does not change the
situation. The stresses causing mountain and seismic shocks cannot have a
functional relation. - their nature is entirely different. The types of
movements. judging by the direction of the effective external active forces
indicated on the diagrams in the quoted article (Gsovskiy. Nikonov.

1973. p 5) are a few of the possible ones in nature. and the fourth type

of movement -- teleseismic - which can cause an earthquake tens and

hundreds of kilometers from the point of seismogenic movement appears quite
doubtful. 1

Detailed seismogeological studies in areas where it is possible to compile

a history of the development of the latest geological processes. for example.
active tectonics in the latest volcanism (ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966) or

to discover the migration of modern tectonic processes (SBISMOTBCTONICS....
1968) indicate that the geodynamic fields changed significantly already in
the Holocene. At the same time. estimation of the possible seismic activity
without discovering the evolution of the seismotectonic processes with
respect to rates and gradients of movements generalizing the results of

the movements of the earth's crust at-lesst for the Neogene-Quaternary time
(29 million to 30 million years) appears to be less and less substantiated.

After the first enthusiasm for the method. on discovery of its obvious
deficiencies. many specialists in the field of seismic regionalization

have been inclined to reject it decisively as was previously done. however.
under defined conditions the method can be used successfully to compare the
expected level of seismic activity and probable recurrence rate of earth-
quakes in individual areas of the seismogeologically united zone with

stable seismotectonic conditions. sometimes for a qualitative comparison

of the potential activity of the adjacent areas and for the solution of
other problems. however, it does not follow to expect more from this

 

1The authors even present specific examples of three such earthquakes
in the Garmshaya and the Northern Tyan'-shad zones. which can only arouse
suspicion: in such highly seismic zones. using the data over a large

area. if desired,it is possible to establish the moat improbable "correla-
tions."

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OWICMI. USI OIL?

nethod than it can give. it ia no accident that it. R. Allen. P. 5. band.
C. r. Richter and n. H. ilordquiat. undertal'ing 29 yeara of aeiaaogeoloaical
and aelanological etudiea in Southern California. arrived at analogoua
concluaiona to oura with reapect to ectivting the ratea of vertical
diaplaceiaenta for iaolation of the active atructurea: "it ia ouch alapler
and more reallatic to up the faulta thewaelvea than to try to calculate
the ratea of Vertical diaplacenent in the geological paat or to oaaaure
auch diaplaceaenta at the preaent tile" (Allen. et al.. 1965).

The concluaiona of thin repreaentative group of Anerican aeiaaologiata

and neianogeologiata with reapect to aatinatiog the aignii‘icance of the
fracture tectonica ior deternining the aeialic potential alao agree with
aura: "Th:- nat inportnnt problea remains the problu of whether the

zone» of high relief detonation ... can he predicted only on the baaia oi’
the locationa of the 'active' fault tone... The nnawer renaina emphatically
'yea': in .ict. all of the baaic aeianic activity waa concentrated in the
arms or abundant fornation of faults in the Quaternary period."

'l'lma. all of the enuerated aeianogeological lethoda failed to offer the
possibility of eatinating aeia-ic danger of previoualy uninveatigated
rI-nlonn. determination of the upper level of the aeialaic activity of
anecifir aeiaaogenlc atructurea. obtaining data on the location of the
epicentrel when and the recurrence rate oi“ the neat powerful earthquahea
and nlao evolution of the aeiuiclty of the apecific areaa. Thia gap in
eaeentially tilled by the paleooeianogeo‘ogical nethod.

The paleoneiaaoneological aethod waa the logical reault of studying the
netltertnnica. aeianogeology and geological conaequencea of atrong (lorce 9
and higher. mod) earthquahea. The neceaaity for earl-sting the aeiaaic
danger o! uninhabited or aparaely populated territoriea o! llaatern Siberia

{or which there were no aeiesoatativ: data aervad aa the direct reaaon for
ita developnent.

The paleoaeimgeologicnl method waa in practice uaed for the firat tine
when correcting the aochup oi the acieaic regionalization up of Eaatern
Siberia coopiled in I956 at the lnatitute of larth l’hynica. The oochup oi‘
the up did not differ theoretically iron the aeiaolc reeionaliution lap
oi 19674951 coapiled under the direction of c. P. Corahltov. (or, aa before,
it wan coopiled on the baaia o! the aelaiaoatatiatical uthod.

need on the data with reapect to the lateat tectonica. aeiaaicity and

the iirtt intonation on paleoaeimdialocationa. ii. A. l'lorenaov.

A. A. Treahov and V. P. Solonenho propoaed an increaae in the extent of the
zone of high-force earthquahea by 900 ha to the northeast and by 1-00 lo

to the west (l’lorensov. et .11.. l960). and a new nap wan co-piled in 1960
(Solonenho. V.. et al.. l960b). The tubaequent aeia-ic eventa and broad
aperiul aeiamlogical. aeiaaogeological and geophyaical atudiea confirmed
the obiectiveneaa oi the paleoaeiauogeological nethod.

7

'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI ONICMI. USE ONLY

The conviction of the seisnologists and aeismogeologists that the residual
deformation of the earth's crust during .grouﬂ earthquakes is a rare
phenomenon and fauleacan reach the surface only in the case of shallow-
focus earthquakes (thenonly in exceptional cases) prevented recognition
of the palenseismngeoiouical method for a lonx time. However. the examina-
tion of powerful earthquakes (with N;6.S) in various highly seismically
active areas of the world reliably refuted this idea. Horeover. when
studying the pleistuceisnal zones of almost all very powerful and disastrous
earthquakes with crustal centers. paleoseismodislocations were invariably
discovered (see. for example. Solonenko. V.. l962b. 1963a. b. 1970a. b:
ACTIVE TECTOﬂlCS.... I966: szlSHOTZCTONlcs .... 1963: Kapp. et al.. 196‘:
Kuchay. l97l. l972; Trifonov. l97l; Allen. et al.. 1965: Asbraseys. et al.,
I969; Buchstein. et al.. 1967; Qureshi. Sadig. 1967: Plafker. et al.. 1971:
Nstsmy-Ywm. et al.. l97l; Tchalenho. et al.. 1975a. b: and so on).

The residual deformations of the earth's crust and the ground are varied.
They are deeply interrelated. but for convenience of discussing the material
and using them with respect to the degree of relation to the seismic process.
we subdivided the residual deformations into seisaotectonic. gravitational-
seismotectonic and seismogravitational (Solonenko. 1972a. b; Solonenho. 0..
1972. h. l973a-c).

The seismotectonic deformations are connected with the tectonic movements

of the earth's crust. with respect to their genetic attributes. encompassed
urea. morphostructural morphosculptural expressions. they are divided into
regional. zonal and local.

zegional Seismogenic Deformations of the Earth's Crust

"hen examining the pleistoceism zones of disastrous earthquakes in the
nongnlian-Baykal seismic belt. we arrived at the conclusion that the move-
ments of the earth's crust are not limited to the zones next to the faults.
but they encompass significant areas. at least. the sections of appearance
of nftershocks (Solonenho. V.. et al.. 1969). and in the case of crustal
centers. they can encompass areas up to tens of thousands and sometimes
hundreds of thousands of square kilometers. The area S of the residual
deformations of the earth‘s crust is approximately defined the following
formuln as a function of the magnitude of the earthquake (H)

_._.-...

IThe maximum value is for broad marine seismic areas encompassing the sea

floor and the island archipelagos. and the minimum value. for narrow
continenni seismic belts of activated platforms.

'0! DIVICIAL US! OIL?
mm ilVI’lCIN. US! ONLY

At the present tine our concept of regional deforlstion of the earth's
crust during powerful earthquakes has received instruaent confirlstion.

with respect to the sareographic and geodetic (repeated leveling snd
triangulstion) data. for the Chilean earthquakes of [960 (the principal
shock on 22 Hay. n-a.a) vertical (to 3-5.7 saters) and horizontal sovesents

of the earth's crust were established over an area of 130.000 ksz (Plafker,
Savage. I970).

During the Alaskan earthquake of 27 "arch [966 (F-8.6). the uplifts. sub-
sidences and buckling of large blocks of the earth's crust took place over
an area of about 300.000 knz - (900-960)X(250-600 ks) -- fro- the Aleutian
Trench to the internal parts of the Alaskan ridge. The vertical displace-
sents on the dry land were fros -h to +10 seters. and at the bottos of the

sea to +l5 seters or note: the horizontal displace-cots were up to 3 asters
(Hansen. et al.. l966: Plafker. l969).

It is possible that the sovesents of the earth‘s crust encospass still
greater areas. A reason for this assusption can be the events which occurred
in Trnnahavkal after the Nays earthquake. The first reports that water
had appeared in the Toreya dry lacustrsl basins after the "uyskiy [huyal
earthquake were received in the fall of 1957 (before theGobi-Altay earth-
quake). He did not attach any significance to this report. for the lakes
.re 750 to 800 ks iron the epicenter. however. the lakes quickly spread.
and in 10 years the area reached 617.5 ksz (the depth of lake Zun-Toreyn
reached .9 seters. lsrun-Toreya. to 3.7 seters). The area of I hunter

of lakes increased not only in the southern part of Transbaykai. but also

in Sorthern Mongolia where a lake l6 ks long appeared. and the area of the
Khukh-ﬁur Lake increased by several tines; the Uldzya River changed its
direction and flowed iron Mongolia to the USSR to the Toreya basins.

The sojority of researchers of theyearawlong cosplex expedition studying
this extraordinary event arrived at the conclusion that it is connected with
the powerful earthquakes of l9S7-l958 which occurred in Nongolie and the
bsyknl rift zone with ”-6, 7.9. 8.6. 6.9. 7 and 6.5. 'The love-ents (of

Lhe earth's crust) are of a differentiated nature. for the scale of the

subsidences in the various lacustrine basins is different"(narinov. 1973.
p 79).

The enornous epicentral distances. of course. provide a basis for doubting
the relation of such significant love-eats of the earth's crust. but

exact coincidence of then in tine with the powerful earthquakes in Mongolia
and the lnyksl rift zone and the absence of any relation to the other
causes at least force the question to be stated oi the possibility of
movements of the earth's crust over areas on the order of a nillion square
kilooeters. ls th.s not the cause of the solidarity of the powerful earth-
quakes in the Nongolian-baykal seissic belt (Solonenko. V.. 1976)?

9

F0! OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Mongolian People‘s Republic Baykal Rift Zone
Kyahhta 6 February 1957. “-6 e "0". 27/June 1957. ”-7.9 .
Gobi-Altay 6 December l957. ”-8.6 * Nyukzha 5 January 1950. "-6.5 *
Bayou-Tsagnnskoye 7 April 1958. ”-7 » Olekma lb September l958. "06.5
Hogodskoye 5 January l967, "-7-3/6 e Tas-Yuryahhskoye lb January 1957 "-7.

Until recently the regional seismogenic movements of the earth's crust uere
not used to discover the disastrous aspects of the past. although efforts
were made to explain the formation of terraces by them (Plafker. l968:
Sigimura. l966). however. when expanding the areas encompassed by the

seismogeological studies there is such a possibilit°. especially in the
marine seismic regions.

Inasmuch as the movements of the earth's crust frequently have different
amplitude and sign next to each other. they can introduce significant
disturbances into the nor-a1 evolutionary series of the relief. The simul-
tnneous variation in relief of different types (transgressive and regressive)

can indicate its seisnogenic nature. ihe problem still lies in exact dating
of these changes.

The zonal seismogenic deformations are movesents of seisaogenic morpho-
structures. A classical exaaple of then is the displacement of the mountain
nroup of Carbon-logdo of Gobi Altay during the earthquake of 6 December 1957
(force 12. ”-8.6. center depth 16:8. aost probable 22-25 km). for the first
tine in the history of seismogeology the possibility was offered to otudy
the novement during the course of the earthquake of u large morphostructure
in a "closed system" at the same time as the seismogenic structures of
other strong earthquakes either are highly complex or they do not have

clear boundaries. and most frequently they are covered with sea and ocean
water.

During the Gobi-Altay earthquake the mountain massif (27SX30 In. absolute
altitude to 6.000 meters). similarly to an icebreaker during lateral
compression of the ice. rose and shifted to the east (the apparent ampli-
tudes of the displacements to 10 and 8.8 aeters: true. as a result of
bending deiornations. appreciably lower). Many explicit and latent
elements of the nechanism of deformation of the morphostructure and seismo-
genie morphosculptures o! the Gobi Altay appeared (Solonenho. V.. 1959.
l960a. 1963a; Solonenko. V.. et al.. 1968: Solonenho. 1965. 1966).

A systen of faults and other residual deformations of the earth's crust
was forned with on overall length of about 350 km. All of the known and
some of the previously unknown types of dislocations in the structural

geology occurred: gravitaiional-seismotectonic wedge with vertical dis-

plncenent oaplitude to 328 meters. strippingofthe mountain peaks. and so
on.

ID

’0! OFPICIAL US! OﬂLY
F0! OYPICIAL US! ONLY

During the Huya earthquake on 27 June 1957 (force [0-11. "-7.9. the
depth of center 22 km) two seisnogenic morphoatructurea were shifted: the
Naaarakit eahryonic depression of the laykal type and the fault-block uplift
of the Udokan and southern Nuya ridges. During the earthquake. the
basin dropped 5 to 6 meters and was shifted to the southwest: the
Udokan ridge shifted in the opposite direction 1 to 1.2 asters. and it
uplifted l to 1.5 meters. end it was simultaneously overthrust on the
depression with respect to the strike-slip thrust fault. The visible nove-
ment along the faults occurred over an extent of 160 km (90 km to the east
and 50 km to the west of the instrumentally determined epicenter). end the
extent of the Nuys system of the fault itself connected with the earth-
quake of 27 June 1957. 35 km. Oscillations of the wells of the old faults
occurred over the remaining extent (Solonenko. V.. 1965).

The principal residual deformations for this type of seismogenic aorpho-
structures are concentrated within the limits of the most active part of
the morphostructural system -- in the embryonic depression. and in the less
actively developed fault-block uplifts they are concentrated in the zone of

faults deliaiting them on the depression side (Solonenko. V.. 1965:
ACTIVE TECTOHICS .... 1966).

The presented examples of the zonal dislocations indicate that when discover-
ing their paleoseisaogenic analogs it is necessary first of all for the
geologist to dismiss the canonical postulates of the handbooks on structural
analysis. for example. a reliable sign of different age of the structures
is considered to be geodynamic difference in type. In reality. during
disastrous earthquakes any type of structure occurs simultaneously. The
incoapatible deformations are mutually transitional: for example. an over-

thrust can quickly turn into a powerful tensile fracture or fault (Solonenko.
V. . 1960a. 1963b) .

In the case of paleoseisaogeological reconstructions of powerful zonal
seisnotectonic phenomena. one of the knotty problems is stratification of
the zonal deformations which will permit determination of the recurrence
rate of strong earthquakes. the "viability“ of the seismogenic structure.
and no on. For this purpone. geological. historical-archaelogical.
dendrochronological and radiocarbon methods can be used.

The local seianotectonic deformations are direct signs of the residual
tectonic deformations of the earth's crust in he epicentrsl zones of power-
ful earthquakes. Vith respect to scale. type and structure of residual
deformations which are visible on the earth's surface. the formation of
which is not explainable by any other causes except seisnic. the location

and intensity of the earthquake. preseismostatistical for the given region.
is determined.

The first standard scale for deteraining the intensity of an earthquake
was established empirically (Solonenko. V.. 1962a) when studying the power-
ful and disastrous earthquakes in the ﬂongolian Bayksl seismic belt.

11

ran OIPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Then. with the accumulation of data on modern aeiamodialocationa. it became
possible to give a general formula for the approximate calculation of the

magnitude of the earthquake with respect to the extent (I) of the seismo-
dislocation aone:

1; I.“ - (1.01 1 0.02) n - 6.18.1

The scale of the seiamodialocationa depends not only on the magnitude and
the intensity of the earthquakes. but also on their depth and aechanism of
the center. the geological structure of the epicentral zone and other causes.

as a result of vhich it can be different for earthquakes uith identical
energy characteristic.

The extent of the zones of aeismogenic faults formed during modern earth-
quakes fluctuates from hundreds of meters (for ”aﬂ.5). The maximum estab-
lished nmplitude of vertical displacement is from tens of centimeters to

10 to 12 meters. sometimes more. and horizontal displacement. to 8.85 meters.

when studying the paleoseiamodialocationa. it has been necessary more than
once to deal vith significantly greater amplitudes of the displacements by
comparison with the ones observed in the epicentral zones of modern earth-
quakes uhich can be explained differently. but two cases are most probable.

l. Poleosaiamodislocation has occurred not in the case of one but in the
case of several earthquakes that have taken place close together in time.
and it expreaaea the total effect of the displacements.

2. After the main shock. the movement of the walls of the fault continues
during the aftershock activity and. possibly. even after that.

if the aeismodialocation is represented by s seismotectonic acarp. uhen
determining the amplitude of the displacement it is necessary to be
especially careful. for on steep slopes the covering deposits or part of
the old fault breaks avay. and the elastic material can be absorbed by

the fracture at the foot of the scarp. The illusion is created of a very
large vertical displace-ant.

 

1The correction factor of 10.02 is of geological significance. It is equal
to n for faults. strike-slip faults. strike-slip thrustfaulta (vith a
subordinate shift cooponent). maximal for shifts. minimal for uethrov faults
and ncismic zones vith special types of stresses (for near vertical position
of the major axis of the stress ellipsoid). If the shift component for the
valls of the fault is simultaneously directed in opposite directions. then
this prevents the develop-eat of faults. and their magnitude turns out to be
less than usual (within the limits of up to twice as much with equal magni-
tude of the differently directed shifts).

12

FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONE!
70R OPPICIAL 083 ONLY

in the case of block type seissogenic structures the area of the displaced
sections hounded by the faults reaches 250 to 300 knz.

Part of the seisnologists and geologists still adhere to the old idea that
the seisnogenic fracture deforsations encoapsss only the cover beds.
although this alao contradicts numerous known facts. There is actually
little data on the behavior of seisaodisloestions at depth. but the exist-
ing observations note indicate an increase in displace-ant anplitudes with
depth and not danping of the displacesents. Thus, in the case of the ldzu
earthquake on 25(26) Novenher 1930 ("-7) a shift with an anplitude of 0.7
setera took place on the surface. and at a depth of 160 aetera (in a tunnel
onthelbkyo-Kohde railroad) it hecase a strike-slip fault with horizontal
displace-ant of 2.6 aeters and vertical displacement of 0.6 meters.

in the case of the Gobi-Altay earthquake where it was possible to study the
shift surfaces in the cover rock and bed rock. the snplitude of the residual
deformations apparent in the surface horizons turned out to be half or

less than half the true displace-eat asplitude at depth.

The fact of prolonged existence on the steep slopes of the rock of the
seissotectonic trenches is an index of deep occurrence of the joints

Only in the case of constant absorption of the elastic asterial by the
joints is it possible for than to rennin in the relief (see below).

We have already given attention (Solonenko. V.. 1973a) to the hypertrophy

of seisuodislocations at the bottols and on the underwater slopes of large
bodies of water. For exaaple. during the Kanto earthquake on I Septeaher 1923.
the relative displacements of the hottoa of the Bay of Sagini reached

-600 and +250 aetets. and within the lisits of up to 1170 aeters (to -720

and *b50)l although in the case of like earthquakes (H-8.3) on the dry land.
the scale of the displace-eat does not exceed the first tens of asters and
only rare structures of special type - gravitational-seissotectonic wedges

(see below) - approach the suhsqual deforsationa with respect to their sapli-
tud.s

in the case of the force 10 Central leykal earthquake on 29(30) August 1959.
the bottoa of laykal dropped 10 to 15 seters (Solonenko. 9.. Treskov. 1960).
and on the dry land in the Isyksl region the sane earthquakes (H-d 3/6)
caused displacenents along the faults of a total of 0.8 to 1.2 seters.

The efforts to classify these phenosena as the result of consolidation of
sedisents are connected with lack of knowledge of the physical-aechanicel

 

1after the earthquake. four special ships worked in the hay. They took
lore than 06.000 neasureaents.

13

F0! OIPICIAL US! OILY
FOR OFFICIAL 033 ONE?

properties of the bottom soil which at a depth of several meters. as a rule.
has negligible excess pnrnsitv. to any nothing of the fact that the rise

of the sea or ocean floor in general does not leave room for such explanations
(we are not talking about bottom deformations connected with underwater

slides -- they basically are ‘11 recognized on the sonar recordings).

This phenomenon remains a nystery.

Gravitational-Seisnotectonic Deformations

The sovenent of the walls of the faults during earthquakes frequently
creates favorable conditions for movesent of the rock masses under the
effect of gravity.

The gravitational-aeisaotectonic structures are directly connected with the
active seismogenic faults. but sometimes also with large fractures experiencing
pensive opening during the oscillatory movements of the earth's crust during
strong earthquakes. The length of the known gravitational-seismotectonic
structures reaches 7 km. for example. the structure of Shartlay (Solonenko.

V.. l962h; SEISNOTECTORICS.... 1968. pp 25-28). an area up to 10 to 20

square kl IONICI’U .

Atthistimeisndslipsorcreepfaultagravitational-seismotectonic wedges and
in one case. supposedly. rupturing of a ridge slope are known. '

landsiip faults are formed on the steep slopes of mountains with high
energy of relief, especially where the faults cut off the spurs of the
mountains. The development of these faults is pronoted by a combination

of two systems of fractures: steep rear faults and more gently sloping
weakened zones inclined in the direction of the foot of the slope. Under
such conditions. even with small shoves of the blocks along the faults.

the rear fracture at the crust expands sharply. and as a result of the
steepness of the slope. the impression of significant vertical displacement
is created. for example, in the landslip fault of the,Snezhnaya seiamogenic
structure, the apparent amplitude of the vertical displacement is 25 to

90 meters. the width of the fault trenchesis 35 to 90 meters. although the
true mean-maximal amplitudes with respect to the fault are 7 meters. In
soae landslip faults there are 5 to 6 series of separation joints.-and
the lendslip fault has a step structure (Khrosovskikh. 1965. pp 15-66:
Solonenkn. v.. 1966s. pp 170-l80' sztmtmtcs.... 1°68. p 67-50).

The apparent amplitude of a landslip fault joint downslope decreases. the
iandslip fault scarp wedges out toward the thslueg and has the appearance
of whiskers facing frontcn.ﬂowever. sometimes the fault intersects the
thelweg and the next cape. at the same time exhibiting its tectonic and

not gravitational nature (Pig 1). Sometimes a true fault. emerging on the
slope of a canyon, becomes a landslip fault.

lb

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Seisnogrsvitational or Gravitational-Seismic
Tectonic Structure of Akiba (the Greater Caucasus),
photograph by V. H. Zhilkin

During force 11 and 12 earthquakes, sometimes grnvitationsl-seisnotectonic
structures of a special type are formed. the possibility for practical
instantaneous formation of which has not been suspected previously by
anyone. These include the grsvitational-seismotectonic wedges and ruptures
of the mountain slopes.

The gravitntionsl-seisnotectonic wedge combining the elements of tectonic
subsidence and collnrnc‘was established for the first tine in the central
part of the pleistoceisn region of the Gobi-Altay earthquake. Its location
was predetermined by a cluster of ancient. new and latest faults. including
three enormous fractures connected with recent earthquakes. In addition.
it is located at the intersection of two large local faults and is

associated with the north corner of the seisnogenic central grsben of
lkbe-Bogdo (10x15 km) formed on 4 December 1957.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Duringtdm earthquake against a background of general uplift. the corner

of the 1°1Nt8 opened up and part of the mountain (3256 meters high)
made up of granitized shales 1.1X3 km in area collapsed into the earth.
The amplitude of the vertical displacement of the tectonic wedge from

east to west increased from 156 to 328 meters (the precision of the
determination was from +0. 2 to +2 meters). As a result of the wedging of
force on the free aide of the Bitut canyon, along the front of the wedge
extrusion of wedges of the rocky ground took place upward to 60 naters
and the formation of an ovarthrust-aeismocupola frontal system took place
(Solonenko. V.. 1963b; Solonenko, 1965).

This phenomenon was so extraordinary that some of the geologists are still
trying to question the possibility of the formation of such a seismotectonic
displacement of a small block of the earth's crust and ctumider that an
extraordinary cave-in took place here. A detailed aeroviaual. ground and
phatogrammetric study (by the aerial photographs of the section made before
and after the earthquake) leaves no room for such doubt. The disappearance
of approximately half of the volume of the displaced block into the earth.
the formation of milonites along the frontal displacer, and before them.

the ascending seismocupola structures and overthrusts. the make-up of the
body of the structure from monolithic rather than crumpled rock. reliably
indicate the seismotectonic nature of the Bitut structure. It is sufficient
(or a nonprejudiced geologist to look at a photograph of the Bitut structure
(Fig 2) made during its prolonged formation (3 January 1958) during the
aftershocks to understand that it is not possible to talk about an ordinary
cave-in here.

The rectilinear faults on the frontal part of the structure are well visible
in the photograph. Later (in September 1958) during field.documentation
we established that these faults dip steeply into the depths of the slope
and are covered with tectonic clay -- milonites formed during the earth-
quake (Solonenko. V., 1963b; Solonenko. 1965). It is clear that the forma-
tion and preservation of such faults in the cave-in is unconditionally
included. The mechanism of the seismogenic collapses indicates this:
during powerful earthquakes seismoexcitation of the crumbling mass takes
place. and it goes at enormous speed to distances that are unobtsinable

in gravitational collapses (Solonenko, V.. 1970a. 1972a.'b; Plafker, et
al.. [97l: Solonenko. 1972a. b), which did not happen in Bitut although

the conditions were more than favorable for this.

For subsidence of the tectonic wedge at Bitut. total opening of the frac-
tures bounding it to 12 m was necessarn and the apparent (residual)
width of the fractures in the epicentre! zone reached 19 meters.

later this type of structure was established in the Baykal seismic belt
(Solonenko, V. l962h: ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966; SEISHOTECTONICS.... 1968).
The largest of thri, Lac Shartlay structure on the west shore of Baykal

is more than twice the size of the litut structure (length 7 km, width
more than 2 km. vertical displacement amplitude to 880 meters).

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The asphitheater of the structure turned toward the lake cut into the
Bnyknl ridge beyond the Leno-Baykal divide line.

Recently the gravitationaleseisaetectonic wedges have begun to be found
not only in the Nongolian-Baykal seisnic belt but also in other nighly
seislic zones. For exaaple. V. S. Pedorenko (1968) considers damning of
Lake Sarychlek on the Chatkal'skiy ridge of western Tyan'-shan by a
seisaogravitational structure of the Bitut type probable. It is possible
that this type of structure occurred on the Yenisey 6 lu- abeve the
den of the Sayano-Shuahenskaya hydroelectric poverplant. It encompassed
both shores and the channel of the river where its local increase in depth
by 90 meters has been established.

Genetically the mountain graben-troughing (subsidence) of the aountain COP!
Gstﬂbliﬂhﬁd in the Stsnovoy Highland . (Solonenko. V.. 1962b; ACTIVE
TECTONICS.... 1966). in the Baykal region [Pribaykal'ya] (Khroaovskikh.
1965), and in the Caucasus (Khroaovskikh. et al., 1972; Solonenko. V..
Khrosovskikh. 1976 - structures of Labskaldi Tseri) are close to the
gravitntional-seisnotectonic wedges.

A characteristic and obviously rare type of gravitational-seisnotectonic
structure is the punctures of the lountain slopes. Such a phone-anon has
still been established only at one point -- north slope of the Southern
Huya ridge. here the ridge in the for. of an arc in advanced into the
Huya rift basin. A slip-strike thrust fault runs along the slope of
the ridge. forcing the chord of this are at the sane tile as the frontal
fault (strike-slip?) bounds it along the border of the ridge and the basin.

The prinsry cause of the for-scion of the structure is assumed to be a
strike-slip thrust fault occurring during an earthquake with an intensity
on the order of force 11 (H‘>7-3/6). here the seismic acceleration exceeded
.Ee gravitational acceleration which caused powerful stresses in the

rock massif advanced into the basin. and a sharp shift fractured it along
the surface inclined in the direction of the basin at an angle of 5’.

The saxisua horizontal shift reached 170 asters. A rupture 6 kn long.
triangular in cross section. with an average width at the base of 800 meters
and height along the rear fracture of about 200 meters occurred on the
slope. The volume of the rupture was on the order of 550 nillion .3.

The structure. although documented (ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966), under the
conditions of its forsation leaves such unexplained. and it awaits
additional. sore detailed studies.

With respect to the mechanism of foruation. the structure obviously is
similar to the shearing of the tops of the Iountains - the transitional
fora fro- tha gravitational-seisnotectonic to seisaogravitational defer-a-
tions.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Bltut Structure. Photo by N. A. Florenaov.

a -- rear fault, amplitude to 32812 meters. dip to the south
at an angle of 70°; 22 -- faults on the frontal section of the
structure dip to the north at an angle of 70°.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

1n the case of disastrous earthquakes. especially in mountainous areas.
often the greater part of the human victims and material losses are
connected not with the earthquakes themselves. but with accompanying
seismogravitational phenomena.

The earthquake on 16 December 1960 in China (force 12. H-8.6) killed
200.000 people: of them. no less than 180.000 died inlandslips. avalanches
and earth flows.

During the earthquake of 10 July 1969 in the mountains of Tyan'-Shan'
(force 10. N-7.5) the rayon center of Khait was destroyed in a landslip.
and the seismogenic avalanches and flows were carried up to 20 km along
the valleys. destroying dozens of populated places and fertile lands.

In May 1960 (H to 8.6-8.6) the Chilean earthquake caused thousands of
slides and 1andslips.in part accompanied by the formation of new lakes.

the destruction of old ones. mud flows causing great material losses and
lossofummw lives (Taeieff. 1960: Davison. Karzubovic. 1963; Heischet. 1963;
and so on).

During the Alaskan earthquake of 27 "arch 1966 (H-B.6) the greatest aaterial

losses were caused by slides. and loss of lives by tsunami (Hansen. et al..
1966).

The Peruvian earthquake of 31 Hay 1970 (M-7.7) came sadly to be known as

the Guaskaran landslip The city of Jungey and part of the city of Ranrahirka
with 18.000 people - 402 of the victims and destruction of the earthquake

-- were buried under the landslip mass (Ta: P880.... 1970). The greater
part of the remaining dead were victims of landslips slides and mudflows
(Plafker. et al.. 1971).

The epicenters of the Chilean. Alaskan and Peruvian earthquakes were in the
Pacific Ocean. and on the dry lend their intensity decreased significantly.
Therefore the victims and losses connected with the seismic effect itself
amount to a total of 10 to 202 of the total losses. and with seismogravita-
tionsl phenomena. 80 to 902.

However. not only are such unique seismic disasters dangerous for man and
nature. The "routine" powerful earthquakes encompassing areas many times
smaller are repeated hundreds of times more frequently. and their total
destructive effect is comparable. Thus, for example, durisg the earthquake
in New Guinea in 1933 (ff-6.1). landslip encompassed 260 km . The vegetation
and soil layer were completely strippedover an area of 60 kmz. According

to the calculations (Pain. Bowler. 1973), 60 to 702 of the total denudation
layer was removed by earthquakes.

The presented examples (a few of the known examples) indicate how vitally
important seismogeologicsl engineering forecasting is. Even if the time
of the earthquake were known. the settlements would still be destroyed.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the majority of the people would die, but not in their homes. but in
areas where they would look for safety. Therefore engineering seismogeology
which is only in its infancy must join the ranks of the most important
branches of knowledge called on to come to the defense of the society and
its achievements against earthquakes.

The seismogravitational phenomena themselves are varied and mutually over-
lapping: settling and subsidence ofmbuntsinsides,lsndslipl.slides-IVllanCheﬂ
snd'dirt flows, mudflows, and so on. They are known appreciably more widely
than the first two types of seismogenic phenomena, for, first of all. they
are encountered appreciably more frequently, they have been observed many
times during earthquakes, and, secondly. for understanding of them the
specialists do not need to cross the barrier of traditional concepts of

the slowness of tectonic processes.

In order to discover the seismogenic nature of the gravitational phenomena,
the identification of their age, discovery of the relation to seismogenic
and seismocausative structures and the analysis of the dynamics of movement
of the mountain masses have primary significance.

The simultaneouaness of various shifts of the soil masses over a large area

is a reliable sign of their seismogrsvitational nature. They are usually
distinguishable from the gravitational phenomena connected with disastrous
rains. The seismogravitational movements of mountain masses during
disastrous earthquakes take place over an enormous area (of thousands of kmz):
Muya, 1957, 150,000 kmz; Chile, 1960. more than 130; Alaska, 1965.300;
Peru. 1970, 65, and so on. Simultaneously, hundreds and thousands of land-
slipa slides,earth and mud flows are formed and so on. No other natural
phenomenon can cause such enormous movements of soil with respect to size,
amount and affected area.

In mountainous regions of modern orogeny, a significant part of the seismo-
gravitational morphosculptures have to the present time been taken as exogenic
(lsndslip glacial, proluvial and others). This is connected primarily with
the fact that the seismoexcited-landslipsand avalanches and dirt flows follow
an unusually long procedure, and the seismogrsvitational facies of the
sediments are similar to glacial or ploluvial.

The scismogravitational, destructive and sccumlative and the corresponding
exogenic morphosculptures in individual cases are often difficult to
distinguish or indistinguishable. However, they have their own qualitative,
quantitative and temporal peculiarities.

The tectonic stresses of the rocks, seismic accelerations and vibrations
during earthquakes exciting the soil masses basically change the conditions
of their stability and movement. Accordingly, the seismogravitational
morphosculptures can develop under geomorphological conditions such that
the formation of the analogous exogenic morphosculptures is impossible.

The formation of them itself in the exogenic version requires a different,
usually prolonged time -- up to many thousands of years -- and in the

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rot OFFICIAL "I! ONLY

seisnogravitational version. in practice, it takes place instantaneously.
The first in the region are of different age (stratified nornhosculptural
generations). and the second are sisultaneous (discontinuous or isposed
aorphoaculptural generations).

The change in stability of the sountein nasses during earthquakes can arise
from different causes. The nost ilportant of then are the following:
i) seissic accelerations and s decrease in strength of the rock: 2) a change

in slope angle of the unstable planes: 1) thiaotropic liquefaction of the
soil.

Seisnic accelerations are the cause of slides.lsndsllpl and other gravita-
tional phenosena on the slopes. No one denies this. but there is no
satisfactory sathesatical sodel of the relation between the earthquake and
the gravitational shift. and the possibility of solving this probles is
still not foreseen. The calculations of the probable nature of the stresses
occurring during the earthquakes on the slopes are being oerforsed in a
region considered to he linear (accordina to the calculeted notes. the
seisnogrens. accelogrens. velocigrans). but the instruments record the
oscillatory and not the true love-eats of the earth's crust. Uhen
examining disastrous earthquakes (”>7-l/6. lq’force 10) wherever it is
possihle reliably to deternine (by the slip surfaces. special types of
seianogenic folded structures. and so on). it is discovered that the true
novenent is reciprocal (in the vertical and horizontal directions) with
rotation. The rotational deforling sovenents are clearly sanifeeted also
in the force 8 zone of force 9 earthquakes (Solonenho. V.. Treskov. 1960).
In addition. for the calculations it is necessary to consider the depth of
occurrence of the parting surface. the weight of the active and passive
parts of the lendelide-elip.the stress-rupture strength and the strength
at the time of the treaor. the angle and direction of approach of the
seissic waves. the duration of the tresor. the degree of flooding. the
degree of stress relief or. on the contrary. the degree of preparation

for shifting of the sountain leases by the preceding earthquakes and a
nuaher of other indexes. the Iajority of which are i-possible to establish
in practice. especially for a regional evaluation oflendslideslu: 400803:

a general idea of the effect of seissic accelerations can be obtained

if we consider the seissic effect on the slope as an increase in its slope
angle (+u'):

l I 40‘
HI. 12-5 0.5-”
GHk-Gﬂu 25-30 Ls-z
avg-sh; 80-h” 3-0
91,-6.1. «ll-7|) O-lz
'hrﬂ an-am 12-15
1-1"; ID-GD 25-3!

OOOQOO~

s.

where l is the force according to the nsx.aa scale: h is the aagnitude
for depths of centers of 1235 has n is the seissic acceleration (cs/sec)
for the periods of 0.1 to 0.5 sec (Hedvedev. et al.. l965).

2!

'0! OVYICIAL US! OIL?
'0! OP'lClAL USE ONLY

The preaented figurea indicate that under the correaponding conditiona
force 4 and S earthquakea can already be the cauae of alidea and landalipa.
Such caaea are known. however. by long-tern obaervationa of alidea in

the Crimea it haa been eatabliahed that during the period of exceaa
noiature. the force 6 earthquakea even cauae alide activation at the aane
tine an with a nhortage o! noiature they have not shifted it a force 8
earthquake (Glukhov. I959).

lt ia each note reliable to deter-inc the dangeroualandalip :onea by the
aeianmatatiatical and paleoaeianoseolouical (Solonenko. 9.. 1962b. l9IJe-c)
data than by the nathenatical Iodela. The coubinatlon of theae two aethoda
oifera the poaaibility oi noting theboundarioa of arena enconpaaaed by
the aeianoaravitational phenoeena during earthquakea of deiined lntenaity.
determination of their typea. dynaeica. and ao on characteriatic for the
given aeianic region with ita apeciiic peculiaritiea of engineering aeiaeo-
geology and naniteatationa oi earthquakea.

The aeianogravitational phenouena have Iaaa develop-ent in the iaoaeialal
arena of force 7-8 and higher. The total area in which it in poaaible to
expect th- developnent oi aeianogravitational phenonena coincidea
appruxnnately with the total area of poaaible deiorlationa of the earth'a
cruat and in to a known degree aubordinate to the above-preaented relation
(nee p 8).

Variation of the Slope Angle of Unatable Planea

Fran the theory of alidea and landalipa it in known that on netaatable
alupea changea of the alope anglea by tone of aeconda are sufficient to
disturb the equilibriun oi the alope and for potential or atabilized alidea
and landalipa to be put in notion.

One or the neat reliable caaea of auch alidea wee deacribed by Hadley
(l96h). During the hebgen earthquake (H-7-3/6). depth of center 10-12 kn.
force 10; aee hurphy. hrazee. l966) a long atabilized alide waa cut by

a fault with an oeplitude of 0.9 oetera. Aa a reault. the alope of the
alide aurfoce increaaed by 23 ainutea. Thia diaturbed the eatabliahed
equilibriun and S deya after the earthquake the alide waa act in notion.

A change in alope angle ia poaaible for all typea of aeianotectonic
deforeationa -- regional. zonal and local.

it in natural that the altered alopea are not auiiicient with reapect to
the entire defer-ed area for the appearance of alidea and landalipa. but
during regional forecaata thia poaaibility auat be conaidered. Obvioualy.
part or the aiidea have taken place during the tine of or aoon after the
Chilean earthquake (Tazieff. I960; Heiachet. l96l) and havin; no other
apparent cauaea. were connected with the change in alope of the weakened
planea in the nountaln naaaea.

22

'0! OYYICIAL US! OIL?
POI DIVICIAL use ONLY

The zonal aeianotectonlc dialocatlona are acconpanied by a aignificant
nunher of different local aelaaotectonic defornationa (foulta. upthrow faulta.
grahena. atrike-alip faulta. and no on). Together. they rarely change the
anglea of alope of the weakened zonea in an area to In to 29.000 aquarehilo-
Ietera. however. the haaic voiuae of unatahle nountain aaaaea here are
fractured during the earthquake and ita nfterahocka aa a reault of aeiaaic
accelerationa. If the aeinlic atructure finda explicit geological reflec-
tion in the fault zone. then the neat algnificant changea in alopea occur
along thie tone. in the caae of powerful earthquahea. ayateaa of aeiaao-
dialocatiana occur in then. the approxilate extent of which can be
determined in the eagnitude of expected earthquakea (nee p 11).

Thixotropic Liquefaction of Soil

During an earthquake thin phenowenon eauaea auhaidence of the earth'a
surface. and volcanoea. and alidea. huneroua destructive olidea of thin
type occurred during the Chilean and Alaahan earthquahea. ln Alaaka the
danage hrnhccitiCI of Seward. Valdez. Uhittier. Anchorage.were reckoned in
the hundrrda of ailliona of dollara. The Ternahein alide encoapaaaed the
greater ptrt of the city of Anchorage (ﬂanaen. et al.. l966). when explor-
ing the alope at the port later it waa eatahliahed that for the atatic
poaitlon :he alone here in conpletely atahle.

The thixozropic liquefaction of the toil not only reduced the hearing
capacity nlaoat to zero. but alao cauaed a powerful dynaaic effect on the
rover. frequently atrong heda which broke out and ahlfted. Sioilar phenouena
were ohae:vcd on broad areae during the earthquahea in nongolia (Khangayakiye
on 9 and 3) July l905. ”-3.6 and 8.7: Gobi-Altay. b Decenher 1957. "-3.6:
Hozmlaltoyn 5 January 1967. "-7-3/5).

it waa prupoaed earlier that predoainantly ailty aand (true quickaand and
paeudoquickaand) are predolinantly capable of aaaa thlxotropic liquefaction.
hut after the earthquatea in Chile. Alaaha and "ligata (16 June 1965. H-7-l/2)
it waa diacovered that often even eand and gravel. aoraine and other aiailar
aoila liquefy.

when foreceating aeiaaogenic alidea of thinotropic rarefaction it ia
neceaaary to pay attention prinarily to the coaatal regiona where earth-
quakea with on inteneity of note than force 7 ere poaaihle.

The following Iain typea of aelalogenic alidea and landaltn can he noted.

I. Seianogenic atripping of aountain peaka waa eatahliahed for the firat
tine in the pleiatoceie- zone of the Gobi-Altay earthquake. The atripping
occurred na followa. During the earthquohee the alplitude of the dinplece-
cent of the aountain lanaifa waa lore than twice the alplitude of the
lrreveraihle deforaationa (Solonenko. V.. l963a. pp 326-329). During the
-unin nhoch the aountnina ahifted far to the eaat and above the petition

\f equilibriua. and then they returned to the weat and down no energetically

23

70! OIYICIAL 08! OILY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that they again passed the point of equilibriun. hut in the opposite
direction. The peaks of the sountains had greater snplitude of displacesent
than their hose. as a result of which there was a lag of solentua of the
pests of the aountnins behind their feet: when the base hegan the return
noveaent. the peaks were still saving to the east. in connection with which
powerful shearing forces occurred in the! (Solonenko. V.. 1968. l963a;
Solonenko. l965. pp 155-358). The low angle of shear (a slope of 10 to 15‘
to the east) indicates that out of the two active forces. near horizontal
seissoinertial and vertical gravitational. the forser significantly exceeded
the latter.

The cross sections of the cleavage planes were fro- lOO to 700Xl500 neters.
their occurrence was at a depth iron tens to 350 neters. The peaks either
shifted to the east with rotation counterclockwise or they were thrown

into the canyon.

The shearing of the nountain peaks was established in southern Prihaykal'ye
lunvknl region]. in the Snezhnayaseisnic structure. the sharp pointed
granite peaks were decapitated to too to lSO seters (base area 0.JXl.2 kn).
and the peaks were thrown into the canyon ef the Sneshnoy River (Khroaovskikh.
1965. op S9 and 99).

2. Tectonic-Seisnogenic Landslides and Lnndslips

in the aodern orogenic helts. the overwhelning najority of enoraous landslips
nnd landslides are tied to the tones of seisaoactive fractures and are
directly or indirectly connected with earthquakes (Solonenho. V.. l950. 1972a.
h; Churinov. l96d; Zolotarev. et al.. I968; radorenko. l968: Solonenko. 1972a.
b).

The selsnntectonic noveuents of the earth's crust create instability of the
rock nasses. and their disastrous soveaents are caused. as a rule. by earth-
quakes. not only are landslips and landslides for-ed. but new ones are
prepared sinultsneously.

The tectonic-seislogcnic iandslipa develop predoninantly as landslidsiland-
slips naturally. svslanching takes place after the nost serious seisaic
oscillations. and the avalanching lass has extraordinary dynasics. including
the range of its spread.

In the areas oade on of noderately dislocated sedinentary or volcanogenic-
sedlsentory foraations. in the presence of severe earthquakes. hands of
beds up to several square kiloseters in area slide (see Pig 1). lnor-ous
cracks. henches up to tens of meters high in the fora of seissotectonic
scnrps are forced. and a network of tectonic lointe appears.and so on
(Solonenko. V.. I973a-h: Solonenko. V.. lbronovskikh. l976).

3. Seisnngenic Landslips with Seis-icaiiy Excited Avalanche Hass

For the formation of such iandsiips obviously two conditions are necessary:
instantaneous collapse and crushing of the rock and the effect of powerful

26
'0‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PDQ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

note-in oacillationa on the plunging fine to nediua lumpy noaa. exciting
it elailarly to n vibration acreen at the ore enrichncnt enterpriaea.

The aeianically excited avalanche eaaa levee at enoreoue velocity. it
travele a path aany tieea longer than ordinary. and it can croaa hroad
valleya and riae high on the oppoaite alopee. There are iacta indicating
the poeaihility of auch an avalanche Iaea croaaing a canyon (Solonenko.
Khroeovakikh. l97b).

So far aa ia known, only one auch landelipa hae been documented
(Solonenko. V.. 1978) in connection with the Khait earthquake on

l0 July l9b9 (force l0. HI7.S). The landallp in the Darikhauz Canyon
(Pig 3) aoved at a apeed of about too kalhr. it croaaed the Yarkhych

River (Ohikahud) and roae to a lS-neter terrace. The area of the

mam, aaaa wee 10.7 3-1. and the longeat path wee 10.5 in. In the
caae of an ordinary gravitational avalanche it did not exceed 1.5 to 2 he.
A powerful air wave paaaed before the landalioo It 'VGPt 0V0! etructurea.
broke off treea or tore then out by the roota and toaaed than hundreds

of netere through the air. A caacede profile ie characteriatic of auch
nvnlanchea: the weakly inclined aectione end in ateep acarpa (there are
nln large wavea with the acarp height up to so to 60 aetere in the
Darikhoue Canyon). Soil apurta iron the aeiaaically excited aaae. forning
characteriatic earth pyraaide when it fella. and it equeeaea the large
rock eonolitha into the ahape of oheliaka. Hith aoee planation which is
unavoidable at tilea. the earphoaculpture of the avalanche field could
eaaily be taken ae glacial.

Tracea of the aeialically excited avalanchea have been eatahliahed in
varioua highly aeianic regiona. 0n the Zealiyakiy ridge the aeianogenic
avalanchea have traveled a path up to )0 kn. they have departed l0 to is
he (roe the foot of the lountaina. they have croaaed an inter-entane

haein and rolled up the alope of a ridge. The evalance eaaa which waa
previoualy taken ea glacial depoaita covered an area of up to 150 he2
(lurdyukov. l966). Obvioualy. the Saidnarreh landalip (lran) -- one of the
largeat in the world with e voluae on the order of 30 kl3 (length of
eeparation well [4.8 kn) ie of the acne type. The avalanche Iaaa traveled

up to [7.5 kn. croeaing a ridge up to 600 aetera high on ite way and
covered an area of 165 kl: (harriaen. 'alcon. l9J7).

A. Seianovihration Landelidea and Landaliv'

Obvioualy. in individual rare caaea the acale of aeiaeic dialocationa
dcpenda not only on the intenaity of the earthquake. the depth of the
center. the type of eeiaeogenic atructure and geology of the area. but
also the duration of the aeeieaic vihratione. Thue. on the Black Sea
count of the Caucaaua (Tuatee-Anap) A. 3. Oatrovakiy (l970a.h) eatehliahed
n enaa developaent oi characteriatic landelidea. ahiita of the aountain
eleaenta. poweriui iracturea. and no on. the {creation of which ia
connected with the dieeatroue earthquakea o! the peat. Uhen etudying

thia area in l97l on the Abrau Peninaula (between Novoroaeiyak and

Anapa) we encountered the haaic type of geodynaeic phenoeena: enoruoua

25

'0‘ OIPICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

 

Figure 3. Plan Viev of the Khait Landalip on 10 July 1969
drawn by V. P. Solonenko.

l -- mlla of ancient avalanchea: 2 - Kheit Landalip;

3 -- acarpa of the avalanche aaaa vavea: 5 - rock-avalanche

uphithutera; S -- landalip uphitheatera in loeaa:

6 - aeiaaogenic rocky landalideolandalip and direction

of ita love-eat: 7 -- landalidea and protruding knolla;

8 ~odirection of notion of the landalipa (I-lv - their

aucceaaive phaaea): 9 - aeiaaogenic upthrou fault;

lo -- aeia-ogrovitational landalip-landalide joints;

ll -- nudolide rill; 12 -- dividea; l3 - Ioraine:

16 -- proluviua: 15 - olluviua (03); 16 .. Proterozoic

(Pt(?)) and Silurian (S) uetanorphic aeriea and granitea:

l7 -- outlinea of populated placea buried under the avalanche:

north 5. Yes-an
aouth 6. Flood plain of the Surkhov River
Khiaarak 7. Yarkhych (Obi Kabut)
Khait 8. Dokhaitakiy dehria cone
9. Darikhau:
10. Lake
26

'0‘ OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

with respect to width (up to 100 to 150 meters) and depth (to 90 meters).
but short (no more than 4 kn) splits or shifts of parts of the mountains
(Fig A) covering the valleys with coarselump rock flows running up to 1.5 km
from their source (among them. up to 2 km into the sea). at the same.time
as for a gravitational shift the avalanche mass could travel no more

than 50 to 100 meters from the foot of the avalanche slope (maximum
height less than 600 meters).

Nevertheless. even during the most powerful earthquakes known on earth.
such formations have not occurred: in addition. they haVe not been connected
with explicit seisaogenic faults and they are not accompanied by a seiano-
gravitational destruction of mountains of the corresponding scale. We
have come to the conclusion that here we are dealing with a new phenomenon
previously unknown in geology -- with a type of aeisnogenic-vibrational
rreep and disintegration of the mountain massifs caused by prolonged
seismic vibrations of mnderate intensity from shallow center zones in the
shelf zone of the Black Sea. This phenomenon which we have called the
"Pontian phenomenon" (Solonenko. Khromovskikh. 1976) can also occur in the
Mediterranean Sea where extraordinarily long~lastlng earthquakes have been
recorded more than once in history (the last of them was on 9-13 August
I95] with H up to 7 on the Ionian Islands).

 

Figure 6. Vibration-seisootectonic Joint of the
Utrish Structure on the Abrau Peninsula.
Photograph by V. P. Solonenko

27

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OVFlCIAL USE ONLY

5. Seismogrsvitational Lsndslips on an Air Cushion

A unique avalanche occurred during the Peruvian earthquake of 3l Hay 1970
("07.7): 50 million to 100 million m3 of soil and ice broke loose from
Guaskaraahountain at an altitude of 5500 to 6400 meters. The avalanche
tell 1 km vertically. and then it ran 3 km along a 22° slope and lo kn
along a S' slope. The avalanche developed a speed of no less than 280 to
385 kmlhr. and according to ballistic calculations (the nultiton lumps
were thrown to the side up to 1600 meters). the speed reached more than
450 km/hr which aade it possible for the avalanche mass to be hurled
across a ridge 230 meters high. across the Rio Santa Valley and travel

83 meters up the opposite side. Mud traveled l60 km along the Rio Santa
River to the sea. destroying a bridge and a hydroelectric powerplant.

in places where the avalanche passed. the vegetation and soil layer turned
out to he undisturbed. The investigators of the avalanche explained this
fact (Just as the enormous speed of the avalanche) by the fact that the
avalanche mass moved on an air cushion (Platker. et al.. 1971).

6. Slipping Landslides

In areas made up of moderately dislocated sedimentary or volcanogenic-
sedimentary fornations during earthquakes in statically stable sections
bands of beds up to several square kilometers in area slipped. Thus.
during the Dagestan earthquake on 16 Hay 1970 (H-6.6. 10-force 9). numerous
slipping landslides were formed. The Achiyskiy landslide (‘10 million
cubic meters) 1 km long crossed the Chvakhun-Bak Valleyand blocked it.

The grahen-like trench up to 180-200 meters wide and 60 meters deep formed
on the slope. Higher up on the slopeanother ssismogenic line of joints was
formed which prepared a new landslide (Klimenko. Tsarev. l971). At

another location. the sliding of one of the peaks of the cuesta created

the illusion of shearing of the mountain peak.

in the case of sharply expressed bedding. schistosity or tectonic jointing
planes. the slipping landelides can also occur in crystalline rock.

7. Seismogenic Earth Avalanches and Streams

0n the slopes of mountains covered with talus. placers. and. especially.
loess sell. a mass of landslides. sud streams and landslips develop

The latter are especially dangerous. They move similarly to snow
avalanches. The individual earth avalanches can cross valleys and travel
hundreds of meters up the opposite slope. if there is a sufficiently
nOwerful stream in the valley they can turn into nud streams. In the case
of mass descent of avalanches (especially with countermovement). on
collision the earth masses acquire powerful dynamic momentum. and they
rush downward at enormous velocities. forming a high-speed earth stream.

28

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. Characteristic Hicrorelief of an Earth Stream.
Photograph by V. P. Solonenko.

in the case of the Khsit earthquake. the earth avalanches and streams
traveled into many of the valleys. Along the broad. gently sloping valley
of the Yasnan River, the earth stream. in spite of snail bottom slopes

(2 to 3') traveled 20 km. destroying 20 kishlaks [Central Asian villages]
and fertile lands. This caused the first investigators of the earthquake
to conclude that a mud stream had passed through the valley. however. the
study that we made later of the morphology of the slide rack. its internal
structure to a depth of 15 to 20 meters and microrelief demonstrated that

a seismically excited earth stream had passed through the valley although
in places (in areas where the water from the submerged strean broke
through) the earth mass could have assumed a mud consistency. The first
inspectors did not note the mass development of the hwmsocks caused by the
earth spouts. a distinguishing feature of seismically excited earth streams
(Solonenko. V.. 1970b). This microrelief (Pig 5) is usually taken as
sedimentary hummocky-sinkhole relief or periglacial earth cone relief.
Secondary spouting channels terminating at the surface in residual sinks

of spurious craters can be seen in the cross section of the cones in the
seismically excited earth streams (Fig 6). This is a reliable characteris-
tic of the spouting cones of the seismogenic earth avalanches distinguish-
ing them from earth mounds of other genesis.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V0! OPflCIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Earth Spout round in the Khait Avalanche in the
Yo Ian River Valley
1 -- pale yellow structureless loan; 2 -- the sale with restored
loess structure; 3 -- dark brown loan with flow texture.
The hound was foraed on 10 July 19“ and it was discovered
on 21 October 1968.

In seismic areas with thick loess deposits on essentially any section with
a slope of more than 10 to 12‘ the occurrence of earth avalanches and
streans is possible. Therefore the lost dangerous areas oust be distin-
guished. These should include the probable pleistoceiaa earthquake zones
with force 8 intensity and higher. The valleys parallel to aeisuaically
active faults are the lost dangerous. The foreation of powerful earth
atreaaa is lost prevalent in then.

Under pemfrost conditions the foreation of earth streaae during powerful
earthquakes depends to a high degree on the state of the active layer:

in the winter when the active layer has serged with the per-afrost. they
cannot occur in general (the Tas-Yuryakhskeye earthquake on 18 January 1967.
force 9-10. "-7): at another tile the selting part of the active layer
slips. and depending on the degree of wetting. earth avalanches or sud
flows are formed (the Omskonakoye earthquake on 18 Hay 1971. force 9-10.
"-7; see Kurushin. et al.. 1972).

In the seismic zones with broad fields of thick friable deposits. especially
loesa. the earth avalanches and stresls can be widely used to discover the
pleistoceiss regions of preaeiseostatistical strong earthquakes.

When there is sufficient flooding. the earth streams heco-e the sud flows
which in general frequently accompany powerful earthquakes (Solonenko. V..
1963c).

Role of the Paleoseislaogeologicsl Method in Forecasting Landslides and
Lnndslips

In the paleooeianogeologicsl nethod broad use is Iade of the traces of
ancient seisnogravitational defonations.

30

FOB ONION USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”3! ONLY

Tho paleoseisaogeologicel data on the pleistoceisa tones of the most
severe earthquakes of this century accompanied by disastrous seiseogravita-
tionel phenoeene indicAte that the largest landslides and landelipe have

n stable tendency to repeat in certain areas (Solonenho. V., 1972a. b;
Solonenko. 1972a. b).

According to our observations. this is connected with two princioal causes:
1) high stress of the rock masses in the body of the seiesogenic structure
end 2) with the preparation of new rock leases for avalanching during
preceding earthquakes.

The stress of the rock in highly active seisnogenic structures is so great
that the landelipe frequently occur without any apparent reason even on
slopes that are stable with respect to outward signs. Thus. in the
Central Greben of the novachanskaya Seiseogenic Structure (see Fig 7)

by aerovisuel observations we were able to photograph the avalanching of

o slope 2.5 ha long (Pig 8). During field essaination of the structure in
1962 two avalanches occurred before our eyes on a single day.

The characteristic sign of the landslipr in the overstresaed aassifs is
splitting of the rock. frequently independently of the existing weakened
plnnes. The blocks (in our case up to 1.5-3xs actors) have the shape of
detritus obtained when taking easples of rock for crushing, and the fresh
cleavage planes are powdered with granite dust (ACTIVE TECTONICS....

1966. p 30).

These landelipe cannot date strong earthquakes. but they are a reliable
index of the high saisaic potential of the seislogenic structure.

In the areas with powerful seiseogenic landelipe and landslides. conditions
are sieultsneously prepared for the following shifts: gravitational-
seisaotectonic and seiseogravitstionel joints encoeoass new large areas
(Solonenko. V.. 1978. b. 1972a. b). often reaching the divide on the oppo-
site slope. To the side of the seiseically active faults on steep
mountain slopes sleller landelipe and landslides are prepared which is
reflected in the eeissogenic (seisaogrevitational) settling of the slopes.

when predicting landslides and landelipe it is necessary to realistically
consider that the estimation of the seiseogenic-gravitationol stability

of the slopes by astheaatical uodels (considering the regional forecasting)
is impossible; therefore the forecasting of seisaogravitational danger
must be carried out prinsrily by the seisaoststistics and the paleoseisao-
geological data (on an engineering-seissogeologicel base).

The engineering-eeislogeologicel regions where there are traces of power-
ful seisaogrevitstionel pheno-ena lust be closed to large-scale construc-
tion. Par ere-pie. the village othait.which was destroyed by the land-
slips of 10 July 1969, was constructed in the path of two earlier such
landelipe. and now everything is ready for a fourth seiseogenic lendelip
(Solonenho. V.. 1970s.b. 1972a. b).

31
POI OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

it is clear that the Sarezakoye Lake we become a source of
the ﬂattens. Pynndzh and the Amudar'ya

that is. only the possibility of a simple rise
in water level was taken

By the existing analo y. the save
y hundreds of meters. and even if
lDuring the earthquake on I

:otnllnn 30.5 million n3
516 meters. Ci

. 61 meters;
rs (Miller. 1963; Tether. 1962).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it does not break through the slide rock. on falling from the kilometer
height it will destroy the hydroelectric powsrplant, and everything in
the Bartang Valley below.

Inasmuch as the statistical data have decisive significance for predicting
seismogravitational phenomena. we consider it extremely important to
catalog them.

Seismogenic Sedimentary Facios

In addition to the direct signs (seismic dislocations and seismogrevita-
tionnl phenomena) the seismogenic sedimentary facies can indicate earlier
powerful earthquakes even for periods when there have been flareups of
seismic activity (ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966. pp 29-36). The intrusion

of the coarsely clsstic. unsorted sediments which were unlayared or have
undeveloped bedding. into the rhythmically constructed foothills section .
intermontane basins and large vslleys.¢specially with anomalous development
with respect to area and remoteness from the feed areas, can indicate the
relation of such deposits to the disastrous earthquakes. 0n the contrary,
the introduction of fine-grained sediments into the coarsely elastic
alluvial and proluvial deposits of the mountain valleys and basins indicates
the sudden formation of subchsnnel facies which can be connected with
covering of the river beds with seiseogenic landslips or seismotectonic
dnms. In the mountains of Tyan'-Shan'. Panir and the adjacent regions of
Afghanistan. many lakes are known which were formed as a result of checking
of the rivers by aeismogenic landslipa from tens to many hundreds of meters
high.

The valleys of many of the streams flowing into the Baykal were covered by
the lendelips. in part seiamogenic. For example, the valley of the
Selengushke River (the right tributary of the Snezhnsya River) at the
Snezhnmaeismogenic structure was filled with slide rock to a height of
about 100 meters. The dam obviously was broken twice, but now a chocked
lake about 2 km long still remains.

The sharp replacement of the lithologic types of sediments can be caused
by earth and mud aeismogenic streams. Thus. in the case of the earthquake
of 9 June 1887 in Zailiyekiy Aletau (Hushketov. 1890). there was a mass
formation of earth (loese) streams. In the ore-bearing valleys, they
frequently became mud flows. The deposits of these flows formed terracee
up to 50 meters high. Many of them went out on the plain and covered

it with a slick up to 8 to 12 km in radius in the mouth of the ravines.

In all of these cases the fine-grained deposits. without any intermediate
sediments with respect to granulometric composition covered the coarsely
clastic alluvial—proluvial deposits.

It is natural that it is impossible to isolate the seismogenic facies of
the sediments only with respect to sharp replacement of their lithology.
and careful complex analysis of the paleogeographic conditions of the

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OYI'ICMI. ll" ONLY

m-rmwlniiim nf emu-Min. the tertnnlv renlne of the allntrlrts end the
selenuuunlv phonon-me of all types is necessery.

The colluviun o! the slide rock fscies in the zones with high selenicity
is sienlficently nore widespreed then use sssu-ed eerlier. its greater
part is docuented es elecisl deposits or weter-rocln streets. The
coeposition of the lsndslide steps depends on the geologicel. tectonic.
eeonorphologicel conditions. the kinetics of the lsndslip. the intensity
of ‘.'..e eerthquske. the degree of intensity of the rock Isssifs end
geographic isediu.

in the case of the HIM-UP (001". the shifted usses are

split into enornous blocks. in the first stege often the soil end plents
layer is reteined. The surfsce of the edvence. lost shifted stezes is
coveted with growl-block lendslide Mteriel canine down off the slopes

of the upper scerps. 0n the surfece of the lendslip-feult

Items. the loose uteriel during the course of the shift

(nore precisely. st the tine of its sherp inhibition or cessetion of lotion)
spurts and fares deposition “The surfece of the scerps covered with
such cones. resembles in the fresh for- the colonies of tereite structured
(Solunenko. l963e. 1970). end subsequently. their nicroreiief is si-iler
to the soffosionosuhsidence relief.

(in the frontel edges of the seisnoeenic lendslides sooetines cherecteristic
cupnlns ere foroed iron extrusion of clestic uteriel up to lo Ictcl’l
high or more (Solonenko. V.. l963. b. I966. p 31).

The index of seisnoeenic neture of e lendslip cen he the nsture of the
elastic mteriel itself end the Iorpholoey of the lendslip less: the
cascade profile. the lerge blocks .. ohelislts. end so on -~ squeezed out
of the general. store or less uniforl uses (Solonenho. 9.. 19706).

Sooetioes it is possible to esteblish the correletion between en exotic
layer of sedinents and 0 specific seislogenic structure. Thus. for
exnnple. two large lsndslipe chockin; the Shertlsy River Cenyon are
genetically connected with the Shertlsy selsuonenic structure. The
traces of the voter end rock uudslide for-ed on breeltthroueh of the lend-
sllp dun can be seen in the cross section of the reasins of the debris
cone preserved in the oouth of the “0701\- The debris cone of thet tine
nlmm the upthrust hen]: wee dropped end covered with uodern proluviun.
The upper horizon of the nroluviel deposits differs shernly fro. the
stratified. ordinary proluviel deposits underlying it - it is lerse-
block with boulder-block-rubble fill. The hesie Isteriei of it is
characteristic of lendslip fecies end not for proluviel-slluviel fecies
like the material of the res-wining horizons of the debris cone. It does
not have anything in co-on with the asterisl of the aoreine deposits.
The exotic nsture of this ieyer indicstes the exotic conditions oi its
formtlon (Soionenho. V.. 1962b. 1963c).

1's

'0! onicuu. US! OIL!
70R OYTICIAL USE ONLY

Sinuitaneously. the disastrous developsent of the landslide facies of

a significant area can be a sign of their relation to strong earthquakes.
These landslide facies are known on the south shore of Iaykal and in the
vicinity of Lake Cusinyy in Transbaykal.

Vulcanngenlc fornations can indicate activation of seissic activity. in
the Stanovoy sector of the naykal rift ayates it is possible to see four
ages of seismic activation when the deep sagas-conducting
fractures were forued: in the upper eopleiatocene. the lower pleistocene.
the upper pleistocene to lower holocene and upper holocene. Re are observ-
ing echoes of these events at the present tise. The epicenters of seny
weak earthquakes. sosetises earthquake trenches (to dozens per day) with

a depth of centers of about 25 ks are coordinated with the pleistocene-
holncene and holocene volcanoes.

The constant formation of neptunic dikes takes place in the seislically
active regions. 0n esanining the pleistoceisl zones of aodern powerful
earthquakes (force 9-l2. "-6.5-8.6) and studying the paleoseissodislocations.
we observed the formation of seissogenic neptunic dikes of two types:
ascending and descending. The ascending dikes are for-ed by the introduc-
tion of wet or water-bearing soil into the fissures. as a rule. sand.
silty. sandy and other types of soil. when reaching the surface they
spout and fora sud cones. The neptunic dikes (or systeas of the.) can be
of significant length. for ass-pie. in the case of the central lsyksl
earthquake of 29 August 1959 (force 9. ”06-3/5) the Iain line of the sud
discharges was about to ks long. The stripping of the soil desonstrated
that there are fissures filled with silty sand - quickssnd -- running
between the Bud cones (Solonenko. V.. Treakov. l960).

The descending dikes are for-ed on filling of the seisnogenlc fissures
with elastic ssterial which travels upward. This tvpe of neptunic dike is
developed quite broadly in the seissic regions, especially where the
selssodislocations are connected with shearing of the earth's crust.
Absorption of elastic saterial takes place in the fissures for tens and
hundreds oi years. The preservation of the seisaotectonic fissures in the
relief is possible only as a result of this aechsniss: otherwise they are
quickly leveled. in such fissures. frequently sinks are observed ~-
absorhing swallow holes fros fractions of seters to tens of seters deep
and in disaster. in the fissures and swallow holes. not only is finely
rlastic saterial absorbed which is renoved fros the slopes. but also
blocks up to enoruous ones of l2 to 15 neters inclusively (ACTTV:
TECTOSICS..... l966. p l9); Khrosovskikh. l965. p 60). The thick (up to
tens of seters) neptunic dikes filled with their own breccia. extre-
urdinarily nonuniforn with respect to granulosetric coaposition are

fur-ed in this way. These dikes reach soae depth still unknown. but in
sany cases it is no less than Iany tens. and more often. hundreds of
meters. for the depth of the swallow holes in their body reaches 50
seters or core (Solonenko. V.. Khroaovskikh. l976).

36

f0! O'TICIAL USE GILT
'0! OVVICIAL "8! ONLY

The ayionitea (“tectonic clay") ate a apeciai type of aeianogenic (aeialo-
tectonic) foruotion. he the experience of the Gobi-Altay earthquake haa
ahown. the Iylonltea ate for-ed iron the neat varied rock (iron argillitea
to gtanitea). but they baaieally are of one colpoaition -- hydro-ice-
nnntaotillonite. Their eatabliahed thickneaa ia up to l aetar. They have
been for-ed not only in practice inatantaneoualy. but were aqueered out

of the creche like paate and in placea fora walla aore than l.$ aeteta
high (Solonenko. V.. l963a. pp 321-326: Solonenho. l965. I966. pp 3&2-355).

The depoaita of the ao-called turbid flow: can occur aa a apecial type of
aeianngenic aediaent in the large bodiea of water.

Previoualy attention waa given to the (act that the ahatp replace-ant of
the deep water aediaenta with ahallow water onea. the note ao. with
coaatal fauna and ripple Iarha with atratigtaphic diacontinuity ia con-
aideted oa unconditional proof of the courae of eventa: l .. rapid
tectonic uplift oi the aea floor. 2 -- regteaaion oi the ace. 3 -- conti~
nental deviation. b -- tranagreaaion. S -- reatoration oi the deep water
regiae. it ia clear to every geologiat that at leaat tena oi ailliona of
year- are needed for thia coutae of eventa. In reality. thia can occur
in o calculable number of houta (Solonenho. V.. I970a. p 25). Thia type
of extraordinary atratigtaphic aection can be created by aeiaaically
excited earth atreaaa - aubaqual aud (lowa (Solonenko. V.. l973a). he

a teault of preciae recording oi the tiae of earthquakea and danage to
underground cablea. aigniiicant (actual data haa been occululated on the
novenent of the aeiaaically excited aubaqual nud flowa. The Grand lenia
earthquake of 18 hove-bet 1929 la a claaaicai exaaple (force 9-l0. ”-7).
During thia earthquake. l2 cablea located up to 800 h. iron the epicenter
were aucceaaively broken. The apead of the auhaqual uud flow waa about
90 kn/hr on the continental alope. and 36 kl/hr in the abyaaal plain.

During the Algerian earthquake of 9 June l956 (force 9. "-6-3/6). five
underwater cablea were broken laid at a diatance oi 6 to 100 ha (to. the
coaat of Algeria. The apeed of the flow on the continental alope waa 60
ka/hr: on the deep water plain it dropped to 8 kn/hr. Theae apeeda and

the length of path oi the aubaqual aud Kiowa not attainable without aeiaaic
excitation explain their gigantic etoaion activity. the penetration to a
depth oi up to £200 aetera o! the coaatal coaraely claatic depoaita

(Gudzon Canyon) foraing conea at the aoutha of the underwater canyona
which are notphoaculpturally aiailat to the proluvial debria conea and
nbaence of a connection between ease of the canyona not only to the
continenta and loutha of riveta. but also to the ahallow water (the canyona
on the Marion underwater ridge 200 k- aouth of Japan).

The underwater canyona and anoualoua diatribution of the aediaentary
iociea are charactetiatic not only {or the aeaa. but alao {or the large
continental hodiea of water in the highly aeianic regiona. In the aaykai
baain there are underwater canyona and intruaiona oi coaraely claatic
depoaita into the deep-water aectiona o! the baain and aectiona free of
aediaent to a aignificant depth. All of thia ia unexplainable without
conaideting the powerful aeianic oacillationa.

37

'0! OIYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

The isolation of the aeissogenic faciss of the sediments froa lithologically
sisllsr formations requires a great deal of attention and cannot always be
reliably sccosplished. The most frequent error which nust be encountered
when using the materials of other geologists is the classification of the
seisnogenic lsndslip and proluvial-landslip facies as glacial. although.
in our opinion. they are cooperatively easily distinguished (with respect
to shape of the clastic saterisl and blocks. composition. nature and
conposition of the filler. the glacial striation or absence of it. the
cumulative micro and sesoforms of relief. the configuration of the earth
covered by the deposits. the accospanying morphosculptural phenosena. and
so on).

it is appreciably more difficult to distinguish the aolifluction rock
streasa fro. the seismogenic lsndslip and landslip-proluvisl formations

at the feet of the mountains (the oblique piednont plains). here it is
necessary to consider that in the pleistocene and part of the holocene

the permafrost was developed appreciably more broadly than at the present
tine. and the solifluction processes had a regional nature. in some cases.
the coastal breccia of the disappearing bodies of water. the avalanche
deposits of other formations of the colluvial type can cause confusion.
for diagnosis of the sedinents it is necessary to study the areas of their
propagation. thickness. cooposition and relations to the seismogenic
structures. and so on.

Age of Paleoseismodislocations

The determination of the aore or less exact age of the paleoseismodislocs-
tions still remains a weak place in the paleoaeislogeOIogical method.

This is connected not only with procedural but also practical difficulties.
Until recently both in the USSR and world practice only our small
collective at the Laboratory of Seismogeology of the institute of the
Earth’s Crust has been engaged in systematic paleoseisoogeological research.
In the remaining highly selssic regions of the earth. the method. although
used quite broadly in recent tines. has been used sporadically. for the
most part when examining the pleistoceiss zones of modern powerful and
disastrous earthquakes. The determination of the exact age of the paleo-
seismodislocations requires painstaking. detailed studies. as a rule. with
a large value of earth work.

for determination of the age of the residual selsmodeformations. the
following methods have been used and can be used in the future: geologi-
cal. engineering-geological. historical-archaeolozleek dendrochronological.
and radio carbon.

By the usual geological aethods. in the overwhelming majority of cases
the age of the residual seissodeformations can be determined highly
approsinately. which can have great significance for knowledge of the
evolution of the seismic activity of the region. but not for applied
purposes. in order to deternine the level of modern seisoic activity of
the neotectonic structures it is necessary to know the events of no sore

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OYPICIAL "8! ONLY

than the first thousanda of years ago. The extrapolation of the eventn
further in the past to nodern tunes can lead to the groaaest errors: in

all seissic regions where corresponding saterials were obtained (Nongolia-
hnyknl. Central Asia. the Caucasus. heditsrranean. Iran. and so on) the
neisnic activity of several thousands oi years ago changed nhsrply. an a
rule. in the direction of a decrease.

The paleoseisnogeological data are a chronicle of the nost powerful
earthquakes inprinted in the geological-geonorphologiesl docu-ents of

the earth's surface. by these data. in the Baykal rift zone we haVe
established four outbreaks o! seissic activity. la the region of the
expansion of the ritt zone on its eastern flank in the upper holocene. the
seismic activity increased sharply in connection with the sigrstion of the
riftogenic processes to the east of the apparent end of the rift systea

(Solonenko. V.. [968a, b). and on the southwestern periphery. in eastern
Sayan. it decreased.

In the northwestern Caucasus. according to the paleoseisaogeologicol
analysis a. I. Ostrovskiy (l970a)isolates two ages of activation of the
noinnicity: l -- approainately in the middle of the late pleistocene

and 2 -- historic. ending at the beginning of the first thousand years
A.D.

with respect to the paleoseisnodislocstions in the vicinity of the
Talono-Pergen fault. V. K. Kuchsy (1971) establishes the naxiau- of the
aelsaic activity at about 50.000 years ago. a reduction in the Ionian:
force of the earthquakes. l0.000 years ago. The nodern earthquakes are
the weakest in a $0.000-year period. The paleoseissodialocations have
been widely developed in the vicinity of the Dzhungar fault (Voytovich.
I969). Nevertheless. the aodern seisnic activity of it is low. This can
either indicate recent changes in the seisnic regile or tenporary seialic
quiet. The isportsnce of the statenent of special paleoaeislogeologicsl
research in such areas is obvious.

It is possible to use the engineering-geological nethods for approximate
dating at specific seisnodislocations. Data on the rate of destruction
of the rock and novenent of the soil on the slopes can be used for this
purpose.

wherever the bedrock has been uncovered as a result of seisnic

deiornations. the tine of this slipping can be calculated by the depth
of destruction or the rock.

Under the conditions of the oaykal region. the (creation of talus.
including structural. takes place at greater speed (cu/year): diabases
l.): granites 2.3: granite-gneissand gneiasl.3; crystal linestones.
norble. Iasnive Juransic sandstones 5.0; thin-layered Jurassic sandstone
9.0 (Solonenko. V.. 1960b. p 17). B. A. Agafonov (1976), who perforned
special observations in experiaental areas on crystalline rock obtained

39

POI OFVICIAL 082 OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the same rates: 12.5-87.6 mm/year. it is natural that the weathering
proceeds nonuniformiy. the rates gradually change. and on reaching the
thickness of winter freezing of the ground. they drop sharply although
the formation of the talus does not cease (as a result of annual
fluctuations in temperature and chemical weathering).

in the case of conservation of the seismogenic deformations on the steep
slopes or at their base. some ides of their age can be obtained from the
calculations of the speed of movement of the ground. however. in this
case we can. as a rule. obtain only the upper age limit.for in the scisso-
genie Joints usually intense absorption of elastic material takes place.
and the height of the scarps can vary during the course of subsequent
(after the earthquake) movements of the earth's crust.

The speed of the loose material under the conditions of Baykal seismic
belt is very high: in the bald peak zone. on slopes of 30 to 15’. the
soil is shifted a to S em/year (Agafonov. 1976): the speed of movement

of the placers is up to 145 emlyear. the denudation meter is in places
only 210 years (Solonenko. V.. 1950. 1960b). Prospecting channels free
quentiy are completely leveled in a few years. The cuts on the Krugobayhal
railroad up to 6 to 8 meters deep abandoned in 1912-1910 not only were
filled with talus by 1941. but in places forests had appeared on them.
These constantly active factors. to say nothing of the "volley" removal

of material from the slopes (during rain. avalanches and so on). must
level the static forms occurring during earthquakes of an intensity of
force 9-10 during the course of 10-15 to 100-150 years. however. the
Joints remain for a longer time. for the elastic material is absorbed
in them.

In recent times efforts have been made to determine the seismodeformstions
and their approximate age by cave structures (Langer. 1970).

The archaeologunlsnd historical data can give more exact information
about the seismodisloeation time. The breaching of encempments and
settlements by a seismogenie structure offers the possibility of
determining its upper age limit. for example. by the presence of the
inte neolithic culture. the age of Posol'skiy Sor -- the analog of the
Provo! lay on Lake laykal - has been established at no more than

2000 to 3000 years; by the dynamics of the shoals and ssndbars. no less
than 500 years (Rogozin. 1976). The second figure is closer to reality.
for at the end of the 17th century and beginning of the 18th century the
remains of the trunks of a submerged forest still stood in the bay.

There are especially broad possibilities for using historical data in long
inhabited areas with a thousand-year culture. For example. when study-
ing the consequences of the earthquake of 31 August 1968 in Iran it was
established that in the last 100 to 200 years the underground water
galleries are shifted by more than 10 meters to the left (Ambrsseys.

et oi.. 1969. p 10).

60

P03 OPPICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OPPlCIAL US! ONLY

V. G. Trifonov (I971) described the ahift of the Xahrit-wall line above
the underground water galleries in the vicinity of the Rain Kohet-Dag
fault. Depending on the tiae of construction. the Kahrlz lines were
shifted fron o to 3 eaters. Now. froa the historical and archaeological
studies aeiaaologista and seisaogeologists can ferret out a great deal of
laportant information about powerful earthquakes frequently well dated.

as we have done when studying the seisaogeology of the western Caucasus
(Solonenho. 9.. Khroaovakikh. 1976).

The historical and archaeological data can be direct end indirect. There
is no doubt that their role in the dating of the powerful earthquakes of
the past. the ties of fornatlon of the seisaogenic struttures. deter-ina-
tion of the recurrence rate of the catastrophic earthquakes. and evolution
of seisaic processes will increase quickly.

The dendrochronologknlnethod is applicable for dating seiseogenic
structures in the forest zone. It aost easily offers the possibility of
deternining the lower age liait of the structure with respect to the age
of the trees growing in the seisaodeforaationa ("a structure no younger
than N years old“).

Exact dating is possible for young structures in which the trunks of the
felled trees or. by fortunate accident. uprooted trees were preserved. The
correlation of the annual rings of live and dead trees can pernit detersina-
tion of the year of foraation of the seisaodislocation.

The dendrochronological aethod has been used in the pleietoceisn zone of
the Nisslssippi earthquake of 1811 for separation of the Hississippian and
prc-Hississippian dislocations and in Alaska (Page. 1970).

The experience of the application of dendrochronology in the Iayhal region
has deaonstrated that already at 10 aeters free the seisaodislocation the
trees do not experience significant disturbances in the nature of the wood.
which must be strictly taken into account when using this method.

The radio carbon aethod appears to be the lost prospective. For certainty
of the correctness of the analysis. it is necessary to extract free the
selanodislocation organic reeaina which could not be brought in after the
earthquake. which is iapossible to do without serious aining operations.
but we still have not had this possibility. Nevertheless. its application
offers the possibility not only of dating the tile of seis-ic dioasters.
but also deter-ination of the direction of the slow aovenents of the
earth's crust during the period between seisnic disasters (Plafker. 1963).

In apite of the tcspting nature of dating the seissodislocations by the
radio carbon aethod. it is iapossible not to give attention to the fact
that the seisaically active faults are special geocheaical zones. and

the prinary 612/61‘ isotope ratio in the plants in the seisaogenic zone
can be different than usual. which can lead to sharp distortion (increase)
in age).

61

FOR OFFICIAL OS! OIL!
FOR OfflCIAL 083 ONE?

Force Scale

whereVer you see rock with cracks, the
traces of an earthquake are unquestioned:
the sore severe. the sore unstable the
debris. the race and the sod.

H. Lononosov (6 September 1757)

The eapirical data obtained when investigating powerful earthquakes indi-
cates that the size. the types and norphology of the residual deforaationa
for the aeisaogeologically uniforn zones are more or less constant. This
offers the possibility of solving the inverse probles: with respect to

the seisaogenic residual deforlations to detersine. of.course. approximately
the intensity and sagnitude of the preaeiesostatistical earthquakes.

This scale cannot be universal for all seismic zones. The scale and type
of the seiasodislocations and the gravitational phenoaens depend not only
on the energy of the earthquake but also on eany other factors: the depth
and aechanisa of the center. the type of aeiesogenic structure. the
orientation of the center zone. the geological structure of the relief. and
so on. For exaaple. the area encospasaed by the seisaogravitational
phenoeena. their type and sites depend on the regional engineering-geologi-
cal (including the seocryological) conditions. Therefore it is ispossihle
nechanically to transfer the force scale free one seissic zone to another.
It is also i-poesible to create a universal foraula for calculating the
theoretical isoseiseal lines. although seissologists propose and use then
for theoretical and applied purposes. One thing is certain: each power-
ful (“36.5) earthquake with a crustal center leaves its traces on the
surface of the earth. but until recently only a few aisply knew how to see
then.

The scale of the residual deformations usually is appreciably greater than
indicated in the scales of the seissic intensity. including in the lost
perfected of then - the "SK-1966 (Hedvedev. et al. 1965).

The first scale with respect to residual deforsations was proposed about
15 years ago (Solonenko. V.. 1962b). Recently broad new factual laterial
has been accumulated which was collected when studying both sodern
earthquakes and paleoscisaodislocations in various highly seisaic zones
of the earth. 0n the whole. it confiraed our scale of 1962, and has not
required the introduction of theoretical changes into it.

Force 8 (H-S-l/Z to 6-1/2). The regional and tonal seisaotectonic
phenoeena can he established only by geodetic studies. but they also still
do not always provide undisputed asterial. The changes in the relief

and hydrogrnphy fro. the paleoseisnogeological points of view are difficult
to detect and still sore difficult to prove. The local dislocations. as

a rule. do not reach the surface of the earth or they are insignificant
with respect to site; therefore they are quickly destroyed by denudation.

£2

'03 OPPICIAL 082 ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless. under favorable conditions, especially in the dry steppe
region. on the basis of the aerial photographs the local seiaaodislocations
sonetiacs are manifested an the surface of the earth and can be detected.
for their extent soaetiaes is quite significant. For exaaple. for the
earthquake of lb Deceaber 1930 in California (H-S.6) three faults were
foraed with a vertical displacement asplitude to 0.2 aeters on a path

with a total extent of about 9 kn (Richter. l963. p 677). In the central

Sudan in the case of the force 8 earthquake (H-S.7), a strike-slip fault
about 6 km long was for-ed in 1967.

In the baykal seisnic zone alone in one case opening of a fault was

observed for an earthquake of aodern intensity (to force 3?) 2 Novenber 1958
("-6-3/4. but. possibly. low).

The epicenter of the earthquake was located in the vicinity of the
Khaniyskiy fault at the point of intersection of the Olekma River by it.
Along the fault cutting thesilicifiedpreeaabrian crystalline linestone of
the Udokan series of the late proterozoic. joints were formed
running 200 to 250 aetera. As a result of the opening of the old fault.

absorption of the block eaterial of the placer covering the rent began
(Kochetkov. 1964. p ‘1).

They differed from the seisaodislocations connected with the force 9
earthquake by the anal! aaplitudes of the shifts (the difference in naxiaun
shifts was 10 to 15 tines).

In order to discover the epicentral zones of the force-8 earthquakes. the
seismogravitational phenoaena appeared to be sore reliable. The basic
difficulty here is to establish the aiaultaneousness of the for-ation

and independence of then with respect to exogenic causes. In the force 8
isoseisaal field of earthquakes with an intensity of force 9 or more. the
residual seisaogrsvitational deformations develop over a larger area than
for the force 8 earthquakes. Pseudotectonic deforlation can occur here.
For example. in the case of the central laykal earthquake of 29 August 1959
(”-6-3/6. force 9. h-lb kn) in the force 8 zone. a line of mud eruptions
about 10 ka long was for-ed (at an epicentral distance of up to 43-65 kn).
The cones of the and volcanoes are associated with the cracks which are
oriented along the lines of the large blind faults coVered by a series of
neogenic-Quaternary sediments 370 to 700 asters thick. The established
width of the cracks is to 10 ca. They were filled with sand and quicksand
injected fro. below (Solonenko. V.. Treskov. 1960).

Such neptunian dikes can be used for deter-ination of the pleistoaeisa
regions of the preseisnostatistical earthquakes. They differ from the
ordinary neptunic dikes by the presence of repeated spouting channels.
Otherwise they are difficult to distinguish froa the exogenic neptunic
dikes.

la the sharply broken aountain regions in the force 8 (and higher) iso-
seisaal area mass landslips occur. Under other equal conditions their

43

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

number. nice and paths of motion after a force-8 isoseiss are sharply

reduced. which for regional engineering-seissogeological studies will
permit core or less certain outlining of the force-a zone.

Force 9 (ll-6-l/2 to 7)

The regional and zonal deformations during force 9 earthquakes are clearly
exhibited only under especially favorable conditions. predowinantly on the
low-lying banks of large bodies of water. The geodetic studies indicate
noveaent of the earth's crust with amplitudes exceeding the possible
observation errors in an area to 600-800 knz.

The local seisnodialocations are represented predominantly by leiIIO?
tectonic fractures and only in two cases have we been able to observe
gravitational-seisnotectonic subsidence which can be connected with the
force 9 earthquakes.1

0n the path of the seissogenic fault or in the cracks connected with it.
Joints are formed which extend tens or hundreds of seters and. rarely
more than 1 he. The total extent of the joint zone reaches 2 to 3 ha.
and in the case of predoainance of the shear coaponent. sosetiaes up to
l0-12 Ian In the latter case obviously we are dealing not with the
consequence of an earthquake. but with total residual defer-ations
connected with the main shock. its aftershocks and the shifts taking place
after the earthquake. The initial saxilal asplitude of the vertical die-
placeaent can increase fro. 0.8-1.2 to 3-5 meters.

The significant seisnogravitstional deformations are observ over an
area of up to 600-800 n.2, menu to 5,000 to 6.000 laa . In the
force 9 isoseissal area of force 10 earthquakes under the corresponding
conditions. seissically excited earth and rock streams occur.

Force 10 (M-7-7-3/6)

In the case of force 10 and sore powerful earthquakes. depending on the
type of aeiasogenic structure. the norphostructure and geological struc-
ture of the seismic region. the regional and zonal residual deforestions
of the earth's crust are manifested to a different degree. and various
types of aeissodialocations are for-ed with different extent. aspiitude
of the vertical and horizontal shifts. gaping of cracks and the nature
of the seisnogravitationsl and other accospanying phenouena. In the case
of the upthrust faults. powerful. but short (fros several kilometers to
15 ha. in the case of strike-slip nor-a1 faults up to 30 ha) joints

 

 

lSTRUKTURY LAISKALDI l TSBRI “A KAVKAZE [stsksldi and Tserl Structures
in the Caucasus! (Solonenko. V.. Khrosovshikh. 1976).

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

occur up to 15-20 meters wide (for upthrust faults, strike-slip thrust
faultu and nvorthruutn the fractures are predominantly closed) with an
amplitude of vertical displacement of up to 7 to 8 neters. For shifts.
the Joints are less expressed. but the total extent of the cone can
reach 100 ha. The sonal deformations are the most obvious in the case of
block seismosenic structures. The blocks 250 to 300 km2 in area are

shifted. Sonatiaes sraben-lihe subsidences and stripping of the mountain
peaks occur.

The seiemogrsvitational phenoaens occur over an area of up to 40.000 knz.
The landslips reach gigantic dimensions and often generate seismically
excited rock streams. Under favorable geological-geomorpholosical
conditions. especially in the loess areas. sass development of earth
avalanches is observed which can form seisaicaily excited earth streams
often eore destructiVe than the earthquake itself. In the case of
sufficiently detailed studies, the aorphostructure and internal structure
of such streams pernit reliable distinction of them free the formations
of other genesis (Solonenko. V., 1970b. l973a).

Force ll ("-7-3/6 to 8-1/6)

The regional seisaotectonic movemenis of the earth's crust encompass an
area of up to 100.000 to 120.000 km . possibly. even more.

The area of zonal defornations depends on the type of seismogenic structures.
but. obviously. it is no less than oo-soxzo-so km.

In order to discover the regional and tonal paleoseismotectonic aoveaenta
of the earth's crust. detailed and exact seoaorphological studies are
required over a broad area which will perait establishment of a sudden
simultaneous change in conditions of denudation and sccunulation.

Such studies have still not been performed although the first steps in this
direction have been taken in Japan (Sigi-ure. 1960). Alaska (Plafker, 1968)
and the Caucasus (Solonenko. V., Khromovskikh. 1976).

The local seisaodislocstiona in the case of force ll earthquakes are
formed over a significant area (thousands or up to 20.000 square meters).
Two extreme groups have been isolated which have different autual con-
versions (Solonenko. V.. 1962b. 1973c; ACTIVE WES...” 1966).

I. In the strain zones in the case of fault movenents. powerful, but
not extensive (20 km or more) joints are for-ed with observed saplitude
of vertical displacement to 10 to 12 aeters (Aacamshoye earthquake on

12 June 1897. force ll. HOB.0). and with respect to the peleoseismo-

dislocations. up to several tens of meters.

2. In the case of shifts extended (up to 350 ha) fracture zones are
formed with small amplitude of vertical displace-eat. The main fractures
are made up of feathering tension and compression joints. in places

65

P08 OIFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

(especially in the sections where the shiftchanges strike) they become
seisaotectonic trenches up to 8-10 meters or sore wide. According to the
paleoseismogeological data. in the presence of force-ll earthquakes. the
"broken plate" structures can be formed with radially diVerging and
branching network of normal faults and fault trenches up to 20 meters
wide in the rocky ground (Khromovskikh. 1965).

The gravitational-seismotectonic and seismogravitationsl deformations can
be represented by all known types. The latter encompass an area of up to
150. 000 km2 or more (at an apicentral distance of up to 350 km). The
former are coordinated with the seismogenic faults and have an amplitude
of vertical displacement to several tens. possibly. a hundred meters.

Force 12 (ﬁgs-lid)

The sharp changes in relief and hydrography over the entire area of zonal
movements of the earth's crust (established area to 7. 000 to 10. 000 km2 )
and noticeable regional variations. oVer an area to 300. 000 km2 and more.
The fracture zones. reactivated and newly formed. extend up to 650 km.
possibly. even more (in the Chilean earthquakes 21-22 Hay 1960. according
to the seismologic data. the fracture zone at the bottom of the Pacific
Ocean was 960 to 1280 km long: see Plafker. Savage. 1970). and the estab-
lished total length of the fractures in the pleistoseism region of
continental earthquakes reaches 850 km (Solonenko. V.. 1963a; Plorensov.
Solonenko. 1965. 1966).

The specific deformations of the force 12 earthquakes are gravitational-
seismotectonic wedges with an amplitude of vertical displacement of
hundreds of meters and shearing of the large mountain peaks. Inasmuch as
the seismic accelerations during such earthquakes can be twice the gravi-
tational acceleration. it is necessary to assume the possibility of

the formation of the most improbable deformations.

Until recently. only one pleiatoseism zone of a force 12 earthquake
completely located on dry land had been investigated in detail with the
application of a special aerial photographic survey. the informativeness

of which was almost exhaustive. All of the known types of disjunctive
dislocations and previously unknown deformations -- gravitational-tectonic
wedge with a vertical displacement amplitude up to 328 meters and shear-

ing of the mountain peaks -- have been established in it. The instantaneous
formation of thick mylonites obviously is also a specific feature of the
force 12 earthquakes (Solonenko. V.. l960a.c. 1963a; Plorensov. Solonenko,
I965. 1966).

Seismic Conditions and Paleoseisnodislocations

None of the existing seismolocic and seismogeological methods offers the
possibility of reliably determining two in practice most important
elements of the seismic regime: the maximum intensity and recurrence rate
of powerful earthquakes.

‘6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It Is impossible in this respect to underestimate the significance of the
recurrence rate charts. the seismic activity charts. the K—pesk and the
seismic sulnerability. that is. the seissologic method of
determining the neat important parasetars of the seissicrosinﬂndeweloped
by Yu. V. Rianichenko. et al (Rianichenko. 1958. 1962. 1966). However.

we should also not overestisate them. for the detersination of the maximum
intensity and recurrence rate of the most powerful earthquakes remains
their "Achilles heel": according to these data it is iapossible to
determine on what level the curve should be discontinued or inflected and
in each seisaic tone it is necessary to propose the possibility of a
force-9 earthquake. The recurrence rate of the earthquakes which is close
to true can be obtained only for broad (a ninimun of tens of thousands of
square kilometers) areas. and the area of destructive treaots (of force 8
or sore) in the case of force 9 and force 10 earthquakes usually is s total
of 6.500 to 8.000 kmz. This greatly lowers the applied significance of
the Indicated nethoda during seismic detailing and aicroregionaliaation.

Yu. V. Riznichenko esphaaises that the dependence of K on the activity

is of a general nature and is almost identical for allngf the seismic regions
-- weakly and highly actiVe. Therefore the most difficult problem is
dissemination of the possible intensity of the earthquakes which requires
gathering of historic material over the longest possible time (Risnitachenko.
1973). We have already demonstrated (Solonenko. V.. Khromovskihh. 197‘),
that even for such a seismic region that is rich in seismostatistical data
as the Caucasus. the Rianichenko method can give distortions of the true
picture as a result of incompleteness or nonequivalent aeislostatistical
data. In particular. on the It“x map of the Caucasus (Riznichenko.
Dzhibladze. 1972) the K-16 isolines cut the seismic zone of the main
Caucasus fault (insufficient information!) which is unique with respect to
paleoseismogeological data. and the seismic danger of the Tbilisi region
(K-l7. that is. more than force lo) is high (the relative redundancy of the
informationl). There is no doubt that using paleoaeismogeological data
would make it possible significantly to refine the “max map of the Caucasus.

The prediction of powerful earthquakes by seismic cycles proposed by

S. . Fedotov (1960) at first glance appears enticing. At the present
time this has served as the reason for broad popularization of the method.
For large seismic zones it can be and is applicable. but within the limits
only of theoretical-reference goals. In order to predict seismic danger
for a specific local section. it is more than risky to use this aethod.
"The main assumption of this procedure is the hypothesis of constancy of
the seismic regimen. without this hypothesis. it is impossible to determine
the recurrence rate of the earthquakes" (Pedotow. 1968. p 137). Neverthe-
less. it is well known that we cannot talk about constancy of the seismic
regimen for the local areas (the earthquake prediction used in practice is
expedient only in the case where we can).

‘7

FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. A. Pedntnv consider» that for the Japanese-Kamchatka section of the
Pacific Ocean zone the average duration of the seismic cycle (the time
hulwnﬂn twn unrlhqunban of maximum force. "11—1/6) is 160+60 vcnra. The
uvvrnnv duration Hi the inrvuhovk and aftershock perinda In I) years each.
it is proposed that after a powerful earthquake and powerful aftershock

a "normal" seismic regimen arises. of course. without disastrous earth-
quakes in the center zones (their dimensions are up to 100x500 km; see
Pedotov. 1968. Fig l. but the fact that this is not the case is obvious
from the data on the zone investigated by S. A. Fedotov. Near

Lake Hokkaido in 1896 there was an earthquake with ">8 and consequently,
in the "center zone" a subsequent earthquake with HaT-Slb could be
expected (with an average duration of the seismic cycle of 143 years; see
Fedotov, 1968. p 126) only at the beginning of the 21st century. Actually.
on b harch 1952 the disastrous earthquake occurred with H-8.6, and in 1971,
with "-7.2. The latter earthquake cannot be considered as an aftershock
of the 1952 earthquake (latei). nor as a foreshock of the next maximum
earthquake (earlyi). From the practical point of view it is entirely
indifferent what this "seismic cycle" element is: the epicenter was
located nearer to the island than the epicsnters of 1896 and 1952 and.
consequently. although "nonmaximal." the earthquake could turn out to be
more harmful than the "maximal" earthquake with the epicenter located
farther from shore.

0n the K11 Peninsula in 195b there were two "most powerful earthquakes"
in a 25-hour period (Richter. 1963; p 566). 0a 7 December 1966 and

20 December 1966, two maximum earthquakes occurred in the same "center
zone" (”-8.3 and 8.6) with close epicenters.

Earthquakes (H~8.3 and 8.6) with merging center zones occurred near

Honshu Island on 23 October 1899 and 31 August 1896. It is possible to
present a number of other examples both with respect to the Pacific Ocean
and other less active zones, where the duration of the seismic cycle

"is many hundreds of thousands of years" (Pedotov. 1968, p 126). The lat-
ter ilﬂBdiﬂtely ~excludes the possibility of the application of this method
for the majority of seismic territories (80 to 902 of the seismically
active area of Siberia).

How confusing this method can be in its practical application of earth-
quake forecasting can also he seen in the example of our Baykal seismic
zone. For its greater part it is necessary to consider the earthquakes
with "26.5 (force 9 and more) "maximal." During a decade there should be
on the average three such earthquakes over an area of 221.000 km . In
reality. in 1957-1967 there were five earthquakes with H-6.5-7.9; of them.
three (Nyukzha. H-6..: Olekma, ”-6.5; and Tas-Yuryakhskoye.
Mn7) were in an area of less than 500 kmz.

In the vicinity of the Seleng! River delta over an area of about 1,000 km2

three "maximal" earthquakes occurred in a century; 12 January 1862,

force 10 ("37-3/6). 26 November 1903 force 8-9 (M‘6-l/2), 29 August 1959.
force 9 (H-6~3I6). and their zones of destructive tremors (force 8 and
higher) overlapped each other.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'03 O'VlCIAL USE ONLY

All of the eslsting sethods of analysis and forecasting of the seisalc
ronditionsareseisnostatistical. but the paleoseisaogeological neﬂwﬂ

has the possibility of obtaining data about the strongest earthquakes in

s more prolonged tine period. Therefore the detersination of the nssiasl
earthquakes aust he couples with respect to eels-ologlcal and paleoseisso-
geological data. The nap of the aaxiasl earthquakes and their sVerage

(long range) recurrence rate must he latched with the seisaogeologital

data. without which no nap and no forecast can he recognized as satisfactory
inasmuch as the seisaic process is a geological process. which is forgotten
or not considered in general hy the majority of seisaoiogists.

Research Procedure

First of all it is necessary to consider that the psleoseis-ogeological
observations are a cosponenr part of the couples seisaological. scisso-
‘pnlogical and geophysical studies. In the case of regional and detailed
selsnlc regionalitstion. and in the especially highly seisaic zones '-
even during nicroregionalieation (for sore precise detersinatlon of the
initial calculated force) -- it is necessary to once-pass areas of tens
and hundreds of tlnusands and even more then s sillion square hilaseters
with the paleoseisnogeological observations. it is natural that without
prelininary serious and conprehensive preparations for field studies in
such areas it is possible to search unsuccessfully for core than I year
for paleoseisnodislocations. Therefore. during the paleoseissogeological
studies. they have thenselves been divided into the following stages.

I. rreiiainary Laboratory Preparation

According to the seissostetistical. historical-srchaeological. seissoiogitnl.
geological and geophysical. geosorphological and other aaterials (depend-

ing on local conditions) the areas of probable asnifestation of powerful
earthquakes have been isolated. and in then. in accordance with the proposed
or known type of seisnogenerating structures. the geoaorphological and

engineering-geological conditions. the sections of sore probable appearance
of residual seisaogenic deformations.

2. Decoding of Aerial rhetographs

Var the isolated regions decoding of the aerial photographs takes place.

The optiani scale of the photographs is l:30000. 0n the 1:60000 scale
photographs. as our aany years of experience have deaonstrated. frequently
the snail seisnodislocations do not find expression or they are difficult

or impossible to distinguish free the photoefiects of other aorphosculptures.
especially in forested areas. The large-scale photographs are decoded

for the sections of previously isolated structures and in the case of

their aerovlaual exaninatian and field docunentstion.

69

P03 OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI ONICML US! ONLY

in order to obtain prelininary quantitative paraneters of the seislodisloca-
tions it is necessary to perfors instruoent processing of .‘he photographs.

it is easy for the nonspecialist to naster quantitative decoding on an
interpea-toscope.

It is ispartant that the participants in the seisoogeological studies
know hou to obtain stereoeffects without a stereoscope. which greatly
accelerates the esaninntinn of the photographs (and for one field season
it is necessary to esa-ine thousands or tens of thousands of then). it
sakes it possible to make full use oi the photographs directly in the
Held and soleti-es to consider the details of the seiseogenic and non-
seismgenic oorphosculptures which cannot be caught with an ordinary
stereoscope (the photographs are beat for this purpose).

The results of the decoding are plotted on topographic naps on which sero-
visual routes will be drawn.

1. Aerovisual Observations

Ilemvisual observations nust be parlor-ed not only in the sections of
proposed paleoseisoodislocations isolated by the aerial photographs. but
nine in the sections of possible active aeisoogenic structures isolated in
accordance with the geological-geophysical data: in connection with the
conditions of the discussion during the aerial photograph asaestly sole-
tises eVen highly distinctive seianodislocations are not recorded on the
photographs or are very unclearly expressed. Previously in renote areas
we perforoed the aerovisual observations on the Ali-2 or YaK-lz aircraft.
and in nearby areas. especially during ground field operations. on the
lit-l or the til-I- helicopters. iiow the ill-2 turboprop helicopter is the
nest convenient for these purposes (when flying over seisoodislocations

at adnlssibly low speeds). with acne skill aroobservers (on the helicopters
til-l. iii-2 or froo the copilot's seat on an aircraft and the til-b helicopter.
even one observer ) usually are able to see the details of the norpho-
sculptures indicating their seismgenic or nonaeisnogenic nature. to plot
the sclsaodlslocation plan and the plan of the accoapanying phenoeena on
the nap. deter-inc the type of structure. approxinately. and its parameters
(crack width. amplitude of vertical and horizontal displacesents. and so
on). to take photographs and maize recordings. to note the traces of the
ground approach to the structure and together with the pilot. select the
nearest landing site suitable for landing the helicopter.

Io. Field Cunination and Docuentation

[luring the field emination it is necessary first of all to be convinced
of the seisliogenic nature of the isorphosculpture isolated on the basis of
the aerial photographs and aerovisual observations. At first glance this
sinple prohlen often requires sharp observation on the part of the
geologist and free orientation in the problens of tectonics, goo-orphology.
engineering geology. field lithology. petrography. and so on.

50

[OI OFFICIAL US! ONLY
'03 OIPICIAL ”I! ONLY

The hroken and pllcntive atructurea, gravitational deforeationa and
(arien of the eedloenta can he a conaequence not of the aeia-ogenic
hut other proceaaee (Solonenko. V.. l962h; 1966. p 13).

The following can renelhle aeiaaodeforlntiona:

l) Paeudotectonic Jointe frequently developed along the ancient faulta
and tectonic Joiata volcano-tectonic dance and depreaaiona. exotectonic
(diapiric and aiailar atructurea. erofolding in the river valleya). anhydrido-
BYPOuI tectonica. JOIOtI of and volcanoes. and in rare caeaa. aatral
etructurea of aeteoritic cratera. the jointa in the folding of the

henda of the heda. exogenic landelipa. auhaidence trenchea and aedinenta

of the alopea. landalipa. landalidea. including rock. connected with then.
In the Coucaaua we encountered curioua exogenic for-a recorded not

unly by aerial photographa during aeroviaual ohaervationa. hut aleo on
the firat ground expeditiona aa aeielogenic faulta -- theae are the upper
ednca of canyona filled with the landalip aaaa (the vicinity of Aatkel
Lake) or ancient alluviua (the kolkhid foothilln on thelorodi River and
coat of it). The edge of the canyon itaelf excellently aiaulatea a

fault ncnrp. and the aubaidence Jointe. the accoopanying aeialotectonic
Jointa. Noreover. in the walla of auch Jointa. the alip aurfacea
were forced in placea with atriation of the atrike-alip fault type. Only

a detailed inveatigation (in the latter caae) hoe aade it poaeihle to
catahliah that the general direction of the "atructure" waa deterained by
the edge of the ancient canyon longitudinal to the ridge. and thediaplaca-eat
in the courae of the aubaidence of part of the blocka in the direction of
the aodern canyona tranaverae to the ancient onea. created an illuaion of
nhift. lnaaauch aa the auhaidence jointa go deeper than the aodern
aurfoce of the ancient alluviu. in placea diaplac-eattookplace under

coapreaaion conditione. and grooving and alip atriationa occurred on the
voila of the iointa in the liaeatone;

2) Glacial and nival foraationa: lateral. radial and aapecially narginal
channels. preaeure norainea accoapanied by glacial dialocationa (eapecially
overthruata and large glacial erratic aaaaea). groovea on the ahouldera of
the trough valleys. auhglacial hollowa. aultiatory valleya. longitudinal
ranpnrta of lateral Iorainea on the alopaa of the valleya. fluvioglacial
foraa of relief. nival trougha and ewella. and no on.

The periglacial fielda of the earth conea. eoletilea the conea of the
soffogion-lubgtdcncc relief can be aiailnr to the aeia-ically excited
earth avalanchea end atreana with reapect to aorphoeculpture. The
neiaaogenic foraationa differ fro- the latter. aa was noted above. by the
prcnence of apouting channelo which are eatahliahed on excavating the conea:

l) The eroaion force. including the and flow canyona. the runoff trougha.

especially in the field with large tectonic jointing when hollow naaaive—
paeudotcctonic forna of relief are created:

5]

'0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OPPIOIAL 083 ONLY

4) ongenic-grnvitational for-s (landslides. landslips. landslide and
landslip trenches which aosetines create the illusion of aeissogenic
shearing of the aountain tops near the corries and horn peaks):

5) Ferns of selected denudation - prepared contacts including tectonic.
veined bodies. in the arid and aesiarid landscape zones. deflation for-s
which are the sharpest on coincidence of the strike of a weak layer or a
detritus. zone with prevailing direction of the wind;

6) Under per-afroat conditions - melting of the veined ice, solifluction
swells and mountain terraces. the frontal swells of the rock streass.
and spring soflosion rills:

7) Artificial shapes -- ancient irrigation systess and other hydro-
engineering structures. ritual and other paths. ancient defensive struc-
tures which can extend tens and hundreds of hila-eters (the Genghis Khan
respect in Southeastern Transbaykal and Northern Mongolia). soseti-es

making good use of the tectonic scarps in the relief. underground workings.
and so on.

With the expansion of the seissogeological studies in the various geologi-
cnl-geonorphological and landscape senes. the list of pseudoseisnogenic
for-s. of course. will be expanded. but the qualified seissogeologists
will distinguish the seissogenic for-etions fro. sisilar for-ations of
other genesis without error if not by aerial photographs and aerovisual
observations. then by ground observations. although (in rare cases) it is
impossible to do this with certainty without pining operations.

This is why in the initial stages of the develop-eat of the procedure we
warned against excess involve-ent of paleoseissogeology (Solonenko. V..
l962b). Unfortunately. at the present tile reports and articles have
appeared on the probless of paleoseissogeology based on the published data.
sosetiaes reinforced by deciphering the aerial photographs. This. of
course. is an easy. quick way to accumulate information. but it is the
shortest way to the grossest errors.

The seis-ogenic structures are carefully documented: a general seisso-
nenlunicnl plan and the seat detailed seialogenic defornations with its
aorphnnetry are coapiled. The relation of the seisaogenic for-ntions

to the tectonic structures and geological forsations of the area has been
discovered. The age and force of the earthquahea and also the potential
seisnic activity of s large sorphostructure or part of it within the
lisits of which they have developed. and the seat probable sections of
residual deforsations and probable paths of aovesent of the seissogenic
landslips. earth avalanches and streass. and so on. have been established
by couples signs.

in the case of detailed regionalization and aicroregionalization in the
vicinity of paleoseisaodislocations. tenporary seismic stations have
been set up to deter-ins the degree of modern seislic activity of the

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OPPICIAL US! ONLY

structure. depth and mechanism of the centers and the solution of other
ecimgeologivnl nruhlcmn.

Uhen organising eeismological observations. as our experience has demon-
strated. it is necessary to consider that the younger and more powerful

the seismic dislocations. the lower their modern seismic activity. For
example. in the powerful China-Vakatshaya structure obviously formed on

1 February 1725. only one epicenter was recorded in l962-l96h. The
powerful zone of young seismic dislocations on the western shore of Baykal
is slightly active. Therefore. in such seisnic dislocations it is necessary
to plan are prolonged seissic observations than in the dislocations with
on ego of many hundreds or a few thousand years.

During the period since the time of first utilisation of the residual
selsnogcnic deformations to discover the seienogenic tectonic structures
and epicentrel sones of powerful earthquakes. the correctness of the
paleoseismogeological method has been confirned both by subsequent seismic
eventn and the results of our application of it and its application in
almost all highly seismic zones of the world Thus. in the northeastern
port of the saykal seismic belt noted at the end of 1956 (Plorensov. et
al.. 1960). eorthquakesoccurred: Huye 27 June 1957. force lo—ll
(H-7.9); nYukrhs 5 January 1958. force 9 (h-6.S); Olekma

l6 September 1958. force 9 (H-6.S): Central leykai 29 August l959.

force 9 ("-6-3/6); Tas-Yuryakhskoye 18 January 1967. force 9'10 ("-7).
for force 8 ("OS-3M4) and more then 30of force 6 to 7.

The paleoseismogeologicol studies in the Central Asian and Caucasian
seisaic provinces demonstrated that such earthquakes as Psyzabad.
Ashrhabad. Khait. Chkhalta end others which turned out to be unexpected.
onoealous for seismic regions distinguished with respect to seismo-
statistical. instrument and geological datg occurred in areas where there
are paleoseismogeologicel traces of the same type or even more powerful
earthquakes (Solonenko. V.. 1970b. 1972a. b. l973a-c; Trifonov. 1971;
Solonenko. Khromovskikh. 1976; Nikonov. 1976). On the other hand. ithas
beeoestablished that at times the seismic danger or probable recurrence
rateof seismic disasters is unreasonably high (Solenko. V.. 1978).

The poloosoismogeologicel method is still the most reliable method of
determining maximum earthquakes (with "36.5) with crustal centers and
their average recurrence rate and the only method for deternining the
potential seismic danger of seismologicaliy uninvestigated territories

and when reconstructing the geological history of the development of the
seisaic processes.

Poleoscismogeology has at the present time such a strong base that it is
impossible to shake its foundation. and only people who are unfamiliar
with the results of the investigations of the pleistoseism regions of
powerful earthqunkes of the highly seismic belts of Europe. Asia. Africa.
New Zealand. North and South America. can doubt its effectiveness.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OPﬁlClAL USE ONLY

The paleoseismogeological method has been sufficiently well checked out
that it can be included in the mandatory set of criteria for substantiating
the seismic regional. detailed and microregionalization maps.

Discussion

We have already noted (Solonenko. 9.. 1973c) that the paleoseisaogeological
method has not been subjected to substantiated criticism. Moreover. some
of the specialists in adjacent sciences with seismogeology have easily
come to detect paleoaeismodislocationa where they cannot occur or take
formations of other genesis for them or to use the method to discover
earthquake epicentere in ancient (before the erchean) series. and so on.
Therefore. at the beginning of the development of the method it was
emphasized that excessive use of the proposed method can do it greater
harm than unqualified criticism (Solonenko. V.. 1962b).

we have constantly emphasized that the paleoseismogeological method is a
component part of the complex geological-geophysical method of determining
the level of seismic artivity of seismogenersting morphostructures. The
statement that "in the works of certain Siberian scientists the paleo-
seismodislocations have been taken as a barely unique ... geological
criterion of seismicity" (Petrushevskiy. 1967. p 65) is based on misunder-
standing. ln our publications on the seismicity of large regions the main
body (6/5) of works deal with the geological. geophysical and seissologic
criteria of seismicity.

The quite ordinary objections of our opponents include: 1) residual
deformations can occur during slow movements of the earth's crust: 2)
residual deformations are not tectonic. but gravitational formations:

3) it is impossible to determine the intensity of the earthquakes by the
size of the seismodislocations.

l. The occurrence of deformations of the earth's crust without perceptible
earthquakes morphologically similar to seismic dislocations is actually
possible (see p 51). However. the paleoseismogenic structures have been
discovered, as a rule, not by one sign. but by a set of signs. The
combination of seismotectonic and (or) gravitational-seismotectonic
deformations with seismogravitational is the most reliable. The slowly
developing deformations are not accompanied by gravitational ones which
could be taken as seismogravitational.

The scismogenic deformations, as a rule. are under -geomorphological

conditlzgs such that preservation of slowly developing joints is impossible
(see p ).

2. Some opponents. who have not seen seismic dislocations in reality doubt

their seismotectonic nature and try to show (not by fact. but by subjective
notions) that they have a gravitational or seismogravitational nature.

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

.__. ._.. .‘....._.. .2.._; '_
~.' '42'v".':|”.‘.’,‘ .
I "I?“ .>

SS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
 

7r", i'.
POM OPPICIAL US! ONLY

Such ideas are the legacy of the old views that the residual deformations
pertain only to the loose cover soil. The Gobi-Altay earthquake finally
refuted such ideas. but efforts are made to revive them in one form

or another from time to time. It is symptomatic that among the proponents
of the surface nature of seismodislocations we do not know a single author
who hes examined even one disastrous earthquake. The irrefutable facts
confirming the tectonic nature of seismodislocationa are available in as
large a number as one might like. and almost every new earthquake with
M>6.S and a crustal center increases the number of such facts. The
comparison of the mechanism of the movement of the earth's crust connected
with earthquakes determined independen'ly by aeismogeoiogical and seiamo-
logic methods (Balahin. et al.. 1972). of course. if the aeiamodislocations
were completely and qualifiedly mapped. is in itself irrefutable proof of
the deep nature of seismodiscloations.

He encountered. perhaps. the most active desire to refute the tectonic
nature of the dislocatious after their discovery in the greater Caucasus.
The discussion in this area only inhibits the development of paleoseisno-
geological research in the Caucasus vithout substantiation. Therefore we
shall present two examples.

0n the left side of the Tsintskali River Canyon (15 km east of the lnguri
Hydroelectric Powerplsnt), the Kvira structure has been mapped (Pig 9).
This is a fault extending about 2 km with vertical displacement amplitude
in the Jurassic sandstone-tufogenic soil. A one-sided graben has been
formed on its southern section (60X500 meters). The fault cut through

5 channels of temporary streams previously flowing into the Tsintskali
River. and it sent their flow together with the waters of a group of
powerful springs associated with the aeiasodislocations through the broken
divide into the Dzholori River. The large landslips are connected with
the structure. inasmuch as the structure cuts the divide along the
diagonal. it is not appropriate to talk about its landslide origin.

0n the divide of the Inguri and Khumpreri Rivers in Svanetia. the solemn-
genie strike-slip normal fault (the Abakura atructure)rejuvenated theprevious
deep fracture (hyperbasites with sulfide mineralization are tied to it

in the structure zones). The strike-slip normal fault (amplitudes 0.5-

20 and 50 meters respectively) 3.7 km long intersects the divide

diagonally (Fig 10). The fracture is continuing to absorb elastic material.
The depth of the closed absorbing swallow holes reaches 50 meters. A

line of powerful landslips is coordinated with the zone (on its continua-
tion to the east and west).

Just as in the first case. the gravitational nature of the Abakura
structure has been excluded.

3. The intensity of the earthquakes with respect to aeismodislocations
is determined. as a rule. quite reliably (some examples are presented in
Table l) by conversion in terms of magnitude (according to formula (2).

p 12).
56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Lnation of H by Deformations ( ) and lnstrunent Data (H )
i

 

 

Principal zone of Type of

wt: faults. length, in deformation Hp
Tsetserlag. 130 Slip-strike thrust 8.6

fault
Severe-Khansayakaya. 370 Strife-slip thrust 8.7

faul:
San Andreas. 300 Shift 8.‘
Huya. 30 Oppositely directed 7.9

strike-slip actual
and strike-slip
thrust faults

Gobi-Altay. 270 Strike-slip thrust 8.6
fault

Hogodsksya, 65 Strikc.slip thrust 7 3/6
fault

Dasht-e—Bayaz. 25 Strike-slip normal 7.5
fault

raphic references: 1 -- Vozncsauskiy, 1907 (dimensions and types
are precisely defined); 2 - Richter. 1963: 3 - Solonenko, V..
; 6 - Rothe. 1969: S -- 6081..., 1963: 6 - Pogrebinskiy. Chern
as in the USSR. 1970; 8 - Tchalanko. Anhraseys. 1970.
.32. 38.3 ~§.3I:-Zoucox 2: no 3.39.28 .8... .2.

.mmmou 0» mam—v.33- ..Oucoaoua .2 II a
Snow

«$3 .259 3 ”3.8302. .n u

o» «5330. 6 “an: 5:30.“ 3 93308. .n.
roman Jayson“ vac 9.02.33 3 9.2.33. .n

 

6-: 870-8 ﬁn: 3-73 6-: 8.9.3
3.22 .3853... .< 8 9:388 .2

«935.5 on» .«o a»... 05 o» nan—:39. : .n I a
AonIUI awash—0: vowuwvsv
.nuz “hop—och 3 nanvuouoc .3
“do: $520.60: 3 "59.300- .0
n .330 3.33 .h “gov—conga .>
“an: .4. u. .939th 0» 9.2.2.30 .v
25 0333-: .~ 338 .o~ .u

 

 

”E
“HAV
Elna-II «if : l.~.ol~q 6.I¢lo~.~.l‘ "alt-€6.33 6I0l£6l2 "match...—
I I I I 8|: .BA I .3 a .i .6 .3 u.
v:
m
B «a = I I :I: 4.7.... .3 4... .2. .2. a... .o =
m...
n o. s a. a. 4.7. .2. . .i .3 E. .2. 2
m a.
I
n. .3A a a. 9 0T». «L3 .. .3 .3 a 1. .i a
O
m 3A 3 z z «T: 4.7.3 .3 .3 .3 .3 .3 .3 .
3A a. z 8 3|». .RI.€ .S a .3 a .6 .3 n
3 9 n. a. 9|: .31.... a .3 .3 .3 q. n o
I m I 8:- ..II I. III 8..- ....u I. an... I al-
u T
Snail-.84.: ‘ Saéluotﬂon tinge-3.8
“I a! v a In"

 

.DI :IIIoII IIII:

58

FOR OFFICIAL 083 0331.?
POR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 10. Xvira Structure. South Slope of the Greater
Caucasus. Photograph by V. P. Solonenko.

The ratios of lo and H (or K), according to different authors. are within
the limits of accuracy of the analysis (see Table 2). Therefore the
objections to the determination of the force of earthquakes by magnitude
in the absence of corresponding macroseismic data in the epicenter are
clearly meaningless. Nevertheless. these objections have been encountered
in recent years when discussing the nethod of compiling the new seismic
regionalirstion map of the USSR.

The force index remains and will remain for a long time the base for seismic
regionalizstion for utilitarian purposes. For the enormous uninhabited
areas or sparsely inhmbited areas the determination of the intensity of
earthquakes in the overwhelming majority of cases is possible only in

terms of magnitude and aeisaodeformations for strong earthquakes.

59.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

CNAPTBR It. STRUCTURAL-TBCTONIC RBGIONALIZATION 0? THE PRBCBNOZOIC
BASBNENT

The structural-tectonic regionalisation of the southern part of Eastern
Siheria (Fig 11) was carried out in accordance with the formational-
structural and tectonic signs (time of formation of the structures. true
composition. peculiarities of lithogenesis. metamorphism. magmatism. fold-
ing. position in the geostructural system and the sequence of the transition
from the geosynclinal development to platform). The reader will find a
detailed structural-tectonic description of the baykal mountain region in
the paper by L. l. Salop (1967).

Region of Pre-Ripheen Folding

In the southern part of the Siberian platform a nest ancient folded base-
ment is most completely represented in the territory of the Aldsnskiy
Shield. The outcrops of the pre-Riphean tectonic complexes on the surface.
their geological structure and setsmorphism indicate the complex
heterogeneous structure of the lower platform stage. the greater part of
which is covered under a thick mantle of slightly dislocated Paleozoic

and neaosoic series.

Alden Shield

The age of the most ancient Alden metamorphic complexes (the Iyengrshaya
and Dzheltulinskaya series) is 2.640 billion to 2.3‘0 billion years
(TEKTONIKA YZVRAZII [Tectonics of Eurasia]. 1966). which permits them to
be paralleled with the saamides of other shields. The structures bordering

the ancient nucleus on the west and south (the Olekma and Stanovoy
zones. including the Kodaro-Udokan trough) belong to the Karelion
phase of the folding. for the deposits of the Udokan. series are

penetrated by the synorogenic intrusions of the Kuandinshiy complex of
granitoids (1.650 billion years).

Several stages have been isolated in the nest ancient history of formation
of the southwestern part of the Alden shield. In the beginning the
Aldon lithoplinth was formed (Dzevanovskiy. et al.. 1968. 1970) made
up of the early Archean formations of the lyengrskaya and Dsheltulinskaya

60

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

series deternining the later structural level of the Upper Archean coaplexes
of the Stsnovoy and Olekaa zones. The platfora stage of develop-ant
of the Alden shield itself. which was subjected to significant reworking
during subsequent epochs of tectonic activation. began with the Lower
Proterozoic. Thus. the western part of the investigated territory (the
Kodaro-Udoken. Region) served as the accuaulstion basin of the terrigenic-
carbonaceous beds of the Udoksn series during the Lower Proterozoic.

The plicative dislocations of the Alden Shield have been sharply coupli-
csted by fracture tectonics. The largest faults enter into the system of
the Stanovoy structural suture which extends hundreds of kilometers to the
west and the east. It is controlled by the basite and ultrebasite intru-
sions. a wide band ofdiaphthoritic and cataclase rock. crushing and schist-
foraation zones. The develop-ant of the deep structural sutures and large
dislocations with a break in continuity on each new level of tectonic
activation was predetersined to a significant degree by the plan of the
ancient faults. and frequently proceeded along the folded substrate not yet
touched by the disjunctives. All of this together created a mosaic-block
structure of the Archean base-ant. especially broken in the deep fracture
zones.

Region of Baykal Folding

The folded structures of Beykalide in Eastern Siberia border the pre-
Riphean Siberian platfora on the south in are separated free the
letter by a systea ofnlrgioaldeep faults. They separate the Angere
projection of the platforl into two branches -- western (Seyano-Yenisey)

and eastern (leykal itself). joined together in the vicinity of the southern
extremity of Baykal.

The Yenisey-Sayan Baykalide region forts a narrow strip extending along
the southwestern edge of the Siberian pletforl. It is divided by the
Bol'shoy Sayan fault into two tectonic zones. For one of then. the
platform zone, block uplifts of the ancient Baykslide foundation are
typical. and the other. the outer one. is a deep Riphean trough.

The occurrence and develop-ant of the laykal geosynclinal took place in the
marginal part of the Archean foundation of the pre-Riphean platfor-
which was either partially broken and reworked or was involved in a power-
ful geosynclinal process. Correspondingly, in the aodern erosion section.
large end ssall blocks of reworked Archean rockbdeveloped predoainantly

in the platform part of Eastern Sayan bounded on the southwest by the

Iain Saysn faulg emerge at the surface.

The Archean structures inside the Baykel geosynclinsl tectonic coaplex
itself woke up the Garganahaya block isolated at the beginning of the
Proterozoic in the form of a stably uplifted block. Later. participating
in the geosynclinal process. it separated the ssdiaentation basin into
individual subletitudinnl troughs (Ohinskiy. ll'chirskiy). The uplifted
Garganskaya block was the nucleus of an snticlinoriua.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

FOR OWICIAI. 08! ONLY

The boyltalide couples waa represented by netsaorphic rock lasting up the
two large synrllnoria (Oltinakiy. ll'chlrshiy) and the Khanar-Dabanalziy
onticlinoriua. The set of Proterozoic eil'usiva and sedinentary {emotions
setamrphosed under the conditions of the green shale i’sciea of regional
netnnnrphisa and reflecting a defined geotectonic regise will peroit the
consideration that here. in the ancient Archean foundation an independent
mmuynrliml aystes arose and developed.

The internal structure of the synclinoris is Isade up of aye-uric enticlinals
and synclinals; the overturned folds are observed only along the periphery
or in contact with the Archean blocks. The general sublatitudinai plan of
the folded structures aosetisea is disturbed. This is explained either by
the effect and the reworking of then by the Caledonian aoveaents or the
primary nonuniforl orientation of the Proterozoic structures caused by the
folded-block and block structure of the hasenent (Zaytaev, l963).

‘lhe Khasar-Daban snticlinoritn is asde up of carbonaceous rock of the
aim series, and the lids were Iade up of gnciss of the Khangarul’sltaya
series. The hinge oi the anticlinorius is undulating. wavy in plan view.
with general sublatitudinal strike. lts lisbs are sade up of iolds of
higher orders having analogous orientation.

The Myhal zone enco-passes the western and eastern hayltal region
lPrihaylul'yel. the layltalo-Pato-skoye highlands and a significant part of
the Stnnovoy highland.-

The Archean baaeaent protrudes in its sodern structure in the {on oi‘
sever-1| hlocka hounded by faults -- layltal, Pays Analatskayt.
and so on. The block are Iade up of gneiss-shale and carhonaceous-gneiss
series with a total thickness up to 10 to 12 In (frolova. 1962). Linear
folds of predoninantly northeasterly strike are characteristic for the
Archean supercrystailine (creation. The coaplication of the large folded
force by smaller ones (to sicroplication) and mass granitization oi' the
rock is noted everywhere.

The ueosynclinsl cosples oi Baylulides is broken down into the outer sio-
neosynclinal and the inner eugeosynclinal zones (TECI’OMCS OP wRASiA,
”66). The {or-er. in the for: of a broad are which is convex to the
north. is located along the periphery of the Siberian platform. On the
south it is bounded by :- ayateo or deep faults separating the Angers and
the Aidan M’Ojections of the platfor- iron the folded bayltalide systes.
In the north its lolded structures continue possibly in the direction of
the Vilyuskoyo syneclise. in the outer zone. in addition to the already
aentioned block projections of the ancient baseoent. a masher of large
rulded structures are isolated: hecherakiy. Tonodsltiy and Chuysltiy
antirlinorin. Haaskiy. llodayhinsltiy and Pribsyltol synclinoria.

The internal hayhalide zone occupies the central zone of the Bayltal
muntnin region, cashing upthe broad. cooplexly constructed Borguzino-
Vitin synclinoriun. The side of the synclinoriu- is asde up of s thiclr.

63

“)3 OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

(up to l2 lua) net of bnnlr effuniven and their tuffs of upilite-keratophyre
fnmtlnn nnd letaunrphosed shales. sandstones and linelltones uking up
the lower structural stage. Lens ehaped bodies of hyperbsnite intrueives

are connected with the faults of the pre-layltsl deposit separating the
outer and inner zones.

legion of Coledonlan Folding

ln cnetern Siberia. in accordance with the uodern concepts (Yanshin. et
nl.. 1966: Stizherskiy. et al.. I968). the strip of Caledonian structures
borders tho Siberian Baykelide region ‘ros the south (see Pig ll). The
area of their propagation is bounded by the structural sutures --
Dzhidino-Vitil on the northwest and liongolo-Okhotnk on the southeast.

Out of the two cycles of Caledonian folding development. early and late.
only the tors-er has found reflection here. The geosynclinal regise of
early Cnledonides begins to be exhibited fro. the Riphean. the conpletion
of it takes place at the end of the ﬂiddle and beginning of the Upper
Cnabrian. Over the extent of the entire period. iomtions have occurred

which are standard for early stages in the development of the geosynclinai
regions.

The Caledonides of the investigated area can be divided with respect to
structural-tectonic peculiarities into two parts: Sayeno-Altay (Sarkhoyskiy
synclinoriun) and Transebayltel (Dzhidl and Udino-Vitis synclinoriun).

Sayano-Altsy Zone

‘l'he lower Paleozoic etructures are represented here by synclinal folds in
the troughs which are cosplicated along the perimeter by upthrust faults
and overthruets. The nedisentsry coaplex of the lower to siddle Cubrian
eifueive-terrigenic and terrigenic-carbonsceous roclr. occurs on the erosion
nurface of the Proterozoic and Archean blocks.

The nest coapletely Canbrian deposits are presented in the Sarlthoyskiy
eynclinoriua where the total thickness of the geoeynclinel cowlexly dis-
located series is 6.2 kn. Alongwiththe isoclinal and sy-etric folds with
steep (70-80') lids gently sloping folds are noted which are made up of
f lexures (Vollwlsltov. 1960; Arsent'yev, Volkolakov, 1966).

The lower Paleozoic folding stage turned out to be the final one. The
tectonic structure. the set of functions. ug-atisa sad setauorphima
indicate that here the geosynclinal reginea ended in the pro-Caabrian tine.
In the west the Ssrlthoysltiy synclinoriuls is bounded by the Shutkhulaysltiy

uplift basically undo up of the pre-Baykel nets-orphic couples: belonging to
the region of bayknl folding (TECTONICS OP WSM, 1966).

66

703 OFFICIAL USE DULY
POI 0"“:th USE ONLY

Tronshayhnl Zone

Tho suhzones are isolated in the Trnnshayknl cone. One of then thee-passing
the hnsin oi the upper course of the Dshida River and the left bank of the
Mongolian part of the Selenga liver is represented by the structures of

the Dzhida synclinoriu- node up of two stages of hand-Casbrian deposits.

The central and edge ports of the synclinoriul are Iade up of faults and
folds of diiiarent order. first of all. this pertains to the southeastern
list which is connected vith the proxisity of the active zone of the
bounding deep faults (Afanas'yev. 1973).

Simple linear folds. in places isoclinal and overturned. participate in

the internal forsation of the syncllnoriul. The centriclinsl closure

is cosplicated by s deep fault with northeasterly strike. In the axial

part of the synclinoriun a central onticlinal is isolated which runs tron
the hordern oi the USSR with Mongolia to the central course of the Darkhituy
River. The geosynclinol developnent of the Dzhida subcone itself ended

in the Middle Casbrian.

In the cast the Dzhidn nynclinoriul because the Udino-Vitil {the second
subznne) through the baselsent protrusions. Its boundary runs along the
southeastern slopes of the Khalsr-Daban ridge: the Vitinkan and the
Tsipikan Rivers on the northwest and the central course of the Chihoy.
lngoda nnd Tungir Rivers on the southeast. Sisilarly to the Dzhids. it
occurs on the broken pro-Cslbrian foundation. individual blocks of which
have been retained in the internal geoenticlinal uplifts (nganskoye.
Yoblonovoye. Halkhenskoye. and so on).

hercinian Folding Region

0n the Tectonic ﬂap of Eurasia, the region located southeast of the
Mongolo-Okhotsk structural suture (see Pig 11) is all considered to be
part of the eastern Siberian hercinides. however. in the description of
the nap it is stipulated that this region has nixed structural features.
and the probles of whether it should be classified along the hercinides
or nesozoides cannot be considered finally decided (TECTOﬂlCS OP BURASIA.
I966).

The geonynclinal complexes of the lover structural stage of the hercinides
began to be for-ed in the Ordovician or Silurian. and the end of their
formation belongs to the middle or the tops of the Niddle Devonian
(TECTONICS OP BURASIA. 1966). Beginning with the Devonian and. approx-
inntely. to the upper Carboniferous (in the Aginskiy trough to the

Lower Trinnsic). the coaplexes of the upper structural stage were tor-ed.

In the troughs where the hercinides are deposited. there are silicide-

terrigenic and terrigenic (creations; in the uplifts. they are supple-ented

ly volconogenic. volcsnogenic-plutonic diorite—granite and intrusive
grnnodioritic cosplexes.

65

POI! ONICIAL 052 MM
70R OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The folded series in the outlines of the hercinian seosynclinal are
detected in the Zachikoyskiy. Daurskiy. Aginakiy and the Priargunskiy
Rayons.

A thick (6-7 km) sand-shale Zachikoyskaya series of pre-Permian age has
developed in the chhikoyskiy Rayon. with respect to formations it is
similar to the Central Paleozoic formations of the Aginskoye field and
northeastern Mongolia. The rocks of the Zachikoyskaya series are in places
penetrated by granites 395 million to 625 million years old. which indi-
cstes the possible presence in its composition of Lower Paleozoic rock
(Kosygin. 1965). In the bottoms of this series the polymictic sandstones
predosinate. At the top of the section they are replaced by conglomerates
and striated shales. The largest folded forms here are the Aginskiy
snticlinorium and the Chikokonskiy synclinorium.

A characteristic feature of the Asinskays atructural-formational zone is

the fact that here the seosynclinsl regimen has been retained until the
Persian to Central Triassic (Amantov. 1963). In the Upper Paleozoic to

lower Mesozoic. thick (more than 5 km) series of terrigenic sediments have
accumulated: aleurolitea. polymictic sandstones with lenses of conglomerates
and argillaceous ahalea. The rocks are crushed into linear folds of
different order. Intensive plication and rasval [disintegrated blocks

piled up on mountain slopes] formation'have developed in them. and numer-
ous extended fractures are observed (predominantly overthrusts and shifts).

la the Daurskiy synclinoriun. the section of the sedimentary series differs
somewhat from the adjacent accumulation regions. here carbon-quartz-
sericite shales (in the lower section) and schistose polymictic sandstones
(in the tops) are isolated. In addition. interlayera and lenses of
greenstone metaeffuaives of basic and medium position are encountered in
the section. The total thickness of the deposits is to 5 km (Gorzhevakiy.
and so on. 1970).

The Priareunskaya geosynclinal zone is predominantly made up of large-
clsatic deposits and limestones. Sometimes acid tufogenic rock is
encountered omongthem.The apparent thickness of the deposits is more
than 2 km. In the basement rocks they occur with sharp angular mismatch.
A hrnchyform nature is characteristic of the folded structures of this
zone .

The hercinide section is crowned by proterogenic continental or marine
molasse and sranodioritic Permian-Triassic formations (Zonenshayn, 1967).
with respect to their lithologic attributes they are very similar to the
hercinide sections of many other regions of the eastern part of Central
Asia. 0n the other hand. similarity of then to the aeosynclinal sections
of none of the mesozoide regions of northeastern USSR is detected. The
most characteristic in this respect is the Priarzunskaya zone where in
recent years small fields of marine Upper Triassic and Lower Jurassic
deposits were detected. This has permitted some researchers (TBCTOﬂICS

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVYICXAL USE ONLY

0? RURASIA. L906) to consider the giVen region as a transitional structural
runlnn between Iyplvnl horclnldnn nnd mesozoides.

Region of Nesosoic Activation

The Mesozoic tectonic—magmatic activation has encompassed an enormous

area: the peripheral part of the ancient Siberian platform. the regions
of pra-Riphean Baykal. Caledonian and Hercinian folding and southeastern
Transbaykal where up to the Upper Hesotoic obviously the aubgeosynclinal

regime was retained which was caused by the effect of the Hongolo-okhotsk
synclinnl belt.

The evolution of the mesosoic structure is presented in the following form.
Since the end of the Upper Triassic. large arches have been formed - the
Sayano-Baykal arch and the Yablonovo-Stanovoy arch (Bogolepov, 1967) -

or a single arched uplift (Koreshkov. 1960). In the Middle and Upper
Jurassic. the differentiation of the movements has led to isolation of

the folds with large radius of curvature: the Sayano-Stanovoy outer and
Khentey-Daurskiy inner belts of block uplifts. the Selenga-Vitim zone of
relative subsidence (Arsent'yev. 1967). the Irkutsk and Chul'man foothill
coal-bearing troughs (Selop. 1967). In the Upper Jurassic to the Lover
Cretaceous. differentiation of the block novements are intensified. which

promoted the formation of numerous intermontane basins and block anticlinals
(lvanov. 1949).

The ﬂiddle Jurassic volcanogenic-sedimentary rock of the Selenga-Vitim

zone of relative subsidence are made of acid effusives (falsitea. felsite-
porphyries. porphyrites. quartzitic porphyriea. and so on). tuffs.
tuffocongloleratea. large block conglomerates. gravelites. aleurolites

and argillacsous shales. The series are usually metamorphosed:
chloritisation and silicification appeared in the effusives. and argillaceoua
shales were converted in places to quartz-mica shales. The deep analogs

of the effusives in this age are the subvolcanic formations: microdiorites.

dioritic porphyries. disbase porphyries, alaskites, granoayenites. and so
on.

Inside the western, eastern Sayan part of the outer belt of the block
uplifta with block differentiation. a group of Urda-Oka grabens was formed.
They are bounded on all sides by the fractures of the ﬁain Sayan System.
Here the Fiddle Jurassic deposits are separated into the Naringol'shaya
series (Florensov. 1968) with a total thickness to 2.5 km made up of
breccia. conglomerates. sandstones. aleurolitea. carbonaceous argillites.
gravelites covered bycoarser-clastic conlloneratea and fanglomerates. The
rock is intensely dissociated. Near the fractures bounding the grabens
and making up their internal structure. overturned folds are observed.

0n the whole. simple synclinal folds predominate here (Basharina. 1973).

67

FOR 0!?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the Central Jurassic time, eastern Sayan served as the basic supplier

of elastic material for filling the depressions of the Irkut amphitheater.
The south edge of the latter was at that time a foothills trough which
occurred at the junction of the preoHesozoic folded structures of the Baykal
(northeastern) and Seven (northwestern) directions. The principal age of
sedimentation -- the Middle Jurassic -- was preceded by the formation of

the basal series from 50 to 300~h00 meters thick. The amount of coarsely
elastic material increnses to the south. The sand-aleurolite horizons
contain numerous coal beds. In the southern part of the Irkut amphitheater
a combination of two troughs of Sayan and Baykal orientation converging at
right angles is noted. The Hesozoic synclinals frequently coincide with

the analogous forms of the Lower Paleozoic. Here the former are more gently
sloping and are somehow embedded in the latter. The dip angles of the
Jurassic layers on the limbs of the synclinals reach 20 to 25’.

The Chul'man trough is located in the basin of the upper course of the
Alden. Structural-geological complexes of the Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous
have developed here which make up both the Chul'man basin and the system

of grabens containing it to the east (the Kudulinskiy, Khaniyakiy) and the
relict Mesozoic depressions of the Kodsro-Udoksn' Region.

The western end of the Chul'man basin was represented by the
Nizhnctungurchinskiy or Usmunskiy trough (Dankevich. 1969). It was
executed as a thick series of continental coal-bearing deposits (Hokrinskiy.
l96l. 1962; Hironyuk. et al., 1971). On the whole. with respect to composi-
tion they are alike and are made up of rhythmically alternating conglom-
erates. gravelites. sandstones. sleurolites and srgillites with interlayers
of coal almost completely compensating for the troughs; clearly expressed
geologically. it is weakly manifested in the modern relief which makes it
similar to the type of inverted structures. The total thickness of the
Jurassic sediments is 1350 to 1500 meters (Ishins. 1961), and with respect
to geophysical data. 6.5 km (Hikunov, 196$; Dankevich. et al.. 1970).

By the end of the Middle Jurassic the volcanogenic formation gradually

is replaced by the coal-bearing formation. The conditions of sedimentation
in the Upper Jurassic age were favorable almost everywhere. In Trans-
Baykal, the coal-bearing Gusinoozerskaya series was formed in the Upper
Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous 1.2-2 meters thick. At the same time.
conglomerates. sedimentary breccia. gravelites. sandstones with interlayers

of aleurolites. argiilitea, csrbon-srgillaceous shalea and coals were
accumulated in the northeast.

The formation of the Mesozoic structures was a direct consequence of the
wavy distortion of the earth's surface with the formation of parallel
swells (arches) and subsidence belts between them. The slow wavy bending
(surface folding) was initial. but not decisive, for the faults and bends
hang on each other and follow one out of the other (Florensov. 1954).

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘I

In the example of several of the basins N. A. Plorensov (l960a)comprehen-
sively invastigated the basic structural peculiarities and derived some
general laws of their development. In the majority the basins are
synclinal basement troughs compensated for by thick sedimentary series.
They are not symmetric either in structural or in fscies respects. The
bottoms of the troughs were almost flat end level, and the maximum
depressions are somewhat shifted to one side. The marginal faults are
noted along both sides of the basins. Many of the faults have had an
active influence on the course of sedimentation in the Upper Jurassic to
Lower Cretaceous time. The transverse faults had great significance in
the poeteedimentetion period. The overthrusts occurring in the latest
stages of Hesosoic activation possibly occurred from the more ancient
faults. All of these structural-geological peculiarities are characteris-
tic of the majority of Trans-laykal basins.

Basic Abyssal Fractures

The natural boundaries between the regions of the Seas. Kerolian.
Baykal and ﬂercinian folding are usually the large zones of abyssal
fractures extending 800 to 1000 km (the Main Seyan. Stanovoy. and so on)
to 2500 he or more (Hongolian-Okhotsk). As a rule, they are accompanied
by thick (to tens of kilometers) zones of tectonically reworked neck.
large and small hasite and hyperbaaite intrusions. the centers of volcanic
eruptions. gravitational steps usually depicting discontinuous variation
in thickness of the earth's crust and characterizing the great depth of
penetration of them into the depths of the earth.

The time of occurrence of deep fractures is determined by the age of the
geosynclinsl systems developing in the edge parts of the formed platforms
(epierchean, epibayhal. and so on). Over the extent of all of the subse-
quent ages of tectegenesis. these linearly extended structural sutures
were the most mobile and penetreble sections of the earth's crust. A high
degree of fracturing of the rock and intensive metamorphism of it are
characteristic of them. In addition, the deep fractures are accompanied

by a dense network of contiguous aubparellel and feathering fractures of
different genetic type (faults, strike-slip normal faults. overthrusts.

and so on). and also the depressions next to the fractures in which relicts
of the Paleozoic and Hesozoic deposits were retained. The genetic variety
of dislocations with a break in continuity in the abyssal fracture zones

is caused by variability of the tectonic stress fields with time. Accord-
ingly, the ages of predominant development of the upthrust faults and over-
thrusts were replaced by ages of fault formation. The role of the shifts
remains unclear to the present tune.

The Stanovoy abyssal fracture extends 800 to 900 km from the Vitim River
in the west to the Dzhugdzhur ridge in the east. Over the entire extent
it is accompanied by thick zones of various tectonically reworked rock.
large and small intrusions of basitechyperbasite composition, depressions
of different age and fields of Cenozoic basalts (Kazmin. 1962). The

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fracture bounds the ancient nucleus of the Alden shield from the south

and includes a section between the Chul'san overthrust. the Stanovoy and
Yuzhna-Stnnovoy ahyssal fractures in the investigated territory. According
to the geophysical data. a zone has been established here with a density
deficit of no less than 0.1 g/cm3 with respect to the encircling sections
of the shield and the Upper Archean folded region. It extends up to 10 km
in depth with a width from 25 to 80 km. This zone can be caused either by
local dispersion of the Archean complex of the shield as a result of the
granitized rock. granites. diafluorites or thickening of the earth's crust
connected with its bending under the effect of the overthrust of the
Stanovoy region onto the ancient nucleus of the Alden shield (Dankevich.
et al.. 1969. 1970).

The Main (Greater) Sayan Fracture extends 1000 ha from the southern
extremity of Lake neykal to the northwest (300-310‘) almost to Kresnoysrsk.
In the modern denudation section it is a system of fractures with powerful
zones of crushing. jointing and mylonitization. All of the rock from the
Archean to the Paleozoic inclusively were subjected to dynamometamorphic
reworking. The basic "trunk" of the fault is accompanied by numerous
subparallel. longitudinal and feathering fractures of sublatitudinal
(270-290'). submeridional and northwestern (330-350.) strikes. The
entire system of fractures from 5-6 to 8 km wide (Smirnov. et al., 1969;
Berzin. 1967). and in some places up to 30 km. forms a characteristic
"horeetail." Small hyperbasite bodies. basic rock dikes and numerous

granitoid intrusions of different age are associated with the fracture
zone.

The occurrence of the fracture belongs to the Late Archean to the beginning
of the Proterozoic. and the subsequent shifts were manifested more than
once to the present time. The analysis of the structures in the vicinity
of the Main Sayan Fracture and its walls leads some researchers
(Arsent'yev. 1965; Husatov. 1966; Berzin. 1961; et al.) to the conclusion
of the participation of horizontal differently directed (along with
vertical) displacements along the fracture. Being the boundary of the
structural-facies zones. as the aeromagnetic research has demonstrated.

a fracture separates the differently oriented linear magnetic anomalies.
The magnetic field of the fracture is characterized by a narrow, linearly
elongated zone of sign-variable anomalies and large gradients (Husatov.
l963). with respect to the gravimetric data. the fracture has an inclina-
tion of the displacer plane to the s0uthwest at an angle of 5:15’. The
roof of the basaltic layer southwest of the fracture occurs at a depth of
[4 km. and northeast, 8 km. Thus. the fracture is interpreted as a fault
with an amplitude of about 6 km (Blonseyenlto, 1969).

Pribaykal Fault

In the western and southwestern Baykal region [Pribaykal'ye] the system
of abyssal fractures separating the ancient Siberian platform from the
folded structures of the Baykal mountain region framing it on the southeast.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

becomes part of the 0hruchevskiy fault system. It in also known under
the nose of the Prihayhal fault (Salon. 1967) or the nayhal sarginal
suture (Yegorov. l97l). It extends 1100 ha. In the opinion of certain
reeenrrhors it began to he formed in the Archean (Zanarnyev. 1961). and
according to others. in the Lower Proterozoic (Salop. 1967). The fault
outlines the platfora froa Southern Bayhsl to the Patonekoye Highland and

predeterainee the orientation of the geosynclinal systea of baykalides
adjacent to it.

The system of faults of the Baykal Iargiaal suture obviously is reflected
in the structure of the geophysical fields. In the asgnetic field it is
obvious with respect to the linearly striated anoaalios. The radio-
active field in the fracture zones is high. and the gravitational field.

on the contrary. as a rule. is low. The suture boundaries are neat clearly
expressed in the radioactive field by replacement of the level and struc-
ture. and in the Iagnetic field, in addition. by variation of orientation
of the anoealies (SEISHOTECTONICS..., 1968: Yegorov. 1971).

In western Pribaykal'ye. the presence of a narginal suture is well.
confirmed by deep seiaaic probing. In all the seissic sections intersect-
ing the Bayhal basin. crosswise fro- the Selenga River delta to the head-
waters of the Lens. an abyasal fracture has found reflection which extends
along the west bank of the lake. It has a vertical dip and runs below the
Hokhorovich divide. At the intersections of the southwestern side of the
basin. a scarp-lihe uplift of the Iantle surface in the direction of the
lake with an amplitude of 3 kn is noted (Puzyrav, et al.. 1973).

The Dzhidino—Vitia abyssal fracture (structural suture) is extended in the
northeasterly direction from the boundary with Mongolia in the vicinity of
the upper course of the Dzhida River. along the Uda and Vitia Rivers and
then along the Kalar River. It obviously rune to where it joins with the
Yuzhno-Aldan aarginal suture. Its tetal extent in this direction is sore
than 1000 ha with a width from 5-10 to 50-60 ha (Arsent'yev. 1965).

The beginning of the formation of the fracture pertains to the tine of
completion of the Baykal folding and the beginning of the manifestation of
the Caledonian folding, that is. it serves as an interface between the two
regions of appearance of the folding of different age. In structural
respects the suture is represented by echelon arranged fractures with which
the hreccia zone. the zones of cataclase. nylonitizstion and cleavage of
rock of different age beginning with the pre-Ca-brian are connected.

According to the geophysical data (Arsent'yev. 1965). the fault bounds the
aagnetic and gravitational fields which differ sharply with respect to
nature and intensity.

The Nongolo-Okhntsk abysssl fracture (Gorzhevskiy. Laz'ko. 1961) is a
suture zone froa 5-20 to 60-80 ha in width extending more than 2000 km
within the boundaries of the Soviet Union (Hisnik. et al. 1969). The
fault runs from the border with Mongolia along the Chikoy. Ingods.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR C IICIAL USE ONLY

Shilkn River valleys and then to the northeast to the shores of the sea

of Okhotsk. Along almost the entire extent. the fracture is the interface
between the Herclninn and Caledonian folded structures (see Fig ll). its
occurrence belongs at least to the Late Pro-Cambrian. The formations of
the late Pro-Cambrian and the Early Paleozoic in the NongolovORhotsk
fracture zone are represented by greenstone, ophiolitic formations
(Zonenshaym 1967).

The depth of the fracture and the duration of its existence are emphasized
by the relation to it of numerous massifs of intrusive rock of different
composition and age. The sharply elongated massifa of Upper Mesozoic
gabbro-diorites and monzonites. Late Lower Cretaceous granitoids and
Paleogenic basalts.

According to the data from deep seismic probing (Bulin. et al.. 1972). the
fracture zone coincides with the sections of the sharp scarps in the
surface relief of Konrad and hokhorovichich. The amplitude of the scarps
of the Konrad boundary reaches 3 to 6 km.

In conclusion. of course. we must answer the following question: do the
structural-tectonic elements of Eastern Siberia have any effect on its
seismicity. and can the historical-structural analysis be used under our
conditions (Petrushevskiy. 1965) even for the general determination of the
seismic potential of the large structural-tectonic regions?

0n the whole. the answer is found to be negative. It is unique but it is
possible when determining the seismic potential of the pre-Cenozoic
structures to use the fact that this is in practice aseismicity of the
greater part of the region 'of development of the Siberian platform mantle.
but strong shocks often occur here (H to 5.2, K-lJ). Another element of
the Siberian platform -- the Aldan shield (a region of pre-Riphean folding.
see Fig ll) - in its different parts has seismic potential almost from

0 to M-7.9, possibly even more. The same thing can be said of the region
of naykal folding. Re are not talking about the rift zone as a specific
neotectonic structural element. but other parts of the baykslides, with like
mesocenozoic rejuvenation. uniform with respect to its seismicity: from
«seismic (Vitim Plateau. part of the Northern Baykal highlands) to force 9
or more (Eastern Sayan).

The zone of Caledonian folding over its greater part is almost aseismic.

and only in the region bordering on ﬁongolia are there individual epicenters
of modern earthquakes. but then to the west. in the territory of Mongolia,
its activity increases quickly and reaches maximum values (to "-8.7)
although with respect to external manifestations the Cenozoic activation

in the entire zone is essentially light and all the more so in the seismo-

active part it is quantitatively less expressed thaaincertain in practice
aseismic region.

The same thing can be said of the region of hercine folding. In the
extreme northeast (Shilkinsko-Argunskiy Rayon) only rare earthquakes are

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

known with H to 4-1/2. Than stretching 650 km to the southwest. only
individual epicenters of weak earthquakes are known. 0n the Daurskiy
Ridge there is n flaccid epicentral field with earthquakes of modern
intensity (to force 7. M to 5—1/6). In the territory of Hongolia. the
seismic activity of this region quickly increases on moving to the west.
and the magnitude of the earthquakes reaches 7-3/6 (hogodskoye earthquake
on 5 January 1967). and with respect to paleoseismogeologicsl data. to 8.

The seismic potential of the abyssal fractures is not uniform. The various
parts of Obruchev. Hongolo-Okhotsk and other fractures are in practice now
sseismic and now they have limiting seismic potential (earthquakes or
traces of preaeismoatstisticsl earthquakes with N to 8.7).

The structural-tectonic level has no defined affect on the spread of the
tremors. If the level of high-force (force 8 and higher) isoseisms is
subordinate to the level of seiamogenic structure. then the subsequent
isoseisms extend now along and now across or diagonally to the structures
visible on the earth's surface. Previously the existing concept of regular
orientation of the isoseisas in the Sayan (Northwestern) and Baykal (North-
eastern) directions‘um not confirmed although for individual earthquakes
the isoseismal fields as a whole or individual sections of it turn out to
be extended along the regional structural fields.

The real composition of the geological complexes is felt more definitely
in the spread of the seismic oscillations. The decisive predominance of
the seismically active regions of dense crystalline rock causes weak damp-
ing of the moderate (less than force 8) seismic tremors which extend to
significantly larger areas by comparison with seismic zones made up of
thick series of sedimentary or volcanogeaic-sedimentary rock (Central Asia.
the Caucasus).

It is natural that under favorable conditions the seismogenic movements are
using the existing weakened sections of the earth's crust independently of
their age. including the transverse and diagonal fracture zones of ancient
occurrence which are isolated in greater amount in accordance with the
detailing of the geological and especially the geophysical research.
However. it is quite definitely obvious that the seismogenic movements
with respect to the ancient structures take place only as a function of the
modern seismotectonic processes. and the latter are genetically independent
of the ancient structures.

73

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0!?ICIAL USE ONLY

CRAPTER III. BASIC CRARACTERISTICS OF T“! LATEST STRUCTURE

The Cenozoic tectonic activation in the southern part of Eastern Siberia
was preceded by a comparatively long (Upper Cretaceous to Paleogene)
tectonic interval during which the denudation plenation surface was formed.
The development of the large latest structural forms (in particular. the
rift basins) began with the end of the Paleogene to the beginning of the
Neogene. In the Middle Pliocene, the intensity of the tectonic movements
increased sharply. however. the increase in rate of movement was not
accompanied by radical rearrangement of the structural plan. Therefore

for solving the general problems of genesis of the latest structural forms
it is admissible to consider them as the final result of the deformation
of the basic (Upper Cretaceous to Paleogenic) planation surface. The
mapping of this surface presents known difficulties and it requires special
geological and geomorphological studies. Unfortunately. these studies were
made in far from all of the areas of the investigated territory.

The approximate representation of the modern position of the deformed

initial planstion surface in the uplift regions can be given by the

imaginary surface enveloping the mountain peaks. It is possible to construct
this "peak surface" by sufficiently detailed topographic maps considering
the geological materials. In the basins. the basic planstion surface is
buried under the Cenozoic deposits. If the precipitates are not thick

(the basins of the Transbaykal type and certain small basins of Pribayksl'ye).
the approximate representation of the structure of such depressions can be
given by a smooth sedimentary surface relief. If the thickness of the
deposits is large. then for analysis of the latest structure it is necessary
to use the geophysical materials. The large basins of the rift zone have
been most completelyinvestigeted by the gravieetric method. The quantita-
tive interpretation of the negative local gravitational anomalies observed

over these basins combined with the electrical prospecting data. seismic
prospecting and drilling offers a representation of the relief of the

crystalline bed under a powerful series of weakly lithified continental
deposits.1

1

A procedure for interpretation of the geophysical data with respect to
hesins. just as the procedure for constructing the "peak surface" in the
uplift regions was discussed in the monograph by Yu. A. Zorin (1971).

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

In the schematic of the latest structure compiled by these methods

(see Fig 12). isohypses of the deformed planation surface are depicted
which offer the possibility of quantitative estimation of the amplitudes

of the vertical tectonic movements. The faults that are active at the
latest time are depicted in the diagram. The faults have greater amplitude.
they are well exhibited in the planetion surface scarps. The faults with
small displacements are plotted on the map according to the geological

data (ACTIVE TBCTONICS.... 1966: satmscronrcs.... 1968).

The southern part of Eastern Siberia is divided into the following regions
with respect to degree of manifestation of the latest movements: the
Sayano-Baykal intensive mountain formation. the Transbaykal moderate
mountain formation and the Siberian platform (the region of weak mountain
formation).

Seyano-Baykal Region of Intensive Mountain Formation

In the investigated territory its greater part enters into the Baykal

rift zone extending alnnst 200 km from the vicinity of the Khubsugul'skaya
and Darkhatskaya basins in the territory of Hongolia to the vicinity of
the Tokkinskaya basin in Southern Yakutie. Here we are talking about the
region of development of the standard, morphologically well expressed

rift structures. Obviously it is necessary to include the high mountain
ridges separating and surrounding the basins in the rift zone. With this
interpretation. in structural respects it coincides with the greater part
of the Sayeno-Baykal arch uplift isolated by Ye. V. pavlovskiy (1948b).

The average width of the Saysno-Baykal arch uplift is 200 km. The tops
of the ridges entering into it reach 2000 to 2500 meters with respect to
the most stable internal parts of the Siberian platform. The arch uplift
is nonuniform with respect to its strike. It is divided into three parts
by transverse reduced peak surface: Eastern Seyan (to the lower course of
the Selenga River). Baykalo-Barguzin(from the Selenga River to the sub~
meridional section of the Vitim River Valley) and Kodaro-Udokan.

The rift zone borders the Siberian platform only in its midsaction (with
respect to strike). In the southwest of the northeast it is separated

from the platform by the transitional structures -- the shield type uplifts:
Prisayanskiy and Baykalo-Patomskiy (Solonenko. V., 1968b).

The large rift depressions usually have a length of 150 to 200 km and a
width of 35 to 65 km. The Bayknl depression extends to 670 km with an
average width of 60 to 55 km (maximum. 70 km). The interbssin commissures
usually are characterized by lower altitudes than the uplifts surrounding
them. Therefore the basins are joined together. forming extended
branching rift valleys. Thus. the Bayhal basin is joined to the Tunkinsksya.
the Upper Angers and the Barguzin basins, and the Chara basin is joined

with the Huya and the Tbkko Basins.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The aaykal basin is divided by the diagonal uplift of the Academic Ridge
into the southern and northern basins. Judging by the gravinetric.
seismologicsl and electroprospecting date. the thickness of the Cenozoic
continental deposits in the first basins reaches 7000 meters (the vicinity
of the Selenga River delta), and in the second basin, 4500 meters (the
vicinity of the mouth of the Upper Angers). The absolute elevations

of the crystalline bed in these areas drop to ~6500 and -6000 meters.

respectively.

In the other large rift basins (Tunkinskaya. Berguzin. Upper Angers,

Lower Hays and Chara) the thicknesses of the Cenozoic deposits
reach 2300 to 2800 meters. anlthe absolute elevations of the basement
surface, drop to -lSOO to -2000 meters. These thicknesses are characteris-
tic of the internal basins which with respect to strike are separated by

the saddle commieeures in which the thickness of the sediments usually
decreases by 2 or 3 times. There are many cases where within the limits

of the saddle commiesures the basement rock is denuded on the earth's
surface (the Tunkinsksys basin). The age of the sediments filling the

large rifts is from the Oligocene to the holocene. inclusively.

The altitudes of the denudation planation surface to the beginning of the
latest activation obviously can be estimated at 300 to 600 meters. Con-
sequently. judging by the modern hypsometry of this surface, the uplift
of the Beyksl arch and the subsidence of the basement in the large rift
basins are absolute and not relative. The full scale of the vertical
movements in the rift zone will reach $000 to 6000 meters, and in the
vicinity of Lake Baykal, even 8000 meters.

In addition to the above-enumerated basins, quite broad negative structural
forms with respect to area with comparatively small thickness of the
Cenozoic.Neogenic and Quaternary sediments are encountered within the
boundaries of the rift zone. These slowly developing structures include
the Bsuntovsksys and Teipiken basins in which the thicknesses of the
Cenozoic deposits do not exceed several hundreds of meters.

Comparatively smell negative structural forms are also developed in the
rift zone: embryonic basins and basins being born (Solonenko. V., 1968b).
The former have a length on the order of several tens of kilometers with

a width to 5 km. The thickness of the precipitates (predominantly
Quaternary) in them is 100-200 m. The basins being born have begun to

be formed at the end of the Pleistocene and in the Holocene. Their length
is less than 10 to 15 km, the width to 0.5 and 1 km, depth from several
meters to 100. The sedimentation in such basins is in the initial stage
(Solonenko. V.. 1968b).

A characteristic feature of the majority of large rifts (basins of the
Baykal type) is unique asymmetry of the transverse cross sections: their
northwesterly and northern sides are the larger. For the Bsykal. Tunkhaskaye
Barguzntand Chara basins. this characteristic has been established

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

You O'VIC'AL US” ONLY
Ila-w'm‘ U’ "‘5’. '29 I. 71"

l -- lsohypseu of the Upper Cretaceous to Paleogenic planation surface
deformed by the latest noveaent; 2 -- fault; 3 -- boundaries of the
neotectonlc regions; 6 -- boundaries of the structural zones: 5 -- areas
of rift basins. The numbers on the left are as follows: I -- Sayano-
ﬂsykal region of intense aountain formation. including the bnykal rift
zone (In). Bnyknlo-Patomskoye (lb) and Prisayanskoye (lc) shield uplifts:
ll -- Trnnabayknl region of aoderate mountain formation. including
Dnurskoye (Ila). OIeksa-Stanovoy (lib). Undino-caziaurskoye arch uplift
(punitive structure) zones (llc).Vitin—Selengn (ltd). the Aga (lie).
Prishllks (llf) and Prlsrgunskays (llg) negative zones; III - Siberian
platform: l-7 rift basins: l -- Tunkinskaya; 2 -- Baykal; 3 - Barguzin;

a -- Verkhneananra: 5 -- Tsipinskayn: 6 -- Tsipikan 7 -~ Upper Maya:
8 -- bower liuya; 9 -- Chara; 10 - Toklo.
Key:
a. Lens 1. Kalar w. Irkutsk
h. Kirengn m. Tsips x. lrkut
v. Bol. Chuya n. Tsipikan y. Kitoy
d. Left luau o. Hertha z. Argun'
e. Right llama p. Vitim
f. Upper Angasa q. Shilka
;. Chara r. Chita
h. Tokko s. Ingoda
i. Olekma t. Chikoy
]. Tungir u. Khilok
h. Knlakan v. Selenga

previously by the geomorphological and geological data. The interpretation
of the geophysical oeasures deaonstrated that the inner troughs of the
lower huya [Nizhnemuyskaya] basin and the Kocherskaya trough of the Upper
Angora hasin have the sase'Bayhal" asynmetry.

The like asymmetry of the large rifts is connected with the fact that the
large-amplitude faults are coordinated predominantly with their northwestern
and northern sides. Usually at these points not one fracture is noted.

but the entire series of complexly branched fractures of the basement.

The nuplitude of the individual faults reaches 1500 to 2000 seters. and

in the case of the Obruchev fault bounding the southern Baykal trough
from the northwest. even 3000 to 5000 meters. It must be noted that the

presented values are 2 to 6 times smaller than the overall scale of the
vertical movements.

0» the southeastern sides of the large basins the discontinuous dislocations

play a significantly smaller role. here their vertical amplitudes usually
do not exceed the first hundreds of aeters. and they disturb the general
picture of the gradual increasedthicbeasof the Cenozoic deposits toward
the axial parts of the depressions little. In the transverse cross section

78

'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL ”8! ONLY

the surface of the crystalline base-eat of the large basin is described

by the gently sloping arches which are convex downward which are complicated
only in individual pieces by iault scarps. Thus. the geodetic data confirm
the opinion of M. A. Plorensov (1960) an the constant coabination of discon~
tinuous and plastic dislocations of the baseaent in the structure of the
large basins of the Baykal'type. '

The develop-ant of the rift tone was nonunifora. In the Oligocene to

Early Pliocene. the rate of downwarping of the sections of the large basins
(the sediaentation rate) was 0.07 to 0.17 an per year (Zorin. 1971). Judging
by the nature of the elastic asterial. it is possible to assume that the

rate of rise of the adjacent uplifts was also anall. and the short geo-
aorphological scarps in the framing of the basins were absent (Logachev.
1968). Obviously the predoninant style of deforaation of the baseaent at
that tine was elastic.

la the Middle Pliocene to the Quaternary period in the large rift basins

the downwarping rate increased to 0.3 to 0.5 an per year (Zorin, 1971).

The subaersion oi the elastic material of the sediaents indicates an
increase in altitude of the aountain ridges and the degree of their dis-
neaherncnt. Proa the Middle Pliocene the relief is siailar with respect

to type to nodern (Logachev. 1968). Hithin the boundaries of the large basins
an important role has cone to be played by the fault scarps. Obviously

the rate of rise of the upliits was with respect to its order cooperable

to the rate of downwarp of the bottons of the large rifts.

The increased seisaicity of the rift zone indicates its high modern
tectonic activity. The presence of correlations between the seisaicity
and certain geosorphological and geophysical para-stern reflecting the
latest structurel. per-its us to consider that in modern noveaents the
basic trends of its neotectonic develop-ant are retained: the formation,
subaersion and expansion of the rift basins against a background of general
arch uplift of the territory.

The eruptions of the effusivea of basic coaposition are connected with
the latest tectonic love-ants in the Baykal rift zone. The volcanic
activity in the southeastern and the central part began at the end of the
Oligocene. and in the northeast. at the end of the Pliocene (ACTIVE
TECTONICS.... 1966) and continued with interruptions to the holocene.

The relation of the volcaniaa to the latest tectonics is expressed only
in most general fora (Plorensov, et al., 1968). The fields of effusives
usually are not coordinated directly with the large rift valleys. The
Tunkiaakaya basin constitutes an exception, at individual locations of
which interotratification of the sedimentary for-ationa with the basalts

 

-4—

lSee Chapter IX.

79

FOB OPYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

is observed. However. in this area (SayanoeKhsaardabsn effusive field)
the basalt covers and pyroclsstic forsations extend far beyond the linits
of the depression to the mountain peaks. In the deposit sections of the
individual large rift basins. the volcanogenic forsations are not
encountered. There are also no relations of effusive activity to the
riftogenic faults.

The Vitin basalt field is sharply shifted to the southeast fros the
axis of the rift zone: the greater part of it is even located beyond its
limits -~ in the Transbaykal region of aoderate aountain foruation.

The third field of the basic effusives is located in the upper part of the
Udoksn ridge. that is. sons shift of the area of Ianifeststion of
the Cenozoic volcanism from the axis of the rift zone in the direction of

Transbsykal is noted here.

In the Neogene-Qusternary volcanic complex nor-a1 olivine basalts and
andesite-basalts predosinste, along which interlayers of subalkaline
differences are encountered on the various levels of the section. Andesites
and trachites are encountered in places among the latest eruptions in the
Udnkan effusive field (Solonenko. V.. l9b6b; ACTIVE TECTONICS....

I966: Florensov. et al.. 1968). A detailed investigation of the geological
and geophysical saterials with respect to the Baykal rift zone with its
obviousness has desonstrsted the superposed nature of its latnat structure
(Solonenko. V.. 1968: Zorin. I971). The southwestern flank of the zone is
located in the Caledonide region. the central part is in the laykalide
region. and by its northeastern section it intrudes into the region of
develop-eat of the ksrelides and sore ancient structures of the Aldsn
Shield. In the northeast the rift basins intersect the axes of the ancient
folds at large angles. In the southwest. although approximate correspondence
of the rift fractures to the linear elements of the Baykal and Caledonisn
structure is observed. the rift basins the-selves do not coincide with
respect to their position in the plan view with the pre-Cenozoic negative
structures. In the vicinity of the Selengs River delta. the Baykal Lake
basin intersects at a significant angle the narrow branching of the
Mesozoic trough. and the chars basin cuts the Jurassic inter-entane
depression (ACTIVE TECTONICS..., 1966). Thus, the rift structural forms

of the Baykal zone owe their origin only to the latest tectonic love-eats.
Certain features of the succession of its structure fros the ancient
tectonic plan (such as the latching of the strikes of the structures in
individual sections, use of frsgzsents of ancient dislocations with a break
in continuity) are connected with the attachment of the latest deforestions
to the mechanical nonunifornities of the earth's crust occurring in the
pro-Cenozoic phases of development of Pribaykal'ye.

Transbaykal Region of Moderate Mountain Porsation

Narrow linearly elongated basins nf the Transbaykal type have developed
here (Florensov. I960). Hith respect to their length. they are commensur-
ate with the large rifts. but their width usually does not exceed 15 to

80

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”SE ONLY

20 km, and the thickness of the Cenozoic sediments in than varies from
0 to so esters: in rare cases it rises to 100 to 150 eaters. The width
of the uplifta separating them is 20 to 60 ha. The relative amount that
the peaks of the uplifts rise above the bottoas of the adjacent basins
is 100 to 800 meters.

In addition. in Transbaykal. positive and negative structural forms of the
first order are isolated. with respect to which the basins of the
Transbaykal type and the uplifts separating then appear as second-order
structural forms. The positive structural zones are large arched uplifts.
the altitudes of which reign over the surrounding territories. Hithin
their lisits the basins of the Transbsykal type either are absent or they
are encountered rarely. For the first-order arches. a centrifugal pattern
of the river network is characteristic.

The largest of the: is the Dsurskiy isolated by N. A. Florensov (1968).

The modern geoaorphological and geophysical data indicate that with respect
to strike. it is expedient to separate this uplift into two arches: the
Daurskiy and the Olekma-Stanovoy itself (see Fig 12). In the Shilka and
Argun' interfluve. the Undino-Gazimurskoye arched uplift is isolated
(Zorin. Sizihov, 1965). The width of the positive structural zones reaches
120-150 km. and the length reaches 300 he or more.

The negative structural zones are broad interarch spaces. within the
lisits of which the basins of the Transbaykal type are predoainantly
developed (see Fig 12). The largest of them is the Vitimo-Sslenga basin
isolated by N. A. florensov (1968). In the Zabaykal'ye [Transbayhal]

it is possible to also isolate the Aginskaya. Priarguoskaya and
Prishilkinskapnegative zones (Zorin, 1971).

The full scale of the vertical movements in the Transbaykal region of
moderate mountain for-ation reaches 2000 meters (the aaount that the peak
of the Daurskiy arch is above the bottoss of the basins of the Vitiso-
Selenga zone) which is 2.5 to 6 tiles less than the analogous values
characteristic of the Bayksl rift zone. In contrast to the latter. in
Transbaykal in the latest tiae the ascending movements have predosinsted.
The sections of the earth's crust corresponding to the negative structural
forms of the first and second order have subsided only relatively. that is.
they were left in the uplift from the adjacent territories.

Judging by the fact that the Cenozoic deposits in the basins of the
Transbnykal type have in the overwhelming majority of cases an age which
is no more ancient than the Pliocene. it is necessary to consider that the
latest movements in the Transbaykal region of soderate mountain formation
began later than the Baykal rift zone. The development of the latest
structural for-s here is continuing at the present tine (Zorin. Sizikov,
1965).

On the whole. the Transbnykal belongs to the moderately and weakly (south-
eastern Transbsykal) seismic regions.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Until recently it was considered that in the Transbaykal region of moderate
mountain formation. the Cenozoic basaltic volcanism has appeared broadly.
However. now more and more data are being accumulated indicating the lower
Cretaceous stage of the shows (Logachev. 1968). The same eruptions of

the basic effusives which belong indisputably to the Cenozoic. have an
extremely insignificant volume. Only the above-mentioned Vitim field of
basalts which stretches to the southeastern boundary of the rift zone
constitutes an exception.

The latest structural formsof the Transbaykal region of moderate mountain
formation reveal an inheritance from the Late Mesozoic (Upper Jurassic to
Lower Cretaceous) basins and uplifts. This inheritance has the nature of
more or less complete continuity of the relative direction of vertical
movements which is characteristic both for the structural forms of the
first order and the second order (Plorensov. 1963. Zorin. 1971). The
differences of the latest phase from the Late Mesozoic consist in somewhat
lower intensity of movements and in predominant activity of the uplifts.

In the southeastern part of the Siberian platform adjacent to the Sayano-
Baykal region of intensive mountain formation. a broad and gently sloping
Vernelenskoye [Upper Lena] uplift is isolated which is bordered on the
southeast by the Pribaykal and on the southwest by the Prisayan foothills
troughs. The maximum amount that the peaks at the uplift are above the
bottoms of the troughs is 1000 to 1100 meters. The thickness of the
Cenozoic deposits in the greater part of the troughs is little: from a
few meters in the divides to several tens of meters in the valleys of the
large rivers. In the area covered by the Pribaykal trough local basins
about 2 to 3 km wide are isolated in which the thickness of the Neogenic
deposits reaches 250 to 300 meters (Logachev, et al.. 1966).

The greater part of the territory of the foothills troughs subsided only
relatively. Therefore it is possible to consider that the structural

forms of the first order of the southeastern part of the Siberian platform
were formed as a result of nonuniform rise of its territory. The above-
mentioned local basins were created obviously as a result of overflow of
the clastic aaterial (rock salt?) in the sedimentary mantle of the platform
(Zamarayev, 1967).

The latest first-order structural forms in this region reveal only certain
features of the inheritance from the corresponding elements of the Mesozoic
tectonics. In the Cenozoic. the Upper Lena uplift expanded sharply attheex—
pense of the areas of the foothills troughs which were converted to
comparatively narrow zones of relative subsidence.

The territory of the Siberian platform in general is in practice aseismic.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
50R OFFICIAL US! ONLY

CHAPTER IV. MECHANISM OF LATEST TECTONIC MOVEMENTS

The historical reviews of the representations of the nature of tectonic
processes causing the occurrence and development of the latest structure

of the southern part of Eastern Siberia are presented in the monographs
by N. A. Florenaov (1968) and Yu. A. Zorin (1971).

Inthis chapter we shall limit ourselves to the discussion of only those
concepts of the mechanism of formation of the latest structure which, as
it appears to us, most completely take into account the modern information

about the structure and state of the depths of the investigated tectonic
regions.

In their primary feature. the general concept of the structure of the
earth's crust end mantle in the southern part of Eastern Siberia was
developed by the end of the 1960's to the beginning of the 1970's

(Zorin, 1966. 1971; Artsm'yev. Artyushkov. 1967; Krylov, et al.. 1970).
The basic principles of this concept reduce to the following. Vithin

the limits of the Siberian platform, the earth's crust is comparatively
uniform with respect to its thickness. For the Baykal rift some. this
uniformity is not characteristic: under the large basins the earth's crust
has significantly less thickness than under the mountain ridges surrounding
them which enter into the system of the Sayano-Baykal arch uplift. In
addition, the crust under the basins has somewhat increased density as a
result of the introduction of the basic and ultrabasic intrusions. Under
the rift zone the upper mantle has anomalous properties: its density and
propagation rate of the seismic waves are somewhat lowered. In spite of
the complex structure of the earth's depths and the high level of
tectonic activity. the lithosphere of the rift zone is in a situation
which is close to isostatic equilibrium. This equilibrium is realized as
a result of unevennesses of the Hoho section and as a result of the
presence of an anomalous region in the upper mantle which insures partial
compensation of the Sayano-Baykal uplift as a whole and also as a result
of some rise in crustal density under the large rift basins (partial
compensation for the insufficiency of the masses in the volume of the
basins). The observation of isostasy (isobsry) does not indicate the
distance of the complete mechanical equilibrium of the "crust-mantle"
system. The region of the anomalous mantle can spread to the sides

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as a result of the effort to minimize the gravitational energy which is
not insured by one isobary. Obviously. this phenomenon is the basic cause

of the tension which ls established in the rift sane both with respect to
uelumulnglc dntn (Hlshnrinn. 1967) and with respect to geological observa-
tions (Plorensov. 1960a).

The data from geothermy (Lyubimovl.1968; Lysek, 1968), magnetometry
(Rovoselova. 1971) end magnetotelluric probes (Gornostayev. et al.. 1970)
indicate that the earth‘s crust and the uPPcr mantle of the Baykal rift
zone are heated to a higher degree than under the Siberian platform. With
respect to intensity of heating of the terrestrial depths, Transbeykel
occupies an intermediate position between the two mentioned regions. These
differences with respect to the thermal state of the upper mantle permit
the assumption that the roof of the ssthenosphericlayer has the least

depth under the rift zone and the greatest under the platform (Zorin.
1971).

In Transbaykal. an increase in thickness of the earth's crust under the
arch uplifts of the first order is noted. These arch uplifta in the
isostatic sense turn out to be weakly overcompensated: the thickness of
the crust here is 1.5 to 2 km more than that which should occur for
complete equilibrium (Zorin. 1971). The latter is obviously explained by
the somewhat greater strength of the lithosphere in the investigated
region by comparison with the rift zone where the temperature of the
earth's depths is higher.

At the present time the method of deep seismic sounding has been used to
obtain new data (Puzyr.v, et n1.. 1974), on the basis of which it is
possible precisely to define the thicknesses of the earth's crust in the
Baykal rift zone. From the results of the spot deep seismic sounding we
have selected the determinations of the depth of the Hoho section by the
reflected wave method which were made with orientation of the bases
approximately coinciding with the strike of the latest structures. He
assume that when using the transcriticel reflections, these determinations
contain the least distorted information about the comparatively non-
latudinal (40-50 km). but sharply expressed structural forms of the "she
section. This opinion is confirmed by the results of the acoustic simulation
atthe Instituteofthe Barth'sCrust of the Siberian Department of the USSR
Academy of Sciences by V. R. Naydich.1 The results of the deep seismic
soundings taken in the indicated way were compared with the altitudes of

the topographic relief averaged over areas of 30x30 km.2 The correlation
coefficient turned out to be equal to 0.75:9.16. The regression equation
has the form -

1The studies were performed on solid models with observation of the
quality of the velocity ratio in the crust and the mantle.

2within the limits of the rift basins. the presented values of the altitudes
were used which were obtained by replacement of the masses of water (in
Baykal) and the sediments by masses of the crystalline earth's crust

which are equal to them with respect to magnitude.
86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFPICIAL USE ONLY

H . 60 + 3.‘ h

where H is the Hobo interface. h is the height of the average wave. This
equation was used to calculate the depths of the Hoho section over the
entire area of the rift zone. and the new diagram of its structure was
coepnred (see Fig 13). The former values of the depths of the base of
the crust (Zorin. 1971, p 127) were retained with respect to the Siberian
platform and Transbaykal in the diagram, for on the whole these values
agree with the deep seismic sounding date. The outlines of the regions
of the anomalous mantle are shown as boundaries of the regional ninimum
in the Bouguer reduction.

In the schematic of the deep structure it is obvious that the earth‘s

crust under the basins is more precisely determined by comparison with

the mountain regions. as was proposed earlier by the gravimetric data.
however. the consideration of the materials of the deep seismic sounding
demonstrated that the earth's crust in the rift tone (both under the basins
and under the ridges) is S to 7 km thicker than was considered previously
(Zorin. 1971).

Considering the above-presented information about the deep structure and
the geological data, the development of the Baykal rift zone can be
represented as follows. During the Upper Cretaceous to Paleogenic interval
manifested over the entire territory of Eastern Siberian, the terrestrial
depths were cooled to a significant degree. and the asthenospheric layer
in this region obviously was absent.1 In the Oligocene (and possibly
even in the Eocene) progressive heating of the earth's crust occurred, in
connection with which the development of the asthenospheric layer began.
This layer is formed obviously as a result of the partial fusion of the
upper mantle similar with respect to composition to the garnet peridotite
(Belousov, 1966). Under the ancient platform where the differentiation

of the material went quite far. the tops of the mantle obviously were made
up of dunite with the inclusion of eclogite lenses. The formation of the
asthenospheric layer is possible only at great depths, where the garnet
pcridotite has been preserved. that is. the mantle material not subjected
to differentiation as yet. Under the rift zone and under Trensbaykal a
similar material obviously was preserved at less depth. Therefore the
roof of the esthenospheric layer in the subsequent areas can theoretically
be lifted higher than under the ancient platform. In this case convective
currents are possible which promote faster heat transfer from its base to

 

‘He begin with the entirely probable situation where the asthenospheric
lnyer occurs as a result of heating of the terrestrial depths in the
phases of increased tectonic activity and disappears in the planation
epoch (Lyubimova. 1970; Zorin. 1972).

US

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON?"

These arguments explain why the surface of the asthenospheric layer is

at greater depth underthe platform than under the mountainous regions.
but the question is left open of the differences in degree of heating of
the depths between the rift zone and Transbaykal. The maximum heating of
the crust in the mantle of the rift zone is possibly connected with the
flow of material from under the platform along the ascending surface of
the asthenospheric layer.

however. another solution to the problem is more probable. Previously

we proposed that the heating leading to the formation of the asthenosphere
takes place as a result of conducting heat transfer from large depths.

We assumed convection only in the layer of reduced viscosity itself and
explained the peculiarities of the thermal regime of the individual regions
by differences in chemical composition of the upper mantle (all of the

remaining positions were in the essence of the matter, consequences of
this thesis). 1

In addition. it is possible to propose. as Ye. V. Artyushkov has done (1968)
that under the rift zone there is a strong additional inflow of heat. It
proceeds convectively with portions of the deep heated material rising as

a result of the gravitational differentiation of the nucleus and the lower
mantle of the earth. 0n reaching the asthenosphere, this material raises
the temperature and at the same time stimulates its development. The

uplift of the roof of the asthenospheric layer is formed under the rift
zone. and the lithosphere becomes thinner and is heated.

In the protrusion of the asthenosphere. as a result of gravitational
differentiation. the relatively light material is accumulated, forming a
lense of anomalous mantle. Judging by the magnitude of the limiting veloc-
ity in the Hoho section, with respect to its chemical composition the
anomalous mantle corresponds to a mixture of peridotite with a comparatively
small part of basalt (Cook, 1962). The accumulation of this material

causes an isostatic rise of the lithosphere. that is. the formation of an
arch uplift (Zorin, 1971).

In the gravitational field of the earth, the lens of material having lower
viscosity must spread in the direction insuring tension of the earth‘s
crust and the formation of rift bases. The continuous inflow of such
material from the depths can insure prolonged existence and development of
a broad arch and rifts. Thus. we arrived at the concepts of the ascending
convective current. The convection obviously has a chemical nature, that
is. it is the consequence of gravitational differentiation in the material
of the earth. The horizontal branch of the current, as we assumed, is
located in the upper part of the asthenospheric layer.

1This point of view obviously is entirely acceptable for many regions of

the earth experiencing weak and moderate activity in latest time (in
particular. for the Siberian platform and Transbayksl).

87

P03 OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The large rift basins are formed as a result of thinning of the crust
during tension of it. This deformation is represented as elastic, which
in the upper. least heated part of the crust is complicated by shifts with
respect to faults (anin. 1966; Artem'yev, Artyushkov. 1967). Some role
In the development of the large rifts is also played by the isostatic
subsidence of the crust occurring as a result of an increase in its weight
as a result of introduction of the basic and ultrabaaic intrusions. The
space required for introduction of the intrusions is also released as a
result of tension. Correspondingly. the thinning of the crust and the
increase in its weight are two aspects of a unique process of destruction
of the thick continental crust.

The small "generating" basins in the rift zone are formed as a result of
settling of the blocks. wedging the Joints opened during tension of the
crust. The association of the powerful earthquakes with the "generating"
basins is connected with the exceptional role of the dislocations with a
break in continuity in their formation.

The height of the arch and the rates of development of the basins are
determined by the speed of ascending convective flow in the mantle. In

the Oligocene to Lower Pliocene. the flow rate is small, and therefore the
altitude of the Sayano-Baykal arch uplift is small. The development of

the basins proceeds comparatively slowly. The increase in rate of ascendv
lag flow in the Middle Pliocene has led to rapid increase in the arch, the
formation of broken mountainreliéf and accelerated development of the rift
basins. with an increase in the rates of neotectonic movements and deforma-
tion of the crust. the role of the dislocations with a break in continuity
has been augmented.

Since the uplift of the asthenospheric layer under the rift zone is
asymmetric, the horizontal branch of the convection flow is directed pre-
dominantly in the direction of Transbaykal. This flow could level out the
steepness of the eastern slopes of the “antiroots,” the asymmetry of the
letter. on the basis of the isostatic tendencies, was reflected in the
surface structure of the large rift basins.

The spreading of the lens of the anomalous heated material in the direction
of Transba,kal probably explains the shift in this direction of the regions
of manifestation of the predominantly basaltic volcanism. This material
reaches the location directly under the earth's crust from great depth.,
weakly differentiated. For the fusion of basaltic magma from it and
accumulation of significant volumes of it, a great deal of time is needed
in which the differentiated material can shift significantly in the
direction of Tranabaykel.

The above-described concepts of the mechanism of the formation of the
rift structural forms of the Baykal zone are theoretically similar to a

number of the principles of the hypothesis of the "new global tectonics"
(EARTH‘S CRUST.. . 1972). However. in our opinion, the large rift

FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

huulnu or lhv Invvstlgntud none are formed to n nignlflrnnt degree as a
result of elastic stretching of the heated earth's crust (the dislocations
of the break in continuity are not deep and develop predominantly in the
upper part of the crust). at the ease ties as the indicated hypothesis
presupposes spreading of in practice the nondeforned plates of the'-I
lithosphere and formation of a new crust in the open slit.

The calculations indicate that for the formation of the entire naykal rift
zone a total stretching on the order of 20 to 30 km was required (Zorin.
1971). which does not coapare at all with the colossal and scale horizontal

shifts of the lithospheric plates which are proposed by the hypothesis of
the “new global tectonics."

This hypothesis occurs as a result of the study of the ocean regions. The
rifts developed there are grandiose with respect to their extent. They are
much broader then the Beykal arch end the midoceanic ridges. At the present
time it is not clear whether the above—mentioned differences in interpreta-
tion of the mechanism of formation of the continental end oceanic rifts
are connected with another scale of manifestation of the similar deep
processes or certain peculiarities of the interpretation of the geological
events by the hypothesis of "new global tectonics" are explained by the fact
that the structure of the ocean rifts hes been studied still in very general
form. schematically, with omission of important details.

The main peculiarities of the structure and the state of the depths of the
Transbaykal region of moderate mountain formation are, in our opinion. the
following. There is no region of dispersion of the upper mantle here.
Under the first order arch uplifts. the earth‘s crust is thickened. Here
its thickness is 1.5-2 km more than that required by the condition of
complete isostctic equilibrium. that is. these uplifts are somewhat over-
compensated (Zorin. 1971). The continuing rise of the arches is in
accordance with the direction of forces trying to put the crust in a state
of isostatic equilibrium. Since in Transbaykal in the Neogene-Quaternary
period predoeinantly uplifts developed (negative structural forms were only
left behind them in the rise). it is possible to show that the isostatic
movements played a significant role in the development of the latest
structure.

The inheritance of the latest structural forms from the Late Kesozoic is
an important characteristic of the investigated region. The Neogene-
Quaternary arch uplifts occurred at the location of the positive forms
existing in the Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous (Plorenaov. 1968). In
addition. a close correlation was established in Transbsykal between the
mean values of the modern thickness of the eer‘h's crust in the large tones
and the intensity of manifestation of the Late Hesozoic (predominantly
Late Jurassic) granitoid magnetism (Zorin, 1971). As is known. the forms»
tion of the granitoid intrusion complexes is connected with the process of
increased thickness of the crust and with uplift of its surface. Therefore
it is possible to propose that in the age of the Late Jurassic to Early
Cretaceous the areas of the latest uplifts where the Late Mesozoic

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe orncuu. US: ONLY

granitnids were predominantly developed corresponded to the thickness of
the earth's crust similar to that which exists here at the present time.
that is, isostasy was observed.

The question arises as to whether the "roots" of the latest uplifts were
again formed after the Late Cretaceous to Paleogenic age of planetion
separating the Late Mesozoic and the Neogene—Qusternsry phases of tectonic
development of Transbnykal or they were simply preserved with the Late
Jurassic to Early Cretaceous?

Obviously. the deep structure of the earth's crust existing at the present
time in Transbayksl was formed in its general features in the orocenic
stage of development of the Hesozoic mobile region where the magnetic
phenomena were especially intense. If this is so, then we are forced to
recognize that in the Late Cretaceous to Paleogenic tectonic interval a
comparatively leveled relief in this territory did not correspond LO its
complex deep structure. that is. isostasy was disturbed. The reason for
this phenomenon was cooling of the depths. which led to the disappearance
of the asthenospheric layer and to sharp worsening of the conditions of
fusion of the crust on the mantle. The crust somehow "froze" into the
mantle. More precisely. the speed of motion restoring equilibrium became
less than the speed of the decrease in height of the relief by denudation.
Under similar conditions. the mountain relief was destroyed by denudation,
and the "roots" of the mountains were preserved (Zorin. 1972).

In the Neogene-Quaternary time. new heating of the earth's depths occurred.
and a layer of reduced viscosity arose. In connection with improvement

of the conditions of fusion of the crust or the mantle. the speed of the
movements restoring isostasy increased. and at the location of ancient
thickening of the earth's crust. arch uplifts arose. The latter are con-
tinuing to develop even at the present time although the deep structure

of the crust in the investigated region has not changed significantly,

as its on the whole low seismicity indicates. The unloading of the arch
uplifts by denudation can stimulate further rise of them. As has already
been noted earlier, the incomplete restoration of equilibrium is caused
here, in all probability. by the comparatively high strength of the litho-
sphere which is heated in Transbaykal to a lesser degree than in the rift
zone.

The new data on the thermics e: the upper mantle in theory do not contra-
dict the proposition of periodic heating and cooling of the earth depths
accompanied by the appearance and disappearmteof the ssthenospheric
layer (Lyubimova. 1970).

The nonuniform uplift of the marginal part of the Siberian platform was
not accompanied by thickening of the earth's crust, but the compensation
masses insuring approximate isostatic equilibrium were located here at
greater death than in the other parts of the Pribaykal'ye and Zabaykal'ye
[Transbaykal] (Zorin. 1971). Accordingly. it is possible to assume that

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R00010003001 1 -6
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the upllft of the norainal port of the platform occurred no a reoult of
lone dispersion of the Ientle materiel It deptho on the order of 100 h-
eriqing fro: 1t. tron-fer to the euthenoophere II a result of heating.

The unall basin. noted within the bounderieo of the Pribnykal foothill

trough occurred. in all probability. no a reoult of redlotrihution of the
elastic material in the real-eatery mantle of the platters. however. this

rediotribution we. stimulated by the nonuniforl uplift of the nursinel
port of the platforl.

91

POI OFFICIAL 052 Ohm!
ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CRAPTER V. MECHANISH OF GEMS AND TECTONIC STRESS FIELD

The regional laws of orientation of the stress axes in the earthquake
centers of Pribayksl'ye [the laykal region] were exhibited quite definitly
by the observations of strong earthquakes and noderete shocks (with
K-lO—ll). The results of these studies perioreed hy the procedure of

A. V. VeVedenskaya indicate that for the centers of quite powerful earth-
quakes in the Baykal seisnic zone. the near vertical position of the axes

of the conpressive stresses is characteristic. The axes of the inter«
mediate stresses (parallel to the structure) and the tensile stresses
(perpendicular to the structure) have near horizontal :‘ientation (Hisharine.
1907. 1972).

During the course of the indicated project. an analogy was discovered
between the orientation of the corresponding stress axes in the centers
of powerful earthquakes (335) and cooperatively weaker earthquakes with
closely arranged epicenters. This fact served as the basis for the
transition to the study of the centers of still less significant shocks
with respect to force (K59).

The regions of preparation of weal: earthquakes enconpass sasll volunes of
the earth's material. and the processes occurring in their centers were
detersined to a significant degree by the local conditions. Therefore the
stresses detected in the centers of weak earthquakes can reflect local
peculiarities of the condition of the crust existing ageth the background
of the regional stress field.

Inasmuch as the seiseic network in Pribaykal'ye remains still sparse. the
initial data delivered by it are quite inadequate for deter-ination of

the orientation of the stress axes in the centers of weak earthquakes by
the generally accepted ache-e. Accordingly. in this paper the group neth
of investigating the aechanisn of the centers was used Oiisharina.
Solonenko, 1972). The lT-aykal seisnic zone was provisionally divided into
seven regions: Tunkinskiy. laykal. Berguein. Upper Myra,
Bauntovskiy. )iuya and Udokan.‘

l
L. R. Leont'yeva participated in processing the data. with respect to the
Upper Angers, Huye and Bauntovskiy regions.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e.

The besic ease of the investigeted shocks in the eentioned regions is
characterized by K-7-9. but elong with these week eerthqusltes. stronger
shocks were included in the investigstion which essentielly expanded the
possibilities of the pasture used end esde it possible to conpsre the
orientstion of the stress sees in the centers of the week end strong
eerthnushes.

1n suing up the dets existing st the present tine on the centers of the
Beyltel eerthquekes of different strength hesicslly ohtsined by the
ohservetion dets for 1961-1969. it is possible to note the following
peculiarities of the stresses opereting in the centers or the eerthqueltes
of the ehove-enunersted regions.

within the lisits of the Tunkinshiy region. the orientetion or the stress
one was deterlined for six groups (see l'eble 3). In the eerthquehe
centers of the first group. the epicenters of which ere locsted in the
Khoytogol'sltsye besin end the regions of the Tunltinsltiy held peeks sdjecent
to it. horizontsl tensile stresses ere detected which ere oriented
npproxiaetsly scross the strike of the Tunltinsltiy isult. neer horizontel
internediete stresses end close to verticel conpressive stresses. In the
eerthquslte centers of the Tmhinskeye besin itself (group No 2) the sites
of the tensile stresses ere oriented enelogously to the exes oi the tensions
in the centers of the Khoytogol'skiy eerthquskes. The directions of the
coepressive stress exes end the intersediste stresses sslte sngles close to
65‘ with the direction oi the zenith. The snelogous orientetion or the
stress exes with respect to horizontel plene is observed in the eerthquelte
centers of the third group isolsted in the western pert of the ‘l‘urensltsye
hesin end the sdjscent regions of the Diner—Dehen ridge.

The lost genersl cherecteristic of the eerthquske centers of the enuereted
groups pertsining hesicelly to the besin region is horizontel orientetion
of the ones of the tensile stresses. On the contrary. the groups of eerth-
qusltes. the epicenters of which ere loceted prinerily in the vicinity of
the Tunkinsltiy peslts ere cherecterised by horizontsl orientetion of the
axes of the cowressiwe stresses end verticsl orientstion of the tensile
stresses. The sures of the intersediste stresses in the centers of the
carthqusltes of these groups ere oriented horizontelly.

For the group of eerthquehes within the limits of the longitudinal zone
extending in the direction elong the ruin Seyen feult to the eestern
extremity of the Kitoyslteye isult systee. the horizontal close to eeridionel
orientation of the sxes of the tensile stresses and inclined orientetion

of the sees of cowrcssive end interlediete stresses ere che‘recteristic

(the axes risking engles of W35 to 55' with the direction of the zenith

are considered inclined with rounding of the vslues of these eagles to

5').

The infornetion shout the stresses in the centers of powerful eerthqusltes
of the Tunkinsltiy region are lieited to the dets perteining to the

93

ran ORIGIN. BS! OIL!
FOR OPFICXAL USE ONLY

Honey earthquake of 4 April 1950 ("-6 3/ﬁ). in the center of the
indicated earthquake the cospressiVe stress axis is oriented close to
horizontal. the tensile stress axis is close to vertical. that is. with
respect to nature of the stresses the center of thelkuuw earthquake

is sisilar to the centers of the earthquakes in the vicinity of the
Tunkinskiy peaks.

The majority of data on the orientation of the stress axes in the centers
of the earthquakes of the Isyksl region were obtained for the southern and
partially central parts of the laykal basin. in its asst southerly part.
the group of weak earthquakes was isolated (So 7. see Table 3). the
distribution of the signs of the shifts for which in practice does not
contradict the nodal lines found for the individually investigated earth-
quakes of 9 October l96l and 30 August 1966 occurring here (see Table h).
The centers of the latter are characterized by horizontal orientation of
the axes of the tensile stresses and the inclined orientation of the axes
of the conpressive and inter-ediate stresses.

East of the source of the Angara there are two groups of weak earthquakes
that haVe been isolated. in the centers of which the conpressive stresses
are close to vertical. the tensile and internediate ones are close to
horizontal.

in the northeastern part of Southern Baykal for group No lo the observations
have been processed in coabination with the data pertaining to the powerful
earthquake of 28 March 1970. The centers of the earthquakes in this group
are characterized by near horizontal orientation on the axes of the
coepressivc and tensile stresses and the inclined orientation of the axes
of intersediate stresses. In the centers of the earthquakes of group No ll.
close to horizontal orientation on the axes of the tensile and intermediate
stresses and close to vertical orientation on the axes of cospressive
stresses were detected. These peculiarities of the stress state are
characteristic of the centers in the Selenga delta and in the central and
northern baykal regions. Group No 15 constitutes an exception: the signs
of the shifts available for it do not contradict the aechanisa of the
centers of one of the groups of aftershocks of the Central baykal earth-
quake of 29 August 1959 recorded in the sane epicentral region and character-
ized by near horizontal orientation of the axes of the tensile stresses and
the inclined orientation of the axes of the coanressive and internediate
stresses (Hisharina. 1969). The centers of the earthquakes of the

Barguzin region also reveal great cosnonness in orientation of the
stress axes. Eight groups of weak earthquakes and seven individually
investigated earthquakes. sililarly to the najority of shocks within the
Iinite of the laykal basin. are characterized by near vertical cospressive
and near horizontal tensile and intermediate stresses. The axes of the
tensile stresses are spproxinately orthogonal to the strike of the bridges
in the basin. In the centers of the two groups of earthquakes of the
lkntskiy ridge (Nos 30 and 31. see Table 3) the axes of the co-pressive

stresses are oriented inclined and the axes of the tensile stresses have
analogous orientation in one case. and the intersediste in another.

96

’0‘ OFFICIAL USE OULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

Table 3

Orientation of the Axe. o! PrinpraI Strcuu 1n the Centers of
Earthquakes Contained Into Group.

Moan MID. WI 1.!-
W as: It“. I Ira-‘2 (3)

   

    
   

I'M pan: (9)

I “AIS-51.11 IDIJS-IMJI I. ‘3 32 .. I“ 0| 3” 10
l 5153-“ .71 IM .1.’- “£23 '4‘ 0 223 so M 8| 9 4|
3 SIS-SI .70 ml .3)- IcIIJS I1 « 35$ 3) I03 18 I91 4%
I “Jo-3|." noun—mm I4 3 ‘0 50 213 I0 I” as
3 9.15-8.63 NIB-IVAN I I0 III 02 313 I5 II. 11
I ”5-52.10 ”hm-MOI 22 5I 215 II I13 11 ‘3 (3
Sum-cud ”do: (10)
1 Ska-SI.” toms- INS: 2‘ 12 8! $1 33 U ZIO 31
I SI .‘M-SIJI I05.07- “5.80 I) ‘6! 0 3) I“ 1‘ 239 so
9 8.76-3.92 mam-103.60 3) N m 30 "7 71 10 .3
I0 W321! IOSJII- I03.”- 0 _w 22 10 I2I 63 3‘5 3
II SIN-52.2) I06.1I- I053: I 22 m 3 III! 8 I0 66
I"! 51.5-51.0 INN- IN.” 2| ‘5 IIB I0 35. M as 8|
I3 SI.” I0 “$.28- IMAI' 9 39 218 33 I27 w 31 50
II WM «1351- I012 I: 0 so 1 320 8 m 8‘
I5 33.43-51.52 noon-mm 1 so 0 50 no I! m 3‘
IO Sim-$3.5 loam-10.67 31 M I” I. m 15 a 5
I1 9.“ -53. S3 IM-IN.” II 3 16 I1 335 II 1A2 15
II 9.9-9.” “'32- I‘D.“ O 33 2: I5 I33 35 a 73
I0 53.11-53.99 “311- up.“ 5 I1 I10. IO 2:: 83 9 15
an “49-55.” noun-won 3 ‘9 1I 21 2B 63 I01 18
2! “'3.“ W.”- m.” 15 a I” 10’ I” W 19 CI
law ”an: (1 1)
22 SIX-“8 IIO.10-III.I1 3.5 5‘ 346 I2 I33 so m 0‘
23 “ﬂ-“N “om-mm I3 52 50 28 MI :2 ans .8
24 SSH-85.21 [ﬂy-Ill.“ as 56 35‘ a) no 1% no 13
13 Ska-“.0 I lo. 32-! I0.” 2| 11 I I9 “0 78 m 17
8 SIN-SM» now—I I0.“ I0 2! 31 21 I“ 0 w 6
21 ”-85.“ “0.3- I l I.“ I8 13 50 I5 3|! .1 m 15
a ”-35.3 IIOJI-I I I.” I3 0‘ 6 I8 3“ u I92 16
a “3-“.‘3 nus-1 II .5 2| I” II M I“ C 2a 76
3° 9.8“” HIM-III.“ I0 I: no ‘I ”I 5! 92 7’
II “JO-5640 “Ix-III.“ 3 1S NI ‘1 99 1S 3“ ‘1
Sam run (1 2)
33 5651-35.” "LN-“2.” JII ‘I O
3 55.0-55.3! I IILB-IBﬂIIg ”:3” I9 I$1§I 150 I OI
M sun-$5.“ "ZN-I mu I0Is III 255 I1

[see key on p 97]
'0! OFFICIAL ”53 “LY
[Table 3. continued.

Soc key on p 97]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3

 

62869-388388

#2888988388286338

8%:88888888

55.70-53.26
”JO-50.1!
5530-555»
55.52-55.75
55.13-55.03
say-am

55510-563
55.50-55.70
50.00-55.32

31-51350
“o‘I’c’ﬁw‘

{72-5513
55.15-50.01
55.56-56.13
56.10-50.13
50.12-50.19
55.97-50.13
“3-55.51
55.15-50.25
5515-55.“
56.15-55.11
50.15-55.27
50.50-55.15
sum-3.15
55.15-56.10
56.31-56.15
9.15-3.13
sun-sex:

50.12-16.50
36.13-56.52
56.61-95.71
56.33-56.12
”33.3.70
30.31—83.11

{IRAQ-30.31
50.50—56.71
95.31 -56.15
33.11-30.17
36.61-56.70

5

5

C

Wanton-l Incl-n
awn—no.2: 11 11 212
“OM-111.05 15 n 161
11055-110453 19 39 1:»
“OAS-111.1» 31 M 275
1113-11151 13 27 51
"kw-111.52 7 33 351
"IN-111.15 23 32 1171
11132—112.“ 25 55 233
11210-112.” 40 G7 81
1123-112.“ 20 10 31
112.57-11232 19 61 63

Mylar“ pun
11252-1111.“ 72 or. 63
112457-111.“ U) 115 111
11310-11331 10 75 21
11357-11552 23 16 171
11153-11330 21 32 11B
115.55-1121” 9 27 119
ION—111.07 15 0 1117
113311-114.“ 2 a 117
11:131-111.“ 12 5 12.1
113.ﬂ—111.l1 11 13 11:
sum-mm 9 3) 1131
1113-1115? 0 23 2121
“Ml-111.50 6 25 23
11545-115481 56 U- 179
11535-115.” 11 1" 21.91
11631-116.” 7 111 113
“om-no.7: 6 a! 5

Ida-neat ”In.
"nu—117.31 11 :15 21
11731-11733 5 5 3m
11731-117." 1‘1 40 m
11731-117420 15 10 121
11732—11753 8 13 m
11753-117312 21 53 1
11755-1178! 37 102 so
117162-1173; 9 19 511
mac-mm 33 1311 711
115111-1185 4 17 187
1183—11...“ 1 11 an
96

FOR OFFICIAL 083 MY

1'.’

(15)

§§§§

151
175

351
115

118
116

331

1711

§§§§§§§

o

351

133
310
152

13
17
331

16‘:
110

316

'31:.

315
91

57
75
76
87

as
§§§a§aﬁa§§3

2838838328:

8?

ﬁﬂﬁﬁﬁﬁxg

23825

9388888233

:aaausaazas
auBEBEEEaEE
38333382333

$

251
217

§
:assaeazgzxascasa

107
2'5

Eggs
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key in Table I]:
I. Group nuaber
2. Linits of the values of the coordinates of the epicenters for
the group as a whole
3. No of earthquakes in the group
6. Total he of recorded signs of the shifts
5. Stress
6. Cospressive
7. Tensile
8. lntersediate
9. Tunkinskiy Rayon {District}
10. Saykal'skiy Rayon [31th District]
11. Barguzinskiy Rayon [uremia District]
12. bauntovakiy Rayon [Diltf1¢t
13. Verkhneangarski Rayon [0990? Angara 010tf1¢tl
la. Huyskiy Rayon l a District]
[5. Udokanskiy Rayon [Udokan District]
Note. A: -- sci-uth reckoned in the horizontal plane free the north
direction. v - zenith angle.

In the Rnrguzin ridge the epicentral zones of the isolated groups of
earthquakes are superposed on each other. The sale thing is observed in
the northern part of the Bargusin basin and in the central part of the
lkatskiy ridge. The iapression is crested that these three regions are
coordinated with a single band cutting the largueinr seisaic region in
the direction free the northveat to the southeast and distinguished by
noticeable variety of the stressed states in the centers of the earthquakes

against a background of sore uniforl surrounding regions in this respect
(Fig 14).

In the case of superposition of the epicentral fields it is natural to
propose that the earthquakes of the different groups take place at different
depths. Actually. in spite of the fact that the low density of the network
of seissic stations of Pribaykal'ye will not per-it deter-ination of the
depth of occurrence of the centers with accuracy required for definite
solution of the problas of the association of the earthquakes with certain
layers of the earth's crust. even a rough co-parison of the depths of the
centers of the earthquakes belonging to the lentioned groups. leads to the

conclusion of correctness of the proposition Iadc (Hiaharina. Solonenko.
1972).

These facts indicate that the deep oarts of the crust cha:acterised by
increased nonunifornity of structure correspond to the band of superposition
of epicentral fields.

it is resnrkable that the investigated band which is transverse to the veil-

knnun norphostructures of Pribarguzin'ye exactly cospared with the trans-
verse flexure-like structure which is visible on the space photograph.

97

lOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

. Table lo

Orientation of the Axes of the Priscipsl Stresses in the Centers
of Bsrthquskss for which Individual Detsruinntions srs Hsde

 

Tm! psi-cu (10)

1| 0w mm ”-41 u'msu I um) “um tmautocl so.
Baum-m! plus (11)
3 UVIII I030 11-“! (PI. 52.05 I07." MI I8 I40 I!) 3| 7:!
3 1IVIII IIM ZI-II 4 $2.39 was: 33 32 m 36 2:6 1!
4 "X IWI III-3D J 5| .50 IMJII 38 53 35 88 2“ .17
5 ”ix IMI 23-“ 5 81.50 IN)“ IO 33 III 83 :m m
0 INVIII mm 33-" 5 'I. mm [18.31 2! I8 I40 SI 3| 7|
7 NS I902 III-N I 51.55 MIX-1 It'- 20 I I8 80 II" 71'
0 3|" I'JI'SI III-ill s I 3m: IIIIJII 7‘ m 3|: 73 III 7-3
9 IO!" I'JI'SI N'- III 5 52.56 “6.33 II) I0 3“ $7 233 73
II) MNIII IIIIII III-l0 5 'I, 5U" WI.” 38 53 305 31) ‘.'II 3?
' II IDII I9“? «2-0: | '53.") IIISS'J 353 III I33 “3 23 83
H 3" mm “-25 :5 am: [07.23 358 13 WI 71' ”I 52
I3 IIIIX mm I3-I0 :5 SM“ Imﬂ IIS I? 109 75 .12 '3
1‘ all“ Ilﬂn m-II 5 'I. 53.3) “3.112 222 70 III B 35 33
'b'qums pm (13) .
15 271' I'll I'I-I 3-40 5 SI.I1I I I‘M“ 33$ 3 III 7?- 38 I“
I. II" I“: II-Io (I “.5” III”) I” 9 ill! 85 32 S
17 III 19m 22-“ ‘I '3. “.3 III.” 33) |8 I82 73 70 8’.
I. 5’" mm zl-SII <4 “3| III}? 60 IO SIG 85 230 9)
I. “I'll 1W 2l-w (I “.75 IIIM :1!) I3 MO 85 58 79
” I51" IN 15-3 85 55.” "MO 95 33 3" 73 2|? 77
2| llIlV ma 17-33 I sun mm m :0 322 a: 23: 1s
Sap-mm rum (13)
a n um: ma 1 01—“ I 5 15m: um I muesmsuuslmlu
Mama-ms ”M 1‘)
D IVXI I'JIII (II-II I 'I. 55.” IIIIJS I“ 5 3‘8 85 73 m
M I2'III IIIII 3-01 (I 36.01 III.3I II? an 318 15 2“ 73
25 II'III IM‘I ”mic I 9&6 I I2.|3 2 9 I82 III III III
a UK" ma 01-25 .' -' 55.87 "2.05 3'5 2| I!) 7!) ZZI 8'.
37 :IIIXII I!“ 0| -5| I 55.“ I I04" I30 8 an SI ,3) U-
28 15" m1 Iii-SO 5 'I. 33.3 "05‘ 2" 27 3|? 85 3| I“
§ INK m1 5-"! -I 9.35 IIUII II: 33 35$ 9| 2|” 7:
1h IWIX I!!! III-SI ti $5.” I IIUII 2|: 2| :m 77 7‘.’ 7|
3| MS I IuiII Il—JI 5'] 35.!” II I .40 3-“ I | I75 8) 83 8'3
32 I‘ll‘ I IM! 13-55 §I 55.!” "0.3 I": 38 I0 83 37') $3
' Hymns m (15)
a ZINI um m—m 1.9 30“ II“)? 3“ ‘7 376 m 85 I?
3‘ IIVVIII me III-52 (I 55.57 "3.75 2'" I0 I3! 8'. 43 s:
35 I5" um w-IB 5 56.71 "2.93 1'35 38 III; 73 I8 57
as ill/VIII I!“ Iﬂ-ﬂI ' '55:.- 56.” "5.18 :9! 2:) IGII 76 15 13
81 IIXI ltla Ic-S‘! %$ 56." I [3.73 2“ I2 I20 89 J'- 7*
[see key on p 99] 98

1’0! OFFICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Table 5]:

l.
2.
3.
‘I
5.

Note.

Key: 1. Barguain

No 10.
Date 11.
Tile in the center. hours . ainutes 12.
H - 13.
Coordinates of the epicenter 16.
Stress 15.
Coapressive

Tensile

Inter-ediate

See the note to Table 3.

ﬂeoeeoeaoaee

Tunkinskiy Rayon
Baykal'skiy Rayon
aarguzinskiy Rayon
nauntovakiy Rayon
Verkhneangsrskiy Rayon
Huyskiy Rayon

 
 

Figure 16. Orientation of the Stress Axes in the Centers of
Earthquakes of the Barguzin District

l-IO -« epicenters of earthquakes belonging to groups Nos 22-31

respectively in Table 3; ll - seismic station; 12 -- basin region;

[3-16 -- co-pressive and tensile stresses. respectively, indicated for

each group in the exsaple of one of the earthquakes (the length of the

arrows is proportional to the cosine of the slope angles of the axes to
the horizontal plane).

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?

ridge; 2. Alla; 3. lkarskiy ridge
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was not isolated by geological aethods. the ilexurc (1) was not
expressed even on aerial photographs obviously as a result of the large
radius of curvature.

In the aauntovskiyndstrictthree groups of earthquakes have been isolated.
One of them belongs to the western part of the Teipa-Bauntovsksya-Bssin
and adjacent regions of the uplifts; two stretch toward the central part
of the basin. The majority of shocks in the last two groups are after-
shocks of the earthquake of 21 July 1968 (see Table a) and the earthquakes
of the swarm occurring in Sentenber-Deceober 1969. In all cases the
orientation of the compressive stress axes epicenters is close to vertical:
the axes of the tensile and intermediate stresses are near horizontal.

In the sequence of aitershocks. Just as in the earthquake aware of 1969.
shocks of both types isolated in the central part of the basin are
encountered.

In the Verkhneangsrskiy [Upper Angers] District the direcuions of
the stress axes in the centers are defined for ll groups; of them. the
processing is carried out for nine by observations only of weak earth-
quakes. In two cases the weak shocks were investigated in combination
with stronger earthquakes for which the individual detersinations were
lads. The observation data for group No 35 (see Table 3) made it possible
sore precisely to determine the orientation of the axes in the center of
the earthquake on 10 September 1968. The earthquake of 26 Nova-bar 1968
was included in group No 60 (see Table 3). In addition to the two indi-
cated earthquakes. the individual processing was carried out for eight
more shocks (see Table 6).

In practice. all or the investigated centers of the Verkhneangarskiy Rayon
are characterized by near vertical orientation of the axes of the compres-
sive stresses and the near horizontal orientation of the axes of tensile
and internediate stresses. For group No 36 alone (see Table 3) inclined
orientation of the axes of the coepressive and tensile stresses was
detected for the earthquake center of 17 June 1968 -- inclined orientation
of the axes of the compressive and intermediate stresses (see Table b).

In the Huya District,the data on the stresses in the centers were obtained
for 17 groups of earthquakes. One of then (No 56, see Table 3) is
characterized by inclined orientation of the axes of the coapreaaive and
tensile stresses and the near horizOntal orientation of the axes of
interaediate stresses. In the reesining cases, the axes of the coapressive
stresses are near vertical. and the tensile and intermediate. near hori-
zontal. The individual detarsinations were nade for five earthquakes

(see Table 6). Three of them are sinilar with respect to nature of center
nechnnisa to the basic sass of the weak shocks. The centers of the

Nuyakiy earthquake of 27 June 1957 andthe earthquake of 15 January 1963
were characterized by inclined orientation of the axes of the ooepreasive
and inter-edlate stresses and the near horizontal. the tensile stresses.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the Udokan DiOIIICt a study is made of ll groups of earthquakes.

the centers of seVen of them are characterized by near vertical orientation
of the axes of the compressive stresses and the near horizontal orientation
of the axes of the tensile and intermediate stresses. In the earthquake
centers of two groups. near horizontal orientation of the axes of the
compressive and tensile stresses was detected and near Vertical for the
intermediate ones. One of these groups is associated with the Huyskoy-
Charskaye [Muya-Chara] interbasin eommiasure: the other centers of the
other are located in the northeastern part of the region in the foothills
of the Udoksn ridge. One of the groups of earthquakes of the Chara basin
is characterized by horizontal orientation of the axes of the compressive
and intermediate stresses and the vertical. the tensile stresses. North

of Malays Laprindo Lake. within the limits of Kodar ridge. there are
epicenters of a group of earthquakes. in the centers of which the axes of
the tensile and intermediate stresses are oriented near horizontal and the
compressiVe stresses. inclined.

From the presented survey of results it follows that the near vertical
orientation of the axes of the compressive stresses and near horizontal
orientation of the axes of the tensile and intermediate stresses in the
centers remains most general for Pribaykal'ye [the Baykel region] even in
cases where the weakest recorded shocks in the zone are included in the
investigation. Out of 73 groups vith established orientation of the
stress axes in the centers. 57 are characterized by near vertical
compressive. near horizontal tensile and intermediate stresses. The
tensile stresses basically operate approximately across. and the inter-
mediatc ones. parallel to the strike of the structures.

The conclusions of the orientation of the stress axes in the centers of
the Baykal earthquakes were drawn within the framework of the theory of
the center mechanism developed by A. V. Vevedenskays (1969). According to
this theory. the defining role in the occurrence of movement in the center
is played by the maximal tangential (slip) stresses
0 -o

0k 12 3 .
operating in the planes making angles of 05' with the axes of the greatest
(°l) and least (a ) principal stresses. In the need force model of the
center of these planes are the bissector planes of the axes of compressive
and tensile stresses of equal magnitude (the third principal stress.
intermediate. equal to 0). Thus. establishing the orientation on the axes
of the indicated stresses on the basis of observations'of the shift field.
we determine the orientation of the axes of the actual principal stresses

in the center zone of the earthquake. However. inasmuch as one and the
same maximum tangential stresses and, consequently. movements can occur
for various values of a1 and 03 (if the difference between the latter is

the some) the established orientation of the axes of the principal stresses
can correspond to different stressed states.

101

I0! 0??!CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we assume (Treskov. 1968; Vvedenskava.1969) that the directions of
the axes of the compressive. tensile and interaediate stresses in the
centers of the Bayksl earthquakes are determined by the directions of the
stress axes of the least. greatest and intermediate tensions in the
corresponding volumes of the earth's crust. respectively. then the data
obtained indicate that the basic regional field of the tectonic stresses
in Pribayksl'ye is characterized in the horizontal and perpendicular
structures by orientation of the axes of greatest tension. the horizontal
and parallel structures by orientation of the axis of intermediate tension.
and the vertical structure by orientation of the axis of least tension
(Fig 15 and 16).

The regional diagram of the stress field is maintained with high stability
alaost over the entire extent of the Baykal rift zone. at least from the
southern extremity of Beykal to the western part of the Chara basin (see
Fig 15. 16). The local peculiarities of the stressed state of the crust
in these regions asking an impression on the sechaniea of the earthquake
centers of individual groups as a rule do not contradict the general
nature of the stresses characteristic of the Baykal region. This unique—
ness is disturbed only on the flanks of the zone. in the Tunkinskiy and
Udokan Districts.

The overall result of the investigations of the stressed state of the

crust within the limit of the Bsyhal rift zone is the conclusion of
unconditional predoainaace in this territory of the stress field of the
rift type under the influence of which the centers of the absolute majority
of earthquakes. both strong and week. are formed.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Legend and key for Fig 15, p 103]

1.3.5 -- near horizontal. inclined and near vertical stress axes in the
earthquake centers investigated individually. respectively; 2.5.6 - the
sane for earthquakes combined into groups; 7 - outlines of th1 regions
encompassing the earthquake epicentcrs with a single center mechanism
(orientation of the stress axes is shown in the example of one of the
earthquakes. The total number of them within the limits of the region
is designated near the outline or inside it). I—Vl .. regions of the
Bsykal seismic zone; I -- Tunkinskiy Rayon [Distr1cﬁ,11 - Baykal'skiy.
III -- Barguzin, IV -~ Verkhneangnrskiy. V - Bauntovskiy,

VI -- Muyskiy [Muys]. VII -- Udokan

Key:
1. Kitoyskiye bald peaks; 2. Tunkinskiye bald peaks; 3. Khamsr-Daban
ridge; 6. Irkut: 5. Irkutsk: 6. Angora; 7. Prinorskiy ridge;
8. Bsykal ridge; 9. Lake Baykal: 10. Barguzin: ll. Barguzin ridge;
12. Ikatskiy ridge: 13. Verkhne-Angarskiy [Upper Angers] ridge;
16. Verkh. Angers (Upper Angers] River; 15. Delyun-Uranskiy ridge;
16. Huys: l7. Yuzhno-Huyskiy (Southern Buys] ridge; 18. Vitim ;
19. Udoksn ridge; 20. Kslsr; 21. Tsipa; 22. Vitin : 23. Ulsn-Ude

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
mu ‘
3)‘ \ 1
ﬂ. 7 . g
o no ' . VIM-u) (-v n
\* ~ ‘
‘\§\\ ‘ . ﬁgure 16. Orient

. of greatest renal]
' ‘ ~ ‘ U) the eltthquakc eel
Ptibayh'ye [Baylu

I (for the provisior

‘ on Hg 15 [p IDA}
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MR VI. m1 CLASSIFICATIW 0F MAKES

At the present tine in Pribayhal'ye. just as in the nsjority of seisnically
active regions of the USSR. the energy classification of earthquakea is
carried out by the procedure developed by 1'. c. Rautian (mos....
1960). The nonogran conetructed by this author with respect to the
observation data at the seisaic stations of Central Asia naturally takes
into account the dissipating propertiea of the substrate of the given
region. when applying this nonogran for the classification of the
Pribsyhal'ys earthquakes. it is necessary to be certain of the correctness
of its use in an area with entirely different geological structure. For
this purpose. first of all it is necenssry to conpare the (la-ping laws of
the elastic oscillations with an increase in the epicentral distance in
the corresponding regions.

Delping Lev of Seisnic Haven in Pribaykal'ye

An eatinste of the psraneters of the da-ping law was nade by us using
several procedures. First of all. this is the procedure for constructing
a free graph developed hy'T. G. Rautian and the so-called difference
procedure (Gayskiy. Zhslltovekiy. l97l). Along with then. the procedure
was aleo used which takes into sccowt the dependence of the energy
defined by the forlula of '3. I. Golitsin (1960) on the epicentral dis ance

(Solonenko. A.. Tstarenko, 1972s). lxperinental data are presented in
Fig 11 for the 'l‘. 6. Rautian procedure.

Fig 18 shows the distribution I! (n'. f) for the difference procedure
which gave the Iain value of the inSex of the dalping function of the
anxiou- anplitudes of the soil displacenents (for epicentrsl distancea
exceeding 300 In) equal to 1.99:0.07. Calculating n“ f for the energy
flux density c in the ease distance range by the fortuia

1; A: (a) - o.“ 1; C(ergslolz) - 0.12 (1)

relating c and A}, (Solonenko. A.. Tatarenko. 1972a). we obtain n‘ «.06.

eff

106
roe OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR Ol’FlCI'AL USE ONLY

Thin value of n'e“ agreea quite V2” (within. the lieite of error) with

the value of the index of the duping function obtained iron the emery
graph (aee Fig 19). The figure alao preeente the curve obtained ueing the
function Sr (6). The comparison of the results obtained by the three
procedurea ia good. which penite us to drew the certain conclueion that

the delving lav of the energy flux density ia characterized for
Pribaykal’ye by the following average perenetere:

so n<o< 10 us. 3-4.2;
. 11

1o ~<A< ”not. I,.- .0;

zoo m<o<tooo u. .3“...

 

2.7 .‘J 5.7 #0 I39 3.? .9; .‘S‘.’ ’39 0016,"!

Figure 17. Scenery graph of the denying of the energy flux
denaity for Pribaykal'ye conetructed by the

T. c. Rautian procedure
Key: 1. 13 c. ergo/c:-2

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OVPICIAL US! ONLY

For aore reliable localization of the points at which variation of the
slope of the dalping graph takes place. we have used the procedure called
"successive reproduction of the daoping curve." The basis for it is the
previously mentioned difference procedure. The entire ran e of epicentre!
distances is broken down into aaall sections. Initially n eff is
calculated for the last of then: then for the two last. and so on. It
the damping of the seislic waves does not change on going from section to
section. the neon values of the index of the daaping function will reasin
constant. Otherwise. an inflection point will be observed on the graph

n. ff (6). The graph presented in Fig 20 was constructed on the basis of
us ng this procedure.

”‘1

I

3

.__I____.g—__.__A——.

3

 

-0, v.” '-‘ V-‘ 0‘ o: 0 I ‘ 4 . . h ‘ o. a “ .“1
1)

Figure 18. Distribution N (“.eff) for the dasping law of the

seislic waves as a funcion of the Prihaykal‘ye

. earthquakes (for the difference aethod).

Key: n eff

108
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE OllLY

j . .
J

    

1

.. tu-omsg g3 gag Eggggg.

Pigure l9. Graphs of the dasping of the energy flux density.
l -- constructed by the T. c. Rautian procedure; 2 -- constructed
using the function P (A): 3 -- calibration curve for the
T. G. Rautian nosogrgn: 6 -- deter-ined by the difference asthod.
Key:
1. lg t. erg/cua

Damping of the Seisnic Haves as a Function of Earthquake Energy

In an entire series of papers. the relation is indicated for the danping
of the seisnic anes as a function of the earthquake energy. but it was
alanst not investigated experinentally until recently. As an exception
it is possible to note the papers by T. 6. Rsutian (VETNODS.... 1960).
K. Dshanutahov. I. ll'yasov (1972). t. A. Dthihladse. et al. (l97l).

A. Nurlagelhetov (1973). in which as a result of the lisited values of
experinental saterial. only a schenatic solution to this problem is pre-
sented.

lnaseuch as the accuracy of the data presented in the nentioned papers is
explicitly insufficient for deteruining the function n‘ff(K). we considered
it necessary to deter-ins the paraneters of the relation of interest to

us on the experisentsl eaterial obtained in Pribayhal'ye. For reliable
deternination of the paraseters. we used two independent procedures which
gave good latching results.

Precedure 1. If the damping of the seismic waves actually depends on the
source energy. the values of the energy classes deter-ined hy the

T. a. Rautian noeogras at different epicentrel distances will not regularly
coincide. If we denote by "0“ the index of the dasping function of the
energy flux density of seisn c waves fro. earthquakes of an energy class
for which the dasping curve coincides with the calibration curve of the
nouogran. and by ngff for the i-th energy class, then

s 08::
wow-mm.
(1)

Key: 1. eff
109

M OFFICIAL USE OILY
'0! OPPICIM. USE ONLY

vhere “If z-q-q ie the difference in veluee of the energy clueee

determined2 for one eerthqueke of the i-th energy cieee et the epicentrel
dietencee ‘1 end A, (Solonenko. A” 197‘).

     
   

 
 

‘ l-II '
IhL _‘

advice» MI!”
I.-

Pigure 20. Graph of desping of sexisus esplitudee. eoil
dieplecesente conetructed by the seth of
"eucceeeive reproduction"

'l'eble 5

Corrections to the Cslibrstion Curve of the ‘1'. G. Rsutisn
hosogres

 

In Table 5 the reeulte ere presented fros the celculetione of Ga“
forsule (2). Here It in the nuber of detersinetione of 611:“ vhichb’ were

averaged when celculeting the seen 6%“: a...“ ie the corresponding
seen equere errore in detersining the seen. The veluee of on.“ were
detersined vith reepect to en entire eet of urthquekee of given inteneity.

‘l'he reeults obteined sede it poeeible to drew the conclueion of eeeentiei
dependence of the index of the duping function of the energy clue of
the eerthquelze. Ae ie ohvioue fros Fig 21. the experisentel pointe in
the coo: dilute eyetes of 611.“. I ere correctly epproxiseted by the

etreight line
Key: 1. eff I)
(the correletion coefficient of the seen veluee 900.997).

110
m OFFICIAL US! MY
70R ONICIM. USE ONLY

—

      

I t! 828 ﬁﬂﬁﬁg

Figure 21. Function 6n.ff(K) Figure 22. Damping curves of the
energy flux density for earthquakes
Key: of different energy classes
la 60.ff Key:
1. ergo/c-2

Procedure 2. If there are two earthquakes (Iarhed by the synbole i and j)
of different energy with in practice coinciding epicenters recorded by
two seisaic stations (syabols 1 end 2) located at distancee ‘1 end A

free the center. then the Isgnitude of the coefficient in fornule (3; can
be cnlculated using the expression

_ (‘3-‘0- 51-4)
2;" (q- s0u¥—(s:—r{)u9k' (i)

where R is the sphere reference radius equal to lo kl.

l’or llplensntation of the second neth of detenining the paraneter of
the function 6n.“ (K). a group of earthquakes was selected fron the

lhetskiy swarn of 1969 end a group of afternhocks of the Radar earthquake
of 1970.

In the for-er case. 78 values of “eff,“ detenined by fornula (A) for

different pairs of earthquakes and seiseic stations located in the range
of $0 to 790 Ice (K-7.2-ll.9) were averaged. The average value turned out

to be equal to ~0.3‘10.06. which agrees well with the coefficient obtained
by the first procedure.

In the second case the observations were used only at two stations -
Chore and Central leler (the lean values of the epicentral distancee
30.5 and 112 he. the range of energy classes ‘.$-0.7 and 6.3-10.6
respectively). The value of

111

'0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
NR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

‘fﬁ " -0s30 * as“

was obtained on averaging 565 individual deterainations of linen/6K.

Previously we discussed the avers: '. paraacters of the da'aping law of

the energy flux density froa the Pribeykal'ye earthquakes. fig 22 shows
the family of daaping curves contracted considering the average parameters
in foraula (3) (for clarity the initial ordinates of the graphs of all at
the energy classes coincide at a canon point). Fig 22 enphasizes the
necessity for considering the dependence of the peraaeters of the daaping
laws of seisaic waves on the energy of thc vibration source when construct-
ing the different systeas of energy classification of earthquakes.

Applicability of the T. G. Rautian Noaograas for Energy Classification
of the Pribaykal‘ye Earthquakes

As was dcaonstrated above. the daaping of the seisaic oscillations
essentially depends on the force of the earthquake. The procedure of

T. c. Rautian and. consequently. its noaograa do not take into account
this effect. Therefore. although this is not a natural cause. the pro-
cedure for energy classification of T. G. Rautian gives an especially
relative earl-ate of the earthquake energy. however. the classification
of this author is still widely used in any parts of the USSR and. what
is no less iaportant. enters in as a fundalaental part in the ache-es for
solving other iaportant problaas of seissology. Accordingly. another
united procedure for energy classification has still not been introduced;
it is necessary to asintain a united approach when rating earthquakes with
respect to their energy aagnitude.

In order to draw a final conclusion regarding the possibility of using the
T. c. Rautian noaograa for energy classification of earthquakes in
Pribaykal'ye. it is necessary. first of all. to coapare the damping laws
of the seisaic waves in the corresponding regions. If we coapare the
parameters of the daaping law of the energy flux density for Central Asia
and Prihaykal'ye. it is possible to note significant differences in then
(Solonenko. Tataranko. 1972b). The greatest disagreeaent of the values
of the index of the damping function is noted at distances exceeding

200 to 250 kn. in addition. the zone of danping decreased to 2.0 at
distances exceeding 70 kn is soaewhat broader for Central Asia. Fig 23
shows the graphical representation of these data. The conclusion which
can be drawn on joint investigation of the graphs is that in spite of the
above-noted nuaerical disagree-eats. no significant difference in the
graphs has been detected fro. the point of energy classification. for the
deviations of one graph froa the other. as a rule. do not go beyond the
liaits of error of aeasuring the energy class (10.5 order). Consequently.
for the purposes served by the energy noaograa of T. G. Rautian. it is
entirely suitable even when studying satanic phone-ens in Pribayksl'ye.

112

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
 
 

  

Illiallll
II Illnl
II "II“
IIIIIIII“
IIIIIIII

° ‘Hﬁ‘?! £3 3&8
on

Figure 23. Coeperieon of the daeping graph of the energy
flux density for Pribeykel'ye (2). the calibration
curve for the 1'. G. Rautian noeogran (l)

  
      

Key: 2
1. lg t. ergo/c-

Energy Monogra- Coneidering the Function "effﬁo

Ueing the data on the duping of the eeianic wavea with dietencc obtained
for Pribaykel'ye end eleo for-ole (3). we coepered the noeogran for
deter-ining the energy clue of the earthquakee conaidering the dependence
of the daeping of the eeieeic wevee on the eource energy (Fig 24). Our
noeograe wee constructed by the one principle ea the known nonogra- of
‘l‘. G. Rautian. however. if in the loot cue the tally of curvee wee
obtained by parallel tranafer of the calibration curve along the y-axie.
in our noeograe ite curve in introduced for each energy claae. To the
left of the non-ogre. preeented in Pig 2‘ three auxiliary ecalee are
plotted which are intended for "facilitation of the traneition tron the
ahifte on the aeieeograe (A5”) to the eoil shift (ha) with augeentation
of tho inatrtment V. '

The odvnntogee of the noeograe preaented in Pig 2‘ by couperieon with the
1'. c. Rautian noeogree can be coneidered to include the fact that the
error in detenining Kn Iuat be appreciably leaa than when determining K.
"hen calculating K. the eyeteeatic errore connected with the fact that
for an arbitrary energy clone the calibration curve doea not coincide with
the effective duping curve but intereecta it. are added to the rando-
errore. Por confirnation of thie fact. a joint deteninetion wee nede
of the energy cleaeea with reepect to both noeogreae. In Table 6 the
mean eouare errore are preeented for deter-ining K and (o and °n)'
their ratio and eleo the nuber N of deter-inetione of t energy
claaaea with reepect to the two noeograea.

113

M OFFICIAL USE OULY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6

Comparison of the Errors when Determining K and Kn

 
  

 
 
 
  

    
   

1 0.“

O 0.43 2.5

O 0.50 0.07 0.10 8.8
i0 0M 0.” 3.3

Beth Table 6 and Fig 25 on which the histogress of the deviations fro.

the lean when detersining & and K9 are plotted for earthquakes of the

12th energy class (by the K scale convincingly indicate the significantly
higher accuracy of deteraining the energy class by the nonogran presented
in Fig 2‘. For the given range of energy classes our nomogran gives
errors on the average 2.2 tines smaller than the nouograa of ‘l'. c. Rautian.

The data obtained by other authors agree on the average quite well with
the function n.“(K) obtained for Pribaykal’ye. 'l'he duping curves for
the basis seisnically active zones of the continental part of the Soviet
Union also differ insignificantly froa each other. Consequently. the
presented nosogram can be used not only in Pribaykal'ye.

Deter-ination of the Magnitude of the Near Earthquakes by Soil Displaceaents
in Voluaetric Haves

The instruction regarding the procedure for the production and processing
of the observations at the YeSSN Seisaic Stations (1966) prescribe the
use (I the following formula for determination of the magnitude of near
earthquakes by the Iagnitude of the soil shift:

In - IgA‘ (II) + 1.32 lg A (nu). (5)

However, it is obvious that forlula (5) incorrectly (and not only for
Pribsykal'ye) takes into account the damping of the aeisaic waves and
requires introduction of the corresponding corrections. Above. we
presented the paraaeters of the damping law for the energy flux density
with distance for our region. considering the fact that constancy of
the relation betveen ' and t was proved (Solonenko. A., Tatarenko.
1972a). it is possible to use formula (1) to deter-ine the damping of

the maxim- alplitudea. Performing the corresponding calculations. we
obtain:

10u<d< 10 Int. lg-MB:
1on<e< one u. ~,'.-o.oa-
nom<a<tooe us. ' -2.o|.
”(1)
Key: 1. eff
115

FOR OFFICIAL 083 05].!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the basis of these data it is possible to calculate the calibration
curve 0(a) for determining the magnitude of the near earthquakes with
respec to the volumetric waves (see Table 7). The systes for using the
table is traditional (Richter. 1961).

N
as

80

‘00 0 M 'M

Figure 25. Histograms of deviations from the mean when
determining the energy classes by the nomograms
presented in Fig 26, and by the T. G. Rautian
version

 

Figure 26. Results of deternining the negnitude m by observa-
tions of earthquakes of the tenth energy class

Fig 26 shows the results of determining the segnitude e by observations
of earthquakes of the tenth energy class (on the K scale using Table 7).
As follows fro- the presented data. the magnitude of m does not depend
on the epicentrsl distance. that is. the celibration curve 0(a) reliably
takes into account the damping of the seisnic waves. The mean square
error of a single detersination of the nagnitude is 0.27.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basic Relations (Energy. Magnitude. Force at the Epicenter)

The aagnitude of the earthquake and its intensity expressed in‘ force
undoubtedly are interrelated characteristics of the "strength" of the
source of the oscillations. However. only in the siepleat cases can
to, Ii’ H and h be related by the seismic field equations (Shebalin. 1968).

More frequently, the isoseisss 11 have an "irregular" shape which is
caused by an entire set of factors.

In Prihaykal'ye, under the conditions of the coupler eossic structure of
the earth's crust and the great variety of engineering-geological and
geocryological conditions. strong earthquakes have clear individual
characteristics of manifestation on the surface which it is essentially
impossible to describe by average relations. The shift of the epicenter
to one of the edges of the region of sexism tremors and asyI-setric (as
a rule, elongated) configuration of the isose..nas of force 7 and 1ower
are colaon for strong (force 9 and lore earthquakes.

As examples of the “individual paradoxes" of strong earthquakes it is
possible to present the following facts.

During the Hays earthquake. the total extent of the apparent dislocations
of the earth‘s surface (>force 9) was 30 kn. 50 km from their termination
(the village of lhogoobeshcheyushchaya kosa) the effects of the tremors
were no here than force 7, and then after 18 to 20 In (the settlement of
Kedrovka) the earthquake appeared with a strength of no less than force 8.

1n the Maya basin at a distance of 60 to 65 its (the settle-eats of
Nelysty. Buys. Toluchevsk) an earthquake was not felt with a strength of
force 5-6. and then 130-160 lus northwest of the epicenter (the village of
Analyk). the effects of force 8 tremors were observed (Solonenko. V..

et a1.. 1966).

For the ‘l'as-Yuryakhskiy earthquake (ti-7.0) 1967. identical effects at
force 6-7 were noted in the village of Ust'-Nyukzhs (60 kin) and in the
city of Chita (700 km). The earthquake was felt 1100 to 1200 It: to the
southwest of the epicenter and only 180-200 km to the north-northeast.

The presented example. in our opinion. clearly indicates the coapliceted
nature of establishing a law of decrease in force for strong earthquakes.

In this sense the situation is soeewhst more favorable with earthquakes
of eoderate strength (HOS-6. 10-force 7-8) although the data on then is
quite limited.

without establishing the goal of obtaining final conclusions. we have
analyzed the distribution of the treaors with respect to area fros five
of the best investigated earthquakes. the magnitude of which is within
the limits of 5.3 to 5.5 (Io-force 7-8). For convenience of comparison.
the epicenters of the earthquakes in Fig 27 were latched at one point.

117
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8 8 8 8 ES 8: 8

88883

11!)
m
110
115

13'

13
1”
135
140
145
150
155
1”
165
‘110
115
10
910
915

2.”
2.90
6.1”
5.“
3.16
633
3.80
8.33
336
333
6.41
3.46
3.45
6.41
8.40
8.51
3.56
6.54
6.56
6.56
6.50
8.61
6.62
6.64
5.65
5.61
3.66
6.”
6.10
5.“

SJ”
SJ”

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Scale for Determining n

4." WM" «5) Adm'tu) .u owls." «4)

15
165
100
195

235

21

on

§§E§§§§§E§2§£§ﬁ§§§

310
815

1.92
6.11
3.12
6.73
6.14
8.16
3.18
6.”
6.62
61“
31”
6.68
5.”
3.93
3.”
8:”
6.91
6.06
4.W
4.02
4.@
4.15
4.“
4.”

§-§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§s

O
O

1
415

§§2§£§E§§§

410

58$

2.16
4.16
4.19
4.30
4.22
4.”
4.34
4.35
4.21
4.28
4.”
4,!)
4.31
4.32
4.33
4.65
4.36
4.37
436
4.39
4.40
4.41
4.42
4.43
4.44
4.45
4.46
4.41
4.48
4.49
5.111

5.08
5.10

118

E§E§§§§§I§§

‘3’

515

§§§§§§

610
615

3&5

2.36
4.50
450
4.51
4.ﬂ
4.53
4.54
4&5
4M
4.51
4.51
4.56
4.50
4.60
4.61
4.61
4.02
4.ﬂ
4.64
4.65
4.65
4.06

m'
no

4.66
4.0
4.10
4.11
4.11
4.12
5.10

5.11
5.11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

§§§§§§§§§§§§£§§§§§8

Q.

10
15

339’“

745

915
W

2.51
4.13
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.16
4.11
4.18
4.16
4.19
4.”
4.30
4.61
4.62
4.82
4.63
4.63
4.84
4.65
4495
4.80
433
4.37
4437
4.88
4.68
4.69
4.”
4.91
5.12

5.12
5.13

Table 1

§§§§§§§§§a

§§§

3&3

§§§2§§§§e§a§§§2§

2.66
m _
4.92
m
4.”
4.»
m
m
m
4.65
m
m
w
m
4.”
m
m
m
m
m
5.01

5.13 '
s.“
s.“
5.“
M ONICIM. 08! ONLY

 

Figure 27. Hep of the conhined inoaeim of earthquake.
with “6.3-5.5. The nunbere: in the circlee.
the earthquakes ntnhere (eee Table a): outeide
the circlea. the force indication

Pirat of all, the clearly expreeaed any-etry of the ieoeeieu of the
individual earthqueltee with reepect to the epicenter ettracta attention.
In addition. the iaoaeiana ere elongated in either one or two directione.
However. the general picture of the auperinpoaed ieooeiana appeare quite
ay-etric. which new it poaaihle to derive the average relatione
preaented in Table 8.

The nnteriela at our diapoaal per-it the eolution of the narrower
problen with aufficient ground: eetehliahlent of the initial (reference
to the epicenter) force of the earthquake by the valuea of the Iegnitude
II or the energy clean I calculated fro- the eeianogren. He have excluded
the function 10-! (h) iron the inweatigation. for'the available linited
data on the dietrihution oi‘ the centers of the etrong earthquahee indi-
cate that their deptha do not exceed the thichneu of the earth'a cruat
and are in the range of is to 20 In.

119

M OFFICIAL US! 0"“
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

The nrnnonition of linear dependence of lo and I! is entirely volid

(Fig 28). lnnstsuch an the cloud of experilental points is epproxinated
by n straight line. the coefficients of the corresponding equation out
be found iron the condition of the ainiaun of the sun at the least
dintances of the experilentnl points iron the desired straight line. On
the orthogonal regression we have halted our selection for the t .aon that

both lo and h are determined with significant and. what is snore iaportant.
couenaursble errors.

in order that the coefficients of the orthogonal regression not depend on
the selection of the scales along the coordinate axes. it is necessary to
know the error ratio e-oH/ol . As is known. the nagnitude oi the earth-
quakes is detenined on the average with an accuracy on the order of

1/6. and intensity to 1/2. Consequently. it is possible to set 8-1/2.
Calculating the paraneters of the orthogonal regression. we obtain

M u- 0.75 I. - 0.15 (6)
I. - L331! + 0.2.

OI’

hence. it l’ollows that on variation of the intensity by one force. the
magnitude varies by 3/6. Calculating the correlation coefficient. we
obtain a quite high value with nail lean square error

e - 0.956 :e 0.0“.
which convinces us another the of the correctness of tennis (6).

Table 8

Dilensions of the Isoseisas of Certain Earthquakes

    
 

 

31.1 106.5 5.5 id
Sill/Ill! lb“ 50.‘ “5.0 83-5513-4

 

”IX! i “-3! 55.9 “LS 5.3 9 - £32 33 i“
all" i ”-46 52.3 mp 3.6 i N i6: Q ﬁ
Will I "-42 $2,. iﬂ.’ 5.8 l3-i ii i5 33 .3

151400 ”

(7)Cseasss m. . . r~-§ pause rQ-iﬂ
(8) (8) (8)
Key:

1. date; 2. tine. hours-ninutes; 3. coordinates; 0. force 6;
5. force 5; 6. force 6: 7. seen values; 8. lean

120

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OPHCIAI. US! ONLY

 

80,090»

Figure 28. Detenination of the relatiOn of H and to for
the Pribayltal'ye earthquake

In order to obtain the ratio between H and It. we need the data preaented
in the collectione on zmmmsmm V 8853 [Earthquakea in the USSR]
for 1962 to l969. The valuea of the energy claaaea of the earthquakea

in the inveatigated territory were taken iron the trounw zmmusmn
PRIMYML'YE llulletina of Pribaykal'ye Barthquakea) coapiled at the
12K lnatitute of the Siberian Denartaent of the USSR Acadeay of Sciencee.

The graphical repreaentation of all of theee date ia preeented in Fig 29.

For ehoclta with average atrength (to K-l‘) the experimental data agree
well with the female

K-i-l-MM. - (7,

For stronger aarthquakea an inaufficiency of data in felt. however. the
available lieited data to a high degree eatiafy another relation alao
propoaed by ‘l'. 6. Rautian 01311008.... 1960):

K-S-l-iJM. (3)

In order to deter-inc the relation between to and K. let ua uae the
fomlee (6)-(8) taking into account that the fonulae obtained can have
less accuracy than 'onulaa (6). (7). Coeparing (6)-(8). ve find:

I. -o.wc-2.s (n
(of x < “o
I... 1.2“: - 9.4 (:0)

for. K> 1“.

The results of the exe-ination oi’ the entire aeriee of atrong earthquakea
in Priboyhnl'ye indicate that the relationa obtained between H or K and
lo corrcapond quite eatiafactorily to thoae ohaerved in nature.

l21

roe OFFICIAL USE OIL!
POI OWIQIAL USE ONLY

     

nuanced."

Fame 29. Relation between :4 and K.

a -- K-l.8NH: b - K-OMJH. the amber "36" indicataa
that 36 aetthquakea have valuea of K-11 and H-h.

122

M OFFICIAL USE OIL?
POI OHICIAI. ”8! ONLY

CHAPTER V11. 5110th WWW

During the couree of the work. eeieeologicel. geophysicel. hydroseochenicel.
geotherlel end other Interiels need to predict eerthquekes were tethered
end enelyted (frequently by couputer). He ere coepletely convinced thet

it is inpoesible to rely with certainty on the conetsncy of the seiseic
regine. the eueteining of the seienic cycles. the hydrogsochenicel
verintions. the speeds end direction of cove-once o! the eerth's cruet.

the verietions of the geophysicel fields. the coenic phenonene end other
known (ects providing the beeis for verioue sethods of predicting earth-
ouekes.

In individuel cesee. especielly for observetions in the epicentrel tonee
or when expleinins the eerthquekes thet heve elreedy occurred. there ere
defined coeperieone of the eerthqueke tine with one phenoeenon or enother.
terrestriel or toe-it. However. when processing the dete not by one but

by neny eerthquekee it is discovered thet the coeperison ie rendon. This
is entirely neturel: the ceuees of the eerthquekes ere unknown.but it ie
cleer thet they ere ceused by deep processes. end the onset of the event
of e tectonic esrthoueke with e crustel center itself. es e consequence

of love-onto of the lorphoetructures predoninently clone the (cults.
depending on the direction of these love-ents. by one set of fectore or
enother. cen be eccelereted. decelereted. or be independent of the-

(for ere-ole. the effect of luner ettrection on en upthruot (eult. nor-e1
(cult or shift). Ior the time being the only relieble besis tor eeti-eting
the level of seisnic ectivity of seisnogenic structures end consequently.
the heeis for seielic reeiooelixetion essentielly reeeins seiseoetetistics.
of course. in the brood understending (necroseiseice. inetruent obeervev-
tions and their verious interpretetione. end peleoeeisnogeologicel dete).

Strong Eerthqushes by Peleoeeieloseologicel beta

The cloesificetion of seissogenic residuel defer-etions of the eerth's
cruet end coil is preeented in Chapter I.

The description of ell of the discovered end investissted peleoseioeo-
genie etructuree would teke up too such epece. end indeed there is no
neceoaity for it: the docueentetion of neny of the structures hee been

123

POI 0'1ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAI. 088 ONLY

publiehed. Therefore we ehell preeent Table 9 of etructuree and a brief
characteristic of the once of then. the docuaentation of which hae not
been publiehed or hna been publiehed in local publicatione.

for convenience of uaing the aaterial. the territory of Baetern Siberia
has been broken down into trapezoide with their own order nut-baring
(rig 30).

Ali-2. The Yanchukanakaya atructure ie located on the aoutheaet aide of
Verkhneangarahaya baain between the Yanchukan and the Yanchuy Rivera.
The eyetea of eeiaaogenic diaturbancea with a total length of about

9 It. followa the tone of the Severoauyahiy lhorthern liuyal neotectouic
fault.

Among the atructure dialocationa. the tenaile (eeparation) fracturee
predoeinate both in coabination with noreel faulte and without vertical
ehift of the liaba. The "pure" noraal faulta are obeerved appreciably
lore rarely; the unim- aaplitude reachee a eetere. The liab at the

foot of the uountain ia eubaided everywhere. The fracturea deforl the
deluviai eantle of the elopea and the cuulative acct-ulationa of the tone
at the foot of the eountain. The eyatee of dielocationa ie diecontinuoua
and elongated in the northeaaterly (65’) direction. The ooet extended
and characteriatic fragnent of it it upped on the left bank of the
Yanchultan liver (aee Pigurea 31. 32).

The oorphology and aorphooetry of the dialocatione. their plan configura-
tion indicate that on for-ation of the atructurc. along with the vertical
structure. the horizontal coqonent of action aleo occurred. The latter
wee expreaaed in the aignificant horizontal teneion (eeparation) directed
acroae the zone of the neotectonic fracture. Thia confine the nor-a1
fault and not the atrihe-elio nature of noveeent along the fault. The
acalee of the dielocationa and the atructure aa a whole lake it poeaible
to deter-inc the aagnitude of the earthquake cauaed by thee of 6-1/2-7-1/2
(9-10 force).

The age of the atructure ia indicated by the preeervation of the hollow
(one of dialocatione on quite ateep elopea and interaectione by then of
the rock etreaaa. the abaence in the craclte of teneion and on the fault
ecorpa of nature arboreal vegetation. the poeaibility of trapping even
fine. nonextended parta of the dialocationa. All of thia providea a baeia
for coneidering the (emotion of the Yanchukanahaya atructure in the
hintoric period. it in not excluded that ite "foraation‘ ia connected
with the earthquake of 1700) Auguat 1902), the eacroeeiaaic effecta of
which to force 8 were obaerved in the Churokan liver baein 150 In about
northeaat of the atructure (SBIMECTOMCS.... 1968. p 63).

12‘

FOR MIC!“ 083 MY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Against a background of general high eodern seiaeic activity of the
northeastern closure of the Verkhneangarsksys basin and. in particular.
the northeeetern link of the Severoeuyshiy [northern Muya] feult the
activity of the Yenchukan stretcher is eheded to a eignificsnt degree.
During the 10-year period of inetrueent observations in the vicinity of
the structure about so veek (K-O-lO) earthquakes were recorded. Soeevhat
northesst of the structure the epicenters of the 5 to 7 force (H to 5-1/3)
shocks on 22 August l967 stretched to the Severonuyskiy fault tone. 0n
the whole. the vicinity of the structure is cherecterieed by eexieue
nodern seiseic activity for the Verkhneangarskeye [Upper Angers] basin.

All-3. The Verkhneyanchukensksya [Upper Tanchuksn] structure (Fig 33)

is located on the right bank of the upper course of the Yanchuksn River

on the northueet side of the Kovoktinshaye eebryonic besin. The structure
vse detected in 1967 when deciphering the lerge-ecsle aerophotogrephe.

No ground inspection was perforeed. The brief description of the

structure presented below is based on the results of the etereophotonrnnnetric
processing of the eeriel photographs using the lnterpretoskop inatrueent.

In contrast to the other well-known seiseotectonic structures of the
Verkhneengersko-Huyekeys interbssin coneissure. the Verkhneyanchukenskeya
structure is oriented in the latitudinal direction. and the total extent
of its dislocations is about 9 kn.

The structure is eede up of s veak “trunk" fracture of letitudinel strike
deteriorating into a nueber of rectilinear or weekly bending segeents

froe 0.2 to 1.) kn long. The breeks between the links fit the bottoes.
eore rarely the slopes of the teeporsry stress benks. end they are caused
by their eodern erosion activity. The fracture eegnents have latitudinal.
esst-north-east (in the s-ss°) and in rare cases. northwest (to 300')
strike. In the lilbe of the beeic fracture s few short (up to 300 Deters)
sccoepenying dislocations in the eene direction (except the northveet)

ere observed. In the eeetern half of the structure. in addition. single

feather joints are noted oriented et an angle of 35 to 38° to the trunk
fracture line.

The enin disturbence of the structure hes en uneteble vertical shift of
the linbe vith respect to strike. The eeplitude is free I to 2.5-) eetere.
Predoninently the highland (northern) lieb subsided. Near the vest end

of the route obviously there is the axis of e feult hinge vest of which
the south lieb subsided l to 2 eetere. The tangents with respect to the
fault are not noted. end the liebs of the feult are joined together.

with respect to externel signs, the eeienic dielocetions have quite old

nppenrsnce and obviously occurred eney hundreds end thousands of yeers

:go. The strength of the earthoueke could not be eore then force 10
H~>7).

I25

'0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:2 a co >8. oom—

. u Fm . a 3 I 3 3 3 9: 2 3 325.133: 0
thwart-lei bur... . ppm“. “.8. : 2.... u o 22. 83 a3. a

2 «a. 8...: 88 .31... .

~21: .« 32. :8 :3» a

 

0:33 Econ-u no nouauuauum 3:335:08:
D UNA—Cu.

126 ‘

m OFFICIAL USE OIL?
[Kay to Table 9. p 126]:

FOR OPFIOIAL US! ONLY

a. No on Fig 30 Square A3

b. Structure 1. osney

e. Coordinates of center 2. Yenchuksnsksye

d. north latitude J. Verkhnayanchukenshayo

e. east longitude b. Kovoktinsknye

f. Length. in S. Huyaksnakeya

3. Haxisus displace-out amplitude. a Square A6

h. Vertical 1* Tekailakaya

i. Horizontal 2* Paranakaye

3. Proposed aaxiaun force 3. "soon

It . Age 6 . She-an

1. Type of structure 5. Koyra

s. Bibliographic references 6. Paaarakitaksye

n. Notes

0. Discovered by aerial photographs: requires sore precise definition.

p. More precisely defined by aerial photographs.

q. Discovered by aerial photographs. requires study.

r. Probably. polygenetic. require. edditional study.

s. Probably, polygenetic. The parameters are more precisely defined by
the aerial photogrephs; requires study.

t. Generated earthquake.

Requires additional study.

127

90! OPPICIAL USE OULY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

n5 :3»: . . o i a;
Hm a 2 I 3
C5 in 32 Hm . a I «
Gm . «old I 3
A5 lull.— ugulh . . a I u
o 2 a .I n
B {1.3:
. o . . . a _ I. . «I... =
3‘ 111....
o < o «J ale:
9 D 3 I 3
o < a .l a.
Any. a an: a '8 . B 2. l 3
.3; is} . Hm <I?. ~.|= 8w 3
3 . .80 a gala I i.
g
3i... 6!. v i 380 - Hm . 87o I 33
AIV ED ‘3 d h t: O I. .M
u . hm < 9 ~ o...
g 3K - cm 3.1. l 84 _ 1
u o n e. «ulna. v
A3! . . -9. e. l a
cl glean 3'
mu..- Ill.
all...» E u . t> =1: 2.6.... 218
$3.?!
Bi... a o . 3 I ono
u km .2 0— N..— 210
a8. is: . n .3 2 l 3
n3 a : 8 o c p 0
now AC 35 A «

 

ad 33—

8. .58
n - - 2. 8
to 3. 8
a 3 8
u 9 8

a .33..

a.» 8::
o 3...:
z...» 8...:
. q 8.:

9. 33—
— 5 a:

a. an:
n. .3:
. .2:
73 a. a:
a.“ 3 a.
a R 2.

«v on:-

3 ﬂ 2.
a... 9. 2.
3 3......

a o
N O

— «Na a so so: can

a «a :3
8 9. {use
.2 an .33
S 8 .123
3 N... 383:.
a n... 89.6
5 S . . IR... .
a 3 I852?
9 S g:
B n... 53:83
up 3 It".
S 3 Inland-8.3.:
8 5 nun-«a
3 3 33h
S 3 5-8.6
c... S agate-88.8:
3 no .3983.

8 a... egg-8.8.5
2. 3 55335383....-

8 an .339:
5 3 32-0
9 9. inn
bub... 92.5.3
a _ u
v

62:: 3.3 .o 030.:

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Table 9, continued. p 129;]:
a-n. See p 123.

o. Requires chscking. 7.
p. Requires additionsl study. 8.
q. Polygenetic. Total length of the 9.
nevly formed faults over an area 10.

of 25:0 to 10 he is indicated. 11.

r. No conjugate lendslips. 12.
s. Requires checking. 13.
t. Landa1ip over an area of 1’0.
1 ml. Requires additional 15.
study. 16.

u. Probable epicenter of the 17.
earthquake 1 February 1725 18.

v. Requires checking. 19*
20*

m'nHFm'ﬁp-‘i-
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

u 3 I 31. 0 38¢
a"
lo . all)". I!
Saw-l: Illa! o call-o « kw — n — 3 «a «To. 8 98‘
ex. «BE-Ebb. i a .89. p u. .E 8- :3." :8.
3 {alt
n on . N. l 8. no 8 8”
A3 « 8 . . 8.... I 8. 18a 2 8.
8330 3% g u . . B a. I alas . a 3 S.
Auv in
.8- ..II nl g a
.5 in ax“ i
q- 8853 in.» ICE-u u . ad 2 I u n 93.
u a 5n 2 I 3 a.» 3 8.
any gull
as,» o lupin-la g
in» Eu 9 98.8 N o .3 2 I 538 a.” 33.
f: a. 98.
.17 Ill! owl-“cu in IE . . 3 I mule an 8-
.e is!
taut-“hm“ III—coo o . 5 S I 8 a 82:
«A» l «.9 1" i v . n 3 I u. v 98.
. n . .3 .a I 2 v 98.
n .5 . o. I 9 v 2 9.
«a It}:
a bun n o. I an a.“ 2. 8.
A3 II.
.53 i i 5. a I v o 3 8.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

93

 

 

8 a 52...... .
3 9. 2: can-Ax 3
3 3 ’33 o.
3 3 g< o
a. 3 .15 n
88 89¢... p
3 3 81¢ o
a. 3 . .3935: on
3 9. ii: v
n 3 iii: n
89. 3.1:... u
83 g... u
8 «a 3818-: o
.8 a E OF

 

:2".— co >9— :m 60:33.80 0 020.:

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Table 9. continued. p 130]:

t.

quuirss additional study.
Grabsn 0.6 kn wids.
Couplicatad by a landslip
fault 0;‘x0.6 km.

A triangular block lOXS kl
subsided under tha lsval

of Bayksl.

Systas lads up of two stappsd
faults. In parentheses,

ths maxi-us amplitude
considsrins dsnudation.
Systsn oi stappad faults in
an area of 2X3 kl. Amplitude
of the ssjority oi than
distortad by ssisnogrsvitstional
shifts.

Systas of subpsrallal fsults.
Jointly vith tha CST Rita
structurs.

Jointly with the systss of
dislocations Tytsri Caps to
Sagan-Norysn Caps

KI-I

KM?QH?HX'UXQ

099P92__
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

sail
§§.§ as. 3 3.3 ..
a5. 8 sin-88 .888. .. v .8 . = I .35 8 3 3. 8 z 33.52.898.33 .
e 98 .5 = I .8...“ a 8 3. S 3 .325 a
v . . 2 I 2 as = E. = 3 .328 w.
. v _ . _.n 3 I 3 an 2 3. B 3 3.2.9.2 w
o . .2 2 I a 2 38. 9 3 . :3. a
v . n 2 I 2 a.” S 8. 8 F. caste... «
n . . 2 3|... 8...... 2 8 8. a a cz§i< .
8 31¢!
n8 . .2. 2 I 2|... 2 n a: .2. 3 Sgaaaap
. 0N
iii. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
ﬂai- ou alt-San . u 3 . I u w... 8 c: an...» 33.9.5. L
. 3 I112
. . 15 ~ 7... a on... a 8 n: 2. 3 .33 .2
A3 . 2» 2|. I 2 a. 3 2. = 9. ”Mon .3
u . 2 I 81... 2 8o: 8 3 an 2
23¢. 2.5.5.: 8 85.13 a. . . . e. I an. a. z. o: 2. 3 9.5.8 u.
« . . a 3 a a 92. a 3 38.3.: :
u . . 2 3 : 3 z o: 2 3 £2.26 2
a . . a I 2|... . a. 8. 8 3 5.3;...”— .a
u . . 87a I a.” a; 8 8. B 9. 3&5... o
.5 n e I a 2 S 8. 8 8, 832.1334: .n
« . n a I 2 a 88. 8 3 3.6... a
58 u . :— 2 I a a .w 8. R 3 .3333; a

 

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OPPICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Table 9. continued. 9 l32]:

p.
q.

[a

Sac p 127. 40
S.

In paranthcaca. the a-plltuda 6.
of tha ahlft with the 7.
gravitational coaponant. 8.
Jolntly with the Alla atructura. 9'
Dlacovarad by aarlal photographa. lo.
raqultea atudy. ll.
Suppltuantad by a daacrlptlon l2.
ualn; tha flald raaaarch Iatartala l).
of 1976 (Oalnovakoya lb.
structural (told). 15a
1.

2a

1.

2.

3.

‘0

S.

6.

7.

a.

133

P0! OPPICIAL 082 OIL!

Svyatonoaakaya
Khlbalanakaya
c ra-la
Malochlvyrkuyakaya
Neatarlkha
Iol'aharachanakaya
Sarankhur
Shalanka
Sukhltka
Dyran
Khanton
Olnya
Square 34
Annunda
Tlllahllnakaya
Squara V2
Arahanakaya
Torakaya
labhha
Khara-Hurln
Sultan
Snazhnaya
Oalnovako-Kadrovaya
Tankhoyahaya
he level of Isyksl.
a latest rejuvenation given.
nrticsl ssplitude of the

structures. the description of
, AB -- lest decsde to the firs
nnd. V - first thoussnds. III
zstionsl seislotectonic. $6 -
the description of the structur
- Solonenko. V.. et sl.. 1975:
FOR OPPlClAL US! ONLY

2.0553: .5. 23:...» .5. “.55 .2
3:53. 53 “3.8.12 .2. “308 .3 “3.9.3522“:— ..E “:25 .3 “933. n: 2:5 :6 .00
“down... .2. "5.333 .9... “an; .3 39.29qu AS “.35 .3 “138 .u "auceuogoaagx S
”mesa-.0 .x ”051.3 .a 3.035 .> ”Incanom .3 "oval—cg .u ”can—.38 é «aueuceocguuz .u
moans—x8 .3 “an; .5 2.39.: .o "3.0.— ... «33-35 .a 3—33.: A ”8.3932“; .x “5.33: 4.
“3:5 .u "8.0 .3 “dug .u “sen-.3 .u 2.33. .0 “I: .v “25 .o muss->3. .a :33: .1 “>8.
.vuouoanuu 05 no «I0». In so on v... .3 .n< «conga-Eu. as» «0
2-95: Logo 2.» 32.0.. 33!... 3095 05. 5.3093 53:» mo 5.33.50»
0..» 5 3.53.5»- oueugnuouoona a...» «o 2.2.89.3». 2—» no unison .on 3:9:

 

135

POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. 088 OHLY

 

Figure 31. Schematic of the northeastern flank of the
Yenchuheuluye structure. Coepiled by

l - elluviel depoeite of the continental delta of the

Yenchuken River; 2 - heterogeneous clutic eccululetione of
the rubble drein at the foot of the mountain; 3 - upper
Quaternary teniual canine (creation; 6 - lounteinoue

(eltitude lore then 2000 Deter.) harder of the Verkhuumrehye

the divide cepee; 7 — divide lines (e) and themes. of the
unwary etreeue (1:). Seismic dislocations: 8 - faults

end their .plitudee (h. I): 9 -- tmlle creeks and mnitude

of their sepia; (e. I); 10 - uorpholoaicelly weekly
expreued sections of the dislocation.
Key:
1. Yenchuken

136

'0! OHIO!“ USE ONLY
FOR OPYICIAL US! ONLY

 

Figure 32. Tensile fracture cutting the mobile Inge—black
placer granites on e 27' slope.
Photogreph by R. A. Kumshm.

137

FOR OUICIAL USR OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

anxasucnr .~ "so:
.uancu -:o«u
uqun>nuuoahuon 00 n. .AAv ouauon cans-uaaou 9:. Adv ouc«0n vun>no~o unvo-onaso .0 cu .Aeouuoouuv
anus. 0:» non-uuvcu >.n»w oz» .nuouoa .ovauunaau “cacao-unaao unauuno> a: nu “was. eds-noun 1c.
usuaouunauuv unoauu¢> tau: nouauoouu It nu ”neouucoo~u«v venous. 0: manna “voooaoua ch oﬂanuuau
.uouauo-uu uncouoauooa so an ”nuanuu ecu-non "nan-ho» v:- ucueuon u- ua «any canon». aucuoaaau 0;»
no nuoznnsu on. any aoauu ovu>uv nu an “coughs. noun-cans ocouoocoua osu no nucoaucuu to o “cu-ca
as» no cannon coma-vacuvuuouuouu an o uc«ucn can no segue» as» o>oa- a annaeo~ o» «ca-«u .ouuuuao
coquuo It a “I coon-comm o» II o .AouauouA-u autuoa ooou o>oac ou:u«u—c :- o» vuuuqaa: us n "cu-an
ohnxnauuuo>ou on» we «Inna shounoazuuoc on» uo nouauoauuo moo—p nu o.n “nu-cant nsv u:«uuaaunn
nuqaaaunn niuununoun .0 a "cacao .«uaov as» no asu>anous It n "Anon-0;»«5aao «ea-non we. unaduoa
nouuonv adequnuuou «Cancun succu0u~3c mean: u: w “nu-oaov «Iaaanuc :uovoa tn uncanny-so nuns: un q
62.33. .< .u 3 332.8
.ouauoauum osnsucqsasuccsons~o> as» no can-susom .nn «hand»

anz._ ~=ﬂHU ~“»»“ .anzu

 

POI OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONLY

s

The eodcrn nelnelr nctlvlty of the structure is appreciably lower then
that observed in the adjacent region - along the severonuyskiy lines-ent.
half of the earthquake epicenters stretching toward the structure 0:19)
with equal probability can be connected also with the ectivity of the
latter. Pot-slly. 29 earthquake epicenters belong to this structure.

A/3-b. The Kovoktinsltaye [Kovokta] structure (see Fig 36) is located in
the headquarters of the Yenchuken end Kovokte Rivers, along the
southeastern side of the basin with the em nsee. The general direction
of the dislocations of the structure is northeast 60’. and the total
extent is 20 ke.

The predoeinant eorphologicel type of seissic dislocation of the

Kovokte structure is the tension joints (tectonic trenches). Significant
segeents of the structure are represented exclusively by these disturbances.
Their transition along the strike to the faults is observed sore rarely.

in the last case the lieb at the foot of the nountain (northwestern or
northern) subsided.

The tectonic trenches. as a rule. have V-type transverse profile and

depth and negnitude of gaping varying significantly along the strike.

The uni-us eorphoeetric indexes of the faults are ordinary at the points
of intersection of the sparse positive forts of the relief - the crusts
of the side eoraines. the divide capes. The width of the separation joints
then reaches 10 to 15 Ieters. and the depth. 5 to 6 neters. often in
such sections the tectonic trenches ere coupliceted hy seiseogrevitetionel
landslides up to 35-‘0 esters long and 10 to 15 leters wide.

Faults are observed over a short extent and necessarily in conbinetion
with tension joints. The sexist- uplitudes of the vertical displace-ent
of the lisbs (5 to 7 esters) do not depend on the relief intersected by
the fault. but the quickly duo with respect to strike.

In the southwestern part of the structure. in the vicinity of the divide
of the Yenchuy and Yenchuken Rivets. the sass developeent of the eels-o-
gravitational slope processes is noted. In the vicinit of the highland
lisb of the structure over an area of no sore then 2 kn there are four
concentrated large (epptoxieetely 0.25 to 0.5 eillion .3 in voice) rock
slides and e large nubar of snell talus piles. The slides heve well-
expressed separation alphitheeters which cut the divide cepes or the
slopes of the divides and penetrate farther down the thalwegs of the
slide cone revines. The plenes of the displecers of the landslips are
associated with the nu-erous subpersllel faults uking up the tectonic
tone of the Yenchuy-Yanchukanekeye echelon structure.

The age of the structure is estieated at a few hundreds of years with
respect to the degree of preservation of the fractures end the presence
in then of lsture arboreal vegetation. The esgnitude of the eerthqueke

nccoepenying its for-etion. judging by the dislocation scales. cannot be
less then 7-1/2 to 8 (force 10-11).

139

M OFFICXM. US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL US} ONLY

\h“q!%%;%~%%‘
- ~‘ 0‘“;
| :‘1 \\.k .

‘ ’ofotg‘:

     
      
   
 
 
       
      
     
     
     
    
      

  

  
 
   

  
 

’,/ é“
§$ﬁ
§$Q£
We
\99‘
. ' . - ~“q .§.1
: .-./..., - (.v_.‘ ‘

. , . .

','....'O Q ..V

“ﬁnﬁwﬁ- %§&~%

. -'.q§ Qﬁﬁﬁwa
" °°' ooo¢‘oo

'° . . 9
4- -°.- ‘~tom:
4_ 2 °. \

  

  

  
   
         
   
 

‘ s . °' . : . ‘ Q

- " ‘ ‘ I V...°.“‘I
l \\ ‘~~ o o .
£§§ME==I%QQQQQ§
.033...‘ ’9‘

» nwo+o.
boowo

v 93 O O -
6.6.s.é.o.q
V Viv-u s%?¢’o’o‘<v‘.
\\ \“ko‘é'e’éo’e‘.
k \\ “Wo’éliﬁ.

150

 

 
 
 
 
  

    
      

 
 

       

m OFPICIAL USE ONLY
3:93: .0 33.33:.» .n “5.3.. .~ £953 A ”son

.033 5:033 303 nan—3:333:03: I. 3 .3933073 no 38390. 50:03.3 >33) sun-ounc—
uognuol a. an .I .390» «o 250!- 30 35°“ :33: 0.. on .I .3353..- 505 2.: 31... an an
uncowunuouuuv 3830. I0 Omen" :3 guy. bones-I» «o .933.» see new 00:: 0339 II «a
30063.3 .3. 0.30:: .33: 02.30302. no .033 us .3 “003.5. :3:ch 35932.9...
Qua-.5 lo On "502. on» no I032— 05 0:5. I 0209" o» and-«u 9.33:0 cow-Ono on o 2:01» 0:»
no .833 ﬂouuavaqovuguoouo I n “I 03732 3 no h .30. no :0an 80m no 303.330 3303-
uu 3 103.39... 00 0 3:3 3:23: on» no .333 305335! 05 go .332...»- 4003 nu 70
«Iowa.— 03.93! nan-no» val ~30»: I. a “23:0: .3. 02.9.30 "Sauna to 0 3:0on 2.» 05:30:
$3.53. noun-Anon.— .. n “can-Inc» "30.3 b05336 neg: 0: N “-3.2... «3.5:. 50.8. t. a
63.33. .< J .3 339-8

                  

 

  
  

  

M 483300 Inca-I0 and 53.03 3325». 03.288 0..» no own-luau» .2" 9:3:
0
m 2E
M mg ”a t”! ~ Gm . “Human”.
I . V
w. , . . 4 11 his . {.40d‘ 44......
"a...“ n... .? 0.; . “$3” ".3...
0364. v .6 O. 0'0 \1000. 000000
30. A0 000, 00 . «00. W00
04.000. (00000000004; . v . 0a.. .1. ...0o0«0
m .00 .0w0vau-.} . v.0«c 000
9000. (00000 00000 0 0 000 w
. o . I0 0 0 0 a» an
0.00.. 0‘ . , u. ...
G .. ‘1‘ o . u

  

161

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL UigLONLY

The seismic activity of the Kovokta structure at the present tine is
confirned by 12 epicenters of weak earthquakes. Of them. three epicenters
with K-lo are grouped in the northeastern part of the Kovokta basin. 0n
the whole the sodern activity of the vicinity of the structure is
significantly inferior to the adjacent regions of the Verkhneangarsko-
Huyskaya interbasin connissure.

All-S. The Huyakanskaya structure was detected by the aerial photographs.
A ground study of it was not wade. The structure is genetically connected
with the sons of the large neotectonic fault bounding the Muyakanskaye
basin from the southeast. The system of dislocations follows along the
foot of the huyakanskiy ridge in the western half of the basin in the
northeasterly $65') direction. It is obvious at a distance of 26 kn.

The dislocations defer. the proluvisl deposits of the debris tones. the
slide rock cover of the slope and lore possibly. the basic granite outcrops
of the Iargurinskiy cosplex. The fractures with vertical displace-ant

are clearly isolated along then. the waxinun aaplitude of which reaches

6 seters according to the stereophotograanetric neasureaents. Thick nud
flows. the seisaogenic nature of which is entirely probable. are associated
with the northeastern flank of the structure.

Ali-l. The Taksiaskaya structure (Fig 35) is located in the western part
of the Huya basin on the left bank of the Huya River. to the north and

the northeast of the village of Taksiao. The general strike of the
structure is northeasterly (60'); it extends about 15 ka. The structure
was detected during chaaber deciphering of the aerial photographs in 1965.
The aerovisual (V. P. Solonenko. S. D. Khil'ko. A. P. Shaotov) and ground
(8. D. Khil'ko and s. V. Lastochkin) investigations were perforled in 1967.

The Taksiso structure occurred in the zone of contrast tectonic articula-
tion of the bottoa of the Huya basin and its northwestern mountain border.
Southeast of the structure there is a broad flat swaapy floodplain of the
Huya River with a set of oxbow lakes and streaas. 0n the right side the
river valley has cut into the lower to middle Quaternary sandy series
asking up the basin. and on the other side. it is recumbent on the steep
high slope of the snail ridge -- the Adyanakaya ridge. This ridge extends
in a northeasterly direction fro. the mouth section of the Kelyan River
20 kl with a width of 6-5 kn. and it is separated from the northern Huya
[Severeluysiy] arch-block uplift by an erosion-tectonic through valley of
the Adyan-Kelysnskiy and Adyan-Paranskiy creeks.

At the southwest end of the ridge (the left bank of the Kelysna and

"eye Rivers) there is the well-known Kelyans nassif of ultrabssic rock
(predouinantly serpentinites and listvenites). The Iassif is extended in
the southwesterly direction orthogonal to the neotectonic structures of
the region; it is no more than 2.5 kn wide. Then to the northeast along

t he strike of the ridge. the serpentinites are contiguous along the
tectonic coapact with the sediaentary series of the upper (1) Proterozoic:
Ictsaorphosed sandstones. sleurolites. shales cru-pled into linear folds

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

of northeeeterly (no-340°) etrike. After 2-3 he the eedinentary rock
in replaced by n thick eoriee of layered lieeetonee end dolomitee of the
laneki etega of the lower Caebrlan (their etrike ie 330-335'. the englee
of incidence are 30-60'). The cerbonete rocke are traced along to the
Aleken Creek. At the baee of the eoutheeetern elope of the ridge above
the creek along the Nuye River granitoide of the liuye coeplex were
detected. The tectonic contact of carbonaceous for-etione with Archean

grenite-gneiee eeriee cruupled into couple: ieoclinel folde of north-
eneterly (do-50') etrike rune along the Aleken Creek.

The articulation of the beein end the Myanekeya ridge in eharply
expreeeed. rectilinear end eepheaieed by the triangular eteep (JO-LO')
cute of the divide capee loceted aleoet in one plane. The tone of
articuletion ie covered by coareely cleetic rockelide end proluviel

depoeite foreleg e narrow (0.3-1.2 h) boulder train et the foot of the
nountein to 80-90 Ietere.

The dielocatione of the Takeino etructure eroee an a result of the
eeieuogenic opening of the powerful neotectonic fault bounding the
Huyn-Konda baein on the northweet and north - the leeet broed and deep

of the two negative uorphoetructuree eelting up the Nuye basin. The beec-
nent of the beein on the eouthaeetarn linb of the fault eubeided to a
depth of more than a kiloueter (Zorin. 1971). at the eeee tile ee the
elevation of the northwaetern lilb. judging by the elevetioae of the divide
line of the Myaneluya ridge ie 1600 to 1500 eetere. Thue. the diepereion
of the blocIte of the lithoephere along the fault bounding the huye-Konda
beain in thie aree exceede 2000 letere coneidering the flexure couponent
end the eroeion cut. The anelogoue aeplitudee of the verticel eovenente
during Neogenic-Quarternery tile are characterietic eleo for the eub-
latitudinel eegpent of thie fault eaet of the etructure where it controle
the intrabeein longitudinel co-ieeure.

The fault zone in the vicinity of the Takeieo etructure ie eede up of
three eubperallel echelon fracturee. The eouthweetern echelon foreation
followe along the Muye elope of the Myanehiy block at an ebeolute eleve-
tion of 800-900 eetere epproxinately frol the south of the Kelyana River
to the central part of the etructure. ln relief it ie cleerly expreeead
by eharp inflectione of the elope end deep eaddlee dieeecting the divide
ridgee of the left tributariee of the Huya River along e etraight line.
The latter fact indirectly indicatee the eubvertical poeition of the plane
of the fracture dieplecer. Ire extent ie about l0 la. and the general
etrike ie northeeeterly (65’). The eccond. central echelon etructure is
gencreted 3 to 3.5 I:- northeeet of the beginning of the firet. it follow:
along the erticuletion zone of the beein end the lountein border to the
Alnken Creek under the looee depoeite of the boulder trein et the foot

of the nountain. It in oriented elong the 60' aeieuth. The angle of

5‘ deter-inn the gredual epproach of the upper and lower echelon
etructuree in the northeaeterly direction free 1 to 0.5 la. Free the
locetion of eaxieu- convergence (approxi-etely et the center of the
etructure) to the northeaet there ie only one neotectonic fracture which

1‘3
'0! OWICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONtY

in a continuation of one of the echelon etructurea. if we take it an a
continuation of the lower echelon atructure. then the total length of the
fracture ia about 1) kn. finally. the northeaaterly. hypaonetrically
loweat echelon atructure. the greater part of which ia located beyond

the liaita of the ayetee extenda parallel to the central one on the left
bank of the Huya River. northeaat of the alakan Creek. It ie poaaibie
that ite aouthweetern flank in covered under the alluvial depoeita of the
river floodplain.

The Iain syatee of aeiaaogenic dialocatione of the etructure followa the
central echelon etructure of the neotcrtonic fault. Suppoaedly. the aouth-
weetern flank of the upper echelon structure experienced active opening.
and ite reaaining part. paaaiVe. Probably. the northeaeterly. lower
fracture uaa not touched at all by the recent eeiaeogenic rejuvenation.

0n the eouthweat end of the Adyanekaya ridge the dielocatione are dietin-
guiahed by the reeulte of the deciphering of the aerial photographs. Their
forletion can be connected with partial rejuvenation of the upper echelon
atructure of the neotectonic fracture and aubeequent traneition of the
dielocation ayaten free the upper echelon etructure to the lower (or vice
verao). 0n the elope of the ridge turned toward the Kelyana River. the
fault cute and ehifta a terrace-like bench bordering the alope at an
elevation of approxiaately 350 netere above the river floodplain (850 n
abaolute elevation). The bench is up to 200 aetere wide. the elope angle
ia 6 to l0' and it in traced in frageente both along the northweetern

and the aoutheoatern alopea of the Adyanehaya ridge. An anelogoue ecarp

at thia altitude ie observed along the periphery of the Maya baain and,
neat probably. ie a lacuetrine sculptured terrace. 0n the downthrown liab
of the fault. the amplitude of which ie no leee than 60 aetere. the

terrace ie not expreaaed in relief. aerging with the divide of the aountain
apur dipping deeply into the baein. An obvioua fragment of it appeare on
one of the divide capea 2 kn northeeat and again on the highland liab of
the atructure. Pros the divide of the lountain apur aade up of aerpentinitee
the dielocatione (obvioualy faulte) inclined elightly to the cent. are
uncleerly traced downward to the foot of the eoutheaetern elope of the
Adyanekaya ridge where they are in contact with the Iain dislocation oyste-
of the Takaiao atructure.

The main dielocation eyetea extende on the whole rectilinearly along the
foot of the elope at an abaolute elevation of $60 to 600 a. The dieloca-
tionn are repreaented by a net of faulte and the teneion jointe accoapony-
lng then (tectonic trenches). They nest frequently defora the looee
boulder fron block eccuaulatione of the boulder train at the foot of the
eountoin. but they are aleo noted in the carbonaceoue and igneoue baaeaent
rock. All of the dislocations. independently of their aorphologicel type.
are oriented in the north'aeterly direction. The lorgeet nunber of
aeneureeenta indicate a strike aeiauth of 60 to 70'.

146

’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPPICXAL 088 MY

:33: .N “0&3..— IhS—uai .u "so“

6.4313323" ”3033:9383: u: an
"001:. such unaowunusuuoluwoo no 8—003 033:. v... 3qu noun-unno- II nu not» 70332.93!
biomass uo dough-51:. I Nu 2.2.28.3 3.5305 cacao“. can...» .0 an «I .313qu .52.»
on! cums-u an!!! In an unconuooonnuvgoo ul 0.7.3 :8 30.5. couuuauoucu no 3033.» v:-
Anv 03.: 03.5.. II o «on: 033—. as» no 3.3 AoOcnoc accu- II a 2.35.3.”- Ouauo-an I 33 009::
As 03:35: 2—» no 3.3.59: 1: n “063 3.309 II e “00.89:. on. 03939— .9539: 3:393
Io!- II r. «can... 0..» no p.33 33.50.. 2.» mo ocean-anon 053.35 33 2.033333 .3593..ng
thong-=8- uuouznnm ~25.— .3- 33.3-80.9:— I c “not: 33 535326 02.3: 3 3:3 3 n 2393
nova-xx- I no 3:050.- I—oonououzz Put—vol o» b.3336 no.3: I. N “cannons—v saga—.8: cue—xvi nu n
5233's .> .m we. 8:75 .n .m no
Quote-I on» «an... anal-.58 .< .8 3 .3320 .9533». Ina—nu. 23 mo laud-.3 .nn than:

.\ Wo‘o‘i.’.,mko‘o\
o‘o

 

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The amplitude of the faults measured by the displacement of the peak parts
of the debris cones fluctuates from 1-3 to 21 a. At the base of the

fault scarp or on tho subsided limb of the fault parallel to it there are
one or several tectonic trenches of triangular or trapezoidal cross

section (Fig 36). The width of the trenches at the top is from a few
meters to 20 meters. most frequently A to 8 meters. and the depth is

from fractions of a meter to 10 meters. predominantly 3 to 6 meters. The
walls of the trenches are broken. steep to vertical. In the loose proluvisl
materiel. their steepness reaches 60'. Frequently the part of the trench

at the foot of the mountain turns out to be more steeply sloping than the
opposite side.

often in the boulder train at the foot of the mountain along the base

of the slope a dislocation zone is observed which is made up of 2 to 4
subparsllel tectonic trenches and sharp peaked and trapezoidal ridges
separating them. The difference in altitude of the opposite walls of the
trenches indicates that in this case there is a system of stepped faults
and tension joints accompanying them with a total amplitude of the vertical
displacement to 6 to 7 meters. Along the strikes some of the dislocations
quickly damp and reoccur: others continue to s more significant distance,
but on the whole the structural dislocations are traced over the entire
extent of the central echelon structure of the neotectonic fracture.
discontinuing only at the points of their intersection by the channels of
streams.

 

Figure 36. System of tectonic trenches (tension joints)
cutting the deposits in the vicinity of the boulder
train at the foot of the mountain in the central
part of the Taksimo structure. Photograph by
S. V. Lastochkin.

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

a

In the central part of the structure between the two echelons of the

fault in the vicinity of their saxisua approach. there are two characteris-
tic rorhslides. They are located in the lower Caabrian linestones dipping
60' northeast at an angle of 50°. and they are sad. an of steep (33’)
irinnnulur faces of adjacent divide capes. The carbonaceous series
supposedly occurs in the igneous rock of the ﬂuya couple; outcropping at
the surface at the base of the slope. The arc-shaped separation edges of
the landslides are located at an altitude of 200-250 seters fron the foot
of the root slope of the Adysnshaya ridge. in the near vertical walls

of the separation. no less than 10 aeters high at the southwestern lend-
slide and 6 to 10 meters high at the northeast. a rock waste cover to

2 to l neters thick and light gray lisestones in the root occurrence are
detected. in the liaestoae. at the base of the wall. a trench is traced
(sedimentation Joint) to S seters deep up to is neters wide in the upper
part up to 3 eaters at the bottoa is traced. The northeastern flanks of
the landslide cirques outline in gently sloping area the body of the land-
slide block. descending to the foot of the slope. They also are expressed
by the separation walls up to lO esters high (in the steeper landslide).
0n the southwest side the landslide blocks are bounded by the V-shaped
valleys of sIall tenporsry streams. The landslide area is approximately
0.3 and 0.1 kmz. the values of the landslide sasses is unknown. for the
position of the slip surfaces has not been determined.

The norphology of the largest landslide block and its relation to the
undisturbed parts of the slope indicate the detrusive nature of the land-
slide displace-ant. The aarinum displace-ent which is lore of a faulted
nature than landslide. was experienced by the upper part of the landslide
block along the separation plane coinciding with the displacer of the upper
echelon structure of the neotectonic fault. The frontal part of the land-
slide cut by the central echelon of this fault apparently does not haVe a
horizontal conponent of notion. As a result. deforestion of the surface
of the landslide lass took place: in its rear section. a broad, flat

trough was for-ed. and the part above the frontal section acquired a
convex surface (Fig 37).

Fron the two exogravitstional phenonena accompanying the for-ation of the
Taksino structure it is necessary to note the nass rock talus located
primarily on the mountain limb of the upper echelon structure in the
vicinity of its approach to the central structure. The talus sakes up the
aornhology of both the northeastern and southwestern slopes of the nountain
ravines cutting the Huya slope of the adyenskaya ridge. The area of the
largest of then reaches O.l hnz.

The process of the formation of the Taksino structure. as it appears to us.
greatly resenbles the Huys earthquake of 1957. The relief of the stresses
(the initial epicenter of the paleoesrthquake) began with the southwestern
flank of the structure where the intersection node of the rift controlling
fault with the transverse Kilysnnkiy deep suture is located. In practice.
the instantaneous opening of the fracture occurred in the northeastern

direction. initially along the upper fracture, and then through the systel

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OPPKCIAL USE ONLY

nf "trnnultinnnl" uninherited dislocations. encompass the central echelon
of the fracture. At the sane tine. not only the adjacent region of the
Huyn-Kondn basin was involved in the faulted subsidence. but also the
erosion-tectonic con-isnur» separating the Huyn basin free the Ulan-
"nkitshaya basin. Si-ilnr disastrous novements of the earth's crust
occurred here during the Holocene. obviously sore than once. in particu-
lar. this is indicated by the gradual sigration of the hey: River channel
in the direction free the center of the basin to the southeastern slope
of the Adyanshaya ridge. The Tahsiso structure is a clear :xanple of the

continuing process of deepening of the Bayhal type basins and their longi-
tudinal growth.

 

Figure 37. Geological-gsemorphological section through the
axial part of the seissogravitational rockslide
on the southeast slope of the Adyanahsys ridge.
Conpiled by R. A. Kuruahin

l - loose deposits of the boulder train at the foot of the

nountsin; 2 -- igneous rock of the Huya couplex; 3 - limestones

and doloeitea of the Lanshiy stage; 6 -- fracture tone -
cchelon structure of the neotectonic fracture: S -- landslide
block and the proposed position of the slip surface of the
landslide; 6 -- surface profile of the slope before formation

of the landslide; 7 - aeissotectonic dislocations of the

Taksiso structure.

Key:
l. northwest; 2. southeast

The time of formation of the structure is approximately determined at
ISO to 250 years with respect to degree of preservation of the seismic
dislocations and age of the srboreal vegetation growing in the tension
joints (pines. larch). The magnitude (H) of the earthquake was in this
case npproxisately 7 to 7-l/2 (no less then force 10).

The modern seisnic activity of the Takaino structure. just as the other
nnlcoseismogenic structures of the Huys basin is low. In the 10-year

1‘8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

period of the inetrunent observations here three epicentere of representa-
tive eerthquehee were noted. Alloet the entire zone of the neotectonic
feult bounding the lluyn-Konde basin on the northwest end north eleo is
cooperatively eeeieeic. Only to the eeet of the epperent duping of the
zone. in the nouth pert of the lime River epproxiutely 20 eerthqunkes of
different energy levels. including the Uet'ohuye eerthqueke of l968
(ll-S-l/Z) were recorded prinerily in 1966 end 1968.

Alto-2. The Pereeeheye structure (fig 38) extending 21 la in loceted in
the erticuletion tone of the liuye beein (the Pereeekeye depression) and
the erch-block uplift of the Severo-huyekiy [Northern Huye] ridge between
the Se-okut end Kenennyy Creeks.

The structure wee studied in fregnente end with a different degree of
deteil. lte eeperete eluente were detected end docuented by L. I. Selop
et the beginning of the 1950's end Ye. A. Zelenekiy, et el.. in 1966.

According to the dete of the indiceted reeeerchere. the observations of
coworkere of the 12K Institute of the Siberien Depertnent of the USSR
Acedeny of Sciences 8. V. Leetochkin end the reeulte of the etereophoto-
grnmetric proceeeing of the eeriel photogrephe. e sche-etic of this
structure (see Pig )8) hee been constructed.

The northern side of the Permian [Perm] depression ie eede up of
thick deluviel-proluviel eccululetione over eleoet the entire extent
merging into e eolid trein of rock weete et the foot of the Iountein from
0.7 to 3 he in width. huleroue debris cones of null teaporery end lerge
perunent etreeee running off the Sesero-Huyekiy [Northern Phaye] ridge
are clearly dietinguiehed on its eurfece. At the center of the depreesion.
fro. under the coereely cleetic fornetione of the boulder trein et the
foot of the nountein. eendy Lower to Middle Querternery sediments eppenr.
the thick eeriee of. which obviously eeke up e eignificent pert of the
ﬂuys basin. The set of floodplein end terrece deposits of the Vitin end
Pete-e Rivers cut into the sandy eeriee. Sane lerge streeu (Senokut.
Bulunde. Kenennyy) else ere eccoepenied by terreces up to 25 neters high
in the lower sections of their nountein velleye.

The northern nountein border of the depreeeion ie eede up of nre-Ceebrien
nedieentery-volcenogenic bede of the Hun eeriee. breached by the neeeive
or gneiee-like biotype grenitee of the huye complex. The coeplexly
dieloceted eedinentery eeriee heve northeesterly (do-60‘) or eubneridionel
strike. According to the observetions of L. I. Selop (1966). when the
Soeokut Creel: leevee the nounteine. the eedinentery-volcenogenic forntione
of the Huye eeriee ere sepereted by s zone of ceteclesites of eubletitudinel
strike ‘0 to 50 netere wide froe nignetized enphibole gneieses of the
Archean detected et the base of the eocle terrece of the streee and
nupnosedly asking up the beee-ent of the depreseione. In the Viti- pert
ol‘ the north eide. nu-eroue dietinctive dielocetione of encient occurrence
heve developed which ante up the Vere-e zone of the deep frecture of
north-northweeterly etrike. The introduction of the Parent useif of ultra-
hesic rock (eerpentinitee) occurred elong it in the pre-Cenbrien.

M9

'0! OFFICIAL USE OIILY
CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030011-5

2007/02/08:

a
.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

1 . 4 . ‘ lu‘qollu 1| .1 Ilclcln..acq1 II c- IctdllCIA

auscuoouv cacao“ acuaaou at o .uuouou .ovauanalu hung» at. ands-u :3 o

uncouunuounuv ounuuoc to but» «any oI-ouu- aucuomIOu any uo onoancnu can

any noauu tou>uv o- n mucuOI «anew on A .uOuoI waned II a uncanny.»

conunuausouq was auuo. al 0 ~no=ou aqua-o :0 n «novuon cucucsol as“ no

anewu¢5u0u o’uqsuucu vac oucouoea0uo’asuqucoluvo- cauunuooaoua I: a

«canyon scan: unannounac ”cane-o cu henna :3 n nouo>uu cuuuczos as»

no Iau>5~ni on» so. auauc=ol 0:» no noon 0:» u. sunny novuaoa «x» no

acouuuuanaoou guano! cu unannoucac u: N “uuooaov cannavoo—u cuovOI u: u
62.33. .< .¢ 3 3:38

.ousuusuua naaxulou-L on» no ouualozum .wn «hanum

 

SE ONLY

150

FOR OFFICIAL U
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

The Pareas structure arose as a result of the holocene rejuvenation of

the powerful. long-lived sublatitudinal fracture which separated the two
tectonic structures with different directional movement in the Cenozoic

-- the Severe-Huyskoye [Northern Nuys] uplift and the Huya basis. In

the "eugenic-Qustornsry time the anplitude of the vertical displacement of
the blocks of the earth's crust along it reached l500 meters.

The seismogenic dislocations of the structure are represented by false and
tension joints (tectonic trenches). The latter. as a rule. accompany

the fractures with verticol displacement or occur independently. whereas
on the whole the system of seismogenic dislocations is elongated in the
sublatitudinsl (with slight slope to the northwest) direction. the
individual fractures or segments are oriented differently. The north-
easterly (do-80‘) and aublatitudinal (do-100‘) strikes are most frequently
observed. and northwesterly (290-3l0'). more rarely. The greater part

of the dislocations are associated with the contact of the loose Quaternary
deposits and the rocks of the steep slope of the ridge. however. deforma-
tion of the Quaternary formations of the most different age is often
observed. Thus. in the western part of the structure, the faults, except
the terraces of the Samokut Creek. cut and shift the terraces of the
Bulundo Creek and its large left tributary (3 km to the east) of different
altitude. The amplitude of the vertical displacement here reaches 16-18 m.
In the bone of the fault scarps there is a fault trench from 3 to 10 meters
wide and 1.5 to 3 meters deep. lts south wells are not always clearly
expressed and are usually more gently sloping.

The dislocations of the western part of the structure deform the alluvial
deposits of the 25 and the 10-15 meter terraces. The channel alluvium

and low floodplain terrace noted in places are not touched by the fractures.
The relation of the morphological elements of the terraces of the left
tributary of the lulunds Creek on the opposite wings of the faults provide
the basis for proposing the presence of a left shift of small amplitude
along the fracture. Further to the east the dislocations run along the
contact of the loose deposits and the root slope or. more rarely, along
the slope in such a way that the displacer plains and the steep scsrp of
the slope coincide. Accordingly, it does not appear possible to determine
the true amplitude of the vertical displacement. Only in this case is a
system of three stepped faults noted cutting the debris cone of one of the
temporary streams 2.7 km west of the Vitim River. The total displacement
amplitude along them is no less than 10-12 meters.

The enstern part of the structure on the right bank of the latitudinal
segment of the Vitim River is expressed most effectively morphologically.
The system of dislocations here extends almost continuously from the
Orernoye Creek to the Ksmennyy Creek a distance of more than 5 km. The
low. flat. divide cape east of the 02ernyy Creek is cut by 2 sublatitudinal
faults which bound the graben about 100 meters wide and 500 meters long.
The fracture bounding the graben on the north has a vertical displacement
amplitude of up to 20 meters. and on the south. to 6 seters. 0n the

151

'03 OPIICIAL 088 OﬂLY
FOR OPFICIAL USB ONLV

uplifted lieb of the northern fault, 100 to 120 aeters free it there is
another fracture parallel to it with insignificant (no sore than 3-5 a)
vertical displace-eat. quickly daeping to the flanks.

The dislocations for-ins the graben serge into a single fault in the
eastern part of the divide. continuously running along the Kaaennyy
Creek. In individual sections it is accoapsnied by feathering joints
foreing a systee of step fault with a total displace-ant aeplitude of

up to lo aeters. The fault is traced hoth along the contact of the
steep (to 25-30“) root slope and the loose deposits of the basin and in
the boulder-block proluviun of the large and seall debris cones. Two kl
west of the Kseennyy Creek it cuts across the adjoining debris cone
270x350 esters foreed at the foot of the slope opposite the snail runoff
trough. The aeplitude of the fault is 9 kn. the steepness of the fault
acnrp is 3S-60'. The scarp is coapletely cut by a teeporary stress. and
at its base a new debris cone is for-ed 30:60 eeters in size superposed
on a sore ancient one.

Between the Kaeennyy Creek and the unnaeed creek to the west. the proluvial
deposits of their combined debris cone represented by eetaeffusive blocks.
sandstones and granites are deforeed by two parallel tectonic trenches.
They are 15 Ieters apart. and the strike is latitudinal. The southern
trench is expressed morphologically more clearly. and its width at the top
is up to lo esters in depth to 5 eaters. The sides of the trench are
asyleetric: northerly with a slope angle of about 30‘ and J-a Ieters
above the southern, eore gently sloping (15'). The upper trench does not
have a vertical coeponent. it is not as wide and shallower than the lover
one. In places. the southern walls of the trenches are eissing. and the
dislocations are traced only along the scarp of the north wall. the
altitude of which does not exceed 3 eeters.

To the east along the strike of the described dislocation. the Kaeennyy
Creek changes direction of its current sharply fro. southwest and
acridional to latitudinal. Its sore ancient channels on the south lieb

of the structure are of subeeridionel orientation. By latching soee
channels with the tension joints of the eastern end of the Para-a structure.
the stream has washed out a ZS-eeter socle terrace in the base of the

slope (on the left bank). The socle terrace ends up of alaskite granites
has been denuded to a height of a-s eeters. It is entirely probable that
part of the height of the terrace is due to the vertical displace-eat with
respect to the fault. with which the creek is associated.

The nature and the interconnection of the various dislocations of the
Parana structure indicates that it arose under the effect of tectonic
stresses essentially not differing from modern. For then. significant
tension in the direction transverse to the neotectonic structures causing
the foreation of faults in the separation joints was characteristic.

As has been noted. the shearing love-eat along the shift plain has not
been excluded, for confirlstion of which careful ground studies are
required.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The available anterinln do not persit unique estimation of the tile of
forsation of the structure. On its western flank the seisaic dislocations
look appreciably older than on the right bank of the Vitis River. It is
possible that in the given case we observe the result of the superposition
of two earthquakes. the seissic dislocations for which grew toward the
east. in the direction of the Nuya-Chara interbaain coasissurs. The

last of these earthquakes. the Iagnitude of which could reach 7-1/2

(force l0) occurred. judging by the preservation of the hollow for-s of
the dislocations. several hundred years ago.

In sodern tines the Para-a structure in practice was aseisaic.

Alb-19. The Keaen structure (Fig 39) is located on the south side of the
Kaaen esbryonic basin. in the vicinity of the aerging of the naainga and
Kasen Rivers.

2 kn above the south of the Nasingsliver on the right bank scarp. a
fracture tone was discovered. The layer of glacial boulders occurring on
the granites and underlying the series of boulder loans was shifted

l2.5 seters here. The strike of the shifter was northeasterly 30' at an
angle of 75-80'. The interlayer of boulders on the subsided liab near the
displacar. occurs on a slant with a dip to the east at an angle of 20'.

In the southeast along the strike of the fault in the glacial deposits.
gently sloping scarps up to 3-5 seters high are observed frequently
becosing broad trenches to 8-10 asters deep. cutting the soraine crust
and the dusped soraines. 0n the right side of the Keaan River 5 kn fro-
the channel of the "slings River. a scarp deforling the terraced soraine
is noted by the aerial photographs.

The second fracture of the northeasterly (60') strike follows along the
right bank of the Nasings River Valley and close to the right bank of the
Keeen River. Locally. it is isolated in the tern of scarps on the slopes
of the valleys or stepped trenches with a difference in wall heights of

10 to 12 asters. The rock which has been crushed to the sari-u- is

8 setcrs thick. by the fracture. the glacier-worn rocks and other glacial
for-a are defer-ed. The fault with an asplitude of 15-20 aeters shifts
the debris cone of the sasll stress; the cone overlaps the lateral aoraine.
The displacer dips to the northwest at an angle of 50-70‘. In the loose
deposits the fault is expressed by a low scarp 31th a steepness of 28-30'.
The root denudations which carry large (to 15 I ) frag-ents of slip
surfaces. elphasise the fault displacer.

The total extent of the traced seislic dislocations is 6 kn. and the
width of the cone is up to 0.5 kn.

The age of the seissic structure is determined by the deforestions of the
glacial and proluvisl foraations and by the coaparstive preservation of
the dislocations in the last hundreds and first thousand years. The

153

’0! OFIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAI. 088 MY

intensity of the earthquake creating the seismic dislocations was no less
than force 10 01:7-1/2).

AIL-20. The tbgnkhlir structure is associated with the outside of the
Told: inshays basin.

In the section between the Purichiltan and the Bbgahhlir Rivers. the
crested divides are cut by steep (to 50°) fault scarp. as a result of
which almost regular triangular facets are forced. In the base of one
of thee. there is a steep (60') scarp fros Ia-s to is aeters high asking
up the sorphology of the basic dislocation vith a break in continuity
and eephasising its later rejuvenation at a distance of about 5 to 7 he.

in the peak section of one of the largest hanging carries at absolute
elevations of 1300 to 1‘00 esters. in the gneisses. the separation wall
of the powerful rock slide is fixed. The entire volt-c of the landslide
ease "splashes" aid the hanging canyon in its nouth section where Iodern
deposits of the debris cone overlap. The landslide front is complicated
by large and gigantic block acute-angle esterial and rocky blocks“. The
approxieete volt-e of the landslip uses is 6.5-5 sillion .3.

Judging by the nature of variation of the rock slide ease and the tectonic
scarp by the superposed erosion-denudation processes. the age of the
structure does not exceed a few hundred years.

Alt-21. The tiedved' structure (Pig ‘0) is located in the eastern part
of the Verkhneltalarsltaya [upper Kelarl basin. on the left bank of the
Chickanda River (the left tributary of the Kalsr River).

The basic seiseogenic disturbances occurred along the Chitltands fault
with northeasterly (ts-50') strike. The displacer dips to the northwest
at an angle of 58-75'. The asplitude of the vertical displace-eat (is a)
is established lost exactly by the difference in levels of the bottous
of the hanging valleys and their continuation in the dovnthrown side.
The outcrop of pre-Caebrian rock surrounded by Canbrian deposits is
deforeed by the fault. A trench extending up to 2 It: was for-ed along
the fault zone. The trench controls the foot of the separation well of
the large sei-ogenic landslip of base-cot rock 600 seters long (along
the foot of the separation wall) and note than 150 seters high. The well
preserved separation plain with enonous step surfaces drops to the north-
west at an angle froa 58' to near vertical.

The total extent of the traced seissic dislocations is I. In.

The age of the dislocations is deterained on the basis of the defonations
of the glacial. cueulative and erosion for-s as Holocene (the first
thousands of years).

The dislocation paraseters indicate the force to an intensity of the
earthquake creating 0!:7-l/2).

lS’o

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

 

Sctaloaaoloatcal ache-act:
tlad by N. Daa'yanovlcb.

of tha Kean baaln.

l - aranttozda: 2 - aadtaantary-Iataaorphtc foraattona of the
r Protaroaotc: 3 - glacial dapoatta of tha first glaciation;
‘ - glactal and Vicar-glacial dapoatta of

tha second glaciation;
oaa; 6 - proluvtal

acory vallaya).
Kay: 1. Kaaen: 2. Hallnga

’0! oartfggl 088 OﬂlY
FOR OTPICIAL 088 ONLY

 

Figure 60. Plan view of the "edved' aeiaaogenic atructure.
Conpiled by N. Dea'yanovich.
l - aoderu and Upper Quaternary alluvial depoaita;
2 -- Riddle and Upper Quaternary glacial depoait: 3 -- terrisenic-
carbonaceous rock of the Paleozoic; i - pre-Caabrian aediaantary-
Ietaaorphic (creation: 5 - granitoida of the pre-Caabrian;
6 -- gabbroida of the pra-Calbrian; 7 - aeiaaosenic fracture
(bargatricha of the direction of the aubaided liab); 8 - pre-
Roloceae fracture; 9 - landalip-fault plaina; lo - direction
of ancient valley: ll - aeiaaosenic trenchea: h - aaplitude
of vertical diaplaceaeat of the landalide-Tault; the arrow with
the number ia the direction and angle of incidence of the
diaplacer
Key:
1. Kalnr; 2. Chickanda: 3. Hedved' Creek

Ala-22. The Argukan structure is traced to the east of the river of cone naae
on the aouth aide of the Tokkinakaya baain. The aeiaaosenic dafor-ationa
(about 3.5 in long) are accoapanied by a cruahins and achiet-forlation

atrin (too-zoo aetera) in the Archean granite-sneiaaea. The rock haa

been atrongly broken down and la intenaely jointed. An abundance of

anal! cleavage jointa are noted which can be connected with abeariag

diaplnceaent. Thia ia confir-ed by noticeable lefthand achiata o' the
axial parta of the aaall dividea.

156

FOR OFPXCIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The vertical displace-ant with respect to the fracture (the downthrown
uplnnd side) is exhibited in the exiel sections of the divide where crushed
grsnite-gneisses are uncovered slong the Joint. At such places. a

”torn" separation surface is observed along which puncture of individual
hlochn tnhes piece. The gaping of the Joints reaches lo tn 5 netorn in thin
cnsu. 0n the divides where e thick telus-eluvial cover hes developed, this
tone is ususlly traced in the fore of a shallow (to 0.5-1.5 eeters)

trench 2-5 esters wide. in pleces the trench ie conpletely strewn with
talus untarisl. 0n the right side of the trough velley of the Arguksn RiVer.

seall rockslides and lsndslides of the telue cover are connected with thin
IOI'IOv

AIS-l. The Kuduli structure is located at the foot of the north aide of
the Kuduli liiver valley (the right tributary of the Olelusa River) end is

sssocieted with the line of dielocations with a bush in continuity of the
sublstitudinal strike.

The seiseogenic rejuvenation is represented by a two-uter fault scarp of
northwesterly (280') strike extending 0.5-l I:- end cleerly expressed in
the relief. n tone up to 3nd uters wide of sherply dislocsted bedding
of Jurassic fleggy sandstone ie treced. Inside this zone vertical
position of the individual pletfons heving en aree to 2 n is noted.

0n the upthrown linb. teal} rochelidea are noted in the direction of the
downthrown linb up to do n in erse. Over the entire extent. the

structure is accoepanied by s strip of felled forest. The fallen trees are
oriented to the south.

The fonstion of such s dislocetion occurred. judging by the frecture of
the soil and vegetation layer. recently (decades ago) and could be csused
by on eerthquelte of force 9 intensity (by colperison with the seiseic
dinlocetions in the cue of the Olelus and the Nyulttha eerthquehes (1958).

c (3)

   

 

—— —————~r —_———————
—- w———-——

«I mun. .—.—:=..
a, " Ithaca:

Figure ‘1. Plan of the Sarithoy seislogenic structure.
Coepiled by V. iiiitoleyew.

l - Ceebrien carboosceoue rock; 2 - steep (SMO’) erosion

slope of the Sarkhoy River valley: 3 - brow of the erosion

ecarp; ‘ - plene of the sheared peek: S - feults

  

l. Sagan-lilo: 2. south: 3. north

157

'0! ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE 06L?

Ill-l. 'l‘hs Sarhhoy structure (fig All is located on the left bank of the
river with the same «one. the right tributary of the Tissa River. at
Seeen-Ula Nountein (2‘37 esters).

The two parallel toults extend in the northeasteriy direction (IS-55')

and ere obviously expressed in the (on oi steep scerps dipping to the
southeast st an angle oi 65-70’. The faults shift with the thslwees of

the teeporery streees end the divides separeting theta. The irecture tones
are occoIpanied by light grey. weakly cemented hreccias with elastic
materiel fro- 0.5 to 5 cu in site. The most extended is the lower scerp
having e length of 2 It- and s vertical displecelent amplitude of 2 esters.
Persllel to it 200 esters higher alone the slope. tones the second frscture
1.5 he long with a vertical displscesent oeplitude of 0.5 to l ester.

The first and second (suits ere sccoeoanied by feather fractures.

 

figure 62. Scheutic o! the ‘l‘ologoy structure. Cmiled by
H. Doe'ysnovich.

l - levelled suriscss of the peeks end their brows; 2 -- slope;
J - flettened pert of the divide; 5 - side of the Tisse River
valley and the brow of the divide; 5 - oivsl cirques; 6 --
scorps of the held peek tsrrstes; 7 - elluviel-proluvisl
deposit: 8 -- vysyphs (rock (repeats scettered showing the
presence of bed rock) of large block uterisl on the divide;
9 - proposed dislocetions with e hreslt in continuity;
h -- vsrticel disoleceneot mlitude.

Key: l. leruuu Debuts: 2. Shuluult ‘l'ologoy

158
FOR Oﬂ’ICIAl. USE OIILY
FOR OFPIGIAL USE ONLY

0n the northeastern end of thd seieaogenic joint systes. rocky stripping
of theztops of the sediaentary colusns is noted along the plain (about
6000 s in area) dipping at an angle of 25-35' to the southwest 230-260'.
Judging by the scales of holocene rejuvenation of the Sarkhoy fault. it

is possible.te propose that the for-etion of the Serkhoy structure is
connected with an earthquake with an intensity to force 9. The tine of
fornetion of the structure is detersined with a large proportion of
conditionality. The good preservation of the fault scerps in the thelwegs

and on the divides of the ssall ravines indicates that the age of the
structure is a few hundred years old.

The aodern activity of the structure is eephesieed by the spatial
coordination with the Sarkhay block of nol'shoy Seyan of two epicenters
of strong earthquakes with K-12 and 14 (force 5-6 and 7-8. respectively).

all-2. The Tologoy structure (Fig 62) is located on the left bank of the
Tisse River between the Shuluuk-Tologoy (absolute elevation 2328 neters)
and the Zholgyn-Sar'deg Peaks (absolute elevation 2562 eaters).

The basic dislocation is expressed in the fora of a scerp with northwesterly
strike l.5-2.0 eaters high on the flat divide of the Santsy and Tisae
Rivers. The gently sloping scerp (less than 30') is traced at a distance

of about 5 ha. in the individual extended sections it is emphasised by
linear concentration of the abundant brushwood vegetation.

The southeastern end of the dislocation with a break in continuity in the
divide part of the side of the Tisse River valley is expressed by a

trench free 5 to 12 asters deep and up to 15 waters wide becoaing a ravine
dipping into the Tisse River valley. Along the sides of the trench.
silicified and ferruginised epidote-chlorite shales are exposed. The
rocks are sharply jointed with a large nuaber of slip surfaces. A scarp
about 1.5 netera characterised by the ease attributes runs free the basic
dislocation to the east. In the upper part of the root slip of the valley.
the scarp is traced in the bedrock at a distance up to 200 eaters.

0n the gentle slopes of the adjacent levelled peaks. linear scerps are
observed which are si-ilar to the basic one. sometimes extending sore than
2 kn. coinciding in individual sections with the slopes of the bald peak
terraces. 0n the right bank of the Baruun-Dabaat River. an erosion-
tectonic (1) scarp of subaeridionel strike is traced. 0n the surface it
becoaes a linear strip of finely elastic neterisl with dense vegetation.
This sone extends sore than 5 kn. Cases of it are noticeable on the

root divides. in the levelled bottoss or the saddles. and on the gentle
slopes.

It is possible to propose that sole of the above-described deformations
could be for-ed in recent decades - the first hundreds of years ago
during an earthquake with force 9 intensity.

159

FOR OPIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 63. Visual plan (with refinements by aerial
photograph) of the Dusaray structure.
Compiled by h. Dem'yaaovich
l - sand-shingle channel and floodplain deposit;
2 -- bottom moraine deposit; 3 - debris cone deposit;
A -- Neosenic basalts; 5 - pre—Caabrisn epidot-chlorito shale:
6 -- faults activated in the Cenozoic; a - established.
b -- proposed; 8 - brows of the seismogenic landslip;
9 - formations of the landslip facies; 10 -- brows of erosion.
scarps; h - height. i - total length of the landslip zone
Key:
1. Tissa

all-3. The Dugaray structure (Fig 43) is located on the left bank of the
Tisse River between its tributaries Targete and Dabaat.

On the slope on the left side several fresh landslips are noted traced

for a distance of 350 to 600 meters. The landslips are located in the
tectonic disturbance zones oriented on the northeasterly and near
latitudinal directions. The west landslip has an area of lOOXSO meters.
It is undoubtedly the case that the outlines of this landslip were greater.
but the annual mud flows have reworked it. Along the rear of the debris
cone. a trench of sublatitudinal strike about 2 to 2.5 meters deep and
about 200 meters long can be traced. 0n the slope along the strike of

the trench. erosion cressts of temporary streams are complicated by
transverse scarps and saddles.

160

FOR OFFICIAL UAR ONLY
The brow of the eeparotion wall of the weat landelip to the eoutheaet
coincidee with the linearly oriented ecerpa to J letere high. To the
northeaat there are two aeall cloae landelipe with a total length of
about 250 latera. The height of the eeperation welle of the landelipe ie
to 30 aetere. The depoaite of the proluvial debria cone in the eurface
of the Cenozoic heaelte occurring in the valley are covered with landelip
tutorial.

It is poeeihle to detenine the age of the eeienic etructure hy the over-
lap of the lendelip iomtione on the glacial depoeite end the feulte.
During preglaciel tiee. the cover of the heaelta wee deforaed and ehifted
with reepect to a etep eyetee of faults of northeeeterly etrike. During
the glaciation. the eurface of the dovnthrown hloclta wee prepared. and
the haaalt cover wee partially deetroyed. a typical exeration relief wee
created in the area. During the poetglecial tiae the tectonic aoveeenta
led to furrowing of certain feulte. Accordingly. the foreation of the
eeienic lendelipe which covered the ecctalulative and exeretion glacial
fort-e took place.

Judging by the paranetere of the eeiaeogrevitetional phenonene. they could
occur for an earthquake of force 8-9.

all-b. The Zehit etructure ie located on the right bank of the Zehit RiVer
2 kn north of the eouth of the right tributary of the Sakhyurta River.

0n the south alope of the eountein with an eheolute elevation of 2616 n,
on erosion-tectonic ecerp ie traced which rune to.the northweet into the
linear zone intereecting the highland terracee. dividee and individual
hold outliera.

The age of the fonntion of the tectonic dieturhance ie provieionally
eetnhliehed ae the liolocene on the haeie of the deforlatione of the for-e
of hold pealt planation which are for-ed inteneely fro. the end of the

Upper Pleietocene to the preeent tine. The total extent of 'the fracture
reachee 3 lul, the maxim- eeplitude of the vertical dieplacenent reechee
about 2 oetere. Theee defomtion perenetere can characterize the inteneity
of the earthquake generating then at force 8-9.

B/l-S. The Shulun etructure (Fig 146) ie located on the eouth elope of
the Kropotkin ridge which bordere the Ola haein on the north (3 la north-
went of Khuzhir).

At the foot of the aountain with an aheolute elevation of 2887 aetera,

.1 fault of euhlntitudinal etrike wee uncovered with vertical displacement
of the walla of the fault to 25 Ietera. The eouth wall at the foot of
the lountain wee downthrown. The fault ecarp ia eoet eharply expreeeed
in the divide of null etreaea (the tributariee of the Oka River) Shulun
end Bulag-Shehey. where the fault cute the Upper Proterozoic grenitee
for n dietencc of about 2 Inn. On the eurface of the Iorainea in the
trough walleye. the tracee of the fault are noted in the for- of

161

PO! OFFICIAL USE OILY

POR OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

The formation of the eeiemotectonic dielocetione of the Shulun etructure
wee accompanied by numeroue eeiemogravitntional phenomena. primarily
rochelidee. The large landelipe occurred directly in the zone of weak
tectonic disturbance (the right side of the Shulun River vallye and the
left side of the Buleg-Sheboy River valley). The two emnll landelipe in
the mouth part of the Khere-Zhelge River, the right tributary of the
Soylag River are eeeociated with the Seyleg iault. The divide cape in
the vicinity of the emergence of the Seylag River in the Oka baain wee
deformed by the lendelip. The lendelip eateriel covered the moraine
depoeito. The outline o! the lendelip amphitheater is drawn along the
large-lump material on both benke o! the Sayleg River. The maximum lend-
elip mass was concentrated at the eeperetion wall over an area of 0.7 hmz.
The separation wall with a total area of 0.8 km2 oriented along the long
axis to the eoutheeet ia eharply eroded. Carbonaceous rock injected with
gneiee gronitee ie expoeed in it. The rock is inteneely crushed end
milonitized.

All of the eeiemic dialocatione of the Shulun atructure are within the
boundariea of the large Oka fracture zone branching from the Hain Sayan
fault. The nature end the dimenaiona of the eeianotectonic end seiamo-
grnvitational defornationa of the earth'e eurface permit eetimation of the
intonaity of the earthquake of more than force 9 creating them.

The age of the eeiamic etructure ie eatebliehed by the deformationa of the
glacial. erosion end other forms end by the superposition of the formations
of the landelip aeisnogenic facies on the glacial end alluvial deposits
(the letter occur on the holocene baaalta) in the Ohm basin. The age of
the eeiamic structure in hundreds of years according to the above-preaented
data. There are reasons for assuming that epicentera of the strong earth-
quakes of 1858 end 1859 could be aeeociated with this structure.

especially the atrong earthquake of 19 November 1859 when the force of

the earthquake reached 8 in the Aliberovshiy mine 90-100 km from the
Shulun structure region.

all-6. The Xhazalkhy structure is located on the divide of the Oka River
and its lett tributary. the Khazalkhy River 16 km south of Sorok.

It is o rectilinear zone about 2.5 km long traced in the metamorphic
ehalee dipping to the northwest 350' at an angle of 65-78’. The strike

of the geomorphologically expreseed line is northwest 280'. In the
terrain it ie a ecarp 0.5 to 1.5 meters emphasized by abundant grass and
moss vegetation. The impreaeion ie created that the modern denudation
surface of the divide is deformed. The amplitude of the vertical displace-
ment of the denudation surface is lowered from the center to its edges.

0n the slopea, the scarp is lost in the deluvial deposits.

all-7. The Tuetuk structure (Fig 65) is located in the valley of the
middle course of the right tributary of the Oka River of the same name.
The geomorphologically propoeed aeiemogenic rejuvenation is expreeeed by

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
70R OPVICIAL USE ONLY

sharp rectilinear scarps. At their base frequently gently sloping
subsidences are observed with which the snail lakes elongated in the
latitudinal direction are associated. This entire sublatitudinel tone
of structural forms expressed in relief is 6 km long.

The erosion-tectonic (7) scarp to 3-4 meters high is traced most clearly
along the left side of the Tustuk River valley above the mouth of its
left tributary. the Dooda-vnagsn Creek.

A socond,clearly expressed fragment of the structure is associated with
its eastern flank and is located along the right side of the Tustuk River
valley above the mouth of Yahhoshop River. This is also a linear scarp
5-6 meters high superposed on the glacial forms of relief. It is identi
cally obvious on the surface of both the bedrock and the loose rock. This
is expressly well expressed at the termination of the fault scarp where
it shifts the debris cone of the unnamed right tributary. The amplitude
of the vertical displacement is 3-6 meters. 0n the north. upthrown well
of the structure. the stream is cut into the debris cone. and on the
downthroun wall. accumulation of the loose material is observed. so that
a young debris cone of smaller dimensions is formed on the older one.

 

Figure 65. Plan of the proposed seismogenic Tustuk structure.
Compiled by V. Nikolayev.
l -- slopes of the Tustuk River valley; 2 - alluvial channel
deposits; 3 -- debris cone; 5 -- faults: a -— established.
b -- proposed; 5 -- stripping of the eluvial-talus msterial~
Key:
1. Tustuk

The clear expression of the scarp in the loose deposits of the debris

cone and its good preservation indicate that this formation is quite young
-- within the limits of the first hundred years. Whereas in the process
of the farthest. most detailed seismogeological studies the seismogenic
nature of the young fractures can be confirmed. the Tustuk structure can
be certainly coordinated with the seismic dislocations formed during the
force 10 earthquake.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The aodern level of seissic activity of the vicinity of the Tuatuk
is detersined by the coordination of the weak (K-b-ll) and soderate
(K-12-13) earthquakes with it.

BIZ-5. The Istokskaya structure (Pig ‘6) occupies the Sor Cherkalova
Bay (the lstokskiy lay) [the underwater portion of the partially sub-
Ierged river basin] and the lowland and sharply swaspy sections of the
shore adjacent to it. The boy is located within the shallow part of the
southwestern edge of the Selenta River delta and has a saxisun depth of
up to 12 asters. and over the larger area. no sore than 3 aeters. The
lstohskiy Sor is separated (roe lsykal by a subseridional elongated
barrier of sandbars (the Norse Lanesova Peninsula. the lab'ya largo
Island). and on the southeaster it is bounded by the narrow (0.2-1 ha)
strip of lowland swaspy shore adjacent to the rectilinear-scarp 10 to
II seters high. the ancient Pofsnovskaya (third Selenga) terrace. In
the capoaed scarp dike the fine-grained sands are revealed.

According to the data of the geophysical work of A. P. lulassov and

the prospecting holes of V. V. Saasonov and 6. P. Ponolareva. the
vicinity of the large Del'tovoy fault in the crystalline base-ant
coincidea with the scarp line on the surface. Another fault bounds the
boy on the west. being placed in the base-ant on the sandbars separating
the bay fro- the naykal water. Thus. the structure in plan view is
approxisately equilateral tectonic wedge with approximately lO-hn sides.
0n the north where it ssoothly joins the floodplain in the surface
terrace of the Selenga delta. the wedge is about 5 km wide.

It is proposed that the terraced section of the shore outlined by the
faults was downthrown under the level of lsykal as a result of the earth-
quake. similarly to the Posol'skiy Sor (Solonenko. V.. Treskov. 1960. p 6)
and the Provsl lay. and subsequently was buried under the beach sands and
bed loads. The Kudara (second Salsnga) terrace. frag-ents of which were
preserved on the southeast shore of the bay and. possibly. the part of the
rotanovskaya terrace next to the lake were involved in the seis-ogenic
burial. The noxious deforlation of the earth's surface appeared in the
southern part of the bay. in the vicinity of the joining of the faults
bounding it. The amplitude of the lowering here is no less than lO-l2 I.

The great siailarity in morphology. size and structure of the Istohaskaya
[Istok] structure with the Posol'skaya [Posol'sk] structure1 and the
obviously seissotectonic for-ations of the Proval Bay pernits consideration
of cannon genetic roots in their origin. The subsidence permits

 

‘Thc calculations perforned by A. A. Rogosin (l97b) with respect to the
buildup rate of the sandbars in the Posol'skiy Sor indicate that they
appeared for the first tine in the bay approxi-ately 500 to 600 years ago.
In the Sor. the older residents still re-e-ber the flooded trees. stu-ps
and logs. Consequently. the age of the bay is about 500 years.

165

’0‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007mm: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030011-5

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007i02/08:

 

V0! (WFICIM. USE! ONLY

166

Figure 56. Plan of

and the Pocol'okaya
structure. Coepilet
l - acurpc of the I
euppoaedly aeianotet
their heighta. Ietel
zones in the crystal
3 -- aectiona of eei
subsidencea; 6 - Kl
Pofanovakaya (Hiddlc
Quaternary) terrace:
and first terrace al
plain; 6 - 3ae and
water shove; 7 -- el
force. 7. 5 and 6 e1
respectively.

Key:
1. Povorot; 2.
Sor Bay; 3. Pom
6. lol. Rechka;
6. Iatokakiy 801
7. north; 8. am

POR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

CIA-RDP82-00060R000100030011-6
FOR OFFICTAL USE ONLY

consideration of common genetic roots in their origin. The lstokskaya
structure is probably younger than the Poaol'akaya structure. This is
indicated by the greater depths of the bay. the smaller amount of erosion
of the shores. and comparatively weak isolation from the lake.

8/3-6. The Svyatonosskaya [Svystoy Nos] structure Fig 67) is located on
the Svyatoy Nos Peninsula (the east shore of the central part of Lake
Baykal).

The peninsula lies on the northeastern continuation of the Ol'khonshaya
branch of the Obruchevskiy fault.

The seismoteetonic dislocations of the structure are represented by faults
and separation joints. The basic system of seisnogenic faults was

revealed in the headwaters of the Harkovo River where they are traced

more than 5 km in the form of clear rectilinear, subparallel and inter-
secting fractures. The length of the individual dislocations is up to

[.5 km. 0n the top of the mountain which is made up of granites. the
longest segment of the fault forms a 30—50‘ scarp up to 10 meters high.
The eastern wall is downthrown.

In the southwestern part of the investigated area on the gently sloping
divide of the Dolgyy and Snethoyy Creeks there are two subparellel step
faults bounding the block inclined to the southeast.

0n the northwest slope of the left divide of the Dolgyy Creek there is a
selsmotectonic graben. It is 320x17uo meters in site. here along the
system of step faults (northeast strike bs-so') a peak part of the divide
crest was downthrown. The wall of one of the faults at the foot of the
mountain forms a tectonic dam b to 5 meters high and about 1 km long
lntersectlng the bottom of the ravine (fig 68).

The grnvitationsl-seismotectonic disturbances are represented by landslip
faults and fractures with significant gravitational components. The
formation of this type of deformation is connected with movements along
the faults with simultaneous removal by the gravitational forces of the
mountain masses dismembered by them.

The seismogravitntional phenomena include landslips. landslips-slides.
landslides and talus creating seismogravitationai amphitheaters on the
slope. hammocky and swell-sinkhole microrelief on the surface of the down-
thrown root blocks and among the landslip masses. The largest seismo-
genlc landslide-landslip is coordinated with the steep divide crest at
the headwaters of the Markov River. The volume of the landslip reaches
62 million m3. The displacement of the rocky massif occurred in the
nerthwesterly direction to a distance of 300 m. In plan it is circular
in shape (350x200 m), 25 m high. The smaller landslide-landslip with
respect to the dimensions occurred on a steep divide cape of the left
tributaries of the Doigyy Creek. The surface of the separation wall has
a slope of 35 to 60'. and the size is 250x500 meters. The total volume
of the landslip mass reaches 26 million m3.

I67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Legend and key to Fig a7. p 168]

1 -- nncient fnuits; 2 -- seissogenic faults (a. bergetriche in the
direction of the downthrown side) and tension joints (8): 3 - gravita-
tionnl-seiseotectonic Joints: 6 .. tectonic surfaces; 5 - separation
brows of the landeiip faults and the direction of displace-ant of the
landslip leases; 6 -- surface profile of the slope before forsation of the
landslide; 7 -- seiseogravitationel (talus) asphitheater; 8 -- erosion
nephitheeter; 9 -- seiesogenic landslip lessee: lo - talus eaterisl:

11 -- river alluvius: 12 - shifted rocky blocks of the landslip; 13 --
outlines of the sections with swell and sinkhole relief; 16 - funnel-
sinkholes of tectonic origin; 15 - elesents of occurrence of schist
forsntion in the granite: 16 - asplitude of vertical diaplacenent. I:

I7 -- divide line.

The seiauogeological echesetic of the Svyatoy Nos Peninsula is presented in
the upper lefthand corner. 1 -- axes of the ridges; 2 -« neotectonic
faults; J - seissotectonic disturbances of the Svyatonosaksya structure
(bernstriche in the direction of the downthrown side): 6 -- accospanying
seissogravitationol phone-one: 5 .. sinerel springs: 6 -- position of the
section of the Svystonosskaye structure depicted in plan: 7-10 - earth-
qunke epicenters: 7 - K-10-10-1I2; 8 -- K-11-12: 9 - K-i); 10 -- 8-16-
15.

Key:
1. Lake Baykal 9. Dolgiy Creek
2. 22 January 1962 lo. Sneshnyy Creek
3. 26 May 1939 11. Msrkova River

a. Iarguainekiy bay
5. Chivyrkuiskiy bay
6. 26 hove-her 1968
7. 2 Noveuber 1869
8. 28 October 1961

The gravitational-seissotectonic phenonena were encountered in the vicinity
of the Lower Izgolov'ye. Here the peak 1686 seters high was broken by
four seisnogenic step faults extending no note then 200 to 300 asters

each. Along the largest of than the peak pert of the sountain was shifted
downhill 10 to 12 seters.

The selssic dislocations on the Svyatoy Nos Peninsula. have a fresh
nppenrnnce. The youth of the seissogenic faults is especially clearly
expressed in the sections where they form tectonic dens across the ravines

of the tesporary streams. Even in their thalweg section. there are no
traces of erosion of the dues. and the elastic material has still not been

deposited in front of then. The trenches running along the southeastern

foot of the Yuzhnyy [southern] ridge cut the runoff basins of the tenporary
strenss. Their brows are elsost uneroded. The trenches are grown over

with young trees. Beginning with what has been stated above. the age of
the residual defor-arions on the Svyatoy Nos Peninsula is essuled to be
n few hundred years.

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPYICIAL "SB ONLY

 

Visure 48. Limb of a seismotectonic graben at the foot of
the mountain forms a tectonic dam. The amplitude
of the vertical displacement is 4 to 5 meters.

‘Photosraph by A. Abalakov.

The total extent of the seisaogenic dislocation zone on the Svyatoy Nos
Peninsula is 62 kn. and the seismotectonic zone. 25 km. The area of
strongest deformations has dimensions of 6X13 km. The presented morpho-
netric characteristics of the seismic dislocations. in accordance with the
seismogeological scale and in comparison with the dimensions of the general-
ized isoseiems. according to the macroseismic data (Solonenko. 1962, h.
1973; ACTIVE T!CTONICS.... 1966: SEISHOTECTONICS.... 1968) permit them to

be related to the disastrous earthquake of the past with an intensity of

no less than force 10.

3/3-7. The Halochivyrkuyskaye (Hal. Chivyrkuy] structure (Fig 59) is
located on the largutinskiy ridge in the headwaters of the Hal. and Bel.
Chivyrkuy Rivers.

The structure is represented by a linear system of aeismogenic joints
cutting the flat top surface of the southwestern extremity of the ridge
(absolute elevation 1200 to 2000 meters). The joints are trenches. and
individual sections of which are traced for a distance of 3-4 km. The
weathered and jointed granitoids of the Barsueinskiy bstholite are
exposed in the walls. The trenches are 15-25 meters wide and 2-6 m deep.
The amplitude of the vertical displacement reaches 3 meters. The north:
western walls are downtnrown. and their predominant orientation is north-
east 30-50'. The walla of the trenches are gently sloping: they are
inclined at an angle of 40-50' only in places. The uphill sides. as a

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR 0010!“: US! ONLY

downhill on“. A: the Late
t the unwary «um by the jotnu. no
t u n in the chances. of the active scum

n observed, at
uy have not been prenrvod. catatonic dulouuonu with a
at in continuity hm bun Inca! to a Monaco of 16 kl.

"action of the
«onion trenche-

      
        

1- patch.

tn the dined 1 - utmotcctonic.

2 -- act“. in the Cenozoic. 3 -- pro—cannon; 1- - lmdnndn;
pout": 6 .. axes of the rug“.

- 3. m1. Chtvytkuy;

awrkuysnyu bum.
° 6. north; 1. south; 8. urguumkty
n' n. Zhunvukhtnauyu

Figure 59.
Cot-piled by A. A
butt in continuity (be:

Key:
1. Anus-my Lake; 2. unoch
5. Dubai; 5. 301. Chtvyﬂmy.
ridge; 9. Zhur
Main; 12. Vim”: 13.
A ' 18. “It’-

any. but .
' 15. lawn:
POI OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

1973: ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966) lake it possible to assume that the
intensity of this paleoearthquake was force 10.

all-9. The lol'sherechenskaya structure (Fig 50) is located on the north-
west slopes of the largusinskiy ridge in the vicinity of its Joining with
the lol'sherechenskaya basin. The seissic dislocations are concentrated

in an area of o.sxo.s he. and they are represented by two systess of super-
perpendicular faults clearly expressed in the relief. They are located in
the granites of the aarguzinskiy batholite. The orientation of the

various disturbances in the first systes is northwest 320-330' with steep
dip angles of the displacers (7o-eo') to the northeast. The length of the
greatest fracture in this direction is 600 seters. lts southeastern end

is in the fore of a slit-like trench 13 neters wide. The walls have becose
suhvertical; the height of the southwest wall is 12 esters. and the opposite.
S seters. Proceeding downward along the slope parallel to the crest of

the divide. the trench gradually beeoaes a scarp 3 to 5 meters high. To
the southwest of it there is a gravitational-tectonic basin of irregular
shape. lts lower border is the tectonic das. which is a relatively up-
thrown wall of a curvilinear fracture running across the ravine.

The slightly convex triangular cape at the top with an elevation of 1632 s
has been broken by a series of subparallel faults .of the second syste-

(Fig 51). Their extent fluctuates fros 60 to 200 eeters. The faults
are oriented in the northeasterly direction (ho-55') and they have large

dip angles (60-70“) in the direction of the ridge. The divide part of the
mountain spur is nonuniforsly downthrown along the step faults. The
greatest saplitude of vertical displace-ant (8 meters) was established

at the highest fault. The dislocations of the breaking continuity in this
direction are based on the faults with southwesterly orientation and are
then not traced. The fractures of the second systel are affected by a
dense network of transverse fine (1-1.5 esters) and extensive (to 200 a)
separation joints. 3y cosbining the faults of the two systess having
opposite surface slope of the displacers. puncture of the tectonic blocks
was caused. Their shift to the southeast (in the direction of the ridge)
is explained by the presence of s free surface in the for. of a steep
slope of the left tributary of the Nalyy Creek.

The earthquake accompanying the forsation of the described cosplex of
deformations of the earth's surface occurred obviously within the first
hundreds of years. This is indicated by the youngness of the saissic
dislocations. The slopes of the fault scarps are fresher and alaost free

of vegetation. The bottoss of the trenches are barely covered with elastic
soterial and have sharp angular shapes. The gravitational-seissotectonic
sovesents and accospanying seissogravitational phenosena probably are
genetically related to the seissogenic rejuvenation of the Bol‘sherechenskiy
ﬁult during force 9 earthquake actions.

B/J-IE. The Khapton structure (Fig 52) is located on the northwest slope

of the ridge of the same name. which is the southern mountain boundary of
the Verkhnetsipinskaya basin.

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 50. Visual plan of the Bol'sherechensksya structure.
Compiled by A. Abalakov.
1-4 -- fracture dislocations: l - active in the Cenozoic
(lol'sherechenskiy fault), 2 -- aeisnogenic faults, 3 -
seissogenic joints, 6 - tectonic dam of unclear genesis;
S -- bottou of tectonic basins; 6 - rock stresss;
7 - loose Quaternary deposits; 8 - axes of the ridges.
Ke :
y 1. south; 2. north; 3. Bol'sherechenskays bssin; b. Hslyy Creek:
5. Barguzinskiy ridge

The basic dislocation systes is connected with the seissogenic rejuvenation
of the Severokhaptonskiy [Northern Khspton] (Verkhnetsipinskiy) fault.

It extends about 10 km. Here the dislocations are expressed in the for!

of fault trenches with s difference in height end sides of 10-15 I. scsrps
up to 15 leters high. extended hollow joints in the granite field of the
Vitisksnskiy complex of the Lower Paleozoic. waterfalls are noted in the
channels of the slall streens. The opening of the feult use accospanied

by the forlation of nulerous subparallel faults (sonetines uith left
shift?) both dounslope and upslope with respect to the Iain dislocation.

The ﬂolocene age of the seismic dislocations was estsblished by the
defornations of the fine proluvial debris cones. The gravitational
phenosena sccospanying the earthquakes occurred in the for. of landslips.

173
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 51. Seismogenic faults on the northwest side of the
Bol'sherechensksys basin. Amplitude of vertical
displacement with respect to the fracture in the
center of the photograph is 8 meters. In the
background is the Bol'sherechenskays basin.
Photograph by A. Abslskov.

Judging by the scales of the seismic dislocations, the intensity of the
earthquake creating them must be no less than force 9.

313-15. The Olnys structure is located in the contact zone of the
Yuzhno-Huyskiy [Southern Muys] ridge with the Verkhnemuyskays [Upper
Huys] basin between the right tributaries of the Muya River -~ the
Vira and Bugunda Rivers.

The set of deformations of the structure is associated with the

Verkhnemuyskiy [Upper Huys] fault which was active in the Cenozoic in a
segment extending about 30 km.

Bits and Olnys sections.

The Birs section is located on the northeast flank of the structure and
encompasses the interfluves of the Birs River with the adjacent tribu—
taries of the Nuys River.

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. . I." . . ' "I": 1. ﬂ
.. _‘ way/W0,

I . ‘7
5/ //////////// //5."/
Mﬂé/wﬁé
$335”

¢

”fizz/17g:

.0 ‘
. ‘ , ‘ s‘ ‘
, ;”u\.’ ‘\\‘ ¢

‘ I
9:
,.

ﬂ \ ‘
" ‘9.
’ ‘ .

// ,W ‘.
-1 ., ’ ‘ 9 ‘
/’ ﬁ/‘i ‘ ‘ ‘D ‘ ‘\
p
- 9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Olnyn section is located in the southwestern part of the structure
opposite the Yukta landmark. The characteristic feature of the given
section is the presence of a large gravitetional-seisaotectonic element
-- the landslip fault.

The formation of the separation wall of the lsndslip is caused by sharp
movements along three faults - northeastern strike (60 and 80') and
northwestern (300'). The height of the separation wall is to 300 aetera.
At the present tine it is represented by several large facets (the tips
of the divide capes) with a steepness of more than 55° separated by deep
canyon-like valleys. The landslip fault block of about 0.8 km2 has a
roughly triangular shape predetermined by the three-sided tectonic
boundary. In the rear part of the landslip fault body there is a trench
fro. 2 to 15-20 meters deep. up to 20-25 meters wide and running more
than I ha coinciding with the orientation of the separation wall.

An analysis of the seisaic dislocations associated with the southern
articulation of the Verkhnenuyskaya [Upper Huyal basin and the Yuzhno-
Huyakiy [Southern Huyal ridge. makes it possible to draw the conclusion
that the tectonic conditions of the Holocene development of the given
section of the earth‘s crust completely permit the occurrence here of
earthquakes with an intensity of no less than force 10 (judging by the
paraaaters of the residual deformations: the total extent 29 km, vertical
amplitude S to 6 meters. left shift 6-7 meters and numerous accompanying
seisaogravitational and gravitstional-aeisaotectonic phenomena). The
holoceae age of the latest disturbances was determined by the deformations
of glacial forms. primarily the latest glaciation (the Upper Pleistocene
to early Nolocene). The degree of preservation of the dislocations per-
mits dating of them from many hundreds to a few thousand years.

BIA-l. The Amnunda structure is located in the southern part of the
mountain ccsnissure separating the Verkhneauyskaya and the Ulan-Hakitakaya
basin. in the headwaters of the right tributaries of the Hays River.
Powerful neotectonic faults are arranged in echelons against the coamissure.
bounding the basins on the southeast.

The structure was detected during deciphering of the aerial photographs
and has not been studied locally. The total extent of the dislocations
visible on the photographs is about &.5 km, and the strike of the system
is northeast 65’. The dislocations cut the Upper Quaternary glacial

formations and possibly the pre-Caabrian intrusive rock. Their seismo-
tectonic nature is neat probable.

BIL-2. The Tilishminskaya structure (Fig 53) is located on the north
slope of the lambuyakiy ridge at absolute elevations of l200-1400 meters.

The entire system of modern faults is associated with the Tilishminskiy

fault which enters the northeastern part of the BauntovskooTsipinakaya
fracture system.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
523821.. I :14
.n «>3—

uoauaoa a mum
not: a mu:

«vane; aw». oua¢0uua
"suave I .Hu.a "zuoat 1. 5. .n “Ina .xak .« nous-a9 aﬁuq cacouoo
nonu>uv an an "cocoa; cad.
oucouUOuOIouoa tn mum .oocdam nan. uncouoououc I: max “ocu2uo-uu as» «o non-nu man. as» no
sown-360:0 «o 3:05.? «I «A faunas In .A. 5:30: ...... i :33: II 50 «325-0.: cacao-nongo-
azu «o unauonauos uauuoIosauoI 1| an ”node: baud. vac-unsound». nu an uhA~>auooaoou and.» can
uaaanvcnu "naouunauOuov uncouuqudpnunalouoo ut ona uA¢uauon ecu-cove wagon-u» nan-u u: n .uuaaau
savanna II o .ouunou It a ”nonsuuuuu oucouoouoasuou 1: son «canoaoua no a .oupoauou :1 a "ououocoo
on cud uqnu ouasau it a "venoaoua n: a .o»An«aou u: a "nausnu oaouoaouuouo u: n
.xoaaIOu haxuuuvauuoxn>=su as» no ocu«=auu ouonouououw no:o« nu a
no vanququw .nn madman

on» an o>uu
190 cocoa || N .

”cannot-v nuanuou
ha oceansoo .ouauuau». u
AN. AN“. .8 .g

.cuxadns .9
any

    

117

ICIAL 058 OI”!

10! 0??
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 51.. Plan of the basic structural field.
Colpiled by S. Lastcchkin and A. Aballkov.

[See legend and key on n 179]

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

[Legend and key to Pig 56. p 178]:

l -- Khangarul'akaya series of injection gneisses and shales; 2 -
Turanakiy complex of the gneiss-lihe granites; 3 an congloeerstes.
shingle. clays of the Anonovakaya suite (Pliocene); é - landslip uses
of elastic material: 5 - rock falls; 6 - accumulativo isometric forms
in elastic material; a - positive. b - negative; 7 - linearly extended
trenches in the elastic material; 8 -— axia1 lines of the divide;
9 -- tectonic dams: lO.-- stratigraphic contact lines; 11 - line of
morphologically expressed fracture with indication of the dip of the
displecer: a - in bedrock. b - in loose rock; 12 v— line of the ancient
dislocation with a break in continuity: 13 - direction of displacement
of the elastic material: 16 -- parameters of the positive and negative
isometric forms: h - height. 0 - diameter; 15 - elements of Iorph-
ologicslly expressed forms: a -- angle of the slope, b -- dip of the
displacer.
Key:

1. Selengushka; 2. Shestipalikha; 3. Osinovka; 6. Zheltyy lereg;

5. Lev. Osinovka; 6. Osinovka; 7. bugs; 8. Prev. Anoaovka:

9. Krugloye Lake: 10. Protochnoye Lake.

A detailed deciphering of the large-scale aerial photographs. aerovieual
end ground investigations of the Tilishminskaya zone demonstrated that
there was a quite complex system of alnost rectilinear young tectonic
fractures in front of us. They were represented by the fault trenches.
faults which along the strike become upthrov faults. In addition. near
the modern seialogenic fractures and especially within the divide part
of the ridge. a set of accompanying seismogravitational phenomena is
noted (the lsndslips. landslides). The total volume of the landslide-
landslip mass during the seismogravitational stripping reached

1 million m3. The landslip amphitheaters have almost vertical slips to
30-60 meters high.

The entire system of active dislocations is traced over an extent of
15 to 16 km.

The east and west flanks of the structure 6 and 7 km long respectively
have northeastern orientation and are represented by rectilinear faults
running near the erosion of tectonic ravines to the nonextensive (to
100-150 meters) upthrov faults. The maximum amplitude of the upthrov
faults is l to 1.5 meters. and the faults to 10 to 15 meters. The planes
of the displacers incident to the north at an angle of 70-80'. bear the
slip surfaces and grooves.

The central part of the dislocation zone is oriented in the sublatitudinal
direction and is represented by the most complex combination of faults

and upthrou faults. The faults predominate uith respect to extent over
the upthrov faults (200-300 and 1007150 meters respectively) and. as a
rule. the fault trenches with up to 5 to 8 meters of gaping serve, as a
rule. as the linking element between them. In the individual sections

179

FOR OFFICIAL USS OllY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

along the fault trenches. intensive absorption of the block material
takes place. The upthrow faults are clearly traced in the divide capes
and in the shallow erosion-tectonic ravines. They were clearly preserved
in the slluvial-nroluvial deposits in the form of the reverse tectonic
protrusions. sometimes blocking the valleys of the mountain springs.
Somewhat farther downstream. the th lwegs of the mountain springs are

deformed by step scarps (faults) with the formation of cascades of water-
falls to 2-3 meters high.

As the instrument seismic observations have demonstrated. the modern
activity of the structure is confirmed by the epicenters of the earthquakes
of energy class 7-12 (Colenetskiy. et 31., 1973). Here association of

Detecting some similarity on the basic seismotectonic peculiarities of the
zone (amplitude, extent. hyposeismic dislocations) the geological-
geonorphologicsl plan and the stressed state of the earth‘s crust with

the epicentral region of the Huya earthquake which serves as a standard for
the east flank of the Beykal rift zone. the Tilishminskaya system of paleo-
aeismic dislocations can indicate earthquakes on the order of force lJ.

the erosion-denudation processes under permafrost conditions. The good
morphological preservation of the residual deformations in the Tilishminskaya
fracture zone provide Lhe basis for assuming that the age of the structure

is from many hundreds to a few thousand years.

 

Figure 55. Top of the left divide of the Osinovks River
cut by a system of seismogenic fractures.
Amplitude of vertical displacement reaches 6 m.
Photograph by A. Abalakov.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
!OR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

BIZ-8. The Osinovehoye [Orinovkal structural field (Fig 56) is located on
the north slopes of the Khamaeraban ridge 10 he to the southeast of the
shore of Lake layhal in the Anosovhs and Qsinovka interfluve. The

coordinates of the central section are 51'32' north latitude. lOS'lb'
enst longitude.

The fracture field was represented by seven sections isolated froa each
other with deformation of the second and third order divides.

The longest but most expressed fractures touch the axial part of the
divide between the Lev. Osinovhs end the Osinovha livers (Fig 55). They
are represented by a series of joints linearly extended in the north-
easterly direction (35‘). the main one of which extends 1.6 km. The
amplitude of the vertical displacement along it reaches 5 to 6 meters.
The dip of the displacers is in all cases to the southeast at an angle
3&60.

0n intersection of the dry ravine by a coluanar joint. the foot wall
(upthrown wall) of the fault in its thalweg forms a steep (to 60') scarp
(tectonic dam) to 1-3 meters high extending sore than 40 asters. Then
to the northeast along the strike of the main joint three more ravines
are deformed by the fractures with foraation of tectonic dens in than.

Six other points are characterised by like deformations. In all cases.
the axial parts of the submeridional divides are deformed. As a rule.
the diaplacers are parallel to the axes of the ridges and dip to the east
at an angle of ‘0'. The maximum extent of the continuous joints is to
250-300 meters. and the eaplitude of the vertical displacement (with
respect to type, faulted) is from 1-2 to 7-8 eaters.

By comparing the morphological structure of the noted for-s, it is possible
to indicate their approximate same age. As a rule. the ethereal vegetation
in the trenches is missing. and the brows of the trenches are still not
smoothed off by denudation, and the dams in the valleys are not eroded.

The oldest trees in the trenches are 200 years old. This indicates the
upper time limit of the formation of the described deformations.

Judging by the description of the Tankhoyshaya structure (Khromovskikh.
1965). the noted forms are very similar to it with respect to morphological
type and age. Considering that the investigated fracture field is located
a total of only 3 km west of the central part of the Tenkhoyskiy seisuo-
genie structure.'inclusion of it in the composition of this structure is
natural.

VIZ-9. Hanturikhinsksya structure (Fig 56) is located at the foot of the
north slope of the Khsmar-Dsban ridge 5 kn northeast of Isbushkin.

The structure is represented by a systen of subparsilel fault scarps
(strike SO-SS' northeast) which occurred in the aassifs of the Proterozoic
granites of the Turan complex. The fractures are traced in a continuous

181

FOR OPPICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

belt between the mouth sections of the nsnturikha River and the Hal.
Tel‘neya River (6 kn). In the different sections. the number of scerps
fluctuates tree 1 to 5 extending 300 to 600 laters. In the case of an
increase in the number of acsrpe, the height of each of then decreases
respectively so that the total amplitude of vertical displaceeent in
general remains constant (12-15 eaters).

The occurrence of the Hanturikhinskaya structure obviously should be
connected with the seislically active Cherskiy fault running along the
foot of the Khsaar-Dabsn ridge and in Lake Baykal.

In the vicinity of the Nyeoveya and Klyuyevka stations. downthroun
quarries have been examined which were worked in various years during the
construction of the Trenasiberian Railroad. A conparison of the preserva-
tion of the walls of the quarries and the seianic dislocations provides

the basis for assuming that the age of the structure is only a few hundreds
of years.

 

Figure 56. Plan of the Nanturikhinskcya [Nanturikhe]
structure. Compiled by A. Abalakov.
1-3 - dislocations with a break in continuity (bergstrichs
in the direction of the downthrown wall): 1 - seisnotectonic.
2 -- active in the Cenozoic. 3 9- pre-Cenoaoic; 4 -- lendslips;
5.6 - loose Cenozoic deposits: Quarternary and Neogenic.
respectively
Key:

1. Lake Baykal; 2. Babushkin; 3. Hysovka; 6. Del. Tel'naya:

5. Hal. Tel'naye: 6. Grenyachiy; 7. Hanturikha; 8. Sukhoy Ruchey

9. 301. Kultushnaya; 10. Kiss

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPfICKAL USE ONLY

The pnroaeters of the structure. in accordance with the standard scale
of the seienic dislocations (see Chapter I) per-its relation of its
occurrence to the force 9 and force 10 earthquakes.

VIZ-12. The Kuyuhtuy structure (Fig S7) is loceted on the vest closure
of the Kudarinskiy ridge et the location of the elbow bend in the Chikoy
River in the south end the arched bend of the Kudere River in the north.
It is associated with the intersection of two different-age. different-
directional and different genetic types of deep faults - the
Nithnechikoyekiy aubaeridional slip-strike fault (Sieykh, 1966) and

Chikoyskiy upthrov fault. which is an elelent o! the extended Mongolian-
Okhotsk fault in the northeastern direction. '

The structure is represented by four characteristic dreinless basins of
subleridional strike. Their characteristic consists in con-ounces of
spatial orientation. siailerity of asyI-stry and internal structure.

 

.~¢-a-e~- e e

EIWIEJ‘ VI :-
-'E33'ISZ‘J'CD

Figure S7. Horphoaetric achenatic of the graben-lske

Kuyuhtuy structures. Compiled by s. Lastochkin.
l -- greben-like closed basins; 2 -- outliers; 3 -- transverse

fault: b - longitudinal faults. reliable (e) and proposed (b);
5 -- benches of the terraced areas: 6 - granite outcrops;
7 - Middle to Upper Pleistocene send and sandy loan deposits;
8 - bottoas of the basins Iade troa Pleistocene-ﬂolocene

coerae sediaents; 9 -- direction of removal of loose aateriel;
I-IV —- numbers of bay basins.

Key: 1. Kuyuktuy

183

FOR OPPICIAL US! OILY
TOR OTPICIAL USE ONLY

The closed basins are parallel to each other not only in general direction
but also pairwise. Pros the north they have steeply inclined erosion-
tectonic borders. and fro! the south. gently sloping erosion borders.
Their bottoas and sides are ands up of scarps with hanging channels of

teaporary streass indicating youngness of the forastion of the fares.

The largest negative fora is the Kuyuktuy basin. It is quite clearly
expressed in the relief. in plan view it has a rhoabic shape. and it is
bounded on three sides by dislocations with breaks in continuity. Its
width is 1300 esters. and it is 1500 asters long. The north side is
200 asters above the flat bottoa of the basin in relative altitude. The
joining of the aountain border to the bottoa of the basin is controlled
by the tectonic disturbance fixed by the ailonitisstion cones in the

granite. The dip azimuth of these zones is 340-350'. and the angle of
incidence is 70-80'.

The downthrow of the basin was not a single act. as is indicated by the
step nature of its sides. The lower steps of the west and east borders

are sore to scale. they have better relief and have been preserved better
than the upper ones.

In analyzing the_structural-geological position of the Kudara group of
basins. first of all it is necessary to note the spatial association of

then with regard to the Nizhnechikoyskiy strike-slip fault with which
they obviously are also connected genetically.

The youngest of the nova-ants along this fault, the age of which obviously
does not go beyond the Quaternary (the cover of loose Quaternary deposits
is disturbed) led to the occurrence of these basins. Their further growth
as a result of nultiaction seisaic activity of the fault over the extent

of the last thousands and hundreds of years in coabination with the erosion
factors have led to the fornation which we now observed. The presence of
the given structures is unquestioned evidence of an increase in seismic
activity in this region. However. in the absence of geophysical and the
incompleteness of geological data. it is difficult to deter-inc the
intensity of earthquakes creating these structures. Supposedly. on the
basis of the aorphological and aorphoaetric indexes coabined with the known
geological data. according to the earthquake intensity scale by paleo-
seisnogeological attributes (see Chapter I) it is possible to talk about a
force-9 earthquake causing residual deformations of the ground during
subsequent seissic activation of the Niehnechikoyskiy fault.

V/J-l. The Yadrikhinskaya [Yadrikha] structure (see Fig 58) is located

on the northwestern side of the Chikoyskaya basin. ?.5 kn north of
Yadrikhino and 7.5 ka east of the Yaaarovka health resort.

The structure is coordinated with the vicinity of the Chikoyskiy fault
cutting the Paleozoic granitoids of the Halkhanskiy coaplex. The dis-
placer of the fault dips to the northwest (335-350') at an angle of 65‘.

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

l\

in the relief it Is represented by the erosion-tectonic scorn up to 10 m
high with slope steepness of 60°. The deformations touch the debris
cones of the modern streams in the formation stage. The apparent thick-
ness of the deposits in the debris cones does not exeed 6 meters. The
material making them up almost is not rounded at all (from fine elastic
to lunp with wood and sand filler). One of the cones in slightly flooded.

Morphologically. the residual deformation of the soil on the eastern cone
is most clearly expressed. These are subparallol fractures - trenches
and scarps of latitudinal direction. The height of the rear scorp is

up to 3 meters. the slope angle is 30-35‘. The scarp is partially
leveled by denudation. Basically. it is outlined by a trench. It is

250 meters long. up to 1 motor deep. up to 3 motors wide. To the south
the trench becomes a horizontal step about 20 m wide. It is intercepted
by a second scarp up to 6 meters high with a slope angle to 30-35'.

The trench. tho rear and front ecarps of tho cone ore forested. The
arboresl vegetation is up to 300 years old.

The degree of preservation of tho seismic dislocations is approximately
identical for all three deformed cones, which can indicate the simuln
toneouanoss of their occurrence. Tho ago of tho structure. judging by
the arboroal vegetation in tho trenches is more than 300 years.

The intensity of tho earthquake creating this structure. considering its
extent (to 1.5 km). the amplitude of tho vertical displacement (to 3 m)
and the nature of the appearance of residual deformations is on tho
order of force 8 to 9.

V/J-Z. The Tango structure (Fig S9) is located in the interfluve of the
301. Tongshan and Deshulan Rivers. tho loft tributaries of the Ingoda
River.

It is represented by a lsndslip-landolide in the axial part of tho local

divide and it is associated with the upthrust fault of latitudinal strike
with dieplocor dip to the north at an angle of 60'. The nature of those

formations of the ancient planation surface indicates the rejuvenation

of this zone in the latest phase of tectonic development.

The large-block granite and granite-gneiss material has been subjected
to displacement. The separation wall structure is up to 630 meters long.
up to 30 meters high with a slope angle of 30-40’. The maximum dimen-
sions (height or depth, width. length) for positive forms are 3. 60 and
70 meters; for negative forms. 6. 50 and 80 meters. respectively.

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 58. Diagram of the geological structure of the
Yedrikha seismosenic structure.
Coupiled by 8. Les-ochkin.
l -- depoaits of modern debris cones; 2 - Upper Quaternary
boulder-shingle cannon send and sandy loam deposits of river
subplains and terraces above the floodplains; 3 -- diorites.
gabbro-diorites. srsnodiorites of the Nelkhan conplex;
6 -- granites. granito-gneisses of the Halkhen coaplex;
S - deforsed debris cone; 6 - one of activated tectonic
disturbaties (bergstrichs in the direction of the recumbent
lilb; 7 -- axial lines of local divides; 8 .. line of the
top surfaces.

Yebrikhinskiy
Lobachikhe
Vyezzhays
Yebrikhino

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

“us-dzmmcaigo

figure 59. Schematic of the geological structure of the
landslip-landslide section of range.
Compiled by S. Lastochkin.
l - modern channel and floodplain deposits; 2 -- crystalline
shale. hornfele, gneiaaee, amphibolites (xenolite fields);
3 - fine-grained biotite granites; b - granite-gneisses;
S -- local divide lines: 6 - isohypses of the ancient
plenation surface; 7 - activated faults; a - with horizontal.
b - with vertical components (bergstrichs in the direction
of the recumbent limb) of movements along the displacers;
8 -- lendslide—lendelip.
Key:
l. 301. Tengalran River

In the separation wall of the landslide-landslip. hanging channels of
temporary streams are noted indicating the relative youngneas of the
formation.

The possible genetic relation of the structure of the seismic activation
of the noted fault is exeained in dsrsct association of it with the
tectonic jointing zone. in the rechanisn of formation differing from the
landslides of the gravitational type (it cannot be considered either
delapsing or detrusive): the ease of large block material experienced
single-act and obviously instantaneous displacement. without any causes
promoting the usual gravitational processes (the plane of the displacer
does not reveal stimulating lithologic, hydrogeological or other factors
for such displacement). The intensity of the earthquake causing the
formation of the structure could be different. but by analogy with the
other parts of Eastern Siberia. these landslides-landslips are beginning
to appear with earthquakes of force 7 intensity or higher.

187
108 OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibility of the formation of the landslip-landslide from the
transient earthquake is excluded inasnuch as in the adjacent zones with
favorable conditions for the development of the gravitational process
such phenomena were not noted.

With respect to genetic type it is necessary to consider the structure
in the category of seismogravitational and, of course. tying the earth-
quake epicenter to it has a certain amount of conditionality.

The time of the formation of the structure can be determined only by the
age of the trees (150 to 200 years old) along the dieplacer.

Strong Earthquakes with Respect to Seismostatistics

The first information on the frequent earthquakes in eastern Siberia
belonged to the end of the 17th century. The seismostatic data for the
18th to the 20th centuries are moreor less reliable only for Irkutsk. but
they pertain only to the strong earthquakes with epicenters in Southern
Pribaykal'ye and Northern Mongolia. The strong earthquakes occurring in
the northern part of Baykal and along the entire eastern part of the Baykal
rift zone are not felt in Irkutsk. The earthquake of 1 February 1725
which would not attract attention if it did not encompass an enormous

area of eastern Siberia and did not show up very effectively in Transbaykal
constituted an exception.

The extremely low and nonuniform population of the high seismic regions of
Eastern Siberia (with the exception of the southern basins of the naykal
system). the absence of populated places to 1932 21 the entire rift zone
of Stanovoye Nagor'ye [Highlands] do not permit frequent, even approximate
determination of the location of the epicenters of many of the strong and
in part, obviously. disastrous earthquakes of the 18th and 19th centuries.

The description of all of the known strong earthquakes (and there are more
than 650 of them) would take up a great deal of space. The analysis of
the available information on the strongest earthquakes has previously

been made more than once. However, this subject awaits special investiga-
tion, especially considering that the library of the Eastern Siberian
Division of the Geographic Society and the archives burned during the
Irkutsk fire of 1871.

All of the archives. the chronicles, newspapers, and individual publica-
tions of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th centuries must include
macroscismic data on certain earthquakes for which it turned out to be
possible more or less moderately to determine the epicentre: regions and
in individual cases. to construct the schematic maps of the isoseisms.
All the information on these earthquakes was presented in accordance with
the "SK-6‘ scale (Hedvedev, et a1.. 1965).

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00080R00010003001 1-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 10

Catalog of Strong (Hz) Barthqqakco in Prtbayknl'ye

    
  
 
    
 

 

A - [£2 . 5-
- ‘ﬂ'FEL u

M ' 0.. 0. .

1 5 5 1 1
1m 1 11 50.5‘ l 115.51 >50
mm 11 5-1 054011.. 11mm 1.5
21111 11 15 51.0-52.5 101.5-105.50 1.11
5111111 1111 2 51.5205 105.0 5.5
0/1111 1 21 50.1 105.5 5.0
1/Vlll 1 15 52.5 105.0 5.1
21111 151 10 51.5 100.5 5.511)
1511111 151 :5 51.0-5..5 100.5-105.0' 0.5
11111 1 51.5 101.5 0.011)
m 15 . 1 51.5 101.1 5.0

(1)
01111 21 51.1 101.5 1.0
101111 1 51.0 101.5 1.0
121111 1 0 00.5 101.0 5.0
10m 1 15 50.1 100.1 5.5
15151111 1 51.1-52.5 105.10 5.5
11111111 25 51.5-52.5 100.01 5.5
111111 21 51.5 105.5 5510.0)
251x11 . n 22 51.0-52.5 1005-1059 5.0
211x11 0 51.5 105.5 5.0
mm 21 51.0 105.0 5.5-0.0
1211 4 0 52.5 W 5.7
1511 . 1 52.5 105.1 1.1
2111111 . 11 00.5 105.5 5.5
21/11 20 52.0 100.0 5.5
51111 - 1 51.1 100-1051 5.0
5111 21 51.0-52.5 100.5-1055 5.0'
11111 15 55.5 100.0 5.0
10m 1 51.1 100.5 5.5
51111 25 52.0 105.0 5.5
511111 11 51.0-52.5 1005-10551 5.5
31" 11 51.0-52.5 1005-10550 5.5
51111111 1:. 51.0-52.5 1005-1055 5.5
23" a 51.0-52.5 1005-10550 5.5
10111 1 51.0-52.5 1005-1011.? 5.5
"X 0 51.5-52.5 1005-10000 5.5
1211 10 52.5 105.5 0.5
151151 1 52.0 101.5 5.0
101111 20 51.5 100.1 0.5
251111 0 51.5 105.0 5.1

 

[See key on p 192]

1011 ORIGIN. 052 MY

189

“-1 1

50
IO

00 .d‘lCOO D

dOQOIOOOOOOOdd...

w (r)
7

ﬁllrlunuuna

(.0
m (5)

 

151-15)
can 50 II.CI. .
manna-Inn“!!!

(:5 talcum-00(k)
In..." I”.

D D

0 D
13111“ I (a)
uni-uno- (o)
nun-11mm” (0)
[Table 10. continued. see key on p 192]

IL'IV
ITIVIII
IIIX
”MI
11!"
”IX
W11
231V"
OIII
OIV
"III
22W
15/"
m
SIIXII
10"
NIX
aw
"XI
VIII
Will
um
10X"
10”
0”
”VIII

IWIII
811V
19X
”III
15"
111111
21W
25“"
2011

10""
1W

NV
0V1
DIX
IIVII
WW
0”
01V
NIX
111W
25m
JIII
1W1
1W
SIX
IIII

‘ In
“In
[In
“|\
1”

a
15
21
11
21

‘ - ‘
93:03-=—»8°uoe0339u

~303¢3u383

- -
8-0u090:32;93~o3

FOR OI'PICIAI. IISB ONLY

515
50.0
ua
32.1
52.5
51.0
0.5
“3
52.5
a;
5M
51 .1
51.0
M
WW
0.0
50.5
a»
52.0
0.0
50.0
55.0
up
50.1
a;
$3

55.1
51.1
51.3
51.5
51 .5
50.5
51.5
55.5
0.1
«J
52.1
53.9
53.0
50.1
52.0
51.0
53.1
51.0
51 .1
52.0
52,1
51.1
51.0
03
51.5
50.0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

101.5
m!
107.3
101.5
1“}
1%.:

01.0

”.0
10M
1M5
105.7
1&3
1M
1N5
106.6

“.7
105.0
115.0
103.0
1N9

07 .0
115.0
101.0
I“)
1U.0
“IA

”.5
105.1
1N5
101.0
15.0
112.5
1%.0
1 I 1 .1

”.3

07.0

“A
“.0
107.5
112.1
10.5
106.0
1D}!
101 .0
1%..

01.0
INJ
1W3
115.1
1N0
10.0
15.5

190

0.1
0.7
.00
0.7
5.3
5.1
0.1
5.1
5.0
u
5.1
5.5

‘53

5.5
5.0
549
5.5
0.1
5.3
5.‘
5.5
5.3
5,0
5.0
5.0
5,0?

5.0
5.1
0.0
M
M
5.1
5.5
0.1
5.0
5.5
5.9
5.1
5.0
5.7
5.0
5.0
ﬂ
7.0
5.0
a
M
5.0
5.1

5.0'

5.3
0.5

1
0
: WM (q)
0
7
1
11
12
1
0
1
1-5
1
a
1
5
II
9 Gmﬂmmwm
1 (r)
4
1
1
5
1
01 0mm» 1.
mer (a)
1
1
5
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
l
0
1
0
I
1
0
9 um “I
1
7
1
1
1
1
1
0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Table to. continued. no key on p 192]

     
   

IUIV
”WI
INVIII
IIIIX
ﬂXI
NVIII
IIX
NW
INVII
0X
MI
29"
TIIVII
an:
an
IJIVIII
IIIXI
WI!
WV!
IIXII
IIIXI
ION
”VIII
SIIXII
SII
I5"
I!"
ann
um
7IVI
221V"!
ZINII
JIIVIII
”MI
8"“

l3”
IUXII
“mill
WVIII
WIVI
2IIVI
I'X
:Iixl
IIIJXII
Gill

(5") nun-noun. I Mun-one.“ Wynn-mm). be

mm W m u
mt‘MEW I In)! I "00mm Juno m an...

nun-yam mum’s-un-
mummymmmm

191
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mum (z)

room-Ian- (u)

  

:‘2
dHOddd.

9'
O
a
I
C

      

a
to
daquqaoq
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Table 10. pp 189-191]:

I. Date

b. ﬂour

c. Coordinates of the epicenter

d. north latitude

e. east longitude

f. Note

g. Chins-Vakateknya structure (see Table 12)

h. Central to Southern Baykal

1. May

5. Epicenter near circular with a radius of 60 ka. See SEYSHOTBKTORIKA
[Seisnotectonice]..., 1968

ks See SEYSWI'EKTONIKA. e e p 1968

l. Epicenter near a circle 215 kl radius

a. The ease, 90 kn radius

n. The sale. 75 kn radius

0. Teaganskoye

p. .Proval Day was foraed (203 km

q. Churokanskoye

r. Severobaykal'skoye [Northern Baykal]

s. The Verkh. Angsra [Upper Angers] River delta subsided

t. Hondinskoye

u. Huyekoye [Muye]

v. Nyukzhinskoye [Nyukzha]

w. Olekninskoye [Olekns]

x. Srednebsyksl'skoye [Central Baykal]

y. Huyakanskoye

z. Mogotskoye

as. Tsa-Yuryakhskoye

2)

bb. Notes. 1. Catalog presented according to S. I. Golenetskiy

(with some alterations). The epicenters and asgnitudes of a number of
earthquakes recorded instru-entslly are redeterained on the coaputer by
the prograne written at the IZK Institute of the Siberian Depart-ent of
the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Institute of Earth Physics of the
USSR Acadely of Sciences. The dates of all of the earthquakes are given

in new style [Gregorian calendar] and Greenwich tile. 2. The asterisk
denotes earthquakes with the epicenter in the strip between the points
bounded by the indicated coordinates.

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 OIL?

The procedure for deter-ining the epicenters of historicel eerthquekes
consisted in the following:

1. The epicenter was located inside the arse outlined by the isoseisn
oi eaxinue forcn or inside the triangle with peak force. here it was
placed et an equal distance (roe the points experiencing the greatest
treaor.

2. In the case of one~wey (with respect to strike of the Beykal seismic
belt) location of the lorce. the generalized radii of the isoeeiane of
the known earthquakes were used. Here. the shortest distance to the
first eeiseicelly active fault in which the earthquake epicenter wes
proposed wee taken.

3. The intensity of the esrthquake in the epicenter wee deternined not
only by the aacroeeisaic data. but also by the dileneions of the areas
encoepsseed by the treeor by colparison with the naps of the isoseisns of
eodern earthquakes. It wee considered to be e einiau- of one force point
greeter then at the two places with laxinun force located on e straight
line in different directions (roe the proposed epicenter.

b. If only two pleces with identical force were known. located on the

ends of the line cutting the eorphoetructures of the investigeted territory.
then the epicenter was placed on the seieeicelly ective fault closest to
the center of this line.

5. The epicenter wee located near the eree with eaxinun sheking where the
noise reached the greatest force.

The list (see Table 10) and the eep (Pig 60) cannot pretend to coeplete-
ness. They do not contein certain even very strong eerthquekee ineseuch
es the available spotty infer-etion about then does not per-it even an
approximate decision to be eede regarding the locetion of their epicenters.

It is necessary to include in these earthquakes. for example. the earth-
quekes in June to July in the year of 1700 end 27 June 1762. which occurred
in lrkutek obviously as force-8 with probable epicenters in Southern

leykel or the Tunke beein. the earthquakes of 1827 end 1856 felt in
Kirenek. and so on. The inforeetion about Iany strong eerthquakes in

pest centuries has not been preserved or found or does not offer the
possibility of deter-ining their epicentrel regions end, consequently.
intensity.

The list and the esp include the strongest earthquake of 17 Hatch l783.
It cncoepessed the territory of severel nillione of squere klloeeters --
fro- Lake Baykal to Kolyvanskiy Altay. Although the information about
this earthquake is contradictory (Huehketov. Orlov. 1892). it can be
essueed that its epicenter wee located in Western Hongolis or Eastern Tuva
(it wee not strong in Irkutsk. and it wee not felt in Trensbaykal).

193
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

‘_--——- ..-' \

 

196
FOR OFFICIAL 033 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to map. p 1941

1. Paleoaeiamic dislocations 10. Vitits

2. Irkutsk ll. Olektsa

3. Khubsugul Lake 12. Chara

A. Dshida 13. Chara River
5. Selenga 1b. Lens

6. Ulan-Ude

7. Kabansk

8. Chita

9. Shilka

Judging by the encompassed area. by analogy with the known earthquakes.
its intensity exceeded 10.

Some data are presented below on the appearance of individual. strongest
earthquakes. The number of the earthquake in the description corresponds
to the number in the list. For the resaining shocks in the table the
corresponding bibliographic references are given.

Earthquake of 1 February 19725. In analyzing the information (very meager)
on this earthquake and the modern data on the seismicity of Eastern
Siberia. Mongolia and China. V. P. Solonenko (ACTIVB TBCTONICS.... 1966.
p 147) arrived at the conclusion that this earthquake was an outstanding
seismic event in Siberia. It encompassed an enorlous territory from
Nerchinsk to Irkutsk. Prom Chita to Selenga (no less than 500 km) signs
of force 7 to force 8 nacroseismic effects were noted: cracking and
huamocking of the earthen dikes on the bodies of water. deformation of
the buildings in Chita. Just as during other very strong earthquakes,
the trembling was nonunifornly distributed. for example. in the vicinity
of chita. the earthquake was not felt on one of the islands in the Ingoda
River valley.

The epicenter could be located only in the Stsnovoye Ragor'ye. If it was
located in Han'chzhuriya where volcanic activity was observed at that
time. the earthquake would have encompassed an enormous territory of China

and could not have missed being entering in the catalogs of Chinese earth-
quakes.

In Southern Transbaykal and in the eastern part of lbngolia. from where

the earthquake could have spread to the south of Transbaykal. there were

no seismicgeological prerequisites for the occurrence of such a strong
earthquake (Solonenko. V.. 1959). Therefore the only highly active seismic
zone with which the earthquake of 1 February 1725 could be connected

turns out to be the rift system of the Stanovoye highland. The area
encompassed by the shaking was at least twice the shaking area during the
Maya earthquake (H-7.9. 10-force 10-11).

195
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIX

..,
of the Ch
f the ﬁizhnty Inga

Section
slope 0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
196
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0f the two possible seisaogenic structures which could be connected with
the earthquake of 1 February 1725 -n the China-Vakatskaya and Dovachanskaya
- the (irst is the host probable both with respect to its scale and fresh-
ness of torus (Fig 61, 62). Hlth respect to the pars-eters of the seisaic
dislocations (see Table 9), the magnitude of the earthquake could exceed

8. and the intensity could exceed force 11-12 (ACTIVE TECTOMCS..., 2966).

Earthquake of 8-19 March 1829. Pro: 24 February to 3 April 1829, one
earthquake followed another in Pribaykal’ye and Tranebaykal. Pro.
8 to 19 Harch they were felt daily three or (our times a day.

The earthquakes enconpassed the Nizhneudinskiy. Irkutsk. the Verkhneudinskiy.
the Nerchinskiy districts and Northern Mongolia. "These earthquakes are
lentioned in the literature as one earthquake occurring on 8 March

(26 February) 1829. In reality obviously there were two earthquakes:

8 Harch (2a February) with the epicenter in the vicinity of the Tursnekays
basin and 20 (19 Greenwich) March (8 March) with the epicenter in the
southern part of Baykal" (SEISIDTECTONICS.... 1968, p 60). The first
earthquake was destructive in the Tunkinskiy region; in the Turanskiy
border guard station there were "terrible shocks accoapenied by a roar."
the wooden barn was destroyed. and in Shinkiy the stoves shook and

several of the chimneys fell (Nuahketov. Orlov, 1892).

The force of the second earthquake was moderate in Tunka. but very sig-
nificant in Irkutsk (to force 8) and Kyakhts (force 7-8). In Irkutsk

many buildings were damaged or destroyed, and cracks formed in the ground.
"Considering that the earthquake was soaewhet stronger in Irkutsk than in
Kyskhts (100 and 200 km from Southern Baykal respectively) and significantly
weaker in Verkhneudinsk (Ulan-Ude) and the Tunkinekays [Tunka] basin.

it is possible to propose the location of its epicenter on the aaykal

slope of Khanar—Daban. where traces of the epicentrel tones of recent.

but unknown earthquakes have been detected" (Solonenko, 1966a, p 170).

Unfortunately the information about these earthquakes is meager and contra-
dictory. The dates coincide suspiciously: 26 February old style1 -

8 March new style% 20 March new style -- 8 March old style. The notes in
the Russian chronicles have served as pri-ary sources of inforlation
extracted free foreign publications; therefore the confusion between the
Gregorian and Julian calendars is entirely probable.

The Tsaganskoye earthquake of 12 January 1862 deserves special attention
with respect to force and geological-geoaorphologicsl consequences.

The results of examining the earthquake have been published and analyzed
many times (SEISHDTECTONICS..., 1968).

 

lJulian calendar

2Gregorian calendar.
197

FOR 0??!CIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. epicenter is nsnoctnted with the tectonic block bounded by the
tlvv“ faults. the subsidence of which exceeded 300 meters in the
n the lake side along the previous bar (the
line at aubaqunl thermal and gas springs

 

2 January.
8 steppe and
f the Hells
| bu (IRGO

t 1518 hours on 1
snganskay
out o
3 sazhen

hock ot the

In the villages locate
in the Tsaganakaya steppe,

like corks. the water to
Report. 186G).

The main 3

h‘s crust from th

s to Fltingof, km
bounded by

11 anxhen‘-2.13 meters.

21 verst-l066.8 meters.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was traced free the shore of the Baykal through the Oysur village to

Kudery village. that is, almost to the central part of the Selenga River
delta. The Teaganekaya stcppe about 20 kl long and 9-14 kn wide subsided
beneath the level of Baykal and the Provsl Bay was forled. According to

the mag conpiled by Colonel Ryebov in 1862, the area of Provsl Bay was
203 ks (Fig 63).

The Bar (large) which borders the Tsagenskaya steppe on the lake side
prevented free access of the Beyl'al water to the 'l'eeganskays steppe.
although during the earthquake water with broken ice splashed across the
Naletoveksya Karge to a height of 3.5-6 meters and reached sore than 2 kn
onto the Tseganskaye steppe. On 13 January the bar was broken in three
locations. end the Baykel water poured through the breaks.

In Irkutsk. the nsin phase of the earthquake continued for 1-1/2 sinutes.
At the sane tine. cracks formed in ell of the stone buildings. sometimes.
gaping holes and any churches were dasaged. The earthquake was accompanied
by loud noise. cracking of the earth and ice on the rivers. Continuous
vibration of the earth was felt for 32 minutes.

The strip of seat powerful earthquakes (to force 8) free Provel passed to
the southwest through Kabansk. to Selenginek and Zeguatayekeya steppe.
Posol'ek. Verkhneudinsk (lllan-Ude) and Berguzin resained outside the
Pleistoeeiet region.

During the second half of the day and night, the earthquake was felt in
ﬁkutsk on the average every 7 to 10 ninutes and in Selenginsk every

2 to 3 ninutes. Gradually ebsting. the aftershocks continued for 16 sonths
especially frequently and strongly in January and February of 1862.

The earthquake encospassed an enorsous area -— on the order of 2 nillion knz.
Colonel Taskin. who participated in studying the earthquake. pointed out
that the "destruction of buildings is observed for approximately 600

versts fron Kudere" (IRGO Report. 186‘). Large rock avalanches were
recorded up to 600 kn fro- the epicenter.

.The intensity of the Tseganskiy earthquake is eetiseted differently,

-‘ sonetiuee even in the ease papers. In the "Atlas..." (1962) force 10 on
the nap. and in the earthquakes list force 9. A. V. Voznesenskiy (1932).
who had the possibility of asking broad use of the naterials fro. the
first documentation. considered that the earthquake reached force ll.

Obviously. the colperstive estinute of the Tsaganekiy earthquake with
modern. well-studied earthquakes. is east indicative.

In the case of the Central Baykal earthquake 01-6-3/6. 10-force 9)

with near center zone, the force 8 effects extended a distance of up to
25-30 km free the epicenter; during the Tsaganskiy earthquake. 170-180 kn.
and the areas of perceptible quaking were 0.8 and 2 nillion knz
respectively. It is clear that with respect to the intensity the
Tsaganskoye earthquake sharply exceeds the Srednebaykal'skoye. and with

199
Ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

respect to its pnrnmotern approaches the Huya earthquake (m-7.9.

To-(nrcc 10-1), and the area of the perceptible quaking is no less than
2 million m2).

Along the length of the main fault (20 km). the minimun magnitude of the
earthquake was 7.4 (see Chapter I).

Thus, the entire complex of signs indicates that the intensity of the
Tsaganakiy earthquake was no less than force 10

The earthquake of 12 January 1885 was felt in the southern part of
Eastern Siberia with an intensity from force 3 to 6 (Table 11).

By the time it is possible to consider that two car:

 

Figure 63. Proval Bay occurring during the earthquake of
11 to 12 January 1862. Photograph by V. P. Solonenko.

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 11

Hacroseissic Inforsation about the Earthquake of 12 January 1885
(Mahketov, Orlov. 1892)

 

The of Epicentral
Iten Populated earthquake distance,
No lace hrs sin Vorce Ic- Note
1 Irkutsk 10-40 6 150 Boo- sisilsr to
claps of thunder
2 Ryakhta 10-30 3 250
3 Balagansk 11-00 5 250
A Tulun 11—00 3-5 550
5 Tarbagstay 11-00 3 230
6 Selenginek 11-62 5 160 Noise similar to
striking a
_ copper bell
7 Kabansk ' 11—45 5 50
8 Bargurin 11—45 3-4 250
9 Verkholensk 11-65 h 180 Roar
.0 Kachug 11-45 In 170
ll Biryul'ka 11-65 5 1&5

The Churokanskoye Earthquake of 18(17) August 1902. On the 'Verkhneangarskiy
[Upper Angora] ridge in the headwaters of the Churokan River. the right
tributary of the Churo River (the basin of the Upper Angara River). the
participants in the baykal hydrogrsphic expedition of P. K. Drirhenko

noted "four ahockn of the strong earthquake at 2 o'clock in the morning
local tine. The first week and second significantly stronger and the

lest two week again. An enorlous avalanche occurred during the second
shock on the mountain on the opposite bank of the river. A stone avalanche
took out the forest on the right bank of the river. Everyone not only
woke up but were thrown out of their beds." According to these data. the
the earthquake intensity at the observation point could be esti-ated at
approxisately no less than force 7-8. It is possible that the use earth-
quake was felt with force 6-5 at the Bodayba nines. where any of the
people woke up and noted the swaying of hanging objects and clanking of
dishes. At the Irkutsk “gusto-meteorological observatory. no recordings
were noted on the Mil'na and boshe pendulms.

The search for the epicentral zone in 1965 did not lead to a unique solu-
tion of the problem. M seislogenic structures were discovered which
could have conditionally been connected with the 1902 earthquake. One
of the. was the Omey structure located on the right bank of the river
by the sane nane (the Upper Angara ridge where rejuvenation of a section

of one of the feathered upland faults of the Verkhneangarskiy [Upper
Angara] fault occurred).

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second -- the Yanchukanskaya structure —- is located on the south

side of the Verkhneangarskaya [Upper Angara] basin on the sloping foothill
plain of the Northern Nuya [Severo-Muyskiy] ridge between the Yanchuy

end the Yanchukan Rivers. In the first case the earthquake intensity

wee force 9. and in the second case, 9'10. The Ogney epicenter is more
probable (the P. K. Drizhenko expedition had its camp at 50 to 60 km
northeast of the Ogney structure, and the earthquake intensity at the camp
could have reached force 7-8).

The Bayksl Earthquake of 26 November 1903 is among the strongest earth-
quakes of Eastern Siberia. A. V. Voanesenskiy, who first compiled the
isoseism map of this earthquake considered that its epicenter was
located on the Selengs River delta and had coordinates of 52.16' north
latitude and 106.50' east longitude.

The analysis of the additional macroseisnic material performed by

V. P. Solonenko (1966a) demonstrated the impossibility of constructing an
ordinary isoseismsl map. In reality. within the limits of the territories
subjected to the effects of the earthquake (an area of about 600,000 km2),
the intensity of the quaking noise distributed highly nonuniformly. The
largest area with tremor intensity of no less than force 6 encompassed the
Selenga River valley to Ulan-Ude, the east shore of Baykal to the

Svysto Nos Peninsula and the valley of the lower course of the Barguzin
River. With respect to size of the territory encompassed by the tremors,
the earthquake of 26 November 1903 compared with the force 9 Central
Baykal earthquake. Comparing the maps of these earthquakes, it is possible
to propose that the intensity of the Bayksl earthquake at the epicenter
could reach force 9 (H-6.5), and the epicenter obviously was located some-
what northeast of the epicenter of the Central ankal earthquake of

29 August 1959 (Solonenko. 1966).

The Tannu-Ol'skiy Earthquakes of 1905 with epicenters in Western Mongolia
had intensities of force 11 and 12 and, in addition to Mongolia,
encompassed significant areas in Hestern and Eastern Siberia.

He processed the correspondence of A. V. Voznesenskiy on these earthquakes
using the HSK-Ga scale. We constructed the isoseism maps, determined the
areas of the earthquake-affected territories and the epicentrsl distances
to several points (Table 12).

Earthquake of 9 July 1905, force ll, HIG.‘ (Richter, 1963). In the epi-
central zone of the earthquake, the fault was uncovered with the formation
of a complex slip-strike thrust fault system of seismic dislocations
extending up to 130 km with an amplitude of vertical displacement to l m.

In the territory of Russia, the earthquake was felt most sharply on the
Krutobaykal‘skaya Railroad and in the village of Kabansk. In the

section between the Kultuk and Baykal stations (500 km from the epicenter)
within the limits of the two tunnels. a shift of the rocky massif

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

occurred along the faulta, vhich led to deetruction of several raila in
each of the tunnels.

The Earthquake of 23 July I905. force 12, Ill-8.7 (Richter. 1963).
The left atrike-alip thrust faults were for-ed 370 and 90 In long with

an aoplitude of vertical displace-eat to 3.5 I and horizontal diaplace-
lent to 2.6 a.

In the territory of Russia it vaa felt froa Tonak to Sretenal: (aore than
2100 lol) and to Kirenak in the north (1100 kl free the epicenter). The

total earthquake affected area was no "-eae than 5 million In!2 (see
Table 15).

Table 12

Mecroaeiaair Effect During the Tannu-Ol'ekiy (Ithensayakiy)

Earthquakea of 1905
———_—_._.__....__.______.

Populated 9 July 23 J"
P10" lpicentral Epicentral

force distance. .1 Force diatance. kl
M

 

Tunka 3-4. no ““1 6-7 565
lrkutak 5-6 550 6-7 585
Bratak S 76$ “5 810
lnsoda 6 1120 6 1155

The earthquake of 23 July 1905 reached uni-u- intenaity (force 6-7) in
the territory of Russia in Irkutsk. Kultuk, Tunka. Kyakhta. and
Tibel'ti. here the people could hardly stand on their feet. and any
fell down. There vaa panic. and belle rang. The housea treabled and
heavy objects fell. In any places the pleater fell of the walls. and
in acne the vindova were broken. Nev cracks (up to 1.3 cu wide) appeared
in the atone buildings in Irkutak and the old onea alaoat doubled in
aize. In soae buildings the cracks split the walls fro. the foundation
to the roof. In a auaap in the vicinity of Irkutak. spouting of ground-
water was observed. The walla of the teaple and the school buildinsa
cracked in Kyakhta.

Northern Baykal Earthquake o! 29 April 1917 (ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966).
According to the aeager aacroseisaic data (Popov. 1939) it can be
ronrluded that the rediua of the force 6 iaoaeisa exceeded 600 lot. and

the area of perceptible breaks obviously aaounted to significantly aore
than $00,000 kaz. The seat reaote populated places froa vhich intonation
was received were the village of Vorontaovka on the lover courae of the
Vitia River (force 6) and the settleaent of Bargain (force 6-5).

203

roe OFFICIAL US: 00“.!
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0111.?

in addition. the earthquake was felt at the Bodayba lines in the city of
Bodaybo with force 6-5.

The earthqimke was recorded by the majority of seisaic stationa of the
world in operation in 1917. Then the British seissological conittee
determined the coordinates of the epicenter (56‘ north latitude.

115’ east longitude). and later a. Gutenberg and c. Richter (Gutenberg.
Richter. 1956) determined its magnitude of 11-6-1/2. Siailsr parasetere

were detersined for the earthquake by S. 1.. Solov'yev: 56‘ north latitude.
115.5’ east longitude. 11-6-1/‘11/4.

The mechanism of the center (Wedenekaya. i961) agrees best with the
seiseogeological situation in the vicinity of the articulation of the
Southern huya ridge and the Huys basin. In 1963 a search was esde for

the cpicentral zone. At $6.17' north latitude and 115.5? cast longitude.
that is. in direct proximity to the epicenter location determined by

S. 1.. Solov'yev. the ileum eeissodislocation was established (see Table 12).
the rclttion of which to the earthquake of 1917 is highly probable.

"1th respect to magnitude and scale of the dislocations. the intensity
of the earthquake was force 9.

The Chitoyskoye Earthquake of 15 October 1936 occurred in the vicinity

of the Yamsrovka health resort. The epicentrel zone was coordinated with
the moving tectonic suture between the Chikoysltaya basin and the Halithsnskiy
aria-block uplift -- a fragment of the Chikoyeltiy deep fault. The signs

of differentiated Holocene noveaents were clearly expressed in its zone.

According to the eyewitnesses. in the Chikoy River valley at the time of

the earthquake movement of the earth waves was observed which rocked the
trees sharply. The intensity of the earthquake. depending on the distance
to the epicenter. reached (Popov. 1939; Solonenko. V.. 1968b) force 7 at
Khilok station (70-80 km): in the city of Petrovslt-Zabaykal'sltiy (130-160 It.)
had reached force 6 (strong vibrations lasting 25-30 seconds: the windows
broke in their frames; several stoves were damaged); in the cities of
Ulnn-Udc (230-250 loo). Kyslthts (280-290 km) and Slyudyanka (300-310 km).
force 5; in the villages of Kabanek (300-310 km). Ust'-Barguzin (320-330 km).
Babushkin (360-350 kn). Torey (‘00-‘10 Ian). force 6. Judging by the
usgnitudc 14-6) and noted effects of the earthquake at the indicated

distances. the intensity of the earthquake in the epicenter could not be
less than force 8.

Hondinskoye [Hondyl Earthquake of 5 April 1950. The main phase of the
earthquake 01-6-3“. 10-force 9) had the nature of a double shock.

The surface effects in the cpicentral region encompassed the western part
of the Handy basin. here. on the high (6th to 9th) terraces of the left
hank of the lrkut River in the vicinity of the Tunha fault. a system of
echelon type fault joints of northwestern and eubistitudinal orientation
arose with a total extent to 2-2.5 in (see Pigure 64). Part of the

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL ”SB ONLY

 

Pisure 6b. Structural-tectonic achenetic of the epicentral
part of the Hondinakiy force 9 earthquake of
’4 April 1950. Cowiled by V. N. Zhilkin (uaina
the data of II. Ye. hadvedev).
1 ~ region of subversion of the pro-Cenozoic foundation covered
by the unbroken sedisentary coupler: 2 - region of its pp!!!“
3 ~ Tunkinskiy longitudinal fault: I» «- fault scarps of the
hondinshiy terraces; S -- Nesocenoroic (suite: 6 .. proposed
postglacisi "southern" (suits discovered by serial photographs;
7. 8 .. ole-eats of the dislocation systes occurring during
the Handy [Hondinskiy] earthquake discovered in i950 and 1972
respectively (the trap sylbola are not to scale).

Key:
1 . handy
2 . Irhut

joints located near the rear edge» oi the high terraces were forled at the
tile of the sain shocks as a result of subsidence of the terrace slopes.
In individual places. on steep slopes. tracee of landeiip-landsiide dis-
nlaceeents are obvious. The sexin- vidth of the joints reached 1-2 s.
end the vertical anpiitude of the displace-ant of the southwestern iinb
reached 0.3-0.8 n (Pi; 65). In sone cases the freely rem-bent blocks of
granite and granite-amiss were cut of! by the joints. vhich indicates

the high concentration and force of the underground shocks. In the centre
part of the seismic dislocation zone. alone the nein joint, a block
structure uas toned (ooxaoo netera) within the linits of uhich the sapli-
tude of the letthand shift reached 10 to 15 can. Thus. the sovesent alone

the iractures was of the slip-fault thrust nature.
205

POI MICK“. 083 MY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 65. Joints occurring in the epicentrel zone of the
Handy force 9 (H-6-3/b) earthquake of
6 April 1950. Verticel displecenent snplitude
0.8 meters. Photograph by P. M. Khrenov.

The beeic tone of eeieeic dislocetione wee 1.5 to 2 kn from the settlement
of Hondy. which fixes the nininun rediue of the force 9 treeor.

The Hondy eerthqueke wee ecconpenied by rockelides noted in the lrkut
River cenyon 8 to 10 he west end eest of the Hondy besin.

All of the brick stoves were destroyed in the eettleeent of Handy during
the eerthqueke. In the wooden buildinge. the ceiling beene end roofs

were deetroyed which wee ceueed by their generel love-ent to the northwest.
In some wooden houses the corners sepereted. the wells collepsed. window
and doorfrenes were twisted. verticel coluene were broken et e height of

l to 1.5 aetere. Soee of the residents felt verticel shocks which wee
also confirmed by the hurling of individual objects upwerd. The force

of the eerthquehe reeched 9 here.

In lrkutek (260 he fro. the epicenter) the seissic necroeffects
corresponded to force 5.

With respect to force end necroeffects. the Huye eerthqueke of

27 June 1957 use the nest eignfficent of ell of the known once in leetern
Siberie during the historic tine intervel end it wee the Iolt powerful in
the territory of the USSR eince l9ll. I e legnitude wee 7.9 (Rothe. 1969).
It wee felt over en sres of 2 sillion kl . The sree bounded by the force 5
isoseise corresponded to 600,000 knz (Pig 66). The seisnogrevitetionel
shifts of the ground (lendelips, telus) were observed over en eree of

more than 150.000 kl: et en epicentrel distence of up to 350 he. The

force 8 effecte were noted et lSO kn. end eix to seven force effects up

to 500 k- (Chite. lodeybo) iron the epicenter. Hith respect to the set

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL US! ONLY

of signs (magnitude. aacroselamics. deformation of the mountain. hydrom
aﬂolonicnl variations), the intensity of the earthquake is reliably
determined at force 10.11. With respect to the Hat ratio at "-20 km:
according to Gutenberg end Richter. force ll. accorSing to Karnik.

force 12. according to Shebalin. force 10-11. according to lune. force 11.
according to V. and A. Solonenko. force 11 (see Table 2).

The reconnaissance examination of the Nuya earthquake was performed in
July 1957. and a detailed ground study was made of the pleiatoaeiamic sone
- in 1962. A detailed description of the results of'the examination was
published in the available publications (Solonenko. V.. 1964b. 1965:

ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966): therefore we shall limit ourselves to the
brief information here.

The epicentral region is associated uith the Namarakitskeya embryonic
basin of the baykal type. During the course of the earthquake. the
basin dropped a minimum of 5 to 6 meters_and shifted to the west. and
the adjacent part of the Udokan ridge was uplifted by l to 1.5 metera
and shifted to the east 1 to 1.2 meters. As a result. a complex system
of seismic dislocations occurred with a general extent of about 30 km.
Among the aeiamodislocations. the strike-slip normal faults and the
strike-slip thrust faults predominate. but the tension jointa also had
great significance (to 7 to 8 meters and in one case to 19 meters): the
compression traces were ”molehilla” up to 3.6 aetere high. In addition.
twisting folds. seismic dome structures. cleavage fractures and so on
were documented.

The seismic dislocations are concentrated predomdnantly on the south aide
of the basin which reflects its general structure - one-way graben.

The left shift is expressed uniquely not only with respect to the main
fractures. but also the feathering joints.

1n the western part of the Namarakitakaye basin there is an intrabasin
mountain commiaaure. It served as a counterforce basin shifted to the
west. as a result of which an asymmetric anticlinal was formed (Pig 67)
transverse to the general strike of the seismic dislocations. The apparent
height of the fold is about 6 meters. and it is about l5 meters wide.

A strike-slip fault runs on the north side of the basin after the mountain
commiaaurea: in the central part there is a right shift (displacement of
1.05 meters). and on the eastern end. a fault having left ahift attributes.

The Udokan ridge was uplifted with reaoect to the displacer dipping to the
south (under the ridge) at an angle of about 70'.

207

’0! O'PICIAL 08! OIL!
"aura 66.

1. tr. ehlkoy:
6. Ktranak; 7.
11. Ola-look;
16. Chara; 17.
21. Sr. Kalar:

     

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’ v ‘ \ovuaZ‘ok a”

tum-'1 ‘ 0‘ \
. my?) \ x
’ ova-h 22 \

' I' 1"" o I 7/ ll \
ﬂ 6 '09:»; "View ‘

A ,(aﬂgtfw ' ‘, ‘
a m "" i:

no . 0’ ’
{um £3) ) ’ (50) t \

Iaoaalaaa1 nap of tha Huya aarchquake (8-7.9.
IO-Iorca 10-11) and tha Taa-Yuryakhauy aarrhquaka
(11-7. IO-Iorca 9-10) (tha dotted line). The toothad
11m 1a the boundary of pat-captaincy (Kuruahtn.
197‘; Kochatkav. at a1.. 1975).

2. Mchura: J. Dlan-Uda; Io. Kabanak: S. Dat'-Kut:
Ntahnyy Tutmlu; 8. Uat'-Chona: 9. Yakutak: 10. Lana:
12. Aldan; 13. Aldan; 1b. Maybo; 15. Olakca:

Huya: 18. laabuyka; 19. Uaktt: 20. Kalakan:

22. Tynda; 23. Taa-Yuryakh; 2b. Uat'-Nyuluha;

25. Chul‘aan; 26. Tuplk; 27. “than; 20. Uruha; 29. Zaya; 30. mun
31. Hosocha; 32. Vina: 33. Manovka; 3‘. 211mg”. Chtca;

36. Narchmk:

37. larylakoya; 38. Olmannaya; J9. Anna's

60. Mar; ‘1. Masmahchanak

208

to: 077161“. 08! MY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Novyy Nanarakit Lake (see Fig 68) was forned in the basin as a result

or its subsidence. Its naxiaun length is up to 3.5 kn and it is up to

600 neters wide. 0n exanination of the epicentral zone at the end of

June 1962. the lake was 3.1 kn long. but its level dropped by l.8 neters.

"e assuned that this drop war ~onnected with fracture of the above-nentioned
anticlinai fold (ACTIVE TECTG; 68.... 1966. p 136). Subsequently. the

area of the lake was reduced persistently. and by July 1975. it alaost
disappeared. Inasmuch as there were no hydrologic causes for the dis-
appearance of the lake. its explanation reauina as follows: the subsiding
basin began to rise after the earthquake. In 1957 it rose approxtaately

a neters. end in 1975 the residual defornation dropped fron 5-6 neters to
1-2 neters. The pheaoaene of the return notion of the earth's crust

after the earthquake are known also in other highly seasnic regions of

the earth. Thus. in the case of the Japanese earthquake of l Septenber 1923.
the shore of the ﬂiurs Peninsula rose 7.6 neters. and after the earthquake
it gradually dropped 6.1 neters (the stable residual defornstion was

+1.5 neters).

The extraordinary intensity of the Huya earthquake found reflection in
the accompanying phone-ens. The passiVe novenent of the walls of the

.fnults was observed to 90 kn to the east (in the direction of shift of
the Udokan ridge) and SO kn to the west of the epicentral zone.

The groundwater regiae changed at great distances. At the Goryachii Klyuch
local health resort 180 kn from the epicenter. the spring discharge
increased. and the tenperature of the water rose fron 62-43' to 67-68'.

In Chita. the level of the deep groundwater in three wells at the water
supply station rose by 2 neters. their discharge increased free 60 to
/hour.

The filling of the Toreyskiy lakes was connected with novenent of the
earth's crust caused by the Muya and. possibly. the Mongolian earthquakes
of I957 (see Chapter I).

The Central aaykal earthquake of 29 August 1959 (K-6. 8. Io-force 9) was
felt over an area of about 800.000 kn2 (Fig 69). In the epicentral zone
of the earthquake. subsidence of a section of the botton of Lake Baykal
by 10 to 15 neters took place along with rejuvenation of the fault bound-
ing the ProvaI lay extending about IO kn (Solonenko. V.. Treskov. I960).

The populated places on the east shore of the Provsl lay suffered the

seat from the earthquake. The earthquake-resistant Siberian log houses
were noticeably defer-ed in nany cases (the corners split. and the top
beans shifted. and so on). and the stoves and snokestacks were destroyed

to the base or rotated around their axis. Cases of nonuniform distribution
of the quake intensity on the earth's surface were noted. For exaaple.

In the club building of the settlenent of Hal. Dulan. there were four
stoves lined up in a row 3. 5 and J neters apart respectively. The first
stove was rotated clockwise IS to 20° and cracked sharply. but it was

210

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
left standing; the second collapsed to its base, and the third received
alight dasnge. end the southwest half of the fourth was destroyed
vertically. It is ispossible to explain the different degree of dassge
to the stoves in this case by the difference in aoil-hydrogeologicsl

conditions in.the foundation (Solonenko, V.. Treskow. 1960: Solonsnko. V..
1962a).

The observations in the vicinity of Irkutsk offer another exasple of
irregular damping of the seismic vibrations more significant with respect
to area. The intensity of the qusking varied from S to 7 here depending
on the local engineering-geological conditions. The central part of the
city located on the second terrace of the Angers River end at the foot and
on the brow of the third terrace suffered nest. About no cases of
destruction and falling of the stovepipes and partial destruction of the
stovss were observed here. Cracks often running all the way through
occurred in the wolls of the old style stone houses. end the plaster

cracked and fell off in pieces. Individual houses were in an essrgency
condition.

In the upland parts of the city where the structures are on a foundation
of thick sandy loss or aseirocky soil and the groundwater level is at
great depth. the earthquake intensity reached force 5-6.

In the Leninskiy Rayon where loose flooded ground developed. the quake
intensity should have been no less than force 8. but in fact it did not
exceed force 5. The difference of 3 points between the expected and the
true force of the earthquake on 29 August 1959 is explained by an increase
in thickness of the "clestic" layer of the Jurassic deposits in the
Leninskiy Rayon by 250-b00 esters by cosparison with the southern parts
of Irkutsk (Solonenko. V.. 1962a).

The nogodskoye earthquake occurred in the territory of Mongolia on
5 January 1967. Its intensity reached force 10 (H-7.8).

In the epicentrsl tone in the territory of llogod-aoason of Bulganskiy
Ayssk in Mongolia a systes of dislocations with a break in continuity
occurred consisting of a principal fault (upthrow fault) extending up to
65 kn. two large joints subpsrallel to it and a large nusber of feathering
and accolpanying sasller fractures. The sari-us ssplitude of the uplift
of the eastern and northeastern liabs of the seen upthrow is S esters.

It is characteristic that the conpressive and tensile deforestiona
correspond to each other (ﬂatsag-Yun. et el.. 1971).

In the territory of the USSR, the earthquake was felt in the southern
ports of the Buryat ASSR and in the Irkut Oblsst (Fig 70). It reached
asxisus intensity in Soviet territory in the vicinity of Zakenensk
at a distance of about 250 kn fro. the epicenter. Two and three-story
buildings were damaged significantly here (there were gaping through
cracks in the ssin wells. collapse of large pieces of plaster). however.
such deforsations were observed only in buildings constructed without
earthquake proofing reinforcing. In structures with earthquake reinforce-ant
no deforestions occurred.

21!

FOR OFFICIAL 088 OIL!
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONUY

   

an unuquhﬁh

@, a: a: arm .4 u
Yigure 69. Iaoaeian nap of the Central laykal earthquake

of 29 Auguat 1959. Compiled by V. . So1onenko
1 -‘ Siberian platforlz 2 .. edge aectiona of the platter: and
hayhaiidea activated by the 1ateat novenente; 3 -— generalized
directiona of the baaic linear atructurea; he ayaboia indicate
the force of the earthquake not characteristic of the given

area no a whole.

 
 

Key:
1. Earthquake force: 2. Selenga; 3. Gorodok; b. Torey; S. Slyudyanha
6. Kyren; 7. Shelehhovo; 8. Irkutak; 9. erl'ye-Sihirako; 10. Bayanday;
11. aokhan; 12. Cheretkhovo; 13. 2a1ari; 1h. Balaganak; 15. Kachus;
16. Zita: 17. Uat'—Uda; 18. Zhigalovo; 19. Kurensa; 20. Kuytun:
21. Tulun: 22. uizhneudinak; 23. Tauguy; 26. Ilia; 25. Lena; 26. Zayareh;
27. Angara; 28. Niahne-Ili-ak; 29. Uat'-xut; 30. Kirenak; 31. Kazachinahnye:
32. Nizhneansarah; 33. Verkh. Angara: 3b. Bodayho; 3S. Vitin;
36. nogdarin; 37. Vitia; 38. Barguzin; 39. Goryachinak; 50. Suhhaya;
61. Znhhaluk: 62. Kahanak: £3. Ulau-Ude; 66. Zaigrayevo;
b5. Khorinak; 66. Heston; b7. Karynahoye; ‘8. Chita: b9. Soanovo-
Ozerakoye; 50. Babuahkin: 51. Petrovek—Zahaykal'akiy; 52. Hukhor-
Shibir; 53. Khilok: 56. Kyakhta: 55. Chikoy; 56. Kraenyy: 57. Chikhoy;
SB. Yanarovka; 59. Ingoda; 60. Asinakoye; 61. Onon; 62. hkahaz'
63. Khapcheransa: 64. Kyra: 65- “GI.
212

'03 OFFICIAL USE ORB!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In lrkutnh. Ulnn-ude. Angnrek end Shelekhov. there wee nn earthquake of
force 5. The local incroeee in inteneity of the quaking to force 6 we
obeerved ae a reeult of favorable ground and hydrogeologicel conditione.
In any of the buildinge. the earthquake proofing eeaaa opened up. creche
occurred in the pleater. and eo on. In individual caeee. through creche
were foreed in the main valle end the water linee ruptured.

During the Kogodakiy earthquake. juet an in the preceding onee. anonliea
were noted in the quaking dietribution over the earth'e aurfaco. The
force 5 ieoeeien eitended to the northveet along the Irkut baein. Within
the outline of the force 5 ieoeeiee. in the vicinity of Lietvenichoye.
there vae an "ialend of aeialic tale." within the lieita of which the
queking intenaity did not exceed force 3-4.

The Tae-Yuryakhekoya earthquake of 18 January 1967 wee one of the atrongeet
in the northeaetern pert of the Beykal rift zone. It occurred near the
epicentere of the Nyuktha and the olekaa earthquakee of 5 January end

14 Septeaber 1958 (ll-6.5. 10-force 9) end it again irrefutably confined.
on the one hand. the eeieeotectonic relatiOn of the two regione --
Pribeyhnl'ekiy and Stanovoy -- end on the other hand. the ihtohetency of
the aeieaic conditiona. Over the area 500 he: where it we poeeible by
the eeienic activity calculatione to expect force 9 earthquakee no more
frequently then once in aeny thoueande of yearn. in reality two force 9
end one force 9-10 earthquekae occurred in 9 yeera.

The joint proceeeing of the obaervation data of the eeieaic atetione of
Pribaykel’ye end Yakutie made it poeeible eore precieely to define the
poeiticn of the epicenter of the earthquake (aee Fig 71) and also to eatiaete
the depth of ite center; 8-13 Ice. The eegnitude (H) of the main ehock
detenined by the data free the teleeeiaaic etationa ia eetiuated at 7.0;
u... energy cleee (K) ia 16; the inteneity of the earthquake in the epi-
center (uith reepect to the ratio of H-K-lo) in force 9-10.

The Tee-Yuryakheoye earthquake encoupaeeed the broad territory of Southern
Yakutia, Chita end the Neur Oblaete end the Buryet ASSR the total area of
about 1 million b2. The gathered eecroeeienic d.te trade it poaeible to
coepile en ieoeeiael nap of thie earthquake (aee Fig 66). but in none
eectione. ee a reeult of the abeence of populated plecea end incoaplete
infatuation the iaoeeieee were only propoaed. Thie eepecielly pertaine

to the northern areae outlined by the eaall forte (3-6) ieoeeiaee.

The vicinity of teatim- qunlting (force 9) exhibited in a coaperetively small
area (200-250 haz) along the right bank of the aiddle courae of the
Taa-Yurynhh River ie baaicelly iaolated with reepect to the aurface
exotcctonic effecte (Kochetkov. et a1.. 1975). Thie ia predolinantly the
“jarred" eluviua and -talue. the and flow foreationa. cheering of the eoil
and vegetation layer, falling of the foreat, nuneroue eectiona of broken
ice and local dehaclee, rock fella and eeall lendalipe on the eteep aidee

of the Tee-Yuryekh River valley. The eeiaaic acceleration in the epicentral
region obviouely exceeded one: in the gently eloping eectione (to 5')

213

FOR OPPICIAI. 088 MY
Key:

you ontcm. use ONLY
Vﬂlr'"

'e’°(2

 

Figure I0. Iaoaetanal map of the Hosodakoye earthquake of

5 January 1967. Coaptlad by s. lhil'ko and

I . Balzhinnyan.
1-6 - earthquake intenaity at the etattona according to necro-
aetaatc data. force: 1-9. 2-8. 3-7. b-6; S - zone of residual
aelaaonentc deforeationa (aeteaically active rejuvenated fault):
6 -- inatruaentally dateratned epicenter of the earthquake.

l. Khuhaugul; 2. laykal; 3. Slyudyanka; 6. Bgiyn-Gol; S. lake-chat;
6. Petropahlovka; 7. Huran: 8. Taryapan; 9. Khantay; 10. Selensa;
11. Raahant; 12. acyanogt; 13. Khangalz 15. Darkhan; 15. Saykhan;
16. Bulsan; 17. Orthon: 18. Orkhon; 19. Zhargapant: 20. Ulztyt;

21. Nosed; 22. Khlahlsunder: 23. lurgukhangay; 26. chy Lake:

22. Daahtnchtpan; 23. Chulut; 26. Tactaerpeg: 25. Khaahat;

26. Kharkhortn; 27. Khuzhirt; 28. Arhaykhcre

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"55530332

“'4.

         
  

    

    

. O O C O O O ‘C 6 V v
I.” a“:.:.::e, '343/0 4..
--. . evades“? .2

" 'e'e’e’e’e‘lzﬁ
‘ O C O C '
’e‘e’e’e e‘efe)‘ ’

~ see.
{so so"
. _ ,

 
 
 
 

  
 
 

   

  
 

     

.00

    
 
 
 

  

lII'irI

MEL...

figure 71. Seisnogeological diagram of the epicentrsl region
of the Tas-Yuryakhakiy earthquake on 13 January 1967.
Coepiled by 8. Khil'ko.
l -- late Archean (a) and early Proterozoic (b) gneiases and crystalline
shale: 2 - gabbro-anorthosi‘te conplsx (Inansrskiy and Arbegasskiy Isassifs);
3 -- Proterozoic porphyritic sysnitss and srsnite-syenites; 6 - other
granitoids. including nesozoic: S - zones of diaphthorites and
diaphthoritic rock: 6 - alluvial deposits; 7 -- Cenozoic faults clearly
expressed in the relief: a - narnal faults and upthrov faults. b --
unclear sorpholozy. I - lsangrskiy, TYu - Tas-Yuryakhskiy, SD -- Severe-
Dyryndinskiy [Northern Dyrynda]. D - Dyryndinakiy [Dyrynda]; 8 - zones of
activated faults rejuvenated during the strong earthquakes of 1958;
9 - pre-Cenozoic faults established; 10 — sections of dislocations with
a break in continuity with established shear couponents; ll -- areas of
surface defamation during the Tas~Yuryakhskiy earthquake; 12 - epicenters
of strong earthquakes (force 9-10) in the Olelnsa epicentre]. zone. nut-bars

on the diagram 1 - Olelus, 1958; 2 -. Nyukzha, 1958; 3 - Tasduryakh.
1967.

Key:
1. lungrs; 2. Cheberkas; 3. Tes-Yuryskh: 6. I; 5. “Wu; 6. SD:
7. D; 8. Dyryn-Yuryakh; 9. Olelna; lO. Ust‘-Nyuzha

215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

there were large blocks up to 120 tons that flew up, turned over and

fell inth eir “holes" on the side or on their "tops" (they roll down
the steeper slopes).

Numerous data indicating quakes of force 8 and 7 were gathered in the
unique. Very large settlement of Ust‘nuyukzha 35 km east of the earthquake
epicenter and also in the winter camps and tent villages of the reindeer
herdsmen located near it within a radius of on the order of 1.0 km. The
sharp vibration of the ground was accompanied by a loud roar of low tones,
rocking of the trees. rockfalls. breaking and piling up of the ice on the
Olekma and Imnngra Rivers. The observations of the local hydrometeorologi-
cal station indicate a sharp rise (to 15 cm) and fall (to 6 cm) of the
water in the Olelusa River during the earthquake.

The force 6 effects were noted at a distance of 80-90 and 180—200 km from
the epicenter. People ran out of their houses in panic. they found it

difficult to stand up. vibrations were felt while walking. the noise of
avalanches and falling of rock was noted on both sides of the Olekma.
Nyuksha and Tas-Yuryakh Rivers.

In many populated areas hundreds of kilometers from the epicenter of the
microseismic effects were accompanied by force 5 quaking. Explicit non-
uniformity of distribution of the quaking with respect to area is noted
here. For example. identical effects were noted in the settlements of
Srednysya Olekne (110 Ian from the epicenter). Ust'-Urkila (180 km).
Sredniy Kalar (225 km). Urusha (290 km). Ksen'yevskaya (350 km), Usugli
(550 km). horeover. in Chico at distance of 675 km free the epicenter
the earthquake was felt with s force exceeding force 5: deformations of
modern buildings were observed. and one case of destruction of a wooden
building was recorded.

Still greater nonuniforaity was noted in the distribution of the force 6 to
3 quakes. Here the isoseisms extend in two directions: far to the south-
west. to Baykal. and to a lesser degree to the east and southeast,
encompassing the settle-ents of Unkhs, Ogoron and the city of Zeys and
Blagoveshchensk (850 km from the epicenter) where serious deformations
occurred in several high rise brick buildings ready for occupancy.

This clearly expressed asymmetry in the quake distribution during the
Tas-Yuryakh earthquake can. on the one hand, be explained by the peculiar-
ities of the deep structure of the territory. Actually. the orientation
of the isoaeisms extended to the west and southeast coincides in the

first approximation with the structural—tectonic boundary between the
haykalides and Hercinidss. 0n the other hand, the appearance of a zone
of increased force at great distances (Chernyshevsk. Usugli. Chita.
Blngoveshchensk) can be connected with peculiarities of engineering-
geological structure of such regions and the propagation of seismic vibra-
tions. however. it is impossible to not mention that the spread of the
perceptible qusking to the southwest 670 km farther from the epicenter
than in the huys earthquake remains a mystery.

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

The lielichanakoye earthquake of 8 October 1976. Although thie earthquake
ia entirely routine for Baetern Siberia (ll-5.2. 11-13. 1 Iforce 7). it
deaervee epecial attention. for it occurred on the plat one. in a region
coneidered aaeienic. The quakins eneoapeeeed the Lenakiy. Vilyuakiy

and Olekalinekiy [Olekeal Rayone of the Yakut am and the northern areae
of the lrkutakaya llrkut] and Aaurekaye [Merl Oblaeta. The Pleietoaeieaal
region of the earthquake wee located in the headwatere of the helichen

River. the right tributary of the Iiryuk River falling into the Lane
50 km above Olek-inek.

By the reaulte of the nacroeeielic examination of the coneequencee of thie
earthquake. the ieoeeieeal lap ehown in Fig 72 wee coepiled.

The force 5-6 effecta were obeerwed at the eeteorolosicel atation of
Kiliyev (at an epicentrel dietance of 50 ka) and at the lineaen'a atation
of Eruedzhey (85 km) of the Lenak—Suntery telephone line. The earthquake
began with a ehock of an "exploeive nature.” The quakin; wee felt even
in the open air while walking. The vibrationa leated 30 eeconda. Cracka
appeared in the huildinge and pleater fell off the walls.

Force 5 effects were noted in the aettleeente of Daban (75 kn). heryuktey-l
(about 80 kl). Chapayevo (100 kl). lyebttakh (110 kn). The vibratione
reeeebled the effect created by a heavy tractor paaeins the houae. The
lose in the houaae cracked. and in placee pleeter fell off the walla.

1n the village of Deban on the bank denudatione of the Lena wade up of
aendy loaea. anall eubaidence jointe were for-ed.

The force 5-6 quakea were felt at a dietance of 95-165 k- in the «tele-
Ienta of Tinnaya. Kochesarovekaya. nel'geyakaya. Abega. Turukta. Tokko.
Yuzh. Nyuve. Saldykel' and Botany. The crackling of the log hute wae
heard. The vibrationa rue-bled the effect created by a heavy truck pen-
in; the houae.

Force 6 quakea encoepoeeed the city of Olekaninek. Lenek. the.eett1eaente
of Unkyur. Hacha. Solyanka. Dehikiede (105-270 he). The equeeking of the
loge. and the rattling of the windowe and diahee could be heard.

The infatuation about the force 3 earthquakee wee obtained fron the
eeianic atetiona in the eettlenente of Bodaybo and Chara.

The preeented data indicate the nonuniforeity of the eeieaic vibrationa -
they were propagated far to the aouth. but they were eharply daaped in
the north. Proe the epicenter to the aettleaente of lodaybo and Chara.
where an earthquake of force 3 wae felt. it wee 600 and 625 kn. In the

aettleeente of Suntary and Keependyey located 1A0 to 160 kn to the north
of the epicenter. the earthquake wae not felt.

217

”I OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

- (37)

 

+1 @2 03 $4 e: (D: 07 re --—'9 -—-1o

Figure 72. Ieoeeleeel up of the neltchenekiy [Helichenl
eerthqueke of 8 October 1976.
Coepned by A. D. Abelnkov. '1'. H. Kozyrev.
l -- epicenter according to the lnetrmt date; 2 - force 5-6:
3 -- 5: I. .. force 5; 5 -- In; 6 - force 3; 7 - not text; 8 upopuieted
oreee uhere the roe: wee heerd; 9 -- tween”; 10 ~ exuiuetion route;
The make" indtcete the force period.

[See key on p 219]
218

M OFFICIAL USE OIILY
FOR 0P?ICIAL "8! ONLY

[Key to Fig 72. p 218]!

l. Chara: 2. Vitin: 3. Bodaybo: 6. Zhuya; S. Bel. Paton; 6. Turukta;

7. Yu. Nyuya: e. Seldykel'; 9. Lena: lO. bensk; 11. Nyuya: 12. Istanay;
[3. Dzherba: lb. Bysyttakh; 15. Viiyuy: 16. Suntary; 17. Ust'-Kespendyay;
18. Keslendyay; l9. Ergedshey: 20. Kipiyer; 2l. helichan; 22. Neryuktey;
23. Daban; 2b. Tinnaya: 2S. Chapayevos26. niryuk: 27. Solyanka;

28. humans; 29. Lane; 30. Unkyur: 3l. Oleklinsk: 32. Abaga;

33. Kochegarovskaya: 3b. Del'geyskaya: 35. Tokko: 36. Dehikisde;

37. Oleksa; 38. Zhuya: 39. Chara

ln tectonic respects. the pleistoseissal region of the earthquake is
associated with the southern edge of the Siberian platforl and is located
in the territory of the Berstovskiy aarginal trough (Fig 73). A sharp
bend of the crystal bed of the foundation is observed here (sore than 3 k-
per 30 kn of linear extent) with which the tone of the Kespendyaysko-
Botataaanekiy structure forcing fault is coupled. According to the data
from the deep aeisnic sounding performed by A. T. Yanis and c. D. latayan
through the Hirnyy-Ruaskaya Rechka profile. this fracture is deep. It
intersects the Hobo boundary and is traced in the upper santle to a depth
of more than ‘3 kn. The roof of the crystalline foundation in downthrown
more than 3 ks along the fault. The thickness of the earth's crust over
the extent of the route varies fron 25.2 kl in the uplifted Nasaninakiy
block to 33 ks in the downthrown Kespendyayskiy block.

In addition. near the epicenter of the earthquake. the coupling of the
latest uplifts of the activated folded and platforl oblants with the
Cenozoic Beretovskiy foothills trough occurs (see fig 73).

Free the sacroaeissic data. three peculiarities of the strong earthquakes
of ancient Siberia isportant to the seisaic regionslitation follow.

1. The area enconpassed by the quakes. including the destructive ones is

anonalously large by cosparison with the earthquakes with equal N(K) and to
in the Caucasian and Central Asian ssissic regions.

This is posaible to explain by the predosinance in the seiseic regions of
crystalline rock and the presence of per-afrost having low capacity for
”extinguishing" the seismic waves.

2. The spread of the quakes is sharply expressed and nonuniforl. The
classical aspa with elliptic isoseisla with approximately equal distance
between adjacent isoseisls are far frol true. Therefore all the calcula-
tions based on the isoseislic naps (depth of center. M. lo) are highly
doubtful. Obviously. the procedure for deteruining the para-stars of the
earthquake by the isoseissal areas will be valid. They are sore or less
identical for earthquakes with equal H(or K) and To.

3. In the areas nade up of thick loose series (basins sade up of Hesoceno-
zoic aediaents). the intensity of the earthquakes decreases sharply (sole-
tines by force 2-3). which in the case of regionalization per-its the
normative force to be reduced at least by one.

219
I0! OPPICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

 

.1 [E]: D E! E: III! .I Z]! .t

Figure 73. Schentic of the tectonic atructure of the seminal
atructurea of the Siberian platform of the vicinity
of the Helichan earthy-5* 0‘ ' “ember 1976.
Cot-piled by A. o. Abalakov uains the atructural nap
of the Siberian platforl edited by A. A. Trofiluh
and V. V. Seaenovich. 1972.
l -- boundariea of the folded regiona and energence of cryatalline rock to
the aurface: 2 - cryatalline (folded) rock: 3 - aedi-entary rock (plat-
fona mantle): 6 - iaohypeea of the cryatalline foundation; 5 - fracturea
(differentiated): 6 -- Kelpendyayavo-Bataunakiy atructure forming fracture
(according to the geophysical data); 7 -- boundariea of the rift zone;
8 - boundariea of the latest uplifta: 9 - earthquake epicenter
Key:
1. Vilyuy: 2. ngattinakaya baain; 3. Suntarakiy arch; 6. Relendyayakaya
boain; S. Nuaninakoye uplift; 6. Lena; 7. oiehinek'; 8. 'l'aanYuryakhakoye
uplift; 9. Nirnyy; lo. Lenak: ll. Nyuyako-ozherbinakaya baain:
12. bereeovakiy trough: 13. laykal folded region; 11:. Aidan ahield:
15. Oleba; l6. Vitie; l7. Iodaybo; 18.11aaa; l9. Nana; 20. Lena:
21. Viti-z 22. Zhuya.

220
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI OPfICIAL 08! ONLY

CHAPTER VIII. ANALYSIS OP In: EPICIﬂTRAL FIELD. sntshlc ACTIVITY
Distribution of the Berthqushe Bpicenters with Respect to Ares

A nusber of pepers ere devoted to the enslysis of the eeiesicity of
Priheyksl‘ye in the previous phase of the investigetion (Hushketov.

Orlov. 1892: Popov. 1939: ATLAS.... 1962: IARTRQUAKBS 1" TH! USSR 1N
1962-1970; Solonenko. V.. 1950; Treskov. Pshennihov. 1961: VOPROSY
SEYSHOTBKTONIKI [Probless of Seielotectonicel. 1960: VOPROSY SEYSNICHNOSTI
SIIIRI [Prob1ess of the Seislicity of Siberie]. 1965: ZRIVAYA TBKTONIKA
[Active Tectonics].... 1966: Solonenho, V.. Treskov. 1967;

SEYSNOTEXTONIKA (Seiseotectonicsl.... 1960; IAYKAL'SKIY R191 lleyhel
Rift]. I968).

The discussion of the results obteined recently besicelly when studying
the 10 ycere of observations (1962-1971) of the sodern network of seiseic
etetione in Pribsyksl'ye orgsnised et the beginning of the 1960's is the
object of Iurther discussion. The precticsl work wee done by the co-
workers of the 1eborstory regioneI seissicity of the Institute of the
lsrth's Crust of the Siberisn Depsrtlent of the USSR Acedely of Sciences.

Piret of s11. the probles of the distribution of the epicenters of the
eerthquskes with respect to eree deserves ettention. Pig 60 shows the
distribution of the strongest known shocks. Just es the week eerthquekes.
they ere c1sssified with respect to energy clesses in sccordsnce with

the T. c. leutisn scele.

The generel Iocstion of the epicenters of the week eerthquskes (see fig 76)
is nnslogous to the location of the epicenters of the strong eerthquehes
(see Fig 60). In order to obtein quentitetive chsrscteristics of the
neiesicity. eccording to the dete of 1962-1971 (see Pig 7‘) seps of the
deneitiee of the eerthqueke epicenters (Pig 7:) end eeieeic ectivity
(Pin 76) were constructed. Since there is such thet is sinilsr in the
isoIIne contiguretione on these seps. it is expedient to describe the:
jointly. when constructing the esp of the epicenter density. dete uere
used on the esrthqushes iron the 9th energy clsss, just es on the shove-
deecribcd epicenter esp. The celculetion of the totel number of earth-
quake epicenters 0! s11 clesses beginning with the 9th wee cerried out

221

M OFFICIAL I133 our
FOR 0??!CIAL "8! ONLY

over areas with the sides 0.2° with respect to Latitude and longitude.
During the calculations the area was successive1y shifted by 0.1' both
with respect to latitude and with respect to long tude. The values of
the epicenter densities are for an area of 100 kn and 1 year.

The aap of the seismic activity characterisea th; nuaber of earthquakes

of the 10th energy class ower an area of 1000 kl per year. when construct-
ing the aaps. the teaporary intensificationa of the seisaic activity were
excluded insofar as possible. Out of each group of dependent earthquakes.
only the strongest shock was taken into account. lnaeauch as the exclusion
of the aftershocks of the strong earthquakes encounters special difficul-
ties. when coapiling the seisaic activity asp in the vicinity of the
Tas-Yuryakhskiy earthquake of 1967 (the northeast flank of the laykal rift
tone) and the Kodar earthquake of 1970 (in the Radar ridge) the activity
was calculated not for 10 years but for the tiae periods to the correspond-
ing aain shocks. in contrast to this, when calculating the epicenter
density asp the aftershocks were excluded by coaparison with the earth-
ounke background before the aain shocks.

The calculation of the neisaic activity aap with respect to the basic field
of the epicentera was perforaed by the suaaation procedure (Risnichenko.
1960a) with constant detail (for constant averaging areas o.“ with respect
to latitude and longitude with overlap of the adjacent areas by 0.2'). In
order that the isolines of the asp not be unjustifiably detailed in the
areas with a saall nuaber of recorded earthquakes (along the edges of the
Iain epicentral field in the rift region) in cases where less than

three epicenters fall in an area. the calculations of the activity were
realised by the aethod of suaaation with constant accuracy (Gorbunova.
Rixnichenho. 1965) and assign-cot of three epicenters on a circular plot.

The high value of the activity obtained for the central part of the
lkatskiy ridge does not reflect the aean longvtera conditions and is

caused by iaperfection of the procedure used to exclude the earthquake
swaras. especially in the case of this extraordinary. long-lasting swara.
Therefore in the asp insert a version of the iaolines of aeisaic activity
is presented for this saall area according to the data for the last 2 years
(1970-1971) when the activity was noticeably lower here.

In addition to the aeisaic activity aap described above. for the seas
decade an analogous activity asp was constructed (see Fig 77) by the
coaplete data on the earthquakes beginning with energy class 9 (that is.
with inclusion of all the shocks aaking up the swaraa. aftershochs and
groups). The procedure for constructing it was distinguished only by the
feet that in the given case and with a sasll nuaber of earthquakes in the
eleaentary areas (o.txo.e° with subsequent shift by 0.2’) the calculation
was perforaed by the auaaation aethod with constant detail. The angular
coefficinnt of the recurrence rate graph in both cases was taken as the
naae (-0.5) average for Pribayhal'ye.

222

'0! 0!?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'IOIAL "8! ONLY

The general configuration of the iaolinea on both nape in very ainiiar.
lt in natural that on the nap conatructed by the coeplete data. the
activity level in nany caaee turna out to be higher and new arena of
increaaed activity are aleo detected (in Central Iayhal. in the vicinity
of the north and of the larguea ridge. in the launtovekaya baain. on

the Kodar ridge. and an on) ceuaed by earthquake forna and the aequencee
of nfterehocka.

0n the nape of epicenter danaity and aeieaic activity. an colparieon of
thee with the initial epicenter lap indicatea. once of the iaportant
atructural ieaturea of the epicentral field diaappear aa a reault of
averaging. Iron fig 1‘ it in obvioua that in a nuaber of caaea the epi-
centera of the earthquakea for- extended etripe bounding the eaeienic or
low neieaic blocka of the earth'e cruet. The activity nap. for the con-
atruction of which apecial attention waa given to the preaervation of
these peculiaritiee of the epicentral field. ie preaented in fig 70. The
valuea of the aaieeic activity of the iaolated ronea indicated on it were
eetinated in accordance with the definition of A10 ueing the nap in

Pig 7‘. The aoiid linaa in Fig 78 bound the certainly ieolated tonea.
end the dotted linee. the once eatabliahed eoet reliably.

An folloue fro- Iig 78. the bende of the earthquake epicenter are oriented
along the tone of the Iain Sayan fault and ite branchee (A10 ie only
eeveral hundredtha). with raepect to Southern and Central laykal (A10 to
0.75). in the northeastern direction through the bargueia region (to

5 hands. aoae of thee obliquely cut the Iarguea and lkatakiy ridgee.

A10 are aeaaured in tentha). Three bende. converging. continue atill
farther to the northaaat. 0n the northeaatern flank of the Iaykal rift
another band in noted. The bende of quite aparae epicentera intereect the
Vitia plateau (Ago-0.03). The active bende on the eouthweatern flank of

the aeieeic zone are oriented eeridionally in accordance with the geologi-
cal atructure.

The isolated bende do not alweya agree with the known fault eonea. The
aeieaicity of the large laulte eetabliahed according to the geological
aigna. in often low or it in exhibited only in individual eectione (the
Tunhinehiy fault). Soeetilea the preaence of bende poaeibly indicatee

the occurrence of new active tonea atill not finding defined geoeorpholog-
ical expreaeion (for exasple. along the aoutheaetern aide of the largurinahaya
baein). The areaa of the nountain coaliaauree between the baaine in the
northeaatern part of the leykal rift are dietinguiehed by increaaed
eeianicity; in the eouthweet. lowered. The etructure of the upper central
tone of the earthquahee of Pribayhal'ye lthe Iayhal region) and Trane-
bayhel wee analysed in note detail in the paper by 8. I. Colonetakiy
(l97n).

223
’0! OFFIClAl 038 OILY
FOR orncm. 088 0““

«mm 9° 4

-\(2:“(‘ m 9“). 4..

 

Fl 75. ﬂap of the earthquake eptcmuu of Prtbnyknl'ye (or 1962-1971
[Soc cy on p 226

[’08 07:13ka USE ONLY
P0! omcm. us: mm

“

   
      

I” 1”

"74»!

4

(P9). Tho nullun In t)». notation correspond to energy clan. of the
uttbqunlmg. [See key on p 226)

225
M OFFICIAL I183 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Pig 70. pp 226-225]!

1. Northern Baykal highland; 2. Upper Angers ridge; 3. Delyun-Ursnskiy
ridge; 6. Kodar ridge; 5. Southern Nuya ridge; 6. Udohan ridge;

7. Kalar ridge; 8. Vitin plateau: 9. Vitias 10. Olekme Stanovik;

l1. Borshchovochnyy ridge: 12. Yahlonovyy ridge; 13. Chita: 14. Khilok;
15. Iketskiy ridge; l6. Berguzinshiy ridge; 1?. aeykal: 18. Baykal ridge:
19. Ulan-lurgasy ridge: 20. IAN; 2l. Ulan-Ude; 22. Primorskiy ridge:

23. Irkut; 26. Irkutsk; 25. Khamar-Da ridge; 26. Gueinoye Lake;

21. Dshida; 23. Dshidinekiy [Dshida] ridge; 29. Selenge; 30. Buren-ﬂuru
31. Bulnay Nuru ridge: 32. Khubsugul Lake; 33. Vostochnyy Sayan

[Eastern Sayan]: 36. lye; 35. Oka; 36. Angers; 37. Lens.

The manifestations of the seismic process in the Baykal eeisnic zone are
varied. The earthquake swarms often occur in the Bargusinskiy Rayon. in
the Kodaro-Udokenekiy Rayon. in the vicinity of the Upper Huya-Huyakan
basins. along the Obrucheekiy fault tones in Central Buykal end the
meridional pert of the Shurmansko-Shutkhulayskiy fault in the extreme
southwest. The earthquake aware in the lkatekiy ridge lasting several
years is unique. As a rule. tte locations of the swarms did not repeat
during the instrument saismologicel observation times. Soaetieea the
swarms occurred in practice at the same places where at another time
seismic process developed fifferently -- a strong earthquake was
accompanied by a series of aftershocha (Golenetakiy. et el.. 1973).

Depths of the Pribayksl'ye Earthquake Centers1

0n the basis of the quite broad observations of the earthquakes of
Pribaykel'ye. it is possible to state with certainty that their centers
are located in the earth's crust. however. the exact establishment of the
depths of the centers within the limits of the earth's crust encounters
great difficulties primarily as a result of insufficient density of the
seismic station network. As a rule. the depth of the center of an
individual earthquake with the existing network of seismic stations in
Pribaykel'ye cannot in the majority of cases be established with the
necessary accuracy. Therefore it is necessary to be satisfied with only
a few average estimates. There are several paths for obtaining such
estimates.

1. Comparison of Average hodogrsphs of the head Haves P for Explosions
and Earthquakes

by the observations of more than 20 industrial explosions from the areas
of Cheremkhovo and Zhelesnogorsk, the apparent velocities and initial
ordinates of the average hodographa of the head waves P were determined.

 

L'l'he greater part of the factual date for the given section was prepared
by E. A. Tret'yek.

226

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They turned out to be equal to 7.910.05 III/sec and 6.930.45 sec respectively.
The calculations of the hodosraphs of the same waves for the earthquakes
with an intensity of more than 200 in various versions (in particular.

for different parts of the seisaic tone) save sonevhat different values.
but values close to those that were obtained by the explosions. If we
consider that the average thickness of the earth‘s crust along the routes
in l’ribsyka'ye does not change sharply according to the seiseologic data
and the deep seisnic sounding data, then the indicated closeness of the
eleoents none that the centers of the earthquakes are shallow for the

most part (they are located in the upper 5 to 10 kilometer layer).

2. The construction of the earthquake distributions with respect to depths
according to the fornula for the travel tine of the head waves is

‘r-(ZH- 401/1..— 3 +15;

Key: (1)
i. mean

or excluding the center tine. bx the_foreules for the differences in tile
of arrival of the direct vave (P or 8) and the head vave P:

a+ .lf'l'_—'i'_a,
P—P- ’ ~(m-h; a; p; 7;.

- A + - — - — ‘ .

3' p r (2:! ”1/3,?" 3" v;

where h is the desired depth of the center; V1,- is the lean velocity
lean

of the longitudinal waves in the earth's crust; Vp. VF’ V are the known

propagation rates of the P. F and E waves: A is the epicentrsl distances
detenined on establisbent of the epicenter. ii is the lean thickness of
the crust in the region (II-38 It: is given for the calculations).

The distributions obtained indicate the snail uesn depths of the centers
and the very significant dispersion of the results as a result of the
random errors (P13 79).

The calculations enco-psss the observations for Januaryalune 1971 of the
earthquakes fro. the various parts of Pribaykal'ye. The propagation routes

of the seiseic waves were not differentiated in this case. just as the
data fro- the individual stations vere not isolated.

227
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

.evosua.nnx .a .6 ha veluouuoa one: «coda-«sonny neuaalou 03h

lﬂsi‘tlseizl‘.'l"l!’, e

I :~ .
up! a; t

 

.

 

      

a,

b n 11
‘0‘ #Ark‘». "I;

letthqoeke epicenter deneity eep to: 1962-1971 with x:9.

_ rlgure 75.

228

IOI OPFICIIL US! ONLY
POI OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
[Key to Hg 75. pp 228-229]:

1 -- Udez 2 -- lye: 3 -- Oke: 6 -- lrkutek; 5 -- Leke Keeogol :

6 -- Orkhon: 7 -. Selenge; B -- Khmr-Deben Ridge; 9 - Ulen-Ude:

10 -- Ulen-Burgeey ridge: 11 -- Prieorekiy ridge; 12 -- Angere:

13 -- Northern Ieykel Highlend: 16 .. Lone: 15 -- Angerekiy ridge:

16 -- Vitin; 17 -- Delyun-Urenekiy ridge; 1!! -- Koder ridge;

19 -- Udoken ridge; 20 -- Deykel'ekiy ridge; 21 - Ude: 22 - Viti-ekoye;
23 -- Ploekogor'ye; 26 - Khilok: 25 -- Chikoy; 26 -- Yeblonovyy ridge;
27 -- Onon; 28 -- Olekne; 29 -- Olekeineltiy; 30 -- Sienovilt;

31 -- Shilke; 32 -- Gainer: 33 - herchinekiy ridge; 3‘ - Argun':

35 -- m; 36 -- m

3. Construction of the dietrihutione beeed on obeervetione of the

trevel tine of the head vevee to the individual etetione. ee in the
preceding item. but ueing more eubetentieted veluee of the neen thickneee
of the cruet with reepect to the deep eeielic eounding profile of the
Centrel Beykel to the nergueinekeye beein.

The hietogrene conetructed by the dete for 1962 to the eiddle of 1972
(Fig 80) ere einiler to the grephe from the precding item.

Obviouely.' the greeteet eccurecy in eetineting the depth of the center
cen be echieved by ueing the known veluee of the thickneee of the cruet

(for emple. eccording to the deep eeienic eounding dete) end obeerve-
tione of the vevee reflected free the top of ite foot. Theee eeti-etee
of the depthe of the centere turned out to be poeeible for the efterehock
of the Centrel Beyhel eerthquehe of 1959 for which in Ieny ceeee reflected
treneveree vevee were recorded et the eeieeic etetion of Beyendey. end

in the region cloee to it where the veve reflection pointe were loceted.
en independent deteninetion of the thiclmeee of the eerth'e cruet wee
node by the deep eeinic eounding procedure. The celculetion of the
depth of the centere h were perfoned in the given ceee on the beeie of
the expreeeion

(2i! — h)‘ + m - (M: + % Vd‘ +9):

where V in the seen velocity of the reflected veve in the eerth'e cruet.
at in t e difference in tieee of errive1 of the reflected and direct
vevee. The reeulte of the celculetione vere for-ed by the hietogre-
(nee Fig 80. e), end they indicete thet the depth of the efterehoclun

oi the Centrel Beykel eerthquelte of 1959 ie quite ehel1ov.

2290230
roe OHICIAI. US! ONLY



FOR OFFICIAL ”SB ONLY

    

a,»

 

Figure 79. Earthquake dietrihution in Pribaykel'ye eccording to
center depth. h_uein3 the differencee in tilee of
errivel of the P end (8) wevee end the head wevee P
and eheolute trevel tilee of the heed vevee P (t, )
et individuel etatione. n is the nuber of caeee.

5. The celculatione of the deothe of the centere of the eerthquekee (elong
with the eetehlieluent of their epicentere) by the oheervetione of the
direct woven in the preeence of e eeieaic etetion at e short epicentrel
dietence (:10 In). A eieiler rere poeeibility occurred. for cane-91a.

when etudyin; the efterehocke of the Uet'oﬂuya eerthqoeke of 1968. The
celcu1etione perforled on the coeputer on the heeie of ninieiein: the

one of the equeree of the errore in the treve1 tines led to the inc1ueion
of ehellow depthe - lore 0.5 In than 6-10 In.

The dietrihution of the ehocke of the Uet'-huye eerthquake of 1968 with
reepect to depth in preeented below:

Depth of center Unvee
h. In .00 and ..
s P
0 5 12
5 2 3
10 c 1
15 0 0

5. The eetehliehoent of the total etatieticel dietrihution of the depthe
of the centere of the entire Beylul zone by the oheewetione of the direct
waves at the eeieeic etetione with epicentrel dietencee to 50 he (for the
defined, fixed poeitiooe of the epicenter end valuee of the center tile)
fro. the center-epicenter-etetion right triengle.

235
POI OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OVPICIAL US! ONLY

 

‘IO 0 20 he.

Figure 80. Eerthquehe distribution with respect to depths.
s-d -— by the observetions of the longitudinel heed wsves P.
e -- by reflected trensverse waves

1. Tyrgen; 2. "shit: 3. Beyendey; b. Alla; S. Bodon; 6. Bergusin

As en exasple of the distribution we cen use the histogres constructed by
952 depth detersinetions for 1967 (Fig 81). The histogress for the other
tile periods differ eoeewhst with respect to externel eppesrence; however.
for all of the: e lerge number of cases of detersintng the ineginery depth
of the center end wide renge of verietion of it are cherecteristic. This
is naturel if the ectuel depths ere shsllow (e few kilo-eters). end the

eccurecy of the individuel deter-instione is low. which sctuelly occurred.

6. Use of necroeeiseic dete for strongest esrthquekes.

An estinote of the center depths use eede for the ten strongest esrthquehes
of Pribsykel'ye by the previously constructed isoseisssl sspe. The
celculntions were perforsed on the bseis of the known ucroseiseic foreulss
(N. V. Shebelin. 1968) using the nmericel psreeeters both specielly
deter-lined for Pribeyhel'ye end evereged over the verious seinieelly sctive
regions. According to these celculetions. the centers of the quite strong
enrthquekes cen also be loceted st shellow depths (to 10-15 h). but es

0 result of low reliebility of deter-instions only euxiliery significsnce
cen he ntteched to then. The only result in this cese indicetes significsnt
depths. but they do not find confinstion froe eny other seiseologic
observetions.

235
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
f0! OfflClAL 088 OﬂLY

 
      

Hui

figure 81. The dietrihution of the depths of centere of
Prihaykal'ye eerthquakea in 12§7 in accordance
with the oheervetione of the 8 wave.
(n to the nueher of detereinatione)

' ﬂ U U U U '0 J0 ~"‘ I: .eu

Sunning up everything that hae been eaid above. it euat he recognized that
on the eodern level of underetending of earthquakes in Prihaykal'ye. the
depthe of the centere of the aejority of then (weak. coherently recorded
enrthquakea) can he coneidered to he ehallow. that ie to eey. provieionally
equal to -5 ha. The correctneee oi thia aaeuaption la confir-ed. in particu-
lar. hy the fact that at thia depth of center. the eati-atee of the cruat
thickneee oade by the oheervationa of the reflected waves during the earth-
quakee agree in a nulher of ereee of Pribaykal'ye with the date obtained by
deep aeiaeic aoundinga. The conclueion of the ehallow depthe of the centere
aleo cgreee with the reeulte of the aodern atudiee of the eeienicity of
other rift eonea. for exaaple. the Beat African rift in Kenya (Molnar.
Agaewae. 1971). the Central Atlantic. in Iceland (Ward. et al.. l969).

This. of couree. doee not aeen that there can he no aaaller nuaher of earth-
quakes with deeper centere in Priheyhal'ye. lt in poaeihle. for exe-ple.
that the Kodar earthquakee of 1970 were eouewhat deeper. On the whole. in
solving the prohlene oi eetilating the depthe of the centere it ie neceeeery
to find additional petha. in particular. ohviouely it ia neceeeary to con-
elder the poaeihilitiee of the diacovery of the type p? (as) wavee at eIall
epicentrnl dietancee.

Recurrence Rate of the Pribaykal'ye larthquakea

The average recurrence ratoa of the earthquakee of different force in one of
the soot ilportant characterietice of the eeienic condition. It in of
interrat to etudy the average recurrence rate of the earthquakea both in

all of Pribaykal'ye and in individual eectiona oi it iaolated with reepect
to eeieeic or other eigne. for thia purpoee. a nulher of linear recurrence
rate grepha were calculated by the earthquake catalog date for Prihayhal'ye

236

’0! OPPICIAL 088 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in recent years (the logsrithl of the nunber of earthquakes of the
corresponding energy as a function of the logarithn of the energy).

The results of the calculations perforned by the least squares nethod are
presented in Table 13. Fig 82 shows the areas for which the calculations
were sade. The energy classes of the earthquakes K in all cases were
deternined using the known T. G. Rautian nosogran by the observations of
the sciatic station network for Pribaykal'ye.

The nest inportant paraneter of the recurrence rate graph -- its angular
coefficient y -- for large areas (all of Pribaykal'ye. the rift region)

is deternined quite stably. and its nunerical value (-0.5) turns out to he
close to the average for the other regions. Moreover. for individual
parts of the regions the values of the angular coefficients differ notice-
ably. indicating the known nonuniforlity of the aeissic process. This
begins to he shown already on cosparison of the two arbitrarily selected
halves of the rift region: northeastern and southwestern. the boundary
between which passes along the Ieridian between the Svyatoy Nos Peninsula
and the aargusinskiy ridge and along the parallel north of the Uahkan‘i
islands. however. here the difference is within the lisits of possible
error: the angular coefficient is higher in the northeastern than in the
southwestern part of the rift zone. Making the transition to ssaller
regions. entirely defined differences are detected. Thus. in the vicinity
of the Selenga River delta and the adjacent parts of Baykal. the angular
coefficient is reduce (--0.6).

Obviously. the angular coefficient of the recurrence rate graph in the
vicinity of the Tunkinskiy basins and the southeastern part of Eastern
Sayan is low. This lowneas. however. is less defined. for when calculating
the angular coefficients for the last 5 years (l967-l97i) it is true that
by a ssaller nulber of observations it was not a low value that was
obtained but a high one (--o.62, ocrdinate for K-10 equal to 0.3). however.
this recurrence rate graph does not agree with the facts known for this
region inaenuch as then it would be necessary to expect repetitions of
earthquakes of the 14th energy class every loo years. the 16th class every
1500 years. and so on. According to the actual data. earthquakes of

-16th class occurred in the region in the 19th century and in the middle
of the 20th century. The recurrence rate graph with snaller angle of
inclination (see Table 13) agrees better with these facts. The high values
for the coefficients were obtained for the local region in the central

part of the ikatskiy ridge (the long-lasting ikatskiy earthquake swars).

it is interesting that for the series of aftershocks of the Hogodskaya
1967. Tas-Yuryakh 1967 and Kodar 1970 earthquakes the angular coefficient
of the recurrence rate graph has an entirely nor-a1 value close to the
neon for the tone. The results for the earthquake swar- on the northern
part of the largusinskiy ridge (the end of 1966 to the beginning of 1967)
are scattered. in this case the very low value of the angular coefficient
is detersined. but it is necessary to note that this conclusion is
obtained by the least nunber of observations and its insufficiently high
objectivity is not excluded.

237
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
POI OWlCIM. [188 ONLY

." 3‘
O, 7
S
1 « s
u " WV ,,-- ,1
‘7' .' ° \
f’ " E I'd m— _ .0 J
. ..........‘. v
' r‘?va‘--z 1 6)
H I’ ........1

Figure 82. Schcoatic of the regiona of calculation of the
earthquake recurrence rate graphe. ‘l'he nuhere
correapond to the nuhera of the regiona in Table 13.
Key:

1. Irkut; 2. lrkutah; J. on; e. Ansare: S. Vitie; 6. Oleba; ,

7. -'I'un3ur: a. Kerenga: 9. lercha; 10. Shilke; ll. Argun'uz. Lena:

D. Chita; ll». Ingoda: 15. anon: 16. Khilok; l7. vlan-llde;

[3. Selena

It ia known that the difference in angular coefficiente of the recurrence
rate sraphe can be connected with a difference in propertiea of the
deatroyed eediu.

0n deatruction of leaa uniforo. fractured naterial. higher valuea of thia
coefficient ere detected. Poaaihly. the ledin in the vicinity of the
Selena River delte. in the region of the Upper Huye-uuyehan haaine and
to me degree in Central leykal and ohvioualy in the ‘I'unhinakiy haaina.
in characterized by aeaeuhet different dietinguiehins propertiea by con-
pnrieon. for era-ole. with the vicinity of the largutinakaya baain and
the ureurinekiy ridge. Let ue note thet in an of the enmerated
regione with low value of the angular coefficient of the recurrence rate

238

m OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX

graph already during the historic period. strong earthquakes occurred.
but together with than the nuabsr of aftershocks after the significant
shock was often very great. This problee. however. is not sieple. for
the dependence of 7 also on the deforlation rate is possible (with an
increase in rate the value of y decreases).

The results of the calculations by the recurrence rate graphs obtained
ﬁorthe eean intervals between the earthquakes of the highest classes
(see Table 13) can of course have only approxiaste significance inasmuch
as they were obtained with significant extrapolation of the supposedly
linear function and under the condition that the seislic process is
stable. that is. it is correctly described by the observations in recent
years. however. coepariaon of thee with the historic inforsation (the
last decades and 100 to 200 years) on the strong earthquakes of
Pribsyksl'ye not used in the calculations indicates that they do not
contradict these data. Another reason in favor of the possibility of
such approximate estimates is the fact of satisfactory agreement with the
recurrence rate graph constructed for the rift zone by the instrueent
inforsation (Pig 8)). the data on the paleoaeisaodislocations obtained
for systesatic seissogeological studies in this region.

The sue-cry of the paleoseiseodislocations gives the following distribution
of their nulber:

Force 12 11-12 11 10-11 10 9-10 9 8-9
No of earthquakes 2 l 3 l 61 0 l7 1

The indicated data referred to a significantly longer tine. It is of
course ispossible exactly to establish the tine interval which these

data represent. Beginning with the seisengeological signs. it is possible
to estilate it approninately at a thousand years.

Obviously. the earthquakes of 16th class (force 9) for this tile period
turn out to be already nonrepresetativez infornation about the. is
incoeplete. The initial data are plotted on the graph (see Fig 83) also
under the assumption that the once-passed tine period is twice as great
(equal to 2000 years). which is not excluded. here. solewhat better
agreement with the continuation of the recurrence rate of the graph is
detected. 0n the whole. it is necessary to recognize that the number of
known paleoseissodislocations agrees entirely satisfactorily with the
calculated recurrence rate graph for the data of this type. A similar
picture is also observed in the case where the investigation was perforled
not for the entire zone but for the northeastern and southwestern halves
of it separately.

239

IOR OIFICIAL USE ONLY
new a co aux oom—

ﬁeﬂﬂdu : 97.. .8. «.... .63.... ...«3... ...-81:3:-
. 83.13.8- Iuog a.

an. 8. 8. 8 8.939 Banana: .. .7» «87.8. ... ..«.......8. 373... 358.5... as.
$19.8... I818... a.

8n 8. 8 a. 88“.: 833.? . . .7. «S78... 4... 3732 7.... ...-88:8...
838.982 it: n.

83. .... 8. 2. Sauce... 865: .. .7. .878». .3 .72....hﬁ13. hang...

...- B

83 83 94 8... 861a... 8333.... _ .7. 57%. ...o 3.7.... 378.3. .535... m"
S. S 8 e. .33.... in .. ...... .875. ... 3.73.. 37.3.. «28... u.

Y 8. 8n 8 a 8...“.8 8.3.3: .8 2... .878: .4 «:73... 373... all...-
m ﬁll-glance.- ..

o. 94 B. 8 .... 8.933 833.3! : .7. .873 : 3.7.32 an}... §.-&e
B. 68.3.9... o.
s an 8 8 o. 8.35. 8..ng .... .7» .8782 ...: 3.72... 9313.. I}... ...-.86 e.
..u 8 8 o. ... Sag 863.6: E “7.. .5782 a «8.1.8. 3.4.3 . a
M. an 2. 8 a. 8:33 8636.. _, c .7» .878: a «8733. 37.9. 83... 33k... a
u a an 8 n 8353 .3327 a...» .5782 ...: 84188-3 ...-86....33. -
... 8- 3. 8 8 8633 .333: ... 2.... .878: 8 3:73... .313... «genitalia. ..
m 9... a.“ 8 8 883.3 8836.. . .7. .8782 .o 878. 8|... Eta-v8.35... a
H .8. .8 h » Soﬁa... 86%| .. . . «7a .8792 8 3.73. 373“ 33-80.... a
m. 8. S .... ... 8.3.3. 863...... N7. .878: an . . £333.82- .

.... 9n 2. 8 ... .33.... 8.33.7 . ...«7. .B782 3 . . 53
.. 3:23.698: n
_ 8 8 a. u .333 imal .5782 5 ﬂan-.833 . 83.8138 u
S .... a «I. 863.... 8.39.7 £34 .878... :- s... “78 _ 73 38.3 .
.7! III til 8!. u
E; m
A 9;! ﬂ.

 

cps—33:8 05.185"...— uo 38. 09.3.3.6:

2‘0

POI OFFICIAL 033 OIL?
FOR OfftctAL USE ONLY

[Key to Teble 13. p 260]:

e. No of the region i. No of eerthquekee

b. Region 5. Trienguler coefficient 1

c. Boundery of the region I. Ordinete for x-1o

d. north letitude. degreee 1. Heen recurrence rete of the
c. eeet longitude. degreee earthquakes (yeere)

f. Arne. thoueende of k-2
g. Period. yeere
h. Cleeeeo. k

l. Entire cone

2. Rift cone (3+3) According to fig 82
3. Northeeetern pert

4. Southweetern pert

S. Bergurinekiy

6. Tunkineko-eeyenekiy

7. Kodero-Udohenekiy

a. Selengn River delte According to Fig 82
9. Central Beykel

10. Northern leykel

10. The cone without the lergutinekiy ewern of 1966-1967
11. Upper Nuye-Huyehen

12. Huye

13. lketekiy

lb. aerguzin ewern of 1966-1967

15. Afterehoche of the Hogodekiy eerthqueke
16. Afternhocke of the Tee-Yuryekh earthquake
17. Afterchoche of the Koder eerthqueke

note. The eeti-etee eerhed by on eeteriek were obteined on verietion of
the enguler coefficient and the ordinete of the recurrence rete greph by
the eeounte of the lean equere errore.

It is poeeible to errive er the cone conclusion if we ere oriented towerd
the total nunber of etrong ehocke beginning with e defined cleee. Thur.
according to the recurrence rete greph nor-elited with reepect to tile.
the totel nu-ber of ehocke in the cleee intervel of Kl-K2(K2>Kl) in

defined by the retio
gown-8.)- mun-n+0

N" :-w

 

e
0

where K0 in the cleee of the eerthquekee by which the ectivity (l0th) ie
deter-ined: T in the tile period for which the totel nulber of checks in
found; 7 ie the enguler coefficient of the recurrence rete rreph token
fro- Teble 13; e in the number of ehocke deter-ined by the ordinate of
the recurrence rete greph for Ko-lo (eleo fro. Teble 13).

261
I08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OWICIM. 083 ONLY

1 W"
I
3
I4
n K
\
\
., \
I ‘1
.,.. I“
' ‘ ‘i

J \
0’ I

Pigure 83. 0reph of the recurrence rete oi eerthquekee in the
leyhel rift eone (the derk circlee ere eccordin;
to the inetruent dete. end the light circlee.
eccordins to the detn on the peleoeeielodielocetione).

Coneiderine ell of the eerthquehee oi force 10 or higher. in the ionule
we eet Kl-l7, chld. 70-0.”. «to (entilo; 1.60). 1-1000 end we ohtein

:- 0 NC
”I“ "-tﬂﬂ'mrw-Jﬂ m rim-83.

thet ie, in e thouunddyeer period. eccording to the recurrence rete nreph.
ehout 33 euch eerthquekee ehould occur. Thie egreee well with .the dete

preeented on p 290 (ehout $0 eerthquelree) heceuee the intervel of
1000 yeere ie teken quite provieioneily.

In eddition. the ueed perenetere of the recurrence rete ereph ere euhject
to rendoe errorr.

If. for exeeple. 7 ie equel not to o0.$2. hut -0.50. then for the celcule-
tion in plece of 3) eerthquekee we ohtein e3.

Thue. for epproxinete eetinetee ohviouely it ie entirely poeeihle to uee
the lineer recurrence rete ereph conetructed hy the inetruent dete.
extrepoletine it to the region of the ehocke of higher energy cleeeee.

The eerthquehee of the higheet force (lath energy cleee) cen he expected
in Priheylzel'ye (en eree of 4.5 eillion In?) with e frequency of one end
e he" centuriee, eerthquehee oi 17th cleee (force 10 in the epicentrel
region) occur on the everegc once every century end e helt. 16th cleee,
after .13 yeere (eee Tehle 13). It we coneider only the rezion of the
Myknl rift (e mller eree). then theee tile intervele ere epproxi-etely

doubled. It ie neceeeery to expect eerthquekee individuelly in the north-
eeetern end eouthweetern perte oi thie tone etill lore rerely (let no

262
roe OMCIM. 08! our
FOR OPPXCIAL 088 ONLY

note that the difference in the nuabers presented in the table with
respect to the corresponding classes in the given case is within the
liaita of the possible errors of the sari-ates).

The earthquakes of the 16th class in one of the seat seiseically active
regions of Pribaykal'ye - in the vicinity of the Selenga River delta --
nuat be observed every three-quarters of the century. l7th class every
200 years. Siailar but somewhat saaller tile intervals were obtained
for another especially active region - the Upper Huya basin and the
huyakan ridge.

with respect to two versions of the solution presented in Table 13 for
the regions of Central and Northern aaykal. it is indicated to what
degree the estiaates obtained depend on the used initial data.

The at first glance extraordinary results were obtained for the Huya
region where in l957 one of the strongest earthquakes of Pribaykal'ye
occurred. classified as class l7. The region is characterized by high
seisaic activity A10. the epicenters are concentrated in a saall area
asking up part of the sublatitudinal aeialic belt. To the south and
north of it they are in practice abaent. however. in spite of their high
seisaic activity A10. the lean tile intervals between high energy earth-
quakes obtained as a result of extrapolation are very large. The date in
Table 13 indicate that in the Huya earthquake of 1957 a rare phenoaenon
for this soall area was realited.

The significance of the aean tile intervals between possible strong
cnrthquakea can be deternined by considering the unique sequence of
earthquakes for Pribaykal'ye in the highly localized region of the central
part of the lkatskiy ridge.

Vinally. obviously analogous calculations for the aftershock zones of

two other strong earthquakes - hogodskiy and Tas-Yuryakh -- also lead

to the seas conclusion. Of course. the calculations with respect to the
series of aftershocka daaping in tile :annot deter-ine the lean tiae
intervals between the strong earthquakes. but they indicate that even for
such significant intensificationa of the seisaic process as the sequences
of aftershocka which according to the available data are not characteristic
for the ordinary conditions in Pribaykal'ye the recorded weak shocks are
still insufficient for the strong earthquakes to be repeated frequently
enough in sasll areas. Thus. in order that the earthquakes of the 16th
energy class in the indicated Nuya region repeat every 100 years on the
average under steady state conditions, the observed seiaaic activity
would have to be at least l0 tiles higher than the aodern value.

Of course, what has been stated does not exclude the practical possibility
of the repetition in individual cases of several strong earthquakes in n
sanll area over a short tile interval (as, for example. occurred in the
vicinity of the Tas-Yuryakh earthquake), but this lust be classified as
fluctuations in the process in spite of the seen characteristics.

2‘3

’08 OFFIClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are no convincing proofo of nonetotionority of the oeiauic proceoo
in Pt'ibayltal'ye at the prooont tine, and there are no eutficiont groundo
for coneidering it otationary. The tioe period of the oeionic oboerva-
tionu ia too ohort for ouch concluoiono. The (note relorred to here are
invootigeted below.

Dovelopeent of the Seiooic Proceoo in the Vicinity of tho baykol Rif t

he io known (roe otudieo oi the Ioochenioeo of tho earthquake centere

(oee Chapter V). the otrooo orientation in tho oerth'e cruot over the
broad territory of Pribeykel'yo io characterized by a high degree of
conotoncy. The overvheloing oajority oi the epicentero oi the oertheuekeo
undoubtedly are clooely connected with the relatively narrov and long belt
of tho intrecontinentel Bayltal rift which io a quite unique oeiooogonic
otructuro. It io not excluded that the tectonic dovelopeento oi the onkol
rift under a relatively otabla and uniforu field of etreooeo active in tho
earth'o cruot can follow oooe general lava. Inaoeuch no tho exiotencc

of tho rift otructuroo io exhibited. in particular. in tho oequenco of
oarthoualteo. it ia poooiblo to expect ooee regularity eloo in tho tile-
opoco diotribution of thee.

Ono of tho principal problooo of otudying the developeent oi tho aeieeic
procooo in tine io inveotigetion oi tho probleo of the ooooible cyclicity
of tho earthouekoo. Unfortunately. tho etudioo in thio direction encounter
greet difficultico in connection vith the fact that tho oboervation poriodo
(the poriodo for which there io intonation about the earthquakca) do not
encoupaoo the tile intervalo during which it io poooible to obaerve the
recurrence of the procoao in ito booic leaturoo.

ﬂovortholaoo. oonotiaeo thia type of anelyio io poooible, end it leada to
lntareating roaulta. Thuo, s. A. Padotov (1968) advanced the ideao of a
oeiooic cycle of 160360 yearo for the oerthquekeo of Kaechetka. the
Kurili Iolendo and Northeaotern Japan.

In order to atudy the develop-out of the oaionic proccoa in the vicinity
of the beyhal rift. e diagroe or the tiee-opeco diotribution of the earth-
euakco we: conatructod. The tine io plotted on the y-exio. and the x-axio
vao uood ao :ho provioionel axial line of the rift ayoto- oriented aa
ohovn in Pig 803 by the dotted line. The egicentora (roe the adjacent
regiona of the opicentrel field were projected on thie line. The territory
in which the onicontora of the inveotigated earthquakoo were located io
overlaid by a degree grid in Pig 84.

Float the dogreoo of longitude between the 99th to the 105th Ioridiano
(along the 51.5‘ north latitude parallel) were uoed eo the ecole with
roonoct to the horizontal aria. and then the provioionel acale obtained
on interooction o! the indicated axial lino o! the tlft eyotn by the
diagonalo joining the oppooite cornora of the degree grid end, finally.
the degroee of longitude between the 116th to 120th oeridiano (along the
56th parallel). The near geographic rogiono are indicated on the axio.

2“
'0! OFFICIAL 088 all!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 86. Schenatic of the provisional axis of the Baykal
rift zone.

1 -- provisional axis of the rift zone; 2 -- provisional

boundary separating the northeastern (I) and southwestern (11)
parts of the zone.

The diagrea was constructed in two versions: 1) with respect to all
known earthquakes with 11-6 or more (energy class 12 and higher) for the
entire tine period for which there are historical and instrument data
(see Fig 85): 2) tron 1967 to 1972 by the earthquakes with energy class 9
(in order to involve information about weaker shocks; Fig 86). The
source of the initial aaterial was the catalog of earthquakes by which
the rap of the epicenters of the strongest earthquakes of Pribeykal'ye
and the list of inetrunentally deter-ined epicenters for recent years
were constructed.

The used initial data for the developaent of the tine periode are non-
equivslent with respect to conpleteness and accuracy. For the 19th
century there are only scattered data on the strongest earthquakee, and
then only in the southwestern half of the rift zone. Undoubtedly, it is

(or this reason that the righthond side of the tiaevapace graph (see
Pig 85) renaine unfilled in for the indicated time period.

There are somewhat more detailed data for 1902-1916 in connection with
organization in Pribaykal'ye of the first inatruuent observations and
also for the tine period from the niddle of the 1920's to the beginning
of the 1960's. but they pertain predoainantly also to the southwestern
part of the zone and to a high degree are based on the materials of
only one seisnic station "Irkutsk."

265

FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
0!:

mo 0!:
I EIIIII o ~
my ’ o I)
IIIIII

mo of

-.-------
gsoqﬁ §§U§
”butﬂsm) (7) -~ 93

MW

 
   
     

 
 

 

.um hi
to n ” [50¢ k0! on
w» m gran-91'" Q ,, 2m

Figure 85. Tine-space staph oi the dietrihutton of the ettonseet earth-
quakes of Priheykel‘ye (with ">5, K312) for the 19th to 20th centuries

(in the projection of the rift out. on the provisional exit according
to Ft; 8‘). 2‘6

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Fig 85. p 2&6]:

l. Kitoyshiya 6. largusinskaya basin
Tunkinskiy peeks Northern laykal
Eastern Sayen

7. Upper Angora basin

2. Tunkinskaye basin _ Northern Huys ridge
Khssar-Daban ridge southern Huya ridge

1. Southern Baykel a. Huyehsnskiy [huyakan] ridge

5. Selenga River delta 9. Huyskaya [Huya] basin

Central Baykal
10. Charskays [Chara] basin
5. Ol'khon Island Udokan ridge

s

There are no data for the Horld Her 1 period. the revolution or .
World Her ll.

The following period encospasses the 1950's where in Southern Pribaykal'ye
the three relatively low-sensitive seisnic stations functioned which were
unable to sake any complete recording of the earthquakes fro- the
northeastern psrts of the rift sone.

Finally. since 1960-1961 the seismicity of the rift system has been
studied by a network of 10 to 20 seisaic stations asking it possible to
record earthquakes free all parts with were or less identical detail.
This is clearly noticeable in Fig 85 where the variety of all other of
the above-described recording conditions is definitely exhibited. Of
course. eore nuaerous data correspond to the better conditions. Thus.

in accordance with Fig 85 it is ilpossible to confire any special general
intensification of seisnic activity in the recent decades.

As a result of studying the tilavspace distribution of the earthquakes
it is possible to draw the following conclusions.

The strong esrthquakes‘(Hondy in 1950 and Central Baykal in 1959) noted

in recent tiles in the southwestern and central parts of the zone occurred
in the regions where previously - a century ago -- a strong earthquake
also occurred; correspondingly in the vicinity of the Tunkinshiye basins
and in the Proval lay. however. the locations of these epicenters do not
surunlly coincide (the centers were located at an in different local
sclesoncnlc structures). Therefore there are not sufficient data to
conclude cyclicity of seisnic process in Pribayhal‘ye. For other regions
of Pribnykal'ye where strong earthquakes also occurred in the last decade
there is no historical data.

267

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1) (2) (3) (a) (5) (6)

- Donov- ' . n) ham-W .
Menu ”1 2"" ﬁn: W urn-Wat ”5“
4“,” L”... ‘23‘ £"13'." “’"‘ W . ”'3‘ .z‘

- u . - an
on: «da- l’ol- ’00- m: it? n’a- ur- on:
mu m ' an out: to «who no! In! ha

0 O O O .
kggg 3 .8. 3-..hvuuuum2:8§§§§ SEEQ
1‘ IIIIIIIHIIIIIIIEI III
IIIIIIIIIII‘IIIII IIEIFJII
9 IIIIIIIBIIIIPIIIIIIIIIIIII
IIIIIIIIILIIIIIIUIBI IIIII

INHIIIIIIISIIIIIIIHI IIDII
3'" IIIEIIIIIIIIIIIIIEBIIIIIIE

    
    
 
     
   
 

3“ III IIIIIIIIIIIIIIBIIIIII
III IIEIIIIIIIUPJIIIIIIII
‘ IIIIIIIIIIHBIIIIEEIIIIIII
'3 IIIIIIIII'JI‘ZIIIIIIIIIIIIII
~ EIEIIIIIIHFJIII' IISJIHIHIII
‘ IIIIIIIHIIIIIIH dlllﬂlllll
IIIIIIIIIII IIL‘IIEIIQIIIII
IIIIIIIIIII IIIFIIIIIIIUII
9 II!IIII§,IIIIIII.IIII 'IIIQII
" IIHIIIIIIIII Ildlll HIIMII
IIIIIIIIIIII IIEHIIHIIIHII
g“ IIIIIIIl-I EIII'iIIIIIIIHII
2 '- IIIIIIIIU.- IIIIIEIIIIIIIIIII
'° [-IIIIIIII.IIIIIIIIIIHIIIHII

. ' IIIIIIIIDIlIIIEfIIE-IIIIIIII
9 IIIIIIIIIIIQISIIIIIIIIEIHIH
~ IIIIIIIIHIQIIII‘IIII’II-IIIH
~ IIIIIIIIIIkIIIElIIBIIIEIII
’4 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIL’IIIIII
= IIIIIIIIIHI!IIIII_IHEIII!II
9 IIIIIIIEIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
.. aIIIIIIIIIEIIIIIIIIIIIIII
. II IIQJHIIIIIIHIIJIIIIEII
g“ IIII IIIIIIIIIIIBIIHIIIBII
2 '. Illilllilllllllll'llllllﬂll
"' IIIIIBI 'IIIIIIEIIIIIIIIGII
' IIIIIIIF‘BQIIIIIIIIIIEIIIIII
IIIIIIILl‘IIIII’IHI-illllill
~IIl-IIIIIHI'J IIIIIIDEIIIIII
'~ I'IIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIEIIIIII

Figure 86. Tile-apnea graph of the earthquake distribution for Pribaylul'ye
[See key on p 250]

 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
  
     
 
     

248
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
um urruuuu nob wot

”II IIIIIII-IIIIIIIIEIIIIII
=II IIIIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIIIIII
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII‘I .IIIIII
IISIIIIIIIIII-JII'III IIIIII
IIIIII IIIIIIIIIHII .‘lIIIII

:‘EI III IIIIIIIIHEIIIIIIIII
:“II IIIIIIIIIIIIIll-IEIIEIIII

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII .
‘ IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIDIIIEIIIIII

~ IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIEIIIEIIIIII
~ IIIIIIIIIIIIIHIIEIIII-IIIIII
~ IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIEIIHIIIIIII
=9 IIIIIIIIBIIIIIIIICIIIIIIIII
= III.IIIIIIIEIIIHIJIIIIIIII
9 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII‘JI'IIIIII
IIIIIIIIII’JIIIll-IIIII’I @IIII
IIIIIIIIIIIII I‘NIIIIIIIIII

5 '~ IIIIIIIIIIFII IRII: 'EIIIIII

2 h IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHBIIIIIIII

‘ '0I:IiIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIKIIIIII
‘ IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII’IIII

'1 HIIIIIIII’HIII-IIIIIDEIIIIII

~ IIIIIIIIIIHIIIhHIIIIIIIIII

'~ IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIJIIIIII
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
= IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
9 IIIIIIIIIIIII'III'EIIIIIIIII
9 IIIIIIIIlﬂIIIIIlIIIIIIIIII
" IIIIIIIIIEIIIIIIIII‘JIIIIII
.2“ IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
§~ IIHIIIIIIIIIIIIEIIEIIIIIII
‘° IIIIIIIIIIIIIII‘IIIIIIIIII
' IIIIIIIIIIIIIIEG‘HIIIIIIIII
6 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIEIIHIII

. ~ IIIIIIllali‘ﬂlllllllllllll

    
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 

 

 
 
 
   
   
   
  
      
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 

h” 7' ﬁx- - ho- to
Man-- gram-1 1‘.” :0. Wm- cw-M m.”
mun-on cub- td- ph- hav «a un- m-

Iguwv “X070“ Cub-J mm an M a!
nil an 1003., mm “in: M“ 7:

(1) (2) (3) (‘)'($) (5) (7) (8) ' (9)

with Kz9 for 1967-1972 (in the projection on the provisional axis of the
rift system according to Fig 84) [See key on p 250]

269
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(Key to Fig 86. p 269]:

l. Kitoyskiye 6. largurin basin
Tunkinskiye peaks Northern Baykal
Eastern Sayan 7. Upper Angara basin

2. Tunkinakaya basin Northern Huya ridge
Khanar-Daban ridge Southern Huya ridge
Southern laykal 8. Huyakan ridge

3- Selenga River delta Nuya basin

5- Central Baykal 9. Chara basin

5- Ol'khon Island Udokan ridge

The available facts indicate that the strong earthquakes occur in
sequence which excludes the possibility of talking about any gradual
furrouing of the substrate in the rift zone in a defined tine interval
in one direction. The epicenter of the subsequent strong shock usually
is located far from the epicenter of the preceding earthquake (Handy
earthquake of 1950 - on the southwestern flank of the zone. Huya earth-
qunke of 1957 -- in the northeastern part. the Central Baykal earthquake
of 1959 in the central regions). The investigation of the observation
materials for individual years indicates that this situation is retained
also for the weaker earthquakes (with KalZ). Under the effect of the
powerful stresses. the eoveeenta in the earth‘s crust take place here
and there. and the position of the epicenter shifts diacontinuously.
often from one edge of the zone to another.

The analysis of the tile-space distribution of the earthquakes leads to
the conclusion that the modern aeisnicity of the individual parts of
the rift system is different. The vicinity of the southwest end of

250

FOR OP?ICIAL USE OULY
FDR OPPICIAL ”8! ONLY

The decrease in shocks with K312 during the last decades in the Kitoyskiyee
Tunkinskiye peaks to Eastern Rayon attracts attention. Such shocks

         
 

020 W M

mm

Figure 87. Graph of the release of provisional elastic
deforsations in the vicinity of the aayhal rift
(by the len'off procedure)
Key:
1. jouleu2

However. if we return to Fig 86 which contains infer-scion also about
weaker earthquakes, it turns out that in both cases the weaker shocks
were nevertheless observed in significant nulber. The close groups of
earthquakes (see Fig 86) correspond to swsr-s of shocks and sequences
of nftcrshoeks, sore or less extended belts along the tile axis -
nctivntion of soislicity - often after sore significant earthquakes.
In other cases. after such earthquakes with resnect to released energy.
si-ilar activation of selsuicity was not observed.

251

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0?!!CIAL "8! ONLY

0n the whole, when investigating the indicated data. the ilpression is
created that the seisaic process in the vicinity of the naykal rift
is quite unifora with. of course. significant tile fluctuations of it.

Another characteristic of the develop-ant of the seieaic process in the
Bsyksl rift region was obtained when studying the release - in the
sequence of earthquakes -- of the provisional elastic deformations
(according to ben'off) (Fig 87). Per construction of this figure the
sane esterials were used as for the above-described graph of the tile-
spsce distribution of the earthquakes and the lap of the strongest earth-
quakes of Pribaykal'ye (the presented procedure of approximate transition

froa the ascroseiseic historical inforaation about the earthquakes to the
energy classes is explained above).

The fare of this function is the usual, stepped function. and it indicates
that the seislic processes over the tile period during which there are
historical data do not deep. The straight lines bounding the graph (see
the solid lines of Fig 81) diverge with tile which could indicate an
increase in intensity of the seiseic process. However. it is more natural
to consider that this is caused by nonunifornity of the inforaation used
when constructing the graph - the passage (especially in the 19th
century) of not only significant aftershocks after strong earthquakes.

but also significant independent shocks. As for the process as a whole.
it is possibly sore or less stationary.

If beginning in 1900 we construct a graph of the release of elastic
defer-etions. just as for the preceding period. only for the strong
shocks (free the 15th class; the broken dotted line in Pig 87). then the

dotted straight lines bounding the graph can in practice he considered
parallel.

In discussing the individual cases of the process in recent tine. it is
necessary to note that after a relatively cal. period in the 1930's and
1960's a noticeable (it is necessary to think. tenporery) activation of
seiswic activity occurred. and the level of the total provisional defores-
tion approached the upper boundary. Judging by the general nature of

the investigated function. a gently sloping section of it should follow
this. if this is correct. then in the forthcoaing decades the danger of
large earthquakes will be reduced. for the energy of the seisaic process
has tclporarily exhausted itself to a significant degree.

The indicated conclusions appear to be still sore substantiated it we
consider that on the graph (see Pig 87) several strong earthquakes fro-
the extreme northeastern end of the seislic zone are not plotted

(Olek-a and Nyukzha 1958. Tas-Yuryakh 1967). Hith the inclusion of these
earthquakes the level of late activation would increase still acre.

The ecan rate of release of provisional elastic deformations (the slope
of the strip between the dotted lines in Pig 87) for the regions of the

layksl rift turns out to be conparable with the analogous values for the
vicinity of Northern Tyan'-Shsn' (Kurochkina. Nersesov. 1970).

252
FOR OIPICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

CﬂAPTBR IX. SEISMIC VULNERAIILITY OF THE IAYKAL RBOION

The wulnerebility celeuletione were performed by the known procedure of
Yu. V. Rienichenko (Ritnichenko. et el.. 1969) using the seieeic ectivitv
eepe. the Iexinue poseible eerthquekes end the deeping lew of the queuing
with dietence. In prectice tho velues of the activity were initielly

token fro- the eep (see Fig 76) constructed in eccordence with the obeerve-
tione for 1962-1971.

when celculeting the eeiseic vulnerability. high dependence of the results
on conperetively enell verietione of the enguler coefficient of the
recurrence rete greph y wee discovered. Therefore in the finel version

of the celculetion. the ectivity eep wee used which wee obtsined not for
one velue of the enguler coefficient over the entire tone. but for
eininue differsntietion of it which better corresponds to the initiel
noteriel elthough obviously it does not fully solve the problea. for the
northeeetern helf of the tone. the velue of y wee teken so before equel

to -0.5. end for the southwest (west of the 109th eeridien) -0.‘. This
esp of the seiseic ectivity essencielly differed little free the first:
the configuretion of the isolines wee left so before end usuelly only
seoll ehift of thee occurred. Considering the possible errors in celculeting
the vulnerebility ceueed by other reeeone end the errore in coepiling

the ectivity Ieps theueelvee. no greet eignificence should be etteched

to the indiceted eeell differences in the seienic ectivity leps.

Deeping of Seisnic Queuing in the beykel Region [Pribeyhel'ye]

the donning characteristics of the seiseic queking with dietence in the
cone of the strong eerthquehee of Pribeyhel'ye required to celculete the
seismic vulnerebility cen be obteined when enelyting the ieoeeieeel esp

for known eerthquehes. In this ceee ueuelly the known necroseiseic foreule
is ueed (Shebelin. 196d).

[0-bu-.", AI+~'+‘9

where H in the eegnitude of the esrthquske; h is the depth of the center;
A‘ in the ieoeeien rediue: Ii is the force et e dietence of d fro. the
epicenter. b. s. c ere constent pereeetere. The indiceted re etion is

253

’0! OFFICIAL 038 OFLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

aetiafied only epproxieetely; therefore it ie poaeihle to detereine only
the approxinato veluea of the para-ate”. Ibr eatiaation of then in the

given etep. the iaoeeiaaic nape for eight earthquahea in Priheykal'ye
could he uaed:

Earthquake Date H

Srednehaykel'ahoye - 29 Auguat 1959 6.7
[Central Iayhell

Khmr-Dahenakoye a January 1963 6.5
lKhanar-Dahanl

On Central layhel 10 Pehruary 1963 3.5

Uat'-Huyahoye 31 Auguat 1966
[Uat'oﬂnya] 6.5

Swatonoaekoye 26 hove-her 1968
[Svyatoy Noe] 6.8

Verkhneangarakoye 26 Move-her 1968 9.3
[Upper Angara]

On Central Baykal 28 March 1970 5.5

Kodnrehoye 15 hey 1970 5.6
[Kodarl

The paraneter h which. according to the puhliehed data. varies little
tron region to region vae aeaued equal to 1.5 -- the lean for a nmher
of neienicelly active regiona. The coefficients a and c vere calculated
by the leaat aquerea method iron the expreaaion

duh—5'4 + -¢-w-n.

The Dean radiua of the ieoaeiata A; vaa found an the aquare root of the
product of the greateat end leaat radii. The initial data need in the
celculetiona end the reaulta obtained are preaented in Table 16.

he the aulnary reaulta of the eetinate of the aean valuea of the duping
coefficienta ohvioualy it ia neceaaary to take the following: a-J.
«24/2 (for the given value of h-l-llz).

The calculation of the average dianetera of the iaoaeiana on the haeia of
the well-preaented eacroaeiaeic formula uaing the indicated valuea oi the
para-etera (Table 15) indicatea aatiafactory- agreement of the. with the

dinenaiona of the ieoeeina eatahliahed by V. P. Solonenlto according to
the cepirical date.

The celculationa of the force at the epicenter for a given Iagnitude by

these for-ole: alao agreea aatiatactorily with the eapirical relation of

V. l‘. Solonenho between the nagnitude and force (deacrihed and uaed
earlier).

256

POI OFFICIAL USE GIL!
IOR 0P?IC!AL US! ONLY

Calculation of tha Ila-pins Coatftclenta

   

qupdhiunuu (3)
linen-um (Io)

Veriﬁes» (5)

g”

'2
o

     
 
  
 

Cincinnaaa (6) Egg;
'1'”
Wm (7) gg
QJIU
ﬂuxc'ulal Banana. (g) 353?

  

 
  
  
 

“anus—a (9)

earthquake

Sradnebaykal'akoya [Cautral laykal]
Khanar-Dabanakoya lKhalar-Dabaul

0n Cantral laykal

Uat'-Nuyakoye [Uat'-Hoyal
Svyatonoaakoya [Svyatoy ﬂea)
Verkhnaansarakoya [Upper Angora]
0n Cantral Iaykal

Kodarakoye [Kodat]

  

 

§§§

git; iii

3-. §§§§

“é iii $31?

ii ’5'?

{‘1
II

Calculated valuaa of the coefficienta a and c

255

F0! OFPICIAL US! ONLY

Table 16
FOR OPHCIM. "8! ONLY

hut un nnto that tho adopted veluen of the queuing tin-ping coefficienta
not only differ free the lean valuee obtained hy the different eaieeicaiiy
active region" hid: e-Jdi c-J (ahebelin, 1960). it vaa noceeeary.
hovever. to coneider that the picture of the quake duping for the
individuel eerthquahee cen be quite characterietic. noticeably differing
from average. The treneition fro- the average cheracterietite to the

lore epecific (in particular. coneideration of the etieuthal pecul ieritiea)
requiree further epeciel inventigation. The valuee of the coefficiente

ere indeed of lore preciee detereination calling on the edditionel initial
data.

Table 15
Calculated Die-etere of the Circuler leoeeim (h-lo he). he

 

82 N T!
ltth (IX) - ‘0 I) no 0)
lbtthll) - O a I“ 228
Key:
1. Energy tleea of the eerthquahee. K (force)
2. force

llep of Harlem Poeeible Berthqualtee in the Bayltel Region [Pribeykal'yel

In calculating the eeieeic vulnerability. tvo vereione of the up of
noxiou- poeeible earthquehee were ueedt the nap obtained on the beeie
of the correlation vith the aeieeic ectivity A 0 end the nap conetructed
an e reeult of eeieeogeologieel etudiee. The atter wee borrowed fro-
the paper by V. P. Solonenlto "Seieeotectonice and the liodern Structural
Develop-mt of the Iaykel Rift Zone” (1968b).

with reepect to the firet up (Pig all) it ie neceeeery to lake noee
explanation.

The efforte to eetahlieh a correlation epecific to Pribayhal'ye (with
different everaging ereee when eetebliehing the Inn ectivity or in
particular. with reepect to the areae of the afterehocl: :onee for the
enrthqunkee of the correeponding claee) were not crowed vith eucceee.
Therefore the up no cooetructed by the correlation of Yu. V. Rienichenko
for Central Aeie (Rienichenlto, 1966):

In. - M + 0.2M... - as).

beeed on e greet deal of factual uterial. The radii ll of the ereee for
which the eeie-ic activity wee found in thin caee are on folleve (In):

256

I0! ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL 088 ONtY

K 10 ll 12 13 lb is 16 17
R 20 20 21 27 3h 66 72 iii

The previously described lane of the epicenters of the Pribayksl'ye
earthquake for l962-l97l (eee fig 7‘) and the corresponding seisaic
activity nap (see rig 76) were used so the source of actual eateriel
with respect to the distribution of the epicenters.

As should be expected. the regions of the strongest possible earthquakes
on the K-0‘ nap obtained are basically located in the rift zone. A

large area in the centrnl and northeastern parts of the tone is occupied
by the regions of possible earthquakes of 16th energy class. The dis-
tribution of the epicenters of the known. strongest earthquakes (with
Kalb) also indicated on the nap agrees satisfactorily in a nueber of
cases with the picture obtained. however. eoeetieee the difference is
highly significant. end accordingly the nap was corrected as follows:

in the northeast. in the vicinity of the epicenter of the Huye earthquake
of 1957 the calculated value of “Inn was 16. Ines-och as the Huya earth-
quake was stronger. the n..,-11 region wee indicated on the naps (bounded
by the dash-dotted line). A value of k,.x eo-ewhat higher than a calculated
one in indicated on the nap for the region of Tas-Yuryakh end

Nyukeha earthquakes. The analogous situation occurred in the vicinity

of the Selenga River delta where. as is known. in 1862 there was a very
etrong earthquake. and the calculated data hardly reached values of

Ea‘.lza

The K..‘-16 region approsieated in the longitudinal direction is indicated
in the vicinity of the Tunkinekiy basins. According to the calculations
8-,, here does not quite reach class 16 (and in a noticeably soaller area).

Significant divergences are detected in the extreme eouthwestern tone --
in the region of known strongest earthquakes of 1905 in Northern Mongolia.
The calculated values of K.. do not reach 16. and the shocks of l905

ouot be coneidered 18th class. The correspondence of infinity of the
Mogodskoye earthquake of 1967 in the southern boundary of the zone is
still worse. If it can be considered to belong to 17th class. and the
calculated value k.. will turn out to be equal to 13. Another earthquake
in Northern Mongolia 6 February l957 was 15th class and turned out to be
in the region with I..,-12.

In the correnponding regions on the l-‘x Iep changes have been introduced.
Here the areas for the possible earthquakes of higher classes were
nelected in accordance with the "too and Saki rntio (Utsu. Seki, 1955)
derived by the. for the aftershock sonest

1g s 0 1.02 H - 6.01,

where s is the area of the zone. H is the eagnitude of the earthquake.

257

'0! OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The ratio at the longitudinal and transverse axes of these regions bounded
on the sap by the dash-dot lines was taken equal to 1:2; they were
oriented according to the general strike of the structures.

The dotted lines on the asp outline the regions in which the calculated
values of ‘aax do not reach the corresponding (indicated at the given
point) asxiaua values only by 0.25 or even less. Thin is the region in
northern and eastern Pribayhal'ye end also in the western part of the
seisaic sons (e aeridionally oriented area).

The described asp. It.“ unconditionally cannot claia to coaplete our
final solution oi the problen of minus possible earthquakes in
Pribsykal'ye. This is all only a working version designed only for
approxlaate calculations. is new date are accuaulated, it aust be
suppleaented and aodified. Per greater substantiation of the conclusions

in the calculations presupposing the use of the intonation about Kn,"
other versions aust be considered.

The asp obtained is eiailer only in general features to the previously
aentioned asp of aaxiau possible earthquakes with respect to the seism-
geological data. The map based on the results of the seislogeologicsl
studies was detailed: in asny cases relatively narrow strips were isolated
on it where according to the used criteria the earthquakes of higher
intensity are possible. in particular. even in the regions with low
Iodern seisaic activity. On the asp constructed by the seissaologicel
date. in these areas it is not necessary to expect strong earthquakes

(for exaaple. between the southwestern extreaity of Baykal and the Tankin-
sksya basin). At the seas tine. certain areas on this lap where there
are no strong earthquakes according to the results of the seisaogeological
studies are encoapaesed only by a region of high values of Ka‘xe As an
exaaple we can use the regions adjacent to northern naykal on the east.
north of the bargusin basin. In general. the regions of high values of
K.“ are broader on this asp.

Results of Calculating the Seiaaic Vulnerability

The eleaentary areas of AS into which the entire investigated territory
is subdivided were assured equal to 0.2' with respect to latitude and
0.2' with respect to longitude in the calculations. Considering the
class distribution of K“, on the laps of aesiaua possible earthquakes.
the value of x.“+o.s is substituted in place of IQ.“ for calculating

the eeisaic vulnerability. For calculations of the seisaic vulnerability
s with force I and higher in practice the value of 1.0.5 was taken in
the forauls.

The angular coefficient of the recurrence rate graph (-0.5) was initially
considered constant for the entire zone just as the coefficients in the
force daaping foraula with distance.

258

M OHICIAI. 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When using the It.“ nap constructed by the seisnological data, the
average recurrence periods of the quakes for earthquakes of Eorcet9,
38.37 (version 1) were calculated. Since the K,“ nap based on the
seiaaotectonic date of the region was cospiled for saaller areas. the
analogous calculations when using it could be parlor-ed only for the
earthquakes of forcea9 and a8 (version 2). The general concept of the
calculated versions of the vulnerability naps can be gotten from Table 16.

All versions of the naps are characterised by certain general features.
Thus. in each of them the greatest vulnerability is characteristic of
the seas regions: Central Baykal. Tunkinahiye basins. Upper Huya-
Huyakan basins. the regions between' the northeast and the Southern Huya
ridge and the Udokan ridge and also the Udokan ridge itself.

The seisuic vulnerability of Transbaykel is such that it can be neglected.

The smaller the force for which the vulnerability is calculated. the
broader the areas encompassed by the isolines. The vulnerability'nsps
constructed using the ‘nex uep based on the seisuotectonic signs contain
more details than the analogous vulnerability nap, on the calculation of
which less detailed maps of K..x according to the seisnologicel data were
used. In the first case in part of the regions the calculations lead

to lower values of the vulnerability (as. for example, in the individual
sections in the Bayguzinskiy Rayon). and in other areas the regions of
calculated vulnerability are sonewhst expanded (Southern Beyhal. the
eastern part of Tunkinskiy basins). However, good correspondence of the
maps compiled in these two versions is maintained in general features.
and this must be especially esphesised. 0n the whole the result depends
quite little on which of the “sex naps was used.

Table 16
Calculated Hinim- Mean Repetition Periods of the Quakes (T,
Corresponding to the First Isolines). Years

(2) lanesrl.1-—O.5 l ”hr-:3" lspmmhF-OJ—Im

>o|>el>1 >ol~a ni> >1
Gene 9

   

 

   

(1) Pi“.

(”cm-em ..... zoo so so
(4) Wm” M moo zoo 50
(z) ”Mum: 200 1000 zoo 50
() xpsﬁrassxpym 500 woo :00 50
(7)8aprym...... 5002000 500 lm

Key: 1. Region; 2. version; 3. Central Baykal; la. Tunkinskiy basin;
5. Upper Huya-Muyakan basin; 6. between the Southern Huya ridge
and the Udokan ridge; 7. Barguzinskiy; B. and sore; 9. force

Note. The It.“ traps were used in the versions as follows: 1 -- with

respect to seianological data; 2 «— with respect to seislsotectoaic
data.

259
FOR OFFICI“. USE WLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Fig 88, p 260I:

l. Lena; 2. Vitim; 3. Chara; 6. Northern Huya ridge: 5. Huyakan ridge:
6. Central Kalnre 7. Nelyaty; 8. Chara; 9. Udokan ridge: lo. Kutora:
ll. Vitia plateau: l2. Chita; l3. Yablonovyk ridge; lb. Chersk ridge:
15. Olekma Stanovik; 16. Borahchovochnyy ridge; 1?. Tulike;

18. Khapcheranga; l9. Nizhneangarsk; 20. Baykal'skaya ridge;

21. anrguzinskiy ridge: 22. lodon: 23. Ulan-Iurgaay ridge: 2‘. Ol'khon;
2S. Kirenga; 26. Angora; 27. Tyrgun; 28. Irkutsk; 29. Kabansk;

30. Ulan-Ude; 31. ﬂalkhanskiy; 32. Khasar-Daban ridge; 33. Kyakhta:

3A. Zakatenak; 35. Arshan; 36. Selengns 37. Uda; 38. Nye; 39. Oka;

60. Orlik; bl. Mendy; 62. Kosogol Lake.

All the calculated naps satisfactorily characterise the relative distribu-
tion of the seismic 'ulnersbility with respect to area. that is. they

give objective material for comparing the vulnerability of individual
regions with each other. As for its absolute values, it is possible to
note the following here.

The maps obtained with the use of the mean angular coefficient of the
recurrence rate graphs of the entire zones (-0.5) obviously contain a

low estimate of the seismic vulnerability at least for the southwestern
half of the rift zone. The strongest seisaic regions in this part of the
ridge systee (Central Baykal. Tunkinakiy basin) making the basic contribu-
tion of factual naterial and of greatest interest when calculating the
seiseic vulnerability are characterized by a saaller angular coefficient
(--0.6). At the same time in the northeastern half of the zone there are
more regions approaching -0.5 with respect to value of the angular
coefficient. Therefore when calculating the seismic vulnerability maps
in another version (Fig 89-92) it was proposed provisionally to a known
degree that the angular coefficient of the recurrence rate graphs is
-0.4 for the southwestern part of the rift zone (before the 109' east
longitude aeridian) and -0.5 for the second half of it.

The comparison of the various versions of the calculations is presented

in Table 16 where for the above-noted seismically dangerous regions of the
Baykal rift. the values of the tile corresponding to the first isoline

are given (bounding the territory with the greatest quake repetition rate
for the given region).

A comparison of the calculations with the known historic information
(Table 17) was made at two points - Kabanak and Irkutsk for which this
information is the most numerous. With respect to individual cases. the
conclusions of the recurrence rate of the quakes as a result of the
possibility of significant fluctuations are, of course, risky to draw.

In the last two columns of Table 17 we have the results of calculating the
seismic vulnerability Tcalc for the two above-described cases: for

v-0.6 and 1--0.b to 0.5. The first columns contain the data for

calculating Tobs'

261
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL “SB ONLY

tn the tine interval for which it is possible to propose the absence of
ndalnalhle oalsnlons of infatuation. the number of observed earthquakes

N of force 5 or more. force 6 or more, and so on is calculated. The
average observed tine period (Tab ) was found by dividing the correspond-
ing time interval by the number of earthquakes. Obviously this value
cannot be established very precisely inasauch as the number of sufficiently
strong earthquakes is small. and the known indeterminacy is characteristic
of the estimates of the force in the given populated place. Nevertheless.
some conclusions can still be drawn.

Table 17

Comparison of Tobe and Tcalc of the Mean Recurrence Periods
of the Quakes with Intensity I or sore

 

5 mam-ma l3 5 2' 5
O 10 0 l3 as 20
1 10 1-1 23 1”
8 ad“) 1 ill) W
0 an as»
lhqpue
5 mum-ma) I! 4 23'
0 10 t 20 do 150
1 350 arm
8 :>amno a
Key:

1. Force 5. Tcslc’ years

2. Time interval. years 6. Kabansk

3. No of earthquakes 7. Irkutsk

4. Tobs' years
Note. The asterisk denotes the values for the earthquakes with force 5.

he follows from Table 17. the seismic vulnerability calculated for a

value of y--0.6 for the southwestern half of the rift region (and y--0.S
in its northeastern part) agrees more with the facts than the calculations
performed for y--0.5 for the entire zone.

with respect to the calculations at Tcalc for the earthquakes with force 5
(the asterisk in Table 17) it must be noted that the results nust be to
some degree high, that is. the actual values of Tc 1c can be somewhat
lower. This is connected with the fact that in or er to calculate the
weak earthquakes it is necessary to encompass larger areas of the calcula-
tions for which the activity and K"* naps should exist. Inasmuch as
there are no such maps for large areas. it is necessary to perform the

calculations for smaller territories, obtaining a somewhat high estimate
of T .
calc

262
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY



2. Map of the 8218.1: vulnerability
of Pribaykal'ye (1310. version 1)

 
    

(10)

Ian-Dds; 2. Yelanuy; 3. Irkutsk; 6. Irkut; 5. Arum; 6. Manic; 7. Chen
Ola: 9, Iya; 10. Lona; 11'. Ntzhneangaruk; 12.. Upper Angan; 13. Km; 16. l
Chan; 16. Chan; 17. Yakut; 18. Vida; 19. breast; 20. Nan-ha; 21¢ 010k:
Shula; 23. Chtta; 26. Ingoda; 25. launch; 26.. Bargain
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is possible. however. to think that the indicated increase in Tcalc is
ssall. Strong earthquakes are quite rare (and only they can give the
corresponding quaking at the distances). In any case. when calculating
Tcnlc for force 5 and higher in Irkutsk the strip between the parallels
of he and 68' north latitude and 91 to 96' east longitude located to the
south dropped out of the investigation. Analogously. for kabansk.
snailsr strips were between A4 and 68' north latitude and the seridiane
of 93.5 and 98' east longitude.

In particular. this can explain the tact that Tc 1c for Irkutsk (7 years)
turns out to be greater than T05. (L years). although other causes. above
all. the errors in detersinations. are possible here. The difference for
force 6 in Table 17 for Irkutsk (20 and 50 years) can easily occur as

a result of the errors in estissting the force of the individual earth-
quakes. 0n the other hand. 705‘ for the earthquakes with force 5 in
Knbansk perhaps turned out to be higher by cospariaon with r¢.1c if
certain shocks are not taken into account for the investigated interval.

According to Table 17. the quakes of force 7 and higher in Irkutsk sust

be very rare. and force 8 and higher. in practice. are absent in general.
However. judging by the historical information. it is possible to think
that over the lost 250 years up to 3 force 8 earthquakes have been
observed in Irkutsk -- in 19762. 1829 and 1862. This somewhat reseublea

the results obtained for Tashkent (Zakharova, Seydusova. 1971) and it is
possibly explained by the fact that the calculation for the high force
earthquakes is unreliable in the given case. On the saps of the higher
force seissic vulnerability Irkutsk is in the marginal zone. However.
probably this is caused by other reasons. above all. failure to consider
the peculiarities of the dasping of the quakes in this case. It should

not be forgotten that the perforsed calculations of the seissic vulnerabil-
ity in Pribaykal'ye are the first effort; they do not pretend to the final
solution of the problea and must be given in sore detail and sore precisely
defined hereafter (in particular. it is necessary to consider the peculiar-
ities of the damping of the quakes under various conditions. and sore pre-
cisely to specify the variations of the graphs of the recurrence rate with
respect to area). Therefore the estisates obtained for the seissic vulner-
ability are expediently used more for conclusions of a general nature but
not for detailed conclusions as applied to the local areas.

Discussing the accuracy of the calculated estimates of the seismic vulner-
ability. it is necessary to note that an error of 1.5-2 tiaes is entirely
possible here (Ritnichenko. Zakharova, Seydusova. 1969; Zakharova.

Seydusova. 1971; Pedotov. Shunilina. 19715 Dshibladse. Riznichenko. 1973).

The seismic vulnerability depends linearly on the seissic activity. that
is. on variation of the seismic activity everywhere in the zone by two
tines. the vulnerability also varies by two tines.

267

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nuuerical valued of the vulnerability obtained for Pribaykal‘ye are
coeperablo to the teeulta known for other regione. Sieilar reaulta have
been obtained earlier for Italy (litnichenho. et al.. l970). and ao-euhet
lover or the cane vulnerability ia characteriatic of Eaatern Uzbekistan
(Zakharova and Seydutova. 1971) and Georgia (Dthibladee. Rienichenko.
1973). The lover vulnerability of the Crimean resiona (Rirnichenko.
Dune. et a1.. 1969) and the Carpathian tone (Dru-ya. Popov. Stepanenko.
1971: Druaya. Popov. Reahatnikov. Stapenenko. 1971) than in Pribaykal'ye.
and higher vulnerability in Kamchatka (Pedotov. Shunilina. 1971) in
entirely natural. however. the exceaa ia not ao great as could be expected
at firat glance. The calculationa of the aeianic vulnerability thue
deter-ine the place of Pribaykal'ye with respect to the degree of aeieaic
danger along other regione of the Soviet Union.

268

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP- JIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER X. EARTNQUAKB FORECASTING

Peculiarities of the Development of the Seissic Process by the Observations
of Beak Earthquakes (in Connection with the Search for Diagnostic
Attributes of Strong Earthquakes)

In nature there are sets of earthquakes. about which there is no doubt
that they belong to a single center zone: foreshocks and aftershocks.
The intermediate position (if it is possible to cell it that) between the
"independent" and "related" earthquakes is occupied by swarms and groups
of earthquakes cosbined by a defined comaonness of territory (space)

and, obviously. somehow interconnected in time.

The investigation of the space-tine laws in the distribution of sets of
earthquakes is of unquestioned interest. for during the course of the
investigations it is possible to obtain data on the peculiarities of the
development of the seismic process.

Thus, the study of the nature of the sanifeststion of the aftershock
activity provides information about the developeent of the process in
the center. the dimensions and configurations of the center zone. The
analysis of the geographic distribution of the shocks in the swerns and
groups permits esti-ates to be made of the effect of one earthquake on
another; the tiawrspace analysis of the distribution of the weak earth-

quakes is of interest for studying the process of the preparation of a
strong earthquake, end so on. The results are presented below from studies

of the enumerated end certain other aspects of the seismic process in the
Bnykal seismicslly active zone performed to discover the possibility of
estimating the occurrence of strong earthquakes.

The basis for the investigations is the date on the 2500 earthquakes
with K38 recorded by the Pribaykal network of stations in 1965-1968.

In addition. it turned out to be possible to investigate the seismic
conditions of the region of the center of 20 strong earthquakes (">5)

and one significant form occurring in the tone for the 1959-1968 period
(Table 18). As a rule. the energy estimates for strong earthquakes were
realized by the known relations between K and H derived by T. c. Rautisn.
the application of which is entirely admissible for Pribaykel'ye

(see Chapter VI).

269
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The obeervetione indicete thet for the eerthquekee of nediun etrength
(H to 5) the coordinetee of the etterehocke end the beeic ehock ere
indietinguieheble within the lilite of eccurecy of the obeervetione.
with en increeee in energy of the nein eerthqueke. the eree occupied by
the efterehocke increeeee. Ueuelly in Pribeykel'ye ereee of the efter-
ehock eonee heve elongeted ehepe: eoletinee the epicentere of the
repeeted ehoche ere elongeted in cheine.

to e rule. in the ereee of "nor-e1“ eeie-ic conditione the eerthquohe
dietribution in epece end in tile followe the Poieeon dietribution. thet
ie. eech eerthquehe in e rendon independent event. The devietione. ee
wee deeonetreted by verioue reeeerchere, ere connected with the occurrence
of efterehocke. ever-e end groupe of eerthquehee. By the grouping
phenonenon we neen the eignificent devietion of the dietribution of the
ehocke in tine froe Poieeon in ereee cherecterieed by e conetent neen
recurrence rete of eerthquekee end not connected with the efterehoche end
ever-e of eerthquehee (Iorovih. 1972). In order to find the ehocke neking
up the group. it ie neceeeery to eelect the criticel veluee-of the nice

of the region end the time interval, felling into which will indicete
grouping of the ehock. The rediue of thie region would be logicelly given
no equel to the rediue of the center of the eerthqueke. however. for
eerthquekee of energy cleee 8-13 in Pribeyhel'ye the poeeible errore in
deternining the coordinatee of the centere ere eppreciebly greeter then
their dineneione. Therefore the rediue of the eree of poeeible grouping
wee teken equel to 30 kn. The celculetion of the tine criterion of the
grouping reduced to finding the tine intervel euch thet the probebility

of eppeerence within the lildte of thie intervel of one or lore ehocke ie
equel to e defined given low probebility. in the given ceee P-0.005.

for the correepOnding everege nulber of ehocke for the grouping eree.

For Pribeykel'ye. the groupe include ehocke occurring on eree of 2000 kl2
and eepereted by tile interwel of leee then 0.35 deye. During e eingle
root. the rendon reelieetion of the event with the probebility of 0.005

ie in prectice iepoeeible. however. when ieoleting group enrthquekee.

we neke not one teet. but cen eccidentnlly heve eoIe nulber of eo-celled
felee groupe. In Pribeyhel'ye. excluding the felee groups. 18.2! of

the eerthquekee belong to the groupe.

Groupe were ieoleted with weluee of the probebility from 0.001 to 0.07
(eee Pig 93). The reeulte ere the noet eteble for the probabilities of
0.005 to 0.01 which in expedient to uee in prectice. Now let us return

to the dependence of the grouping effect on the dineneione of the eree.
The following eitee of the ereee were eelected -- 80, 316, 1200. 7800

end 2x105 kn. For eech ceee e etudy wee nede of the nulber of true
groupe end the grouping coefficient x - the retio of the number of

group eerthquekee to the totel number. The grouping coefficient increeeee
with e decreeee in nice of the grouping eree until ineccurecy begine to

be felt in deter-ining the poeition of the epicentere. thet ie, when

isolating the group eerthouekee it ie poeeible to use eny velue of the
grouping eree not exceeding 3000 in: .

270

[OR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL US! ONtY

Table 18

Date on the Sequencee of Repeeted Shocks of Prlhl ykel'ye

Berthquehee in 19594968

Emma“ w<a>

amn me «n. OI. mo >000 at
mm m: “.0 me 0 -: mo ; m m:
mm me 31.1 401mm. :38 - ~1
. . . . m . ' Mam»
I ' | ' III“
auvm me “.4 m; 9!. «n (180) (m 01
mm «a 53.1 190.5 9/. as , «no; no as
nu mu m «m : 9/. u ‘ - . - e
aux: me up «1.3 9.8 n m (too—«op e
mu m: 51.0 w W. (m- -'- - ' 3'
sum no. as: no.3) at'“ one as» an Mme- (5)
. - ‘ - I'll-i
ssn an 55.0 no; ‘ We -- - - -
10m an 82.0 ’10”. 8 t ' to 7:0 0
2mm me 85.2 m.‘ 8 a so mm 00
. mm m m «3.0 h-S - to m «m 0
am an as some I.-8 a - - a
mm m: 86.! no.0 0/. as - - 8
an no 51.: 101.0 0/. to m. - a
.unm no“ em 1” 0!. u .. - e
m as “.1 mg 6 to m - z
mu m: «.1 m}! 1.4 a: - - a
mm as 51.0 tun-1.4 s - - a -
Key:
1. Dete
2. Coordtuetee
3. Note.

5. For deterstnetton of 5 there ere few dete.
S. terthqueke ever-

Note. 1.

n 1e the number of ehocke 1n the series coneidered during
proceeetngg 1 to the extent of the afterehock zone; 5 1e the
eree of the etterehock tone; Q ere the dieenetone of the region
of preperetton or the eerthqueke. 2. The veluee of n were teken
fro. the eels-01031: bulletin of the eeienic etetlon network of
the USSR end the collectione on "Berthquekee in the USSR."

271

FOR 0??!CIAL USE OﬂUY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

Previously it has already been pointed out that the groups. just as the
series of aftershocks belong to the local sets of interconnected events.
The aftershocks are related by commonness of the area. in groups this
relation is expressed by the effect of the centers that are close to each
other. It is possible to define the linits of this effect approximately.
Inside each set of group earthquakes isolated for various values of the
grouping area. a study is made of the group distribution with respect to
the maximum distance between shocks in each individual group. In addition.
the earthquakes of which energy. classes constitute a group was taken

into account. For this purpose. the difference (Kl-K.‘*) was determined.
where “1 is the energy class of the first shock in the group. “max is the
maximum energy class noted in the given group. From the comparison it
follows that groups are most frequently encountered with a spacing
between the most renote shocks not exceeding 10 km. that is. the mutual
effect of the centers of the week earthquakes appears at this distance.

A more detailed analysis. unfortunately. is impossible. for the epicentral
region of the earthquake center of the 8th to 11th energy classes is
smaller then the region of possible position of the epicenter.

Therefore. for the Pribsykal seismic zone data were obtained on the

extent of the regions. within the limits of which the centers of the group
earthquakes are located and the linear dimensions of the center zones of
the strong earthquakes have also been approximately determined. There-
fore hereafter it turned out to be possible to perform the studies of the
seismic conditions in the regions occupied by the centers of the strong
earthquakes before the occurrence of the earthquake and after it. The
study was made by the following diagram: 1) a study was made of the
earthquake distribution over a significant area, including the future
center of the strong earthquake long before its occurrence; 2) the epi-
centrnl zone of the isolated region was investigated during the period of
maxi-us activity of sftershockn; 3) the development of the seismic process
in the isolated tone after the end of the series of aftershocks was
traced; 6) the discovered epicentral fields were compared.

The time intervals during which a study was made of the space-time
distribution of the earthquakes before and after the occurrence of the

series of aftershocks were selected usually the same. lasting several

years. sometimes months. depending on the quality and quantity of the initial

data. the density of the epicenters at the given point and the strength
of the earthquake.

The series of aftershocks of the Central Bsykal earthquake of 29 August 1969
(H-h-3/b) are presented in Fig 96 as an illustration of the processing.

The distribution of the representative earthquakes in the vicinity of
Central Baykal for the periods of 1 January 1952 to 29 August 1959 is
presented in Fig 9b, a; the period of maximum activity of the aftershocks
(29 August 1959 to 30 June 1966) is presented in Fig 96. b. Fran July 1964
(Fig 96, c). the activity of the aftershock zone in practice compared with
the average activity of the region. The region of reduced seismic activity

272

F0! 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

§
c:

Figure 93. Grouping of weak earthquakes for various values
of the probability of random occurrence of an event.
n2 is the total number of isolated groups; “true is the number

of true groups; n is the nunber of false groups; a is the
number of groups {the numbers 2. 3, k. 5 are the nuaber of
shocks in the group)
Key:
1. n
l
2' ntrue

isolated when conparing the epicenter naps (see Fig 96. d) including the
center of the earthquake, has an area on the order of 6000 knz. Let

us note its "region of preparation." The sizes of this region exceed

by approximately two times the area of the aftershock zone. It is true
that in the northeast the boundary is drawn uncertainly as a result of

the absence of data. For coaparison, a region is isolated (see Fig 95. a),
the area of which was selected for convenience equal to the area of the
preparation region.

The data on the variation of the activity in the region of preparation
of the earthquake and the adjacent coeparison region are presented in
Fig 95 (the nulber of observations is plotted on the y-axis, and the
observation tine on the x-axis). As is obvious. the "period of quiet"
of the preparation region lasted at least 7 years; at the ease tine in
the surrounding areas the background of seismic activity in practice

did not change.

273‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Roy:

 

1.

FOR qmcuu. v.53 mm
W

Figure 9b. Analysis of the epicentrel field in the vicinity
of Centrel leykal by the data on earthquakee
with K210 for 1952-1970
a -- epicentral field of the region for the period fro-
1 January 1952 to 29 Auguat 1959: b - epicentral fieid of the
region for the period iron 29 August 1959 to 31 Deco-her 1960;
c - epicentrel field of the region for the period iron
1 January 1961 to 30 June 1966: d - epicentrel field of the
region for the period iron 1 July 1966 to 31 December 1970.
l .. linit of the inveatigated region; 2 —- epicenter: of the
earthquakes with K310; 3 .. boundary of th- aftershock zone.

Lake Baykal; 2. Selenga River.

276
FOR O'TICIAL USE ONLY
”OR (WPICIM. "8}! ONLY

 

Figure 95. Seismic conditions within the liaits of the region
occupied by the center of the earthquake of
29 August 1959

a -- aftershock zone. region of preparation of the earthquake

and region of comparison: 1 -~ boundary of the aftershock zone.
2 -- boundary of the preparation region. 3 - comparison
region; b -- develop-ant of the seissic process in tine in
the region of preparation of the earthquake (the solid line)
and the region of cosparison (dashed line)
Key:

l. Lake Baykal

2. Selenga

3. T. years

The series of aftershocks of 12 strong earthquakes in 1959-1968 were
processed by the same schene. The results were found to be analogous.
that is, it is possible to propose that a strong earthquake is preceded
by a prolonged preparation process which develops within the lisits of
the significant area (Borovik. 1971).

The preparation regions have been isolated most reliably for earthquakes
with magnitude “-5-1/2 and more.

Thus. for Pribaykal'ye. the preparation region of an earthquake of defined
magnitude can be characterised by the paranetersz Q. Tq. no. where n

Q

is the number of shocks in the region Q for the period T . Under the con-
dition that the precess of the occurrence of a strong egrthquake is

275

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘8"

1968; 1 --

nhock densl ty .

increased

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

276

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uuhordinntv to laws discovered when investigating the seismic conditions
of the regions of the centers of strong earthquakes in the past and the
seismic equivalence of the individual sections of the Baykal seismic zone.
the attributes Q. T and n can be used to discover the regions of
increased seismic d nger 13 the near future (Borovik, 1976).

The region of low activity can be isolated by construction of the maps

of the distribution of the epicenters of weak earthquakes by the defined
time-space areas where the spatial parameter is the dimensions of the
preparation region of an earthquake of corresponding magnitude, and the
time parameter is the duration of the preparation period of the earthquake
of the same magnitude.

Then the isolated regions must be checked for the criterion nq.

The approximate values of Q. T for the corresponding magnitudes are
indicated above. it is necess ry to find n0 for which the quiet can be
assumed connected with the formation of the preparation region. For
this purpose. selecting the value of the low probability of the random
realization of the event within the limits of the defined region. let us
find the probabilities of occurrence of 0. l..... shocks. If the
number of shocks n in the region Q for the period T is less than that
selected by us (nan). then the quiet can be consi ered nonrandom.

For probability P-0.005. the possibility of isolating the region where
earthquakes of magnitude “25-1/2 are probable was discussed under the
condition that the average number of shocks in any elementary space-time
area is identical for the entire investigated zone.

The annual distribution maps for the earthquake epicenters with Kas are
constructed with respect to areas of Q-6000 ka for 1965-1968. Within
the limits of this area. during the year earthquakes of energy class 8
and higher must be absent. that is, nQ-O.

When comparing the maps obtained, 16 years were isolated corresponding

to the parameters Q. Tq. : I, III. VII, Ix, XII, XIV, XVII. XXXI.
XXXIX. XXXXII, XXXXIII. . III. XXXXIX, LI in Fig 96. All of the
strong earthquakes of HeS-l/Z noted for 1966-1968 occurred within the
limits of the isolated areas (III - 1966; III -- I967; XXIII -- 1968).
that is. for Pribsykal’ye the probability of the occurrence of a strong
earthquake with HzS—l/Z within the limits of the section with anomalously
low activity is higher (0.2) than the probability of a strong earthquake
within the limits of the area of normal or increased activity.

The simple division into elementary areas and calculation of the number
of epicenters following into each area do not permit sufficiently
reliable determination of the dimensions of the regions of low concen-
tration of epicentera. Therefore, another density map was constructed:
an area 0.6' north latitude X 0.6’ east longitude was shifted by 0.1'
latitudinslly and longitudinally, and in each of these shifted areas

the number of epicenters was calculated (Fig 97). Against the background

277
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rot orrtcm. use our

of uniform noraal density distribution (see figure 97. 2) areas of
reduced density were isolated (see fig 97. 4). The strongest earthquakes
or significant swarms in the near future are lore probable within the
linlts or on the boundaries of the defined regions and in the regions of
nor-a1 or increased shock density.

It is natural that the 5-year observation interval which we could analyse
is insufficient to obtain reliable forecasting attributes of a future
strong earthquake. The eost reliable results can be obtained when
analysing the seismicity of the area for the longest tile interval possible.
Unfortunately, we do not have the possibility of performing such an
analysis. Only indirect estimates can be aade.of the eeisaicity of the
isolated regions of reduced density: analysis of the earthquake epicenter
map with K38 for 1965-1968. distribution of strong earthquakes for 200
years (1771-1971). centers of paleoseiseodislocetiona and schematics of
the basic fault systole. The coepsrison confirss the correctness of the
possible appearance of strong earthquakes in the isolated regions.

Hithin the boundaries of the I region on 28 March 1970, a strong earthquake
occurred (H-S.5); in Hay 1970. a strong earthquake was noted (H-5.6)

within the limits of region V. In 1973 an earthquake with “24.5 and a
significant swarm within the limits of regions 11 and IV were observed.

Thus, a detailed analysis of the seianic infornation for a quite short

observation period lads it possible to obtain results that deserve atten-
tion:

1. 0n the basis of the investigation of 20 series of aftershocka and
one aware. the relation was established between the maxi-us linear dimen-
sions of the aftershock zone and magnitude of the Iain earthquake.

2. The investigation of the grouping of the earthquakes not belonging to
the series of aftershocks and swarms demonstrated that out of all of the
earthquakes (K-G-ll) recorded in 1965-1968. 18.2! belong to groups.

The autual effect of the grouped earthquakes on each other is exhibited
at distances not exceeding 10 km.

3. 0n the basis of the investigation of the regions of the centers of
12 earthquakes with M-5 and more it was established that before each of
then there is some region of calm. the dimensions of which are proportional

to the magnitude of the earthquake and which can be conuidered es the
preparation region.

6. The investigation of the inverse law er the relation of the "empty"
regions (corresponding to the parameters Q, T , n ) to the subsequent
occurrence of strong earthquakes —- denonatraged t the regions of csln
can he considered as regions with increased probability of the occurrence
of strong earthquakes or significant swarms.

278

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

long-Range forecasting of the Seismic Activity According to the
Geophysical Data

The basic materials for permitting characterisation of the seismiclty of
one region or another are the results of the processing of instrument
observations of earthquakes. however. the uniforn seismoatatisticai
material for the southern part of Eastern Siberia has been accumulated
only since 1962. In accordance with the fact that the observation time

is short. this material characterizes both the long-term and short-term
(random) components of the seismic process. In a number of regions. the
random component can predominate. Therefore it is difficult to forecast
the future seismic activity with respect to aeismoatatistics. To a known
degree the indicated deficiency in studying the seismicity is filled by
the paleoseismogeological method. Seismogeological studies in the southern
part of Eastern Siberia revealed a large number of pelaoaeiamodialocetions.
and an approximate estimate was made of the force of the earthquakes as

a result of which the indicated paleoseismodialocations were formed. The
material obtained indicates that the increased seismicity was observed in
individual sections of the described territory hundreds and even thousands
of years ago. However. as a result of intense effect of the denudation
processes up to the present time. traces only of the strongest disastrous
earthquakes have been preserved by which. of course, it is impossible to
obtain a complete representation of the manifestation of the seismic
process in the entire investigated territory of Eastern Siberia.

The information about strong earthquakes in the 17th to 19th centuries
that has coae down to us, the broad material on paleoseismodislocations

in accordance with the ssismostatistical data permit us to state that the
increased aeismicity during the prolonged period is characteristic of a
comparatively clearly located area in the Bayhal rift zone. The continua-
tion of the process of tectonic activation in the Baykal rift zone is
indicated by numerous earthquakes - 3000 or more per year.

The phenomenon of seismicity of the Baykal rift zone cannot be considered
isolated. separated from the various geological-geophysical characteristics
of the region. The deep geophysical studies in recent years have estab-
lished that the zones of the latest tectonic activation -- both oceanic

and continental rift systems -- have a number of specific features:

contrast of the forms of modern relief, the existence of large rift basins
filled with thick Cenozoic deposits. increased heating of the earth's depths,
the presence of a zone of reduced velocities in the upper mantle and many
other characteristics. The Bayhal rift zone. according to the data of
numerous studies (Bulmasov. 1959; Zorin. 1971; Gornostayev. at al., 1970;
Mishnrina. 1967, 1972; Novoselova. 1972 a, b; Puzyrev. et al., 1975) is

also characterized by surface and deep structure of the earth's crust
significantly different from the bordering territories and by the

specific peculiarities of the geophysical fields respectively (see Chapter IV).
The variation of the surface and depth structure of the earth's crust

caused by the riftogenic process takes place slowly, and the characteristics

280

?OR 0!?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or the relief. the structure of the earth's crust and the geophysical

fields nvnllnhle ni the present time are the result nf prnlnngod development
of the region. inasmuch as the modern suinmicity of the Baykal rift zone
and with peculiarities of its surface and deep structure characterize
various aspects of the same tectonic process. the theoretical possibility

of obtaining the representation of the long-term component of the seismicity
from a comparison of the seissostatistical data with the different geologi-
cal-geophysical parameters characterizing the latest tectonic activity is
noted. However. for extrapolation of the basic peculiarities of the long-
rnngc component of the seismicity in the modern stage of development of

the region. proofs are needed of the preservation of the ssin trends in the
appearance of the tectonic process. we have certain proofs of this at our
disposal. First of all. this is the Ianifastation of increased seismicity
in almost the same frame of the region of Cenozoic activation where a
special surface structure of the earth and its depths is observed. Then.
comes the preservation of the basic peculiarities in the development of
uplifts and basins. The formation of the generated basins in the Kodar.
Udoksn and Khamar-Daban ridges. the variation in rates of sediment accumula-
tion are phenomena of a local order.

Thus. having information available about the long-range component of the
tectonic process in the form of geomorphological parameters and the
characteristics of the geophysical field and data on the modern seismicity
(we are talking about seismic activity). it is possible to try to establish
quantitative relations between them and. in the presence of the latter. to
determine the long-term component of the seismicity.

The study of the relations of seismicity to various geological-geophysical
parameters has acquired broad scale at the present time. Quite frequently
the researchers have alerted themselves to the establishment of the
qualitative relations of the investigated parameters (Gamburtsev. 1954.
I955; Gamburtsev. Veytsman, 1956; Ibragimov, 1970; Dru-ya. 1973;
Kuznetsov. et al.. 1971; Ksragityan, Hanukyan. 1971). The works aimed at
obtaining quantitative characteristics of the relations of the seismicity
to the geological-geophysical parameters are of significantly greater
interest (Riznichsnko. at al., 1969; Ta1'-Virakiy. at al.. 1971; Butovskaya.
Sokolove. 1970; Gorshkov. Shenkareva, 1970). However. only in the papers
by V. l. Buns. H. Ye. Artem'yev, N. Sh. Kambarov (1971) and

N. Sh. Kambsrov (1971) was an effort undertaken to estimate the seismic
danger of the territory on the basis of the quantitative relations of
seismicity. isostatic anomalies of the gravitational force and their
gradients.

In Pribaykal'ye. the studies of the quantitative relation of the seismic
activity to the relief and the gravitational field vere begun by

Yu. V. Riznichenko, Yu. A. Zorin and K. V. Pshennikov (Riznichenko. et a1..
1969). The seismic activity map compiled by K. V. Pshennikov by the

281

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

method of summation of the earthquakes using a constant averaging area
for the period from 1962 to 1966 was compared with the altitudes of the
average relief (the dimensions of the averaging area were 30x30 km),

the moduli of the altitude gradient of the average relief (the dimensions
of the averaging area are hsxas km) end averaged isostatic anomalies
calculated by Yu. A. Zorin by the simplified method proposed by him.

The pair correlation was fulfilled for the entire territory of the Baykal
rift on the whole and separately for its flanks and central regions. It
turned out that over the entire territory there is no clear quantitative
interrelation between the altitudes of the average relief and the seismic
activity. The pair correlation coefficient is close to zero. It
increases to -0.3b:0.15 only on the flanks of the rift system.

The modulus of the altitude gradient of the average relief is correlated
with the seismic activity somewhat better: r-O.3Q:p.09 and preserves the
order of magnitude both in the individual sections of the territory and
on the whole throughout the rift tone.

The relation between the averaged isostatic anomalies and the seismic
activity turned out also to be reliable, but weak (r-0.2110.09). 0n
making the transition free one section of the rift to the other, the
nature of the relation did not remain constant. The results obtained led
to the conclusion that the quantitative relations between the seismic
activity and some of the geomorphological-gravimetric parameters in the
linear and quadratic forms exist reliably. but they are weak and cannot be
used for forecasting the long range average seismic activity.

The further study of the interrelation of seismic activity and the geologi-
cal-geophysical parameters was continued by M. R. Novoselove and

Yu. A. Zorin in the direction of finding an improved form of the relation
and the set of parameters which would have a closer relation to the
seismicity. For comparison. a nap of the seismic activity is used which
was constructed at the Seismology Laboratory of the Institute of the Earth's
Crust of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences by the
method of constant accuracy on seismoststisticsl data for 196 1968. The
dimensions of the averaging areas varied from 96 to 18.000 km . and
accuracy of determining the seismic activity turned out to be equal to 351.
The seismic activity was calculated by the generally accepted formula in
the shocks of the network with a step size of 0.2' with respect to latitude
and longitude. All of the earthquakes were used beginning with the

8th energy class. The 10th class was taken as . The angular coefficient
of the recurrence rate graph for using the set 0 earthquakes is 0.b85.

The described map of seismic activity is in general feature similar to
that in the paper by Yu. V. Riznichenko, et al, (1969), but it differs

in detail. This difference is caused by the use of the seismostatistical
material for various years and the application of various construction
procedure. It is necessary to note that the correlation coefficient

282

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between the values of the seismic activity of the two maps is 0.6. How-
ever. when repeating the correlation of the seismic activity with respect
to the new map to the gradients of the averaged altitudes and isostatic
anomalies. estimates were obtained for the degre of linear and quadratic
relations having the same order as in the earlier paper (Risnichsnko. et
nl.. 1969).

The modulus of the altitude gradients of the upper Cretaceous to Palaogenic
planation surface deformed by the latest movements. the modulus of the
horizontal gradients of the gravitational anomalies in the Bouguar reductions
and the isostatic and also the values of the gravitational anomalies in the
Bouguer reduction were used as the new parameters with which a comparison
of the seismic activity was made. The maps of the moduli were constructed

by the general principles described in the paper by Yu. V. Risnichenko.

et sl.. (1969). The gradients were calculated by the averaging areas on

the order of 9000 kmz. The latter value was obtained as the arithmetic

mean of the dimensions of the earth used to calculate the seismic activity.

The pair correlation coefficients characterizing the linear form of the
relation turned out to be reliable. but low.

Then the set correlation of the seismic activity with the sets of geological-
geophysicnl parameters was carried out. Several versions of the combination
of the correlated parameters were tested. but the values characterizing

the dismembarment of the relief. the variability of the local component of
the gravitational field and the values of this field themselves always
participated here. In addition to the linear relation. the quadratic.
cubic. logarithmic and aemilogarithmic forms were also tested. The best
form of the relation turned out to be the semilogarithmic (the logarithm

of the seismic activity was considered to be a linear function of the
geological-geophysical parameters). With this form of the relation. the
maximum set correlation coefficient (0.75:0.05) was obtained for the seismic
activity. the altitude gradients of the average relief, the gradients of

the isostatic anomalies and the Bouguer anomalies respectively.

The regression equation has the form1

Am - 2.3 exp (75.58- Igrsd hcpl + 0.1- Igrad gal - 0.01- gb - 4.02} (1)
A map of forecasting the long-range component of the seismic activity was

constructed by this equation. The analysis of the map is presented in the
paper by Yu. A. Zorin and M. R. Novoselova (1972).

 

‘All of the calculations connected with the correlation analysis and
determination of the coefficients of regression equations were performed on
the BESN-b computer of the Eastern Geophysical Trust (Irkutsk).

283

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1972 8. I. Golenetskiy and c. L. Hyl‘nikova constructed a new map

ol’ the seissic activity by the sethod of surnation of the earthquake with
a cunntnnt averaging arcs (the provisional dimensions of the area renaincd
constant). Its sisilar characteristic is presented in Chapter VIII. here
let us note that the unquestioned advantage of the new nap. in contrast

to the previously cospiled ones. is that it encospassaa a large aaount of
asisnostatistical saterial (1962\1971).

Naturally it could be hoped that this asp would give a nora objective
characteristic of the seismic activity and would be sore advantageous
for determination of its long-tars cosponent. The sap was constructed in

two versions: considering all of the earthquakes and with exclusion of
the swarm of weak shocks.

In view of the fact that the averaging area has appreciably ssaller disen-
sions (988 to 1321 b2) by cosparison with the average area used previously.
the necessity arose for transforsation of the naps of the geological and
geophysical parameters respectively (to present the dimensions of the
parameter averaging areas in accordance with those which were used for
calculation of the seissic activity).

The correlated values of the seismic activity and the geological-geophysical
parameters were selected in the shocks of the bSXlS kn network. The

set correlation coefficient turned out to be equal to 0.75.10.05. The
regression equation has the for-

A10 - 2.3-exp [80.03- Igrad her] + momma gal - 0.0134;B - 4.90) (2)

A comparison of equations (1) and (2) indicates that their coefficients
are close to each other. Thus, in spite of the different initial scisso-
atatistical aaterial. the operation of planation of the series using
stably defined geological-geophysical paraseters leads to close results.
This persits the conclusion to be drawn that as s- result we obtained the

description of the actually stable (long-tern) cosponent of the seissic
process.

1: must be more precisely deterninsd that the presented equation (2) was
obtained as a result of cosparing the geological-geophysical paraseters
with the total values of the seissic activity (that is, with those which
were obtained when considering all of the earthquakes beginning with their
given representative class). Using the naps of the ssisnic activity with
the excluded earthquake forms. in practice the sane equation is obtained
(the differences in the coefficients are statistically reliable). This
means that the proposed procedure autosatically insures exclusion of the
forms of weak earthquakes if these seismic events are random.

Let us try to explain the existing relations of the seismic activitv to
each of the parameters entering into equations (1) and (2). The nodulus
of the altitude gradient of the averaged relief is directly proportional

28!.

P93 OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL US! ONLY

to the modulus of the horizontal velocity gradient of the latest vertical
movements. The physical meaning of the relation of the last value to the
seismic conditions is generally known (Gaovskiy. 1959. 1963). Under
natural conditions, for nonuniformity of the earth's crust. this relation
is entirely naturally of a statistical nature; therefore in individual
sections its violation is entirely admissible.

The physical essence of the relation of the seismic activity to the gravi-
tational field is not so obvious. The following arguments help to explain
it. In Chapter II it was pointed out that the Baykal rift zone in the
Bouguer anaomaly field corresponds to the extended regional minimum (more
precisely. the system of minima) which. judging by the deep seismic sound-
ings. is caused by the presence of the region of dispersion of the upper
mantle (see Chapter IV). The rise of the dispersed material from great
depths obviously is the basic cause for riftogenesis (Artem'yev.
Artyushkov. 1968; Zorin. 1971). to one of the manifestations of which the
increased seismicity of the region belongs. The intensity of the rifto-
genesis obviously is directly related to the volume of material accumulated
under the crust. On this level the correlation of the seismic activity

to the intensity of the nouguer anomaly becomes understandable.

The relation of the seismicity to the horizontal gradients of the local
anomalies is assumed to be explained by the fact that the maxima of the
latter fix the fractures. However. when using the gradients of the iso-
static anomalies of the averaging area on the order of 60 km in diameter
for the calculation. the peaks of the gradients can only in individual
cases correspond to specific large faults. The analysis of the map of

the modulus of the gradients of the isostatic anomalies indicates that the
increased values of this parameter are characteristic of the entire rift
zone as a whole. that is. in generalized form it reflects only the degree
of contrast of the local anomalies (the regional component of the field

is completely excluded by isostatic reduction). The contrast of the local
anomalies is caused primarily by the presence of a thick series of

Cenozoic deposits in the large (but comparatively narrow) rift basins of
the Baykal. Bargutin and other types. Therefore the relation of the seismic
activity to the moduli of the gradient of the isostatic anomalies indirectly
reflects the inheritance of the modern tectonic movements expressed in the
seismicity from the movements of the entire latest stage. This is valid
also with respect to the remaining used parameters. The contrast of the
local gravitational anomalies is caused. in addition, by increased
heterogeneity of the upper layer of the earth's crust. As H. R. Novoselova
(1972) demonstrated. this is a specific feature of the Baykal rift zone

by comparison with the bordering territories. The direct consequence of
this is a reduction in the mechanical strength of the crust material

which under the conditions of the tectonic activation promotes destruction
of the continuity of the material and. consequently, an increase in
seismicity. Ye. V. Karus and I. Ye. Rexanov (1971) indicate that the
sections of articulation of the materials with different physical proper-
ties are most favorable for the manifestation of seismicity.

285

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE QNLY

Using equation (2) and the values of the above-mentioned parameters, we
calculated the long-term component of the seismic activity (Fig 98) for
the entire territory of the Baykal rift zone. It appears useful to us

to compare the picture obtained with the initial data (seismostntistical)
0n the seismic activity. In this comparison three caaeaaretheoretically
possible:

1. Complete coincidence of the initial and forecasting maps. This
indicates the absolute preservation of the trend in the development of
the tectonic process and the unconditional suitability of the initial map
of the seismic activity for the long-range forecasting of the place and
the strength of the earthquakes. However, the sections for comparison of
the initial and forecasting map are few. They have small area and are
'arranged primarily around the periphery of the Baykal rift zone.

2. The values of the long-term seismic activity are higher than on the

initial step. Beginning with the statement of the problem itself. in this
case we can show that the reduction in seismic activity in such areas is

a temporary phenomenon. It is impossible to guarantee that this reduction
will last a long time in the future. 0n the contrary, the tectonically
active sections in the recent geological past in which the last 5 to 10
years the activity is relatively dropped. can correspond to the preparation
zones of strong earthquakes. This conclusion agrees well with the data of
N. s. Borovik. et al.. (1971) regarding the formation of such zones in s'
few years before the strong earthquakes.

The regions with such relations of modern a;» long-term seismic activities
include the southern part of the Baykal basin, the Tunkinskaya basin and
its vicinity and also the northeastern part of the northern Baykal basin.

3. The values of the forecast long-term component of the seismic activity
are lower than on the initial map. Such relations are characteristic for

the regions where the geological-geophysical indexes of the tectonic activity
are comparatively low. and the modern seismicity is high. These regions
include primarily the northeastern part of the naykal rift zone. This has
served as the main reason for the assumption that the riftogenesis process
develops in the northeasterly direction. encompassing the new territory in
which noticeable rearrangement .f large volumes of the earth's crust have
still not succeeded in occurring, and the standard rift structures are

still morphologically poorly expressed (Solonenko. V. ,1968b).

Strictly speaking. our data on the quantitative relations of the geological-
geophysical indexes to the seismic activity say nothixg for or against this
hypothesis. Formerly. the latter regions are entirely equivalent to the
sections where the long-term component of the activity is greater than
modern. Actually for the statistical approach (in the process of solving
the problem of the equalization of the series) the deviations in different
directions from the regression equation are equiprobable. we can assume

287

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R00010003001 1-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that the ohaerVed increase in seismic activity is a temporary (random)
phenomenon. however. this trend can exist for tens and hundreds of years.
If any industrial or other object is destroyed by a strong earthquake.
then the consideration of the latter in the category of random. irregular
evonta is of little comfort. Therefore we assume that in such regions.
determining the seismic danger. it is necessary to be oriented toward
modern high activity and not belong to a component. This "overinsursnce"

is entirely Justified when we are dealing with such destructive forces of
nature as an earthquake.

Thus. when estimating the seismicity we recommend the use of both the
map for forecasting the long-term component of the seismic activity and
the initial map of this parameter. in each region giving preference to
the one for which the grea'ar level of seismicity is indicated. Fig 99
shows the summary map of the maximum possible values of the seismic
activity constructed by the indicated procedure.

It ia entirely natural to state the problem of how reliable the information
is about the long—term component of the seismic activity obtained by the
geological-geophysical parameters with s set correlation coefficient
of 0.75. We have already noted above that the correlation coefficient
between the values of the seismic activity calculated for the different
time intervals will be a total of 0.6. Moreover. the correlatability
between the values of the activity calculated by L. A. Anislmova and

c. L. Hyi'nikova (1971) by the nethod of constant accuracy and the method
of equal areas for the same year of 1970 turned out to be on the level of
0.75. Thus. the reproducibility of the value itself on varying the pro-
cedure and the time interval turns out. unfortunately. to be low. with
respect to statistical reliability the forecasting map for the long-range
component of the activity is not inferior to the initial maps.

0n the basis of what has been discussed. it is possible to draw the
following conclusions:

l. in the leykal rift zone the modern seismic activity reveals a quite
close set correlation with the moduli of the gradient of the average relief.
the gradient of the isostatic anomalies and the louguer anomalies themselves.
All of the enumerated factors characterise the total effect of the latest
tectonic movements.

2. The set regression equations permits determination of the long-term
component of the seismic activity. The map of this component offers the
possibility of isolating potentially dangerous sections in seismic respects
characterized at the present tiae by a comparatiVely quiet seismic regime.

3. The use of the maps obtained for seismic regionalisation is expedient

in combination with the aeiamostatisticsl material and information about the
pnleoaeismodialocationa.

288

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

CﬂAPTER XI. NEOTECTONICS AND SEISHOTECTOﬂICS

In the territory of the mountainous belt of Easter Siberia during the process
of Cenozoic activation. various geological-geomorphological. neotectonic

and seismic processes appeared broadly. The complex seissic geological
studies of this complex region made it possible to establish both the general
features and the differences of the neotectonic zones entering into it and
individual elements of the sorohostructure here.

The neotectonica of the mountain belt of Eastern Siberia and the adjacent
Dart of the Siberian platform has been considered by us in the seisnotectonic
aspects. This will permit concentration of attention on the neotectonic
movements prosoting the formation of morphostructures with different seismo-
geological relations and the nature of sanifestation of the earthquakes.

The young movements converted the ancient (precenosoic) structures and
created neotectonic zones in the development of which the phenomena of
inheritance are closely cosbined with sharp resrrangesent of the ancient
structural plan (for example. the Transbaykal block-wave and naykal rift
zones). In seismotectonic respects. this is felt primarily in the different
seismic potential of such regions and the structural elesents of the
different sorphogenetic type entering in than.

Seismotectonics -- part of the latest tectonics -- are considered by some
researchers in the narrow sense as the division which studies the occurrence.
the course and the surface effects of strong earthquakes (Vardanyants.

1935: Svyatlovskiy. 1955: Gofshteyn. 1963: and so on). Obviously. it is
more correct to consider the probless of seisuotectonics on the broader
levol -- priaarily in the revelation of the genetic relation of the modern
seismicity to the geological-structural development of one region or another
(Gubin. 1950. 1960: Petrushevskiy. 1955; Plorensov. 1960. 1968; ACTIVE
TPCTONICS.... 1966; SEISHDTECTONTCS.... 1968. 1975a. b; the Gobi-Altay
earthquake. 1963: Allen. et al.. 1965. and so on). In one way or another
the main goal of the seisnoctectonic studies must consist in the fact that
on the basin of geological-geophysical analysis of the relation of the
geological atructure-morphostructure-earthquake establish-est of the seismo-
genic structures and determination of their seismic potential constitute

one of the nest isportant elesents of the set of attributes by which

seismic regionalization is carried out.

290
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the understanding of the morphostructures as genetically unique
complexes of the tectonic-orngraphic elements formed by the latest endogenic
movements comes the importance of their seismotectonic classification with
the corresponding estimate of the relative potential seismicity. here it

is most important to discover the geodynanic type and nature of the move-
nents causing genetic variety of the morphostructures and modern geomorph-
ological contrasts. Often. especially when there is a shortage of seismo-
logical and seismogeologicsl data. this estimate is complicated and to some
degree is subjective. Nevertheless, the Joint analysis of the geological-
Reophysicai. neotectonic and seismological.data will permit quite reliable
isolation of the basic epicentral zones of the possible maximum earthquakes.

The basis for this is the seismotectonic map (Fig 100) reflecting the
different structural-geological and morphostructural criteria of the seismic
processes occurring in the earth’s crust - the type and differentiation of
the morphostructures and the dislocations of the break in continuity. the
active faults and the main "seismogenerating" zones. the paleoseismogenic
structures and other seismogeological information. from the investigation
of the data together with seismologic and geological-geophysical material.
as a consequence. comes the conclusion of estimation of the potential
scismicity of the neotectonic zone and individual morphostructures -- the
most important element of seismotectonic analysis. Here the paleoseismo-
dislocations depicting the maximum intensity of the earthquakes which
occurred in one zone or another for the latest activation period and also
the seismoststistical data and the results of their interpretation (activity
nap. Keax- and so on) are the most informative. This estimate of the epi-

central zones of possible maximum earthquakes is presented on the potential
seismicity map.

On these maps on the neotectonie and, above all. seismotectonic level the
investigated territory of Eastern Siberia encompasses the two large regions
of different types - to a significant degree the activated southern part
of the Siberian Cenozoic platform and the epiplatform orogenic belt. The
neotectonic and seismotectonic movements in them appeared differently and.
along uith the other geodynamic peculiarities gave rise to the specific
nature of the manifestation of the earthquakes. Accordingly. four regions
are isolated on the seismotectonic map: I) stable and marginal activated
zones of the platform: 2) the laykalo-Stsnovoy region of intense Vault-
block and riftogenic movements: 3) the Transbaykal block-wave zone and 6)
the belt of aorphostructures transitional between the second and third
regions.

For certain large regions of the mountain belts of Eastern Siberia the
seismogeological and seismostatisticsl information is meager or in general
missing. Most frequently this is the poorly or recently inhabited regions

 

1it is matched with the seismic regionalization map.

291

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICML USE ONLY

 

Figure 100. Sou-oceanic up of Eutom Siberia. Conpttcd by
A. D. Abalakov. H. . Dcl'yanovtch. V. H. thlldn. R.

292

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

s. V. Lutochkln, V. V. Nikolayev, s. D. Khll'lw, V. S. momwkikh.
Edited by V. P. Solonenko. 1973. [See legend and key. p 296]

293
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Legend and key to sap. pp 292-293):

Siberian Cenozoic platform: 1 - stable regions. 2 - edge parts encompassed
by the Cenozoic activation; epiplatfora Cenozoic orogenic belt: A --
Inykalo-Stanovoy zone of intense arch-block'and riftogenic novenents.

8 -- Transbaykal block-wave zone (81 -— Selengo-Vitis eubzsne of soderatc
differentiated sovesents. 8 -- Khentey-Daurskaya subzone of intense

arch uplift. 83 -- eastern $rsnsbayks1 subzcne of weakly differentiated
novementl): positive norphostructures: 3 -- block. b -- arch-block (A ~-

in zone A. 8 -- in zone 8). 5 - arch-fault. 6 -- arch. 7 - interbasin

and intrabasin cosnissures: negative norphostructures: 8-12 - rift basins:
8 -- nature unloaded (e - sections with sharp intrabssin differentiation

of the foundation. b - sections with weak interbaain differentiation of

the foundation. c -- sections of noxious loading of the foundation). 9 --
nature loaded. 10 - embryonic basins and satellite basins. ll - generating
basin. 12 - infantile basins: 13 -- subrift basins; lb -- Transbsykal

typo basin; 15 -- fault basins of the unsxplicit type: faults: 16 --
principal precenozoic. l7 -- active and Cenozoic (a - established. 8 --
proposed); 18 -- deep (a - established. b - proposed). The relative
notations is as follows: 19 - relicts of troughs (a -- Mesozoic, b --
Tertiary). 20 -- Quaternary volcanoes. 21 -- boundaries (n -- leykul rift
system. b -- remaining zones and subzonea). 22 -— epicenters of strong
earthquakes: a -- with respect to seisnostatistic (Mab-l/Z: K212).

b -- with respect to paleoseislodislocstions - predo-inantly force 9 or
sore. ":6-1/2.

Key:

1 -- Alygdzher: 2 -- Iya; 3 - Nizhneudinsk; b -- Tulun; S -- “4!;

6 -- Zita: 7 -- Oka: 8 -- Cheretkhovo; 9 -- 801. Belaya; 10 -n Angers:

11 -- Irkutsk: 12 -- Kitoy; 13 -- Hal Bedoya; 16 .. Irkut; 15 --
Slyudyanks; 16 -— Baykal'sk; l7 -- Snezhns; 18 - Zakenensk; l9 - Dzhida;
20 —- Mendy; 21 —- Grlik; 22 - Lake Khubsugul; 23 -- Lower Tunguska;

26 -- Kirensk: 25 -- Ust'-Kut: 26 - Kirenga; 27 -- Lens; 28 -- Kschug;

29 -- Yelsntsy; 30 -- Sslengs; 31 -- Selenginsk; 32 - Ulsn-Ude:

33 -- Gusinoozerek: 3b -- Khilokt' 35 -- Nizhneangsrsk; 36 -- Lensk;

37 -- Lens; 38 -- Vitil: 39 - Nana: , 60 - Upper Angora: bl -- Uakit;

62 -- Bagdarin: 63 -- Aloaot: 66 - Ronanovks; 65 - Sosnovo-Ozersk;

66 -- Kutora: 67 - Lake Bayksl; 68 -- 8srguzin: 49 - Turkagso -- Uda;

51 - Henza; 52 - Chikoy: 53 -- Ingoda; $6 - Chapcheranga:

SS —- Khilok; 56 - Chita; 57 - Bodsybo; S8 -- Vitin; $9 - Lar~ Oren:

60 -- Nelysty; 61 -- Chara; 62 -- Middle Kalar; 63 -- Vitin; 66 -- Karenga;
65 -- 8ukachacha; 66 - Shilks; 67 - ﬂerchinsk; 68 - Ingoda; 69 -- Onon;
70 -- Lake Barut—Torei; 71 -- aorzya; 72 -— Argun‘; 73 --cornyy-Zerentuy;
7h —- Anur; 7S -— Nogocha; 76 - Tulik; 77 -- Olekas; 78 --01ekninsk

79 - Teanik; 80 -- Gazi-ur ; 81 - Kyakhta; 82 -- Tokko; 83 -- Andsn;

86 -- Chara: 85 -- Ust'-Nyukzhs.

296

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with general seismic potential not exceeding force 8 (for example. the
greater part of Transbaykal, the Baykal-Patomskoye Highlands). In such
cases. at least for a qualitative estimate of the potential seismicity of
the specific morphostructure. an estimate of the vertical tectonic movements
is used (in combination with other data). For this purpose. by the correspond-
ing procedure (Gzovskiy. et al.. 1959; GzoVskiy, 1963) with certain altera-
tions (Lastochkin. 1972) a map of the velocity gradients of the vertical
tectonic movements with the mountain belt of Eastern Siberia was constructed
(see Fig 101). In connection with the divergence of opinions noted in
recent years with respect to the problem -f the "relief-seismicity" ratio.
it is necessary to give some explanations.

The valuss of the gradients for the different areas fluctuate from 510'10
to 1-10” years’1 or more. The maximum values of them are characteristic
of the Baykal-Stanovoy highland with intense vault-block and riftogenic
movements. the middle values. for the western and central parts of
Transbaykal block-wave zone. and low values for the eastern part of the
latter and the marginal zones of activation of the Siberian platform. The
intrazonal ratio of the seismicity and magnitude of the velocity gradients
of the vertical tectonic movements is exhibited far from always far from
everywhere. and at times is contradictory. This indicates that the correla-
tion between the seismicity and the relief exists not only in the most
general form on the scale of at least the young mountain belts where
mechanically imperfect articulation of the mobile (predominantly block)

morphostructures is exhibited through the sharply differentiated and
contrasted relief.

Thus. between the seismicity and relief (and. consequently, the velocity
gradients of the vertical tectonic movements) in general form there must
be as simple a correlation as exists between the latest tectonics and the
relief on the whole. However. the aeismotectonically similar relations
can be expressed for regions of stable tectonic regimes. If the tectonic
conditions change significantly in the modern age (for example. on the
flanks of the rift zone). then the ratio of the level of modern seismicity
and the velocity gradients of the vertical tectonic movements will be
anomalous. Therefore the application of the "gradients" as the seismicity
level index separated from the other seismotectonic criteria can lead to
invalid representations of seismic potential of specific morphostructures
and to serious errors during seismic regionalizstion. This pertains not
only to the seismically active areas of Eastern Siberia. ﬂany researchers
(Petrushevskiy. 1960..l96&. 1969; Florensov, 1961. 1965; Florenaov, et al..
1964; Solonenko. 1960c. 1965), and in recent times the authors of the method
themselves when considering the problem of the "relief-seismicity" ratio
have warned against exaggeration of this relation. especially when estimating
the seismicity of the specific sections. Without going into a detailed
discussion of the neotectonic history of the development of the mountain
belt of Eastern Siberia which has already been the subject of broad dis-
cussion and was investigated in the well-known papers (Pavlovskiy. 1968b;
Florenaov. 1960a. 1968; ACTIVE TBCTONICS.... 1966; SEISHOTECTONICS...,
I968: Lamakin. 1968; and so on). let us proceed to the seismotectonic
analysis of the specific elements of the morphostructure of this territory.
295

FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

   

.m up nouuaaoo
“—0?

     

! '1’!

canny easy wand cu m “annuaoa ouo»n~un.0v on In a

.=A;.=u:u .m
up.» «nu a“
me an: .aOa «name»

"anon can ”launch wso«nu|w.oV on In H

OﬂLY

296
P0! OFFICXAL USE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Fig 101. p 296]:

l - Lake Baykal; 2 - Upper Angara; 3 -- Uda; 6 - Oka; 5 - Zita;

6 -- Belaya; 7 -- Irkutsk; 8 -- Dzhida; 9 .. Chikoy; 10 -- Tugnuy;

ll - Selenga; 12 -- Ulan-Ude; 13 - Berguzin; 14 -- Lens: 15 -— Vitim;
l6 -- Bodaybo: l7 -- Olekma; 18 -- Uet'-Nyukzha; 19 -- ﬂyukzha;

20 -- Chara; 21 -- Olekaa; 22 -- Vitim; 23 - Xhilok; 24 -- Chite;

25 -- lngoda: 26 -- Shilka; 27 - Cazimurz 28. lrkut.

Siberian Cenozoic Platform

In the investigated territory of Eastern Siberia the platform region
occupied a subordinate poeition. entering into it only as its own marginal.
predominantly activated part. In the aouth end southeast it is bordered

by the Baykal-Stenovoy orogenic belt from which it is sharply distinguished
by low velocity gradients of the vertical tectonic movements

(5-10‘10 to 2-10’9 yeara'l). however. the Cenozoic tectogeneaie has been
manifested here in the form of gently sloping bending deformations. Ae

Yu. V. Pavlovskiy (1968a. b) end N. A. Logachev. et a1. (1966) have
demonstrated. in the Cenozoic sediments of the marginal part of the platform
signs of folding are noted -- predominantly flat aynclinale with step
angles of the limbs to 10'. The total stratigraphic thickness of the
Cenozoic depoaita reaches 500 meters (the Pre-Beykal trough).

The Baykal-Stenovoy orogenic belt has had significant influence on the
marginal zone of the Siberian platform which was reflected in its differ-
entiation with the formation of the Cenozoic troughs and uplifta. Never-
theless. the latest dislocations with a break in continuity. which play
the principal role in the development of the morphoatructuree of Baykal-
Stenovoy zone loae significance here. and the bending deformations and
flexurea are acquiring a defining role.

The geological-geomorphological. neotectonic and aeisnotectonic peculiar-
ities of the Siberian platform will permit isolation of a stable (internal)
zone and a zone encompassed by the Cenozoic activation (marginal zone)

in its territory.

Stable Region. The stable region of the Siberian Cenozoic platform around
the periphery of the Irkutak amphitheater is bounded by the margin
foothills uplifta and troughs. For this region the lowest (<5'10 years’l)
gradients of the vertical tectonic movements, broad developeent of the
preneogene planatioa surface, large cupola-like and swell type uplifta

with large rediua of curvature are characteristic.

The neotectonic structures of the stable region of the platform are in
practice aselsmic. In addition, the nonuniformity of the atructure of the
crystal foundation and the mantle of thick Heaozoic and Cenozoic sediments
covering it cause a different degree of manifestation of the "transit"
quakes. In the uplifted regions they are manifested more sharply than in

297
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe ontcm use ONLY

the large troughs with the thick mantle of Mesozoic and Cenozoic sedisents
(the Pre-Baykal trough).

The sarginal parts encospessed by the Cenozoic activation are a transitional
aorphostructural elelent between the platfora and orogenic structures and

have seisnotectonic features characteristic of both the former and the
latter.

The absence of internal neotectonic differentiation and host glacial activa-
tion of the dislocations with a break in continuity, good maintenance of

the pre-Neogenic planetion surfaces and the development of smooth forss of
the relief and also the low degree of seisuic activity will permit considera-
tion of these sorphostructures close to pletforu. 0n the other hand. the
increased rate of neotectonic novesents and their gradients (to 2'10'9 years'1
reflected in the specific for-s of the relief indicate the genetic relation
of the marginal uplifts and troughs to the Baykal-Stenovoy orogenic belt.

The latter is also confined by the local centers of week earthquakes which
indicates their seisnogenerating role, in contrast to the stable platform
structures. The examples of such development are the Peredovoy ridge. the
Boykalo-Patonskoye highland. the Alden shield. the Predbayltal'sltiy
[Pre-Bnykal] and Prisayenskiy [Sayen] troughs.

The distribution of the local earthquake centers in the urginel zones of

the platforu is subject to acne law. wherever the orogenic belt has a

clear discontinuous boundary (the Priseyanskiy section) or the Cenozoic
troughs (Predbaykal'sltiy) are directly adjacent to it. the activated zone

of the platfore usually has narrow (50-100 In) width. and the density of

the epicenters decreases sharply in the direction of the platform. wherever
the unrginal parts of the platform do not have clear boundaries. the

density of the epicenters drops gradually on going away from the orogenic
belt. and the width of such zones reeches 300 Ian (Baykalo-Patonskoye High-
land). that is. is 3 to 6 tiles greater than in Prissyen'ye and Pribeykal'ye.

The sarginal uplifts and troughs located under the effect of the intensive
development of the Baykalo-Stsnovoy zone of the arch-block and riftogenic
hove-eats participate passively in this preceee. Nevertheless. the accum-
lation and release of the tectonic stresses occurs here. Consequently. the
marginal uplifts and troughs have independent seismtectonic potential.

and the earthquake centers with magnitude to 6—3/6 (to force 7) are possible
within their limits.

Bpiplntforn Cenozoic Orogenic Belt

Boykalo-Stanovaya Zone of Intense Arch-Block and Riftogenic Moveuents

The Baykalo-Stanovsye zone is a system of regularly oriented linear uorph-
tectonic eleuents which taken together nuke up a large arch-uplift freeing
the Siberian platform on the south. This latest first-order negastructure
extends in the investigated boundaries free the oountein structures of
Eastern Sayan to the Western part of the Stanovoy ridge a distance of

298

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

about 2000 km. with an average width of 150-200 km. Over the almost entire
extent the axial part of the arch-uplift is fragmentally eade up of the
Baykal type basins. longitudinally and transversely differentiating it into
the neotcctonic structures of higher orders. In the majority of cases the
latter correspond to the basic orographic element of the territory .- the
mountain ridges and the intermontaine basins.

The basis for the morphostructural division of the Baykalo-Stanovoy zone

is the concepts of geotexture. morphostructure end morphosculpture of

the earth's surface developed by I. P. Gerssimov (1956) and deepened by

Yu. A. Neshcheryakov (1965): Gerssimov. Meshcheryekov. 1967).

N. A. Florensov (1960a, 1966). N. V. Dumitrashho. et al.. 1968). In seiamo-
tectonic respects for us the most important are the morphostructures which
are genetically the only complexes of tectonic-erographic elements created
by the endogenic processes in the neotectonic stage of development.

The Cenozoic sedimentation cycle in which the history of formation of the
morphostructurea of the Baykslo-Stsnovoy zone is imprinted is separated from
the Hesozoic in time and. in part. in space. The regional break in sIdi-
ment accumulation encompasses the Upper Cretaceous and the Peleogene.

During this period a thick (to 80 meters) weathering crust was formed which
covers the weekly dismembered preneogene surface.

The territory of the higu mountain belt of Eastern Siberia was. at the end

of the Tertiary to the beginning of the Quaternary. subjected to intense
tectonic effects. basically transforming its internal structure and relief
(Lognchev, 1958: Plorensov, 1960a). The revolutionary period of the develop-
ment of the modern mountainous terrain with its geological-geomorphological
and hypsometric contrasts was preceded by a longer (Peleogene to early
Neogene) evolutionary phase of development. In the Eocene-Oligocene. a
transition was noted from the stable state to the slack-mobile tectonic
regime (Logachev, 1968). The modern basins. in the majority of cases. then
were shallow-water sedimentation basins. The relative rises of the sides

of the basins above their bottoea were hardly more than 500 meters (Logachev.
I968). The area had at that time a slightly undulating. quiet relief.
Judging by the thickness of the late Paleogene-Hiocene coal-bearing sedi-
ments. the bending of the bottoms of the basins in this period. reached.

in the final analysis. 1-3 km. However, this submersion obviously was
compensated for at the same time by accumulation of sediments and large
unloaded bodies of water, and there was no similarity to the modern naykal
basin (Logechev. 1958; Plorensov, 1968).

 

lThe terrigenic-effusive suite up to 60 neters'thick of provisionally
Paleocene age has recently been isolated in the Tunkinskaye basin
(Hazilov. et al.. 1972). N. A. Logachev (1968) admits the possibility of
the existence of the Cretaceous-Paleogene deposit in the basins of the
Baykal system at depths of more than 3000 meters.

299

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic changes in the tectonic life of the region occurred at the end of
the Tertiary to the beginning of the Quaternary (Plorensov, 1968). The
powerful process of beginning mountain foraation led to a sharp tectonic
differentiation of the relief. Against the background of the archogenic
bulging of the territory. the morphostructures of various orders were
formed and gradually acquired the modern outlines (the arch-ridges and
their anilpodal troughs). The mechanical differentiation of the sediments
across the basins reflects intensive growth of their mountain framing
(Logachev. 1968). reaching its maximum in the vicinity of the modern Beykal
mountain region. The development of the rift zone in the Late Pliocene

and Anthropogene occurred under the conditions of the suppression of the
early plastic forms by more and more active discontinuous deformations
(Florensov. 1968).

In general outlines. the scale and contrast of the Cenozoic movements can
be characterized by the following facts. The continental deposits of the
Nesozoic detected in the Baykalo-Stanovoy zone occur in the form of dis~
connected fields on various hypsometric levels. On the one hand, they are
covered by drilling in the Selenga River delta at a depth of more than

1500 meters. and on the other hand they are encountered at altitudes to
2000 ers or more in the Tunkinskiy. Udokan and Kodar ridges. Genetically
these ueposits have nor been connected at all with the modern relief. The
Neogenic sediments have been found on bald peaks 2000 to 2500 meters above
sea level (the Khamar-Daben ridge. the Kitoyskiye and Tunkinskiye bald
peaks). here they occur horizontally or are slightly inclined (Plorensov.
1960). Analogous deposits of the internontsne troughs occur. according to
the drilling and geophysical data. at 2000 to 2800 meters below the earth's
surface (1500 to 2300 meters below sea level). Moreover, it is not
excluded that the foot of the Tertiary deposits in the Baykal basin occurs
almost at 6000 to 7000 meters below sea level (Zorin. 1971; Vetrov. 1968;
Bulmasov, 1968), and according to the magnetotelluric sounding data. even
10,000 meters below sea level. In this case the magnitude of the vertical
displacement of the separated sections of the Tertiary peneplsin reaches

12 km. These data indicate the powerful differentiated movements of the
post-Neogene time leading to basic rearrangement of the earth's surface and
the occurrence of highrcontrsst, Quaternary relief of the lountain belt of
Eastern Siberia (Plorensov. 1960; Logachev. et a1., 1974).

On the whole. the latest structure of the baykalo-Stanovoy zone is defined
by the complex interaction of the bending and discontinuous deformations

of the earth's crust. Hith respect to nature of nanifestation and direction
of the neotectonic movements, they are broken down into two basic groups -
positive (uplift) and negative (subsidences) of the morphostructure. Both
were formed, judging by the existing sections of the Cenozoic sediments.
simultaneously. The amplitudes of the absolute descending movements are
comparable or significantly exceed the amplitudes of the ascending move-
ments. The latter is characteristic of the Baykal basin. in individual
parts of which the ascending movenents account for no more than one-third

of the total amplitude of the vertical neotectonic movements. 0n the flanks

300

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Baykal-Stanovoy zone .- in Eastern Sayan and on the Stanovoy ridge

- relatively poorly differentiated absolute uplifts predominate (positive
morphostructures predominate sharply).

Thus, the principal role in the neotectonic and seismotectonic development
of the Baykalo-Stanovoy zone of intensive arch-block and riftoganic move-
ments goes to the positive and negative morphostructures making up a
complex evolutionary series and the zones of activated faults -- the
principal seismically active linesments.

Positive Norphostructures. with respect to predominance of one type of
deformation or another, the uplifts are subdivided into block. arch-block
fault-arch and arch uplifts.1 The boundaries between them are frequently
provisional to a known degree. and they are often characterized by gradual
transitions.

The fault-arched uplifts are a specific set of tactonic-orographic elements
framing the Baykal rift zone on the Siberian platform side. This boundary
position of the fault-arch uplifts determines the peculiarities of their
internal neotectonic structure and seismicity.

The most characteristic example of this morphostructure is the Primorskiy
and the Baykal ridges framing the Lake Baykal baainon the northwest.
Structurally and morphologically they are a single uplift about 600 km long
and from 15 to 60 km wide. The absolute elevations of the upper surface
increase nonuniformly from the southwest to the northeast from 1000 to

2400 meters. 0n the Baykal side the uplift is controlled by just as extended
subparallel systems of normal faults and strike-slip faults active in the
Cenozoic and entering into the zone of the powerful long-lived Obruchevskiy
fault. They cut the lake slope of the morphostructure into narrow linear
tectonic blocks submerging by steps into the basin. A characteristic
peculiarity of the fractures outlining the strike-slip faulted uplift on

the basin side is the maximum amplitudes of total vertical neotectonic move-
ments for the rift zone. This is indicated by the difference in elevations
of the basement of the basin and the upper surface of its mountain frame.
reaching 8000 to 8500 meters in the narrow belt on the west side (Zorin.
I971).

0n the platform side the bending nature of the deformation of the initial
surface is clearly exhibited which leads to deformation of the northwest
limb of the strike-slip faulted uplift. Here the ground surface gradually
rises to the axial line of the structure closest to the shore of the lake,
there are no large neotectonic sutures, and no modern activation of the
dislocations with a break in continuity is noted. The transition from

__.__——

lThe arched uplifts. as atypical of the investigated zone, are characterized
in the section on "Transitional Structures."

301

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

platforn to ridge structures frequently is reflected by the formation of
the latent flexures at the present tine in practice aseisnic.

Thus. in the transverse cross section the uplifta of the Prinorskiy and

Baykal ridges have the nature of a narrow. internally weakly differentiated
limb of the arch separated in its axial par: by a system of large-anplitude
young fractures. The latter alnost everywhere bear traces of Holocene
seisnogenic rejuvenation. A lore blurred picture is observed on the northern
extrcnity of laykal and in the Northern Baykal highland where virgation.
gradual daaping of the dislocations of the break in continuity and significant
internal differentiation of the norphostructnre are noted. This section
corresponds wore to the other norphogenic type -« the fault-block uplift.

The analogous fault-arch norphoatructures frees the large nature basins of
the rift tone of the Stanovoy highland on the northwest and north -- the
Upper Angers. Muya and Chara. Their morphological characteristic consists
in significantly greater width of the external platform liabs which can be
explained by the fact that here the fault-arch uplifta plasticslly becone

a weak narginal part of the platforn uplifted in the Cenozoic. Accordingly.

the northern boundary of the rift zone in beconing even more shaded and
undef int-d .

The sharp asynnetry of the fault-arch uplita obviously deternines the
different nodern seisaicity of their platforn and prerift parts -- fro-
nininun to forces 0-9. In addition. it as possible to note the variation

in the degree of seislic activity and with respect to strike of the aorpho-
structures. In particular. it decreases in the northern part of the Baykal
ridge where. as has already been stated. virgation and danping of the earpho-
structural elenents are noted.

in the zones of articulation with the negative structures. the level of the
potential seisnicity of the fault-arched uplifta according to the seisno-
geological data can reach force 11-12 in the laykal frane and force 10 in
the frame of the Stanovoy highland basins. The seismic danger of the
internal field of the uplift is deter-ined basically by the transit quakes
free the fracture centers of the earthquakes.

The block uplifta are essentially horsts of different nagnitude. lost
frequently one-way. located along the axial part of the rift zone -- in the

helt of maximum differentiated and contrasted neotectonic and modern nove~
seats of the earth's crust.

The internal field of the block upliftﬁ is lost frequently not differentiated
or it is slightly differentiated. Here. in practice there are no young or

rejuvenated faults or the higher order norphostructural elements connected
with then or seianogenic structures. however, in Isny cases the principal
zones of the fractures controlling the horsts are acconpanied by the
feathering transverse or diagonal and longitudinal (acconpanying) fractures.

302

FOR OIPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The negative structures are sometimes genetically connected with them -- as
generating and embryonic bases of the Baykal type and the paleoaeiamo-
dislocations reflecting the youngest (Holocene) differentiation and.

probably inversion of the radial tectonic moVementa in the axial strip of
the riff zone. As examples of such uplifts we can use the northeastern part
of the Yuzhno-Muyakiy [Souther Huyn] ridge (the interfluVe of the Syul'ban
and Ronda). the Dovachanskiy block in the vicinity of the huya-Chara inter-
baain comniasure and the Svyatoy Nos Peninsula (the diagonal commissure
inside the Lake Baykul basin).

The width of the transition zone between the block uplifts and the negative
morphoatructures in contact with them is minimal. Horphologicaily. they

are represented by steeply inclined oblique plains bounded at the rear by
tectonic sutures. Usually these are extended (to 100-200 km) fractures
having a long history of development and significant (to 1.5-2 km) amplitudes
of vertical displacement caused by differently directed movements of the
bursts and the basins connected with then. The numerous epicenters of both
strong and weak earthquakes and especially paleoseiamogenic structures
stretch spatlslly to these zones. The bending deformations here are in
practice absent. and the stress relief is transforled only into discontinuous
shifts of tho monolithic blocks along the strike-slip faults bounding them.

On the whole the potential seisaicity of the block uplifts appears to be
the highest of all of the positive mophoatructures of the Baykal-Stanovoy
zone. it is determined primarily by the coordination of morphostructures
(the moat tectonicslly active and sharply differentiated parts of the rift
zone which causes maximum mobility of the entire body of the positive
structure with sharply contrasting movements along the faults bounding it.
The expected maxi-um force of the earthquakes within their limits can reach
force 0-9 with local increases (as a result of complication of the uplift
by feathering and accompanying fractures) to force 10. The potential
activity of the block structures participating in the framing of the large
mature basins of the Bayknl type (the Tunkinskiye bald peaks. the southern
half of the larguzin ridge) and also asking up individual uplifts in the
Eastern Saynn part of the tone appears lower (force 7-8) on the basis of
their significant monolithic nature and auch lower modern seismic activity.

The arch-hlock uplifts in the Iaykal-Stanovoy zone are wider. Primarily.
they frame. together with the arched norphostructurea. the system of rift
basins from the direction of the Transbaykal block-wave zone. The south-
eastern or southern limbs of these uplifts are in many cases simultaneously

the sides of negative morphostructures of the subrift type hearing the
features of basins of both tones (see below).

In the foruation and evolution of the arch-block uplifts an equivalent role
is played both by the bending deformations and the discontinuous deforma-
(ions, which is well illustrated by the most typical norphostructure of the
Udokan ridge bordering the Chara and the Tokka rift basins from the south
and southeast (acTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966).

303

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I188 ONLY

The widespread nature of the norphostructurnl elenents of higher orders.
both negative and positiVe. in the Udokan ridge indicates conplex differ-
entiation of the radial tectonic novenents during the fornation of the
arch-block uplifts. reaching the culnination point at its developeent

(in the sense of the naxinun accmlation of arch stress) in the Holocene.
Therefore the internal fracture zones of the norphostructuren carry traces
of the grand seisnic disasters of the recent past -- the Chins-Vskntshayo.

Kenen. and liedved' structures. The high seisnic potential of the norpho-
structure as a whole is determined by then.

The arch-block uplifts in the other parts of the Baykal—Stanovoy zone

are distinguished iron the Udokan by the degree of tectonic differentiation

of their internal fields. Thus. for exanple. the norphostructure of the
northern half of the Barguzin ridge is differentiated quite poorly and at
that. prinerily on the Bayksl basin side. The degree of internal differentia-
tion also of the western part of the arch-block uplift of the Stsnovoy ridge
is approxinately the sane. At the sane tine obviously gradual transitions
are noted free the arch-block to arch norphostructures.

The leVel of nodern seisnic activity of the arch-block uplifts is conpara-
tiVely low with the exception of the proposed epicenter of the force 11
earthquake on 2 February 1725 where quakes up to A‘th energy class are

known. The nuerous epicenters of the weak earthquakes are distributed

nore or less unifornly. with greatest concentration in the zones of enbryonie
basins and the nest inportant activated faults controlling the uplifts and
the partial higher order structures inside then.

The intrsbasin and interbasin eo-issures are blocked projections of the
crystalline basanent of the rift zone reflecting the internal differentia-
tion of the negative sorphostructures and separating then fron each other.
The classification of the col-issures in one type or another frequently

is difficult. for in the najority of cases the rift basins forn geonorpho-
logically united. extended structures. in which the interbasin couissures
differ little free intrabasin. Per eunple. the linear zone of basins
and the emissures of the Tunkinsko-Yuzhnobeyltal'sko-Bsrguzinssya systen
separeting then is this type of zone (see Fig 102).

An essentially different picture is observed in the northeastern (bsykal-
Chara) nepent of the rift zone where. along with the linear systems. an
echelon type arrangenent of the basins is traced. The large nature Bayhsl
type basins do not have a direct structural or norphological relation to
each other here. They are separated by broad sections of the rift zone
broken up to the naxinun. in the nakeup of which the block uplifts predoninate
(Fig 103). The latter constitute a direct continuation and result of the
internal differentiation of the positive norphoatructures asking .p the
linbs of the rift zone ith which they haVe conparable anplitudes of uplift.
These sections can be considered as interbssin nountainoua co-issures
(l'pper Angsrn-Muye, Hays-Chara. and. possibly. barguzino-huya).

306

roe OHXCIAL 082 MY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The intrahasin connissures are characteristic norphostructural elements

at the majority at the basins fro. embryonic to nature. They have nuch
less altitude than the surrounding uplifts. and they usually are blocks

of the basement. relatively stable or experiencing retarded subsidence.
with respect to general orientation of the basins the counissures can be
arranged longitudinally. transversely and diagonally. which is predetermined
by the conditions of their formation and the nature of the bordering young
fractures. The diagonal and transverse coamissures arose as a result of
gradual longitudinal merging of the adjacent basins into a single. large
negative neotectonic structure. and the longitudinal connissures. as a
result of lateral merging of the two parallel basins.

The seissotectonic potential of the intrabssin and interbasin com-issures
is different in the different parts of the rift tone.- It is the highest
both with respect to seisnogeological and instrument seissological data in
the rift zone of the Stanovoy Highland (ACTIVE TECTOﬂICS.... 1966). The
majority of paleoseismogenic structures and epicenters of both strong and
weak earthquakes have been coordinated with the con-issures. The modern
seismic activity of the regions of interbasin cosnissurea is approximately
three times the average for the Baykal rift zone.

in the Central and Southwestern laykal region the level of seisnicity of
the coenissures is on the whole reduced. although there are extreme cases
- the highest holocene and sodern activity of the Svyatoy Nos block
(Abalakov. 1973. 1974) entering into the coaposition of the diagonal
cos-issure separating the basins of Southern and Northern Bayhal and
almost conplete tectonic passivenes! of the celnissure between the basins
of Southern layhal and Tunkinshiye.

Negative Horphostructures. In the asykal-Stanovoy zone of the epiplatforn
orogenic belt the shots-described positive lorphostructures are genetically
and spatially closely connected with the narrow linearly expended graben-
like basins. In accordance with the seisnotectonic classification of

v. P. Solonenko (l968) these negative norphostructures for: a single
evolutionary series: generating .. esbryonic - nature (aonostructural

and polystructurai) -- fading (or infantile) (Fig 105). The developing
eorphostructures of this series deter-ine the seisnic potential of both

the entire territory as a whole and its individual parts. Therefore it is
expedient to present a brief characteristic of the standard negative earpho-
structures considering the results of the latest studies performed in
recent years (Logachev. l963; Zorin. 1971; Shlotov. 1972; Solonenko. V..

et al.. 1971; SEISNOTECTONICS.... 1968. 1975a. b; Hasilov. et al.. 1972;
Rushich. l972; Sher-an. et al., I973; Putyrev. et al., 1973).

 

lThe seiseic passiveness of this coauissure during at least the last two

to three centuries still re-ains a riddle: such powerful and active
faults as the Cherskiy. Obruchev, Tunkinshiy and Main Sayan converge in
its vicinity.

305

’0! OIPICIAL US! ONLY
I01 OIPICIAL USE ONLY

The generating basins are formed on the slopes and in apical parts of the
series of positive sorphostructurea.

This type of basin includes the.highland grabon-troughs of the seianogenie
structures: Kitoyskaya. lsbkhi. Snnzhnaya. Tanhhoyskaya. Priaorskays.
Dovachan and Baronki. Soae of thee possibly occurred at the end of the
Pleistocene. but the nest intensive development case in the holocsne and in
the sodern epoch. The extent of the highland ssisuogenic grabens fluctuates
froa 0.6 to 12 he. the width and the depth fluctuate from tens to hundreds
of meters. The faults bounding the grebens follow the ancient fractures or
occurred in a primarily integral crystalline substrate. However, in both
cases they are traces of catastrophic earthquakes with an intensity of up
to force 10-11. The bottoms of the grabens .. fragments of plateau and
sharp peaked lountain tops - are wedged inside the ridges experiencing
tension. The sedi-ent accumulation in the generated basins occurs in the
initial stage. The thickness of the sediments does not exceed the first tens
of meters. The brightest representative of the generated basins is the
central graven of the seisnogenic structure of Dovachan. its extent is

12 kn. its width is 0.8 he and its depth is up to 100 neters. The high
seismic potential of this basin is proved not only by the presence of paleo-
seisnodislocstions. but also the extraordinarily high nodern seisnic activity
and also the overstressed state of the rock. The latter gives rise to a
high recurrence rate of rock slides here. One of then. which occurred on

29 July 1961. instantaneously encospassed the front of the slope about 2.5 km
long. in the case of the lsndslip of 27 July 1962. the crushing of the rock
occurred independently of the systeas of separation joints developed in then
(ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966; Solonenko, V.. 1968c).

1n the vicinity of the generated basins. earthquakes with H to 7-3/5 to
8-1/6 (force lO-ll) are possible.

The eabryonic basins occurred obviously in the lower or middle Pleistocene.
The length of such basins is the first tens of kilometers. the width is up
to 6 km. and the thickness of the sediments accusuleted in the. is 300-600 I.
These norphostructures can be classified as grabens. one-way grsbens and
graben-like synclinais. The fracture boundaries of the aejority of then
have explicit signs of seismogenic rejuvenation accoepanied by underground
shocks of intensities from force 9 to force 10-11.

in the baykai-Stenovoy zone there are a large number of esbryonic basins

that have been isolated. The nest typical of then are the Handy. Grenyachaya.
Verkhneihstshaya. Kovoktiskaya. Tilishninskaya. Naaarakitshaya. and
lgnanakitahaya basins. In essence. they are morphologically basins of the
anyksl type in liniature. in the nore developed of then the block differ-
entiation of the basesent is manifested. -

306

IOI OIPICIAL US! OﬂLY
IO! 0!?ICIAL "8! ONLY

In the Baykalo-Stanovoy tone a large nunber of embryonic basins have been
isolated. The seat typical of then are the Nondinakaya [Mendy].
Grenyachaya. the Verkhneikatskaya. kovoktinskaya. and Tilishainskaya.
Nanarakitakaya. Ignasakitakaya. Essentially aorphologieslly they are
nature basins of the Baykel type in niniature. In the sore developed of
them the block differentiation of the basenent is freely exhibited.

In the case of one-way grabena. the eabryonic basins have either baykal
eaymnetry or asynnetry that is the inverse of it:

The seisnotectonic essence of the eabryonic basins is expressed by the fact
that in the tones of these negatiVe norphostructurea that are snaller in
size. extraordinarily thick aeisaic stresses are generated. The seiaaogenic
stress fields go beyond the linits of the basin area. as a result of which
the feathering and accoapanying discontinuous dislocations occur which.
along with the train fault ayatena. have high aeisaic potential. The sign of
active buildup of the enbryonic basins is the aeisnogenic discontinuities
going beyond the geoaorphological outlines of these norphostructurea. The
embryonic basins breaking the arch-block uplifta and the crystalline
cosmiaaurea between the large negative norphostructurea usually fern chains
extended along the large lineanenta or located to the aide of then. “any
large peleoseisaodislocations and epicentera of the strongest earthquakes
(M-G.5-7.9) in the Stanovoy highland extend to the areas of enbryonic baaina.
One of then. the Nanarakitskaya. participated in the generation of the
strongest earthquake in the USSR in the last 65 years. the huya earthquake
of 27 June 1957 (H-7.9: 10-force 10-11). In this case the bottom of the
basin subsided by S to 6 esters and use shifted to the southwest; the
Udokan ridge bordering the basin on the south vas uplifted l to 1.5 asters
and shifted to the northeast by l to 1.2 asters. The systsn of nine-
dialocetions occurring along the faults delimiting these norphostructures
had a total extent of about 30 kn. The gaping of the fractures reached

a to lo and even 19 setera.

It is highly indicative that the aeisnogenereting stresses in the enbryonic
basins extend to greater depths (to 60 kn or sore) than on the average along
the rift tone (the depth of the centers of the strong earthquakes is 2Q15 kn.
weak earthquakes. predoainantly about 10 kl). vhich is established by the
distribution of the hypocentars of the aftershocks (ACTIVB TBCTONICS....
1966).

in the investigated territory, the regions of the eabryonic basins and
norphostructures with generated basins have the highest seisnic potential.
According to the instrunent and paleoaeianogeological data. the epicenters
of the earthquakes vith N to 8 can be associated with then (Io-force 10—11).

The nature basins constitute the besis for the laykal rift system and are
divided into two groups - unloaded and loaded. or dry valley.

307

'0! OYPICIAL US! OIL?
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

63.33339-
» «.313 05 no run—=53
09.33 7270* In 3 .

:- 3 323: 51.. 38325.30 32133 9.3.». no
01 an gal. Coho: uxuontcxnt¢lt II o.— .noua .92.:
7.50 can 3 0303 7: I. an Anus-35:0 33.36

:25 533630. 33:32» no «at: 2.3

9: u
.02”... «as: u
3 29.

£832,090
as» we a!- cane

 

[0| OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3'03
’0R OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

[Key to Fig 102, p 308]:

l -- 18 December 1928; 2 -— 8 March 1820; 3 -~ 6 September 1950;

6 --s March 1829; 5 - handy; 6 -Ni'eve Puetyn‘ Khutun;

7 - Yeloty; 8 .. Shilka; 9 -- Kyren; :0 - 10 August 1958; ll -- Yengerga;
12 - Kharibnty; 13 -- Tunks; lb -— Arahen; 15 -— trkut; 16 - Tibel‘te:

l7 -- Lake Beykal; 18 -- Slyudyanka; 19 -- Kultuk

The unloaded basins include the Lake Beyksl basin which occupies the

central place among the rift morphostructures. It is divided into two
depressions -- Yuzhnobeykel'skye [Southern naykal] and Severobeykal‘skaya
[Northern Bsykal] - correspondingly with sharply and weekly differentiated
basements (see Fig 100). Obviously. the riftogenesis process began with the
formation of its southern trough. then spreading to the northeast and west
(Florensov. l960e; Logechev. 1968) although some of the researcher consider
the northern basin of leykel eore ancient than the southern one (Dmitriyev.
Kolokol'tseva. 1970). The beginning of the rift formation in the vicinity
of Southern Beykal is more probable inasmuch as the axis of the great neo-
tectonic trough traced along the entire complex of structures and orographic
signs from the southern edge of the Siberian platform deep into Central Asia
runs here. This point of View is adhered to by the majority of researchers
(Florensov. 1960e, 1961; Solov'yev, 1963; Logschev. 1968; SEISHOTBCTONICS....
1968).

The basic elements of the structure of the Bayksl basin and one of the
largest dislocations with a break in continuity are the Obruchevskiy fracture
(Shcherbekov. 1951) end the Cherskiy fault which are described in the section
on "Activated Vaults.“

The thickness of the lens or loose Cenozoic sedimenwts making up the
Southern Beykal basin varies from 6 to 6 km. and in the frontal part of the
Selenga River delta it increases to 8 km (Vetrov. 1968; Zorin. 1971). By
the thicknesses of the Cenozoic sediments of the Southern Bsykal basinl we
can determine the sedimentation rate and also the rate of flexure of the
bottom of the depression. The thickness of the Tertiary deposits in the
vicinity of Tankhoye. according to the date of C. 8. Pel'shin (1955) and

N. A. Lagechev (1968) is 1905 meters. However. somewhat to the west is
the Solzenskaye depression which represents the next regular element in the
system or Tankhoyskiye Cenozoic flexures. The maximum thickness of the
older-shingle. supposedly $:eternsry formations making it up is 500 meters
(Solonenko. 9.. 1966.). e Solzenskaye depression has great structural-
tectonic similarity to the Provel Bay which. is associated. just as the
depression. with the Cherskiy fault zone. The thickness of the Quaternary
sediments in the Proval lay exceeds 300 meters, and in the Ust'-Selenge

 

lThe Northern Beykel basin is excluded from the calculations. inasmuch
as the reliable thickness of the Quaternary deposits is known for it, end
there are contradictory data about the age.

2According to the latest geophysical data. to 700 meters.

309

FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:3 a :0 >9. was .35on «on.

5.22:3. .u .3 vonqnaoo .unau Hug—him on» we unmask conga away:-
up: uuuauop econ minus»; x255“; can no 23300.. uo 9:50:59 auscuugaauum .2: ~53..—

\ 1 \ \\\\ \
u\ v§u $1.1
\ .. _.._w_u_._____wmm“§ H
ix. ._ .....
. \\N\\\__T:nﬁk1ww
\mevuurH~MWH__:N-HLu—_= kmxwﬂmmlwr

tuu

...m.u.m\; 1... ., .1 .. . -
.54 1. cm?“ “1......de 1.1%“ . .

l.vl .15.... . .u N. 1
“\‘Awyﬁim; W133 .1 .\

. .
t .It L'rL-

\r’$}n.uw...r

out. ﬂue. Hp."

I

/f0. I
No

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

[Legend and key for Fig 103. p 310]:

1-é - Positive norphostructuree: 1 - block. 2 v- arch-block; 3 - fault-
arch. a -- relatively uplifted blocks of the basement (intrebasin and inter-
basin crystalline connissures); 5-9 .. negative sorphostructures (rift
basins); S -- mature polystructural. 7 - internediste type between nature
and embryOnic (a) and satellite basins (b). 8 -- generating. 9 - supposedly
embryonic; 10-16 ‘1 fractures (bergatriche in the direction of the downthrown
well): 10 —- deep. 11 - pre-Cenozoic (a- reliable.b -- proposed).

12 -- active in the Cenozoic (s-re1iab1e.b -- proposed). 13 - riftogenie.
seisnogenerating._la - sections of faults rejuvenated during earthquakes
with intensity of force 9 or note. 15 -- relicts of the upper Mesozoic
trough; 16 -- epicenters of strong (K312) earthquakes (a -- established

with a precision of a and b. b - nonclassicsl).

Key:

1 -- Upper Angers; 2 -- Huyakan; 3 - Vitis; b -- Mendy; S -- Syul'ban;
6 -- Chars: 7 -- uuye.

depression. abut 500 meters (Zanarayev. Smonov. 1959).1 Let us remember
that in the Tunka basin the thickness of the Pleistocene deposits is 400 to
500 meters. Consequently.for approxinate calculations of the rates of

flexure of the bottos of the Southern Baykal basin we are correct to take

the thickness of the Quaternary sediments close to 500 meters for it. however.
then the sedimentation rate in the Tertiary period (25 to 30 million years)

is about 70 meters in l nillion years. and in the Quaternary period (1 million
years) it is close to 000-500 meters. Consequently. the rate of subsidence

of the crystalline bed of the basin increased by 6-7 tines in the Anthropogene.

Combined with the other attributes this can serve as an explanation of the
high seisnicity of the Southern Bayksl trough. However. the front of the
neotectonic and seissotectonic processing of the crystalline substrate
during the historic period encompasses not only the peripheral zones of the
basin. It shifts in the direction of its nountein border and. in particular.
to the north slope of the arched uplift of Khansr-Daban. In the last
centuries and nillenie the most intensive crushing of the crystalline sub-

strate has taken place with the formation of inversion aeisuogenie structures
genetically related to the force 10-11 earthquakes.

The northern basin of Bayhel has been studied in less detail. Its basin is
weakly differentiated. It is separated free the Southern Bayksl depression
by the uplift of the Acadenic ridge - the underwater continuation of the

 

1In the last paper by V. V. Samsonov and C. P. Pononareva (1070) part
of the upper Pliocene deposit section is included in this number.

3ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
snsenent most important basins
c rogeoic belt of Eastern Siberia.
Th dotted line denotes the boundary of the y 1 rift
zone. ilod by R. Kumbi , S. Lsstochkin
1 - nondy; 2 - Khoytoaol'sksys; - Tursns yo; 6 ~-
6 - Bystrs; 7 -- hylul'oksy
Itsncsinsks

Rs; 5 - Torsksys;
s yuzhnsys [Southern Bsykul' 8 -~ Selengino-
ys (Selensrrcsntul'
11 ~-_ Kotoksl'sks

VI
Ks sn'ys; 29 -
Northern Kayla”:

Gorbyloksksys; 32 ~v~ Ts
» - Tsips-Bsuntovsksys; 35 ~-
1 - Balbukoyshys;

’
linslmy ;
, 41 -
ouysksys; 43 - Char :
Albumin)»; 46 -« Y nchuyoluy ; 67 -
vokcinshya: 68 - erklmuuys ya; 69 - Muysluno rs; 50 -
net-ny- y [Upper Maya]; 51 min-mm” : 52 - yshys {Huysl'

-- Syul'bsn has; 56 - Boron 3 55 - Nmrskicsksys: 56 - Tobi lays:
- Dzhslod; 58 ~Kokorsvskoys' 59 -- Emkhsksys; 60
Icinuod on p 313]
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Legend and key for Fig 106. p 312 (continued)]:

61 - Lurbunsknya; 62 -- Ugargasshaya; 63 -. Kusndinskeyn; 66 -
Verkhnesyul‘bsnskaya: 65 -o.1ngemakitskayn; 66 -— Chineyskaya; 67 --
Verkhnekalarskeyn [Upper Kalar]; 60 -- Kc-ensknye; 69 - Chnrskaya [Chara];
70 - Chitksndinsknys; 71 - Tokkinskayu; 72 - Khsniysksys; 73 - Imsngrs-
Chebnrknssksye: 76 - Kudulikanskaya; 75 - Teninksknyn; 76 -- Dzhidinsknyn
[Dzhida]; 77 - Gusinoozerskaya; 78 -- Tugnuysksya; 79 - Udinskays;

80 -- Kurbinskeyn; 81 -- Zesinskaya; 82 - Bagdarinsksys; 83 v- Taloysknys;
M--mmuuu85-ﬂdmhhahn[mmmlmuﬂt%--nhhmuwg
87 - Amslstskeye: 68 -- Krasnoysrovsknys (Vitinskaya); 89 -- Yernvninsksys;
90 - Khudunskaye; 91 -- Kondinskays [Konda]; 92 - Nenyuginskaya;

9h - Tungirsksyn; 9S -- Horikskaya; 96 -- Belo-Uryunskaya; 97 -~ Zeleno-
02erskaya; 98 - Srednenerchinskaya: 99 - Usuglinsksys: 100 -- Chitino-
Ingodinskaye; 101 - Beklemishevskaye; 102 -- Khiloksksye; 103 - Chikoy-
Khiloksksys 106 -- Ungo: 105 - Chikoysknyn; 106 -- Olenguyskaya: 107 --
Olenguysko-Tyrgetuysknya; 108 -- Alten-Kyrenskaya: 109 -- Ononsksys:

110 -- Kunnginskays; 111 - Olovskaye; 112 - Zyul'zinsksya; 113 -- Shilko-
Anurskoye; 116 -- Argunaksya: 115 - Toreysksya; 116 -- Urulyunguysksys;
117 -- Ust'-Karskaye; 118 - Unds-Dainsksya; 119 - Sharokuduysksys;

120 -- Varkhnealdanskays [Upper Alden].

Key:

1 -- Tulun; 2 -- Zits; 3 - Irkutsk; 6 -- Irkut; 5 .. Slyudyanka;

6 -- Dzhida: 7 - Kyakhts; B -- Chikoy; 9 -- Selenga; 10 - Ulan-Ude;

ll -- Nizhneengersk: 12 - Bargusin; 13 -- Upper Angers; lb - Lake Bunt;

15 -- Lens; 16 -- Lensk; 17 - Vitin; 18 -- Ronanovke; 19 - Chita:

20 -- Onon: 21 -- 1ngods; 22 - Karenga; 23 - Bukachachs; 26 - Shilks;

25 - Nerchinsk; 26 - norzya; 27 -- Chara; 28 -- Olek-a; 29 - Ust'-ﬂyukzha;
30 -- Hogochs; 31 - Asur.

Ol'khon Island. Along the southeastern slope of the Academic ridge there is
a fracture. the signs of which have been established according to the
grevinetric dots and by aonsr (Lut. 1961a; Zorin. 1971).

The maximum flexure of the basement was established in the northern part in
the vicinity of the Verkhnyaya [Upper] Angers River delta where the thickness
of the Cenozoic sediments reaches 6500 meters. Over the remaining territory
of the basin is within the limits of l to 3 kn, decreasing to the first
hundreds of meters in the ﬂalyy Sea (Zorin. 1971). According to the calcula-
tions of G. A. Dlitriycv and E. H. Kolokol'tseve (1970), the accumulation
rnte of the Cenozoic sediments in Northern Iaykal over the extent of the
entire period of its formation was almost 5 tines less than in the southern
part of the lake (1.5 and 7 cm per 1000 years respectively). Therefore the
time required for the accumulation of the sediment lens in the Northern Baykal
basin is deter-ined by these researchers at 40 nillion years. and in Southern
asyksl. at 30 million years. Considering the entire series of versions of

313

10% OFFICIAL US! ONLY
roé omcm. use om:

the sediment accumulation for possible elimination of this lack of
correspondence. 6. A. Dmitriyev and E. M. Kolokol'tseva arrive at the
conclusion that the "northern part of Baykal is more ancient than the
southern and central parts" (1970, p 73).

However. certain facts have been established in recent times indicating the
youngness of the northern basin. the filling of which with water can be
classified as the end of the Pleistocene to the beginning of the Holocene.

The loaded (dry valley) basins of the Baykal type include the Tunkinskaya.
Ust'-Barguzinskayn, Barguzinskaya, Verkhneangarskaya [Upper Angers].
huyskaya [huya]. Charskaye [Chara]. and the Tokkinskaya.

The-majority of the enumerated norphostructures. Just as the unloaded
southern and northern Bayksl basins are polystr"ctural grabens. They
occurred as a result of the merging of the monostructural basin breaking
the longitudinal or transverse mountain commissures separating them.

The Maya basin is a clear example of the still incomplete merging of two
subparallel depressions into a united rift structure. He consider it to
include the large latitudinal intermontane depression located in the

lover courses of the huya. Ronda and Parama Rivers. Its dimensions are
90x45 km. The least absolute elevation of the bottom of the basin is

663 meters, the nean absolute elevation is about 550 meters. On the north
and from the south the basin is bordered by the Northern Muya and Southern
Huya ridges. On the east it is bounded by the complex block structures of
the Hays-Chara interbasin commissure. and on the west by the mountain spurs
of the northern and southern Huya ridges. The divide line of the latter

is a total of 6 to 5 km from the accumulative boundary of the basin at the
ease time as this distances increases to 12 to 15 km for the Northern Huys
ridge. however. even here many of the peaks with elevations of 1500 and
1900 meters are located 3 to 5 km from the northern boundary of the loose
cover of the basin. The average maximum rise of the uplifts surrounding the
basis above its accumulative surface is about 1800 meters. The indicated
relations characterize the great steepness of the sublatitudinal sides,

in cases reaching 35-40’.

The Huya basin is made up of Cenozoic deposits of different composition and
genesis. Just as in the other negative structures of the Stsnovoy Highland.
their section has been studied only in the surface part. The most ancient
sediments date from the beginning of the Pleistocene (Zelenskiy, 1971).

The structure of the basin basement according to the geophysical data
(Zorin, 1971) is highly complex. As has already been pointed out, the
Huyn basin is divided by a large longitudinal commissure into two basins -—
the Huya-Konda and the Parana. The greatest loading. beginning with the
interpretation of the results of the gravimetric observations, was
experienced by the southern Muya-Konda depression. the thickness of the
loose deposits in which reaches 2100 meters (Zorin. 1971). The region of
maximum depths of the crystalline bed is located in the western part of

the depression (vest of the Vitim River), and it is close to its north

313-a
I03 OFFICIAL US! OﬂLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

side. In the eastern half. according to the observations of M. V. Ivanov
and V. D. Ogorodnikov. the corresponding regions of maximum precipitation
accmulation are close to the southern mountain border of the basin. At
the same time it is possible to assume a change in nature of the transverse
asymmetry of the basement along the longitudinal axis of the depression.

The overall aublatitudinal structure of the Huya-Konda graben is disturbed
by a comparatively small inlet-type depression of higher order (the satellite
basin) going deeply into the southern mountainous border. It is located
on the southwest point of the depression and is elongated in the north-
northeast to the direction along the Hudirikan. Anavrikan, and Ana Rivers.
The transverse profile of the depression is sharply asymmetric: the south-
eastern steep side of it is cut by a powerful fault. the apparent amplitude
of the displacement along which is no less than 700 eaters. The opposite
side is gently sloping; it is formed by the slopes of the submeridional
mountain spur of the Southern Huya ridge smoothly plunging to the east.
which simultaneously from the vest bounds the Huye-Konda basin. In its
eastern part the analogous satellite basin extends to the northeast along
the Syul'ban River. entering into the boundaries of the Muya-Chara inter-
basin commisaure.

The northern. Parana depression has a significantly simpler structure. The
thickness of the Cenozoic sediments here does not exceed 600 meters. and

the maximum plunging of the basement is along the foot of the northern
mountain border (Zorin. 1971). The south limb of the basin rises gently to

the intrabasin coemissure. From the vest and north it is separated from

the Northern Huya uplift by zones of faults of submeridional and sublatitudinal
strike active in the Cenozoic. The amplitude of the vertical displacement
along them is from 500 to 2000 meters.

The intrabasin commissure separating the two depressions is a low-mountain
ridge rising 200 to £00 meters above the accumulative surface of the basin.
It is basically made up of Archean rock and extends in a narrow (h-B km)
strip in the sublatitudinal direction along the left bank of the Muya River.
East of the Vitia River the commissure continues through the outcrop of the
basement at the village of Bargolino on the right bank of the Ronda River.
The north slope of the ridge. judging by the sinuous contact line of the
loose deposits in the crystalline basement and also by the geophysical data.
smoothly plunges in the direction of the Parana depression. The south slope
is expressed by a sharp rectilinear scarp steeply falling toward the Huys-
Konda depression. Already 2 to 3 km south of the scarp the basement of

the depression is at a depth on the order of 1000 to 1500 meters. In
addition. the fault nature of the southern slope of the con-insure is
indicated by the seismogeological-observations and thermal springs located
in the mouth part of the Maya River. The fault along the left bank of the
Muya east of Vitima obviously changes in echelon fashion with another
tectonic disturbanc of sublatitudinal strike hidden under the loose deposits
and completing the structural formation of the Huya—Konda depression on

the north.

314

FOR OFIICIAL 058 ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Thus. the Huya depression has entirely sysaetric structure and is a poly-
atructural grsben. The negative structures of higher order within its
liaits have both ”naykal" aayasetry and asynaetry opposite to it. In
addition to the shove-noted sublatitudinal tectonic disturbances. the
faults of subseridional (20-30‘) and northeasterly (60-70‘) direction
participate in the for-ation of the aodern structural tectonic appearance
of the basin and the block differentiation of its base-eat. The first of
then is exhibited predoainantly in the western half of the basin. outlining
its distal boundaries here. and the second. on approaching the Muya-Chsra
interbasin coanisaure. In addition. in the crystalline basement of the
basin. the systea of disturbances of the northwesterly strike has been
established coinciding with the orientation of the pre-Cenosoic (prisarily
Proterozoic to Lower Paleosoic) folded and ruptured structures. These
disturbances are obviously passively rejuvenated during the for-ation of
the rift.

The most con-on feature of the nature basins of the aaykal type having
significance for sari-sting their seissotectanic potential is the aosaic-
block. sometimes extrelely complex structure of the crystalline bed. This
is demonstrated. in particular. by the presented essaples of the Southern
Bayksl and Huya basins. In the last case the longitudinal nountainoua
coanissures separating the aorphoatructure into two depressions can becoae

a region of occurrence of centers of strong earthquakes which will only be

a reflection of the noted trend toward nerging of the Nuya-Konda and

Parana basins. The analogous picture is observed on the southwest flank

of the Baykal rift zone in the Tunka systea of basins where the Nilovskaya
and Yelovskayo crystalline col-issures are gradually encospassed by
riftogenic faults. they are fractured and separated fro- the souncain border
in the direction of the basins - a situation alaost repeating the "absorption“
of the mountain block of the Southern Huya ridge by the southern part of the
"uya-Konda basin in detail (see figures 102. 103).

A characteristic feature of the nature basins and the proof of their
growth as a result of mountain uplifts is the presence in the side parts of
the depressions of parallel fault zones predolinantly at a distance of

2 to 5 kn. between which the oblique foothills plains or sections of the
slopes are included. For ens-ole. on the western shore of Beykal between
the shore and highland faults there are great seisaic structures of

Rita. Shartlay. Kedrovaya and so on created by force 12 earthquakes. North
of then the systea of paleoseisnodislocations traced with discontinuities
at a distance of about 160 kn (the seisaostructures of Kedrovaya.
Soloatsovaya, Khibeleaskaya) occurring during the force 10 earthquakes

are associated with analogous sorphostructural ole-eats.

0n the east coast of anykal between the lake and shore fault during tbs
Tsaganskiy force 10 earthquake of 1862 the tectonic block about 260 k-

in area drops 7 to 5 meters. The subsidence by 10 to 15 asters of a
section of the bottol of the lake was observed here also during the
Central aaykal force 10 (HOG-Slb) earthquake of 29 August 1959 (Solonenko.
V.. Treskov. 1960). The block between the faults experienced a strike-

315

'0' OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI OfrlOlAL ”8! ONLY

alip dlaplacelent at this tile. The exalples of the analogous seisno-
tectonic buildup of the Baykal basin at the expense of its peripheral parts
are provided by the lstokskiy and Posol‘skiy Sore. the subsided blocks of
the Listvenichnyy lay and the Tyya River delta. the cutoff rocky capes
protruding into laykal which we discussed earlier.

In recent years in the vicinity of the Baykal basin deep seiinc sounding

has been carried out (Pueyrev. et al.. 1973. 197‘). Here it was discovered
(Pig 105) that the seisaicaliy active rift sorphostructures falling into

the observation field (Southern bsyhal. part of the Iarguzin basin)

clearly extend toward the sections with thinned earth's crust. just so the
majority of such norphostructures in the anykalo-Stanovoy zone (Zorin.

l97l). Thus. the thickness of the earth's crus in the Southern Bsykal

basin is JA-Jo kn. and in the less seissically active Northern laykal basin.l
39.5 to AA hm.

However. this rule obviously is valid only for the Bayksl rift. for under
the Barguzin depression the thickness of the curst is 60.5 to 53 km. and
it is nevertheless highly seissic. The thickness of the crust under the
like ridge here is 61-46 kn.

A scarp up to 3-6 kn high in the ssntle expressed by uplift of the

Hoho boundary is placed in practice along the entire west outline of the
baykal rift. coinciding in plan with the zone of the Obruchev fault. The
Iaykal rift turns out to be located above the northwestern edge of the
broad (to 200 to 600 kn acroso) region with velocity of the elastic waves
in the tops of the nantle reduced to 7.7-7.8 kn/sec (Pusyrev. et al.. 1973).
The southeast boundary of this snonalous mantle zone is 200-300 ks fro-
Bayknl. It cuts the large geological structures of ancient age and only

in places is controlled by the deep faults. The vertical thickness of this
deconsolidated tone in the santlc exceeds 10 to 12 kn and possibly reaches
20 kn (Puzyrev. et al.. 1973).

A sharp contradiction between the deep seismic sounding data and the
neissologic determination of the thickness of the earth’s crust by the
reflected wavee of the earthquakes interpreted by s. l. Golenetskiy arises
only for the vicinity of the Ust'-Isrgutin basin (db-£8 and 36-38 h-
renpectively). For part of the Siberian platforl adjacent to the vicinity
of the Bayksl ritt. the thickness of the crust according to the data of
these two sethods is close to 39 kl.

 

'According to the data on the reflected waves of the earthquakes in the
interpretation by s. l. Colonetskiy, the thickness of the earth's crust
under these depressions is 32-36 and £0-£5 kl, respectively.

316

'0‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M ORIGIN. US! ONLY

f“ 3, 7

   

 

1d,! 1
.._....__J

figure 105. Depths with respect to the aantle surface in the layhal
region and Transbayhal according to the deep seisaic
sounding data and observations of earthquakes.
l-I. -- Depths to the aantle surface (deep seisaic sounding). l - according
to the reflected wave data. 2 - according to the refracted ane data.
1 -- depths at the point of exit (entrance) of the refracted waves. ‘ --
sharp ecarps in the Iantie surface; S -- isohypses of the base-ent surface
of the aorguzin basin (according to Yu. A. Zorin); 6-7 -- depths to the
auntie surface according to the observations of earthquakes interpreted by
s. i. Golenetskiy: 6 - depths according to the reflected wove data (in
the nuaerator. according to the transverse waves. and in the denoninstor.
longitudinal waves). 7 - depths according to the data of the reflected
exchange waves.

The aoet iaportant consequence for aeisaotectonica fro. the deep seisnic
sounding date is proof of the especially coaplex deep structure of the
earth's crust in the co-issure sectior. between the Southern laylzal and
Northern bayhal basins. The analysis of the depth nap for the asntle
surface in this section indicates the following.

317

M OFFICIAL 08! MY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

The zone with anonalously shallow depths to the santle surface characteristic
of the Southern Baykal basin (36-36 kn) follows in a wide band from the
vicinity of the nouth of the Bugul'deyk RiVer along the southeastern boundary
of Ol'khon island and reaches the Bargusin say where the thickness of the
crust is )5 kn. At one of the points of this strip (in the center of the
southeastern shore line of Ol'khon Island) the crust thickness is 60 to 61 RI
according to the reflected earthquake waves. However. the accuracy of the
detersination does not exclude displacesent of this point to the north.

to the vicinity of Ol'khon Island.

The zone with anomalously deep depths (40.5.42,5 kl) with respect to the
mantle surfaces enconpssses all of the haloye Sea. Ol'hhon Island. and,
extending to the northeast. protrudes into the northern Bayhsl basin. The
thickness of the earth's crust sonewhat north of Khoboy Cape is 62-h} ha.
The sharp scarp in the relief of the mantle surface (Duzyrev. et sl. l973)
separating the two noted tones with different crust thickness follows fro:
the northeast extrenity of the Ol'khon Island (the vicinity of lshisey
Cape) precisely to Nishniy lsgolov'ye of Svyatoy Nos Peninsula. here. in
the vicinity of the interbasin con-issure. a deep trough is noted in the
mantle surface. "complicated in its central part by a sharp uplift. that
is. there is a type of combination of two polsrly opposite for-s --

"root" and "entiroot" with contrast variation of the depths to the h
boundary in the range of 35-66 kl. in the other profiles. this cosbinarion
is not discovered (Puayrev. et al.. 1973).

It was noted above that the thinning of the crust under the basins can be
one of the signs of increased seisnicity of then. The fact that the lost
clearly expressed "antiroot" was detected by deep seissic sounding in the
vicinity of the interbasin coasissure is one proof of the correctness of the
previously drawn seisnotectonic conclusion regarding the increased seisaic
potential of the interbasin con-issures which during the course of their
seisnogenic decay are converted to the botto- of the negative Iorphostructuras.
The signs of seismic destruction of the southeastern part of the island

of Ol'khon are present: according to our observations. in the vicinity of
Izhiney Cape in the coastal denudations excellently expressed slip surfaces
udac retained hundred: of square aetcrs in aica. aucy fix the chopped shore
capes and are none other than the relains of the displacers on relatively
uplifted walls of the faults. the opposite lisba of which are dropped to the
depths of Bayhal. The seislogenic destruction of Svyatoy Nos Peninsula

both by the highland and coastal paleoseislodislocstions was established by
Ii. 0. Abnlohov (1973).

Accordingly. it is impossible to consider the explicitly recent sub-ersion
under the level of baykal of the now underwater Acadeuic ridge. the sedisent
accumulation on the top of which is in the initial stage (but. 1966)
accidental.

318

POI OVPIOIAL US! ONLY
POI OPQICIAL ”bl ONLY

Thua. the eeiaaotectonic abaorptlon by the rift baaina of the nountain
coeniaauree eeparating then obviouely has a deep cauae - growth (or forea-
tion) of the "antiroot." The interrelation of theae phenonena leading. in
the final analyeia. to the creation of nature polyetructural grabena vith
thinned cruat doea not. in the opinion of Yu. A. Zorin (1971). contradict
the phyaical eaaence of the riftogeneaie proceaa.

The ecale and the contract of the neotectonic noveaente in the Iajority of
the nature negative eorphoetructurea in only eonevhat leaa than thoee noted
for the Southern beykal baain. Thua. for example. in the border of the
Tunkinahaya depreaaion the height of the Tunkinakiye peaha (sari-u. abaolute
elevation 3000 netera) above the bottoa of the baain (maxi-u. absolute
elevation 550 netera) ia about 2500 eetera. The cryetal bed of the baain
according to the geophyaical data ie at a depth to 3000 eetere (Plorenaov.
l960a. Zorin. 1971). Conaeouently. the anplitude of the vertical diaplace-
eenta of the blocha of the earth'a cruat in the Naogene to Quaternary tine
in about 5300 aetera. This figure indicatea priearily the rate of the
differential vertical noveeenta along the Tunhinekiy fault. lt ia unquea-
tioned that the indicated nagnitude of the vertical diaplacenente alao
containa the ”plaatic" conponent.for it includee the aeplitude of the neo-
tectonic diatortion of the baaeeent. but it ia iepoaeibla etill to coneider
it in the given caae.

For the approxi-ete calculation of the epeed of the differentiated vertical
novcnenta. ve Proviaionally conaider all of the coal-bearing aedinonta and
the aedinente above the coal-bearing onea in the Tunkinahaya baain to belong
to the Tertiary period. including only the Pleiatocene depoeita in the
Anthropogene. The naxieun thickneaa of the latter ia about $00 netera
(Logachev. 1950; Plorenaov. 1960a). The thickneaa of the Tertiary for-etiona
reachea 2600 eetara. Conaidering the aedieent accueulation tile (the

seogene la 25 eillion to 30 eillion yeara. the Anthropogene, about i eillion
yeara). ve euat atata that the eedieentation rate and. conaequently. the
aagging rate of the botton of the depreaaion increaaed in the Quaternary
period by no leaa than aix tieea. According to the calculationa of

V. V. Ruehich ([972). at the and of the Pliocene and in the Quaternary period.
the ratea of aagging of the bottol of the Tunhinahaya baain increaaed by
conparieon vith the laogene by one order and amounted to 1-2 Illyear. It

ia natural that thia led to an increaee in the aeialotectonic activity of

the Tunkinehaya baain which ia indicated. in particular. by the aeriee of
atrong (to force 9) earthquahea of the 19th to 20th centuriaa.

The overall acale of differentiated vertical love-cote coneidering the
abaolute altitude of the eountain border of the Uat'nSelenga depreaaion
(1200-1450 eatera) reachea 8000 to 0500 eetera here. The thictaeaa of the
nolaaae depoaita oi the Iopleiatocene-holocene for the baaina of the layhal
ayatea in eatieeted at $00 to 1200 eetera (Logachev, 1968). In the

Proval lay. the drilling atopped in the Quaternary aanda at a depth of

334 netera (Zanerayav. Saloonov. 1959). According to the date of

h. 5- IDBDChOV (1968). the Quaternary aanda up to $00-$00 netera thick lake

319
FOR O'YICIAL 083 OIL!
f0! OIPIClAL 08! ONLY

up almost half of the nren of the majority of dry valley basins of the

beykal system. Therefore it appears basic to consider the minieum thickness
of the Quaternary deposits in the Ust‘-Selengs depression equal to 500 m
(Zennrayev. Sannnnov. 1959). A compnrison of the thicknesses of the Upper
Paleogene-Neogenel (to 8000 meters) and the Quaternary formations with a
duration of the sediment accumulation (50 million and 1 million years)
indicates that the sediment accumulation rate and. consequently. the sub-
mersion of the crystal basement in the Quaternary period increased by

2.5 times. This indicates an increase in the rate of the neotectonic process.
as a result of which the seismic activity of the Ust‘-8elengo depression
increases. Let us note that just as in the case of the Southern bayksl
basin. the intensity of these phenomena is caused primarily by the descending
and not the ascending shifts of the different sections during the course of
the bending of the crystal substrate. This is clearly confirmed by the
incompatibility of the amplitudes of the dounvsrping of the basement of the
depression and the heaving of the arched ridges bordering it (about 8000 and
1200 meters respectively). The downwarping rate of the basement exceeds by
almost six times the rate of uplift of the ridges. During the historical
time. movements of a negative sign also predominated. These include the
formation of the Provai Bay and probably. previously. the Posol'skiy and
istokskiy Sore. the deformation of the Selenga River terraces. the submersion
of the peat beds under the waters of Iaykal and also the subsidence of the
bottom of the lake by l0 to is seters during the earthquake of 29 August 1959
(Solonenko. V.. Treskov. 1960).

Thus. the subsidence rate of the basement of the basin on the southwest

flank of the aaykai rift tone increased in the Anthropogene by 2.5-6 times

by comparison with that in the Neogene. Similar relations are characteristic
also for other mature basins. This caused high modern seismic activity
which is confirmed by the association of a large number of earthquake epi-
centers with the mature basins.

The zones of the activated faults bounding the basin. somehow ”thread" on
themselves the plaeoseismogenic structures -- epicentral regions of large
seissic disasters of the recent past. The seismic potential of the activated
faults and the interbasin commissures has been investigated separately. The
remaining elements of the mature negative morphostructures represented
predominantly by the central parts of the troughs with thick beds of Cenozoic
sediments haVe different potential aeismicity:

l. n-b-ilb to 5-1/2 (force 7-8). The Ust'-largusin depression in the central
parts of the mature basins - Uorthern laykal. Upper Angara. largusin.

nuyn-Konda. Para-a and Chara. Active faults have not been established in
the hnsenents of these basins.

 

 

‘if we begin with the recognition of the Paleocene-Eocene weathering crust
in the baykal region (Logachev, 1968), then provisionally the Upper
Foleogene deposits isolated in the Ust'-$elengs depression by

V. v. Samsonov and c. P. Ponomareva (1970) can be considered Oligocene.

320
'0! 0'?ICIAL US! ONLY
TOR OPPICIAL "BI ONLY

2. H-S-l/Z-o-l/z (force 8-9). The Tunhinshaya systel of basins. with the
exception of the vicinity of the fault with the sane hale: central part of

the Southern laykal basin. with the exception of the region with naxinua
expressed differentiation of the basenent; the northeastern part of the
Upper Angara basin and the eastern part of the Huys-Konda depression with
the proposed active faults in the basement.

3. hob-l/2-7 (force 9). The southeastern part of the Ust'-selenga
depression with actively growing Tvorogovo-lstokskiy uplift.

a. "97 (force l0 or sore).' Part of the southern nayhal basin with sharply
expressed differentiation of the baaenent: the delta trough of the vet'-
Selenge depression with a plunge anplitude of the base-en: to 6000-8000 n
bounded on the northeast by "active" faults. The high seisaic potential
here is confirsed also by the calculations of the long-tern seisnic activity
by the geophysical data (see figures 98 and 99).

The fading or infantile basins are only norphologically similar to eabryonic
once. an the shore of boykal they are oriented parallel to the shorelines
of the lake and they are separated free it by low coastal sountain ridges
(Kotokel'skaya. et al.. on the east shore. Kocherikovshaya. et el.. on the
west coast). These shallow troughs began to be forned obviously eilultaneously
with the other large naykal basins. but the process of their developeent.
for still unknown reasons. occurred axtreaely sluggishly. Probably. the
inclined planes of the vicinity of the Pokoyniki-Solontsovyy Capes are
marginal nesbers of such "infantile" basins. however. they cannot be con-
sidered entirely stable. This is indicated by the seiseic activity of the
Kotokel'shaya basin with which the epicenters of the earthquakes up to

force 7 are coordinated (for example. 7 October 1960. n-s-n/z).

The fault basinsarethe unclear type (die in Eastern Sayan. Kolokskaya

and Yanbuysbaya on the Priuorshiy and the Ihadshiy ridges respectively).

On the other hand. the clear morphological expression. asylletry. presence
of Cenozoic loose deposits and even basalt flows. which is characteristic
of the basins of the layhal type are characteristic of then. and on the
other hand. their Iodern develop-ent does not correspond to the require-ents
of the purely riftogenic process. At the present. they are either involved
in the uplift and are developing under the conditions of predosinant
coapression (the Obs basin) or they are passive structural elesents
(Yeabuyskaya and Kolokskaya) of the rift zone. With respect to their
dieensions they correspond to the eebryonic values. for which high nobility
and aeisnotsctonic activity are characteristic. for the final solution to
the prohles of the genesis of these negative structures and their seisnic
potential. special detailed geological-geophysical studies are required.

Activated Faults and Main Seisaically Active Zones

In the generalized papers on the latest tectonics and seissotectonics of
the sountein belt of Eastern Siberia (Plorensov. 1960; ACTIVE TECTONICS....
1966: SEISHOTBCTONICS.... l968. 197’s. b) it is recognized that in the

321
’0‘ OFFICIAL 08! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

formation of its modern the primary role goes to the vertical tectonic
movements of the earth‘s crust which were accompanied both by plastic
(bending) and discontinuous deformations. "are the general dynamic (and
seisnotectonic) situation of the Neogene-Quaternary stage of development

of this territory was regulated by the forsation of the main morphostructural
elements -- the arch-block uplifts and systems of Baykal rift and subrift
basins.

Recognizing the important role of the bending deformations. it is necessary
to note that the neotectonics of the mountain belt of Eastern Siberia.
especially the "active (Holocene) tectonics." is determined primarily by
the development of the large systems of activated faults (see Fig 106) such
as. for example. the "sin Saysn fault. Obruchev. Stanovoy. and so on. The
large faults entering into these systems. as a rule. deep. long-lived.
control the development of the principal morphoatructures. The existing
concept of the development time for such faults. the multiple rejuvenation
of the displacements along them during various geological periods has been
proved by numerous observations. no for the rate and the regimen (the type
and direction) of the shifts along the fault. the seismogeological practice
has demonstrated that they can be both prolonged. slow. "creeping" (tectonic
creep). and sharply. discontinuous (characteristically seismic). This
situation now definitely follows from a great deal of the factual material
on the Nongolanaykal seismic belt and is proved by direct observations of
the San Andreas fault regimen (Allen. et al.. 1965: Anderson. Donell.

l97l; Hellman. 1972). Moreover. the seismogeological studies of the faults
prove the presence in them of inversion zones of the tectonic movements --
changing of the direction of the displacement to the opposite sign. "0“
the inversion nature of the movements is noted both along the normal faults
and the upthrow faults and with respect to shifts.

The activated faults have an important role in estimating the level of
potential selsmicity of the various structural elements of the earth‘s crust.
These suture zones which delimit the morphostructures which are different
with respect to type. rate and direction of the neotectonic movement are

the main seismically active lines with which the overwhelming majority of
apicenters of the strong earthquakes and paleoseisnogenic structures are
closely connected both spatially and genetically. Thus. for seismotectonics.
the activated faults expressed in the relief and realizing the morphostructursl
control and their spatial connection with the epicentre! fields are of
special interest for seismotectonics. Numerous seismogeologicsl data on the
territory of Eastern Siberia indicate that the epicenters of the earthquakes
and the epicenters of the earthquake swarms extend to the lineaments. It is
true that a comparison of the epicentral fields with the plan configuration
of the discontinuous structures reveals high correlation usually on the

maps of survey scales. 0n the whole. the small possibility of tying the
epicenters of the moderate and weak earthquakes to the specific faults
increases significantly in the case where they are actively expressed in

the relief and have clear morphological signs of seismogenic rejuvenation.

322

’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

Therefore. although when analyzing the relation of the earthquake epicenters
and the epicenters of the activated faults it is still more correct to

talk about their overall area relationship and not the unique tying to a
specific fault. it is in such seisnogeological relations that the paths of
quantitative analysis of defined Iorphostructural elenenta are noted free
the point of view of the potential seisaicity.

Horphologically. the zones of activated faults are extended (by hundreds

of hlloaetera) lineaaents. as a rule. made up of individual echelons. each

of which is clearly expressed in the relief. The problea of the degree and
nature of expression of the faults in the relief has independent overall
aorphological significant. In addition. by the nature of this expression the
geoaorphological (surface) phenoasne become the criterion for the scisso-
tectonic (deep) role of the faults. The usual morphological signs of the
"seismogenerating" (activated) faults are extended and rectilinear. often
echelon steep scarps in the foothills relief. Frequently. they are accoapanied
hy triangular facets - flat steep cuts of the mountain spurs on the sides

of the negative norphostructures. Usually these foras make up a sort of
"plane front" at the transition of the aountain slopes at the bottoa of the
depressions (for esaaple Tunkinskiy. Bargusin. Xodar. and other faults). Often
in the zones of such faults chains of linearly extended saddles are formed

in the nountain spurs and divides or systems of tectonic say-metric seni-
extended trenches in vhich absorption of coarse lump talus-proluvial aeterial
takes place. In addition to the clear geosorphological expression. such zones
usually are emphasized by crushing. intensive jointing of the rock and their
dynaaoaetaaorphic alteration (aylonitea. cataclasites. tectonic breccia.

slip plains. and so on). An entire series of other attributes of activated
faults -- hydrogeological. hydrographic. geophysical. stratigraphic. Ind son
on ~- have been isolated.

Genetically. the aajority of the activated faults are nor-a1 faults and
upthrov faults. frequently vith a snail shift coaponent. In asny cases geo-
lorphologicelly and also by structural analysis of the slip plains in the
zones of such faults traces of successively occurring left and right hori-
zontal shifts are discovered. This is why we see the shifts in the seiseo-
genie ruptures connected with the given earthquake and us do not find con-
vincing proof of significant horizontal shifts with respect to the long-lived
faults. Independently of the shift aaplitudes, as a rule. very saall ones
(first eeters). this phenoaenon indicates the secondary role of the shift
component in the tectonic aoveaenta along the young rift-foraing faults.
Exaaples of aodern seisaodislocetioas (in particular, with respect to the
Huya earthquake of 1957) indicate that the horizontal (shift) displace-eats
are l to a tiles less than the aspiitude of the vertical displaceuents
ACTIVE TECTOHICS.... 1966). On the whole, for the zones of activated faults
of the Baykalo-Stanovoy zone the shift conponent is felt little, vhich is
also conflr-ed by the special study of the mechanism of earthquake centers
(see Chapter V).

323

'0! OPPICIAL US! ONLY

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Legend and key for Fig 106. p 326]:

l -- Systess of faults and their abbreviated uses; 2 - faults and their
numbers on the list; 3 -- boundary of the Bsyksl rift zone; nose of the
systes of faults and the components of their individual dislocations with
hresks in continuity: 08 -- Nsin Ssynn deep fsult: 1 -- llsin Ssyan.

2 -- Biryusinskiy [Biryunse]. 3 «w Okinsksya [Ola]. I. -- Kitoyskiy.

99 -- nototskiy. o - Obruchev: 5 -- Tunhinskiy- 6 -- Prisorskiy.

7 -- Northern Beykal. 8 - K(l)icherskiy. 9 -- Tyya-Ahchadskiy. 10 --
Grasnlnskiy. 11 -- Poarsnichnyy. 12 - Akitksnskiy. 0V -- Ol'khonskayo
[Ol'khon] branch of the Obruchev systes. 13 -- 01'khon. 16 -- Svystonosskiy
[Swetoy Nos]. 15 -- Chivyrkuyskiy. 16 - Kahsniy, 17 -- Bol‘sherechen(?)skiy.
Ch --Cherskiyx 16 -- Chsrskiy. 19 - Del‘tovyy. 20 - Bezysysnnyy [unnamed].
21 -- Kntltovskiy. 22 -- NsliIoVskiy. 81' r- Selenge-Turkinskaya branch of

the Chershiy system: 23 - Selengs. 2!. -- Khssarskiy. 25 -- Turkinshiy.

B -- Barsuzin: 26 -- Ulyuchihnskiy. 27 M Shsssnskiy. 28 -- Turaki. VA --
Verkhneonssrsksys [Upper Angers]: 29 -- Verhhnesngsrskiy [Upper Angers].

30 -- Pravmnskiy [Right Hess]. UK .. Ukolkitskays; 31 - Ukolkitskly.

32 .- Kovolttinskeys. 11's -- lket-‘I‘sipikansknya; 33 -- ﬂarektaksnskiy.

31o -- Gnrginskiy. 3S -- Ulan-Burginskiy, 36 -- Drhergolsnta Nerungdinskiy,

37 -- Tsipihanskiy. 38 - Gorbyloksltiy. 97 -- Iketskiy. 8V -- Berguzino-
Vitis; 39 -- Yeshuyskiy. 50 -- Harekta-Hukdekenskiy. 61 -- Vitishanskiy.

0V -- Uzhids-Vitis; 62 - Dzhids, 63 -- Kha-binskiy. M - Uda. laS -- Melat-
skiy. 66 -- Zszinskiy. 67 -- Verkhnevitissltiy [Upper Vitis]. 1'1' --
Tugnuysksys: 68 -- Tugnuyskiy. 69 .- ngsnskiy. 50 -- Kichingshiy.

KhK -- Khilok-Kerengsknys: Sl - Khilokskiy: 52 - Yuzhnokhilokskiy
[Southern Khilokekiy]. 53 - Bekleseshevskiy. Sb - Ksrengekiy. no ..
Honsolo-Okhotslt deep fault: 55 -- Kuderinskiy. 56 -- Chiltoyskly. 57 --
Zachikoyskiy: 58 -- Pravo-Insodinskiy [Right Ingoda]. 59 - Levo-lnsodinskiy
[Left lngoda]. 60 -- Shillinskiy [Shilka]. Nizhnenerzhuganskeye branch of
the Mongolo-Okhotsk system: 61 - Nerchusanskiy. 62 -- Verkhnetungirskiy.
(Tl' -- Once-Turinsksye: 63 -- Ononskiy. H — nuyskays [Huys]; 66 -- tluyoksnskiy;
6S -- Vcrkhnesuyskiy [Upper Huya]. 66 - Ulan-Nskitskiy. 67 -- Nizhnesuyslziy
[Lover Huys]. 68 - Parssshiy [Pursue]. HT -- Huys-‘l’okko: 69 -- Hudirikenskiy.
70 .. Yuxhno-Huyskiy [Southern Hays]. 71 - Syul‘hsnskiy. 72 .. Kodsrsltiy
[Kodor]. 73 -- ‘l'oltkinskiy [Tonto]. Chlth- Chitksnds~|01sniyoksys branch of the
Huye-Tokko system: 76 -- Chitkendinskiy. 75 - Khsniyskiy. 'l'sB -- Tsips-
Bnuntovskaye: 76 -- Tsipinskiy l‘l'sips]. 77 -- lsuntovshiy; 78 -- Kudurskiy.
79 -- Tillshninskiy. 80 -- Balbuysltiy. 81 - Taksiu-Dzhilindinskiy.

U -- Udoknnsheyn [Udoksn]: 62 -- Ila-ershitshsys. 63 -- Kondn-Eymskhskiy.
86 -- Dovochsnskiy. 85 -- Lurvinshiy. 86 .. Esotochi-Keaenskiy. 67 -
Chinn-Vskstskiy. 88 -- Kateginsltiy. 89 - Chepinskiy. K -- Kslsrsksye
[Ruler]: 90 - Ust'-Tsipa. 91 -- Nizhnekslsrskiy [Lover Kalsr]. 92 --
Dehelo. S -- Stsnovoy deep fault: 93 .— ‘l’ss-Yuryskhskiy. 9‘ -- lungrskiy.
96 -- Stnnovoy, 96 -- Yuzhno-Stanovoy [Southern Stsnovoy]. lndividsul faults.
98 - Gazinurskiy, 100 -- Tissinskiy [Tisss]. 101 w Fofsnovskiy.

[Key to Fig 106. p 3261

325

M OFFICIAL 083 OIL!
’03 OPPICIAL 088 ONLY
[Key to Fig 106. p 326]:

l -- niryusa; 2 -- cs; 3 - Uda; A -- Nishneudinak; 5 - Tulun; 6 -- lye;

7 -- Alygdzher: 8 -- Oka; 9 -- Chara-khovo; lo -- Orlik: 11 -- Zita;

12 -- Uaol'ye-Sihirakoye; l3 - cs; 16 -- Hondy; 15 -- Slyudyanka;

l6 -- Bayknl'ak; l7 -- DV; 16 .— Zakanensk; l9 -- Lake Khuhsugul; 20 -
Kyakhta; 21 - Gusinoozersk; 22 -- Ulan-Ude; 23 - ST; 26 - Selenga;

25 -- Yelentsy: 26 - Irkutsk; 27 -- Ust'-0rdynskiy; 26 - Kachug; 29 --
Ust'-Kut: 30 -- Kirensk: 31 - vitia; 32 - Lens; 33 -- VA:'3& - UK; 35 --
Kuaora; 36 -- UK; 37 .— largusin: 38 -~ Barguzin: 39 -- av; 40 - Sosnovo-
01ersk: 61 -- Yaravninakiy Lake; 62 -- Rosanovka: 63 —~ bagdarin; 66 -- Uakit;
as -- HT: 66 -~ Vitin: b7 - Nelyaty; 68 -~ Kalsr; 69 -- Central Kslar:

50 -- 0V; $1 -- Lake Baykal; 52 -- thz 53 -- Karenga; 56 -~ Bukachachs;

55 -- Nerchinsk: 56 - Khapcharsnga; 57 .. aorun-Torey Lake; 58 - lorsya:
59 -- Argun': 60 - Shilka; 61 - ﬁornyy Zerentuy: 62 - Anur; 63 - Tungir;
6d -- Tupik; 65 - Vogocha: 66 -- H0: 67 -- Olekla: 68 -- Tokko; 69 --
Chara: 70 -- Olekainskzz 71 -— Chita: 72 - Nyukzhs: 73 - Chikoy;

76 -- Nizhnsangsrsk; 75 - VA

The nain (trunk) activated faults are often accolpanied by short (to the
first tens of kilometers) feathering and accoapanying fractures playing an
inportant role in the davalopaent of the fine block structures in the
sections near the faults. The aaplitudes of the vertical displacements
along certain faults are different. and they depend both on the age and

the norphogenetic type of the structures than on the speed and direction

of the latest tectonic move-eats. here the greatest aaplitudes of the
vertical displacement (to 3000 to 7000 aeters) are noted by the activated
faults bounding the nature aorphostructures of the baykal basins aaintaining
a stable trend toward subsidence during the entire period of rift formation.
The least displacement saplitudes tens to a few hundreds of meters) are
noted uith respect to the activated faults of the youngest basins of the
evolutionary series and also in the sections of inverted infantile rift and
subrift basins.

with respect to degree of inheritance of the pro-Cenozoic structural plan
and alteration of it by the latest tectonic aovenents the aountain belt of
Eastern Siberia is extra-sly nonuniforu: along with the areas of prolonged
inherited developnent here. the tones of sharp and single structural re-
arrange-eat are widespread. Analyzing the strict spatial localisation of
the basins of the bayksl site. the systeaa of activated faults controlling
these axial structures and the ratio of the Cenozoic and ancient structural
plans. N. A. Florensov (l960a.l966. 1960) showed that the rift zone extend-
ing spatially to the ancient aarginal suture of the Siberian platforl is
distinguished by sharp auperposition of the substrate structures. to
Tertiary.

The opinion of V. P. Solonenko regarding the genetically independent develop-
seat of the Baykal rift systea with respect to the ancient structures is
still more definite. "The laykal rift acne is adjacent to the aarginal

326

’0! OFFICIAL 08! Oil!
I0! OVIXCIAL US! ONLY

southern projection of the Siberian platform only over a short segment.
and than it deflects sharply away from it. in spite of the presence at the
platform boundary of poverful marginal tectonic sutures - the Seyan fault
zone. The secondary role of the Siberian platform and the pre—Baykal

deep fractures is traced quite clearly here... The basins. Kosogol'skaya
and nerkhatskaya. in general go from the field of layksl folding to the
Caledonian... The aarguzino-Bauntovakaya and Upper Angers branches of the
basins are still more removed from the Siberian platform. In the Stanovoy
sector the rift zone intersects the system of Bsykal folding, the huya
central massif. the Chars block. and it cuts by one branch into the Alden
shield and by the other. into the region of Proterozoic folding of Stanovik...

The deep end large regional faults of the pre-Baykal occurrence form a

dense network in the region of Cenozoic orogenesia. It is entirely natural
that some of them. just as the weakened zones of the earth‘s crust. are
encompassed by rift formation. but they have only promoted and have not
predetermined the place of occurrence of the rifts... Therefore in the seismoa
geological estimate of the fault zone it is necessary to discover in detail

the degree of their participation in the rift formation and “active"

tectonics. The powerful fault zone is well expressed geologically and even
geomorphologically. can turn out to be aeismicslly passive. and the

unexpressed young or pre-Bayksl faults. recently involved in rejuvenation

(for example. in the embryonic basin zones). highly'hctive" (Solonenko.
V.. l968e. pp 69-70).

The morphostructures located outside the rift zone have inherited to a
significant degree the structural-tectonic plan of the preceding stages of
development. and the principle of inheritance on the whole is maintained both
with respect to the ancient and young faults and with respect to the folded
complexes. All of this is felt to one degree or another in the variety of
structural forms which are the result of the prolonged history of geological
development of the mountain belt of Eastern Siberia. and in the final
analysis it finds its expression in the peculiarities of the manifestation
of aeismicity. The most highly seismic regions are isolated in the axial
part of the layhalo-Stsnovoy zone where as a result of predominant extension.
there is complex block differentiation of the earth's crust with the forma-
tion of an extended system of rift basins and the block and arch-block
uplifts bordering them. The intensive seiemotectonic development of this
zone in which the primary role is played by the systems of activated faults
influences the bordering territories and causes increased seismic potential

of the adjacent zones of activation of the southern part of the Siberian
platform and the Hongolian-Okhotsk folded belt.

The seismogeological relations are varied. As the basic relations it is
possible to indicate the relation of the earthquakes to the zones of
activated faults, the blocks of sharply differentiated tectonic movements.
the sections of local rearrangement of the Cenozoic and more ancient struc-
tures of the plans by the riftogenic processes. the marginal parts of the
regions of stable subsidence or uplift. the interbesin and intrabasin

a 327

I0! OIIICIAL US! ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL US! OGLY

mountain commissures, the areas of the intersection and echelon type
articulation of the latest morphostructures. especially the large fracture
zones to the embryonic basins. the sections of manifestation of the latest
volcanism. and so on.

In many papers on the various seismically active regions when discovering
the lava of the relation of earthquakes and the geological structure. not
only the seismologicsl but also the geological—tectonic criteria of the
occurrence of earthquakes are given. In recent times studies have been made
from these complex ssismotectonic points of view of the seismically active
regions of Mongolia and Pribsykal‘ye. Central Asia and the Caucasus. and
abroad -- Southern California. Alaska. Japan. New Zealand and so on

(Gubin. 1960; Solonenko. V.. et s1.. 1960b; Petrushevskiy. 1960. 1964;
Gobi-Altay.... 1963: ACTIVE TBCTONICS.... 1966; SEISHOTBCTONICS..., 1968.
1975n. b; Kuchsy. 1969: Hedvedev. et al.. 1971; Allen. et a1., 1965;

and so on). Here the main role was given to the deep and crystal activated
faults having important significance in the seismotectonic development of
the morphostructursl elements and in estimating the level of their potential
seismicity.

In the different stages of their development and depending on the morpho-
genetic type of bounded structures. the seismotectonic role of the activated
faults can be different. For example. they can be zones ef release of the
most powerful seismic stresses. but in the case of "transitional" tremors
usually part of the energy of the seismic waves is absorbed. causing an
irregular decrease in strength of the earthquake. In one way or another the
zones of activated faults. which are extremely mobile and connected with the
deep parts of the earth's crust. react most extraordinarily to all of the
geodynemic changes occurring in it. Although in different parts they have
different level of modern seismic activity. nevertheless the individual faults
controlling the development of the genetically united morphostructures (for
example. the individual rift basins) must be considered potentially seismically
active over their entire extent. here the maximum intensity of the earth-
quakes (the potential seismicity) must be determined by the scales of maximum
seismic dislocations detected at least in one section of the fracture zone,
for the seismostetistics do not always or everywhere reflect the upper level
of seismicity. however, in the cases of complex internal structure of the
large basins and uplifte. the zones of activated faults separating them into
different sections can have different seismic potential (for example. Main
Sayan. Tuckinskiy. and the Obruchev faults).

The seismogeologicel materials available at the present time are permitting
us to isolate 22 systems of the latest faults in the Baykal-Stsnovoy zone.
including more than 100 fracture structures (see Fig 106) undergoing modern
seismic rejuvenation or carrying traces of paleoseismodislpcations. All

of these zones correspond to the above-enumerated common morphostructurel
and seismotectonic peculiarities of the activated faults; therefore below

ve shall present the characteristic of only two fracture systems typical

of the Bsykal-Stsnovoy tone of intensive arch-block and riftogenic movements:

328

’03 OPYICIAL USE ONLY
20R OPPICIAL 08! ONLY

the well-known Prinorekoye (Iruchev) fault which extenda along the north-
weetern ahore of Baykal in the Udohan ayaten of activated faulta in the
northeaat of the Baykal rift zone. Detailed deacriptionn of the najority
of the foulta in the lountain belt of Eaatern Siberia are preaented in the
publicatione of recent year. (Ploreneov. 1960a. b: ACTIVE TBCTONICS....
1966; SEISHOTBCTONICS.... 1960a. 1975a. b: Solonenho. V.. et al.. 1971:
Sherman. et a1.. 1973; and no on).

D. 1. Shchtrbakov (1951) propoaed that the fault bounding the ayatea of
Tunkinekiy baeine and the Baykal rift iteelf on the Siberian platforl aide
be called the Obruchev fault. It in Iade up of a nuaber of independent
brenchee of the ayateaa of faulte ~a Tunkinekaya. Prinorakaya. Ol'khon and
Northern laykal (Florenaov. 1960b; SEISHOTECTONICS.... 1968: Zorin. 1971).

The Tunkinekiy atrike-alip fault (fig 106. ace Fig 102) ie the general
structure of the entire chain of Tunkinahiy beaine. he the Cenozoic dialoca-
tion. it inherited the ancient euture for-ed in the Lower Paleozoic
(Florenaov. 1960a) or in etill earlier agea. It in not excluded that thia
rejuvenation occurred in the Central to Upper Pliocene during the period of
the noet energetic downwarping of the bottoaa oi the depreeaiono (luthich.
1922). Being diacontinuoua. the Tunhinekiy fracture in nade up of eeverel
eectiona. in the damping of which the nountain apure occur (Nilovekiy.
Yelovakiy) -- traneverae and diagonal intrabaain con-leaurea having a
reduced eection of Neogene-Quaternary aeriea (Logachev. 1950). At the
pointn where the Iain fault line bende. bunchee of trenaverae and radial
iracturee appear (Floreneov. 1960a).

By the obaervatione of A. P. Shnotov (1972). cent of Arahan the branch of
the Tunkinekiy fault inherite the ancient (Tubotekiy) overthruat. 1t ie
traced fro. the Teagen-Ugun' River fro. the Torekaya baein to the Tubote
River valley through the Yelovakiy epur to the Kyngerge River and then to
the northweat (aee Pig 102). between the Tunkinakiy bald peake and the
Yelovehiy epur the zone of ancient overthruet ia Iorphologically expreaaed
in the fora of a linear chute-like depreaaion running a dietance of up to
15 km (ace the vicinity of the Arehanekaye etructura in Fig 102).

In the inveetigated region the ancient overthruata are lapped at Iany placea
(see Fig 102). but the linear ainkhole in the relief in expreaaed only by
the Tubotekiy overthruat. lnaenuch an it ie located in the zone of

controat articulation of the intenaely developing rift baaina with their
mountain border. there are grounda for conaidering that the morphological
expression of the ancient fracture in the nodern relief is obligated to ita
Cenozoic rejuvenation and convereion to the Tunkinekiy atrike-elip fault.
The highland acarp which replacee thia einkhole in the went and obliquely
intersecting the ancient aeriea on the alope of the Tunhinakiy Alpa

directly indicates the atepped nagging of the blocka in the vicinity of the
Tunkinakiy feult (Sh-otov. 1972; Solonenko, V., et a1.. 1971). The co-para-
tive younnnone of the Tunkinakiy otrike—elip fault ia indicated by the
frocturea of the Pleiatocene terracee in the vicinity of the health reaort

329

10R OPPICIAL US! ONLY
m OHICIAI. 0“ ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL "8! ONLY

[Legend and key to Fig 107. p 330]:

Seisnicity: 1 - epicenters of the earthquakes with respect to energy

sassen -- KI a<7, h -- 7. c -- B. d .. 9. e -— 10. f .- 10.5 to 11.

g -- 11.5. h -- 12; 2-4 - groups of earthquakes by the center mechanisms.
2--first group; 3--second. b--third; S-direetion of stress axes.(a--cospraseive

b - tension. o -- interaediata). saiaaoteetonica: 6 -- soat mobile
block of moderate uplift;

B -- weak uplift. 9 - projections of the basement in the baseaent of the
transition type: 10 -- outcrops of Cenozoic basalts; 11 .. part of the
harguzin basin of the aaykal type: 12 - embryonic basins (1 -- Harektinskaya:
2 -- Podikatakaya. 3 -- Karektakanskaya. 6 -- Verkhnaihatakaya [Upper that].
S -- Dzhillndinahaya): 13 -- basins of the transitional (fro. Transbaykal

to naykal) type; 6 - Vitiakan. 7 - Nishneikitskaya. The dislocations of
the break in continuity: 16 -- seissically active: a -- established. b -
proposed (1-! -- Ulan-lurginskiy): 15 - active in the Cenozoic (a --
established. b -- proposed); 11-11 - Narehtanskiy. Ill-Ill -- Garginskiy.
lV-lv -- nzhorgolento-Nerungdinskiy. V-V - Vitlnkanakiy. Vl-Vl --

lkatakiy; 16 - hesocenozoic (a -- established. b -- proposed): Vll-Vll --
Podikntshiy; l7 -- pro-Cenozoic (a -- established. b -- oroposed).18 --

a) norual faults. b) overthrusts.

Key:

1 ~- lltat
2 -- Vitinhan
3 -- Cargo

of Arshan and Yelovskiy spur. the triangular facies along the front of

the Tunkinskiy bald peaks and the line of sineral springs at their foot
(Florensov. 1960). Recent and Iodern seissic activity of the Tunhinshiy
strike-slip fault is confirsed by the association of an entire series of

cpicenters of weak and strong earthquakes and also seissogenic structures
with its zone.

The Tunkinskiy fault has feathering and accospanying fractures of signifi-
cant extent. The southern branches of then are buried under the loose
series of the basin (SEISHOTBCTONICS.... 1968; Zorin. 1971). The sorpho-
logical expression of zone of then in the crystal bottos of the depression
can indicate their Cenozoic activation. This pertains prisarily to the
largest transverse Kyngargskiy fracture which obliquely cuts the Tunkinshaya
basin with respect to the Arshan meridian (Sher-an. et a1.. 1973). The
lrkut branch of the Tunkinskiy faults separating the Iountain Isssif of
ﬂunku-Snrdy Cape (absolute elevation 3693 seters) fro. the lowland vestern
side of the Tunkinskiy bald peaks has clear traces of Cenozoic rejuvenation.
One of the feathering fractures has a crushing zone of up to 200 seters.

It is hrnnched from the Irkut fault in the section near the fork of the
Chernyy lrkut and aelyy lrhut Rivers. Extending along the northeastern

331

'08 0!?ICIAL US! ONLY
P08 OIIICIAL US! ONLY

npurs of Munku-Snrdyk mountain. the fracture is clearly expressed in the
relief and has a strike to the northeast 70‘. At an elevation of 2000 to
2500 aeters the fracture is rooted along the chains of nuneroua landslipa
and also extended acarps and trenches (Shnotov. 19723 Solonenko. V.. et al..
1971: SEISNOTBCTONICS.... 1975a). On entering the Handy basin. the Irkut
fault branches. One of its branches is traced along the north side of the
basin. the other. Judging by the tectonic scarps. is well visible on the
aerial photographs. it extends to the southeast to the foot of the Khanar-
Dnban ridge. The traces of the latest novenents haVe been established
predominantly in the northern foothill section of the basin. Beginning with
Khara-Daban and to the western extrenity of the Handy basin. along the foot
of the nountains there is a chute-like depression (strike arinuth 300°) fron
100 to 300 neters wide which follows the Hondy-Khara-Daban ancient fault.
its recent rejuvenation is proved by a swath of nadern streans and chains

of snall lakes (Sh-otov. 1971: Solonenka. V.. et al.. 1971; SBISHOTECTONICS....
1975a).

The series of rectilinear scarps and trenches up to 80 neters deep and up to
5 km long is observed in the nountain cannissure between the Mandy and the
Khoytagol'skaya basins. intersecting. the riftagenic faults which break up
this nountain connissure converge here. approaching tron opposite directions.
There is no doubt of the increased seisnic danger of such sections

(ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966: SEISHOTECTONICS.... 1968. 1975a).

0n the left side of the irkut River valley near Khara-Daban. the superposition
and intersection of the ancient overthrust by the riftogenic Joints is

clearly observed. which denonstrates the neotectoaic rearrangenent of the
structural plan existing here (Solonenko. V.. et a1.. 1971; Shnotov. 1972;
SEISHOTECTONICS.... 1975s). it was noted above that in the eastern part of
the Tunkinskiy basin the fault with the sane nane follows the zone of the
ancient overthrust.

in the vicinity of the eastern closure of the Torskaya basin. the Tunkinskiy
fault has not been norphoiogically established. Between the Vystrinskaya
[Vystral and the Southern Iayksl basins. the zone of the Obruchev fault also
is not expressed in the relief. and in the Southern laykal basin. the main
route of this fracture has an underwater continuation.

The study of the underwater relief of the botton of laykal was undertaken by
B. F. but (1961a. b. 1966) by the nethad of deep water echo sounding. which
node it possible to discover an entire series of geanorphologicsl peculiar-
ities of the batten of the lake caused by the neatectonics. In particular.
the large. alnast continuous extent of the sharply expressed sinuous under-
water scarp around the west bank of the Southern laykal basin was confirned.
The steepness of the deep water slope of the lake forned by the displacer
surface of the Gbruchev fault reaches naxinun magnitude (60»70') in the
vicinity of Kalokol'nyy Cape. The graviletric data interpreted by

Yu. A. Zorin (1971) indicate the sane thing. in accordance with which the
0hruchev fault has an anplitude to 4000-5000 actors. and its displacer is

332

FOR OFIICIAL USE ONLY
’0! 0!?ICIAL 083 OIL?

inclined in the direction of the basin at an angle from $0 to 90'. In the
opinion of B. P. but (1965). a shallow water aection adjacent to the
Listvenichnyy Cape experienced block subsidence along the fault. The
displace-ants of the blocks in the vicinity of the Obruchev fault were
established in the underwater parts of the Priaorskaya and the Kresnoyerovakaye
seisaogenic structures. The rejuvenation (possibly. historically. quite
recently) of the Obruchevskiy fault has been proved by the fracture of the
ancient baykal terraces in the Slyudyanskaya Gulf and in the Tyya River
delta (the northern part of Baykal). In the aouth of the latter. in the
opinion of 3. ?. Lut. a section of the coast with sharply intersected
ground relief was thrown under the level of the lake. The basic plane of
the Obruchev fault cuts off a series of rocky capes such as Segan-Harynn,
Kovrirhka and Luver' on the west bank of Iaykal and Kaaen' laklaniy in

the vicinity of Peschanoy lay and shifts sons in the direction of the lake.
The values of shifted rock aaaaifa reaches 1 kn (La-akin. l955: tut. l96£z
Pal'shin. 1960).

According to the observations of N. V. Tyulentsev. in the vicinity of the
village of Kory and the Coloustnaya River. the lake of parts of the snall
river valleys cut off and thrown into the depths of laykal have been well
preserved. V. V. Laaakin (195$) extended these observations to other
sections of the west shore of Iaykal.

The seisaogeological investigations in recent years have denonstrated that
in the recent historical past. the sons of the Obruchev fault was an arena
of powerful earthquakes. It is coordinated with the Prinorshaya and the
Krasnoyarovakaya aeisaogenic structures for-ed during earthquakes with an
intensity of no less than force l0 and having an underwater continuation
(Lut. 196‘; Khroaovskikh. 1965). The Shartlay. Rita. Solontsovaya.
Srednekadrovaya [Central Kadrovaysl and Khibelenskaya aeiaaic structures

of grand scale occurring during rejuvenation of the Northern Iaykal branch
of the Obruchev fault by underground shocks up to force 12 are located
northeast of then. The echo sounding of the coastal zone in the vicinities
of these aeisaic structures denonstrated the exceptionally complex structure
of the lake bottom. Under the surface of the water in a strip up to 8 k-
wide gigantic blocks are hidden (up to 900 oeters wide) -- erratic aasses
up to 150 aeters high separated by graben-like depressions to 200 aeters
deep (Zhilkin. Pinegin. 1973). These are the frontal parts of the seisaic
structures with their characteristic swell-sinkhole relief. The sore
ancient seiaaostructures of Ange. Tonta. Saris. Aral'akaya genetically
connected with force 9910 earthquakes are coordinated with the Prinorskaya
branch of the Obruchev fault which runs along the line of the mouth of

the bugul'deyka River to the Haloye See. This branch, although it enters
into the Obruchev fault zone. in the Bugul'deyskoehalonorskiy section plays
n secondary role in the rift foraation, inaaauch as the anplitude of the

vertical displace-en: along it does not exceed 200 asters (Zorin. 1971).
With respect to the set of geological-geophysical and seisaogeological
attributes in the vicinity of the Obruchev fault the following sections
can be isolated with different seiaaic potential: 1. "-6.5-7;

333
rue OPPICIAL US! OIL!
'0! 0'1101AL US! ONLY

1 -force 9. The section of the Prisorskiy fault between the southwestern
c oaure of the Baykal basin and the Rite saiesic structure. the section of
the Northern Iayknl fault north of the Khibelenakaya aeiseic structure
and the Kicherakiy fault. the Ol'khonskaya branch of the Obruchev fault.

2. he7: 10-force lo ore note. The Tunhinekiy fault. a section of the
Northern aaykal fault between the seiseic structures of Rita and Khihelenaksys.

1n the vicinity of the southwestern closure of the Bayknl depression.
articulation and x-intersection of the Obruchev fault and the Cherskiy fault
bordering the depression on the southeast takes place. The closure of then
was established by echo sounding in the vicinity of Kultuk 10 ha fron the
shore. here the Obruchevskiy fault is split into a number of step faults
with aeplitudes of 700. 900 and 1200 esters. it is this characteristic
"decay" that explains the dasping of this powerful. extended fault disloca-
tion in a very short distance (but. 1966).

Southeast of Slyudyanka. in the profile of the deep water slope of the lake
the effect of a new structure begins to be felt -. the Chershiy fault (see
fig 100). The amplitude of the fault scarps with respect to the direction
fro. the coastal shallow strip in the direction of the lake water is 90.

180 and 300 neters (but. 1964). Then to the southeast the Cherskiy fault

is traced in the for. of an underwater scarp of 900 meters high gradually
increasing to 300 asters (Ladokhin. 1957). The shifts along this fracture
explain the inverse say-setry of the lake pool in the section between
Tankhoy and Hishikhoy. In general for bayhal coordination of the laxisun
depths with the western shore is regular. however. along the Cherskiy frac-
ture the subsidence of the botton of the basin takes place an intensely that
it cannot be co-pensated for by the aedinent accusulation (but. 1966). In
addition. the uplifted wall of the fault here is incoeperably sore sharply
dissesbered by the underwater canyons which have occurred along the trans-
verse and diagonal fractures (Voropinov. 1961; Ladohhin. 1957; but. 1966).
They bound the horst and greben structures sorted by high seismic activity.

On approaching the Selengs River delta. the Cherskiy fault is split into
two independent branches. One of then runs into the internal part of the
delta. and the other passes along the delta front. The sorphologicsl
peculiarities of these fractures have been discussed in quite soce detail
in recent papers (Lut. 1966; Solonanho. V., 1966a; Khrolovskikh. 1965;
SEISHOTBCTONICS.... 1968). On the periphery of the Selenga River delta
there is articulation of the Cherskiy fault zone with the Coloustinsko-
Kukuyskaye underwater structure (Lut. 1966), which is the intrabasin heaving
of the crystal basement. 1n the barren relief the Goloustinako-
Kukuyskoye uplift is in the for- of two pronontories up to 1000 Deters
high having northeastern orientation. One of then extends fro. the

Kukuy Cape on the periphery of the Selenga River delta in the direction

of the west bank along the traverse of the Goloustnaya River. An analogous
pronontory runs fro. the northeastern part of the Selenga River delta and
wedges out into the central basin of Baykal.

336

10! OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OfflClAL US! ONLY

This characteristic undervater ridge in structural respects is a one-way
horst. on the east (frontal) side bounded by the fault. and on the west side.
by the bend dislocations (but, l96lb. l966). In our opinion. it is lore
logical to consider it the western boundary of the Obruchev fault tone.

The northeastern continuation of the frontal fault of the coloustinsko-
Kukuyakaya aorphostructure is the Selengs fault which enters into the
Cherskiy fracture eons (SEISNOTBCTONTCS.... 1968). The activity of this
unique fracture is proved by nuserous outcrops of thermal springs and the
Concentration of earthquake epicenters in the liabs of the Coloustinsko-
Kuhuyskayn structure. The northeastern branch (established anplitude 15 n)
of the fracture vaa rejuvenated during the force 9 Central saykal earthquake
of 29 August 1959 (Solonenko. V.. Treshov. 1960). The foreation of the
joint was accoepanied by roiling of the water in the fore of a linear belt
of northeastern orientation. The other pert of the investigated under-
water norphostructure is foraed by the tectonic step -- the uplifted western
wall of the fault running free the Krestovshiy Cape in the direction of the
Selenga River delta. The ssoothed surface of the bottoa of the lake traced
free the mouth of the augul’deyka River is broken here by a sharp scarp sore
than 150 a high (Lut. l96la. l963. 1966). According to the oral renarks of
Yu. a. Zorin. these lov-saplitude fractures in the crystalline basesent
cannot be recorded by the methods of graviaetry; therefore they are absent
on the proposed structural diagraas (Zorin, 1971). This pertains on the
whole to the entire Goloustinsko-Kukuyskaya aorphostructure inasauch as
possibly a significant part of its uplift aaplitude (80001000 neters) is

not connected with covenants along the fault but is the result of the
erosion-accuaulstive activity of the Selenge River in the frontal part of

the formed delta against a background of general downuerping of the sayksl
basin.

The uplift along the Cherskiy fault of the north limb of the Khaaar-Daban
arch in the latitudinal segaent of the Southern sayksl basin during the
Quaternary period hardly exceeds 250 to 300 asters (the aaxiaun height of
the Quaternary lacustrine terraces). The overall scale of vertical nove-
aenta along this fault could reach laxiaua for the vicinity of the Southern
laykal basin with a aagnitude that is on the order of 8000 asters. Up to
5000 eaters of this in individual sections could be the ”pure" aaplitude
of the Cherskiy fault.1 In this case, the same law is retained as for the
layhal branch of the obruchev fault: the asai-ul displace-eat along the
fault decreases not in the ascending nose-ants but in the descending love-
seats of the blocks of crystalline substrate. and therefore these deep:

sutures lore proaote the forsation of the basin than the positive aorpho-
structures bordering it.

 

‘The anplitude of the background dovnvarping of the bottoa of the seyhal
basin undoubtedly reaches a significant value, but at the present tiae
it is impossible to consider it quantitatively.

335

FOR OP?ICIAL USS ontx
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The Udnkan fault system is predolinantly a sublatitudinal systea of neo-
toctonlc fractures occurring as a result of the involveeent of the west
flank of the tone of the Stanovoy deep suture in the process of rift
activation (ACTIVE TSCTONICS.... 1966). It runs sore than 200 he primarily
along the northern foothills of the Udokan ridge. However. s number of
large fractures making it up (Nasarakitskiy. China-Zakatskiy) are in the
body of this arch-block uplift. controlling the develop-ant of the sorpho-
atructures of different orders.

In spite of the coupler. branched plan configuration, the Udoksn systes of
dislocations with a break in continuity is characterised on the whole by
echelon structure predoeinantly with sublatitudinal and northeasterly strike
of the individual echelon fractures 15 to 60 he long. Couplexly differen-
tiating the axial part of the rift zone. at the sase tine they define the
development of the structures differing with respect to their aorphogenetic
peculiarities. Here the type. rate and direction of the seisaotectonic
soveeents. and accordingly. the level of the potential seissicity are
different for the individual fractures and even sections of then. The
highest seissic potential characterizes the fractures controlling the
elbryonic basins -- Na-arakitskaya, Bysnakhsknya. Lurbunskaya. and so on.

The aain fractures of the Udoksn systes are the Nasarakitskiy. Kenda-
eysnahhakiy. Dovachanskiy. Lurbunskiy, Enegachi-Kesenskiy and China-
Zakatskiy (see Nos 82-87 in Fig 106).

The Nasarakitskiy fractures located on the south limb of the Nuya-Chars
interbasin sountain cos-issure. running in the sublatitudinal direction
(75’) free the Takaisa River basin to the Durelag River. Along the entire
extent (3S kl) it is clearly expressed in the relief. controlling the
south side of the Nalarakitskaya elbryonic basin.

The west flank of the fracture breaks down into parallel echelons. The
northern echelon running about 12 kn bounds the coeplexly differentiated
bottom of the western part of the Nalarakitskaya basin on the south. 0n
the south limb of the fracture there is a block of the first stage of the
uplift of the Udokan ridge with an absolute altitude of 1200 to 1300 n.
The apparent amplitude of the vertical displacement along the fracture is
approxinately 500 meters.

The southern echelon 25 kn long separates the first stage of the ridge and
the bottom of the central and eastern parts of the basin fro- the high
mountain. so-called Tundakskiy block uplifted to a height of up to 2500 I.
The fracture extends here predosinsntly along the rear suture of the
pedestal of the ridge and disappears into the right bank of the

Purelag River. The amplitude of the vertical displacesent reaches 800 to
900 seters. The displecer tlane dips steeply to the north.

The west flank of the echelon which runs more than 10 km underwent holocene
rejuvenation. The deposits of the aide soraines of the lake glaciation

336

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and divide capes of the left tributaries of the Nasarskit River were

broken and displaced. The height of the fault scarp reaches 10 seters (the
basin well is downthrown).

In the west. in the headwaters of the Nerundakan River (the Teksias River
basin) the south echelon is cut by the extended (note than 80 ka) Tekaias-
Dehilindinskeya fault tone (see ho Bl in Fig 106) bounding the Kokarevsksya
end Taksias basins on the southeast (see No 56. 58 in Pig 106). The cone
is oriented in the northeasterly direction end on the east bounds both the

block of the first stage of the uplift of the Udokan ridge and. apparently.
the northern echelon of the Naaarskitskiy fracture.

The epicenter of the force 10 to ll Huya earthquake of 27 June 1957
("07.9. center depth 22 ks) for which the rejuvenation was experienced by
two echelons of the Neasrakitskiy fracture was coordinated with the vicinity

of the articulation of these faults (north elnost conpletely end south
extending lo kn). The seisaogenic aoveaent along the fault bore on the

whole the nature of a left strike slip. end the ratio of the horizontal end
Vertical displace-ants was approxiaately 1:3 (ACTIVE TICTONICS.... 1966).

Thus. the Nanarakitshiy fault is a clear exanplo of the fracture structures
causing the develop-eat of the esbryonic basins for which. as was desen-
strsted above. the highest level of seissicity is characteristic. The coabins-
tion of paleossissodislocations. aodern dislocations caused by the Nuya
earthquake and the extraordinarily active epicentrel field in this fault

tone sakes it possible to define its asaiaua seisaic potential as force 10
or acre.

The Konde-Eyanakhekiy fault extending about 100 kn has general sublstitudinal
strike. It is located in the vicinity of the Huye-Chsra interbaein
connissure. participating in the foraation of the Kuanda and the Bysnakhskaya
eabryonic basin. By its west flank sade up of two parallel echelons of
northeasterly strike. the fault penetrates deeply into the body of the
Southern Huys arch-block uplift. coaplexly differentiating it into the
positive and negative aorphostructures of higher orders. 0n the west the
latitudinal branch of the Huye-Tokko fault systea departs fros it. in this
way realizing the connection of two regional lines-eats. The narrow low-
land con-issure located between then is involved in slow subsidence. pre-
paring the nerging of the Maya and the Kusnda basins.

Farther to the east, the Konde-Eyanekhskiy fault in the fora of the clear
contrast fault scarp bounds the xuands basin on the south. The total
asplitude of the vertical displacelent reaches 1000 asters (without consider-
ing the plunge of the base-eat of the basin). A large thersal spring
(T-ebz'C) is associated with the fracture. The oneeaided horst of the
Nansrekitskiy ssssif located on the south wall participated in the love-ants
during the Huya earthquake of l957, which is indicated by numerous surface

deforastione within its liaits and the nature of the rupture of the teyge
ntructures.

337

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL US! ONLY

The cast flank of the fault is broken into several parallel eublatitudinal
branches expressed in the relief by steep scsrps and controlling the sorpho-
ntructure of the Rynnakhskaya embryonic basin. The holecane volcanoa and

a number of einaral springs stretch to these faults. According to the
geological and geasorphological attributes. the asplitude of the vertical
displacesents during the Quaternary tine reaches 900 seters here.

In the central and western parts of the fault. sections of its fragmentary re-
juvenadon are dinxteithe tectonic deformations of the sand series of

Niddle Quaternary age and Upper Quaternary to sodern proluvial deposits).
During the entire period of instrusent observations in the vicinity of the
fault and especially on its western flank. high concentration of earthquake
epicenters is constantly observed. Considering the entire set of attributes
characterizing the seisnotectonic activity of the fault. it is possible to

consider that earthquakes with an intensity to force 10 are possible in the
vicinity of it.

The Dovachanskiy fault branches from the Konda-Eysnakhskiy fault supposedly
in the south section of the Purelat River. and it follows in the north-
easterly (60-70') direction along the Ronda River. across the Dovachan Lake
to the Lurbun River a distance of up to 60 km. In the section from the
southwest flank to the Dovachan Lake. the fracture zone has the most complex
structure. Here it is lads up of several subparallel branches in which the
erosion-tectonic Ronda River valley is located. In the southeastern limb
there is a block sorphostructure. the part of which near the fault is
deformed by numerous accompanying and feathering fractures forsing the
pologenic Dovachan seislic structure taken together (Solonenko, V.. 1965;
ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966). One of the aublatitudinal faults feathering
the Dovachan fracture intersects the axial part of the block at a distance
of more than 20 km (the southern fault-graben).

The overwhelming sajority of the disturbances of the structure of ancient
occurrence has the nature of faults. sometimes uith left shift. Each of the
fractures is characterized by a acre or less steep. high scsrp in the
relief and is confirmed by the geological observations. The seismogenic
movements of the Upper Quaternary and ﬂolocene time occurred more than once
along it. One such earthquake with an intensity of no less than force 10
occurred in the eastern part of the southern graben fault several decades
ago. and the last earthquake (s-s.2) on 6 Pebruary 1975.

The long-preserved activity of the Dovachan fault sons, the traces of recent
seismogcnir rejuvenation and the high concentration of earthquake epicenters
(especially in the southvestern part) permit estimation of its seismic
potential at force 10 or more.

The Lurhnnskiy and the Nizhneingamakitskiy faults are made up of series
of sublatitudinal echelons connected by means of northeasterly shears into
a united zone controlling the Lurbunskiy graben and the lngasakitskaye

embryonic basin from the south and southeast. lts total extent is 50 to
60 km.

338

FOR OFVICIAL US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0|.“

The fault is clearly expressed in the relief by the steep (JS-hO‘) fault
scarps 500-800 eeters high. Considering the thickneae of the loose
deposits in the basine. the total anplitude of the vertical displeconent
along it reaches 1000 eaters. here the minute dieplaceeente (600—700 In)
belong to the Upper Pleistocene to holocene (300.000 to 600,000 years).
which is established by the difference in elevations of the foot of the
lover Pleistocene basalt flow in the lnganakitshaye basin and on the
8tolovoy eountein. The last uoveeents in the burbunsltiy fault zone occurred
no nore than hundreds of years ago (the Nishneinguskitsltiy structure).

Considering the degree of intensity of the loveeents along the fault in the
Late Cenosoic. the seiseogenic nobility of the tone in the Holocene and

the relatively high eodern seieeic activity. it is correct to consider that
earthquakes can occur here with an intenoity to force 10.

The China-Zahatsltiy fault in the for- of a single latitudinal linear tone
is traced free the upper lngaeahit River to the Kaiar River (about 90 lot).
in the veat it is supposedly coupled uith the eysten of riftogenic faults
bordering the Lurbunshsys eubryonic basin. Diagonslly intersecting the
lidohan arch-block uplift. it controls the neotectonic structure of the
upper Kslsr subrift basin on the south here. In the east hie fault eerges
with the activated tone of the Stanovoy deep suture.

The partial fractures Ialtiog up the China-Zahatshiy fracture syatee has
predominantly sublatitudinsl and northeasterly orientation. In the vicinity
of the sharp bend in the lover lngaesltit River and on the eastern flank.
large feathering of fractures branch off it to the northeast (the northern
branch and the Chepinahiy fracture). All of these tectonic disturbances
are clearly expressed in the relief; the Late Quaternary love-ants along
thee frequently cause significant rearrange-ent of the geooorphological
appearance and the hydrogrsphy of the territory.

0n the vest flank. the fault in the fore of e scarp 10 to 15 oeters high
cuts the cover of the "lore-.1 plateau basalts. The slsg cones of the two
Vakatshiy extinct volcanoes are directly coordinated with it. On the left
alone of the lover Inga-shit River valley in the Chinoyskiy gsbbro-
anorthosite pluton field. the fault is eorphologicelly expressed by acarps
20 to 25 esters high. replacing each other in echelon fore.

in the vicinity of the lover Inga-shit River where the northern branch
separates free the China-Vakateltiy fault. the vertical lovmnts along the
fault have led to sharp rearrangelsent of the river network. as a result of
vhich the headwaters of the China River have entered the lover Inge-shit
beein. The subsequent erosion has obviously occurred using the gaping
tectonic faulte. and at the present tine the lover Inga-ahit River and sole
of its tributaries have deep rectilinear canyon-like valleya up to l.5 kl
long and up to 100 esters.

339

FOR ORIGIN. 058 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

East of the lover lnganahit River. the basic route of the China-Vakstshiy
fault is shifted somewhat to the south and acquires a different structure.
to this section the fault bounds the China enbryonic basin and is fixed on
its south side by a chain of tectonic saddles and trenches. more rarely the
steep scsrpe up to d to 3 esters high. In plan they represent a systes of
echelon type fractures fros 1.5 to 5 he long.

0n the east flank. in the vicinity of the upper Kslsr subrift basin. the
China-Vshat fault is discontinuous. here. in individual sections of it the
signs of fault and fault-shift displacesents are noted. The alplitudes of

the vertical novesents reach l00-150 meters. and the horizontal sovesents.

the first tens of esters. The sections of saxinuu plunging of the bssenent

of the basin and active asdieent sccueulstion are coordinated with the fault
tone (the intorfluve of the Solotoy and the Doros. the Asudis Lake depression).

The saterial cosposition of the rock in the vicinity of the Chins-Vskatskiy
fault indicates its ancient pre-Casbrisn occurrence. The clear expression

in the relief indicates the rejuvenation of the tectonic sovenent in the
Quaternary tine along it. The rejuvenation of the tectonic sons in the
post-glacial period occurred in the flank sections. In the west the complex
of residual seissogenic deforsations with a total extent of £3 he (Chins-
Vahatshays palsoseisnogenic structure) is supposedly connected with the
pleistoseisl region of the force 10 to force ll earthquakes of 2 February 1725
(ACTIVE recrouxcs.... l966). In the eastern closure of the upper Kslar

basin the traces of the Holocene (first thousands of years) nova-eats have
been established in the vicinity of the Chepa fault (the psleoseiseogenic
Hedved' structure). Thus. the seisnic potential of the Chine-Vakatshiy fault
zone is estilated according to paleoseianogeological data at force 10 or
sore. The epicenteral field.of the last decade encospasses only the western
part of the fault. and the rest of its path is alsost seiseicslly passive.

Transitional Morphostructures setueen the asyksl Rift and Tranebayhal
block-wave Zones

Along the southeastern edge of the bsyksl rift zone there is a characteristic
set of norphostructural elements developing on interaction of the eoveeents
of the riftogenic and Transbsyhal type. The farther free the axis of the
loyksl rift. the less the rift stress field is felt. and the bending defores-
rinns have predoainant significance in the developsent of positive and nega-
tive sorphostructurea. The outlines of the basins on the uplifts are
hlurred. Their articulation tones are snoothed; in the Iajority of cases

the contrast is poor. and the fracture structures play a secondary role.

Anon; the positive eorphostructures. the arched uplifts predolinate. here
the large arches (for example. Khaear-Dabsn. lkstskiy. 0dohano-lslsr) have
a complex structure. The frontal parts of the uplifts turned touard the
rift structures experience sharp rearrangesent. predo-inantly as a result
of the descending (riftogenic) love-enta. As a rule. they are sharply
differentiated. and on the aeissotectonic level they approach the norpho-
genetic type of the arch-block uplifts of the nayksl-Stsnovoy zone. At the

3‘0
TOR OFFICIAL 053 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sane tine. orographically these sections are connected with large massive.
weakly differentiated areas. the tectonic aowesenta in which during the
period of Hssocenosoic activation were sanifestad in the form of a slow.
general rise causing predominance of bending deformations.

The negative eorphostructures also have characteristic transitional develop-
mental features. and on the whole they belong to the subrift basin type.
These troughs with sharply disinished rate of downwsrping and thickness of
the Cenozoic deposits obviously exhibited activation siaultaneously with

the large riftogenic basins. but the process of their develop-ant proceeds
such more slowly.

Let us consider the seat characteristic exaaples of these transitional
aorphoetructures.

Positive Morphoetructurea

The standard structures of this sorphogenetic series are the arched uplifts
of the Khanar-Daben and the that ridges.

The Khanar-Deban ridge fraaaa the Tunkinskaya and the Southern aaykal rift
basins about 350 km to the south and southeast. Vith respect to its morpho-
structural peculiarities. it is nonunifors. The western and northeastern
Khaaar-Dnban are characterised predoninantly by the features of arched
uplifts. and the Central Kha-ar-Daban. by the arch-block uplifts.

0n the whole, the ridge is asyanatric; the height of its top surface
increases sharply free the direction of the rift zone. reaching 2200 to 2300
seters (noxious height 2758 asters). In the highest part of the uplift.
sections of the Volcanic plateau and Tertiary peneplsin with gently sloping
wavy relief were retained. These frag-entslly retained relicta of the
ancient denudation surface outline the arched uplift sosewhst flattened in
its axial section. Its Iaxinua is coordinated with the central Khasar-Dsban.
lbwever. the bending deforsation first noted by V. V. and N. V. Lasakin

has been best noted in the western Khssar-Daban along the slope of the

lava plateau.

In general sorphologicsl appearance of the uplift of the Khaaar-Daban ridge.
the stepped nature of the relief has been poorly noted. This indicates
insignificant participation of the latest faults in the forsation of the
arch and in its internal differentiation. The naykal zone of the central
Khnaar-Dabsn where the Cherskiy fault has a noticeable effect constitutes
an exception. Here. in the axial part of the uplift close to the laykal

 

1with respect to its aorphostructure and aeisaotectonics. this part of

Khanar-Daban essentially belongs to the arch-block structures of the Bayksl-
Stanovoy zone.

351

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basin numerous saiemogenic fractures are concentrated which are connected
with the earthquakes of the recent past of force 10-11 (Solonenko. V.. 1963a;
Khromovekikh. 1965: SEISPKTIBCTONICS.... 1968). This zone of high-activity
contains direct proofs of the growth of the Southern Baykal rift basin as

a result of rupture of the highly uplifted part of the arched morphostruc-
ture by the descending (riftogenic) displacements of the individual blocks

of the earth‘s crust. here an important role is played not so much by the
Cherakiy fault sons as by the faults feathering it having ground continua-
tion in the form of fault scarps, obliquely intersecting the northern frontal
part of the central Khsmar-Daban.

Thus. in the investigated part of the arched uplift of Khamar-Dsbsn the
development process proceeds in the direction of sharp complication of its
internal field. The high seismic potential. in addition to the numerous
seismostatistical data. is confirmed by traces of the great seismic
disasters of the recent past .. the Solaan. Badkha. Khars-Hurin. Snerhnaya
structures, and so on (Khromsvskikh. 1965).

Accordingly. the potential seismicity of the frontal part of the Khsmar-Daban
arch turned toward the rift zone appears to be high, and it reaches a
maximum (forces 9-10 or more) in the central Khamsr-Daban. 1n the remaining
part of the arched uplift. moderate seismic activity is noted. and the
possible maximum earthquake strength is estimated at force 8 (K..xslb).

The lkat ridge downs the Barguxin rift basin from the southeast. and just

as the Khamar-Dabsn uplift, it has inherited features of the ancient
plateau (smooth forms of massive divides. broad development of the planation
surfaces, and so on).

The outlines of the transitional boundary between the Ikat arched uplift
and the Barguzin rift basin are sinuous and blurred. This nature of the
pedestal tone of articular, the absence of the latest tectonic strikes in
it, the soft and smoothed forms of the relief indicate that the bending
deformations play the basic role here.1

On the whole. during the formation of the morphostructure of the that arch
the inheritance was manifested in predominance of the retarded general
uplift which predominantly caused a flexible nature of deformations. Never-
theless. the frontal and axial parts of the uplift turned toward the rift
zone experience complex block differentiation (see Fig 107) connected with
the active development of the largest, latest fractures 9m Cargo, Argods,
Ulsn—Burga. Harektakanskiy. and so on (SBISMOTECTONICS..., 1968). The

lines of these faults clearly expressed in the relief are located at an
acute angle to the strike of the that arch and complicate the morpho-

1In recent times the liners epicentral zone was discovered. s. I. Golenetskiy
considers that it can be connected with the fault still not emerging at the
surface of the earth (see Chapter VIII).

362

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structure of its central and rift parts by the superposed block displace-
ments. The noted faults of general northeasterly strike are expressed in
the relief by erosion of tectonic scarps from 25.50 to lSOoZOO meters high
extending several tens of kilometers. Sane of them control the development
of the enbryonic basins - Harektakanskays. Podikateksya. Verhhneikatskaya.
Ulan-Burga. Thus, these latest faults. which have s local nature on the
scale of the entire uplift cause the arch-block nature of its central part.

The seisnotectonic peculiarities of this part of the that arch are also
connected with the complex block differentiation. Thus. in spite of the
high nodern eeisnic activity (A10 about 1.0). this territory is in prsctice
free of traces of recent disestrous esrthquakes; there are no necroseissic
data about then since the beginning of the 19th century. It is true that
some of the fractures clearly expressed in the relief (Ulsn-Burga.
harektskanskiy. Argoda) sometimes carry signs of seismogenic aoveaents
occurring in them. but the sources of these move-ents obviously run deep
into the Anthropogene. Of them the Olen-Surge fault has the greatest sig-
nificance for estimating the potential eeianicity. In its vicinity earth-
quakes with an intensity to force 9 (H57) are possible. The same potential
can he proposed also on the whole for the Barguxa conplexly differentiated
part of the that arched uplift. Along its periphery. along the fault zones
controlling the development of the subrift basins (Verkhne-Turkinskaya
[Upper Turkinskaya]. Vitinkanakaya (Vitimkanl). structures have been
isolated with which the connection of earthquakes of an intensity to

force 8 (N-S-l/Z to 6-1/2) is possible. For the renaining territory of the
that arch (about 502 of the area). the occurrence of force 7 earthquakes

is possible ("-6-3/4 to 5-1/2).

The sections with clearly expressed arch-block norphostructure of the that
uplift are distinguished by the constantly high modern seismic sctivity.

here the analysis of the numerous weak shocks and earthquake trenches have
made it possible to discover the characteristic of the center zones separated
in the section of the earth's crust with respect to the nature of the
mechanisms (Hisharins. Solonenko. N.. 1972). which possibly reflects the

"layered" nonuniformity of distribution of the stresses in the given section
of the earth's crust.

Thus. the examples of the Khannr-Daban and the that ridges indicate the
nonuniform seismic potential of the arched norphoetructures of the
transitional type. The sections of riftogenic rearrangement of such
inherited. long developing structures (modern basin formation. the "active"
tectonic zone, activated faults. and so on) are neat favorable for the
recurrence of earthquakes with maxinum intensity. In the evolution of the
lplifts themselves these sections can indicate different stages of transition
free ”pure" (Transbaykal) arches to complexly differentiated arch-block
structures of the rift zone. 0n the whole the level of the potential
seismicity of the erch uplifts of the transitional type is moderate. The

expected naxisnsn strength of the earthquakes in the majority of cases will
not exceed force 8.

353

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Negative Morphomtructures

The subrift structures (Selenga-ltantsinskaya. Verkhneturkinskaya.

Vitimkan. Gorbylovskays. Tsipskanskaye. beuntovskaya and upper Kalsr)

occupy an intermediate position between the basins of the Baykal and the
Transbsykal types (see fig l00). 0n.the other hand they have historical-
genetic connection with the Transbaykal and on the evolutionary level (at
least to the Pleistocene) they developed in a tectonic situation similar

to them. On the other hand. beginning with the Pleistocene. the development
of these transitional morphostructurea received significant influence from
the riftogenic movements. which is expressed in the intensification of their
block differentiation. the involvesent of the individual sections of the
basins in active subsidence. seismogenic rejuvenation and the occurrence

of the latest faults in their borders.

The basement of the subrift basins. by comparison with the rift basins.

have been uplifted (absolute elevation 300 to 700 meters. sometimes to

l000 meters). and with respect to the Transbayhal. it has been downthrown

by 200-600 meters. Considering the amount of plunging of the basement and
the maximum absolute elevations of the Cretaceous-Paleogene planation
surface (2600 to 2700 meters). it is possible approximately to determine

the total amplitude of the vertical tectonic movements during the Noogene-
Quaternary period of activation. it fluctuates from 1700 to 2100 meters
for the region of different subrift structures. This is approximately 3 to
4 times less than in the rift structures themselves. and it exceeds by two
times the scale of the displacements in the Transbaykal zone. This contrast
of the tectonic movements as a whole agrees also with the velocity gradients
(Igrad VIM-0.6'10'a to l.0‘lO'B). the values of which are much higher than
the Transbaykal and lower than the rift. Thus. even this approximate
analysis of the morphometric data makes it possible to describe the subrift
structures as occupying an intermediate position between the Transbaykal and
rift structures themselves.

The accumulation of 300-700 meter series of Neogenic-Quaternary deposits in
the subrift basins indicates activation of the tectonic movements in the

late Cenozoic. in a number of basins (Tsipa-Bauntovshaya system) the lower.
thin part of the section is characterised by the Eopleistocene. predominantly
lacustrine facies (the depressed molasses of orogenic formation). The
accumulation of.these finely elastic facies occurred under the conditions

of the weak contrast relief. The intensification of the block movements.
beginning with the Upper Pleistocene. the increase in the sediment accumula-
tion rate caused sharp facies changes. at the same time. thicker polygenic
series (orogenic molasses) are formed.

The upper Kalar basin is isolated from the overall system of investigated
transitional structures (ACTIVE TECTOSICS.... 1966; Vel'yanovlch. et al..
l969). In contrast to the remaining subrift basins. it was involved from
the Paleogene in intense uplifting and during the Late Cenozoic remained in
practice inhert. This is indicated by the thin (to 100 to l50 meters)

346

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

discontinuous series of Quaternary deposits covering about 502 of the

basin area. Pros the Pleistocene in the develop-ant of the upper Kaler '
basin some reactivation is noted connected with the block differentiation
of the Udokan-Kalar uplift under the affect of the riftogenic sove-ents.
This was also felt in an increase in the seisaotectonic activity. which

is confirled by the "reactivation" of the “federovskiy” fault on the left
bank of the bores River and the paleoseissogenic Hedved' structure for-ed
during the earthquakes of no less than force 10. The seisnostatistical
neterial (during a decade of observations) with respect to the upper Kalar
basin indicates its relative seissic passiveneaat only individual earthquakes
with Kclo were recorded. however. it is not excluded that the seissic
passiveneas is apparent. occurring after the disastrous earthquake of

1725 obviously connected with the China-Vskatskiy fault (Solonenko. v..
1968b). The upper Kalar basin enters into the "tone of quiet" in the highly
seisaic region. and there are grounds for assuming that this zone is a
"region of preparation" of strong earthquakes (Borovik. et al., 1971).

The subrift basins expanding the Baykal rift zone with respect to its south-
easterly periphery is an additional elesent in the evolutionary series of
negatch aorphostructures (Solonenko. V.. 1968b: SEISMOTECTONICS.... 1968).
with respect to age of Cenozoic activation and degree of sorphological
perfection. in the given stage of development they approach the nature basins
of the Iaykal type. but with respect to intensity of the riftogenic love-eats.
they lag behind the majority of the rift basins.

The potential seislicity of the subrift basins. both with respect to scisso-
statistical and with respect to aeisnogeological data on the whole is sig-
nificantly below the rift structures (H-6-3/b to 5-1/2. 10-force 7 to 8).
However. in the vicinities of the faults bounding the individual basins (for
exasple, the Bauntovskoy-Tiliahninskaya and the China-Vakatskaya). the
paleoseissogeological data indicate the possibility of the occurrence of
earthquakes with an intensity to force 10 (the Tilishainskaya and the
hedved' seissic structures. see Chapter VII).

Just as in the majority of rift structures. the intrabasin cos-issures have
increased activity in the subrift basins. For example. in the Bauntovskaya
basin on the lusano-Pilinskaya ccnaaissure, a significant nuaber of weak and
moderate earthquakes are constantly recorded. A strong earthquake occurred
here on 21 July 1968 (H-5.l; 10-force 7). It was preceded by nulerous fore-
shorks. The activity of the center was noted after the Iain shock: thus.

in Sente-ber-Decesber 1969 an earthquake aware was recorded here (206 shocks).

0n the whole. the analysis of the structural-geological and seiesotectonic
peculiarities of the Iorphostructurea of the transitional type indicates

that their foraation and developnent occurred under the effect of the
tectonic stresses acting both from the direction of the laykal rift and the
Transbaykal block-wave tone. here the effect of the rift stress field,
beginning with the Pleistocene. bees-e predoainant. and in the holocene.
individual parts of the investigated aorphostructures are cospletely involved

345

703 OFFICIAL USE OﬂlY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

in the riftogenic type of development. Accordingly. the increasing influence
of the riftogenic processes also caused increased (by comparison with the

Transbayhal structures) seisaic potential of the transitional type aorpho-
structures.

Transbayhal Block-Have Zone

The Transbaykal block-wave sone Iore than 60.000 kn: in area occupies the
southeastern pert of the epiplatforn orogenic belt. It is characterized
by alternation of the low and nediun mountain uplifts with basins of the

Transbaykal type extended in the northeasterly direction. which on the whole
causes an arch-block (block-wave) structure of this territory.

With respect to nature of the latest tectonic uovenents and the morpho-
structural peculiarities all of Transbaykal is broken down into three sub-

sonas: Selenga-Vitin ('l)° Khentey-Daurakaya (32) and Eastern Transbayhal
(39 (see Fig 100.

The thntey—Daurskaya subrone is represented by a high. weakly differentiated
arch uplift. It was isolated as a first—order structure by N. A. Plorensov,
1963) and Ye. V. Pavlovskiy (1968a). The two other subtones are large

regions of relative subsidence (lagging in the uplift behind the Khentey-
Dsursskiy and Baykal arches). the internal parts of which are nade up of

positive and negative morphostructures of second and higher orders.

A characteristic feature of the neotectonic developeent of the Transbsykal

as a whole is the predominance of the ascending type of movements (Khsin.
1973). In addition to the qualitative analysis of the geological cituation.
this is confirmed by the quantitative calculation of the rate of the vertical
tectonic nove-ents. The rate of the ascending noveeents is approximately

5 tines higher than the descending. For example. the average rate of rise

of the Halkhanskiy arch-block uplift. judging by the deformation of the
Miocene-Pliocene planation surface in 10 Iillion to 20 million years reaches

0.1 In/yesr. The lean subsidence rate of the Chikoy basin adjacent to this
arch does not exceed 0.02 II/year.

Another re-arhsble feature of the latest and modern develop-cut of Transbsykal
is basically the inherited structural plan and type of develop-ant of it

from the Upper Mesozoic tectonic regimen (Ploreneov, 1960b; Zorin, 1971;
Ufintaev. 1971). However, the inheritance features are not identical every-
where. They appear most clearly within the limits of the Selenga-Vitin sub-
sone and the least in the Monkeys and the eastern Transbaykal subaone.

Under the conditions of Transbaykal, the calculation of the gradients of
the rate of vertical tectonic Dove-ents and satisfactory convergence of
these data with the scisnoatatistics have Iade it possible to approach the
determination of the level of the seismic potential both of the entire zone
as a whole and its coeponent ele-ents. As a result of the calculations,
the followinglseries was obtained with values of the gradients: %) fro-1
1‘10‘9 years to 2 10'9 years"1 :2) iron 2-10’9 years’ 1to 6 10‘ years' 1;

366

FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) iron MO"9 years"1 to 010'9 years 1 (see Fig 101). This series
approximately corresponds to the tones with possible strength of the earth-
quake: 1) less then force 7; 2) force 7-8 and 3) force 8-9. This
correspondence was initially established by us in the exaaple of the
central. and in part western Transbaykal (the vicinity of the Chikoy.

lngoda and Gueinooaerskeye basins). where seismostatietical and paleoseisao-
geological date are available. Then it was extended to the remaining
sections of the territory of Transbayksl derethe paleoaeisaogeological
material is missing. and the seismostetistics are quite aasger.

He shell discuss the specific estimate of the potential seismicity when

describing the seienotactonic role of positive and negative aorphostructures
in Transbeykel.

Positive Horphostructures

The predominant position in Transbeykel both with respect to area and with
respect to seisaotectonic activity is occupied by the arched and the block-
arched uplifts. With respect to necheniss of formation. these structures

are quite similar. but for the second type. along with the bending deforma-
tions. the brittle deformations also acquire a noticeable role. playing a
significantly lesser role than in the Baykel-Stanovoy zone. The characteris-
tic of the development of the positive structures is presented in the papers
by V. N. Denilovich (1960. 1963), h. A.-Plorensov (1960b; 1965),

c. F. Ufiatsev (1971).

Let us present examples of the most characteristic Transbaykal uplifta.

The Hslkhenskoye uplift is the standard arch-block norphostructure. The
maximum height of the Malkhsnskiy ridge is 1600 to 1700 asters; it is 270 km
long with a width to 30-60 km.

The arch-block nature of the latest structure is emphasized by the nature
of the deformation of the ancient planation surface. the relicts of which
have remained at saximun altitudes in the axial part of the uplift and
frequently in the limbs. The slope of the plenation surface in the limbs
of the Halkhanskiy uplift is 2 to 5', and at the articulation points of the
limbs of the structure with the intermontane basins. it exceeds 5'.
creating the flexureaforsing transitional tones (Ufintsev. 1971). In the
transition zone itself between the uplift and the subsidence structures

are noted which are comparable to the forebergs (Gobi-Altay..., 1963). The
extent of the structures is on the average up to 10 km. up to 3 km wide.
the absolute elevations rarely exceed 1000 seters. Some asymmetry of the

slopes of these promontoriea is noted. The spoke usually is greater in the
direction of the ridge.

in various areas it is possible to see different stages of development of
the forchergs. For example. the generating structures of the giVan type
are observed. These are the individual low ridges made up of proluvisl
material of the Upper Pleistocene and younger age. The amplitude of the

3‘7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relative uplift reaches 60 to 60 meters. The more mature form of these
structures is the well expressed linear ridges extending up to 15 km with

a height to 100 meters. They are made up of the dislocated Early Quaternary
deposits. Finally. it is necessary to consider the mountain chain made

up of rocks of the Paleozoic basement that are isolated from the basic
mountain massifs and are collected by unity of strike with the "forebargs"
of the preceding type. They extend up to 15 to 20 km. and the relative
rises are 200 to 300 meters.

These three types of structures are different stages of their development
and indicate successive involvement in the uplift of the lateral parts of
the basins. which causes expansion of the positive structures at the expense
of the adjacent negative ones. The Transbaykal type of structures are
similar to the Gobi in this respect. and it distinguished them theoretically
from the Baykal (Solonanko. V.. 1968b).

The level of potential seismicity of the arch—block uplifts of the
Malkhanskiy type. judging by the gradients of the neotectonic movements
and the residual deformations (see Chapter VII. Yadrikhinskays structure)
is high among the positive morphostructures of Transbaykal and can reach
force 8-9 at the limit (N to 5‘1/2 to 6-1/2). This is indicated by the
epicenter of the force 8 earthquake of 1936 (H-b).

In the general case the difference in nature of growth of such positive
structures. their intensity. differentiation and stage nature causes
fluctuation of the seismic potential of the Selenga-Vitim and the Eastern
Transbaykal subzones from 7 or less to force 8~9.

Among the arches of the Transbaykal zone the best studied is the
Khentey-Daurskoye uplift. In the investigated territory it is bounded by
deep faults: Chikoy-Ingoda -- on the northwest. Onon-Turinskiy. on the
southeast: Vostochno-Khangayskiy on the west. and Kukinskiy (supposedly
according to the geological data) on the east. The width of the arch exceeds
150 km. and it is more than 400 km long. The maximum amplitude of the uplift
fixed by the planation surface reaches 1700 to 1800 meters (the headwaters

of the Chikoy and Chikokon Rivers).

The bending deformations with large (to 2600 km) radius of curvature
(Ufimtsev. 1971) participate in the formation of the arch. The absence of
large linear arch blocks will permit the assumption that in the initial

stage of development of this structure no significant differentiated movements
occurred. However. traces of weak latest tectonic movements with respec to
the zones of individual fractures are quite numerous here. The ascending
movements of the block are basically uniform along them. Some of them lag

by 200-300 meters in the uplift.

Being developed in the latest time with inheritance from the Upper Mesozoic
structural level. the arch nevertheless experiences constant growth with the
exception of the northwestern part bounded by the Chikoy-Ingoda marginal '

358

FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OffchAL USE ONtY

suture. here. for example. the Altan-Kyrenskaya Upper Mesozoic basin

turns out to be involved in the uplift. This basin which previously (in

the Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous) was at the foot of the arch. making
up its southeastern boundary. The boundary of the arch after the Neogene-
Quaternary period shifted about 35 he to the southeast. and at the present
time it runs along the Ones-Turinskiy fault. The involvement of the adjacent
sections along the northeastern periclinsl arch. for exasple. Arahsnskaya
and Dreyskaya Upper Mesozoic basins proceeds analogously (Ufimtsev. 1971).

The noted peculiarity is also characteristic for the development of other
arches of the Trensbsyksl block-wave tone. Seismicslly the seat dangerous
within the limits of such structures are the marginal parts of the arches
(the limbs and periclinals).

Negative Horphostructures

The Transbayksl type basins occupy another aeissotectonic position in the
Transbaykal lump-wave zone (Floreneov. 1960s). These are the geosorpholog-
ically expressed intersentane troughs (graben-synclinsls) -- linear sections
of plunging above the fault or next to the fault between the arch-block
uplifts. The maximum length of them reaches a few hundred kilometers. and
the width reaches 30-60 km (see Figures 100-104). The greatest thickness

of the ﬂesocenozoic sedimentary series in the basins is 1600 to 1800 meters;
of then about 200 meters are for the Pliocene-Quaternary sediments.

As the geological boundaries of the basins let us take the flexure forming
transition tones along the marginal srcogenic overthrust (or upthrust faults)

bounding the region of propagation of the lithofied sedimentary series.

Hith respect to morphological and genetic attributes u. A. Florensov (1960a)
includes only those slopes in the troughs which are converted to the sedi-
mentary accumulation bed with completed layer formation. He includes the
higher ablation region in the mountain border.

The outlines of the basins discovered in this way in general have smooth
features. sosetimes disturbed by sharp distortions connected. as a rule.
with the folded disturbances and the dislocations with a break in continuity.

The basic structural elements of the basins are the trough-like depressions
separated by the projections of the crystal basement reaching the day sur-
face or covered with a thin veneer of Hesocenotoic deposits. In the large
basins (Chita-Ingoda. chikoy. Khiloksksys, Gusiaootersksya) up to 3-5 troughs
are observed separated by projections of the basement. These include the
maximum thicknesses of the Nssocsnozoic deposits.

In the modern relief the troughs are the lowest sections of the depressions
occupied by the accusulative plains. In both cases their surface ssoothly

becomes the adjacent arched uplifts. and in other cases, it is emphasised by
the erosion-tectonic scarps up to 300-600 meters high or more. In the sec-

tion the troughs are say-metric. The asymmetry of the basins finds reflection

369

’03 0??!CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the tonality of different facies types of loose Quaternary deposits.
According to the drilling data. entirely defined correspondence of it to
the tonality of the Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous deposits is
established.

The general characteristic of the latest tectonics of the Transbayhal basins
is the inherited plan and type of their development from the Upper Mesozoic
tectonic cycle (Plorensov. 160a). It is also possible to talk about main-
tenance in the latest time of the Upper Nesosoic development rate. This

is indicated by the comparative analysis of the sediment accumulation rates
in the same basins as. for example. in the Chikoy basin the maximum thickness
of the Upper Mesozoic series in the individual troughs does not exceed

1200 to 1400 meters (Vnuhov. 1967). Considering that its accumulation has
occurred during the period from the Upper Jurassic to the Lower Cretaceous

(about 60 to 70 million years). the average sediment accumulation rate is
approximately 0.02 mm/year.

The thickness of the loose PlioceneoQuaternsry (10 to 12 million years)
series in the same troughs does not exceed 150 to 200 meters (Khotina.
1966). that is. the average sediment accumulation rate is also about 0.02
em/year. which by comparison with the sediment accumulation rate in the
rift basins is almost 10 times less. Accordingly, many researchers are
inclined to consider that the basins subside only relatively. lagging in
the uplift behind the actively developing positive structures. The fact
that in the latest and modern period they still experience weak plunge

is indicated by the presented sediment accumulation rates.

Among the other general features characteristic of the Transbaykal basins.
it is necessary to mention the reduction of their area as a result of
involvement of the marginsl~parts in the uplifts.

Evaluating the seismotectonic peculiarities of the basin development on the
whole. it is necessary to indicate their insignificant role in the
determination of the level of seismic potential of Transbaykal. Their basic
formation is due to the smooth submersion with insignificant intrabaain
differentiation. Therefore the tectonic movements connected with the
formation of the basins cannot be a source of strong earthquakes.

Activated Faults

In Transbaykal. the latest faults of northeastern strikes which.are longi-
tudinal with respect to the smooth morphostructures predominate. With
respect to genetic type they belong to the upthrow faults or the arcogenic
overthrust sometimes complicated by gravitational faults (Danilovich, 1966:
Plorensov. 1960a: Ufimtsev, 1971).

The latest and modern movements along these faults are basically connected
with growth of the positive structures. In some cases they are the
interfaces between the positive and negative firsteorder structures

350

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(Nongolian-Okhotsk and Dthida-Vitin faulte). and in others, of second and
higher orders (Khilok-Karenga. Tugnuyskiy. and so on).

The individual'faults iron 20 kn or nore located parallel to the continuation
of each other or substituted in echelon fora. torn aeparate systene with
different level of activity. The width of such tones reaches 20 to 60 kn.
and eoaetines nore. The total naxinun amplitude of the vertical displace-
nent with respect to the individual faulte during the Pliocene-Quaternary

is 300 to 600 neters. and possibly more (Khotina. 1966; Ufintaev. 1971).

he an example let ua discuss the characteristic of too fault tones ~-

hongolian-Okhotek and Khilok-Karenga separating the firet and eecond order
structures respectively.

The Hongolian-Okhotek fracture extends to Trensbaykal tron the territory of
Nongolia and in the northeasterly direction. across the headwaters of the
Nyukrho River. it runs almost to the Sea of Okhotsk. lts total length is

up to 3500 kn (in the regionslited territory. 1200 kn. and the width of its
tone is from 20 to 40 km.

The fault is the boundary between the subzones - the Selenga-Vitin (31)
in the northwest and the Khentey-Daurskaya (32) in the eastern Tranabaykal
(33) in the southeast (see Fig 100).

The fault deletes the ancieht Cretaceous-Paleogene and younger Miocene-
Pliocene planotion surface. The total amplitude of the vertical displace-
ment of these surfaces with respect to individual faults in the tone during
the Pliocene-Quaternary tine reaches 300-400 neters. The nodern activity
of the Hongolian-Okhotsk fault is confirned by the association of the
epicenters of the-strong earthquakes of force 11 and 12 with it (n-8.6 and

8.7) on 9 and 23 July 1905. and force 8 in 1936. force 7 in 1935. and so
on.

The fault zones in the investigated territory include six individual
elcnente. Their potential seisnicity. judging by the pslcoseisnogeological
data. seisnostatistics and the nagnitude of t_ velocity gradients of the
vertical tectonic covenants reaching (d-6)°lo eare'l. decreases tron force
8-9 in the west (the Chikoy elenent) to force 7 and less in the east (the
Shilke elenent).

0n the whole. a general decrease in the potential seisnicity of the

individual elements of the Hongolian-Okhotsk fault is noted fro- southwest
to northeast.1

1

beyond the eastern edge of our nap (in the vicinity of the Tukuringro-
Dahaeda anticlinoriun) it again increases at least to force 8 (ﬂ to 6 and.
possibly. lore).

351

FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The Khilok-Karengshaya systes of faults in the latest structural plan
is the boundary between the positive and negative second-order structures
entering into the Selenga-Vitia zone. The extent of the system free the
southwest to the northeast is 'up to 700 In with a zone width to 20 ha. The
mean length of the individual faults making it up is 120 ha.

b
with respect to genetic type. these are basically upthrow faults or arcogenic
overthrusts. The amplitude of the vertical tectonic aoveaents along the-

during the Pliocene-Quaternary period is sore than 200 asters (Khotina.
1966: Ufistsev. 1971).

The low seissic activity (A 0-0.02 and lover). absence of paleoseisuogenic
structures. the low asgnitu e of the valocity gradients of the vertical
tectonic aoveaents not exceeding 3-10‘ years‘ indicates that the oaxinus
leVel of the seissic potential of the individual faults in this zone is

no more than force 7-8 (appreciably lower than for the faults of the
Mongolian-Okhotsk zone). The other fault zones bounding the second-order
structures do not exceed this level.

a comparison of the seissogeological data with respect to the characterized
faults zones of different order confirss the existing opinion that the
regional disturbance zones which bound the large structures having different
speeds of moveaent are the lost seissic. In addition. the opinion of the

united seissic potential of the fault zone enters into contradiction with
the actual aaterial here.

Basic Laws of Seissotactonic Development

The above-described neotsctonic and seissotectonic elesents of the Siberian
Cenozoic platforl in the epiplstforn orogenic belt provide iaportant saterial
for deternining the nature of the aovenents of the earth's crust for the
genetic varieties of sorphostructuras and the conditions of aanifestation

of the earthquakes. The seissotectonic process in aany aspects follows the
laws of tectonic developsent which were laid down in the Cenozoic for the
Baykal-Stanovoy tons and in the Hesozoic for Transbsykal.

There is a contradictory opinion about the evolution of the rift process.

In particular. it is considered that cospression takes place fro. the Siberian
platfora side to the east (Groswald. 1965) or to the southeast (Dusitrashko.
1952; Azhgrrey. l960; Voronov, 1966), tension to the southeast (Plorensov.
1960a; Zorin. 1971) and to the northwest as a result of shoving of the
platfors back (Van Baaselsn. 1960) or cosbination of tension with horizontal
displacement along the faults (La-akin. 1968). Hithout discussing the
advantages and disadvantages of each hypothesis. let us note that now the
predoainance of the tensile stresses across the strike of the neotectonic
structures of the laykal rift zone is generally recognized. Accordingly.

the soot probable and well-founded is the system proposed by N. A. Plorensov.
(1970) supplemented with respect to seisaological and geophysical studies
(Hishsrina. 1965. 1972; Zorin. 1971).

352

’03 OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
M OPFICIAI. "8! ONLY

The analysis and the statistical processing of the data on the age of the
surface planation for Burseia as a whole (Ti-ofeyev. 1965, 1968. 1969)
indicates that a trend is observed toward the rejuvenation of the denudation
pleinn froa west to east. Thus. for the orogenic Central Asian halt the
ego of the initial plain varies fros Triassic in the west to the Cretaceous-
Palsogene in the east. This confine the sequence of the tectonic activa-
tion in the latest tiss which began such later in Pribaykal'ys than in
Heatern Asia (Petruehevsltiy. 1966). Il'hs conclusion that the rift process

is continuing to develop toward the east agrees with these principles and

the Bayhel rift sons is at the present tine expanding its distal and lateral
boundaries (Solonenko. V.. 1968b. c; Plorensov, 1970).

One of the clear indexes of growth of the rift sons is the continuing develop-
aent of the eabryonic and the generated basins (including the satellite
basins) on the slopes and in the atrial parts of the bordering uplifts. 0n

the southwestern flank of the layhal-Stanovoy tone the ssall basins have
already lost the capacity for further developsent (Plorensov. 1960a). and

the activity of the peripheral aaianogenic structures in the Upper Pleistocene-
"olocene has been decreased significantly. The development in tins of the
beginning of the neotectonic sovsssnts betvesn the southwestern and north-
eastern ends of the rift structures is also noted. If for the Baykal and

the Tunkinshaya basins the min- intensity of the heogene-Quaternary
activation belongs to the Pliocene-Pliocene. then in the Stanovoy highland it
belongs to the Pliocene-Pleistocene (ACTIVE TBCTONICS..., 1966; 3mm-
TECTONICS.... 1968). D. V. lapstin (1972) arrives at the same conclusion

on the basis of analyzing the geonorphological data with respect to the
eastern part of the baykal aountain region.

The trend toward rejuvenation of the processes of reworking of the earth's
crust on soving froa west to east finds confiraation also in the sanifests-
tion of the effusive activity. Hhersae in the southwestern flank the min-
nanifestation of volcanisa belongs to the Oligocene-Pliocene (Obruchev.

1950: Plorensov. l960a. Plorsnsov. at al.. 1960a) and the eastern flank the
beginning of the eruptions belongs to the Pliocene-Pleistocene or Lower
Pleistocene (ACTIVB rmomcs.... 1966; Logschev, 1968; Lopatin. 1972).

In connection with the problem that has been touched on regarding the
possible relation of the Neogene-Quaternary volcanisa to the evolution of

the rift structures it is necessary again to esphssise (Floraneov. 1960a;
Solonenlto. V., 1966b. 1967; ACTIVE ncroutcs.... 1966; Plotsnsov, at al..
19604:). that the direct relation of the volcanic processes to the zones of
activated faults has not been established anywhere in the investigated region.
On the contrary. even the Ilolocene. well-preserved volcanic apparatuses and
the basaltic dikes (Udohanshiy. Ithanarnnaban, Oka volcanic regions). to

say nothing of the lore ancient ones. do not have defined structural control
on the part of the riftogsnic faults. They are associated with the struc-

turnl lines. as a rule, which obliquely the discontinuous elaenta of the
rift structures or they are far to the side of then (Vitin and one

plateaus). This noncoincidence of the strike of the volcanic zones
(SV-JO-SO') and the riftogsnic faults (sublatitudinal orientation) is

353

”I OHICIAL US! ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

especially clearly noted in the Udoken volcanic region (Solonenko. V..
l966h; ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966).

On the neotectonic level. the nature of the volcanisa reflects the process
of the latest activation on saving to the northeastern flank of the Baykai
rift zone (Solonenko. V.. 1968b. c). However. the actual relations of the
volcanic and the riftogenic. frequently spatially coahine and synchronously
occurring processes. remain unclear and. most frequently of all. if they
occur. then only in the seat general fore. Accordingly. in the scisso-
tectonic aspect there is no defined or direct relation between the volcanic
regions and the epicenters of strong earthquakes. Nevertheless. in a
number of cases (for exasple. the holocene volcanoes of the Udokan region)
local epicentrel fields and awaree of week earthquakes are noted which
extend spatially to the individual groups of volcanos. It is possible that
in these cases we are dealing not with tectonic. but volcanic earthquakes
(Solonenko. V.. 1968c). the sore so in that the ”suppression of the volcanic
eruptions in the Holocene is possibly only a teeporary phone-anon"
(Florensov. 1960s).

The above-enumerated ere-plea clearly indicate the rejuvenation of the
tectonic processes fro: west to east. Accordingly. the proposition of

V. P. Solonenko (1968b) regarding the migration of the rift stress field

to the Stsnovik region rasaine valid. however. this finds confirsation also
in the geophysical field in which the regular decrease in absolute values

of the gravitational anosalies above the basins fro- southwest to northeast
of the Beykal rift eons is noted which. together with an increase in the
overall level of the cravitstional field is in accordance with the conclu-
sion regarding aigration of the rift for-scion to the east.

The studies of the aechanise of the earthquake centers performed by

A. V. Vvedensksya (1961) and especially in detail by L. A. Hisharins (1965.
1967. 1972) demonstrated that the earth's crust within the limits of the
Nongolisn-Bsyksl seismic belt experiences the effect of the horizontal
tensile forces oriented across the strike of the basic neotectonic structures.
and the compressive stresses are steeply inclined (sore than 55') or they

are close to vertical. The orientation usually corresponds to the strike of
the norphostructures.

Previously it was considered that on the southwestern flank (Tunkinos
Koaogol'skiy sector) the orientation of the stress axes is directly opposite.
The inversion of the Isykal tectonic field was explained by the growing effect
of Central Asian stress field. however. the detailed studies of recent

years desonstreted that the stresses are sun-ed up here which are cannected
with the riftogenic and the nountsin-foraing processes of the Mongolian
(latitudinal) and Sayan (northwestern) directions which are still complicated
by the directions of the tension (decay) in the highly uplifted blocks of

the earth's crust.

356

FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Accordingly, the different earthquakea. even with cloae centera. can have
a different nechaniaa which in confiraed by the analyaia of the nechaniaa
of the weak earthquake cantera. Previoualy "it appeared that in the
Tunhinakaya baain and to the wear. the near-horizontal tenaile atreaeea
acting acroaa the rift.atructurea vere being replaced by coapraaaive once.
This idea hoe not been confiraed. and all of the conclueiona regarding the
aodern direction of the tectonic nova-ante of the earth'a cruat baaed on it
have no baaie" (SEISNOTEC‘I'ONICS.... 1965a. p 128).

On the aaatern flank of the rift zone. aoee apecific peculiarities have
alao been diacoverad in the aachanian of the earthquake center. For the
center of the Zveravakiy earthquake of 15 June 1971 (56.28’ north latitude.
123.66‘ eaat longitude. "-5.9. “-15 kn). the eubhoricontal orientation of
the axea of the tenaile and coapreaeiva atreaaea haa been eatabliahed.

although their apatial position with reapect to the atructuraa ia analogoua
to that in the leykal rift zone.

The aigrationai proceaa of related activation in connection with the rift
formation reached the vicinity of Central Olekna. in the individual rifto-
genic atructurea (Iaangro-Chebarkaeakiy graben and Kudulikanakaya generating
baaina) are coordinated with the vent and of the Stanovoy arch. The plan
differentiation of the intenaity of the riftogenic proceaa ia confirmed not

only by the aagnitude and the nice of the grabena. but alao by the thickneaa
cf the aolaaaoid fornationa filling the baain. Hhereaa in the Chara and
other loaded roofed baaina it ia 1000 to 2000 meters or acre. in Tokko baain.
about 500 aetera. and in the eaall baeina of the baykal type (aabryonic and
generating). appreciably leaa - tena and a few hundreda of meters. At the
some time the aodern activity of the dialocationa with a break in continuity
controlling theae atructurea ia colparable or even higher for the eaall baaina
by coapariaon with the baykai rift tone. The morphological damping of the
rift atructurea on the eaet flank of.the Baykal rift zone in coabined with
intenaification of the general atreaaed atate of the earth'a cruat. In
particular. the baeic number of paleoeeiauodialocationa and atrong earth-
quakee in the rift zone of the Stanovoy highland etretchea to the earpho-
etructural canplexea in which the email baeina are developing.

la eatabliahing the aeieaageological relationa and the eeiaaotectonic
peculiaritiea, the principle of inheritance haa inportant aignificance.

It uaa developed by N. S. Shatakiy (1938) an applied to the defined tectonic
atructurae.

By thia tera ve aeant three interconnected aapecta - inheritance of the
tectonic plan, tectonic forna and tectonic aovenenta.

Tho.hnykal rift zone hae during ita develop-ant to the eaat cut acroae the
strike of in practice all of the pro-Cenozoic atructurel coeplexee. Theae
prohleaa have been inveetigated in considerable detail previoualy
(Floreneov, 1960b; Solonenko, V., 1968b; and no on), and the conclusions
drawn convincingly indicate the auperpoaed nature of ice develop-eat.

355

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The rift structures are newly formed, and their origin obviously is
connected primarily with the dynamics of the mantle processes.

At the present time there is a possibility for tracing the structural
evolution of the earth's crust from the Mesozoic in close connection with
the tectonic stress field. The dislocations with a break in continuity
bounding the Mesozoic and Cenozoic negative structures are indicators by
means of which it is possible to deter-ins the direction of the compressive
and tensile forces and their change in time. Beginning only with these
conditions. we can state to what degree the latest structures inherit the
development of the preceding ones, for the replacement of the stress field
leads to inversion of the sign of the movement of the individual tectonic
elements of the crust. The formation of the Mesozoic basins and troughs
bounded by the upthrow faults and overthrusts is closely connected with the
predominance of the cospreseive stresses across the morphologically expressed
structures.

The majority of discontinuous dislocations of this time connected directly
with the tectonic field have sublatitudinsl strike, orthogonal to the
compressive stresses. As examples confirming this phenomenon we have the
upthrow-ovsrthrust faults. spatially and genetically connected with the
origin of the Kalar. Kheniysksya. and Kuduls tectonic depressions and the
Chul'msn trough. If we consider the series of overthrusts. including the
Angers associated with the back of the Siberian platform of the same name.
then it is obvious that the compressive stresses do not have a local, but
they had a regional nature. It is true that in the vicinity of the Angers
outcrop the compression structures are significantly smaller with respect
to scale than those within the limits of the Alden shield, and the age of
the former is somewhat more ancient: at least the sedimentation cycle here
ended in the Middle Jurassic. at the same time as in the Chul'msn trough it
continues even in the Lower Cretaceous. Obviously this is a consequence of
the gradual weakening of the tectonic mobility from west to east in the
Hongolisn-Okhotsk belt (ﬂsgibina, 1963; Romerov. 1967).

Beginning with the history of the geological development of the southern
part of the Siberian platform in the Hesozoic. we can say that the tectonic
field was characterized by the meridionally oriented subhorizontsl compres-
sive stresses and the sublatitudinal tensile forces steeply inclined toward
the horizon, and thus. in turn, determined the nature of the dislocations
with a break in continuity and the structures connected with them.

The Bsyksl rift zone, sometimes following the ancient dislocations with a
break in continuity as weakened zones of the earth's crust, is developing
in general features independently of them and has its own specific features
of tectonic development differing from the preceding stage. This is
primarily expressed in the fact that it was formed during the predominant
stress role across the strike of the morphologically expressed grsbens
(Plorensov, 1960a, 1910) in combination with the horizontal movements
(Solonenko, V., 1960a, 19686) with respect to the riftogenic faults.

356

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Comparing the preceding (Upper Hesozoic) field of tectonic stresses and
the modern one, we see that the orientation of the stress axes in them is
diametrically opposite: the genetic type of the dislocations of the break
In continuity and the nature of the moVenents along then are different.
and correspondingly. we do not have any grounds for talking about the

inherited development of the beyksl rift cone with respect to the preceding
phase of tectogenesis.

The processes of modern activation of the western part of the Stanovoy ridge
hava found their expression in the deep erosion. the rearrangement of the
hydraulic network and also in the formation of a number of discontinuities
in the divides end on the slopes of the Zverev ridge expressed in the
relief. Along the axial line of the latter. almost over its entire extent
there is a fault expressed in the form of a steep scsrp. The formation of
this extended (60 km) fracture in the apical part of the arch-block uplift
possibly represents the process of inversion of the tectonic movements in
connection with the platement of the stress field. A similar process
obviously has occurred at the location of the Chul'man Nesozoic trough which
at the present time participates in the regional uplift of the southern part
of Siberian platform and is a standard inVerted morphostructure. The change
in stress field. Just as the side of the tectonic sovements was caused by the
effect of the neotectonic processes in connection with the development of
the anykal rift system. It is entirely possible that at the present time

in the vicinity of the Stsnovoy ridge the stresses of the naykal type pre-
dominate. and the process of complete inversion of the hesocoic field of
tectonic stresses has occurred correspondingly. and the stress field of the
anykai type is developing farther to the east.

The deep faults have since the time of their formation usually represented
active structural elements of the earth's crust. in connection with which
they usually are considered structures of inherited development. however.
it is impossible not to take into account the fact that from period to
period. the type. the rate and the nature of the movements along them have
changed. Just as their magmocontrolling role has not been constant in timt
During the periods of predominant compression the penetration of the
magmatic melts in large volumes has low probability. and during the period
of tension. the situation is more favorable for penetration of the deep.
basic and ultrabasic differentiates of the magma (Peyve. 1965; Sherman.
I966; Florensov. et al.. 1960s). The formation of the tectonic structures

is directly connected with the tectonic stress field depicting, in turn.
the mantle processes.

Thus. considering the development of the Beykal rift zone, we must again

emphasize that it has developed superposed with respect to the more ancient
structural plan.

Transbnykal. on the other hand, is characterized by relatively low level

of seismic activity and moderate rate of neotectonic movement. The tectonic
regime here is caused by the predominant development of the modern
structural forms from the more ancient ones. This point of view was

357

FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stated by N. A. Plorensov (1960a). and it was confirmed during further
rasenrch.

The predominant type of latest and Iodern tectonic movements for Transbaykal
must be considered to be the ascending one. here the most active growth

is experienced by the arches and the arch-block positive structures involv-
ing the lateral parts of the negative structures in the uplift.

As a result of the studies of the centers of strong and weak earthquakes
(Hisharina. 1965. 1967. 1972; Miaharinn. N. Solonenko. 1972). in addition
to the horizontal orientation of the tensile stresses. the orthogonslness

of them with respect to strike of the main neotectonic structures was

also discovered. This conclusion is in accordance not only with the general
geotectonic ideas of the riftogenic structures. but also with the seismo-
tectonic observations in the epicentral zones of the majority of strong
earthquakes in the past (paleoseismodislocations) and modern times.

Thus. the mechanism of themovement of the earth's crust during the Huya
earthquake of 1957 established with respect to the seismic dislocations

agrees quite well with the orientation of the stresses in the vicinity of
the center (ACTIVE TECTONICS..., 1966). In the centers of the Nyukzha and
the Olekma earthquakes of 1958. the stress orientation also corresponds to
the situation and nature of the discontinuous deformations in the epicentral
zone. which are tension joints of sublatitudinal orientation with insignifi-
cant component. This nature of the deformations corresponds to the
meridional tensile stresses noted for the centers of these earthquakes.

The determinations of the mechanisms of the centers of the latest strong
earthquakes -- Tas-Yuryakhskiy 1967 and Kadar 1970 -- confirm the presence
of the tensile stresses oriented orthogonally to the main structural elements
of the Kodar-Udokan and Stsnovoy zones.

The studies of the stresses at the centers of the weak earthquakes
(K‘lO-ll) performed by L. A. Hisharins and N. V. Solonenko (see Chapter V)
indicated that even for them. in the majority of cases the rift orientation
of the stress axes discovered by observations of stronger shocks is
characteristic.

This indicates that the predominant type of surface deformations here must
he the tension joints combined with the faults which can be accompanied

by shifts. The surface deformations naturally are not a direct reflection
of the processes. but at the same time the types of latest structures and
also their spatial orientation are in accordance with the nature of the
stresses in the center zones.

Thus. the modern stress field discovered by the seismic observations in
the Baykal-Stanovoy seismically active zone agrees with the peculiarities

of the stressed state of the crust in this region established by the
geological characteristics. The stressed state of the earth's crust

358

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

re-eine in senerel typically "rift" even in the bordering pert of the
Stanovoy ridge, which indicate. migration of the riftogeneeie proceee to
the Stenovik zone. canning higher potential eelenicity on it (ACTIVE

TBCTONICS.... 1966; Solonenko. V., l968h, c).

359

FOR 0!?ICIAL USE OIL!
POI OPPICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER XII. SEISMIC REGIOIMLIZATION

Seinic regionalization by the earthquake force estiaates has been criti-
cised for many years. It has been proposed that it be replaced by region-
alisation with respect to quantitative characteristics (seismic accelera-

tions and their spectra. the duration of the oscillations and their ampli-
tudes. and so on).

However, these proposals. which are outwardly tenpting. especially for cal-
culating structural earthquake proofnesa are isolated from the actual na-
tural situation. the possibilities of the equip-ent. the level of develop-
nent and ”density" of the aeisnological observations. They are frequently
based on representations of earthquakes at the earth's surface "by analogy"
or on purely theoretical and not true nanifestations which can be discovered
only by investigating strong earthquakes.

Our experience in investigating earthquakes of all force levels (from 5-6

to 12) in the Hongolian-Baykal Seisnic Belt and objective data from investi-
gating earthquakes in other seisnic zones of the earth indicate that .
sharp (to force 2-3 frequently. force 6—7 sonetinss) variations of the seis-
nic effect on the ground and structures are observed at short distances of
up to 3 to 5 neters (Solonanko. V.. 1960c. 1962a; Solmenko.V.. ‘rreskov.
1960; cost-aunt... 1963; Soloneuko. V.. 1976). The investigators of the
San Fernando earthquake of 9 February 1971. aphasised that the "tre-ors and
destruction frequently were distributed over the area in a highly unexpected
way. in connection with which the problen of seisnic regionalitation appears
to be such nore coarplicated than was asst-ed" (Gillete. welsh. 1971). These
phenomena have been encountered by the investigators of the Peruvian earth-
quake of 31 Hay 1970, who established that often there is no obvious rela-
tion between the intensity of the destruction, the base-ant aaterial and

the engineering-geological conditions. "He cannot explain all these phenonem,"
they conclude (Plafker. 1971a).

In addition, it is necessary to consider the following:

360
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. The effect of earthquakes on the groom! surface and the structures
varies sharply and theoretically on going free 5 to 6 and especially fron
force 9 to 10 when the reversible and residual defornations of the surface.
the ground and the earth's crust with enlitudee to several eaters estab-
lished the liniting possibility of building earthquake-proof structures
(Solonanko. V.. 1960a. 1962a. 1976).

2. The quantitative paranoters. for annals. of a force 9 local earthquake
cannot have aleost anything in dense with such force 9 tremors as the
"transit" one. (free the zone of a strong earthquake of force 10 or
higher).

3. The instruasnt characterisation of destructive earthquakes (more than
force 8) is faced with equip-ant and nany other barriers (the possibility
of obtaining recordings of epicentral and “transit" earthquakes of

equal intensity in close areas with different engineering-geological con-
ditions. and so on).

Thus. in order to obtain a true quantitative characteristic of earthquakes.
it is necessary in essence to have a nose of seisnonetric equipnent.

If we consider what has been seid objectively. it becomes clear that the
problem of "quantitative" general seiseic regionalieation will be solvud
only in the distant future if it is solved st all.

During nicroseisnic characterisation of earthquakes, the level of the seisnic
effect is averaged both as a result of the nunber of observation points and
as a result of consideration of various factors. Thus. the "force" estinste
is found to be significantly more meaningful than it appears to the propon-
ents of the "quantitative" seisnic regionalieation. and it offers the possi-
bility of designing actually earthquake-proof structures. Per ample. in
Irkutsk on 29 (30) August 1959. during an earthquake the intensity of which
was approxinstely the ease as over the greater part of Tashkent in 26 April
1966, the buildings with force 8 antiaeisnic construction sustained only
light dosage in individual cases at the sane tine as alnost all the old-style
buildings. snailer and with thicker wells and foundations nsde of high-quality

building laterials. were defer-ed and often significantly (Solonenko. V..
Tresltov. 1960).

Thus. there are still nothing to replace the "force” concept (in the fore-
seeable future). The investigation of many strong earthquakes. wherever it
has been done by objective investigators, indicates that the “SK-66 scele
(Herkalli-Kankani-Ziberga-hedwedeva-GEOFIAN-GOST) gives a highly reliable
deterninstion of the intensity of the trenors and agrees quite well with the
values of H and It (see Table 2). On this scale the dinensione of the resi-
dusl defornations of the ground are essentially low. that is. by these signs
it gives a high force estinate.

361
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The relation between the force and the Iagnitude established empirically

by the results of investigating strong earthquakes in the Hongolian-Baykel
Seisnic Belt (SEISHOTECTONICS... 1968. page 157) was checked out in sub-
sequent years end has demonstrated good convergence. 1t agrees well also
with the data of various authors for the various seieaic zones of the earth.
The divergence is within the limits of accuracy of the observations Q:p.5);
therefore it was also used when coepiling the new map. The corresponding
calculations with respect to the relation of H. K and J facilitating the
use of aodern earthquake catalogs are presented in Chap era VI and VIII

(see tables 7 and 12).

The preceding seismic regionalization map (Solonenko. V.. et al.. 1960b:
Solonenko. V.. 1963s. 1968s), which is the basis for the state sap (8N1?
II-A. 12-69. Irkut Oblast. Buryat ASSR. Chita Oblaat) was compiled on the
seianostatistical (Southern part of Eastern Siberia) and predominantly
tectonic and paleozeieaogeological naterial. The instruaented data were
very meager, for before 1952 there was only seislic station (Irkutsk). and
then three. but all located in Southern Pribaykal'ye. Since 1961 the sta-
tion network has been expanded significantly. and it provides for recording
earthquakes with K - 7 for the entire rift zone. with the exception of a
saall section of the central part of Beykal froa Lake Ol'khon to the Svyatoy
Nos Peninsula (representative class K - 8). For the adjacent parts of the
Siberian Platform and Transbaykal. earthquakes with K - 8 are representative;
for Southeastern Transbaykal. earthquakes with K - 9. In addition, signifi-
cant factual data have been obtained by the network of teaporary seiseic
stations in the Udokan region (1962-1965), in Pribaykal'ye (1963-1965) and
the Barguzin Basin (1972-1973).

At the sane tine broad seisaogeological and special geophysical studies and
a great variety of analytical seisaological and geosorphological-geophyaical
operations were performed.

It is natural that for such a broad territory as Eastern Siberia where an
area of about 1.5 million km2 has been subjected to regionalization, it is
impossible to collect the entire set of eeismogeological, seisnologic and
geophysical data with the ease degree of detail; therefore when estimating
the seisnicity of one territory or another, preference has been given to
the method most "representative" for the given section.

Inasmuch as an earthquake is a physical-geological phenomenon, the regionali-
zation naturally has been carried out first of all on a seisnotectonic basis.

however. in all phases of seismic regionalization seislologic and geophysical
data were used:

1) when compiling the seismotectonic map. the seiamological data were taken
into account in order to discover the specific seiamogeological relations
in structural fields with nonsharply expressed boundaries between the morpho-

structures. for classification of the dislocations with a break in continuity
and for solving a number of other problems;

362
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOE OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) Hhen coepiling the protential eeieeicity lap (poaeible epicentral
eonee of nexinue earthquakes): along with the aeienoatatietical and
paleoeeielogeologicel datn nape of the aeianic activity. maximal eerth-
quakes and long-range foracaeting of eeieeic activity were used. The
probable regione of short-tern "eeieaic calh" (see Chapter K) were also
taken into account. When ieolating the zones of increased center activity.
the grapha of the recurrence rate of the earthquakea were considered:

3) When calculating the averaged ieoaaiane. in addition to aaianoatatia-
tics and the data on aaianic dislocations. calculations of the daeping of
the oscillations were also used:

6) In the concluding phase of the regionalieetion. all of the iaolated
regione were checked and corrected with reepect to all of the aeienologi-
cal and geophyaical nape.

The baeic difficultiee of regionalization were encountered when eatiIating
the aeieeic danger of a territory where there are no paleoaeiaeodialoca-
tiona. Wherever there are epicentere of strong historical and eodern earth-
quakes. in theee eeianogenic norphoetructural zonea. there are no paleo-
aeiamodialocationa. wherever there are no paleoeeialodialocetiona or there
are fewer of the: and they are unreliable. there are no aeieeologic data
eufficient for aeianic regionaliretion (Tranabaykal). The difficulties
also arise free the fact that the geological data in the absence of paleo-
aeiseodialocationa do not up to the present tine have a reliable Quenti-
tative expression. Nevertheleaa. for territoriee with eeienological and
paleoseielogeological naterial insufficient for regionalization it is neces-
sary to use the redianta of the vertical tectonic noveaenta. From what has
been stated it in clear that our aeielic regionaliration lap cannot be put
in any definite category ("aeia-oatatistical." "aeiaeotectonic." "tectono-
physical," "quantitative." "peleoaeiaaogeological." and an on). and it is

in the coeplete sense a up of coeplex aeiaaic regionalization.

by the level of aeianic activity in the regionalized territory three regions
are clearly isolated (Figure 108): l) the Siberian Platforr-in practice
an almost aaeianic region with "tranait" earthquakes from the laykal aeianic
belts; 2) Tranabaykal with eoderete aeiaeie activity and with "transit"
earthquakes fro- the Baykal rift zone and Northern Hongolia; 3) the Baykal
rift zone with mine aeiaeic activity.

Whereas for the last zone the paleoaeianogeological data can serve as re-
liable indexee of the higher level of seismic potential. for the platforu
they are completely invalid. and for Tranabaykal they have auxiliary value
(the paleoseiatnodialocationa are few and unreliable). The aeiauoatatistical
date for Tranebaykal are also unreliable. for before the eiddle of the 20th
century there are only spotty data on the earthquakes. and the aeiaeic ata-
tions (two in all of this enormous territory) have been in operation for

3 to 5 years. It is natural that for noderate seiaeic activity there are

insufficient data for coepiling the activity and nape. Accordingly.
an effort has been Iade to deternine the eeieeic potential of euch
regions by the quantitative method of H. V. Grovekiy.

363

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

1. m. m o #1”
. .‘ I.~‘ ‘~ "“ "
‘ W J}:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 108. Map of the ssissic ragionalisation of Eastern Siberia.

Colpiled by V. P. Solonenko, R. A. Kuruahin. H. G. Den'yanovich.
s. V. Lastochkin, V. V. Nikolayev, s. D. Khil'ko, V. s. Khroaovakikh.
V. H. Kochatkov, V. H. Zhilkin. A. o. Abalakov. Edited by V. P. Solonanko.

[See preceding page for Figure 106]

The zones of possible occurrence of the earthquake centers or their
magnitude OM) and the indication of the exaaple intensity (lo):

1 -- ">7 (force 10 or sore); 2 - H - 6-1/2 to 7 (force 9). 3 -- HIS-l/2
to 6-1/2 (force 8-9). 6 -- "-6-3/4 to 5-1/2 (force 7-8). 5 - "36-3/6
(force 7 and lees than 6). 6 - in practice aaeianic regions. The soislic
regions: 7 - probable laxinua strength of the earthquakes in force points
by the “SK-66 scale; 8 - boundaries of the regions with different force:

a -- reliable. b - proposed; 9 - schenatic of the IAN [Baykal-Alur rail-
road] route.

Key:

1 -- hishneangarsk; 2 - Tulun: 3 - Alygdzher; 4 -- Zita; 5 - Chereakhovo:
6 - Orlik; 7 - Handy; 8 - Slyudyanka; 9 .. Zakancnek: 10 -- Baykal'sk;

ll - Kyekhta; l2 - Gueinoozerek; l3 - Ulan-Ude; 16 -- Selenginsk;

15 -- Irkutsk: 16 -- Kitox: l7 - Angersk: 18 -- Usol'ye-Sibirskoye;

l9 -- Kachug; 20 -- Yelsntey; 21 -— Angara; 22 -- Karenga; 23 -- Ust'-Kut;

26 -- Lens; 25 - Kirensk; 26 - hizhncangsrak; 27 -- Vitia; 28 - Kuaora:

29 —- Lake beyksl: 30 - bargusin; 31 - Turks; 32 -- VitiI; 33 -- Roasnovka:
36 -- Lake Yeravninskaye; 35 -- Sosnovo-Ozsrak; 36 -- Khilok: 37 -
Khapcherenga; 38 - Chita; 39 - Shilka; 60 - Ingoda; 61 - “crinsk;

62 -- Cornyy Zersntuy; 63 - Priargunsk; 66 -- Borsys; 65 - Lake Toreiskiye;
66 - aukachacha; 67 -- Karenga: 68 -- Bogderin; 69 -- Kalar; 50 -

Centrel Kalar; $1 --Chara; 52 - bodaybo; S3 - Olek-insk; $6 -- Oleksa;

$5 - Ust'-Nyuk:ha; S6 - Tulik: 57 - Hogocha; $8 - Shilka

S9 -- Nyukzha: 60 -- Lensk; 61 - Onon: 62 - Oka; 63 -- lye.

365
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OPVICIAL 0'" ONLY

The predoeinsnt lsteat end eodern tectonic movements in Trensbsykel con-
stitute growth of the erch and sreh-bloch uplifts (Florsnsow. l960e;
Khotinn. 1966: Ufietnev. 1971; and so on). Under these conditions e
quantitative estimate of the werticel tectonic movements in connection
with eeismicity sppesred possible. The method wee tested in the exemple
of Central Trenshsyhsl (Leetochkin. 1972) where information wes svailshle
about eerthquekes to force 8 (K to 6). end psleoseismogeologicsl studies
were performed. The results of quentitetive evaluation of the seismic
potential gsve setisfectory convergence with the actual dete. This medc
it possible to extend the quentitetive method of estimeting the seismic
potential to ell of Trsnsbayhel end to the edge part of the pletform es
s region with stsble neotectonic regimen.

Gradients not oxceeding 5'10 10 yeers.1 which. eccording to the H. V.
Gcovskiy clsssificstion (1963). correspond to in prectice eseiseic re-
gions (to force 6-5) ere chsrecteristic of the pletfore. Of course. there
cen be exceptions here. For exemple. e force 7 eerthquehe (H - 5.2) oc-
curred on the pletform on 8 October 1975.

in Transbeykel the intresrea distribution of the gradients neturelly. with

e known proportion of provisiomelness. permits the isoletson of mo oetruc-
tures with seismic potentigl to fore; 8-9 (giadienteo'lo’ to 6'10’ yesrs‘l).
force 7-8 (gredients 4'10‘ to 2'10' years“ ) end less then force 7 (gra-
dients 2'10'9 to 1'10'9 yesre’1).

"hen isoleting the seismic regions. primsrily'mecroseismic dete from the
results of inwsstigeting strong eerthquskes end the locetion of the epi-
centrel zones of the preseismoststisticel esrthquakes with respect to psleo-
seismodislocetions ere used. These dete hsve msde it possible to estehlish
the meen dimensions of the generelired isoseismsl ereee (see stle 19).

when compiling the teble. es s result of the small number of date. eepecislly
on the strongest earthquekee (force 10-12). meterisls were used from inves-
tigating the strong esrthquekes of hongolie. lnesmuch es in hongolie s dif~
ferent tectonic stress field preveils than in the Beyhsl Region [Pribsykel’ysl.
end during seismogenic movements of the earth's crust the shift component

pleye e significsnt role. the spreed of the tremors hes its specific peculieri-
ties. Therefore the lerger figures for the dimensions of the isoseismsl ereee
along the structures pertein to the shift seismogenic structures. During
regionelizetion of the highly seismic part of Bestern Siberie (the leykel

rift zone) with its normel feult. strike-slip normel fsult end strike-slip
thrust feult seismogenic structures. with predominsnce of the normsl fault
component, the most proheble figures for the extent of the isoseismel ereee
elong the structures ere the minimum ones (Solonenko. V.. l96£b, 1973e-c;
SEISHOTECTONICS... 1968).

366
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Brass “mansions (at-stsrs. In) of tbs malts“ boss:
atsas with rsspsct to ncrosstnk affects

———————_—_——_—

 

10 11
pas along across slog; across 8
stmturss

-25 200-600 30-110 220-550 100-225 120-510

so o-st - no so zoo-320
2-3“ To 2... To 500 To 15 50-130
— -- 1w- 1-zat 15-60

 

y acttvs fault. In tbs sptcsntsrs of fares 10 sarthquabs
10-12 In; for block structurss, 20-25 h.

t sons tbs nacrosstsuic sffscts are 11131: by ons forca poi:

(1t dspsnds on the width of ths fault tons).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The isolation in the epicentrel zones of the force 9 earthquakes of small
force 10 sections (see Table 19) is connected with the fact that during the
earthquakes with h 3 6.5, the seismogenic fractures. as a rule. reach the
surface of the earth (see Chapter I) and significantly increase the necro-
seismic effect. The seiaaogenic joints and sharp oscillations of the walla
of the faults with a residual amplitude to 0.8 esters and sosetines more
(true aeplitude spproxisately twice that; see Solonanko. V.. 1968c; 6031-
ALTAY.... 1963. pp 326-328) unconditionally destroy any structure. even
with force 9 sntiseissic reinforce-ant.

The isolation of such sections is entirely logical: no one objects to in-
creasing the force estimate by one as a result of unfavorable engineering-
hydrogeological conditions. and what can be more unfavorable than a moving
seiamogenic fault zone? During general regionaliration, the for-er cannot
be reflected on the sap (because of scaling conditions). at the same tine
as the seiasogenic faults are a mandatory element of the center seisnicity.
seisnotectonic. end seismic regionslization naps. and so on.

when investigating strong earthquakes in the Hongolian-Baykal seissic belt

and according to the published data the following laws were established already
15 years ago (Solonenko, V.. l962b: SEISHOTBCTORICS.... 1968. pp 1‘6-lb9)
confirned by subsequent events both in the Soviet Union and in other aeianic
zones of the earth.

1. For linear seisnogenersting structures the force 10-11 earthquake zone
extends in a narrow strip along the aaisnogenic dislocations. The width

of the zone is about 6 kn on the active size (or sides) of the structure and
2-9 ks. on the passive side. In the presence of feathering and accompany-
ing fractures, it can increase to 10-12 km or sore. For the block seiaao-
genie structures the intensity of the tremor on the surface of the displaced
structure is distributed nonuniforsly-the difference for adjacent sections
reaches several force points. but the variations with respect to area are
not subject to advance calculation.

In the pleistoscisn zones of force 10-11 earthquakes (Taagsnskoye. Huys.
Baysn-Tssgsnakoye. Hogodskoye. and so on) the established amplitude of the
vertical and horizontal diaplacenents reaches 7-8 netera. the anplitude of
the surface waves in loose ground is up to 6-5 meters with a length on the
order of 15-20 meters. In the loose ground the width of the gaping trench-
jointa is usual up to é-6 netsrs. frequently to 10 meters. and in individual
cases to 19 meters (ACTIVE TEBTONICS..., 1966. pp 151-152). In the rocky

ground joints are for-ed with gaping to 6-5 esters and obviously sosetises
”re.

The apparent opening of the faults on the surface of the earth along the
strike is observed over an extent of up to 30 km (the Huye earthquake).
and with predominance of the shift component. to ‘5 kn (the Hogodshoye
earthquake on 5 January 1967. H - 7 3/6). During the Huya earthquake the
movsnents in the fault sons were observed to 90 kn from the epicenter to
the east (in the direction of the shift of the ridge) and to 50-55 kn in
the opposite direction.

368
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The creetion of economically end technicelly expedient entiseismic struc-
tures for force 1‘) zones is impossible: therefore they must be categorically
cloud for construction. with the exception of unevoideble cmlcetions
which eust cross such eones by the shortest psth.

2. The force 9 regions with respect to seismic denger ere nonuniform In
the seismogenic feult tone ectuelly the force of the eerthquskes exceeds
the resistsnce of the structures with eny eerthquske-proofing construction.
These movements ere observed elong the strike of the feult up to so km.

end sometimes more. Therefore in the force 9 regions elong the seismogenic
feults st e dietsnce of up to 2 km from them the erection of cspitsl struc-
tures (with the exception of unevoideble co-unicetione) is insdeiseible.
0n the seismic regionelieetion esp. such sections ere shown es possible
center tones with M - 6!; to 7.

3. For the force 8 eerthquehes in the epicentrel segeent of the seiseo—
genic structure there ere sherp. but es s rule. reversible oscillstions of
the wells of the feults end the mscroeeismic effects resch force 9 (on the
everege to 1‘ hm-slong the feult end 1-2 km scross it). Therefore it is
necessery to evoid cepitel construction in such zones.

lo. In the erees with thick (300-600 meters or more) series of nonmetemor-
phic sedimentery rock. the eerthqueks intensity decresses sherply end ir-
regulerly. Therefore in the internel ports of the besin in the ebsence of
highly ective seismogenic structures in their besement. the initisl nom-
tive force of the esrthqueke cen be low by one force point.

In order to outline the ereee of the "trsnsit" tremors in the direction of
the seissogenic structures. it does not eppeer possible to use the stenderd-
iced procedure. For exemple. by the celculeted dsts for the circulsr iso-
seisme end by the everege sizes of the :soseismel eress with respect to
mecroseismic effects (see Teble 19) on the Siberien Pletform the eree of

the force 6 region by compsrison with the 1962 mop (Solonenko. V.. l963e)
should be expended 200-250 km to the northwest. which contredicts the sveil-
eble escroseiemic dete. Therefore primsrily seismostetisticel dete were
used. end in csse of e deficiency or in the ebsence of this dete. the everege
dste (see Teble l9) considering the seismic vulnerebility msps end else tht
specifics of the spreed of the tremors over the sunny isoseiemsl esp.

when determining the bounderise of specific seismic regions, definite dif-
ficulties ere encountered. The regions with possible force 10 eerthquekes
or higher end the sections of the force 9 regions with incrsssed seismic
denger require especislly cereful enelysis of the seiemogeologicel. seismo-
logic end geophysicel dete. They. es hes elreedy been steted. must be first
of ell forbidden for cepitel construction (with the exception of co-nnnice-
tions) end. secondly. they must be the sterting points for determining the
bounderies of the "trensit" tremor regions. including the pletform sections
where no locel strong eerthquehes occur. The problem is somswhet feciliteted
by the fect thet these regions ere within the boundsriee of the beyhel rift
system (with the exception of the user-rift zones of the on end Kitoy feults
in Bestern Ssyen).

369
P08 OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

During general regionalisation, the concept of constantcy of the laxiaun
earthquake energy over the entire extent of the ssisnotectonic fractures

is used. For the Baykal rift. we have long refrained from using this rule
(Solonenko, V.. 1963a). In the overwhelaing asjority, the faults have more
ancient occurrence, and the riftogenic processes causing high seisaicity
are Cenozoic. If a fault goes beyond the boundaries of the rift zone. the
seismic activity decreases sharply (for the Obruchev fault systsn. fron
force 10-12 to force 5-6). Under these conditions, the question naturally
arises of the linits of the force 10 region in the flank zones with poten-
tial seismic activity of force 10 or higher (see Figure 108). If we con-
sider, as usual. that at any point of the section with potential seiaaic
activity of force 10 there can be an epicenter of the corresponding force
estimate. then the boundary of the force 10 region nust be considered along
the strike of the structure at least 25 kn or more. and the force 10 region.
‘5 kn (see Table 19). This lengthening of the high-force regions fron our
point of view is valid only in the case where the saisnologic data indicate
high activity of the fault sons beyond the proposed boundary of the rift
systen. In the opposite case the provisional epicenter of the future earth-
quake is taken in the center of the section of the seisnically active zone
which can insure a force 10 earthquake. that is. 25 kl from the end of the
structure. In this case the distal boundaries of the regions of potential
seisnicity and seisnic regions (see Figure 108) of different intensity coin-
cide.

On isolation of high-force regions. the probable recurrence rate of the
vtrongest earthquakes is taken into account also. The earthquakes of force
11-12 were not considered. for their probability is very small. The traces
of such earthquakes have been established only in three areas of the rift
zone (Southern Pribsykal'ye. the western shore of Central naykal and the
Udokan Ridge). with intervals between their epicenters of 350 and 750 kn
where such earthquakes have never occurred at least during the last thousands

of years. The possible force 10 earthquakes in isolated seisnogenic struc-
tures, the potential seisnicity of which according to geological and paleo-
seisnogeological data will reach force 10 were also not taken into account.
but the recurrence rate of such earthquakes is low (no more frequently than
once in a thousand years according to the paleoseisnogeological data and less

than once in ten thousand years by the seismic vulnerability nap). and by
the seisnological data, the activity and Knax are low. These regions belong
to force 9. ~

Description of Seismic Regions
The basis for isolation of the regions, especially of high seislicity (force

9, 10 and higher) is the palsoseisnogeological, seisnotectonic and seisno-
statistical data. They deter-inc the initial ("background") seisnicity for

370
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

the average ground conditional. Along with this. saiamological and geo-

physical materials are used (the time-space distribution of the earthquakes.

the eelsnic activity of the region of specific seismogsnic structure and the

probable aaxima earthquake center with respect to K33 . the long-range fore-
casting of the seismic activity. the “preparation" a is. and so on).

The increase or reduction in the force estimate as a result of the engineer-
ing-geological. geocryological. gas-orphological and other purely surface
factors which are taken into account only during detailed seismic regionali-
zstion and nicroragionalization are not reflected on the seisnic regionali-
zstion map.

The boundaries of the seissic regions of higher forces on the whole do not
correspond to the boundaries of the center zones of highest activity taking
into account the entire set of geological-geophysical data. However. there
are no exact boundaries of such zones in nature. in connection with which
the boundaries of the seismic regions can be drawn only within the limits
of the defined fiducial intervals of values of different intensity and ac-
tivity of the observed processes.

The boundaries of the high-seismic (force 9 and 10) regions have been drawn
the most definitely. Their isolation is clearly controlled by the neotec-
tonic structures with highest seismic potential, the paleoseismogenic struc-
tures and modern seisnic dislocations and also the entire set of ssienologic
Gets. The regions of moderate and low seismicity (force 8, 7 and 6) which
are isolated predooinantly by the seis-oetatiatical. saismologic and averaged
macroeeismic data (see Table 10) and also by the type of latest structures,
degree of intensity and contrast of the naotactonic novensnts are less re-
liably outlined.

l. The regions with earthquake intensity of force 10 or more entend spa-
tislly to the Baykal rift zone. Genetically they are closely connected with
the marginal parts of the large rift structures. being located along the
zones of sctivated ("seis-ogenerating") faults. Among then the cleerest
examples are Tunkinahaya. Obruchev, Kodsr. Udokan. the Stanovoy fault systen.
the Cherekiy fault and other saisnically active lineamsnte. These include
the short dislocations with a break in continuity activated in the anthropo-
gene, developed in the regions of highly seismic regional interbssin consis-
suree where. as a rule, they control the develop-eat of the small rift struc-
tures of the type of type of the generating and enbryonic basins.

In the majority cases the isolation of the epicentrel regions of maximum
seismicity is substantiated by the paleoaeisnotectonic structures. the forma-
tion of which occurred during earthquakes with H on the "do: of 7 or more.

 

By the average grOund we mean the natural sand-loom series with deep
occurrence of ground water of nore than 8 meters (from the level to surface).

371
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to the structural-tectonic and the seismogeological criteria.
the isolation of such zones is substantiated by an increased concentration
of the epicenters of moderate and weak earthquakes. which is reflected on
the seismic activity map (the values of A10 for them usually do not drop be-
low 0.2).

The highly aeisnic spicentral regions extent in narrow (from 1-2 to 8-10 km)
strips along the riftogenic faults. Here the fault zones with simle struc-
ture. with the clearest contrast of the neotectonic noveaents (for example.
Tunkinskaya. Obruchev, Barguzin. Kodar. and so on) give rise to still clearer
and straighter boundaries of the force 10 seismic regions. In the case of
conplex structure of such zones (echelon structure. broad develop-ant of ac-
conpanying and feathering dislocations. variations of the active faults.
sharp block diffrentiation in the marginal and axial parts of the uplifts
bordering the rifts, the system of generating basins. and so on) the force
10 seismic regions are expanding and have conplex configuration. This is
especially characteristic for the rift sections of the arch-block uplifts
(Khamar-Daban. Udokan) and the large interbsein mountain co-issuree (Upper
Angers-Huya. huya-Chara). For regionalization of the highly seismic zones
it is deemed that the single seismotectonic lineament is aeismically dan-
gerous to an equal degree along its entire extent. However, as has already
been noted at the beginning of the chapter. the large. extended zones of
"seisnogenersting" faults are divided into sections with different level of
aeisnicity. First of all. this pertains to the faults which go beyond the
limits of the tectonic stress field of the Baykal rift zone both on its flanks
and on the periphery. Accordingly. significant sections of the Tunkinshaya.
Eastern Says. Obruchev. Bargutino-Huya. and Stanovoy systena of activated
faults are included in the force 9 seisaic regions. and against this back-
grOund they are considered as zones of increased seismic danger. For such
sections. the absence of explicit sips of seismogenic rejuvenation and

a lowered level of modern seisnic activity are usually characteristic (see
Chapter XI).

In addition to the neotectonic and ssismogeological factors, the isolation
of the force 10 regions is confined by the seisnostatistical data-the
epicentera of strong (force 9-10) earthquakes and also increased concentra-
tion of the epicenters of erate and week shocks within their boundaries
(see Figure 73-75), which a reflected on the seisnic activity maps (see
Figures 76-78) and maximum earthquakes (see Figure 89). The values of A1

for such regions usually do not drop below 0.2. however. in the baykal-
Stsnovoy seismically active zone there are a number of force 10 regions which
on the seismic activity maps and the maps of maximum possible earthquakes
correspond to low values of A (g 0.05. and K < 16). Bits-plea: the
Huyo Basin. the Northern “yd? part of the mﬁ’c‘hev faults. the Upper Angers.
Parana and China-Vskatsltiy (eastern part) fault zones in the Stanovoy High-
land. The inclusion of such sections in the force 10 regions. in spite of
the noncorrespondence to the seismological data. is substantiated primarily
by their seismotectonic position (all of them control the development of rift
structures and eubryonic basins) and coordination of the paleoaeismogenic
structures occuring during earthquakes with an intensity of no less than
force 10 with them.

372
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the Obruchev fault sone these are the following structures: Southern
Rite. Shartlay. Srednekedtovaya [Central strovaya]. Khibelenskaya, Solon-
tsoveya; for the eastern part of the Upper Angers feult--the Ogney struc-
ture and the generating Churo graben; for the vicinity of the Huya Basin--
Tsksin and Parana structures. and for the eastern section of the China-
Vakatskiy fault--the hedved' structure (see chapter VII). Many of the
enumerated sections with respect to necroseismic information and instrument
date are confirsed by the epicenters of strong (on the order of force 8)
earthquakes. Thus. for example. on 6 August l93l. an earthquake occurred
in the vicinity of the northwest shore of Lake Beyhal with a proposed in-
tensity of more then force 8; in the vicinity of the northesstcrn border

of the Upper Angers Basin instruments recorded two earthquakes with an in-
tensity of up to force 7 (11 March 1936 end 17 September 1957); in the some
region on 18 August 1902 an earthquake was felt. the force of which at the
observation point reached force 0 (see Chapter VII).

It is also proposed that at least pert of such zones (for exaaple. east of
the end of the China-Vakatekiy and the Upper Angers faults) corresponds to
the regions of "preparation” of strong earthquakes (see Chapter X).

when isolating the force 10 regions on the map. the possibility of the oc-
currence of earthquakes also with greater intensity is suspected. which is
indicated. for example, by certain paleoseismogenic phenomens within the
boundaries of the Saykal rift (the Shartlay, Southern Rite structures) and
the Stenovoy Highland (China-Vakstskiy structure). however. the recurrence
rate of such seisnic disasters on the whole for the territory of the Beyksl-
Stanovoy aeisnic zone is low (according to the paleoseisnogeological dsta.

no sore frequently than once in 500-600 years). In prectice they are ex-
cluded from the regionalisation and must be considered only when constructing
especially important long-range projects.

The regions with esrthquake intensity of force 10 or more occupy an srea of
33,800 km . which is almost twice the area of the force 10 regions isolated
on the seisnic regionslization map of Eastern Siberia of 1962 (Solonenko. V.,
l963s). The area was increased as a result of inclusion of the water part
of Lake Beykal in the regionalization (about 8,000 km ) and partially as s
result of isolation of ngw force 10 regions in the rift zone of the Stanovoy
highland (ebout 7,000 km ) discovered during complex soisnogeological studies
in the lest decade (ACTIVE TECTONICS..., 1966; SEISHOTEJTONICS.... 1968.
1975s.b). The unavoieability of this increase was proposed also earlier
(Solonenho. V.. l963e). The regions with maximum intensity of the possible
earthquakes have also been isolated here along the riftogenic fault zones
controlling the northeastern part of the Upper Angers Basin, the northern
and western sides of the huya Basin and the systen of small (embryonic)
basins of the Bayksl type within the boundaries of the Upper Angers-Hays.

the Bsrguzino-huye end the Huya-Chara interbssin mountain commissures.

The force 10 regions along the Tunkinskiy and the Berguzin fault zones and
northeast of the Svyetoy Nos Peninsule have been increased somewhat. In the
letter csse the highly seismic region encompasses the Bol'sherechenskaya

373
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the Sosnovekeya sstellite basins end the zones of the latest faults
bounding them (SEISMOTBCTONICS..., 1968; Abalakov. 1973) located on the
continuation of the seismically active Central Baykal interbasin commiesure.
Two new small force 10 regions have been isolated on the northeastern flank
of the Beykal rift zone. on the left bank of the middle course of the Olekme
River (Olekma-Chare interfluve). They outlined the seismogsnic structures
of the epicentrel regions of three strong earthquakes-vOlekma and Nyukzha

1958 end Tas-Yuryakhskoye 1967 (ACTIVE TESTONICS.... 1966. S!ISHOTBCTONICS....
l975e).

The force 10 seismic regions must be forbidden for capital construction.

It is necessary to consider the fact that in the majority of cases these
regions. as a rule. are characterized by extremely unfavorable or unsuit-
able engineering-geological and geomorphologicel conditions for construc-
tion. Only speciel state interests or special economic requirements can jus-
tify the erection of certain engineering structures in these areas. It is
true that in individual cases, especially where significant expansions of the
force-10 regions are indicated on the described map (Southern laykal. the
Huye-Chara zone), on detailed investigetion and microregionalization. it is
possible to isolate eress with reduced seismic denger. The scale does not
permit indication of such small sections on the map. but it is necessary to
consider that the possibility exists.

2. The regions with earthquake intensity of force 9 occupy the largest arses
in the Beykal-Stanovoy seismic cone, primarily along the system of Beykal
rifts end on its flanks. Essentially all of the morphostructural elements

of the Beyksl rift zone (primarily the rift basin) ere characterised by

force 10 potential seismicity. In the regions of the uplifts directly bound-
ing the rift basins, these areas include the complexly differentieted central

parts of the side and the arch-block morphostructures removed from the zones
of maximum (force 10) seismicity.

The outlines of the force 9 seismic regions are connected both with local
center zones end with the extent end configuretion of the force 10 regions
from which the force 9 surface effects extent (the "transit" tremors). Ac-
cording to Table 10, during an earthquake with en intensity st the center of
H g 7 this effect cen extend to a dietsnce of up to 30 km across the strike
end 160 km along the seismicelly active structures. Thus. in the force 9
seismic regions bordering the broad belt of the sctivated fault zone with
esteblished maximum (force 10 and higher) seismic danger. obviously the "tran-
sit" oscillations play a significant role. Moreover, centers of force 9
earthquakes are possible here according to seismotectonic conditions.

In the regions of mature rift basins, the force 9 zones include longitudinal
rift forming faults or the set of echelons of such faults (without epperent
treces of seismogenic rejuvenation) controlling the maximum plunged sections
of the basement. In the formation of the erticuletion zones of these basins
with the mountain borders a significant role is played by the bending de-
formstions, and the mean velocities, in spite of the maximum scele of the

376
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. USS ONLY

neotectonic novelents probably is sonewhat less than in the small rifto-
genie norphostructures. In the nature basins. in addition, the cones of
force 9 seisnic danger include the intrabaain coamissurea and lateral pro-
jections that are nanifested on the surface characterizing the sharp dif-
ferentiation and increased contrast of the aoveeents of the individual
blocks of the basenent of higher orders.

The large regional interbasin co-issurea are in practice conpletsly asso-
ciated with the zones with possible occurrence of force 9 earthquakes.

Such zones here include the snail rift basins, the bottoms of which. as a
rule. are differentiated with deformation of local intrabasin and inter-
besin couissures, and the sides are frequently conplicated by young longi-
tudinal and transverse faults. Usually the enbryonic basins of this type
are separated by co-issures into a series of depressions as a result of
which. inside then the blocks with different signs and rates of latest nove-
nents are in contact. within the limits of these negative norphostructures
it is possible to expect the occurrence of residual seisnotectonic deforna-
tions connected with the local force 9 shocks and ones excited by maximal
earthquakes. the hypocenters of which are within the zones of the Iain rift
forming faults. The examples of the Huya (1957) and the Heady (1950) earth-
quakes indicate this quite obviously.

The regions of probably force 9 earthquakes H - 6 1/2-7, within the limits

of regional cosmiesures also include the sharply differentiated parts of

the block norphoatructurea usually located between the zones of increased
seismic danger. Here we also have the parts of the faults having animus
degree of seismic danger with respect to geological and seienic data (M > ).
but going beyond the limits of the norphostructurea which cause this danger.
(For example. the Huyakan fault. the northeastern parts of the vicinitiea

of the Upper liuya. the Uchargasskiy. the western parts of the Southern Huya.
the Konda-Bynnakhakiy and any other faults in the regional couissure areas).

Thus. in the force 9 regions the sciatic danger depends on the nanifestation
of both local earthquake centers with H - 6 l/2-7 and the surface effects

of the "transit" tremor from the direction of the seismgenic structures of
high potential 01 ‘2 7). Here the force 9 regions are constricted in the

case of the simply outlined force 10 zones (for example. Tunkinskaye, Eastern _
Sayan. Baraguzin. Obruchev. Upper Angers) and they expand significantly in

the case of complex configuration of then (Southern Baykal. Buys-Chara re-
gions).

It is necessary to note that in the investigated territory of Eastern Siberia.
significant sections of force 9 regions with respect to area are not always
confirmed by strong earthquakes and high level of nodern seismic activity.
However. with respect to the neotectonic situation. the degrees of differen-
tiation. contrast and amplitude of the latest novenents. intensive rearrange-
Iaent and development of the neotectonic structures they are analogs of the
areas with the established force 9 seismic potential. For exasple. the

375
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flank parts of the Baykal rift zone (Eastern Sayan and the Stanovoy uplift)
and certain aorphostructures of the transitional type fron the direction of
the Transbaykal block-wave zone (Kheaar-Daban. lkat. Udokan-Kaler. the fault-
block uplifts)are under such seisaogeological conditions. Nearer to the
marginal part of the Siberian Platfora the force 9 regions are constricted.
which is connected with a sharp reduction in the seisaic potential of the
uplifts bordering the rift zone to force 8 and even 7 (Prilorakiy, Upper
Angara. Northern Nuya. Delyun-Uranskiy ridges) and the appearance of pre-
dominantly (transit) treaors with an intensity to force 9 from the center
zones of the force 10 earthquakes.

In seisaotectonic respects the force 9 regions. in contrast to the regions

of naxiaum seisaicity. enconpass not only the rift zone itself. but they

also go beyond its limits. This is caused by the peculiarities of the seisao-
geological relations and nonunifornity of the seismic manifestations within
the limits of the transition aorphostructures. This nonunifornity is felt
primarily in the fact that the force 9 regions are outlined in the cases of:
a) coabination of local force 9 centers and "transit" force 9 tremors fro-
the maximum eeienicity zones; b) superposition of force 9 "transit" trunor

on the structures within the linita of which the earthquakes with N to

6 1/2 are possible; c) local earthquake centers with intensity of force 9
(N 3 6 1/2).

In connection with the fact that the paleoseisaogeological data are explicitly
inadequate (on the basis of the fast denudation destruction of the traces of
the residual deformations in the force 9 pleistoseiss zones). the analysis of
the seisnological and geophysical materials has great significance when isola-
ing the force9regions. Above all. these regions are located within the limits
of the regions characterized by increased values of the seisnic activity

(A1 3 0.1). The same values characterize the epicentral regions of his-
torgcally known force 9 earthquakes (see Chapter VII). The same thing can
also be said about the nap on which the force 9 aeisaic regions as a
whole correspond to the a see where the occurrence of aaxinun earthquakes

with K 3 15 is assumed. The nap of the long range forecast of the seieaic
activity in general features also confirna the boundaries of the force 9
regions.

However. a direct comparison of the high force regions isolated with respect
to the aeisnogeological and aorphostructural criteria with the naps of the
seiswic activity and naxinun earthquakes indicates that in a number of cases
(Olekna-Chara interfluve. the northern border of the rift zone of the Stanovoy
highland, the southern part of the Northern naykal Highland. Eastern Sayan.
Khamar-Daban) there are noncorrespondences: force 9 seisaic regions, for
example, are characterized by low values of A10 and Knax' The explanation
for this (in addition to the existence of the ”zones of calm" see Chapter
X) can be found in that the adopted functional relation K - K (A)

does not take into account all aspects of the interrelatisﬁxof tngxstrong
and weak earthquakes. Thus. for the vicinity of the lkat ridge with its
high values of A10 the absence of strong shocks (seisnostatistics since the

376
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

beginning of the 19th century) and peleoseismodislocations is charac-
teristic. end within the limits of Southern Beykal end the Tunkinskays
zone for comperatively low values of the seismic activity. epicenters
of strong eerthquekee end peleoseisnodislocstions are known.

The seiemngeologicsl end seismological studies performed in the lest decade
on the territory of Beatern Siberia permitted significant more precise defi-
nition and more reliable substantiation of the bounderiee of the force 9
seismic regions. Here their ereae were significantly reduced on the north-
sestern flsnk of the Beykal rift zone end from the direction of the merginel
pert of the Siberian Platform. The totel area of the force 9 regions in

the investigeted territory by coeperieon with the seieeic regionalizetion
map of 1962 was reduced by 62,500 no.2.

The small increeee in area of the force 9 regions took plsce in Hestern
Trenebeyksl within the limits of the morphostructures of the transitional
type (Iket end Tsipa-Beuntovekiy sections). primerily se a result of the
force 10 zones (SEISHOTBCTONICS.... 1968). For example, the vicinity of

the Ikat ridge has. according to the instrument date, a very high level of
seismic ectivity (A1 - 0.5-1). end the calculations of the seismic vulnere-
bility permit us to gapect eerthquakes in it with an intensity of more then
force 9 with e recurrence rate of 2.000 to 5,000 years. However. the ebsence
of clearly expressed peleoseiemegenic structures does not provide grounds for
isoletion of e force 10 region here. In eddition. this ares is located on
the periphery of the highly seismic rift zone end partially goes beyond its
limits. The nonuniformity of the structure of the earth's crust established
in the lket region. and the "layer by layer" stress distribution in cross
section end different eerthquakee with respect to center mechenise estab-
lished in the Ikat region (see Chspter IV) obviously crests favorable pre-
requisites for constent relief of the stresses by numerous. but week (“sex -
- 12) earthquakes. However. con connection with the seismotectonic pe—
culisrities of the transition morphostructures with broad development of the
faults ective in the Cenozoic (Ulsn-Burke. Gerge, Ikat. end so on) end the
fornstion of the embryonic besins in the exiel pert of the uplift, the iso-
lation of the force 9 region here eppeers to be substsntieted.

0n the continuation of the Ikat zone to the northeast there are transitional
morphostructuree of the Bsuntovekiy Region eleo considered in force 9. This
includes the Tsips-launtovskiy system of subrift depressions, Kadslinskaya.
Bembubukoysksya. the Tilishminskaye embryonic besins end the uplifte directly
bordering them. The seismic potential of these morphostructural elements is
high end cen reech force 9-10 which is indiceted primerily by the paleoseismo-
genie Khspton and Tilishminskaye structures detected here with en age on the
order of the first thousand years (see Chapter VII). The seismic activity

of the Bountovskiy territory is high (0.1 3's; 3 0.35). and earthquakes

ere possible with x_.x to 16¢ ﬂowever. the r gurrence rste of the force 10
earthquakes is sparse here (eccording to the seismologic datat. every 20,000
to 50,000 years). Thus. with respect to the set of seismogeological data

the system of Tsipe-launtovskiy end Tilishninekiy trensitionel structures

is distinguished by reduced (by comperieon with the rift zone) seismic po-
tentisl and belongs es a whole to the regions with force 9 seismic denger.

377
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

here the Tilishminskiy fault aone controlling the develop-ant of the embryon-
ic basin and bearing traces of force 10 earthquakes remains a region of in-
creased seieeicity.

The force 9 regions both with respect to structural-tectonic and engineering-
seisnogeocryological characteristics. and with respect to seismic danger.
are nonuniform. with detailed investigations this permits isolation (espe-
cially in the large rift basins with a thickness of the loose deposits of
more than 300 to 600 esters) of the areas. the initial normative seismicity
of which can be low by 1 force point. Nevertheless. it is necessary again
to emphasize that under the conditions of Eastern Siberia in the force 9
seissic regions. especially on the island pernafrost. the choice of sections
for large-scale construction requires preliminary detailed engineering-
geologicsl. seisnogeocryological and seismic studies. and the zones of
increased seismic danger (seissically active faults) in general must be or-
cluded for capital construction (naturally, with the exception of communi-
cations).

3. The areas with earthquake intensity of force 8 occupy the smallest areas
in the mountain belt of Eastern Siberia. encospsseing the aarginal parts of
the Seyan-Baykal-Stanovoy arch. In Transbaykal they include the vicinity
of the Chikoy Basin which previously was classified as force 7 increased
seismic danger (Solonenko. V.. l963a)2.

The isolation of the force 8 seiseic regions is caused both by the spread

of the "transit” tresors from the highly seismic regions and by local centers
with intensity to force 8. The greater part of then are located at signifi-
cant distance from the highly active rift tone.

The boundaries of the force 8 regions are substantiated first of all by re-
duced seismic potential of the neotectonic structures on the limbs of the
Sayan'-Beykal-Stanovoy arch and. secondly. the width of the zones encompassed
by the "transit" tremors from the direction of the highly seissic (force 9
and 10) regions (see Table 20) [sic-~perhaps they nean Table l9--Translator].
In addition. the snail force 8 regions with respect to area are isolated
within the liaits of the rift sons itself. This is pri-arily the internal.
deeply (more than 300-600 eaters) plunged parts of the large rift basins
with weak differentiation of the basement re-oved from the seismic active
borders (for example. the Northern Baykal Basin). The scale of the map

does not permit depiction of such sections in other rift structures with
thick series of loose deposits. However. it is necessary to consider that
in the Tunkinskays. the Iargusin. the Upper Angers. the Huya and the Chara
Basins it appears possible to isolate small force 8 areas. This pertains
also to the central. weakly differentiated parts of certain rift uplifts

(for example. Bargurin. Southern Huya. Udokan. Kalar and Kodar Ridges).

2 In the SNiP-IIA. 12-69. by reconnendarion of the editorial cos-ission of
the Earth Physics Institute of the USSR Acade-y of Sciences it was included
in the force 6 regions although this contradicted the factual data (Solonenko.
V.. 1968a. page 367).

 

378
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the whole. the force 8 regions. with respect to their structural-geo-
logical peculiarities and nature of seisaic manifestations, are still more
nonuniforn than force 9. Aaong then the following are isolated:

l. The moderately active areas (A10 - 0.02-0.l. 5 3 lb). where both
local force 8 earthquakes and the ”transit" tr e from the center zones
of highly seisnic (force 9 and 10) regions occur. In the rift belt, as has
already been noted. these are the central parts of the large basins and the
axial sections of the arch-block and block uplifts renoved fro. the seis-
mically active faults. These include also the flank morphoatructures of

the Baykal rift cone within the boundaries of the arch-block uplift of
Eastern Sayen and Stanovik.

2. The weakly active (A 0 - 0.01-0.05; R - 12-13) regions of predominant-
ly "transit" tremors wit low recurrence e of local shocks with intensity
to force 8. These are the urginal. weakly differentiated parts of prinarily

the arch uplifts and depression lowlands in the transitional region to the
Transbaykal block-wave sone.

3. The in practice "centerleas" areas with extronoly low values of the
modern seismic activity (3“ g 0.01). where only the "transit“ trenors are
exhibited. These are pr tly the narginal (shield) uplifts and to a

lesser degree. the foothills troughs of the activated part of the Siberian
Platform.

lo. The moderately active region of the Chiltoy Basin in Southwestern Trans-
baykal (see belw).

The macroeeiemic study of strong earthquakes (force 9. 10 and higher) in the
territory of the Hongolian-Beykal seisnic belt and the seismogeological
analysis of the residual defornations indicate (see Table 20 [sic]) that

the force 8 surface effects extend froa the epicenter of the force 9 earth-
quake (with a depth of center of 15-20 h) to a distance of up to 130 kn.
and force 10. to 160 in. Accordingly, an extraordinarily nonunifora intensity
distribution on the earth's crust is noted (especially in the presence of
complex engineering-geological. geomorphological and geocryological condi-
tions). Therefore the "mechanical" outlining of the force 8 regions by the
nagruitude of the established noxiou- redii of the corresponding isoseisms
can lead to significant unjustified expansion of the area of the regions.

The "transit" trenors of the force 9 and 10 center zones of highly seismic
regions are in the final analysis defining when drawing the boundaries of
the force 8 regions. here. in all of the known cases the force 8 macroseie-
nic effects (average) of the strongest earthquakes of the Baykal-Stanovoy
seismic zone have not spread more than 160 In from their epicenters, and
this boundary was taken as initial for the initial external boundary of the
force 8 region. Then it was corrected depending on the seismotectonic situa-
tion, the nature of the epicentral fields. the isolines of seismic activity.
K . and so on. Here a check was node with respect to macroseismic effects
(Efﬁe average) fro. the force 9 center cones. However. for definite quanti-
tative estinates of these regions (especially in the marginal zones of the
Sayan-Baykal-Stanovoy arch) there are still insufficient instrument and

FOR Oﬂlezzl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aeismogeologicsl data. and it is necessary to use the materials with re-

spect to other aeiamicslly active regions (Mongolia. Central Asia. Cali-
fornia. and so on).

On withdrawing from the axial Baykal-Stanovoy seismic zone. two force 8
regions are isolated in which the centers of the local earthquakes with
an intensity to force 8 ( 5 15) are possible. In the investigated

territory of Eastern Siber . both of these regions are represented only
by their marginal parts.

One of them--the northwestern flank of the extended Tukuringra-Dzhagdinskaye
aeianically active zone-encompasses part of the chernysheva and Tuhuringra
ridges extending to the Upper Zeysk Basin. This region on the existing
seismic regionalizetion map (SNiP-IIA 12-69) belongs to force 5-6. how-
ever. the seismogeological and the instrument studies perforned here in
1970-1971 and in 1976-1975 in connection with planning the MM [Baykal-
Amur Railroad] route and building the Zeysk Hydroelectric Power Plant

[SEISHOTBCTONIcs.... 1975b) have made it possible to reexanine the estimate
of the seismic conditions of this territory.

The force 8 potential seismicity here is determined by the modern tectonic
activity of the Tukuringra arch-block uplift and the systems of latest faults
bounding it (Cilyuysltiy, Tukuringra. Southern Tukuringrs. and so on).
partially entering into the Hongolian-Okhotsk deep fault sons. These struc-
tures are connected with quite numerous epicenters of earthquakes with

K - 9-16. In recent years force 6-7 shocks were recorded here. and on

2 November 1973. the Zeysk earthquake occurred with H - 5.6; K - 11..

I0 . force 8 (Semenov. Avdeyev. 1975). It confirmed the correctness of the
isolation of the force 8 region along the Tukuringra zone. According to
the preliminary seismogeological materials. in 1967 V. N. Solonenko already
forecasted high seismic activity of this territory.

In connection with what has been discussed, the force 5-6 estimate of poten-
tial seismicity of the Zeysk Region finding reflection in the SNiP Il-A.
12-69 appears to be extremely unsubstantiated. which. beginning in 1967. was
made known by the design organizations (Lengidroproyekt. Gidroproyeht).

In Southwestern Transbeykal. the Chikoy Basin is considered to be force 8.
According to the seismic data in it moderate seisnic activity is noted

(A10 - 0.01-0.02; i 13). that is. the expected maxi-u earthquake in-
tensity here can reac force 7.

However. the Chikoy Basin is part of the broad Khentey-Daurskays seismicelly
active zone which reaches into Northern Hongolia. The western segment of

this ‘rtended zone in the territory of Mongolia exhibited itself in 1905
with the strongest earthquakes (H - 8.6 and 8.7; J0 - force 11 and 12).

380
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the vicinity of the Chikoy Iesin. eccording to seiseostetietics. e

force 8 (M - 6) eerthqueke wee known in 193‘ (Solonenho. V.. 1968s. pege

367); in eddition. during the eeieeogeologicel studies (Lestochkin. 1972)

the residuel deformations of the force 9 eerthquekes were estebliehed here

(the Yedrikhinskeye end the Xuyuktuyskeye structures). The possibility of

the occurrence of the centers of force 8 eerthquekee in this eree is elso
indiceted by the highest eegnitude of the velocity gredients of the verticel
nsotsctonic novensnts for the territory of 'rrensbeykel-u- Igred VI. x (0.6-0.6)-
‘10‘ yeer'l.
All of this forces us to clessify the Chikoy Resin es force 8. Its bound-
eries ere drown considering the neture of the denping of the necroseiseic
effects in the ample of the eerthqueke of 193A (Popov. 1939) end using
dete on the evereged isoseises (see ‘i'eble 29 [sic]).

The regions with eerthquehe intensity of force 7 encoepess lerge erees with
coeperetively week differentietion. contrest end intensity of the leteet
tectonic movements. 0n the one hend these regions include the weekly ective
(A1 < 0.01; K < 12) nerginel uplifts of the Alden Shield. the Northern
Bey end theml’etonskiy highlends end the pstentislly seeisuic nerginel
troughs end uplifte of the lrlnlt enphitheeter. end on the other hend. the
greetsr pert of the ‘l‘rensbeykel block-weve sons (Alo - 0.01-0.05: R - 12-
13) end the section of the hyukehe-Gilyuyshiy depression between thﬂtenovoy
Uplift end the ‘rukuringre Ridge.

In the direction of the Siberien Pletforl. the centers of locel eerthquekes
(with K within the limits to 10) ere extrenely rere with the exception of the
ectivsted pert of the Alden Shield were in the vicinity of the Chul'nen
depression end the uplifts freeing it on the north. increeesd seiseic ectivity
is noted (A10 to 0.05), end it is possible to expect en eerthqueke with

K - 13). The seismic dengers of these territories is determined hesicelly
b'y“fhe "treneit" tre-ors from the center zones of the force 8-10 regions.

In the lrkut enphitheeter, the locel force 7-6 centers ere in practice ex-
cluded. At the some tine the eecroseisnic dete with respect to strong eerth-
quekes from the highly seinic cones give rise to the isoletion of the force

7 region over e significent territory of this stehle end rigid block of the
eeith's crust, including prinrily the Pristenovoy end Predbeykel‘skiy troughs.
0n the whole the houndery of the force 7 region on the Siberien Pletforl side.
by conperison with the preceding up. wes left unchenged with the exception

of the smell sections in the southern pert of the Alden Shield end in the
Beykel-Petonskiy highlend where it is euglented es e result of the force 8
region.

The new force 7 seisnic region is isoleted in the southern pert of Yskutie
within the limits of the nerginel structures of the Siberien Pletforn. the
seisnicity end the letest tectonics vf which have not been investigeted.
end therefore they were considered eseisnic (with respect to their pletforn
situetion). However. on 8 October 197‘. e force 7 eerthqueke occurred here
(H - 5.2; K - 13). the epicenter of which wee loceted in the Berezovskiy

381
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

trough (see Chapter VII). According to the existing necroseisnic naterisls,
here a quite significant force 7 area with respect to size was isolated.

the basic part of which met be to the north. in the Yakut seisnic zone,
where the systen of extended faults running fron northeast to the Berezov-
skiy trough was isolated. The boundaries of the region before perforning
the special seisnogeological studies nust be considered quite approxinete.

The broadest force 7 region enconpassee part of western Transbaykal. Central
Transbaykal and a small area of Eastern Trensbsykal. For strong earthquakes
in the Bayksl-Stanovoy zone, the treaor intensity reaches force 7 for epi-
central distances to 320 kn. and in individual cases to 500 and even 675 kn.
Thus. for exaaple. for the earthquake of 1 February 1725 [sic] the center

of which is neat probably located in the Ukoksn eeisnically active zone.

in Chita (the epicentral distance is about 600 km). even the force 8 necro-
eeisnic effects were noted. ﬂare. during the Huya earthquake (about 500 km)
on 27 June 1957. numerous cases of deforntione of the structures correspond-
ing at least to force 7 nacroseisnic effects were noted, and for the Tea-
Yuryakhekiy (675 he) on 18 January 1957. individual cases of such defornstions.

The seislnogeological data. the increased velocity gradients and also the rela-
tively high degree of differentiation and contrast of the vertical neotec-
tonic movements indicates the possibility of the occurrence in the investi-
gated areas of Transbeyksl of local force 7 earthquake centers. These in-
clude the Uletovskoye earthquake of 1912, the grOup of Heatern Transbaykal
shocks of 1835) 1856 and 1915, the earthquakes of 1963, in Prisrgun'ye and
1965 (H - 5 1/2, in the vicinity of the Daurskiy Arch. In a nunber of places,
seisnogravitational structures are noted (for exaarple. ranginskaya in the
border of the Ingoda Basin). With respect to the seisnological date. over

a significant area of Transbaykal earthquakes are possible with Knex - 13.
here the relatively high values of the velocit; gradients of the vertical
neotectonic noveuents (2-5.0‘olgrad VI. 5 6°10‘ years'l) serve as confirme-
tion of the force 7 “background" seianicity, which. according to H. V.
Gzovskiy. can correspond to force 7 land more rarely force 8 earthquakes.

Soee expansion of the area of the force 7 regions in Tranebaykal is caused.
on the one hand. by the appearance of new eeieeoetstistical naterials indi-
cating the local force 7 earthquakes (22 June 1963, H - 5.3, K - l3;

2l Noveaber 1965. ‘3 I S 1/6, K - lb; 3 September 1970, H - 6.5.x - l3).
and on the other hand. more careful analysis of the seisnotectonic situa-
tion, including the velocity gradients of the latest sovenents.

The total area of the force 7 regions in Eastern Siberia have increased by
comparison with the 1962 nap and SNiP-IIA. 12-69. from 516.000 to 558,000
Ian-2 both as a result of a reduction in area of the force 8 regions (the
Alden Shield, the Baykal-Patolakoye Highland) and as a result of expansion
of the force 6 regions (Beatern Transbayksl).

The regions with earthquake intensity of force 6 are isolated on the Siberian
Platform and in the southeastern part of the Transbeykal block-wave eons
(Eastern 'l'ransbaykal aubzone).

382
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the platform the area and configuration of the force 6 seissic region

are caused by the nature of propagation of the "transit" seismic oscilla-
tions iron force 7 of the Baykal-Stanovoy zone of tho arch-block and rifto-
genic movements. In Southeastern Transbaykal. on the contrary, the local
center zones (K < 13) have defining significonco. and the "transit" trenors
ploy the suborthe role. As a result of the ranoteness of the seismic
stations from those areas, the precision of dotersining the apicantars of

the earthquakes is insufficient to establish the relation of tho earthquake
centers to the specific geological structures and the sorphostructureo.

0n tho Siberian Platform side. tho boundary of the force 6 zone is quite
reliebly substantiated by the soismostatistical material. and therefore in
general is left without change by coworison with tho previously existing
map (Solononko. V.. 1963a. 1968a). At the ease tine, within the limits of
the Eastern Transbeykal subsone the area of the force 6 region is increased
as a result of the force 5 region isolated here. This is caused prinarily
by the new seisnostatiotical data and increased values of the vtlocity
gradients of the vertical latest movements to (l--2)-lO"9 years' .

The nest active in the territory of Eastern Transbaykal oppeare to be the
ﬂerchinsko-Zovodskoy region where week shocks have been quite frequently
recorded ( g 12), end in individual years (for exaaple. 1700. 1800. end
so on), stro er earthquakes were noted according to the necroseismic data.

The latter. possibly, are connected with the "transit" tremors from the
Stanovoy and the Hongolian-Okhotsk deep fracture zone. It has not been ex-
cluded that part of the week local earthquakes here are not of tectonic
origin. but landslip 01132? (collapses of old nines. karstic caves. and

so on).

Peculioritios of the Seismic Manifestations Under Permafrost Conditions

The problem of special engineering-seisnological conditions of the perma-
frost region has been recently stated (Solonenko, V., 1960b. l962e), but
purposeful special studies were started only in 1966 on the east bank of
the Baykal rift zone where high seisoic activity and couple: permafrost.
the thickness of which varies in short distenceo from 0 to 1100-1300 meters
are combined (Nekrasov, et el. 1967; Nekrasov. 1970). These and subsequent
studies performed under the direction of 0. V. Pavlov in the Berguzin rift
valley and in Transbsykal, and laboratory experiments confirmed the proposi-
tion of shorp contrast of the variation of the anionic vulnerability es a
function of the permafrost conditions (Solonenko, V., et al., 1970. 1972;
Pavlov, et a1.. 1972: Zarubin. Pavlov, 1973; Dzhurik. Leshchiltov, 1973;

the necessity for isolating a special engineoring-seimgeocryological
region in the seismic region has come. In the Northern Hemisphere3 it
ocgupies an area on the order of 10 million b2, that is. about 3.5 million
km in the territory of the USSR. and the rest in North America (Canada.
Alaska), Northeastern Greenland and on the islands in the Arctic Ocean.

 

3 The Antarctic is in practice aseismic.

383
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effect of the seislic processes on permafrost is especially clearly
and directly obvious in the seismogenic structures which during strong
earthquakes experience eultimster vertical and horizontal displacements.
Here old fracture zones are uncovered. and new ones occur which insure
the conditions for the formation of anomalous endogenic (ascending) end
exogenic (descending) thermal fluxes.

The most highly seismic permafrost region in Buresis is the Baykal rift
zone. The cryolithozone is extraordinary here. In the rift valleys there
is permafrost of the "Bayksl type" (Solonenho, V.. 1960b): even near the
southern boundary of the cryolithozone the permafrost is encountered to a
depth of hundreds of meters. In the section the permafrost has two layered
structure. The upper horizon is modern, predominantly insular permafrost
to tens of meters thick and rarely more than 100 meters (in the northern
basins according to the geological data. to 200-250 meters). The lower
horizon of the permafrost is relict. syngenetic. It was formed obviously
on the boundary of the holocene where the climatic conditions promoted the
formation of permafrost. and the high mobility of the earth's crust noted
by seismic activation. its submersion and burial. These horizons rarely
merge; as a rule, they are separated by s horizon of thawed ground from
tens to hundreds of meters thick.

The Beykal type permafrost can be encountered not only in the rift zone but
also in other geological structures experiencing significant plunging at
the end of the Pleistocene to the beginning of the Holocene.

The dependence of the cryolithozone on the type and nature of movement of
the tectonic structures has been confirmed by the geothermal observations
(Demidyuk, 1968). The least value of the thermal fluxes (on the order of
300 kcsl/mz-year) and greatest thickness of the permafrost were established
in the negative structures. A significantly higher thermal flux to 6.000
to 26.000 kcal/mz-year in the positive structures and maximal, to 160.000
kcal/mz-year and more was established with respect to the tectonic dis-
turbance zones. Therefore in the seismicelly active regions. even in the
frozen layer of low temperature (to -lO' and lower) thick (to 1100 meters
and more) permafrost. narrow, but extensive taliks [thawed ground] are
encountered coordinated with the zones of tectonic disturbances and, above
all, the seismogenic lineaments. The) ..re often well deciphered with re-
spect to vegetation, more "luxurious" and heat-loving by comparison with
the vegetation of the sections alongside. However, there can be exceptions
to this general rule. The inactive faults, during the course of the seism-
genic movements of the earth's crust. often passively open up, and cold
air can pour into them, which will promote the development o‘ permafrost
and the formation of lode ice to significant depths (on the east flank of
the Baykal rift zone on the Udoltan Ridge we were able to observe veins of
ice to tens of centimeters thick at a depth of about 700 meters).

384
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP02-00050R00010003001 1-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The permafrost essentially conplicates the seisaic rsgionalization. The
proper selection of the conbinntion of pernafrost and seisnic characteris-
tics has important significance here. however. it is impossible to con-
sider all of the variety of per-afrost conditinns; therefore unavoidably
it is necessary to use a rough classification geocryological ache-s. As
the first experiaent. the following versions was proposed (Solonenko. V..
1973): l--individual islands; uninaular; lib-with talik ielands: a)
block. b) cellular or msaic; IV--continuous; V—lsyhal type.

The seisnic properties of pernsfrost depend not only on the granulonetric
cosposition. the iciness and tenpersture. but also the thickness of the
pensafrost. the conditions of its occurrence, and so on. These relations
are varied; any of then have still not been studied. In the first ep-
proxination the per-afrost is divided up with respect to seisnic proper-
ties into hard frozen. platy and pseudothawed and loosely frozen. The
sol idly frozen includes the ground. with respect to the velocities of the
longitudinal sen-1c waves (3.5-6 Wsac end higher) end the oscillation
amplitudes. siailsr to rock. Its te-perature is below -2 to ~3'. The
loosely frozen end pseudothawed ground has tenperatures above -l’. end
the seismic properties of this grotnd are sppt‘oxiastely the sane as for
the truly thawed ground. The platy frozen ground takes an interlediste
position with respect to its seisnogeocryologicsl characteristics.

with the accumulation of factual material. it appears possible to classify
the seismic pemfrost-lithologic coaplexes. Their boundaries fer fro-
always coincide with the boundaries of the engineering-geological aicro-
districts. For exasple, in one seisnic lithological-perlsfrost conplex
there can be plsty frozen coarsely clastic deposits end solidly frozen

fine grained soil (the velocities of the longitudinal waves. frequency-
amplitude characteristics of then can be in practice identical). 0n asking
the transition to the pseudothawed or thawed state the force of the forner
is higher by one and the latter. by two or three; the bearing capacity and
other geotechnical properties will be different.

Each of the isolated types of per-sfrost has its own specific engineering-
seisnogeocryologicel peculiarities.

Type 1. The thickness of the permafrost in individual islands usually is
less than 15 to 20 neters. The thin (first tens of asters) lenses of pern-
frost either have no significant effect on the saplitude level of the oscil-
lations or during passage of the seianic wavea they cause sharply expressed
resonance phenomena. In the presence of water saturated soil above then
capable of nud eruptions. the permafrost lenses can receive additional low
frequency oscillations. The breaking up of the beds and lenses of pena-
frost, the settling of the individual blocks and fast degredation of it are
not excluded. Therefore the construction of the capital structures on the

pernafrost islands without preliminary thawing of it in the seisnic regions
is undesirable.

385
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Type II. lnsular pansafrost usually is high temperature. The soil is
plsty frozen or pseudothawed. By comparison with the rock and solidly
frozen ground the intensity of the earthquakes rises by one to three

force points. The fine-grained highly icy ground with layered and reticu-
lar structure is especially dangerous.

with a permafrost thickness on the order of 20 to 1.0 esters in the presence
of interlsyers of thawed or pseudothawed ground in it. resonance phenonena
and an increase seisnic danger by two to three force points are probable.
In the presence of tall]: and pseudothawed sinks. cumulative processes are
probable which can involve multiple increase in aaplitudes of the oscilla-
tions and spouting of the ground in the central parts of the talilts.

Construction in this type of parasfrost is also uudeoirable. but it can
turn out to be unavoidable. for it frequently develops in the lost conven-
ient areas for development in river valleys end intermontans basins.

Type III. Per-afrost with talik islands can turn out to be the nest coaplex
(especially the cellular subtype) for engineering-scissogeocryological ex-
ploration and regionalization as a result of the whiuical oonbination of
solidly frozen. platy frozen. pseudothawed and thawed ground with sharply
different aeisaic properties. and the morphology of t-: cryolithozone itself ‘
promotes broad and varied nanifestation of resonance and cumulative processes .

For the blocks subtype pernafrost the talilt lineaaents next to the faults
are the most seisnically dangerous as a result of the total increase in
force points as a result of thawed ground and love-onto along the disloca-
tions with a break in continuity.

The variations in the force points by conparison with the initial ones in
the areas with type Ill pernafrost can fluctuate from sinus one or two to
plus one to three points.

Type IV. The solid permafrost predoninantly with solidly frozen ground in
the foundation of the structures. when constructing while retaining the
pemfrost. the normative force points can be lowered by one. Usually the
structures are erected on pilings with ventilated base-eats. however. the
nature of the operation of the pilings in two (winter) or three layer nediun.
seisnically sharply nonunifora. rensins unclear. The oscillations of the
foundation are realized as a result of the upper part of the ground, and
with depth the anplitude of the oscillations decreases rapidly. All of this
can lead to powerful shearing stresses of the pilings. however. the latter
can play the role of a flexible foundation which under defined structural
characteristics has a positive effect on the earthquake proofness.

‘ This proposition has found confirnstion in the instruaent engineering-
seismlogicsl studies perforned under the direction of O. V. Pavlov. It
was established that in the talits of limited size the increase in intensity
of the trenors reaches force 2.

386
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Under structures with hot technological proceesee, as a rule, telik sinks
occur which have a sharply negative effect on their eeisnic conditions.

Type V. In the areas with Baylral type per-sfrost. a under of specific
engineering-eeisaogeocryological problens arise. The eultilayered struc-
ture of the looee series filling the basins of the Baykal type can change
the isoseieeal field sharply. It is possible that this is one of the causes
of significant divergence of the intensity of the tremors not only in the
closely located ground, but even individual parts of the sane structure
which we have often encountered when investigating the consequences of
strong earthquakes (Solonenho. V.. 1960c).

Before the special studies of the seisaic properties of the areae with per-a-
frost of the Baykal type it is necessary to orient ourselves on the proper-
ties of the upper (nodern) horizon of the penafrost considering that the
lower thick (hundreds of neters) series of loose and frozen sedinente ex-
tinguish the force of the aeisnic shocha at leaet by one point (Solonanko.
v.. l962e: ACTIVE 1301031168.... 1966).

In the case of seisnic regionaliration of the penafrost region it is neces—
sary to coapile either a complex pernafrost-seienic nap or superpose a
geocryological nap of the use scale on the basic nap. The detailed seisaic
regionaliration is neat efficiently carried out on the basis of the earpho-
structursl coupler engineering-geological and gaocryological regionalira-
tion.

In the case of sciatic nicroregionelization. in accordance with the haeic
construction principles (while nintaining or deetroying the pernafrost)
it ie propoeed that two nape he cot-piled: for natural conditions and for
thawed ground (Solonenko. V.. at al., 1970, 1912).

For regionalization of the territoriee of the specific atructural conplexes.
a specialized asp can he conpiled considering the new postconatruction per-a—
frost conditions or tenporsry laps with respect to the periods of naetery

of the areas. considering that the telperature. the icinees. the ratio of
the solid and liquid phases of the water. porosity and density of the soil
during the course of developnent and during the year vary continuously re-
vernihly and irreversibly. The seisnic properties of the rock vary correa-
pondingly: acoustic rigidity, enlitudea and periods of the oscillations
of the ground. resonance and cumlative propertiea and aleo the nature of
the interaction of the ground-structure eystel. An earthquake has an active
effect on the couree. especially the rate of the geocryological processes
and phenonena: solifluction is accelerated. the now-ant of placea in
facilitated as a result of the ease slipping of the active layer. the
established therael reginen of the upper horiaons of the per-afrost is die-
turbed, which causes degredation of it with all of the consequences follow-
ing therefron. and it promotes the bastion of avalanches. At the “to til.
the pernsfroet to a significant degree deter-inn the nature of the nine-
gravitational phenoaena. consolidating the rock leases on the slopee and at
the ease tine reducing the amber of landslips. landelides. earth and rock
avalanches. especially during earthquakes occurring during conplete freezing

of the active layer.
can Ann—r“ [ICE A\'IV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 0ynyakonskoye earthquake of 18 May 1971 (force 9. H - 7) was indica-
tive in this respect. lts epicenter was near the pole of cold of the
Northern Hemisphere. In the pleistoceisn zone over an area of 3 x 6 kn
along the fault zone massive separations of the thawing part (about 0.3
meters) of the active layer occurred. The soil-vegetative mass in the
valleys of the rivers formed mud flows up to 5 to 6 meters thick. 0n the
general slopes (to 15‘) end in the horizontal sections mass spouting of
fine gravely type soil occurred (Kurushin. et el.. 1972). but it was not
accompanied by significant subsidence an is observed in the permafrost
areas. 0n the whole, as a result of the persefrost. the seismogrevita-
tional phenomena during this earthquake encompassed a smaller area and

had smaller dimensions than for identical earthquakes in the nonperna-
frost areas.

The distribution of the tremors over the surface of the earth was also re-
narkable: in the area with solid permafrost the intensity of the tremor
was regularly attenuated. At a distance of 250 to 350 km, it dropped to
force 6 and then continued to attenuate. but at the epicentral distance

of 650-500 km on reaching the insular permafrost region near the Sea of
Okhotsk. the intensity of the treeor rose by 1 to 2 points. The force 5
tremor was felt on the coast of the Sea of Okhotsk at a distance of about
700 km. The relation of the tremor intensity to the type of permafrost in
the given case is obvious and indisputable (Solonenko. V., 1972a).

The extended iced zones frequently are connected with fissure-stratal water
of the seismogenic lines-eats. In the seismogenic jointed zones in places
very thick ice fields are formed-to 10 t~ 15 meters or core in the Syu1'-
benskaya. China-Vakatskaya seismogenic structures of the rift system of the
Stenovoy Highland (ACTIV! TECTONICS.... 1966). During the earthquake sons-
tiees a powerful "volley" eruption of water takes place which under winter
conditions leads to disastrous formations of giant ice fields. Thus. during
the Gobi-Altay earthquake of 6 December 1957 (force 12. H - 8.6) an ice
field more than 10 ks long was formed (Solonenko, V.. et al.. 1960a).

In the sections with highly icy soil the earthquakes cause or activate
thermokarstic processes. This is insured either as a result of the for-a-
tion of fissures through which the ground water and surface water pours
into the permafrost or as a result of throwing off of the active layer and
uncovering the pernafrost. Strong seismic shocks are not necessary for
this; week earthquake aver-a can cause the same effect. For example. in
1967 in the vicinity of Leprindo Lake in the Stanovoy highland in the epi-
central area an earthquake swern (85 shocks) of moderate intensity (K to
10-11) suddenly formed a thermokarstic and valley 650 meters long. 10 to 15
meters wide with a depth to 6 neters and a thermokarstic sink more than
2.500 n2 in area and 20 meters deep (in moraine).

388
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPIICIAL USE ONLY

Engineering seisaogeology has been faced with coupler problens in general,
and especially under the conditions of per-efrost (Slonoenko. V., 1971.
1973). The existing asthode of seieeic regionalitation have been developed
using the uterials from the esienic regions of our southern republics and
foreign countries with positive geothermal reginen of the soil. The engi-
neering-geological end instrment oeiseological observations give the soil
pare-etere. characteristic of the. during the investigation. During further
engineering-seismgeological interpretation. the stability of these para-e-
ters is understood. Under perufrost conditions the geotechnical and eels-it
properties of the soil in the vicinity of the effective engineering struc—
turea change constantly. Therefore the existing develop-ant with respect
to the seiaeic regionaliration procedure. especially eicroregionelizetion
are unacceptable to a significant degree in a permafrost region.

All of the growing rates of develop-eat of aeianic regions in per-afroet

areas are bringing sbout a nev scientific arse—engineering seia-ogeocry-
ology.

We have already had the opportunity to state (Solonenko. V., et a]... 1971)
that in the seieeic arm of per-afroet regions. during construction the
entiseisaic neasures euet be conbined with antipernafroet Isaaures. There-
fore in order to select optinal conatruction sites the seisnological and
engineering-geocryological exploration is insufficient. A careful econonic
analysis is also needed. For exasple. construction in a force 8 region
with insular permafrost (types I. It and partially V) can be nore expensive

than in a force 9 region but with favorable engineering-aimgsocryological
conditions.

389
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.

coucws ION

'l'he enelyeie of the eeienologicel. eeieeoseologicel. geophyeicel end peleo-
eeienologicel dete with reepect to the Eeetern Siberien eeienic region hee
denonetreted thet on the nodern level of ecience. the eeienic regionelire-
tion an be cerried out only with coqlex nee of the enuereted neteriele.

Depending on the locel conditione. the "weight“ of certein dete can be
veried eignificently.

In spite of the obvioue echievenente in eeienology. eeienogeolosy end geo-
phyeice. the eeiemetetieticel (ucroeeienic end inetrt-ent) end peleo-
eeienogeologicel dete rennin ee before the only relieble dete for eeti-
neting the true level of eeienicity.

At the preeent tine fer fro. ell of the territory of Beetern Siberie hee
been enconpeeeed by the complex etudiee. The beeic efforte hove been eined
et etudyin; the noet eeienicelly ective perte--the Beyhel rift zone-which
hee been inventiuted in quite eone deteil over ite entire extent (ebout
2.000 he).

he e reeult of the conplex etudiee it wee diecovered thet the leyhel eeienic
belt in with reepect to externel eisne elone pert of e united Aeien eeienic
zone entering into Beetern Siberie froe Honsolie. At the eoutheeetern pro-
Jection of the Alden Shield the eeienic belt ie breached: one breach in the
Dzhusdehurekeye. which rune to the See of Okhotek. end the other. the
Verkhoyenekeye. turne eherply to the northweet end rune to the rift eyeten
of the Arctic Oceen. Thie purely externel fector (eeienicity) hee provided
the beeie for certein euthore to eee the reletion of the Beykel rift tone

to the world rift eyeten. However. the individuel perte of the eeienic

zone ere connected with verioue typee of neotectonic etrocturee. different
geophyeicel fielde end tectonic etreee fielde. They,heve different depthe
end eerthqueke center necheniene. thet ie. they ere different with reepect
to the nein tectonic-phyeicel eigne.

he in known, the effect of the teneile etreeeee ecroee the etwctnree ie
one of the noet cherecterietic (if not the only) eigne of typicel rifte.

390
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In thin renpect the Bnyknl rift none in reliebly inoleted (ran the world
rift nyeten by brond fieldn of neer horizontel conprennion. Horeover, it

in extreeely conplexly constructed. both with renpect to norphontructurel
nttributen end the deep ntructure. end it hen e nobile tectonic regimen.
Over the greeter pert of itn extent. the verioun norphontructuren of tha-
Beykel eynten ere undergoing energetic nodern growth in the leternl end din-
tnl directionn end reerrengenent.

The growth of the beninn nlong the ntrike in nont clenrly exprenned to the
out of the Upper Angern Benin. llere the interrift nountein couinnuren
ere broken by the newly for-ed beninn which findn reflection in the in-
creeeed (by 3 to 5 tinen by conperinon with the neen) neinnic nctivity of
the interbenin nountnin col-innuren end nlno the eentern dietnl none of the
rift nynten. In the letter, the riftogenic proeennen ntill hnve nlnont not
received norphontructurnl exprennion. With renpeet to the velocity gredientn
of the verticel tectonic nowaente, the geophynicel end neinnologicel cel-
culetionn. K here in no nore then 12 to lb with rnre recurrence rete.
Actunlly, thﬂ‘in one of the nont neinnicelly dengeroue nectionn of the rift
zone with probeble ntrong end frequent eerthquekee with K to 16-17.

On the other hend. on the eouthwent (Eentern Seyen) flenk of the rift nynten
fnding of the riitogenic procennen in tnking plece.

Uhereen in the Beyhnl rift zone the neinlic ectivity in detenined prinnrily
by the develop-eat of rift beeinn. in the Trenebeykel block-we‘re zone. the
erched uplittn heve increneed neinnic potentiel. They ere weekly recomen-
neted (nee Chepter IV). end the energy of the cmtion upliftn in null.
ineuring unifentetion of rare ntrong (to force 8. H to 6) eerthqueken.
However. thene enrthqueken nre occurring, end it in i-ponnible not to con-
nider the. during neinnic regionelizetion.

Between the Beyknl rift end the Trenebeykel block-weve eonen e nynten of
eubrift ntructuren hen been inoleted. the neinnotectonic develop-eat of which
in tnking plnce on interection of the novenentn of the riftogenic end Trenn-
bnykel typen. Thin hee elno predetermined the potential neienicity of the
nubrift ntructuren: the totel eeplitude of the verticel noveeentn in the
Neogene-Queternery tine in the: in twice nn high en 12‘. the Trnnnbnyhel Beninn,
but three to tour tinen lower by cowerinon with the neerent rift velleyn.
The ponnibilitien of the occurrence of enrthqueknn of lexiu intennity

(nore then force 9) here obviounly nre lower, which wee teken into eccount
when ieoleting the neienic region.

The Siberian Plntforn, eppenring to be previounly neinicelly pennive turned
out to be not no lifelenn. In eny cene. in itn nerginel pert eerthqueken
ere ponnible end noneti-en occur (for example. 8 October 1976. K - 13-.

Io - force 7) which ere not inferior with renpect to energy to the ‘renhkent
enrthqueke of 1966. Thin nignificently expendn the nree of the required
neineogeologicel-geophynicel ntudien in Ieetern Siberie (in eny me when
building ntructuren of increeeed denger: the high-heed hydroelectric power
plent dean, end no on).

391
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The quick improvement of the seismic regionalization map of Eastern Siberia
has become possible as a result of the application of the pelsoseismogeo-
logical method (combined with other methods of investigation). Hhen using
the popular procedures (without paleoseismogeological procedures) a long
term accumulation of seismostatistical material is required. The objective
analysis of the various data has demonstrated that wherever the upper level
of the seismicity of specific seismogenic structures (the rift zone) has
been determined by the paleoseismodislocations with certainty. the seismo-
logical and geophysical materials confirm the high values of Kmax' A10 end
the recurrence rates of the earthquakes.

Where there are no signs of paleoseismodislocations (the edges of the Siberian
Platform). there too. according to instrument data the seismic activity is
equal to or close to zero. although sometimes earthquakes occur here which

in the presence of populated places would be destructive. In the areas where
the paleoseismodislocations are not expressed or are absent (Trsnabaykal).

the seismological data are unreliable. However, in such areas with time

the reliability of the seismological data will be increased. at the same

time as the prospects for improving the reliability of the peleoseismogeo-
logical material are problematic. This again confirms the necessity for com-
plex studies and not confining the studies to any one method.

The paleoseismogeologicel date still remain the only data when discovering
the evolution of seismic processes which has great significance for esti-

mating the degree of reliability of the long-term seismic forecast accord-
ing to seismological-geophysicsl data.

In the uninvestigsted or poorly investigated regions paleoseismogeology is

the only means of fast determination of the epicentral zones of strong earth-
quakes. their maximum intensity. the discovery of seismicslly active struc-
tures. and so on. In the broad investigated regions the paleoseismogeologi-
cal studies can essentially supplement the seismological data. Hhile in prac-
tice the requiredK time of instrument observations for objective estimation

of the activity.K and the seismic vulnerability is actually unknown.“

can only say with .:§tainty that the 10 year period of observations is too
small for these purposes. For example. the only arch-block Udakon structure
coupled with a single system of deep faults noted over the entire extent of
the paleoseismodislocations of force 9- 12 has A10 from 0.01 to l.K from
12 to 17, seismic vulnerability of more than force 9 of l. 000 and, mo§e rarely
50. 000 (see Chapter VIII and IX). It is natural that such calculations can

not be the basis for such a serious document as the State Seismic Regionali-
zation Map.

The conclusion still remains valid that we arrived at when studying the seis-
micity of the rift zone of the Stanovoy Highland (ACTIVE TECTONICS.... 1966)
that for quantitative estimation of the recurrence rate of the earthquakes
the recurrence rate graphs can be used if they are compiled for large seismo-
genic structures or systems of them responsible for the preparation of strong
earthquakes (an area of no less than several tens of thousands of square

392
’0‘ OP?ICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kilometers). Under our conditions the recurrence rate graphs increase the
number of earthquakes of force 11-12 and in this part nust be corrected by
the psleoseismodislocstions, but they give more reliable recurrence of the
force 10 shocks. the traces of which are quickly destroyed by denudation
and ere in pert skipped over during paleoesismogeological studies.

During the course of this work. coinciding in time with the "boom" in the
ersa of earthquake forecasting (not only locetion end intensity but also
exact time). we have constantly followed the course .of these investigations.
primarily in Japan, the USA end the USSR. end we heve tried to give an ob-
jectiva eveluation of their results insofar as possible. Re have arrived
at the following conclusionslx

1. No reliable relations heve been established between the deep structure
end the level of modern seismic activity of the local areas.

2. Modern movements of the eerth's crust are not such a relisble index of
possible seismic activity: their rates in the platform ssuiseic regions
sometimes ere 2.5-6 times higher then in the highly active seismic zones.

3. The established anamoloue movements of the earth's crust which frequently
are considered as predictors of earthquakes take place several hours to 60
years before strong earthquakes (the Alaskan earthquake of 27 March 1964).
and probable ones. to hundreds of years.

6. The hydrogeologicel (including hydrochmeical) changes during the course
of preparation for en eerthqueke or the eerthqueke itself are observed at
a distance of up to hundreds. sometimes thousands of kilometers from the

epicenter and cannot be the basis for predicting the location. intensity
and time of the esrthqueke.

5. The prediction of strong earthquakes by seismic cycles (Fedotov, 1968)
begins with constancy of the seismic regimen. The facts indicate thet con-
stancy of the seismic regimen for local regions cannot be discussed. end

it is only in this case that it is in prectice expedient to predict earth-
quakes.

An unfounded amount of attention hes been given to the prediction of the time
of earthquakes. The index of this is the feet that in mountainous regions
up to 80 to 90 percent and more of the victims end materiel losses are not
connected with the earthquakes theuelves but with the accompanying seismo-
grevitationel phenomena (landelips. landslides. earth streams and avalanches.
mud flows). If in such cases the time of the earthquakes were prediced. the
cities and settlements would still be lost, and the people would be killed.

 

From the report by V. P. Solonenko at the Intarnetionel Symposium on
Earthquake Forecaster Research (1976).

393
FOR OFFICIAL USS OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!

Therefore the engineering-aaisnogeological forecast in nountaine. especially
loeee regions in in practice sore inportent then the short-tern forecasting
of the tine o! the eerthquake. Under pemfrost conditione (nore than 50
percent of the area of the seismic regions of the USSR). the aignificsnce
of the engineering-eeienogeocryological forecast is still higher.

Modern knowledge of the procesees leading to earthquakes do not leave room
to doubt that the exact prediction of the time of an earthquake is still
unattainable. At the present time eeieaogeologiets, eeisaologiete end geo-
physiciete can by their collective efforts with quite high reliability fore-
ceet the location. poeeible inteneity and approximate recurrence rate of
eerthquakee. "It is vitally important not to predict the exect tine when

a city will be destroyed but to construct it in a plsce and in euch a wey
that it will not be destroyed" (Solonenko. V.. 1976).

39‘
FOR OFFICIAL US! 01.1.!
1'

3.

‘a

5.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abalakov. A. D. "Pleietoaeielel Region of Diaaetroua Earthquake on
the Swatoy Noe Pennieula (Pribaykal'ye [Baykal Region])." in the
book: 8313mm 51mm I SEISMDISLM‘I‘SII (Selmgenlc Struc-
turea and Sale-1c Dialocatione). noacov, Ied. VNIIGeofiziki. 1973.
pp 56-58.

Abalakov. A. D. "Cenozoic Maine on the Beat Shore of Lake Baykal,"
6201.. 1mm. (Geology and Geophysics), No 9, 1971., pp 1141-166.

Asafoncv. B. P. "Buimering-Geodynanlc Characterietic of the Baylzal
Beain.” 6801.. 1 6801112., No 9, 1976. pp 107-112.

Aahgirey, c. 1). ”So-a IIportant Lave of the Tectonic Structure and
Movemente of the Barth'e Cruat." 12V. All SSSR. 5311. 6301.. (Neva of
the USSR Acadeuy of Sciencea. Geology Seriea). No 8. 1960, pp 3-20.

Anantov, V. A. "Stratigraphy and the luatory of Develop-eat of the
Aginakaya Structural Zone of Tranahaykal," TRUDY V8368! (Horka of the
All-Union Scientific Raaearch lnetitute of Geology). Vol 81. 1963,
pp 3-1‘.

 

Andreyav, B. A” and Kluehln. I. G. CBOLOGICIIESKOYE ISTOLKOVARIYA
ennui-3mm mu (Geological Interpretation of Gravitational
Anonaliea). Leningrad. Goagoptekhiadat, 1)62. 1.95 pages.

Anieinova, 1.. V.. and Hyl'nikova. G. 1.. "Construction of the Hapa of
the Seienic Activity in Prihaykal'ye [Bayhl Region]," in the book;
V mam-ram. 101.01”!!! mm WIKOV. 11218? WV
(Fifth Conference of Young Scientific Coworkera. Topics of Reports).
lrkutak. 1971. pp 106-106.

Areent'yev. V. P. "Main Structural BIG-Ont. of the Territory of the

Buryat Assn (Brief Outline) ," HARM! P0 6301.. 1 P0113111!“ ISKOP
BURYATSKOY issn (ﬁateriale on the Geology and Venerology of the

Buryat A883). Ulan-Ude. No 9. 1965. pp 3-20.

395
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1°.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Areent'yev. V. P. "Problens of the Tectonics of the Seyen-Bsyksl
Folded Belt." in the hook: MATERIAL! K GBODOGICNBSKOY [(8an
POSWASNCMSNNOY 50-1311“! SOVITSKOGO GOSUMRSTVA 1 10-1313“! IUIYATSKOOO
GBOLOGIMSKOGO UPRAVLENIYA (Meteriele on the Geologinel Conference

in honor of the 50th Anniversety of the Soviet Union end the 10th
Anniversary of the Buryet Geological Adninietretion) , Ulen-Ude. 1967.
pp 120-123.

Areent'yev. V. P.. end Volkolekov. 1?. K. "Preeeeozoic Tectonics of
Bestern Seyen." in the book: 6301.061“ 8389. (Geology of the USSR).
Vol xxxv. Pert 1. Moscow. Nedrs. 196‘. pp 474484.

Artea'yev. M. Ye.. end Artyuehkov, Ye. V. "Isosteey end Tectonics.”
ctormomn (Geotectonics). No 5. 1967. pp 101-57.

Arten'yev. M. Ye.. end Artyuehhov. Ye. V. "0n the Origin of the Rift
Beeine.“ 12V. AN SSSR. SSR. 6301.. (News of the USSR Acedeny of
Sciences. Geology Series). No 6. 1968, pp 58-73.

Artyuehkov. Ye. V. "Grevitetionel Convection in the Depths of the
Berth." 12V. AN SSSR. PIZIKA 2911.1.(Neve of the USSR Acedeey of
Sciencee. Physics of the Berth). No 9. 1968. pp 3-17.

ATLAS ZMBTRYAS. I? V 8831! (Atlas of Berthquekee in the USSR). Moscow.
ltd-v0 AN SSSR. 1962. 337 pages.

Afenes'yev. V. M. "Tectonics of the Dthids Zone of Early Celedonides
(Southwestern Trensbeykel) ." in the hook: 2mm ZAMYKAL'YA
(MATERIALY K X 83831! NAUCIINWO SOVETA P0 WIRE SIIIRI I
DAL‘NEGO VOSTOKA) (Tectonics of Trensheykel (Meterisle for the Tenth
Meeting of the Scientific Council of Tectonics of Siberia end the Per
But)). Ulen-Ude. 1973. pp 68-69.

IAYKAL'SKIY RIFT. (Beykel Rift). Moecov. Necks. 1968. 175 peace.

Bssherine. N. P. "Jureseic Grehens end Troughs of the Altey—Seyen
Folded Region." in the book: mm REZOZOYSKOGO OROGBNNOGO IOYASA
TSBNTRAL'NOY A211 (Tectonics of the Mesozoic Orogenic Belt of Centrel
Aeis). Novosibirsk. Necks. 1973. pp 18-65.

Seloueov, V. V. ”Prohlee of the Methods of Seienic Regionelieetion."
12V. AN $859.. $23. GBOFIZ (Revs of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
Geophysics Series). No 3. 1956, pp 209-222.

Belousov. V. V. "Phenonenon of Tectonic Activation in the Develop-
nent of the Earth's Crust." in the hook: AKTIVIZIIOVANNYYB ZONY ZMOY
NORY (Activeted Zones of the Eerth'e Crust). Moscow. Neulte. 1966.

pp 7-13.

396
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Balousov, V. V. IMAYA [ORA I VEWAYA HANTIYA HATBRIKOV
(Barth's Crust and Upper Mantle of the Continents), Roscoe. Nauka,
1966, 121 pages.

Benin, N. A. ZONA GUWNOGO RAZLOHA VOSTOCHNOGO SAYANA (Principle
Pault Zone of Easter Sayan). Hoecov. Hanks. 1967, 168 pages.

Bogolepov. K. V. HEZOZOYSKAYA TBKTONIKA SIBIRI (Mesozoic Tectonics
of Siberia). Moscow, Nauka, 1967, 326 pages.

Borovik. N. S. "characteristics of the Regions of Prihayksl'ye
Earthquake Centers." IZV. AN SSSR. PIZIKA ZBHLI. No 12. 1970. pp 3-9.

Borovik. N. S. "Grouping of the Pribaykal'ye Earthquakes." in the
hooluVOPROSY SBYSHICNOSTI SIBIRI (Problems of the Seismicity of
Siberia). Part II, Novosibirsk. 1972, pp 59-65.

Borovik. N. S. "Sons Peculiarities of the Development of the Seismic
Process in the Vicinity of the Baykal Rift." author's review of
candidate’s dissertation. Hoscov. 1976. 20 pages.

Borovik. N. S.; Hisharina. L. A.; and Treskov. A. A. "Possibility of
Future Strong Earthquakes in Pribaykal'ye [the Bayltal Regionl."
023. All SSSR. PIZIKA ZEHLI. No 1. 1971. pp 21-26.

Bulinnl. K.; Afanaa'yeva, N. A.; Pronyayeva, Ye. A.; and Brglis, Ye. 1.
"Deep Section of the Southeastern Part of the Siberian Platform and
its Folded Border According to the Seismologic Data," SOV. 0301..
(Soviet Geology). No 10. 1972. pp 134-139.

Bulaaaov. A. P. "Structure of the Earth's Crust in the Vicinity of
the Baykal Basin According to Geophysics Data," TRUDY Imrrsxoco
Ill-TA, 1959. 1'. XIV. 838. 6301... (Horks of the Irkut University.
1959. Vol XIV, Geology Series). No 6. pp l73-l85.

Bulnaeov, A. P. "8er Peculiarities of the Geophysical Fields and
the Structure of the Earth's Crust of Prihaykal'ye," in the hook:
BAYKAL'SKIY RI”. Roscov, Hanks. 1968, pp 113-124.

Buns, V. 1.; Arte-'yev. )4. Ya; and Kasharov, N. H. "Relationship of
Seisaicity to the Characteristics of the Gravitational Field in the
Eastern Caucasus." m. AN 8583 (Reports of the USSR Academy of
Sciences), Vol 197, No 6. 1971. pp 1305-1307.

Burt-an. V. 8.; Luk'yanov. A. V.; Peyve. A. V.;.and Ruchentsev. S. V.
"Horizontal Displaceoents along the Faults and $0.9 Methods of
Studying 11m." 111qu GINA Works of the Geology Institute) . No 80,
1963. pp 5-33.

397
P01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
32.

33.

35.

37.

38.

39.

‘0.

61.

62.

Vutovskaya. Ye. H.. and Soltolova. I. A. "Correlation of Sone Pars-
nsters of the Seienic Regine with the Nonunifornitiee of the crust."
Ill). 6801. m. (Uzbek Geological Journal), No 3. 1970. pp 3-7.

Van-Benelux. R. U. "Developnent of Hesaundations. Mechanical Model
of Large-Scale Geodynanic Pheno-sns." in the hook: sxsrm umv
23111.! (Rift Systen of the Earth). Roscoe, Mir. 1970. pp 230-269.

Vardanyente, 1.. A. "Seissotectonica of the Caucasus." mo! SBYSHOIDG.
Ill-TA AN 888]! (Vorks of the Seissology Institute of the USSR Academy
of Sciences), In 66, 1935, 88 pages.

Vvedenskaya. A. V. "Characteristics of the Stressed State in the
Centers of the Deth Earthquakes." IZV. AN 8883. SR. 6301712. (News
of the USSR Acadslsy of Sciences. Geophysics Series). No 5. 1961.

pp 666-669.

Vvsdsnskays, A. V. ISSLBDOVANIYB NAPRHZHBNIY I MRYVOV V ocaacm
zmasm PRI PWCBI 130311 DISLOKATSIY (Study of the Stresses
and Fractures in the Centers of Earthquakes Using Dislocation Theory),
Moscow. Nauka, 1969. 136 pages.

Vetrov. S. V. "Nature of the Gravitational Field Observed above
Baykal." in the hook: DAM'SKIY RIPI' (Daykal Rift), Roscoe. Nauka,
1968, pp 126-131.

Vnukov. A. V. "Geological Structure and Conditions of. Formation of
the Gael-Bearing Deposits of the Chikoyskaya Basin (Hestern Trans-
haykal)." author's review of candidate's dissertation. Irkutsk.
1967, 27 pages.

Voytovich, V. s. PRIRODA DZHUNGARSKOGO GLUDINNOCO MLM (Nature
of the Dzhungar Deep Fault), Roscoe. Hanks. 1969. 191 pages.

Volkolekov, F. K. "Stratigraphy of the Lower Paleozoic Deposits of
the Southeastern Part of Eastern Saysn." TRUDY DWI! 80 AN SSSR
(work of the Durmn Institute of the Siberian Depart-est of the
USSR Acadeny of Sciences. Geology and Geography Series). Ulsn-Dde.
No 2, 1960. pp 19-38.

VOPROSY SBISHICENOS‘II SIBIRI (Problem of the Seislicity of Siberia).
Novosibirsk. Isd-vo 80 AN SSSR, 196‘, 2110 pages (IRUDY Ill-TA ZMOY
KORY. (Works of the Institute of the Earth's Crust), No 18).

"Problems of the Seisnotectonice of Prihaykal'ye and Adjacent Terri-
tories." DYUL. SOVB'I'A P0 831ml! (Bulletin of the Council on
Seissolosy), ﬂoscow. Izd-vo AN SSSR, No 10, 1960. 176 pages.

398
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘3.

66.

‘3.

b6.

67.

‘8.

69.

50.

51.

$2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Voronov. ll. 8. "Prohlee of the Structure of the Arctic Beein and
the Glohal Shear Zonee of the larch.” in the hook: rectum ARK‘I‘IKI-
ANTARK‘I'IKI (Problem of the Arctic and Anterctic). No 18. heningrad.
Gidronetirdat. 1964. pp 11-23.

Voropinov. V. 6. ”Grevitationel and Diajunctive Dislocation in
Tertiery Depoeite at the Botton of leykal Along the Southeaetern
Shore." MATERIAL! P0 “0100!! mmmowrmm MENU VOSTOCHHOY
smu (heteriale on the Geology of the heeocenoeoic Depoeite of Eutern
Siberia). lrkutek. 1961. pp 26-35. (mm VOST.-SII. GIOL. Ill-TA

80 AN 888]! (Vorka of the Beetern Sihe'.1en Geological lnatitute of

the Siberien Depart-eat of the 088R Acede-y of Sciencee). No 3).

Gayekiy. V. 11.. and 2ha1hoveltiy. N. D. ”Hicroearthquekee of Veetern
'ruva: Energy Claaeiticetion and Sitee of the Centere." IZV. AN 888R.
SERRA PIZIKA 2310.1 (New of the 08811 Acedeny of Sciencee. Barth
Phyeice Seriee). No Io. 1971. pp 29-40.

Ga-hurteev. G. A. "Deep Sesienic Sounding of the Berth'e Grunt." in
the hook: "0le P3001021: 2911.311?“le (Problem of Porecaetin:
Earthquake). Hoecov. ltd-v0 All 8883. 1956. pp 125-137.

Galhurteev. G. A. "Stete of the Art and Proepecte for Operatione in
the Field of earthquake Prediction." em. SOVB‘I'A Po 821810140011

AN 8883 (Bulletin of the Council on Sciennloo oi’ the USSR Acadeuy
of Sciencee). No l. 1955. pp 7-14.

Galhurteev. G. A.. and Veytelen. P. 8. "Conparieon of the Date tron
Deep Seienic Sounding of the Structure of the larth'e Gruet in the
Vicinity of Northern Tyan'-Shen' with the Seienology end Grevinetry
Date." 12V. AR 8883. see. GZOYIZ. ("eve of the USSR Acede-y of Sciencee.
Geophyeice Seriee). No 9. 1956. pp 1036-1063.

GEMSIHOV. 1. P. "Structurel and Sculptural Peculieritiee of the
Relief of haekhetan.” in the hook: VOPROS‘! 0806“!!! (Problem of
Geography). ho 1. mecca. Geografiedet. 1966. pp 63-75.

Gereeinov. l. 9.. and lieehcheryahnv. Yu. A. ”Concepte of the
'ﬂorphoetructure' and 'ﬂorphoeculpture’ and their Uee for Purpoeee
of Geonorphologicel Analyaie.‘ in book: at}!!! 2911.1 (Relief of the
Eerth). Noecov. heulxa. 1967. pp 7-12.

Gtoveltiy. H. V. "Tectonic Suhetentietion of the Geological Criteria
of Seinicity (It. I and 11)." 12V. AN SSSR. 8211. 030712. [In 2.
1957. pp 161-160; No 3. pp 273-283.

Grovekiy. n. V. “Dee of the Lateet end hodern Tectonic Hoveunta for
Detailed Beinic leeioneliretion of e Nev Type.“ in the hook: mm
01712111!!!“ 2mm [ORV (hodern Hove-ente of the Berth'e Cruet). No l.
Hoacov. Itd-vo A]! $88!. 1963. pp 169-178.

399
FOR ORIGIN. 058 OIILY
53.

56.

55.

$6.

$7.

61.

62.

63.

FOR OFI’XCIAL 082 ONLY

Crovahiy. M. V.: Kreatnikov. V. 9.: Nereeeov. 1. I»; and

Reyeiyer. c. 1. ”Conparieon of Tectonice vith Seiuicity of the
Car-akiy Rayon of the Tadehih SSR.“ 12V. AN $88!. $23. C20F12.. No 8.
1958. pp 959-976: No 12, pp 1125-1442.

Czovekiy. h. V.; Kreatnikov. V. N.. Nereeov. 1. 1.: and Reyeiyer.
c. 1. "New Principlee of Seienic Regionalization in the Exagple of
the Central Part of the Tyan‘-Shan' ." 12V. AN 8882. 8211. 620212..
No 2. 1960, pp 177-194; No 3. pp 353-370.

Czovakiy. H. V.; Kreamikov. V. .\'.; end Reyeiyer. C. 1. "Geological
Hethoda of Quantitative Characterization of the then Velocity Cradient
of Vertical Tectonic Hove-elite (Chengee in Slope) of the Earth Cruat
and Sone Reeu1te of the App1ication." 12V. AN sssn. 8811. 6201112..

No 8. 1959. pp 1157-1156.

Canvakiy. h. V.. and Nikonov. A. A. "Physical Tectonic Interpreta-
tion of hodern Move-ante of the Earth'e Cruet." CEOTEKMIKA (Ceo-
tectonice). No 3. 1973. pp 45-58.

Glukhov. 1. C. "Earthquakee aa One of the Pactore of Activation of
the Cornyy Kry- [Hountainoue Crilean] Lendelidea." mm. 1106K. Ih-TA
(Veetnik of ”new Univereity). No A. 1959. pp 3-12.

GOBI-ALTAYSEOTE WRYASENIYE (Cohi-Altay Earthquake). Hoecov.
de-vo AN SSSR, 1963. 392 pane.

Go1enatakiy. s. 1. "Manhattan of the Thickneae of the Earth'a
Cruat by Oheervationa of "even Reflected frn ite Baee and Depth of
Occurrence of the Centere of the Afterehocka of the Central laykal
Earthquake on 29 Ausuet 1959." 6201.. 1 620712. No 2. 1961. pp 111-116.

Colenetehiy. s. 1. ”Thickneee of the Earth'e Cruat in Centra1 layke1
According to the Oheervationa of the Exchange Reflected Haven."
6201.. 1 620712.. 1965. No 5. PF 89-87.

Go1enetahiy. s. 1. ”Structure of the Epicentral Field of the Earth-
quakee of the Beykel legion [Prihayhal'yel and Tranehayhl." 2121“
22111.1 (2arth Phyeice). No 1. 1976, pp 85-”.

Colenetekiy. S. 1.; lukina. K. 1.; Dan'anovich. M. 0.; and
Novouyekaya. P. V. ”So-e Characterietice of the Seienicity of
Prihayke1'ye in 1968-1969." 2121“ 2011.1. 1973. No 7. pp 20-36.

Colenetekiy. S. 1.; Hiehariva. 1.. A.; Novo-eyehaya. 1?. V.; lukina. Kh.
1.; Perevalova. C. 1.; Tret‘yak. E. A.; Pouina. Te. V.; Leoet'yeve.

1.. 2.; Kol'teova. H. 8.; and haehkinteeva. 2h. C. ”General Survey

of the Seialicity of Priheyhal'ye in 190." in the hook: 22111211162111“
V 0:38: V 1967 C (Earthquake in the 0882 in 1967). hoecov. hauha. 1970.
l 1 l.

‘00
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
65.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

76.

Colonetekty. 8. 1.: Novoeeyekeye. P. V.; end Mine. K. 1. "Node:
zetthqueke 1n 1970 end Thickneu of the Berth'e Cruet 1n the North-
eeetern P .tt of the leyhel Rut,“ 1n the hook: VOPPOSY 8318111610105?!
8131111 (P.oh1eee of the Set-tot” of Stherte). Novoelhirek. Neuke.
1972. pp 16-30.

Colonetekty. S. 1.: Novoneyekeye. P. v.; mum. It. 1.; Perevelove.

c. 1.; ‘l'ret'yek. B. A.: Poelne. Ye. V.; Anleteove. L. \‘.3 Leont'yeve.

L. 3.; So1onenko. N. V.: end Heee1'ek1y. 0. K. ”Survey of the 8e1ee1c1ty
of Prtheykel’yo in 1960." 1n the hook: 29113111153111“ V 6881! V 1968
0000 (Berthquehee 1n the USSR 1n 1966). Hoecov. Neuke. 1972. pp 107-

139.

Golenetekty. 8. 1.. end Shnotov. A. P. "Uet'-Nuye Berthquehe on 31
Au'uet 1968." "21171 2011.1. No 11. 1970. pp 60-75.

Coltteyn. B. I. 123W HWY (Selected Roche). Vol 2. Noecov.
ltd-v0 AN SSSR. 1960. pp 365-370.

Gorhunove. N. V.. end R1m1chenko. Yu. V. "Expedence 1n Hepptna
the Seieetc Activity by the Sutton Method." PIZIKA 200.1. No 7.
1965. pp 22-30.

Goreheveldy. D. 1.. end Let'ho. Ye. M. "Nongolten-Okhotek Deep Prec-

ture." m. AN SSSN (Reporte of the USSR Acedeey of Sciencee). Vol
137. No S. 1961. PP 1177-1180.

Gotthevekty. D. 1.; Pogel'een. 1. A.: Alektorove. Yo. A.. ltndeeen.

N. N.; Vet1-ov. V. A.; Zortne. V. 8.; Konetentinov. R. 14.; Ntronov.
Yu. P.; Nitonove. 8. P.; Solodov. A. A.: end Sh111ne. c. P. 6301.001“
1 uncommon: “2113811013111“ “momma 11881030211le WM'YA
(Geology end Leve of the Metrthouon of Endogentc Depoette of frene-
heykel). Noecov. Nedre. 1970. 220 pegee.

Gornoeteycv. V. P.; Mkhelevekty. V. 1.; end Poepeyev. V. 1. “Deep
Nesnetotenuuc Sounding 1n the Southern Pert of the Sthetten Pletfon
end 1n the Vtctntty of the Seyhel lift." 6301.. I 680712.. No la, 1970.
pp 111-118.

Corehkov. c. P. MASENHA NA MIMI SSSR (Ketthquekee 1n
the Tenttoty of the USSR). Noecov. Geogrenedet. 1969. 120 pegee.

Gorehkov. c. P.. end Shcnkereve. G. A. ”Spectﬂc Se1ee1c Energy

end Soto-1c legtoneluetton." 1n the hook: mm mm'm ASSANILB!
WSW 53151110115”! K111118511 (Both of the Generel Aeenhly of
the Europeen Seteuc Co-1ee1on). Vol 11. Noecov. 1970. PP 119-130.

Gofehteyn. N. D. "Seteeotectontce o1 rteucerpethn." non. AN SSSR.
coon. (Reporte of the USSR Acede-y o1 Sctencee. Geology). Vol 168.
No 3. 1963. pp 661-666.

‘01
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
87.

88.

89.

91.

92.

93.

9“

95.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Doo'yanovich. H. 0.; Lopatin. D. v.; ond Pavlov, 0. V. "Structuro
ond Dovolopnont of Sull Baoino of tho hountain Syoto- of Udoluzn
and tho huyo-Chara Co-ioouro." in tho hook: VOPROSY crowcu
numm'u I ZAIAYKAL'YA (Prohlo-o of tho Geology of Pribaykol'yo
[The loykal Rogion] and Tronohaylul). Vol 6. Chito. 1969. pp 19-23.
(TRUDY WM'SKOGO “LIAM GBOGMP. Ol-VA 888R (Horko of tho
Tranohaykal Branch of tho Goosraphic Socioty of tho USSR). No 6).

thanuzakov. K.. and Il‘yaoov. B. "Tho Effect of tho Hagnitudo of
tho Earthquake Bnorgy on tho Damping of tho Soinic Vavco Undor tho
Conditiona of Southoaotorn Forgnna," 12V. AN KIRGSSR. SBR. YBS'I‘KS‘IV. I
m. NAUK (Now of tho Acadony of Sciontoo of tho Kirgi: 88R.
Natural and ‘l'ochnical Scioncoa Sorioo). Pronto. No S. 1972. pp 15-21.

Dthihladto. l. A.: Darokvolidzo, 1.. IL; ond Tobunodto. To. A.
”Do-pins of Soiaoic Hovoo with Diotanco for Caucuian Borthquokoo."
12?. AN 838R. "21“ 2911.1. No 1. 1971. pp 93-95. '

Dzhihlodto. E. A.. and Rixnichonko. Yu. V. "Soiooic Vulnerability
of tho Coucaouo." PIZIKA 20M. No 1. 1973. pp 9-20.

Dzhurik. V. 1.. and Loohchikov. P. u. ”Bxporioontal Studioo of tho
Soto-1c Proportioo of Pornofroot.“ in tho book: 1! WM“

mnmsm. PO MWOVBDINIYU m. 6. osuovv GEOKRIOLOGICRISKOY
SW9!!! 1 PROONZA (Socond Intoruotioool Conforouo on Pomfroot.

No 6. Moo-onto” of anthropological Surveying and Porocootins).
Yakutok. 1973. pp 213-216.

Dzovanovoltiy. Yu. 1.. and Hironyuk. Yo. P. "Bvolution of Anciont
Kohilo nogiono of tho notorn Part of tho USSR." in tho hook:
WINES“?! MASA (Orogonic Bel“). Hoocov. Naulta. 1968. pp 96-99.

Dzovanovokiy. Yu. IL; Hironyuk. Ya. In; and ugdtina. 6. Yu. "lliotory
o1 tho Geological Dovolopoont of tho A1dan Shiold.” in the hook:
TBKTONIKA sum (Toctonico of Siborio). Vol In. Moscow. mm. 1970.
pp 132-161.

Doitriyov. c. A.. and Kolokol'toova. 8. H. "Eaton and Typos of Sodi-
ooot Accululotion in Lako Boyhol." in tho hook DOM?! 011.0282!!!“
IAYIWA (lotto. Dopooito of loyal). Koocov. houlto. 1970. pp 69-80

Dun-ya. A. V. ”Soinic Activity and Nootoctonica of Noldovio,"
in the book: mm W IV VSBSOYUZNOGO 800021!!!“ PO
88190me Imam (Topico of tho Reports of tho tourth A11-
Union Syupooiul on tho Sail-1c Condition), liohinov. Shtiintoa.
1973. 70 pagoo.

Dru-ya. A. V.: Popov. V. 11.; loohotnikov. A. 7.; and Stopanonlw. N. Yo.
"Earthquako Vulnorohility of tho Carpathian Zone fro. Subcruotal

602
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

81.

82.

33.

81-.

85.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Groovel‘d. H. O. WVITIYE RBL'BIM SAYANO-TININSKOOO NAOOR'YA '
(Developeent of the Relief of the Syeno-‘ruve ﬂighlend). hoecov.
Neuke. 1965. 165 pesee.

Guhin. 1. Ye. mmrmn 113101) 88181110138110!» MYORIROVMIYA
(Beieeotectonic Method of 8eieeic 1lasioueliutiou). Hoecov-Leninsred.
ltd-v0 AR 8811. 1950. 63 pace.

Cabin. 1. 8. "heeic Principlee of the Scienotectonic Method."
121'. '1'? All 8883. 8811. 8813811]. (hem of the Phyeice Inetitute of the

08811 Meduy of Sciencee. Neturel Sciencee Seriee). No S. 1953. pp 26-
27.

Guhin. I. Ye. WWW! 881$“me "0“le 1M 7311111101111
TMRIS‘I'MA (hem of 8eienic henifeetetione in the Territory of
Tedehihieten). hoecov. ltd-v0 A11 8831:. 1960. 464 peaee.

Guhin. 1. Ye. "Hultieleeent 8eienic Resionelieetion (in the Sample
of the Indien Penineule)." 1811. M 88811. P121“ 2911.1 (New of the
USSR Acede-y of Sciencee. Berth Phyeice). No 12. 1971. pp 10-23.

Denilovich. V. N. "Neture of the Principel Tectonic Precturee in the
Southwetern Treneheykel." am. SOVB'I'A PO snsnowcn. NO 10.

VOPROSY susmmomn PRIIAYKAL'YA I mzmm 1133110111? (Bulletin
of the Council on Seienology. No 10. Prohlene of Seieeotectonice

of gigyhl'ye end Adjecent Territorice). Hoecov. ted-v0 Al! 83811. 1960.
PP ' .

Denilovich. V. N. "Arcogenic Type of Overthruete.” 6301.. I 020312..
No 2. 1963. pp 3-11.

Denhevich. 1. 11.: Pevlov. Yu. A.; end Perfenov. 1.. 11. "Deep Structure
of the Southern houndery of the Alden Shield in the Vicinity of the
Chul‘een leein." cacrmoum (Geotectonice) No lo. 1969. pp 85-95.

Denkevich. 1. V.; Pevlov. Yu. A.; Perfenov. 1.. 11. ”heeenent Relief
of the Chul'een Ieult.” in the hook: rmonm 8181111 (Tectonice of
Siherie). Vol 111. Hoecov. Neulu. 1970. pp 175-179.

Delidyuk. 1.. 11. ”Role of tectonic Structuree in the Pomtion of the
Theml legiee of the Rock of the 1nternontene heein of the “Irene-
heykel Type.” in the book: mums ISSLMANIYA (Perleftoet
leeeerch). No V111. Hoecov. led-v0 )bek. in-te. 1968. pp 215-220.

Den'yenovich. II. C. ”Structurel houndery hetveen the Beyluel Rift
Syetee end the Trencheykel Block-Hove Uplift in the Vicinity of the
Ieuntovekeye Beein.” in the hook: MATERIAL! m. mum mum
WW. (Heteriele of the Conference of Young Scientific Co-
vorhere). Irkutek. 1968. pp 128-135.

‘03
[0| OHICIAI. USE ONLY
96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102 .

103 .

106.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Centere." in the hook: IZUCHBNIYB SEYMCRBSKOY OPACNOSTI (Study of
Seiuic Denser). 'l'eehkent. led-v0 IAN uabsssn. 1971. pp 55-62.

Dmitreehko. N. V. “Gemrpholopicel end Peleogrephy of the heykel
Hountein Region.” TRUDY Ill-TA WI All 8883 (Vorke of the Geosrephy
Inetitute of the 0883 Acedeqy of Sciencee). led-w All 8853. Vol 55.

No 9, 1952. 191 puee.

Duitreehko. N. v.; Hilenovekiy. Ye. Ye.; Antonov, a. A.; Aetekhov.
N. Yea Bel'yen. S. P.: Liliyekhcrs. D. A.: Hueeytov. H. 1.;
Sefronov, I. ".3 Shirknov, N. Shch. "Horphoettucturel Love of the
Ceuceeue." 12V. AN 888R. sen. caocm.. No 6. 1968. pp 65-56.

Yegorov. N. 1. "Block Structure of the Northern Beykel Volcenic
Belt eccording to the Geophyeicel Dete." in the hook: nun-cum
SIBIISKOY PLATFORM! 1 mm onusm (Tectonice of the Sihetien
Pletfore end Adjacent Region). No 9. Irkutek. 1971. pp 233-263.

ZHIVAYA mm. VULKANY I SBYSHICNNOST' STANOVOGO moor“ (Active
Tectonice. Volcenoee end Seieeicity of the Stenovoye ﬂiphleod). Hoecov.
Neuke, 1966. 231 pegee.

Zhilkin. V. IL. end Pinegin. A. V. ”Active Tectonice of the heel:
Slope of the Lela leykel leein (in the Section fro- Ongureny Settleaent
to Yelokhin Cepe)." in the hook: ptosmmet'm POYASA 1‘82“-
TML'NO! mt (rm-om. unm'mmemncum 3.1:. at Centre!
Aeie (Tectonice of trencheykel”. Ulen-llde. 1973. pp 110-112.

Ze-ereyev. S. H. ”leeic Structurel Eleoente of the Southeeetern
Pert of the Siberien Pletfore in the Precahrien end Lover Pelee-
:oic." 6301.. I 630912., No 11, 1961, pp 30—39.

Zelenyev. 8. H. WW! mum: WY CHAS?! SIBIRSKOY
PLAIN!!!“ (Merginel Sttucturee of the Southern Pert of the Sihetien
Pietfon). Hoecou. Neuke, 1967. 24.8 pegee.

Zenereyev. 5. lb, end Sneonov. V. V. "Geologicel Structure end on
end Gee luring Neture of the Selenae Depteeeion.” in the hook:
GBOLOGIYA I mmosnosr' WSW! $13181 (Geology end Oil end
Gee luring Neture of Beetern Siberie). Hoecov. Goetoptekhiedet.
1959, pp 635-673.

Zeruhin. N. Ye.. end Pevlov. a. V. ”toreceetins the Verietion of

the Seienic Propertiee of Penefroet." in the book: 11 WW“
WHA PO mzwrovmeum. m. b. OSNOVY 68001010610838”!
8"m I "MOM (Second Internetionel Conference on Pemfroet.

No 6. Pundenentele of Geocryoloucel Sumyins end roteceeting),
Yekutek. 1973, pp 219-220.

606
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
105 .

106 .

107 .

108 .

109 .

110.

111.

112.

113.

116.

115.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zekherove. A. 1.. end Seydueove. s. S. "Berthqueke Vulnerability

Mepe for the lnteneity Given in Force Pointe." in the hook:

1200113111“ SEYMCIISKOY OPASNOS‘I'I (Seielio Denger). Teehhent, led-v0 FAN
UrhSSl. 1971, pp 28-31.

Zelenekiy. Ye. Ye. "Cenozoic Depoeite of the Lover Couree of the
Huye liver." in the hook: VOPROSY 62010611 BURYA'I'II (Problem of the
Geology of Buryetie). Ulen-Ude. 1971, pp 53-61 (mm on. 68010611
BURYATSKOGO PlLlALA so All 8838 ("orb of the Geology Department of
the luryet Brench of the Siverien Depertnent of the USSR Acede-y of
Sciencee). No 3 (ll)).

ZWMASBNIYA V 8383. MINI!) (Berthquekee in the 0883.. (An-
nuel)).lloecov. leuke. 1962-1973.

MAYA [ORA I WWAYA "ANTI“ (Berth Cruet end Upper Mantle) .
Noecov. Mir. 1972. 6A0 pegee.

Zoloterev. G. S. "Lend Slipe end Lendelidee on Mountein Slopee end
their Stebility." in the hook: VOPROSY 1821438811110! 6801.061! 1
GRUN'I‘OVBDBMYA (Problem of Engineering Geology and Soil Science).
No 2. Hoecov led-v0 Hook. un-te. 1968. pp 183-203.

Zoloterev. c. 8.; Metveyev, Yu. 0.; end Sheehenye, N. L. “Typee of
Rock Slidee end Lendelidee in the Vicinity of the Toktogulekeye
Hydroelectric Power Plent on the Neryn River end Prohlene of Poreceeting
Then." in the book: VOPIDSY 1mm 63.01.0611 I GRMOVBDBNIYA
(Problem of Engineering Geology end Soil Science). No 2. Hoecov.

Izd-vo Koch. in-te. 1968. pp 259-280.

Zoneieheyn. 1.. P. "Tectonice of the l'olded Regione of Central Aeie."
6mm. No 6. 1967. pp 69-69.

Zorin. Yu. A. "Deep Structure of the Leke Seylul Beein According to
Geophyeicel Dete." 12V. All 8888. 883. 6301... No 7. 1966. pp 75-85.

Zorin. Yu. A. NOVBYSEAYA sum 1 IZOSTAZIYA BAM'SKOY RII'TOVOY
2M 1 sormu'm mnmm (Leteet Structure end leoeteey of the
Seykel lift Zone end Bordering Territoriee). Hoecov, Neuke. 1971.

168 pegee.

Zorin, Yu. A. "Geophyei-cel Aepecte of the Prohlu of the Agee of
Plenetion of the Relief (in the Sample of Baton Siberia)." GEO-
HORFOIDGIYA (Geomorphology). No 2. 1972. pp 13-18.

Zorin. Yu. A.. end ﬂovoeelove. Ii. 1!. "Poeeihility of Ieoleting the
Conponent of Long Ter- Seienic Activity in the Beylul Rift Zone."
in the book: 680m!“ (W115 WISHA 12K 80 AN 888)
(Geophyeice (Scientific lntonetion of the In lnetitute of the

Siberien Depertnent of the USSR Acedeny of Sciencee)), lrhutek, 1972.
pp 68-52.

‘05
m OFFICIAL USE OIILY
116 .

117 .

118.

119.

120.

121 .

122.

123.

126.

125.

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

Zorin. Yu. A.. and Sixikov. A. I. ”Schematic of the Trenehaykel
Neotectonice (within the Chitineluya [Chita] Ohlaet). "12V. MAY-
KAL'SKOGO I'ILIAM amour. Ol-VA 8888 (Ilene of the Tranebeykel
Branch of the Geographic 80c ty of the 0883). Vol 1. No l, 1965.
pp 12-18.

Ihraginov. R. I. SEYMK'IONIKA FBIGANSKOY VPADINY (Seienotectonice
of the Pergena Benin). IuhkentJed-vo PAN Uzbssn. 1970. 162 pegee.

Ivanov, 3. A. ucumosmn I 011061!!! mozorslmz KONTINMAL'NYYB
OILOZIIBNIYA ZABAYKAL'YA (Coal Beering and Other Heeoronic Continental
Depoeite of Ireneheykal). Irkutek. 1949. 192 pagee (RUDY VOST.-SIB.
GBOL. UPR. W811. 32 (Horke of the Baetern Siberien Geological
Adeinietration. No 32)).

IZVBSTIYA POSIOYANNOY ISBNTRAL'NOY SEYSHICHESKOY MISSII (New of
the Penenent Central Scienic Co-ieaion). 3t. Peterahurg. 1902,
Vol I. No I: 1903. V01 I. No II; 1905, Vol III, No III; 1905,

V01 III. 110 I; 1907. V01 IV. No III.

INSTRUK‘I‘SIYA O PORYAM PROIZVODSTVA I OBMBUI’KI WLYUDBNIY NA
SBYSKICRBSKIKH STANTSIYAIOI YEDINOI SISTER gummsum WLWIY

SSS! (Inetructione on the Procedure for the Performance end Proceeeing
Oheervatione at the Seiuic Stetione of the Integrated Syeten of
Seienic Obeervetione of the 0881!). Mount. 1966. pp 65-69.

lehna, ‘l'. A. "Stretigraphy. Lithology end Paciee of the Juraeeic
Coal-Bearing Depoeite of Southern Iahutiya." in the hook: rumo-
YAKUTSKAYA WOSNAYA PMCHAD' (Southern Yekut Coal-ﬂeeting Am).
lbscov-leningred. Ird-vo All 8883. 1961. pp 63-121.

Retain, Yu. V. ”Stenovoy Deep Precture. Ito Developnent and Influence
on Hegnetien end Hetellogeny." in the hook: MATERIAL! P0 REGION.
GEOLOGII (Heteriala on legionel Geology). Hoecov, 1962. pp 96-101
(nun? BAG? (works of the All-Union Aerogologicel Truet). No 8).

Kanbarov. N. Sh. "Seienicity, Ieoeteey and Deep Structure of the
Ceuceeue and Bordering Ierritoriee of the Southern Part of the USSR,"
author's review of candidate‘e diuertation, Heecov. 1971. 60 pegee.

Keregityan. N. 1.. and Menukyan, 2h. 0. "Couperieon of the Par-etere
of the Seienic Regine of the Territoriee of the Arnenian 83!! with
Other Geophyeicel Iielde." in the book: TRISY DOKIADOV IV VSBSOYUZNOGO
SIHPOZIIMA P0 snmcatsm manna) (Iopice of Reporte of the Fourth
All-Union Synpoeiun on Seieeic Condition). Kiehinyev. Shtiintee.

1971, 53 pagee.

Kerua, Ye. V.. and Ieranov. I. A. "Relation of Scienic Pheno-ena to
the Structural Peculiaritiee of the Barth'e Crust," 80V 6301.. (Soviet
Geology). No 11, 1971. pp 32-62.

406
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

132 .

133.

136.

135.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Klinenko. A. 1.. end 'resrev. P. V. "Seienosonic Lendslide in
Degeeten." in the hook: PROBLEM INZWRNOY OBOLOGII SMRNOGO KAVIAZA

(Problems of Rnsineerin; Geology of the Northern Ceucssus). Sochi.
1971. pp 1.7-54.

mm. Yu. V. "ste Higrstion of liesozoic Tectonic Procesees in
Heetern Treneheykel." in the hook: HATERIALY K GEOLOGICIIESKOY
KORPBREIITSII. POSVYASIIW SO-ISTIYU SOVBTSKOGO GOSUDARSTVA I

10-1311“! BURYATSKOGO WIMKOOO UPRAVLBNIYA. Olen-Ode. 1967.
pp 132-135.

Kopp. h. 1.,; Restsvsteysv. L. It; end Trifonov. V. c. "Tectonic Joints
For-ed during Holocene Berthquehee in Centrel Kopet-Deg end Its Foot-
hill Areee." 12V. AH 8881!. an. 6801., No 7, 1966. pp 59-69.

Koreehkov. I. V. OBLAS'I'I SVODOVOOO PODNYATIYA I OSOIBNNOSTI IKE
RAZVITIYA (Regions of Arched Uplift end Peculisrities of Their
Developnent). Hoscov. Goeaeoltekhizdst. 1960. 185 pegee.

Koeysln. Yu. A. CBOLOGICHBSKOYE snomm ZEHNOY KO“ SIBIRI I
DAL'NEGO VOS‘I’OKA (Geologicsl Structure of the Earth's Crust of Siberie
end the Per zest). Novosibirsk, Neuke. 1965. no pesce.

KOCBETKOV. V. H. "Berthquekee of Yekutiye." in the book: 22111311!“-
SENIYA V 8883 V 1962 c. (Berthquskee in the USSR in 1962), Hoecov,
Neuke. 196‘. pp 163-151.

Kochetkov. V. H. snmamosr' YAKUTII (Seinicity of Yehutiys).
noecov. Neuke, 1966, 91 poses.

Krylov, s. V.; Kiehen'hin. B. P.; Krupekeye. G. V.; Petrik, 6. V.;
end Yenushevich, 1‘. A. "Structure of the Berth'e Crust with Respect
to the Deep Selenic Sounding Profile through the Bsyksl Rift Zone."
0301.. I 620712., No 1. 1970. pp 84-91.

Krylov, 8. V.; Hishen'kin. B. P.; end Petrik, a. V. "Study of the
Tope of the Hentle by the Method of Deep Seieeic Sounding in the
Beykel Rift Zone.” in the hook: VOPROSY 8818810010811 SIBIRI. Oil. 1.
3mm 2980? ID!!! I am HAITII, DINAKIKA SBISHICIIBSKIE
VOLN (Prohlene of the Seinicity of Siheris. Pert 1. Structure of
the Berth'e Crust end Upper Hentle, Dyan-ice oi the Seinic Heves),
Novoeihirek. "suite. 1972, pp 5-15.

Kurnetsov. V. P.; Agnirzoyev, R. A.; end Gyul'. 8. K. "Seiseic
Activity of Azerheydehen in Coepnrison with Leno Geologicel Structures."
1n the book: T2218! WV IV VSBSOWON 31190211!“ PO SHSHICIIBSW

Imam: (Topics of Reports of the Fourth All-Union Syeposiu- on the
Seisnic Regine). Kishnev, Shtiintse. 1971. 61 pesos.

607
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
136.

137.

138.

139 .

. 160.

1101.

1‘2.

1‘3.

166.

1115.

166.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kurdyukov, It. V. "Leteet Tectonic Nova-onto end Traces of the
urgent Seiuic Shocks on the North Slope of the Zeiiiyekiy Ridge."
in the hook: mmzrnovm 2W ZMOY KORY. NOVBYSHIYB m-
TONICHBSKIYE WIZHBNIYA I 83190080081" (Activated Zonoo of tho
Berth'e Cruet. Leteet 'rectonic Monte end Seinicity). Noecov.
Neuko, 1966, pp 153-159.

Kurochkine. R. 1.. end Ncreoeov. I. L. ”Berthquekee of Northern
Tyen'-8hen." in tho book: ZWRYASBNIYA V 888]! V 1967 00!!) (Berth-
quekeo in the USSR in 1967). Noecov. Neuke. 1970, pp 90-99.

Kurnehin. R. A.; Kochetkov. V. 11.; Nikoleyev, V. V.; Den‘yenovich.

H. 6.; end Kot'nin. S. H. "Strong Berthqnekeo of Yokutiye. 1971."

in the hook: SEYSI‘DLOGIYA I SBYSWOWIYA. (MUWYA INVOMTSIYA
12K 80 AN SSSR) (Seienology end Seinogeology. (Scientific infom-
tion of the 11K Inotituto of the Sihetien Depertnont of the USSR
Acedeny of Scienceo)). Irkutsk, 1972. pp 43-45.

Kuchey. V. R. "Reoulte of the nepeeted Bminetion of the Reciprocal
Detonetione in the Pleiotocieo Region of the Kobe Earthquake,"
6301.. 1 680112. No 8. 1969. w 101-108.

Knchey. V. K. "(lee of Peleoeoiooodiolocetione when Studying the
Seienic Regine (in the Staple of the Pleistocioo Region of the
Chetkel'ekiy Betthqueke of 19116)," 6201.. I GEOPIZ., No lo. 1971, pp 126-
129.

Kuchey. V. K. "Peculietitieo of the Hui-1- Seiooic Mice: with
Reopect to the Peleoeeimseolosicel Dete." 6301.. I GBOPIZ.. No 12.
1972, pp 85-95.

Ledokhin. N. P. ”Underwater Velleyo (Canyone) in the Southceetern
Port of leyke1," in the book: HATBRIALY P0 120mm: PROIZVODITBL'NKH
SH. 3)! ASSR (Netorielo on the Study of the Productive Forcee of the

SN ASSR),Nc 3, Ulen-Ude. 1957. pp 125-151.

Lolokin, V. V. USM'I OSTROVA I PROBLEIIA PROBKIIOZHOENIYA 1mm
(Uohken'i Ielendo end the Prohlen of the Origin of Beykel). Noocou.
Geostefitdet, 1952, 198 pace.

Lenokin, V. V. "Ohtnchevokiy Peu1t in the Beykol Beein." in the hook:
VOPROSY 630L061! AZII (Problem of the Geology of Aeie). Vol II, Hoocov-
Leningnd. Ind-vo AN SSSR, 1955. pp “8-679.

Lnookin V. V. 1113mm BAM'SKOY VPADINY (leotoctonice of
Beykel Beein). Noecov, Neuke. 1968. 2‘3 poses.

Leotochkin, S. V. "Loteot Tectonico and Seieoicity of the Centre).
Tronoboym," in tho hook: VOPROSY SEISMICIII'OS‘II SIBIRI. Ch. II.

(Problelo. of the scat-1cm of swam.- pm: 11., Novooihirok,
mm, 1972, pp 121-129.

‘08
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
167.

158.

169.

150.

151.

152 .

153.

156 .

155.

156.

157.

158.

FOR OFFICIAL USE f‘NLY

Logachav. N. A. "Cenozoic Continental Depoelte ot' the Bayltal Type
tum." 12". AN 8883. 8311. 6301... No 6. 1938. pp 18-29.

Logachev. N. A. "Sedlaentery and Volcanic For-attone of the Baykal
Rift Zone,” in the book: MM'SKIY Rm. Noecov. Nauka. 1968. p 30.

Logachev. N. A.; Lononoaova. 'r. K.; and Int-anon. V. N. KAYNOZOYSKIYB
OTLOZNBNIYA IRKUTSKOGO mtmm (Cenozolc Depoalte of the Irkut
Anph1theatet). Noacov. Naulu. 196A. 196 pasee.

Logachev, N. A.: Antonhchenko-Olemv. I. v.; leearov. D. 3.; Collin.
V. 1%: Goldyrev. c. 8.;Yendr1kh1nak1y, A. 8.; Zolotarev, A. 6.;
slum. A. h: [In-tow. G. P. "The “(new of. Develop-ant of the
teller of Siberia and the Fat Beat." in the book: NAGOR'YA

PRIMYKAL'YA I ZABAYKAL'YA (Highlande of Prthaykal'ye end 'l'rmbeykel).
Hoecov. Nauka, 1971.. 359 pegee.

Lopatln, D. V. cmmwcnn VOS‘rOCNNOY CNAS‘rI BAYKAL'SKOY RIPTOVOY
ZONY (“morphology of the Beaten Part of the naykal 31ft Zone).
Noecov, Nauka, 1972. 115 pesee.

but. 3. P. "New Data on the Bottoe Rene: of the Southern and Central
Beykal.” 12V. AN SSSR. sen. W. No 6. 1961a, pp 90-99.

Lut, a. 1’. "Structure of the Central Depteealon of Lake Baykal."

0010.. AN SSSR (Reporte of the USSR Aeade-y of Sclencee). 1961!».
Vol 160, No 1. pp 201-206.

Lut, I. P. "Geo-orphology of the Bonn of Beykal." 1n the book:
ﬁmman DNA BAYKALA 11300 383364”. («morphology of the lotto-
of Baykel and Ite Shoree). Noecov. Nauka. 1966. pp 5-123.

Lylek. S. V. 6801310116113an USWIYA 1 nm'mn VODY YUZENOY
CHASTI VOSTJCIINOY $13181 (Geothenal Condition. and Thermal Hater of
the Southern Part of tutu-n Stbetla). Noeeov. Nauka. 1968. 119 pesee.

Lyubhove. Ye. A. "Theml Annaly 1n the Vtctntty of the Baykal Rift."
1n the book: MM'SKIY RI". Hoecw. “nuke, 1968, pp 159-166.

Lyuhlnova, Ye. A. "Thor-a]. Plume and the Dyna-ice of the Barth'e
Depths.“ 12". M 88311. PIZIKA m1. No 5. 1970, pp 3-17.

Naxllov, V. N.; bononoeove, 1‘. 1L; Klilonova, V. 11.; Kuhayeva, 6. 11.;
Yerehov. It. 1.; and Senenova. G. o. 11101.0an MICE“!!! (momma!
VPADIN WOO-WANG! CIIAS‘I'I BAYKAL'SW 111va mm (Lithology of
the Ternary nepoute with the Boom of the Southwestern Part of the
Baylul [1ft Zone), Noecov. Nauka. 1972. 119 pagea.

609
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

166.

165.

166 .

167.

168.

169 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Marinov. N. A. "Modern Tectonic Movuenta in Southeastern Trans-
haykal and in the For Northeast of mucus." onwomwcnm. No 3,
1973. pp 14-79.

Hedvedev. s. v.; Nateas-Yus. I»; lionkho. 0.; Balthiuiyea. N.;
Lkhanaeursh, 6.; Ad'yaa. 11.; Tseabel. 3.; Anak'in, I. V.; Shtsyhherg.

V. V.; Popova, Ye. V.; and Toluekov, V. A. 83281410168ow RAYONIROVANIYB
m—urou (Seisaic Regionaliutiou of man-later). Mecov. Nauka.

1971. 203 peses.

Hedvedsv. s. V.; Shpoukoyycr. V.. and Kamik, V. 3mm SEISMCIIBSKOY
WSW”! “SK-1966 (“SK-1966 Seismic Intensity Scale), Moscow.
ltd. Hethvadoaetvennoso :eofisicheskoso koaiteta pri Presidium AN
SSSR, 1965. 11 pages.

MODICHBSKIYB WAT“! Po SBYSKICHESKOKI RAYOIUIROVANIYU TERRITORII
888R (Procedural Race-andations with Respect to Seismic Regionalisa-
tion of the Territory of the USSR), Hoscov. Isd. In-ta fiziki Zenli

AN 8838. 19710, 195 pages.

"Methods of Detailed Study of Scienicity." TRUDY IN-TA FIZIKI 28111.1
AN SSSR (Horus or the Barth Physics Institute of the USSR Academy
of Sciences), No 9, (176). Hoscov, Isd-vo All SSSR. 1960, 116 pages

Meshcheryakov. Yu. A. . STRUKTURRAYA GBMRPOLOGIYA ummxn SM.
(Structural Geo-orpholosy of the Low Laud Countries) . Noecov, Necks.
1965. 390 pages.

Mikunov. V. P. "Basic Characteristics of the Tectonics and History
of Develop-sat of the Chul'aan Trough." 12V. AN SSSR. 838. 6801.,
No ’0, 1965, pp 42-57.

Mironyuk, Ye. P. "Basic Probleae of the Stratigraphy of the Pre-
caabrian in the Kodaro-Udokanskaya Zone and Adjacent Regions,"
6201.. I 630312.. No 11, 1969, pp 156-158.

Hironyult. Ye. P.: Lyuhieov. 3. IL; and tiaguushevakiy. B. L. GEOLOGIYA
ZAPADROY CHAS?! ALBANSKOGO sucum (Geology of the Hestern Part of the
Alden Shield), Hoscov. Nedrs, 1971. 238 pages.

Hisnik. Yu. P.. and Ogorodnikov. V. 1). "Details of the Internal
Structure of the Honsoliah-Okhotsk Deep Pault (in the zxauple of the
Shilka lie-her) ," IZV. 2AMYKAL'8KOGO PILIALA W. OB-VA 8553
(News of the Tranahayksl Branch of the Geography Society of the
USSR). Vol V, No 6. 1969. PP 23-“.

Hisharina. L. A. "larguu Earthquake of 28 October 1961." TRUDY
INSTITUTA mar KORY '5) AN 5551! (works of the Institute of the Earth's
Crust of the Siberian Depart-cut of the USSR Acadeay of Sciences).
Novosibirsk. No 18,1965, pp 41-50.

510
FOR OHICXAL USE ONLY
170.

171.

172.

173.

1710 .

17S I

176.

177.

178.

Hieherine, 1.. A. "Screen Field in the Earth's Cruet in Priheykel‘ye
end Honsolie end Ite Comerieon with the Streee Fields in the knit
Seienic Selte of the Berth." euthor'e review of cendidete'e dieeerte—
tion, Irkutek. 1969, 169 peaee.

Michednn. 1.. A. HAPRYAZHBRIYA V 20090? KORE V RIP'I'OWKH ZONAKH
(Streeeee in the Serth'e Cruet in the Rift Zonee). Hoecov. Neuke,
1967. 135 pegee.

Hieherine. L. A. "Study of the Hechenien of the Centers of week
Serthquekee in the Northeastern Sector of the Scykel Rift." in the
hookﬂ'RUDY 111 VSSSOYUZNOGO SIHPOZIUHA P0 831811101138me REZHIHU
(Worke of the Third All-Union Smoeim on Seinic Conditione) . Pert 1.
Hovoeihirek. Neuke. 1969. pp 167-165.

Hieherine, 1.. A. "Streeeee in the Berthqueke Centere of the Honsolien-
Seykel Seismic Zone," in the hook: POLE UPRUGIKB HAPRYAZHENIY ZSHLI

1 HERBAHIZH OCHAGOV WRYASBNIY (Bleetic Streee Field of the Berth
end the Hechenien of Berthqueke Centere). Hoecov, Neuke, 1972, pp 161-
170.

Hieherine, 1.. A.; Pehennikov. K. V.; Sauna. K. 1.; V1edinirove. G. P.,
Voetokove, A. Ye.; Kol'teove. H.. 8.; Novoeeyekeye, P. V.; Perevelove,
G. 1.; Popove. z. I": end Poeine, Ye. V. "Serthquekee of Beykel."

in the book: zmmmsmm V SSSR V 1963 cow (Serthquekee in the
USSR in 1963), Hoecov, Nenke, 1966. pp 107-130.

Hieherine. L. A.; Pehennikov. K. V.; Bukine, R. P.; Voetokove, A. Ye.;
Gorelik. 2. L.; Kol'teove. H. 5.; Novoseyekeye, P. V.; Perevelove. c. 1.;
Sednonove, V. S.; Uepenekeye. ‘l'. A.; end Famine. Ye. V. "Eerthquekee

of Beyke1," from the book zmnxuswm. V 8883 V 1965 cow (Berth-
quekee in the USSR in 1965). Hoecov. Heuke, 1967, pp 100-118.

Hieherine, 1.. A.; Pehennikov, K. V., Bukine, K. P.; Voetokove, A. Ye.;
Kol'teove, H. 5.; Leont'yeve. 1.. P.; Nova-eyekeye, P. V.; Perevelove, G.
1.; Uepenekeye. ‘r. A.; end Poeine, Ye. V. "Earthquakes of Beykel,"

in the hook: ZSHLB‘I'RYASBHIYA V 8883 V 1966 60111' (Berthquekee in the
USSR in 1966). Hoecou, Heuke, 1970. pp 157-186.

Hieherine. 1.. A.; Pehennikov. K. V.; Bukine, K. P.. Voetokove, A. Ye.;
Kol‘teove, H. 8.; Novouyekeye, P. V.; Purevelove. P. 1.; Popove,

2. L.; end Ponine. Ye. V. "Beykel Berthquekee," in the book:
WASSNIYA V 8883 V 1966 cow (Earthquakes in the USSR in 1966) ,
Hoecou, Nenke. 1967, pp 103-127.

Hieherine, L. A.; Pehennikov, K. V.; Troteenko, G. P.; Perevelove.

G. 1.; Paine, Ye. V.; Mine. K. 1.; Gorelik. 7.. In; Voetokove, A. Ye.;
Vladimirove. c. P.. end Kol'teove, H. S. "Beykel Serthquekee." in

the book: ZEHLS‘I‘RYASEHIYA V 583]! V 1962 0011! (Berthqnekee in the

USSR in 1962), Hoecow, Heuke, 1961., pp 93P112.

611
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
179.

180 I

181.

182 .

183.

1810 .

185 .

186.

187 .

188 .

189 .

Hisharina. L. A.. and Solonenko, N. V. "Stresses in the Centers of
Week Earthquakes of Pribaykal'ye." 12V. AN SSSR. FIZIKA 2210.1. No 6, 1972
1972. pp 2h36.

Hisharins. 1.. A.; Solonenko, N. V.: and Deont‘yeva. 1.. P. "local
Tectonic Stresses in the Baykal Rift Zone by the Observations of
Groups of Beak Earthquakes," in the book BAYKAL'SKIY RIFT, No 2,
Novosibirbk, Nauka, 1975, pp 9-21.

Hoiseyenko. F. 5. "Deep Structure of the Central Part of Eastern
Sayan." 6201.. I 6801-12., No 11, 1965. pp 28-27.

Hokrinakiy V. V. TERTONIKA ruzlmo-Ymrrsm UGLENOSNOY PLOSRCRADI
(Tectonics of the Southern Yakut Coal-nearing Ares), Hoscw, Gosgeol-
tekhizdat, 1961, pp 278-351. (TRUDY LABORATORII GBOL. UGLYA AN SSSR
(Works of the Laboratory of Coal Geology of the USSR Acadsny of
Sciences), No 11).

Hokrinskiyﬂ. V. "Tectonics of the Southern Yakut Marginal Trough."
in the book: TBKTONIKA SIBIRI (Tectonics of Siberia), Vol 1. “ovo-
sibirsk. Izd-vo so AN SSSR, 1962, pp 140-156.

Husstov, D. I. ”Some Characteristic Features of Deep Faults in the
Example of the Fo1ded Regions of the Southern Part of the lirasnoyarsk
Kray," in the book: TRIGONIRA SIBIRI, Vol II, Novosibirsk. Izd-vo

so AN SSSR. 1963, pp 153-163.

Musatov. D. I. "Basic Steps in the Tectonic Develop-en: of the Eastern
Part of the Sayan-Altay Folded Region and the Yenisey Ridge (Yenisey-
sko-Altaye-Sayanakiy Folded held." in the book: SKIADCRATYYB

OBLASTI YRVRAZII (Folded Regions of Eurasia), Moscow. Nauka, 1964,

pp 197-208.

Hushketov. I. V. "Vernenskoye Earthquake of 26 Ray (9 June) 1887,"
TRUDY GEOL. KOHITETA (Works of the Geological Cousittee), Vol 10, No
1, 1890. 63 pages.

Hushketov, I. V.. and Orlov, A. P. "Catalogue of Earthquakes of the
Russian Empire." ZAP. RUSSKOGO GBOGRAF. OB-VA. OBSHCIIAYA GEOGRAFIYA
(Notes of the Russian Geographic Society. General Geography), Vol 26,
1892, 582 pages.

Nagibins, H. S. TEKTONIKA I HAMTIZH MONGOLO—OIQIM‘SKOOO POYASA
(Tectonics and Hag-stint of the Hongolisn-Okhotsk Belt) , Moscow,
Izd-vo AN SSSR. 1963. 1.66 pages.

Nstsag-Yus. 1.; Balthinnyan. I.; and Honkho, D. "Hongolian Earthquakes,"
in the book: SRYSHICBBSKOYB RAYONIRGVANIYE M-BATORA (Seisuic Region-
slizstion of Ulan-Bstor), Moscow, Nauka, 1971, pp 510-82.

412
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
190 .

l9l .

192.

193.

191. .

195.

196 .

197.

198.

199.

FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

Nikoleyev. V. V. "Seienotectonice and Seienicity of the Beaten Plank
of the Iayhal Rift Zone." euthor'e revieu oi candidate'a diaeertation.
Irkutek. 197‘. 20 pepee.

Nekraaov. I. A. cecmowcicureron Mun MAN!!! 8883 (MA)
(Geocryologicel legionelieation oi‘ the ma (Hep)). Yatuteh, ted.
ln-ta neulotovedeniya 80 AN SSSR. l970.

Nehraeov. I. A.: Zahoiotnik. s. 1.; xii-oven” I. m: and Shuthevich.
Yu. 6. WWW?! comma POW STANOVOOO MOOR‘YA I
vumsxooo MSKOGOIi‘YA (Penefroet of the Stanovoyc highlnnde and

the Vitin Plateau). Noecov. Nauha. 1967. 167 pagee.

Nihonov. A. A. "Modern and Iiolocene Seieaotectonic Dialocationa in
Southern 'ryan'-Shen Seielicelly Active zone (Tedehihieten).“
12V. AN SSSR. PIZIKA m1. No 12. 1976. pp 71-76.

Novoeelove. ii. a. "So-e Characteristic. of the Neotectonice and
Deep Structure of the Northeastern Port of the laykal zit: Zone
According to Phyaice Data.” in the hook: 6801901“ 1 90mm:
ISKOPAYMYB VOSTOCIINOY 8131!“ (Geology and Mineral. of Baatern
Siberia). lrkutah. 1971, pp 72-76.

Novoaelova. H. R. "Sole heulta of Anelytin; the Gravitational Field
of the hortheeetern Part of the Saykei Rift Zone." in the hook:
CBOPIZIKA (JMUCIiNAYA INNMATSIYA 12K 80 AN 338” (Geophyeice
(Scientific Intonation of the 12K Inetitute of the Siberian bepart-
nent of the USSR Acadeny of Sciencee)). Irkutek. 1972a. pp 3-7.

Novoaelove. h. a. "Stmcture of the Barth'e Cruet in the hortheaetem
Pert of the Seyhal Rift Zone According to Geophyeice Data.” euthor'e
review of candidate'a dieeertation lrkutek. 1972!». 23 pagee.

Numsadaetov. A. "Procedure end Reeuita of Studying the Spectrel
Tine Cheracterietice of Seienic Vihratione of Local end Near Berth-
quekee.” euthor'e review of candidete'e diaeertation. Hoecov. 1973.
29 pesee.

0hruchev. S. V. "Young Nov-ante and lruptiona of laaalte in the
Sayan-‘ruva Highland." amount. NOVAYA sn. (Barth Sciencee.
Nev Seriee). Vol 3 (63). 1950. pp 26-31.

Oetrovehiy. A. l. "Paleoeeienotectonic Dielocetiona and Poeaihilitiee
of Geological Porecaetin; of the Seinicity of the Black Sea Coaet of
Northveetern Caucaeue.” in the hook: VOPROSY 6101.061! 1 mm
CHZRNOHOIIROY WADINY (treble-a of Geology end Tectonica oi the

Sleek Sea Saein). Port 11. ﬂoacnv. lleuha. l970a. PP 2942.

613
703 OFFICIAL USE OIL!
200.

201.

202.

203.

206.

205 .

206 .

207.

20..

209.

210.

211.

FOR OWICIAI. [188 ONLY

Oatrovekiy. A. I. “Paleoeeienotectonic Dialocation. on the Black
Sea Gout of the Northueatern Gaucam. in Connection with lietinatin;
the Modern Seienicity oi Thi. Territory.” in the hook: maxim
lSSLEDOVANlYA ammamstmr VPADM (Go-pie: Studio. of the Black
Sea Baain). Noecov. haul... 1970!». pp 66-50.

Pavlovekiy. Ye. V. ”Geological llietory and Geological Structure of
the laylul hountain legion." mm [on All 8881! an. GBOL. (Vorha oi
the lat lnetitute of the Acad-y oi Sciencee. Geology Seriee).

No 3). Vyp. 99. m... 176 pas...

Pavlovekiy. Ye. V. ”Cowarative Tectonic. of the Naeocenoaoic
Structure. of Baetern Siberia and the Great Rift of Africa and Arabia."
12V. AN 889R. 3... G801... No S. 191.». pp 25-30. .

Pavlov. 0. V.; Pavlenov. V. A.: Drennove. N. 11.: and 8o.nina, L. G.
”Retinatina the Sale-1c Propertie. of Soil by the Pourier Spectra."
in the hook: GEOIIZIKA (”MAYA INPOIIHA'I‘SIYA Iii-TA 2mm KORY)
(Geophyuc. (Scientific Intonation of the Earth Grunt ln.titute)).
lrkutelt. 1972. pp 105-00.

Pal’.hin. G. B. KAYllOZOYSlYe Will!!!“ 1 01,01le 1000-me
NBBM’YA MW (Cenozoic Depoeit. and undelide. of the Southeaet
Shore of layltal). Dionne-Leningrad. led-vo AK 8888. 1935. 201 pegee.

P.1'.hin. G. I. ”undnlidee." in the book: [WWYA MWIYA
PkllAYKAL'YA (Iuineerin; Geology of Pribayhal'ye). Hoecou. lieuka.
1960. pp 90-100.

Payve. A. V. ”Principal Me. of Deep Irecturee." 12V. All $38!. 8...
0201... No 3. 1936. pp 57-71.

Peyve. A. V. “Horizontal Newt. of the Barth'. Cruat and the
Principle. of inheritance.” mm. No 1. 1965. pp 30-37.

Petruohevekiy. II. A. W118 cameraman! YAVLullY n1
momentum RAYMIIOVANII (Significance of the Geological Pheno-ene
During Seienic legionalieation). Hoocov. led-vo All $38!. 1955. 60 pagan.

Petruehevokiy. I. A. "Son. Current Problem. of Seinoseolou."
"UL. 1011’. 010. GEOL. 001? Bulletin. Geology Diviuon). No 5. 1957.
pp 99-126.

Petruehwekiy. I. A. ”telation Ietueen the Earthquake. of Hui-
force and Geoloucel Situation." 3m. SOVETA P0 summon (Bulletin
of the Concil of Seienology). no 0. 1960. pp 20-35.

ratruehevekiy. .. A. "Latent tectonic hove-onto of Continental
A.ia end the Seiuoseoloaical Situation of the Area. of Their Hanifee-
tation). in the book: leIZIMVm m 2000! tour. W511!!!

610
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
212.

213.

216.

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

FOR OFFICIAL US! 0111.?

11111014101138“?! ovnmuni 1 83181110111108? (Activeted Zonoe oi the
Berth'e Cruet. The hunt Tectonic hove-onto end Scienicity). hoecov.
Neulte. 1966. pp 65-67.

Petrocheveekiy. I. A. "new Areee in Sei-ogeolou in Connection with
Seielit legiouliution." 0M. 1011’. 011). 0801.. (1011’ lnetitute
bulletin. Geology Divieion). Ito 5. 1967. pp 60-73.

Petrochevehiy. D. A. "Berthquelme end 'i‘ectonice." 0101.. 1101?. 010.
0201... No l. 1969. p 6-7.

Plotter. on. ”Bolocene Vertical Dieplecenente in the Southern Port of
Centre]. Ante.” 1n the hook: "MIAMI“?! zmnusmv (Berthqueke
Iorecutiu). Hoecov. Hir. 1960. pp 207-200.

Purehenekiy. 11. 1.. end Cherwehev. 8. 1|. ”teether Jointe of the
Seiulc Shiite.” out. All 3882. 1976. Vol 218. No 5. pp 1171-1176.

Popov. V. V. KATALOG ZWBENIV NA 111181101111 88311. WP. 11.
8131”. (Cetelogue oi Betthqneitee in the Territory of the 03911.

Vyp. 11. Siherie). Hoecov-Leninued. lad-vo A11 8858. 1939, 38 pegee
(mm SBYSMLOCICIIBSKOGO 1N-‘1'A (Vorlu of the Seimlogic Institute».

Poelevohiy. V. V. ”A Dieuter ie Venir." 01011011131011“ 1 mhlolIA'l'SIYA
(Hydreulic Engineering end Lend ”me-eat). lo 3. 1968. pp 30-36.

Puryrev. N. 11.; model’heu. Ii. 11.; Krylov. 3. V.; Hiehen'ltin. l. P.:
Petrik. ‘1'. V.; Veyun. 1. 1.: end tropeheye. e. V. ”Structure of
the lerth'e Crnet end rope of the lientle in the leyhel Region
According to the Deep Seinic Sounding. note.“ in the hoolu 080-
simm'm POYASA ‘I’SIITIAL'IOY A211 (“MIRA WM'YA)
(Geomclinel Belt of Control Aeie (‘l'ectonice oi trencheyknln.
Ulen-Ude. 1973. pp 97-90.

Payrev. 1!. 11.; Mendel'heu. 11. 11.; Krylov. S. V.; Niehen'kin. 3. P.;
Krupelteye. a. V.: and Petrih. 6. V. “Deco Structure of the leyhel
Rift According to the beta of Exploeion sue-clog.“ 6801.. 1
000712.. no 5. 1976. pp 155-167.

Pehennihov. K. V. ”Approxinete anti-etc oi the Energy of lepeeted
Shocke in the Centrel leym lerthqoelte of 29 Magnet 1959.” 0301..
1 000712.. No 2. 1961. pp 117-120.

Ritnichenko. Yu. V. ”Study of the Seienic Condition.” 12V. AN SSSR.
8”. 030112. No 9. 1958. pp 1057-1076.

licnichenho. Yu. V. ”Poeeihilitiee of Cnlculetio; 11min- lerthquehee.”
11001 Iii-TA 712131 2911.! AN SSSR (Notice of the lnetitute of north
Phyeice of the 083! Acedely o1 Sciencee). No 25 (192). 1962. pp 61-65.

615
M OPPICIM. 032 0111.?
223.

22‘.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

236.

235.

FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

Rttnichanko. Yu. V.. ”mum of 8min; Barthquakaa to Study Snip-to
mum." :29. AN am. an. 030m. 110 7. 1966a, pp 969-977.

Mnntchanko. Yu. V. "Ra1at10n of tha Bnam of mm Barthquahaa
to tha 8010.1: Activlty." 170K!" AN 83311. Vol. 157. N0 6. 196%.
pp 1352-1355.

Rttntchanko. Yu. V. ”Calculaun; the 8010-10 Vulnanbntty of Point.
on tha Barth's Cruat tron lnrthquakaa in tha anitonnant.” 12V. AN
838R. P131115 8011.1. 110 5. 1966. pp 16-32.

Rttntchanko. Yu. V.: luna. V. 1.: Zakharova. A. 1.: and Sayducova.
8. 3. "Satanic Vulnatabtuty of tha Crlmn hum." P121“ 2911.1.
110 0. 1969. pp 3-15.

Ricn1chcnk0. Yu. V. and Dthlbladca. B. A. "801-“ Acttvtty and
Large urthquakaa of the Caucuun." 12V. All 83811. PIZI‘A 2011.1.
110 11. 1972. pp 35-19.

ltmaankn. Vu. V.; Zakharnva. A. 1.: and Sayducova. s. 3. "Study
of tha Accuracy of Calculating Satntc Vulncrabutty." IIZIKA 2210.1.
Re 6. 1969. pp 11-20.

Runtchanko. Yu. V.; Zakhatova. A. 1.; and 80,.dn0va. s. S. "Sa1u101ty
and Vulnctabutty of Italy." 9121“ 2911.1. 110 7. 1970. pp 3-10.

thntchanko. Yu. V.; Pahannlkov. K. V.; and into. Yu. A. ”Satanic
Acttvtty 0f Prtbaykal'ya prarad with tho mm and Gravttattonal
Anonaliaa.” 12V. AN SSSR. IIZIKA 2911.1. 110 20. 1969. pp 10-28.

mhtar. c. 1'. ”Inntn-cnt Scala for urthquaka Magnum.” 1n tba
book: sum: WYASINIYA (Baal: Barthquataa). 110.com 11.. 1961. pp 13-“.

Rﬁthtar. c. 2. WM“ 58151101700er (Bu-nary Sat-.010”).
“new. 11.. 1963. 670 pagan.

Ranch. A. A. “Dyna-1c. 0! Cantata Burton and Barn in Iaykal."
1n the book: PROUK‘I‘IVNOS‘I' MW 1 muorocwm IthA BOO
PARODY (Producttvity of laykal and tha Mthtoposcntc Altarattou 01’
[to Natura). Irkutak. 126. 061111. 1971. pp 26-39.

Ruzhtch. V. V. "Dyna-1c. of tha tectonic Davclopncnt of Prthaykﬂ'ya
1n tha Canoutc." 01101.. 1 080112.. No b. 1072. pp 122-126.

5a10p. 1.. 1. 6801.061“ IAYKAL'SKOY 00mm OIMSTI (09010” of the
00th Romain 11031019). V01 1. 110.com Nauh. 196‘. 515 pages;
V01 2. 1100c0v. Indra. 1967. 700 men.

‘16
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
236.

237.

238.

239.

250.

2‘1.

262.

263.

2“.

265.

266.

267.

FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

amonov. V. V.. end Penn-ere“. G. P. "Bottoe Depoe1te of Beykelo-
the Leteet mu 1n the Cenoto1o Ceep1ex of the Continental Sedmnte
of the Ieykel Betta.” 1n the hook: WE W1“ mum
(lottol Depoette of leykel). Hoecov. Neuhe. 1970. pp 17-24.

Swet1oveuy. A. Ye. "Setuotectontce of the Kmhetke-Kutn Obleet."
0010.. AR 8881!. Vol 103. No 1. 1955. pp 125-128.

snmcmmt WYONWAIIIY! V ustovnml VBCINOY 113112er
(Seton: Mctoteuoneneetton under the Pemfroet Condition)
Novoethtreh. Neuke. 197$. 07 pesee.

smsnmnoum. CHEW! 81110138“! 1 SBYMCHNOST' SEVEN-VOW
IAYKAL'sm RIH‘OVOY 20m (Setenotectontce. Deep Structure end Setutctty
of the Northeeetetn Pert of the Ieykel Rift Zone). hovoetbtrek. Neuhe.
197Se. 100 pegee.

snsmtmomu 1 58181110110081“ woo-vos-mmmov CIIASTI vas'rocanoco
8AYAN'(8ete-otecton1ce end Setmctty of the Southeeetern Pett of
Eutetn Seyen). Novoethirek. Neuke. 1975 b. 133 pegee.

$318M!“ I SHSKICIINOST' RIFTOVOY szsmor PR'JAYKAL'YA
(Setuotectonice end Seleucity of the nut: Syetee of Puheyhel'ye).
Hoecov. not... 1968. 220 puee.

Seeenov. ll. lb. end Avdeyev. V. A. "Zeyehoye setthquehe of 2 hove-bet
1973." 6301.. I 6801'12.. he A. 1975. pp 106-116.

Stu-nu. A. "Incltned retrecee. Bepec1e11y 1n the Southern Port of
lento Dietrtct.” 1n the book: 1’qu 290.8111!”le (Berthquehe
Ioreceettna). Hoecov. Mir. 1968. pp 166-169.

Sttyhh. V. I. "Tecton1c Dielocettone with e Brook 1n Continulty 1n
the Heetern treneheykel." 12V. ZAMYKAL'SKOGO YILIALA 6806MB OB-VA
888! (New of the ‘l'teneheyltel Drench of the Geogtephtc Society of the
USSR). V01 11. vyp. z, 1966. PP 31-60.

"Strong Berthquekee of Ptlbeyhel’ye 1a 1967." 1a the book: WA-
SEIIYA V 888! V 1967 c. (Earthquake. 1n the ”38R 1!: 1967). mecca.
Neuke. 1970. pp 133-169.

"Strong Eerthquehee 1n Prtheykel'ye In 1968." 1a the book: ZMTRYA-
SHIYA V 888R V 1968 G. (utthquekee 1n the USSR to 1968). ﬁoecov.
Neuke. 1972. pp 123-139.

Sen-now. A. 0.; Dede-0v. I. 3.; end luldekov. V. V. RIMS“?!
STRUKTURY VOSTOCIINOGO SAYMIA I POMZHBNIYB V NIH! BWTI‘I‘OW FOLEY
(Rtpheen Structute of teeter-n Seyen end the Poetttonm of Pemttttc
P1e1de 1: then). Hoeoov. Neuke. 1969. 156 pent.

617
[OR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
268.

269.

250.

251.

252.

253.

256 .

255 .

256.

257 .

2,8.

259.

260.

Solov'yev. V. A. "Genetic Reletion of the Cenozoic end Meeeeoic
Ieeine of Veetern Treneheykel vtth Pelee Syeteee of Different Age."
OBOLJ 6£0P12.. he ’0. 1963. pp 79-86.

Solov'yev. V. A. 08NOVI|YYB 6118311 BZOZOYSKOY TBK'I‘ONIKI PRIMYML'YA
1 ZAIAYKAL‘YA (Ieeic Peeturee of the Heeoeoio Tectonice of Priheykel'ye
end Treneheykel). hoecov. Ilenke. 1968. 126 pegee.

Solenenho. A. V. ”Energy Cleeeificetion of Priheykel'ye Perthquekee."
in the book: MGNI‘I'U'DA I NERMICHBSKAYA KLASSIPIKA‘I‘SIYA ZMYASBNIY
(Magnitude end Energy Cleeeificetion of Berthquehee). Vol II. Hoecov.
Neuke. 1976. pp 176-179.

Solonenko. A. V.. end Teterenko. H. A. "De-ping of Seinic Vevee in
Pribeykel'ye end the Energy Cleeeificetion of Berthqnekee." in the
hook: VOPIOSY 88188161010811 8131111 (Probleele of Setuicity of Siberie).
Pert 1.. Nomihirek. Neuhe. 1972e. pp 113-129.

Solonenko. A. V.. end Teterenko. H. A. "Nev Dete on the beeping of
Seieeic Vevee in Priheykel‘ye." in the hook: 881311011061“ 1
88181106801061“ (Seienology end Seieeogeolov). Irkutek. 19721:.

pp 18-21.

Solonenko. V. P. ”Dyneeic Phenoeene Connected with the Neotectonice
of Beetern Siberie.” non. AN SSSR. ROVAYA 83R. (Reporte of the 0881!
Acedeay of Scienoee. NOV Seriee). Vol 12. No 1. 1950. pp 109-112.

Solonenko. V. P. "Berthquekee in the Gobi Altey on Io Deceeher 1937."
12V. AN 888R. SIR..OIOL.. No 7. 1959. pp 32-39.

Solonenho.V. P. "Gohi-Altey Berthqueke.” 0301.. I 6801212.. Re 2. 1960e.
pp 3-27.

Solonenko. V. 1’. ocean: P0 11121121632110! 63010011 VOW 8131111
(Outlinee of the Bngineertng Geology of Eeetern Siberie). Irkutek.
19601:. 68 pegee.

Solonenko. V. P. "Nonunifonity of the Dietrihution of the Queke
Inteneity over the Surfece of the Perth during Berthqueltee.“ 6301..

I GEOPIZH No 3. 1960c. pp 122-126.

Solonenko. V. P. "Sane Problem of Nodern Seie-ic Hicroregionelieetion."
CEO!" I GPOPIZH No 9, 1962e. pp 69-02.

Solenenko. V. P. "Deterlinetion of the Epicentrel Zonee of Bertheuekee
by the Geolegtcel Sine." 12V. AN SSSR. see. 6301... No 11. 19621:.
pp 53-76.

Solonenko. V. P. Stratum MYONIROVAVIY: VOSTOCIINOY sum
(Seinic legioneliution of teetern Siberie). Irkuteh. 1963e. 30 pegee.

618
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
261 .

262.

263.

266 .

266.

266 .

267 .

268.

269.

270.

271.

Solonenko. V. P. "8eienic Dielocetione end Accompanying Phone-one."
in the book: GOII-AL‘I‘AYWB ZWABINIYB (Gobi-Altey Earthquake).
Hoecov. ltd-w AH 8883. 1963b. pp 238-357.

8o1onenko. V. P. ”Hm! Slide Activity end Pleietoeeien 0h1eete of
Dieeetroue Berthquekee." 3m. ”DIP. 011). 030]... No 2. 1963c. pp 133-160.

Solonenho. V. P. "Seinicity of Southern Priheykel'ye end Experience
in the eeienic Hicroregioneliutiou of the Debrie Cone on Lehe leyhe1."
in the hook: VOPROSY 33131116103081? 813131.. Novoeibtrek. lad-V0 80

m 333:. 1964.. pp 169-203 (mm m-u 2mm mat so an sssn.

(Votke of the Inetitute of the Berth'e Cruet of the Sihetien Deperteent
of the 0883 Acedeny of Sciencee). No 18).

Solonenko. V. P. "Berthqueltee end Volcanoee o! the Stenovoy uish1end."
PRIMM (Neture). No 9. 1966!). pp 102-110.

Solonenko. V. P. "Active Tectonice in the Pleieticien Region of the
Huye letthquehe." 12V. All 3881. 8“. 0801... No lo. 1965. pp 58-70.

Solonenko. V. P. "Pneoeeiuogeologicel Method,” in the hook: ZBIVAYA
1310111“. vuuum 1 831811108081" STANOVOGO NAGOR'YA (Active Tectonite.
Vo1cenoee end Sei-icity of the Stenovoy lligh1end). noncov. Neuhe.

1966. pp 15-36.

Solonenko. V. P. ”Beetern Siberie." in the book: SEYMCHBSKOYB
RMWIROVANIYB 8883 (Sen-1c Regioneliution of the USSR). Mouton. Neuke.
1960b. pp 350-371.

Solonenko. V. P. ”Seiuotectonice end the Hodern Structutel Develop-eat
of the Beyhel Rift Zone." in the hook: MM‘SKIY RIPT, Hoecov.
Neuh. 196%. pp 57-71.

Solonenko. V. P. "Active Tectonice, Volcenoee end Sou-oncology of

the Treneition Zone of the leykel end Yekut Seienic Region." in the
hook: moum SOVBTSKOGO DAL'NEGO VOS‘POKA I PRILKGAYUSBCIIIIO! MVA‘I'ORIY
(Tectonice of the Soviet Pet ﬂeet end Adjecent Bodiee of Veter). Hoecov.
"nuke. 1963c. PP 169-158.

So1onenko. V. P. ”Strong Betthquehee with Reepect to Seinoetetietice."
in the book: SHWIM 1 88181116816081" WM 5181'!!!
PRIMYKAL‘YA (Seienotectonice end Seienicity of the Rift Syntae of
Priheylul'ye). Hoecou. Neuke. 1960d. pp 60-68.

Solonenko. V. P. “Peleoeeienogeologitd Nethod.” in the book: 8113““!
WYASBNIYA sum A211 I W743“ mum: N0 1 (Strong

Berthquekee of Centre]. Aeie end Kezekheten. Annual No 1). Duehenhe,
Donieh, 1970c. pp 63-93.

619
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
272.

273.

276.

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

280.

281.

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

8o1onenho. V. P. “Score on the Pece of the Perth." PRIRODA. ho 9.
1970!». pp 17-25.

Solonenko, V. P. "Problem 0! Engineering 8e1eaogeology,." in the book:
PUT! DAL'RBYSIIEGO WVITIYA INZWOY CBOLOGII (“THINK DISMSII
K PBIWOIII WONG!” KNOMSSU PO INZHENERNOY 680140611) (Pith.

of Future Deve1opeent of Engineering Geology Outeriele of the nie-
cueeion at the Piret Internationel Congreee on Engineering Geology».
Noecov. 197. pp 126-130.

So1onenko. V. P. "Deetruction of Mountain Slopee during Berthquekee."
in the book: SEYMIDGIYA I SBYSPOOBOIDGIYA MOMMA INPOMTSIYA
Iii-2A 29210? KORY so AR 8883 (Seieeolegy end Seieeogeology (Scientific
Infomtion of the Inetitute of the Berth'e Cruet of the Siberien
Depertnent of the USSR Acedeey of Sciencee). Irkuteh. 1972e. pp 28-32.

Solonenko. V. P. "Scienogenic Deetruction of Homtein Slopee." in the
book: 010110630th I IRWYA GEOLOGIYA. DOKL. 80V. GBOLOGOV
NA “W 83881! WK (hydrogeo1ogy end Engineering Geology. Reporte

of the Council of Geologiete fro- the 2loth Meeting of the Hoecow
Ceologice]. Conieeion). Noecov, Neuke, 1972b, pp 162-151.

Soionenko. V. P. "Berthquehee end Relief." CMRPOIDCIYA (Gee-or-
phoiogy). No b. 1973e. pp 5-15.

So1onenko. V. P. "Pe1eoeeienogeo1ogice1 Method end Engineering
8eieeogeology." in the hook: snsuocmmn mun-rm I SEYSIICDISLOKA‘PSII.
(mm. MP. “IN. 0201.. 8881!. VNIIGBOPIZ.) (Seienogenic Structuree end
Seieeic Dielocetione. (heteriele of the Conference of the Hinietry of
Ceo1ogy of the USSR, VNIICeofic Inetitute)). hoecv. 1973!). pp 62-6‘.

Solonenko. V. P. "Peleoeeieeogeology." 12V. All 88811. P121“ 2911.1.
No 9. 1973c. pp 3-16.

.Solonenko. V. P. ”Seienicity of the Cryoiithorone end Problem of

Engineering Seieeogeocryology." 11 mm. KONP. Po mama.
now I SOOBSIICH. (Second Internetionel Conference on Cryology.
Reporte). Ito 6, Yekutelt. 1973. pp 25-32.

Solonenko. V. P. "Seieeogeology end Problem of Berthqueke Poreceeting.
6801.. I GEOPIZ. No 5. 197‘. pp 168-178.

Solonenko. V. P.; Kuruehin, R. A.; Pevlov. 0. V.; Khil'ko. S. 0.;
Khro-ovekihh. V. 8.: and Sh-etov. A. P. "Modern Dieeetroue hovoente

of the Berth'e Cruet in the Piongolien-leylml Seinic Region." WAR.
30m 62002211 I GEOPIZIKI. III WW“. 311902. (International

Union of Cecdetice end Ceophyeice. Third Internetionel Symoeiun).
Hoecov. Nenke. 1969. pp 377-385.

620
[0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
282.

283.

284.

285 .

286 .

287.

288.

289 .

290.

291

292.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Solouenko. V. 2.; Kuruehin. I. A.: and nil'ko. 8. I). "Strong Earth-
quakaa." in the book! lelVAYA mourn. VULKANY I SEYSHICHNOST‘
STANOVOGO WR'YA (Active Tectoniea. Volcanoee and Seinicity of the
Stanwoye lliahland). Hoaeov. Nauka. 1966. ppasee Nos-171.

Solonenko. V. 9.; Pavlov. 0. V.; lhreuwakikh. V. 8.; and Pavleuov. V.
A. "Buineeria; Beiaaogaoloay under Peraairoat Condition.” in the
book: ”38mm sovrsncnmm P0 tantamount: (All-Union Con-
ference on Penafroat). )baeov. lrd-vo Hark. un-ta. 1970. pp 302-303.

Solonenko. V. P.: Revlov. 0. V.: mire-oven“. V. 8.; and Pavlenov. V.

A. "Method of Sela-1c Hicroregionaliution under Per-afroat Condition."
am. 1’0 mmmor summon (lunatin on Engineering Sela-ole").
Yerevan. Iad-vo AN Ansssr. No 7. 1972. pp 25-30.

Solonanko. V. P.. and Treekov.‘ A. A. MMMML'SKOYB ZMYASBNITB
29 AVGUS‘I‘A 1959 6. (Central laykal Earthquake of 29 Auguat 1959).
Irkutek. 1960. 36 pagaa.

Solonenko. V. P.. and Treakov. A. A. "Active Tectonice and Barthquakee
in the Honsolian-hylul Seieolc Zone." in the book: IRKUTSKIY "Am
1831!“! 50 AN 888R. PROBLEM! WVITIYA NAIR! (Irkutek Scientific Center
of the Siberian Depart-eat of the 888R Acacia-y of Sciencea. Problem
of the Develop-ant of Science). lrkutak. 1967. pp 22-“.

Solonanko. V. 8.; 'rreekov. A. A.; and Plorenaov. R. A. "The Diaaatrooa
Gobi-Altay Earthquake of I: December 1957 (Seie-ogeological Outline).
Hoecov. Goageolirdat. 1960a. 48 pasee.

Solouenko. V. P.; ‘rreekov. A. A.: and Florenaov. N. A. "Seiaaic Ile-
giona1lratioo of Baatern Siberia." 6801.. I atom” No 10. 1960!).
pp 106-114.

Solooenko. V. P.. and Khmnovekikh. V. 3. "Poverful Earthquakes of the
Greater Caucaeue." PRIRODA. No 6. 1974. pp 36-67.

Solonenko. V. P.; Khrooovekikh. V. 5.: Zhilkin. V. IL; Goleoetakiy.
s. 1.; and Kuruehin. R. A. "So-e Seienotectonic and Engineering-

Seieaogeological Aepecte of the Problem of Vulnerability during
Earthquake." in the book: 12mm SEYSKIC‘IIBSKOY OPASNOSTI (Study
of Seieaic Danger). raehkent, lad-v0 PAN nabssn. 1971. pp 86-118.

Spiaherakiy. '1'. 8.; Bulina. 1.. V.; and Hoehkin. V. N. ”Siberian
Platforl. “ la the book: 0801061me mm: 3888 (Geological
Structure of the USSR). Vol II. Noacov. Nedre, l968. pp 669-509.

'l‘el'-Vir0kiy. 8. 8.; Zekharova. A. IL; and Yakmlieva. I. 8. ”Relation
of Soil-1c Activity of the territory of Uzbekiatan to Certain ale-ante
of the Geological Structure and Geophyaical field.” 028. 6801.. um
(Uzbek Geological Journal). Ito 2. 1971. pp 3-8.

‘21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
293.
296.

295.

296.

297.

298 .

299.

301 I

302 .

303 .

306.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TMONIKA RVRAZII (Tectonics o1“ Buresie). Hosoov. Neuke. 1966. 688 peaes.

WIMSKAYA WA EMILCI'ectonie Hep of Buruis). Chief Editor
A. 1.. Yen‘shin. Moscow. ltd. 6116!. 1966.

TERTORICRBSKAYA MA 88311 (Tectonic Hep of the USSR), edited by
N. S. Shetskiy. uoecow. led. 011611. 1953.

Tlnofeyev. A. D. SWAYAINIZENYAYA om (Centrel end Lover
Oleﬁn). Moscow-Leningrad. Neuke. 1965. 138 psses.

Tisofeyev, A. D. "Sons Generel Problem of Neotectonice end Morpho-
tectonics in the Bxeeple of the Geo-orphologicel history of Southern
Yekutie." in the book: PROBLEM! 63010113013611 1 “30131110111111 03mm
0314813! 8131111 1 DAL'NEOO VOSTOKA (Problems of Geo-orpholou end
Neotectonics of the Orogenic Regions of Siberis end the Per Best).

Vol II. Novoeibirsk. Nsuke. 1966. pp 235-2“.

Tlllol-‘EYEV. D. A. “Plenetion Surieces of Siberie end the Per Best;
Stete of the Art end Study of the Problem." in the hook: GEOGRAPIYA I
GBMRNLOGIYA A211 (Geogrsphy end Geomorphology of Asie). Hoscov.
Neuke. 1969. Pp 81-105.

Treskov. A. A. "Hechenisn of the Berthqueke Center end the Tectonic
Stress Field.” in the hook: summer-roam I SBYSHICHNOST' RIPTOVOY
sxsrm PRIMYKAL'YA (Seisnotectonics end Seinicity of the Rift
Systee of Pribeykel'ye). Moscow, Neuke, 1968. pp 73-69.

Treskov. A. A.. end Pshennikov. K. V. "Seinicity of the Beykel Zone."
in the hook: WHASSNIYA V 88811 (Berthqueltss in the 083R). hoecov.
lad-v0 A11 8883. 1961. 612 pesos.

Tresltov. A. A.. end Florensov. h. A. "Hondinshoye [Moody] Berthquelte."
em. SOVB‘I'A P0 SBYSKDLOGII AN 8881! (Bulletin of the Council on
Seiseolosy of the USSR Acedeny of Sciences). No 2, 1952. pp 12-36.

Trifonov. V. c. "Impulse Neture of Tectonic Hove-ante in the Region
of Lstest Mountein Pomtion (Kopet-Dss end Bestern Ceucesus)."
mmxu. No b. 1971. pp 65-68.

Ufintssv. V. s. "Leteet Tectonics of the Centrsl Trensbeyksl." ZAP.
MAYHEM PILIALA Groom. OB-VA 883R (hotel of the Trmbeykll

Breach of the Geogrephic Society of the USSR). Chits. No 55. 1971.
pp 116-188.

Pedorenko. V. S. "Tectonic end Seisuic Phone-ens end their Significsnce
in the Pomtion of Dies-trons Lendslips end Lendslides (in the Vi-
cinities of the Chetksl'skiy end Aleyskiy Hountein Folded Structures) ."

.VOPROSY 11121121183110! 6301.061! I WUA (Problems of Engineering

622
FOR OFFICXAI. USE ONLY
305.

306.

307.

308 .

309 .

310.

311.

312.

313.

310.

315.

316.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Geology end Soil Science). Noeoou. Ind-v0 Noek. un-te. No 2. 1960.
pp 229-266.

redotov. S. A. “Seienic Cycle. the Poeeihilitiee of Quentitetive
Seienic Regionelixetion end Long-Ten Seinic Poreceeting." in the
hook: SBYSNICNBSKOYS RAYONIROVANIYS SSS]! (Scinic Regioneliution
of the USSR). Hoecou. Neuhe. 1960. pp 121-150.

Pedotov. S. A.. end Shuiline. 1.. S. ”Seinic Vulnerehility of
mum." mm mm. No 9. 1971. pp 3-15.

Floreneov. N. A. "Goonorpholosy end the Leteet Tectonice of Trenc-
beykel.” IZV. AN $88!. 8311. 0301... No 2. 1950. pp 3-16.

Ploreneov. N. A. "Role of the Precturee end Troughs in the Structure
of the Blykel Type Meme." 1n the book: VOPMSY 030L061! A211.
Vol 1. Noeccv. ltd-vo AN SSSR. 1956. pp 670-685.

Floreneov. N. A. HBZOZOYSKIYB I KAYNOZOYSKIYB WADINY PRIMYKAL'YA
(Neeotoic end Cenotoic Seeine of Preheykel'ye). “pecan-Leningrad.
Ind-v0 AN SSSR. l960e. 258 peeee.

Floreneov. N. A. ”Neotectonice end Seienicity of the Mongolian-Sum
Nountein Region." 0801.. 1 GEOPlz-. No 1. 19606. pp 76-90.

'Ploteneov. N. A. "Young Tectonic Nave-onto end Relief of Seetern

Siberien Nizhlende." ram 9081.41). 0201.. IN-‘I'A (Norke of the Beetern
Sihetien Geologicel Inetitute). No 3. 1961. pp 6-16.

Ploceneov. N. A. "Structure end Geologicel Nietory of the mm M0
Buine." 1n the book: can. 809. 0801.. NA m1 838811 NBZNDUNAR. GBOL.
WA (Reporte of Soviet Geoloeiete et the 22nd neetin; of the
Internetionel Geologicel Canteen). Noecov. Neuke. 1966. pp 252-262.

Ploteneov. N. A. "l’rohlea of the Nechenieu of Nountein Pomticn in
lnternel Aeie." aommzn. No 6. 1965. pp 3-16.

Floreneov. N. A. "leykel Rift Zone end Sou Problem of Ite Inventige-
ticn." in the hook: MM'SKIY R1111. Noecov. Neuke. 1960. pp 60-57.

Floreneov. N. A. "llifte of the Ieykel Nountein Region." in the hook:
PROBLEM! sreormne m K081 I W “ANTI! (Problem of the
Structure of the Berth'e Cruet end Upper Nentle). No 7. Noecov. Neuke.
1970. pp 166-150.

ﬂoreneov. N. A.; Solonenko, V. P.: end Louchev. N. A. ”Cenozoic
Volcaniel of the Rift Zonee." vmmm I W. m. 80V.
680me NA XXIII 838811 no: (PROBLEM 2) (Voluniea end 'l‘cctoseneeie.
Reporte of Soviet Geologiete et the 23rd ﬂeeting of the Intemticnel
Geologicel Consteu (Proble- 2)). Noeccv. Neuke. 1968. Pp 166-151.

‘23
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
317 .

310.

319 .

320.

321.

322.

323.

326 .

325.

326 .

327.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ploteneov. N. A.; 'rreekov. A. m; end Solonenko. V. P. "Seienic
Regioneliution of Benton Siberie." BYUL. SOVB‘I'A Po SBYSMLOGII
(Bulletin of the Council of Seimlou). ho 8. 1960. pp 173-178.

Floreneov. N. A.: ‘l'reekov. A. A.; end Solonenko. V. P. "On the
Article by H. V. Gtovekiy 'Uee of the Leteet end Modern Tectonic
Hove-ente tor Deteiled Selenic Regimliution of e New Type.”

Frolove. N. V. ”Problem of Stratigrephy. Regional note-orphiee end
Grenitiution of the Archeen of Southern Yekutie end Beetern Siberia."
13m ”513-313. 6301.. m'TAe 8m. 6301” (Work. of th. Buttrn 3113021011
Geologicel Inetitute. Geological Seriee). Hoecov. No 5. 1962. pp 1349.

Frolove. N. V.. end Yeliur'yev, Yu. 2. "Archeen Poreetione of the
Shore of Leke leykel end Beetern Seyen." in the book: GBOLOGlYA 8231!
(Geology of the 0881), Vol XVII. lrkut Obleet. hoecov, Goeseoltelthin-
d.‘. 1962. pp “7-62e

Khein. V. Ye. OISHCIMYA cmmouzu (Generel Geotectonice). Hoecou.
Nedre. 1973. 502 pence. .

Khil'ko. S. D. "Seieeotectonice of the Kodero-lldokenekeye Structurel
Zone.” euthor'e review o! cendidete'e dieeertetion. Irkutek, 1967e.
20 pegee.

Khil'ko. 8. 0.. end Nikoleyev. V. V. "Neotectonice of the Tokkinekeye
Seein in Connection with Beienicity end horphoetructure of the

Beet Flenk of the Beykel Rift Zone.” 12V. ZAMYKAL'SKOGO FILM
GBOGW. Oil-VA SSSR (hove of the Trenebeykel lunch of the Geogrephic
Society of the 088R). Chite. Vol VII. No 3. 1971. pp 55-70.

Khotine. Ye. l. "Deeic Peeturee of the Neotectonice of Heetern frene-
beykel.” 12V. WM'SKOGO FILM GBOGIAF. OI-VA 8993. Chite. Vol
11. No lo. 1966, pp 55-65.

Khro-oveklkh. V. S. SEYSWLOGIYA W000 FIIMYKAL'YA (Selene-
;eology of Southern Pribeykel'ye), Hoecov, Neuke, 1965. 121 pesee.

Ihroeovekikh. V. 8.; Solonenko. V. P..; Zilkin. V. 11.: Khil'ko. S. 1).:
Zelenkov. P. Yea end Seeenov, R. H. "Seieeic Dielocetione of Heetern
Ceuceeue and Their Significence for Seinic Regionaliution." in the
book: sum sm 1 88190111310018” (HARM!
WWII) (Seienoaenic Structuree end Seieeic Dielocetione (Gon-
ferenct Materiel“). Hoecov. 11d. VNnGeoflziki. 1973. pp 12-15.

Churinw. l. V. "Lendelide Generetins e Lela," nmom. No 8. 196‘.
pp 08-91.

m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
328.

329 .

330.

331.

332.

333.

336.

335.

336.

337 .

338 .

339.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shatekiy. II. S. "Tectonice of Central Kaukhetan." 12V. AN SSSR.
SIR. 6501". ”0 5'6. 1938. PP 737-770e

Shovelin. N. V. "Methode of Vein: Engineering-Seieaologic Data

During Seielic Regionalitetion.” in the book: SEISMICRBSKOYB MYONIRCF'
me 888R (Seienic Resionelieation o! the 0881!). Heocou. “nuke.

1968. pp 95-111.

Sher-en. 8. I. "Potential Cepecity of Deep Paulte for hapocontrolling
Activity ." VEST“. ZAIGO 888R (Veatnik of the Tranehaykal Geological
Society of the USSR). Chita. No 5. 1966. pp 16-23.

Sher-nan S. 1.; liedvedev. H. Ya.; Rushich. V. V.; Kieelev, A. 1.: and
Shantov. A. 1’. mm I W WOO-MANDY CIMSTI BAM'SKOY
RIl‘rOVOY 2m (Tectonice end Volcanic: of the Southueetern Part of
the laykal Rift Zone). Novoeihirek. Neuke. 1973. 135 pasee.

Shootov. A. P. "Structure and Hodern Development of the Tunka Fault
Zone." in the book: 080?!“me IBILBDOVANIYA V SEYSMPASNYKH
zonml. (Geophyeioal Studiee in Seinically Dangeroue Zones) . hoecov.
Nauke. 1972. pp 75-78.

Shcherheltov. D. 1.. "Lake-See." mun I zliIZN' (Science and Life).
"0 a. 1951. pp 20-22

Shcherbakova. B. Ye.; Savinekiy. K. A.; lobechevekiy. I. V.; and
Shtutin. I. H. "neeuite of the tint Deep Seieaic Studiee iron the
Earth Station in Pribayhal'ye. " in the book: MM'SKM RIPE. Hoacou.
Neuke. 1968. pp 168-158.

Shcherbaltova. B. Ye.: Selenova. G. 1.; Krupelteye. 6. V.; Lin'kova.

1'. “.3 Luteeuto. '1'. 3.; and Helekhin. V. I. "Structure of the Barth'e
Cruet in the Southeeetern Part of the Siberian Platfon end Ito
ﬂountaio Border.” 30V. 6301.. (Soviet Geoiogy). No 9. 1970. pp 107-116.

Allen. C. 3.; hand. St.; Richter. c. 3.; and Rordquiet, L. H.
”Relationehip between Seieeicity and Geologicel Structure in the
Southern Celiiornie Region.“ ISSA. 1965. Vol 55. No 6. pp 753-798.

Mraeeye. N. n. "So-e Characterietic Peaturee of the Anatolian
Iault Zone." monomstcs. Vol 9. Ilo 2-3. 1970. pp 163-165.

Albreeeye. N. lb: Andereon. 6.; luhnov. 5.: era-pin. 5.; Shahidi. 11.;
'l'eeeioe. I. 9.; and Tohelenlzo. I. S. min-noun: amount. or 31
AUGUST 1968. UNESCO. Parie. 1969. ‘9 pasta.

Andereon. Don I. ”The San Andreee Peult." SCI. mm. No 5. 1971. 225
pagae.

625
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
3’00 .

351.

362.

3‘3 .

31.6.

365 .

3A6.

3‘7.

348.

369 .

350.

351 .

352.

353.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Euchstein. 11.; Clouet, d'Orval, 14.; Jepheraone. 1.; and Trottereau.
6. ”Le eels-e de Eeni (20 14ers 1966. Rep. Den. Congo) et lea Fallen
du Posse tectonique Les Edouard Sealikilaa Albert." P01111111
909081!!! 01' APRICAN GEOLOGY. Univ. of Sheffield. 1967.

Daviaon. ll. 8.. and Karsubovit. "Chile." 8111.. SEISH. SOC. AMER” Vol 53.
No 6. 1963.

Floreneov. N. A.. and Solonenko. V. P. TEE con-ALTA! EAR'ﬂlQUAKE.
Jerusalen. 1965. Jerusalem-Hasbington. 1965. London. 1966.

Gutenberg. 11.. and Richter. C. P. "Earthquake Magnitude. Intensity.
Energy and Acceleration." 3111.. 881811. soc. AMER. , Vol 146. No 2.
195‘.

Gianella. V. P. "Earthquakes and Faulting. Port Sage mountains."
301.. 8318“. 800. Mill... Vol 47. 1950. pp 173-177.

Gillete. 11.. and Halah. 1'. "San Fernando Earthquake Study; NBS Panel
Sees Preaonitory Lessons." SCIENCE. Vol 172. No 3979, 1971.

Hadley. J. E. "Landslides and Related Phenonena Acconpanying the
Eebgen Lake Earthquake of August 17. 1959," 6301.. SURVEY. PROP. PAPERS.
No ‘35. 1966. pp 107-137.

Hansen. 11. 3.; Eekel. E. 3.; Schaen. H. 11.; Zyle. R. 3.; George. 11.;
and Chance, 0. "The Alaska Earthquake. March 27. 1966." 0201..
SURVEY. PROP” Paper 561.

Harrison. J. V.; and Paleon. N. 1.. "The Said-arreh Landelip, Southwest
Iran." GEOGRAPE. J.. Vol 89. 110 1. 1937. pp 62-107.

banger. Arthur 1.. "The Detection of Prehistoric Earthquakes from
Fractured Cave Structures." CAVES AND KARST. Vol 12, No 2. 1970.

Miller. Ben J. "The Alaska Earthquake of July 10. 1958; Giant Have
in Lituya Bay." 3111.. SEISH. SOC. AMER” Vol 50. No 2. 1960.

Molnar. P.. and Agarvae. Y. P. "A Hicroearthqualte Survey in Kenya."
BUB. $315M. SOC. “11.. Vol 61. No 1, 1971. pp 195-200.

Murphy 1.. 11.. and Braces. 1!. J. "Seianological Investigations of the
Hebger Lake Earthquake." 6801.06. SUBV. PIOP. PAPER, no 435. 1966. pp 13-17.

Oakeshot. Gordon B. . and Tocher. Don. "Surface Faulting in Recent

Earthquakes in Western Cordillera." 3111.. GEOL. soc. AHEIL. Vol 71. No 12.
1960. p 2038.

626
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
356 .

355 .

356.

357.

356.

359 .

360 .

361.

362.
363.

364 .

365.

366 .

367.

PI"- RObﬂ’h "Dido: BMeodee of mum; fro- I'ree Mon; “Reece
of the 1958 Ruptute of the Patrvaathar fault on Ptee Growth." BULL.
GEOL. 800. mm. V01 61. No 10. 1970. pp 3035-3096.

Pain. 0. 7.. and Bowler. J. H. ”Deaudauon 1011M“ the Nov-her
1970 Earthquake at Nada“. Papua. New Gum." z. 6mnPll0L..
Suppleaentad 18. 1973.

Plafkar, c. "Tectonica of the Karel; 27. 196‘ Malta Barthquake."
0801.. SURVEY PROF. PAPER. No 5’03. 1969.

Plafker. 6.. and Savage. 1. C. "Hechaaiea of the 61:11am: Barthquakee
of my 21-22. 196°." '0‘" “01.- a“. man. Vol .1. “o ‘. 19700

Platter. 6.; lrickeen. G. 8.: and Concha. J. 3. "Geological Aepecu

of the May 31. 1970 Penn Earthquake." 301.. 881811. soc. mm. V01 61.
No 3. 1971.

Rtenttchenko. J. V. "Vega aur Btdbedenvoxhenage." WSCIIAIJ IN
utsszuscw-r mm TBCIINIK. V01 73. No 7. 1973. pp 217-218.

Roche. J. P. “The Setutctcy of the Larch. 1953-1965." UNESCO. Pat-1e.
1969. 336 pages.

Qureeht. I. 2.. and Sada. A. A. "Barthquakee and Aaeoctaced faulting
1n Centra1 Sudan.“ NATURE. V91 215. No 5090. 1967. pp 263-265.

Saeea. K. GREAT mmquuzs. Kabunda Co. Tokyo. 1951.

801mm“. V. P. "Sate-1c Dla1ocat1m and Aeaoc1ated Phebe-em."
In: Ploreuaov. N. 4., and Solomon. V. P.. Ed. 1113 con-urn m-
QUAKE. Jeruaalel. 1963. L.. 1966. p. 271-396.

So1onenko. V. P. "Sate-93m: Deatrucuon of Mountain Slopea." INT”.

0801.. CWGR. XXIV 3283.. SEC. 13. manic caowcr. cmm PAPERS.
MONTREAL. 1972!. PP 201-290.

Solouenko. V. P. "Sate-opal: Rupture of Human Slopea." In: 1m.
0801.. WNGR. XXIV 835$. M8111. W. 197%. PP 606-605.

Tattetf. ll. "Interpretauon dea gnu-ante de retrain acne-pawn: 1e

aunt Iota-1: du 611111. 301.. DE LA socxm 38153 W 0801.00”. 1960.
:. LXIX. P. 2.

Tchalenko. J. 8.. and Mraaeye. N. N. "Structural Analysis of the

Daaht-e-Baya: (Iran) Earthquake Practurea." 6:01.. soc. Am. BULL”
No 81. 1970. pp 61-60.

627
FOR OFFICIAL US! OIILY
366.

369 .

370.

371

372.

373.

376.

375.

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Telulouko. J. In. and Baud. J. "Sou-1:1” and Structuu of the lure.
(Inc); the Hun hunt hula 60mm 33 and 35° 11.." ran. TRANS.
m. soc. LONDON. 1976:.

Tclulonko. J. 8.: lnud. J.; and Borbortau. 11. ”Mount, 0! '11qu
Buthquulm Punk. 16 Inn.” mm. Vol 266. No 3630. 1976!». pp 661-
663.

"11;; Peru Earthquake: a Spud-l Study." 6111.. 41mm. 801.. Vol 26. No 3.
19 .

‘16th. Don. "The Alulu Buthqunku of July 10. 1956.” m. 831811.
soc. mm. Vol 50. No 2. 1962. pp 153-162.

Ill-u. 1.. and am. A. "kahuna bemoan the Mn of “cutback and
the mum of 11:16 Shock 2m» (11). No 7. 1956. pp 233-260.

ward. P. I”; Palm». 0.: and onto. Ch. "Meroouthqunko and the
Hurting“ Ridge in Iceland.” cnovms. mum. Vol 76. No 2. 1969.
pp 65-6 .

"ouch“. 1!. ”Further Observation of Geologic and Coo-orphlc Chm“
mum». (to. th. Catastrophic earthquake of my 1960. in 01:11..”
nun. 831$". soc. m.. Vol 53. No 6. 1963, pp 1259-1262.

Hon-an. 11. U. ”hunt Cmul Hove-onto: Technique. and Mitten-cuts.”
netwomsxs. Vol 13. no 1-1.. 1972. pp 373-392.

comma: Immune “mu." 1977

10865
680:

3166/0607 m

628
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY