FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10390
I6 March 1982

Translation
OCEAN RESEARCH ON

HYDROPHYSICAL FIELD VARIABILITY

Ed. by

R.V. Ozmidov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

ms publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically oi transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itaas are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGH' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MERSBIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
OCEAN RESEARCH ON HYDROPHYSICAL
FIELD VARIABILITY

Moscow ISSLEDOVANIYE IZMBNCHIVOSTI GIDMDFIZICHBSKIKH FOLEY

V OKEANE in Russian 1974 pp 2-31, 42-65, 83-98, 155-162,
208-211

[Excerpts from "Ocean Research on Bydrophysical Field

Variability," edited by R. V. Ozmidov, doctor of physical
and mathematical sciences, Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka', 211 pages,

number of copies unknown]

Annotationou.....o.u.o............oo.o.o.....o...oo...--..........

Investigation of Variability of Hydrophyaical Fields in
Oceanic Polygon
(R. V. omdov, at .10)....OOCO.C.I.0.000000COOOIIOOO'OIOUOOI

Spectral characteristics of (bnductivity Fluctuation Field
in Ocean
(V. S. Belyayev. et a1.).....................................

Statistical Evaluations of Parameters of Snell-Scale hrbulence
(v. D- POZdynm).c......a.-......o.....oc............-.......

Experience in Investigating Microstmcture of Oceanic Gon-
ductivity Field by Sounding bbthod
(V. P. Wrw'yev’ ct 81.)...OIOIIOOOOIOOOOCDO.DOD-IOOOOOOOOI.

Inertial Interval in Nrbulence Spectra in Stratified Fluid
(Heisenberg-Ibnin Model)
(A. Yu. Benilov. I. D. lozovatakiy)..........................

Internal Gravitational Waves in Ocean
(Yu' A. Imov' e: 81.).IIIOOOOOOIIOOIOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOOCOOO.

-a- [I - USSR - E POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5'!

7!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Construction of Recording Comic: for Investigating Pine Ocean
Structure
(V. P. vomb’yev, In G. Palevich)cooouonoocouooocuuccoo-canon... 85

Abstracts of Papers in 'ISSLEDOVMIIYE Imauvosn
GIDMPIZIGIESKIKI‘I FOLEY V M'.................................... 95

-h-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ANNOTATION

This collection of articles is about the results of experimental and
theoretical investigations of the variability of hydrophysical fields in
the ocean. Particular attention is devoted to the f ine structure of fields
and microscale oceanic turbulence, experimental data on which were obtained
on specialized expeditions of the Institute of Oceanology imeni P.P.
Shirshov using newly created towed and sounding measurement devices. The
articles give the results of large-scale computations of the statistical
characteristics of velocity and conductivity microfluctuations in sea
water in different regions of the world ocean and also data on the stat-
ist ital characteristics and parameters of macroscale variability of fields.
A number of arti'olesgive the theoretical and experimental results of inves‘
tigat ions of internal waves and the processes of diffusion of impurities

in the ocean. Possible types of spectra of fluctuations of velocity. temp-
stature and Reynolds stress in the stratified ocean are theoretically anal»
yzed. Also examined are some methodological problems involved in the coll-
ect ion and processing of data on variability of hydrophysical fields in the
ocean. Information is also given on new sensors and measurement systems
for investigating fine structure in the ocean.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INVESTIGATIW 0F VARIABILITY 0P HYDROPHYSICAL FIELDS IN OCBARIC 1’01.ch

Moscow ISSLEDOVAN‘IYE IZHENCBIVOSTI GIDROPIZICHBSKIKB POLE! V (KEANE in Russian 1974
pp 3-31

[Article by R. V. Onidov, V. S. Belyayev, H. H. Lyubimtsev and V. T. Paka from non-
osraph "Ocean Research on ﬂydmphysical Field Variability," edited

by R. V. 0midov, doctor of physical and mthmtical sciences, Izdatel'stvo 'Wauka,"
211 pages, number of copies printed inborn]

[Text] Spatial-tanporal variability is a distinguishing characteristic of hydro-
physicel fields in the ocean. The scales of this variability have a wide range.
Due to the turbulent character of movement of ocean waters fluctuations can exist
in it whose ninimun dimensions are determined by the effect of molecular forces.
The dimensions 1.1,, of such fluctuations in the velocity field can be evaluated
using the formula for locally isotropic turbulence nun - 5/755. where ‘V is the
kinematic coefficient of molecular viscosity of sea water, being about 0.01 cnzl
sec; 8 is the rate of dissipation of turbulent energy in the ocean. The 8 para-
neter is extremely variable, but with its reasonable evaluations in the range
10"5-100 cuzlsec3 for 1,1“ we obtain values 0.3 III-l cm. The minimum tine scale
Tm of the turbulent fluctuations of the velocity field can be evaluated using
another formula for locally isotropic turbulence Tnin -./V7£ , which with these
sane 8 evaluations gives the order of magnitude T‘I of 0.1-100 sec. The naximm
spatial scale Lnax of variability of hydrophysical ields in the ocean is evident-
ly governed by the geometric dimensions of the ocean basins, that is, it can at-
tain several thousand kilometers. However, the upper boundary Tux of temporal
variability in general is difficult to indicate, since together with seasonal

variations of the fields there are also year-to-year fluctuations and climatic
variability.

In the experinental investigation of variability of hydrophysical fields it is
first of all necessary to establish the limits of the scales of variability which
nust be investigated. The fact is that the total duration of the necessary observ-
ations, the position of the observation points and also the characteristics of the
used instruments are related to these limits. In order to determine the statis-
tical character‘ 7‘ ice of field variability the duration of the measurements must be
approximately an order of aagnitude greater than the sexism investigated time scale
of variability and the extent of the measurement runs (or the distances between

the extreme points of placement of the instruments) lust also exceed by an order

of magnitude the maxim:- investigated spatial field inhoaogeneities. The‘diacrete-
ness of the observations in this case should be at least less than half the period
(or spatial scale) of the minimun investigated field variations and the time con-
stant of the instrment (and the entire measurement-registry channel) is about

2

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1/10 of this period. Due to these requirements it follows very clearly that it is
virtually impossible to investigate any significant interval of scales of varia-
bility of this field in the ocean with instruments of a single type. In actuality,
low-inertia instruments (such as thermoanemometers) are usually not capable of op-
erating continuohsly in the ocean for a long time; more approximate instruments

(of the hydrological current meters type) have large time constants and large meas-
urement discreteness intervals. Accordingly, for this type of investigations it is
necessary to have, in general, an entire "arsenal" of instruments with overlapping
frequency characteristics. It is desirable that the researcher have instruments
capable of registering the most small-scale field fluctuations. This is important
because without information on such fluctuations the data from some instruments
(such as BPV-Z current meters), operating with a great discreteness, can give erron-
eous ideas concerning the spectral structure of the process due to discretization
noise. If there is also information concerning microscale fluctuations as well, such
errors can be avoided [1].

If the macroscale limit of the investigated scales of fluctuations is determined, it
is desirable that the subsequent observations be made in the following way. In the
ocean one or more regions (polygons) with typical macroscale characteristics are
selected. Among these characteristics it is necessary to include the mean vertical
profiles of density (temperature and salinity) and current velocity, the character-
istic horizontal current velocities, the direction of the heat flow through the
ocean surface (heating, cooling), mean regime of wind and waves in the polygon. A
number of such polygons with different sets of typical characteristics to a certain
degree can also ensure investigation of the spatial variability of hydrophysical
fields at the scale of the entire ocean. In actuality, the discretenesa of the
points of such observations can attain many tens or even hundreds of kilometers and
therefore in principle it is possible to "cover" the entire ocean with this type of
polygons. However, for an investigation of the long-period temporal variability of
the fields it is necessary to carry out prolonged observations in a polygon with a
temporal discreteness which is consistent with the investigated processes. For ex-
ample, in an investigation of the statistical characteristics of variability up

to an annual period observations must be carried out in the polygon for about 10
years, but their discreteness can be several days. The greatest attained duration
of continuous observations in such a sort of polygon at the present time is equal to
several months [2, 3].

The extent of the polygon can be different, but the desire to "overlap" all the spa-
tial scales of variability, beginning with Lmino leads to a limitation of L..‘ to
several tens or a few kilometers. In the ocean area of the polygon there should be
buoy stations with approximate instruments operating for the entire period of ob-
servations in the polygon. However, the duration of operation of low-inertia instru-
ments can be considerably less, but in this case there shOuld be multiple repetition
of such measu.eaents with different values of macroscale factors. In each individual
measurement low-inertia instruments cannot operate for a long time, for example,
ab0ut 10 minutes, but the number of such measurements must be sufficiently great for
a comparison of the characteristics of microscale processes with the meso- and
macroscale factors varying in time and in space.

Investigation of this variability of fields in polygons with the use of low-inertia
instruments was initiated in 1969 [6]. Thereafter several specialized runs were made
by scientific research ships with work in polygons. The tracks of these vessels and

f 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the location of the investigated polygons are given in [S]. In this article as an
example we will make a detailed examination of the complex of measurements and
give their results in one of the polygons of the seventh voyage of the scientific
research ship "Dmitriy Hendeleyev" (1972).

The polygon was situated in the region of the sources of the Somali Current to the
east of Socotra Island (Pig. 1). Bork in the polygon was initiated from a hydrolog-
ical section whose data were routinely processed on a shipboard electronic computer
by the dynamic method. Sections of the fields of temperature, salinity and geo-
strophic current velocities (Figures 2-4) made it possible to determine the macro—
scale hydrological structure of the work region, define the contours of the branch
of the Somali Current and thereby afforded a porzibility for validly selecting the
place for setting out a buoy station and carrying out measurements of microscale
variability with lowbinertia instruments. A buoy station with BPV-Z current meters
and photothermographs was situated in the current and served as a reference point
for other measurements*.

The macroscale thermal structure of waters in the polygon, according to data for
hydrological statioas 488-é94 (Fig. l),is shown in the sections in Pig. 2. These
same data were also used in constructing the section of distribution of water sal-
inity (Pig. 3). It can be seen from the temperature section that in the upper «00-
m layer the depth of the isotherms decreases somewhat in a southeastern direction,
which indicates an upwelling of waters in this part of the section. The advection
of water masses from adjacent regions of the ocean can be seen from the position-
ing of the isohalines in the section in fig. 3. The penetration of more saline

and warmer waters of Red Sea origin determines the vertical structure of the upper
layer of water in the northern part of the section; the existence of a salinity max-
imum at a depth of about 100 m is an indication that the Somali Current during win-
ter carries waters forming in the Red Sea and Arabian Sea regions.

Thus. the development and maintenance of the vertical water density gradients in
the polygon region exerts an influence on the horizontal transport of water masses
which acquired their principal physical characteristics prior to arrival in the
region of the Somali Current.

The hydrological structure of the waters in the neighborhood of station 690 was
characterized by a relatively poorly expressed temperature jump layer (Fig. 5,

Fig. 6). The mean temperature gradient in the upper lOan layer is AI0.02'/m and
increases in the jump layer to 0.07'lm. whereas in equatorial polygons, occupied or
this same voyage in the Indian Ocean. the temperature gradient attained 0.25'lm.
Accordingly, density stratification in the polygon ensured a small vertical stabil-
ity of the water mass in the upper layer of the ocean, including the temperature
jump layer, which could facilitate the development of microscale turbulence in the
upper layer of the ocean.

Figure 4 shows a vertical section of the current field in the polygon. constructed
on the basis of data from computations by the dynamic method. The figure shows

 

*
The hydrological work in the polygon was carried out under the direction of V. G.
Neyman.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that in the region of hydrological stations 1:90 and 691 there is a clearly defin-
ed flow with a southwesterly current component whose maximum was situated in the
upper loo-m water layer. To the southeast of station 1090 and to the northwest of
station 491 the current velocity changes sign, attaining values greater than 40
and 50 cm/sec. In the deep layers at the left edge of the section there was again
a flow of southwesterly direction with a current velocity up to 20 cm/ sec.

0 O O O O
52 JJ :0 .v [5‘ ”11'

      
      

II 'IJ’

II'JJ'

J‘J'JI’ JI'II’ .v'u' II'JI’
Pig. 1. Diagram of polygon for measuring oceanic turbulence and background condi-
tions with indication of numbers of hydrological stations. 1) hydrological series,
bathythermogrsm, sounding with A181 instrument and acoustic probe to ascertain cur-
rent velocity; 2) sounding with AIST instrument and acoustic probe to ascertain
current velocity: 3) multiple sounding with A151; 4) anchored buoy station with
current meters and photothermographs; 5) radio temperature buoy; 6) measur-ent
with "Sigma" probe; 7) bathythermogrsm. The solid line with the arrows indicates
the towing of turbulence meters. The rectangle enclosed in a dashed line is shown
at a larger scale in the lower part of the figure.

As is well known, computations of currents by the dynamic method give only the
pattern of the current field averaged over a great time interval, dependent at the
same time on the choice of the reference (zero) surface. Accordingly, in the re—
gion of microscale measurements a buoy station with BW current meters was set out;
the current meters were at the horizons 15, 25, 50, 75. 100, 1.50, 200. #00, 600,
1,000 and 1,500 m. Figure 7 shows the vertical profiles of current components aver-
aged for the entire period (63 hours) along the parallel (u) and meridian (v) and
also the distribution of the mean current vectors with depth. The figure shows

that in th. layer from the ocean surface to a depth of 1,500 to during the period

of observations there were two almost oppositely directed flows, which agrees with
data from the dynamic section. The boundary between the flows was approximately at a
de;.:h of 400 m, but the transition zone from one flow to another is already trac-
ed from 200 m. In the upper layer the velocity vectors had a northwesterly direc-
tion with a modulus 15-20 cm/ sec, whereas in the lower layer the current was close
to easterly with velocities ~15 cm/sec (which deviates from the dynamic section
data with respect to both modulus and direction). It can be seen from the distribu—
tion of the current vectors that in the layer 50-100 m the vertical current

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gradients developed due to a simultaneous change of both current direction and
velocity with depth; in the layer 100-200 m the vertical current gradients developed
primarily exclusively due to a change in flow direction. Large gradients were ob-
served in the layer fro- 200 to 600 m, where there is a marked change in both di-
rection and modulus of current velocity. In the water layer deeper than 600 m the
mean vertical current gradients become insignificant. The sharpest change in the
meridional velocity component was observed, as indicated in the figure, in the
uppermost layers of the ocean and the maximun v value was registered at the 200-111
horizon. The latitudinal velocity component changes relatively smoothly from 18

cm/sec at the upper horizon to 15 cm/sec at the 600-1: horizon. after which it re-
mains virtually constant to the lowest observation horizon.

 

Fig. 2. Field of isotherms according to hydrological series (a) and bathythermo-
grams (b) in hydrological section. The numbers of the stations are indicated along
the horizontal scales. The temperature values are given in °C.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a.” ”J "012 ‘ci/ " M! a” at

$7
.ﬁJ

 

WI w —
73—!an A
g -— ‘7

m -_.._. .. ‘ ———- ~
._—_.__....__,—'__

rm: . ____.___.

Pig. 3. Isolines of salinity (in °/oo) based on neasurenents in hydrological sec-
tion. The nunbers of the stations are indicated along the horizontal scale.

'u/u a” u; m I” 'ui all
\'.‘ ‘-\ I‘ -
“l“:‘bi‘i"!

V

 

Fig. 4. Current velocity field computed by dynamic nethod (the positive values cor-
respond to the current direction "in the figure").

Some idea concerning the macroscale variability of the velocity field in the poly-
gon can be obtained from Fig. 8. which shows the curves of the half-sun of spec-
tral densities of fluctuations of the horizontal velocity components on the basis
of data from current meters at the seven upper horizons at the buoy station. Time
series of the values of velocity components with a discreteness of 5 linutea were
subjected to statistical processing. The spectral functions were scaled into spa-
tial functions using the "frozen-in" hypothesis with use of the values of scan
current velocities at each of the observation horizons. Due to the short duration
of the series used for the computations the interval of wave embers of the con-
structed spectral functions 30:) extends approximately only 1 1/2 orders of nag-
nitude, whereas the Bat) values in this interval change approximately by four or-
ders of magnitude. The spectral functions for all seven horizons have virtually

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an identical level and in logarithmic coordinates are close to straight lines

with a mean value of the tangent of slope of about 2.7. Such a rapid dropoff of
the 2(k) values with an increase in k is evidently evidence of a predominance

in the considered range of wave numbers of well-developed two-dimensional turbu-
lence, for whose spectral density the "-3 law” can be satisfied [6, 7]. It is also
not precluded that in this k range a: important role in the velocity field can be
played by mve movements of different origin.

[ls—W 3'" 1'” ’3',”- ’ ‘2 arbitrary units
JII JJ 1 If, 3, '/o

W
" J m I} :0 . [JffC

     

mo 5r——"’—'.———‘3T,
m ’0 E I I
I
mot ‘
. '0] .
I 150 '
m . .
m

Pig. 5. Vertical profiles of temperature Fig. 6. Bathythermogrsm at station 490.
'1‘, salinity S and conventional density

0': according to measurements at station
490.

Due to the great spatial discreteness of observations of current velocities made us-
ing current meters information on the vertical structure of the flow (including
on its vertical gradients) is quite approximate. A direct comparison of the data
from individual measurements of microscale turbulent fluctuations (with scales
from Lmin to 1-2 m) with such macroscale characteristics evidently does not make
it possible to discover any relationships between them [8]. The characteristics
of microscale fluctuations must evidently be directly related to the finer (local)
parameters of the oceanic velocity field. It was possible to obtain this sort of
information on the vertical profiles of current direction and current velocity
modulus in the polygon using a new acoustic sounding instrument developed at the
Pacific Ocean Division of the Institute of Oceanology imeni P. P. Shirshov, USSR
Academy of Sciences (now the Pacific Ocean Oceanological Institute, Far Eastern
Center, USSR Academy of Sciences). The instrument registers the Doppler frequency
shift of acoustic oscillations of a signal scattered on density inhomogeneities
moving with the flow. The volume of fluid in which the scattering of ultrasound

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
occurs is about 1 cm3 and is quite distant from the instrument housing. The probe
does not require the calibration mandatory for current meters and thermoanemo-
meters. The error in velocity measurements was about 1 cm/sec and is determined
for the most part by the error in frequency measurement. The probe also has a
meter for registering orientation relative to the magnetic meridian based on meas-
urement of the signal phase induced in a wire loop during its rotation in the
earth's magnetic field. Current direction is measured with an accuracy to 3°.

Figure 9 shows examples of the vertical profiles of current velocity modulus and
direction obtained using the new instrument. The measurements were made from a
drifting ship, and as a result, the values for current velocity and direction are
relative, at the same time that their gradients must coincide with the gradients
of true current velocities in the ocean (during the time of sounding the ship's
drift velocity must be considered constant). The curves show how more complex the
vertical structure of the field of currents is in comparison with the pattern ob-
tained using data from current meter observations at buoy stations. Using sound-
ing data it is easy to see the fine vertical stratification of the current. The
adjacent layers of fluid with a thickness of several meters move at different
velocities differing by 5 and sometimes by 10 cm/aec. The direction of movement
of the fluid in such layers can also differ appreciably. For example, the layers
at depths of 175 and 185 m moved at an angle of 100° to one another. The velocity
gradients, computed on the basis of probe data, are considerably greater than the
values obtained using current meter profiles in Fig. 7. Whereas in this figure the
gradients were found to be no more than 0.1-0.3 cm/sec per meter, according to
sounding data in individual cases they can attain several centimeters per second
per meter. It is clear that such local characteristics of the velocity field must
exert a definite influence on the microscsle fluctuations of hydrophysical fields
in the ocean.

Information on the macroscale variability of the temperature field in the polygon
was obtained from photothermographs installed at a buoy station at the hori-

zons 100, 150, 200 and 400 m. The discreteness of readings of temperature by the
photothermographs was 5 minutes and the duration of observations was 63 hours. The
resulting series of temperature values were used in computing the spectral density
functions shown in Fig. 10. For the three upper observation horizons the spectral
density functions E(k) for temperature fluctuations were virtually identical, but
at a depth of 400 m the E(k) values were considerably less. The E(k) functions,
computed using data from the photothermographs at the horizons 100. 150 and 200

m, fit well with the sectors of the spectral functions in Fig. 14 situated in the
more high-frequency region (radio buoy data). Comparisons of Fig. 10 and Fig. 14
also make it possible to explain some decrease in the slope of the spectral curves
in Fig. 10 with an increase in R. It is clearly associated with discretization
noise, since in the interval of wave numbers greater than 10'3 the spectral den-
sity function, although it decreases rapidly, is nevertheless different from

zero. The tangent of the angles of slope of the spectral density functions in the
zone of wave numbers where the influence of discretization noise is not expressed
is close to 2.5.

More detailed information on the vertical structure of the fields of temperature.
salinity (conductivity) and density in the polygon were obtained using the AIST
sounding instrument. This instrument makes it possible to determine the vertical

INDR‘OFTICJAI.lﬁiE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

profiles of temperature and salinity to a depth of 1,000 m and with an accuracy
to 0.02-0.03°C and 0.03~0.06°/oo respectively. Such an accuracy is provided by
a carefully calibrated thermoresistor and induction-type conductometer. The ver-
tical resolution of the instrument for ordinary scunding rates is about 1 m. Ana-
log signals from the sensors are coded and registered on a punched tape and at
the same time on an automatic recorder. After processing of the punched tape on
an electronic computer the profiles of temperature, conductivity, salinity and
density are fed out and the latter two parameters are determined by computations.

Examples of the vertical profiles of temperature, salinity and density obtained
using the AIST instrument in the polygon are shown in Fig. 11. It can be seen eas-

tion of the instrument in comparison with the "smooth" curves in Pig. 5 , construct-
ed using the infrequent points of the bathometric series". The AIST data reveal

ample, microscale turbulence (with characteristic dimensions from l‘min to l It) must
react" very sensitively to the stepped field structure. In actuality, the density
gradient is one of the most important parameters for turbulence; it determines the
expenditure of turbulent energy on work against Archimedes forces (in the case of

analysis of the data obtained using lowinertis instrunents. However, an attempt
to relate the characteristics of microscale turbulence directly to the mean hydro-

difficult, and frequently impossible, to establish causenand-effect relationships
between the studied processes.

extremely variable in both time and in horizontal directions. Such a variability
can be investigated by means of multiple soundings carried out from an anchored or
drifting ship. It is true that it is extremely difficult to determine what causes
the observed variability -- nonuniformity of the vertical structure of the field
in a horizontal direction or its nonststionary character. In actuality, the drift-
ing ship moves relative to the water mass under the influence of the wind, but in
the case of an anchored vessel the fluid is transported relative to it by the cur-
rent. Accordingly, each subsequent sounding in general brings information concern-
ing the vertical structure of the field at different moments and at different
points in the water mass. In order to investigate the spatial variability of struc-
ture it is necessary to carry out synchronous soundings at a number of points in
the ocean (for example, from several ships at the same time).

M

* We note that the zigzaging nature of the density profile in Fig. 11 is related

to errors in computing 0"t on the basis of measurements of the temperature and
conductivity values.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
("l/1),”. 10:"

”a!

U

H III
h—h-l
0 n0 lofaWTI "%L

'2! -/a a m , ‘35;

        

:,~

Pig. 7. Diagram of current velocity
vectors and depth distribution of zonal
u and meridional v coaponents according
to data from anchored buoy station. The
numbers alongside the vectors denote
depths in m.

Fig. 8. Spectral densities of fluctua-
tions of current velocity according to
data from anchored buoy station at hor-
izons 15 (1), 25 (2), $0 (3), 75 (6), _
100 (s), 150 (6) and zoo a (7). ' _ Mr, ' 'J

 

Figure 12 shows an example of the processing of six successive soundings (with in-
tervals of about 1 hour) by the AIST instmment in the polygon. The thick curve
represents the averaged temperature profile for all soundings. The profile bacane
considerably "smoother," but there are individual "steps," interlayers with a vir-
tually constant temperature, zones of increased gradients and a region of tempera-
ture inversions. The extreme curves in the figure show the value of the standard
deviations of temperature values at the horizon according to data from individual
soundings fron its mean value. These deviations do not exceed fractions of a de-
gree in the upper 8S-m layer and then increase to l.5-l.6°c in layers with large
temperature gradients. Such a taperature variability at this horizon can be caus-
ed by both the spatial-tapsral variations of meaoatructure of the temperature

field and by Vertical movements of this entire structure under the influence of
internal waves.

Interesting information on the characteristics and variability of temperature
field nesostructure in the polygon were obtained using a radio bmy. The instru-
ment temperature sensors were situated in the layer of greatest temperature gradi-
ents at the horizons 103, 115, 126, 138, 150. 170, 212 and 232 I. The discreteness

ll
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of interrogation of the sensors was 12 sec. The information received by ship via
the radio channel was registered with digital magnetic recorders or on punched
tapes, after which it could be introduced into an electronic computer. The program
for processing on an electronic computer included one-point statistical analysis,
construction of the field of isotherms and the field of spectral density of tem-
perature fluctuations. Figure 13 shows an example of construction of the field
(section) of isotherms on the basis of data for a 3.5-hour radio buoy operating in-
terval. The total number of temperature readings used in constructing a section,

as is easily computed, was approximately 8,000. From the macroscale characteris-
tics of the field of isotherms in Fig. 13 it is possible to note a general tenden-
cy to a deepening of the isotherms during the observatioi period. Such a phenomenon
can be caused, for enample, by tidal internal waves of a saidiurnal or diurnal
period. The figure also shows more high-frequency tapersture fluctuations with
periods of about 5-10 minutes which can be interpreted as internal gravitational
waves. It is interesting to note that such internal waves did not exist during

the entire period of observations, but only during definite time intervals, disap-
pearing and arising anew. They sometimes occupied virtually the entire considered
layer of the ocean and sometimes were observed only at a few horizons.

_ l I!- !!l" ’ ,uvl -
V on see 1 17.; II I: III m 'm n: ‘f de81"!”

II

III

III

[‘0'

I”

Fig. 9. Vertical profiles of intensity (a) and direction (b) of current velocity
according to data from acoustic probe.

From the statistical characteristics computed on the basis of radio buoy data

we will cite two families of spectral density curves E(k) for temperature fluctu-
at ions at each of the eight observation horizons (Fig. 14). In computing the first
family of curves we used a four-hour record with the number of temperature read-
ings at each horizon equal to 1,200, and for computing the second family -— a 3.5—
hour record (of 1,032 terms), folloﬂng the first record approximately after a
1.5-hour interval. The figures in the diagrams denote the observation horizons in
the sequence of an increase in depth. The spectral densities were computed by the
'l'ukey method (Fourier transform of correlation functions) with a maximum shift

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in computing the correlation functions equal toll.l the total length of each aer-
les and when using a high-frequency cosine filter with a paraneter equal to 0.2
the length of the series. On the x-axis in Pig. lb'ue have plotted the values of
the wave numbers k, scaled from the values of the frequencies f of oscillations
using the "frozen-in" hypothesis with a mean velocity of the transport current V -

10 cn/sec.

'
£10,011!“ . ' degreez'cm
z

[0‘

II"

 

ll " /.I/ 'J a on"

Fig. 10. Spectral densities of temperature fluctuations according to data from
photothermographs at horizons 100'(l), 150 (2), 200 (3) and 600 m (4).

The principal characteristic of the spectral density curves in Fig. 16 is their
rapid dropoff with k values greater than 10'3 cn'l. The tangent of the slope of
curves in this region, that is, the exponent in the power-law approximation of the
curves, exceeds -3, gradually decreasing toward the right end of the graph. The
decrease in the slope of these curves in the most nicroscale part of the spectrum

13

IWDR‘OHWHCJAl.lKﬂE(NQLY
FOR‘0FF1C]AI.USEZ(NNLY

can be influenced by discretization noise because the energy of the higher-fre-
quency temperature fluctuations. as we will see below. is quite high. The maxima.
on the curves in the region R - 10'3 cm’1 are evidently caused by gravitational
internal waves of the aboveqnentioned period. However, as can be seen from the spec-
tral density curves, in the polygon during the observation period there were not
only these waves, but an entire spectrum of higher-frequency temperature fluctua-
tions. The energy oﬁ'théSedfluctuations does not regularly change with depth; the
curves for different.horizons are intertwined with one another. A comparison

1.1.3 ”I 20! 2.5.! 25.5 1],! 0'

JIII JJJ III! Jill M) JIJ 3"/~

In ”.0 III III I! 0 III I"

‘

    

    

   

          

J!
’00

I”

Ill

4'."

Fig. 11. Vertical profiles of conventional density (1), salinity (2) and tempera-
ture (3) according to AIST data.

 

Fig. 12. Averaged vertical temperature profile (thick curve) according to data from
multiple sounding with AIST instrument. The thin curves represent the mean square
temperature scatter of individual soundings from mean value.

14

FIHR(HWHC1AI.USE1MNLY
of the families of curves obtained for different parts of the record reveals some
nonstationary nature of the process. In actuality, in Fig. 14,!) the spectral curves
on the average lie soaewhat higher than in Pig. llo,a. Individual curves also do not

maintain their shape and their relative position: they are somewhat nodified and
are displaced relative to one another.

2, u a
I” (I
3, __,_ :J’
I:
we -—’\-——Il
2:”

Fig. 13. Field of isotherms (in °C) using data fro- radio tanpersture buoy.

The distribution of the energy of temperature fluctuations by wave nunhers and by
depth h is graphically illustrated in Fig. 15. The isolinea of spectral density
are given in 3(f) units; for scaling them into 80:) units it is necessary that the
figures indicated on the isolines be multiplied by V/Zn - 1.59. The figure shows
that in the h, 1: sections of spectral energy density for temperature fluctuations
there are individual maxilla, where it is necessary to anticipate the generation of
energy and from whence it can be propagated into the h, k region with mall 30:)
values. In our case the principal zone of energy concentration is the horizon 140
n and a wave number close to 10‘3 cn‘l. It is interesting to note that at this
same depth there is a density gradient maximal. The position and intensity of the
energy density maximum vary very little from one period to the next (Fig. 15) ,
whereas all the renaining field of Bar) isolines experiences appreciable varia-
tions. Thus, during the second period of observations there is a secondary maxi-
mum with h, k coordinates (220 m, 10-3 curl), and the maximal with the coordinates
110 m, 8-10" cm-1 is somewhat displaced and decreased. The configuration of the
isolines in the upper right part of the section also was considerably changed.

The still finer structure of the temperature field in the polygon was obtained us-
ing a group of thermistors mounted on a special trawl. This special trawl, con-
structed at the Atlantic Division of the Institute of Ocaanology, is a towed ap-
paratus with a system of sensors for the mean and fluctuating values of velocity,
temperature and conductivity of sea water. The optima rate of towing of this trawl
is 6-6 lawts with a deepening up to 200 n. The number and aakeup of the sensors on
the trawl can vary depending on the situation and the purposes of the experiaent.
In measurements in the considered polygon tne trawl carried a system of ten te-per-
ature sensors spaced 70 on apart and two conductivity sensors separated by the
same interval. In addition, there was also a sensor of velocity fluctuations and
the mean velocity of novaent of the trawl relative to the surrounding median and
a sensor for depth of subaergence of the trawl. The conductivity and fluctuations

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of velocity sensors were situated in a two-hull container (catamaran) oriented
along the flow. The container also held a depth sensor. Oscillations of the con-
tainer (course angle, banking, fore—to-aft fluctuations) were monitored by angul-
ar velocity sensors, which made it possible to avoid signal distortions due to in-
stability of carrier movenent. The measurements were made only in a case when the
velocities of the oscillations did not exceed 1 degree/sec. Such conditions were
ensured virtually constantly due to the syst- for suspending the container under
a deepener with a great mass preventing the imparting of vibrations from the tow-
ing line to the container with the instrumentation.

Thermoresistors with a time constant of about 1.5 sec and a response of 0.05°C

were used for measuring t-perature. Conductivity was measured by capacitive sensors
designed at the Leningrad Mechanical Institute. The sensing element of this sensor
is a pair of electrodes covered with condenser ceramic, cut into a high-frequency
circuit whose quality varies in dependence on the change in conductivity of sea
water. With respect to operating principle the sensor is inertialess, but it aver-
ages the conductivity spatially with a radius of about 1 cm. The signal contains
both constant and fluctuating components which are separated during the registry
process by means of electric filters. Hith a constant salinity of about 35°/00 the
sensor reacts to temperature fluctuations with an amplitude of m-“oc with a signal-
to-noise ratio equal to unity.

In measuring velocity fluctuations use was made of a thermoananometric sensor de-
signed by V. V. Stolypin, whose sensing element is a conductivity sensor with a
microelectrode near which, due to the release of Joule hear, there is a heating of
the ambient conductive medim. An ordinary thermoanaometric effect arises during
movement of the medium. This is called a hydroresistor thermoanemometer. In con-
trast to the film thermoanasometers used in study of turbulent flows the hydrore-
sistor thermoanasometer has considerably greater mechanical reliability. Its iner-
tial properties are determined for the most part by spatial averaging with a radius
dependent on the dimensions of the electrode. In our case this radius did not ex-
ceed 3.5 mm. The sensor noise level was tenths of a millimeter per second.

The mean rate of towing at the observation horizon was measured by an electric cur-
rent meter. This instrument has a rotor and frame from a standard current neter

and in order to obtain an electric signal near the rotor there is a conductivity
sensor producing pulses with each revolution of the rotor. The refashioning of the
current meter did not worsen its metrological characteristics and therefore the
error in measuring mean flow velocity did not exceed 3-5 cm/sec.

The depth of submergence was measured using a sensor of the vibrotron type with a
range 0-50 atm and a measurement error of 1.25 m.

The recording devices of this special trawl included four-channel analog magnetic
recorders suitable for the registry of constant and variable signals with a fre-
quency up to l 1012. These magnetic recorders were used in registering fluctuations
and the mean velocity and conductivity values. At the same time these same signals
were visualized using a low-inertia three-pen automatic recorder and on oscillo-
scope screens.

16

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
n7”

m-J

     

'0" Ir! ' m" are 1,!” .1

Fig. 16. Spectral densities of temperature fluctuations according to data from
radio temperature buoy at horizons 103 (1). 115 (2), 126 (3), 138 (6), 150 (S),
170 (6), 212 (7) and 232 n (8) for two segments of records with a duration of
lo (a) and 3.5 hours (6).

The temperature signals were registered sinultaneously in digital and analog forns
on a digital magnetic recorder and by automatic recorders. The period of interro-
gation of the sensors did not exceed 2-3 see. The frequency signals of the vave
recorder and the vibrotone were monitored fron the dials of electronic frequency
meters and in case of necessity could be registered in digital for- on a second
digital magnetic recorder. In addition, the pulsed signal of the wave neter was
registered on an analog nagnetic recorder so as to ensure the transformation of
the tine scales of the investigated fluctuations into space coordinates.

Figure 16 shows the vertical spatial sections of the taperature field constructed
using data for ten therliators during the towing of the special trawl. The first
section was conputed on an electronic conputer using tenperature readings with a

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

discreteness at each horizon of 3 sec. The isotherms were drawn each 0.l°C with

a total length of each of the series of 131 points. In order to construct the
second section (Fig. l6,b) we used data on temperature with a sample of 6 sec with
corresponding smoothing and a length of 227 points in each series. The isotherns
were also drawn each o.1°c. The first section clearly shows a localized layer
with great vertical taperature gradients in which there are high-frequency tem-
perature fluctuations against a background of s slower "variation" of isotherms
with wavelengths of approximately 300 and 700 a. In the second section such a lay-
er is absent and due to the smaller scale along the horizontal axis the isotherms
frequently are very steep. The left part of the section is characterized by a rel-
atively quiet temperature field. Then the field becomes more coaplex, the isotherms
come closer together, and finally, the field acquires a calmer character. The ver-
tical temperature drops in the echo of clustering of isotherms attain 0.2 and even
0. 3°C per aeter, whereas in quiet zones the taperature difference of o.1°c can be
attained at distances of several meters vertically.

ity, obtained using the special trawl, at two horizons with a vertical spacing of
70 cm. Curves la and 2a correspond to the lower, and curves lb and 2b to the upper
measurement horizon. In the registry of the high-frequency signals the amplifica-
tion factor for the upper horizon was several times less than for the lower horizon.

In Fig. 17 it is possible to define the following regions arbitrarily: during the
course of the first lo minutes the neaaurements were made in a layer with a rela-
tively small vertical conductivity gradient, then for a period of 1 minute -- in
a layer with a large conductivity gradient, in the next 0.5-1 ninute - again with
a relatively small da'ldz value and then with db‘ldzzo. The upper sensor entered
the homogeneous layer (dﬁldzzO) sooner than the lower sensor by approximately

1 minute. The level of high-frequency conductivity fluctuations with relatively
small dO’ldz values is appreciably higher than with do‘ldz z__0 and in the layer with
a greater conductivity gradient. If it is assmed that o'wdoidzw, wherea’ and w are
the mean square values of nicroscale fluctuations of conductivity and the vertical
component of current velocity respectively, then with doldzzo with any real w
values the conductivity fluctuations will be small. With identical w values the

0' values must be greater in the layer with greater dd/dz values, but with an in—
crease in the vertical conductivity (temperature) gradient it is necessary to an-

ticipate a considerable decrease in w and as a result this can lead to a decrease

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' .710
0, N

Fig. 15. Isolines of spectral density of temperature fluctuations (in degrees:-
sec) according to records of radio t-perature buoy with a duration of lo (a) and
3.5 hours (b).

in 0' . Thus, the change in the level of high-frequency conductivity fluctuations
in actuality is related to variations in the local background conditions (in ac-
tuality, variations of the vertical conductivity gradient).

Measurements of microscale fluctuations of the fields of current velocity and con-
ductivity were made in a polygon at a nunber of depths in the layer from 20 to
213 m. The spectral densities of the high-frequency signals were were computed on
an electronic computer by the fast Fourier transform method by segaents of the
record with a duration from loo to 80 see with a time discreteness of 1/260 sec.
Figure 18 shows the spectra of fluctuations of current velocity in the range of
scales from approximately 1 cm to l n. The level of fluctuations of current velo-
city was maxinum at a depth of 195 to; its change with depth is nonnonotonic. At
the very same depth the level of current velocity fluctuations can vary consider-
ably (compare curves 13a and 13b in Pig. 18), which should be related to the dif-
ference in local background conditions. In the case of a linear (at a logarithmic
scale) continuation of the high-frequency spectra into the region of lower fre-
quencies their level is higher than the level of the spectra of sucroscale

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IIIIIIIIII ‘
IEIIIIIIII
liilllllll .:
ESEIIIIII
ram
IE3IIIE “
IEIIIIHI
IEQIIIIEI
IE -IIIIIII .
. §3III51
It SIIIHI
Laura]:
IEtillliiI
F3III=3
SIIEI. -
—1 :3IIIES

IEIIIIHI
iﬁllEfi
fluctuations of current velocity according to data from the anchored buoy sta-
tion (see Fig. 8). This can be caused, in particular, by the influx of energy into

the region of scales of about 10 m. The distribution of intensity of fluctuations
of current velocity in the spectrum of wave numbers is shown in Fig. 19,a,b. In

the investigated range of scales the contribution to the dispersion of current
velocity fluctuations in general increases regularly with a decrease in wave num-
bers (with an increase in the scales of inhomogeneities), and accordingly, the
nicroscale range does not determine the total dispersion of fluctuations of cur-
rent velocity in the ocean. Figure 20.a.b gives the k281(k) curves characterizing
the spectral distribution of the dissipation of turbulent energy. The scatter of
the curves here is considerable, since in the k2E1(k) spectra there is a clearer
manifestation of different types of interference. However, it can be seen in Fig.
20,b that the k231(k) curves increase with an increase in k, but do not attain
maxima in the investigated range of scales.

If the spectral curves in Fig. 18 are approximated by straight lines with the
slope -5/3, it is found that the empirical curves deviate systematically from the
approximating straight lines in the low-frequency region and have a steeper (close
to -ll/5) slope to the x-axis. This suggests a possible influence of buoyancy
forces on turbulent fluctuations of the current velocity field. Adhering to [9],
it is possible to obtain the universal spectral function f1(x) of longitudinal
fluctuations of current velocity in a stratified medium for comparison with the
experimental curves. Hatching of the empirical spectra with the universal curve
is accomplished in the following way. The experimental curve at a logarithmic
scale is approximated in the high-frequency region by a straight line with the
slope -5I3. A transparent sheet on which the universal spectrum is plotted is
superposed on the empirical graph in such a way that the segment of the universal
curve with the slope -5/3 coincides with the approximating straight line and then
the—sheer—is-muved—aiong the approximating—seeaighe line until the best (visual)
coincidence is attained between the experimental and.theoretical curves. The re-
sult of such an operation with the spectra in Fig. 18 is shown in Fig. 21. The
figure shows that the experimental curves fall well on the model spectrum (in Fig.
21 the longitudinal spectrum of current velocity fluctuations in the model [9] is
shown as a thick curve).

The rate of dissipation of turbulent energy a is easily computed from the inertial
segment of the spectrum with the slope -S/3, and the matching of the empirical
curves with the model spectrum makes it possible to determini the value of the buoy-
ancy scale Lg (with an accuracy to the constant factor 40163 ‘7'1/2, where 010 is

the ratio of the coefficients of turbulent thermal conductivity and viscosity,
T'is a proportionality factor in the Heisenberg hypothesis on the form of the
spectral coefficient of turbulent viscosity). Using an expression for the buoyancy
scale in a stratified fluid [10]

I" I
Aﬁ‘un)"
where g is the acceleration of free falling, at is the coefficient of thermal ex-
pansion of the medium, it is possible to compute the rates of evening-out of tem-

perature inhomogeneities N. The 5 and N values, according to the data in Fig. 21,
on the average are close to 10'2 cmzlsec'3 and 10’3-10'4 degreezlsec, and the L*

L,—

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

value has the order of the dimensions of "steps" of the fine structure of the den-
sity field in the polygon.

The measurements of the high-frequency fluctuations of conductivity in the poly-
gon were carried out synchronously using two sensors which were spaced 70 cm

apart vertically. The spectra of conductivity fluctuations at both messm‘enent
horizons are usually close, but in three cases they are somewhat different from
one another with respect to form and level, which confirms the hypothesis express-
ed above concerning the dependence of turbulence characteristics on local back.-
ground conditions. Figure 22 shows the spectral densities of conductivity fluc-
tuations on the basis of measurements with one of the sensors. The spectral curve
2a falls considerably below all the other curves, forming a relatively dense group.
We note that the spectrum 2b was obtained by measurements at the sane depth of 138
m as_ in 2a. In the buoyancy interval, according to the model in [9}, the spectral
density of the conductivity (t-perature) fluctuations has a power-law dependence
with the uponent ~7/5. In Fig. 22 the spectral density curves in most cases can
actually be approximated in the low-frequency region by straight lines with the
slope -7/S. Thus, the effect of Archimedes forces is manifested in the flow both
in the current velocity field and in the conductivity field. Figure 23 shows the
distribution of the intensity of conductivity fluct tions in the spectrum of

wave numbers, and Pig. 2!. shows the "dissipative" It 121(k) spectra. In their charac-
ter they are similar to the corresponding curves for current velocity fluctua-
tions.

In the polygon measurements of microscale conductivity fluctuations at great depths
(to 1,200 n) were also made for the first time. The measurements were made using
the "Sigma" turbulence probe, constructed from elements of the special trawl.

The number of sensors on the probe was reduced to the minimum adequate for determin-
ing the characteristics of the microstructure of the conductivity field against the
background of the characteristics of field stratification. The probe had channels
for the mean and fluctuating conductivity values, mean velocity of movement (cur-
rent meter) and depth of submergence (vibrotron). The probe was placed at the end
of a three-strand supporting and electrical cable with a fish-shaped deepening
weight of 250 kg weight. Measurements with the probe could be made both in a ver-
tical sounding regime and in a towing regime with constantor variable deepening,
which was attained by a change in the rate of the ship's movaent and the length

of the supporting and electrical cable.

In the polygon the "Sigma“ probe was used in carrying out vertical soundings and
seven horizontal "sections" of the conductivity field were obtained in the range
of depths from 60 to 865 m. The registry of the conductivity signal was simultan-
eous in the two magnetic recorder channels: in one channel the full (unfiltered)
signal was registered, and in the other (with a greater amplification) -- the sig-
nal filtered from the low-frequency component. Such reception was caused by limit-
ation on the dynamic range of the recording apparatus, not making it possible with
adequate resolution to register the signal in a broad frequency range. The statis—
tical characteristics of variability of the conductivity field were then computed
for two frequency ranges and then "spliced." The computations were made using
records with a duration of about 10 minutes.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. . -2
[ﬁt] tﬂ"!!l°‘, c‘“ “F

      

ll"

Io '1

Fig. 18. Spectral densities of nicroscale current velocity fluctuations (according
to hydrotrawl data) at horizons 20 (1), 33 (2), 55 (3), 77 (6a, lob), 91. (5), 103
(6), 121 (7), 138 (8a, 8b), 141 (9), 157 (10), 160 (11), 168 (12a, 12b), 195 (13a,
13b) and 213 II (1108, 14b).

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600040036-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'5, ll), (#11:: ‘2 cnz 'sec’z

 

Fig. 19. Distribution of intensity of microscale fluctuatiol

in spectrum of wave numbers according to data from hydrotra‘
same as in Fig. 18.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000500040036-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

m '3 m " m a to ’ 10",:

Fig. 21. Hatching of spectral functions in Fig. 18 with Honin node]. curve [9].

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
II"!

 

II"

Fig. 22. Spectral densities of conductivity fluctuations (according to data fron
special trawl) at horizons 910 (l), 138 (2a.. 2b). 141 (3), 157 (4), 160 (5), 168
(6). 174 (7). 195 (8a, 8b) and 213 a (9).

As an example. Fig. 25 shows the "spliced" spectral density functions for fluctua-
tions of conductivity for records at depths of 645 and 720 n. The nean vertical
conductivity profile, obtained by scans of the probe, is shown in Fig. 26 in
relative units. The depth scale on the profile is nonlinear; the depth marks are
indicated on the profile itself. The figure clearly shows the fins layered struc-
ture of the conductivity field in the entire investigated ocean layer. As indi-
cated in Fig. 25, the levels of the high-frequency conductivity fluctuations at
great depths are comparable in order of magnitude with the levels of such fluctua-
tions in the surface layer of the ocean (Fig. 22). The distribution of intensity
of conductivity fluctuations by wave Ins-hers for these sane records is shown in
Fig. 27. In 'the investigated range of wave numbers (scales) the contribution to the
dispersion of conductivity fluctuations increases, as we see. alnost nonotonicslly
with a decrease in wave numbers, that is, with an increase in the scales of the
inhonogeneities. The naxisun with k - 0.01 CI'1 on curve 2 is not reliable because

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it falls in the limits of the 95% confidence intervals for evaluation of the kE(k)
values. Thus, the investigated range of scales (from lo cm to 12 1:) does still not
completely determine the dispersion of the fluctuations of conductivity and ac-
cordingly, in the considered case in the conductivity field there were inhomogen-
eities with horizontal dimensions greater than 12 m. The "dissipative" conductivity
spectra 132(k) (Fig. 28) have naxima in the field of scales fro. approximately 9
to 16 cm and slowly drop off with an increase and decrease in k.

 

Fig. 23. Distribution of intensity of conductivity fluctuations in spectru of wave
numbers according to data from special trawl. The notations are the same as in Fig.

22.

Now we will sumarize some of the general results. The illustrations cited above
graphically show how complex and variable are the hydrophysical fields in the
ocean. Against the background of the mean climatic nacroscale structures there
are mesoscale processes associated with weather effects and tidal- forces. In turn.
internal gravitational waves are superposed on these and these interact with the
stepped structure of the vertical profiles. Finally. sensitively reacting to local
background conditions, there are microscale fluctuations having a turbulent char-
acter. All these processes interact with one another, frequently in a definite way
detersining one another, frequently being related indirectly or stochastically.
For example, necroscale density stratification detenines the limiting frequency

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 26. Exanple of record of mean conductivity obtaimd with "Sigma" probe. The
mnbers alongside the curves represent depth in a.

It'll! 'II”,In'3-M '1 _ I A

clan-"20cm"2

     

ll- ‘/’.I

I” 1,07”

Fig. 27. Distribution of intensity of conductivity fluctuations in spectra of
wave numbers according to data from "Sign" probe. Notations are the ease as in
p13. 25.

Kit/ll ‘ ll”, 01”!" 'J

 

Fig. 28. Spectra of ”dissipation" of conductivity fluctuations according to data
from "Sig-a" probe. Notations are the same as in Fig. 25.

32

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
of gravitational internal waves, which, overturning, create spots of highly tur-
bulent fluid and "steps" on the vertical profiles of hydrophysical elunents. In
turn, nicroscale turbulence tends to mix the surrounding layers of fluid, leading
them to a more honogeneous state. An intensification of turbulent exchange is
favored by velocity gradients arising in currents of drift or geostrophic origin,
and also in surface and internal waves. 0n the other hand, a stable density strat-
ification suppresses turbulence, thereby reducing the intensity of mixing. With
the cooling or salinization of the upper layers of fluid an unstable stratifica-
tion of waters'can arise which generates convective movements, frequently leading
to the appearance of water layers close to homogeneous. Nonlinear interactions of
surface and internal waves with one another and with the mean currents and turbu-
lence can generate mov-ents of different scales and intensities, lead to the
localization of kinetic and potential energy and individual spatial-temporal zones
in the ocean. However, dissipative molecular processes tend to-level out existing
gradients and bring the ocean into a state of thermodynamic equilibriu. But this
process cannot go far due to the constant new receipts of energy in the considered
volume of the ocean through its boundaries. In order to establish qualitative and
quantitative cause-and-effect relationships among all these diverse processes in
the ocean it is necessary to sake measurements in a broad spatial-tenporal range
of scales. An example of such measurements can be the already described complex
of observations in the oceanic polygon. We hope to carry out a more detailed quan-
titative analysis of the relationships among individual processes in the polygon
in the inediate future.

In conclusion we take the opportunity to express appreciation to E. I. Karabasheva
for assistance in carrying out the computations.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Guidov, R. V., GORIZONTAL'NAYA TURHILENTNOST' I mm om V OKEANE
(Horizontal Turbulence and Turbulent Exchange in the Ocean), Moscow, "Nauka."
1968.

2. Shtolonan, V. 3., Koshlyakov, H. N., 0midov, R. V., Fomin, I... H. and Yanpol'-
skiy, A. 1)., "Prolonged Measurements of the Variability of Physical Fields in
Ocean Polygons as a New Stage in Investigation of the Ocean," DOKLADY AN 8853
(Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), 186, No S, 1969.

3. Brekhovskikh, L. H., Ivnnov-Prantskevich, G. I., Koshlyakov, H. IL, Pedorov,
K. N., Fonin, L. H. and Yampol'skiy, A. 0., "Some Results of a Hydrophysical
Experiment in a Polygon in the Tropical Atlantic," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA Am-
SPERY I OKEANA (News of the USSR Acaday of Sciences: Physics of the Atnosphere

and Ocean), 7, No S, 1971.

lo. Osmidov, R. V., "Second Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Dnitriy Mendel-
eyev'," ommwcmx (Oceanology), 11, No l, 1971.

5. Oznidov, R. V., "Experimental Investigations of Hicroscale Ocean Turbulence
at the Institute of Oceanology imeni P. P. Shirshov USSR Academy of Sciences,"
ISSLEDOVANIYE OWICHESKIY TURHILENTmSTI (Investigation of Ocean Turbulence),

Moscow, "Nauka." 1973.

33

FOR OFl-TCIAI. USE ONLY
6.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kreichnen, R. 8.. "Inertial Ranges in hie-Dimensional Turbulence," PHYS.
FLUIDS, 10, No 10, 1967.

Batchelor, G. K., "Computation of the Energy Spectrum in Homgeneoue M-
Dinensionel' Turbulence,” PHYS. FLUIDS, Suppl. 11. 12. No 12, 1969.

Belyeyev, V. 8., Geeentevey, A. IL, Lyubimteev, 1!. 1L, Onidov, R. V.. Palm,
V. 1‘. and Pozdynin, V. 0., "Some Results of an Experimental Investigation of
Fluctuation: of Hydrophyeical Fields in the Upper Layer of the Ocean."
ISSLEDOVAIIIYE OMICHBSKOY mmmmosn, Hoeoou, "ﬂanks," 1973.

Honin, A. 5., "Spectru- of Turbulence in e Temperature-Inhomogeneous Atmo-
sphere," IZV. All SSSR: SERIYA cmnz. (News of the USSR Acedeny of Sciences:
Geophysical Series), No 3, 1962.

Obukhov, A. H., "Influence of Archimedes torcee on the Structure of the Tel-
pereture Field in e Turbulent Flow," non. AN SSSR, 125, No 6, 1959.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Blanks", 1974

5303
C90:

8146/ 1839

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SPECTRAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CONDUCTIVITY FUJCTUATION FIELD IN OCEAN

lbscow Issunovamvz Immrvosn cmnonzmmsnm FOLEY v om in Russian 197a
pp 42-49

[Article by V. S. Belyayev, A. N. Gerentsvey and R. V. Ozmidov from monograph
"Ocean kaearch on Hydrophysical Field Variability," edited by R. V. .
02midov, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, Irdatel'stvo "Nauka", 211
pages, number of copies printed unknown]

[Text] 0n the 7th voyage of the "Dmitriy Handeleyev" specialists carried out numer-
ous measurements of high-frequency fluctuations of the conductivity field in the
upper ZOO-m layer in a number of polygons in the Indian Ocean (the location of the
polygons was given in [1]). Data on microfluctuations of conductivity were obtain-
ed using lowbinertia hydroresistor sensors with a radius of spatial averaging of

__ahout 1 mm. The sensors were placed on—a—spesial-towed line whose description was
given in [2].

0n the voyage use was made of three sets of a towed measurement system which differ
somewhat in design. Using one of the towed lines the measurements were made in
polygons 2. 6. 6 and 8; the second towed line was used in polygons 3 and 5; and the
third was employed in repeated measurements in polygon 6.

The high-frequency signals were registered on analog magnetic recorders. The signals
were visualized on photopaper and after inspection of the records segments with a
duration of about l minute were selected for processing on an electronic computer.
Hith the input of analog signals into the electronic computer use was made of an
analog-code converter which made the signals discrete in tine and quantized them

in amplitude. First the signals were passed through low-frequency filters with dif-
ferent cutoff frequencies for the purpose of decreasing the effect of discretization
noise. The discretization frequency exceeded the filter cutoff frequency by a factor
of approximately 3. In computing the spectral density 3(f). where f is frequency,
use was made of a fast Fourier transform program prepared at the Atlantic Division
of the Institute of Oceanology. The program provided for the breakdown of the ini-
tial series into individual "pieces," the Fourier coefficients are computed for

each of them, and the spectral densities are averaged for the entire length of the
series (for n1 "pieces") and for a stipulated frequency band (for n2 points on the
frequency axis). In the computations the equivalent number of degrees of freedom

V, evaluated using the formula V3 annz, was not less than 100. This ensured a
high statistical significance of the resulting spectral density evaluations.

35
FINICHHWC!AI.[EHE(H§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figures 1-7, at a bilogarithmic scale, represent the one-dimensional spectral
densities of conductivity fluctuations in the 2d-6th and 8th polygons of the 7th
voyage of the scientific research ship "Dmitriy Mendeleyev." The spectral curves
in each figure are numbered in the order of an increase in the depth of measure-
ment. The spectra for different nonoverlapping segments of the record at one and
the same measurement horizon are noted by differer' letters. The conversion from
the frequencies f to the wave numbers k was accomplished on the assumption of the
correctness of the hypothesis of ”frozen-in turbulence" using the formula k -
ZIIf/V, where V is the velocity of motion of the sensor relative to the medium at
the measurement horizon. Accordingly, for scaling the function B(f) into the spec—
tral density El(k) use was made of the formula 81(k) - Vin B(f).

The range of wave numbers when computing 31(k) extended from 6.3-10'2 to 6.7 cm'l,
which corresponds to the change in scales of inhomogeneities of the conductivity
field from 0.9 cm to l m. The figures show that the spectral density values vary
in a wide range. In the low-frequency region the E (k) values in each of Figures
1-7 vary in the range from one to more than two orders of magnitude.

Measurements of conductivity fluctuations by means of a towed line of the first
type in polygons 2, 6, 6 and 8 were carried out under different hydrological con-
ditions and this evidently explains the difference in the levels and diversity

of the shapes of the spectral curves in Figures 1-6. The values of the 31(k)
spectra with k - 100 or1 vary by almost three orders of magnitude (fron.-2'10‘1‘
ohm'Z-cm‘l to ~110'11 ohm’z-cm'l). The straight lines approximating the 31(k)
functions at a bilogsrithmic scale have a different slope to the anxis (the tan-
gent of the curve slope varies in the range from -l.h to -3).

Figure 1 shows the spectral curves (polygon 2) based on measurements in stratified
layers with the values of the vertical gradient of current velocity (about 1.5 cm/
sec/m) maximum for this polygon. The lower group of curves is approximated well

by a straight line with the slope -5/3 and the upper curves lb and 2a have a
steeper dropoff with an increase in the wave numbers. It should be noted that the
spectral curves for one and the same measurement horizon can differ appreciably
from one another with respect to both level and shape, which can be related to a
difference in local background conditions (processes determining the generation
and attenuation of microscale turbulence).

The spectra of conductivity fluctuations in Fig. 2 (polygon 4) were obtained from
measurements in a layer with a constant density gradient (curves 1-7) and in the
quasihomogeneous layer (curves 8, 9). The current velocity vector in polygon a
with an increase in depth (in the investigated layer of the ocean) rotates in a
counterclockwise direction and decreases in value from £5 cm/sec at a depth of

50 cm to 20-30 cm/sec at a depth of 100-125 m. At depths of 50 and 125 m the cur-
rent velocity vectors are directed in the opposite direction. The current velocity
gradient in the polygon is governed for the most part by a change not in the mod-
ulus but the direction of the current velocity with depth. The 81(k) values in
polygon 6 change in the widest limits (in comparison with polygons 2, 6, 8). With

an increase in the level of the 81(k) curves the dropoff of the spectral functions
with an increase in k on the average becomes steeper and the slope of the approx-
imating straight lines increases from ~5/3 (for curve 9a) to -3 (for curves 2c and

36

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USEGDNLY
3). The spectral curves 8 and 9a, 9b fall in the lower part of the bundle of
curves: this is evidently attributable to the fact that neasurenents 8 and 9

fall in the quasiholnogeneous layer. The bundles of curves in Figures 1 and 2 when
latched virtually fall on one another.

-2 _1
(III), ’~-:_:’l,, 0h osec

 

Ir’ me my”

Pig. 1. Spectral densities of conductivity Fig. 2. Spectral densities of conduc-

fluctuotions in second polygon. Measure- tivity fluctuations in fourth polygon

ment horizons: 77 Ill (la,b,c,d). 120 n for horizons (.9 (1), 60 (2b.2c), 65
(2a,b.c).

(3). 67 (4). 70 (5). 75 (6). 80 (7).
103 (8), 120 1a (9a, 9b).

In polygon 6 the measurements were made in the layer with a constant density gra-
dient (curves 2-5) and at the upper (curve 1) and lover (curve 6) boundaries of
this layer situated between the quasihonogeneous layers. The current velocity
field has a complex vertical structure. The current velocity vector in the upper
75-! layer of the ocean rotates in a countercloclwise direction by the angle 3/4
and decreases in value fron 95 cnlsec at a depth of 13 n to 35-60 cn/sec at a
depth of 50-75 m and in the layer from 75 to 100 n rotates in a clockwise direc-
tion and decreases in value to 15 cal/sec. In the layer from 100 to 125 I: there

is a change in current direction to the opposite direction and at a depth of

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

125 m the velocity was close to 30 ell/sec. At a depth of 200 n the current velo-
city decreases to 10 cn/sec. The spectral curves in Fig. 3 form a dense group

and fall somewhat above the curves in Figures 1 and 2. The 310:) curves in Pig.

3 (except for 3, lo and So) can be approximated by straight lines with a slope -5/3
and curves 3, lo and 5a -- by straight lines with slopes -2 and -7/5. The good ap-
proximat ion of the curves lo and So by straight lines with a slope ~7/S-nakes it
possible to postulate a substantial influence of buoyancy forces on nicroscale
turbulence in the ocean in a number of cases [3, lo].

[I It], ur'I-n. -I ohm'z ° cn'l

I, In], Iﬁ'z-‘ﬂ'l Gill-2 -cm'1

 

 

[30/]
II" Il’sm”

Fig. 3. Spectral densities of fluctua-

tions of conductivity in sixth polygon

for horizons 10 (l), 14 (2). 54 (3),
60 ([0), 68 (58, 5b), 89 I (6).

II "4’ I

Fig. lo. Spectral densities of fluctua-
tions of conductivity in eighth polygon
for horizons 55 (1), 95 (2). 110 (3).
11.1 (It), 145 (S), 161 (6). 170 (7a, 7b),
175 In (8). m-

Figure la shows the spectral densities of conductivity fluctuations in polygon 8.

The measurements were made in layers with different (different from zero) values

of the density gradient (the maximal density gradient is at horizon 3). The meas-
urements lo. 5 were made in the layer with a marked change in curvature

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the density profile. In the layer fron 50 to 200 n in polygon 8 the direc-
tion of the flow changes by the angle‘vn/k; the current velocity vector below

75 n rotates is a clockwise direction, remaining unchanged in the layer 50-100 n
(IVSS cn/aec) and decreasing to 25 and 35 cnlsec respectively at depths of 125
and 200 n. The spectral curves in Fig. 6 form a relatively dense bundle and can
be approximated at a bilogarithnic scale by straight lines vith a slope close to

-2. The bundles of 21(k) curves in Figures 4 and 3 are latched well with one
another, except for curve 6 in Fig. 4.

I." t) , ”:40! " ohn’ZIﬂ-l

\
IJ'”[ \\ l

 

I] " II I '. ",4

 

Fig. 5. Spectral densities of conductivity Fig. 6. Spectral densities of conducL

fluctuations in third polygon for horizons tivity fluctuations in fifth polygon

35 (2b, 2c), 52 (3), 70 (4a,b,c), 72 (5s, for horizons 55 (1), 80 (2). 90 (3).

Sb), 91 (6), 103 (7), 118 (8), 127 n (9). 100 (lo), 105 (S), 115 (6), 120 (7),
129 (8), 150 (9), 187 n (10).

39

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'1 ' ’2

I, ‘ [J

 

Ir,

Pig. 7. Spectral densities of conductiv-
ity fluctuations according to repeated
neasuraaents in sixth polygon for hori-
zons 23 (1a, lb), 105 (2), 71 (3a,b,c.d).
7S (lea. lob), 106 (5a, 5b). 125 (6a, 6b),
132 (7), 166 (8)I 149 (9a, 9b), 217 n
(10).

In polygon 3 the measurements were nade
by the second towed line in the layer
free 35 to 127 a with a variable (non-
zero) value of the density gradient. The
current velocity vector in the upper
1501 layer has a value 20-25 ell/sec and
varies in direction. The level of the

(k) spectral curves in polygon 3 (Pig.
5 varies in a very broad range (by al—
most three orders of magnitude with k -
10° cn‘l). Soae of the curves in Fig. 5
can be approxinated in the entire inves-
tigated range of scales by straight lines
(with a slope -2 for curves 7, 9 and with
a slope for the other curves sonawhat
greater in absolute value). however. most
of the curves in Fig. 5 are approxinated
by straight lines only in individual
sIall segments; with an increase in k
the slope of. the 331(k) curves increases.

In polygon 5 the neasuraaants were nade
in the layer from 55 to 187 a with dif-
ferent values of the density gradient
(neasureaents 3-8 were made in a clearly
expressed density juup layer and neasure-
ments 9, 10 in the quasihouogeneous lay-
er). The current velocity field in the
considered layer has a relatively COI-
plex vertical structure: the current
velocity vector changes in value fro-
40 to 10 cal/sec with a change of direc-
tion within the limits of the angle 3/6
31. The 810:) spectral curves in poly-
gon 5 (Fig. 6) form a dense bundle which
lies below the bundle of curves in Pig.
5. All the curves in Fig. 6 can be ap-
proximated by straight lines with slopes
in absolute value somewhat greater than
2 (only the straight line approximating
curve 10 has a greater slope, close to
-3).

The neasureaents of high-frequency con-
ductivity fluctuations in polygon 6 were
made using towed lines of two types and
an interval between neesuruents of 1
day. Repeated aeasurenents were nade in
the layer from 23 to 217 n with different

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
density gradient values. The coupler vertical structure of the velocity field
in the polygon was described above. The "fan" of curves in Fig. 7 graphically
illustrates the possibility of a great variability of the characteristics of
microscale fluctuations of conductivity in the upper layer of the ocean. The
spectral density of conductivity fluctuations 31(k) with some values of the
wave numbers varies in polygon 6 by more than three orders of magnitude. The
spectral curves in Pig. 7 in the low-frequency region can be approximated by
straight lines with the slope —7I5 (for the lower curves) and -5/3 (for the
upper curves). The spectral curves in Figures 3 and 5 agree quite well with one
another, which makes it possible to consider the results of the measurements
using different towed lines to be representative.

ll,l!),l~"~r~‘l I -

[I'll] Il'fu '1 and a 0M‘2 'CI-z

   

II " II” 1,!!!"

Fig. 8. Distribution of intensity of conductivity fluctuations in wave number
spectrum in second polygon. Notations are the same as in Fig. 1.

Using the records of conductivity fluctuations obtained in the polygons we also
computed the k! (k) and kzs (k) functions. The k31(k) curves at a semilogarithmic
scale graphically show the distribution of the intensity of conductivity fluctua-
tions in the wave number spectrum. The rate of evening-out of inhomogeneities in
the conductivity field in an isotropic case is proportional to the area under the
k231(k) curve (in ordinary coordinates) and therefore the k231(k) spectra can be
arbitrarily called "dissipation" spectra.

As an example. Pigures 8-11 show the spectral functions kzl(k) and the dissipation
spectra for the conductivity field 13310:) for polygons 2 and 6. In most cases
the kﬁl(k) curves in all the polygons almost monotonically increase with a de—
crease in the wave numbers k (with an increase in the scales of the inhomogeneit—
ies). At individual horizons the he (k) curves with a decrease in k attain a maxi-
mum (for example, curves 1, 2, 5b, % in Fig. 10) and it can be assumed that in
these cases there are processes of generation of inhomogeneities in the conductiv-
ity field with scales of several tens of centimeters. The "dissipation" spectra
are very jagged and as a rule do not attain maxima in the investigated wave num-

ber range. An exception are the k231(k) spectra for polygon 6 (according to
41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

repeated neaeur-ents), nost of which have mine in the range of scales fro-
S to 15 cm.

-2 -3
t’l,N-Il”u"'t~” all! ":3

    

”-I II, ‘. ‘ﬂ-I

Fig. 9. "Dissipation" spectra of conductivity fluctuations in a
notations are the sale as in Pig. 1.

if Ill-Il’fnr‘l-nt" ‘2. '2

econd ‘ polygon . The

 

II" III I, IN“

Fig. 10. Distribution of intensity of con- Fig. 11. "Dissipation" spectre of con-

ductivity fluctuations in wave nunber ductivity fluctuations in sixth poly-

opecttuu in sixth polygon. Notations son. Notations are the some as in Pig.
are the one as in Pig. 3. 3.

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Thus, the spectral characteristics of conductivity fluctuations in the upper lay-
er of the ocean were utrasely variable not only with substantially different
macroscale hydrological conditions (in the case of interpolygon comparison), but
also in the case of measurements at one and the same depth (or near depths) with-
in the linits of, an individual polygon, where the nacroscale "background" condi-
tions must be considered identical. In the generation of nicroscale turbulence
an important role should evidently be played by nesoscale processes (with scales
up to several meters). Accordingly, neasurenents of nicrofluctuations of hydro-
physical fields must be accompanied by the registry of local background condi-
tions (local nesostructure of hydrophysical fields). The spectral characteris-
tics of nicrofluctustions of conductivity (level of the spectral curves and their
shape) do not reveal a monotonic change with depth in any of the polygons. The
1122 (k) dissipation spectra in the range of scales fro. 0.9 cu to 1 a do not have
max Isa. Evidently, the diversity of ferns and levels of the spectral functions of
conductivity fluctuations in the ocean indicates the existence of different lech-
anisns of their generation and attenuation. Among such nechaniuss a najor role
can be played by buoyancy forces, local current velocity gradients, caused, for
example, by high-frequency internal waves. The steep slopes of the 810:) func-
tions which we observed in some cases are also possibly attributable to the latter.

BIHLIOGRAFHY

1. Oznidov, R. V., "Experinental Investigations of Hicroscale Oceanic Turbulence
at the Institute of Oceanology ineni P. P. Shirshov USSR Academy of Sciences,"
ISSLEDOVANIYE OKEANICHESKOY TURBULMMSTI (Investigation of Oceanic Turbu-
lence), Moscow, "Nauka," 1973.

2. Pairs, V. T., "Complex Measure-ants of Physical Fields in the Ocean in a Tov-
1ng Regine," AMATIZATSIYA NAUGHNYKR ISSLEIXWANIY HOREY I OKEAKN (Automa-
tion of Scientific Investigations of Seas and Oceans). Part I, Sevastopol',
Izd. HGI AN Ukrainian SSR, 1972.

3. Bolgiano, R., "Turbulent Spectra in s Stably Stratified Ataosphere," J. Gm-
PHYS. “8., 66, No 12, 1959.

6. Honin, A. 3., "On the Turbulence Spectrum in a Temperature Inhomogeneous Atno-
sphere," IZV. AN SSSR: SERIYA GEOPIZ. (News of the USSR Acadaly of Sciences:
Geophysical Series). No 3, 1962.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1975

5303
C80: 8144/1839

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STATISTICAL EVALUATIONS 0F PARAMETERS 0P SHALL-SCALE WC!

Moscow ISSLEDOVANIYB IMHCIIIVOSTI GIDROPIZICIESKIKB Pom V 0mm in Russian 1976
pp 50-60

[Article by V. D. Pozdynin froa monograph "Ocean Research on Hydrophysical Field
Variability," edited by R. V, Omnidov, doctor of physical and
mathematical sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 211- pages, number of copies unknown]

[Text] The expeditionary investigations of microscale turbulence undertaken during
1969-1972 by the Institute of Oceanology imeni P. P. Shirshov USSR Acadeny of Sci-
ences yielded a considerable voluae of empirical data making it possible to employ
different mathematical processing methods for its study. In particular, the pur-
pose of this study was obtaining a series of statistical evaluations of some par-
ameters of nicroscale turbulence and also the degree of their variability in a
horizontal direction and with depth.

Heasurements of microscale turbulence carried out on the 9th voyage of the "Mud--
enik Kurchatov" (1970-1971) in the Atlantic Ocean made it possible to give statis-
iatical evaluations of its external and internal horizontal scales, energy level,
rate of energy dissipation. coefficient of relative variability and other para-
meters.

The measurement method also provided means for collecting data which would be suit-
able for clarifications of the statistical uniformity of evaluations of the measur-
ed characteristics at one and the same depth and at different depths. For this pur-

pose the unit for measuring turbulence was towed behind the ship in different di-
rections or was lowered on a single run to a limiting depth of submergence with
holding each 10-15 m for making turbulence measurements.

Interest in the statistical uniformity of empirical evaluations of different tur-
bulence parameters was dictated by the following considerations. The diversity of

the possible mechanisms of generation of microscale turbulence in a general case
should give rise to some aging and spatial diversity of their evaluations. and in

MWWONLY
particular, statistically significant differences between them. The detection of

the latter at some measurement horizon could serve as an indication of the depths
and water layers where investigations of differences in the mechanisms of genera-
tion of turbulence would be most successful. 0n the other hand, the absence of stat-
istically significant differences in evaluations of turbulence parameters at a num-
ber of depths would indicate a statistical uniformity of the vertical structure of
turbulence in the investigated water layer.

[00

 

Fig. 1. Determination of limiting correlation radius r0.05; r1, r2 correspond to
the correlation functions 1, 2.

Measurements of fluctuations of current velocity were subjected to statistical pro-
cessing. These measurements were made in three polygons on the 9th voyage of the
scientific research ship "Akademik Kurchatov" situated in ocean regions with the
coordinates 29°30’S, £60“ -- fifth polygon, 23°0'S. 36°0'H -- sixth polygon and
0°0's. 24°0'H ~- seventh polygon.

We note at once that all the procedures for the statistical processing of data are
based on assumptions concerning the adequacy of microscale oceanic turbulence to
the normal random process and the possibility of use of some formulas of isotropic
turbulence for carrying out the necessary computations. In order to simplify the
processing of the mass of measurement data the computation of the external tur-
bulence scale was replaced by a determination of the limiting correlation radius;
by the latter is meant the distance in which the correlation between the two ordin-
ates of the process does not exceed 0.05. A graphic method for determining the lim-
iting correlation radius from the graph of the normalized correlation function is
shown in Fig. 1. From the limiting correlation radius we found the number of inde-
pendent measurements in the record

In - 'r/ro.os. (1)

where T is the length of the record, n is the number of independent measurements,
r0.05 is the limiting correlation radius.

The n value makes it possible to use different statistical criteria and evaluations
in an investigation of the parameters of ocean turbulence. The computation of the
mean values, dispersions and other statistical characteristics was carried out us-
ing known formulas and in accordance with the recommendations set forth in [1]. In
Tables 1, 3, 5 and 6 cited below the first column gives the depth at which

65

FOR1DFFEJAL.USE(NVLY
NR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

turbulence was aeasured; the second column gives the number of independent meas-
urements n: for some parameters this is the number of records, for others it is

the number of independent measurements in the record multiplied by the number of
records; the third_and fourth columns give sample evaluations of the mean values

of the parameter (X) and their standard deviations ( ); the fifth column gives

the standard deviation of an individual measurement ); the sixth column gives the
95% confidence intervals for x and S (in Table 5 there is no second confidence in-
terval); the seventh column gives the coefficient of relative variability computed
using the formla q - s/i‘.

Table 1 gives the results of statistical processing of material characterizing the
limiting horizontal correlation radius r0 05 of microscale turbulence in the poly-
gons. The table shows that the evaluations of the mean limiting correlation radii
have appreciable differences. The statistical significance of these differences
was investigated using dispersion analysis [1]. In the fifth and sixth polygons
these differences at the 0.05 level were insignificant. In the seventh, at the two
lower horizons r0.05 had statistically significant differences from r0.05 at the
above-lying horizons.

Table 1

Statistical Characteristics of Limiting Correlation Radius ”0.05

_————————._——_———
Depth, 951 c nfiden e

  
 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fifth polygon

       
    
 

3) 5 09 ii 25 33-1“) 15—12 0.36
’0 9 57 i 11 “—66 7-21 0, to
so 3 38 5 9 15-53 5-36 0.25
00 5 55 8 18 33—77 11—53 0.13
70 5 39 4 9 30—50 5—26 0.2:
50 5 50 M so “—89 18—86 0.6!
61 5 43 6 i3 26-80 8—37 0.31
Sixth polygon
w 10 35 2 7 31—40 5-13 0.20
$0 1’. bl 3 11 35-48 8—17 0.21
50 16 . ii 2 8 31—45 ﬁ—O 0,15
60 12 39 2 6 35—“ -5—11 0.11
11 3 31 2 5 32-42 3—10 0.1!.
. Seventh polygon
30 5 41 1 2 38—44 1-6 0.06
32 5 . , 35 i 8 33-33 -'.—l1 0.11
73 6 40 2 5 31—43 3-12 0.14
)0 6 36 '2 6 33—39 i—IS 0.113
I 10 6 33 2 4 ' ’ 2-10 0, H
m 3 51 I 2 1-12 0.05

          

* _
In Tables 1, 2, 3 and 5 x and S are given rounded-off and therefore the q values

computed from them can differ somewhat from the values given in the seventh column
of these tables.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR 0F13C1AL.USE()NLY

In the table the variability is represented by evaluations of the standard devia-
tions of individual values of the correlation radius from their mean values.

The data in the table show that in all the polygons the horizontal variability u-

ceeded the variability with depth; the variability in the fifth polygon was apprec-

iably greater than in the other two, where it can be considered identical.

4!

  

I”! III}! Mn”: sec

Fig. 4. Dependence of microscsle ). and coefficient k on discreteness of measure-
ments.

As a result of statistical processing we determined the internal scale of turbu-
lence }.or the Taylor microscsle. It was also determined by a graphic method whose
essence is the construction of a parabola conjugate with the correlation function
curve (Fig; 2) [3].

In the use processing of material it is more convenient to couple the correlation
function with the parabola. For this it is necessary to construct the nomogram il-
lustrated in Fig. 3. which represents the set of necessary parabolaa. 0n the ver-
tical axis of the nomogram we have plotted the y-scale of the noraalized correla-
tion function. and on the horizontal scale the scale of distances covered by the
turbulence measuring instrument relative to the water. The family of parabolas is
marked with the corresponding microscsle values in centimeters. For determining
the microscsle the initial points of the correlation function curve are plotted on
the nomogram and are joined by a smooth line to its juncture with the corresponding
parabola.

The influence exerted on the microscsle of inaccuracies in joining of the correla-
tion function curve with the parabola, associated with the relatively great dis-
creteness of data taken for computing the correlation function, was excluded by
means of the following procedure. 0n the basis of the correlation functions, comput-
ed using one and the same record, but with a discreteness of the readings of 1/300,
1/150 and 1/75 sec. we determined the corresponding values of the microscsles. The
averaged data fro: these computations were used in constructing curve 1 in Fig. 6.
The left end of the curve, represented by a dashed line, is the result of extrapola-
tion of the resulting dependence for a discreteness of readings of less than 1/300
sec. The equivalence of microscsles for a discreteness of initial data of 1/300.
1/150 and 1/75 sec was attained by scaling using the formula

10 ' RAD
48

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where k is the proportionality factor; A is a nicroscale deternined with the dis-
creteness A t; 7x0 is the value of the nicroacale corresponding to the continuous
registry of initial data used as the final result of processing. The dependence of
the k coefficient on the discreteness of readings is illustrated by curve 2 in Fig.
«'0. This curve was constructed using the very use data as curve 1.

Table 3

Statistical Characteristics of Internal Turbulence Scale (Taylor Hicroscale) )0

 

' 95: I confidﬁce
“Pt“ II :0, u 6‘- a s m _ 'I
n for) 0 I for 8

 

 

 

 

   

Fifth polygon

 

 

 

30 m 1.3 0.1 0.4 I.5—2.: 0.23—0.73 v.22
40 17 1.! 0.1 0.4 0.9—1.3 0.11—0.59 I216
5.0 s 1.I- 0.1 0.2 0.0-4.3 tum—0.11 0.13
60 12 1.9 0.1 0.1. I.a—2.: n.23—u.72 n.2l
7o 7 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.04.: 0.00-0.22 0.10
30 8 1.1 0.1 0.2 0.0—l.3 0.13-0.31 II.I8
87 II 1.3 0,2 0.5 1.0—1.6 034-0.!" 0.3
Sixth polygon
m . to I 0.3 0.0: . 0.03 I 0.3—0.9 I’m-owe ".10
so as 0.3 0.05 | 0.13 0.3—0.9 o.u—u.:'. ".2"
So to 1.0 0.05 0.16 0.9—1.1 0.11-0.29 ".11
60 10 1.1. 0.10 I 0.32 l I.::-I.G 0.22—0.53 «9.1“.
71 s 1.2 I 0.02 , 0.05 1.1—1.3 0.03—0.10] om
Seventh polygon
m: 1 1.0 0.0 n.1' | 'n.8-—I.1 ION—0.2 f“ I-
5,» 1 0,3 0,1 0.2 0.7—1.) Inn—um I'.I‘a'
13 3 0,9 0,0 0,2 I 0.3—1.0 max—u.“ "J!-
m m 0.3 0.0 «m 0.7—0.9 0.i‘7—0.l3 lull;
Ill) 3 0.9 0.0 0.1 | Inf—0.9 onus-ugh) Hut}
I40 I I. 1.6 0.1 i 0.2 I I.:—-.‘.o Io.||-u.1l. um.-

Table 3 gives the results of statistical processing of measurements in polygons
characterizing the internal scale of oceanic turbulence.

The statistical significance of the differences in evaluations of the mean values
of the nicroscales at different depths was checked using dispersion analysis. The
analysis indicated that with a significance level 0.05 in the fifth polygon there
were two statistically significant nicroscales: 1.8 cm at depths of 30 and 60 la
and 1.1 cu in the layer 40-90 I: (excluding a depth of 60 II); in the sixth polygon
there were also two: 0.8 cm in the layer 30-50 In depth and 1.3 cu in the layer 60-
77 n. In the seventh polygon the statistical uniformity of the nicroscale was noted
in the layer fron 30 to 110 In with a mean value 0.9 can; at a depth of 150 n the
nicroscale differed significantly frun this value and was equal to 1.6 cu.

According to data from dispersion analysis, the variability of the Iicroscale at
one and the same depth and between depths (in the evaluations of the standard de-
viations) is characterized by the figures cited in Table 6.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of the statistical processing show that the internal scale of oceanic
turbulence can retain statistical uniformity in depth over the extent of several
tens of meters.

The processing of data on the energy level of nicroscale turbulence in the polygons
was also carried out with computation of the infomtion not only on the mean and
extremal values of this parameter. but also on the degree of statistical uniformity

of its enpirical evaluations at the same depth and between depths.

' Table lo
Results of Dispersion Analysis of Variability of Taylor Microscale
Polygon In entire investigated water layer, In layer with statistically hono-
CII geneous evaluations in depth, on
at one depth between depths between depths
S 0.35 0.36 0.00
6 0.14 0.07 0.03
7 0.14 0.2!. 0.06
Table 5

Statistical Characteristics of Energy Level for Microscale Turbulence

 

 

 

 

30 30 LOI 0.61 0.79—1.69 0.4l
40 mo 0.07 0.20 0.35-0.33 0,19
so 12 0.49 n.» 0.37 .66 . um
1.1 mm 9.74 51.13—19.18 . 0,07
00 so 1,10 2,3 _ 5.38.10.05 | om
10 us 18.72 8.0 14.61—25.31 I 0.48
so so 1.” 1.0 s 2'.— 9.80 , 0.50
81 :05 22.0 8.76 ”ms-29.43 0,40
' Sixth polygon
no 230 5.80 1.19. 4,154.01 0.31
1.0 288 nm 0.20 0.66—0.98 . 0.3:-
wu 3.1.: 1.2:: 2.66—1.16 : 0,36
50 am 1.31 0,55 Lia—1.1;: E 0.2“
‘48 4.13 1.3:; -_r_m_r.,.'.:. - 0,32. '
so 203 on: um 0.53—0.33 i a,“
5': 35.“. 0.0:! 1.55-1432 : 0.1.1
11 m 0.91 I 0.23 0.19—1.10 ! 0.29
' Seventh l on
I‘ll 2'65 I..“n’. 0.32 PO ysI.W5—l,.'v9 - I 0.31
52 23!. mar. n.42 1.50—2.31 0.23
13 250 0.61 0.31 0.50—0.15 0.01
no 330 1.49 0.40 l.23—l.82 0.21
no :16 1.3: 0.11 l 1,034.59 0.2:.
mo 13 0,63 0.35

0.12 l 0.40—0.30

_ _—____.___
1“95!! confidence interval'for mean energy level. CIIZ/sec2

 

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The evaluationswof the mean squares of the amplitudes of current velocity obtain-
ed st a single depth were subjected to checking for statistical homogeneity using
the Cochran tests [1]. A detailed exposition of the procedure for applying the
Cochran tests, and also some of the results of the processing are given in [2].
More complete results of the processing are given in Table 5.

In particular. in the sixth polygon more detailed data were obtained on statistic—
ally significant differences in the turbulence levels at depths from no to 60 m.
0n the basis of the results of measurements at three horizons, b0, 50, 60 m, us-
ing the Cochrane test, it was possible to discriminate two statistically signif-
icant turbulence levels (this was also recorded at a depth of 50 m in the fifth
polygon). The differences in the levels were reflected in a similar way in the
values of their mean square fluctuation amplitudes.

With all the diversity of evaluations of the mean turbulence levels indicated in
Table 5 it is nevertheless possible to see a definite tendency to their changes
with depth: in the fifth polygon the level increased with depth, in the sixth
polygon it decreased, in the seventh it varied around some mean value. The stat-
istical significance of changes in level with depth was investigated using the
Bartlett test [1], which was usually employed in checking the hypothesis of an

equality of the series of sample dispersions with unequal numbers of measurements
in the samples.

If the empirical value of the test with a significance level 0.05 was less than its
tabulated value, the assumption of an equality of the energy levels at comparable
depths was regarded as noncontradicting the measurement data; the turbulence level
at these depths was considered identical and its value was computed as the mean of
the compared levels. However. if the empirical value of the test exceeded the tab—
ulated value, this gave basis for assuming a nonrandom nature of the differences
between the compared levels. Such a result of this checking was of great importance
for a subsequent analysis of the material: precisely in these cases it was neces-
sary to carry out a comparison of the different levels with the hydrological condi-

tions corresponding to them or the values of individual hydrological factors. Other-
wise the established dependences between the hydrological factors and the turbulence

level could be random and would not be confirmed in subsequent measurements. In the
light of the results obtained using the Bartlett test the vertical energy structure
of turbulence in the polygons is represented in the following form.

Fifth polygon. At a depth of 30 m turbulence had the level 1.01 cm2/sec2. Then, in
the range of depths 60-50 m the level was 0.61 cmzlsecz. However, at a depth of 50
m there was turbulence of a greater intensity -- 18.59 cmz-secz. This same level

was observed at depths of 70 and 87 m. The turbulence level at depths of 60 and 80
m was 7.14 cmzlsec .

Thus. in the fifth polygon there was a total of four statistically significant tur-
bulence levels. Their depth positioning was governed by the well-expressed strat-
ification of the energy structure of turbulence. Accordingly, layers were determin-
ed which should be used in comparing hydrological factors with evaluations of the
turbulence level in the search for relationships between them.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sixth polygon. In this polygon there were four statistically significant levels:
5.80 cmzlsec2 at a depth of 30 m, 3.21 cm2/sec2 at depths of 1.0. 50 and 60 m,

1.37 cmzlsec2 at a depth of 50 m and 0.82 cmzlsec2 at depths of 40, 60 and 77 m.
01' the two levels existing at the horizons 40, 50 and 60 m the higher was charac-
teristic for the entire layer from #0 to 60 m, whereas the second, lower level, was
observed only at depths of 40 and 60 m and then was repeated at a depth of 77 m.

Seventh polygon. The vertical energy structure of turbulence in this polygon was
characterized by three statistically significant levels. In the upper homogeneous
layer of the ocean, at a depth of 36 m, and also in the water temperature and den-
sity jump la er, at depths 90 and 110 m, the turbulence level was identical --
1.38 cmzlsec . The highest level 1.86 cmzlsec2 related to the depth 52 m; the low-
est - 0.62 cmzlsec2 — was at the depths 73 and 160 m.

The evaluations of the mean square of the amplitudes of current velocity fluctua-
tions u'2 and the internal turbulence scale A0 were used in computing the rate of
dissipation of turbulent energy 5 using the formula

‘7;
6-15v ET" (2)
"5

where V is water viscosity [3]

The determination of 8 using this formula requires a high accuracy in measuring the
initial data, as is easily confirmed, inspecting formula (3), which is used in com-
puting the relative mean square error in the rate of dissipation A" :

o.a2]/6i+6i++63. (3)

where Junk sndJu are the relative mean square errors in the'amplitudes of velocity
fluctuations, turbulence microscale and water viscosity respectively.

With existing measurement techniques, even under the most favorable conditions the
error in determining i using formula (2) will nevertheless be about 202. According-
ly, it was of definite interest. prior to proceeding to large-scale computations on
the basis of formula (2), to compare the results of computations using this formula
with the results of determination of e by other nethods. Such a possibility appear-
ed due to the computations of 5 made by V. S. Belyayev, H. H. Lyubimtsev and R. V.
Ozmidov [lo] on the basis of measurements made in the seventh polygon. The rate of
dissipation of turbulent energy was computed by these authors using the formula

#97] m

where V is the rate of towing of the instrument relative to the water, and using the
universal curve for the spectral density of the energy of velocity fluctuations

[5].

The results of determination of 8 by the three indicated methods are shown graphic-
ally in Pig. 5. Curve 1 corresponds to computations of s using formula (2), curve 2
corresponds to computations made employing the universal curve and curve 3

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
corresponds to computations using formula (la). When using formula (2) the dissi-
pation rates were maximum and when using formula (14) they were minimum. The shape
of the curves based on formula (2) and the universal curve agrees well, which. in
particular, is determined by the insignificance of the fluctuations of the differ-
ences between the dissipation rates computed by these two methods. However, the
discrepancies with the results of computations using formula (lo) are unstable in
value and vary in a considerable range. with an unknown absolute accuracy in de-
termining E, by the considered methods the first two seem of equal value, and in-
deed, preferable. Accordingly, at the present time the carrying out of large-scale
computations on the basis of formula (2) seems entirely feasible.

Table 6

Statistical dﬁaracteristics of Rate of Dissipation of Turbulent Energy 6

 

Fifth poly or. .

 

 

30 I 4 0.97 0.00 0.0! U. 5—010!) 0.00-0.01 ".3"
go 9 0.09 0,01 0.09 0.03—0.15 ".07—0.M I."
.m a 1.9:} 0.10 2.0x 0.01-3.22 Lia—$.15 1.2:-
go 7 I 0.3.: 0.11 0,45 mun—".9? IJ.::4—n.'l7 ~03:-
'.U 7 3.9- 0.43 l2" 231-31“ 0.77—2.55 0521'
m I S I lél 0,.“ wt: u,r.-:..:_|u Gail-1.5" 0.13.;
87 5 6,15 1,3!) 3.1: 2.88—Iu.60 1.81-8.97] 0.?!-
Sixth polygon

30 9 i 1.22 0.“ 0,10 I 0.90—1.3’. | Dali-0.53 I 0."-~
.1." 15 . 0.8! u.” 0.1.; l),.')$—l.ll'n min-0.65. 0.’-‘.
:30 In 'i' 0.29 v.07 n_:: :qu—n/g, 0.5—0.4» 0.1-.
Lug In - 0."! 0.0: 046 0.u.’-—U.H um—om u.:‘-:
.. | B I 0.“ 0.ul um o,oz—o,13 0.02—0.06 0.22

_ Seventh polygon
.'_'.ﬂ - 1 ",2: 0.0. 5 «LI: n.|'.—n,:‘.‘. mus—”5:6 0.3--
..n'.‘ ' n |-_'-l'u u_u,\ = II_'_'| , ||_'_'('._u.I‘-l'. |).|‘.—II,’.IB I I) 'II
.-. I .s ‘ 0.13 n_|l' I "my u_m—o,:’.3 u,u7—u,2n n.5-
‘lu II I I),’.:I OJ": mm Il.’_’,‘|—0_57 ”ll-0.1” 0,5.-
uu | 8 0.1'. I u u" 0.05 0.29—0.39 "pa-0.10 U.l'-

’- I . | 0.05 0.02-0.15 0.03—0. 19 ..'~*

I

     

a

The 8 values computed using formula (2) for each depth had a great scatter and thus
it was necessary to check them for statistical homogeneity. In the checking use was
made of the Grubbs test [6], computed using the formulas

-x _
Venp - 313—. or Vemp - 11M, (5)

where V“? is the empirical value of the test, X is the mean sample to be checked,

xmm, ’ﬁnax are the extremal terms of the sample, 8 is the evaluation of the stan-
dard deviation, determined using this sample.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, my: ”a cal/all an/ucli

  

III

III
I, I:

Fig. 5. Profiles of rate of dissipation of turbulent energy computed using formulas
(2) and (b) and using universal curve.

 

Fig. 6. Vertical profiles of coefficients of relative variability r0.05v A , FT
and 8 in fifth (a), sixth (b) and seventh (c) polygons.

Table 7
Results of Dispersion Analysis of Variability of 6 Parameter

Polygon Standard deviation . enzl sec3
at one depth between depths
5 1. 33 2. l3
6 0. Mb 0. 12
7 00 14 o O 12

The computed value of the test was compared with the tabulated vul- values correspond-
ing to the significance level 0.01 and the number of terms in the sample. In the

case of the inequality venp>v1~ the checked tern of the sample was considered to be-
long to the other general set (to other conditions of the dissipation of turbulent

energy) and excluded from consideration in this sample. However, despite expecta-
tions, only two 8 values were excluded.

54

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
Table 6 gives the results of statistical processing of data on the rate of dis-
sipation of turbulent energy in polygons.

   
 

(213/ sec2 ’,__.__ ’,0 [Jul/cu!
cnzlsec3 Watﬁg/NI'
. d c)
cmzlsec2 .

  

1!! ll J‘l II J"! tlrnt/dl’

Fig. 7. Vertical profiles of 372 and 8 in fifth (a), sixth (b) and seventh (c) poly-
gons.

It can be seen that the dissipation rates, even in the sane polygon, varied with
depth by an order of magnitude, and in one case, even two orders of Iagnitude
(fifth polygon, depths 30, 87 a). With such a great vertical variability the stat-
istical homogeneity of dissipation rates was observed only between individual lay-
ers. as. for example, at depths 30 and 40, 50 and 80 m in the fifth polygon, at .
depths of 60 and 77 m in the sixth polygon and at 52, 90 and 110 n in the seventh
polygon. The variability of the dissipation rate at one and the sale depth and be-
tween depths is characterized by the data in Table 7, in which we give evaluations
of the corresponding standard deviations obtained by dispersion analysis.

The rate of dissipation of turbulent energy varied with depth differently in each
polygon: in the fifth polygon it increased, in the sixth it decreased, in the sev-
enth it varied, first increasing and then decreasing with depth.

A cooperative analysis of the coefficients of relative variability ro,05, 1A0, u'2
and 6 revealed an interesting peculiarity in the structure of turbulence in the
polygons: the relative variability of its energy parameters considerably exceeded
the variability of its characteristic scales (assuming that the variability of the
limiting correlation radius is identical with the variability of the external tur-
bulence scaled. Figure 6 shows the vertical profiles of the coefficients of rela-
dve variability in the fifth, sixth and seventh polygons. It can be seen from the
relative positioning of these profiles that the greatest relative variability is
for the dissipation rate (curve 1), then for the energy level (curve 2), and then

55

FIJIIOFFICJAI.IHSEICNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is approximately identical for the microscale and the limiting correlation
radius (curves 3 and 4). According to formula (2) the changes in the energy level
and the turbulence microscale exert an identical (in absolute value) influence on
changes in the dissipation rate. The absolute and relative variability of the
microscale in the polygons was small: water layers with a thickness of tens of
meters are characterized by the same microscale value but its relative variability
in most cases did not exceed 20-302. Thus, the change in the rate of dissipation
was influenced to a considerable degree, apparently, by the energy level of tur-
bulence due to its great spatial-temporal variability. A confirmation of this as-
sumption may be the almost complete reproduction of the details of the vertical
profile of the energy level of turbulence in the profile of the dissipation rate,
especially in the fifth and seventh polygons (Pig. 7).

All the results of statistical processing cited above clarify the problem of the
possible mean values of the individual characteristics of microscale turbulence
in the ocean. However, the next step, a comparison of these data with the evalua-
tions of hydrological factors obtained from measurements with existing standard
instruments, once again has demonstrated the untenability of such attempts due to
the extreme paucity of hydrological information. For example, the considerable
spatial-temporal variability of turbulence characteristics observed in the fifth
polygon found no explanation in the materials of background hydrological condi-
tions obtained in the polygon using standard oceanological instruments.

Turbulence measurements relating to the equatorial current (seventh polygon) agree
only partially with data on the hydrological conditions in this polygon, which were
also determined using standard instruments. Thus, the insignificant spatial-tempor-
al variability of the characteristics of turbulence along the flow can be attribut-
ed to the stability of current direction and velocity registered by BPV current
meters installed on a buoy station in the polygon. But the absence of significant
differences in turbulence levels, for example, at the depths 36, 90 m, was com-
pletely inexplicable.

According to hydrological data at a depth of 36 m there was a considerable vertical
current gradient and a small vertical water density gradient, conditions favorable
for the existence of a relatively high turbulence level. At a depth of 90 m, ac-
cording to these same hydrological data, there was an opposite situation, and
nevertheless in both cases the turbulence levels did not have statistically signif-
icant differences. Evidently some local details of the vertical structure of the
density field could not be detected using the standard oceanological instruments
employed.

In order to clarify such fine relationships and the dependences between the para-
meters of microscale turbulence, dynamic and thermal state of the investigated
water layers it is necessary to have complexes of new oceanological instruments.
Only with the availability of these instruments will the researcher be able to
trace all the local changes in hydrological conditions from micro- to mesoscales
inclusive.

56

FOR 0FF1C1A1.lMﬂE(NVLY
l.

2.

3.

S.

6.

._. .. 11111.10an?“

Dunin-Barhovskiy, I. V. and Snitnov, II. V., rmsm VKROYATIDSTEY I HATE!-
AIICHBSKAYA STATISTIKA V mm (Theory of Probabilities and MathematiCsl
Statistics.,in.,1'echnology) , Moscow, Gostekhizdat. 1955.

Khintse, I. 0., TURNILENTNOST' (Turbulean , Moscow, Piznatgiz, 1963.

Belyayev, V. 8., Guentsvey, A. N., Lyubiltsev, M. 11., 0midov, R. V., Palm,
V. '1'. and Pozdynin, V. 1)., "Some Results of an Experimental Investigation of
Fluctuations of Hydrophysical Fields in the Upper Layer of the Ocean,"
ISSLDOVANIYE OMICHESRDY W51! (Investigation of Oceanic Tur-
bulence), Moscow, "Nauka," 1973.

Belyayev, V. 3., Lyubintsev, H. H. and Oaidov, R. V., "Rate of Dissipation of
Turbulent Energy and Rate of Byening-out of Taperature Nonmiforuities in the
Ocean," 12?]. AN SSSR: rum ANSI?!“ I am (News of the USSR Academy of
Sciences: Physics of the Atmsphere and Ocean), No 11, 1973.

Stewart, R. H. and Grant, 8. L. , "Determination of the Rate of Dissipation of
Turbulent Energy Near the Sea Surface in the Presence of Waves," J. GmPBYS.
RES” 67, Bo 8, 1962.

Grubbs, --, "Sample Criteria for Testing Outlying Observations," ANN. MATH.
STATISTICS, 21, No 1, 1950.

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'stvo "Nauka", 1974.

5303
C80: 81 104/ 1839

57

ms OFFICIAL WE ONLY
maomanussouu!

EXPERIENCE IN INVESTIGATIM MICROSIRUCI'URB 0P OCEANIC camuc'rrvm FIELD BY
SOUNDING METHOD

Ibscow ISSLBDOVANIYE IDENCHIVOSTI GIDROPIZICEESKIKH P013! V ms in Russian 1976
pp 61-65 '

[Article by V. P. Vorob'yev, N. N. Korchashkin and 0. N. Nikolayev fron nonograph
"Ocean ksearch on Bydnophysical Held Variability," edited by

R. V. Ornidov, doctor of physical and-mathematical sciences, Irdatel'stvo 'mauka",
211 pages, number of copies printed unknown]

[Text] During recent years great interest has been manifested in study of the fine
structure of hydrophysical fields in the ocean. Such investigations are being
carried out using special sounding apparatus developed both in our country and
abroad. The AIST probe, developed at the Institute of Oceanology ineni P. P. Shir-
shov, USSR Academy of Sciences [1], for example, as well as probes of the STD type
[2], with a vertical resolution of about 1 n, have gained great reknown. The neas-
urenents which have been made using such instruments have substantially changed

our ideas concerning the structure of hydrophysical fields in the ocean and the
physical processes transpiring in it.

*t*

Numerous verticalsections of thernohaline fields which have been obtained by the
use of sounding instruments have demonstrated that the vertical profiles of tea-
perature and salinity in the ocean usually have a "stepped" structure which varies
in time and in space. It was found that in the ocean there are thin interlayers of
water with very great vertical changes in their properties, in turn separated by

more extensive layers where the vertical gradients of the measured paraneters
change slightly.

0n the seventh voyage of the scientific research ship "Dnitriy Hendeleyev" in the
winter of 1972 in the neighborhood of the ()0er Islands in the Indian Ocean spec-
ialists carried out a series of sounding measurements of the vertical structure of

the conductivity field using a new low-inertia sounding instrument with a resolu-
tion of less than-l on vertically. The sounding was carried out to a depth of
300 n with a rate of lowering of the instruent from 0.7 to 1.3 III/sec.

58

POROFFICIALUSEONLV
__'.‘._"_"_':1‘;_"_:'_';1' _ j ,__..,....:
._,',_ . I r I {7 } | J

'

F—-- ‘---"—1 H I

l
SE - sensing element ' |
G - generator _ ' l
PS - pressure sensor I
DA - operational amplifier I
A - amplifier I
D - detector I I

l___;________| | I |

  

__ _______ ___._. L_.J L__._._

Fig. 1. Block diagram of measurement apparatus. 1) probe; 2) communication line
(supporting-electrical cable); 3) recording apparatus carried on ship; 1;) hydro-
resistor instrument for measuring conductivity.

The probe used in the experiments was created at the Special Design Bureau for
Oceanological Equipment at the Institute of Oceanology ineni P. P. Shirshov. In
different operating regimes the instrument can simultaneously measure up to five
different parameters. The probe has a three-strand supporting and electrical

cable for data transmission. In the described experiment the probe operated in

a regime for measuring the conductivity of sea water with the simultaneous registry
of the depth of instrument submergence. The conductivity of sea water was measured
employing a so-called hydroresistor measuring instrument whose block diagram is

shown in Fig. l.

The sensing elesent of this instrument is the volume of sea uter situated between
the central and annular electrodes of this sensor. The electrodes were applied to
a hemispherical surface. The central electrode has the form of a "point" with a
diameter of 0.3 as and the annular electrode is situated along the diameter of

the hemisphere, equal to 9 mm. The electrodes were cut into the circuit of the gen-
erator G in such a way that with a change in the conductivity of the sea water
between the electrodes there is a change in the amplitude of the signal produced
by the generator. The generator frequency is about 5 H82.

The effective volume of sea water, that is. the volume whose change of conductivity
exerts an influence on amplitude of the signal received fron the generator 6, 13
equal to approximately 3 m3. which also determines the mininun dimension of the
measured inhomogeneities. The equivalent resistance between the electrodes is ap-
proximately 170 ohms with a generator frequency equal to 5 Pill: and' a media: con-
ductivity of about 50 unho/cm.

The signal from the generator is fed to the detector 1), from which it is fed
through the supporting and electrical cable to the recording apparatus or through
the amplifier A (in this case the signal is proportional to the mean conductivity
value) or through an operational amplifier 0A. In the latter case the recording ap-
paratus receives a signal proportional to conductivity fluctuations. The d-c ampli-
fier A has a voltage amplification factor 7, whereas the operational amplifier of
fluctuations 0A amplifies the voltage by a factor of 100 and has a bandpass at' the
0.7 level from 1 to 5000 Hz. The level of electric noise in this instrument in
conductivity units is 3.5-10“ mho/cm. which corresponds to approximately 2.5-
10“ c for temperature or 5-10“ oloo for salinity.

59

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The transconductance of the instrument for measuring conductivity of the instru-
ment at the detector output was 1 nV/mmho/cn.

 

Fig. 2. Profiles of mean (1) and fluctuating (2) couponents of conductivity field
obtained by vertical sounding.

Depth was measured using a pressure sensor PS. The probe signals were registered
on a magnetic tape and also using an automatic pen recorder with'depth narks being

registered each 50 a (Fig. 2).

The information obtained during sounding was then subjected to statistical pro-
cessing on a shipboard electronic computer; this made it possible to ascertain
the correlation and spectral functions and also the reciprocal statistical char-

acteristics of the signals.

In the course of the experiment a total of ten soundings were made at a single
point in the ocean with intervals between soundings of 40-60 minutes. The repeat-
ed soundings nade it possible to evaluate the temporal variability of the micro-
scale vertical structure of the conductivity field. As an exanple. Fig. 2 shows
the profiles of mean conductivity and fluctuations of conductivity obtained dur-
ing the sounding. The scales of these curves are given both in conductivity units
and scaled to temperature units. The figure shows that the rate of sounding varied
somewhat with depth. which evidently is associated with flexure of the electrical
and supporting cable due to nonuniformity of the ship's drift and the variability
of the velocity of sea currents with depth. A distinguishing characteristic of
all these profiles (as is clearly traced in Fig. 2) is an increase in the mean

60

FIHICNHHCJAL.USE2(NiLY
conductivity values and a relatively weak change in conductivity fuctuations with
depth. Such a regularity is also detected in the spectra of conductivity fluctua-
tions computed for sections of records from different horizons: the total level of
spectral density is virtually identical at depths from 50 to 250 m.

Figure 2 clearly shows that the curve of mean conductivity has a clearly expressed
"steplike" character in virtually the entire investigated layer of the ocean. The
thicker quasihomogeneous layers alternate with thin interlayers with large con-
ductivity gradients. Strong "surges" in the fluctuations of conductivity are as-
sociated with such interlayers.

For statistical processing on an electronic computer we selected several equal seg-
ments of records from each sounding at depths corresponding to 50, 100, 150, 200
and 250 m. The length of the processed record corresponded to a vertical extent

of the record of about 20 m. A continuous signal of the conductivity fluctuation
(first registered on an analog magnetic recorder) was introduced into an electronic
computer with a discreteness of 0.002 sec. Such a discreteness was selected in ac-
cordance with the frequency characteristic of the microsensor.

The statistical homogeneity of the records introduced into the electronic computer
was achieved by the filters incorporated in the instrument circuit. The homogen-

eity was then checked from the curve of the current dispersion of the processed
pieces. A reciprocal statistical analysis was carried out for pairs of records
selected at identical horizons in two successive soundings. The wave number inter—
val in the processing of records was in the range 0.07-10 cm'l, which correspond-
ed, as noted above, to vertical dimensions of inhomogeneities 0.6-90 cm.

A reciprocal statistical analysis of the records afforded a possibility for trac-
ing the variability of vertical structure of the conductivity field during the

time interval between successive soundings. The reciprocal spectral characteristics
obtained using an electronic commputer indicated that the microstructure of the
conductivity field changes considerably over the course of 60-60 minutes. For the
considered range of wave numbers the values of the coherence functions for the
records were extremely low (the maximum coherence did not exceed 0.‘). Thus, it

can be concluded that in this case the inhomogeneities of the conductivity field
with a dimension to l m vertically existed in this region for less than one hour

or that their dimension horizontally was sufficiently small that there was then

an influence of the ship's drift, which in the course of the experiment was insig-
nificant.

Figure 3 gives the normalized correlation functions determined from one conductivity
fluctuation profile. The length of each processed record was equal to a depth change
of 20 m and their beginning corresponded to the horizons 100, 150, 200 and 250 m.
The correlation radius has the value r - 25-30 cm and varies little with depth.
Similar graphs of the normalised correlation functions were obtained for all other
soundings. A constant r value for all horizons and for all profiles is indicative

of the fact of vertical homogeneity of microscale turbulence (in the ocean layer

to 300 m) in the considered wave number range.

Figure 6 shows a "bundle" of spectral density curves obtained for these same hori-
zons (50, 100, 150, 200 and 250 m) along one conductivity fluctuation profile.
Since it can be assumed that the conductivity of sea water is linearly related to

61
FOR OFFKJA1.USE:0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

temperature, the values of the spectral density functions are couveniently repre-
sented in temperature units, as has been done in Pig. 4. The values of the dissi-
pation rate functions for the inhomogeneities were also computed in temperature

units using the formula

‘3
,v .. 21$ k’E(L-)dk.

where )L is the thermal conductivity coefficient, k1. k2 are the limiting values
of the considered wave number interval.

The ﬁ value, computed for all horizons, other than the uppe; horizon, and for all
the soundings, varied little and was close to 5-10‘5 degree 'sec'l.

The agreement in the behavior of curves 2-5 in Fig. 4 and in the considered range

of wave numbers means that the vertical structure of the field of conductivity
fluctuations in the layer 100-300 m was statistically homogeneous.

[quuvﬁu degreez-cm
m”

    

m" m' mku‘

Fig. 3. Normalized correlation functions Fig. 4."Bundle” of spectral density

for conductivity f1uctuations correspond- curves for conductivity fluctuations
ing to horizons 100 (1). 150 (2). 200 corresponding to the horizons 50 (1),
(3). 250 m (a). 100 (2), 150 (3), 200 (4), 250 m (5).

In the spectral density functions in Pig. 4 it is possible to discriminate two
characteristic segments with different curve slopes (at a logarithmic scale): the
first in the range of wave numbers k - 7-10‘2-7-10‘1 cm‘l, the second k - 7‘10'1
-7-10° cm‘l. The spectral curves in the first segment have a high energy density
level and rapidly drop off with an increase in wave number. The slope of the curve
in this segment is close to "-5/3." The spectral functions of the second segment
are characterized by a slower dropoff with an increase in wave number and the
slope of the curves here is close to "-1."

62

503(HHWCJAI.USE(NVLY
The spectral density function 1 (Fig. 4) was obtained on the basis of the results
of the same measurement, but from the segment of the record in the upper region
of the thermocline. Two segments can also be discriminated: one with the slope
"~3" and a second with the slope "-7/5.“ The spectral curve 1 is also characterize
by s higher density level for the energy of fluctuations in the zone of small
values of the wave numbers and a sharper dropoff of the curve with an increase in
k. Such a behavior of this function can indicate a somewhat different mechanism
of the formation of microstructure of the conductivity field in the upper-layer
thermocline in cgpparison with deeper layers of the ocean. For example, it is not
impossible that in layers with sharp drops in density there are very high-fre-
quency internal waves for which steep dropoffs of spectral densities with an in-
crease in wave number values are characteristic [3].

In conclusion, the authors express appreciation to R. V. 02midov for advice and
attention given in all stages of the work and to Ye. I. Kuznetsov and V. I. Ped-
onov who participated in developing the probe.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Borkovskiy. H. H., Volochkov, A. G., Prokhorov, V. I., Pudov, V. 1)., Sorokh-
tin, 0. G. and Shekhvatov, V. V., "The AIST Digital Hydrophysical Probe."
b-y VSESOYUZNYY SIHPOZIUH PO AVTOHATIZATSII NAUCHNYKH ISSLBDOVANIY HOBBY I
OKEANOV (Fourth All-Union Symposium on Automation of Scientific Research in
the Seas and Oceans). Sevastopol', Izd-vo H61, 1972.

2. Tait, R. J. and Howe, h. R., "Some Observations of Thermohaline Stratifica-
tions in Deep Ocean," DEEP-SEA RBS., 15, 1968.

3. 02midov, R. V., "Experimental Investigations of Hicroscale Oceanic Turbu—
lence. Ninth Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Akademik Kurchatov',"
VESTNIK AN SSSR (Herald of the USSR Academy of Sciences), No 7, 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1974

5303
C80: 8144/1839

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IKIR¢MHWC1A1.USE1MVLY

INBRTIAL INTERVAL IN TURBULENCE SPECTRA IN STRATIIIBD FLUID (EBISENBERG-HONIN MODEL)

Moscow ISSLBDOVANIYB IZHENCBIVOSTI GIDROPIZICEBSKIXB POLE! V OKEARE in Russian 197$
pp 83-91

[Article by A. Yu. Benilov and I. D. Iorovatakiy from monograph "Ocean Research
on Hydrbphysical Field variability." edited by R. V. 02midov. doctor ' .

of physical and mathematical sciences, Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka", 211! pages, number of
copies printed unknown]

[Text] Turbulence plays a najor role in many processes in the ocean. for this rea-
son the investigation of oceanic turbulence is of great practical interest. Since
the ocean is usually stably stratified, the turbulence which is observed there must
have characteristics associated with the influence of Archimedes forces and dis—
tinguishing it from the turbulence in a density-stratified fluid.

Experimental data are now available indicating some characteristics typical for
the oceanic turbulence phenomenon. Observations which have been made by Canadian
researchers [1] and by specialists of the Institute of Oceanology [2] have shown

that in the spectra of oceanic turbulence there is often an absence of an inertial
interval of scales and in many cases the measured spectra agreed well with the 3019
giano-Obukhov "-11/5 law"[3, 6], which is correct under conditions of a strong
stable stratification. In the opinion of the authors of [l]. the influence of
stratification leads to a decrease in the characteristic turbulence scale, that is,
the Reynolds number_becomes small and the inertial interval can be very narrow. 0n
the other hand, with a strong stable stratification the Archimedes forces can er-
ert an influence on the turbulence regime up to scales where viscosity is impor-
tent and this can also lead to the disappearance of an inertial interval. This ar-
ticle is devoted to a discussion of these peculiarities.

***

1. According to the theory of locally isotropic turbulence in s density-homogeneous
fluid [5], the separation of the inertial interval, where the "-5/3 law” is correct
and the "dissipation interval" in the spectrum is observed for a sufficiently great

FOIIIJFIICJAJ.IEIBCNULY
Reynolds turbulence number. If Lu is the characteristic scale of change in the
field of mean velocity 3.3, t). Y] - (v3/$)1 " is the Kolmogorov scale. coincid-
ing in order of magnitude with the scales of the maximum of those disturbances on
which molecular viscosity ‘V exerts a substantial influence. 8 is the rate of
dissipation of turbulent energy, the width of the inertial interval can be charac-
terized by the value of the 17/1.u ratio. The following evaluation [5] is correct
for this value in the approximation of locally isotropic turbulence '

n/LUNRe’sll‘, Re - AuLu/V , (1)

where A u is the characteristic change in the field of mean velocity at the scale
Lu. It can be seen from this evaluation that with a decrease in the Re number
there is a narrowing of the inertial interval. In a study by Gibson and Schwarz
[6] there is a comparison of the longitudinal one-dimensional normalized spectra
obtained in a flow of water in a pipe beyond a grid at different Re mmbers with
the data from other authors. It was found that the width of the inertial interval
is the lesser the lesser the Re number. In the Stewart-Townsend data [7], ob-
tained with relatively very small Re (Re: 2.6-10’), the inertial interval is vir-

tually absent. Similar effects can also be observed in the turbulence spectra in
a stratified fluid.

As is well Known [5], turbulence in a stratified fluid differs from the turbulence
in a homogeneous medium in that fluid particles are in the field of action of the
Archimedes forces. The minimum scale of the inhomogeneities. beginning from which
the influence of Archimedes forces becomes substantial. is determined by the scale
L,“ introduced by A. H. Obukhov [3] and Boldgiano [A], which is equal to

 

t O
L. ll W15. (2)
where N is the rate of evening-out of temperature inhomogeneities. ,8 is the buoy-

ancy parameter. If lo - min (Lu, 11) is the characteristic scale of the me n velo-

city fields 3(5', t) and temperature fields “3;. y). 1-1. is the characteristic scale

of the mean temperature field and the following inequality is correct

In > L.>Ln - mum. n Pr“). Pr =- v/x, (3)

inhomogeneities with scales I< L0 belong to the equilibrium interval of scales in
which the fields of turbulent fluctuations of hydrodynamic fields must be consider-
ed locally homogeneous and unambiguously determined by the parameters 8, N, ,3 .

V and X( x is the coefficient of molecular 'hormal conductivity [3, 4 ]. Inhomo-
geneities with the scales 1 from the interval

Lo>l>L. (4)

are under the influence of Archimedes forces. Inhomogeneities with scales from the
interval

"non

L.I>I>L. (5)

belong to the inertial interval. Inhomogeneities with the scales

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

($1.. __ (6)

belong to the "dissipation interval." Thus. the equilibrium interval, determined

by inequality (3). breaks down into three subintervals, the limits of which are
stipulated by the inequalities (6)46).

Our reasonings make it possible to adopt the value of the ratio 7/L* as an evalu-
ation of the width of the inertial interval in the turbulence spectra in a strat-
ified fluid under the condition that l0>L*’ It follows fro. the inequalities (3)-

(6) that in this case the criterion of existence of a quite broad inertial inter-
val is the condition ’2/1.*<l.

In the simplest case of statistically stationary and horizontally homgeneoua tur-

bulence, using the equation for the balance of turbulent energy and the intensity
of temperature inhomogeneities in the form [5]:

""(%)’<1-cnn. . m

or a . ar . 0.: :
Nam-(w). m-nlu-é; 143;). (a)
where K is the coefficient of turbulent viscosity, KT is the coefficient of turbu-
lent thernal conductivity, Rf is the dynamic Richardson number, 0’ is a paraneter
which in the case of an unstable stratification takes into account the diffusion
of turbulent energy, and in the case of stable stratification d- R‘1 (R is the
critical Richardson number), for the ’2/1...I value we obtain the formula

+‘m(tﬂ-§—'Jr)“- ' (9)

where ReT = KT] V is the Reynolds turbulence number. The dependence on the Rey-
nolds number here is similar to formula (1), but by virtue of the dependence on

Rf, even with a finite adequately large R number in the case of a strong stable
stratification. the inertial interval in the turbulence spectra can be absent.
When the L. scale becomes greater than Lo and no longer belongs to the equilibrium
interval of scales. formula (9) does not determine the width of the inertial in-

terval. In this situation the width of the inertial interval can be evaluated by
the n/Lo ratio.

It can be seen from what has been stated above that the turbulence spectra can have

a different fats: in dependence on the relationship of scales limiting the width of
each of the subintervsla of the equilibrium interval of scales.

II. In order to explain the specific form of the spectral densities in a stratified
turbulent flow with different Re numbers and stratification regii as we will examine

the spectral equations for the balance of turbulent energy am! the intensity of
temperature inhomgeneities in the form [5]

k as
e-2vS P’Ew)dP-S(k):tBS Env(P')dP'. (10)
I. , h

R
N - 21: #8: (19) «UP - R (k).
(11)

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where 80:), £1.00. 513(k) are the spectral densities of turbulent energy, temper-
ature fluctuations an the turbulent heat flux (with an accuracy to the factor

c Po), S(k) and R(k) describe energy transfer and the measures of inhonogeneities
o the temperature field fron the nacroscale turbulence components (with wave nun-
bers less than k) to nicroscsle (with wave nunbers greater than In). As the hypo-
thesis for closure of this system of equations we will use a generalization of

the Heisenberg closure proposed by A. S. Honin [8] for the case of s turbulent flow
with mean velocity and temperature gradients:

80») - K(Ic)[(%}’+2§ rump]. <12)
5's
30:) - aK(k)[(_%§)’+§ :9 .7 map]. “3’
S'Brwwapm aK<k)[(% '+§ P'Er (p)dp]'". - ' <10
x ‘0

where [(00 is the coefficient of turbulent viscosity, at is the ratio of the coef-

ficient of turbulent viscosity to the coefficient of turbulent therul conductivity.
in general. dependent on Rf. Adhering to [8.1, for K(k) we will use the formula

m) = T [S p“; <p')dp']"'.

(15)

where 7 is a numerical constant. With It - k0 (10)-(15) are transformed into a sys-

tem of macroscopic equations (7)-(8) with 0' - l. Proceeding in (10)-(lS) to a
dimensionless form using the formulas

z _ “Ink. . . (16)
we (I) = [c::V"%-"-'~e"'] E (k), (17)
v: (2).- IcaN‘“ 4'9”] 51‘ (1:). -~ . (18)
‘l ' ”“43”". c2 - 2"a‘-'~1’". c. - 2-’a'I-1"-. . (19)

for determining the functions ’18 and VT we obtain the two equations:
1 — 138 m (an: - 2"“ [m + S we (a) a] :l: 2%!“ [n + 89% (mar ‘20)
8 x (21)

where 1—P.§ ﬁ’W(§)d§-2'F'[F.+§E‘%(§)d§],
" v. (22)
Hz) ‘- 2 [S E’s»: (t) at] .

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The solution of system (20). (21) in the case r, - f}, - 0 was investigated in
detail by A. S. Monin in [8].

The parameters r1, r 2. F3 and r',, are dependent on the relationship between the
scales which can be formed from the dimensionless parameters entering into (10)-
(16). These dependences have the form:

n-H‘; “Hal“. .
Mel“. meta-1*. -

where I.“ and LT are scales dependent on the gradients of the mean fields of veloc-
ity and temperature and accordingly are equal to

L.=¢I-(%)"". (25)
1.7 =~V2-:-(3—f)‘“. - (26)

Since the scales (25). (26) are determined through the mean velocity and tempera-
ture fields, they can be adopted within the framework of this model as the char-
acteristic scales of these mean fields.

The solution of equations (20)-(21) can be obtained in parameteric form much as
was done in [8]. Assuming P as a new independent variable, for x, We and V1-
we obtain the formulas:

x - 2-91-11. A‘V'B“"[2"‘Z‘ 8"" 3F @3st A 3-: + 2:1)p_ gun-1., (27)
w - 2"”‘F'A°B*"0"z‘. (28)
w - 2""P‘ﬁ‘_‘A’B""Q"¢. (29)

where A. B, Q are some functions of the argument P, equal to

A = W“- + I3. 1; = 2’!” + I‘.. - (30)
o - 2‘~cu‘-'A u + 2*P11‘I):.':|2wrmu-Iu + 3-2-uw-I) +
+ 2W" (I + 2":10")- M <1 + war! + aims-m. (31)

and the parameters C and P are_expreased through the parameters of the problem
(23)-(24) in accordance with the formulas:

C -= 1 + m3. P a (1 + mark. (32)

The functions III and 4f , determined by the formulas (28). (29), are solutions
of the equations EZO)-(21 only when x> no, where the x0 value, in accordance
with [8], determines the maximum scale of the disturbances allowed by the geo-
metry of the flow. The ac value is found from (27) with P - F0. In turn the F0
value can be obtained from system (20)-(21), assuming x - x0. Using (20)-(21),
(23), (25), (26), we express Po and the parameters [‘1 and ('2 through Rf. After

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
simple transformations we obtain the formulas:

 

t—m 1—!!5' " {hf '
rn-W. rs'LﬁﬁE'L' F°-Tgl_ ' (33)'(35)

which makes it possible to indicate the relationships between the scales under dif-
ferent stratification conditions:

1) in the region of Rf values such that Rf<1 -o(., the scale LT<Lu, hence no " Dr;
2) with Rf> 1 -°¢ we will have Lu<Iq-, hen .e 1.0 - Lu;

3) with Rf< 1 -°‘ we will have “310 (the equation is satisfied in the case of
limiting instability when Rf-r-co); the L.» scale with such Rf values belongs to the
equilibrium interval of scales (integral (4) is absent); ,

I.) with 1 - ¢<at<‘|/ L? 44.;

I

we will have Ls< Lo (slight stabili_ty,__ir£sr__va_l_go) is absent), ugh

1/1 +a_—.’_,—<m<1
we will have La< Lo (strong stability, interval ([0) exists);
5) the value Po-tl/Z with Rf-v-oo and for values Rf<0 we will have 0€Fo<1/2;
with Rf> 0 the Po value increases with an increase in stability and tends to in-
finity with Rf-olg as noted in [8], the corresponding Po-xo values in the case of
an unstable stratification are always finite and different from zero (essentially
an influence of the limiting surface); with an increase in stability (Rf-91) 10—?
O (turbulence has a primarily local character). The solution of equations (20)-(21),
determined by formulas (27)-(29), (35), has the following asymptotic peculiarities.
1. With r 3 . r1, . 0 (V- 7. - 0) the derived solution coincides with the solution
in [81- "he" x-oco the 1/3, V1- functions are proportional to 1"” 3. In the case of
a strong stable stratification (in the interval of scales (6))

4».- ~ N... “29;.- 1;. <;‘< n. ' . (35)

2. With (‘3 + 0, F' 1, 4- 0 and Pretl the 1/3 and Y1- functions are proportional to
3’7 with 1-» so . which is a consequence of closing of the initial equations using
the Heisenberg hypothesis. In the case of a stable stratification this asymptotic
behavior exists if the parameters of the problem (2_3)-(Zlg)lsatisfv the inequality

(1 + r.)' > r. (a +‘br.).

which is derived from formulas (27)-(31), (33), (34) after a limiting transition
with P-to, by virtue of the positive certainty of the 1111- function. Hhen ['0 is
such that (37) is transformed into the equation

(1 + rm =; rite; + an). (as)

(37)

the VB and #1- functions become equal to zero with some final x value equal to x .
sq.) 3:0. For the XIII value from (27), with (38) taken into account. after a limiting
transition with F-oo we obtain the formula

x... - 2am Pr‘hﬁ’“ nr”'(1 — th-RY:

- (39)
R. - (1 + mu - myb + RI [2% Pr + (1 — Br) F.I"' It”.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from which it can be seen that with an increase in stability (Rf-.1) xm"°’ that
is. in this limiting situation the turbulence spectra will degenerate with an in-
crease in the Richardson number; with a tendency of Rf to zero (a stratification
close to neutral) arm—mo; within the framework of the model employed this limiting
case corresponds to the asymptotic equation

’In 'va

rQ+ S an more - 2"'[r. + S my (944". (40)

a. 5'0

equivalent to the condition (38).

3. In the case Pr<l the temperature spectrum reveals an inertial-heat conducting
interval of the scales Pr3/4n >L> ’1 in which the temperature inhomogeneities be-
gin to disappear due to the influence of molecular thermal conductivity and viscos-
ity still does not exert an influence on velocity fluctuations. According to the
theory of Batchelor. Howells and Townsend [9] (neutral stratification), in this in-
terval of scales the energy spectrum is proportional to It's/3 and the temperature
spectrum is proportional to run. With an adequately smll value of the r para-
meter an inertial-heat conducting interval exists in the considered mdel un er

different stratification conditions», but the temperature spectrum in this interval
has the form:

51' (k)~k"". 'Pt‘hn“<k< n". (41)

that is, decreases with an increase in the wave number by k times more slowly than
follows from the theory of Batchelor, Howells and Townsend [9].

lo. In the case Pr>1 in the spectra of turbulence in a density-homogeneous fluid
there is a viscoconvective interval of scales in which the velocity fluctuations
are already acted upon by molecular viscosity (the 80:) spectrum decreases propor-
tionally to k"7 in the Heisenberg theory or as the exponent in the Batchelor
theory [10]), whereas tanperatura inhomogeneities still are not subjected to molec-
ular thermal conductivity. The temperature spectrum 0:) in the range of scales
Q>l> Pr'3/‘r1, according to the Batchelor theory [1 ], decreases proportionally
to k'l. From the resulting solutions under conditions close to neutral stratifica-
tion for the range of scales ( 71 , r1 Pr‘3l"), we obtain power laws in the form

E(k)~/~"’. Er(k)~k. m-o. n"<k<Pr’-‘an‘|. (42)

The noted differences in the asymptotic behavior of the temperature spectrum in
this model and in the Batchelor theory can be explained in the following way. In
the Batchelor theory the formulas for spectral densities are obtained from linear-
ized equations; the turbulence described by these equations must be considered
weak, as is correct for the region of scales k>n‘1. The Heisenberg closure is
essentially nonlinear; mixing in this model occurs more intensively than in the
Batchelor model; by virtue of this circumstance the spectral densities obtained

in the Heisenberg approximation decrease with an increase in the wave number con-
siderably more slowly than in the Batchelor theory.

In the case of unstable stratification

E(k)~’~*”". sun-)4”. nt'<o. n"<k<Pr'-"n".- (1.3)

\K
70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pig. 1. Dependence of the products x5/3vlg and its/3411. on the dinensionless wave
number for different stratification conditions.

WF’

  

Pig. 2. Dependence of the products xzufn and x2411. on dimensionless wave number for
different stratification conditions and Pr numbers. Notations are the ssne as in
Pig. 1.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The result is related to the fact that with Rf<0 the temperature fluctuations in-
duce fluctuations of buoyancy forces which maintain velocity fluctuations in the
viscous interval. As a result, the 2(k) spectrum decreases with an increase in
the wave number are slowly than k'7 and since some of the energy of the buoyancy
forces was expended on overcoming viscous forces, the Era) spectrun becomes de-
creasing in comparison with the case (42). Analysis of equations (20)-(21) shows
that in this situation thg Kara-eters determining the turbulent regime in the in-
terval of scales (71,??? I ) are the values V, N and ,8 .

In the case of a stable stratification (RE) 0) the system (20)-(21) does not have
asymptotic solutions (Pr>l), since the inequality (37) in this case loses sense;
however. the viscoconvective interval with large but finite Pr numbers, when (37)
is still correct, can exist. Under the condition (38) the functions “’8 and VT
are different from zero only for x values in the interval [30, xi], where xm

is given by formula (39).

It follows from what has been stated above that the turbulence spectra in a strat-
ified fluid can have a different for- in dependence on stratification conditions,
Pr number and width of the equilibrium interval, which can be determined by the

value of the ('0 parameter. The inertial interval, as was demonstrated, in a number
of cases can be absent. In the case of a strong stable stratification and a quite

small width of the equilibrium interval (large values of the ('0) the turbulence
spectra degenerate, that is, are different from zero in a finite interval of val-
ues of the wave numbers, which is narrowed with an increase in stability.

III. 0n the basis of the derived fornulas we carried out computations illustrating
the noted characteristics (Figures 1, 2). Figure 1 shows the functions V3 and V1-
multiplied by x5/3. These values in the inertial interval, if it exists, become
constant. The computations were made for cases of large ['0 (Fig. l,a) and small
['0 (Fig. l,a) and small [-0 (Fig. l,b). In the first case the relationships sung
the scales are such that the following inequalities are correct:

Lr<L.<L.<n. RI<0. (1.4)

L.$L.<n$Lr. m>o. “5)

Hith Rf<0, as indicated in Fig. l,a and inequality (64), viscosity is operative in
the entire region of values 3) :0; the inertial interval is absent. In the case of
a stable stratification viscosity is also operative in the entire region X3103 the
inertial interval is absent.

In the second case the relationships between the scales have the form:

n<Lr<Lu</a.- “(<0.
n<la$lau<lm Rl>0- (1.7)

(’06)

In the case of an unstable stratification the interval (4), by virtue of (46), is ab-
sent. There is an appreciable interval of the argument at in which they’g function
(curve 3) adheres to the "x'5/3 law." There is no such interval for the VT function

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and for all x>xo it decreases mre rapidly than x‘5/3. This is attributable to

the fact that the Reynolds number. stipulated by the {‘0 value and the Rf number.
is inadequately large. Thus, molecular thermal conductivity begins to act on tur-
bulent fluctuations whose scales in order of magnitude are comparable to the scales

[.1- and L“.

In the case of a stable stratification the functions VB (curve I) and War (curve
2) are solutions of equations (20)-(21) in a broader 7ange of values of the argu-
ment x)l.01o. As indicated in Pig. l.b the product 3:5 39% for all x>xo decreases.
In the region of scales where the influence of viscosity is negligible (x<50), the
decrease occurs more slowly than follows from the asvaptotic formulas (36). It can
be assumed that in the considered case there is a slightly expressed inertial in-
terval, since the Reynolds number is inadequately great. For the V function there
is a region of values of the argument at (36::(10), where VT‘VSIS- It is easy to

lated to an insignificant deviation of the exponent on the function V1. in interval
(4) (in comparison with VB) from 5/3. Accordingly, the transition from the inter-
val (4) to the inertial convective interval is not so drawn out as for the function

Vp

Pigure 2 shows the dissipation spectra (product of 3:201: and XZVT). The curves in
Figure 2,b,c correspond to the same values of the F0 and Rf parameters as in Fig.
1. When the Re number is smll (Pig. 2,b. F0 - 3.2), the dissipation spectra for
the velocity and temperature fields do not have mxinm with x) :0, since the func-
tions We and V1- decrease rapidly with an increase in the x argument under the in-
fluence of molecular forces. For greater Re (Fig. 2,c, r0 - 3.2~10'3) the dissipa-
tion spectra have maxima; with an increase in the Re number the maxim in the dis-
sipation spectra are displaced into the region of greater 3: values. As an example,
Fig. 2,a shows dissipation spectra with the. same values of the parameters as in
Fig. 2.c, but with a Pr number lo. In this case the snximum in the temperature dis-
sipation spectrum is displaced relative to the maximum in the velocity dissipation
spectrum into the region of relatively greater values of the x argument. The great-
est contribution to the temperature dissipation spectrum is from scales less than
72 . with x>60 the temperature dissipation spectrum increases sharply (curves 2, 6
in Fig. 2,a), that is, in the region of amll scales the local gradients can be
significant. This peculiarity in the behavior of the turbulence spectra with large
Pr numbers was noted earlier in [5].

This analysis and the numerical examples presented in Fig. l and Pig. 2 show that
in a stratified fluid the turbulence spectra have a nonuniveraal form. The behavior
of the spectral densities in a broad range of wave numbers is determined by the Re
number (or the ['0 value), the Rf amber and the Pr number. The inertial interval
of scales exists with a sufficiently large Re nusber and not excessively great Rf
(in the case of stable stratification).

These qualitative conclusions agree well with observations [1, 2]. However, for the
time being it is difficult to put the measured spectra [1, ll] and the formulas
deriVed above in unambiguous correspondence [1. 11]. The nonuniversel form of the
turbulence spectra, as was demonstrated. is related to the properties of the mean
velocity and temperature fields, that is. for comparison of theory and experiment

73

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is necessary to have information not only on the regime of fluctuations of
the velocity and temperature fields, but also data on the mean gradients of these
fields at the measurement point. At present there are still no such measurements.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Grant. H. 1... Hughes, V. A., Vogel, H. H. and Hoilliet, A., "The Spectrum of
Temperature Fluctuations in Turbulent Plow," J. FLUID NECK” 34, No 3, 1968.

2. Ozmidov, R. V., "Second Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Dmitriy Hen-
deleyev'," OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), 11, No l, 1971.

3. Obulthov, A..H., "Influence of Archimedes Forces on the Structure of the Tel-
perature Field in a Turbulent Flow," D010... AN 8883 (Reports of the USSR Academy
of Sciences), 125, No 6, 1959.

4. Boldgiano, R., "Turbulent Spectra in a Stably Stratified Atmosphere," JOURNAL
OF CEOPHYS. “8., 64, No 4, 1959.

S. Honin, A. S. and Yaglon, A. BL, STATISTICBESKAYA GIDRGIBKBANIKA (Statistical
Rydromechanics), Part 1, Moscow, "Nauka." 1965: Part 2, 1967.

6. Gibson, C. M. and Schwarz, H. 3., "The Universal Equilibrium Spectra of Turbu-
lent Velocity and Scalar Field," J. FLUID HECH.. No 3, 16, 1963.

7. Stewart, R. w. and Townsend, A. A., "Similarity and Self-Preservation in Isotro-
pic Turbulence," PHILOS. TRANS. ROY 8°C., A243, No 867, 1951.

8. Honin, A. 5., "Spectrum of Turbulence in a Temperature-Inhomgeneous Atno-
sphere," 12V. AN SSSR: SBRIYA GEOPIZ. (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences:
Geophysical Series), No 3, 1962.

9. Batchelor, G. K., Howells, I. D. and Townsend, A. A., "Small-Scale Variation
of Convected Quantities Like Temperature in Turbulent Fluid," J. FLUID NECK”
No 1, 5, 1959.

10. Batchelor, G. K., "Small-Scale Variation of Convected Quantities Like Tenpera-
ture in Turbulent Fluid," J. FLUID 11363., No l, 5. 1959.

11. Belyayev, V. 8., Lyubintsev, M. H. and Oznidov, R. V., "Rate of Dissipation
of Turbulent Energy and Rate of Evening-out of Temperature lnhonogeneities in
the Ocean," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA A1108?!“ I OEANA (News of the USSR Academy
of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), 9, No 11, 1973.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1974

5303
C90: 8144/1839

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTERNAL GRAVITATIONAL WAVES IN OCEAN

Moscow ISSLBDOVANIYB IMCBIVOSTI GIDROPIZICEBSKIIB Pom V 0MB in Russian 197‘
pp 91-98

{'Article by Yu. A. Ivanov, Ye. G. Horozov and A. S. Samodurov from monograph
Ocean Research on Hydrophysical Field Variability, edited by 8., V.

Ounidov. doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, Izdatelfstvo "Nauka", 211

pages, number of copies printed unknown]

[Text] Intensive experimental investigations in the ocean carried out during re-
cent years have made it possible to study a number of important characteristics

of internal gravitational waves in the real ocean.

we will examine the principal results of these investigations. 0n the basis of an
analysis of long series of measurensnts of fluctuations of temperature and currents
in the Atlantic polygon [1] information was obtained on the distribution of the
energy of fluctuations in a wide frequency range. Figure 1 shows the spectrum of
temperature fluctuations, from which it can be seen that the energy-bearing bursts
of spectral density are in tidal (sanidiurnsl and diurnal) and inertial periods.
The spectral density decreases sharply in the direction of high frequencies and

its values here are one or two orders of magnitude less.

As indicated by an analysis of the measurements [2]. the fluctuations of hydrolog-
ical fields with a tidal period are determined by the propagation of internal waves
of a tidal period. As an illustration. below we give the coherence and phase shift
of fluctuations of a semidiurnal period as a function of distance:

L, miles 5 20 30 50 70 80
H (12 hours) 0.88 0.85 0.83 0.85 0.77 0.73
A? (12 hours) degrees 18 56 100 156 266 320

These data were obtained from temperature measurements in the Atlantic polygon for
.eight points at the 1,000-m horizon. The monotonic increase in phase with distance
and the high coherence give basis for assuming that the observed fluctuations are
a result of the propagation of an internal gravitational wave.

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.310111” 8, degree2 ' sec
JIM

ma .

[III

      

”Mil/Ill I I I I t, :uhours

Pig. 1. Spectral density of temperature fluctuations at the 200-1: horizon (Atlantic

polygon, 1970). The length of the series is 5 months. the discretaness of the less-
urenents is 30 minutes.

I' I,“

, ,1 "- -- --u.--

 

Fig. 2. Diagram of location of research regions. The figures represent the naxinum
dispersion values; the letters indicate the research regions.

The phase diagrams constructed on the basis of neasuruents of temperatures and cur-

rents in the polygon confirm this conclusion. The lengths of the waves determined
frou the diagrams for the meant-ants made during different periods were virtually

76

l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
identical and equal to 110-120 km. The direction of wave propagation was maintain-
ed. The length of the semidiurnal internal have of the first node, computed from
the dispersion expression with a close ap roximtion of the vertical density dis-
tribution. gives virtually the same value . Waves of such a type, as indicated in
[3, lo], are generated during the interaction of a barotropic tide with bottom re-
lief nonuniformities. Experiments on the shelf [5, 6] confirm this result.

J0 I00 I! [M J0 - J! 1000 ultra '

f—'—!— ———f—— CI/Sec-l
' 0.! I: 470}. a.) II: I!) 41 1.1 4.5 W 4,; 1U 07 up!” degrees

I m AIM/um" sec'l

     

II I” U0 J7 II! I.” I! [M lid

    

,-

   

A B -C D

Fig. 3. Profiles of Viisdlg-Brent period. current velocities and standard deviation
of temperature fluctuations with depth for different research regions. The letters
denote the research regions.

Considerable fluctuations of hydrological fields at frequencies close to inertial
are also discovered in the experimental spectra. There is always some frequency
shift of the burst of the spectral density function relative to the inertial fre-
quency. Cross-statistical analysis of the measurements indicates a relatively rapid
attenuation of coherence horizontally. In the Atlantic polygon on the basis of tem-
perature measurements at three points situated at a distance of 15 miles from one
another it was possible to determine the wavelength and direction of propagation
of disturbances with a frequency close to inertial [2]. It can be seen from the
computations that these disturbances may correspond to the propagation of waves
whose length is 25 miles to the south-southeast. Measurements [7] show that the
spectrum of temperature fluctuations near the inertial frequency has a sawtooth-
like character (somewhat separated by frequency of the peaks). 0n the other hand,
in [8], on the basis of measurements at points situated along the meridian it was
found that the energy of the fluctuations at the inertial frequency at the first
point also has bursts at more southerly points. These experimental results are in
agreement with the Hunk-Phillips theoretical model. In this model it was possible

 

it Thus. measurements in the Atlantic polygon indicate the existence of stationary
systems of internal tidal waves.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to obtain an asymptotic form of solutions for internal waves at frequencies close
to inertial periods. The dependence of the solutions on latitude is expressed
through the Airy functions. An evaluation of the Airy scale gives a value 25
miles. The problem of the generation of internal inertial waves for the time being
has not had either an experimental or theoretical solution.

S. defreeZ-sec a b

it’ll 1-” J, (nil-en a 5;; It“, .9; (pollen J
. F ' l II
”0‘ Ill” INN '-

l .
Ia . I M'- | . . _
M I u" -. "-4-?! ~ :
J \ .'
w 4 0.7 ‘ . ' .
u E z ‘5' I '3‘ -

II II [I II I! [III (I II II II JO 4” 0 II II J! II II 1,10” ‘

Jiulﬂ-rn l c .
I” minute’s

 

  

  

I!" [J ‘II’I"U.III" sec-1

Fig. lo. Graphs of spectral densities of temperature fluctuations. a) equatorial
region; b) region of northern tropic; c) l, 2. 3 -- fluctuations at the equator at
the horizon 110 m at different times of investigation; lo) region I' , horizon 110
m; 5) region A, horizon 120 m.

Fluctuations of the characteristics in the higher frequency range. corresponding to
an interval of periods less than 12 hours and sore than 10 minutes (average dis-
creteness of standard instruments), were studied in many characteristic regions of
the ocean under different mean conditions (vertical density stratification, ver-
tical velocity shear) [10]. First of all it should be noted that the dispersion

of fluctuations in this frequency range changes substantially in time and space.
Figure 2 shows the maximum dispersion values in the upper thermocline, determined
from 24-hour series, for some regions of the Atlantic Ocean. A comparative analysis
of the stated dispersion values with the mean vertical density and current velocity
profiles shows that the dispersion increases with an increase in the mean velocity
shear. The greatest dispersion is observed in the equatorial region. where the ver-
ticsl velocity shear is maximal. The observed stratification differences do not in-
troduce a significant contribution to the change in dispersion. With virtually coin-
ciding density and temperature profiles the dispersions can differ substantially.
The form of the distribution of dispersion with depth in most cases corresponds

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to the vertical profile of the Viisila-Brent frequency. However, there are cases
when the maximum dispersion values are discovered in the layer where the vertical
density gradients are less than in the density jlnp layer (Fig. 3).

4A ' ‘I'h

JJ

 

Ia J! M I: M M M M ’J "W" minutes
r10 -/JI~ lb“ -NI~

Fig. 5. Graphs of coherence functions between records at different horizons. A. 8)
investigated regions.

D
II ’C r
I
1.: ‘A .
to w J! z! I: m to a: J! u I: m

" m minutes

Fig. 6. Coherence functions between temperature fluctuations and current velocity
modulus for horizon 110 m. c, D) investigated regions.

The form of the spectra, as indicated by computations. is dependent on the disper-
sion of the oscillations. The dropoff of the spectral density functions for re-
gions with a small dispersion approaches the "-2 law"; at the equatorial stations,
where the dispersion is maximum. the dropoff is close to "-3" (Fig. lo,c). In the
layer of the upper thermocline with small values of the total dispersion the spec-
tra are considerably deformed with depth and the spectral density peaks move along
the frequency axis. In the case of great dispersions there are virtually no dis-
tortions of the spectra (Fig. 6.a,c).

A cross-analysis of temperature fluctuations in the vertical section also indi-
cates a difference in the statistical properties of the two mentioned types of
fluctuations (maximum and minimum of the total dispersion) (Fig. 5). A co-Ion
characteristic is the appearance of maximum coherence in the layer where the dis-
persions are maximal. The fluctuations of characteristics above and below this
layer are displaced in phase. For equatorial stations (maximm dispersion) a high
coherence in a broad frequency range is discovered in the entire layer of the
upper themocline. At stations occupied beyond the equator coherence values above
the confidence level are discovered in thin layers in a narrow frequency range.
At some stations the coherence in the entire layer is below the confidence level.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of a cross-analysis between temperature fluctuations and the current

velocity modulus (the instruments were spaced 1-2 m vertically) are of interest.

Figure 6 shows examples of the results of a cross-analysis. In the equatorial re-
gion the coherence is great in most of the studied frequency range; in other re-

gions it is almost everywhere below the confidence level.

mule” 5. degreez-sec

1

1;-.L__. __.J

 

..... '5' -
k ﬁrs

IJJI I ('0‘:

 

Fig. 7. Spectral densities of temperature fluctuations for horizon 125 m and coher-
ence between fluctuations at 125 and 150 m.

Thus, the most intensive fluctuations of the hydrological fields in the considered
frequency range, observed in the equatorial region and probably characteristic of
other regions of boundary currents with a great vertical shear, are characterized
by statistical properties which indicate a wave nature of these fluctuations. In
the ocean area where there are small mean velocity shears and small dispersion val-
ues the fluctuations of the hydrological characteristics are determined by unsteady
internal waves and turbulent fluctuations.

In an analysis of long series of measurements there is found to be an intermittence
of the energy of fluctuations with time. Such results were obtained in measurements
in polygons in the Black Sea, Atlantic and Indian Oceans, that is, this phenomenon
has a general character. Figure 7, based on temperature measurnent data for the
polygon in the northwestern part of the Indian Ocean, shows spectral density curves
constructed with a three-day shift. With an increase in the total dispersion there
is an increase in the slope of the spectrum from "-5/3" to "-3" and an increase in
vertical coherence; then, when the dispersion decreases, the slope of the spectra:
becomes, as before, "-5/3" and the coherence decreases. Such patterns to one degree
or another are manifested in an analysis of all long measuraIent series.

It can be concluded from the results of experimental investigations that internal
gravitational waves are generated as a result of the instability of motion of a
stratified fluid with a vertical velocity shear. It was demonstrated in [11] that
instability arises when the Richardson number is less than one-quarter and the co-
efficients of wave growth increase with a further decrease in this number. At least
qualitatively the experiments correspond to the theoretical conclusions. As a rule
it is impossible to carry out quantitative evaluations on the basis of available
measurements since there is no detailed information concerning the vertical

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
structure of density and currents.

layer 50-250 m during the propagation of a train of waves. Computations show that
an increase in potential energy is about 101 of the change in energy with total
mixing of this layer. The potential energy was computed by the averaging of data
from bathohetric series registered before and after propagati>n of the train. Ac-
cordingly, the evaluation can contain an error, but such an approach with the
availability of special measurements can be promising.

A theoretical study of the processes of destruction of internal gravitational waves
is being carried out in two principal directions. The first direction is an invest-
igation of the stability of small disturbances imposed on the mean state; the sec-
ond is a study of the nonlinear interaction of waves. The stationary distribution
of the field of currents and density is used as the mean state. In [11, 13-15]

the mean state (current density and velocity) is a function only of the vertical
coordinate, that is, a study is made of the stability of disturbances relative to
velocity shear in a vertically stratified fluid. As a result of these investiga-
tions it has been demonstrated that if the VbisalS-Brunt frequency and the velocity
gradient are dependent on the vertical coordinate, the characteristic values of the
problem will be complex with Ri<21/4. This indicates an instability of small fluc-
tuations. Naturally. these complex characteristic values still do not indicate a
process of wave destruction. but give basis for assuming that if the receipt of en—
ergy from mean motion is equal to the dissipation in the wave, neutral waves of a
finite amplitude are formed; however, if the receipt of energy exceeds the rate

of dissipation, the wave amplitude will increase. which can also lead to its de-
struction. Here intelligible results can be obtained only in a nonlinear formula-
tion. In [16] a study was made of the behavior of disturbances in a fluid with a
horizontally variable Vﬁisﬁld-Brunt frequency. As a result it was found that with
an approach to the point "(xo) - 00 ( cd is wave frequency. "(x0) is the Viisali-
Brunt frequency at the point x ) the wave amplitude increases and the wave length
decreases. The wave deformatio can cause its destruction, which, however. has a
different nature than that described above (receipt of energy from mean movement).

(30 < Vo)‘/(i\r' -— (0‘5,

where 9 is the angle between the horizontal wall and a sloping bottom,a)is angular
frequency. The amplitude increases with approach to the corner point approximately
inversely proportionally to the distance to it. This inequality was also obtained
by Hunk and Hinbush [18].

IN)R OWNHCJAI.lEHE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

criterion is determined in the wave process by analogy, that is. with such an
approach it is assumed that the critical Richardson number is formd as a result
of disturbance of the mean state, which in itself is stable. In the latter study
these considerations are applied to an examination of the superposing of waves,
which can consist of the entire spectrum of the internal gravitational waves. It
is assumed that the criterion can be realized sporadically at individual points
in space and time (coincidence of phases) in the wave process, and accordingly,
lead to the local destruction of waves. However, if the save process already is
developing against a background of considerable quasimean current gradients, the
total critical Richardson number (of mean state and the save process) no longer
requires unrealistically great slopes of individual saves (h/A is the amplitude-
length ratio), as was necessary in [19]. It appears that the qualitative mechanism
of destruction of internal waves described in [20] can be of great importance in
the energy supply of the ultraahort-Jwave part of the spectrum of fluctuations of
physical fields in the ocean.

The criterion of destruction of Haves Ri<ll6 for real conditions may be too
strong, since it was obtained in linear theories in which no allowance is made for
the finite nature of amplitude in the wave. A study by Orlanski and Bryan [21]
described a numerical experiment for study of the nonlinear interaction of waves.
The authors ascertained the condition for the overturning of a nonlinear internal
wave as a result of an increase in amplitude in the absence of a mean current

u) c.

Here u is the horizontal component of the orbital velocity of particles in the
wave, c is the phase velocity of the wave.

It is of interest to examine the interaction of a nonlinear wave with a qiasimean
state in the presence of current velocity. It can be surmised that allowance for
currents leads to a weakening of the determined criterion.

Thus, the destruction of internal gravitational waves, on the one hand, is deter-
mined by the total energy of the characteristic wave process, and on the other

hand, inhomogeneities of the medium (velocity shear, horizontal nonuniformity of
the density field) in which the wave is propagated.

He note in conclusion that virtually all the problems considered in this study
are only in the initial stage of their solution. The problem of the stability of
internal waves, their destruction and the generation of microscale turbulence has
only a hypothetically qualitative solution and therefore requires the carrying
out of specialized experiments. -

BIB}. IOGRAPHY

1. Brekhovskikh, L. H., Ivanov-Frantskevich, G. N., Koshlyakov, H. 1., Pedorov,
K. N. and Yampol'skiy, A. D., "Some Results of a Hydrophysical Experiment in
the Tropical Atlantic," 12V. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEAHA (News of the
USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), No 5, 1971.

2. Ivanov, Yu. A. and Horozov, Ye. 6., "Investigation of Fluctuations of Tempera-
ture in the Tidal and Inertial Periods," TRUDY IN-TA OKEANOLOGII. GIDROFIZ-
ICHBSKIY POLIGON 70 (Transactions of the Institute of Oceanology. Hydrophys-
ical Polygon 70). Moscow, "Nauka," 1971..

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

S.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Cox, C. 8.. and Sandstron. 11., "Coupling of Internal and Surface Waves in
Hater of Variable Depth." J. OCEANOGR. SOC. JAPAN, 1962, 20th ANNIV. VOLUME.

Paupu, 11., "Development of Internal Tides in the Coastal Zone," VNIJTRENluYB
VOLNY (Internal waves), Moscow, "Hir," 1964.

Reid, J. 1... "Observations of Internal Tides in October 1950." TRANS. AMER.
GEOPHYS. UNION, 37 (3), 1956.

Smers, H. J. and Emery, K. 0., "Internal Tides of Tidal Period Off South-
ern California," J. cmms. £138., 68(3), 1963.

Webster, 1'. and Fofonoff, N., "A Compilation of ﬂoored Current Heter Observa-
tions," WOODS HOLE OCEANOGR. INST. TBCHN. 2391., No 3, pp 61-66, 1967.

Hendershott, Myrl C., "Inertial Oscillations of Tidal Period." Ph. D. Thesis.
Harvard Univ., 1964.

Hunk, H. and Phillips, IL, "Coherence and Band Structure of Inertial Motion
in the Sea," RES. GWPBH 6(4), 1968.

Ivanov, Yu. A. and Horozov, Ye. 6., "Analysis of Water Temperature Fluctua-
tions in the Upper layer of the Ocean," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA AMSTERY I
OKBANA, 9, No 10, 1973.

Miles, J. 11., "On the Stability of a Heterogeneous Shear Flow," J. FLUID
“SCH” 10(4), 1961.

Honin, A. S. and Yaglon. A. 11., STATISTICHESKAYA GIDROHEKBANIKA (Statistical
Hydromechanics), Part 1, Moscow, "Nauka," 1965. Part 2. 1967.

Horozov, Ye. C., ”Destruction of Internal Haves," OREANOIDCIIA (in press).

Thorpe, S. A., "Experiments on the Instability of Stratified Shear Flow:
Hiscible Fluids," J. FLUID Hui!” 46(2), 1971.

Hench, C., "0n the Propagation of Internal Waves Up a Slope," DEEP SEA 1158.,
15(3), 1968.

Sanodurov, A. S. . "Internal Waves in a Medium With a Viis‘li-Bruut Frequency
Varying Horizontally," 12V. AN 8881!: 1’12le AMSTERY I OKEANA (in press).

Woods, J. . "Investigation of Some Physical Processes Associated With a Ver-
tical Heat Flow Through the Upper Layer of the Ocean," PORHIROVANIYB STRUKTURY
I FLUKTUATSII W0 TERHOKLINA V OKEANB (Formation of Structure and Pluc-
tuations of the Upper Thermocline in the Ocean). Moscow, Gidroneteoizdat,
1971.

Hunk, H. and Uinbush, 11.. "Simple Criterion for the Destruction of Haves on
a Shore Slope." OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), No 1, 1969.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FT1CJAL USEGDNLY

19. Phillips, 0. H., DINAHIKA VERKHNEGO SLOYA OKEANA (Dynamics of the Upper Lay-
er of the Ocean," Moscow, "Mir," 1969.

20. Garrett. c. and Hunk. H.,"Ocean1c Mixing by Breaking Internal Haves," DEEP
SEA RES., 19 (12), 1972.

21. Orlanski, J. and Bryan. K., "Formation of the Themcline Step Structure by
Large Internal Gravity Haves," J. GEOPHYS. “8., 712(28), 1969.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", 1976

5303
cso: 8144/1839

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONSTRUCTION OF RECORDING CMLEX FOR INVESTIGATING PINE OCEAN STRUCTURE

Hostigvsi-ISSLBDOVANIYB IWCHIVOSTI GIDROFIZICHBSRIKB POLK! V mm in Russian 1974
pp 162

[Article by V. P. Vorob'yev and L. G. Palevich from monograph "Ocean Deaearch

on Hydrophysical Field Variability." edited by n. V. 02midov, doctor of.

physical and mathematical sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", 211 pages, number of cop-
ies printed unknown]

[Text] Towed measurement complexes, including those for measuring mean and fluctu-
ating values of various parameters, are used extensively by the Institute of Ocean-
ology imeni P. P. Shirshov of the USSR Academy of Sciences in experimental studies
of microscale hydrophysical processes. There is a clear tendency to these complexes
becoming more couplicated due to the need for increasing the number of measured
parameters. Whereas in experiments carried out by the Institute of Oceanology in
1968 [2] the towed line carried only one instrument for measuring velocity fluctua-
tions in water messes, in subsequent work by the institute's research ships the
towed line was transformed into a diversified measurment complex. In particular,
on the 7th voyage of the research ship "Dnitriy Hendeleyev" in 1971-1972 use was
made of towed complexes with instruments for simlteneous measurement of the fluc-
tuating and mean velocity, conductivity and temperature values in the ocean medi-
um, instrumentation for measuring submergence depth and instrueent carrier vibra-
tions and a mmber of other auxiliary devices. Measurements of some parameters

were made synchronously at several horizons

The towed complexes usually consist of experimental models of measurement instru-
ments whose reliability is not always adequately high; sometimes, for comparative
purposes, use is made of measurement instruments designed on different physical
principles for measuring the same parameter (for example, thermosnemometric, hydro-
resistor, electromagnetic instrumentation for measuring velocity fluctuations,
etc.). Accordingly, the task of monitoring the performance of measurement complex
cowonents is assumi -.g great importance in different types of experimental work

so that the experimenter can, in case of need, without interrupting the experi-
ment, adjust the measurement conplex or even restructure it in order to ensure con-
tinuation of a maximum information yield when individual components of the complex
malfunction. The conditions prevailing on long oceanic expeditions impose addition-
nl requirements on the measurement complex as a whole with respect to reliability
and performance since an oceanic experiment is very costly, is limited in time and
usually there is no possibility of repeating measurements. Repetition of an experi-
ment usually involves the organization of a new expedition. Accordingly, in inle-
menting a physical experiment in the ocean the design of a complex simultaneously
performing instrmeent monitoring functions and graphic visualisation of results

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFIOAL USE ONLY

of the measurements for the purpose of controlling the towed complex is trans-
formed, as the latter becomes more complicated, into an independent task, in
many cases more complex than the construction of the measurement complex itself.

Hork on formulating the principles for constructing the registry complex were ini-
tiated at the institute, including by the authors, ismediately after implementa-
tion of the first specialized hydrophysical voyage in 1968. On the 9th voyage of
the scientific research vessel "Akademik Kurchatov" this problem was dealt with
by a specialized detachment which successfully carried out the registry and
speedy processing of experimental data. On the 7th voyage of the scientific re-
search vessel "Dmitriy Hendeleyev" use was made of several extremely complex tow-
ed complexes, there was an increase in the number of measured parameters and more
perfect recording apparatus was used for data registry. On this voyage much work
was done for improving the recording complex, directed primarily to improvement
in the system for functional monitoring of the measurement complex and methods
for preparing for an experiment and carrying it out.

The authors carried out this work applicable to a towed measurement complex con-
sisting of instrumentation developed at the Special Design Bureau of Oceanological
Apparatus of the Institute of Oceanology of the 0883 Academy of Sciences (on 0T
complex).

In determining the principal hydrophysical parameters - fluctuating and mean val-
ues of velocity, temperature and conductivity - use was made for the most part
of new experimental models of measurement instruments. The technical specifica-
tions of these instruments are given in the table. Standard-produced industrial _
instruments were used for measuring the depth h of submergence and vibrations of
the carrier (Xx, 05y, Mg: vibration pressure sensor of the DDV type and accelero-
metric ceramic vibration sensors.

Highly reliable standard-produced instrments were used in constructing the re-
cording complex. The Soviet-produced apparatus used included EPP-09 automatic re-
corders, N-700 loop oscillograph with registry on ultraviolet photopaper, pen
five-channel “-327-5 automatic recorder, Ch-3-30 frequuency meters, SIch-l low-
frequency spectrum analyzer (parallel-action type) with photoattachment, standard
controlling amplifiers from electronic modeling units, digital voltmeters, one-
and two-ray oscillographs.

Among foreign instrumentation use was made of: Japanese four-channel magnetic re-

corder, type R-loOO, of the TEAS Company. This magnetic recorder with a registry
rate of 3 inches/sec, has a bandwidth 0—1000 Hz, with a rate 20 nches/sec — 0-

20 KHz, allowing for a transformation of signal frequencies during reregistry or
when working with a spectrum analyzer; the dynanic range is 40-43 db; the error is
not greater than 11; the input resistance is 100 kilohm and the output resistance
about 10 ohm. A "Rilcadenki" three-channel automatic pen recorder with a bandwidth
up to 20 Hz; DISA amplifiers with an amplification factor 10 db, supplied with
low- and high-frequency filters (attenuation 6 db/octave); DISA quadratic volt-
meters with an averaging time from 0.1 to 30 sec.

When working with the 010 GT towed measurement complex in the first polygons use
was made of traditional placement of measurement and recording instruments [3]. as
shown in Figures 1 and 2. In particular, in polygon 3 (Timor Sea, 21-22 January

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1972). the principal parameters in the experiment were the mean and fluctuating
values of velocity and salinity which were fed to four channels of one of the
magnetic recorders through decoupling amplifiers. The working band of the amplif-
ier of fluctuating parameters began from 1.5 Hz, whereas the amplifiers of mean
values had a working band beginning from 0 Rs.

In order to evaluate the influence of vibrations of the carrier on measurement of
fluctuations of velocity in the imediate neighborhood of the 11’s sensors there
were vibration s'a‘izsora. The components of vibrations cg, Ahmad, are registered
on a second nagnetic recorder together with the signal u'. e repeated registry
of the u' parameter on the second magnetic recorder was caused by the necessity of
synchronization with the introduction into the electronic computer of signals from
different magnetic recorders for the purpose of eliminating discrepancies in the
rates of movement of the magnetic recorder carrier. Taking this into account, it
is also necessary to register on the cot-son carrier groups of signals which it is
proposed be processed jointly thereafter. In addition, the presence of a conson
signal considerably facilitates comparison of the results from different magnetic
recorders when visualizing data on photopaper. '

Technical Specifications of on 0T Complex Instruments

Type of measurement Measured parameter Nota- Measurenent Frequency
instrument tion range range
Thermoanemometric in- Mean velocity In 1-5 m/sec 0-0-3 “2
strument for measuring Velocity fluctus- u' 325 cm/sec 1.5-150 Hz
velocity fluctuations tions

(IPS)

Hydroresistor instru- Mean velocity I; 1-10 m/sec 0-0.3 Ha
ment for measuring velo- Velocity fluctua- u' :25 cn/sec 1.5-1000 Hz
city fluctuations (GIPS) tions

hydroresistor instrument Hean conductivity 3' 3000-6000 Inna/n 0,1 1!:
for measuring conductivity Conductivity fluctua-

fluctuations (GIPB) tions 0" #100 m,“ 1.5-1000 Hz
Thermistor instrment for Temperature T _2+30.c 0-1 B:
measuring mean temperature

(TIST)

Pilm instrument for measur- Temperature fluctua- T' 11°C 1.5-150 Hz
ing temperature fluctuations tiona

(IPT)

In order to form some idea concerning the nature of hydrophysical processes in the
polygon the principal parameters u'. 0" and the mean temperature T3 at the horizon
for measuring these parameters (and sometimes also ax. cl. endolz) were visualie-
ed at the time of the experiment using an N-700 loop oscillograph. Thereafter this
oscillogram served as a basis for choosing records for input into the electronic

87

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

computer. Monitoring of instrument performance and an approximate rejection of sig-
nals caused by grid induction or distortions associated with limitations in the

amplifiers were both accomplished using electronic oscillographs.

Temperature sensors, attached on a towed line and catamaran, had a time constant
of about 1 sec and therefore temperature data were visualized on BPP-09 automatic

recorders and a five-pen N-327-S automatic recorder for creating a general picture
of temperature changes at the horizons.

In accordance with the method employed by the institute on preceding voyages [6-6].
the carrying out of experiments with a towed complex was preceded by a study of
materials from a hydrological investigation of the polygon. and, in particular,
bnthythermngrans. In order to clarify the general pattern of small-scale processes
we selected both the horizons with minimum and maximum vertical temperature gradi-
ents and the horizons where there was a sharp bend on the bathythermogram; we also
took into account the characteristics of currents at different horizons. Figure 3
shows a bathythermogram of one of the polygons on the 7th voyage (fifth polygon,
equator in the neighborhood of the Maldive Islands (13-14 February 1972)), with the
noted towing horizons. From the point of view of the experimenter, one should ex-
pect difficulties (which in the course of the experiment was also confirmed when
carrying out measurements at the horizons 55; 105, 120. 129 n0,characterized by a
sharp temperature change in a relatively thin layer, which is associated with the
need for a very rigorous monitoring of the depth of submergence of the carrier. An
investigation of the neighborhood of horizon 129 m indicated that a change in the
depth of submergence of the towed measurement complex by even 0.5 m gives a sub-
stantially different picture of small-scale hydrophysical processes [7]. Using vis-
ualization of the temperature gradients in the measurement zone (Pig. 6), the auth-
ors succeeded in considerably expanding the possibilities of the experiment. Ac-
cording to Honin [1, 7], the data obtained in instrumental investigations of small-
scale processes contain information on the small-scale turbulence, on microstruc-
ture and on internal waves.

iment is especially important.

The data from vertical soundings, traditionally carried out at the beginning of the
polygon, are points of departure in the first stage of the experiment with a towed
complex. Later, after several hours of work and increasing distance from the sound-
ing point - tens of miles - the features of vertical structure of interest

to the researcher are usually displaced in depth due to the spatial and temporal
variability of hydrophysical fields in the thickness of the ocean. Naturally. the
initial choice of the measurement horizons prior to an experiment is of a prelim-
inary character and there is need for correction in the course of the experiment.
The use of so-called "losable probes" is extremely promising for this purpose.

Such probes have already come into rather extensive use in the United States (for
example, see [8]) for the most part for military purposes and fishing. The intro-
duction of "losable probes" in the practice of the large-scale hydrophysical ex-
periments developed and conducted by the Institute of Oceanology, it seems, would
substantially increase the effectiveness of this method.

88

FIN!()FF1CIAL.USE§(NULY
JjTemi‘e-uaﬁ'l 33,71,753?"
) ’II’IIIIIIII

nﬂlzlllum' "run: I

HIIIIJMI
I ”It I
Juno 5

I l}:},¢;,1}

' R manual

I!!!

III!!!
II— , W, - 0'

IL _______ I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_.._.__ _.._._..;._.._.__ ;___._.__
5| 5) turn: [mt-pun 7!” (lulu 10.71;:
laawuwamua nuuwmu H ﬂawluuuws

  
 

harm:

    

1) Measurement system

2) System for registry on magnetic carrier
3) Graphic visualization system

lo) TEAS magnetic recorder

5) Examination of

6) EFF-09

7) Digital voltmeter

0n the 7th voyage of the scientific research ship "Dmitriy Hendeleyev" there was
also a further improvement in the recording complex associated with the introduc-
tion of a number of devices for operational control of the experiment. One of the
last schemes is shown in Fig. 5 (station 510, equatorial zone of the Indian Ocean,
1 April 1972).

The first magnetic recorder was used in registry of the three fluctuating parameters
u', 0", '1" and the depth of submergence h. The T' and u' fluctuations are measured
at a single point by a sensor with two sensitive film elements. The second magnetic
recorder is used in registry of the mean values of these same parameters and the
third is used in registry of longitudinal vibrations of the "fish" (04x) and the
vertical temperature gradient relative to the measurement point -- 4‘10. The para-
meter u' was a cannon linking parameter for all the magnetic carriers. as in the
preceding variant. The investigation of vibrations of the carrier of these instru-
ments was not the objective of this experimmt and therefore for monitoring purposes
we registered only one component of vibrations 04x, which, it was established. can
exert a maximum influence on the readings of the fluctuation sensors. The remaining
vibration components were observed periodically during the measurements using an

electronic oscillograph. The mean temperatures, as before. were registered on K??-
09 magnetic recorders.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
—-—, _p__ __2 ______ .

‘— tmumn 1 [- taunt alum l

u" [annulus l I luluuuu
I
l

l
O" a' . |
I”-.” r w
9 s I -

         
 

E“ [In
1) 0;

[warns
:5
1

 

Fig. 5. Diagram of recording complex with gradient measurements.

KEY:
1) Measurement system 6) Ch-3-30 frequency meter
2) Registry system 7)'Rikadenk1 automatic recorder
3) Graphic visualization system 8) SlCh-l spectrum analyzer
6) Mean square voltmeter 9) Photoattachment
5) EFF-09 10) Speedy processing system

.‘, '!

 

’ 45-45
0'

Fig. 6. Symbolic bathythermogram with discrimination of sectors on basis of gradi-
ent criteria.

The difference ¥ - T; was determined for measuring the temperature gradient in the
zone of the towe instrument carrier. In addition,_the gertical temperature gradi-
ents above and below the instrument "fish" (ST; ' T2 - 13 and Ta - T3 - T‘ were de-

termined, which together with the depth h were registers using a "Rikadenki" three-
pen automatic recorder. For a more precise determination of the temperature

91
FOI:0FF1CLAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at extremal points use was made of digital voltmeters. It must be remembered that
the gradients [5T3 and 15TH may not be registered; they are auxiliary parameters
rather than the main parameters and enable the experimenter to seek routinely and
with the necessary accuracy the required measurement horizon or correct the towing
depth if this is deemed necessary because the method for investigating the select-
ed horizon may be different; there may also be an effort for precise tracing of a
selected layer, even if it changes its depth, for example, due to internal waves,
meandering relative this layer, and some other maneuvers with the measurement com-
plex. An additional depth measurement element with an output to a Ch-3-30 fre-
quency meter, by means of which the instrument carrier with great accuracy can be
sited at the necessary measurement horizon, is also of substantial assistance in
such maneuvering.

The introduction of new instrumental methods for checking the microstructure of
the pycnocline substantially simplified control of the towed complex in the in-
vestigation of small-scale processes. In the example of a symbolic bathythermo-
gram, represented in Fig. 6, whose appearance is extremely typical, it can be
seen that by stipulating a definite value of the difference ATB - AT" the exper-
imenter can carry out towing in the stipulated layer, in case of necessity cor-
recting the depth. For example, for investigating segment 6 it is possible to
select the condition [3T3 - 'ZSTH' For the extremal point 5 in the temperature
inversion zone it is possible to select the condition -[§Tg -[§Tﬂ. In an invest-
igation of layers with a constant gradient (segments 3, 6) it is convenient to
exercise control using the expression ATE ' A?“ or even using the expression
ATB - AT“ I 0. The cited considerations can serve as a point of departure for
creating an automated measurement complex in which the relationshipfz3rn 'Z3Tal
is used as the adjustable parameter of a closed control system acting on the rud-
der device of the instrument carrier. [B - upper: H - lower]

With respect to use of the SICh-l spectrum analyzer and the mean square voltmeter
(in Fig. 4 denoted SKB), which were intended for the most part for analog speedy
processing during the time of the experiment,it must be noted that a parallel—
action spectrum analyzer can be used as a good indicator of the quality of the
results from the point of view of the influence of the noise introduced by the
shipboard net and also for rejecting unsuitable data in the experimental stage.
The appearance of noise from the shipboard net is attributable to the fact that
four generators operate on shipboard simultaneously in a synchronized regime. When
there are peak loads created by powerful motors (motors of the active rudders,
winches, etc.) the synchronization of the generators can change and the noise can
attain appreciable levels. This noise freely passes through the power rectifiers
of the measurement instruments and introduces noise into the units containing an-
plifiers capable of amplifying these low frequencies, that is, into all the instru-

ments for measuring fluctuations and into the recording apparatus. This interfer-
ence as a rule cannot be determined using an oscillograph, other than in the most

conspicuous cases, and since it is virtually impossible to predict with what com-
bination of operating shipboard motors this interference may appear, a spectrum
analyzer must be an indispensable part of the recording complex as the only ef-
fective means making it possible to suspend in time the carrying out of experiments
whose results will obviously be incorrect.

92

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
The results of operation of the improved towed complex on the 7th voyage of the
scientific research ship "Dmitriy Hendeleyev“ confirmed the usefulness and pos-
sibility of carrying out a controllable experiment, as is extremely important in

an investigation of small-scale processes in the ocean. For a more operational con-
trol of the measurement complex and improvement in control it appears desirable to
introduce some new improvements, enumerated below.

1. Introduction into the complex of apparatus for measuring the temperature gradi-
ents above and below the instrument "fish." The use of gradient meters not only
will increase measurement accuracy and the information yield of the records, but
also will make it possible to discriminate a parameter which is extremely important
for control -- the derivative of the time gradient. A change of this derivative is
needed by the operator for more precise holding of the instrument container in the
selected temperature layer. With the creation of a self-controllable instrument
container such a method will make it possible to make an attempt at a separate
study of small-scale turbulence, the fine microstructure and internal waves,
whereas the data now registered uaually represent a superpositioning of these phen-
omena.

2. Introduction of additional spectrum analyzers for simultaneous monitoring of
signals of fluctuating parameters for the purpose of determining noise. In addi-
tion, in the measurenent of the spectra of several parameters in the experimental
stage it is already possible to establish interrelationships with changes in dif-
ferent parameters.

3. For a continuing analysis of hydrological conditions during the time of towing
it is necessary to give attention to the development of sounding apparatus operat-
ing while the ship is proceeding on course. in particular, simplified, inexpensive
probes for one-time use which should be included in the makeup of the towed com-
plexes.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Munin, A. 8., "Principal Features of Marine Turbulence," OKEANOLOGIYA (Ocean-
oJogy), 10, No 2, 1970.

2. Ozmidov, R. V., "Second Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Dmitriy Hen-
deleyev'," OKEANOLOGIYA, 11, No l, 1971.

3. 02midov, R. V., "Experimental Investigation of Small-Scale Oqeanic Turbulence
on the 9th Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Akademik Kurchatov',"

VESTNIK AN SSSR (Herald of the USSR Academy of Sciences), No 7, 1971.

6. "Report on the Second Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Dmitriy Mendel-
eyev'," Archives of the Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences.

5. "Report on the.Fifth Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Dmitriy Mendel-
eyev'," Archives of the Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences.

6. "Report on the Ninth Voyage of the Scientific Research'ship 'Akademik Kurcha-
tov',” Archives of the Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences.

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. "Report on the Seventh Voyage of the Scientific Research Ship 'Duitriy Men-
deleyev'." Archives of the Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences.

8. Brown, N. I... Diehl, R. J., Hamin', H. B. and Stahl, P. 5.. MARINE SCI. IN-
STRUMENTATION. V01 3, pp 91-97, 1965.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks". 1976

5303
(:80: 8144/1839

91.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ABSTRACTS OF PAPERS IN 'ISSLEDOVANIYE IZHENCHIVOSTI GIDROPIZICHESKIKH FOLEY V OKEANE'

Hosgow ISSLEDOVANIYE IZHENCHIVOSTI GIDROPIZICHBSKIKH eons! v oxsaus in Russian 1976
pp 08-211

[rem] ' unc 551.465.15

INVESTIGATION OF VARIABILITY 0F HYDROPHYSICAL FIELDS IN OCEAN POLYGON

[Abstract of article by 02midov, R. V., Belyayev, V. 5., Lyubimtaev, H. H. and
Paka, v. 1.]

[Text] The article describes a method for complex measurements of fluctuations of
hydrophysical fields in a wide range of spatial-temporal scales. The authors give
the results of measurements in the seventh polygon on the 7th voyage of the sci-
entific research vessel "Dmitriy Hendeleyev." There was found to be a complex spa-
tial-temporal structure of macro- and nicroscale background conditions on the basis
of data from standard hydrological measurements using the AIST hydrophysical sonde,
an acoustic current velocity sonde, radiotemperature buoy and temperature "trawl."
There is a dependence between the intensity of microscale turbulence and local
background conditions. Also given are the results of deep-water (up to 1200 m)
measurements of conductivity fluctuations in a sounding regime. The strong varia-
bility of hydrophysical fields in the entire investigated range of scales is at-
tributable to the interrelationship of different processes transpiring in the
ocean. Figures 28, references 10. (p 3)

UDC 551.665.15

INTENSITY SPECTRA OF MICROPULSATIONS OF CURRENT VELOCITY AND DISSIPATION 0F
KINETIC ENERGY IN OCEAN

[Abstract of article by Belyayev, V. 5., Gesentsvey, A. N. and Osmidov, R. V.]

[Text] 0n the basis of.measurement data for a number of ocean stations it was pos-
sible to obtain the intensity spectra of current velocity fluctuations and dissipa-
tion of turbulent energy in the upper ZOO—m layer of the ocean. The curves of dis-
tribution of the intensity of current velocity fluctuations in the spectrum of

wave numbers in most cases have a tendency to saturation in the region of small
Have numbers. In some cases the spectra of dissipation of turbulent energy attain

95

Illl(lﬂﬂI1Al.UBE¢lﬂLY
ROI OIIWCJAI.1EHE(NNLY

maxima in the investigated range of scales, which is evidence of an important in-
fluence of viscosity forces on pulsating movements. Figures 12, references 5.

(p 31)

UDC 551.665.15
SPECTRAL CHARACTERISTICS OF FLUCTUATIONS 0F CONDUCTIVITY FIELD IN OCEAN
[Abstract of article by Belyayev, V. 8., Gezentsvey, A. N. and Osmidov, R. V.]

[Text] The article gives the spectra of microscale fluctuations of the conductivity
field 81(k), the spectra k21(k) and k231(k), where k is the wave number, in a ser-
ies of polygons in the Indian and Pacific Oceans. The B1(k) spectral curves at a
logarithmic scale can be approximated by straight lines with slopes changing in a
relatively wide range. In some cases the k81(k) spectral curves are saturated with
small k. Figures 11, references 6. (p 62)

DEC 551.565.15
STATISTICAL EVALUATIONS 0P PARAMETERS 0P MICROSCALE IURBULENCE
[Abstract of article by Pozdynin, V. D.]

[Text] The author gives the results of a statistical processing of measure-ants of
microscale turbulence in three polygons in the Atlantic Ocean. The measurements
were made by the method of horizontal towing of instruments in the layer with a
depth of 30-200 n. Estimates of the mean values, standard deviations and their

95! confidence intervals are given for the energy levels of turbulence, limiting

horizontal correlation radii, Taylor microscales and the rates of dissipation of
turbulent energy. Figures 7, tables 7, references 6. (p 50)

000 551.665.15

EXPERIENCE IN INVESTIGATING HICRDSTRDCTURE 0F CONDUCTIVITY FIELD IN OCEAN BY
SOUNDING METHOD

[Abstract of article by Vorob'yev, V. P., Korchashkin, N. N. and Nikolayev, 0. “.1

[Text] This paper is devoted to a study of the vertical nicrostructure o. the con-
ductivity field using a low-inertia sonde on a connecting electrical any support-
ing cable. A block diagram of a hydroresistor instrument for measuring sonde con-
ductivity is given. 0n the basis of correlation functions and spectral curves ob-
tained using an electronic computer there is a discussion of this experiment. Fig-
ures A, references 3. (p 61)

UDC 551.501

METEOROLOGICAL SUPPORT FOR EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS OF OCEAN TURBULENCE

[Abstract of article by Shishkov, Yu. A.]

[Text] The possible influence of nacroscale atmospheric disturbances on the var-
iability of the microscale structure of physical fields in the ocean is examined.

96
INDI‘OIIICIAI.IJSIICNVLY
The author gives some methodological recommendations on the implementation of
meteorological measurements. Figures 1, tables 1, references 8. (p 66)

UDC 551.665.15

BALANCE OF TURBULENT ENERGY IN OCEAN
[Abstract of article by lpzovatakiy, I. 0.]

[Text] 0n the basis of data on current velocities obtained in 1970 in a polygon in
the Atlantic Ocean it was possible to estimate the values in the equation for the
balance of the mean density of kinetic energy of turbulent fluctuations in the
ocean. Also examined is the spatial and temporal change in characteristics of the
field of turbulent velocity fluctuations 3:. It was found that in the course of in-
dividual time intervals with a duration of 5-10 days the E: function can be consid-
ered quasiststionsry. In the polygon there is a predominance of transfer of tur-
bulent energy by "turbulent viscosity" and at the considered turbulence scales is
homogeneous. Figures 1. tables 2, references 7. (p 71)

006 551.‘6.062

STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CURRENTS BASED ON OBSERVATIONAL DATA FOR ATLANTIC
POLYCON

[Abstract of article by Vasilenko, V. M. and Krivelevich, L. M.]

[Text] The article gives the results of a statistical analysis of time series of
velocity components on the basis of data from polygon investigations by the sci-
entific research ships of the USSR Academy of Sciences in the Atlantic Ocean. The
energy spectrum of current velocity was obtained in the range of scales from 720
to 7 hours. A study was made of the spectral characteristics of second-order ms-
ments of the velocity field. Figures 7, references 7. (p 76)

BBC 551.465.15

INERTIAL mrsxvu. m mamas srscm m smmrsn rwm (answers-mum
MODEL)

[Abstract of article by Venilov, A. Yu. and Lozovatskiy. I. 0.]

[Text] A solution was obtained for a system of spectral equations in a stratified
fluid in a wide range of wave numbers. Tue analysis lads and the numerical ex-
amples given show that the turbulence spectra have a nonuniverssl form. The be-
havior of the spectral densities is determined by the Re number (or by the {b
value), the Rf number and the Pr number. The inertial interval of scales exists
with an adequately high he number and not excessively large Rf (in the case of a
stable stratification). Figures 2, references 11. (p 83)

97

ERIICIHHCIAI.UEE1DBHAV
FOlloFFKJA1.USE(IVLY

UDC 551.66.062.6
INTERNAL GRAVITATIONAL WAVES IN OCEAN
[Abstract of article by Ivanov, Yu. A., Horozov, Ye. G. and Samodurov, A. 5.]

[Text] The results of statistical processing of measurements of fluctuations of
temperature and current velocity in different regions of the ocean in the range of
frequencies of internal gravitational waves are described and an analysis is given
of theoretical investigations related to the problems of wave generation. Figures
7. references 21. (p 91)

UDC 551.46.662.6
GENERATION OF TRAINS OF INTERNAL WAVES IN OCEAN
[Abstract of article by Samodurov. A. 8.]

[Text] The author has solved the problem for disturbances in the neighborhood of
the critical point (u - c0) by some internal wave of a finite amplitude which is
assumed to be known. It was found that disturbances in this region have the form
of packets of waves. The characteristics of these packets are analysed. Numerical
estimates are given for the real ocean which make it possible to conclude that the
most probable generator of the trains of internal waves of the indicated type in
the ocean is internal tides. Figures 2, references 11. (p 99)

UDC 551.46.062.6
OBSERVATION OF INTERNAL WAVES IN CENTRAL ATLANTIC
[Abstract of article by Karabasheva, B. I. and Paka, V. 1.]

[Text] The article presents the results of observations of internal waves in the
range of wave nunbers from 10’3 to 10‘2 m'1 in the layer of the seasonal thermo-
cline. The measurements were made using a temperature "trawl" towed in different
directions. The results are presented in the form of temperature sections, disper-
sions and spectra of fluctuations of isotherms, and also in the form of the dis-
persions and spectra of temperature fluctuations, areraged in the entire layer of
the thermocline. There is a stationarity and isotropicity of the field of internal
waves. The averaged one-dimensional spectrum of displacements drops off in conform-
ity to the law k‘3 and does not have peaks. Figures 6. references 16. (p 108)

006 551.665.15
SPECTRUM OE REYNOLDS STRESS
[Abstract of article by Benilov, A. Yu.]

[Text] A solution of the spectral equation for turbulence in a flow with a shear of
mean velocity is cited. Velocity spectra and Reynolds stresses are obtained. These
agree sufficiently well with the experimental data. Figures 2, references 14. (p 115)

98

FOI‘OFFIJA1.USE(NNLY
UDC 551.665. 15

PEASURMNT OF PARAMETERS 0F WAVE-COVERED SEA LAYER AS METHOD FOR ME STUDY OF
SURFACE VERTICAL TURBULENCE

[Abstract of article by Aleksandrov, A. P. and Vayndruk, E. 8.]

[Text: An acoustic method is proposed for investigating some properties of surface
turbulence unrelated to the need for surface-layer placement of unwieldy floating

carriers and sensors-for measuring the velocity of water movement. The method
makes it possible, on the basis of measurements of the parameters of the ser-

ated (bubble) layer, closely associated with the hydrophysical characteristics of
the water medium, to carry our investigations of vertical turbulence remotely from
beneath the water under stationary conditions. Figures 10, references 4. (p 122)

UDC 551.565.15

SOME PROBLEMS IN USE OF STRUCTURAL FUNCTIONS FOR DETERMINING OEGCETRIC PARAMETERS
OF ANISOTROPY 0F TURBULENT FIELD

[Abstract of article by Konovalov, Ye. A. and Yasenskiy, V. “.1

[Text] A model of a two-dimensional turbulent field with an anisotropy close to _
elliptical is considered. An expression is derived for a section of a two-dimen-

sional structural function related to the adopted anisotropy index ﬂ . The re-
sults of an experiment with an anisotropic field of conductivity of a submerged

jet are given. Figures 2, references 3. (p 129)
UDC 551.665.15

ONE APPROXIMATE METHOD FOR C(HPUTINO EVALUATION OF DISPERSION OP TURBULENT SIGNALS

[Abstract of article by Konovalov, Ye. A., Hatytsin, V. D. and Yassiskiy, V. N.]

[Text] A method for computing an evaluation of the current dispersion is examined
for a random signal with a normal distribution law. This involves the squaring of

the smoothed values of the modulus of a random signal. A dependence is 'found for
the dispersion of the scatters of the evaluation on the duration of the averaging

interval and the interval for correlation of the initial signal. Experimental
curves of the current dispersion of fluctuations of conductivity of a submerged
jet, comuted by two methods, are given. Figures 1, references 2. (P 131)

UDC 553.72
INVESTIGATION OF DIFFUSION OP IMPURITY IN SEA USING LUHINESCENT INDICATORS AND
TUNED SENSOR
[Abstract of article by Karabashev, G. S. and Ozmidov, R. V.]

[Text] The authors generalize experience in investigating diffusion processes in
the sea using artificially introduced fluorescent dyes. The article describes a

99
FOIOIIICIAIJBEONLY
FOROFFICIALIBEONLY

toved instrument, a fluorometer making it possible to measure small concentrations
of dye in water. Methods are given for experiments with instantaneous and contin-
uous dye point sources. The results of experiments in the Black and Baltic Seas
are given. These demonstrated a marked anisotropy of the diffusion process in her
izontal and vertical directions. The drawing out and deformation of dye spots is
attributable to the joint influence of the gradients of mean velocity and turbu-
lent diffusion. The values of the coefficients of turbulent diffusion are estimt-
ed and computations of the statistical characteristics of impurity fields in the
sea are presented. Figures 8, references 8. (p 135)

UDC 553. 72

TURBULENT DIFFUSION OP IHPURITY IN SEA COASTAL ZONE

[Abstract of article by Goroshko, V. 11.]

[Text] The field of concentration of an impurity generated by a point stationary
source in the coastal zone of theses is computed. The change in' the averaged velo-
city of a coastal current is taken into account, as well as the coefficients of
vertical turbulent diffusion and the changes with increasing distance from the
shore. The results of numerical computations are analyzed on the basis of an ex-
pression derived in the study for the field of concentration of an impurity. Fig-
ures 2, references 3. (p 145)

UDC 551.665.15

EXAMPLE OF COMPUTATION OF VERTICAL CURRENT VELOCITY AND VERTICAL COEFFICIENT OP
TURBULENT VISCOSITY IN OCEAN BY INDIRECT METHODS

[Abstract of article by Dobroklonskiy, S. V. and Pyzhevich, H. L.]

[Text] Solutions of the stationary equations of motion of a viscous fluid and the
continuity equation made it possible to derive expressions for the vertical velocity
of movement of water masses v and the kinematic coefficient of vertical turbulent
viscosity V in the ocean. Computations of these parameters are given for an equa-
torial point in the Pacific Ocean for the upper 500 m. In the Cromwell Current v<o
and the characteristic values v - 10-2-10'1 cm/sec. Figures lo, references 5. (p 150)

UDC 551.“.08
CONSTRUCTION OF RECORDING COHPLBX IN INVESTIGATION OF FINE STRUCTURE 0? OCEAN
[Abstract of article by Vorob'yev, V. P. and Palevich, L. 6.]
[Text] The recording complex as a component part of a measurement complex is snag
the principal means for experimental investigation of macroscale physical process-
es in the ocean. In addition to recording the measurement data, the recording com-

plex performs the functions of monitoring and functional checking of the measure-

ment apparatus and also for graphic visualization of measurements in the experi-
mental process for a prelimary evaluation of the results for the purpose of

100

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
choosing the most informative records. The article gives recommendations on im-
provement of the recording complex and the method for working with it for opera-
tional control of an experiment in the course of its implementation for increas-

ing the reliability of measurements and for increasing the information yield of
the records. Figures 6, tables 1, references 8. (p 155)

UDC 551.46.08
USE OF A THERHOAUEHOHBTBR IN A FLO" “1TH TEMPERATURE FLUCTUATIONS
[Abstract of article by Nabatov, V. N., Peka. V. T. and Skurenko, V. 1.]

[Text] The authors analyze the influence of temperature inhomogeneities of the tur-
bulent flow of a fluid on the readings of instruments of the thermoanemometric and
hydroresistor type for measuring velocity fluctuations. Under conditions of a sta-
tionary turbulent flow created in a hydraulic apparatus the authors made measure-
ments of its fluctuating components in the presence and absence of temperature
fluctuations. The measurements were made by the "three hearings" method. Process-
ing of the thermoanemometer readings indicated that the influence of temperature
fluctuations in the velocity spectra is manifested to frequencies not exceeding

100 Hz. The "three hestings" method is recommended for checking the thermoanemo-
meter and its characteristics used in thedata processing procedure. In investiga-
tions of oceanic turbulence it is better to employ an instrument with a hydroresis-
tor-type sensor. Figures 8, tables 1. references 10. (P 162)

UDC 551.46.08

FREQUENCY-TYPE PRESSURE-SENSITIVE DEPTH DETECTORS FOR OCEANOLOGICAL RESEARCH
[Abscract of article by Plushnikov, V. H. and Khlystunov, H. 8.]

[Text] The article deals with the problem of metrology and designing of frequency-
type depth (pressure) detectors constructed on the basis of AT-type tensocontroll-
able resonators employed as a sensing element. The authors give computation expres-
sione, technical parameters and characteristics of a discretely constructed and
monolithic sensor and it is shown that it is superior in comparison with the par-
ameters of the depth (pressure) sensors used at the present time. Figures 11,
tables 1, references a. (p 175)

UDC 551.b6.08

AMERICAN 'BREAKAVAY' TEMPERATURE PROBES

[Abstract of article by Vorob'yev, V. P., Kuznetsov, Ye. 1., Obukhova, L. V. and
.Palevich, L. G.)

[Text] On the basis of materials in foreign publications the article gives an anal-
ysis of the design, circuitry and operational features of "breakaway" temperature
probes produced by different companies in the United States. A comparative table of
the technical specifications of different types of "breakaway" temperature probes-
is included. Figures 2, tables 1, references 39. (p 185)

101
FOI:0'IIC1AI.I£§E(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681. 3

IMPROVEMENT 0F SYSTEM FOR CURVE PLO'ITING FOR 'HINSK-ZZ' comma
[Abstract of article by Arvan, B. M.]

[Text] The article describes an output device for the "MinserZ" conputer making it
possible to construct curves of spectral densities, correlation functions, histo-
grams, isolines of hydrological sections, etc. The authors set forth the sequence
or operations and work regimes for the unit in dependence on the nature of the in-
formation fed out to the curve plotter. Figures 6, references 3. (p 197)

000 518.5
ERROR IN RECONSTRUCTING PROCESS FROM SIGNIFICANT READINGS
[Abstract of article by Sorokin, A. A.]

[Text] Three algorithms for reconstructing a telemetric process on the basis of sig-
nificant readings obtained as a result of processing of a flow of readings following
with some initial time quantization interval, with a zero-order predictor with a
floating aperture, are analysed. Comparison of the restoration algorithms with one
another is accomplished using the maximum values of the dispersion of the interpol-

ation error in the interval between successive significant readings. Figures 2, ref-
erences 7. (p 201)
COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1975

S303 - END -
CSO: 8144/1839

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY