APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00880R000100020012-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8267

6 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 8/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliternted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF TN IS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .
' I. I ~me N . 3. Recipient's Accession No.
gagtlscnﬁPNIC DA!A ‘ " JPRS L, 8267
i. In 77-7-7 nan-Ir . rpou hm

rwsmwss on ussn SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - rnysrcu, s Febrile 1979
scchrs mo racnmomcr , (F000 8/79)

 

 

7. Ruth-uh! Io Salami" anaiaauoo Reps. 4 -
o.

 

9. I‘ninum-u lh‘mnualwn Name. and Add'cu IO. Hourll‘l'aslxl'ock Unit No.

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clebe Road “Connect/Grass No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

12. Sponsoring Cups-nun“ Name and Address II- Type oi Report a: Period
Covered

As above

I}. ~'mpplurau-mmy Notes

'6. Mum. s.

The report contains information on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics:
atmospheric sciences: chemistry; earth sciences and oceanography: electronics -
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials: mathematical .
sciences; cybernetics. computers; mechanical, industrial. civil, and marine
engineering; methods and equipment; missile technology; navigation,

communications. detection.and countermeasures, nuclear science and technology;
ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels: space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

. K: v loo-i- an-i Dormer Analysis. a- Descnpross

USSR Electronics Missile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Engineering Navigation and

Astronomy Energy Conversion Communications
Astrophysics Materials Detection and
Atmospheric Sciences Hathematics Comtermeaeures
Chemistry Mechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Computers Civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics Industrial Engineering Ordnance
Earth Sciences Marine Engineering Physics
Oceanosraphy Methods Propulsion and Fuels
In. LII-mulls" Open-tad“ Teens Equipment spa:e TCChnolosy

we. ( «Nu Fun/(nous 01.03.04,07.os.o9.lo.1l.12,13.lb.16.17.18.19.20,21,22
leper!) .
For officlal Use Only. Limited “ 1‘ '
Number of Copies Available From JPRS m .

'°'“"'""‘“"'"" TMBIOIIUAYBEREPRODUCED

 

“DEMO: IIIW'II
I-‘(m HI-‘l-‘H'IAI. mil-2 UNLY

JPRS L/8267
6 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(rouo 8/79)

CONTENTS PAGE

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL mammals

Surface Acountic Shear Waves in Periodic Structures on the
Surface of Solids
(Yu. v. Gulyeyev, v. P. Piesokiy; mmremrn I
small“, "0 9’ 1978) one...ooooo-ooonoosooooooo 1

MINING AND mmnm

Dynamic kroro of e Pleated Integrating Gyro
(V. A. Kovnl', K. P. Andreychenko; WM'NAXA
TElGiNIKA, No 8, 1918) 1h

PUBLICATIONS

The Strength of Composite Miteriala
{nanny Moiseyevich Karpinos, et a1.; mocmms'r'
mmmrrsmumm m‘rmmov, 1978) 19

Computer Mulysis oi‘ Geophyaical Regularities
(L. i. Damn; et 31.; MATENM'ICWOYB
ODBSPRHHIIX‘B ISSLBDOVANIY 6mmICEESICIlGi ZAKONO-
MmﬂOS'rE! NA PRIMERE KOSMICHESKIIGi mam,
REZUL'TATY ISSLEDOVANIY P0 MEZHDUMRODNYM
caonzxcxmsm momcrm, 1978) 23

Mb:- id Computing Devices With Separately Controlled
Parameters
(v. a. Smolov, Ye . A. Chernyavskiy; 0mm
WCNISLITEL'NYYE USTROYSTVA S DISWOUMVLIAMHI
PWRI’ 1977) coo...oooooeoooo-ogoooo-ooouoooooo 29

Printers for Computing Ihchines
(u. n. Saveta, et n1.; mmrusnoam MROYMAM,

- a - [III - USSR - 23 S 8 '1‘ F000)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 (lNl-Y

comma (Continued)

Numerical Mcthodn ln the Mcchunlcs of Continuous kdln
(V. M. mukouov, 0. 8. Roelynkov; WGHISLITE'NYYB
MENU! I MOGRMMIROVMIYE (CHISLENNYY MENU! V
MEIGIANIKE 5mm SEED) XXVIIuSBORNIK mm
NAISHNO-ISSIBDOVATEL' SKOOO WCHISLI'I'BL‘ uoso Tam-1m
VOSKOVSKGIO OOSWVENNWO WIVESI'I'B‘M, 1977). ..

Geophysical Exploration Equipments Described
(A. v. mtveyev; oaommmmm Amm, 1977).

Automatic Nuvlsntlon of Heavy Aircraft

(v. N. Vaamnm; Av'romrrzmovmon voznnanm:
TYAZHELM WV, 1973)

Abstracts From the Publlcatlon 'Applied Oeopbyaics'
(mmnmm 0301mm, "0 91, 1978)

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z ONLY

l-;|.I-Zi2'i'RUNll25 AND lilJ-LiTI'RlC/il. ENGINEERING

UDC 621.37/.39:53ﬁ
SURFACE ACOUSTIC SHEAR UAVHS [N PERIODIC STRUCTURES ON THE SURFACE OF SOLIDS

Moscow RADiOTEKHNlKA I BLBKTRONIKA in Russian No 9. 1978 pp 1939-1947 manu-
script received 29 Mar 78

[Article by Yu.V. Guiyayev and V.P. Plesskiyl

[Text] A study is made of the influence of periodic inhomogeneity of the
surface of an elastic solid on the properties of surface and body acoustic
waves propagated near this surface. it is demonstrated that a slow-speed
purely shear-type surface wave can be propagated along the corrugated surface
of an elastic body. A study is made of electronic damping and amplification
of these waves. A study is made of amplification of a normally incident
acoustic sheer wave when reflected from the periodically uneven interface be-
tween a piezoelectric crystal and a semiconductor in which electron drift has
been created. A theoretical prognostication is made of resonance transmission
of an acoustic wave through a vacuum slit in a piezoelectric crystal. This
effect takes place in normal incidence of a wave onto a slit with periodically
uneven edges and is explained by the resonance generation of slit waves in

the system.

Introduction

As we know. periodic structures have been quite extensively and successfully
employed in electrodynamics (cf., e.g.. [1. 2]). As an example can be cited
moderating structures along which an electromagnetic wave can be propagated
with a velocity considerably lower than the speed of light. This wave can
interact effectively with an electron stream moving in the direction of pro-
pagation of the wave at a velocity close to the phase velocity of the wave.
This type of interaction is utilized in a traveling wave tube and other devices.

in recent years much attention has been paid to studying the feasibility of
employing acoustic (sound) waves in electronics. This trend has been called
”acoustoeiectronics." it is possible to believe that the application of
periodic structures in acoustoelectronics. just as in superhigh frequency
electrudyuamucs. will open up new possibilities and will result in the creation
of new acoustnelectronic devices and apparatus.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z ONLY

Of interest in particular is the feasibility of substantial moderation of
acoustic waves. in spite of the fact that acoustic waves are so "slow" in
comparison with electromagnetic (on this is based one of the most important
applications of acoustic waves in radioelectronics--in delay lines). never-
theless it often proves to be desirable that their speeds were even lower.
This situation arises. for example. in creating delay lines for a very long
delay period (hundreds of microseconds and longer). in developing acousto-
electronic amplifiers. when for the purpose of realizing the sound amplifica-
ilmt effect it is necessary that the velocity of the electron drift exceed
the phase Velocity of the wave. in developing acoustoelectronic devices for
frequencies below 1 MHz, when a substantial reduction in wave length is re-
quired at a specific frequency. etc.

Recently in Ill and [4| the idea was independently advanced of the possibility
"I substantial moderation of acoustic waves by means of periodic structures
created on the surface of an elastic solid.

lhis article is devotrﬂ to a theoretical discussion of the moderation effect,

as well as of questions related in the dissipation of moderated surface acoustic
waves at irregularities in the periodic structure and to their electronic
ah:otp.tun and amplification. Also constructed is a theory of certain dif-
fracilnu phenomena in piezoelectric crystals with a periodically uneven surface.
tonstd.r:tion ls given. thai is, to the possibility of electronic absorption

and amplifitation of acoustic waves when they are reflected from a periodically
uneven interface between a piezoelectric crystal and semiconductor and of the
transmission (including complete) of an acoustic wave through a periodically
uneven slit between piezoelectric crystals.

i. Slow Surface Acoustic Shear Haves in Periodic Structures on the Surface
of Solids

in ii. hi it was demonstrated simultaneously and independently that along the
sarface of a solid covered with fine of rectangular shape or having periodically
spaced slits of a specific depth along the line perpendicular to these fins
propagation of a slow-speed purely shear-type surface acoustic wave (PAV) is
possible. with mechanical movement along the fins. It was demonstrated

that with specific ratios between the dimensions of the fins and the wave-
lennth the phase velocity of these waves can be very low--substantially lower
than the velocity of a transverse acoustic body wave. In [4] was indicated

the definite analogy between these waves and Love waves. Lowe waves are purely
shear-type rav's. propagated along the surface of a solid covered with a thin
(or the order of ungnitude of or less than the wavelength) film of another
material with a lower acoustic shear wave velocity. Actually. the creation of
a avatem of fins on the surface of an elastic solid reduces the rigidity of the
surface layer. 1.0., as though it lowers the effective shear modulus of the
material in the surface region.

Uruerallv. when the hose and system of fins are made of different materials,
constant . . which specifies the exponential attenuation of displacement into
the interior of the material of the base. is given by the equation:

,.

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C
x- -—' -d- It, lg k,li.

. l (1)

Here c and C. are the shear moduli of the material of the base and

the Iaterial of the fins: d and h are the thickness and height of the
fins; l in the spacing of the structure: k - u/v is the wave number
of the shear wave in the material of the fins (e istghe wave frequency and
sz is the velocity of the shear wave in the material of the fins).

here the velocity of a slow-speed surface wave is given by the expression:

 

v r- .-.—...__L
I - . —.;E-—du..r— I
+ ' v’ki
V ' ( ...,.-.. ) m -
(2)
where v is the velocity of the shear wave in the base. Equations (1) and

(2) canlge arrived at easily by using the complete surface compatibility in
[a] between equations (or u-polarized electromagnetic waves propagated in a
two-dimensional moderating structure (cf. [1]) and equations for purely shear-
type acoustic waven (with the line of shear along the fins or slits) propagated
along a corresponding two-dimensional structure on the surface of a solid, as
well as the identical type of individual boundary conditions.

The expression» written here are valid in a single-wave approximation [1].

when the length of the moderated wave is considerably greater than the struc-
ture's spacing. As is obvious from (2), with an increase in the frequency of
the wave. as the condition kzh - I/Z is approached the surface shear wave
considered here will experience as heavy moderation as desired. However. since
when kzh m u/Z equation (2) is no longer valid (the length of a slow PAV

must be greater than the spacing of the structure), the maxi-en possible Iodera-
tion is of the order of hit . As a numerical example let us consider a periodic
structure on the surface of fused quartz (vt1 - v 2 - 3.5-105 eels) with
dimensions of t - b u . d - 2 n . h - 85 u . For a purely shear-type PAV

with n frequency of 10 MHz from (2) we get v 1 0.1 v . i.e., the wave is
slowed approximately 10—fold as coepared withsa body acoustic shear wave.

Here the length of a slow PAV equals 35 u , and the depth of penetration into
the material of the base equals d - x“ 3 6 u . i.e., the wave is of a clearly
pronounced surince nature.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISH ONLY

2. Attenuation of Slow Haves on Account of Dissipation in Imperfections in
the Periodic Structure and Aeplificatlon of These Waves by a Drift-Type
Electron Stream

The periodic structures described can be obtained by the ionic etching method,
or. possibly. by special growing. But with any method of fabrication the
structures will have occasional deviations from strict periodicity. which

will result in attenuation of the slow wave as a result of its dissipation.
Estimates have shown that the greatest dissipation takes place in the case of
variations in the height of the fins. in this case the coefficient of wave
attenuation can be estimated from the equation in [5]:

((6h)‘)

P shtkh.

 

l'=q(ql)’
(3)

Here q is the wave number of a slow PAV. and <(6h)2> is the mean square

at the deviation in the height of the fins from the mean value. For simplicity
in (1) It was assumed that the slits are infinitely thin and the fins are made
of IL» same material an the base (Itl - k2 I k).

A slow shear PAV can undergo electronic absorption (or amplification) as the
result of interaction with free drifting electrons in semiconductors. For the
sake or deiiniteness. let us consider a piezoelectric semiconductor whose sur-
face is covered with rectangular fins sade of a nonpieaoelectric dielectric.
The orientation of the piezoelectric semiconductor is such that a shear PAV
with mechanical movement along the fins is piezoactive (e.g.. in the case of
cas the hexagonal axis can be directed along the fins). In the case of fairly
low-frequency ultrasound. when qu << 1 (r is the Debye radius). for the
coefficient of electronic absorption (amplichstion) of the wave under con-
ditions of considerable slowing we get the following expression [5]:

u'r.
e-nq , .

1+ (l+:—:- (o’tJ'

 

(6)

where a - K2 is the electromechanical coupling constant; r is the
ﬂaxweliian relaxation time: c and c are the dielectric constants of
the piezoelectric semiconductor and thg material of the fins. respectively;
and u' - u — evd (Q - 21/1 and vd is the velocity of electron drift in
ihv direction of the wave).

The estimate of the attenuation coefficient in (6) is similar to estimates
made previously in [6. 7] of the amplification factors of Love and Rayleigh
waves in laminar structures. It is easy to see that when v > v. the
coefficient of electronic absorption, o . is less than zero. i.e.. absorption

u
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of thin wave changes into amplification when the velocity of electron drift
in the direction of the wave exceeds its phase velocity.

For numerical estimates let us consider a CdS crystal whose surface is covered
with fins made of a dielectric clone in mechanical parameters to CdS (v 3

n 2-10h cola). Let the dimenuions of the [ins be the following: h - £7 n .

d . l u . and t . 6 u : and the hexagonal axis. c , is parallel to the direc-
tion u' the fins. The concentration and mobilit of electrons equal, respec-
tively. n n i.5-10'? cm“1 and u - 200 cm2(V's)‘ . Then. with a frequency of
id ﬂux. for the velocity and amplification factor (when (v [V ) - l - l) of

a slow PAV we get v - 1.7-10“ cm/s g vt/S and n - 65 dﬂlcg. The Joule heat
released in the procgss is approximately 6 H/cm3. which can be diverted under
continuous conditions.

Let us note also that in view of the reduction in wavelength during slowing
(increase in q ) the maximum value of the electronic amplification factor per
unit of length of the crystal is greater than for a body shear wave of the same
frequency.

3. Effect of Amplification of an Acoustic Have in Reflection from a Periodically
Uneven Interface Between a Piezoelectric Crystal and a Semiconductor

As we know. in an "0rotron" or diffraction generator [8. 9] the electron beam
interacts not with the fundamental electromagnetic wave present in the open
resonator. but with one of the harmonics of the field originating near the
reflector. which is made in the form of a periodic structure. The spacing

of the structure is selected as considerably smaller than the wavelength of
the resonant frequency. so that the phase velocity of field harmonics origin-
ating near the periodic structure is found to be many times less than the
speed of light. which facilitates obtaining the required electron beams.

halo; we will construct the theory of an "acoustic '0rotron.'" i.e., we will
deucrlhu the amplification of a wave when reflected from the periodically
perturbed surface of a piezodielectric near which there is a semiconductor
with a drift-type electron stream.

Let nu aention that the amplification of an acoustic wave upon reflection from
the smooth interface between a piezodielectric and semiconductor was discussed
previously in a number of studies [10. 11].

ii was demonstrated that fairly strong interaction between the wave and the
ueaieonductor's electrons takes place only with very oblique (almost glancing)
Incidence of the wave at the interface. In the case of a periodically uneven
interface which we discuss. strong interaction is gotten even with normal in-
cidence of the wave at the interface.

Pnr the sake of definiteness. let us discuss a piezodielectric of class c6v'
with a hexagonal axis along axis 02 (cf. fig 1), occupying the region of
v - nix) . Then y - 0 equals the mean value of periodic function y - C(x) .

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

describing the boundary of the piezodielectric. The lower space is occupied
by the semiconductor. in which is created an electron drift in the direction
of axis 0X. He will assume that there is no mechanical contact between the
piezodielectric and the semiconductor. A normally incident purely shear-type
acoustic wave is propagated in the direction opposite axis OY and has mechanical
displacement in terms of axis 02. We will assume that the spacing of the in-
homogeneity ia less than the wavelength, and its height is small as compared
with the period; we assume the angles of inclination of irregularities of the
nurfnco to be small. Reflection from such a surface takes place as from a
smooth one along the normal to it. since in view of the snail irregularity
spacing of the boundary only one interference maximum is possible for the

secondary waves generated by inhomogeneity of the boundary--in the direction
or axis OY.

 

Figure 1. Geometry of System

Key:
1. Drift

Near the uneven boundary there arise periodic distortions of mechanical and
electric fields. The period of these distortions along axis ox equals the
spacing of the surface's unevenness. Here an electric field originates also
outside the piezoelectric crystal and is in the form of a standing wave with

a period equal to the spacing of the surface's unevenness, i . and a frequency
equal to the frequency of the incident acoustic wave. The electric field
emerging near the uneven boundary of the piezoelectric crystal represents the
Superposition of two waves of electric potential traveling at a velocity of

(l /')v < v (A is the length of the acoustic wave). The interaction of
tthe fieldstwith charge carriers in the semiconductor also results in attenua-
tion (amplification) of the reflected wave.

Assuming that y - t(x) - t cos Qx . where Q - (2nli) > k is the wave
number of the unevenness (k is the wave number of the incident wave). as
the result of calculation we find the wave'a reflection coefficient [12]:

Nil-1+ %3,%(kt.)' n. c.

(5)

a

0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fill: Il|"l"l(2|:\l. l'fil-Z UNI-Y

“ere
G__Cu(")’) + balm”)
c‘le ' .+ ”'
. aim) r. anon) (6)
where - is the dielectric constant of the piezodiolectrir, and cef(w.0)

Is the "effective dielectric constant" of the semiconductor; w' 6 u - Qvl ;

m" n u-Pde (vd is the velocity of electron drift along axis 0X). ‘

The value of in G , with the degree of accuracy of a constant factor, deter-
mines the total amplification factor of a PAV when passing through a specific
section in the direction of electron drift and counter to electron drift. Such
hidirectional amplification usually takes plaec with a drift velocity somewhat
greater than the velocity of the PAV. But entering (6). instead of the velocity
of the PAV. is v n u/Q < v --the velocity of the harmonic of the electric
field. Thus. amplification during reflection vlll be accomplished at the
velocity of electron drift. which is approximately Q/h times less than is
required for a normal PAV amplifier.

It is obvious from (5) that the amplification of the acoustic wave during
reflection achieVed in this case is not so great since it is proportionate

to the product of minor parameters. (k/Q)(k )5 . But if it nevertheless is
greater than the losses incurred in propagatios of the acoustic wave in the
body of the piezodielectric and in reflection from the opposite boundary. then
through multiple reflection the amplification will be built up and generation
is possible in the nvstem.

if instead of slight unevenness of the surface use is made of a heavily uneven
surface of the comb type. as is done in an "Orotrou," then it is possible

to increase the amplification factor of the wave in reflection, Of course.
the nmpllflvatlnu factor remains small in terms of parameter a , but para-
meter (ktnlz . resulting from the slight degree of unevenness, disappears.

This phenomenon is modified substantially if the length of the incident wave
becomes comparable with the spacing of the structure [13]. Let the frequency
of the incident wave be such that the length of a purely shear-type surface
electroncoustic wave [14, 15] of this frequency agrees with the spacing of the
structure. 2 . Each unevenness generates a surface wave with an amplitude pro-
portionate to the amount of unevenness and the electromechanical coupling con—
stant [lb] (ﬂny . where y N Qto << 1 is a minor parameter describing the
unevenness of the surface). This wave, being propagated along the uneven sur-
face. attenuates on account of backscnttering into the body at a distance on
the order of (n17)" wavelengths [17]. When the length of the surface wave is
close to the spacing of the structure. waves generated by different sections

of the inhomogeneous surface are combined in phase. Therefore the amplitude

of the mechanical displacement at a certain point will be determined by the

(
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ilFl’IiilM. "SCI-I ONLY

sum of the amplitudes of Haven hnvlng deVeloped from a distance of ~(nY2)-l .
i.e.. will he on the order of nv(nv )'1 - 7'1 >> 1 . Thus. the amplitude
of resonantly excited purely shear-type aurface electroacoustic waves can be
suhnlnntinliy greater than the amplitude of the incident wave (which is
aunnmvd to equal one). Noreovor. if n > 12 _ then the "electric" portion of
the dvnsliy of the energy of excited aurface waves will he computable to or
nrvulvr than the density at the entire energy in the incident acoustic u‘.e.
Thin mounu that interaction of surface waves with drifting electrons in the

adjacent semiconductor can result in considerable (without minor parameter n )
alteration of the amplitude of the reflected wave.

 

Figure 2. Dependence of Modulus of Reflection Coefficient on Frequency
of the Incident Have, 1-4: n I 72 I 0.06; l-y I vd/v I 0;
2--y - 1.0; any - 1.2; lo--y - 2.0; sun - 0.01. y? - 6.01.,
y I 1.2

The estimate in [I7] confiras these qualitative notions. For the reflection
vnvliivirnt the following expression is generally obtained:

 

 

‘ . _1 ’ " k
” ‘ 2’ [(1H, + «wee-(at J
, ________________

“(021)., " I: + " 1 J .

 

 

e (—3,— e--e---e-(T)'::

)

(\

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN I‘FF'CIAI. "3:"; 0le
whu‘l‘l'

II
—___—.. ‘I I". (ll

"-"("0)” kﬁ ”“']qur.+étgz L."=ralM"nQPJ-

Curvcu representing the dependence of [RI on the length of the incident anc
and on tnv drlit velocity are shown in figs 2 and 3. The effective dielectric
vnnslnut of the semiconductor was taken in the following form:

 

c..(u.0)nt.(l -- ‘ ).

“Al‘-

(8)

 

Flgurv 1. Dependence of Modulus of Reflection Coefficient on Velocity
of Electron Drift: n - y? - 0.04; l---x - Qlk - 1.0005; 2--
x a 1.0008: 3--x - 1.0000; h--x 9 1.0010: 5--x - 1.0020

Hero ii one asnumod that the dielectric constants of the piezodieiectric. cl .
and the semiconductor. c . are identical: c - c : it was also scanned
thnt w I - I . where - th is the frequency at which the length of the

ul
hndv ﬁh94$ wave In equal 90 the spacing of the structure.

rhv question or thv possibility of generation of waves in this structure re-
.iu i l't'~‘ i'urt hm" simly.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

Finally. let us give numerical estimates of the dimensions if the structure.
So. with a frequency of f a 500 H"; . n - y2 - 0.06 . and \ - 3.105 cm/a .
the lattice spacing should be t - 6 p . and its length must Seasiderably
exceed L0 - 1.5 cm .

A. Resonant Transmission of an Acoustic Have Through a Slit Between Piezo-
electric Crystals

Let a piezoelectric crystal with a periodically perturbed boundary occupy the
region of y a 0 . As before. let us assume that the piezoelectric crystal
belongs to class c v and its hexagonal axis is in line with OZ. If in the
region of y > 0 is placed the same piezoelectric crystal with identical
perturbations of its surface. then the surface electroacoustic shear waves
originating on account of unevenness of the lower surface (from which a body
wave is reilected) will generate surface waves on the upper surface. which.
being scattered in turn at unevennesses. will produce a body wave moving
along the normal to plane y - 0 . Ultimately the incident body acoustic
wave. at least in part. will pass through the slit in the piezoelectric crystal.
"hen u - .’ . as demonstrated by the estimate in [1‘]. this passage can be
total. The absolute value of the transmission coefficient is given by the
equal lun:

 

ITI- -— éﬂ._—’_
—l—":—8—'i;_|-_i_———I
Wiz- - 31-.) } 42w}

(9)

II is possible to demonstrate that the two transmission peaks when n > 12
(Hz to) correspond to the excitation of syanetric and antisymtric slit
modes [l9l. The width of the transmission curves is on the order of:

AH X. .
o a: 1'

A similar transmission effect can take place when the surfaces of the a piezo-
electric crystal are covered in addition by elastic layers of thickness h .
in this case in the system are resonantly excited Lozc waves. and the two
transmission peaks (fig 5) occurring when a - ne‘zthy2 cos k h > 1 corres-
pond to the excitation of symmetric and antisymmetric nodes. e wave trans-
mission coefflclent is given by the equation in [20]:

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
To. .

1 lkc.- I..(.‘.lgk.5--A(— )_ lk..(‘--'..-,clgk,)i-A(+_)
2{lk‘.(.‘.-:1k.c.luk,7|hl( ) ”(.0 +.'k.( ll: k'JII'A(+)'

who re
1 (mya‘r

M-H -- -.—-- ——-—1——— .
A (7: VI“ 4‘ 'l) —' 7'!“ 114m — (mtg “I;

la these. expressions 0 1a the. wave frequency: C and c are the shear
modal! of the pleznelectrlc crystal and material of the layers; It and k2
are the wave numhew of the ho_dy_ shear wave In the_g_lezoelectr1c crystal
and elastlu layer: ql '- If? - kl7’ ° Fl] . and no is the
amplitude of the perlmlle mas [and of tho surface.

 

The halfwldth of trnnamluslon peaks is en the order of Aw/u N 72 cos

Enllamlca have ahoun that how waves of great umplltude. 'vlly , arc for-g;

at distances of \/1 cos kzh . 1. cu. considerably less than the character-
lsth' «(sum-v nl‘ \Iny' for the fnrmtlon of purely shear-type surface electro-
amust lr waves. Therefore. In thls case the effect of total transmission of
the acoustic wavo: can he realized ulth a much smaller aperture of the incident
sound beam.

 

Figure In. Dependence of ITI on Length of the Incident Have: a - 0.06;
I": - 0. 0|: 2--y7' - 0. 0]: 3--yz I 0.010; ("-12 - 0.09

Conclusion

In rem-m Hum pertodlc structures on the surface of solids have begun to
Had an up. Ihal [on In acoustoelectronlcn—-for the present as structures for

n-I‘lm llnr. aml 0"“ ltlnr. surface Rayleigh waves ’01... e. 3.. [20. 21]) sad for
alrlp-lypc ullrcrtlanal couplers for these MW 3 [22]. These structures. hov-
uw-r. practically «Is not alter the properties of surface scousttc vsves as such.

i 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

U" l 1

ms me an 'r, hilz'

Figure 5. Dependence of [TI on Q/k1 - l /i . v1 - 3-105 cI/s--the
Velocity of the shear wave in the piezoelectric crystal;
v. - 2-105 cn/s--the velocity of the shear wave in the Iaterial
of the layer; h . 3 u . i - Zl/Q - 11.78 h . G1 I 62; l--n -
- 0.05. y - 0.05. a g 3: 2-n - 0.03. y - 0.1, a g 0.5:
an" - 0.03. y - 0.2. a g 0.1

in this paper cases have been discussed in which periodic structures sub-
stantinlly modify the properties of acoustic waves: Possible are the origin

of slow-speed surface shear waves which do not exist in the,sbsence of a
periodic structure. “huge" amplification of waves in reflection from a boundary
with n sesiconductor. and total transmission through s vacuum slit in a piezo-
electric crystal with norual incidence. Experiaental detection and study of
these effects in our opinion can serve as the basis for the creation of a
nnaher of fundamentally new acoustoelectronic devices.

Bibliography

1. Silin. R.A. and Sazonov. V.P. "Zaledlyayushuhiye slate-y" [Moderating
Systemsl. lzdatel'stvo Sovetskoye Radio. 1966.

2. Norvdov. Ye.l. and Sivov, A.N. "Elektrodinasika periodicheakikh struktur"
[Electrodynamics of Periodic Structures]. Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1977.

l. Auld. 3.A.. Cagnepain. J.J. and Tan. H. ELECTRONICS LITTZRS.1976. 1. 2‘. 650.
6. Gulynyev. Yu.V. and Plesukly. V.P. PISH'HA ZHTP, 1977. g. 5. 220.

5. Gulyayev. Yu.V. and Plcsskiy. V.P. ZHT?. 1978. ﬁg. 3, 467.

6. Culynyev. v.1. ~1d Puatovoyt, V.I. ZRETP. 1966. $1. 2. 2251.

7. Guiyayev. Yu.V.. Karabanov. A.Yu.. Knits. A.ﬂ., Hedved'. A.V. and Tursunov.
Sh.S. FIZIKA TVERDOGO TELA, I970, 11. 9. 2595.

12
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬂ

9.

10.
II.
[2.

ll.

lh.
15.
16.

I7.

18.
l9.

20.

11.

as
u..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m«m.?$.mMIwmmﬂm.CJL rmwmzmnn wmnq,o.2w.

Shostnpnlov. v.9. "lernkrulonnnyn olektronlkn" lD1tfrnct10n Electronics].
Vlnhchn uhkoln. Izdalol‘nLVo Khnr'kovskono un-tn. 1976.

Lynmshvv. L.H. and Shevynkov. N.S. AKUST. Z".. 1973. 12. 918.
“nlnklrov. M.K. and Glllnskly. I.A. PIZIKA TVERDOGO TELA. 197A. 19. 3166.
Gulynycv. Yu.V. and P1essk1y. V.P. PIS'MA 7NTF. 1977. A. 19. 1028.

(:ulynyev, Yu.V. mad Pleaakty. vm. mom'rmmm I anaxmonm. 1977.
323. 12. 2601..

Hulynyev. Yu.V. PIS'HA SHETP. 1969. 2, 63.

“Inustoln, J.L. APPL. VHYS. LETTERS. 1968, 12. 612.

Glllnskty. I.A. and Popov, V.V. ZHTF, 1976. $9. 2233.

unlyayov. Yu.v. and Plcsakty. V.P. "delgovyye puverkhnostnyye nkuatichea-
klyo volny nn perlcdlchcskl nerovnoy povcrkhnostl tverdogo teln" [Surface
Aconatl: Shcnr Waves on a PerlndtcnIIy Uneven Surface of a Solid]. Pre-
prInt IRE AN SSSR. No 1 (253). 1978.

ﬁnlynyov, Yu.V. and Plcsakly. V.P. FIZIKA TVERDOGO TELA, 1978. 29, 133.
Cnlynyev. Yu.V. and Plesskly. V.P. AKUST. Z".. 1977. 32, 5, 716.

Gulynyev, Yu.V.. NIkitov. S.A. and Pleaskly, V.P. FIZIKA TVERDOGO TELA.
I978. 29, S.

JnmJnlshl. H.. Ancda. M., Kawnmutn. T.. Hlkoshlbn, .. and Tsubouchl. K.
ELECTRONICS LETTERS. 1976, 12. 13. 317.

Meyns, Pcydzh TIIER. 1976. 95. 5. 81.

COPYRICHT: Izdntcl'stv« Nnukn. RADIOTEKRNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, 1978

HSII
CSO:

ﬂléh/0555

,.
-J
FOR "FFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT

DYNAMIC ERRORS OF A FLOATED INTEGRATING GYRO
Moscow IZHHRITEL'NAYA TEKNNIKA in Russian No 8. 1978 pp 66-66

[Article by V.A. Koval' and K.P. Andreychenko]

[Textl At the present tine floated integrating devices are finding extensive

application nu gauges of slight angular sovenent in indicator stabilizers of
Inertlnl navigation systems.

Let us investigate the dynamic error or a floated integrating gyro under the
influence of forces along the device's axis of sensitivity.

He will assume that the floated unit and the device's body represent two eo-

axial cylinders which are symmetrically bounded by planes at their ends (cf.

fig 1). The spaces between the float and the body are filled with a viscous
incompressible fluid.

 

Figure I.

The equation of motion for the floated unit has the following form:
t!
Jilin Mn; 4- .u. + .u..(n

(1)

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN ill-'It'lifIM. "Kl-Z UNI."

where J in the moment of Inertia of the floated unit in relation to the nxin

of [he nunpennion; m is the angular rotational velocity of the floated unit

around this axln: u is the angular momentum of the gyro; ”r is the con-

pnnent of the angular velocity of an object in relation to the device's axis

e' nonnlilvltv: M5 Is the force of the effect of the fluid on the cylindrical
o t:

nurfnce of the fl and H2 is the force of the effect of the [ﬂuid on the
end nurfaees of the float.

In view of the low Reynolds numbers. we nssuue that plane-parallel flow of the

fluid (Conette flow) takes place in the cylindrical and end spnces. and, accord-
ing to Ill:

(2)

(3)

where a is the rndlus of the float: t is the length of the float; n is
the dynamic viscosity of the fluid; v is the velocity of the fluid in the
cylindrieal space; r is the instantaneous value of the radius. read from the
axis of the suspension; n is the ongnlnr velocity of the fluid in the end

spaced; z is the instantaneous value of the space. rend fron the nurtoce of
tae flout.

The Value of the velocity of the fluid in the lengthwise space between the
coaxial cylinders in the flonted unit (with the radial and axial components
of [he fluid's Velocity equaling zero) is determined by the equation:

-. ¢ .

u- '.,3;. i (I. 9“

- -- v(- :-""'-~"- .

' ’ i" ' I 0' I‘ i «no. he
.

(b)

anew. h is the radius of the body.

This equation is fulfilled with boundary conditions of v(n,t) I sw(t) and
v(h.i) a 0 . and initial conditions of v(r.0) - 0 and a i r i b .

The velnvlty of the fluid in the end spaces is determined by solving the
equuiion In Ill:

(5)

where h in 0he enl «pace.

l')

Fill: ()FFllIIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equation (5) is valid with boundary conditions of 9(0.t) - w(t) and n(h,t) -
- 0 . and initial conditions of n(r.0) - O .

Let us represent equation (1) by taking (2) and (3) into account, in Carson-
"enviside nape:

1:31;) nlluz-s-il- upl- 'T_—-- I

I
.. J I"”;"'0 I
I 1:: ”I -. F —]L'-°.

o

(6)

The map of the velocity of the fluid in the cylindrical space is found according
to [2] iron solving equation (4) by the operation method:

9(r, r) .. n-T-(t)x

(7)

where I and K1 are nodified first-order Bessel functions of the first and
second kind.

Solving equation (5) by the operation method. we find the nap for the angular
velocity of the fluid in the end spaces:

/ Q
ill (b "8) "
tin.“ .5") L '

 

 

shslgx -f-
(8)

By considering (6). (7) and (0) together. we find the map of the angular
rotational velocity of the floated unit:

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(9)

where i and K2 are modified second-order Bessel functions of the first
and second kind .

Utilizing the Carson-Heaviside theorem regarding the finite vslue. we find
the value or the angular velocity of the float in the stesdy stste:

U‘ .‘ ) J |-IIII-I(” x . ‘Iﬂl;(|l ,

I o n [-00

(10)

He arrive at a solution to (lo) by representing the Bessel functions in equa-
tion (9) in the turn of power series [3]:

"U.
s o
0‘6.) “a- . ;.__--_—....._

I u. _l_'-_3_.' '
3.: II! I: 4. cud—4*;

 

(11)

The error of the floated integrating gyro under the influence on it of s
constant angular velocity relative to its axis of sensitivity has the fora:

'hnuapugg.5n(~\..nm-Jﬂ111::2£9_.

s... 3

(12)

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
n -7. 4, _.._.._...
I 3 1's .
__..._____.__.

r s «at: e ‘
a i —. .
n 60”! h 4 “(M—0.)]

r. a_. a
Ill-l‘{l-l'ﬂfl‘p 1'! ”6 n) n

 

Arm») m

 

(13)
where p is the density of the fluid.

The equation arriVed at makes it possible to estimate the influence of the
fluid's inertial properties on the systematic error of a floated integrating
gyro.

Let us make an estimate of the device's error with the following parameters:

a 3»- .s cm. h - 4.02 cm. 2 - 8 ca. h - 0.05 cm, .. - o.t re... p - 2 g/cm3, and

J N 600 g-cmz, under the influence of forces relative to the device's axis of
sensitivity.

According to (13). A80») - 0.96-10‘6 a... . The value of this error. estimated
according to the method suggested in [b[. without taking the fluid's inertia

into account. equals 0.77010” ﬂu . The results of this calculation demonstrate
that the fluid's inertia exerts aCconsidersble influence on the device's system-
atic error (the calculated value of the error is 20 percent higher).

The example given and the theoretical propositions sade above agree with the
results of experimental research in [5].

Bibliography

I. Landau. L.D. and Lifshits. Ye. “Hekhanika sploshnykh sred" [Mechanics of
Continuous Media]. Moscow, Costekhizdat. 1966.

2. lehonov. A.N. and Samarskiy. A.A. "Uravneniya satematicheskoy fiziki"
[Mathematical Physics Equations]. Moscov, 61m. 1951.

l. Grudshtcyn. 1.8. and Ryzhik. 1.". "Tablitsy integralov. summ. ryadov i
pruizvadeniy" [Tables of Integrals. Sums, Series and Products], Moscow,
Fizmatgiz. 1962.

6. Rivkin. s.s. "Teoriya giroskopicheskikh ustroystv" [Theory of Gyroscopic
Apparatus]. Part 2. Leningrad. Sudostroyeniye. 196k.

5. Slouyanskiy. c.A. and Pryadilov. Tu.h. "Poplavkovyye giroskopy i ikh
priseneniye" [Pleated Gyros and Their Application]. Hoscow, Oborongiz.
1958.

COPYRIGHT: izdatel'stvo Standartov, 1978
8811

cso: 8144/0be 1b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ﬂNLY

I’UIILICAT IONS

we STREMTII OF COMPOSITE MATERIALS

Kiev PROCHNOST' KOMPOZITSIONNYIOI HATERIALCN (The strength of Composite
Materials) in Russian 1978 signed to press 13 Mar 78 pp 2-4, 233-234

(Annotation, Foreword and Table of Contents from book by Dmitriy Moiseyevich
Korpinozh Georgiy Grigor'yevich Maksimovich, Valeriy Khahibovich Kadyrov and
Yovgeniy Mikheylovich Lyutyvo Neukova dunka, 2,000 copies, 236 pages]

[Text] The results of investigations on strengthening metals and alloys
by high-undulus and high-strength fibers are generalized in the monograph.
The methods of producing composite materials reinforced by discrete and
continuous fibers and also by knitted netting are considered. The effect
of temperature on the structure and properties of composite materials is
studied in detail. Special attention is devoted to interphase interaction
of the components of the reinforced systems. The areas of application of
fibrous composite materials based on light alloys are considered.

Intended for scientific workers, designers and engineering technicians in-
volved in development and creation of new materials. May be useful to
post-graduate students and students of machine-building and metallurgical
vuzes.

Pn revord

The development of modern technology requires creation of construction
materials with high strength and improved characteristics over a wide tem-
perature range. Huch attention is now being devoted to development of com-
ponito materials -- an essentially new class of heterogeneous structures
which consist of metal matrices with uniformly distributed continuous or
discrete fibers and filament crystals in them. By combining the volumetric
content of the elements of a composite material. one can produce materials
with the required strength and magnetic. dielectric and special properties
as .1 function of desiqnstion. The achieved properties in composite mete-
rials are significantly higher than those in alloys produced by ordinary
methods. The reinforcing elements bear the main load in composite materials
strengthened by continuous fibers or filament-like crystals, whereas the
more plastic metric transfers stresses to the fibers. The strengthening

:9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fibers in manufacture of high-strength fibrous composite materials are
arranged in the direction in which maximum strength must be achieved in
the product. The ultimate strength of this composite material in the
direction of continuous fibers [205] is ﬁt - 6va + G'n'il - vv).

Imong the undoubtedly promising composite materials of the light alloy type
"V be included highvstrength fibers. Specifically. an alminmn-high-strength
fiber composite material compared to aluminum alloys may provide high ulti-

mate strength and specific strength. a high modulus of elasticity of rain-
forced aluminum alloys and also high heat resistance.

a number of Soviet and foreign monographs has been devoted to investigation
of composite materials [17, 21, 29, 30, 71. 72, 73, 98, 121. 216, 219]. 'me
topic of most of them is study of the effect of production parameters on

the physicomechanical properties of composite materials. There are still
insufficient papers in which the strength of mite materials, specifi-
cally the effect of temperature-time factors on their properties. are syste-
matically investigated.

The monograph consists of eight chapters. Problems of the theory of tomo-
site materials are illuminated in Chapter 1. Chapter 2 is devoted to the
technology of manufacturing composite materials. ’lhe existing methods of
reinforcing metals are described and the methods used are outlined in detail.
Chapter 3 is devoted to investigation of the properties of the reinforcing
elements. Classification of the fibers is given and the physical and machani-
cal. properties of tungsten wires, 08a. KhlBNlO'i‘ and KhlJNl3li2 steel wire and
knitted netting based on them are investigated. The results of testing com-
posite materials are outlined and the strength and plasticity, thermal ex-
pansion. electrical conductivity and other characteristics are investigated
in Chapter 4.

One of the timely problems in investigating composite materials is the
interaction of the components of the reinforcing systems at the fiber-matrix
interface. Brittle layers of intermetallida phases which actively affect
the strength of composite materials occur due to interaction and the inter-
face. Chapters 5, 6 and 7 are devoted to study of these problems. The
methods which reduce the tendency of reinforced systems to interaction are
described in Chapter 8.

Contents Page
Forcword.............................. 3
HainNotations........................... 5
Chapter 1. Modern Theory of Composite Materials on a Metal Base . . 7

l. Reinforcement of construction materials . . . . . . . 7
2. Effect of reinforcement on the properties of materials 10
3. Nomograms for calculating the properties of reinforced
fibermaterials................... 15
20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 2 .

Chapter .1 .

Chapter 4.

Chapter 5 .

Chapter 6 .

Chapter 7 .

FUR UFPICIAI. USE ONLY

Technology of Manufacturing Composite Haterials . . . .
1. Methods of producing fiber-reinforced metals . . . .
2. Technology of manufacturing fiber-reinforced metals
3. ﬂothod of plasma spraying . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Mother! of tasting. Machines and installations . . .

Reinforcingf'ibers ..................
l. Physicomechanical properties of reinforcing fibers .
2. Creep and permanent strength of tungsten wires . . .
3. Permanent strength and creep of 08A, KhlBNIO'r and
mllulamsteelwires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5trengthofsicfibers. . . . . .. .. . . . . . .
5. Strength of knitted netting . . . . . . . . . . . .

Physicomchanicel Properties of Reinforced Metals . . .
l. Tensile strength and plasticity . . . . . . . . . .
2.1‘hermalexpansion .................
3. Electrical conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.

5.
6.

Dynamic modulus and fatigue of aluminum reinforced by
steel fibers. Impact strength and damping capability
Tendency of composite materials to brittle failure . .
The effect of the medium on the strength of composite

materials.....................

The Effect of 'nemerature on the structure and Properties

ofCompositeHaterials ................
l. Reinforcement by metal fibers . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Reinforcement by B and sic fibers . . . . . . . . .
‘5. Reinforcement by netting . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Effect of pre-loading on the strength of composite
materials .....................

Interaction of the Components of Reinforced Systems . .

1. Comatibility of the fiber and matrix in composite
material......................

2.1hediffusionlayer ................

3. Structural and phase analysis of the interaction com-

ponentsandzone..................
4. Interaction of aluminum with the fibers of N16K4HS'I‘

and Khl3Nl3M2 steel and with B and sic nonmetallic
fibers.......................

'Ihe Effect of the Diffusion Zone on the Strength of
Compositeﬂaterials..................
1. Analysis of the role of the fiber-matrix transition
layer for composite materials . . . . . . . . . . .
2. The effect of aging at elevated temperatures on the
strength of Ill-stainless steel couposite material .
3. The bonding strength between the fiber and matrix .

2’].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0

e

e
Chapter 0.

FOR (III‘PICIM. "SH ONLY

at. 1110 effect of the transition zone on the strength pro-
portion of composite materials . . . . . . . . . . . .

5. The effect or tompnraturo on the properties of “-8
compositcwltorill.......s....o.....

Controlling the Interaction of the Reinforcing Systeu
Cmonta I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
1. 111a effect 0! coatings on the strength of refractory
fibers I I I I I I I I I I 0 I I I I I I I I I I I I I
2. The strength of Nichrome reinforced by Mo fibers with
mating. I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
3. 11m effect of alloying on the strength of mosita
tutorials.............o...o....
4. Areas of application of composite materials. Prospects
fordovuloptnont............-...o..

niblioqraphy............................

COPYRIGHT!
6521
C50: 1070

tzdatel'stvo ”Naukova ducts", 1978

.32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

193

190

202
202
207
212
219

221
JMl'iu‘l‘l‘Ili ANAIIT-if} i‘-l-' lil'ft‘lllYllICM. lll'lllllMHTlHS

:c-m .‘iA‘l‘i-tiili'l‘lt:lli-:s:l:-.)i'l-: Oh :Sl‘i-ICiil-liliYI-l Is.‘lIl-:DOVANIY GlXiF‘IZICIIRSKIIGl ZAKONO-
Nun“?! TEA l‘NIHI-Lm-t Kozmcmsxixn llICIil-IY. nmusm‘v ISSIEDOVANIY P0
:-'lei'llliAIH-ilfli‘l unvwznnuxr‘m i'llO'ﬂ-ZK'I‘AN (tine-.puter Analysis of Geophysical
«anti: ii 1-2:: by 1hr Example of Connie liuyo. iieeulte or Neeenrch on Inter-
...I.i.,n..j (2v!n|-l\ysit?:\l i‘rnjncis) in Runninn 107'! signed to prose 17 Apr 78

i a '.'I'. w

   

Annnmtiun. ion-ennui uni Hhiu ni‘ unuluutn from book by 1.. I, Dorm“.
L. ic. l‘imnn‘l .1!” V. V. .‘nlz'nk, llnulm. 1.100 Copies. 153 911308]

i'exl : The .nnnvm‘eIi: describes the methods for computer-processing (analysis)
u' «implric-‘tl tie-I curios. The problem of anllyoie ut‘ the quality of output
ini'nrmt‘u-n iron- r-~-~.riuyz:i-~.~\l innirumuin and the approximtieu of empirical
Iain II."-|I'1'. elem-u! .r;.- i'mwtlnns are discussed. Consideration is given to
Haw-Erin rl'nl-l-in". -u izeiv‘ar free studying the cor-min my verintieuo: inclusion
- l' 9i." Hint-.IllI-"l" "'i‘m't )r. (:(‘liulli lay intumtily detected on the earth. tho
rm! -:~. --I‘ :uulyninr the data of latitude expeditione. The method of digit
:‘illruinn of the -hta, verification of their stationnrinosn. calculations of
.41" " i .--- .un-‘H'I of power (in the Bleeknau-‘i‘eukcy version) are described.
"in ~,: ‘:-.!»u- -'-i' l-:-"=cni.\'.i(-n of experimental data using the models of tine
.n-‘zv; w- mm: '.-3-'l~!:i. 31in attention is raid to the problee of the prac-
tic-ii 'nipli-‘n' inn of mm or another method. Data processing is s culti-
“Jar-2 It’ﬁp'"! and dynamic process. The available theoretical methods for
-:i]l_-.- :uniyztlnr the experimental data cannot he used directly by
--\';~-s-'..-.un.tm in all cases. since even a ready method needs to be prec-
Hm-it, realized. The nulhnr-z make an alteept to develop the methods for
:':I.i‘--;:.'i:u' -‘v;mi'ln'uata1 data using techniques which my be computer realized
in rnvucn. The slrdied theoretical problems are progranned in each chapter
m! an {II-u. in nhy-ritl-mic language "Alpha" which is one of the specific
ingr-‘tz-‘Itlhlil-u: of the International Algorithmic language AWOL-60. Appli-
“a” \n v-r my n‘..-_nrm.r.-.r. an) rregrams is illustrated with a number of examples.
'-~hi‘-- 5 ll::'!' u-Iinnr- rer uninc, the Alpha-programs developed in the nono-
-. -.,-. :u-e f':‘¢‘:'-.‘!-"‘|. {tong-He the fact that the net of algorithms is incon-
- tin r~-~'--‘.::-'.! mt -~l' rrnnraes pai'nlliz the tine series to to computer-

\: 1.22m! "Elmo a sufficiently high effectiveness The use of computers as

- -~-:\~-:-.'. avian-m! h roe-Joni one or another regularity is A neens to
FOR (WFIIHM. “Si-2 ONLY

substantially spend up the pronoun of application. All the proposed algorithms
have boon conputer-approhatod. The monograph is of interest for the researchers
nnumrnd in the analysis of empirical time series in cosmic ray physics and

noun riniriu or neonhysicn. It nny he of ospecinl help for experts when
anaiyninn thn long-tom nurinu of data obtained in the framework of the pro-
rranu nr International (geophysical projncte.

Contontu Page
i‘rni'aoo 5
Chnplor 1. Primary Processing of Data 8
1. int roduc tion 8
2. Verification of the quality of orerntion of cosmic ray
stations using the standard algorithm 8
'i. COII|':U':H.\V0 analysin of the quality of operation of s set of
m-nmit‘. ray ntationn using the single-factor model is
-'I. Am-rnrinn'Jon oi” exmrinontnl data using the functions 18
s. Alpha-programs and instructions for their running 21
1‘. Examples of conpntnr-proceseing of data 2?

Cltu-t-n- P. l-Enthodr. for Calculaling the Barometric Coefficients
of Cosmic hay Noutron Component 3!:
l. inir- inciiun 71

'taiculatiunu ni‘ bunnetric coefficient using the notth
of paired and triple correlations 3':
‘i. Mitthcuu method 36
d. Hothod of rartiel barometric coefficient 3?
,. Mom-program and instruction for its running '10

h. Exam-1m: of calculations of barometric coefficient on the

Main of the data fro: the worldwide network of stations 102
char tar 11. Amlyair. of Latitude Effects in Connie Raye M
i. introduction “6
?. Insertion of corrections for global coeaic ray variations in
the data of latitude expeditione 166
'i. Me. thod for obtaining the coupling coefficients on the basis
or no data on the geomagnetic effects in comic rays 1&7
io. Alrha-rrorrnns and instructions for their running 51
a. annrins or coapuier-analyzing the data of latitude expeditions 56
Chapter In. Finding of For lodicitien in Cosmic Ray Variations 63
i. introduction 63
?. S-vlnctivn spectral estimates 65
1. Digit-filtration of data 67
-'I. Criterion for verification of time series stationariness 72
'u. “pm-programs and instructions for their running 80
(., Examples of finding. of periodicities 89
manor 5. Unified Aunlynis of Comic Ray Variations with Sons
600- ani lleliophyaical Factors 9"
1. Introduction 90
2'»

FUN OFFICIAL USE UNIX
tl"."‘ ’v. Im-mription of Experimental Data Uning the Module of

Time 1hr ion 12?
i. Viral-wile" 1?.2
finial oi self-rnr'esniou 123
‘41. 12min] n'.‘ moving average 130
’I. th-i-rrmcrnm anl Instructions for their running 132
Exemplar. ul' nnniyuin of data using the tine eories models 11:2
iwiut ‘mnrt 1"“
.g-I rm” “.5
l'ﬂrmi-Mr. 1H6
l-In-iitm:- “m

nil :Il‘.‘

i mi: ueri: .un 'IHJ'r-Ipl hm been made to generalize certain results of works
.- Hm '\uHml'-- en the information of swindle:- on variations in comic rays.
"my r""I:H:: rerm- In, Mr g-rinary processing: or data. Unfortunately. the
‘rn "trim-1n i-rcunsnliio'." is iunnfi‘icinntly defined since the actual content
r Ihe ninnr) [-rm‘nnnlng or experimental data ciuinges "ith tine in any

rm: r-‘:--!.‘|!'-‘h. Variations in cosmic. rays in this reepect are not an
w‘nrti-ui.

9-." lu'pnw‘ .l‘ the hook in to systemum and generalize certain known methods.

- we” r- them pup-mi hy the anlhern for computer amlyeic of empirical

in! .:-~-in... I. :---l ut' programs hm: been not up that mites it possible. in our
rim-m. in fairly cr-mnietuiy solve the task of the primary analysis of date

:' '."Irl .Ei--:-..- in e mmic rays. The programs are written in the Alpha language--
:--- w’ 'm 'gv‘cii'ic reg-reaentativua or the nlgoritheic language ALGOL-60“

, I .

, .. . " -n;-.n.-:°l;.'. cm in! use: or any computer where there are the appropriate
: -n:‘.' lturrt.

.. u...» 2'1-9 Om book will he useful also to repreaentativea of other scientific
rum». ”,n-‘n in ai-iitinn to wmcific algorithms that can be applied in
Mil-'2. m. the variations in cosmic rays. it has programs of more universal

.‘i'rri'hn". (-4-mztn1 an‘i mutual spectral analysis of time series. digital
21': Hi ~n. [-arnnniric models. otc.).

'. is. imp-an. current 13: in the USSR the qualitative and quantitative growth

‘. in Hue! of electronic computers. as H011 at. the rates for obtaining
vrnrinnntu ‘i.!‘\rm\tlon are continually increasing. At the use tine a

'fiIJin i-rn‘t'v. ir observed between the ever-increasing anount of experimental
m rn-I Inn rn'ﬁniialities of conputer technology on the one hand. and the
”L: I- -:‘ t'zu-i-i .md comprehensive rre:essing of data on the other hand.

:~.- “."nrj‘! l'.\ reduce this mar. apparently. is justified.

o

Fliii OFFICIAL IKE ONLY
FOR (iPi’iCIM. NSF. mm
1! has: involve iiLiininid to mm electronic computern in geophysical studies.
"mower the ei'l‘iciency of their nee. in our opinion. is still insufficient.
The quantir‘." of how to extract nest cenpletely. without distortions. and
rapidly the necessary Information from the data is. as before. an urgent one
for the researcher who in involved in analyzing enmricai tine series. In
nxnnininr. tho 1ucntionn of the Information content of the prinary processing
of «iota of mound observations from the variations in cosmic rays no ntiespted
to preserve the possibility of using the rroprans cited in the book for other
typ-‘r. of rocphysical research. 0n the whole the hook consists of six chapters
constructed no a simle principle: methods--prograns--exsnples.

Chapter one dencrihen the cathode for quality control of the operation of
cosmic my station. the set of stations and approximation of the observation
results with the help of oicmntary functions. Quality control of the work
of a nepwraiely taken station of cousin rayr. is conducted With the help oi‘A
technique ivmn-i on analysis of the output data of three channels of single-
in“ physical ini‘ormtion. ilcre the regular components are excluded and a
.‘rnini nnnlyrir- in main of fluctuations in the recordings of individual
channels. The ntatinticnl characteristics of noise in the case of e sal-
i‘unction in the omrntlon of the channel are charged. The nethod sakes it
pus-"Hue tn fin-i our-motions; in the running of individual channels. reveals
Ilm “if-motion interval. and permits insertion of a correction into the
data for it! tine of tho nali‘nncl.ion. In that form that the nethod is stated
hero it out. in used for quality control over the operation of any geophysical
instrument that in: three anti more channels of single-typo physical infor-
mHa-n. if it." n-mher of channels exceeds three the method is easily sodi-
i‘in-i Io I'lci mlrunotions in two and more channels. The Alpha-preys: that
rerniiros this mtho-i in not given in the hook since the questions of analysing
the dam 1-..iiity in :miilllﬁ up the network of cosnic ray stations is solved
loco-natal.- 1:: the stations are started, and with the help of that cosputer
technology which 1.". available at the sites. The method of quality control

of tho ope: 1tion of the set of stations with the use of the single-factor

.-. ici. in our opinion. can also be employed in any geophysical studies where
the man phmmnen'm is recorded by the network of apprexinately the ease
instrunonts. for example in seisnic noasnressnts. The text of Alpha-progress
in (“MN that realizes this method. and exasples of analysis of data on
cosmic ray Variations. The oxanples illustrate the need for a cautious
Irrrcnc‘u i“ the nu. of the single factor nodal in analyzing the quality of
2.11:: her. the set oi stations. Chapter one also examines the approxination
or enpirioa‘. relatinnahips with the help of elementary functions. The Al ha-

P
['1 .-.r~.- of ﬂl’i‘foxli‘ﬂtlon mkos it possible to cake on approxisation of data
h: any set E'Jdﬂ of 1" functions.

'Inipier two covers. specific questions: estination of the effect of changes
in attenrmri" pressure on the '.itensity of the neutron component of cosmic
myr. oi px'mticai calculation is given for the haroootric coefficient
wi'h the help or netimds of paired and triple correlations. as well as the
difference .-.c'l.n.'. Algorithm are given for calculating the so-called

:12" :1: Luna-mt: iv. coefficient that considers the variations in the prinary
drum, the ririiiiy of the cut-off and atmospheric pressure. An Alpha-

;‘ronnr. in given 1!..1' realizes the the paired correlation nethod (in three

‘0

Fit“ (WHCIM. INK new
I'utt III'I‘II'JM. l'Iil' UNIX

"Nutter-J. hue tn the iimilnl nature .‘I' the hunk m- have 'Iut examined
.---'I--II: I'.-I Inwuvlng the Iririe cort'elat‘m: tuchniqm that men a nlngle-
-- wa-II-II. ar- uell as the direct mm of thin mule] I‘ur calculatienn of the
‘.'-'I rI-' "a ”'1 lclenl .

-'-~.-‘ three examines. the innertion of corrections for world variations of
I'm my“ intv the data for latitude expeditions. and calculates the

"."u', I‘acIurza for the 'iata of these exreditienn. A: in known. the correct
-- Int? 2. t-I' the coupling factorr. in very Important for obtaining infer-

| I. -r. clan-hue: in the enemy spectrum of the pr imrv n1.ftl‘..\m The methul
-‘\:I‘Il:"‘-'W the mtnnetere of the coupling factere from exrerinentel data
1" itnle expedittnne er- waned in chapter three is controversial since it
inane I‘nnpllllllﬁ the coup] ing factore fer rigidities that exceed the range
uh'vr tI.-- latitude rmaareeenIn were made. in our opinion. the accuracy
Ihe prop-med nethol In determined by the correctnesu of the phynical

nuts: . lk-‘l‘ in the n yrteri aseignim er analytical expressions for the
anim- --'-III‘I«:IentI-.. 'I'he klpIn-I'rcmane of chapter three make it possible
wule. fur the eptiaal valuea of raranetera and tn calculate the coupling,
‘- I :: -'I::.=lI'.n-I-i III the IIIn- an-i tlIren-mranetr icnl fern. The methodn presented
-I.-IIn- It'd-I are illustrated in detail utth eyanples of an analysis of

:l I‘I--:-- l'l' ~_..”., erlx-ditiunu for the i‘I‘h cycle of solar activity.

.II-n r- ‘17 Inn-scrim the moth-nth .‘I' detecting the periodicitiea with the

,- .‘I re '.er-I. Iw spectra of rover. In the presentation we adhered to the
'run I- Ive-re! II he. (in the Bitcknan-Teukey version) of obtaining selective
what an: mane-mt: I.n:- and on the er e of the l-ourier transform from the rMIIeeIhod
im-II-m ruin-r. "nI the uItI-cI.-rrelation function. The efficiency of the

we I. -- r-"v‘h vI-‘mnir I- -. man iderehie degree on the fulfillmnt of the
.2‘." ' .I.I .: Inn-vex... 3.1!153 cem- .-e.1Ience. en the prelinnary digital
‘- ‘ : m: -'I '.mmt II :n‘. ., IIIfIn-I .I-le;.Iien:-. are also examined in chapter
.- . 2"" I. ‘.II. .-| I-rIItranr when in chatter tour make it possible tc make the
...., -.r-.- -«-.-:-'en '.-..n it. reveaIInr. I‘m pvricdicitier. in recording the finite
. '- . '=--:n alu- "V'Ir.r.'¢!e are Itiven for :nalyzzing data on color activity and
w! r :".“:“l.“:‘.- in cur-Pic rays.

rt": .". .-.. I: I-‘z‘ly rremnts a mthoi for calculating the selective nutual
M”. -:' 'm- that permits a study 0 the amplitude and phase correlations
“4- -1'..’.' Irtll; linked time cerie? The. Alpha-program for calculating
"t".- -; Herr: - 'ent.. makes it settle to study this link in the time
‘ :.. I'x- .I rr viranr. I‘rr calc-Ila‘ing the mutual spectra of power perait
'.-.-...:.'..~ I we correlation links in the frequency function. "Preparation"
In 7- «ninth-n links In the fre1nency range provides additional infor-
': - - II.~“.~- nu'.‘ rze. it shoe: -l he noted (this concerns the contente of
rim t'u-zr .._ a". e-I-ni degree) that the presence of programs realizing, the
I :2 -" -!‘I--c spectra in not a (.mranme of success. Besides obtaining
I--:2~'-~-I cum-Ira It is meet. am to have the art of correct interpretation
'.m f‘.:-.I‘!..--r- Ihtzz er. r'rialiv concerns the spectra of coherence and

. '{
E'tll‘. "FFNIIM. l‘hl'. “SLY
Vii“ (WI-'HHM. “SI-i (INLV

lihapim'n rum- anl l‘i-m amlyzm the tine uerien in tiwv frequency fleldel
chapter six examiner. the amiynir. or them sorter. directly in the tine region
with the. help of parametric nmieln. Due to the vigoroue mm of epectrel
mthn-lr. the mivanoen in analyzing the data with the help of the notion
minis are much more modest and attract lone attention of the reeearchere.
linwever. the parametric mioln have known advantasent coapactneas of data
recording. facility of phyeicai interpretntlon for models of small orders.
and the possibility of forecantinc. Since the practical need for analyzing
data on connic ray variations with the help of mramtric Iedele is currently
not evident. the book done not exaeine the models with coefficients need in

time. mixed models of the tyre "moving average-autoregroeeion." nodule with
predicting ilrilcatorn. etc.

The Funk n-‘iknﬂ certain recomwmdetiene for the use and running of Alpha~pro-
I'i‘mn.

The vim-i mthulz. mi their real inatinn in the Alpha language. it goes without
:riyim'. ('annni pretend to he complete even in the field of studying cosmic
my variatinnu. However. we hope that to A certain degree they will help

the rnmnrviwii' to new tin» and effort in analyzing expert-ontal data.

Ci'EYiliiZil'i't {.‘r-Jiﬂﬂl'iilw) "minke." 1973

2.’

FOR (WFlCU‘i. IN}: 0st
Fill! HH‘ICIAI. "SE IlNIN

l'l'lll. l i'A'l' [UNSS

HYBRID COMPUTING DHVlCES HIT" SEPARATELY CONTROLLED PARAMETERS

Leningrad GIBRIDNYYH VYCHISLITEL'NYYE USTROYSTVA S DISKRETNOUPRAVLYAYEMYHI
PARAMETRI in Russian l977 signed to press 3 Nov 77 pp 2. J-h. and 295-296

(Annotation. foreword. and table of contents of book by V. B. Smolov and
Ye. A. Chernyavnkiy. izdatei'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye" 6.000 copies. 296
very-i l

[Annotation]

liextl The book considers aspects of the theory of hybrid computing equip-
ment intended for the control of computer assemblies. mobile objects and
various production processes. Also considered are the principles of the
construction of hyhrld computing devices based on computing elements with
integral analnﬁ and digital characteristics. These devices provide for
nation ail Prlﬂllpﬂl hybrid computing operations (addition, multiplica-
tiun. division. integration and differentiation) in which the input and
output values are expressed both in digital and anslog form by use of
physically different information carriers.

{he hunk is intended for engineering and technical workers occupied with
lhv rrnhlcmu of building specialized computer control devices.

roelve tables. 182 illustrations. bibliography of 56 titles.

l-II’I word

"Hr ui the features of modern systems of the control of production processes
and inciiities is the diversified character of the presentation of informa-
iion; that is. the combination of digital and analog forms with physically
different signal carriers. This circumstance makes it difficult to use
analog (AVU) or digital (TsVU) computing devices or machines (AVH. TsVH)
dirvetly in control systems.

Fp to l“3h only analog computers uere developed for control systems. Than
honinuinn in 1056. with the emergence both in our own country and abroad

2‘)
mu ovricm. use out?
FOR OFFICIAL llill-Z ONLY

of the digital computing devices. scientific investigations were carried
out on the solution of the problems of the compatibility of the sensing
and actuating members of the facilities to be controlled with digital
computers. The converters of the forms of presented information which
were developed as the result of these investigations successfully solved
the problem posed within the limited framework of the forms of the presen-
tatlonn and the physical signal carriers.

The efforts of developers of control computing devices toward the use of
the positive properties of analog and digital computers and also toward
the direct execution of mathematical operations on dissimilar signals led
to the creation of the hybrid (combination) devices of computing tech-
nology (GVT): a) hybrid computing complexes (GVK) based on the combina-
tion of analog and digital computing devices; b) hybrid computing devices
(“V“) based on computer elements with integral analog and digital charac-
ierintlcs.

uhlle hybrid computing complexes are being developed and used as the main
form for the solution of problems connected with scientific investigations
and the design oi complex systems of control; hybrid computing devices are
lntenied as the basis for the solution of problems of the direct control
of the name facilities.

Anung the trends in the development of hybrid computing devices are the
su-rallcd hybrid computing devices with separately controlled parameters
(GVU-DP). the development of which began in l957 in the faculty of com-
puter technology oi the LET] lheningrad Electrical Engineering institute]
imeni V. i. Flyaoov (Lenin). The basis for the construction of GVU-DPa
were eiertronic converters 1f the form of presentation of information.

Regardine the areas of application of CVU-DPs. it is advisable to use them
in automating systems for the control of processes of production or produc-
tion facilities in which the allowable error of computation is 1/2 percent.
and the input and output information is presented by dissimilar physical
carriers and codes. which makes the direct use of both analog and digital
computing equipment difficult.

The importance or bvbrid computing technology for modern control systems

has hrrn rinariy set forth in what. at present. is the solitary foreign
nununlaph by In. heki/ and IU. Karplyusl entitled "The Theory and Applica-
tlun of Hybrid Computing Systems." however. in that book the aspects of

the construction or hybrid computing systems are considered only on the
basis of integrating analog and digital computing machines within the frame-
work of the solution of one problem. By no means does that duplicate the
contents of this particular monograph.

in View oi the great volume at scientific and experimental data accumulated
over in yearn. in selecting the organization of this work and determining
Its contents the problem was to reflect the most important and key aspects
oi the development of GVU-DPs: namely: a) to assess the distinguishing

5‘
Hill ilfii'iCla'il. INF. "SLY
Filli OFFICIAL URI-T ilNl.Y

Inatures of the construction and the possibilities of the use of GVU-DPs as
an independent rlaas of specialized computing equipment. h) to assess the
rnaulta oi the theoretical and experimental investigations. c) to develop
techniques and recommendations for the design of GVU-DPa. and d) to define
the paths of the future development of GVU-DPn.

\II the materials presented in this work reflect the scientific and experi-
mental investigations carried out. with the participation of the authors
and under their leadership. by scientists in the scientific research labo-
ratory oi hvhrld computing devices and systems of the faculty of computer
technology of the LET] imeni V. l. Ulyanov (Lenin).

In writing the hook much assistance was given the authors by T. l. Polyan-
«hay» with whose assistance Chapters 2 and 7 were written; by B. A. Kurdlkov
iu rhapter u; by V. N. Pertsev and V. P. Karanchuk in Chapter 7; by D. D.
Nvdoseliu in Chapter 9; by A. V. Kraynikov in Chapter 8: by V. V. Corhuletov
in part i of Chapter A; and by V. D. Senin who wrote part b of Chapter 6.

7hr authors convey special thanks to Candidate of Technical Sciences T. l.
Pnlvannkaya who took a most active part in all stages of the preparation
Of the book.

the authors will gratefully receive all comments and inquiries relative
to matters touched on in the book.

Table of Contents
Page

Foreword 3

"haptor I. The status and prospects of the development of hybrid
comput ing techno logy S
l.i Principal trends in the development of hybrid
computing technology
|.Z ConVerters of the form of presentation of information 9

(hapier :. General aspects of the construction of hybrid computing
devices with separately controlled parameters (GVU-DP) l7
2 l reculiarities of the construction and use of GVU-DP -
2.2 The presentation and conversion of information in a

hybrid computing device with a variable program

structure 23
2.! The distribution of information in a GVU with a
variable program structure 27

innovvr i. he principles of engineering realization of operators

[or linear digital-analog transformation 50
3.1 operators--resistance code. conductivity code. and
capacitance code -

31
FOR "FFICIAL "SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents (continued)

U6

.2

.3
3.5
3.5

Chapter 6.

6.1
5.2

##b
...
U|3~u

Chapter 5.

Chapter 6.

Chapter 7.

Voltage code. operator iln (Ne-41m)

DUN [Diakretnyye Deliteli Napryazheniya--digita1
voltage dividers] with alternating sign voltage output
Operating schemes of DUN"

Operators of continuous-impulse input variables

The principles of the engineering realization of
operators for analog-digital transformation

General information

ATsP [Anologo-Tsifrovoye Preobrazovaniye--analog to
digital transformation] of voltage into a code of a
countable type

ATsP of the cascade principle of operation

ATuP of the combined principle of operation
Variants of the realization of an operator voltage
of alternating current code

The principles of the engineering realization of
computing hybrid operators

General characteristics of hybrid computing operations
hybrid digital-analog operations of addition. multi-
plication. and division

lntegro-differontial digital-analog converters of
information

hybrid nonlinear operations of digital-analog typo
Nyhrid analog-digital operations of addition. multi-
plication. and division

lntegro-differential analog-digital devices
Nonlinear analog-digital computing devices

The principles of the engineering realization of
alternating current hybrid computing operators
General characteristics of alternating current
computing hybrid operators

The induction-resistor hybrid coaputing device
The transformer hybrid computing device

The construction of linear transforming systems
with a phase code

hybrid computing devices with programmed controls

investigation of the accuracy of CV" by statistical
modelling

General aspects

investigation of the statistical characteristics
of the errors of elements and subassemblies of
GVU-lll'

Investigation of the accuracy of GVUs at the level
of the prograo structure

3;.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
63
b9

53
55

58

66
69
75

82
91

93

107
125

131

13a
138

164
1‘8
161
166
177
192

195
211
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

Contents (continued)

Chapter 8.

3.!

8 2
8.3
8.4

8.5

8.6

Chapter 9.

9.l

9.2

9.5

The program design of hybrid computing devices
with separately controlled parameters
Peculiarltiea. objective and general principles
of the program structure design of GVU—DP
Selection of the program model of a GVU-DP

The fundamental engineering techniques of the
program structure design of GVU-DF

The development of variants of the structures
of the 00 [Operatsionnoye Uatroystvo--the
operational device] of a OVU-DP with constant
linkages

The development of Variants of the structure of the
00 of a GVU-DP with alternating linkages

The development of variantn of the program of
GVU-DP. Selection of the optimum variant.

Hybrid computing devices (or determination of the
(requency response of nonlinear systems of automatic
control (GVU-ChKh)

Technical requirements and analysis of the
algorithns of the work of conpnters

Features of the construction of u GVU for inves-
tigation of the frequency response of SAD
[Sisteny Avtomsticheskogo Upravleniya--systens

of automatic control] with alternating current
output sensors

investigation of equipnant methods of reducing
errors from the carriers of hybrid cosputing
devices based on the Bessel algorith-

Errors of cvu-cnxh based on the ordinate method
with analysis of the rounding of carrier fre-
quencies and measures to reduce them

Aspects of the selection of the optimum structure
of hybrid conputers of frequency response

Blhliuuraphy

COPYRIGHT:

9' .“I
(3":

I870

lzdatei'stvo "Hashinostroyenlye." 1977

35
FOR orncm. use mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

PRINTERS l-‘Oll COMPUTING MACHINES

Humane PHCHATAYUSHCNIYE USTROYSTVA (Printers) in Russian 1977 signed to
press 2/. August l977 pp 2 Mid 21.5-21.6

llinnotntion and tnhie or contents from book by N. N. Snvetn. L. H. Khokhlov.
n. c. nrlkmnn. L. P. Dobretsov. v. i. Royznan, Izadatel'stvo "Hashinostroy-
euiyo" 8000 copies 2106 pageal

[Text] The methods and devices used in computing machines for the sequential
or simultaneous printing of letter or digital information are reviewed. The

eimpositions and principles of building printing devices are analyzed. Prin-
ters with both striking and nonstriking action are considered. Observations

are made on the status and trends of the development of printers.

The hook is intended for engineers and technical workers occupied with pro-
hlens oi the development of the means of recording letter and digital infor-
mni ion .

7 Tables. 169 illustrations. bibliography of 47 titles.

CONTENTS Page

Foreward 3
Chapter 1 The purpose. structure. and methods of constructing

printers 5
i. The purpose of printers and the requirements

imposed on them 5
2. The methods of recording used in printers 7
J. The structure of a printer 15

chapter 2 The types. sizes. and shapes of print-outs and

specifications for them 18
l. General information 18
2. Sizes and shapes of print-outs l9
3. Paper for continuous. cut-off, and loose leaf
print-outs 20
3h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In.
').

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (continued)

intermediate Information carriers
Heat—sensitive paper
Pressure-sensirIVe paper

:hupter 3 Printers with a striking action

1.
2.
3.
6.
5.
6.

7.

Peculiarities of the printing process

Symbol printing devices

Symbol synthesizing devices

lnk feeding mechanisms

Paper feeders

The mechanism for moving the pnper feeder or
printing hend along a line

Control devices

:hnpter 4 Printers without u striking action

1.
2.
3.
h.

oomuom

General information
Photographic printers
Electrophotogrnphic printers
Eiectrographic printers
Electrochemical printers
Electric-spark printers
Biectrothermal printers
Thermogrsphic printers

Jet printers

Ferromagnetic printers

.hnpter 5 Pecuilnrities of the use of printers as components
_nf different kinds of computer equipment

I.

2.

3.

sumnnry
Lilvl ingraphy

Peculiarities of the use of a printer as a
component of an EVH

Peculiarities of the use of printers as com-
ponents of management and recording machines
and electronic accounting machines
Peculiarlties of the use of printers in EKVM's
IElectronic keyboard computers]

Peculiarities of the use of printers in EKRH
[electronic monitoring and recording machines]

OPYRICHT: izdntel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye", 1977

Uh
$0: ”370

35
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "EH-Z ONLY

I‘I'IHJIIA l' I UN};

NUMERICAL METHODS IN Till; MECHANICS 0|" CONTINUOUS MEDIA

Mom-ma \‘YCIIISI.ITEI.'N\‘YH .‘iliTODl’ l PRINIRAHNIROVANXYE (CIIISLBNNYYE HBTODY V
NERHANIKH SPLOSHNYKH SRED) XXVil--SBORNIK RABOT NAUCHNO-ISSLBDOVATEL'SKOGO
VYCHISLITFL'NOGO TSENTRA HOSKOVSKOGO GOSUDARSTVENNOGO UNIVERSITETA
(Computational Methods and Programming (Numerical Methods in the Mechanics
of Continuous Media) XXVil—-A Collection of works fro. the Moscow State
University Scientific Research Computer Center) in Russian 1977 signed to
press 2| Feb 77 pp 2. 166

IAunotniion and table of contents from book edited by V. M. Paskonov and
at S. Rnsiynkov. izdatel‘stvo Hoskovshogo universiteta. 2600 copies. 166 pp)

[Toxtl The general direction of the collection is toward application of
numerical methods in solving problems of aerohydroaechsnics and the theory
of resilience. A number of preceding numbers of the series "Conputstionsl
Metlnﬂs and Programming" (numbers ll. IV. Vll. XI. XV. XIX. XXIII) have al-
ready been devoted to this topic. The collection consists of three sections.
the first section contains articles on the application of the method of nets
to calculating the viscous (low of a gas (flow in the wake behind a body.
flow with consideration of the physical and chemical processes in the gas.
vlr.). The second section is devoted to numerical investigations of flow

of non-viscous gas (the Inverse method for calculating flow in nozzles,

ilnu in nozzles with current fluctuation. flow of a gas in the presence of

4 nauneilr field. problems of the relaxation of the vibrational degree of
iroodom). 1he third section is devoted to several theoretical questions of
diilorenliui nethods for solving problems of the theory of elasticity (iso-
Iropic and orthotropic plates).

The material In the collection will be useful to scientific and engineering
and technical workers who are interested in numerical lethods and their
applications in the mechanICs of continuous media. as well as to students
and graduate students specializing in these areas.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ituntvn t a:

:u-l'tlnn I. How M n Vlm‘mm Liquid

Kukuuhlunkayu. N. 5.. "Numerical Investigation of
Fluu in a Laminar Hake utter a Blunt-Nosed Cone"

Yemvl'yanovn. 2. M.. Pavlov. a. H.. “hypersonic
Fluupdul or n Cone with large Reynold'a Numbers"

Kuznelanvn. L. V., Pavlov, n. ... "0n Calculation
of Flow of a Viscous Gas in love! Nozzles"

L. I. retrova. "Calculation of Fioupaat ut Blunt
ﬁnding by Nun-Equilib'iun Air Flow on the Benin
uf the Navier-Stoken Equation"

Varzhannkayn. T. 5.. Kuskovn. T. V., Polezhnyev. V. l.,
"Calculation or Natural and Therno-Capillnry
Cunvvctlon in a Spherical Vessel Containing a Can

Cavity with Large Rayleigh and Marnngoni Numbers"
Svrtlnn ll. Flow of n Non-Vlacoun Gnu

uvxynnnlkuv. A. H.. "InVestigation of the influence
ul Currvnt Fluctuation on Flow in Nozzles"

Prlumnv. H. 6.. Suvoruva, V. N.. "Direct Tank of
the l‘hcnry of Nozzles!"

hreyev. V. V.. Priumov, U. 6.. Shevchenko. V. 8..
"Mlxed Axlally-Synnetric Flow of n Conducting Gas
in a Nozzle in the Presence of n Magnetic Field"

Arshntuv. E. A.. Duhinsknyn. N. V., "investigation

of Flows in Nozzles in the Presence of Vibrational
Relaxation"

Svrtion lll. Tasks of Elasticity Theory

Audreyev. v. h., "Stability of Differential Schemes
for Elliptic Equations of the Fourth Order in a

Rectangle with Boundary Conditious of the First
Urller"

LnrxhluhT: Izdntel'stvo Moakovskogo univeraiteta

2* 5!. :

as": l170

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020012-5

VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

GEOPHYSICAL EXPLORATION EQUIPMENTS DESCRIBED

Leningrad caonzxcussmvn APPARATUMC'OeophyaLcnl Equipment") In Russian
quqv n‘, 1977 ulnned to press 30 Jun 77 pp 157-158

[Table or contents Iron book edited by A. V. Metveyev, Izderol'otvo Nedro.
2.200 copies. I60 pages]

[Text] Contents Page
Magnetouetry
Avctinyan. E. V. "Tronaiotorized Portable Transmitter" 3

Vasyutochkin. 6. S. "Analysis of the Absorption Lino in a Casino

Quantum Mognetoueter in the 20.000 - l50.000 ntl [tenlo unite]
Band Field" 5

Kudryavtsev. Yu. 1.; Miklyeyev, Yu. V.; ond'rikhonow B. N. "A
Highly Sensitive rroho with a Zero Primary Field for Honouring
Magnetic Receptivity on a Flat Surface" 8

- Berkuan, R. Ya.; Rakhlin. L. 1.; and Fedotov. V. M. "Investigative

Layout work on Stimulation of Magnetic Modulators with o Ferro-
rcsonancc Loop" 19

Guscv, V. P.; Mel'nikov. A. N.; and Rogochevokiy. 0. M. “Correction
or Frequency Characteristics for Inductive Transducer." 28

Studentoov. M. V.. and Shitrin. V. Ya. "Error Analysis in the

Compensation for Variations in the Earth's Field with tho Aid
of Quantum Tranoduccro" 35

Lomanyy. V. 0.; Polynkov. B. P.; and Zenoakovskiy. 0. u. ”Standard
Measure for Magnetic Induction under Couple: Magnotic Conditions" 60

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN Ill-'FICIM. "5|" ONLY

Nuclear Geophysics

Betiu, Yu. r.: Zhabiu. Ye. 6.; vagorodniy. V. N.; Krampit. l. A.;
Smirnuv. V. N.; and Shchekin. K. 1. "x-ray Radiometric Fluor-
escent Analysis by Spectral Relationships with the Use of Semi-
Conducting Detectors"

lotle, Ye. H.; Harbukh, V. V.; Gerling. V. 5.; and PrehiyalgoVskiy.
S. M. "Program for Calculating the Concentration of Elements
under Multiple-Component x-roy Radiometric Analysis of Poly-

metailic Samples"
Aero-Geophysical Methods
Kamonetskiy. r. u.; Timorcyev. V. H.; Hamaycv, V. A.; and Portnoy.

A. L. "Multichannel Aero-Blectric Exploration Helicopter System for
the transitional Processing Method -- AHPP-Z"

Vatsuro. A. 3.. and Tsirel'. V. 5. "Study of Magnetic Interference
lor the Ka-26 Helicopter"

Krivcpalov. G. 0.. and Fridland, V. Ya. "Prospects for Utilization
on New Flying Apparatus in Acre-Geophysical work" '

Haritime Geophysics
Artacunov. L. V.: Molochnov, G. V.; Noiseyev, 0. N.; Pikulev.

Ye. u.; and Uspenskiy. l. N. "Hideband Electrical Field Trans-
ducer [or maritime Research"

Strizhenok. c. 5. "Integration of Methods for Electric Maritime
Exploration"

Hining Geophysics

Pruskuryakov, V. H.; Kryzhanovskiy, H. V.; and Blyskhmsn. A. 8.
"Shall Seismic Apparatus"

Borehole Geophysics
Dayev. 0.8.: Denisov, s. 5.; zinchenko. V. 5.; and Tslslov.
A. D. "Two-Frequency Apparatus for Electromagnetic Have
Logging"

Burisenko. Yu. 3.; Hakhutin. A. 1.; and Portnov, V. S. "Probe
Design for the Method of Apparent Resistance"

Vuutrikov. A. Ye.; Savitskiy. A. P.; and Solov'yev, V. S.
"Sou-Contact Resistance Logging (BKS)”

:9
run urncw. USE. ONLY

68

53

GI

68

78

86

93

96

IOI

l08
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Davydov. A. V. "Determining Statistical Measurement Error through
RadioactiVe Logging by Borehole instruments with a High Reso-
lution Capability"

KoVahnv, 6. N.; Alimbekov. R. 1.; and Sirayov. A. Kh. "Inelino-
meter for Determining Borehole Deformation and Direction of
Deflection"

Equipment Reliability

Rynhinov. M. N. "Calculating Malfunctions in Evaluating Reliability
lor Discrete Geophysical Equipment Installations"

Change by Experience

Hechdev. Yu. 8.; Lemon, Ye. P.; Skirta. G. V.; Orlov. V. N.:
and analnyev, V. M. "Use of the SRPD [dismountable assembled
iitting unit] with the RRShA-l Apparatus in x-rey Radiometric
Logging of Underground Boreholeo"

bol’ehakov, G. V.; Gabitov. R. ".3 Kozynda, Yu. 0.: and Sinitayn.
A. Ya. "highly Sensitive Borehole Radioactive Logging instrument"

Proskuryokov. V. n.; Storozhenko. A. 6.; end Kryzhanovskiy.
M. V. "Instrument for Determining Distribution Velocity of
Compressional Have: in Rocks"

Kamcnskiy. Yu. V.; Shmonin. L. [.3 Oatapenko. V. F.; and Solo-
mntova, Ye. P. "Quick X-ray Radiometric Determination of
Copper in Sediment"

Koloeov. G. F.; Horozov. D. ".3 and Smolin. V. K. "BValuation
of a Standard Sensor for Uniformly Distributed Random
Number: for the “-222 Computer"

COPYRlGul: lzdotcl'atvo "Nedra". I977

9082
050: I870

#0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN nFFIClAL NHL nNLY

PURLIVATIONH

AUTOMATIC NAVIGATION 0F HEAVY AIRCRAFT

Moscow AVTOMATIZIROVANNOYE VOZHDENIYE TYAZHELYKH CAMOLETOV in Russian 1973
signed to press 29 Jun 73 pp 2-5. 199

lAnnutatlun. introduction and table of contents of book by V. N. Vasilinin.
Vneulzdat. 7.000 copies I99 pages]

IAunotat Ian]

lTextl The hook givus an account of the basis of automated navigation of
heavy aircraft; that is. the aerial navigation and trajectory control of
modern heavy aircraft. Their fundamental characteristics and classifica-
tluns are cited. Much attention is given to the composition and functions
of the crew. The principle of operation of flight navigation systems and
their components is described. The algorithm and method of execution of
typical. high-altitude. automated flight are verified. Flight prepara-
tluns and post-flight analysis are briefly considered.

The book was written for pilots and navigators in military and civil avia-
tion and also for a wider circle of aviation specialists interested in the
automation of aircraft navigation.

Introduction

lhih hook is dedicated to the automated navigation of modern heavy air-
craft. the relative significance of which at public airfields, is continu-
ously growing. Problems of navigation--the foundations of automated navi-
gation--are presented in interrelationship with trajectory control.

Nowadays heavy aircraft are equipped with the east modern flight naviga-
tion systems. They ensure high accuracy and reliability in navigation.
they simplify the work of the crew in flight, but they require a high
level of training of flight personnel. This is because. though it is
called automated. in the final analysis. navigation is carried out by the
Cl't'U.

Despite the fact that flight navigation systems are widespread both in
domeatic and foreign heavy aircraft. the amount of literature about them

“1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in small and the basic attention in it is given only to principles of
operation and the equipment in the individual systems and their technical
rhnraeterlstlru.

The author net hlmnvli the gndl oi giving n general account of the prin-
ciples of construction of flight navigation systems and the foundations

of the procedures of navigation for the whole class of modern heavy air-
craft. in almost equal degrees the hook contains material of technical

and methodological character.

A number of positions taken in the book are not as yet officially accepted
and reflect only the author's opinion. For example. in the interests of
generalization and syntematizatlon of the classifications of heavy aircraft
and their flight navigation systems. as the starting point. two technical
levels were assumed: modern and near future.

The majority oi the formulas presented are intended to serve as reference
muterlal {or the algorithms of on-hoard computers. To reduce the volume
oi the hook. an a rule these formulas are presented without their deriva-
lions. Also on this reasoning. oft repeated lengthy terns are replaced
by ahhrevlated deulgnations.‘

In writing the hook, foreign and domestic periodical open literature was
exienulvely used.

The anther eonVeys deep gratitude to Professor. Doctor of technical Sci-
ences 6. F. Holokanov and to Candidate of Technical Sciences 8. P.
Novadvorskiy for valuable counsel directed toward improving the contents
and design of the book.

Table of Contents

rage
introduction 3
(hapter I. General information 5
l. The heavy aircraft and its crew -
2. The equations of motion of an aircraft and
of the "aircraft-autopilot" systel 26
3. Terrestrial navigation systems of coordinates
and equations for calculating flight paths 38
fhaplvr 2. Flight navigation systems (tax) 52
l. The classification of PNK and generalized
criteria for their evaluation -
2. The structure of PNK of the first group 65

_.__._

*A list of achFEET ahhreviated designations is given at the end of the
hook.

hr:
FOR OFFICIAL “SE 0le
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents (continued)

Chapter 3.

Chapter 4.

chapter 5.

Chapter 6.

Summary

Appendices

J. The structure of PNK of the second group
A. Preliminary observations about PNK of the
third group

Navigation systems. central computers and the

essential sensors of the primary para-eters

1. Navigation systems of the first group and
their basic elements

2. Navigation systems of the second group and
their peculiarities

Navigation charts and the integral display

1. The abridged characteristics of navigation
charts

2. The integral or generalized display

The automation of the navigation of heavy aircraft
in standard high-altitude flights
1. The stage of flight--the cyclical work of
the PNK and the crew
2. Navigation near an airfield
J. Ascent with acceleration of the aircraft
6. The cruising part of the flight along the route
S. Descent with deceleration and approach to landing

The preparation for flight and post-flight analysis

of results

1. Certain aspects of col-on preparations for flight

2. Preliainary preparation for flight

3. Preflight preparations and post-flight analysis
of results

Table of the standard atmosphere SA-66

Conversion table for flight level number into
altitude in leters (according to the IKAO)
[international Organization for Civil Aviation)
Table of semicircular separation (of IKAO)

Table of quadrantal separation (of IKAO)
Calculation table of altitude profile and condition
of flight

Table of delta 1.; along the route

Preliminary calculation of flight along route

1‘3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020012-5

VON OFFICIAL IISH ONLV

Appendices (continued)

8. Enaineering--navigation estimate of flight along the
route

List of accepted abbreviations
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat. 1973

9136
(250: 1870

uh
roa OFFICIAL use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020012-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

ABSTRACTS FROM THE PUBLICATION 'APPLIEO OEOPHYSICS'

Hoscow PRIKLADNAYA GEOFIZIKA No 9|. I978 pp 3. IS. 30, 67. S3. 66, 77. 87,
9S. IOI. IIJ. IJI. l39, 165. 155. l62. I70, I78

UDC 550.835.5

THEORETICAL POTENTIALITIES FOR INVESTIGATING PINCN OUT ZONES TNROUGH CON-
BINED PROCESSING OF COMPLEX REFLECTED HAVE SPECTRA

[Abstract of article by Polahkov. H. K.; Kondratovich. Yu. 9.: Urupov. A. K.;
and Screen, V. 6.]

[Text] Aa an example of proceaaing experimental material obtained in the
Shaimakiy Rayon of western Siberia. the theoretical potential in ahoun for
the use of combined proceaaing of complex apectra to recover an acoustical
croaa aection of thin-layered member layera through tranaformation of both
volume and atructure. The preciac poaition of the pinch out region for a
productivo randy level, which holda promiae for exploration. vaa determined.

. illustrations and 3 bibliographical referencea.

UDC 550.836.05

SOME STUDIES OF "EIGHT STACKING IN CONVERTING TIME SECTIONS TO DEPTH
SECTIONS

[Abstract of article by Tayplakova, N. 8.; Huahin. l. A.; and Kuaidi. V. 9.]

[Text] An algorithm for weighted atacking inconvertingtile aectione ‘0
depth sectiona with a preliminary atage of viaual horizon tracking on a time
aection in reported. Teat reaulta of the algorithm on aimulated materials
are prcaented. Examined are the paramatara which influence the efficiency
oi the conversion within the bounda oi the propoaed algorithm.

5 illuatratione and 7 bibliographical references.

‘95
Fox orncuu. use 0qu
FOR OFRICIAL "SE ONLY

UDC 550.836 .5

THE EVALUATION OF KINEMATIC AND DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF SEISMIC WAVES BY
A STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF A HAVE FIELD

[Abstract of article by Kondrat'yev. I. K.. and Loginov. V. V.)

[Test] An eValuation of the kinematic and dynamic characteristics of re-
flected waves by a statistical analysis of a ane field (SAVP) was presented.
ln both experimental and actual materials it was shown that SAVP can suc-
cessfully soIVe the task of determing the kinematic and dynamic character-
Istics of useful signals. wave interference and random noise. The utilisa-
tion of these characteristics determined by SAVP in calculating 0MP (optimal
multichannel filters] systems allows for a qualitative improvement in the
processing results of data by the CDP method.

7 illustrations and 8 bibliographical references.

UDC 550.83%5

SOME NEN CONSIDERATIONS OP REFLECTED HAVE TRAVEL TIME CURVES FOR FLAT-BEDDED
MEDIA

[Abstract of article by Malovichko. A. A.]

[Text] A new formula is proposed for a travel time curve of s reflected

wav» for a layered medium. It is shown that the shape of the travel time
curve is determined by three basic parameters - bedding depth of the re-
flected border. the average dispersion velocity of the compressional oscilla-
tions and the value which characterizes the extent of the medium's hetero-
geneity. Distance limits were determined from point 0 to the reception

point for which the formula is accurate.

I table, 3 illustrations and 9 bibliographical references.
UDC 550.836.5.053:68l.3

DIGITAL PROCESSING OF SEISMIC DATA 3‘! THE CDI’ TECHNIQUE FOR NON-LINEAR RE-
I‘LECTIISG SURFACES

[Abstract of article by Gur'yanov. V. M.; Ksrev. Ye. A.; and Pyatnitsina. P. V.)

[Test] Described is a new consideration for kinematic corrections of pro-
cessing by the cor technique for seismic exploration data which has been ob-
tained in a layered heterogeneous medium and with non-linear separating sur-
faces between the layers. The kinematic corrections are calculated taking
into account wave refraction on the surfaces. A new algorithm is proposed
for inputting kinematic corrections which does not distort portions of the
lines prior to summation. Calculation of the algorithm and correction inputs
are accomplished on the lESH-b computer and represent a sample test.

7 illustrations and 8 bibliographical references.
#6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SH "NIX

UDC 550.834.5

lwu-hlﬂhhaluﬁnh TlHL-VANIABLE ANALYSIS OF GDP SEISHOGKAHS
:Ahstiart ul article by Neshbey. V. l.. and Bogdanov. G. A.]

llext; Examined is a two-dimensional time-variable analysis of a series of
(NP scluhﬂntams [with traVcl time curves t(x) on COP aeismograms and traVel
lln- ruchs total on a time prolile]. it was shown that the changeover to
. two-dimensional tronslormation of the aeismogram series substantially in-
rieasvo lhr accuracy in determining the kinematic parameters of reflected
UJVCS s

b illustrations and I bibliographical references.
UDC 550.837.2Il

"ISTURIIONS 0F MALNETO-IELLURIC SOUNDING CURVES ASSOCIATED “IT" DIURNAL
Si'Kl.\Cl Ull'

ihhatract oi article by Anishchenko, G. N.l

(text! An evaluation is pertnrmed of distorted HTZ [magneto-tellurlc sound-
inn] cuths caused by the diurnal surface dip. Based on an approximation
mulhud tor the solution a model of a homogeneous half-space with a surtace
dip. an atmospheric model with sloping plane-parallel layers and an atmos-
phrric model with non-parallelism oi the layers and diurnal surface were
examined. the results at the calculations provide a concept of distortions
Ivt amplitude! and phased HTZ curves which are characteristic for such models.

2 illustrations and 5 bibliographical references.

"00 550.837.2ll

CUﬂrUltK PROCESSING OF HAGNBTO-TELLURIC VARIATIONS IN TBS RANGE OF I0 T0
'UUU bECUNUb

AhsIta-t ut article by Bezruh.t. A.; Chernyavskiy. c. A.; and chinereve. O. H.)

I -at; Ptesonted is a generalization tor testing mass processing of HTZ
LJ'rriJls. A processing algorithm with selection of known impedance values
is examined. It was shown that various processing programs which accomplish
ti; algorithm provide tor a high degree of accuracy in determining impedance;
tr-g are quite ellicient and iniormative. Recoamwndations (or improving the
acc.incy and determining impedance in the future are formulated.

J . luutratious.

W
roe orruzw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.837.82

DETAILING AND DEl‘TlI OF THE TRANSIENT HETNOD IN MAGNETIC mmncanou IN THE
CASE OF A CONDUCTING NEHISPNERE

[Abstract of article by Gubateuko. V. P.l

{Text} based on the investigation of the influence of various areas of a
conducting hemisphere on the total electrical field, a comparative analysis
ul detail. depth and sensitivity to flat heterogeneities of the method for
establishing the electromagnetic field in near and distant zones is provided.
It is shown that the detail of the field build-up soundings are better in

the closer zone than in the far one.

2 illustrations and 9 bibliographical references.

UDC 550.837.211
A l-b\tlllE11|-TELLURIC FIELD OVER GENTLY SLOPING ELONGATED STRUCTRUES
[Abstract of article by Pechnrich. Ye. 1.]

[Text] Examined is the problem concerning magneto-telluric sounding on the
surface of a multi-layered medium with wavy foundation surfaces along the
length at the electromagnetic usves in layers of considerably greater ampli-
tudal irregularity. A solution was derived with the assistance of the method
for removing the boundary conditions on the surface.

I illustration and 7 bibliographical references.

UDC 550.83l

A REALLY ACNIEVABLE ACCURACY FOR ESTIMATING INTEGRAL CHARACTERISTICS OF IRON
ORE DEPOSITS PROM GRAVITY AND MAGNETIC ANOHALIES

[Abstract of article by Strekhov. V. N., and Shaposhnikova, N. Yu.)

[lent] Described are the results of investigating integral and approximated
three-dimensional techniques for determining the integral characteristics of
perturbing substances in complex simulated examples. The advantages of the
approximated techniques were ahovn. An evaluation of a really achievable
accuracy in determing the integral characteristics of magnetic iron ore
deposits is given.

5 tables. 3 illustrations and IS bibliographical references.
UDC 550.83l.0l6

THE RESULTS OF STATISTICAL PROCESSING OF REGIONAL GRAVITY AND PSEUDOHAGNETIC
ANOHALIES

nu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Abstract of article by Portnova. V. P.]

[Text] The results of the statistical processing of the Ag for the terri-
tory oi the USSR are presented. As a result of a two-stage differentiation
of a normalized autocorrelation function 9(1) of an anomalous gravitational
field. pseudomagnetic correlation functions are derived. A comparison of
the parameters ro pm and To P“ with similar parameters derived through an
anomalous magnetic field shows a certain discrepancy in these parameters.

I table, 6 illustrations a 9 bibliographical references.

UDC 550.831.01
SuMB ASPECTS OF OBSERVED GRAVITY FIELD REDUCING

[Abstract of article by Hikhaylov. I. N.]

[Text] The physical nature of reducing the observed gravitational field is
examined. A comparison of various types of anomalies (in the open atmosphere,
bouguer‘s. (Prey's) and their analogies) with the objective of selecting the
most effective for geologic interpretation of the data from gravimetric
mapping is presented. it is shown that in any situation the validity of

dynamic reducing and (Prey's) analog reducing is higher than Bouguer's re-
ducing.

lZ bibliographical references.

UDC $50.83!.0I

THE POSSLBILI1Y OF USING GRAVITY LOGGING DATA IN REDUCING GROUND GRAVITY
ANOHALIES

[Abstract or article by Prishivalko, A. 1.]

[Text] it is shnuutheoretically that bouguer's reducing with variable
values 0! apparent density vhich is determined by gravimetric techniques
durs not allow for the exclusion of distortions which are connected to the
dense heterogeneity of the intermediate layer and the variable distance of
Lhc obnervation points iron the disturbing masses, that is it does not con-

lurm to the true values of the gravitational anomalies at the reference
level.

I table. 2 illustrations and 6 bibliographical references.

UDC 550.832.05:68l.3

Ah OPERATIVE INTERPREIATION 0F BOREHOLE GEOPHYSICAL MEASUREMENTS IN LOGGING
COMPUTING HINICENTERS

“9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llh‘l‘. ONLY

[Abstract ot article by Gruzinov. V. A.; Snkhranov. N. N.; and Strukov. A. S.)

lText] Shown is the merit for applying logging computing minicenters for
the processing and interpretation ol geophysical data from borehole measure-
ments. The problems which are resolved through logging minicsnters are
examined and the technological systems and processing results are presented.

A illustrations.

uoc 550.832.46
rntn INTBRrRETnTION OF A HAVE SONIC L06
lAbstract of article by Shcherbakova. T. V.; Fokins. I. L.; and Ivanov. N. N.l

lText| Presented are the results of investigating a complete sonic signal
which has been obtained in a borehole item a uldeband sonic logging apparatus.
Gchu in the analysis of various ane types in a sonic logging wave pattern
which compares the results of manual and machine processing for wave pat-
terns. shown is the :eologic information content of separate wave parameters
and the method tor isolating the collectors with secondary porosity is pre-
sented. The results or the test of this method are presented.

J illustrations and 6 bibliographical references.

UDC 550.832.0$:68l.3
HIGH-SPEED PROCESSING OF OIL FIELD GEOPHYSICAL DATA

{Abstract ol article by Zinchenko. A. [.1

[Text] Questions concerning the processing and interpretation of geophysi-
Cni data from borehole measurements (618) with the aid of specialized com-
putation which has been installed in a logging station are covered. The
tasks which have been resolved are examined and the results of the 618

data processing in borehole logging are presented.

A illustrations and L bibliographical references.

UDC ”0.832.542
A QU: lll'lTATIVE STUDY OF PULSE NEUTRON LOGGING INFORMATION CONTENT

[Abstract or article by Polyachenko, A. L., and Tseytlin. V. 6.1

Ichll A quantitative approach to the evaluation of the information content
at the INNK [pulse neutron—neutron logging] and INGK [pulse neutron-gallm
longing] methods is developed. An algorithm is developed in the DEL'TA pro-
gram (or the BESH—b. Raw data serve as the INK [pulsed neutron legging]
readings which were calculated on the RUM-3 program in a given network of

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spatial terminals [or the parameters at the logging task. The boundaries of
the [NR eliiciency regions were found and the accuracy for determining the
stratum parameters relatiVe to its porosity. mineralization of its water
deposit. the diameter and stopping of the borehole and the measurement mode
were uValuated. Given is a comparative analysis of the eftectiveness of
mm: and luck, as well as the measurement methods for the particle flows
and attenuating decrements. The connection of information content with the
distribution of particles was examined; and in particular the impossibility
tor complete homogenization of the compressed borehole in lNNK is shown.

3 table. 4 illustrations and 6 bibliographical references.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel‘stvo "Nedra." I978

9082
650: l870 END

5;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY