APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040027-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE URL

JPRS L/8391
10 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(FOUO 8/79)
PIPELINE TRANSPORT or PETROLEUM

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NMB

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was ausnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within iteas are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGiT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP OF
MTBRIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIMTION
0P nus PUBLICATIOII BE RESTRICTED MOFFICMI. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8391
10 April 1979

TRMSLATIONS M USSR RESOURCES
(2000 8/79)

PIPELINE Tmsponr or Psraousm

Ilolcow TWO-PROM TRANSPORT KEPT! I GAZA ('Pipolino Transport:
of Patrolman and an“) in Russian 1978 signed to pnu 19 my 78
pp 146-192, 322-37!

[chapters 5 and o of book edited by VJ. Yutin. Isdatol'atvo
'NOdrﬂ,‘ 7,700 copies, 408 pages] -

Conn-ans PAGE
Technical 095in Of Main Petroleum Pipeline! oooooooooooooooooooooooooo 1

Pumping of Highly Viacous and Highly Consulingl’euoloul 9000000000... 59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

momma. 18816! 01' MIN 9311mm! 1’1an
Moscow muso-movoomr M903? mam l GAZA in hueaian 1978 pp “6-192

[chapter 5 by V. D. Delouaov. I. ll. Bleykher. A. G. laundrov. V. A. Yufio
and Ye. I. Yakovlev fro- tha book moo-momma! TRANSPORT arm I M
edited by V. A. Yufin. Irdatel'stvo "Nedre." 7,700 copies, ‘08 pages]

[lent] me technological designing of a petroleun pipeline involves solu-
tion of the following fundenontel problem:

deter-ination of the economically lost advantageous para-tars (pipeline di-
nneter. preesure at the petroleun puqing stations, pipeline wall thickness
and the amber of petroleul puqing stations):

deter-ination of the positioning of stations along the pipeline route:
coI'utetion of the pipeline operating regimes.

Uaing several dianeter values it is possible to carry out hydraulic and
nechanical mutation detenining (for each variant) the amber of pet-
roleua puping stations and the pipeline wall thickness. the best variant
ia found fron the reduced expenditures, that in, oceanic comtations.

The positioning of the petroleu pulping stetions ia deternined graphically
on a conpreased profile of the route.

The cowutation of the operating regineo involves a deter-ination of the
pressures at the stations, the backups before then and the throughput cap-
acity of the pipelines under puning conditions differing fron the conputed
conditions. In addition. the problen of regulating pipeline operation is
.olnde

[5.1. Initial Data for Technological Design of Pipeline

The following data are necessary when designing a pipeline: throughput cap-
acity: dependence of petroleum viscosity and density on telperature; ground
tenpersture at the depth at which the pipeline is laid; nechanicel properties

of pipe naterial; technical-econonic indices and a sketch of the cowressed
route profile.

The throughput capacity of a pipeline in given in nilliona of tons pas year
in the design specifications; for computations it is converted into a [hour
and n3/sec (in the conputed density values). It is assuncd that a pipeline
operates 350 days (or 8,600 hours) annually. \ .

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V03 OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Throughput capacity in the principal factor deter-inins the pipeline dia-
Ieter and the preaeure at etationo.

The technological deeisn norne give the pipeline diameter veluea end pree-
eurea at petroleun pmins atetione en a function of throughput capecity
(Table 5.1).

Table 5.1

Pipeline Diuetere and Output Preeaureu et Statione an a Mction of the
' throughput Capacity

_.. -_—... -. ——..~ _ -.._— .n. . ..

KEY

e.

 

Petroleun product pipelinee
Petroleum pipeline.
Diameter, In

Pressure, ks/cnz
Throughput cepecity, millions of tone annually

Tale 5.2

Cepitel Expenditure. on Linear Part of thin Pipelinee

    

Pipeline diameter. II
Capital expenditures. thousands of rubles/kn

on Iain pipeline
on parallel pipeline

2
FOR OI’FICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. 3

Capital Expenditure. on Ono Pawn; Station (in mounds of lublu)

 

l. Throughput capacity. millions of tons annually

2.
3.
lo.
5.
6.
7.

“o

.. ---—..

“—1:

Nov “to
Hatched 01:.
Halo (head)
Intel-Iodine

1” on as
”06 5‘ mo
mt no mo
"a my mo
“I. an mo
i“ «at am
"0.20.9000!!!
sun «as | “so
use ”I: 6100
am am two
we nu us
an m was
me: an mu

Pocrolou product ptpollm
Petrol“. pipelines

Coats of Pupil): Under Technological Duty: Non.

 

. l. Plpollac din-our. -

2. Out of 9mm, launch/(tomb)

3
m ontcm. use own

)

1.510 5.6
you or'ncw. us: ONLY

Win-a {ya u luck J’snuu 0mm lac-cuss um.“

    

Fig. 5.1. Bouts profile. Note: mo nsnss of tho ststions srs aivsn stbittsr-

A. Novodvorki

n. Nguyev

c. Aleyovo

D. mftshhi

B. Prolovo

P. Kuporichi

6. lhisil'sk

ll. Ground slsvstions (buck). I
I. Distsncs. In

The petrolsul density snd viscosity sro dust-lined by lsbontory mlysos.
Tho density P is ususlly dust-inst! st ZO‘C. At othst tsqsrsturss

aim-1w».

where P: snd P20 srs dsnsitios st tho tqsrstum t snd 20°C. Ins/n3;
g is tho tmtsturs consctign._ ﬁgs/53.31%).

gum-0.0015189...

The results of laboratory viscosity dotsuinstions srs given in tho (on
of s viscosity-towsrsturs cum.

In the sbsencs of this was ths kinsnstic viscosity Vst tho nscssssry ton-
porsturs csn bs found using the apiricsl totals (in contistoks)

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in. (hm-.40 I. r.
where a and b are constants which can as datersined using this ease for-

sula if one knows the viscosity values for two different tenperetures; T
is the absolute tssperature. 'K.

The ground tanpersturs at the depth at which the pipeline is laid is de-
ternined using field data. It must be known for detersining the coeputed
values of density and viscosity of the punped petroleum.

The sechenicsl properties of the pipe material are given in the correspond-
ing handbooks. nepsnding on the grade of steel. the tensile strength and
yield screen {all in the range iron 50 and 35 kg/nn2 (for lblhde) to 60

m to ugh-2 (for 16mm). .

The technical-economic indices are necessary for determining the reduced
expenditures.

The capital expenditures can be conputed by using consolidated indices tak-
en iron the technological design norss (Tables 5.2 and 5.3).

The cepitel expenditures on the linear per: consist both of the coat of
the pipes and of the cost of all the work on pipeline construction (weld-

ing. insulation. digging of trenches, etc.). The capital expenditures at
the station include the cost of the equipsent. pipeline culsunication eye-
ten. buildings. and for the head stations. also the cost of the tank fern.
About 802 of the total capital expenditures are spent on the linear pert.
Approxinntely 65-501 of the capital expenditures on the linear part consti-
tute the cost of the pipes.

The operating expenditures consist of the following principel itsns:
deductions for snortization (8.51 of the capital expenditures on the sta-
tion and 3.51 of the capital expenditures on the linear part) end on cur-
rent repair (l.3 and 0.3: respectively);

expenditures on electric power .. 0.7-1.5 hopeck/(KHB);

expenditures on lubrication. water, heating. electric power and "housekeep-
ing" needs;

wages;
naintenence. preservation, control;

other expenditures.

The first three itens in the expenditures are fundamental. Thirty-forty per-

cent of all the expenditures are for amortization and current repair. The
expenditures on electric power constitute 60-601.

5
Fox OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

The total opereting expendituree. detereining the coet of owing opere-
tione, ie the soot inporteut index which cherecterieee the econon of
pipeline operetion.

In finding the econonicelly noet edventegeoue verient the opereting 01'
pendituree 0p cen be detereined ueing the for-ale

OP. SCI...

where s in the coat of pulping, rubles/(tomb) -- lee 'reble 5.0; 6 ie

the throughput cnpecity of the pipeline. tone/yen; I. to the extent of
the pipeline. kl.

1he route profile (Fig. 5.1) ie ueed for deter-doing the coqmted veluee
of the length of the pipeline end the difference in geodetic elevetione
and eleo for finding the plecee for eiting puning etetione.

The profile ie e diegren on which the cherecterietic pointe on the route
are plotted end connected vith one enother. “the dietencee froe the initiel
point end the geodetic elevetione of theee pointe ere their coordinetee.
The dietence between eny two pointe thue ie detenined not by the length
of the line connecting the. but by ite projection onto the x-exie. In
other words, the dietencee on the profile ere plotted elong the horieontel.
Thie ie very iwortent to beer in nind.

The route profile is plotted in cowreeeed fore: the ecele elong the ver-
ticel is greeter then elong the horizontel. therefore, ell the rieee end
depreeeione elong the route stood out eherply end the diegren ie grephic.

it.

6
ma orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

05.2. Principal Pornulae for Hydraulic Conputationa of Pipeline
Steady notion of a liquid in a pipeline ie deacribed by the equation

' '4, - e a -
aln-Ezyuﬁ-Mu-o. (5.1)

where p in preeaure: p in liquid denaity; A ie the hydraulic reeiatance
coefficient; :1 ie length: D in pipeline die-eter: v in the Ian velocity
of notion of the liquid: g ia the acceleration of gravity; a in the level-
ing elevation.

The dplp value repreaent'a the work of novenent of the liquid in the aeg-
nent dx, related to a unit naae [the neaaurenent unit (ll/l2)(I3/ks) ' Ell
kt].

thia work in expended on the overconing of frictional forgea [)(dx/D) (wzl
2)]. on a change in the kinetic energy of the liquid [d(w [2)] and on reit-
ing the liquid to the height dz.

Taking into account that P - conet (droplet liquid) and that in thin ease
with a constant dianeter of the pipeline d(w2l2) - 0. after integration we
obtain: _ 7. 5- - -—.-..,
11—h! _ . "

P 13' 74-10% (5.2)
where 1. ie the distance between points 1 and 2. that in. the length of the

pipeline; A: - :2 - 2 ie the difference in the geodetic elevatione of the
end and beginning of the pipeline.

We divide expreeeion (5.2) by g:
-'%'L-x%~%+u (5.3)

In equation (5.3) each tern repreaente the work. no longer related to a
unit Iaaa, but to a unit weight of the liquid. that in, height. The pllpg
value (or for brevity p1/7’ , where Y - Pg ie the specific gravity of the
liquid) in the height Ill to which the liquid riaee in the pieeoneter under
the influence of the exceaa preaeure [)1 at the initial point in the pipe-
line. The value pzlpg ia the height ll; to which the liquid rieee in the
pietoneter under the influence of the exceee preaeute p; at the final

point. he value p/p g (or ply) ia called the head. or, to be are pre-
cine, the pieeonetric head. Ite dinenaionality ia (El-2)(n3lll) - n.

Equation (5.3) can be written differently:
3;.‘443" ' (5.5)

where ll - ﬂ - 112 ie the difference in heada at the initial and final
points on t e pipeline;

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1, I
N434." (5.5)

The ll value is also called the general or total head loss. In a general
case it also includes the head losses on local resistances and in velocity
Chang‘s

Coefficient of Hydraulic Resistance

Formula (5. 5) is called the Darcy-Helsi- ich fornula. The hydraulic resistance
coefficient entering into it is a function of the “Reynolds nder Re and the

relative roughness 8: —
ﬂg-LVD' I: 3 engage

where Y is the kineutic viscosity of the puwod petroleum: Q is the vol-
une flow; a is the absolute equivalent roughness of the pipeline walls.

In the case of la-inar flow. and also in the case of turbulent flow in a
zone of relatively snall Is there is a sooth flow of liquid aroinid the
roughness projections: roughness exerts no influence on the head loss and
the hydraulic resistance coefficient is dependent only on no. Uith an in-
crease in Re the coefficient ) decreases.

The region of turbulent flow. in which A - Ann), is «11.4 the moth
friction region.

As a result of an increase in Is eddies begin to be detached fro. the rough-
ness projections. Eddy foraation occurs the sooner the greater the rough-
ness. Now the resistance to liquid flow is dependent not only on Re. but

also on roughness.
The region in which }- Am. a) is called the timed friction region.

Hera withan increase in as its influence on) is gradually decreased and
the influence of 5 increases (there is an increase in the intensity of
eddy for-scion on roughness projections).

In the case of large no the) coefficient ceases to be dependent on it.

The region in which ) - 2(a) is called the region of coqletely rough
friction or the region of a quadratic friction. 1:9. since here } is a
constant value and the head loss is directly proportional to the square
of velocity.

In the case of laminar flow (“(2000) the hydraulic resistance coefficient
is found using the Stokes foruila: ----

hn-gv

The laninar regise occurs during the parting of very viscous potrolenns.
For couputing A in a turbulent resin (In) 3000) in the smooth friction
region we use the sapirical Blasius fornula

8
FOR OFFICIAL use om:
POI! OFFICIAL 083 OIL!

h%.

Usually this forsula is used in designing pipelines for petrolsuns of sodiu-
viscosity.

For ﬂ“ “man!“ "8100 the hydraulic resistance coefficient is decal-.1“.
°d “3108 the Nikursdre formic """ -- - -—-— .._

I—V'r-au-‘ﬁm;
A. D. Al'tehul' races-ends use o_f_ the Shiftinson for-ole

1-0.“ (—z-Y'”.

where k is the equivalent roughness. characterising the total influence of

the state of the internal surface of the pipeline wall on hydraulic resis-
tnncc.

In the Nikuredre ﬁstula and in all the for-soles cited belov the a value
also aust be deternined using the equivalent roughness e - 2WD. Sometimes
it is only aseuned spproxinately that in the case of a quadratic friction law
light petroleun products can be med. ‘lhe quadratic friction lav can be
used in conputstions for asin gas lines.

Universal formulae are used for deter-ining the hydraulic resistance coef-
ficient in the nixed friction tone. Their structure is such that in the
case of small Re they are transfer-ed into the formulas A - )(lle), and

in the case of lerge Re are transforled into the for-ules 2- 3 (e ). For
the first tile a formls of such altype was proposed by Oolebrook and Wire:

7r(-:-7r

If the second ter- in the parentheses is neglected, we obtain the Nikursdse
formula for the quadratic friction lav. Rovever. if the first term is
neglected. we derive the Prandtl for-ale foruthe snooth friction region:

V'r-Ilsﬁeyf-HM.

The results of cosputetions of 2 using the Colebrook and White for-ula co-
incide Hell with erperissntel data obtained for industrial pipelines. But

this for-ole has a significant shortening: in coeputing ) it is necessary
to have recourse to the successive epproxilstions sethod.

mis shortcoming is absent in similar for-ulss (giving virtually the ease
results) proposed by:

N. Z. Prenkel' . .. ..... _.
7'?--=nc[vf7+(%‘.-)"']= ,
I. A. Isnyev h" .

v‘r- "did-(31%) ”r"

9
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

The A. D. Al'tahul' fomla ia characterized by particular aiaplicity
o.»

i-om (-3-+1'r';) .
With Re le<lO it virtually coincidaa with the Blaaiua Inmla. and with
Re le> 500 - with the Shirrineon tornula.

Tho Re k/D - 10 Value can be considered the linit between the regiona of
snooth and aimed frictionn and Re It") - 500 ia the linit between regions of
nixed and conplotely rough friction.

Some k values are given in Table 5.5.
Table 5.5

A. D. Al'tehul' Equivalent noushneea Values

 
   
 

1 ”IND-II I .ll "10

3 WW 5 Roan-urn- 3%
5 mane-nun- _u.£_

6 Cranium 7 mam “MM
3 cmww NH") '
elem o o

9 Yum-tunnel... 0M.”

Clap-em 'GN-M

1. Material and type of pipea

2. Condition of pipe.

3. Sea-leae steel

lo. welded ateel

S. Nev and clean

6. After aaveral yearn of uae

7. New and clean

8. with inaignificant corroaion after cleaning
9. Moderately ruated

10. Old rusted

ll. Severely ruated or with great dapoeita

10
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Generalised L. s. beyhenton Poreula

The Stokes, llasius and Rikuradre foreulae (and also the Shifrineon for-
mula) have the following general fore:

1.3+... (5.6)

where A and n are constant values (a is the index of the liquid notion re-
glee). substituting (5.6) into the Darcy-Heisbech equstion (5.5) and taking
into eccount that Re - 40/31 IN. we obtain the generalised hybenson foreule:
Iﬁ-
Iva-95.71»
where . ..

M
’.6"ni"'g
The Leybenson formula is used extensively in those ceses when the dependence

of h¢ on Q oust be expressed in explicit fora.
The values of the pare-stars n, A and ﬂ are given in Table 5.6.

On the greph lg 1- {(lg Re) the dependence (5.6) for the flow regieee indi-
cated in Table 5.6 is represented in the for- of straight lines. the tangent
of whose slope to the lg Re axis is equal to n. In the region of nixed fric-
tion, vhere 1 is dependent not only on Re, but elso on the relative rough-
nese kill. the line lg ) - f(lg Re) is e seooth curve. The index n of the
flow regime in this region is e verieble value.

Table 5.6

Values of (befficients uttering into uybenson Pomls

  
  
 

3 lamps“ pen-n

l' 1796’va me a aces Essay“

‘5
‘3" 06am nespmeeoto samne rpsess

l.
2. ml-

3. laminar regi-a
lo. mrbulent regime in Blasius zone
5. Region of quadratic friction law

The latter circnstence virtuelly excludes the possibility of use of the
Leybenson fornula in the timed friction region. This is a eajor inedequacy
beceuse the region of nixed friction occupies a broad range of Reynolds
nMere in which the pulping of low-viscosity petroleua and light petrol-
eu- products is usually accoeplished.

11
m OHICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ihwuwr. ut the price of some loss in the accuracy of conputetione this
uhortcoeing can be elieineted.

0n the graph (Fig. 5.2) 1g k - f(1g Re) we note by the figure 1 the point
on the "Bleeius straight line" where Rel - 10 (It/DY“. end by the figure
2 the point on the ”Shifrinson streight line.” Vhere Roz - 500 (It/D)"1
(limits of the region of nixed friction). Substituting Rel into the Bles-
ine fornule. snd Re: into the Shifrineun fornule. we find lgl1 end 1g3\2
- the ordinstes of the points 1 and 2.

Now us will pees e straight line through the points 1 and 2. Its equetiun
is reduced to the fore

Igiuctz11¢—;-—onn-muunc.

ensuing .
O
”on" a 1,- -e.eu .m,
we obtain '
A
hﬂm‘r. (5. 7)

it is obvious that for the region Rel<ne<lz the replace-sat of the curve
lg 2 - f (lg Re) by the etreight line 1-2 is equivelent to a replacessnt
of the Alt'shul' formuls by formula (5.7). Ibis nekee it poesible to epply
the Leybenton formuls also to the region of nixed friction.

For this region in eccordence with (5.7) I - 0.123 end the ﬂ coefficient
met be computed for eech specific case. since A for the timed friction
region is dependent on le.

05.3. Rydreulic Slope. bosses of need in Pipelines with Loopinge end Inserts

Pros the initial and final points of the profile of a line drefted with
identicel horizontal and vertical scales we plot the heads 111 - 91/7
and a2 - pzlr (Fig. 5.3). ‘ihe ends of the detenined sea-sate Ill end I;
are connected by s straight line.

he tengent of the slope of this straight line is We as the hydreulic
slope i (aesuning thst the diameter of the pipeline elong its entire
length is identicel. there are no locel resistences and diechergs elong
the length does not change).

It cen be seen free Fig. 5.3 thet

I. Ill—Era! . .

but in eccordence vith (5.6) 31 - It; - A r - hg. Accordingly. the phys-
icsl sense of the hydreulic slope - the heed loss on friction, assig-
sble to e unit length of pipeline is

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 5.2. Replace-ant of curve 131- Fig. 5.3. Diagran explaining deter-

f(lg Re) by etraight lino. ninetion of hydraulic alopa.
A) Bloaiue: B) Al‘tehul': C)
Shiftinaon . . .
_ i 00
Mr;
or according to Leybenton
W
“’33:.
It ia convenient to use the following cowact fornula:
new".
where f ie the hydraulic alopa when Q - l.
14%.

The otraight line connecting the code of the aopente R1 and ti: ia called
the hydraulic olope line. It show the dietribution of heads (and accord-
ingly preaaurea) along the length of the pipeline.

If a parallel pipeline ("looping”) or a pipeline with a different dianeter
("insert") in laid in eoee eection of the route. the hydraulic alopa in
this eection will differ fro. the hydraulic elopa of the nain line.

9: will find the ralationahipa between the hydraulic elopea of the looping.
inaert and Iain line. He will aaeue that the retina of petroleu moment
in then are identical.

vein; the notationa in "3. 5.6 we have:

hydraulic elope of the Iain line W
l-’ D... o
hydraulic elope of the looping aector ' ‘ - “0}"! or”; .

 

h-6 D... “w.

taking into account that Q; - Q: - q. we obtain
‘.-‘“' . (50')
[n- "looping”: I - inaert]

13
ton onlcm. use our
FOR OFFICYAL USE ONLY

where '
"1—0—1711:
I O-ﬂ
”(1') - -
If D - D then
loop . .-a.‘..e

In thie cue in e leniner regine a! I 1/2. in the ceee of e turbulent regine
in the Meeiue none e1 - 0.297, for the quedretic region A! - 0.25.

Sieilerl_ .or the ineert '
“U“

n-(%- a...

The heed loeeee in friction for e pipeline with e looping will coneiet of
the heed loeeee in the single end double (with looping) eectore:

vat-5w».
where 3: ie the length of the looping.

where

Teking (5.8) into eccount. it cen eleo be written thet
~..uL-s'«-e)|.
The totel heed loee for e pipeline with e looping ie

a-m—su-emu. (5.9)

For a pipeline with en ineert the expreeeion for heed loee hee e einiler
fern.

If the heed loee not he expreeeed in dependence on Q. we will nee the for-
male

a-p-qgr-éwu (5.10)
of
u-IQHL+ei. ($.11)

ISA. Cherecterietice oi Pipeline. m end Punping Stetion

The dependence of the heed lane on flow ie expreeeed by the pipeline cher-
acterietic curve. Reunion (5.10) or (5.11) is en enelyticel expreeeion oi
thie dependence. A grephic repreeentetion oi the pipeline cherecterietic
curve in ehown in Pig. 5.5. 'Ihe initiel point of the cherecterietic curve
in the end of the “pent A r, plotted upwerd iron the II exie. if :2 > :1,
or dowwerd. when :2 < t . If the pipeline operetee with the counterpreeenre
92 et the tinel point. t n to A: we edd pzly’.

1h
ron orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

The veluee e! . L and D deter-duo tho eteepneee of the characteristic curve.
The greater the viecoaity of tho punped fluid. tho extent of tho pipeline.
and tho leoeer ita diaaator. tho ateeper ia tho characterietic curve.

 

Pig. 5.4. Hydraulic olopo in differ- Fig. 5.5. Characterietic curve of
out pipeline oectore. A) looping, B) pipeline. A) region of turbulent
nain line flow. 3) region of laninar flow

In the caeo of anall (love in tho none of laniner flow the dependence of R

on Q in linear and in tho region of turbulent flow - the dependence ie
parobolic.

However. in tho equation for tho pipeline cheracteriatic curve there ie no
reflection of traneition iron the linear part to the parabolic part. Aaeun-
ing. for xxa-ple. that n - 0.25. ve obtain a porabolic curve for eny Q val-
uea. including vith velueo correeponding to leninar flow. In Fig. 5.5 thia
ia ahoun by a daehed lino.

In practical conputationa there is no need to draw tho characterietic curve
free the initial point correeponding to Q - 0. It ie entirely auificient to
conatruct the characteriatic curve of the pipeline on tho baaia of three or
even two pointo eituated in the narrow range of (love anticipated in the
operation of the colputed pipeline.

the hood characteriotic curve for the pulp ie o reproaentation of the depend-
ence of the developed head n on flow quantity Q.

For pioton pulpa the q-u characteriatic curve hoe the eane ehope ea the de-
pendence of torque on rpe for an engine. In particular for a apecial care

for a pulp with drive iron a aynchronoua electric enter the charecteriatic
curve in a atreight line perallel to the H axde.

ﬂbr centrifngol punpe need on main pipelineo the chorectoriatic curvea have
the ahapo of gently eloping curvee. The aector of the cherecterietic curve
correoponding to the higheet efficiency valuea ie the vorking region. var

it the dependence of a on Q ia approximated very aucceaefully by the exprea-
aion

15
m orncm. use our
l’OR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY

-___,.__ ..

”-I-.0.:I

($.12)

Frequently there is e need for joint solution of the equstions for the cher-
nctorietic curvee of e pulp (puping stetion) end e pipeline. In these ceees
in plece of (5.12) it is desirehle to esst-e

"u-._.'q3-. ' ' 7 (5.13)

In for-ulss (5.12) end (5.13) e end h ere conetent velues deter-lined by the
proceesing of the coordinetes of points teken in the working region of the
characteristic curve. According to the sense of (5.12) or (5.13) s is the
head with Q - 0 end the h coefficient is evidence of the steepness of the
cherecteristic curve. In fornuls (5.13) the s velue ie the use es in the
Leyhenzon fornule for heed loes in the pipeline. The cherecteristic curvee of
the pups ere ohtsined experinentelly when working with wster.

When working with very viscoue petroleu the Q-ll chsrscteristic curve is
reduced end hecones steeper. lhe nethod for the sceling the cherecteristic
curve "fron wster' to petroleu” csn he found in epecisl nsnuels. The den-
eity of the puqed fluid exerte no influence on the 0-1! chsrscteristic
curve; the heed developed by the pm r-eine constent with e chengein the
density of the pmed fluid.

An increese or decreese in the die-eter D of the wheel pun. end else the
frequency of rotetion n. chenges the cherecteristic curve. It is known thet

.3“. .. -%°-° g1... 72?. _ (5.14.)

Here the asterisk denotes the new. chenged conditions. with s chsnge in the
frequency of rotetion the equations ere siniler. with cutting down of the
wheels (D‘< D) or with s decreeee in the frequency of rotetion (n'< n) the
0-}! chsrecteristic curve decresses.

The chsrscteristic curve for the pm efter cutting down of the wheel to the
diseeter 0‘ con he ohteined on the hesie of the for-er cherecteristic using
fornules (5.16). It is iwossihle to restructure the cherscteristic

curve ueing only one of these for-ulss.

If it is necessery thst the an cherecteristic curve pesses throuh the
point with the coordinetee Q . I“. situsted under the cherecteristic curve
corresponding to the wheel die-eter D. the wheel dienter efter cutting down
can he found using the for-Ale

a,“ VIE-E (5.1s)

'lhis fornule is derived free (5.12) end (5.16). The perenstere s end b enter.
ing into it nust he colputed using fornule (5.12). proceeding on the heeie
of the given 0-! cherscteristic curve dete with the disaster D.

16
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMPIM. 083 MY

The cherecterieti‘c curve of the group of interconnected page (totel cher-
ecterietic curve) ie obteined by edding together the cherecterietic curvee
of the one entering into thie group.

In the cue of one connected in eeriee we edd the heede (or identicel
flove. end in the ceee of connection in perellel - the (love with identicel
heede (Fig. 5.6. e.b).

Oll-

 

a 5
ﬁg. 5.6. Plotting of totel cherecterietic curve for two (identicel) puepe:
a) connected in eeriee; b) connected in parallel.

The equation for the totel cherecterietic curve is the use u (5.12) or
(5.13).

with the in-eeriee connection of pm” .

0-20..
Uith in-perellel connection of It identicel pope with the cherectorietic
curve ll - e - bmz'. the totel cherecterietic curve will be no follow:

(1%)”.

Meaning here thet bllkz" - b. no errive et the eerlier expreeeion (5.13).

The totel cherecterietic of the punpe. opereting et the paving etetion, ie
celled the cherecterietic curve of the pumping etetion.

05.5. Reed Belence Equetion. Integretcd Chorecterietic Curve

If the flow of liquid in the pipeline not overcome not only the reeietence
teased by friction. but eleo rieing by the height 4 e. and aleo perforu

nechenicel work bringing into notion. for exeqle. e turbine, then equetion

(5.2) mt be eupplenentcd by the ten NIH (where N ie the pour: bl ie the
me flow).

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, it elong the peth of the flow there ie e pm. rether then e' tur-
bine. the tern NIH nuet be eeeigned e einue eign.

Thus, vhen we coneider e eyeten coneieting of e pipeline end e paging ete-
tion.

 

zen-n{:-;‘-+w--fir.
Converting to heede end teking into ecco‘qtnthet __
u-on-o-E-
"'4 Mn. "

[CT - etetion] where ll.t in the heed developed by the puping etetion, we
obtein

.£'L+n.,-e,+eu+-n-. (5.16)

For a min pipeline, elong whoee route there ere n petroleu pining ete-
tione. in eqnetion (5.16; in piece of 8.; it ie neceeeery to write nil“.
The heed p1/7’ ie creeted by e epeciel (eupporting) pwing etetion.

If froe p1l)’ we eubtrect the heed loee in the eyeten of pipelinee in the
suction direction of the nein pming etetion (hm!) [ed - euction direction].
we obtein the heed in the enction pipe of the tiret nein pm. celled the

”backup" ( Alll) .

The pore-eter hf includee the heed loee in friction in the nein line (in)
and in the co-nniceting linen (nhu) of ell n pining etetione. In turn.
the heed loee in the co-nniceting lieu (of one) etetion ie

het " hed "‘ hpd’

where the eubecript "ed" ie for the "euction direction” end the euhecript "pd"
ie for the "pining direction."

The heed et the finel point of the petroleun line p2]? will he deeigneted
hfp (fp - finel point). 11m 1. the heed lane in the connecting linee et the
fine]. point. including the height of the level in the receiving tent.

Por the nein pipeline with n identicel ming etetione equation (5.16) ten
new be repreeented in the following torn:

 

w.+na..l-u+u+u..::-.' I (5.17)

[Ct - st: KJI‘. - fp - finel point]

Henceforth for brevity we will write:

u.+‘....-.m.. ($.18)
18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OfilClAL USE ONLY

Equations (5.16), (5.17) and (5.18) are called the head balance equations.

The left-hand side of these equations gives the head developed by the pulp-
ing stations and the right-hand side gives the head loss.

The sense of the head balance equations is sinilar to the sense of hewton's
third I‘Ve

Expressing the head developed by one steti n in the fore I! t - a - M12"
and the hydraulic slope in the fern i - fQ ". we obtain t head balance
equation

‘ --..

43.4.. (a-so'ﬁ-ioﬂog- As. (5. 19)
This equation has one unknown. llere Q is a specific value.

Manning A111 to be a constant value. free (5.19) we obtain
s-e

o - —§.-;-ﬁz'—. - (5.20)

After deteraining Q. using fowla (5.13) it is possible to coupute the head
developed by the stations. and using for-uls (5.11) the head loss in the
pipeline. Both these values are equal to one another (head balance).

'Ihese sane flow and head values can be found graphically (Fig. 5.7). in the
sane diagraa plotting the characteristics of the pipeline and the pulping
stations (integrated characteristic curve).

The point of intersection of the "(0) curves on the integrated characteris-
tic curvs is called the working curve. The coordinates of this point are the

flow in the puping station - pipeline system and the head developed by the
pu-ping stations (head loss in the pipeline).

In Fig. 5.7 the Q axis can be shifted upward by the value A81 (dashed hor-
izontal line). In this case the backup before the head station Alll must be
taken into account by the pipeline characteristic curve:

u-tQ‘*L+u-£a..

Integrated characteristic curves can also be plotted for individual puping
stations with corresponding segnsnts of the pipeline (rune). For identical
stations the coordinates of the working points of these characteristics
will be one and the ease if the backups before the stations are related to
the characteristic curves of the runs. In other words, any of the puning
stations situated on the route develops one and the seas head. regardless

of the length and difference in the elevations at the end and beginning of
the run connected to it.

In contrast to this. the heads developed by stations with piston puns are
dependent on the lengths and the differences in heights of the end and be-
ginning of the corresponding runs (drive fron synchronous electric notors.
pulping with connected tanks). 19

FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The head balance and the equality of delivery by the punps to now in the
pipeline (neterial puwing balance) give basis for the following inortant
conclusion: the pipeline and the punping stations constitute a unified hy-
draulic systel.

min principle is the point of deperture in solving any probla- in the pup-
ing of petroleun (petroleun products) along the ruin pipelines. The change
in the operating regine of any one paging station (such as shutdown of

port of the puspa) inpairs the regine of the ronsining stations and sinul-
taneously leads to a chenge in the operating regine of the pipeline, and
vice versa. a change in pipeline resistance exerts an influence on the
operating regine of the puping stations.

The operation of the pipeline and pulping stations always nust be regarded
as a joint operation.

Hydraulic celputatione of any (not only the Iain) pipeline cannot be consid-
ered finished it only the head loss is conputed for a stipulated flow and
selected punps. As a result of the cowutstione. it should he possible to
deternine the actual flow which is established in the eyeten pm (pup-
ing stations) - pipeline. that is, the flow corresponding to the working
point on the integrated characteristic curve.

05.6. Pass Point and Oosputed Length of Petroleun Pipeline

A rise on the route along which the petroleu flows to the terninel point
of the pipeline by gravity is called a pass point.

There can be several such points (Fig. 5.8). The distance iron the initial
point on the petroleun pipeline to the closest of then (3!) is called the
conputetion length of the petroleu pipeline.

 

Fig. 5.7. Integrated characteristic Fig. 5.8. Finding pass point and
curve of pipeline and pming stations. conputation length of petrolaun
pipeline.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 5.9. Line of hydraulic alope beyond paaa point.

In hydraulic conputationa the length of the petroleun pipeline ia aeauaed to
be equal to the computation length; the difference in elevatione A: ia aa-
auned to be equal to the exceaa of the pun point over the initial point on
the route.

In order to find the paaa point. fron the final point on the route I we
will draw the hydraulic alope line 1 to its interaection with the profile.
Then we will draw the parallel line 2 in each a way that it touchee the
profile, not intereecting it in any place. The point of contact of the
line of the hydraulic alope 2 with the profile of the route is the pane
point 31 , determining the cowutation length of the petroleul pipeline.

If the hydraulic slope. line drawn fro- the final point on the route nowhere
interaecta with the profile and is not in contact with it (the daehed line
in Fig. 5.8). the pane point ia abeent and the coqmtation length in equal
to the total length of the pipeline. He will examine the novenent of the
petroleul beyond the pan point.

We define two eegpenta in the route interval fro. the pane point to the
terninal point: 31A with the length 9.1 and AK with the length 1.2 (Fig.
5.9). In the latter of thou the gravitational nova-ant of the petroleun
ia enaured by the difference in elevationa of' the pointa A and II: it: -
Ag.” In the aegnent IA. as can be aeen fron Fig. 5.9, A: _ > 121
by m value Jr 0. But this contradicts the balance condition of the loot
(111) and active (4 2,1 -A) heada. Accordingly, in the aegpent “J? A the
hydraulic alope nuat be greater than i. Thia ia poaaible only in the cue
of an increaee in the velocity of novenent of the petrolet- in the repent

YA. Fran the continuity equation 0mm?“ -
-0

it can he aeen that with an increase in velocity the croea aection P of the
flow ahould decrease. Accordingly, beyond the peas point (to the point A)
the petroleum novea with partial filling of the pipeline croea aection. The

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pressure in this segment is lower than at any other point in the pipeline:
it is equal to the pressure of saturated vapor of the paved petroleum In

this case (A z; -K - it NY is the power nonproductively lost beyond the
pass point.

Is. 7. Computation Values of Discharge and Viscosity of Puwed Petroleum

The viscosity of the pmed petroleue does not rsuin constant during the
course of the year. It changes in accordance with the seasonal variations

of ground tqereture at the depth at which the pipeline is laid. Hidt a
change in the viscosity of the puped petroleu, as already mentioned above,
there is a change in the characteristic curves for the pipeline and the pups
(centrifugal): with an increase in viscosity it increases, whereas with a de-
crease it decreases. Accordingly, the throughput capacity of the petroleum
pipeline, determined by the point of intersection of the characteristic
curves for the pipeline and puping stations (working point). in the course
of the year changes froe a mini-1- walue (March-April) to a maximal value
(August-Septedaer), as shown in Fig. 5.10.

The novement of the working point in the field 0-1! is determined primarily
by a change in the steepness of the pipeline characteristic curve. In most
cases the "deformation" of the characteristic curve for the centrifugal

pumps is insignificant and it can be neglected.

From the point of view of the saving of energy expended on the pining of
petroleu. it is advantageous that the mentioned covenants of the working
point not exceed the limits on the zone of high efficiencies of the puping
plant characteristic curves.

This requith is satisfied by the proper choice of the puqs for puming
petroleu.

In accordance with the norms for technological planning. the computed hour-
ly throughput capacity is assumed equal to

{5%.

The computed viscosity eust also correspond to the computed teneraturs.

[r011 - sn(nual)]

The counted temerature ‘is that which the oil flow assumes in the pipeline
in the cold season of the year. It is determined by the ground teqerature
at the depth of the pipeline and the self-heating of the petroleu flow in
the pipeline as a result of friction.

”.8. Determination of Rube: of Petroleum Puwing Stations

Neglecting the value Am in the head balance equation. we obtain

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘Obn-Oii-M. (5 21)

Using this equation we find the number of stations. The head developed by

one station (Hat) is logically taken corresponding to the counted flow
(using the Q-ll characteristic curve).

me nuder of stations no is usually a mixed fraction. It is rounded off to
a whole nutter n. ' - “n -.

.—~...

   

Fig. 5.10. Change in characteristic Fig. 5.11. Graph of change in out-
- curves of pipeline and pumping station put of pulping stations with change
with change in viscosity. Note. The in their number. (06 - Q; - Q
solid curves are for a sunset regime greater)(QH - 01.33““)

and the dashed curves are for a win-

ter regime.

The throughput capacity of a petroleum pipeline with a rounded-oft nutter
of stations will be called the planned throughput.

If no is rounded off in the greater direction. the planned output Q; (6-
greater) will be greater than the computed level 00, and vice versa, with
the rounding off of no in the lesser direction the planned flow Q ess is
less than the computed value. This can be seen from fornula (5.20} and from
the graph in Fig. 5.11.

The output 01.“ or Qmore in the pulping stations ~ pipeline systee is es-
tablished automatically.

However, the planned output can be left equal to the cowuted output. For
this it is necessary that the working point on the integrated curve for the
pipeline and pumping stations be situated on the segment ab (see Fig. 5.11).
with the rounding off of no in the lesser direction the characteristic
curve for the pipeline must pass through the point a, that is. the head
loss in the pipeline nust be decreased by the value 0a - (no - am”. This

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. can be accomplished by laynng a looping (or an insert with a large dia-
meter).

A looping with the length it decreases the hydraulic resistance by the value
ix - 1100px - ix(l «:0. Accordingly. the length or the looping ensuring
maintenance of the cowuted throughput capacity with rounding off of the
number of stations in a lesser direction can be found fro- tho equation

(no-n) II..-u u-e).
[CT - sta]

It is also possible to use equation (5.21) and tho equation
.”¢'-‘ lb-‘(“‘.”;

The result will be the seas. that is. we obtain
ie-I '

a-Fum.

With the rounding off of no in the greater direction the head developed by
the stations with tho cooputed discharge Q0 will be greater than necessary
(that is, greater than tho head loss in tho pipeline) by tho value ll' (see

Fig. 5.11. sogoent 0b).

The head balance equation with tho rounding off of no in the greater direc-
tion will be as follows: . ._ _ _
Wse"'-lla4h.

It is obvious that

awn-n.) a...'

where W is the value by which the head developed by the stations oust be
decreased.

The head can be reduced by means of a decrease in the order of pining
plants or cutting down of the pup wheels.

After a decrease in the nudaer of puping plants the characteristic curve
of the pumping stations is reduced. as a result of which the gap between
the head developed by the pulping stations and the head losses in the pipe-
.1 inc is reduced. -

A final balancing of the heads can be obtained by cutting don the pun
wheels. ‘lhe diaseter of the cut-down wheel can be dotsroined using for-ula
(5.15).

”.9. Option- Parasetors of Petroloua Pipeline

Sequence of Technical Oowutations

2b
son omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL 098 ONLY

The pareeetere of a petroleus pipeline. cheracterising it free both the
econoeic and technical points of View. are the pipeline diaeeter D. pres-
sure p developed by the pining stations. masher of patrolet- puwing sta-
tions and the pipeline wall thickness 5 (the throughput capacity Q of the
petroleu pipeline is stipuleted).

All four parneters are interreletedt a change in one of thee leeds to a
change in all the others. lhe greater the diaeeter of the pipeline or the
greater the pressure. the fewer is the nuher of necesesry petroleue pum-
ing stetione and vice verse. The thickness of the pipeline wall. with the
selected grade of steel. is detereinsd by the p end D parameters.

Thus. for pulping a stipulated quentity of petroleu it is possible to pro-
pose a number of veriants of the plen. differing with respect to the para-
meters D. p. n end 5 . 'fhe prohlee involves finding the econoeicelly lost
advantageous variant.

The capital expenditures K on construction of the Min pipeline can he brok-
en down into two perts: the cost of the petrolet- puqing stetions I“ end
the cost of the pipeline (pipes. welding. insulation. digging of trenches,
etc.) Km”. Hith an increene in D or p the capital expenditures on e pipe-
line increese. whereas on the petroleu pulping stations they decrease.
Since K" and rm, chenge in dependence on D or p in opposite directions.
the functions It - K(D) end It - K(p) have a einieun. 1he operating expenses
0p change sieilerly. Accordingly. there is a sinieue also for the reduced
expenditures Red - K}: + Op.

The values of the pipeline peraeeters D. p. n end p for which the reduced
expenditures are Iininue are options. .

The finding of the pipeline peraseters free the Iinim of the reduced ex-
penditures does not take into account such factors as the short supply of
different eaterisls or equip-eat. sinicity. convenience end safety of
servicing. requiresents of a specisl neture. etc.

It is obvious that with these indices different variants of the plen for
one end the ease pipeline cennot differ significantly free one another.

For solving the prohlee of the optim pipeline pereneters it is necessary:
1) to write an equation for the reduced expenditures;

2) to express the capital expenditures K and the operational expenditures
0p entering into the reduced expenditures Red in dependence on the pere-
neters D. p. n end 8 . that is. ohtein the equetion

m - m. 9. ms): + on». 9. me!)

where a is the stendard coefficient of effectiveness of capital investeents;
J) to find the ninieu of the function Red. here it mt be taken into ac-
count that the para-eters of the petroleuu pipeline are releted to one

25
rot urn-1cm. use 0qu
FOR OPHOIM. 088 ONLY

nnothor. Tho oortolation conditiono Ill’li

pronoun holonco equation 3” .
If - ﬁlbvrv+¥ﬂ

and tho ottongth oquotion ““—‘ "" ' ""-
D
0-417'

vhoro 0‘ in tho comatod otrooo of natal in tho pipoo.

Tho uni-no of tho Rod (motion io found uoina tho Lagrango rulo. For thio
wo utito tho not function _. ._ _-..___

m- my 0-n+x(-'[--n%?f—v--‘i-v)'

vhoro 1 io an indotoninato Loaronao iactot.

 

Thon no obtain tho partial dotivativoo of Q rolativo to D. p and n and oqnato
thoo to aoto.

Tho joint oolution of tho oquotiono

..._--_ .—.. _

4%». 3—». 43-“
with tho cotrolation oquationo nahao it poooihlo to dotivo iomlao tot do-
toninina tho optima paranototo of tho pipolino.

In otdor to oxprooo had no a (motion of tho pottolou pipoiino pat-ototo.
capitol oxponditntoo and opotational owonditutoo oto roptoomtod in tho
(on of a on in which oach ton io rolotod to tho diiiotont pato-ototo.

Pot thia pnrpooo tho capitol wonditntoo on owing otationo oto roptooont-
od in tho (on of two tom: in tho (on of uponditutoo proportional to
pour and omnditutoo not dopondont on povor (povot in ptoportionoi to no).
Tho capital oxponditutoo on tho linoat part of tho pipoiino oro oxprooood
no oxponditntoo ntopottionol to tho diaaotor of tho pipolino and proportion-

.cizto tho non of tho pinoo (tho oooo of tho pipoo io linoatiy dopondont on
DD )o

Tho oootational osponéitutoo rolatin; to paying ototiono conoiot of “pond-
itutoo propottional to povor and not dopondont on povor. and also alloca-
tiona for mrtiution and curront topoit. Tho allocationo for .ottitation

and cuttont topair can ho toutdod on tho opotationai omitutoo for tho
linoat part of tho pipolino.

Tho upondituroo not dopoMont on tho pipoiino potnotoro can to ooaioctod.
If any of the patanototo ato otipnlatod, that io. aro bum in advonco. tho
prohioo io oolvod in tho on my with tho oinalo diﬂoronco that it in not
nocooaary to taho tho iitot dorivativo (or thin pan-tot.

26
Iron onlcw. use on!
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

in preparing a list of expenditures or in clarifying the technical-scones-
ic indices necessary for detersining the capital expenditures and operating
costs there will inevitably be errors which can sssrt an influence on the
nuserical values of the sought-for parameters. In addition, the considered
ssthod (or detarsining the optisus pereseters does not take into account
nany circusstencas dependent on planning and construction conditions. it is
therefore not surprising if the optisus parassters. cosputsd by this neth-
od. in acne cases will be far iron reality. Accordingly. the optisun pres-
sure can be lower than that which is developed by the pusps produced by fac-
tories and the optisus thickness of the pipeline wall will be less than the
lisiting adsiesible thickness.

But this does not seen that the analytical nethod for detersining the op-
tieua parasaters of a pipeline is useless. lt sakes it possible to trace
both the interrelationship between the psreneters and the influence exerted
on than by pusping conditions. An investigation of the equations determining
the optilus paraseters of a pipeline Iade it possible to draw a number of
isportant conclusions. The seat isportant of then are:

l) with an increase in the pipeline throughput capacity the optisun pres-
sure developed by the puaping stations decreases. the nunber of stations
increases and the optinua disaster of the pipeline increases;

2) with increase in the cosputsd stress of the pipe ssterial there is an
increase in the optinun pressure and a decrease in the optiaun number of
pusping etetions;

3) with an increase in the viscosity of the pumped petroleum there is n
decrease in the pressure which the pumping stations must develop and the
nusber of stations and the diaseter of the pipeline increase:

h) with an increase in pressure there is a decrease in the disaster of the
pipeline end the nulber of pulping stations and also an increase in the
thickness of the pipeline wall;

5) with an increase in the pipeline disaster the relative thickness of

the wall. pressure and nu-ber of stations decrease.

Usually the optisus paraaaters of the pipeline ere detersined by a cooper-
ison of variants.

The sequence of technological conputstiona can be as follows:

i) spprosieate deter-instion of pipeline disaster free the table given

in 05.1;

2) selection of the three clonost disleters fro- the Stets Standard;

J) selection of the pulps for the pulping (delivery) of petrolsul. Then.

in accordance with the pressure recon-ended in this ssse table. the nu.-

ber of working plants (usually three or two) is detersined and the pusping
station characteristic curve is constructed. This characteristic curve is used
used in finding the head H.‘ developed by the station for the coeputed flow
and then the cosputed pressure is detersineda

pm” 4 A my;
[CT - st)

27
ron orncm. use ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10) detereining the wall thickneee and the interior die-eter of the pipe-
lino tron the aacertained p and D valuea for all three varianta:

5) deter-ination of the Reynolde nuher. the hydraulic reeietance coef-
ficient. hydraulic elope. peea point (coeputed length I.) and the corree-

ponding difference in the geodetic reedinge Aa. and finally. the total
head loea

Il-iL+A:;

6) doterninetion of the nuder of petrolem pulping atationa:

7) computation of capitel expendituree and operating coete ueing coneolidet-
ed tochnicel-econonic indicee:

8) couperieon of variente with reepect to reduced expendituree and «let-
tion of the econonicelly loot adventegeoue 0! than:
9) detenination. for the aelected variant. of the planned delivery (if

it it not eeauled equal to the cowuted value) and the correaponding head
developed by the pming atatione;
10) siting of the etatione on the route profile.

0..

28
ton orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”.10. Positioning of Petroleue Puping Stetions

The siting nethod wes proposed by V. 0. Shukhov for pipelines with piston
petroleun pumping stetions. The siting is eccoeplished grephicelly on the
route profile.

The heed h.t developed by the etetion is plotted along the verticel free
the initiel point on the route where the heed stetion eust be situeted

et the scele of profile elevations. After this. the hydraulic slope line

is drewn iron the end of the detersined segeent. The point of its intersec-
tion with the route profile is the site for positioning of the second ste-
tion. The heed developed by the stetion is egein plotted free this point.
the hydreulic slope line is egein drewn. etc. The hydreulic slope line

running free the lest etetien lust run to the peee point (or finsl point)
on the route.

The siting of the petroleum pulping stetions. sccenplished by the described
method, lust not elweys be regsrded es strictly obligstory. The siting of
stetions cen very in certein lieits.

Assuee thet the theoretical nulber of stetions no. determined by coepute-
tions. is rounded off in the greeter direction. Then the site. for exneple.
of the second stetion (Pig.‘$.12) cen be shifted to the right. thet in.
forwerd. by the distence et which the heed "st etteins the edeissible vel-
ue "ado Hith eoveeent of the stetion to the left there is e decresse in
the heed developed by the preceding stetion. Since the totel heed develop-
ed by ell the stetions should reeein constent. st leest one of the reusin-
ing stetions eust operete with en increased heed.

The position of the ststion et which it end ell the subsequent stetions ere
forced to develop the lieiting edeissible heed “.4 deter-ines the lieit to
which it cen be loved to the left. As elreedy eentioned. the linit to the
right is detersined by the sdeissible heed B et the preceding stetion.

In Fig. 5.12 these lieits ere denoted by the points s end b. The sector of
the route between these points is celled the tone of possible siting of e
petroleun pulping stetion.

when the nneber of stetions is rounded off in the lesser direction. end ec-
cordingly. coeputstions cell for the leying of s looping. fro- the end of

the verticel segnent H.t two hydreulic slope lines ere drswn (Pig. 5.13):

for the eein line i end the looping ilgop. The length of the segeent i1
corresponds to the length of the looping x obteined by coeputetions. We
drew e second line i free the end of the segeent 11 . The points of in-
tersection of the hydreulic slope lines with the prgflle (s end b) deter-

wine the zone of the possible siting of the next stetion. A ststion cen be
put in eny plece between these points.

oop

Assume thet the point c is e convenient site for the second stetion. Pros
this point we drew the hydreulic slope line of the looping to the intersec-
tion with the hydreulic slope line for the eein line. The projection of the

29
you orncm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resulting segsent cd onto the horisontsl will he equel to the length of
the looping :1 used on the segsent (run) between the first end the second
stetions. ‘l‘hen free the point c we plot the heed ll" end then sgsin drew
the lines in” end i; the length of the segpent i1 here corresponds to
the not furtheg used length of the looping x - x1. R2 lines 1 essnsting
free the ends of the segnent 11°09 intersect with the profile at the new
points as end b (not shown in Pig. 5.13). A new point e csn be selected be-
tween these points - the site for the third stetion. Subsequent construc-
tions ere ends in the seas wsy.

   

Fig. 5.12. Deterninetion of linits Fig. 5.13. Positioning of petroleu-
of zone of possible positioning of pulping stetions with rounding off
potroleun pmping stetions with of their nun-her in the lesser direc-
rounding off of their nuaber in tion.

the greater direction.

There can be cases when in the tone of possible positioning there is no
site convenient for the siting of s petroleu puming station. The siting
of a station outside the tone of possible positioning (points e or f .in
Fig. 5.16) lesds to the necessity for lsying en edditionel looping at end
at the some tine to the underloeding (work with incoqlete heed) of st
leest one of the ststions.

loopings on the lines between stetions cen he leid where it is edvsntsgeous
to do so. The effect free e looping (decresse in hydraulic resistence of
the pipeline) run st the beginning. or the siddle or st the end of the seg-
sent is one end the seas. however. in order to decresse the stresses eris-
ing in the pipeline from the petroleu pressure it is desirsble thet the
loopings he leid st the end of the sepents. But in sons tests the decreese
in the loed on the pipeline cen he schieved by the leying of s looping in
the niddle of the segnent (fig. 5.15). In the neighborhood of point A it

is desireble to lsy e looping end not construct e ststion there since in
this csse the pressure in the lowered segpent of the route will be consider-
ably less.

The following conclusion cen he drewn: with siting of the petroleu pulping
stetions, regsrdless of the type of pups (piston or centrifugsl) it is
necessary to "press" the hydreulic slope line to the profile. this reduces

the stresses in the pipeline.

)0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. $.lb. Siting of ototion outoido Pig. $.15. Loyiug of looplng in
tom of pooolblo pooitionlng. olddlo of oogoont.

"hon uoing tho principlo doootibod obowo. by which io found tho oito for
pooitiohing of tho pottolou owing ototiooo. tho typo of pun io not
tokon into occount. Ilowovor. tho oitlng o! ototlooo with oonttifugol
puwo hoo pocullotitioo couood by tho following:

1) ooinlioo oontrlfugol pupo con hot-olly 0P0!!!“ only Vlth I NCKUP.
thot io, only whon tho ouction pipo io undor prooouro. ‘l‘ho hookup botoro
tho ototioo ouot not bo looo thou tho oini-un odoiooiblo voluo Ah. oinoo
othotwioo tho oporotion of tho pulping ototion will ho oooowoniod by cov-
itotioh;

2) tho hookup oonoioto of tho hood ll“ dovolopod by tho puwing ototlon.
Tholr ou- (hood on tho fotco oido of tho ototlon) ouot not oxoood tho od-
niooiblo voluo I!“ dotonlood by tho otrongth of tho pun ond tho pipolino.

For ototiono with ooottifugol puopo tho liolto of tho oono of poooiblo
pooltioning oto not dotorninod by tho poioto of intorooctloo of tho hydroullc
olopo linoo with tho ptofilo but by tho odoiooiblo hookup voluoo. Tho tight
lloit 1o dotoninod by tho uni- hookup Ail“. whotooo tho loft lioit lo

tho noxl-n hookup All“ - I!“ - E“ (Fig. 5.16).

Tho zone of pooolblo pooitiouihg of tho cootritugol ototion oloo oxloto in
o oooo whon thoro io no looping (ooo Fig. 5.16. right pott).

Nov wo will ooooine o cooo whoa ony ototion ouot bo oltod outoido tho oono
of poooiblo pooitiooihg (ooinoidonoo with o populotod plooo. noto tovoroblo
goologiool-ooll ohotoototiotico of tho tottoio. clooonooo to ooutcoo of ol-
ootrio powor. wotot. oto.).

Aoouoo thot thlo notion hoo tho nunbor c + l. Tho oxtont of tho plpolino
oopont from the hood ototion to tho oouoidorod ototion io donotod lea.

‘l'ho longth of tho oo at (too the ototion c + l to tho end of tho pipolioo
wlll bo oquol to I. - ”1'

31
you omcm. use can
FOR Oﬂ'ICIM. 08F. ONLY

 

Fig. 5.16. Linite of eonee of poeeible poeitioning of etetione equipped
with centrifugel pupe.

He will plece the etetion c + 1 beyond the right boundery of the none of
poeeible eiting. hen the beckup before thie etetion Allen will be leee
then A H. . In order to eneure cevitetion-free operetion of the etetion

c + 1 it fe neceeeery to reiee the beckup Allen to All“. 'lhie cen be done
by leying the looping in the eegpent between the etetione c end c + l or et
any other deeireble eite in the eegpent 1‘91. lte length x‘ cen be found
free the following heed belence equetion for the eegeent [c 4. 1:

w.+en..-au...--«-g)-'-'«--°'n+ai...+dn

[Ct - et(etion); All - ed(nieeible)] where it ie the length of the looping
obtained iron hydreulic coeputetione with rounding off of the nteber of
etetione no in the leeeer direction; c ie the nunber of etetione eitueted

in the eegpent “+1.

The need for leying the looping x“ doee not follow Iron hydr ulic cowute-
tione of the pipeline. Therefore, efter leying the looping x the heed bel-
ence which ie coma for the entire pipeline will be iweired. In order to
reetore thie belence in the eeglent I. - tell it ie neceeeery to reduce the
heed developed by the etetione.

The H' velue by which the heed developed by the etetione in the eegnent
I. - be.” euet be decreeeed ie determined iron. the following heed belence

“mum" emu.-.) Ila-U'nt (L-‘ut)+6l..
[CT - et(etion); n. - ed(eieeible)]

A decrenee in the heed by H' cen be echieved by e decreeee in the number
of pumping plente (if ll' ie greeter then or equel to the heed developed
by one pulp) end by cutting down the pump wheele. 1he dieeete: of the cut-
down wheel cen be detereined ueing formle (5.15). The heed ﬂ entering
into thie fomle ie faund free the obvioue equelity

[HAG II p”) ha...T-ﬂ:'-‘ﬂ°,

where It ie the umber of puwe whoee wheele it ie propoeed be cut down;
ll,” ie the heed developed by e pun vhoee wheel hee not been cut down.

32
row. orncm. use ONLY
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prone the hydraulic point of view it lakes no difference whether the de-
crease in head occurs at one (end specificielly which) or at several ete-
tions. It is desirable to do this. that is. use pups with cut-down wheels

or decrease the umber of puepe at those stations where the propulsion head
1. h£Bhe

Now we will site the station c + 1 without going as far as the left boun-
dary of the sons of possible positioning. He will assu-e that the proble-
of positioning of all t + 1 stations in the sealant to.“ is already solv-
ed and the operating regimes of the pulping plants up to station c have
been detereinsd.

In order for the propulsion head at the station c + 1 not exceed the adeie-
sible value I!“ it is evidently necessary to decrease the head developed
either by the station c + l or by the station c (decrease in the nunber of
pumps, cutting down of wheels). In the latter case there is a decrease in
the backup before the station c + l and accordingly there is a decrease in
the heed on the propulsion side of this station.

A decrease in the head II' is determined free the head balance equation for
the segeent between stations c and c + l:

 

 

[c ' prop] '5.-'-F:u+m+§1:.
where "prop is the head on the pmulsion side of the station (is deter-in-
ed by preceding computations); All“ is the minus admissible backing.

The sense of this equation is 5 follows: in order that the backup before
the station c + 1 not exceed All“ at station c it is necessary to reduce
the head by the value H‘.

If the decrease in head is accowlished at the station c + l. the head bal-
ance equation for deter-lining II' is logicallmitnn in the following

f0": ' "e-II+M+‘g-(ﬂcv‘n')'
[c - prop; R 0 ad; c'r- st]

where I!“ - (ﬂu - a') is the backup before the station c + 1; li t is the
head developed by the station without a decrease in the udQ! o working
pumps and without cutting down the wheels.

It is easy to see that this equation is identical to the preceding one.

with a decrease in head at the station c + l the segsent between stations
c and c + 1 will obviously be under a greater pressure. Therefore. fro-

the point of view of a stressed state of the pipeline the decrease in head
at station c is more desirable then at station c + 1.

If provision is nede for the laying of an "insert" of a lesser diameter
in the segnent between stations c and c + 1. its length X“ can be deter-
Iined tron the equation 33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

up", - u L- ammo. 42)] + 4: “he - “no

A decrease in head or an increase in hydraulic resistance in the segment
lea. es in the already considered case of going beyond the right boun-
dary of the tone of possible positioning. imeirs the head balance co-on
for the entire pipeline. For conpenseting this ispairnent it will be neces-
ssry to decrease the hydraulic resistance of the segnent l. - Len. for de-
tersining the length of the looping 3" ensuring such a decrease in hydraul-
ic resistance we can use the following heed balance equation for the seg-

ment L - I .- n . -
“1 m+ (I-r—i) 11..-. [(6 "1000-3 (1 -~)-8° “-Wl “5'

where x is the length of the looping obtained in hydraulic co-putstions
due to rounding of! of the nunber of stations in the lesser direction and
falling in the segaent I. - lc+l°

15.11. (hangs in Backups Before Stations with Change in Viscosity of Puaped
Petroleu-

1he backup before the pulping station c + l is determined from the head bal-
ance equation for the segnent )6.“ (between the first end the c + let sta-

tions): . . _ _.._
Mg+¢(‘—W"~)-IQ"“.0;+ Alan-Pblhei.

Taking into account that from the head balance equation for the entire pipe-

line all—4." ..-_.
. IO.“
0 “Ii—We

we obtain - -.
' 'OeI
r 6-H ‘

All... -AII.+~-Mm —(au,+u—an 7—1—3

. ”'1 T

In this equation only ' ” J:

is.“ D... e
is dependent on viscosity.

Thus. a change in the backup Alien with a change in viscosity is detenin-

ed b th elue
’ ° V Him. 1:)
1+ HIM '

where leg/c is the nean distance between the petroleum puming stations
in the segncnt he“. and L/n is the ease distance betveen the tuning ste-
tions (or the entire pipeline.

If l¢+1Ic>Lln. with an increase in petroleum viscosity the fraction
b+lﬂullél
0! I i -)

increases and therefore the backup Alien decreases.

3h
roe orncw. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

l‘ig. 5.17. Change in bsckups before ststioas with a chsnge in viscosity of
puped petroleue.

For the cue [cu/cOJn. on the other hand, with en increase in petroleu
viscosity the backup before station c + 1 increases.

Finally. if [cu/c - L/n. e chenge in petroletl viscosity exerts no influ-
ence on the negnitude of the 529.399.. since with any f value in this case

5+} 35"
—T-‘.

The chengs in backups before stations with a change in viscosity is illus-
trated in fig. 5.17.

The vertical dsshed lines on the route profile cut off identical diatences
bin (in the figure LB): 1. ie the counted length of the petroleun pipeline.

The solid end dashed h‘draulic slope lines i and 1‘ correspond to the via-
cgsgties. 1/ and V‘: V > V. The segnsnte.eA1 - MA: - Age; and eel -

A“: - A33 represent the heads ll“ end B”.develcped by the pulping eta-
tions vi petroleun viscosities V end 1/ 3 the segnent la is the beckup
before the first station Am.

We will use the point 1 es the origin of coordinetes. men the hydreulic
slope lines eneneting free the points A and A will be described by the
equations

hunch-f” u... nonﬁilwa-m.
where 2 is the dietence from the initiel point on the route 1; II and ll.
ere the ordinetee corresponding to 1 .

35'
FOR omcm. use our
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the points of intersection of the mentioned lines II - R'. that is

("n—u I ‘,:'-‘.“
[CT - st] Taking into account that

‘ an +£51.15 ’
V‘.—|TL—-
‘,_ All-HEQ—da .

it is easy to confirn that the hydraulic slope lines with the viscosities
V and v intersect at the distances
to

:-‘—.

...

and

.oe

where c is a whole nuaber, that is. c - l. 2. 3. etc.

If the third station is situated at the point b. over which the lines 1
and i“ intersect. that is. at a distance which is a aultipla of tin.
with any increase or decrease in petroleum viscosity the backup would re-
main unchanged (condition I¢+1lc - L/n).

however. this station was situated beyond the point of intersection of
the hydraulic slopes i and i and for it

n... _&_
0’.

Therefore. the backup before the third station with an increase in viscos-
ity is reduced (see Pig. 5.17). The second petroleua pulping station is
situated to the left of the point of intersection of the lines 1 and i .

For it .
1 ‘ I.
%<7'
Therefore. the backup before it with the viscosity 1" is greater than with
the viscosity V.

A change in the backups with a change in petroleu viscosity nust be taken
into account when siting petroleun pming stations: the linits of the
zones of their possible positioning are dependent on viscosity. If the
nature of the profile is such that 1&1" (L/n). the right linit of

the zone of possible positioning of the station c + 1 will be deter-lined
by the point of intersection o: the hydraulic slope line i' with a eaxiuae
viscosity of the petroleum ‘V with the line drawn equidistantly to the
profile at the height which is equal to the linin- adnissible backup A a“.
In Fig. 5.17 the third station has been placed incorrectly: the right lia-
it of its sons of possible positioning nust be at the point c, where the
distance iron the profile to the hydraulic slope line is equal to All“.

36
ron orncw. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second station in Fig. 5.17 can be situated at a distance [2 < L/3.
Therefore. the right limit of the cone of its possible positioning is
determined by the hydraulic slope line i with the minimum viscosity 1!.

The left limit of the zone of possible positioning of the station c + l,
where the backup hes the greatest value, must be determined from this
same hydraulic slope line (i or i *). which passes above.

[5.12. Planning of a Petroleum Pipeline with a Stipulated Positioning of
Pumping Stations. Planning of "Short" Pipelines

It is advantageous to place petroleum pumping stations at places situated
close to villages, railroads and highways. to sources of electricity sup-
ply and water supply. Favorable topogeological characteristics of the
areas around petroleum pulping stations are of great importance. In addi-
tion, the areas should be situated in such a way that the propulsion pres-
sure at the stations will be identical as possible.

with the placement of stations by the Shukhov plan there is always a guar-
nnteed satisfaction of only the last of these requirements. The selection
of sites around petroleum pumping stations free of restrictions. dictated
by the Shukhov method (zones of possible positioning) sometimes most rees-
onably makes possible satisfaction of the mentioned requirements.

Assume that all the computations up to the choice of the optisnss variant
have been made, the number of stations has been rounded off in the greater

direction and the sites of the petroleum pumping stations have been select-
ed.

Then it is necessary to ensure that the heads on the propulsion and auction
sides of the stations will not exceed the limits of the admissible values.

The sequence of the computations can be as follows.

We will begin with the first segment (head station and the segment adja-
cent to it).

1. Using the 0-H characteristic curves we find the heads developed by the
backup All and Iain H9; stations. Adding then, we obtain the head on the
propulsion side of the station (propulsion head “PKOP):

u+'"-';s
[CT - station; H . prop(ulsion)]

2. Using the head balance equation for the segment we find the backup A H
before the second station. Taking into account the losses in the station
connecting lines this equation will be as follows:

up,” - u+u+s..+uz. '

37
FOR orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where l and A: are the length and difference in elevations of the end
and beginning of the line sealant between stations (found free the route
profile): “at is the head loss in the station connecting lines.

Computations for subsequent sag-ants are siai let: us will detarnine the
propulsion head lip,” and then the backup Ali before the next station.

if at any station the head up,” is higher than the adsissible level. in

order to reduce it to If“ it is possible to use the eaasures cautioned
above: a decrease in the nueber of working pulps, cutting down the pulp

wheels (interchangeable rotors). and also throttling.

The first aethod is the lost econoeical. "ith the second method there is
some reduction in puep efficiency (a cutting dovn of the wheels by not
more than 102 is admissible). Throttling. that is. an artificial increase
in hydraulic resistance, involves an expenditure of energy and therefore
it eust be used only when it is the only possible leans for reducing
head.

It oust be reeenbered that a decrease in propulsion head inevitably causes
u decrease in the backup before the next station. If the backup is above
the admissible level. in order to increase it to All“ in the considered
segIsent it is necessary to lay a looping (large-disaster insert). Its nec-
essary length x“ is deter-lined fro- the equation

l.-ili-a°(i-O)l+ds+h;+dﬂ;.
[1' ad; (71' 'I' It]

Cowutations of the heads “It" and All at stations can also be needs in a
different way, beginning vi h :he last sagpent.

1. We will determine the head II”, which such exist on the propulsion side
of the last station (required head) using the fonula

u -1l+4x+hc1.

9309

where he is the head loss in the connecting lines at the final pipeline
station (including the level height in the receiving tank).

If there is a pass point. it eust be considered the final point. in this
case the required head at the.last station is

.g- “+No
ll! - prov]

2. Using the 0-“ characteristic curve we find the head I!“ and than ve
find what backup should exist before the last station:

- —n' .
[ii - prop; CT - at] “I If. a

38
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. we will detenine the required head at the next-to-the-laat etation
ueing the foreula

l.-u+nc+n..+nll.
l" - prop: CT - et]
Then we find the backup before thie etation. etc.

If it appeare for any eegaent that “prop> I!“ or AII<AH d0 the eeaeuree
ueed for decreaeing up,” or for increaeing All“ are t e eaae ae con-
eidered above.

The conetruction of integrated Q-ll characterietic curvee and aleo the hy-
dreulic elope linee. when the poeitioning of the etatione ie etipulated.
evidently loeee independent ilportence. They Ililt be conetructed only for
checking the correctneee of the cmutetim.

For the eegnente where the propulsion preeeuree differ coneiderebly fro-
thc coeputed level it ie neceeeary to refine (again detereine) the thick-
neee of the pipeline well. Then the problen of "breakdown" of the pipee
ie eolved.

Petroleue pipelinee with one or two petroleul puuping etatione will be
celled ehort.

For computing euch pipelinee there ie no need for perforning all the oper-
etione indicated in 05.9. The coeputatione are reduced to a deteninetion
of the dianeter of the pipeline with two valuee of the nueber of etatione
(n - l and n - 2) and to the eelection of the moat adventageoue variant.

Piret we will find the co-puted length of the pipeline end the A: value.
For this (Fig. 5.18) fro- the initial point of the route we lay out the
backup Am and twice the head I!" end we draw the linee i1 and 12 (with
another route profile there can be two paee pointe — for the linee 11 and
12 or there may be no paee point).

Then froe the head belance equation
t

"V'
All; +nII.'-ﬂ-q-DT;-: L+de
we find the veluee of the pipeline die-etere D], and D; with n . 1 and n .

2. Then. adopting 01 and 02 free the State Standard. we determine the cap-
ital expendituree for both variante and eelect the beet of then.

The heed ll” ie detenined fro. the 0-}! characterietic curve, firet eelect-
ing the unite and nulber of punpe opereting at the etation.

The poeitioning of the second etation (with n - 2) can be found by the ueual
Shukhov uthod. However, if the eite for the eecond etation ie etipulated.
ee before the coeputetione must be ended by determining the propuleion heade
et both etetione and the backup before the eecond etation.

39
ron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

95.13. increase in Throughput Capacity of Petroleue Pipeline

An increase in the need for petrolaun products in the considered econoeic
region. caused by the peculiarities of its develop-ant. leads to an in-
crease in the capacity of the petroleus refinery (refineries) servicing 'the
region and the scans for delivering the refined petroleun products to con-
eueers.

An increase in the capacity of the plant in turn involves a need for in-
creasing the handling capacity of the transportation facilities deliver-
ing petrolem iron the fields to the petroleus reiinery.

Thus, the problen arises of increasing the throughput capacity of an exist-
ing petroleum pipeline.

00L?

Fig. 5.19. Increase in throughput cep-
acity of petroleue pipeline with pis-
ton puns: 1) characteristic curve of
Fig. 5.18. Diagran explaining coeput- pming station; 2) characteristic
ation of short petroleue pipeline. curve of pulping station after in-
creasing nuber of puping plants;

3) characteristic curve of pipeline
(run between stations): lo) character-
istic curve of pipeline after doubling
nuber of stations or after laying

looping.

 

Frequently in the planning process the condition is iwosed that the through-
put capacity of the pipeline nust be increased gradually and attain the laxi-

sun vnlue only by a definite ties. The disaster of such a pipeline is select-
ed corresponding to the aaxinul throughput capacity. Patroleu pwing sta-
tione are constructed and put into operation as required.

An increase in the petroleu pipeline throughput capacity (roe Q to Q' can
be achieved by a change in the characteristic curve for the pipeline or
pulping stations for which the working point on the integrated character-
istic curve is moved to the right.

The ratio 0..-, s

ho
FOR orncm. use mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is celled the coefficient of increase in throughput capacity.

The probles is solved sost sisply in the csse of e very greet steepness of
the characteristic curves of the pulping stetions (vertical line for pis-
ton ptnps). In this csse an increase in the throughput cspacity is secon-
plished by installing at each station additional puping plants which are
connected in parallel. and if st each station there were I: working pups.
and if after the instelletion of the additional pulps there were k‘. the

coefficient of increase in throughput capacity (under the condition thet
the pups ere identicsl) is "

he
hur-

An incresse in flow after the sdditionsl pups ere put into operation lesds
to an increase in head loss. The working point on the integrated charsc-
teristlc curve (1-)! is soved not only to the right. but also upward (Fig.
5.19). In this case the head H: which the stations will develop say be
above that which is adsissible fro- strength conditions.

The head h" can be decreased by the following nethods:

by the construction of additional ststions on the runs between existing
stations (doubling the nunber of ststions). In this case a decrease in

the heed occurs due to a decrease in the lengths of the runs serviced by
the stations;

by laying additional loopings.

Now we will era-ins these sethods. he heads I!“ developed by the ststions

before and after the increase in the throughput cepecity will be considered
identical.

Doubling of Nusber of Ststions

ilefore en incresse in throughput cepecity
.s..-m"c+ea.

After doubling the number of ststions and instslling additional puming
plants ensuring en increase in flow we obtain

tau-10' “""M'ﬁ

Dividing the second equetion by the first. we obtain

_n.
"($553“; "‘ . (5.22)

Formals (5.22) shows thet for pipelines running uphill (with A:>0) the
X coefficient is greeter then for "horizontal” or (even soreso) for pipe-
lines for which A :<0.

The A: value is frequently neglected. Then

kl
FOR OFFICIAL use (mu
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1-81,:-

(5.23)

Accordingly. it it ie neceeeery to incieeee the throughput by e iector of
Fi’
2

(in the teee of e turbulent regime in the tone of operetion of thelleeiue

lea l
2 Fe" - 1.1.35).

then it ie deeiteble to double the nutter of etetione. ln thie ceee the pree-
euro developed by the etetione doee not chenge.

Laying of Additionel Ioopinge
1
11m nethod to effective when X< 2 7-3 .
'

    

‘
I ..
1" .1
,I.
’ I
’i
or e or t

Fig. 5.20. lncreeee in throughput cepecity of petroleul pipeline with centrif-
ugel punpe: e) eiter doubling nuber of etetione; b) etter leying loopinge;

l) cherecterietic curve of pwing etetion; 2) cherecterietic curve of pn-
ing etetione efter doubling nuber of etetione: 3) cherecterietic curve of
pipeline; 6) cherectetietic curve of pipeline efter leying looping

The length of the looping x eneuting retention of the toner preeeure etter
inetelling edditionel paying plente et the etetione ie detenined fro. the
equetione

“lee-19"“4'”

 

end

nan-w(Nubia-Jim?
[CT - et] Hence

.— . .-—._-

’i. '_ :2
"' 3-0( 1". ' (5.24)
If it ie neceeeety to incteeee the throudlput cepecity by e fector meter
then 1
2 2-.

the doubling of the amber of etetione con be eupplenented by the leying of
loopinge (codioed method). In thie ceee the neceeeery length of the loop-
ing (without teking At into eccount) ie

302
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally. the problen of doubling the nude: of stations or the laying of a
looping is solved by an economic cowerison. Whereas on e patrolsue pipe-
line with piston pueps a doubling of the nuber of stations and the laying
of loopinga serve for reducing the head developed by the puwing stations.
on pipelines with centrifugal puns a doubling of the nubsr of stations
and the laying of loopings serve as a eeane for increasing their throughput
capacity. It is easy to confire this by cowering the graphs in Figures
5.19 and 5.20. a. b. lha first of these requires no clarification. The sec-
ond gives a deternimtion of the throughput capacity of a pipeline with
centrifugal puma after doubling the nuber of stations (see Fig. 3.20, e)
and after the laying of loopinge (eee tig. $.20.b). It can be seen froe
these graphs that an increase in throughput capacity can also be eccowlish-
ed without the installation of additional punps connected in parallel. The
letter are necessary in those cases when after an increase in throughput

capacity the working point on the (Hi characteristic curve goes beyond the
lieits of the working tone (having a sufficiently high efficiency).

With a doubling of the nuber of stations we obtain a fined value of the
coefficient of increase in throughput capacity. with an increase in the
throughput capacity by the laying of a looping the coefficient X can have
different values in dependence on the length and diaeeter of the looping.

The coebined nethod also nakes it possible to ensure a set of X values
(due to the looping).

Since the characteristic curves for the pulping stations are "dropping off”
curves. the head developed by the stations. after increasing the throughput
capacity, decreases. Therefore. with a doubling of the nuber of stations
Outfitted with centrifugal puns the coefficient of increase in throughput
capacity will be less than detareinad by fornula (5.22) or (5.23). The

length of the looping for this sane reason will be greater than the length
deter-ined using formula (5.26).

We will exanine what increase in the throughput capacity will be given by
a doubling of the nuber of stations and what the length of the looping
should be for obtaining a stipulated )L value.

Doubling of Huuber of Stations

Froe the head balance equations before and after doubling the nulber of

stations . - . _ .. .. ...._
u.+-(c-bo"")-w"‘b+u
and
an.+2a(.—eo|~')-yo'""'n+a.
We have

1&3
FOR OFFICIAL use ouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A! +ne—Ai

QI-a__|m_
u: +2u-de
oe(I-a)__lnTm_

Dividing the eecond equation by the firet. we derive e fomle ehoving thet
for centrifugal pueping etetione. the eene ee for pieton pulping etetione.
the coefficient of increeee in throughput cepecity ie the greeter the greet-

cr ie the A 2 value: w. “, ‘2‘.” “ab —63 T4,}.
‘ '-(Km-ﬁne)17xh‘i—ﬁiit+e“—£en‘

For thoee ceeee when the A 2 end 4R1 veluee cen be neglected,

x""-2 Hg}, (5.25)

and

It follows fro. this formle thet:

l) with centrifugal wipe the coefficient of increeee in throuﬂnput cepecity

in lean then 1
27-7.

thet is, ie leee then for pieton pulpe (ee wee motioned ebove);

2) the steeper ie the pipeline cherecterietic curve (the greeter the fl. vel-
ue). the greeter ie the effectiveneee in doubling the nulber of etetione;

3) the } velue decreeeee with en increeee in nb, thet ie, with en increeee
in the eteepneee of the totel cherectetietic curve of the pulping etetione.

Leying of loopinge

Solving jointly the equetione
u.+~(--bo"")-Io""z+m

end ., h-._---.‘ _
w|+.(._.oon-av)..,QctH(L—:(t-e)|+dn

we obtain e formula for determining the length of e looping neceeeery for
incrceeing the throughput cepecity hy e fector of x:

I: ‘ I e
Jam‘('- 1'*)(‘+7z- . (5 26)
Formula (5.26) ehowe thet the neceeeery length of the looping ie not depend-
ent on A: (the eeee ee ie true of pieton pupe); with one end the eene coef-
ficient of increeee in throughput cepecity for petrolem pipelinee with cen-
trifugel pupe it ie neceeeery to heve e greeter length of the looping then
for petroleun pipelinee equipped with pieton pine; the effectiveneee of
leying of the looping ie increeeed with en increeee in the eteepneee of the
pipeline cherecterietic curve end with e decreeee in the eteepneee of the
cherecterietic curve for the pupe.

 

If we eubetitute into fornule (5. 26) the X velue deternined by for-ale
(5. 25) V. obtein L a

8-1—“ _., .

an
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1hln In tho longth of a looping giving tho ooao oftoct ao a doubling of
tho nuobor of ototiono.

Adopting x - L in fornula ($.26), wo (ind tho noxiou- valuo of tho coat-
ficiont of incroooa in throughput capacity poooiblo whon laying a looping:

It aoaouroo aro takon at ototiono (or naintoining tho for-or prooouro (in-
otollotion of additional planto, raplocoaont of oxioting onoo by othoro).

than formulao (5.25) and (5.26) aro tronaioraad into tho toroulao darivod
abovo (5.23) and (5.26).

Tho oiting of additional potroloul pulping ototiono (with contrifugal punpo)
io dotoradnod ao botoro: f‘on tho initial point of tho routo wo plot tho

backup ‘5"; and tho hood a, dovolopod by tho Iain puapo of tho ototion
with tho (low Q‘; thon tho hydraulic olopo lino i' corrooponding to tho

flow 0' io drawn and tho oito for an additional ototion io ooloctod. Tho
nocoooary (that io, not oxcooding tho adadooiblo liaito) backup botoro

tho additional ototion io olwayo onourod it tho ototion oito ia locatod in
tho ”oona of poooiblo location." Tho backup boforo tho noxt ototion. that
io. botoro an oxiating ototion in tho firot plan. by no Iaano olwayo will

ro-oin in tho nocoooory lioito (it lay bo both oxcoooivoly graot and aa-
coooivoly onall).

Now wo will conoidor how it io poooiblo to dotoraino tho backupo boforo oto-
tiono in tho firot plan and how it io poaoiblo to hoop thou within tho
fro-owork of tho adudooihlo valuoo.

we will writo oquationo for tho linoa of hydraulic olopoo for tho oognant

£c+l boioro an incroaaa in capacity and ottor a doubling of tho odor of
ototiono:

an.lo-¢u..'—Tu and l‘-AD.+2¢H:.-‘0;,
[CT - ot(ation)]

Horo u and H. aro tho ordinatoa; l'io tho ahociooa. Tho origin of coordin-
atoo io at tho point of oiting of tho hood ototion.

Hhon L- 1c+1 ll' - ll roprooonto tho additional backup {lien carriod
to ototion c + 1 fro. the procading additionol ototion:

on...-c(zn:.-n..)°-«°-¥o'un-
- - ' " ' —+ o 2-»

Since

'6
you orncm. use ouu
FOR OFFICUKL USE ONLY

the Jam value can be represented in the following for-2
‘uen- 3%(33:'-"et) (%"""‘;'L) .-

‘l‘his fornuls lakes it possible to draw the conclusions:

1) if station c + l is situated at a distance I“; less than c (L/n) (iron
the initial point on the route). then 8!! 1)0, that is. the backup before
station c + 1 increases after an increasectn thethroughput cspacity.

Aﬂag - 6.". +630“:
2) 1f ‘ . > L .

‘ a 7 __ _ _
”I.“ "on < “ .34! 5"! < “so“
3) with '1‘ -%‘- ou...'-o.

In the latter case the backup before ststion c + 1 does not change.

The change in the operating regine oi ststions in the first plen after the
construction of additional stations is shown in Fig. 5.21.

lbs lines of hydraulic slope i ennating from stations in the second plan.
A. B and c, intersect at points lying on the a: line. These points divide
the route into equal sag-ents with the length Lln (in Fig. 5.21 1.13). ‘ihe
distance of station 2 fro: the initial point on the route I. (1.13; there-
fore. after stations A, 3 end c are put into operation. the geckup in

front of station 2 increased by 8H2. This led to en increase in head at
the station. The third station was situated at the distance 13 > 21.]3 and
therefore the backup before it was decreased (8113 < 0). 1! station 3 was
situated at point p, distant iron the beginning of the pipeline by the dis-
tsncc 21.”. the beckup in front of it would not change.

 

Fig. 5.21. Operating regime of pipeline Pig. 5.22. Diagra- explaining
sfter construction of second-plan sts- doubling of mﬂer of stations.
t‘ome

1:6
ma orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If after doubling the number of stetions the hood st station 2 is greet-
er than the adsissibls level “n (due to the strength condition) or the
head before ststion 3 is less t n All“ (cavitation), the throughput cap-

acity of the segsent 1; will be greater than the throughput capacity of
the segnent linited by stations 2 and 3.

Figure 3.22 shows that for evening out the throughput capacities in these
segnents at the additional station A there was a decrease in the nubar of
pups and on the line between ststions B and 3 there was a looping with the
length x which cospsnaates the decrease in hand developed by stetion A and
ensures an increase in the backup in front of station 3 to the for-or level
AM. _In order to put!) petrolsus iron station I to the pass point it it is
necessary to have a head somewhat less than 11:: (the run between station 3
end the point I! is less than US). ‘lhe excess head can be eliminated by
cutting down the wheels or the puns installed at station I. As before. the
degree to which the wheels is nodiriad is deternined. as before. using for-

mula (5.15). in which the head ll. can be found using the head balence eque-
tion or by a construction on the profile. as is shown in Fig. 5.22.

05.110. Petroleum Pipelines with Uithdrawels end Additions of Petroleu-
Along Line

In any cases for supplying consuners located along a route there is s with-
drewsl of the pusped petrolsun from the petroleus pipeline. The withdrawals
can be continuous and periodic. Continuous withdrawal can be organized. for
exswle. for supplying petroleu to s patrolet- refinery located near the
route of the petrolaus pipeline. Periodic withdrawals ere into auxiliary
pipelines (supplementing the reserves at near-lying petroleu bases).

If at any place a petroleus pipeline passes close to s producing region.
petroleu can be pt-ped into the passing line. The petroleu produced in
these fields is carried in the sane Iain petroleu pipeline. Depending on

the productivity of the deposit the delivery can be either continuous or
periodic.

The technological cosputstions for a pipeline with continuous withdrawals
or with continuous additions of petroleum can be node for the segnents
limited by the points of withdrawal or addition. '

In the case of insignificsnt withdrawals or additions the pipeline is de-
signed without teking then into account. however. it must be rennbered
that in the case of periodic withdrswals (additions) the technological
pming regine changes: this usually leads to a necessity for regulating
the operation of wing stations.

Now we will ens-ins the opsrsting regime of a pipeline with periodic with-
drawals and additions.

The pipeline sea-sot fro- the initial point to the point of withdrawal (ad-
dition) will be called the left segnsnt and the segpent fro- the withdrawal
(addition) point to the final or pass point will be called the right seg-
ment. 157

mu sew-vaun- .-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the cone of a withdrawal the flow for the left asgaent will increase.
whereas for the right ssgpent it will decrease. The backups before all in-
tereediate stations will be reduced.

‘lhie is confirmed by the following considerations. Assues that the point of
withdrawal is situated at the distance 1c.“ free the initial point on the
route. that is. near the station c + l. Pron the head balance equations:

For the left pert of the petroleu pipeline
A”: 4’ €(‘-W’ “ab-"mo. (.;.,+M0|+5..tsl (5'27)

and the right part of the pipeline ‘ _
A's.“ +(- -d la -b (0‘-q)""'l - I (la-Icon) (Q'-s)""' +6!»

where q is the withdrawal. a is an index denoting "with withdrawal": it is
easy to derive the expression

(obi-ll...) 0° (3") *l' l-(l—f‘) 5+! (LLIeolil (0.- ﬂhi'f‘il‘l' ‘3’“ (5. 28)

which shows that with an increase in withdrawal there is an increase in flow
for the left part of the pipeline.

Fron equation (5.27) and the head balance equation for puming without with-
drewel

53.4» e (a ~bQ")- "no 7"“4-Moon +Mlm

we find that the decrease in bac'cup before the station c + 1 (where the with-
drawal point is situated)_ is ______.

"eel Iwcq- ”:0!- - (g.- + "“0 (Q. (1-.|_ 0...)

Using this sane foreula we deter-ins the change in the backup before station
c' + l. situated to the left of station c + 1.

mm .- (A 411‘)“, (bi (i-au .'_' '01:).
where Q‘ has its for-er value.

 

 

Since c'<c. than 5 ll 0+1< 83,... Accordingly. in accordance with the length
of the left aspen: of the petro sun pipeline the backups before the stations
(beginning with the second) decrease: the nini-un backup is at station c + l.
where a withdrawal is nade. The backups along the rightp sealant of the pipe-

line increaae; this can be d-onstrated by sinilar reasonings. The change in

backups before the stations in the case of withdrawal is illustrated in Fig.

5.23.

In the case of an addition along th: line, in the left part of the pipeline
Q '<Q; the flow in the right part Q + q>Q. with an increase in the added
quantity q the flow Q decreases. his can be confined by placing a ”+" sign
in front of the q value in fore-ale (5.28).

R8
ma orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 5.23. Change in operating resine of petroleu pipeline with withdrawal.

The backup before atation c + 1 inc eaaee with an increaae in the volune of
petroleum added_tp _§he line. 'l‘h_ia c.n be ”on fro; the fornula

‘ucot-Olc'u-Aﬂm'(OH'HM) (OH-0° 0%)),

The distribution of backupe before etatione will be ae follow: for e etation
aituated near the point where petroleun ie added - the naxinun backup; with
increaein. dietance iron it (in both directiona) the backupe decreaae.

withdrawal and flow in the lett part of the pipeline. for which the backup
before the etation ie c + l (at the withdrawal point). attaining the nininua
edniaeible value All“. will be duimted the critical value ﬂu and Q".

U. will write the head balance equation for the left part of the pipeline
in the caae of critical wi_thdre_!al:

“‘4‘. (.-.o:. - I“O]IQ:-'-‘-+-A_‘CO|1 ﬂ‘e - .I- --
m’ ' "(means 11 - ed(nieaible)]

llence we find the critical flow _ , _ . ‘_ _
' I

_ M due—dun-AB 7-7

on (—“W'Q °

05a+ ('-¢)l0-0(Q-e-m)HI-I (lo-‘mHQw- b)”+“a
[KP - or; 11- ed) we_obtain a formula deter-min; the critical withdrawal:

. Al.+(a-e)a-Ae.I.—_L-
”' 9" ‘(a‘-e)' m; l‘_-- (”J °
If the withdrawal q>q . there ie then a need for artificially incraaeins

the backup before autign c + l; for enaurins cavitation-free operation it
not not be leee than All“.

The backup can be increaeed by an increaee in the hydraulic reeietance of
the right part of the pipeline or a decreaee in the head developed by the
etatione aituated there (after the withdrawal point). Thie ia accowliehed
by regulation.

how we will clarify what ahould be the increase in reeietance. or (which in
the ease) what heed li' nuat be extinguiehed by regulation.

‘69
Iron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since by neene of regulation before etetion c + l the backup All“ in
weinteined. the flow in the left pert of the pipeline in equel to q“;
in the ridtt pert it will be equel to Q“ - q.

The heed II' which nuet be ebeorbed by the reguleting device cen be deter-

mined using the equetion _ p h- _ _‘ . n. .
maﬁa...) [a—s (0..—.)""l-I (Ii-‘19:) (On-o)“+“e+ " '

[11- ed; KP - cr] If ';-§u.l..-|:h'. ‘

[IIAC - pulp] where “pill? ie the heed developed by one pun with the flow
Q“. - q: k in e whole nuber end h' < “K , then it ie deeireble to cut
out it punpe end the heed h' in extinguie 3"» throttling.

He will cell the criticel eddition of petroleue to the line ‘lcr thet ed-

dition with which the heed et etetion c + l etteine the min- edeieeihle
velue “adv

no flow in the right pert of the pipeline in the cue of e criticel ed-
dition of petroleum will eleo be celled criticel Q“.

We will find the criticel flow fro- the heed belence equetion for the right
pert of the petroleum pipeline (with the eddition of petroleum. on before.
before the etetion _c_ + 1)

ruin—.4) (o-oo:;")-I (£41.36 'o'ﬁﬁé- '
u.;(;'_'._'a)'.';'ii__,i‘- '
°"'[(—_‘(T_$n-c-I)o+r 4...] '
Now we will write the heed belence equetion for the left pert of the pipeline
in the ceee of e criticel addition of ”trout-x

u.+cl--s(o.-o.)'*l-nm(on-m)“+a~ou+'u-('-W»"')'
llence we find thet the'criticel eddition of petroleue ie

Anp+“-Al¢n— ‘j-(C-WM) }.+..
[KP - ct] W" 0"- c‘ﬂlm ‘

With the eddition of petroleun q>q¢r it ie neceeeery to heve resuletion.
The purpoee of the resuletion ie to reduce the flow in the left port of
the petroleul line to the velue ch - q. ‘l‘hie ie echieved in the use wey:
by cutting out none of the pun or increeeins the hydreulic reeietence.

He ob tein

 

The heed II' which lust be elinineted by reguletion in the left pert of the
pipeline is determined fro- the equetion

“ml-4b(o»-¢)'-'I-'-It..f(bo4o"‘+Mmﬂi-("W'mﬁ4
[KP - cr] '

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

05.15. Operating Regine of Pipeline With Shutting Down of Peeping Stations

'Iha tsnporary shutdown of any station can be caused by malfunctions in the
electric supply systen. damage. the need to do repair work. etc.

lhe shutdown of a punping station greatly changes the operating regins of
the pipeline (flow, pressure. backups before stations). Such a change in
the operating regime is characterised by a transient process with a dura-
tion of up to several tens of minutes and a new steady-state operating re-

gine of the pipeline which sets in after attenuation of the transient
process.

"hen there are transient processes in pipelines with intermediate puwing
stations there are sharp changes in pressure and flow. The pressure at
individual points on the route can exceed the admissible values.

5 s

..__._. - . .—-—-_ _—-..

  

Fig. 5.26. Change in operating regine of petroleun pipeline with shutdown
of station.

Methods for protecting pipelines against excessively high pressures and
methods for computing fluctuations of pressure and flow during transient
processes have been examined in detail in Chapter 9. Now we will examine
the method for cosputing the rsgine for a pipeline which is established
in it after shutdown of one of the pulping stations and attenuation of os-
cillations. In order to understand better the change in the pulping regise
we will assuse for the tine being that the petroleum pipeline can operate

with any heads and pressures arising as a result of shutdown of the sta-
tion.

Regardless of what station has ulfunctioned - the second, third. etc. or
last. from the head balance equation for the entire pipeline it follows
that ._

o All “7.413842:
0 “""-I—ITT_(5— ’ 4! . (5.29)

The flow Q’ is established automatically. as a result of self-regulation.
It is obviously less than the flow Q which prevailed prior to shutdown of
the station.

He will clarify how the backups change before the stations with shutdown
of station c.

Fran the head balance equations for the left part of the petroleun pipe-
line (segnent LC”):

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US” ONLY

with shutdown of station c

.o

in, +(e-i) (a-so' “"‘")-n...o' u“"'+ stun-MIM-

with operation of _a_ll'stat_ion_s _ _

as.+.(.—bo"')-umo"‘+eunHum _

we find that with a shutdown of the station the backup before station
c + l is reduced by the value

'IUsol 'A—Usol -dilb'u 'E-‘Q. "40"“. +"00I) (0".- Q. (04"). (5 a 30)

It can be seen tron forauls (5.30) that the closer the shut-down station
is situated to the head station. the greater will be the decrease in the
backup before station c + 1.

Similarly. fro- the equations

a». + 9- 2; (. -bQ‘ (""'))-n...o' “""+Axm +65%:
and
5" 1+ (0-?) (‘ -W"") 4" I‘C'IQ...+ MM +Allc.‘
it follows that before station c - l the backup increases to

MI...-madam-«cannula(cu-0"“);

It is obvious that the backup before station c - 2 also increases. but to
a lesser degree. before station c - 3 - to a still lesser degree. etc.

It can also be deeonstretsd that in the right part of the petroleu line
the backups will increase fro- station to station. but will reasin less

than they were prior to the shutdown of station c.

The change in backups before the stations with a shutdown of one of the.
is shown in Pig. 5.26.

On the basis of fomla (5.30) it is possible to writs the pming condi-
tion for a self-regulating regiae:

(c—w' """)—(co +11...) (o""-0' W") < ..
where 6 is the backup reserve.

‘- ‘ucag- 5".

Usually the head reserves will be saall: at the station following the shut-
down station. with a decrease in All below the admissible level the appear-
ance of cavitation can be observed. The backup before the station c + 1 can
be raised to the admissible value A)!“ by regulation of operation or sta-
tions situated in the right part of the petroleua pipeline. “the head a'
which aust be extinguished by regulation is found free the head balance

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equation for the right pert of the pipeline

|n . ndl MI‘I(e--c)(e—bO°“°‘")-I(L"'ml0°"'~)+M'+?"'

where the flow Q ie determined iron the heed balance equation for the
left pert of the pipeline

All: 0- (c-l)(0-OQ‘ ""‘")-Ih 10‘ """+ Au. 1+ Ale-
‘l‘hie flow will be leee than the flow deter-iced by female (5.29).

Since the beckupe before the etetione in the left part of the pipeline in-
creeee. the propulsion preeeure at atetion c - 1 can be greater then the
ndnieeible level II .A decreaae in the heede to ll“ ie attained by reg-
uletion at the etat tone in the left pert of the pipeline. In thie caee
the flow Q“ will be detenined by the equation

u.-no“""+m+w.. (5.31)

where I in the dietance between etetione c - l and c + l: A: ie the dif-
ference in the leveled elevatione of the end and beginning of the eegeent.

The value a' by which the heed developed by the etatione in the left pert
of the pipeline must be reduced can be found from the equation

A». 4-.(r—i) (e—bQ‘ i'*))-'n;.,o°l 6*’+As,.,+'n.+u'
or

Nil-Z- (t-1)(0-50' ""'))-Ilcoi0' (”’4' As... i'ae‘i"?

If H' exceede the heed It developed by one pun. then. romding off a'/
“Pu-P to a whole nueber 1n the leeeer direction), we find the nuaber of

puma k eubject to ehutdown. The heed u'- up“, out be extinguiehed by
throttling.

me operating regiee of the pipeline when any etetion breeke down can be
cowuted graphically. using the profile of the route end the characterie-

tic curve for the paying etetion. He will d_enonetrete thin in the fol-
lowing exenple.

 

Fig. 5.25. Diagrae explaining eoeputatione of the operating regiee of a
petroleum pipeline with ehutdown of etetion.

53
you orncm. use our
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n n petroleum pipeline with a horizontal profile of the mute there are
four stations. at each of which there are three working pumps. The lines
of the hydraulic slope in the case of a normal operating regime are repre-
sented by solid lines (Fig. 5.25).

Assume that the third station has malfunctioned.

Free the point on the profile where the second station is situated we plot
the hand lla and from the point where the fourth station is situated -
the head 4‘.“ By connecting the ends of these segments (a.b) we obtain
the line of tga hydraulic glope i corresponding to the equation (5. 31)
and determining the flow Q with which the pipeline should operate after
shutting down of the third station.

Now on the basis of the characteristic curve for the pumping station we
find the head 11:: for the flow Q“ and we plot it from the initial point on
the profile after Am (segment A181). From the point 81 we draw the line
of the hydraulic slope i“ (segment Blhz). By plotting the head Ila from the
point A; (segment 32) we see that at station 2 it is necessary to shut
down one pun) and tﬁe excess head so is eliminated by throttling. But it

is better to shut down one pump at the first station and at the second to
extinguish the head ac; in this case the run between the first and second
stations will experience lesser pressure (see the line of hydraulic slope
1* below the line 31 A2).

Then. drawing the line is for the last run. we find that at the fourth sta-
tion it is necessary to shut down one pump (the segment bd is equal to the
head developed by the two pumps with the flow Q ) and by throttling elimin-
ate the head ed.

In a graphic method it is convenient to use analytical cosputation of the
regime for monitoring.

[5.16. Regulation of Operating Regime of Puping Stations

Changes in pulping conditions in the course of operation (change in flow.
temporary malfunctioning of any station) can lead to an iwairment of the
normal operating regiae of the pipeline: to cavitation at some stations
and to pressures exceeding the limiting pressure at others. 'ihis means
that the throughput capacities of individual sepents of the pipeline

will be dissimilar. The matching of the operation of the pulping stations
(or, which is the same thing. the evening-out of the throughput capacities
of pipeline segments) is achieved by regulation. As a result of regulation.
the backups before the stations should not be less than the admissible
levels All“ and the heads must not exceed the limiting value 1!“.

With regulation there is a change in the head at the pumping station and
at the same time. the flow. The regulation can be step-by-step (shutting
down of the pulping plants) and smooth, accosplished by a change in the

52.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONICIAL 088 08].?

frequency of rotation of the engine or map. by tranefar of part of the
petroleu flow fro. the preeeure collector into the auction collector and
by throttling of the flow.

 

Fig. 5.26. Diegren expleining coqutation of pining ata-
tion regulation.

Regulation by the ehutting down of one or nore plante ie the noet econ-
onical nethod. It ie need in thoee ceeee when it ie neceeeery to decreeee
the head by a velue cloee to the head developed by et leaet one pup. In
order to eatablieh precieely the neceeaery heade and flowe. etep-by-etep
reguletion nuet be eupplenented by enooth reguletion.

Regulation by a chenge in the frequency of engine rotation hee not cone
into wide uea eince for the tine being the extieting echenee are etill con-
plex. unwieldy and expeneive (reference ie to electric notore).

‘lhe regulation of the change in the frequency of pm rotetion ie accou-
pliehed ueing epecial nagnetic or hydraulic clutchee.

Now we will examine reguletion by new of clutchee. trenefer and throttling.
cowering theee nethode with reepect to efficiency.

A»... that ee e reeult of regulation the flow and head ere equal to q‘ and
3' (l’ig. 5.26). which are the coordinetee of the point A, lying on the cher-
ecterietic curve of the pipeline (the letter ie not ehown in Pig. $.26).
Then with reguletion by throttling the Inning etation will develop the
heed ll: : the heed ll‘ nuet be extinguiehed by thro tling. the uaeful power
ie equei to Q." 7’, end the expended power — to Q tY‘ lience

nthrot - amt:t

or
ﬁrm: - 1 - “"“:e' (5.32)

Uith reguletion by trenefer (bypeeeing) the delivery by the owing etation
ie equel to 00; the petroleu flow with the volt-e Q0 - Q met circulete
through the bypeee line.

Accordingly. in the cone of trenefer (bypaeeing)
a
rfby ' Q [90-

55
ron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

u. will express it» through the values ﬂ' and Ila.

If the equation for the characteristic curve for the puwing station is
written in the for. a - a - qu. then -

e-l I] e-l. ‘
(CT - st(etion)l . o...» ‘ a and 0'- ‘ '

Also taking into account that ll. - it": - Il'. we ohtain

_— _ ....- -...

—R“
"by ' l‘ 0-.Gn-l')
"by - V i-m- (5.33)

In the csse of regulation using a clutch the torque on the engine shaft is
transmitted to the map shaft without a change, that is

"not/“an ' "'7".

where N.“ and 9'“ are the power and frequency of rotation of the notor
shaft: N and n are the power and frequency of rotation of the pun shaft.

0!

Accordingly. the efficiency with this regulation lethod is equal to n‘lnmg.

It is obvious that the efficiency for the entire pulping station is equal to
this sane value if identical owing plants are installed in the station.

The value n'lnmt is the total efficiency (’7 lutch total); it includes the
efficiency of regulation and the efficiency with a shutdown regulating de-

vice of the clutch chugch u; (the matin- efficiency when the driven
shaft rotates with the greatest frequency of rotation n).

Thus. qclutch ”I, " qclutch lax ”clutch. where
e Q
'lclutch st ‘ “l/“mt' '(clutch ' n ’“r

The eaxieue efficiency for ngnetic clutches is 0.93-0.95. and for hydraulic
clutches - 0.97-0.98. The efficiency of regulation "clutch is deterained
by the frequency of rotation. that is. by the lieits of regulation.

Por centrifugal pulps
%-%." and ‘” '° '
Fron these expressions we have
r[clutch ' 0" Q1

56
you orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and II.
'II— .
.0” q. (5.34)

Equation (5.34) is a parabolic equation for sinilar pm operating rsgieas
(in Fig. 3.26 -- the dashed line). The flow 01. corresponding to the fre-
quency of rotation n1. is found by the joint solution of equation (5.32)

and the equation for the puping station characteristic curve, which is
represented in this sale for.

 

”CC—We
As a result. we will have
I
o ~1/-—1,-. .
' H-W
‘l'hen. halting the replace-ant
Q..- Lani and [India-u"
[CT - st(ation)) we obtain
.1'
g... V9.7. (5.35)

[H - clutch]

It follows from for-ulas (5.33). (5.34) and (5.35) that 0c “5" ) mm,
C:

and "clutch > '15,. however. this dose not mean that regu on by clutch-
es is always lore advantageous.

in cosparing regulation by neans of clutches and retaining nethods it is
necessary to use not the coefficient chutcho but the total efficiency

'1 lutch c ). which takes into account the energy losses in regulation
and the «33...: losses. The latter exist not only during the tine of reg-
ulation. but also during the operation of the pipeline. when there is no
regulation. The lesser the frequency and duration of the period of regula-
tion. the less advantageous is the regulation by leans of clutches.

Now we will coware nethods of regulation by throttling and transfer (by-
passing).

From the formulas

II. I. .-
"~"$F.‘.' “d v-ﬁr
[‘7 I by; CT - station - at; ll? - throt(tling)]

it follows that u qon'> q‘u't. then it y< 1th,“; accordingly, 1: the
power used by the pm (pm ng station increases with an increase in the
flow, regulation by throttling is store advantageous than regulation by by-
passing. and vice versa.

57
ran orncm. use 0qu
{on omcm. use om

Tho pup. and on Iain pipelinu have oloping q-n choroctoriotic curves;
for that tho «pendants N - “(0) in on incrming function. mute“,
on Iuin pipelinor regulation by throttling in nor. ndvanugoouo that rog-
uiation by bypauing.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntol‘stvo "Nedrn", 1978

5303
(:80: 8356/0811

58
POI! orncm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PWINO 0P HIGHLY VISCOUS MD HIM? CONGRALIK) PETROL!!!"
Moscow TMO-PROVOM TRANSPORT NIH“! I RAM in Russisn 1978 pp 322-3"

[mapter 8 by V. D. Ielousov, 8. R. bleykher. A. 6. Remdrov. V. A. Yufin

and Ya. I. Yakovlev (also participating in the writing of this chapter vare
Candidstes of Technical Sciences V. A. Kulikov and V. H. Agapkin and Engineers
V. ti. Hikhaylov and 8. R. Chelintsev) Iron the book Tmo-PIDVOMY TRANSPORT
um I GAZA edited by V. A. Yufin. lrdatel'stvo ”hedra." 7,700 copies; ‘08
pare-l

(Text) At the present ties in our country and abroad there is a consider-
eble production of both highly viscous petrolem and petroleus contain-
ing a great quantity of paraffin and accordingly congealing at relatively
high temeratures. 'lhe pulping of these petroleus by the usual nsthod is
irrational bacsuse at the anbient teqeratures the hydraulic resistance of
the pipelines is great. A decrease in the hydraulic resistance of the pipe-
lines is ensured by different nethods for increasing the flovsbility of
petroleuns: the nixing of viecous and congealing petroleum and petroleu
products with those having a low viscosity and their joint pulping, sixing
and pulping with water. thernal processing of congealing parsffinic petrol-
ens and petnoleun products and their subsequent pming. pulping of pre-
heated petroleuae and petroleu products. use of additives and depressants
in the petroleu. etc. In each case the choice of the punping nathod nust
be backed up by technical and econonic coqutations.

08.1. Rheological Properties of Viscous and Congeeling Petrolem

Rheology is s science concerned with study of the flovsbility of liquid,
gaseous and plastic embstsnces. as well es processes associated with recid-
ual defornations of solid bodies. ‘lhe properties of the liquid on vhich the
nature of their flow is dependent are called rheological properties.

In pipeline transport the rheological characteristics of petmleus are
evaluated using the following paranaters: viscosity (Revtonien). plastic
viscosity. effective viscosity. initial (stetic) shearing stress. liniting
dynsnic shearing etresa and congesling point.

The nature of liquid flow is determined by the the for-- of the dependence
of the frictional forces on the surface of conuct of the liquid layers or
shearing stress f on the velocity gradient slong the radius or cheering

velocity dv/dr. The graphic erpression of this dependence in celled the
liquid flow curve.

For light petroleua products. petroleum vith e low peraffin content and
paraffinic petroleum at a high towerature s dependence obtsined by Rev-
ton ie correct: he fornulsted it in the following way: ”the resietence

59
ran orncw. use om
NR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

which arises due to inadequate slipping of liquid particles. all other con-
ditions being equal. is proportional to the velocity with which the liquid
psrticles love relative to one enother," or

do
'--’1'-.
where pie the dyneeic viscosity coefficient.

The liquids for which the cited dependence of ‘5 on dw/dr is correct for
a constsnt I.» value ere known as Newtonian liquids or fluids, end the vis-
cosity of such liquids is called Newtonian.

The behevior of my liquids. especielly paraffinic petroleum end petrol-
sul products at temratures close to their congealing point. does not con-
fore to the Newton lew. Such liquids ere called non-Newtonian.

There are several classes of non-Newtonien liquids differing with respect
to the shape of the flow curve (Fig. 8.1).

The flow curves describe the behavior of liquids: plastic or unsha- (1).
pseudoplastic (2). Newtonian (3) and dilatent (6).

Figure 8.1 shows thet the flow curves of pseudoplastic. Newtonian end dilat-
ont liquids pess through the origin of coordinates and eccordinsly their
flow begins with the einieue pressure differentials. The flow of linshse
liquids begins only after the creetion of e definite stress («0. In the ones
of stresses less than to. such liquids behave as solid bodies, whereas
with greater stresses -- es fluids. The rheological squetion for a Binghae
fluid is derived from s conbinetion of two equetions - the Newton equetion
(8.1) and the rheological equation for a plastic body (1- To) - and cen
be written in the following fore:

[1m - Pl(estic)] ....-.w%..

It contains two coefficients: yield stress ‘00 end viscosity '791. which
is called plastic viscosity.

For pseudoplestic and dilatant liquids in e wide range of change in shear
velocity in the technical coeputations it is possible to use e power de-
pendence of stress on shear velocity

(Is I“
“-477 7:-

where Idw/drl is the dieensionless shear velocity modulus; n and k are
constant coefficients for the perticulsr liquid. The n coefficient is known
es the flow index and It is a cherecteristic of consistency. For e Mtonien
liquid n I 1 end I: . p 3 for pseudoplaetic liquids n<l end for dilatant
liquids n) l.

The flow of paraffinic petrolsues end petroleum products st telperetures
close to their congeelins point or below cen be described by curvee l or
2 (see Fig. 8.1). In other words. they cen be related to plestic or

60
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

paeudoplastic liquids. and in the case of sufficiently high telperatures
-- to Nevtonian liquids.

‘l‘his peculiarity is associated with the high content of paraffin in such
patroleua. At a high teqerature the main quantity of paraffin present
in the petroleun is in a dissolved state. Under these conditions the pet-
roleu is a newtonian liquid.

with a tenerature decrease the paraffin begins to crystalline out of the
petrolau. The process of crystallisation of paraffin as the first stage
includes a change in structure of the liquid phase of the petroleue with
a decrease in teqerature. The essence of these changes is an ordering in
the arrange-ant of aoleculea of the dissolved substance due to a decrease
in the energy of their thernal notion. As the solution is cooled the cap-
acity of the Iolecules of the solvent to hold paraffin solecules in a

dispersed and isolated state is reduced. that is. the dissolving power of
the solvent is reduced. Hith a further teaparature decrease the paraffin

concentration in the hydrocarbon nadir. attains a level at which the solu-
tion baconss saturated.

hovever. in this case the crystallization of paraffin does not begin and
there uust be some supersaturation of the solution. which creates the pos-
sibility of appearance of quite large paraffin crystals with a site greater
than the critical sire of crystallisation centers.

with approach of the cooling te-persture to the congeeling point tcon the
nu-her and site of the crystals increase to such an extent that they fora
a spatial lattice structure through the entire veins of the petroleum
and i-obilisa the liquid phase of the petrolen. The petroleu acquires
the properties of paeudopleatic and then plastic fluids.

. Sone highly parafinnic petroleua (such as those fro. the Hangyahlakaltiye
deposits) also have the properties of thixotropic liquids.
, .

 

Pig. 8.1. Dependence of shearing stress ‘3 on shearing velocity dv/dr for
different liquids.

Thixotropy is a property of bodies as a result of vhich the ratio of the
shearing stress to the defamation rate (shear) telporarily decreases due
to the preceding deformations. In other words. thinotropy is the capacity
of a liquid. as tiae passes. to restore the earlier destroyed structure.

61
FOR orncw. use our
YOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Viscosity (Newtonian)

The noveeent of s flow of s reel fluid is elweys sccoepsnied by sn energy
loss. This occurs even during the movement of a fluid through pipelines
with completely snooth wells. ‘lhs reason for such losses is not so such
friction sgsinst the pipeline wsll es the internsl friction of the fluid

(viscosity).

It has been esteblished thst for the novessnt of s plate lying on a layer
of fluid it is necesssry to ispsrt to it a tangential force which is di-
rectly proportionsl to the arse of the plate 8. the velocity of its nove-
nent v. and is inversely proportionsl to the thickness of the fluid layer
at. This dependence is given sore precisely by the Newton equation. in which.
as mentioned sbove. pk is a proportionslity fsctor. known es the dynelic
viscosity coefficient.

During the pumping of viscous fluids the influence of viscosity on the hy-
draulic losses is sxtressly sinificant. and therefore in esch rssl case

it is necessary to detereine viscosity with the greetest possible sccurscy.

If in the lsborstory there is no possibility of deteruining the petroleus
Viscosity-tespersture curve. the viscosity st the teepersture of interest
can be cosputed using espiricsl for-ulss. ‘Ihs following forsulss hsve cone
into widespread use: Auricen Society of 'resting Heterisls (A811!)

lglg(v+o.s)-s+blgr;
Vogel-Fulcher-‘l‘s-sn fomls 0:

meg):
Reynolds forsuls .-. .- . ’.

""0“Pl-'(‘-'o)l.

where V is the coefficient of kins-stic viscosity at the tespereture t (in
‘C) or 1‘ (in R): 1/0 is the coefficient of kins-stic viscosity st the tee-
pereture t z e, b, b1, Va . 9 . u are detenined using the for-ulas cited
above if v scosity is known st three or two tewerstures; in the A3114 for-
male the disensionslity V is in centistoks.

Plsstic Viscosity
Plsstic (Binghsn) viscosity chsrscterises the plestic properties of s fluid.

Ususlly plestic viscosity is deter-lined from the curve of flow of e fluid
using the Binghsn equstion ‘_'
nu- ., .

[1m - pl(sstic)l 77

Grsphicslly plestic viscosity can be expressed by the rstio of the seglents
BC to Ac (see Pig. 8.1).

62
son ontcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Effective Viscosity

Effective viscosity is the ratio of shearing stress to shear velocity

[3 ' .‘fl p.-7:—-o
1'-

Por Newton fluids this is e constant value. equsl to the eo-celled Newton
viscosity, vhereas for non-Newton fluids it varies with a change in sheer
”locitys

Graphically the effective viscosity value can be represented as the ratio
of 3D to 30 (see Fig. 8.1).

Initial Shearing Stress

A nulber of rheological parameters of pereffinic petroleuns vary with tins.
Outvsrdly this is nenifested in the: under a nechanicel influence (shsking.
airing) the systen ecquires nobility and (inability. but during prolonged
rest under lov-tewereture conditions it solidifies and a paraffinic struc-
ture is for-ed whose strength increases with tine.

It is necessery to create a definite initial pressure for the shear of per-
sffinic petroleum. This pressure corresponds to the initial shearing stress
’31“, whose value is dependent on the strength of the psrsffinic structure
forning under the given conditions during the tine of presence at rest.

Figure 8.2 shove the chsractsristic curve of the dependence of the change
in ‘in on the tins of the presence of petroleu- at rest.

It nust be renumbered that the operation of a main pipeline involves inev-
itable stoppages. It is necessary to take into account the capscity of 11,,
to increese with tins. since during the tins of s standstill the ‘in value
can attain a value at which the pressure developed by the puping etation
ney prove to he inadequste for loving the petroleu in the open line and
then the petrolem pipeline vill be "from."

Due to the nultiplicity of different rectors exerting an influence on the
initial sheering stress of paraffinic petroleus. there are virtuslly no
fornulee tor couputing ﬁn. Therefore. in each specific case the ‘6“
value is deternined experinentally.

Liniting Mus-it Shearing Stress

One of the rheologicsl parameters characterising the plsstic properties of
paraffinic petroleum is the limiting dynanic shearing stress to.

For determining ‘60 it is necessary to plot the petroleu rheological curve;
the extension of the linear sepent of the rheological curve to the ‘taxis

cuts off on it a segnent chose velue characterires the liniting dynamic

63
ton omcm. use om!
POI! ORIGIN. USE ONLY

sheeting stress of the perticuler petroleu (see Fig. 8.1).

 

Pig. 2. Dependence of initiel shearing stress on tins of presence of petrol-
.“ .t rute

It should he noted thet the tempereture prehistory of the petrol". exerts

e greet influence on the rheologicel pereletere of both Newton end non-New-
ton petroleue. thet u. it is inortent to known to whet tenpereture influ-
ence the petroleu wee subjected prior to the deteninetion of eny pertic-
uler rheologicel pereneter.

08.2. Methods for helping Highly Viscous end nigh Oongeeling Point Petroleum
Puping Pereffinic Petroleum with Bydrocerhon Diluente

The introduction of e hydrocerhon diluent into pereffinic petroleu in eoee
ceeee ukee it possible to echieve e coneiderehle inprovenent in its rheo-
logicel properties.

Experience in the joint pulping of petroleue. petroleu- liquefied geees end
gee condensete hes been geined in e umber of foreign countries.

The puping of Iixturee of verioue petroleum with liquefied geees, gee hen-
cine end dietilletes is eccoeplished in the United Stetee through e.pipelinc
with e dinner of 300 I end s length of 1.080 In which connects e field

in Oklehone with Best micego. Indiene.

A highly viscOus nucleus with en eepheltic heee is pmed through e petrol-
eun pipeline between uoydninister end herdiety in Genede (v50 - 2.9 stoke).
with e tapereture decreeee its viscosity increesee eherply. Lloydninister
petroleul is puped one-querter diluted by condeneete; in winter the nix-
ture is heeted. Despite the feet thet e specie]. pipeline of the sene length

ne the min line wee constructed for feeding the condeneete to the deposit.
this treneport nethod wee econonicelly note edventegeoue then other puping
“tme

ﬂwmr. es e rule, the feeding of e light hydrocerhou diluent (benzene.
kerosene, diesel fuel) to e petroleu producing eree end the necessity for
constructing edditionel open-line structures et the petroleum pipeline ter-
einel involves greet expenditures end ukee it very expensive to enploy this

6':
FOR OFFICIAL us: 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

method for improving the rheological properties of psreffinic petroleu-s.
Accordingly, the pumping of parsffinic petroleum with light diluents is
frequently more expensive then other transport methods.

As the diluents it is best to use petroleume with a low viscosity. If the
field produces psreffinic and low-viscosity petroleums, it is feasible to
mix them in structures at the head of the petroleum pipeline and transport
them together.

The mixing of highly pereffinic and low-viscosity petroleum makes it pos-
sible not only to lower the cost of puwing. but also to melee more effect-
ive use of the produced petroleums. By mixing different petroleums in dif-
ferent ratios it is possible to obtain petroleum mixtures of a predeter-
mined cospoeition; this mslues it possible to stabilize operation of the
petroleum pipeline end the installations et petroleum refineries. In addi-
tion. the mixing of petroleums sometimes makes possible a considerable im-
provement in their quality. For exawle, the mixing of highly paraffinic.
but low-sulfur petroleumue with low-paraffin but high-sulfur petroleums
makes it possible to obtain a petroleum mixture with a moderate paraffin
and sulfur content. An example of this is the highly pareffinic petrol-
eu- which is pumped in a bested state fro. the Hangyshlek peninsula to

the Kuybyshsv area, where some of it is refined and some of it is mixed
with low-viscosity sulfur petroleum from the Volga region end fed into the
"Druzhba" petroleum pipeline system.

The mechanism of the effect of a hydrocarbon diluent cen be expleined in
the following way. First, with the addition of a diluent to e parsffinic
petroleum there is a decrease in the paraffin concentration in the mix-
ture. end also a decrease in the saturation temperature of the solution
end the appearance of paraffin crystals. Accordingly. the congealing point
of the system is reduced. Second. when using as diluente law-viscosity pet-
roleums containing asphalt-tar substances, the latter, being depressants.
impede the formation of a paraffinic structure lattice in the petroleum
end thereby reduce the congealing point and the effective viscosity of the
mixture. It must be remembered that the solubility of the pareffins to a
high degree is dependent on the properties of the diluent. As a rule, the
lesser the density and viscosity of the diluent, the more effective is its

action. In addition, the lower the teqersture of the mixture, the greater
is the improvement in the rheological properties of the psreffinic petrol-
eum with addition of a diluent.

The rheologicsl properties of the petroleum mixture are also influenced by
the method of mixing of the petroleums. In order to obtain a homogeneous
mixture the mixing of the petroleums must occur at a temperature 3-5' high-
er thsn the congealing point of the viscous cowonent. Under unfavorable
mixing conditions the effectiveness of the diluent is reduced to a consid-
erable degree and there can even be a separation of the petroleum.

65
ran onrcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pumping of Highly Congealing Paraffinic Petroleums With Additives for
Stimulating Plow

In the pumping of petroleums and their refined products through pipelines
at the present time use is made of petroleum-soluble chemical additives
having different purposes. For the purpose of reducing head losses in fric-
tion during a turbulent flow regiae of low-viscosity petroleums they are
supplemented by some quantity of polymer having long and strong molecules.
Such polymer additives retard the development of eddies in the flow when
there are great discharges. As a result, the throughput capacity of the
pipeline is increased. In a laminar regime these polymer additives do not
lessen the losses in friction.

The use of additives capable of improving the pumpability of highly congeal-
ing paraffinic petroleums in the field of low temperatures is of great in-
terest.

in the Soviet Union and abroad research is being carried on in selecting
additives which, interacting with petroleum paraffins. could improve its
rheological characteristics (static and limiting dynamic shearing stress,
plastic, that is. ningham viscosity). the use of such additives for stimul-
ating flow is a further development of the principle of use of additives
which long ago were employed for reducing the congealing points of oils.

Investigations indicate the pour-point depressants for oils do not exert an
influence on the low-temperature properties of paraffinic patroleums; this
is attributable to the extremely complex physicochemdcal composition of the
latter. .

At the present time there are already effective flow stimulators whose addi-
tion to highly congealing paraffinic petroleums imparts to their flow a
Newtonian character at relatively lov temperatures.

As the basis for stimulators controlling the process of crystallization of
paraffins in the petroleum flow it is possible to employ such high-molecular
compounds as polymathacrylates. polyisobutylene. ethylene polymers. poly-
propylenea, etc.

Ash-free ethylene-propylene polymer additives are now being produced abroad.
Examples are additives designated Paramins-ZO. -25. ~70 for medium distil-

late fuels. and also additives of the BCA type for heavy fuels and petrol-
come.

with respect to external form, these additives constitute a paraffin-like
mass acquiring mobility only at 50-60'6.

The effectiveness of use of these additives is dependent on the physicochem-
ical properties of the paraffinit petroleums or their mixtures vith low-vis—
cosity petroleume. and especially on their content of paraffins and natural
surface-active substances - tars and asphaltenes.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

The necessary concentration of flow stinulator in the patrolman is depend-
ent on the purpose and the specific conditions of its use. For example.
for successful pulping of petroleum along a main pipeline it is sufficient
to introduce an additive in a quantity 0.1-0.22. In the case of transport
of a mixture of high-congealing pstrolem with low-viscosity petrolauas
this concentration can be reduced.

In the storage of petroleun containing paraffin a concentration of additive
up to 0.03! to a considerable degree lessens paraffin deposition on equip-
ment and can eliminate expensive manual cleaning of the tanks in petroleum
tanks (tank fame). tankers, etc. At the present tine there is no uniform
opinion concerning the mechanism of the effect of both depressor additives
to oils and flow stimulators.

It has been established that flow stimulators do not decrease the quantity
of paraffin precipitated from the petroleum and do not change the tenets-
ture of onset of its ease crystallisation.

\4...

5g.

       

l OI G: a: M 0.5 M
B “(mun-l mnwsm.%

Fig. 8.3. Graph of dependence of
theological parameters on concentra-
tion of additive at constant tsqsra-

Fig. 8.6. Graph of dependence 1.-
‘c(dw/dr) with constant rate of de-
formation 6- const: 1) for initial
petroleum containing paraffin at

ture.
congealing temperature; 2) for pet-
m: roleum processed with flow stimul-
A. Rheological parameters star at this same tesperature.

s. Stimulator concentration

The first fractions of the additive are the most effective (Fig. 8.3). In
this respect the action of flow stimulators is similar to the action of
depressants for oils.

The possible mechanism of the action of additives for high-paraffin oils

can be judged from the change in the deformation-strength properties

of the structure of paraffin in dependence on the conditions of its forma-
tion (in the presence of additives or without them). A study of the kinetics
of development of shearing stresses with a constant rate of defamation in

67
ran orncw. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

disperse systems makes possible a deep investigation of the mechanism of
appearance and nature of the structure. Any physicochemical processing

of the system acting on the conditions of appearance of particles and also
the number of contacts between them is manifested in a change in the course

of the deformation process.

figure 8.6 shows a diagram characterizing the development of flow in a high-
congcsling petroleum first heated to SO’C. that is. to the initial temper-
ature in the case of "hot" pumping. The process of destruction of the par-
affin structure includes not only the destruction of the crystal lattice
proper. but also the setting free of the liquid medium immobilised within
the structural lattice, a change in orientation of anisodismetric par-
ticlcs and other mechanisms for reducing resistance to deformation. The
descending branch of curve 1 reflects completion of the complex process

of change in the structure and transition to a steady-state flow regime.

0n the basis of the nature of destruction of the structure of paraffin.
high-congealing petroleume can be classified as elasticoplastic bodies.

This is attributable to the fact that with cooling of the petroleum the par-
affin crystals which separate out. joining with one another. form a struc-
ture lattice - a gel. An increase in the mechanical strength and a de-
crease in plasticity of petroleume containing paraffin with a decrease

in temperature is associated with the quantity of the solid phase crystal-
lizing out and the presence of polydisperse crystals of paraffins expend-
ed on the strengthening of the phase contacts.

Asphalt-tar substances are of great import.nce in forming the paraffin
gel; they can envelope the precipitating paraffin crystals, not allowing
them to create a more solid crystalline lattice. In the presence of flow
stimulators in a quantity of about 0.22 there is a radical change in the
picture of development of the flow in petroleum containing paraffin. Here
a plastic flow arises with stresses considerably less than in the initial
petroleum.

A decrease in strength and an increase in plasticity, as capabilities of
bodies for flow, that is. leading to extremely great residual deformationo
without apparent rupture under the influence of stresses exceeding the
yield stress. must be attributed to the formation of complexes of the
stimulator-paraffin molecule, creating a spatial obstacle to the formation
of crystalline gel contacts and decreasing their ordering.

Considering the mechanisa which is involved in the action of additives,
they must be introduced into the petroleum at temperatures at which its
pareffins are dissolved and it constitutes a true solution. The methods
for introducing flow stimulators can be different. The principal condition
is ensuring a high degree of mixing of the stimulator and the petroleum.
This can be achieved by introducing the additive into the flow of heated
petroleum in the pipeline through a nozzle. In order to ensure normal
pulping of petroleum containing paraffin in the case of an isothermic

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regime in a pipeline of considerable length it is sufficient to introduce
the additive only once. for example. at the head structures of a pipeline.

The experience in the use of additives improving the flow of petroleume
with paraffin under industrial conditions during the pumping of African
petroleue through the European pipelines Rotterdam - Rhine (D - 600-900
1-. I. - 236 km). Ile de France (0 - 500 me. I. - 150 km). Pinnart-Grange-
mouth (Great britsin). and also use of the additive ace-A242 during the
starting-up of the pipeline Hangyshlak-Kuybyshev shows that using them

it is possible to facilitate the startup of a pipeline end the pumping of
petroleum in an isothermic regime at temperatures lover than its solidif-
ication point, and also reduce or completely exclude the deposition of
paraffin in pipelines. tanks. etc.

Thus. this method for improving the rheological properties of petrol name
with paraffin makes it possible to increase the throughput capacity of e
pipeline and solve a number of specific problems in the transportation
of such petroleues without additional capital investments on broadening
the main equipment or on strengthening thermal insulation.

Additives of the type of flov stimulators can considerably simplify the
operation of ”hot" pipelines, especially in nonetstionary operating re-
gimes. Such regimes must include their starting-up after construction
when the ground around the pipeline is not heated, reaching the planned
throughput capacity under conditions of an increase in petroleum produc-
tion in the fields. repeated startups after stoppages of quing. etc.

Pumping of Thermally Processed Petroleum

With the heating of petroleum to a definite temperature with subsequent
cooling the rheological parameters of the petroleum experience consider-
able changes. In some cases the values 130, ‘61“ and it; increase; in
other cases they decrease. The thermal processing of petroleum for chang-
ing its rheological parameters is called the thermal processing of petrol-

eum. [P‘e " I’eufectiveﬂ

Thermal processing is one of the methods for improving the rheological
properties of the petroleum for the purpose of increasing the effective-
ness of pipeline transport of petroleum containing paraffin and petroleum
products. 1hermsl processing makes it possible to obtain petroleum with a
weak paraffin structure not capable of holding the entire volume of petrol-
eum in its lattice elements.

The thermal processing process consists of the heating of petroleum to
some temperature vith subsequent cooling to its pumping temperature. With
the heating of petroleum containing paraffin there is a total or partial
dissolving of the paraffina present in the petroleum. Hith the cooling of
the petroler- the paraffin is precipitated from solution in the form of
crystals. the number and form of which are dependent on the temperature
of the preliminary heating and on the cooling conditions.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our country the problems involved in the thermal processing of petrol-
eums with paraffin and petroleum products were already investigated in

the 1930's. for example. we know of the studies of Zelinskiy and Sakhanov.
in which the authors obtained positive results with the thermal processing
of mazuts. The thermal processing of petroleu in the Romashkinakoye depos-
it made it possible to reduce the viscosity of petroleum: by a factor of
more then 2 and decrease the solidification point of petroleum to 20°C.
Investigations made it possible to detect a number of regularities asso-
ciated with the thermal processing of petroleums containing paraffin:

l) the thermal processing of highly congealing paraffinic petroleums with
a heating temperature 60-50°C (somewhat below the melting point of paraf-
fina) greatly worsens the rheological properties of the petroleum;

2) for paraffinic petroleums there is a definite heating temperature at
which the thermal processing effect is maximum. This temperature is always
higher than the melting point of paraffins present in the petroleum;

3) the greater is the ratio of the content of paraffins to the content of
asphalt-tar substances. the lesser is the thermal processing effect;

4) the conditions of petroleum cooling exert n greet influence on the
properties of thermally processed petroleums.

Accordingly, by changing the conditions for cooling of the petroleum and
the temperature of the preliminary heating, it is possible to exert a sig-
nificant influence on the strength of the paraffin lattice in the petrol-
cum, that is. it is possible to select such a thermal processing regime in
which its effect will be maximum.

The dependence of the rheological parameters of thermally processed high-
paraffin petroleums on the rate of their cooling after heating is attrib-
utable to the conditions for crystallisation of the paraffin present in
the petroleum.

The process of crystallisation (size, number and shape of the paraffin crys-
tals in the petroleum) is influenced by the ratio of two rates: rate of ap-
pearance of centers of crystallization of paraffin and rate of increase

of already precipitated crystals. If the rate of appearance of centers of
crystallization is greater than the rate of crystal growth, a system is
obtained with a great number of small crystals; otherwise. in the system
there is formation of large unconsolidated crystals and the strength of
such a structure is considerably less than that of a fine-crystal structure.
For example, with a rate of cooling of thermally processed Hangyshlak pet-
roleum equal to lO'c/hour, a favorable ratio of the rate of appearance

of the centers of crystallization and the rate of increase of the forming
paraffin crystals is created. Host of the paraffin goes to the formation

of a small number of large crystals forming unconsolidated clusters.

It was noted earlier that the temperature of preliminary heating of the pet-
roleum exerts a great influence on the crystallization of paraffin during
the thermal processing of petroleums.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 8.5 shove the dependence of petroleus viscosity on the temraturs
of thanal processing. Figure 8.5 shove that with an increase in the tes-
psratura of pstrolsu heating its viscosity at first increases. and then
decreases. beconing ainiaua vith a definite taspsraturs of that-Isl process-
ing. with a further increase in he_a_ting tameraturs the viscosity of the
petroleu again increases.

 

Fig. 8.5. Dependence of petrolet- .iscosity on theraal processing para-
meters: 1. 2. 3 and 6 - heating temperature of 60, 80. 100 and 90'c re-
spectively.

m:
A. Viscosity. on
3. Cooling rate, 'CIhour

These peculiarities of the influence of the temperature of that-a1 process-
ing on rheological paranaters can be explained in the following way. At the
surface of the paraffin crystals there is adsorption of asphalt-tar sub-
stances present in the petroleua. With the heating of the petroleu to a
lov tsqerature sons of the paraffin crystals are dissolved and the as-
phalt-tar substances released are adsorbed at the surface of the undis-
aolved paraffin crystals. Subsequent cooling leads to the formation fro-
the precipitating paraffin of a solid fine-crystal structure increasing
the effective viscosity and solidification point of the pstrolsun. With an
increase in the heating telperature there is an increase in the quantity
of paraffin dissolved in the liquid phase of the petroleum. and in addi-
tion. the retaining crystals of paraffin with a high nelting point adsorb
an increasingly lesser quantity of asphalt-tar substances. hiring the
cooling of the pstroleua. due to the adequate quantity of the madsorbed
asphalt-tar substances. being surface-active substances, which favor den-
dritic crystallisation. there is for-ation of a saall nu-ber of large crys-
tals of paraffin.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With heating to ouch a temperature when all the paraffin is dissolved. the
most favorable conditions are created for the dendritic crystallisation
of paraffin with formation of the least solid structure.

with a still greater temperature of the thermal processing of the petroleum.
the asphalt-tar substances present in it. which mart a favorable inﬂuence
on the formation of a coarse-grained structure. are irreversibly destroyed.
thereby reducing the thermal processing effect.

The rheological parameters of the petroleum too], (solidification or con-
geuling point). (om. i». and $0. improving as a result of thermal process-
ing. with time assume-their initial values. The time required for restora-
tion of the rheological parameters of the petroleu must be taken into ac-
count in the operation of pipelines puqing thermally processed petroleum.

Thus, if the thermal processing of high-paraffin petroleu gives good re-
sults and thermally processed petroleum has a long time of restoration of
rheological properties. such a petroleum after thermal processing can be
pmped as an ordinary low-viscosity fluid.

llydraulic Transport of High-Paraffin and High-Viscosity Petroleums and
Petroleum Products

A substantial improvement in the pumpability of viscous or high-congealing
petroleum can be achieved by adding water to the petroleum flow.

with the joint owing of water and petroleus the flow can be imparted dif-
ferent structures. such as coaxial. emulsion, separate. etc.

A coaxial structure is obtained when the water forme around the petroleum.
along the inner surface of the pipe, in a concentric ring. In order for

the petroleus not to float in the water and not stick to the upper surface
of the pipe, a groove is made in the pipe which imparts a rotational motion
to the flow. “the water. being the heavier fluid, is propelled toward the
pipe wall.

In an experimental pipeline with a diameter of 200 am and a length of 100
km the throughput capacity was increased by a factor of 12.

In the case of hydraulic transport the flow increases with lesser expendi-
tures of energy in comparison with the pumping of high-viscosity petroleum
alone. 'ihe separation of the water and petroleum is accomplished at the
final point in the pipeline by one of the well-known methods (standing,
thermal method, etc.).

Ilydrsulic transport of highly viscous petroleums through pipelines with
on internal groove has not come into wide use for the following reasons:

1) with the stoppage of pumping there will be a stratification of the water
and petroleum. The latter sticks to the upper generatrix of the pipe and

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pecks the spirel, es s result of which there is e nerked decreese in the
effectiveness of hydreulic trensport;

2) this eethod cen only be used when pming petroleu through e pipeline
vithout internediete pulping stetions. since with the entry of ester end
petroleu into the pup e eteble eeulsion is foreed which beyond the pum-
ing stetion no longer eeperetee end imedss the fornetion of the ester ring
elong the pipe wells; -

3) the comlexity in producing the spireling on the inner surfece of the
pipe.

with the fornetion of the pentroleue in veter (p/e) esuleion there is e

coneidereble decreese in systen viscosity. Such e systee consists of pet-
roleue particles eurromded by e fill of veter end there is virtuelly no
contect between the petroleu end the pipe surfecs. As e result. e veter

ring is foreed elong the entire internel surfece of the pipe end the pet-
roleu slides elong it.

with the trensport of veter-petroleun snulsions through pipelines with
sons pueping reres. tenpereturee end ester concentretions in petroleu-
there is fornetion of en eluleion of voter in petrolem (VIP). me viscos-
ity of such emulsions csn be greetsr then the viscosity of pure petroleue.

In order to improve the conditions for fornetion end incresse in the sub-
ility of enuleions of the type p/v different surfece-ective eubetences
(SAS) ere edded to the voter-petroleun nixture.

A eurfece-ective eubetence. dissolved in veter, hydrolyzes the pipeline
wells. considerebly decresees the forces of ettecheent of the petroleun
to the wells and crestes conditions for the forestion of s disperse sys-
tem of the p/w type. All this leeds to e nerksd decresse in hydreulic re-
sistence during puping.

The technology of joint puwing of petroleu with e weter solution of SAS is
directed to the creetion of e eteble syste- of the pin type in the pipeline
end the prevention of e phese inversion. thet is, e trensition of the sys-
tem from direct to reverse (w/p).

The stebility of e system of the p/v eyeten is influenced to s consider-
able degree by the fore end concentretion of the SAS. teqereture. inten-
sity of eixing end relstionehip of pheeee.

The SAS used in prepsring ester-petrol“. eeulsions suet correspond to the
following principel requirements: eeIulsify well (thet is, creete en enve-
lope on the surfece of the petrolsue globules, nechenicslly sufficiently
strong end cepeble of being essily restored then it breeks). not be non-
toxic end not csuse corrosion of the pipeline end tenks.

One of the SAS best corresponding to the sbove-nentioned require-eats is
NP-l sulfenol.

73
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An increase in the concentration of water in the mixture improves the stab-
ility of the emulsion but reduces the economic indices for this particular
type of hydraulic transport. It has been established by experimental in-
vestigation that the minimum water content should be about 301 of the to-
tal volue of the mixture to he transported.

Pumping of heated Patrolsums and Petroleum Products

The pumping of highly viscous and high-congealing petroleuma and petroleum

products with heating is the most ommmndy employed method for the pipeline
transport of these products. The pipelines through which heated petroleums

are pumped are called "hot” pipelines.

The petroleum can be heated at stations or along the entire pipeline route.

In the first. most commonly used variant of ”hot" pipelines there are three
types of stations installed on the pipeline: pumping-heating stations (Pas),
at which the product is both heated and pumped, heating stations (BS) at
which only heating takes place, and pumping stations (P8) at which only

the pumping of the product occurs. The heating of the product occurs both
in tanks (at the head station). equipped with spiral or sectional steam
heaters, and in heaters (at all stations), which can he steam operated or
fired (furnaces).

In the second variant a heating satellite pipeline is laid alongside the
pipeline through which the heat carrier (hot water or steam) is pumped.
This same variant is possible using electric power.

A reduction in thermal losses in ”hot” pipelines can he achieved by cover-
ing the pipes with heat insulation.

iii

7:.
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

”.3. Initial Data for Thernal Conputetion of "not" Petroleu- Pipelines

"hen carrying out therlal cowutations of a petroleum pipeline it is neces-
sary to have the folloving initial data: physical and thsrnophyaical prop-
erties of the petroleum. themal insulation, the ground (density. rheolog-
ical characteristics. specific heat capacity. thernsl conductivity, thereel
diffusivity, noiature content). clinatic data (lean nonthly teqeratures
of the air and gromd at the depth at which the pipeline is laid in a nat-
ural therlal state. level of solar radiation, depth of snow cover).

Data on teqarature of the air and ground. snow cover depth and the level
of solar radiation are taken free the climatic handbooks for the region
through which the pipeline is to be laid.

The physical and theraophysical characteristics of the petroleua. thereal
insulation. ground and others are deternined erperinentally or can be con-
puted using the corresponding empirical fornulas.

Specific heat capacity of petrolsul [in kJ/kg-‘Ql is determined using the
Crego fornula

r. -'7"? (i.681+3.80- 104 I).

where FF is the relative density of petroleun relative to water at t -
ls'c.

The specific heat capacity of petroleu-s and petroleun products falls in
the range fron 1.6 to 2.5 Int/(kw 'C) and for approximate cowutationa it
can he assumed equal to 2.1 kJ/(kr'c). The specific heat capacity of hy-
drocarbon steels and paraffin deposits is equal to 0.5 and 2.9 U/(hg-‘CJ.

The thernel conductivity coefficient for petroleum 2, depending on the
temereture in the range of change in pulping paraneters, varies in the
range froa 0.1 to 0.16 U/(no'c).

For refined computations use is eade of the Grego-Snith fornula
“tenement.

The neen values of the thernal conductivity coefficients for steel and per-

effin are 56-50 and 2.5 H/(nv'c) respectively.

The then-l diffusivity coefficient is related to the thermal conductivity
coefficient by the expression .1 -

.-w.
The total coefficient of heat transfer It fron petroleum to the surrounding
medium is dependent on the regine of novenent of the fluid and its thereo-
physical properties. thornal resistance to heat transfer into the aurromd-
ing nediua through the anticorrosion heat insulation, pipe wall, paraffin
deposits and others:

75
ton onmm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N
1 i I D‘ 1
T. nT.‘ “1-ng Is ”In +Te. N s (a 1)

where 001 is the internal heat transfer coefficient (frou the petroleum to
the internal surface of the deposits or pipe): 13 is the thernal conductiw
ity coefficient of the j-th cylindrical layer (deposits. pipe natal, insul-
ation. etc.): Do and D“ are the internal and external diameters of the pipe-
line respectively; D is the external diameter of the j-th cylindrical lay-
er; at: is the coefficient of heat transfer from ths outer surface of the
pipeline into the surrounding nediun.

For pipelines with a great die-star (Du > 500 In) the k value can be deter-
nined approximately using the foreula

N
l _ i 6: I
~ 7. +§Ir+—a.'
where 81 is the thickness of the j-th cylindrical layer.

(8. la)

The coefficient of heat transfer from the outer surface of an underground
pipeline into the surrounding nediue characterizes the thernal resistance
of the ground and heat trmsfer fro. its surface into the atnosphere

Bl
[rp - ground] “'bﬁﬁdﬁﬁ’

where ~
Big-wit"; "Veg-(0.50”;

u-hlwnwrvmnlz

1 is the coefficient of therlel conductivity of the ground; 0‘3 is the
coﬁficient of heat transfer fro. the ground surface into the stuosphere;
ho is the depth of laying of the pipeline to its axis.

Under conditions of a high intensity of heat transfer from the ground sur-
face (high Biz values). and also with a considerable depth of pipeline
placement. when (ho/03)) 2. the at; coefficient can be computed using the
P. Forchheiner formula . _

£1

“-0”. s
The coefficient of heat transfer from the petroleum to the pipe wall it

the ratio of the heat flux in the particular pipe section to the differ-

ence betveen the mean tenperature of the petrolem and the tewerature
of the internal pipe wall.

For deterlining the coefficient of heat transfer from the loving petroleu-
(petroleun product) use is made of the H. A. Hikheyev criterisl equations:

76
FOR ovncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the case of a leniner tesine (Ref<2000)

ﬂn _ 0.11Re’-”Pr}-“Or’-‘ (%)°‘”;

in the case of a turbulent regine yuan?) ‘_

m-o.ozmo;-'n;-"(-§;'£-):‘. .

In the region 20000.,(10‘ the heat transfer coefficient is found by in-
terpoletion.

In the cited females the per-etera with the euhecript f ere deter-lined
with the mean intesrel tewereture of petroleu, vhereee the parameters
with the I subscript ere determined with the nean integral tewerature of
the internal well of the pipe. ‘fhe neen integral teqeretore of the inter-
nal well of the pipe is releted to the lean integral tenpernture of the
petroleul by the expression

4
(f—ku)?

——-r—_-'_—""
-:T+z%ln1%+;3§;

The Reynolds (Re). Prendtl (Pr). Grashof (Gr) and Nueeelt (Nu) paraneters
are equal. respectively. to:

Iii-'4‘: Fulﬁl»:

lcp - sun}
ftp-"Gs!"

n: (u. 1-!» .)

[B - pet(roleu)l 0! - 3h;

Mata;

where V is the coefficient of kins-etic viscosity of petroleu: v is the
neen velocity of petroleu flow in the section; 3 is the acceleration of
free felling: .5 ”t is the coefficient of value expansion of petroleu.

The coefficient of host transfer from the petroleul to the pipe well in
a nonoperating pipeline (ul‘WP) is determined using the elpirical for-Lie

Nun” - c(Gr Pr )3. in vhich the coefficients c and n ere taken fro- the
date in Table 85.
Tehle 8.1

Values of Coefficients c and n

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The coefficient of heat transfer from the ground surface is determined as
the ratio of the heat flux directed into the atnosphere to the difference
in the nsen temperature of the ground and air. The value of the heat trans-
fer coefficient includes values of the coefficients of convective (d3 con)
and radiation heat exchange (a, red): “I! . 0‘3 con + at 3 red°

The convective cosponsnt “3 con [in H/ (.2. -'c)] is determined using the
fornula

an’con ' 631M018V.
where v is wind velocity. Ilsec.

1he value of the coefficient in con falls in the range fro. 10 to 18 H/ (n2°

:c) and for approxinate computations is seemed to be equal to ll H/(mz-
c).

The value of the coefficient 0‘3".“ is determined using the formula

11' n g s c 3 +213 t +273 3.2
‘ °“' ' “v-Tril—nK—mr— " ' ) -.(' TH ( ’
where t is the temperature of the ground surface, 'c; 91 is the de-

8:? gigglaclness of the surface; c. is the Planck constant [c. I 5.68 HI
( K )1.

The radiation component “3 .rad is2 70-80: less than “3.60“ and on the ever-
ege its value ie equal to 2. 0 "I (II2 "6).

The coefficient of heat transfer from the pipe wall into the atnoephere
when the pipeline is above the ground is related to the teqerature dif-
ference between the outer surface of the pipes and the air. Its value is
deternined by the sum 0‘3 con + 013. "a.

The convective comonsnt d when 39103 is found using the criteriel
B

formula ’60“ .
Pr. m
".3... camper" (177,; ' ' (a. 3)

(B, K - B. can] vhere the subscripts B and N seen that the corresponding
dinensionless paranetere ere couputed with the tenperature of the outer
air and the external surface of the pipeline. The letter is related to
air tenperature by the expression

    

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hith an error not greater than 31 in the range of temperature change -loO<

t<40'c it can he seemed that: ..
I". .s..
The) ~ I. P:.~o.7z.

sisplifying in the corresponding any the for. of the dependence (8.3)

No 0.22m}!
[3.x - Leon] MI '3"

The coefficient “Leon csn also be detenined using table 8.2.
Table 8.2

The Vslues “Leon [wail-'0] for Pipelines With Forced Hove-eat of the
Surrounding Air

"IP’IIII usurp 793%“ I

 

KEY:
1. Hind velocity. Ilsec
2. External dis-eter of pipeline, I

In the csse of s totel calls (VB-9 0) were, as elsewhere. 3 . sir] end for
pipelines protected against exposure to the wind, the coefficient of heat
transfer by convection is determined using the free convection formula

m..." (GI.Pr.)‘- (8.3.)

For the conditions of main pipelines the couple: Gram-3 > 105.

In this case the conetsnt coefficients I end I: are equsl to n - 0.53 and k
- 0.25.

Expanding the parenetere "umcon’ Cr; and PrB. Bhgscoefficient “Leon
is represented in the furl «Leon - s(t“ - t3) ° ,

g._ ‘ u C (‘N - ‘0’"),
where

Mun-l.
0-0.53 (W e

79
son orncm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

Table 8.3
Valuee of a Coefficient
D“. I .. w/(-2.oc)l.25
0.05 2.25 .
0.1 2.09
0.2 2.01
Table 8.6

Phyaical Properties of Hater on Saturation Ourve

 

1. Its/:3
2. U/kz
3e "£01130
a [hour
5. “all2
6. nzleec

7. Pr;

The coefficient a for approximate coqutatione in a broad range of temper-
ature change (-60<t<40) can he considered con-rant and be taken from the
date in Table 8.3.

The coefficient of heat tranafer by radiation ie determined uains formula
(8. 2), in which it ia aaetned that turf gr - tn . The value 0‘3 rad in the
case of forced convection is 3-14 timee leea than 0‘; con and in thie case

it can he aeeumed approximately that ”33°43 con- however, in the case of
free convection, which is poaeible during winter in the northern regione.
the valuee 0‘; con and 0‘3 rad are co-parable and in the «animation
of 0&3 it ie neceeeary to take into account the influence of radiation. It
is adlaieaible to aeeume that an, m, fella in the range 2-5 mm.2 'c).

The coefficient of heat tranefer of underwater pipelinee ia the ratio of
the heat loeaee of the pipeline averaged along the perimeter and the dif-
ference in the teeperature of the pipe wall and the temperature of the

aurrounding water. lte value ia found uains formulae (8.3) and (8.3a), in

which the corresponding thermophyaical cheracterietice are taken for water
uaing date from Table 8.10.

80
FOR onrcm. use om!
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

Table 8.5

Soee Determined Veluee of manual Conductivity (befiiciante of Ground in
‘lhaved and Frozen Staten

    
 

"cotton-eon“ o noon
"Wm. 31/0345.

     
 

:1 Quad mums-a ). "I”
9 m a u: _
7"?“ w.
°m m
D
n OJﬂB—OJGB
if cmfwm.mm. ze- ind—23
12 $1! tau-m
u ' -
t; m... o...
121' autumn-I: mam-0.0m
KEY:
1. Ground

2. Hoiature content. 1 of mean of dry matter

3. Ground theml conductivity coefficient. "Ha-'6)
5. moved

5. Frozen

6. Ooarea eand (1-2 In)

7. Denaa

8. Uncmolidated

9. Fine and Indiu- eend (0.25-1 -)

10. Dry eend of different granularity

11. Sandy loan. clayey loan. pulverized aoil, thawed ground
12. Clay

13. Hater

16.-lce

15. Uncoapected anon

16. (impacted snow

17. Preaaed peat, water saturated

18. anreoeed peat

lt io rather difficult to ascertain the theraophyaical characteriotica of
the grand because their values vary both in the depth of the ground me
and along the length of the pipeline trajectory. In addition. the

81
you orncut us: ONLY
ins natarial

. Its/I3

conductivity coefficient, U/(n-‘
lyurethane
lyatyrene
iber
88
can polyatyrene (0081' 15588-70)
foa- polyurethane (1'0 V-56-70)
(can polyurethane (m ““188 67-4
foa- polyurethane (m V-llo3-69)
n foan polyurethane
thenofomldehyde (on plastic (V'
‘ ie taperature in 'c
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

theraophysical characteristics of the ground vary in the course of the

year as a result of the seasonal nigration of moisture in the ground. caus-
ed by spring high waters. rains and tsnperature variation. In addition, the
properties of the upper soil layers can even vary during the course of 26
hours as a result of condensation of noisture in the ground pores during
the nighttine hours and its evaporation with an increase in temperature
during the daytile. In addition to these factors, the thermophysital prop-
erties of the ground are influenced considerably by the thernal effect of
the pipeline itself. This is associated with the migration of moisture in
the region of the thermal influence of the pipe. arising due to the tenper-
ature gradient between the wall of the pipeline and the near-lying ground
layers. the thermophysical characteristics of the ground - the thernal
conductivity coefficient (ﬁgr). the coefficient of theml diffusivity
(881-) and the specific heat capacity (car) are determined as a result of
special investigations. The leasursnsnts are made directly under field
conditions or in the laboratory. In the latter case the ground sauplea are
taken in special tight boxes retaining their natural noieture content and
are transported to the laboratory. The number of points for neasuring the
thermophysical characteristics of the ground along the pipeline route and
the frequency with which the neasurenents are made are deternined by the
requirements on the accuracy in finding A“. a r and c r and are dependent
on the degree of inhomogeneity of ground propergies with depth and strike
of the ground mass.

The 7hr. a f and c" values. determined under laboratory conditions, nust
be correcte taking into accomt possible iwairmcnts in structure and
changes in the temperature and moisture content of the sanples arising in
the process of their sampling, storage. transport and neaaurenents. For
this purpose use is made of mirical dependences of the therlophysical
characteristics of the ground on the mentioned factors. The data from
field measurements correspond to the natural conditions of gromd bedding
and therefore their correction is not necessary.

0n the basis of the results obtained in the course of field investigations
a sr-ary is prepared of the therlophysical characteristics of the gromd
along the entire route of the pipeline, which serves as a basis for corput-
ing their lean values for the entire route or individual Iajor seglents.

Considerable expenditures of tins and money are required for special field
investigations for determining the thermophysical properties of the ground;
therefore they are determined in the planning of a liaited number of petrol-
eun pipelines. In those cases when the plan takes no provision for deter.
mining the thermophysical properties of the ground, and also for approx-
imate coeputations in the stage of technical-economic planning. their val-
ues, depending on ground types, are taken from the data in Table 8.5 or
are conputed using the formulas derived by I. Ye. Khodanovich and B. N.
Krivoshein:

thawed sand 1. A" - —o.3to+ 0.055- + 1.024», -0.055l.,-0.0m0';

83
ton orncm. use ouu
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

f roren send
In in - -m+o.om -o.om.,+o.ow,, —o.oom.-;

.--

from clayey loa- 1.5--..u2+o.otoo—o.oaup.,+lo.oosn..; '

eh, m..- 4.05m.»—o.m..+o.ou.,-o.mm-o.oomui.,—
-o.onp:,+o.ooup.,c,,—o.ooou:,. -

[t' p - gr(ound)] where 13, is the coefficient of thernal conductivity of
the ground. H/(no'c); pa, 1. ground density. tons/a3; w is ground mis-
ture content; ‘8? is gromd teaperature. 'c.

In order to take into account the thermal influence of a pipeline on the
change in the coefficient of thernal conductivity of the ground. instead
of its value. deternined for the conditions of natural bedding of the
ground, in the thernel coqutatione use is nade of the comuted value. cel-
culeted using the formula

‘ (8.4.)

‘N I
10. D's—:3".- 5%(‘o)“n-S’M(‘re)“n]'

[l’ p - gr(ound)] where to in the ground temperature at the depth of laying
of the pipeline in a natural thernal etete: t“ to the tenperature of the
outer surface of the pipe. With a linear dependence of the thernel conduct-
ivity coefficient on temerature its conputed value is equal to the half—
aua of the A r values. deternined for conditione of natural bedding of
the ground ens near the pipe:

[r v - edema)! ’8' ' 0'5”‘sr(‘") * “when.

The thernophyeicel characteristics of the thernal insulation are determined
experimentally or are taken from certificate date. In the thernal couputa-
tions use is uncle of the counted value of the thernophyeical characteris-
tics of the heat insulation. equal to the half-su- of the values. which
correspond to the tewerature of the inner end outer surfaces of the heat-
insulating covering. The values of the thermal conductivity coefficient of
cone types of theml insulation, used in constructing "hot" petroletnl
pipelines. are given in Table 8.6.

98.6. Them}. Regine of Main Pipelines

Coaputatione of the thermal interaction of pipelines with the surrounding
nediun are necessary for selecting the nethod for laying the line. the
pumping aethod, deternination of the power of purple; and thermal stations,
etc. It is particularly inportent to take into account theraal processes
for petroleua nipelines pulping petroleu in a heated state. The purpose
of the thernal co-putatione for the planning of a min pipeline is to de-
ternine the tenpereture distribution along its length and to estimate ther-
Ial losses. Taking into account the date fro. the therlal computations,

8h
FOR orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is possible to deternine the throughput capacity of the pipeline, the
intervals at which puning (thermal) stations should be placed. the strength

and stability of the pipeline can be comuted and the type and thickness of
the heat insulation are selected.

In the process of operation of pipelines the results of therael coQutetione
are used for routine dispatcher control of its operation: finding the safe
tine for stopping the "hot" puwing of high-viscosity petroleum. selection
of a neth for expulsion of cooled petroleun free a stopped pipeline. ee-
timating the optinun variant for starting up a ”hot" pipeline end deter-in-
ing the safe ties for shutting down the pumping stations.

The operating reginee for a "hot” pipeline under conditions of start-up end
operation. stoppage of pming, changes in volune and te-pereture of petrol-
eun heating are called transition reginss. They are characterised by a
change in Volt... and teapereture of the petroleun with tine free one sta-
tionary state to another. Under these conditions the process of flow of
petroleue through the pipeline and its themal regine are unsteady. The
reason for the appearance of transition regines in the operation of "hot"
pipelines can be the planned or accidental shutdown of individual pumps

or pulping stations. heating plants or heat exchangers at thernal stations.
filling of the pipeline with petroleum during its startup. stoppage of pup-
ing or its renewal. successive pulping of petroleum with different physical
properties. connection or disconnection of petroleue inlets or outlets along
the pipeline route. seasonal variation of air tenerature and thernophysical
properties of the ground. These factors lead to a change in puping para-
asters: tesperature. pressure and flow. A deviation of any of these para--
meters from a stationary state, if there is no special regulation of the
systee, leads to a corresponding change in all the others. For exeeple,
with the accidental shutdown of a heating station cold petroleun, having

a higher viscosity in cogerison with the heated petroleum, begins to enter
into the pipeline. As a segment of the pipeline is filled with cold oil and
the heated oil is expelled, there is an increase in head losses on friction.
For a pipeline with puping stations equipped with centrifugal pms. this
automatically leads to a reduction in the flow and an increase in pressure;
the latter can exceed the edeissible pressure set on the basis of pipe
strength. Simultaneously changes in telperature and accordingly pressure and
flow occur as a result of change in the heat losses of the pipeline into the
surrounding nediua arising in sagnents filled with cold petrolem. In addi-
tion. any change in the pulping rate in turn exerts an influence on the dis-
tribution of the teqerature of the petroleum along the length of the pipe-
line and with tine. The transient regime of pipeline operation continues
until heat exchange in the ”pipeline-ground" systen attains a new steady
state. The duration of the transient thermal processes can attain several

aonths. Taking into account the seasonal variation in air and ground ten-
persture. it must be noted that "hot" pipelines virtually always operate
under conditions of variable regions. However, since the number and nature
of the transient processes are random. the planning of "hot" pipelines is
carried out for stationary operation regimes. For these conditions the

85
son orncm. usr ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

principal technical and economic indices are selected, as well as the con-
Struction and technological decisions. The data from comutations of trans-
ient regimes of pipeline operation are taken into account in the operation
process when deteraining safe deviation of the pumping parameters from the
nominal values, in selection of the optima conditions for the transport
of petroleum in the case of breakdown of individual pulping plants and
heating plants, etc. ‘ ' —“

Fig. 8.6. Graph of decrease
in temperature along length
of pipeline.

 

In connection with the development and introduction of :utonated systems
for control of operation of main pipelines. cowutations of transient re-
gimes for the operation of "hot” pipelines are being carried out more and
more extensively in the planning stage. The results of such computations
are used in determining the parameters of the automation and telemechan-
ical system of the pipelines, being a component part of the automated sys-
tenm for control of operation of main pipelines and in formlating an al-
gorithm for control of operation of pumping and heating stations.

Now we will examine the method for thermal computations of pipelines in
stationary hydraulic and thermal regimes.

Assume that petroleum heated to the temperature tm is fed into the pipeline
through its initial section. Then at some distance x from the beginning of
the pipeline, as a result of heat exchange with the surrounding media. the
teeperature of the petroleum is reduced to t (Pig. 8.6). In order to deter-
mine the law of tenarsture decrease in the segment from the beginning of
the pipeline to x we will define an elementary segment with the length dx and
we will examine its thermal balance. According to the principal heat trans-
fer laws. the quantity of heat lost by the petroleum enclosed in an ele-
mentary volume 0.251103 is directly proportional to the teqerature drop

At - t - to, the heat exchange surface abodx and is inversely proportional
to the thermal resistance of the surrounding medium Accordingly. the heat
losses of an elementary volume of petroleum into the surrounding mediu-
with the tmeratute to are

‘7! ‘-' “De (‘ - lo) ‘8.

The loss of part of the heat by the petroleum into the surrounding medium
leads to a decrease in its heat content by the value

4’;- -0¢.dt.
where G is the mass flow in the petroleum pipeline.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the heat of friction is neglected and no allowance is made for the
phase transitions associated with the crystallization of the paraffin in
the petrolsu, in accordance with the law of energy conservation, the dql
and 4'12 values must be equal to one another, that is

hnD.(t-I.)da- -0¢.a.
Separating the variables and integrating, we obtain
up c —a '
I" - m wit-ht?
or
c-c.+(c.-¢.)axp (-%s). (g, 5)

Hith r - L, from formla (8.5) we obtain the petroleun temperature at the
end of the pipeline

[x - end] a-t.+«.-t.)oxp (—%ﬁ'-L).

With a considerable length of the petroleum pipeline (theoretically With X
4 on in accordance with (8.5) the petroleus temperature approaches the adi-
ent temrature, equal to the ground tewerature at the depth of laying of
the pipe in a natural thermal state in the case of placement underground
or equal to the air tesperature if the pipe is laid above the ground.

Equation (8.5) was derived for the first tine by V. G. Shukhov and the equa-
tion has been given his name. It gives satisfactory results for a consider-
able range of operation of the pipelines and therefore these results are
used extensively in thermal comutations. ‘111e accuracy of the cowutatione
"‘10: formula (8.5) to a considerable degree is dependent on the reliabil-
ity in determining the total heat transfer coefficient.

V. c. Shukhov proposed that the if value be determined experimentally in
operating pipelines and that these results be applied to planned systems.
We can allow such an approach if It is determined directly for an operating
pipeline or for a pipeline for which the conditions are similar to an al-
ready operating pipeline, for examle. when laying it parallel to the oper-
ating pipeline at a short distance from it. 'lhen, using operational data,

the heat transfer coefficient can be determined using an expression which
follows from (8.5): H

of. l —‘
i-mln ﬁn -

[K - end; H I in]
In a general case, however, It must be determined using formula (8.1) or
(8.1a). when transporting petroleum with a high paraffin content it is
necessary to take into account the paraffin crystallization effect. From
the initial temerature tie to the temperature of onset of paraffin crys-
tallisation t p“. the cooling of the petroleum occurs in accordance with
the V. 6. 8h ov law. With further cooling the heat losses are partially
compensated by the released heat of crystallization of the paraffin.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If it is assumed that the quantity of crystallising paraffin is proportion-
al to the tewersture decrease, the quantity of heat released due to crys-

tallization for the elementary segment dr is equal to a” a“

(H. W - in. par] where 6 is the paraffin concentration (in fractions of
unity), released from the petroleum with a decrease in temperature from
tin s to t p ; te is any temperature for which bis known; a» is the
lateng heat of paraffin crystallisation.

4‘.

- 3-. l-f.

Then. writing the heat balance for an elementary sealant and solving the
11mm equation. for l1<x<n we obtain

In." . in. P‘r] l-lg'l'Um.l-‘Q)OX’[-%:%1(3—ll)]’ (8.5.)
where

9-: -¢m+ “K‘s. m"‘.);

1.1 is the distance over which the petroleum temersture decreases from t1“
to ‘in. par' determined using the V. G. Shukhov formla.

With the quing of viscous petroleums in a heated state there are cases
possible when in the initial segment of the pipeline there will be a tur-
bulent regime. whereas in the end segment. as a result of petroleum cool-
ing there will be a laminar regime. As is well known. the regime of liquid
movement is characterised by the Reynolds number. ‘lhe transition from one
regime to the other occurs at the so-called critical Reynolds umber Re“.
It has been established that for heated petroleums Rec;- - 1000-2000; for
highly parsffinic petroleus Beer is closer to the lower value. whereas for
viscous petroleums with a low paraffin content it is closer to the upper
limit. Since Rec; - bQ/nno Veg. then Vcr - bQ/x Dokecr. The Vet value
determines the temersturs tcr at which there is a change in the flow re-
gime. In this case tcr can be estimated using both graphic and analytical
dependences. l’or example. using the Pilonov-Reynolds formula, we obtain

m . cr] .n-.,+.1.,..m.‘w$_"m, (8.6)

Substituting the ‘cr value from (8.6) into the Shukhov formula and denoting
the Shukhov parameter for a turbulent regime as Shu-r - lorn DOL/QPC'H- we
obtain " “

l. c —02
w-mh h‘J-‘e .
[KP - cr;1‘ - 1': H - lazily - Shu] (8.7)

Accordingly, in the segment 0<x(r¢r the regime of petroleum flow is tur-
bulent, whereas with "cr‘ 3(1. it is laminar. Ooqautntions of temperature
in both segments are made using formula (8.5), in which the R value is de-
termined for the conditions of laminar and turbulent flow regimes respec-
tively.

Knowing the lengths of segrents with different liquid flow regimes, it is
possible to estimate the total head losses in the pipeline by tuning the
head losses in both segnemte in the form h; - h1- + h}...

88
non onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with allowance for the releeee of heat due to friction the heat balance
of a eeyeent of the pipeline in written in the fore

h0(t-c.)da-Qpca+0uda.
where i 1. the hydraulic alope.

Separating the variablee. we obtain

e

[n - mucmn InﬁEé-nu (8.8)

or ""e-i-5-l-(‘nf-le-5) “IN-'43))

where ._%; - .__%_.

(lowering the derived expreeaion with the V. G. Shukhov for-uh. we find

that the increnent in the petroleul teaperature with allowance for the heat
of friction ie equal to
Aida—0*").

With 2-900 the maxim error ie Alex - b.

For a petroleul pipeline with different valuae of the heat tranafer coef-

ficiente It: in individual eepenta with the length Id, on the baeia of
(8.5) it ie poeeible to write:

— no
[a - in; x - end] '“H'W‘m’

Noting that an)” - tend J and tin j - “ond’j-lt and adding by terse.
we obtain

n ' -
‘51“. an '
[II I in; K I end] 1' tu-le - 096 gm” t

where j is the eequence nutter of the eegaent; n ie the amber of eepente.

If on a pipeline with heating atatione the diatance between the atetione ie
1., the heat transfer coefficiente k in the aesaenta and the 6 value by which
the petroleum teqereture it increased at the etatione are identical, for
the first eeuaent between the that-e1 etetione it ie poeeible to write:

[1! I in; K '- end] Ian-30+(‘nl“o)"P(-=Olo)-

For the eecond aegnent. taking into account that at the eecond station the
petroleun tawerature ie increaaed by 9 ,

[K . end] ‘u"e+('u+0-‘e)“?(-OL)~

Substituting into the latter expreeeion the tend 1 value fro- the preceding
expreaaion, we obtain

'lra" I..+(ln—I.)'oxp (—ZeLH- Oexp ( QeL).

89

FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sinilarly determining the temperature in successive segnents. us find the
tespersturs at the end of the pipeline . _
jag-«+(lm-t.) exp(—ne&)+0lexp(-sL)+erp(—2sb)+. . .+axp(i—a)sl.l.

mam-rm "WW-4° "F‘mf' “Paw the ‘-
’ en-u+«u~uhno-uu+ol=&——-

e‘ —i ..
In the case of large n values -

0
[K - end] ﬁnnﬁﬁ.

08.5. Hydraulic Regine of. "not" Petroleun Pipelines

The hydraulic regime of a "hot" petroleum pipeline is determined to a con-
erable degree by the conditions for its heat exchange with the surrounding
medium. Hith an increase in the temperature of the transported petroleum
there is a decrease in its viscosity and a decrease in head losses. with

a decrease in tewerature the reverse picture is observed. The temperature
regime of the petroleum pipeline in turn is dependent on the puqing value.
the conditions for the transfer of heat fron the petroleus into the surround-
ing media. Ieteorological conditions and other factors. In the preceding
sections analytical dependences vere obtained for taking into account the
influence of these factors on the distribution of petroleum teqerature
along the length of the pipeline and its thermal losses. Using these de-
pendences, it is possible to detenine the distribution of pressure along
the length of the pipeline transporting highly viscous petroleum in a heat-
ed state and estinte the head losses on its pumping.

Since the teqerature, and accordingly, the viscosity in a "hot" pipeline
operating under stationary conditions change with length, for finding losses
in it one can use the Darcy-uybenaon equation in differential form:

. .
hence . _ .. L
L i .
' . Ar ‘8 M.
-14E§E}-z:§ v o) a) -+ . (s 10)

where Ah is the difference in the geodetic readings of the beginning and
end of the pipeline.

The Ar value is the correction for the nonisothermicity of the flaw in a
radial direction. If the Ar coefficient is considered constant along the
entire length of the pipeline. the integral on the right-hand side of the
latter expression has the sense of the mean integral petroleum viscosity:

1.
[cp - mean] va-«i—Sv'uwx.
0

Then the head losses on the pumping of a heated highly viscous petroleum
are

90
you OFFICIAL use our!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cm;

”In. 0:...

A,L+M.

this expression with A, - l coincides with the Darcy-Heisbach iornula for
deteraining the head losses on the pulping of petroleun with the viscosity
V...“ under isotheruic conditions.

The 1/,“ value is determined by the temperature conditions of transport
and the viscosity-teqerature dependence of the particular petroleua. We
will asst-s a petroleuI-tsaperature distribution using the V. G. Shukhov
formula. and the dependence ‘V- V(t) using the Filonov-Reynolds fornula.
Then "

L
”3'2;S up (.. uIt.)oxp l-wlﬂ (‘s-h) "IN-")1“-
0

[cp - seen; It - in)

After integration. taking into account that

Is 0"
S+-£‘ (ﬁ)—£l (300
'l
we obtain . .
*" — an
[op - scan- a - inJ'a’ﬁ‘oxpl-Mtu-tmlﬁtl-IMh-‘M-E‘l""‘“-“"°‘“ ‘ ‘
D

where 31“) is an integral exponential function.

Multiplying the right-hand side of the latter expression by Vm/[Vo exp
(-utgnn . l, we find , . ,.-__ . ..

V-

(cp I lean: ll - in]';__._1_."lu.("_'.)l‘3‘l_.n(‘._1.)]—£i[—uu(l.-l.)up(—IHH

Ol'

. . . . -. . _. ..
van-:57“, [an (l..—t.)| [8i [-8. (tn—(.ﬂ-Bl I -|HI (‘a-‘sm- .

Us use the notstion

[B - 1n: K - and} ~_!m_“_:itﬂL‘ggl_an(n.—t.)|-Bll--~(!u-‘-)l’-

Then .
v"- " s
[cp - seen; a - in] " "A

‘lhuﬂ, the A; coefficient characterizes the deviation of petrolezn viscosity,
and accordingly. the hydraulic losses fro- the values corresponding to iso-

thernic conditions when t - tin. Taking the results into account, the head
losses in the punping of heated highly viscous petrolem are

1-. .
n-p-gﬁ- LAWN» (8° 11)
0

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI'ICIAL USE ONLY

The head distribution along the length of the pipeline in this case is

0‘... :6, ‘ _ .n . .
”"’--"—'—-—“——'-"L" m.“ " (5tI—u(t.-:.)n-au-uu«pawn-am. (9.11.)

0:"

An analysis of the latter formda shows that the head distribution along
the length of the pipeline has a parabolic nature, whereas under isothernic
conditions it is linear. 'lhe deviation from a linear distribution is asso-
ciated with an increase in the viscosity of the petroleun as a result of
its cooling. The rate of head decrease increases in the final eeuaents.

with high values tn - to and saall tend - to
[R I in] Bil-“(‘sj-‘en‘Voo

that is, under these conditions the Iain resistance to novenent of the flow
is crested by the "cold” end of the pipeline.

In droplet liquids not all the physical properties change identically with
temperature. In the section there is the strongest change in viscosity
Perl #3; densitwa/Pf changes far less. as do thernal conductivity Av/Rf
and heat capacity cV/cf. A change in the tespersture heads tv - tf in a.
section of the pipeline leads to a change in the velocity profile since
the greatest change is in viscosity and as a result of this, leads to an
additional change in the tesperature profile. The changes in the velocity
profile will be greater in laninsr flows and less in turbulent flows.
Usually the change in head in dependence on inhomogeneity of the flow in
the diameter involves allovance for the change in viscosity and allowance
for distortion of the tenperature and velocity fields as a result of heat_

.0—.

transfer by the factor 41-. For A, ve use the dependence A (v. )t
t-8 '— '

where 6 and I are coefficients, for laminar flov 6- 0.9 and CI 1/3 - 1/1»,
and for turbulent flow 9- l and 4' I 0: V. is the viscosity of petroleua
for the mean Hall tenperature of the pipeline tq neon; V: is the viscosity
of the petroleun with a nesn flow te-persture tg .“n,

‘u-‘;

[cp I teen; 1! I in; K I end] ‘Ies-‘s'i'm'
where tend is determined using formla (8.5).

The t‘, scan value is conputed using the expression
[cp I seen] t.g,-‘]e'-(‘Iep“0) 3;!”

Taking into account the change in petroleum tenperature along the length
of the pipeline by the V. c. Shukhov method. and the change in viscosity
by the Reynolds nethod, we obtain

92
pox omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1:
4' ﬁt? " "P {35‘ ';;'(t.-c.m+cxp(—u,)1}-

k
«xv (-2-; w. -c.)+ «.—t.)l} -
[cp-mean; C‘r-st; u- in; K-end]

Earlier the A, coefficient was deter-ined for the nean tenperature along
the length of the pipeline. If the A, value is assigned to an elementary
segment. integration of (8.9) will give the following result;

JIM{[(—)1[(—>1} (m

at

[li- ln: K' and]

In those cases when there are two flow regimes in the pipeline - laninar at
the beginning and turbulent at the end — the losses for the two segpents
are determined separately. The lengths of the segments are found using the
formulas cited earlier.

The reliability of the computed data is dependent to a considerable degree
on the accuracy in approximating the viscosity-temerature dependence 1/(t).
Therefore. for more precise computations it is soundeet to employ a nueerb
ical method for determining the head losaes on the pumping of heated pet-
roleuma. In this case the pipeline is broken down into M segments (1 - l,
2,...,H). in the liaits of which the petroleum viscosity with a stipulated
accuracy is considered to be constant and equal to its mean value. Then

it can be written I! Mr.
II- a M: (A) +M
[en-nun] El ‘3..- I I! .

where the subscript 1 denotes that this parameter applies to the j-th seg-
nent with the length 13.

TC - heating station
uc - pulping station

 

l a a: a

Fig. 8.7. Positioning of pumping and Fig. 8.8. llead characteristic of
heating stations and rlso curves of "hot" pipeline.

decrease of head and tmerature in
open lines. [h - in; K - end]

93
FOR orncm. us: ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040027-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the solution of technical and economic problems it is better to use
analytical dependencea, for example, for investigating the influence of
different factors on the technological and energy indices of petroleum
transport systems. With an identical nunber of puping and hosting sta-
tions the curves of decrease in temperature and head have the shape shown
in Fig. 8.7. Bach petroleum temperature corresponds to a very definite hy-
draulic slope. The number of pming stations is limited by the maxim-
head which the pipes and pumps can withstand end the number of heating
stations is limited by the maximum admissible heating temperature.

“me graphic head characteristic curve for a "hot" pipeline describing the
dependence 0-". in accordance with the derived formla for head losses in
friction, has the form shown in Fig. 8.8.

The head characteristic curve can be divided by vertical straight lines
into three zones. In tone I of small flows the slowly moving petroleum

can be cooled even in the initial segment of the pipeline to a temerature
close to the temperature of the surrounding medium and in the remaining
greater part of the pipeline there is movement of cold petroleum with a
virtually constant high viscosity. Graphically in this zone the head
characteristic curve has the shape of a straight line with a great slope
to the x-axis due to the high viscosity. In tone III of great flows. the
petroleum. moving with a great velocity. can pass through to the end of
the pipeline, still retaining a high tamersture. Since the mean tempera-
ture of the flow in this zone is high. the head characteristic curve has
the shape of a straight line (laminar regime) with a far lesser slope to
the x-axis than in the first zone due to the low viscosity of the petrol-
eum. in zone It the head losses increase with a decrease in the flow.

This is attributable to the fact that with a decrease of flow in this zone
(tone of intermediate flows). and accordingly. with a decrease in the velo-
city of movement of the petroleu. each of its portions remains longer in
the pipeline and can cool more. As a result. there is. a decrease in the
mean temperature and an increase in the mean viscosity of the petroleum;
the relative increase in viscosity in this zone is greater than the rela-
tive decrease in flow and this leads to an increase in head losses with a
decrease in the flow. Only zone In with relatively great flows is a work-
ing zone. Zone I is a nonworking eons, because with these same heads the
flows here will be several times less than in zone Ill. If the head loss
at the point of transition from zone I into eons ll exceeds the maxim-
head developed by the puming station, when the working point of the pn-
ing station - pipeline falls in zone II. being unstable. the flow will

be reduced spontaneously and finally the working point will enter into tone
I. For practical purposes this means a stoppage of the pipeline because the
flow becomes very small.

If for any reasons the working point of the "hot" pipeline has approached
the boundary of zone It or has already passed into this tone. it can be re-
turned to working sona III by one of the following methods:

9"
ran orncuu. use om
FOR ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

1) by repidly increasing the heating tenperetute of the petroleu;

2) by tepidly increesin; the heed et the etetione by etertins up additional
PM”

3) by beginning the pumins into the pipeline of e lees viecous product
without lowering the petroleu heeting tenpereture.

If the min; etetion cen develop e heed exceeding the minu- heed loee-
es et the boundery of zones 1 end 1!. these losses not exceeding the eduis-
eible heed ee governed by the etrensth of the pipeline end the equip-Int

at the stetion. the return tron tone I to zone In presents no difﬁculties.

 

Fig. 8.9. Schenetic diecren of redient-convection network.

08.6. Bouipuent for ﬂeeting Petroleu-

Puqins-heetin; end hosting (theml) etetione ere outfitted with heeters

of different designs for heeting petroleun end petroleu products. In e
one when et the heed station on the pipeline the viscous product (such so
neeut) is fed fro. the inutelletione of e petrolet- refinery in e hot etete.
et the heed etetion it is possible to get by without heetins plents. The
tenhe et the heed etetion ere heeted by tubuler heaters (coils or eectione)
for preliniury heetins of the petroleum. The purpose of this heating is

95
m ornc'm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

to reduce petroleua viscosity to the level adequate for its evacuation
fro- the tank with a stipulated flow rate. ‘Ihe heating in the tank to
the temperature of pulping through the pipeline is infeasible due to the
great heat losses free the tank walls into the surrounding asdiua and an
increase in the losses of light fractions due to intensified evaporation
during heating. As the heat carrier use is node of ordinary water vapor.
In order to lessen the heat losses the tank can be supplied with heat in-
sulation.

lleating to a pumping tencrature is acconplished in steel or fired heaters.

Kultipass heat exchangers with a-flosting head are now increasingly coming
into the widest era in stean heaters. In these the petrolsl- passes through
pipes and the steaa passes through the space outside the pipes. Such a dis-
tribution of flows increases the heat transfer coefficient and decreases
the dimensions of the heat exchanger. Usually there are several heat ex-
changers at the station; they can be cut in either in series or in parallel.
Host frequently they are used in-perallel. asking it possible in broad lin-
ite to regulate the tenperature of petroleua heating.

During the ties of operation of the heat exchangers. in addition to aonitor-
ing the petroleum te-perature it is necessary to nonitor carefully the
purity of the condensate eaerging fro. the heaters. The entry of petroleua
into a heat exchanger is evidence that the heat exchanger is aslfunctioning.
In this case the entry of petroleum into the heat exchanger aust be stopped
at once. 0n "hot" pipelines extensive use is also ads of fired heaters

(for the first tine in the USSR on the Usen'-Gur'yev-Kuybyshev pipeline).
They constitute furnaces the fuel for which can be gas or the puped pro-
duct or petroleum

figure 8.9 shows a scheaastic disgru of a radiant-convection furnace for
the heating of petroleu. the design of which was developed by the Cipro-
neftenseh codeine. All the space in the furnace, actuated in the netallic
housing I, is divided into two zones: radiant l and convection II. ‘Ihe ra-
diant tone in turn is divided into two parts by a well 2 node of refractory
brick, arranged along the axis of the furnace. In the lower part of the
furnace there are six nosrles 5 with air spraying of fuel. 0n the Uren' -
Ger yev-Xuybyshev pipeline the fuel is the petroleua which is transported.
However. the nozzles are gas-naeut. which sakes it possible to burn gaseous
fuel with their assistance as well. The air is fed to the nozzles through
the air line 6. In order to prevent destruction of the furnace fro- the
"booa" occurring when fuel is fed again after a brief interruption. the
furnace has air releases 3, whose covers 1!» fly off when there is a shock
wave.

In the radiant zone the pipes 11 of the coil through which the petroleum
flows are laid on supports lo. In this zone the heating of the patrols:-

occurs for the lost part due to the radiant energy of the flare. Ihe coe-
bustion products then pass into the convective zone, where the transfer of

96
mt orncut use ONLY
POI! OFPICIAI. USE ONLY

heat to the petroleue flouting through the pipe. ia ecconpliehed by aeane
of convection. Pro- the convective tone in the furnace the conbuation pro-
ducte are ejected into the atnoephere through the etach 8. The regulation

of rerefaction (draft) in the furnace ia eccoapliahed by aaene of a gate
7.

‘lhe coiled tubea are eecured in the convective zone in the middle 9 and
and lo tuba lattices. 'lhe furnace walla are covered on the ineide by the
refractory brickwork 13 and on the outeide by the theraal ineulatinn 12.
There it a ladder 16 for aervicing the furnace, whoae height without the
etach atteina 10.5 I. In order to obaerve the condition of the convective
pipea and for their cleaning when there in an accu-ulation of aoot. which

conaidarably reduces the heat trenafar coefficient. proviaion ie ude
for hetchea with covera 16.

The ayaten of nonitoring and automation inetru-ente enablea the operator
to watch over the proceaa of heating of the petroleum and enaurea auto-
natic protection of the furnace vhen there ie deviation from the etipulet-

ed technological regine. 7he preaence of aervicing pereonnel during opera-
tion of the furnace ia nandatory. The throughput capacity of one furnace
is 600 I 3[hours the petroleum ie heated fron 30 to 65‘0. The naxieu- work-
ing preaaure of the petroleu- upon entry into the coil not not exceed
6.5 Pa. The furnace heat productivity ia 10 500 m and the efficiency
etteina 0.77. evidence of ita high thernel efficiency.

The heating of petroleua only at certain pointa (at pumping-heating ata-
tiona and heating atationa) inpoeae linitatione on the deaign and opera-
tional flexibility of the "hot” pipelinea. ‘l'hue, due to the linitation

on the teqerature of petroleu- heating by the conditions for nor-a1 opera
tion of the heat exchange apparatus, in a number of ceeea the calculated
diatence between the heating atetiona can be ehort, which forcea an in-
creaae in their nu-ber and accordingly leeda to an increase in the capital
expenditurea. A prolonged atoppage of puqing can reault in a congealing

of the petroleum in the pipeline and in thin caae a renewal of paging
involvea great expendituree.

1heae ahortconinga can be eliminated by the one of en-route heating of the
"hot" pipeline. Such en-route heating by neane of aetellite pipelinea has
definitely beguun to be uaed. ‘rheee aetellite pipelinea are anall in die-
aeter and hot water in punped through; these lines are laid parallel. to
the pipeline and adjacent to it (a cannon heat-inauleting covering ia ap-
plied to the petroleu- pipeline and the hot ureter line). Such a ayaten

for en-route heating in enployed, for angle. in one of the pipelinea for
the treneport of highly congealing petroleum in Indoneaie.

Blectric heating of the pipeline with use of the akin effect in pro-icing.
M in well known. when an alternating current ia paeaed through a eteel
pipe the current in not diatributed uauiforlly through the aection of the
pipe all, but due to the chin effect in concentrated near the inner eur-
fece of the pipe. The intenaity ofgfurrent concentration is dependent on

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the frequency of the latter. however, due to the high conductivity of the
steel the skin effect is nsnifested in it to a high degree even at indus-
trial frequencies. tor exanple. at a frequency of SO Ila the depth of

the shin effect (the fundamental index of intensity of this phenonenon.
showing what thickness of the natal. neasursd fron its surface, bonds
the zone of current passage) in the case of steel is only 1 -.

 
   

bl,
3

Fig. 8.10. Diagra- of heating of pipeline by neans of skin effect.

Figure 8.10 is e diagr. of the systen for heating a pipeline by means of
the skin effect. A heating pipe 2 with a disaster of 6-60 In lies flush
against the petrolsun pipeline 1. within the heating pipe there is an in-
ternsl copper cable 3 with a cross section of the conductors 8-60 .2 . me
cable has a heat-resistant insulation. A source of alternating current of
an industrial frequency is connected at one end to the internal cable and at
the other end to a second cable Io, whose other end is connected to the heat-
ing pipe. The second end of the internal cable is connected to the end of
the heating pipe opposite the current source.

Since the electric current is concentrated in a very stall cross-sectional
zone in the pipe, its resistivity increases and a great quantity of heat
is released. Usually 80-902 of the total quantity of heat released in the
circuit is generated in the heating pipe. whereas the remaining quantity
is generated in the internal cable. The petroleu pipeline and the heating
pipe are covered by a canon heat insulation. The heating line is welded
to the pipeline and the heat generated in the heating line freely passes
into the petroleum pipeline. At the sane tine. since the current passes
only along the internal surface of the heating line it can be grounded.

Such a systea of en-route heating has a high efficiency since the heat
from both the heating pipe and from the internal cable is expanded on

the heating of the petroleun pipeline. According to test data, the differ-
ence in temerstures between the heating pipe and the petroleun pipeline
does not exceed 10°C. the heat yield is 15-150 H per 1 n of length for one
heating pipe. Several heating lines can be laid next to large-disaster
pipelines.

08.7. neat-Insulated Pipelines
In sons cases in order to increase the econony of operation of ”hot" pipe-

lines it can be desirable to cover then by heat insulation. The heat insul-
ation reduces the heat loss by the puped product; this makes it possible

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to reduce the number of heating stations. The proper choice of the asterisl,
design and thickness of the tharaal insulation plays an inportant role in
increasing the econoey of a "hot" pipeline.

Usually the asterial and design of the thereal insulation are selected first
and then the next step is deter-ination of the thickness. The solution of
the letter probles is dependent on the adopted optisality criterion or the
condition which the decision lust satisfy (econoaic criteria, inadnissibil-
ity of congealing of the product during stoppages of a definite duration,
stipulated heat losses). The laterials used for heat insulation aust have
the following properties: mini-u- heat conductivity coefficient, low nois-
ture capacity and hygroscopicity, low density, absence of chenical interac-

tion with the surface of the pipeline, incodmstibility, biological inertia
with respect to fungi, parasites and rodents, heat resistance, capacity for
withstanding aultiple coolings and heetings, strength, longevity and uni-
fornity. In addition, when selecting the heat insulating aateriel an effort
must be nade to satisfy a number of additional require-eats. Thus, the ex-
penditures on insulation must be low end pay for themselves quickly; the
installation of the insulation aust be convenient end reliable. Usually it
is not possible to satisfy all the requirensnts mentioned above. Many of
the requiresents inescd on the insulation of pipelines are satisfied by
insulation of foam polyurethane covered by synthetic fills. The principal
characteristics of the heat-insulating aaterials produced by Soviet indus-
try are given in Table 8.6.

The determination of the optimal thickness of the insulation is a technical-
economic probles and in a general case is extreaely cleex since it is
necessary to optiaise several parameters in addition to thickness: camera-
tures at the input and output fron the heating stations, number of heating
and pulping stations, etc. however, in actual practice, taking into account
the experience in planning and operating "hot" pipelines, the optiniution
problen can be sisplified.

In any cases the heating tespereture t1“ 0f the' petroleun ﬁt the theml
stations is adopted on the basis of experience in operating similar pipe-
lines or the aaxisua admissible tesperature set by technological limita-
tions (beginning of acceleration of petroleua, clogging-up of the pipes in
heat exchange apparatus and others); the final tenperature tend at the end
of the run between heating (thermal) stations is ensued for highly congeal-
ing petroleum to be 3—5'0 above the congesling point, whereas for hidt-vis-
cosity petroleus it is adopted on the basis of experience in operating
similar pipelines. Accordingly, the heat losses are stipulated in the runs
between heating stations. Investigations have shown that the aininun ex-
penditure (sass) of insulation will be used in this case when the thickness
of the insulation along the entire length of the run is constant. With an
increase in the thickness of the insulation there is an increase in the cap-
ital and operational expenditures on insulation, but at the sale tine there
is a decrease in heat losses and accordingly a decrease in the necessary

99

ms OWICIAI. USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nusber of heating stations and expenditures on these stations. With a de—
crease in the thickness of the insulation there is a corresponding de-
crease in the expenditures on insulation, but at the ease tine due to an
increase in the heat losses there is an increase in the nuber of heating
stations and the expenditures on then. The optinun variant will be one for
which the sun of the reduced expenditures on heat insulation and heating
stations will be sinisu.

The necessary ntﬂrer of heating stations n for pipelines of the length l.
and the diameter no in accordance with the V. 6. Shukhov fornule is

[My - Shu] a-%s

where, in accordance with (8.5) and (8.1)

 

f —t!
[my - Shu; a - in; x - end] "P" 3:“.
and _
i _- i i D 1 0
TD? "b‘c‘ .+wh-rf+-5;uﬁ+ mg”. (3.12.)

lH - metal; "3- insul(stion)]

where A“ and 21”“ are the thereal conductivity coefficients for the
setsl in the pipeline and the insulation; Do and I)" are the internal and
external diameters of the pipeline:

Dinaul " ”u + 251mm:
(Sinsul is the insulation thickness.

For underground pipelines the external heat transfer coefficient can be de-
termined with sone simplifications using the for-uln

[r’p - gr(ound);u3 - insul] "" Dn(‘°T£E+ E; )' (8.13)

where A“ is the ground thsml conductivity coefficient; a is the depth
of placement of the pipeline to its axis; “0 is the coefficient of heat
transfer from the ground surface into the air [“0 - 10-18 "I (-3301.

Since the theml resistance at the petroleuls-pipe discontinuity and the

resistance of the pipe setal are insignificant in comarison with the
therssl resistance of the insulation and ground, the first two terms in
(8.12s) can be neglected and after substitution of (8.13) into (8.12s) we
obtain ‘ ' '
r~l+sllom
(M3 - insu1(ation)] 0'

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where , W + 3% I. w ‘3': Is 0.;
[na- ineul: rp - sr(ound)] "*(‘ﬁ‘i-é)‘
Then the necessery nuher of hosting stetions is
My - Shu; ”3- ineul] n-ﬁm. I t

The hut expenditure on heating of the puned petroleum et etch hosting ste-
tion is

[T D but: a . in; K . ma] W'MUs-k).

The hosting surface of the hosting plent is deter-ﬁned es
-L '

[1' - heat; 9 - ru(gm)] ’ «93"

where q? is the theta]. stress of the hosting surfece; n1- is the effic-

iency o the heating pleats; It". is the coefficient of reserve of the heat-
ing equipnent.

The cost of constructing the hosting stetions is

[01' - cost; My - Shu: ll - in; 'r- host; ”3- insul; K - end]
3 —' yC
‘3‘", W’

vhere 0h“: is the cost of constructing the heating plents. releted to e unit
heating surface of the plsnt.

the operetionel expenditures for s heating ststion can he represented in the

for-
Oa-c'leri-n-‘i-mm-gfmv
[CT-coetza-inzt-end] -

where 00 ere the annual costs for current uintenence end eaortizstion in
trections of unity; s1 ere the ennuel asses elloceted for one hosting ste-

tion: s2 ere the expenditures for voter. fuel, lubricsnts. etc. per unit
of ststion theml power.

Then the reduced expenditures for heeting stsgigus are

N
[c1 . cost; on - insul] 3n75‘0+9¢?"4+51e0u '
.. “4‘" "'9 .‘é. _‘.1_'::.
"h‘" u my D“ ”’3’ + mart.) + m]

[l - in; K - end; my - Shu; 'r - host]

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1183 max

B in the standard coefficient of effectiveneee of cepital investments.

Next we take into account the expenditures on insulation. The capital er-
pendituree are represented in the (on

[as - ineul] x.-i.;..cu-{-(n:,—o;,)w..

where Vinaul is the volus of insulation; P is the density of insul-
ation; cm,” is the cost of a unit uses of inﬂation. including erpend-
itures on its installation.

The operational expenditures on the maintenance of insulation are
[ ”3- ineul] au-ﬂi‘~+.l‘ '

where P1 are the costs for anortiaation and current repair of the thernal
insulation in fractions of unity; b1 are expenditures not dependent on the
pipeline parameters.

Then the reduced expenditures on themel insulation are

se-(x+h3-’:-(o:.-n§)‘u.c.+n.
The total reduced expenditures are

where
u.--';'-(x+h)-’£-w..:

H; are the remaining term. not dependent on the thickneee of the insula-
tion.

Equating 328/3 Dineul to zero, we obtain an algebraic equation relative to

I)ineul up so
bum-nun»)- m -

which is solved nunerically or graphically.

It follows tron an analysis of the equation that the optimum thickness of
the thermal insulation is not dependent on the length of the pipeline and
the viscosity of the punped liquid; it decreases with an increase in the
depth of laying the line, diameter, throughput capacity of the pipeline,
cost of the insulation, and increaeea with an increase in the coefficients
of theraal conductivity of the ground and insulation.

If we are considering the cyclic operation of "hot" pipelines. it is neces-
sary to cerry out checking computations in order to select insulation of
such a thicknee-I as would make it possible after stoppage for a stipulated
time to resume puqing without cosplicationa or to estimate the time of
possible stoppage of the pipeline having a particular thickness of the
insulation for which the petroleum product along its entire length is not
cooled below the stipulated tewerature.

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

08.8. Pmins oi Patrolams Hhich ere Non-Newtonian Liquids

As nsntioned in 08.1. the flow of paraffinic patrolauls and petroleu-
products can with sons approxinetion be described by the equation

[1m- pl(astic)] _ r-u—w%o (3.14)
the so-called unsha- equation.

gob petroleuae are non-Newtonian liquids and can be classified as Dingba-
uide.

For a cylinder in a flow of liquid, whoae axis coincides with the axis of

the pipeline. we can write the following dependence between the force act-

ing on the cylinder and the stress at the cylinder surface (Fig. 8.11):
spars-away. . (8.15)

where Ap is the drop in pressures acting on the ends of the cylinder: r
is cylinder radius; I, is the length of the pipeline.

"35-. .’ (8.16)

Substituting the '6 value into (8.18), after transforletion we obtain an
expression for the velocity of the flow at the distance r fro- tha axis

of the p1po11u(¥._“)k___a__w)+c, (3.17)

[m - pl(astic)] c__ w(_zﬂ__'.k)

The integration constant c is deter-lined fro- tha condition of attach-ant
of the liquid on the wall (absence .of slipping). that is. when r - R and

E‘

Fig. 8.11. Curves illustrating shearing stresses (a) and velocitiee (b)
in cross section 0! ninghen liquid flow.

It follows tron (8.15) that

[1m - pl(eetic)]

 

Substituting the C value into (8.17). we obtain
- a) 8.18
q-— W_'.(R—r)] ( )

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 8.11 shove a shearing stresses curve constructed in accordance with
(8.16) for the cross section of the flow. These stresses decrease iron a
narinu- value on the pipeline wall to zero on the axis. Wen these stress-
es are equal to or less than the yield point 150 there is no shear between
the concentric layers of flow end accordingly the "nucleus" of the flow
noves as a solid body. The radius to of this nucleus is deternined by the

substitution of ‘t- ‘50 into (8.16): in ‘
n- .
” (8.19)

The velocity of the nucleus um“; is deternined by the substitution of the
re value from (8.19) into (8.18):

a .
[ﬂ . nuc] "-135- (R—r.)'.

Figure 8.11 shows the curve of flow velocities of a Binghan liquid in uhich
the nucleus noves as a solid body and the liquid surrounding the nucleus
flows in a laminar regine'. Such a flow is called structured flow.

The discharge for a structured flow can be determined iron the expression
J!

I a " INC] 0- I Tau-drinker?» (3-20)
'0

Substituting the w and vnuc values tomd above into (8.20), after integra-
tion we obtain ' ' '

“M, 4 m 1 2n .
m- 910mm 0-wf['-Tn°7+'r(—T»°) 1° (8.21)
This equation was derived by Buckinghsn in 1921.

It follows from (8.19) that the lesser the pressure drops in the pipeline,
the greater is the radius of the nucleus r0. With a definite pressure drop
the radius of the nucleus bacoass equal to the internal radius of the pipe-
line R -- this is the nininun pressure drop at which the liquid still noves.
This pressure drop is equal to

2
».--H-'-- (8.22)
Pro- (8.21) and (8.22) we obtain another tern of the Buckinghsn equation:
- - ' A R‘ d 'A i d
[m P1(ssiic)] 9-955-[i—y-ét'h-y 1%)}

The Buckinghaa equation relates the flow to the pressure loss for a Bingban
liquid in a horizontal pipeline. Flow is usually stipulated and it is neces-
sary to deteraine the corresponding pressure loss. which can be done using
the buckinghaa formle only by scans of several. iterations. Since in any
cases Apo is considerably less than Ap, the third tern in the brackets

in these cases can be neglected. which souvhat sinplifies the deter-ina-

tion of pressure loss Ap.

10h
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As night he expected, when ‘0 - Apo - 0 the luckinghan equation is trans-
foraed into a cowutstion tor-ula for a laainar regine -- the Poiseuillo

equation
as
”-7- g- (pg.

“.9. Optinun ﬂoating Temerature

In contrast to isotheraic pipelinee. where in the planning it is neces-
sary to optinire only the die-tor of the pipeline and the preneure at the
output fro- the pwing station. in the planning of a "hot" pipeline it is
necessary to optinite a great nuﬂaer of para-store: the disaster of the
pipeline. the temerature at the heater input and output, the nder of
pumping-hosting stations. heating stations and pulping statione, etc.

It seens imesibh to solve this proqu in general fore, analytically. ob-
taining dependences by neens of which it would be possible to cospute the
values of parameters suitable for practical use. In eech specific case

this problen lust be solved by a cowarison with respect to tho econonic
indices of tho entire couple: of variants which are feasible on a practical
basis. Due to tho great voluae of coqutatione, and also tho considerable
nueber of variants. it is desirable that electronic coaputers he used in
selecting the optima pareseters.

Accordingly, the umrsture of heating of the petroleua at the stations
on "hot" pipelines is one of the planning paranoters. related to the other
construction pare-stern of the pipeline. and its optima value mat be de-
termined in the stage of pipeline planning.

however. in the operation of an already constructed "hot" pipeline the prob-
len arises of selecting the optin- tenperature of petroleus heating. The
fact is that in the plenning process the optinitation of pipeline para-
eaters is accomplished for any stipulated conditions: definite air and
grand teqeraturo. fined throughput capacity. properties of the petrol-
eun to be transported. etc. In the operation of a pipeline my 0! these
conditions change or can change. In particular, in the course of the year
there is a change in the tenperature of the media surrounding the pipeline.
there can be a change in the puaped volunee end the nature of the petroleu-
to be pmd. In these cases the planned tenerature of heating of the pet-
roleu- at the stations ceases to he optima and in each individual case it
not be detonained anew.

The optimal tewerature of heating of petroleum at the stations is deter-
mined Iron the following considerations. with an increase in the heating
tesperaturs there is an increase in the expenditures on heating of the
petroleum; at the sane tine there is a decrease in petroleum viscosity,
and this neanl head losses in the pipeline and corresponding expenditures
on petroleun pming. The optinua teaperature of petroleu heating corres-
ponds to the ninim of the sun of expenditures on the heating and puqing
of petroleua.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With the introduction of sons sinplificetions the problea of optimization
of heating tewereture can be solved analytically. but the graph analysis
solution of this problen is nors precise and graphic.

The power N or the quantity of energy expended in a unit tins on the pulp-
ing of petroleua 19 deternined iron the expression

“ML,
n-
where Q is the discharge; ll is the heed developed by the pmiug plants.

equal to the totel head loss in the segnent of the pipeline between two
pumping-heating stations (if there are pulping stations on the line be-'
tween the penning-heating stations, this heed is equal to the sun of the
heads developed by ell the pulping plants in the segnent of the line; 17“
is the nechenical efficiency of the punping plent.

The cost of the nec'nenicel energy is

Sg-lam‘eu. (8e23)

where 0'" is the cost of a unit of nechanical energy.

The cost of the theml energy expended in a unit tins on the heating of
petroleun is determined fron the expression

“Agar—ﬂ.” (3.24)

[H I in; K - and]

where r) is the efficiency of the heating apperatus: OE is the cost of
a unit of thernel energy.

If there are heating stations on the line betveen the pulping-heating ste-
tions. the value obtained using formula (8.26) nest be nultiplied by the
nunber of beatings on the line between the pulping-heating stations (it is
essuned. as is usually done, that at the pulping-heating stations and all
heeting stations the difference in petroleu- teQeretures at the ensrgence
and entry into the station is identical). lbs loss of head ll. detersined
using fornula (8.11). is dependent on the tewersture tin at the energence
Iron the puping-heating station. The teqereture t.“ at the end of the
line betveen pulping-heating stations cen also be deterained using fornula
(8.5) as a function of tnuc' Stipulating a series of tn values. we deter-
nine the corresponding values 3,, and st and in the coordinates s and tin
we construct (Fig. 8.12) the curves SM - {(tm) and 8': - {(tm). ‘Ihe opti-
Ilun temperature is that corresponding to the minim of the function 8“ 4-

st " “‘end)‘

Despite the fact that the structure of formula (8.25) indicates, it would
seen. that there is a linear dependence S; - {(tm). in a general case this
dependence is expressed by a curved line. since with an increase in heating

106
ton orncm. US: ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tesperatura t1“ there is a change in the ratio of the lengths of eegnents
with turbulent and laeinar flows: an increase in cm leads to an increase
in the la tgth of the turbulent sepent. an increase in the neon weighted
heat transfer coefficient for the particular pipeline segment. and as a re-
sult. an increase in the tewarature difference tin and tend°

The t1“ values oust be adopted taking technological limitations into ac-
count. ‘l‘he heating tewersture of the petroleum t1n lust not exceed the
values at which there will occur a clogging-up of the pipes in the heat-
erchaags apparatus or the decowosition of petroleus begins. At the sass
tine, the petroleus tesperatnre at the and of the run W nust exceed its
congealing point by not less than 25-90 in the case of highly congealing
petroleum; accordingly. using fornula (8.5) with a known mini-us tend
value we determine the lower limit of the possible “and values. for highly
viscous petroleuss there is no technological restriction with respect to
the lower linit tgnda

08.10. Placenent of Stations on "Hot“ Pipeline

The installation of three types of stations is possible on a "hot" pipeline:
heating stations (HS). puning stations (PS) and pulping-heating stations
(PBS). For practical purposes there can be three conbinatione of stations
on the pipeline: 1) only P88; 2) ms and as and 3) P118 and PS.

We will exssine how the stations are placed on the pipeline in all the men-
tioned variants.

1. Only paying-heating stations are installed on the pipeline (Fig. 8.13).

On the vertical drawn on the profile fron the beginning of the route we plot
the backup hbug created by the backup pups and the head a created

by the sainline pups (if the stations are equipped with pi ton pms. then
only the head created by the mainline pumps is plotted).

Using the Shukhov fomla, we deter-ins the point where the teqerature
drops to the value ttr corresponding to a transition of the flow regise
from turbulent to leninar.

Breaking down the sector with turbulent flow into several aegnents (preferb
ably with identical ground conditions in each of these aspents, which will
lake it possible for each of then to take a particular value of the total
heat transfer coefficient), we will deteninc the head losses in each of
than (n - 0.25) and fro. the detersined values we will construct a curve

of the piezosatric heads. If this curve intersects the route profile. this
means that in the entire run to the next pipeline wiping-heating station a
turbulent regine will be observed. however, if the curve does not intersect
the route profile, then fron the point where the turbulent regise undergoes
transition into a laminar regise we will determine the head losses in short
sealants, using the ease eternikin formls (8.11s), but with s - l.

10'!
IOR 0171an use ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

successively until the curve of pieroestric heado intersects the profile

of the pipeline route. Then. dropping back along the profile to the point
where the head is equal to the necessary anticevitation backup hcw for

the pueps. free the curve of pietonetric heads we plot the head III. de-
veloped by the eainline pups installed at the pulping-heating stat on at
this point and we will continue the construction the sees as for the run
between the first and second pimping-heating stations. with the equipping
of the stations with piston puaps the station is constructed at the point
of intersection of the lines of the pieronetric heads and the route profile.

 

.i .
5e" 3.
i.
t" to” “tin
Fig. 8.12. Graph for determining op- Pig. 8.13. Place-ant of wing-heat-
tieue heating tenpsrature. ing stations along pipeline route.

2. It is necessary to install wiping-heating stations and heating stations
on the pipeline (Pig. 8.16).

As in the preceding case. on the profile free the beginning of the pipeline
route we plot the head at the nsin pining-heating station. Taking into ac-
count the poesible change in the heat transfer coefficient we deter-inc the
distance Ln“ free the pueping-heating station to the point where the ten-
perature drops to the conputed value ‘fin (the final tenperature before the
next station) and 2,“, free the pulping-heating station to the point where
the tenperature drops to t“. We will break down the distance Lf‘n into seg-
nents with the constant heat transfer coefficients It and if I.“ <lcro we
use coaputations with the auernikin formula with construction 0? the curve
of pietooetric heads only for a turbulent regies (- - 0.25). and if Lﬂu >
I.“ - for two regines - to r for a turbulent regiee and fron I," to
I.f n for a laminar regies (n - 1). If the curve of pieronstric heads
intersects the route profile to L“... in the particular eepent between
pulping-heating stations it is not necessary to have a heating station

and the placement of a second pining-heating station is acconliahed the
one as in the preceding case. however, if the piesoestric curve does not
intersect the route profile. then in the place where the curve ends. that
is. at the distance Lfin free the head pulping-heating station it is neces-
sary to construct a heating station which again raises the teepereture of
the petroleue to t1“. Then we deter-ins the distance ”(in to the point
where the tewerature drops to tan and also the distance ”or and as
before, we will carry out cowutatione and aeke our constructions. These
coaputatione are repeated until the pietoeetric line intersects the route

108
roe orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

profile. Retreeting elong the route to the point where the backup ie
equel to (or exceede) the enticevitetion velue, we plece there e pulping-
heeting etetion. Further colputetione end conetructione for the plecenent

of hgesing etetione end puping-heeting etetione ere eieiler to those de-
ecr o .

Inc I pueping-heeting etetion

'rc - heeting eteﬂpn I”: W
m u‘rc - Mins-
heeting etet'ion

' uc - puning etetion

     

‘ ' tfin
I'fin
Fig. 8.16. Plecenent of puping-heet- Fig. 8.15. Pleceeent of pu-ping-heet-
ing ntetione end heeting etetione ing etetione end puping etetione
elong pipeline route. elong pipeline route.

3. It ie neceeeery to inetell puping-heeting etetione end pumping etetione
on the pipeline (Fig. 8.15).

Doing the Shukhov for-ole (8.5) we determine the dietence Lfin fron the
beginning of the pipeline et which the te-pereture drope free “in to tan,
obteined by coeputetione when detereining the optieu pipeline pereeetere.
In the ceee of e eubetentiel difference in the heet trenefer coefficiente
in the different eepente of the route the coeputetione of the teqereture
decreeee ere nede by eegpente. At the dietence Lfin froen the beginning of
the pipeline e eecond puping-heeting etetion ie conetructed (the firet ie
inetelled et the beginning of the pipeline).

Subetituting the Lfin velue into the anemiltin fornule (8.lle) we find the
heed loee in thie eegnent (in the ceee of two reginee in the eegnent -

turbulent end leeiner - we coqute the loeeee in eech eegnent end eue
thee).

0n the reute profile we drew e verticel fro- ite origin: on thie profile
we plot the beckup creeted by the eupporting (beckup) pulpe end then we
add the heed ll. equel to the cowuted heed loee. The heed h in divided by
en equel naﬂer of perte in euch e wey thet eech pert ie equel to or is
eoeewhet leee then the edeieeible heed or the etetion (pointe 3 end 0).

He conetruct e conditionel curve of pieronetric heede from the point A in
occordence with the Chernikin forutle. “thie curve with e werticel drewn
fro. the locetion of the eecond puping-heeting etetion on the profile
intereecte et e height fro. the profile line hay correeponding to the

enticevitetion heed which it ieperted to the eecond pulping-hating ete-
tion.

109
Fox ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Prone the points 3 and c we draw lines equidiatant to the route profile

to the intersection with the conditional curve of the pianosetric heads
(3'. c'). The points on the intersections of the verticals drawn through
13' and c' with the line of the route profile correspond to the points of
location of the pumping atations. If we draw fros c and 3" lines which are
equidistant fro: the lines AB‘ end s'c'. we obtain the lines of pieaonet-
ric heads on the seyaents (runs) between stations.

Other cosbinatione of stations are also possible: pulping-heating stations
with pumping stations and heating stations. pumping stations and heating
stations; the construction principles for the place-ant of stations in
these cases are sinilar to those described above.

08.11. Increase in the Throughput Capacity of "Ilot" Pipelines

As in the case of isothermic pipelines. increases in the throughput capac-
ity of "hot" pipelines by a change in their design can be achieved by
three methods: by the laying of a looping. by an increase in the ouster of
stations and a cosbination of these two methods. But since stations of all
three types can be constructed on a ”hot" pipeline, accordingly there is
an increase in the number of nethods: l) the laying of a looping; 2) an
increase in the number of pulping-heating stations; 3) an increase in the
nunber of heating stations; an increase in the number of pming stations.

In addition, it is possible to increase the throughput capacity by a codin-
ntion of the sentioned methods. We will examine each of then.

1. An increase in the throughput capacity by the laying of a looping (Fig.
8.16). Hith different diameters of the looping and the main pipeline the
thermal regimes in these two lines in parallel sectors will not be the
same. and this will exert an influence on the distribution of the flows.
Therefore. the formulas for isotherlic hydraulics for computations of the
loopings on "hot" pipelines are inapplicable. In order to deter-ine the
length of the looping necessary for attaining a stipulated increase in
throughput capacity we will write a system of equations:

1) head balance in the segment between stations (see Pig. 8.16)
ow.- :-v--~) - ‘
11-! D... 1‘ “I (SJ[-ms(t.—l.)]-Bll—u(ln—l.m+

. pry: .I-I (kn-h)
+3 7??!- Tm l-uztn -¢.)l-8I l-eeau-tcm +0:

It“ - tn; tr ‘fin‘ J!- 1oop(ing); tle - t1”, fin (end of looping)!

 

 

(8.25)

2) the condition of equality of head losses in the looping end the sepent
of the asin pipeline parallel to it

9-.
#15![~sus(l..-i.)|—lll~ma(In-Igni- ‘ ~ (8.26)

03"
«02"

[c . tot(ai)]

 

‘E‘ ‘--U (In-IQ’I-‘l I-.. (k. 1-..)":

110
NR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

3) equationa of tenpareture decreoee along length of pipeline

'Il"d+(‘a“e).'d‘3 (8.27)
- c..-c.+(c..-t.)e""‘3 (0.23)
1...-t.+«.-t.)o"‘": (8.29)

6) balance equatione for lengtha and Home

"H“ (3.30)
Qe-Orl'oa: (8 31)
A. no .a. t... “,3, m
“n -—‘-—:=: c ' ‘
tum-I. in tin 1
on " Qtot(al) - loop tun loop

Fig. 8.16. Increaee in throughput capacity of petroleun pipeline by the
laying of a looping.

5) other dependencee:

«5%.
(3.32)
""%' (3.33)
“4%. . (3.34)
'._;n...(.,..,,. (3.35)
“ﬂ“,nvu-n). (8.36)

In theee equations 1.. ll and ‘1.” are the lengthe of the entire eegnent.

the eeguent to the looping and the looping; Q10”. Q1 and Q“: [t . t”chi-)1
are the {love in the looping. in the line parallel to the looping and the

total flow; t t . t 19° . t are the teeperaturea et the be-
ginning of thenlingualeénengfnet the awn. of the looping, at the end

of the looping and et the end of the pipeline eepent parallel to the
looping.

By the joint eolntion of the equetiooe cited ehove we detenine the length
of the looping 1100? of the etipulated dieneter 010., eneuring an intreue
in the throughput capacity to the etipuleted velne ngt.

the folloving eeqoence o! cowotatione can be rem-ended:
l) we etipulate the length of the looping hoop and iron (8.30) 0e deter-

nine L1;
2) iron (8.27) we deter-ine tn 1, fire: deterlining a Iron (8.32):

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) from (8.35) and (8.36) we find Vin and “V1“ 1:
6) we stipulate the value Q1 and iron (8.31) we deter-inc Q1” ;
5) substituting 01 and Q1009 into (8.33) and (8.34). we deter-nine s1 1nd

0 :

5MB“. (8.28) and (8.29) we deteraine tun 1 and tun loop;

7) we substitute all the deterained values of the parameters into (8.26).
If the identity is not sntisfied, we change the adopted 01 value and re-
test all the operations in 0-7) until (8.26) is transforasd into an ident-
t7:

8) we .. .-itute all the deternined values of the parenetere into (8.25).
If tht 'entity is not satisfied. we change the adopted L100, value and

we repeat all the operations in l)-8) until (8.25) is transfer-nod into an
identity.

In all the fornulae cited above it is seemed that the flow regime in the
entire extent of the pipeline is identical. Sonewhat coeplicating the
for-ulna. it is also possible to obtain a solution for the case of differ-
ent regines in the pipeline segnents.

As a result of the great nuﬁer of uniform conputstions, it is desirable
to use an electronic colputer for deter-lining the length of the looping.

In contrast to isothernic pipelines. the position of the looping on a ”hot”
pipeline exerts an influence on the total head loss. The loopings nust

be situated on the "cold” ends of the segnents; the thernsl losses will be
less than when laying a looping at the ”hot" and, and accordingly, the
total head loss will be less with the sane flow.

2. An increase in the number of puping and heating stations (Fig. 8.17).
we will examine the segment between two pulping and heating stations with
a uniform rise or descent of the route and identical thernophysical char-
ncteristice of the ground along the route. Then the second puning and
heating station with the-sane head and heating tenpereture as the first
pumping and heating station nust be constructed in the niddle of the seg-
want (run) and the head a of each puning and heating station will be ex-
pended on overconing resistance in a half of the segnent length. that is,
ll - “Qtot' U2). Therefore. in accordance with (8.11a) we obtain

- «- .m;
”I, #Q:'. -& {5‘ ‘-n. “a-..” —£‘[--.(‘._w. 0' 8°. l‘eO'I'A?’ (8.37)

[c '- tot(al); I! - in(itisl)] where k. and A g are the values of the coef-
ficients It and Ar after an increase in the aroughput capacity.

The Q ot value is deternined by the successive approxinations nethod or by
graph c interpolation fro- (8.37).

In the case of a dissected route profile, dissinilsr thernophysical proper-
ties of the ground along the route or a change in flow regines in the aeg-
nent prior to the installation of an additional pulping-heating station.

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040027-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.8 2.3»:-
nawusuuaugn no 93.398. wound and 65 38.33. undo-8.
Inn—«an no 3.392. ououon 052.3 :03: no 59—3 28.".

3.» 83833-8 2.- 3m 83.. no 83.5338 .26 $8

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040027-7
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

the latter need not be placed in tho niddle of the nbove-nentioned eegpent,
the poeitioning of the additional puming and heating etatione is deter-
eined in thie use can the eaee ee when poeitioning it on a newly planned
pipeline.

 

Hg. 8.18. Dietribution of heede I! (a) and teqeraturea t (b) elong length
of "hot" pipeline before doubling of pulping-heating ete'tione (1) and after
doubling of pruning-heating etatione (2).

It should be noted that in the cane of a dieeetted profile and different

thernophyeicel propertiee of the ground along the route the nuber of ad-
ditionel puning end heating etetione in different eegeente for attaining
a etipuleted increaee in throughput capacity can be diuindlar.

Figure 8.17 aleo ehove the dietribution of petroleul tenpereturee along the
route before and after inetellation of additional pming and heating ete-
tione. 'lhe higher tenereture on the approach to the additional pulping
and heating etetion then before ite conetruction ie attributable to an
increeee in flow due to the inetellation of the additional wing and
heating etetion.

3. An increeee in the nueber of heating etetione (Fig. 8.18). Hith identical
thereophyeicel propertiee of the gromd along the route and an identical
flov regine in the entire eegpent it in neceeeery that an additional heat-
ing etetion be conetructed in the edddle of the eegnent. the head I! of the
pine vill be expended in overtoning the reeietencee of too eegnente of

the length 112 identical in themal regine. where 1 1a the length of the
eegeent between the pulping-heating etatione. that ie. -

. . t
[c - tot(e1)) 3-2!(o.. 1-).

Subetituting theee notatione into for-ula (8.11a), we obtain
no

4: ' -— '
"”3=0e""1='."as[RH-"oa-un-ml-u-«we.» " 'Wﬂauw. ‘3'”)

[c - tot(el); a - in(itiel): cp - eeen]

11';

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 8.19. Dietribution of heede (e) end teqereturee t (b) elong length of
"hot" pipeline before doubling (1) end efter doubling (2) of pumping ete-
t1me

‘rhehgaot velue. ee in the preceding ceee. ie determined by the iteretione
net .

6. An increeee in the nuﬁer o! pulping etetione (rig. 8.19). With the con-
struction of en edditionel puning etetion the doubled heed of the eretion

will be expended on overcoming the reeietencee on the eegeent between the
pulping end heeting etetione, thet ie

23 " ‘(Qtogo 1)

0"

w ‘ ' -
18- c—‘L 0H -m l .
’ D ‘I e :ﬁ {Ell-~.(‘l‘“’l-“[-‘Il (!._'.) . Q .w]}A'.+A., (8e39,

[c - tot(el); cp - neen)]

The edditionel puning etetion nuet be loceted cloeer to the end of the
line so thet the heed loeeee overcone by eech etetion will be identicel.
The poeitioning of the edditionel pming etetion cen be deter-ined en-
elyticelly. but it ie lore convenient to do thie by the greph enelyeie
”two

For thie purpoee on the profile of the route et the beginning of the run
we plot off the bechup end the doubled heed of the neinline puwing ete-
tione. Subetituting different Lvum into formle (3.39). we deternine
the corresponding veluee of the heed loeeee end we oonetruct e conditionel

pieeonetric curve. hon the point A. correeponding to the heed et one ete-
tion. we drew e line which in equidietent to the route profile; ite interb
eection with the conditionel pieroeetric line determines the poeition of
the edditionel pming etetion.

08.12. Speciel Opereting leginee of ”not" Pipelinee

“not" pipelinee e coneidereble pert of the tine operete in e nonetetionery
theml end hydreulic regine. A theme). nonetetionery etete, eeeocieted
with elov heeting or cooling of the nediu eurrounding the pipeline, ten

1-15
m omcm use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lead to s stoppage of the pipeline due to an exceptional increase in the
head in it - to its "freezing up."

One of the nost serious and responsible operations is the start-up of a
newly constructed hot pipeline. Before being put into operation the petrol-
eun pipeline is filled with cold water after ulding. If this water is
forced out bv ‘not viscous petrolem or petroleum which has great tendencies
for congealing, for whose punping the pipeline was designed. the petroleu
(especially that part of it in contact with the cold water) will cool rapid-
ly, its viscosity is greatly increased or it solidifies and plugs up the
pipeline, stopping the flow.

In the case of a short distance between the heating stations and a rela-
tively low viscosity or solidification point of the petroleu it is sons-
tines possible to sccosplish a start-up of pumping into a cold pipeline
by heated viscous petroleum or petroleum with high solidifying properties.
llowever, in most cases such conditions do not exist and the pipeline lust
be heated before pulping in any petroleum. It is necessary to create a
corresponding heat field in the ground around the pipeline. Such a field
before startup is created by pumping a heated low-viscosity petroleum.
petroleum products or water through the petroleu- pipeline.

For determining the duration of heating (puping through of a heating fluid)
P. l. Tugunov has proposed a sisplified formula:

D. ..
r- cm 7"... (kl-'4“). (8.60)

where ‘C is the duration of hosting by a low-viscosity petroleul product;

”ex [0“] is the external diameter of the pipe; a and A are the thornsl dif-
fusivity and thernsl conductivity coefficients for the ground; tpipe [cl-E]
is the tenperature of the outer wall of the pipeline. assmed equal to t e
tespersture of the heating fluid at the end of the segment between heating
stations; to is the tenpersture of the ground in an uniwsired thermal
state at the depth at which the pipeline is laid; q is the heat transfer
from a unit length of the pipeline in a unit tine.

i
000 -I.)T3
[ll - in; K - fin(al)] '~ '

G is the mass flow of the heating fluid; c is the heat capacity of the flu-

id; t1 and ‘fin are the initial and final tesperatures of the heating flu-
id: 1. 2s the distance between the heating stations.

The wall tenperature of the pipe is 2-10'c lower then the flow temerature
and therefore, assuming in (CAD) that the telpersture of the pipe wall
tptyg is equal the the flow tewersture tfino the heating tins is somhat
exaggerated. that is, there is assurance of sons tine reserve.

The volule of the heating fluid is then determined from the forsula

1.16
ros orncm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V-—‘l.

9

The value ‘Pilﬂ - t“ is asaued to be such that the total head loss in
the segnent between tne pulping stations with pipeline filling by the
transported petroleum does not exceed the min. admissible head at the
stations and at the seas time the flow will be turbulent or situated in
the third zone of the characteristic curve in the case of laainsr flow.
This will nake it possible to put the pipeline into a stationary thernal
regine while already puning the oil to be transported. The heating can
be speeded up by using for this purpose heated water instead of a low-
viscosity petroleum product; the heated water has approxinately a twofold
greater heat capacity than petroleus products. The heating tins of the
water ‘6' ts with a known tile for heating by a petroleua product ‘pet
is deter-Ines using the spproxinate formla:

n-nup('--z“:—f)-

[B - water; I! - pet(roleun products)] where on", and cweter are the lease
flow and the heat capacity of water.

By technical-economic computations it can be deternined to what thermal
level (above the nininun, determined by the maxim- edlissible head loss-
es in the aegasnt between pulping stations with the pming of the petrol-
eun to be transported) it is desirable during the heating of water to heat
the petroleun pipeline before the initial pulping of petroleun.

The foraulas cited above auet be used for preliminary cosputations of heat-
ing of the petroleul pipeline. me to the inaccuracy in detersining the ther-
Isl diffusivity. theraal conductivity coefficients and other parameters, and
also the inaccuracy in the aatheaatical nodel the actual heating tine can
differ substantially fro. the muted value. Therefore, the puning in

of the petroleus to be transported met begin when the teqerature of the
heating fluid at the end of the upset between heating stations. Ieasured
with instruents, attains the stipulated value tn...

In the operation of a ”hot" pipeline it is inevitable that it will experi-
ence stoppages for more or less prolonged periods. These can be caused by
deluge in one of the segnents. the need for carrying out repair work. dis-
ruptions in the delivery of petrolet- to the head station and the technol-
ogy adopted for cyclic transfers. In order, insofar as possible, to pre-
vent the "freezing up" of the petroleu pipeline. it is necessary to know
the so-called safe tine for stoppage of the pipeline. that is. the tine
during which the petrolet- with a tendency to congeal will still not sol-
idify in the stepped pipeline and a highly viscous petroleum will not attain
that viscosity level at which the head loss will exceed the admissible head
at the pulping station.

Approxiaately. the safe tine ‘C of pipeline stoppage can be conuted using
the formula

117
roe orrrcm. use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. DI ‘(I
“Nail-5‘ .232; we

[1)“ - ”and where H is the depth at which the pipeline is laid

"a ' Human] “'ﬁ"

:1“ is the initial tenperature of the pipe well (inediately after cessa-
tion of pumping); t is the te-psrature of the pipe wall at which it is
still possible, without any complications. to renew the puwing.

In some cases a "hot“ pipeline has a throughput capacity considerably as-
ceeding the quantity of petroleum received for transport. So it is during
the initial period of working of the deposit when the production voluee

is still inadequate for loading of the nain pipeline designed for the com-
plete development of the field or during a period of decreasing production
in a deposit which is being sadleusted.

In these cases there can be two variants of pipeline operation: with con-
tinuous pulping with reduced flows and with cyclic pumping in which sons
of the ties the pipeline operates with a full load and the reminder of the
time the pulping ceases.

In order to ascertain which of the operating variants is sore advantageous
it is first necessary to determine the optimum nuber of cycles (in this
case a cycle is the period of ties including the duration of one interval
of continuous puming and one interval of stoppage) with cyclic puning.

The greater the number of pumping cycles. the. lesser need be the capacity
of the additional tanks for the storage of petrolaun at the two ends of
the pipeline and the expenditures associated with then. but on the other
hand. the greater will be the expenditures on the heating and substitution
of the nain product to be transported by e low-viscosity product at the ties
of pipeline stoppages. 0n the other hand. a reduction in the amber of
cycles causes an increase in expenditures on additional capacity and a de-
crease in the expenditures on substituting the petroleum in the pipeline
by a low-viscosity product. By stipulating the cycles with different nu-
bars. it is possible to ascertain the sun of the reduced erpenditures on
the capacity and expulsion of petroleua for each variant. The optiaun
nutter of cycles will be that corresponding to the variant with the mini-
mum reduced expenditures.

Now we will compare variants with continuous and cyclic puping. Hith coo-
tinuoua puwing with a reduced flow the petroleum teaperature between the
heating stations will drop off aore than in the case of a noeinal flow.
which can lead to an excessive increase in head loss or the congealing of
the petroleum Accordingly. with a decrease in flow in cowarison with the
nor-s1 planned flow it is necessary to construct a definite number of ad-
ditional heating stations, which involves additional expenditures on their

1.18
son onlcm. use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction and operation. However. in the case of cyclic puming addi-
tional expenditures arise for tanks and for expulsion of petroleun by
low-viscosity products during stoppages of pumping. The variant vith ain-
isun reduced expenditures will be better.

Hith the stoppage of petroleue pulping in a ”hot" pipeline for a prolonged
period, in order to prevent its "freezing-up" the petroleue mat be ex-
pelled by a low-viscosity petroleun or petroleum product. In sons cases
the petroleul has succeeded in congealing before onset of expulsion.

If the petroleun to be expelled is a Newtonian fluid. that is, for this
fluid. in particular. there is no static shearing stress. its expulsion
from the entire sealant between the punping stations is possible by the
station pups. However. if the petroleun is non-Newtonian. such expulsion
is possible only in a case when the pressure p developed by the station
is adequate for overcoming the static shearing stress ‘6“, that is. if
there is satisfaction of the condition (for horizontal pipelines)

.
, l?— < «on...

'> “Vex '

[CT - at] where D and tare the diaeater and length of the pipeline segaent
between stations.

hence

I b

      

Fig. 8.20. Graph of expulsion of congealing petroleum iro- pipeline. A)
period.

If this condition is not satisfied. the petroleu expulsion must be accele-
plished in lesser segpents.

Now we will axe-ins the piston process for the expulsion of petroleum
which is emloyed with the placenent of a separator in front of the ex-

pelling product or in the case of a structured flow of the petroleus to
be expelled.

In order to accelerate the petroleun expulsion process it is desirable that
it be eccoqlished with the anxious possible flow. In this case the re-
strictions are the maxim- edniseible head at the output iron the puqing
station, taking into account the strength of the pipeline and equip-eat.

n9
roe omcm. use mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or the maxim delivery of the station puma.

In a general case the petrolem expulsion process can be broken down in-

to two periods (Fig. 8.20. a). During the course of the first period the
head of these is limited to the maximum admissible value h.“ and the

flow Q with an increase in the length of the segment occupied by the low-
viscoaity product increases. Finally, the flow attains the naxisun possible
delivery of the pups under the given conditions. that is. by this time the
heed restriction is cowletely removed. This is followed by a second per-
iod associated with a further increase in the length of the sealant occup-
ied by a low-viscosity product, a total loss of head, and together with

it the head at the station is reduced and the flow in the pipeline slow-

ly increases due to movement of the point of intersection of the head char-
acteristics of the centrifugal pumping station and the petrolet- pipeline
in the direction of an increase in the flows (with the outfitting of the
station with piston pumps the flow during the course of the second period
will be constant).

Two special cases are possible. If in the case of total delivery by the

pumps at the very beginning of expulsion the head developed by the pumps

is equal to or less than the maxim admissible level (Fig. 8.20.b). the
head at the station will constantly decrease and the flow will slowly in-
crease. llowever, if the head losses in the pipeline corresponding to the
maximum delivery by the station pumps when the expelling product reaches

the end of the segnent between the pumping stations exceed the maximum admis-
sible head at the station hm“. the head at the station must constantly be
maintained equal to hm and the flow will constantly increase (Fig. 8.20.
c).

For the first period (see Fig. 8.20,a) with expulsion of Newtonian petroleum
the head losses in the pipeline at any nosent are expressed as follows:

 

""W'xp 9,0“"“"""U ‘3) PI 8e ‘1
“not?! - bong-n: I 4' —T..a'-T.'_“"m ( )

where the subscripts l and 2 relate to the expelling and expelled fluids
respectively; A: is the difference in the elevations of the end and beginn-
ing of the segment; pm“ is the scan density of the fluids in the pipe-
line.

Breaking down the pipeline into short sepents. we will substitute the cor-
responding x values into (8.51) and determine the Q values for different
flow regimes of the two fluids. Using the Q values for the segments we

determine the time of passage through the discontinuity of each segment,
a'nd then‘ sunning theatwe find the tine ‘61 -- the duration of the first

expulsion period.
In the case of a laminar flow regime of both fluids expression (8.1.1) is
silplified:

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mm -%’§rlvm1-M&-t)sd+Mm (8.42)
[cp - nun] hence . .
Substituting into the continuity equation
oat-$a. " (3.“)

the Q value free (8.63). after integration we obtain the duration of the
first expulsion period

a: . . .w- . .-.

'1! (5‘ (Other-m (W- 1 q) (3-45)
The length of the sealant at corresponding to the first period of expul-
sion is determined free (8. 2) by substitution of the Q value correspond-
ing to the head h.“ in accordance with the head characteristic curve for
the punins station.

For the second period it is possible to write the pressure balance equation

In - 1n] m(..-A.Q)--‘§§;‘-loms+'m(L-sn+w~ (8.1.6)

km” —s ) '
o-H—ﬁmm —s)+ a: (8.47)
and after substitution into equation. (8.69) and integration “obtain

. 3: g 9-...
“'W[(W+wnwm)ww-MM—r’-I
Here so and h1 n are coefficients of the interpolation for-ula in the forts

hence

ll - .0 - th.
describing the head characteristic curve of a centrifugal pumping station.

The total expulsion tine is ..
v-irl-Vv

If the petroleum to be expelled flows in a structured resins, the total
Pressure loss Ptot in the pipeline can be represented as follows:

Ptot '-m'ﬁ§2'-+ m” “” Nil—""5“”.

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOB OWICIAL USE ONLY

lloro the first tors represents the pressure loss in the segnent x occup-
ed by the "pushing" fluid. which noves in e leniner regine: the second

and third terns represent the pressure loss in the segnent l. - x occupied
by the fluid to be expelled. which noves in e structured regine. in accord-
once with the simplified Buckinghen forum.

In this equetion replscing pg” by the nexinu sdnissihle pressure h.“ 1g
for the first period end (no - th)!’ g for the second period end solv ng
this equation Jointly with the continuity equetion (8.36). siniler to the
preceding ceee we will deternine the tine for expulsion of the pstroleu
flowing in e structured regine.

If the petroleun to be expelled is e Newtonien fluid et the expulsion ten-
pereture, the product expelling it (with e leniner flow of both fluids)
will be wedged into it-(in the ebsence of e seperstor st the discontinuity
of the fluids) end the vertex of the wedge etteins the end of the line seg-
ment sooner than the reneining ness of the product. Accordingly, the entire
process of petroleun expulsion cen be divided into two phones: expulsion
phnse, ending when the wedge vertex of the expelling fluid resehes the end
of the line segnent. end the Meshing" phsse. during which there is s vir-
tually conplete expulsion of ell the petroleu to be expelled fron the

line eegnent.

If it is eesmed thst during expulsion there is retention of the profile
of velocities cherscteristic for e leniner regine, thet is. the exiel velo-
city is two tines greeter then the neon velocity, it is possible to deter-
nine opproxinetely the durstion of the first expulsion phese, which will be
half on greet es the duretion deter-lined using the fornules cited shove.

The duration of the second phase — the "weshing out" - is deternined ue-
ing the fornules for the sinilsr operstion of successive pulping in s lsniner
regine.

08.13. Clesring of Pereffin Deposits fron Petroleun Pipelines

Many petroleum. especielly petroleum fron esstern regions. contein pereffin.
For exenple, the following contein persffin: Volge region petroleuss -- fron
2 to 111. petrolsues of Turlueenie - up to 162, Oxeksustskeye petroleus
(Stevropol'skiy Krsy) - 261 end Hengyshlek petroleuls (Ksukhsten) - up

to 292.

Under stretuln conditions the pereffin is dissolved in the petroleum. Hith
rising to the surfece end during pulping through pipelines the petroleu
tenpersture is reduced. the solution beconee setureted end under definite
conditions the persffin precipitetes fron it, being deposited on the pipe-
line wells. The psreffin deposits decreese the pipe cross section snd ec-
cordingly reduce the throughput cepseity. For exegle, the deposition of
persffin in none pipelines in the Beshkirskeye ASSR hes reduced their
throughput cepecity to 501. As denonstrsted by sn investigetion of the

122
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
'OR OPPICIM. "8! ONLY

deposits, they consist of pereffins with e high nelting point end ceresin

we: (up to 502). esphslt-ter substencee (up to 201), lechenieel impurities
and oils.

The deposits ere distributed nonunifornly elong the pipeline. In the ini-
tiel segeent of the pipeline. where the tenpereture is higher then the
onset of precipitetion teepereture for pereffin. its deposits ere insig-
nificent. ‘lhen. where the t-pereture is lower. the pereffin is releesed
intensively end its deposits are substentiel. 'lhereefter the thickness of
the persffin deposits elong the length of the pipeline decreesee since the
petroleue slreedy eaves et en eleost conetent teepereture equel to the
ground telpereture end the lein less of the pereffin precipiteting et this
teepereture hes elreedy been deposited in the preceding segment.

however, it should be noted thet both the weether conditions exerting on
influence on the tenpereturs of the ground surrounding the pipeline end
the properties of the petroleul cen introduce significent corre-.-tions into
the described pettern of distribution of pereffin deposits in the pipeline.

A study of psreffin deposition in petroleln pipelines Iede it possible to
clarify the conditions necessery for the fornetion of such pereffin depos-
its on the inner surfece of pipes:

presence in the petroleun of e coneidereble quentity of pereffin, which
with e decreese in the teqereture to e welue when the pereffin content
otteins e seturetion content begins to precipitete out;

o relatively low petroleum viscosity, melting it possible for the pereffin
crystsls to love freely in the petrolet- flow:

e teqereture decreese in the petroleum pipeline to the level et which the
pereffin precipitetes out due to e decreese in solubility.

In order to neintein the pipeline throughput cepecity et e level close to
the plenned level it is necessery to cleer it free the pereffin deposits.
The nest effective nethod for claering the inner surfece of the pipeline
at the present tine is nechenicel clesning by eeens of screpers. Both in
the Soviet Union end ehroed neny designs of netel screpers heve been devel-
oped in which the cleening eleeents ere disks. knives end wire brushes. The
scrapers of different designs ere different in the effectiveness of renov-
ing deposits from the wells of the pipes. with respect to resistence to
weer end psssebility. The letter quelity is very inportsnt for pipelines
hewing even ineignificent obstacles in the inner cevity in the for. of
hacking rings. burrs end constrictions in fittings. During reguler clean-

ing of e pipeline netel screpere cen pess up to 100 be without excessive
weer.

Good peseebility quelities ere cherecteristic of spherical rubber seperetors
which can elso be used for cleering pipelines fron pereffin deposits. 1he
optim- periodicity of peseege of screpers (or sphericsl seperstors) along

123
roe orncm. use 0qu
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

a pipeline is deternined on the baeie of the following considerations.

The depoeition of peratiin in a pipeline eaueee a decrease in throughput
capacity end corruponding loan; the greater the tile lapee between uee
of the eerepere, the greater will be theee louee. 0n the other hand, the
leaner the tine lapee between use of the acrepere. that ie. the greater
the nunber of peeaee of the ecrapere, the gutter will be the expendituree
on ecraping (and alto the lotus due to etoppagee of the etationa when the
scraping ie being done it euch etoppegea ere required by the eetabliehed
cleaning methods). The optieun periodicity of peeeege of the acrapere
correspond. to the varient in which the loeaee iron peraffin depoeition
in the pipeline and the reduced expendituree on peeeage through of the
ecrepore are nininul.

common-r: Irdetel'etvo "Nedra". 1978

5303
cso: 8366/0011 m

12';

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY