FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10214
23 December 1981

USSR Report

EARTH SCIENCES

(FOUO 9/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
EARTH SCIENCES

(POUO 9/81)

CONTENTS

OCEANOGRAPHY

Experiment for Determining Velocities in Sedimentary Layer of Sea
of Japan Using Seisnoacoustic Radiobuoys .......................

Interpretation of Data on Oceanic Have Movements Registered by
HOVi-ns sensors .00.00.00...OJO0.0.0.0...00OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOO.

Influence of Sound Scattering on Depth Dependence of Low-Frequency
Oceanic Noise ..................................................

EPH Marine Electric Field Meter ..................................
Electrokinetic Interference in Electrometric Work in Sea Areas....
Articles on Dynamics of Fluid With Free Boundaries ...............
Collection of Articles on Ocean Dynamics .........................

Collection of Articles on Atmosphere-Ocean Interaction in
Atlantic ocean o.coo-0.00.0.00....OOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.000......

Tasks of Department of Oceanology, Atmospheric Physics and
Geography, USSR Academy of Sciences. in Conformity to
Resolutions of 26th CPSU Congress ..............................

Collection of Papers on Marine Meteorology .......................

TERRESTRIAL GBOPHYSICS
Collection of Articles on Applied Geophysics .....................

Collection of Articles on Dynamic Theory of Seismic Have

Prop.‘.t1°n onees.eeo00one.no.soecon-eon.ooeoeeeeoooooeeeaeeesoe

- a - [III - USSR - 218 8&T

FOR O‘TWCJAU-IEEECHULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSICS 01’ ANSWERS

Collection of Papers on Atmospheric Jpcice ........................

Monograph on Geophysical Parameters of Ionoephere ................

ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

Collection of Articles on Geophysical Research in Antarctica ......

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OIIWCIAI.LEEZCNVLV

UDC 550.834

EXPERIMENT FOR DETERMINING VELOCITIES IN SEDIHENTARY LAYER 0F SEA OF JAPAN
USING SEISHDACOUSTIC RADIOBUOYS

Moscow OKEANOLOGIYA in Russian Vol 21. No 5, Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript received 12 May
80. after revision 8 Sep 80) pp 915-919

[Article by B. Ya. Karp, s. I. Hedvedev and V. P. Karman, Pacific Ocean Oceanolog-
ical Institute, Far Eastern Scientific Center, USSR Academy of Sciences, Vladi-
vostok]

[Text] Abstract: This article gives the results of experi-
mental-methodological work by the reflected waves
method carried out along five profiles in the Sea
of Japan. The work was done using a highly correl-
ated observation system and employing an instru-
ment complex based on "Sprut" seismoacoustic radio-
buoys. The objective of the work was a clarifica-
tion of the possibilities of the developed appar-
atus in investigations in the deep sea and a de-
termination of the velocities of seismic waves in
the upper part of the earth's crust of the shelf,
continental slope and deepdwater basin of the Sea
of Japan. The good capabilities of "Sprut" radio-
buoys were established.

Extensive use of seismoacoustic radiobuoys (SARB) has come about during the last
decade in oceanographic expeditionary work for clarifying the velocity structure
of the earth's crust in the seas and oceans [4, 5 and others]. The principal ad-
vantage of seismic work with SARB is the possibility of using a single vessel for
carrying out investigations with highly correlated observation systems over a rel-
atively short period of time.

In the summer of 1979, during a geophysical expedition of the Pacific Ocean Ocean-
ological Institute, Far Eastern Scientific Center USSR Academy of Sciences (T01
DVNTs AN SSSR) on the scientific research ship "Borey," specialists carried out ex-
perimental-methodological work by the seismic method of reflected waves using high-
ly correlated observation systems and employing Soviet-produced SARB of the ”Sprut"
type [3]. The objective of the experimental-sethodological work was the testing of
the complex of apparatus developed at the Pacific Ocean Oceanological Institute,
Far Eastern Scientific Center, USSR Academy of Sciences, the basis of which was
standard-produced instruments, from the point of view of its suitability for carry-
ing out investigations using the mentioned observation systems and determining

FOITOFFIJAI.UBB(NWLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

velocities in the sedimentary layer of the Sea of Japan for the purpose of interb
preting continuous seismic profiling records.

The principles for constructing the apparatus complex for carrying out seismic work
in the deep sea using highly correlated observation systems, using SARB and nonex-
plosive sources, are well known and are set forth in a nunber of studies [1, 6, and
others]. These principles were used in creating a similar complex at the Pacific
Ocean Oceanological Institute, Far Eastern Scientific Center. USSR Academy of Sci-
ences. Figure 1 is a block diagram of the apparatus. The complex consists of three
blocks: reception and relaying block, registry block and radiation block. SAID of
the "Sprut" complex were used in the reception and relaying of seismic signals. In
the radiobuoys there was a change in the suspension of the hydrophone. which made
it possible to use them with sea depths greater than 120 m.

The reception of radio signals from a buoy and their conversion is accomplished
using the radio receiver and demodulator (RD). The signal from the demodulator
output is divided into three channels by means of the band filters BPl-BPB. The
filters have transmission bands 5-35, 50-150 and 150-300 32, a flat frequency char-
acteristic in the transmission band and a cutoff steepness 12 db/octave. The fre-
quency separation of the signal makes it possible, using several automatic record-
ers simultaneously, to register the oscillations propagating only in the water
layer (a so-called "direct" wave), reflections from deep discontinuities, and ob-
tain a good resolution for the boundaries situated immediately below the sea floor
11].

 

Fig. 1. ”lack diagram of instrument complex. Explanations in text.

KEY:
1. RB -- rudinbuuy 7. DOR - discrete operation recorder
2. RD -- receiver-demodulator 8. FA - facsimile apparatus
3. ur -- band filter 9. "0-62 -- magnetograph
a. A -- amplifier 10. CSU -- control-synchronization unit
5. H - hydrophone 11. 888 - electrospark source
6. H -- mixer 12. PS - pneumatic source

2
NOR OFFICIAI.IEIB(HULY
I!!!(Iﬂﬂ(1hl.lE§E(HVLY

The signal is fed from the output of the band filters through the-amplifiers Al-A3
and mixers to standard paper tape recorders: DOR (discrete operation recorder) and
FAK-P (facsimile apparatus). With simultaneous operation of both recorders a signal
from the lowarequency filter 3P1 is fed to one of them and simultaneously, with a

lesser amplification, the total signal from the BFZ and 8P3 filters, whereas the
second receives divided signals from the 8P2 and 3P3 filters.

In order to ensure the possibilities of further analog and digital processing of
seismic information the signal from the output of the receiving unit is registered
in one of the channels of the N062 magnetograph. The other channels are used in
the registry of the oscillation radiated by the source and arriving at the magneto-

graph from the output of the towed hydrophone (B), as well as the moment of radia-
tion and the synchronizing pulses with a frequency of 1200 Hz.

The control of radiation and signal registry is accomplished by a control and syn-
chronization unit (050). The synchronization of operation of this unit is accom-
plished using the FAK-P tuning fork oscillator. In addition. provision is made

for the possibility of operation from an external source of synchronization with

a frequency of 1200 Hz and a voltage of 1.5 V. Using the CSU the operator can sel-
set the necessary duration of functioning of the recorders (2, 4 or 8 sec) and

radiation interval (from 2 to 20 see with a discreteness of 2 sec). The csu makes
possible simultaneous radiation by pneumatic and electrospark sources (PS. ESS).

Experimental method. The described instrument complex was used for seismic invest-
igations on five profiles in the Sea of Japan (Fig. 2). Since the geophysical ob-
jective of the experimentsl-aethodological work was a determination of the veloc-
ities of seismic waves in the upper part of the earth's crust for the purpose of
interpreting data from continuous seismic profiling, the radiobuoys were situated
on continuous seismic profiling profiles intersecting the shelf, continental slope
and the abyssal basin of the Sea of Japan.

 

Fig. 2. Map of arrangement of profiles in Sea of Japan.

3
FOI'OFFHJAI.USEIINLY
FOIGMHHCJAI.USB(MVLY

In the working of profiles with sea depths exceeding 120 m, a SARB was placed at
the center of the profile, then the ship moved to one of the ends of the profile
and moved along it at a speed of 4 knots, towing a pneumatic sound source. The
observation system was intended for obtaining individual travel-time curves of
reflected waves. The total length of the profile was dependent on the depth (H)

of the acoustic basement, discriminated on the continuous seismic profiling
records, from the sea surface; it was (5-6)H. with such a relationship between
the length of the profile and the depth of the discontinuity it is possible with
a high accuracy to determine the mean velocity to the discontinuity and its slope.

The radiobuoy hydrophone was suspended at a depth of 36 m, which approximately cor-
responds to one-quarter of the length of a wave with a frequency 10 Hz. For separ-
ation from the surface waves the hydrophone was connected to the buoy by a neutral
buoyancy cable with a length of 15 m and an underwater "brake." This suspension
method made it possible to carry out work with waves at sea up to 5 scale units.

A pneumatic source (PS) designed at the All—Union Scientific Research Institute
of Geophysics with a volume of 2 dm3, towed at a depth of 9 a, was used for the
generation of elastic oscillations. In the experiments the radiation period was
8 sec, that is, with a ship speed of 4 knots the "shots" were set off each 16 m.

The high density of the radiation points made it possible to carry out reliable
correlation of regular seismic waves with a low aignsl-to-noise ratio.

The profiles on the shallow-water shelf (sea depths less than 120 m) were worked
using two SARB placed at their opposite ends. In this case the hydrophone was
situated on the bottom and the separation from surface waves was ensured by means
of an anchor attached to the hydrophone cable at a distance of 20 m from the hy-
drophone. The radiation period was reduced to 4 sec, that is, the radiation points
were situated at a distance of 8 m from one another. Otherwise the work method re-
mained the same as in the first case.

A method was developed for processing the travel—time curves of reflected waves

registered by means of radiobuoys. The method makes it possible with a greater
accuracy and with a lesser expenditure of computer time than the known algorithm

published by Le Pichon, et a1. [6] to determine the velocity and structural para-
meters of the medium within the framework of this same model with plane slanting
discontinuities. Another study has been devoted to a detailed vatidation and ex-
amination of this method. Here we briefly deal with the algorithm for the process-

Ing of travel-time curves of reflected waves based on this method.

The algorithm makes use of the perturbation and optimization methods. As the "perb
turbation" of the constant refractive index of the medium “0 - vo'l use is made
of the small increment n1 as a function of the coordinates x, z, where x is the

horizontal coordinate directed along the line of observation; 2 is the vertical
coordinate directed into the depth of the medium; v0 is "unperturbed" constant

velocity, that is, the refractive index of the medium is represented in the form

n - no + n1(x,z). (1)

I.
F0810FFKJA1.USE(HHLY
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE(HVLV

A travel-time equation for a reflected wave for a refractive index in the form

(I) was derived. On the basis of this equation it was possible to for: a so-called
”purpose function" whose minimua is separated by the choice of four parameters by
means of the Fibonacci method [2].

As a result, it is possible to compute the depth of the reflecting boundary, its
slope and time of propagation along the ray normal to the boundary (to). After
determining these parameters for the upper and lower boundary for any individual

layer it is possible to compute the mean velocity in the layer using a formula
derived from siaple geometrical reasonings.

Results of investigations. Among the five profiles worked on the voyage two were
situated within the limits of the Primor'ye shelf, two on the continental slope
and one in the abyssal basin of the Sea of Japan (Fig. 2). The seismic records to
be interpreted were interpreted on all the profiles. Below, as an example, we give
the results of processing of data along three profiles, each of which character-

izes one of the studied morphostructures (shelf, continental slope and abyssal
basin).

Profile I is on the Primor'ye shelf on the traverse of Rynda Gulf. Inforlation on
the velocity of seismic waves in the upper part of the earth's crust are complete-

ly absent here. According to continuous seismic profiling data which were obtained
on this expedition, the rocks typical of the acoustic basement approach the real
surface of the bottom in this region. The profile was worked by means of two sn-
chored SARB situated at distances of 5.26 km from one another. The total length

of the profile is 11.3 km. The following were registered: the wave refracted at
the water-bottom surface (Prefr), the "direct" water wave (Pdir) and uninterpret-
able reflected waves from discontinuities below the bottom (Pig. 3). Along the
bottom the profile is virtually flat and slightly inclined (sea depth under radio-
buoy 1 - 105 m, under radiobuoy 2 -- 75 m). The counter travel-time curves Pref:
where processed by the constant difference method. A boundary velocity 6.6 km.
sec'1 was obtained.

Profile 3 is situated along the continental slope of Primor'ye at sea depths 1.875
km. In working the profile the objective was to obtain a travel-time curve of re-
flected waves from the principal discontinuities discriminated on the continuous
seismic profiling records and a determination of the velocity of seismic waves in
the layer covering the acoustic basement. According to continuous seismic profil-
ing data, here beneath the sea floor there is a stratified layer with a time
"thickness" of 0.76 sec, underlain by an acoustically transparent layer with a
"thickness" of 0.42 sec, and the bottom of this layer is the acoustic basement.

The investigations were made using a single SARB situated at the center of the
profile. Travel times of waves reflected from the floor and the discontinuities
below the bottom and the travel time of the "direct" wave were registered. The
travel times of the reflected waves were registered along the entire length of
the profile; the travel-time curve of the “direct" wave was registered only to
a time 1.625 sec. 0n the record it is easy to discriminate the travel-time curves

of the bottom reflection and the wave reflected frOm the acoustic basement. In
addition, it was possible to discriminate the travel-time curve of a wave

FOIiﬂllﬂClAl.lEI£(lUlY
F0!‘0I11CLAI.US€<0NLN

reflected from the top of the acoustically transparent layer and the travel-time
curve of the reflection from one of the discontinuities in the stratified thick-
ness of sediments.

The travel-time curves of the reflected waves were processed using the algorithm
cited above. The distances between the source and receiver were determined from
the arrival times of the "direct" wave, whose travel—time curve was extrapolated
to the maximum distances of registry of reflected waves. The mean speed of sound
in the water was computed using data on temperature and salinity - 1.51 kmosec‘l.
The total length of the profile is 15.3 km (9.65 km - left branch of the travel-
time curve, 5.85 -- right branch of the travel-time curve). As a result of the
processing it was possible to obtain the following section of the upper part of
the crust. Immediately beneath the sea floor there is a layer with a thickness

of 0.53 km with a stratum velocity 1.72 km-sec'l; it is underlain by a layer with
a thickness of 0.18 km with a velocity of 2.6 km-sec‘l. At the base of the section
there is a layer with a thickness of 1.17 km and the stratum velocity is 6.0 km'
sec'l. The bottom of this layer (acoustic basement) slopes at an angle of 8.70

to the horizontal.

 

Fig. 3. Travel-tine curves of seismic waves and section of upper part of earth's
crust on shelf (profile 1, see Fig. 2). Pdir - direct wave, Prefr -- the wave re-
fracted at the water-bottom discontinuity.

m :
A) Pdir

B) prcfr
c) Vmean - 1.5 kn/scc

D) Vboun - 4.4 km/sec

Profile 4 was worked in the abyssal basin of the Sea of Japan at sea depths 3.36

km. The observation system here was also intended for obtaining travel-time curves

of reflected waves using one SARB. Along the entire profile it was possible to dis-
criminate the travel—time curve of a bottom reflection and the travel—time curve of

waves reflected from the acoustic basement and from the first boundary beneath the

bottom. The distances, as on profile 3, were determined from the extrapolated ar-
rival times of the "direct" wave. The total length of the profile is 20.5 km (8.7
km - left branch of travel—time curve, 11.8 km - right branch). The results of

6
FOI<DFFHJAI.UFEGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processing on the basis of our algorithm are as follows: iunedistely below the bot-

tom

there is a layer with a thickness of 0.11 km and a mean velocity of 1.58 In-

sec'l; the mean velocity in the layer between the bottom of this layer and the
acoustic basement is 2.12 kn'sec‘l and the thickness of the layer is 1.26 km.

1.

3.

6.

. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Heinard, G. I... Sutton. G. l|., llassong, D. M. and Kronke, 1.. 14., "Study of the
Velocity Section of Sea Sediments by the Hethud of Reflected Haves with Slant

Incidence," AKUSTIKA HORSKIKH OSADKOV (Acoustics of Sea Sediments), Moscow,
Mir, pp 89-119, 1977.

Moiseyev, N. N., Ivanilov, Yu. P. and Stolyarovs, Ye. 11., 143101)! OPTIMIZATSII
(Optimization Methods), Moscow, Nauka, 1978.

l’ushkin, V. K., Kiktev, Yu. V., 'l‘opotkova, ‘1'. A. and Pugachev, V. 1., "Seismic
Rudlobuoy for Work by the Refracted Haves Method on the Shelf ," APPARATURA I

SREDSTVA AV‘I‘OHATIZATSII DLYA SBYSHOAKUSTICHESKIKH ISSLEDOVANIY V 0MB (Appar-
atus and Methods for the Automation of Seismoacoustic Investigations in the

Ocean), Yuzhno-Sakhnlinsk, pp 147-152, 1977.

Houtz, R. 3., "Preliminary Data on the Speed of Sound in World Ocean Sediments
Obtained Using Acoustic Buoys," AKUSTIKA MRSKIKH OSADKOV, Moscow, Mir, pp 681-
498, 1977.

Houtz, R., Ewing, J. and Le Pichon, x., "Velocity of Deep-Sea Sediments Prom
Soundbuoy Data," J. GEOPHYS. 835., Vol 73, pp 2615-26101, 1968.

Le Pichon, X., Ewing. J. and “outs, R., "Deep—Sea Sediment Velocity Determina-

tion Made While Reflection Profiling," J. GEOPHYS. 1128., Vol 73, pp 2597-2616,
1968.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka", "Okeanologiya", 1981

5303

C80:

1865/28

MOWMIJSIONLY
FOR 0F1WCIAI.U5810NLN

UDC 550.834

INTERPRETATION OF DATA ON OCEANIC HAVE MOVEMENTS REGISTERED BY MOVING SENSORS

Hoscow OKEANOLDGIYA in Russian Vol 21, No 5, Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript received 30 Jun
80, after revision 20 Jan 81) pp 911-914

[Article by S. V. Popov and K. D. Sabinin, Acoustics Institute imeni Akad. N. R.
Andreyev, Moscow]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of some aspects of
interpretation of evaluations of spatial-tem-
poral spectra registered by moving sensors. A
method is presented for comparing the measured
spectra with the wave dispersion expression
with movement taken into account. The method is
illustrated by examples of measurements of in-
ternal waves with the drifting antenna of dis-
tributed temperature sensors and synoptic eddies
in the POLIHODB polygon.

When measuring internal waves in the ocean it is customary to use sensors moving
relative to the medium with the same velocity.

If the measurements are made from immobile or only slightly mobile bases, such as
anchored buoys, bottom instruments, etc., it is assumed that the information ob-
tained over the course of a more or less prolonged time will make it possible to
evaluate the frequency spectrum of the waves. The spectra obtained in this way

(moored spectra) will be denoted Sn(f). The spectra computed using data from towed
measuring systems (towed spectra) will be denoted St(k).

The choice of frequency f as an argument in the first case and wave number k in the
second case, as is usually done, is based on the assumption that in the first case
it is time sections of the wave field which are involved. whereas in the second
case it is spatial sections which are involved.

However, strictly speaking. in both cases it is some spatial-temporal field sections
whid: are involved. In actuality, on the one hand, the velocities of the currents
existing in the ocean are not much less than the phase velocities of the internal

waves (especially the higher modes) and therefore it is essential to reckon with
the effects associated with the transport of the wave field relative to the anchor-
ed sensors. On the other hand, the velocities of towing are not so much greater
than the velocities of waves (especially the lower mode) that the sections can be
considered purely spatial.

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Accordingly, the need arises for developing methods for interpreting the results
obtained when usiq; moving sensors. It is by no means always necessary t: know the

“true" spectra, undistorted by movement, especially since obtaining such spectra
from measurements is an ambiguous and quite complex procedure [1].

He will examine the situation arising during the movement of srnsors, first from

the theoretical point of view, and than in the example of leasurenents of internal
waves and synoptic eddies.

The value of the "towed" spectrum is equal to the value of the "moored" spectrum in

the plane f - fa + W (where k is the wave vector, V is the velocity of towing; fa
is the Doppler frequency): °t(fd» k) - c.(fd + W, It). Here Gt(fd, k) is the ."towed"
three-dimensional spectrum, Gm(f, k) is the "moored" three-dimensional spectrum.

The one-dimensional spectra are equal to:

S! (k) - i 61 0‘, k) d"

and

3:04) = Tod’s. ”(1‘

In the case of great velocities of towing, when v/c h>1, where cm, is the phase

velocity of the waves, k - fd/v and the relationship between said) and Sc(k)_be-
comes equal to

‘\

$c(!a)=sc (k) (1)

However, with towing velocities comarable with the phase velocities of the waves,

expression (1) is no longer satisfied and identification of the St(fd) and Sc(k)
spectra is inadmissible.

a I
cycles] hour I. dud/u cycles/km

  
 
 

I

Esau/n

Pig. 1. Section of dispersion surface of first node of internal waves by planes
(2) with Ed - -8 cycles/hour, v - 3.5 Ina-hour'l. a) projection onto the plane f,
L; b) projection onto the plane 1 , 1:. A1 and A -- projections of the spectral
corridors with a towing velocity comparable to the phase velocity of waves; 3) pro-
jection of spectral corridor with v/cphyl.

FOR OFFIGAI. USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since in actual practice the spectrum is evaluated on the basis of limited records
in some :uquency band fthf, determined by the width of the time spectral window

ZAf - LT, where 1‘ is the length of the record in time, the spectrum G.(f, K) must
be integrated by frequencies between the planes:

lu=ld+ KViAi, (2)

that is l I‘owi

0: (la. '0 = ,7, 0,, 0,104,.

If. V-"

In this case each observed frequency fd is assigned the entire spectral density
situated in the volume of phase space which is bounded by the plane (2) and is
some "plate" which can be called the "spectral section." This section is illustrat-
ed in Fig. 1,a together with the dispersion curve for internal waves of the lower

mode. Here and in the text which follows as a simplification we will examine only
fd<00

.w-I/u c e [In

  

Fig. 2-. Evaluation of spatial spectrum of internal waves and spectral corridor for
first mode (dashed curve). Mean drift velocity u - -0.7lo km'hour‘l; v - --0.71 km'
hour'l; dopplcr frequency fd - -5.2 cycles/hour.

[f we now impose n limitation on the time frequency in the fern of a dispersion ex»
pression, then, solving the system of equations

In =7" +_KV_:i:AI.
{; = qua/Mm». ‘3’

(where f - (ﬁg/12 + m2) is the dispersion surface of the i-th mode, Rand m are
components of the K vector), we obtain regions of phase space within which there

should be concentration of the spectral density of waves of one mode or another.

He will call these regions "spectral corridors."

Figure l,b shows the projection of such a spectral corridor for the lower mode of

internal waves onto the plane of horizontal wave numbers obtained by numerical so-
lution of system (3). In this case V is directed along 01. We note that for spec-
tral evaluations from the half-space f>0 the signs on L and I: must be reversed in

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
order that the position of the point on the ‘1. m plane indicate where the corres-
ponding spectral component is directed. This same figure shows the corridor in the
case of a towing velocity greatly exceeding wave velocity. It can be seen that it
differs greatly fro- the spectral corridor for the case of lesser velocities. These
differences are evidently also reflected in the form of the one-dimensional spec-
trum, which graphically shows the illegitimacy of identifying the one-dimensional

spectrum of doppler frequencies St(fd) with the one-dimensional spectrum of wave
numbers st(k) if the velocity of movement of the sensors is not much greater than
the phase velocities of waves (compare (1)).

 

Fig. 3. Evaluation of the spatial spectrum of kinetic energy of synoptic eddies and
spectral corridors for barotropic (dashed curves) and firit baroclinic modes (dot-
dash curves). Mean velocity of transport u - -2.l cn°sec' v - -0.8 cm‘sec'l; ob-
served period 64 days; one graduation corresponds to 1°10'5 cycle/km.

It can be expected that in the case of linear internal waves the peaks of the eval-
uations of the spatial spectra should "gravitate" toward the spectral corridors of
some mode. In Fig. 2 the evaluation of the spatial spectrum of internal waveswns ob-
tained using the drifting antenna of distributed temperature sensors and the spec-
tral corridor for the first mode. The method for measurements and analysis is sim-
ilar to that described in [4]. These measurements were made on the scientific re-
search vessel "Sergey Vavilov" in the POLIHODE polygon [3].

small phase velocities of the Rossby waves. Assuming that the observed current
fluctuations are caused by linear Rossby waves, it is possible to construct spec-
tral corridors using the method considered above.

For Rossby waves system (3) is written in the form

it. = I. + Knew.
i- " '

n+m+Ai

11
FOR 0"!(1AI.IEI!(HVLY
FOR(NHNCIA1.USE(MVLY

where 8- afo/a y, f0 - ZQcosQ is the Coriolis parameter; 9 is local latitude;
52 is the frequency of the earth's rotation; A - fez/gh; h is equivalent de th; 3
is the acceleration of free falling; the vector V has the components {u, v . By
excluding f, we obtain vm3 + (fa-4f + ubmz + v( [2 + A) +1 (uj, + fthf) +

l (ﬁ‘+ Au) + A(fd 113f) - 0. Solving the derived equation with the necessary values

fd, we obtain the projections of the spectral corridors onto the plane of wave num-
bers.

Figure 3 shows an evaluation of the spatial spectrum of kinetic energy of synoptic
currents at 700 m together with the spectral corridors for the barotropic and first
baroclinic modes. In the figure peak A lies within the spectral corridor for the
barotropic mode and two lesser peaks B and C within the corridor for the first baro-
clinic mode. It can be seen that the spatial-temporal parameters of the synoptic

currents agree well with the parameters of linear Rosaby waves carried by the mean
current (for further details see [3]).

The described method for comparisons of experimental data with the conclusions of
the linear theory of waves is simple and does not require carrying out a complex
procedure for restoration of the true spectrum undistorted by the movement of sen-
sors relative to the medium.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Kate, A. V. and Spevak, l. 8., "Restoration of the Spectra of Sea Haves Using
Measurements With Moving Sensors," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ATHOSPEKY I OKEANA
(News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean),
V01 16, No 3, pp 29é-304, 1980.

2. Konyayev, K. V. and Sabinin. K. D., "Spatial-Temporal Spectrum of Synoptic
Eddies in the Ocean," DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences),
Vol 253, No 4, pp 971-973, 1980.

3. Kort, V. 0., "International Large-Scale Oceanological Experiment POLIMODE,"
OKEANOL. ISSLED. (Oceanological Research), No 30, pp 5-9, 1979.

4. Snbinin, K. D. and Serikov, A. N., "Spatial-Temporal Parameters of Short Period
lntcrnal Waves in the Indian Ocean," GIDROPIZICHBSKIYB I OPTICBESKIYE ISSLBDO-
VANIYA V lNDlYSKOH OKKANE (Hydrophysical and Optical Investigations in the In-
dian Ocean), Moscow, Nauka, pp 13-27, 1975.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nuuka", "Okeanologiya", 1981

3303
C50: 1865/28

12
EDI OIIWC1A1.lEI!(lVLY
FOI‘OFINCIAI.tEIE(N‘LY

UDC 551.463.228

[Article by B. I. Klyachin and B. P. Kur'yanov, Institute of Oceanology imeni P. P.
Shirshov, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

ditions exert the greatest influence. In particular, for typical conditions of the

open ocean the theory predicts the following characteristic depth dependence: noise
minimum - on the axis of the acoustic channel, maximum - at a depth somewhat be-

low the critical depth, decrease - vith direct approach to the bottom [4, 6]. How-
ever, there are experimental data which contradict such a dependence; for example,

according to [1, 2] the noise On the channel axis is greater than the noise at the

critical depth. A number of authors have postulated that the increase in the noise

level on the channel axis can be caused by sound scattering in the ocean depths

[3, S], but no theoretical basis for computing this effect has been presented.

eous medium [6]. In addition to the assumptions in [6], specifically the assumption
of homogeneity and isotropicity of the sources at the surface, their dipole charac-
ter, stratification of the medium and depth constancy, we will also make the fol-
lowing assumptions concerning sound scattering.
INJR‘OFFICJAI.IISE§(MVLY

Under the conditions mentioned above the solutions of the radiation transfer equa-
tions with allowance for the effects of multiple scattering and refraction can be
obtained in closed form.

We will write a system of equations for the ray intensities 11 and I2 incident in
the direction 3 from above and below on the sound-scattering layer situated at
the depth as. The effect of the scattering layer is reduced to two effects: atten-
uation of the wave as a result of scattering as exp(-,B), where A93) - lulu/cos

93, and the total effect of scattering of waves arriving from all directions. in
the direction as.

If we dengte the mean ray intensity of sound incident on the layer in all direc-
tions by I(zs),

’12,):%I[I,(O,,2,)+IQ(0,,I,)]d-Q.H I I ' I (1)

and take into account assumption 1 concerning the isotropicity of scattering, the
ray intensity of the scattered component will be equal to 51 and the equations for

11 and 12 are written as follows:

1 _ .
I.(o,z.-)(:—') mm 1a.»: I.(a,.z,)exp(-a). (2)

:.(a.. 1,) = mm.» + m. mew-n). (3)

. . -._————.......

Here 3(61) - Jo c086 is the ray intensity of the dipole surface sources, V is
the coefficient of ref ection from the bottom and the subscripts l, 2, s on the
velocities, angles of incidence and depths correspond to the horizons: surface,
bottom and scattering layer. Equations (2)-(3) were derived for those directions
63 along which the ray intersects the surface and bottom. If the ray does not
reach the bottom, in equation (3) it must be assumed that Val, whereas if it also
does not reach the surface, in equation (2) it must be assumed that J50. By solv-
ing the system of equations (l)-(3) for the ray intensities in the scattering hor-
izon, we obtain

[1(09 1,) ‘-' “(l/(1),] " 370.)“ + yexp("»l’(‘ _ V“P(-25))- (‘)
ma. 2,) = Vl(n/t.)'lcxp(-n)9 57000 + Vexp(-m)1m - Van-25». (5,
11:.) = (1.1mm: —(c./c.)' 1’" m —(I —(c./c.)’)"’1. (6)

For an arbitrary horizon z the ray intensities 11 2‘ 9,2) are easily found from the
expression c2(z)1(9,z) - const, which is correct'along any ray [6]. Using this ex-
pression and taking into account assmption 2 concerning the smallness of scatter-
ing, it is possible to find the mean ray intensity 1(2), proportional to the volu-
metric energy density of sound, for any depth a:

 

 

_ l c. ’ I+V -c,_)’7 1+3ynn9do+
[(2) 3(5) A. ' _ V Idnada *(CO) (1,) fl, l—V (7)
"3(3), 1 i sinOdO +(-c-'—)’f(z.) I sandO. '

2 ((2) n, 0 d!) n,

14
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUI‘OFFHJAI.USE(HNLY

The integration region for the 521 angles corresponds to botton rays, 52 cor-
responds to rays incident on the surface and not incident on the bottom 32
corresponds to all rays not incident on the botton. It follows from for-ula (7)
that the dependence on s enters only by means of the dependence c(z). that is, the
law of conjugate depths [4] is also satisfied in the presence of scattering.

In expression (7) the first and second terns correspond to the contribution of the
botton rays. The first coincides with the sinilsr ter- in for-ula (S) in [6]. The
third tern characterizes water waves, but in contrast to [6], instead of the at-
tenuation value in the lengt of the ray cycle“ 5 the denominator contains at-
tenustion due to scattering . The second and fourth terns in (7) correspond to
the contribution of secondary sources of sound caused by scattering which disap-
pear in the absence of scattering. Using assuwtion 3 (snallnese of scattering ﬂ
in comparison with losses during reflection 1 - V), we will neglect the first and
second terns in fornula (7) and after transiornation of the angular variables we

b 1n . .n., .. _ .. .
o to . J. 7‘ “1,; dsdnll -(€J€|) ﬁll 0'd0| +

T(x)'l'(1)”"(‘)' 3;; ,; I—(c(z)l€n do 0:
,I
.m.) '1” ”can". - if ‘8’

.; 7| —(r(r)l¢:,)i said, .

, , .
Here 9; and a are the angles of energence of the rays free the surface and from
the scattering ayer for those rays touching the botton. Porsula (8) is suitable
for depths 2 less than the critical depth zo(c(ao) - q); for greater depths” a the
upper integration limits it is necessary to use 6.1. - arcsin(c1/c(s)) and a: -

arcsin(c,/c(a)) .

The integral describing the I'(s) value and representing the contribution of the
prinary sources of sound at the surface is not expressed in known functions and
can be conputed only numerically. The second tern 1"(3) represents the contribution
’of the secondary sources situated in the sound-scattering layer; for it we obtain

m2) . n: ) (if {J1 Jew/252% -' (c—(2)Ic.)"- c(:)<c.s (9)
' C(8) Jl — (c(x)lc, P . 0(3) > C:-

As an illustration of the derived depth dependences in Fig. l we show the results
of computations using fornulas (8)-(9) for the hydrological conditions of the Hor-
ris experiment [2] on the assuaption that the sound-scattering layer is on the axis
Iof the acoustic channel (Fig. 1a) and at s_depth of 150 n (Fig. lb). As the zero '
level of noise intensity we use the value Hz.) at the depth of the scattering lay-
er. The dashed lines at the right side of the figure represent the depth dependences
l'(z). It is interesting to note that the shape of these curves has virtually no de-
pendence on the depth of the scattering layer, and in addition, coincides with ade-
quate accuracy with the for- of the distribution of lean intensity with depth in

the absence of scattering [6]. Such an agree-ant is attributable to the fact that
for the deep ocean the bean of water rays within which there is a noise acct-uls-
tion is quite narrow and the distribution of intensity with depth has little depen-
dence on the direction of the sources and is alsost entirely deternined by the geo-
netry of the rays. The solid curves at the left side of the figure show the depth

15
uncommonly
FOItOIIIC1A1.USII(l‘LY

dependencee for the term I"(z) in accordance with formulas (9).

 

Fig. 1. Depth dependence of oceanic noise: a) sound-scattering layer at the depth
of the channel axis. 2’ - 1000 m; b) sound-scattering layer at a depth of 150 I.

The maximum I"(z) value is attained at the depth of the scattering layer; if the
layer is not situated on the channel axis, there are two maxina - at the horizon

of the 28 layer and at the depth z'o for which C(z'o) - c(z.) and which it-is nat-
ural to call the second kinetic depth. As indicated by the curves of the total dis-

tribution of noise with depth 1(2) - I'(z) + I"(z), allowance for the tern I"(z)
increases the noise level near the axis of the acoustic channel.

The results of these computations indicate that allowance for scattering has the
following effect: the total noise level is not determined by sound absorption in

the length of the cycle but by the intensity of the sound-scattering layer sh. In
addition, this somewhat smooths the nininum near the axis of the acoustic channel

but the general character of the depth dependence persists.

we note in conclusion that the influence of sound scattering on the depth dspsndence
for oceanic noise can be more significant for the high frequencies and also in cases
when bottom reflections play a more substantial role.

16
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE(MULY
FOI:OFIﬂ(3nl.lEII(HVLV

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Klbleuhite, A. 8., Shooter, J. A. and Watkins, S. L., J. ACOUST. 50C. AH.,
V01 60, p 1060. 1976.

2. Morris, 0. 3., 1310., V01 61., p 581, 1978.

3. Anderson, V. C., 1810., Vol 66, p 1666, 1979.

b. Heston, D. 8., 1810., V01 67, p 530, 1980.

S. Cavanagh, R. C. and Renner, W. H., 131D., V01 68, p 1667, 1980.

6. Kur'yanov, B. F. and Klyachin, 8. 1., DAN (Reports of the USSR Acadely of Sci-
ences), Vol 259, No 6, 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akadelii nauk SSSR", 1981

5303
C80: 1865/40

17
FOI¢IHHC1AI.UBE(NNLY
INNI(HHNCJAI.USE(HVLY

UDC 550.510.S35;550.338;523.76;550.37
EPH MARINE ELECTRIC FIELD METER

Moscow ISSLEDOVANIYA KOSHICHBSKOY PLAZHY in Russian 1980 (signed to press 18 Jul 80)
pp 143-151

[Article by V. V. Novysh]

[Text] During recent years specialists in the Section on Marine Electromagnetic Re-
search have been developing a marine electric field meter (the EPH) for measuring
electric fields in the sea.

It is based on a determination of the strength of the electric field existing in
the sea by means of measurement of the potential difference in the sea between the

ends of a measurement base by use of salt bridges and nonpolarizing electrodes
ll. 2].

The scheme for measuring one of the electric field components is represented in

Fig. 1. A5 is a tubular salt bridge, filled wiﬂmsea water, connecting the elec-
trodes 33 with the external sea media at the points A and 6 . The segment A-S is
the measurement base of the electric probe. The tubes and housing with the electrodes
are made of an electrically insulating material. The chamber with the electrodes is
separated by a moving electrically insulating switch K by means of which the tubular
parts of the salt bridge A and 5 can be joined together or separated.

 

Fig. l.

The main housing of the developed electric field meter is fabricated of plastic
material. Attached to the housing are three pairs of orthogonal polyethylene tubes
by means of which the external sea medium is joined to the measuring electrodes
placed in special cells of this housing. Thus, this instrument can measure the
three components of the electric field. The electrode cells of each pair of elec-
trodes are brought us close as possible to one another, which creates a uniformity

18
FOIiOFIICLAI.lNI§0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

of the physical conditions for the functioning of these electrodes. favoring a
greater stability of the characteristic emf of each pair of electrodes. The gen-
eral appearance of the instrument at the time of its lowering over the ship's side

is shown in Pig. 2. The equivalent scheme of measurements of one field component
is shown in Fig. 3.

 

Fig. 3.

 

Fig. 2.

The following notations have been used in this diagram: V is the potential differ-
ence measured in the sea, U are the readings of the measurement instrument, e1 and
C2 are the characteristic emfs of the electrodes;3.is the internal resistance of
the electrodes, 2 0 is the resistance of the external measurement circuit, R/ 2

is the resistance of the water circuit of each of the two tubes of the measurement
base; Z is the resistance of the electrically insulating switch; (Z1 -- with a
closed electrically insulating switch and 22-- with an open switch; 3“ is the in-
put resistance of the measuring (recording) instrument.

We note that in the cited scheme no attention was given to current leakage through
the instrument housing and the tube walls of the measurement base, this because
they were made from materials with a very high bulk resistivity and their geomet-
rical dimensions ensure a high total resistance to leakage currents.

If one measurement of U] is made with closing of the electrically insulating switch
and a second measurement is made with the switch open, as follows from this equiv-
alent circuit and allowing some sinplifications not giving rise to large errors

19

F0! OWIOAL USE ONLY
ﬁOIlO‘IIClAI.lEIE(NVLY

in measurements with the developed design of the electric field meter [3, 4], it is
pusslblc to exclude the characteristic enf of the electrodes and determine the elec-
tric field strength V0 using the following formula [6]

V0 _ U1 - 02 (zi +R)(zi) + R)
Tm <1)

where i,is the length of the measurement base and

 

In the first variant of the instrument both electrode chambers were joined together

sulntinn of the closed switch. The squeezing was accouplished using a knifelike
plate controlled by the armature of an electromagnet. Using this switch design

the instrument was successfully employed in the Black Sea in making measurements
of the electric field of the ship from aboard this ship [3]. Vertical measurements
of the ship's field were made over the side from the horizon 5 m, where its hori-
zontal component was about 600-900 PLV/m, to the horizon 30 m, where this compon-
ent was 20-30ptV/m. The vertical component had values bO-SOtiV/m and l-2f4V/m. The
measurement response threshold was about lfiV/m.

it during work at sea. In addition, during the entire time of work with an open
valve it was necessary to keep a current flowing through the electromagnet, and
this could create interference. Accordingly, in its next design we used a different
type of electrically insulating valve as shown in Pig. 4. It consists of a rod 1
with a conical rubber tip 2 closing and opening a cylindrical channel connecting
the chambers with the electrodes 3 and the salt bridge tubes 4. In a closed posi-
tion the rubber valve is clamped by a spring on the rod, this closing the upper ap-
erture of the cylindrical channel. The cylindrical aperture was opened by means

of the armature of the electromagnet 5, acting upon the rod and compressing the

Using this variant of the electric field meter (KPH-2‘ measurements were made of
the three components of the electric field from aboard an iron ship in the western
part of the Caspian Sea. Here, as before, the ship's field was registered, the
strength of whose horizontal vector near the ship at the sea surface attained
about 1000!l.V/n with gradual attenuation to a value 1o—2o;lv/u at the horizon 60-
FIIICENHCJAI.USE<DNLY

  

a

    
     
  
  

     
   

5 /
| 2

I

5’
vi”? a
1!?
A" ./
--'ll/
.19;
| z

/’

g 5

Z

V
.6
I?
,/ 1

   

\\\\\§\\
§

  

-~~-..—-

.

        

Fig. 6.

however, sea tests revealed that this electrically insulating valve had substantial
design shortcomings: the upper compression device was not always triggered properly
and the need for insulating the lower rod in the valve by means of an oil-filled
elastic rubber sleeve led to technical difficulties in assembling the valve and
worsened the reliability of its operation. Accordingly, a new variant of an elec-
trically insulating valve was developed in which there were several design improve-
ments in the assembly of the electrode chambers and a strengthening of the elec-
trodes (BPH—3); a schematic section of this is shown in Pig. 5. In this design the
compressing of the rubber valve 1 is accomplished by a flat spring 2 and in this
process the connecting cylindrical aperture 3 is shut off. This aperture 3 is
opened by means of a rubber valve 6, rigidly coupled to the rod, and the armature
of the electromagnet 5 with excitation of its winding. The winding and the magnetic
drive were in an oil-filled sealed housing 6 which at its top has a compensatory
rubber diaphragm 7 for equalizing the inside and outside pressures. The rod 6 was
made of plastic and the spring 2 and the armature 5 were covered with insulating
lacquer. With compressing of the spring by a force of 0.5 kg there was a value

21
FIIIIIHHCIAl.lEﬂICH‘LY
IND! OFFICIAL US£Z(MVLY

of the Insulation resistance to closing of the valve of about 1 uegohn, after pres-
ence of the entire complex in sea water for 24 hours.

 

Fig. 5.

With this instrument in the following year in the eastern part of the Caspian Sea
measurements were nude of the electric field of a ship and the natural electric
field in the sea in the coastal sector at Avaza near Krasnovodsk. In this region
it was possible to register rather high values of the natural electric field at

15-20 m and at 50-75 m from the shore at the time of a storm attaining about 100
ILV/m and decreasing gradually to near-zero values after cessation of the storm.

22
FORi0F11CJAl.USIZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

The implementation of field tests of this design of electric field leter (the RPM-
3) confirmed the coaplete reliability and fault-free character of its operation.
However, the need for feeding a rather high voltage across the coil for exciting
the electromagnet (about 50 V) during the time of registry of the electrode zero
(electrode with open valve) created the danger of influence of leakage currents on
the results of registry of the values of this zero. In addition, according to
available data, the use of a rubber valve for great depths was unpronising because
with an increase in pressure it loses its elasticity and at a depth of more than
lo km becomes rigid and brittle [S].

In this connection, a new, more perfect design of the electric field meter 18 now
being developed.

Yu. A. Coryachev participated in the development of all the designs. Some of the
sea tests of the electric field meter and processing of their results were carried
out by M. M. Iiogorodskiy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. Mnngelsdnrf, P. 5., "The World's Longest Salt Bridge," MARINE SCIENCES INSTRU-
MENTATION, V01 1, 173-185, 1962.

2. Filloux, J. 11., "Electric Field Recording on the Sea Floor With Span Instru-
ments," JOURN. CEDMAGN. GEOELEC., V01 26. No 2, 269-279, 19710.

3. Novysh, V. V., "RPM-1 Sea Three-Component Electric Field Meter," GEOFIZICHBSKAYA
APPARATURA (Geophysical Instrumentation), 67, 17-23, 1979.

4. Novysh, V. V., "0n the Theory of Errors in Measurements With the 2PM Sea Elec-
tric Field Meter," ISSLEDOVANIYE GEOHAGNITNGO POLYA NA AKVATORIYAKH WREY I

OKFANOV (Investigation of the Geomagnetic Field in Areas of Seas and Oceans).
Moscow, 12MIRAN. 191-199, 1978.

5. Hear, 0.. NA CLUBINU MREY V BATISKAPB (To the Depths of the Seas in a Bathy-
scnphe), Sudprtmmlz, 87, 1961.

COPYRIGHT: lnstitui zcmnogo magnetism, ionosfery i rasprostraneniya radiovoln
AN SSSR, 1980.

5303
(:50: 1865/7

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTROKINETIC INTERFERENCE IN ELECTROMETRIC WORK IN SEA AREAS

Hoscow [SSLEDOVANIYA KOSMICHESKOY PLAZMY in Russian 1980 (signed to press 18 Jul 80)
pp 152-157

[Article by H. M. Bogorodskiy]

[Text] Electrometric work in sea areas is carried out for solving a whole series of
scientific and practical problems. Among the types of interference acting on elec-
tric measurement sensors with a frequency close to the frequency of the measured
useful signal is the movement of water relative to the elements of the measurement
complex and is important. This is manifested most clearly with the movement of an
electrolyte near the surface of the conductor of an electrode [1], which causes a
change in the concentration of ions near the surface of the conductor and a change
in the electrode potential value. In order to safeguard the conductor from the in-
fluence of the medium, including from flow around it, the sea electric measurement
electrodes are enclosed in a housing of some type [2], but a convection current,
filtration currents and other electrokinetic phenomena [3] arise during the move-
ment of the fluid along the surface of virtually any material and interference as-
sociated with the movement of water relative to such electrodes occurs in both
fresh water [4] and in marine [5] areas, especially when making measurements near
the sea surface [6] or when using measurement complexes with short bases [7]. It
sh0u1d be noted that in the special literature proper attention has not been de-
voted to electrokinctic interference when carrying out electrometric work in sea
areas. Sevoral examples of tribopolarization of a towed electrode are given by
Alcksandrov and Zaytsev [4], who employed electrodes with a housing of porous cer-
amic. With a change in the ship's speed from 0 to 9 knots the difference in the
electrode potentials of two electrodes of the same type changed by approximately 6
mV. The authors note that the "potential level is directly proportional to the
velocity of movement," which leads to the evaluation

'10 tribxu'l‘ mV'M'1~sec)- (Voolrsec'l) (1)

where 9",“, . Voo are the potential of electrode tribopolarization and the velo-
city of. the oncoming flow of water.

24
FOR Ol-TICIAI. USE ONLY
FOIAOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

2. An examination of the mechanism of formation of tribopolsrization potentials
was made using two models: a solid housing of the electrode in the form of an
elongated ellipsoid of revolution, streamlined along the axis (Fig. l), with the
electrode cavity conumnicating with the housing surface by a single channel and in
the computations is not taken into account, and in a model of a porous thin~walled
housing of the same configuration (Fig. 2), with the electrode cavity communicating
with the external medium over the entire surface of the housing through the pores
of the housing and filled with an electrolyte of the same concentration as the
surrounding median. The overall dimensions -- ¢2 cm, [ - 12 cm and the velocity
of the oncoming flow -- V .9 = S m~sec'1 were selected as being characteristic for
towed IELAN-IZHIRAN electrodes. The value of the electrokinetic potential-- 1; -
-0.1V and the conductivity of the medium -— J? - 7.5-10’3 ohm'lm'1 were selected
for comparability with [4]. The kinematic characteristic of the water 2, and its
dielectric constant 8 were adopted corresponding to 20°C.

Computations of the field of shearing izuand normal p stresses acting on the surface
of the housing from the direction of the oncoming flow were made using the empirical
method for computing the turbulent boundary layer with a stipulated distribution of
pressure in the external flow, taking into account flow around the body of revolu-
tion, including computations of the point of detachment of the boundary layer [8].
It is easy to see that for the model with the solid housing the correlation between
the convective Surface current 1'1: and the local value of shearing stresses 'l.’ has the

form
3a ' 0-55707I'T1'9 (2)

where 20 is the momentary radius of the ellipsoid.

The spreading currents of the convective surface current create a trihopolarisation
potential ﬂotrib whose variation along the body of the electrode is represented in
Fig. l. The asymmetry in the distribution of shearing stresses and accordingly the
tribOpolarization potential is related to an increase in the thickness of the boun-
dary layer with the advance of the flow along the body of the electrode and with
detachment of the boundary layer in the intake part. Fixing the intake position of
the elcctromctric tube at the surface of the housing [9] and bearing in mind that
the shearing stress, and with it, also the tribopolarization potential, are propor-
tional, taking into account the influence of the Reynolds number and the velocity
of flow in the power 13/7, we have an estimate of tribopolarizstion for the model
with the solid housing in the form

sotribg K1° §.Z-1.v,13/7; K1: 2'10'6K20/7sel'3/7ohn‘1 (3)

where K] is a proportionality factor dependent on the choice of positioning of the
electrometric tube and the electrode configuration.

For the model with the porous housing we examined the tribopolarization currents
arisinx in the housing as a result of the hydrodynamic difference in pressures in-
side and outside the housing. Using for the density of the leakage currents 3n

[3| the expression: _
J“ - -o.79u £(91T7d)‘1.5 ~(P, - P) (1.)

where H,0( are the porosity and thickness of the housing shell, P3 , P is

25
FOIIOFIICIAI.IEIECI‘L¥
INTI OFFICIAI.IISEICN'LY

pressure outside and inside the housing, we note that the dipole density of the
currents jn-o( is not dependent on the thickness of the housing shell, which makes
it possible to find the potential created by the leakage currents as the potential
of a double layer of a known thickness using the electrostatic analogues method.
In the computations we used the value will, which corresponds to a considerable
porosity; the P value was adopted on the assumption of a homogeneity of the hous-

ing: _ 1
P'§.JP5dS (5)
S
where 5, ds is the surface area of the housing and its increment. Assuming that
a central positioning of the conductor in the housing is typical and bearing in
mind that the external pressure is proportional to the square of flow velocity,
we have an estimate for the porous housing:

V'crib ’-' Kz' 15-3” 441%.; K,z7.5-10'5M'3aec2ohm-1 (5)

Additional effects may arise with changes in the rate of towing due to a change
in P (barosensitivity) [10] and the leakage potentials accompanying then [3].

3. The electrokinetir characteristic for material of the housing enters explicitly
Into the estimates (3), (6) and implicitly into the estimate (1). All other con-
ditions being equal, the tribopolaritation error is the smaller the lesser the ab-
solute value of this characteristic. Despite a broad search in the patent and
special literature {3, 11]. information on any investigation of t}, the potential
of the materials entering into the construction of the electrodes in solutions of
the sea water type,could not be found. In carrying out the investigations we sel-
ected the current potential method, regarding it as more precise [3, p 83].

The apparatus for determining g (potential) by the leakage potential method, whose
diagram is shown as Fig. 3, consists of the vessels 1 and 2, containing the electro-
lyte 3 and movably joined to the measuring cell 4. containing a powder of the in-
vestigated substance 5 and the gaskets 6. Due to the difference in the heights h1
and hz of the vessels, an electrolyte is pressed through the substance to be inves-
tigated 5, creating between the vessels 2 and 1 an electrokinetic potential differ-
ence ( 7’2 -?1); the electrodes 7, protected by the casings 8 and the potentiometric
device 9,nake it possible to register this difference. The connecting lines 10

and the electrolytic switches 11 are set in a screen 12 and placed on a hinged par-
allelogram 13, which makes it possible to change the relative height of the vessels
(hz'hl) within the range 12 m, and with reversing change the pressure drop to 6 m

"20.
The value g" the potential, is determined using the formula [3, p 81]:

a. dim-e 44502 -9’1)°[(h2-h'5 1/514 (7)

where.19, g are the density of the electrolyte ard the acceleration of gravity. In
the measurements use was made of solutions of sea water of a stipulated salinity
and the temperature in the cell was monitored. The other characteristics of sea

water entering into (7) were tabulated [11 + 13], which makes it possible in pro-
cessing the experiment to use (7) in the form

26
FOR OiflCJAl.l!ﬂE(HVLY
FOIIDFFHJAI.USEINNLY

& 4W2 - 9’1) (7')
' " T (hi-T1)

where K = K(S°/oo, t°) is a function of salinity s°loo and temperature t°. The K
values for solutions of the sea water type were tabulated and are cited in Table 1,
where they have the dimensionality m1. It was found that this coefficient has a
very weak dependence on temperature.

Table l
Computed Values of Coefficient K (s°/oo, t°) for Solutions of the Sea Utter Type

06 S°/oo 0.5 1.33 6 12 36
0 11.6 31.0 92.6 260 721
5 11.6 31.1 92.6 260 725
10 11.7 31.3 93.1 262 736
15 11.8 31.5 94.1 266 738
20 11.9 31.7 95.1 269 766
25 12.0 32.2 96.5 272 756
30 12.1 32.3 96.9 273 758

ing into account the characteristic electrokinetic characteristics of the measure-
ment system, influence of the gaskets and measurement cells if the material of the
latter did not coincide with the investigated material, for which the necessary aux-
iliary measurements were made. Table 2 gives a summary of the 1; (potential) values
for a number of materials. '

b. A summary of tribopolarization estimates is given in Pig. 6, where the Sptrib
values have been normalized to the value (élx). For ceramic electrodes Aleksandrov
used the values 6 - -37 mV [3, p 160]. As a comparison, Pig. 4 shows the tribopol-
arizntion effects for three electrode pairs which we observed in the Caspian Sea

(5 - 12°Ioo, t° - 10') in a specially formulated experiment using electrodes of

the IELAN-lZHIRAN type [5] in shallow waters; the velocities of water flow around
the electrodes were estimated on the basis of the depth of the site and the wave
parameters [M]; the ﬁ value 4- ~9nV was adopted in accordance with Table 2 as

the mean between the values for AsCl (packing) and plexiglas (electrode housing).

tions under which they were obtained (noted by an asterisk) are close to our esti-
mate (3) for a porous housing, which indicates a successful use of the potentialit-
ies of this electrode. The [ELAN-IZHIRAN electrodes, close to an electrode with a
porous housing. due to the presence of numerous openings in the housing [2, 15],
have a tribopolnrizntion considerably greater than the computed value. In these
cases the source of interference in the electrodes is evidently other mechanisms,

such as instability of the composition of the electrode chamber, entry of fresh
portions of oxygen and other dissolved gases under the influence of hydrodynamic

pressure, especially under conditions of transverse flow arOund the housing, cus-
FOR‘DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

Interference by 1 1/2-2 orders of magnitude. In addition, interference can be re-
duced by an optimum choice of housing material (or material for the salt switch).

Table 2

Electrokinetic Potentials C (mV) of Some Materials in Solutions of Sea Water Type

50/00 0.58 1.34 6.08 12.2 36.2
cambric (fabric) —ll.l -8.5 -6.7 -6.9 -3.6
vinyl plastic (shavings) -39.7 -31.5 -22.2 -15.0 -9.9
caprylon (shavings) -24.7 -19.2 -15.9 -13.7 -9.5
foamglass (shavings) -21.0 -16.6 -12.8 -10.9 -6.6
polyamide-lZ -26.8 -l9.0 -l3.2 -ll.0 -7.5
polyvinyl chloride (hard) —8.8 -9.9 -10.7 -7.9 -7.6
polynethyl acrylate (shavings) -l6.8 -10.6 -7.8 -7.0 -6.0
polystyrene (shavings) -l7.2 -9.3 -7.3 -6.1 -5.1
polyethylene v density -16.9 -12.5 -9.9 -8.7 -6.2
polyethylene n density -2é.7 -l9.0 -l3.8 -ll.0 -6.8
silver chloride chemically pure -30.6 -29.6 -l9.6 -ll.2 -ll.0
rock glass (from electrode) -l9.6 -l7.3 -16.7 -ll.6 -6.6
fluoroplnstic-3 -18.6 ~15.3 -11.2 -9.4 -6.2
fluoroplnstic-é (shavings) -30.4 -23.0 -lé.3 -10.7 -6.3
mean temperature 19.70 18.60 l7.2° 15.3° 16.8°
BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Kistyakovskiy, V. A., BLEKTROKHIHICHESKIYB REAKTSII I ELEKIRODNYYE POTENTSIALY

2.

5.

6.

NEKOTORYKH METALLOV (Electrochemical Reactions and Electrode Potentials of
Some Metals), St. Peterburg, p 36, 1910.

Mltrofanov, V. N. and Sevast'yannv, B. 5., VOLNOVYYE PROTSBSSY V KRAYEVYKH
0 LASTYAKH OKEANA (Gave rLUL¢38e3 in Boundary Regions of the Ocean), Iu.-<akh-
alinsk, pp 122-131, 1979.

Grigorov, 0. N., ELEKTROKINETICHESKIYB YAVLENIYA (Electrokinetic Phenomena),
LOU. 1973.

Aleksandrov. V. V. and Zaytsev, L. V., IZMENCHIVOST' GIDROPIZICHESKIKH FOLEY
V OZERAKH (Variability of Hydrophyaical Fields in Lakes), Leningrad, pp 215-
218. 1978.

&>gorodskiy, M. H.. FUNDAMENTAL'NYYE PROBLEHY HDRSKIKH ELEKTROHAGNITNYKH IS-

SLEDUVANIY (Fundamental Problems of Sea Electromagnetic Investigations), Mos-
cow, pp 70-77, 1979.

Bondnrenko, A. L., Bychkov, V. 8., Grinfel'dt, S. 6., Lapshin, V. 8., Monakhov,
L. F. and Skryubin. S. A., HORSKOYE MAGNITOTELLURICHESKOYE ZONDIROVANIYE (Sea
Mngnetotelluric Sounding). Moscow, pp 63-70, 1978.

Vun'yan, L. L., Svetov, B. 8., Sochel'nikov, V. V. and Fonarev, G. A., MDRSK—
0Y8 MAGNITOTCLLURICHESKOYB ZONDIROVANIYE, Moscow, p 11, 1978.

28
ROI,OFINC1Al.lﬂiB(IVLY
8. Loytsyanskiy, L. 6.. WNIKA ZHIDKOSTI I GAZA (Mechanics of Fluid and Gen),
Moscow, 1973.

9. Volkov, V. 6., TRUDY INSTITUTA OKFAKJIDGIYA All 8858 (Transactions of the Inau-
cute of Oceanology USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 19, pp 88-106, 1956.

10. Bogorodskiy, H. H., FUNDAMENTAL'NYYE PROBLEM! masmm ammonium Is-
SLEDOVANIY (Fundamental Problem; in Marine Electromagnetic Investigations),
Moscow, pp 78-91, 1979.

11. Khlppcl', A. R.. DIELBKTRIKI I IKH PRIHENERIYE (blelectrics and Their Use),
Moscow, 1959.

12. Bogomdskly, V. V. and Rudakov, V. 18., PM?! RADIOFIZICHBSKIKH KETODOV V
OKBANOGRAFICHBSKIKH I LEDOV‘IKH ISSLENVANIYAKH (Use of Radiophysical Methods
in Oceanographic and Ice Research), Leningrad, pp 21-30, 1965.

13. Zubov, N. N., OKEAmWGICHBSKIYE TABLITSY (Oceanographic Tables), Leningrad,
1957.

16. Shuleykin. V. V., FIZIKA noun (Marine Physics), Moscow, 1953.

15. Solov'ycv, 1.. 0., TRUD‘! INSTITUTA OKEAIDLOGII Ml 88811, Vol 39, pp 85-90, 1960.

16. Abramov, Yu. H., Abranova, L. H., Himoyan. S. 11., Hitrofanov, V. N. and
Shcherbakova, A. 5., WRSKIYE ELMROMAQHTNYYB ISSLBDOVANIYA (Sea Electrons-
netic Investigation), Moscow, pp 22-60, 1976.

17. Novyah, V. V., GEOPIZICHBSKAYA APPARATURA (Geophysical Apparatus), No 67, pp
17-23, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Institut zemogo magnum, ionoefery 1 raeproatraneniya radiovoln
AN sssa, 1980.

5303
C80: 1865/7

29
summon“
FOI|OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

ARTICLES 0N DYNAHICS 0F FLUID HIT“ FREE BOUNDARIES

Novosibirsk DINAHIKA ZHIDKOSTI SO SVOBODNYHI GRANITSAHI in Russian No 46, 1980
(signed to press 4 Jul 80) pp 172-175

[Abstracts from collection of articles "Dynamics of a Fluid With Free Boundaries".
edited by L. D. Estrina, Institut gidrodinamiki so AN SSSR, 500 copies, 177 pages]

[Text] Abstracts

UDC 517.965

MIXED PROBLEM FOR THREE-DIMENSIONAL SYSTEM OF ACOUSTIC EQUATIONS WITH SHOCK HAVE
BOUNDARY CONDITIONS

[Abstract of article by Blokhin, A. ".1

[Text] The article gives the derivation of a dissipative energy integral in the
mixed problem for a three-dimensional system of acoustic equations with shock wave
boundary conditions.

UDC 532.69
THERHOCAPILLARY EQUILIBRIUM INSTABILITY OF A FLUID LAYER BOUNDED BY FREE SURFACES
[Abstract of article by Badratinova. L. 6.]
[Text] A linear formulation is used in examining the problem of the occurrence of

thermocapillary convection in a weightless fluid layer bounded by free nondeform-
able surfaces.

UDC 556.3.001.57

ONE CLASS OF HYDROHECHANICAL PROBLEMS FOR REGIONS WITH MOVING BOUNDARIES
[Abstract of article by Verigin. N. N.]

[Text] The article defines the conditions under which there are self-similar solu-
tions of one-dimensional filtering problems in the case of moving boundaries. Also
examined is the problem of the need for and adequate number of independent condi-
tions at a moving boundary. The author gives a review of solutions of such

90! OFIICIAl.lﬂiB(H‘LY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NNLY

problems for moving boundaries of three different types. Some timely problems
with a moving boundary for which the solutions are not self-similar are indi-

cated.
unc 533.07:533.527

ONE MODEL OF GAS DYNAMICS IN THE AXIAL ZONE 0? EDDY APPARATUS
[Abstract of article by Zelenyak, T. N., Kislykh, V. I. and Provorova, 0. 6.]

[Text] An adequately complete mathematical description of heat and mass exchange
in an eddy chamber meets with fundamental difficulties. The authors demonstrate
the possibility of a quantitative description of the axial zone on the basis of

an axisymmetric eddy model.
006 517.9

DETERMINING EQUATIONS OF CONSERVATION LANS FOR EVOLUTIONARY EQUATIONS

[Abstract of article by Kaptsov, 0. V.]

[Text] In this article a method is proposed for systems of evolutionary equations
which makes it possible to find conservation laws by solution of determining equa-
tions. A study is made of the correlation between the determinants of the equation
for the conservation laws and for the admissible Lie-Backlund operators.

VARIATION METHOD FOR INVESTIGATING STATIONARY PLANE SUBCRITICAL GAS FLOWS

[Abstract of article by Kucher, N. A.]

lText] The article represents an investigation of a variational inequality related
to a nonlinear degenerate elliptical operator of the second kind arising in the

theory of plane stationary gas flows. The theorem of existence and uniqueness is
demonstrated, and an approximation of solution of the inequality of a series of

solutions of some unlimited elliptical problems is obtained.

UDC 517.966

SOLUBILITY 0? THE BOUNDARY-VALUE PROBLEM FOR A STATIONARY UT EQUATION

[Abstract of article by Lur'kin, N. A.]

[Text] A study was made of the boundary-value problem for a nonlinear equation in

partial derivatives of the third order describing small perturbations in a viscous
stationary transonic gas flow. The theorem of existence and uniqueness of a "small"

solution of the formulated problem is demonstrated by the "compressive mapping"
method.

31
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USEIINLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 517.53

SOME CLASSES 0P LIMITED REGULAR FUNCTIONS REPRESENTING A RING IN A MAIN WITH
A QUASICONPORHAL BOUNDARY

[Abstract of article by Mityuk, I. P. and Tul'chiy, V. V.]

[Text] 0n the basis of the concept of a k-quasiconformal curve, the authors intro-

duce some new classes of functions, regular in a ring, representing this ring in a
domain whose outer boundary is s k-quasiconformal curve. Using the symmetrization
method in these classes it was possible to obtain some coverage theorems and precise

upward and downward evaluations of the absolute value of the function.

UDC 518: 517. 91/96

VALIDATING THE FITTING METHOD 0N GRAPES FOR svs'rms 0P DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS WITH
CONSTANT COEFFICIENTS

[Abstract of article by Ovcharova, A. 8.]

[Text] A variant of the "parallel fitting" method is proposed for solving systems
0f linear algebraic equations with constant coefficients determined in a complex
(graph). Evaluations of the fitting coefficients are obtained and the correctness
of the method is demonstrated for systems of implicit difference equations whose
matrix has a three-diagonal structure.

UDC 517.966
A PRIORI EVALUATIONS OF SOLUTIONS OF DEGENERATE QUASILINEAR PARABOLIC EQUATIONS
[Abstract of article by Papin. A. A.)

[Text] The author obtained a priori evaluations of limited solutions of degenerate
parabolic equations in the form

'“t + div(n(t,x,u)Vu) + f(t,x,u,ux) ' 0, xéan, t6 [0,T].

For example, in the case of a very simple equation with a(t,x,u) - u, n - 2, an
evaluation is given of the H5lder constant of the function u(x,t).

UDC 532.546;519.632

NUMERICAL SOLUTION 0F PROBLEM OF HORIZONTAL SYSTEMATIC DRAINAGE FROM ZONE 0F
INCOMPLETE SATURATION

[Abstract of article by Sabinin, V. I.)
[Text] The stationary filtration problem is examined. It constitutes a mixed boun-

dary-value problem in a rectangle, close to the Neumann problem, for a quasilinear
equation of an elliptical type. The article describes a numerical solution method

32
FOII|>FIIC1AI.II§I§(NULY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and a method for applying it to the nonststionary problen. For finding the dif-
ference solution the author proposes a modification of one of the variants of an

iteration lethod _for inconplete factorization. Eats-plea are given which provide
sons idea concerning the effectiveness of the solution method.

UDC 517.947

SOLUBILITY OF 80% CLASSES 0P PROBLDIS HIT“ AN 0mm BOUNDARY FDR NUATIOKS OF
THE PARABOLIC TYPE

[Abstract of article by Yakubov, 8.]

[Text] A study was made of the following problems with an unknown boundary
a(t,x)uxx + b(t,x)ux + c(t,x)u - u: - Y(t,x).
u,‘(t.0) - um. u(t.h(t)) - A01). ux(t. h(t)) - 0.

where A is some operator. The uniqueness theoreu is delonstrated. When A is an

integral operator it is possible to establish the existence theorem and the
asymptotic behavior of the unknown boundary at - h(t), with t-o +oo . If boundary

conditions of the first kind are stipulated along the known boundary this will
give the local and nonlocal theorems of existence for the considered problem.

UDC 517.9
IIUYGENS PRINCIPLE OF THE ORDER (p.11)

[Abstract of article by Zaytsev, V. A.]

[Text] The problem of the presence of the Huygens principle was studied for equa-
tions breaking down into linear factors.

([00 519.66
BACKLUND TRANSFORMS FOR SYSTEMS OP EQUATIONS IN PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

[Abstract of article by Krcndelev, S. P. and Talyshev, A. A.]

[Text] A class of systems of equations in partial derivatives allowing Backlund
transforms is foruulated.

COPYRIGHT: Institut gidrodinaniki 80 AN SSSR, 1980

5303
680: 1865/ 2106

33

roamwouu'
FINI<MHHKJAI.[EHE(MNLY

UDC 551.461.2+526+551.66S.15+532.59
COLLECTION 0? ARTICLES 0N OCEAN DYNAMICS

Moscow TRUDY GOSUDARSTVENNOGO OKEANOGRAFICHBSKOGO INSTITUTA: VOPROSY DINAMIKI MDRXA
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 6 Apr 81) pp 120-124

[Abstracts from collection of articles "Transactions of the State Oceanographic Inst-

itute: Problems in Dynamics of'the Sen", edited by B. Kh. Glukhovskiy. doctor of
technical sciences, Hoskovskoye otdeleniye Gidrometeoisdata, 530 copies, 12‘ pages]

[Text] ABSTRACTS

UDC 551.666.31
DETERMINING THO-DIMENSIONAL SPECTRUM 0P MOVING ?IELD 0F WAVES
[Abstract of article by Trubkin, I. P.]

[Text] A method is proposed for determining the two-dimensional (frequency-directed)
spectrum of wind waves on the basis of data from measurements of the rises and

slopes of the wave-covered sea surface. It is shown that it is possible to find an
evaluation of the two-dimensional spectrum of the moving field of waves by subject-
ing the initial records to narrow-band filtering and determining the angular dis-
tribution function of the mean square absolute value of the slope and the spatial
filtering function introduced into consideration. The article gives experimental data
characterizing the relatively high resolution of the described method using a space
variable. Figures 2, references 5.

UDC 551.466.31

CROSS-SPECTRA 0F SLOPES AND RISES 0P HAVE-COVERED SBA SURFACE

[Abstract of article by Trubkin, I. P.]

[Text] 0n the basis of experimental data obtained by the author it was possible to
evaluate a linear theoretical model of wind waves for describing the cross-spectral
characteristics of slopes and rises of the wave-covered sea surface. The results of
the evaluation indicated the possibility for this case of a use of linear theory in
the first approximation. An approximating expression is proposed for the two dimen-
sional spectrum of the moving field of waves. by means of which expressions are de-
rived for the considered characteristics in relation to the parameters of the

34

FOIIOFFIJAI.USE(NNLV
l-‘OI OWICIAL USE ONLY

angular distribution of energy and the frequency spectrum of waves. The evaluation
of the function introduced into consideration, obtained on the basis of experimental
data, characterizes the movement of the wave field in space and is expressed through

the spectra of slopes and rises of the wave-covered sea surface. Figures 1, refer-
ences 4.

UDC 551.666.31:551.665.7
SPATIAL STRUCTURE OF WIND WAVES AND ITS CORRELATION WITH WIND-HAVES ENERGY EXCHANGE
[Abstract of article by Hakova, V. I. and Trubkin, I. P.]

[Text] Using evaluations of the two-dimensional spectra of waves it was possible to
determine the energy distribution of waves by frequencies and directions. There was
found to be movement of a part of the wave energy in the general direction of wave
propagation. It was also possible to ascertain the features of energy exchange be-
tween the wind and waves on the forward slope of the wave spectrum and its rela-

tionship to evaluations of the moving field of waves. The values of the kinetic and

potential energy of wind waves obtained on the basis of spectral data were close to
one another. Tables 3, figures 2, references 15.

UDC 551.466.78
VARIABILITY 0P TIDAL HARMONIC CONSTANTS AS A RESULT OF NONLINEAR EFFECTS
[Abstract of article by Sgibneva. L. A.]

[Text] A study was made of the possible reasons for the observed variability of the
harmonic constants of tides on the basis of their numerical computations for Penzhin-
skaya Bay in the Sea of Okhotsk within the framework of a nonlinear model of tidal
movement in the shallow-water bay. It is shown that the nonlinear effects caused by
the shallow water, the nonlinear form of bottom friction and convective accelera-
tions cause the appearance of secondary waves and change the characteristics of the
main tidal components. In addition, these effects are a cause of the seasonal var-

iability of the harmonic constants. Cotidal charts are given, as well as the re-
sults of numerical computations for Penzhinskaya Bay in the Sea of Okhotsk. Tables
2, figures 4, references 4.

UDC 551.665

COHPUTATIONS 0F REGIME-STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF LEVEL VARIATIONS IN THE SEA
SHELF ZONE

[Abstract of article by German, V. Kh., Rybak, B. Kh. and Pilippov, Yu. 6.]
[Text] A method is proposed for computing the distribution functions of extremal

levels (frequency of recurrence once in T years) and the distribution functions
(guaranteed probabilities) of all levels on the basis of data obtained by the hy-

drodynamic method. The Khips model was used in computing the levels. Computations
for the northwestern part of the Black Sea were made as an example. The Langbein

35
FOIiol1ﬂC1ALlﬂﬂiflilY
FORTOFTWCIAI.USE(MVLY

expression was used for conversion from the distribution function (guaranteed prob-
ability) of all levels to the distribution functions for extremal levels. Figures
2, references 13.

UDC 551.b61.2

COMPUTATIONS 0F DURATION OF SEA LEVEL POSITION DURING ITS RISE AND FALL
[Abstract of article by Zotin, M. 1.]

[Text] 0n the basis of an analysis of a great volume of data it was possible to
establish the peculiarities of distribution of level variations in three guaranteed

probability ranges. A method is proposed for evaluating the duration of level posi-

tion for the upper and lower parts of the guaranteed probability curves. Tables 2,
figures 2, references 5.

UDC 551.465

COMPUTATIONS 0F REGIME CHARACTERISTICS OF SEA CURRENTS 0N BASIS OF RESULTS OF USE
OF NUMERICAL HYDRODYNAMIC METHODS

[Abstract of article by Belov, V. P., Filippov, Yu. G. and Shkudova, G. Ya.]

[Text] The article describes a method for determining the regime characteristics

of currents on the basis of statistical processing of the results of hydrodynamic
computations. A detailed examination is made of the problems involved in ensuring
computations of the initial hydrometeorological information. The fundamental for-
mulas for ascertaining two-dimensional density re cited, as well as the diatrib-
ution functions for currents. The organization of the program on an electronic coar
puter is discussed. The results of statistical computations for the Sea of Azov
are given as an example. Tables 3, references 8.

006 551.466.3

STRUCTURE OF EMPIRICAL DISTRIBUTION FUNCTIONS FOR WIND VELOCITY AND OTHER
HYDROMETEOROLOGICAL ELEMENTS

[Abstract of article by theplinskiy, G. V.)

[Text] A study of the distribution functions for hydrometeorological elements is

of great practical importance. Using them it is possible to determine the quantiles
of the elements, allowance for which is necessary in the planning and implementa-

tion of different economic measures and studies. Also examined are typical distor-
tions of the functions caused by imperfections in the series of observations and

leading to erroneous evaluations of the quantiles. Procedures are proposed for con-
structing and extrapolating the functions. These procedures are intended for elim-
ination of the mentioned distortions and make it possible to determine the values
of the quantiles closer to their mean long-term values. Under the condition that

36
IIIICNHHCIA1.USEINNLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the long-tern distribution of the element is known, by means of simple logical
constructions it was possible to compute the probability of appearance of the
long~term maximum of the element as a phenomenon in any stipulated time interval.
Examples of such computations are given. Figures 1, references 7.

UDC 551.465
INVESTIGATING CURRENTS IN THE SHELF ZONE 0? A DEEP SEA
[Abstract of article by Shkudova, 6. Ya. and Yeremeyeva, G. v.1

[Text] The authors analyze the vertical structure of waters in the shelf zone of
of the sea. A study was made of the influence of stratification on the circula-

tion of waters during the period of winter convection for the purpose of taking
it into account in a hydrodynamic computation Iodel. Figures 3, references 25.

UDC 551.465. 55

STOCNAS‘HC GENERALIZATION OF THE DYNAMIC METHOD FOR COMPUTING CURRENTS
[Abstract of article by Sukolov, V. A.]

[Text] The proposed generalization within the framevaork of a geostrophie model

of ocean currents nukes it possible to compute evaluations of the mathematical ex-
pectations and dispersions of current velocities on the basis of the first two
statistical moments of the density field of sea waves, stipulated from observa-
tions, bottom relief and the approximate values of currents at the reading hori-
zon. The computations of velocities at a fixed depth are made from a solution of
an overdetermined system of linear algebraic equations containing information on
horizontal currents at the reading depth and the equation for the conservation of
total flows. The use of a priori information on the errors in stipulating the in-
itial data and the equations of conservation of total flows makes it possible on
the basis of the generalized least squares method to stabilize the sought-for re-
sults relative to the errors in stipulating the input parameters. Computations at
each investigated horizon are represented in the form of evaluations of the math-

ematical expectation and the standard deviations of current velocities. Tables 3.
references 5.

UDC 551.68.018

SOME RESULTS OF SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF CURRENT FLUCTUATIONS IN THE ATLANTIC OCEAN
[Abstract of article by Lyashenlw, A. 17.]

[Text] The article gives the results of a spectral analysis of current fluctua-
tions in the frequency range of internal gravitational waves on the basis of meas-
urements made in two regions of the Atlantic Ocean. The modal composition of the
tidal semidiurnal fluctuations is investigated. Figures 2, references 9.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms Ol-‘t‘lOAl. USE ONLY

UDC 551.465.635

SHORT-TERM VARIABILIT’Y 0F GULF STREAM DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS
[Abstract of article by Baranov, Ye. I. and Hel'nichuk, N. 3.]

[Text] A study was made of the short-term variability of the positions of the
front, axis, southern boundary and width of the Gulf Stream, as well as the front

of slope waters along the line New York-Bermuda on the basis of the results of
bathythermogrephic measurements made on a frequent schedule during the period

1 June 1973 through 10 October 1974. Tables 3, figures 1, references 4.

[106 651.465.752:551.510.522

METHOD FOR QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF HACROSCALE DYNAMIC INTERACTION 33mm THE
PLANETARY BOUNDARY LAYER OF THE ATmSPHERE AND THE OCEAN SURFACE

[Abstract of article by Tarnopol'skiy, A. G. and Shnaydman, V. A.]

[Text] The authors discuss different methods for stipulating the boundary condi-
tions in problems of sea dynasics. It is proposed that the parameters of dynamic
interaction between the air flow and the underlying surface be computed using the
improved model of the atmospheric planetary boundary layer proposed by the authors.

Also examined is a method for determining wind stress at the sea surface and the

friction coefficient on the basis of data from standard hydroneteorological observ—
ationa. The article gives the results of computations of the principal parameters of
interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere with different conbinations of the

thermal and dynamic state of the moving air flow. Tables 2, figures 2, references
11¢.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy okeanograficheskiy institut, 1981

5303
C50: [865/41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOITOFFICIAl.llﬂB(NVLY

UDC 551.542.l+551.552(261)+551.665.15(261)+551.576

COLLECTION 01" ARTICLES 0N ATMOSPHERE-OCEAN INTERACTION IN ATLANTIC OCEAN

Moscow AMSFERNAYA TSIRKULYATSIYA I YEYE VZAIMODEYSTVIYE S OKEANOM V TROPICHESRIKN
I VNETROPICHESKIKH SHIROTAKN ATLANTIKI in Russian 1981 (signed to press 13 Apr 81)
pp 286-287

[Abstracts from collection of articles "Atmospheric Circulation and Its Interaction
With the Ocean in the Tropical and Extratropical Latitudes of the Atlantic", respon-
sible editor V. S. Sasoylenko, professor, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1000 copies, 288
pages}

[Text] ABSTRACTS

UDC 551.579

EVALUATION OF ACCURACY AND REPRESENTATIVENESS 0F METEOROLOGICAL DATA FROM THE
TROPICAL EXPERIMENT

[Abstract of article by Romsnova, N. A. and Ssnoylenho. V. 8.]

[Text] The authors give a comparison of evaluations of the errors in measuring
atmospheric pressure, wind direction and velocity under marine conditions obtained
by different authors on the basis of observational data from ships. A study use
made of problems relating to the choice of a representative place on a ship for
observations of the wind, the influence of the operating regime of the ship (on
course, at drift) and its rolling on the readings of wind-gaging instruments. Pig-
ures 3, tables 1, references 15.

use not stated

EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION OF THE RELATIONSHIP OF FORCES DETERMINING THE "IND FIELD
IN THE TROPICAL ZONE 0? THE OCEAN

[Abstract of article by Ronanova, N. A. and Romanov, Yu. A.]

[Text] 0n the basis of scheduled meteorological and aerological observations of

stlospheric pressure and wind at island and shore stations located in the tropical
latitudes (25°s-25'N) the authors determined the values of individual terms of the

39
FOI1OFIKJA1.U5840NLV
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equations of notion as a function of latitude. At the earth's surface and aloft
1n the zone from the equator to 15° latitude the force of the pressure gradient

is decisive and exceeds by an order of magnitude the value for the horizontal ad-
vection of the wind. The possible reasons for the results obtained are analyzed.
An evaluation of the terns in the equations of notion on the basis of observation-
al data from the TROPEKS-72 expedition indicated that in the equatorial Atlantic

the role of advective acceleration is substantial; its individual terms are only
3 or 4 times less than the pressure gradient values. Figures 3, tables 8, refer-
ences 29.

UDC 551.511.A65

THERMAL ENERGY OF ATMOSPHERIC PROCESSES IN THE TROPICAL LATITUDES OP THE OCEANS.
NEAT BALANCE IN THE OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE

[Abstract of article by Lunyakova, L. G. and Sanoylenko, V. 3.]

[Text] 0n the basis of materials from a thorough aerological sounding of the atmo-
sphere froa Soviet ships participating in the tropical experinents of 1972 and
1974 it was possible to determine all types of heat flows penetrating the atmo-

sphere at different levels in different spatial averaging scales as well as
to establish the dependence of the heat flows on atmospheric circulation. All the

heat balance components in the atmosphere and ocean are determined for different
types of atmospheric circulation. Figures 25. tables 9, references 79.

UDC 551.521.31

CLOUDS AS A REGULATOR OF THE RADIATION AND NEAT BALANCE IN THE TROPICAL LATITUDES
OF THE OCEANS

[Abstract of article by Voytova, K. V.]

[Text] On the basis of continuous registry of the influx of solar radiation at the

ocean surface, radiation from the surface and hourly visual determinations of
cloud forms and the extent of their coverage of the heavens, made on shipboard
on vessels participating in the tropical experiments of 1972 and 1974.1t was pos-

sible to establish the degree to which clouds in the tropical zone of the ocean
regulate its radiation and heat balance. Figures 19, tables 5, references 17.

000 551.571
TURBULENT AND ADVECTIVE TRANSPORT 0P HATER VAPOR IN TROPICAL LATITUDES OP OCEANS

[Abstract of article by Yevseyeva, L. S., Sanoylenko, V. S. and Snopkov, V. 6.]

[Text] 0n the basis of materials from frequent aerological sounding of the atmo-

sphere, carried out from vessels participating in the tropical experiments of 1972
and 1976, a study was made of the vertical distribution of water vapor in the atno-,

sphere, its full vapor content is determined and the reasons for its variability

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IKNKOFFRJAI.USE(NNLV

in different polyrons in the tropical zone of the ocean are clarified. For this
purpose computations are made of the advection and divergence of water vapor in
the free atmosphere. Computations are given for the turbulent flow of water vapor
from the ocean surface, condensation and the falling of moisture in the fora of
precipitation. which sakes it possible to determine the moisture balance within
the limits of each polygon. Figures 13, tables 10, references 14.

UDC 551.555.;
CONVECTION, CONVECTIVE CLOUDS AND PRECIPITATION OVER THE OCEAN IN TROPICS

[Abstract of article by Zavel'skaya, N. A. and Lebedeva, N. V.]

[Text] 0n the basis of hourly observations of clouds by Soviet ships participating

in the tropical experiment of 1974, on the basis of aerological sounding of the
atmosphere from these ships and records of pluviographs aboard them it was possible

to determine the degree of propagation and development of the process of atmo-
spheric convection in the Trades zone and the ICZ, the thermodynamic factors gen-

erating it and the degree to which it is subject to diurnal variation. Figures
6, tables 10, references 15.

UDC 551.521

OAY-TO-OAY VARIABILITY 0F SOLAR RADIATION PLOXES IN TEDPICS, NACROSCALE CLOUD COVER
VARIATIONS AND ATMOSPHERIC TRANSPARENCY

[Abstract of article by Kislov, A. V.]

[Text] A study was made of the day—to-day variations in the radiation regime in the
tropical latitudes of the Atlantic Ocean with a period of 2-3 weeks and variations

with a period of 4-5 days caused by changes in the cloud cover at different scales

and the transport of aerosol mist from the arid regions of Africa. Figures 7, ref-

erences 20.

UDC 551.571
SEASONAL CHANGES IN VAPOR CONTENT OVER THE ENTIRE ATLANTIC OCEAN

[Abstract of article by Snopkov, V. 6.]

[Text] Information on the total content of water vapor in the atmosphere over the

Atlantic Ocean is generalized. Computations of the transport of water vapor across
the equator are presented. Maps of atmospheric vapor content over the ocean were

constructed for February, May, August and November. IR observations were also used
for constructing these maps. Figures 5, tables 5, references 35.

41
FOI‘OFFNJAI.U§£(NVLY
F0! OFTICIAI.USE(NHLY

UDC 551.555
NATURE OF EQUATORIAL UBSTERLY WINDS IN INDIAN OCEAN

[Abstract of article by Krivelevich, L. H. and Romanov, Yu. A.)

[Text] within the framework of a zonal model of equatorial circulation of the atmo-
sphere the authors made computations of the components of wind velocity in the low-
er troposphere near the equator on the basis of stipulated meridional profiles of
surface atmospheric pressure. The analysis reveals that with whatever meridional
profile of surface pressure actually observed in the Indian Ocean it is impossible
to obtain a westerly flow at the equator of such an intensity as is observed in
nature. The conclusion is drawn that a zonal pressure gradient should not play a
significant role in the fornation of equatorial westerly winds in the Indian Ocean.
Figures 3, references 13. '

UDC 551.555
ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION IN ICZ AT 23.5°H DURING TROPEKS-76 PERIOD

[Abstract of article by Romanov, Yu. A. and Ronanova, N. A.]

[Text] The article gives an analysis of day-to-day changes in surface atmospheric
pressure, divergence and velocity components of the surface wind along a run 23.5°

from 6°S to 12°N during three phases of the TROPEKS-76 expedition. Figures 1, tables
1, references 17.

unc 551.562.1:551.552(261)

VARIABILITY OF THE EQUATORIAL “IND FIELD AND ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE FIELD AND THEIR
INTERRELATIONSHIP ACCORDING TO TROPEKS-74 DATA

[Abstract of article by Romanov, Yu. A.]

[Text] 0n the basis of observational data from Soviet ships during the TROPERS-7é

expedition a study was made of the spatial and temporal variability of wind velo-

city components, atmospheric pressure and atmospheric pressure gradients. An anal-
ysis was made of the correlation between wind velocity and the pressure gradients

at different distances from the equator. Figures 8, tables 10, references 22.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

5303
C50: 1865/46

42
FOI.OFIICIAI.IEHB(MNLY
FOIiofFIJAl.US£¢INLY

UDC 551.46

TASKS 0? DEPARTMENT OF OCEANOLOGY, ATMOSPHERIC PHYSICS AND GEOGRAPHY,
USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES, IN CONFORMITY TO RESOLUTIONS 0? 26th CPSU CONGRESS

Moscow VESTNIK AKADEMII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 66-53
[Article by L. H. Brekhovskikh, scademician]

[Text] The 26th CPSU Congress summarized the achievements of our country, outlined
the program for its development during the next five-year plan and for the more
distant future. The attainments have been impressive, but the tasks are serious,
requiring the unleashing of all forces. A highly important role will continue to
be played by science, and especially by the scientific directions dealt with by
the Department of Oceanology, Atmospheric Physics and Geography.

In this connection it is fitting to review our achievements during the last five-
year plan, during 1980. and also to analyze the tasks for the next five-year plan.

In the "Principal Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR
During 1981-1985 and During the Period to 1990" in the section "Development of Sci-
ence and Acceleration of Technical Progress" it is mentioned, in particular. that it
is necessary to concentrate efforts on study of the structure, composition and evo-
lution of the earth, biosphere, climate and the world ocean, including the shelf,
for the purpose of rational use of their resources, improvement of methods for
weather forecasting and other natural phenomena, an increase in the effectiveness

of measures in the field of preservation of the environment; development of ecol-

ogy.
Soviet scientists are carrying on work in all these directions on a broad front.

Investigations of the ocean. The ocean is the largest natural planetary fornnt1on.
Attention to the ocean is dictated by its ever-increasing importance in the life of
mankind. In actuality, almost four-fifths of all world transportation of cargo is
by sea. The output of petroleum and gas from the bottom of the shelf zones of the
world ocean and the seas adjacent to it at the present time is about one-quarter

of the total output. In the very near future an expansion of the output of many min-
eral resources from the floor of the world ocean, especially ferromanganese nod-

ules,wll| occur. The time is evidently not far off when the extraction of uranium
from sea water will become justifiable.

43
IOIIOFFIJAI.USIIINLY
FORiOFFlﬂAl.USE(HNLY

One-sixth of the food protein consumed by mankind comes from the ocean. Unfortun-
ately, this fraction is increasing slowly. The reason is the incorrect. not sci-
entifically validated catching of traditional species of fish in many regions of
the ocean, which has led to overfishing. As a result, the existing volume of

the catch - about 70 million tons annually, is not far from the maximum. In mar-
ine biology the direction associated with the cultivation of fish and other marine

organisms in the coastal zones of the oceans and seas suitable for this purpose
(aquaculture) is becoming promising.

The ocean also exerts an enormous influence on the life of man because it determines
weather and climate on the earth. Heteorologists know that weather forecasting for
(for example) more than 10 days in advance requires allowance for processes trans-
piring in the ocean. This applies to a still greater degree to the formulation of
the theory of climate of our planet.

During the elapsed five-year plan investigations of the ocean developed successful-
ly. They were brought together in a multisided interdepartnental program consisting
of 16 projects (nine of these were international). Each project provided for the
solution of a definite problem; the work was done under the direction of and with
coordination by a key organization. Participating in the projects were 17 minis-
tries and departments and 80 scientific organizations in the country. The key or-

ganization for implementing the entire program was the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Much attention was devoted to investigations of synoptic variability and frontal
zones in the ocean. Extensive investigations were made under the POLIHODB project
(Institute of Oceanology imeni P. P. Shirshov, USSR Academy of Sciences, Marine
Hydrophysical Institute, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Acoustics Institute). It
became clear that in the upper kilometer of the ocean synoptic variability for

the most part is governed by the presence of macroscale quasigeostrophic turbu-
lence. Smaller eddies than before were discovered. In the deeper layers of the
ocean the nature of the variability was governed for the most part by processes of
the Rossby waves type. The investigations were made in cooperation with scientists
of the United States and other countries. The results are still being processed.

Interesting work was carried cut by the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research
Institute for study of the Circumpolar Antarctic Current. It was possible to clar-
ify its structure, meandering and also eddy formation in this zone. It was found
that contrary to the earlier and less reliable results the Circumpolar Antarctic
Current does not have any well-expressed deep countercurrent.

The Scientists of the Soviet Union actively participated in the First Global Experi-
mcnt CARP (Program for Investigating Global Atmospheric Processes). In the course

of this experiment the state of the ocean and atmosphere and their interaction was
investigated on a broad scale.

Interesting results were obtained as a result of study of structure of the ocean
floor. Soviet scientists participated in the international project for deep-water
drilling aboard the "Glomar Challenger." During the last 10-15 years these investi-
gations gave results of outstanding importance and made it possible to discover
much new information concerning the geological history of our planet. In partic-
ular, work has continued on refinement of the hypothesis of the tectonics of

44

FORiOFFﬂﬂAl.USE(HNlY
FOI10FFIJAI.USE(HULY

lithospheric plates. However, it should be noted that deep-water drilling is not
the only method for studying the history of the earth's crust under the ocean. Re-
sults of comparable importance can be obtained by the ordinary collection of
samples on underwater ranges and in underwater rift zones. This research method
has become especially effective when the scientists acquired underwater vehicles
making it possible to descend to the ocean floor and work at great depths like
geologists work on the land, that is, visually examine samples, take samples,
measure heat flows on the oceanfloor, etc. An example of such effective work is
the Red Sea Expedition of the Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences, em-
ploying the "Paysis" underwater vehicle.* Incidentally, these and other investiga—
tions indicated that hydrothermal processes play a decisive role in the formation
of metal-bearing ores on the ocean floor.

Significant results were obtained relating to the presence of petroleum and gas on
the ocean floor. This problem could be tied in to the tectonics of lithospheric
plates. In particular, it was demonstrated at the Institute of Oceanology that for
an understanding of the presence of petroleta and gas in the arctic regions of our
northern shelf the tectonics of plates in this region in the Cenozoic is of consid-
erable importance, and specifically the tectonics of the zone of underthrusting of
plates in this epoch. The regions of presence of both petroleum and gas deposits are
evidently related precisely to these zones. Important geological investigations of
the floor of the Sea of Okhotsk, Kurile-Kamchatka trench and Sea of Japan have

been carried out by the Pacific Ocean Oceanological Institute, Far Eastern Scien-
tific Center, USSR Academy of Sciences.

With respect to the use of the biological resources of the ocean, here interest

has increased in the open ocean. This is understandable. 0n the one hand. most
countries have declared the ZOO-mile zones adjacent to their shores to be zones of
their national interest and the carrying out of fishing in these zones requires
special permission and signed agreements. 0n the other hand, in the open ocean fair
results can be obtained by fishing at great depths or in zones of upwelling asso-
ciated with synoptic eddies. In addition, great attention is being given to less
traditional objects of the catch - Antarctic krill. The institutes of the Ministry
of the Fishing Industry are concerned with all these problems. Our biologists have
devoted great attention to experimental investigations and the formulation of math-
ematical models of life cycles and food chains of biological communities in the
ocean.

There are a number of advances in marine chemistry. The most important of these, pos-
sibly, are methods for the sorption of different metals from sea water proposed by
scientists of the Institute of Oceanology. These methods, as asserted by their auth-
ors, make it possible, for example, to obtain rubidium from sea water less expens-
ively than by other available methods.

Investigations of the ocean from space have been broadened. It appears that very
much interesting information can be obtained from manned space stations by means
of simple visual obServation and photographing of the ocean. Frontal zones, mean-

ders, eddiesI and sometimes also internal waves are visible in the ocean from

* See V. I. Voytov and A. S. Honin, "Investigations of the Red Sea Rift," VESTNIK
AN SSSR (Herald of the USSR Academy of Sciences), No 10, pp 125-135, 1980.

45

FOR OIIWCJAI.USEioNlM
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

space. The study of the ocean by means of artificial earth satellites is becoming
more extensive. Pour oceanological satellites have now been launched in our

country, two of them under the "Intercosmos" program. Artificial earth satellites
are used in obtaining data on the temperature of the ocean Surface, waves, surface
wind, in determining the color of the sea, and in this connection, the biological
productivity of waters, ice conditions, integral moisture content of the atmosphere,
liquid-water content of clouds and many other parameters. The importance of sub-
satellite polygon investigations has increased, especially for the uppermost meter
layer. The scientists of the Institute of Oceanology have obtained many new re-
Sults relating to the dynamics of this layer.

Work has ended on publication of the multivolume monograph OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanol-
ogy). With respect to the breadth of coverage of the material and the drawing upon
the talents of the best specialists in the creation of the monograph this event is
of outstanding importance in world science. The first volumes of GEOGRAPIYA OKEANA
(Geography of the Ocean), begun on the initiative of the late Akademician K. K.
Markov, have now been published.

During the new five-year plan Soviet scientists will work on a new complex program
for investigating the ocean and the use of its resources. This program will bring
together 38 projects. and again the Academy of Sciences will be the key organiza-
tion. Among the new projects is the "Razrezy" ("Profiles") program, this directed
to the implementation of monitoring over those zones of the ocean which exert the
most effective influence on weather and climate. It is based on modern concepts
concerning macroscale circulation of the atmosphere and ocean and their relation-
ship to one another, with the use of mathematical models and representations fol-
lowing from the theory of conjugate equations developed by Academician G. I. Mar-
chuk. Soviet scientists are making efforts to involve the world scientific commun-

ity in this sort of investigations and this will make possible a considerable in-
crease in their effectiveness. The ocean is great and experience shows that the

most useful results are obtained with the joining together of the efforts of sci-
entists of different c0untries.

Thv "Dyum-nd" project is also new in the multisided program. It is directed to im-
plementation of investigations preparatory for a major experiment in which the
ocean would play the role of an optical and acoustic detector of muons and high-
energy neutrinos. A third new project is "Ocean Acoustics." Although the maximum
information concerning the state of the ocean evidently can be obtained only by the
use of space vehicles, the State of the ocean layer can be determined remotely only
by the use of accustic instruments, since only acoustic waves can propagate sig-
nificant distances under the water. At the present time plans are being considered
[or the carrying out of preparatory work for creating systems for acoustic tomo-
graphy of the ocean. As is well known. a system for x-ray computer tomography of
the human body is extremely effective. Something of this sort can also be done with

the ocean using relatively low-frequency acoustics. Over ocean areas of millions of
square kilometers it is possible to obtain remote information on synoptic variabil-

ity of ocean waters, that is, concerning the movement of fronts and eddies in these
zones, to determine the structure of the ocean along profiles, both horizontally
and vertically, etc.

Finally, investigations of the ocean from space will be considerably developed un-
der the new multisided program. There will be an increase in the role of investi-
gations which on the basis of the state of the surface layer, monitored from space

46
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(INLY
F!III)FI1(1AI.lEIE(HHLY

vehicles, will provide information on the structure of the deep layers. In partic-
ular, in the field of marine geology there will be a broadening of study of ferro-
manganese nodules.

Professional oceanologists have an excellent scientific research fleet, but its

instrumental outfitting leaves much to be desired. In order to fill this gap it
will be necessary to proceed as follows.

Meteorology and atmospheric physics. Here it is possible to mention the following
intensively developing fundamental directions. One of these is improvement in the
reliability of forecasts of different types and for different times in advance
(forecasts of weather, ice conditions, productivity, etc.). Another is study of
climate, the theory of climate and the prediction of changes in climate. The pre-
diction of climatic changes is highly important. This can be demonstrated in an
example. We are evaluating the feasibility and necessity for shifting part of the
runoff of rivers from the north to south both in the European USSR and in Siberia.
The shifting of part of the runoff of Siberian rivers to Central Asia is a grand-
iose undertaking which can evidently be fully implemented no sooner than in 20
years and the principal expenditures on its implementation will pay for themselves
during the subsequent decades. It is clear that a reliable prediction of the fees-
ibility of accomplishing the shifting of this runoff can be made only by knowing
what the climate will be like after 20-40 years.

There are two other directions -- investigation of elementary physical processes
in the atmosphere. integration of the results of these investigations in mathemat-
ical models of circulation of the atmosphere and its interaction with the ocean;
work on the artificial modification of hydrometeorological processes.

Studies for improvement of forecasts were coordinated by the interdepartmental Sci-

entific Council, USSR Academy of Sciences, on the problem "Heather Forecasting,"
the chairman of which was Academician G. I. Harchuk. There are a number of signif-

icant attainments. I will mention only some of them.

At the USSR Hydrometeorological Center specialists have developed methods for the
long-range forecasting of the fields of meteorological elements (wind, geopotential)
based on solution of the conjugate equations of hydromechanics within the framework
of a harotropic model with a source. The Hydrometeorological Center, together with
other institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology, has improved synoptic
methods for predicting the mean monthly temperature anomaly for the European USSR
and Western Siberia.

At the Main Geophysical Observatory specialists have developed a physicostatistical
method for the long-range forecasting of multisided meteorological parameters de-
termining the yield of agricultural crops for 15 consolidated economic regions of
the Soviet Union. Specialists there have also developed a hydrodynamic-statistical
model for predicting pressure, temperature, cloud cover and precipitation over the
territory of the northern hemisphere for interaediate times. At the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute specialists have developed a method for pre-
dicting atmospheric circulation and weather for three-ten days for the polar re-
gions.

47
FOI!0FFKJAI.U§B(HVLY
F0!‘0FIIC1AI.IEHE(NVLV

The attack of our scientists on the climate problem is expanding. An all-union pro-
gram has been developed for the investigation of climate. its possible changes and
the influence of these changes on the national economy. The program has been ap-
proved by the State Committee on Science and Technology, the Presidium USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences and the USSR Gosplan. The key organization is the State Committee
on hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring. It is also possible to mention
some results of investigations made last year.

Semiempirical methods for evaluating the response of climate to change in 002 con-
tent in the atmosphere have been proposed and tested (Institute of Atmospheric
Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences, State Hydrological Institute). In order to de-
termine the present trend in global climate, specialists at the Geography Institute,
USSR Academy of Sciences, have reconstructed the spatial distribution of paleo-
meteorological parameters for different epochs for which the state of the climatic
system was comparable with its present-day state.

At the scientific institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the State Committee
on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring (Computation Center, Siberian De-
partment, USSR Academy of Sciences. Main Geophysical Observatory, Institute of
Oceanology. USSR Academy of Sciences) specialists have created and tested modern
hydrodynamic models of climate. Using these models it was possible to obtain a ser-
ies of results of practical importance.

investigations of atmospheric energetics have continued for the purpose of clarify-
ing the role of different atmospheric components in the formation of climate: aero-
sol absorption (Institute of Atmospheric Physics. USSR Academy of Sciences, Main
Geophysical Observatory), nitrogen oxides, carbon halogens (Main Geophysical 0b-
servatory, Institute of Applied Geophysics). General theoretical investigations of
the formation of climate have developed. For example, specialists at the Institute
of Atmospheric Physics have proposed theoretical evaluations of the year-to-year
fluctuations of global surface temperature. Important studies carried out for
determining the structure of the monitoring of climate were initiated in the Labor-
atory for Monitoring the Environment and Climate of the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring and the USSR Academy of Sciences.

These and other investigations have made it possible to obtain preliminary evalu-
ations of possible changes in climate caused by human activity. In general the
evaluation coincides with similar evaluations made in the United States. These in-
dicate the presence of a definite probability of an increase in mean global temper-
ature at the earth's surface. At the same time, neither in the USSR nor in the
United States has it yet been possible to obtain substantiated quantitative conclu-
sions concerning the anthropogenic changes in climate possible in the future. In
deer to obtain a reliable evaluation of the influence of anthropogenic factors on
climate it is necessary to broaden still further investigations made with modern
models (including joint models of the atmosphere-ocean-cryosphere).

There must be a considerable strengthening of investigations of the effect of pos-

sible changes in global climate on economic_activity at the scale of our country,
on the world economy and on the natural resources of our planet.

FOI10FFKJAI.USB(NULY
POI 0‘11C1AI.USEIMNLY

With respect to study of individual physical processes in the atmosphere and the
integration of the results in mathematical models, I usuld like to note the fol-
lowing studies. At the Institute of Atmospheric Physics a study has been made of
the mechanism of generation of eddies in very simple systems. A nodal with few
parameters was formulated describing the results of experiments modeling cyclo—
genesis processes. A study was made of the phenomenon of parametric resonance in
the atmosphere in relation to the problem of quasi-two year cyclicity.

At the USSR Hydrometeorologicnl Center work has been completed on numerical exper-
imenta for modeling of general circulation of the atmosphere in the northern hemi-
sphere for different seasons on the basis of a finite-difference hydrodynamic mod-
el. A model of circulation of the atmosphere and ocean was developed at the center
with their interaction taken into accbunt. Studies of this type are also being de-
veloped at the Computation Center, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences,
and at the institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences.

Interesting investigations of internal gravitational waves in the atmosphere with
the use of radiometeor data have been made at the Institute of Physics and Mathe—

antics, Kirghiz SSR Academy of Sciences.

The use of space vehicles for obtaining routine data on the atmosphere and the
earth's underlying surface is expanding (State Scientific Research Center for the
Study of Natural Resources). At the Central Asian Regional Hydrometeorological In-
stitute of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring
recommendations have been developed on the multisided use of satellite and surface
data for routine determination of the productivity of agricultural crops.

Geography, natural resources and their rational use; preservation of the environ-
ment. Investigations in these fields are of primary importance. For the first time
a special section "Preservation of the Environment" has appeared in the "Principal
Directions." The Institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Academies of
Sciences of the union republics, State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Honitoring and colleges of the country are making investigations on a broad
front.

The Geography Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, in collaboration with the geo-
graphy institutes of the Academies of Sciences of Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland,
Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia have prepared methodological recommendations on the
economic and noneconomic evaluation of the consequences of man's effect on nature
for use in the countries of the Soviet Economic Bloc.

As a result of studies carried out by the institutes of the State Committee on Hy-
drometeorology and Environmental Monitoring during 1978-1980 it was possible to

determine the principal characteristics of a national system for observing and
monitoring the state of the environment. A standard program for physical. chem-
ical and biological observations is being developed and introduced at the back-
ground stations entering into this system.

At the Laboratory for Monitoring the Environment and Climate of the State Committee
on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring and the USSR Academy of Sciences
specialists have created the fundamental structure of ecological monitoring making

69
FOI‘OIINCIAI.USEGHNLY
as to geochemical monitoring of the influence of anthropogenic activity on the
natural cycles of some structural chemical elements. Specialists at the Institute
of Applied Geophysics have proposed and improved methods for monitoring the con~

hydrOcarbons in sea water, soils and other media. Scientific principles have been
developed for expert environmental protection for plans for major national econ-
omic structures.

Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences, a prediction has been made of the
changes in water quality along the route of the Baykal-Amur Railroad for the per-
iod up to the year 2000. At the Pacific Ocean Institute of Geograph , Far Eastern
Scientific Center, USSR Academy of Sciences, specialists have formulated a balance
ecological-economic model of an industrial complex. A method has been developed
for a cost estimate of the tranaportation-geographical position of complexes of

ioration measures for contending with this process.

The study of the environment by means of space vehicles is expanding. At the Geo-
graphy Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, on the basis of materials from space
surveys, specialists have created a method for landscape-typological regionaliza-
tion of the Mongolian People's Republic. There also, using materials obtained from
space vehicles, a geomorphological map of the USSR on 16 sheets was created. At

Geocryology occupies a highly important place in the geographical sciences. both
with respect to fundamental and practical importance. It is known that permafrost
exists over almost half the territory of our country. It is also known that al-
lowance for the characteristics of the cryolithozone in the economic exploitation
uf territories is a highly important matter. The ignoring of the characteristics
of permafrost can lead to extremely sorrowful consequences. At the Permafrost In-
stitute, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences, specialists have prepared

A geocryological map of the zone of the Baykal-Amur Railroad compiled there has
also been published and a Manual on Protection of Landscapes "hen Laying Gas
Pipelines in the Far North" (RUKOVODSTVO P0 ZASHCHITE LANDSHAFTOV PRI PROKLADKE
CAZOPROVODOV NA RRAYNEH SEVERE) has been prepared. At Moscow State University
specialists have developed a aethod for permefrost-engineering-geological inter-
pretation of aerospace photographs in engineering field work for pipeline

50
NO! OFFICIAI.USE¢N¥LY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction in the cryolithozone. Specialists there have also carried out invest-

igations of the spatial patterns of the lithospheric permafrost zone in Western
Siberia.

Hater problems in their importance are becoming of equal rank with energy problems.
The problem of supplying water to industrial enterprises, for agriculture and
household needs in adequate quantities and of sufficiently high quality (stated
simply, pure), in many parts of the earth and in our country is becoming very
acute.

A great number of institutes (several dozen) of different departments are engaged
in an examination of different variants of shifting of part of the runoff of north-
ern rivers to the south both in the European USSR and in Siberia. An evaluation
has been made of the influence of this measure on natural climatic conditions in
the region affected by the shifting, on the hydrology of rivers, in their mouth
zones and along the entire course, on the biological (fish reserves), economic and
social conditions.

The Institute of Hater Problems, USSR Academy of Sciences, was the key organization
for all this work. It carri..d out a great amount of work, all under rather complex
conditions. The shifting of runoff is very expensive. A demonstration of the fees-
ibility of such shifting of runoff and an analysis of possible negative conse-
quences is a very coaplex matter. This is dependent on the possible variants adopt-
ed for change in cliaate in the coming decade, on the different scenarios adopted

for the development of the national economy in the coming decade and on many other
factors. It is also necessary to take into account the possibility of alternative

means for supplying the national economy with water, in particular, improvement
in the technology of water use.

In the light of all these considerations we feel that what is written in the "Prin-

cipal Directions" is extremely far-sighted and reasonable: proceed to the inle-
mentation of preparatory work on shifting of part of the runoff of northern rivers

into the basin of the Volga River, and also continue scientific and planning work
on the shifting of part of the waters of Siberian rivers into Central Asia and
Kazakhstan. At the same time, provision is made for the implementation of necessary
meaSures for the rational expenditure of water in agriculture, on improvement in
the meliorated state of irrigated and drained lands, for increasing responsibility

for their loss from the crop rotation cycle, for eliminating salinization and en-
hanced acidity of soils.

A number of significant studies have been carried Out on other, not so fundamental,
but nevertheless very important aspects of the water problem. At the Limnological
Institute, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences water balances have been
determined for the Bratskoye and Ust'-Ilimskoye Reservoirs from the time of their
formation, indicating a reduction in the inflow of water from Baykal during recent
years. The "Principal Directions" called for the continuation of work on the pres-
ervation and rational use of unique natural complexes, especially Baykal. He know
that the threat to Daykal has by no means been removed, but on the contrary, is
increasing. And the role of the Limnological Institute in the preservation of this
unique coaplex from destructive anthropogenic effects is very great. At the Lake
Science Institute, USSR Academy cf Sciences, specialists have obtained the

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics of the ten largest lakes in the USSR and their anticipated natural
resource changes up to the year 2000.

Everything stated above indicates that at the institutes of the USSR Academy of
Sciences and the Academies of Sciences of the union republics, at the USSR State

Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring, at colleges and in
other departments there has been extensive development of scientific research work

directed to the solution of problems outlined in the "Principal Directions."

In the "Principal Directions" there is mention of the need for broadening the auto-
mation of planning-design and scientific research work with the use of electronic
computers; timely determination and modification of the direction of research and
aevelopment; the organizational structure of scientific institutes in accordance
with the requirements of the scientific and technical revolution. This is a very

important indication. An inadmissible practice is when new directions at our in-
stitutes can be formed and expanded only with an increase in personnel and out-

dated themes for years continue to be developed by tradition and custom. The in-
stitutes of the Department of Oceanology, Atmospheric Physics and Geography lust

very responsibly discuss the "Principal Directions" and note the necessary meas-
ures which each must take in its sphere of activity.
COPYRIGHT: izdatel'stvo "Naukn", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

5303
C30: 1865/49

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFMJAI.USE(HVLY

UDC 551.55+526

COLLECTION OF PAPERS 0M MARINE METEOROLOCY

Moscow TRUDY ZAPADNO-SIBIRSKOCO REGIONAL'NOGO NADCHNO-ISSLEDOVATEL'SKOCO INSTITUTA:
MORSKAYA METEOROLOCIYA. VETROVOY I TEMPERATURNYY RBZHIM SEEL'POVYKH ZON MOREY SOVET-

SKOCO SOYUZA in Russian No 50, 1981 (signed to press 10 Mar 81) pp 127-132

[Abstracts of articles from collection "Transactions of the Nest Siberian Regional
Scientific Research Institute: Marine Meteorology. Wind and Temperature Regine of
Shelf Zones of Soviet Union Seas", edited by S. D. Koshinskiy, doctor of geograph-
ical sciences, Moskovskoye otdeleniye Gidroneteoizdata. 430 copies, 132 pages]

ABSTRACTS

UDC SSI.501:551.582

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF BARENTS SEA "IND REGIME OBTAINED BY DIFFERENT METHODS

[Abstract of article by Zykova, G. 6.]

[Text] A comparative analysis of the statistical characteristics of wind directions
and velocities obtained on the basis of observations by ships in the opsn sea, at
shore and island stations using a vane (with the Beaufort scale) and also by comput-
ations for the surface atmospheric pressure field is presented. An evaluation of the

errors is made when using series of observations of different duration. Tables 3,
figures 2, references 11.

BBC 551.553:551.582

INDIRECT METHODS FOR COMPUTING LOU-PROBABILITY "IND VELOCITIES OVER SEA

[Abstract of articIc by Zykova. C. 6.]

[Text] 0n the basis of data from shipboard observations in the southern part of the
Barents Sea it was possible to deter-ine the regional dependences between the stat-
istical characteristics of the distribution of wind velocities, by means of which.

using known methods. indirect computations are node of maximum wind velocities of
different guaranteed probability over the sea. An evaluation of the errors in indir-

ect computations of wind velocities is given. Tables 3, figures 2, references 6.

53
roe omcut use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.55

USE OF NORHAL DISTRIBUTION OF RANDOM VECTOR LAW IN CHARACTERIZING WIND REGIME ON
SHELF USING WIND GRADIENT DATA

[Abstract of article by Bot'yanov, V. Ye.)

[Text] The article gives the results of evaluation of applicability of a normal cir-
cular law for computing the standard deviations of wind velocities and their fre-
quency 01 recurrence by directions on the basis of data on the regime of wind velo-
cities and directions computed from the surface pressure fields. It is shown that
there is an adequate consistency of the theoretical and empirical characteristics.
An exception is the theoretical frequency of recurrence of directions, whose values,
even with allowance for the ellipticity of the dispersion, can substantially differ

from the actual values; the influence of the shore is evidently reflected to a strong
degree. Tables 2, figures 3, references 8.

UDC 551.553.8
COMPUTATION OF MIND VELOCITIES WITH LOH GUARANTEED PROBABILITY

[Abstract of article by Koshinskiy, S. D.]

[Text] The article examines the problem of optimizing the computation of wind velo-
cities which ocCur infrequently (possible once in a stipulated number of years) by

indirect methods. For these purposes use is made of the mean annual wind velocity
and the mean annual number of days with a storm wind, that is, with a velocity V;

15 m/sec. An analysis is given of the reasons for the large errors allowed earlier
in preparation for the publication of the SPRAVOCHNIK PO KLIHATU SSSR, CHAST' III.
VETER (Handbook on USSR Climate, Part III. Hind). Approximate computations of V8
and an evaluation of the reliability of such computations were made using observa-
tional data for stations located on the shore and on islands of the Far Eastern

seas of the Soviet Union. Such methodological studies are assuming particular value
in connection with the work carried out by the Service on the "Shel'f" theme.
Tables 2, figures 3. references 13.

UDC 551.553.8

COMPUTING WIN" VELOCITIES OF INFREQUENT FREQUENCY OF RECURRBNCE OVER OPEN PART OF
SEA

[Abstract of article by Koshinskiy, S. D.]

[Text] A method is proposed for computing the extrema of wind velocities with a low
guaranteed probability (possible once in a stipulated number of years) over the
open part of the sen where there is virtually always a complete absence of any ob-
servations. For this purpose it is recommended that use he made of the results of
earlier computations of gradient wind velocities at the earth on the basis of the
pressure field in accordance with the recommendations of the State Oceanographic

FOI¢OFFNJA1.USE(NNLY
FORiOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

institute prepared by S. V. theplinskiy in 1973. The proposed computation method
was tested in the example of the Kara Sea. The results were entirely acceptable
and objective. In this connection the author assumes that such computations can
also be made over other areas of the internal and marginal seas of the Soviet
Union. Tables 4, figures 2, references 10.

UDC 551.51

INDIRECT COMPUTATION OF CONTINUOUS DURATION OF STRONG WINDS OF DIFFERENT GUARANTEED
PROBABILITY OVER KARA SEA WATERS

[Abstract of article by Rudova, L. 8.]

[Text] The maximum continuous duration of the effect of wind velocities of differ-
ent probability cannot be computed directly over the waters of seas due to the ab-
sence of information. An indirect procedure is proposed for computing this charac-
teristic by the correlation analysis method. The resulting correlation dependence
between the computed maximum continuous duration of the effect of great wind velo-

cities and their guaranteed probability makes it possible to compute the extrema of
the continuous duration on the shore and islands, as well as over the sea surface.
Tables 7, figures 2, references 9.

UDC 551.583
STATISTICAL MODELS OF LOCAL CLIMATOLOGICAL FORECAST OF BREEZES

[Abstract of article by Burman, E. A. and Stupina, P. Ya.]

[Text] A study was made of the possibility of modeling conditions favorable for the
development of breezes by means of statistical modeling of series of the amplitude
of diurnal variation of air temperature with subsequent computation of the char-
acteristics of "surges" for definite levels. The article gives a comparison of the
characteristics of a time regime of breeze circulations obtained from modeled ser-
ies and by means of direct samples. Tables 5, references 10.

UDC 551.509.322

PREDICTION OF WIND VELOCITY IN THE VOLGA DELTA

[Abstract of article by Voznesenskaya. L. H.]

[Text] Hind forecasting occupies a special place in the hydrometeorological support
of the merchant marine and fishing industry. The basis for the proposed method is
known dependences of wind velocity on different components. The article gives curves
of the dependence of maximum wind velocity in the region of the Volga delta on mean
velocity in the layer ground - 900 m, on the sign and intensity of temperature ad-
vection in the layer ground - 850 mbar. Practical recommendations are given which
can be used in preparing a short-range forecast of the wind and storm warnings for

the Volga delta and the northwestern part of the Caspian Sea. Tables 1, figures
2, references 7.

55
F0. OIIICJAI.IEIE(HNLY
FEHICHHHCJAI.USE(NNLY

UDC 551.51

FLOODINC CONDITIONS IN THE NORTHWESTERN CASPIAN 10-13 NOVEMBER 1952
[Abstract of article by Koshinskiy, S. D. and Ryzhkova (Kravets), L. H.]

[Text] The authors give an analysis of the meteorological conditions for the setting-
in of a severe southeasterly storm on 10-13 November 1952 in the Caspian Sea, this
resulting in flooding in the northwestern part of the Caspian. On 12 November the

sea water spread over a series of sectors of the land into the depths of the contin-
ent for a distance of about 20-35 km. The article includes a map of the zone of lim-

iting flooding. These materials are of great value in light of the work impending in
the llth Five-Year Plan for study of the hydrometeorologicsl regime of the Caspian.
Sea. Tables 5, figures 5.

UDC 551.55
CLINATIC PARAMETERS 0P WIND ENERGY ON THE SEASHORE

[Abstract of article by Borisenko, H. H. and Sokolova. S. N.]

[Text] A study was made of the climatic parameters of the wind used for evaluating
its energy resources: velocity norms and annual amplitudes - in the example of the

shore and sectors of the Black Sea adjacent to it. It is shown that on the coast
the mean long-term velocities are 10-60% greater than on the adjacent sectors of
the land. 0n the other hand, the amplitude of the annual variation of wind velocity
on the shore is substantially less than in the depths of the land. The results ob-

tained in this study can be used in evaluating the wind energy resources of sea
areas. Tables 2, figures 1, references 8.

UDC 551.582
ERRORS IN ”IND VBLOCITIES READ FROM SURFACE SYNOPTIC CHARTS

[Abstract of article by Kravchenko, I. K.]

[Text] The author has evnlwnted the errors in wind velocities read from annular syn-
optic maps. A comparison was made of more than 2,000 wind velocity values computed
from maps with TH-l dnta for meteorological stations on the shores of the Gulf of
Finland and the Gulf of Riga. It is shown that there are rather substantial differ-
ences between the wind velocity values. In the case of low wind velocities it is
easy to trace a tendency to an exaggeration of the velocities read from synoptic

charts in comparison with the TH-l. and with high velocities. on the other hand,
an understatement. The principal reason for the differences is the peculiarities

of coding when plotting wind velocity on the map. Tables 1, figures 1.

S6
FOR‘0FFK]A1.USE¢NNLY
FOIIDFFMJAI.USE(NUUY

UDC 551.524.36(26S.5)
MINIMUM AIR TEMPERATURES OVER SOVIET ARCTIC SEAS

[Abstract of article by Petrov, L. 8.]

[Text] Maps of the distribution of minimum temperatures over Soviet arctic seas are
represented. The patterns of the regime of minimum temperatures for different time
averaging scales are considered. A graphic form of representation of the generaliz-
ing information on minimum temperatures is proposed on the basis of data for indi-
vidual stations. Such schemes make it possible to give approximate evaluations of

the regime of minimum temperatures at any point in the Arctic. Tables 2, figures 1.
references 6.

UDC 551.524

RECOMMENDATIONS 0N COMPUTING THE CONTINUOUS DURATION OF PERIODS HIT“ AIR
TEMPERATURE BELOW STIPULATED LIMITS USING "LON-LEVEL" AUTOMATION METHODS

[Abstract of article by Luchitshaya, l. 0.]

[Text] Due to the reoutfitting and replacement of electronic computers at the Nest
Siberian Regional Computation Center, the introduction of programs for the computer
processing of meteorological information on electronic computers in the years im-
mediately ahead cannot be accomplished. Accordingly, a simplified method is propos-
ed for determining the continuous duration of periods with an air temperature below
(above) the stipulated limits with respect to the minimum, maximum and mean daily
air temperatures. This method will make it possible to carry out computations using

"low-level" automation methods and manually. It is adequately reliable and less
time-consuming in comparison with the method based on use of the earlier proposed '

empirical formula. Tables 3, figures 1, references 6.

UDC 551.575.62

SOME REGIME CHARACTERISTICS OF CONDITIONS FOR ICING 0F ABOVE-HATER FEATURES IN
SHELF ZONE 0? ARCTIC SEAS

[Abstract of article by Kolosovu, N. V. and Panov, V. V.]
[Text] Maps of the empirical probability of sea breeze icing for October in the ex-
ample of the Kara Sea are given. Data are given on the duration of cases of icing,

thickness and mass of deposited ice from atmospheric icing according to observa-
tions on a glaze wall at polar stations. Tables 4, figures 2, references 6.

57
FOI‘OFEIJAI.UEI¢NWLY
FOI4OFFICIALIEIE(NNLY

UDC 551.551.8
FEATURES OF STRUCTURE OF ATMOSPHERIC NEAR-HATER LAYER IN NORTHERN SEAS
[Abstract of article by Garbuzov, A. V.]

[Text] 0n the basis of long-term data from shipboard observations the author exam-
ines stratification conditions in the atmospheric near-Hater layer in northern
sens. It is shown that it is necessary to take into account stratification condi-
tions in the atmospheric near-water layer when computing exchange characteristics
for different averaging periods. It is shownthat allowance forluludity stratifi-
cation when computing exchange characteristics in northern seas is necessary only
for small averaging periods. It was established that the relative variability of

the parameters of the near-water layer of the atmosphere in the northern seas is
close to the values obtained for the North Atlantic region. The author gives eval-

uations of the errors in computing climatic values of heat flows when using in-
formation on the mean values of meteorological elements governed by the variabil-
ity of these elements. Tables 2, figures 4. references 11.

UDC 551.577.2.(268.5)
FREQUENCY OF RECURRENCE AND INTENSITY 0F PRECIPITATION IN SOVIET ARCTIC SEAS
[Abstract of article by Bryazgin, N. ".1

[Text] For the first time for arctic seas, on the basis of data from island and
coastal stations and shipboard observations for 1936-1965, it was possible to con-
struct maps of the frequency of recurrence of precipitation. For the poorly observ-
ed areas of the seas. when constructing the mentioned maps, in addition to ship-
board observations use was made of the empirical correlations of the probability of
precipitation with meteorological elements. The computed values of precipitation
intensity are cited. The annual variation and patterns of distribution of their fre-

quency of recurrence are given. An evaluation of the accuracy of the constructed
maps is given. Tables 5, figures 1, references 9.

COPYRIGHT: Zapadno-sibirskiy regional‘nyy nauchno-iasledovatel‘skiy inatitut
Goskomgidrometa, 1981

5103
C50: 1865/53

58
INDI10IFICJAJ.USI:(NNLY
mamauusnoutv

mmm. GEOPHYSICS

unc 550.33
COLLECTION 01" ARTICLES 0" APPLI- GEOPHYSICS

Moscow PRIKIADNAYA GmPIZlKA in Russian No 100. 1981 (signed to press 16 Apr 81)
pp 191-192

[Abstracts of articles from collection "Applied Geophysics", responsible editor
Ye. V. Karus, lzdatel'atvo "Nedra", 1690 copies, 192 pages]

[Text] Abstracts

unc 550.8%.5
DIFFERENTIAL PARAMETERS OF SURFACE TRAVEL-TIME CURVES 01’ mm HAVES

[Abstract of article by Levin, A. 11.]

[Text] It is shown that the differential parameters of the travel-tine curve of re-
flected waves are. interrelated to surface wave fronts and fictitious surfaces. 3:-
pressions are derived for the curvatures of the surface travel-tine curve, fic-
titious surface and surface of the front of a reflected wave. Figures 1, references
5.

1ch 550.836.05
FETURBS 0P PROCESS!!!) OF EXCHANGE HAVE $3118le 3‘! THE D-MNSPOBNS METHOD
[Abstract of article by Kondrat'yev, 0. K. and Orlov, V. P.)
[Text] The article examines an algoritln for D-trnnsfornation of records of the :-
conponents in the transmitted exchange waves nethod into the image of a deep sec-
tion. It is shown that in the "reconstruction" of inhomogeneous nedie it is desir-

able that an algoritl'n for the autonatic regulation of the all-nation base be in-
troduced into the D—transforl procedure. Figures 6, references 5.

59
momentum“
FOI:0§1HCJAI.[EIE(NVLY

UDC 550.834.53

INVESTIGATION OF HAVEGUIDE SURFACE WISE IN SEISMIC PROSPECTING BY THE COﬂDN DEEP
POINT METHOD

[Abstract of article by Gil'bershteyn, P. 6.. Pochtovik, V. S. and Kopilevich,
Ye. A.]

[Text] A study was made of the spectral and energy characteristics of PL interfer-
ence waves in the case of different filtration parameters as a function of source-

receiver distance and shot depth. 0n the basis of a study of the properties of P1
interference it was possible to develop a method for its subtraction. Figures 4,
tables 2, references 9.

UDC 550.836
ANALYSIS OF CONCEPTS ON EXTENT OF EFFECTIVE REFLECTION REGION

[Abstract of article by lavalishin, B. R.]

[Text] This is a discussion of the contradiction arising in estimation of the ex-
tent of the effective reflection region in frequency and time representations. The
author demonstrates the arbitrariness of defining the concept of "effective reflec-
tion region" on the basis of allowance for the role of edge diffraction. The fre-
cuency dependence of diffraction creates the impression that the extent of the ef-
fective reflection region is also dependent on frequency. In actuality, this ex-
Lent is not determined by frequency, but by the duration of the wave process. Fig-
ures 4, references 8.

UDC 550.834.S

AUTOMATED SYSTEM FOR PROCESSING SPATIAL OBSERVATIONS BY THE CORDN DEEP POINT
METHOD

[Abstract of article by Staykov, P. P., Minkovskiy, Kh. 8., et s1.]

[Text] The article cxaaines an automated system for the processing of spatial ob-
servations in the common deep point method. The results of processing of field ob-
servatlons make it possible to conclude that in the case of spatial observations
there is an increase in the reliability of discrimination of reflected waves due to
the collection of wave energy in space. The principal advantage of spatial process-

ing is the possibility of obtaining data on the behavior of the reflecting boundary
in space. Figures 5, references 6.

UDC 550.834.04
EVALUATING GROUND EFFECT TENN FOR SOURCE OF SEISMIC VIBRATIONS AT SURFACE

[Abstract of article by Heyorov, V. V.]

[Text] 0n the basis of a diagram relating deformation of the ground and stresses,

it was possible to calculate the time t for introduction of the shock mechanism
of a surface source into the ground. It is shown that t is determined by the

60
DO! OFIICIAI.IENZ(NVLY
FOI‘OFFIJAL.U§E(NNLY

momentum of the shock mechanism and reaction of the ground. Figures 1, tables 1,
references 4.

UDC 550.83.05:519

USE OF GEOLOGICAL-cmPHYSICAL DATA FOR DELINEATING PETMLEIH DEPOSITS IN THE
SALYHSKOYE DEPOSIT USING THE POISK PROGRAM

[Abstract of article by Khomenyuk, Yu. V., Haksisov, A. B. and Guseva, V. 8.]

[Text] The authors describe experience with the use of surface geological-geophys-
ical data in delineating petroleum deposits in the argillites of the Bazhenovskaya
suite of the Salynskoye deposit (Western Siberia) using the P018! program for the

identification of images. The preliminary evaluation of the reliability of the
forecasts is not less than 702. Figures 3, tables 1. references 5.

UDC 550.837.81
POSSIBILITY OF USE OF CONCEPTS OF QUANTUM PHYSICS IN INDUCED POLARIZATION THEORY

[Abstract of article by Balsssnyan. 8. Yu. and Kobyl'skiy, V. A.]

[Text] A study was made of the possibility of using the concepts of quantum physics
in the theory of induced polarization. It is shown that in this case it is quite

easy to explain such phenolena observed in actual practice in the induced polar-
ization method as negative polsrizability and polarizability exceeding 1002. Fig-
ures 3, references 12.

unc 550.831.01
DEPENDENCE OF DIFFERENTIATION 0P HASSES ON THE EARTH'S GRAVITATIONAL FIELD
[Abstract of article by Veselov, K. Ye.]

[Text] It is demonstrated that any lengthening of the terrestrial day. secular
shortening of the terrestrial year, periodic and irregular changes in the length
of day and sale geological phenomena can explain generation and change of mass. It

is proposed that this effect be taken into account in computing the flight trajec-
tories of space vehicles. Tables 1, references 14.

UDC 550.831.017

ITERATION-ANALYTICAL METHOD FOR SOLVING INVERSB PROBLEM OF GRAVIHAGNETIC
EXPLORATION FOR VERTICAL, CYLINDRICAL AND STRATAL BODIES BY NONLINEAR OPTIMIZATION

[Abstract of article by Lyubinov. A. A.. Abramov. A. N., D'yachkov, N. P. and
Ivanov. S. N.]

[Text] This paper gives an iteration-analytical solution of the inverse problem in
gravimetric and magnetic prospecting in a class of vertical, cylindrical and strat-
al bodies on the basis of the totality of the most informative points which is

61
EDITOFEKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR!OF1WC1Al.lEIE(NNLY

obtained using an electronic computer by the trial-and-error method by minimizing
a nonlinear functional. Tables 4. references a.

DDC 550.831.017

COMPUTATION OF REDUCED POTENTIAL FIELDS HITH A PHYSICAL SURFACE ON A HORIZONTAL
PLANE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE KURSK MAGNETIC ANOHALY

[Abstract of article by Lyubimov, c. A. and Lyubimov, A. A.]

[Text] A method is described for the reduction of magnetic and gravity observations
with an arbitrary surface to a plane, which makes it possible to increase the ac-

curacy 11 reduction and reduce the expenditures of computer time in computations of
any class. Figures 3 tables 2, references 4.

UDC 550.831.05:519
RIMLIZM‘ION OP FULL GRADIENT METHOD UITIDUT SPECTRAL EXPANSION 0F INITIAL DATA

[Abstract of article by Berezkin. V. N. and Otroshko, Ye. N.]

[Text] The authors propose a computation scheme for the full gradient method withOut
spectral expansion of the initial data by means of transforming a Fourier series

into a contraction integral. A program for a BESM—G electronic computer is prepared
on its basis. Figures 3, references a.

"DC 550.831.016
SEPARATION OF GRAVITY ANOHALIES PROM BODIES SITUATED ABOVE ONE ANOTHER

[Abstract of article by Antonov. Yu. V.]

[Text] A method is proposed for the separation of complex gravity anomalies for the
case of two anomalous bodies situated one below the other. Numerical schemes are

developed for determining local anomalies from the distribution of a complex anomaly
on the observation profile. Figures 3, tables 3, references 6.

UDC 550.831.017

A’PROXIHATE METHOD FOR SULVING THE PLANE INVERSE PROBLEM IN STRUCTURAL GRAVIHETRY

[Abstract of article by Pedorova, N. V.]

[Text] An approximate method is examined for solution of the two—dimensional in-

verse problem in potential theory for the purpose of determining discontinuities
which is based on use of an approximation of the observed fields of a new class of

potentials. An algorithm for constructing a family of equivalent discontinuities

is described and is tested in model and practical examples. Figures 6, references
7.

62
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USEGINLY
I‘MICIHHIJAI.USE(I'LV

UDC 550.831
REDUCTION OF THE OBSERVED GRAVITY FIELD
[Abstract of article by Hikhaylov. I. ".1

[Text] In a theoretical example the author examines the problems involved in re-
duction of the observed gravity field. The possibilities of reduction with the

use of the apparent rock density values, determined fron the results of gravita-
tional logging, are pointed out. Figures 2, references 5.

"DC 550.831

ERRORS IN TRIGONOHETRIC APPROXIMATIONS AND USE OF SHORTENED POURIER SERIES "HEN
USING FILON METHOD

[Abstract of article by Yeliseyeva, I. 8.]

[Text] It has been established that the degree of nonequal accuracy in computing
the coefficients of a Fourier series by the Filon nethod is dependent on the number

of reading points at which the initial function is stipulated. It is proposed that
the optimum length of a series be determined in the case of shortened approxima-
tions on the basis of finding of the limiting expansion errors. figures 2, refer-
ences 3.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Redra", 1981

5303
030: 1865/13

63
BOI‘OFIICJAI.USE¢MNLY
FOI‘OFFMJAI.USE(NNLY

COLLECTION 017 ARTICLES 0N DYNAMIC THEORY OF SEISHIC WAVE PROPAGATION

Leningrad VOPROSY DINAHICNBSKOY TEORII RASPROSTRANENIYA SEYSHICHESKIKH VOLN
in Russian No 21. 1981 (signed to press 5 Aug 81) pp 195-196

[Abstracts from collection of articles "Problems in the Dynamic Theory of Seismic
Have Propagation", edited by G. I. Petrashen', Leningradskoye otdeleniya, Isdatel'stvo
"Nauka", 1150 copies, 196 pages]

[Text I ABSTRACTS

UDC 550.364
RAY METHOD AND POLARIZATION OF SEISMIC BODY WAVES
[Abstract of article by Petrashen', G. 1.]

[Text] The author introduces the concept of a natural base ek(t ) of a ray system

of coordinates constructed at points (smooth segments) of a ray defining constant
directions of polarization of longitudinal and transverse waves during their propa-
gation in isotropic inhomogeneous media. 0n the basis of such a concept the article
sets forth the formalism of the ray method in the mentioned media and this formalism
is compared with the formalism of the ray method in cases of anisotropy of the
medium. As a result it is clarified that with a tendency of the parameters of aniso-
tropy to zero the directions of the polarization of quasilongitudinal and quasi-
:ransverse waves at each point, on the (limiting) ray tend to the specific direction

of some natural base. A simple algorithm is given for constructing the base ek(-r)
simultaneously with construction of the ray. References 6.

UDC 550.3b6

SOME PROBLEMS IN STUDYING SEISMIC HAVE FIELDS ON THE BASIS OF rmz-cmm
OBSERVATIONS

[Abstract of article by Knshtan, B. H., Kovtun, A. L. and Petrashen', G. 1.]
[Text] General information is given on the propagation of body waves in inhomogen-

eous seismic media close to real media and on its basis there is clarification of

the problem of approach to a description of the polarization of seismic oscilla-
tions arising when waves of different types are superposed. The results are applied

66

F0l10FFKJAl.USE(NNLY
to the problem of discriminating useful waves (and determination of their parameters)
on the basis of computer processing of material from three-component registry of
wave fields under seismic prospecting conditions. Figures 7, references 19.

UDC 550. 344

INVESTIGATION OF DISPERSION EQUATION ROOTS IN CASE OF PACKET 0F TRANSVERSELY
ISO’I‘ROPIC ELASTIC LAYERS

[Abstract of article by Molotkov, L. A. and Baymagambetov, 0.]

[Text] Analytical methods are used in investigating the roots of a dispersion equa-
tion for a packet of transversally isotropic elastic layers with free outer boun-
daries. In the investigation use is made of matrix representations of dispersion
equations. 0n the basis of asymptotic expressions for the left-hand sides of the
equations it was possible to derive approximate formulas for the roots for small and
large wave numbers. These results make it fully possible to trace the movement of

the roots with an increase in wave nunbers and to clarify the nature of the change
in phase velocities of normal waves as a function of frequency. References 8.

UDC 550.344
HEAD WAVE RADIATED BY A THIN ELASTIC LAYER

[Abstract of article by Holotkov, L. A. and Smirnova, ﬂ. 8.]

[Text] The low-frequency head wave from an e1 astic layer in a fluid is related to
the longitudinal-lamellar wave in a . elastic layer. If the elastic layer is in rigid

contact with the surrounding elastic medium, a longitudinal-lamelIar vave cannot
propagate in such a system. However, as indicated by an analysis of the correspond-

ing dispersion equation, at some low frequencies a highly attenuating head wave
is also possible. Figures 3. references 6.

UDC 536.213Jo. 550.934.013
THEORETICAL-EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF WAVES GLANCING ALONG A CONCAVB BOUNDARY

[Abstract of article by Kraukl is, P. V., Koptev, V. I.. Krauklis, 1.. A. and Yakubov,
V. A.]

[Text] The article gives a comparison of asymptotic and precise solutions of the
problem of waves glancing along the concave boundary of an elastic medium. Theoret-
icnl seismograms are compared with experimental data in the case of a wave on the
circular boundary of a plane model. There is a good agreement between the observed
and theoretical travel-tine curves and amplitude curves. Figures 6. references 5.

65

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.836

DEPENDENCE OF INITIAL PARTS OF SEISHOGRAHS 0? REMOTE EARTHQUAKBS 0N PARAMETERS
0F THREE-LAYER MODEL OF EARTH'S CRUST

[Abstract of article by Gal'perina. R. H., Ledovskaya, Ye. M. and Volin, A. P.]

[Text] The article presents an extremely effective method for computing the initial
parts of full theoretical seismograms of remote earthquakes under the "Krat-3" and

"Krat-S" programs. The authors discuss new possibilities afforded by the programs in
the interpretation of seismic observations. 0n the basis of the results of computa-
tion of the theoretical seismograms under the "Krat—3" program it is possible to an-
alyze the dependence of the structure of the initial parts of the seismograms on the

parameters of the three-layer aodel of the earth's crust. Figures 7, tables 2, ref-
erences 7.

BBC 550.834

SPATIAL MODEL OF ANOHALOUS UPPER HANTLE ZONE IN ALTAY AND SAYAN REGION AS A RRSULT
0F SEISMIC PROBING

[Abstract of article by Matveyeva, N. N., Rogozhina, V. A. and Antonova, L. IL]

[Text] 0n the basis of data on earthquakes registered along the profile Pamirs-Lens
River it was possible to study a zone of reduced velocity in the upper mantle. With
deviations At in the travel time of seismic waves from the standard Jeffreys-Bullen
travel-time curve it was possible to ascertain the spatial position of the zone and
the velocities within it. In this procedure only At) 2.0 see are taken into ac-
count. A theoretical probing of the zone is carried out. The travel times of waves
in a three-dimensional medium are computed for different sources. It was found that
the zone extends for approximately 2,000 km and plunges in a NIB-SH direction. The
minimum depths are 150-200 and the maximum depths are 750-800 km; the propagation
velocity of longitudinal waves on the average decreased by 0.5-0.8 [cm/sec. Figures
7, tables 2, references 18.

000 550.8365

FEATURES OF THE HAVE FIELD FOR TRANSFORHBD FAULT ZONE IN CASE OF m—nmsxom
MODEL OF MEDIUM

[Abstract of article by Tsymbal. T. H., Neprochnov, Yu. P. and Antonova, L. N.]

[Text] A study was made of the kinematic and dynamic features of the wave field in
a three-dimensional model of a transformed fault having a curvilinear bottom (fault
canyon). It is shown that the curvilinear bottom, focusing the energy of the re-
fracted and reflected waves, exerts a substantial influence on the wave pattern. For
the purpose of refining the nature of some observed waves the authors compared
theoretical computations with experimental data. Figures 8, tables 1, references 3.

66

FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.834

EVALUATION OF EFFECTIVENESS OF MN DEEP POINI' OBSERVATION SYSTDIS AND CHOICE OF
OPTIMUM FIELD WRK METHOD 0N BASIS OF EFFECTIVE SEISHIC IDDEL METHOD

[Abstract of article by Kurbanov, R. K. and Hametov, K. 11.]

[Text] An interpretation system is proposed which makes it possible to evaluate the
effectiveness of accumulation.systems in the common deep point method, to ascertain
the optimum spacing of shot points and the optimum length of the travel-time curve.
In the example of the Middle Syr-Dar'ya Depression of Southern Kazakhstan a study v
is made of all stages in investigations by the proposed method and the optimum
field work method by the common deep point method is defined. Figures 6, tables 1,
references 8.

UDC 550.834.05

EXPERIENCE IN USING THE DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF REFLEC'I‘H) WAVES IN SELECTING
CHARGE SIZE

[Abstract of article by Pershina, R. A., Kosarev, V. K., Loginov, V. T. and Hakokin,
V. 1.]

[Text] It is demonstrated experimentally that using the dependence of the effective
absorption coefficient on the frequency characteristics of seismic waves it is pos-

sible to exert an influence on the structure of the observed field. In particular,
within the limits of the Moscow syneclise in this way it is possible to achieve a

relative attenuation of the most intensive group of multiple reflected waves with
three reflection events, one of which occurs in the near-surface part of the sec-

tion. The attenuation of the mentioned group of waves causes a change in the dynamic
characteristics of the registered field of reflected waves. Figures 3, references 3.

UDC 550.834
SEISNOGRAH TRANSFORMATION HIT" USE OF CHANGE IN TIME SCALE 0F PATHS
[Abstract of article by Latyshev, K. P. and 02erov, D. K.)
[Text] A procedure is proposed for seismogram transformation which involves the lin-
ear extension and compression of the paths along the time axis. It is shown that

this procedure considerably reduces the sharply changing part of the wave form and
this can be used in separating oscillations. Figures 8, references 1.

UDC 550.834
CONVERGENCE OF AN ITERATION ALGORITHM FOR SEPARATING INTERFERING SEISMIC WAVES

[Abstract of article by Troyan, V. N.]

[Text] The convergence of the iteration procedure for finding evaluations of para-
eeters of interfering seismic waves is demonstrated for the special (but of

67
INDI‘OIIICIAI.IISIIIHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

practical interest) case of separation of two waves. The author examines two vari-
ants of stipulation of signal shape: the shape is known with an accuracy to the am-
plitude factor: the shape is unknown but the effective duration of the signal is

stipulated. Formulas are derived for the residual tern. These can be used for prac-

tical evaluations of the accuracy of the n-th approximation and mint. probability
evaluations. References 2.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

5303
C80: 1 865/38

68

MOFFICIALUSEONLY
FEIIGDFFICIAI.IISEZ(MVLY

PHYSICS 01' AMSP‘IKRE

UDC 551.593+551.510.536
COLLECTION OF PAPERS 0N ATMOSPHERIC OPTICS

Moscow TRUDY [NSTITUTA EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY HETEDRDLOGII: OPTIKA ATHDSFERY in Russian
No 10, 1981 (signed to press 28 Jan 81) pp 103-105

[Abstracts of articles from collection "Transactions of the Institute of Experimen-
tal Meteorology: Atmuspheric Optics", edited by V. N. Lebednite, doctor of physic-
al and mathematical sciences, Moskovskoye otdeleniye Gidroneteoisdata, 430 copies.
105 pages]

[Text] ABSTRACTS

UDC 535.345.67
APPARATUS FOR PABRICATIPG HEDGE INTERFERENCE FILTERS

[Abstract of article by Vasil'yev, A. S. and Davletshina, R. A.]

[Text] Apparatus is described which makes it possible to employ the UVR-7lP-3 stan-
dard—produced vacuun apparatus for the fabrication of wedge interference filters of
an annular shape. The article gives the spectral characteristics of s netsllodielee-
tric wedge filter in the spectral region 380-680 nn, fabricated using such apparatus.
Tables 1, figures 2, references A.

UDC 53S.216.6
POSSIBLE ERRORS IN RADIOHETRIC APPARATUS

[Abstract of article by Allenov, H. 1., Hanonova, I. G. and Tret'yakov, N. 0.]

[Text] The article gives the results of computations of the errors in rsdionetric
apparatus for different spectral intervals of radiant energy detectors Pbs, PbTe,
InSb, different interference filters with A.- 0.06, 0.54, 1.56, 2.06’sn and with
a background level outside the transmission band 10’3 and 10" relative to trans-

mission at the maxi-um for different tenperatures T of the radiation source (from
273 to 6000'K). Tables 3, figures 1, references 2.

69
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USECNMUY
INJITOFTWC1A1.l!ﬂE(HVLY

UDC 535.853.225
SPECTROMETER FOR LON-ENERGY ELECTRONS

[Abstract of article by Kal'sin, A. V., Klimentov, A. H. and Hikheyev, Yu. P.]

[Text] The authors describe an electron spectrometer intended for investigations
aboard geophysical rockets for determining the intensities of electron fluxes,
their angular and energy distributions in the energy range 5-70 eV. The instrument
field of view is 10 x 20°, energy resolution is 51. the geometry factor is 4'10'3
cmzsr, the spectral scanning period is 1 sec. The spectrometer electronics system
was developed on a modern component base. Figures 5, references 8.

BBC 550.380

DETERMINING ANGLES 0F ORIENTATION 0F RAPIDLY ROTATING GEOPHYSICAL ROCKETS BY MEANS
0? SOLAR AND MAGNETIC SENSORS

[Abstract of article by Kal'sin, A. V. and Hikheyev. Yu. P.]

[Text] A method is given for determining the orientation of a rapidly moving geo-
physical rocket relative to the vector of strength of the geomagnetic field and
the direction to the sun, developed for a case when there is regular nutation of

the longitudinal axis of the rocket. A method was developed for in-flight calibra-
tion of magnetic field sensors. Figures 1, references 6.

UDC 535.241.626
ENERGY CALIBRATION OF A SPECTROMETER FOR OBSERVING TWILIGHT SKY EMISSION
[Abstract of article by Gusev, S. V. and Tereb, N. V.]
[Text] A method and apparatus are described for carrying out energy calibration of

a spectrometer complex. The apparatus is an outfit in which the standard radiation
source used is an 818-200 U light-measuring lamp. HB-lé milk glass is used for fill-

ing the field of view. The computation error in energy calibration is 10-16:. Tables
3, references 5.

unc 551.593.65
STUDY OF BRICHTNESS FLUCTUATIONS 0F STRATOCUHDLUS CLOUDS

[Abstract of article by Allenov, H. 1., Bulgakov, V. 6., Ivanova. N. I. and Tret'ye-
kov, N. 0.]

[Text] The authors analyze the results of investigation of the stochastic structure
of brightness fluctuations of stratocumulus clouds simultaneously in the spectral

intervals 1.50-1.80, zoo-2.32, 1.60—286 and 2.60-286pbm. Also given are the moments

70
FOR OIIWCIAI.USEIDNLY
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NNEY

and differential distribution functions, autocorrelation functions and spectral
densities for all four channels. Tables 2, figures 2, references 6.

HBO 551.576.12
STATISTICAL STRUCTURE OF EFFECTIVE TRICKNBSSES 0P FIELD OF CUHMLUS CLOUDS

[Abstract of article by Allenov, H. I. and Bulgakov, V. 6.]

[Text] A study was made of the statistical structure of effective thicknesses of the
field of cumulus clouds. The field is simulated on a Yes-1050 electronic computer by

the Monte Carlo method. The authors give the moments and differential distribution
functions of effective thicknesses for different zenith angles and absolute scale
units. Tables 1, figures 2, references 9.

UDC 551.510.535.001.57
FORMATION OF STABLE LAYERS 0F METAL IONS IN THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE
[Abstract of article by Tereb, N. V.]

[Text] The author carried out numerical modeling of the process of transport of
uetal ions at altitudes 85-119 km under the influence of tidal components and the
prevailing wind. It is shown that the tidal components cannot be responsible for

the formation of stable layers of ions of metals at altitudes 90-95 km. Tables 1,
references I

UDC 551.510.536
MEASUREMENTS 0? Ca II EMISSION IN KIRGIZIYA

[Abstract of article by Tereb, N. V.]

[Text] Measurements of the emission of ionized calcium, carried out in 1977-1979 in
Kirgiziya, indicate that as a rule the intensity of the emission does not exceed
the threshold of response of t e apparatus. but sometimes a:tains extremely high
values corresponding to 1.5.10 ions/cs2 of the total content of calcium ions; the
days when the emissions were observed (only 11 cases of the appearance of the Ca II
emission were registered in 2&3 neasurements) do not coincide with the periods of
the most powerful meteor streams; the probability of the appearance of a powerful
emission in evening is greater than in the morning. Figures 3, references 9.

UDC 551.521.17

INFLUENCE OF A SERIES OF FACTORS ON THE LEVEL OF SOLAR UV RADIATION SCATTERED BY THE
OZONOSPNERE

[Abstract or article by Barysheva, V. I. and Troyanov, N. H.]

[Text] This is a discussion of the problems involved in numerical nodeling of the
process of transfer of solar UV radiation in the atmosphere. The article gives quan-
titative estimates of the influence of different factors on the level of scattered

71
FOR OFFICJAI.IEHB(NNLY
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

radiation. Allowance for single scattering alone leads to an underevaluation of

the intensity of scattered radiation to~401. Comparable to the influence of mul-
tiple scattering processes on the level of scattered radiation is the influence

of the temperature dependence of the ozone absorption coefficient, which attains
122 under some conditions of atmospheric illumination and wavelengths. Measures

are proposed for optimizing the selected model of the atmosphere from the point of
view of the reliability of reconstructing the characteristics of the ozonosphere on
the basis of scattered radiation from artificial earth satellites. Tables 3, fig-
ures 1, references 19.

UDC 551.510.5
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS 0P ATMOSPHERIC CARBON DIOXIDE (REVIEW)

[Abstract of article by Kamenogradskiy. N. Ye. and Shashkov, A. A.]

[Text] This is a review of the principal results of experimental investigations of
the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration. The author describes modern measure-
ment apparatus (nondispersion IR optical-acoustical gas analyzer) and the measure-
ment method. Also discussed are the prospects for further development of experimen-
tal methods for studying atmospheric c02 associated with the use of the spectro-
scopic method for the mean C02 concentration in a column of the atmosphere weighted
by altitude. Figures 10, references 75.

000 551.593.5

MOLECULAR ABSORPTION or mom-mu IN THE wmnow or mum moospmrc mmsmnm
3.5-4.1.) m (REVIEW)

[Abstract of article by Aref'yev, V. N. and Visheratin. K. N.]

[Text] This is a review of the principal publications of recent years on the molec-
ular uhsurptlnn of IR radiation in the window of relative atmospheric transparency
3.5-ﬁ.lrxm. Tables A. figures 3, references 66.

COPYRIGNT: Institut eksperimental'noy meteorologii (IBM), 1981

5303
C50: 1865/52

72
FOI‘OFIICJAI.IEIE(NVLV
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USB(HVLY

UDC 550.388
MONOGRAPH ON GEOPHYSICAL PARAMETERS 0P IONOSPHERB

Alma-Ara GEOPIZICHESKIYE PARAMETRY IONOSPERY in Russian 1979 (signed to press
10 Jul 79) pp 2, 116

[Annotation and table of contents from monograph "Geophysical Parameters of the
lonospherc". by Marlyn Pctrovna Rudina and Nina Fedorovna Solonitayna, lsdatel'stvo
"Nnukn" Kazakhskoy SSR. 1000 cOpies, 117 pages]

[Text] In this monograph the authors examine the state of the ionosphere on the
basis of data from the world network of stations over a long period of observa-
tions. It is shown that at latitudes 35—45' the state of the upper atmosphere,
determined by a series of geophysical parameters. has features not fitting into
known theories. A hypothesis is advanced that at these latitudes. with a special
state of the interplanetary aagnetic field, an effect is exerted by corpuscular
streams and that long—period fluctuations of the solar system are transmitted

to the earth's atmosphere through the interplanetary magnetic field. Thus. the
discovered features make necessary a new approach to formulation of a theory of
the formation and behavior of the upper atmosphere and diagnosis. Computations,
graphs and tables are cited which are necessary in preparing short- and long-
range forecasts of radio wave propagation. The book is of interest for special-
ists concerned with the problems of solar-terrestrial physics and geophysicists,
graduate students and students at the corresponding colleges. Figures 33. tables
16, references 137.

Contents
lntrmluctlnn.......................-...onou.n..u............o................. 3

Part 1. Quiet State of Ionosphere

Chapter 1. Spatial-Temporal Changes in lonospheric Parameters................... 6
Morphology of Anomalies of Geophysical Parameters in Ionosphsric P—Region...... 7

Chapter 2. Investigation of Main Features of the Ionospheric F-Region (Ionization
and Recombination Processes and Temperature Regime)............................ 15
"idday ionization of F2 region....n.........u...”..noo............coouu.o 15
Correlation dependences of ionospheric and solar parameters.........r.......... 26
Evaluation of lon'zﬂt lon-roromblnation conditions-soosseoeeassesses-ossesossees 29
Temperature regime of ionospheric F region..................................... 48

73
HOI<OUIICIAI.!IIEIIUL¥
IN)R‘0FF1C]AI.IEIE(HNLY

Chapter 3. Motion of neutral and charged components of thermosphere............ 52
Motion of neutral atmosphere. Determination of velocity of horizontal wind at

altitudes 180-400 km ooooooo o-oooolc0.0.0.000000000000COCO-Oooloooooooooooooo 52
Motion of charged component. Vertical drift of ionization..................... 65

Part 11. Disturbed State of Ionosphere

Chapter 4. Ionospheric F-Region During Disturbed Periods....................... 70
Diurnal and seasonal distribution of disturbances............................. 73
27-day and cyclic frequency of recurrence of disturbances..................... 77
Temporal and spatial correlation £‘F2........................................ 79
Correlation of disturbed state of F-region with solar flares........-......... 83

Effects in Ionosphere after disturbances caused by solar flares.............. 100
Intluence of movements and corpuscular streams on distribution of electron

concentration.............................................................. 103

Bibliography................................................................... 109

COPYRIGHT: lzdutel'xtvo "Nuuka" Kaznkhskoy SSR, 1979

5303
CSO: 1865/55

74

liliCHﬂﬂCJAl.lﬂﬂB(ﬂILY
roe omcm. use ONLY

ARTIC AND ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

UDC 550.83(99)
COLLECTION 0? ARTICLES 0N GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH IN ANTARCTICA

Leningrad CBOFIZICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA V ANTARKIIDB in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 31 Dec 80) pp 2-3

[Annotation and table of contents from collection of articles "Geophysical Research
in Antarctica". edited by H. G. Terekhanova, Nanchno-issledovatel'ekiy institut geo-
logii Arktiki (NIICA), 295 copies, 75+ pages]

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles gives the principal results of
Soviet geological-geophysical research in Antarctica carried out during 1970-1980.
The articles examine the deep structure of the two largest rift zones -- the Pilch-
ner Ice Shelf in Hestern Antarctica and Lambert Glacier in Eastern Antarctica. The
leading role of riftogenic processes in the formation of extensive periconrinentsl
sedimentation basins is demonstrated. The high effectiveness of the airborne mag-
netoneter method under Antarctic conditions is denonetrated for detecting struc-
tures in the basement and determining its paleotectonic nature. Brief communica-
tions discuss methodological problems involved in carrying out seismic soundings by

the reflected waves method and the use of radiogeodetic systems for the tie-in of
aerogeophysical surveys.
Contents

Gaponenko, G. I. and Grikurov, G. V. ”Principal Scientifie-Methodological Re-
sults of Soviet Geophysical Investigations in Antarctica in 1970-1980” 5

Masolov, V. N. "Structure of the Magnetically Active Basenent of the Southeast-
ern Part of the Weddell Sea Basin" 14

Grikulov, G. V., Kadmina, I. N., Ksnenev, Ye. N., Kurinin, R. 6., Haeolov, V. N.
and Shulyatin, 0. G. "Tectonic Structure of the Weddell Sea Basin" 29

Kadmina, I. N. "Structure of the Magnetically Active Layer of the Earth's
Crust in the Neighborhood of Lambert Glacier" 44

Volnukhin, V. S. and Kurinin. R. 0. "Physical Properties of Rocks in the
Neighborhood of Lanbert Glacier" 52

Brief Communications

Kogan, A. L. "Methodological Problens in Seismic Sounding by the Reflected Haves
Method Under Antarctic Conditions" 59

75

FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE(HNLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pozdeycv, V. 3. "Velocity Parameters of the Ice Layer According to Data From
Seismic Inveatigations :37 the Reflected Haves Method" 62

Bochkovakiy, L. H. and Khnelevakiy, V. A. "Doppler Navigation Systens and Pos-
sibilities of Their Use for Horizontal Tie-In of Regional Geophysical Investi-
gations" 68

Bochkovskiy, L. H. "Use of the 'Poiak' Radiogeodetic System for Coordinating
Geophysical Surveys in Antarctica" 75

COPYRIGHT: Nauchno-iaaledovatel'skiy institut geologii Arktild. (NIIGA), 1980

5303
cso: 1865/42

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY