APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020030-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8294

28 February 19 79

TRANSLATIINS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOU0 12/79)

U.. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020039-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
trensmieeions and broadcasts. Hateriels from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, uith the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of e briei. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was sumrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Vords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses vere not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. ‘l'imss vithin items as as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes oi the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGl‘l' MRS AND "NATIONS oovtmmo mm» 0!
MTERIALS "PRODUCED 33321" mum MT nuammnou
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! usrnicm MOFFICIAL US! ONLY.
. TRANSLA IONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - PHYSICAL

SCIP“CE$ AND TECHNOLOGY,

(POUO 12/79)

O. Peoletming Organization Name and Address
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clabe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

n, Spoaaeuag Organisation Name and Menu

As above

'3. Supplementary Notes

a. Abamua

3. Reeépieu'a Accession No.

3. open an

29 Februa 1979

I. Peder-in. Otgesiutlsn Reps.
No.

I0. Prokrll‘l’aail'ock Uen No.

II. Contact/Glam No.

1). Type ol Aspen a. Period
Covered

The report contains information on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics;
atmospheric sciences; chemistry; earth sciences and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; mathematical
sciences; cybernetice. computers; mechanical. industrial. civil, and marine
eng.1eering; methods and equipment; missile technology; navigation.
communications. detection.and countermeasures. nuclear science and technology;
ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels; space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

1. Key fouls and Document Analysis.

USSR

Aeronautics
Astronomy
Astrophysics
Atmospheric Sciences
Chemistry

Computers
Cybernetics

Earth Sciences

Oceanography
In. Ideauliua/Opee-Eeded Terms

.- Dean-press

Electronics

Electrical Engineering
Energy Conversion
Materials

Mathematics

Mechanical Engineering
Civil Engineering
Industrial Engineering
Marine Engineering
Methods

Equipment

Missile Technology
Navigation and
Communications
Detection and
Countermeasures
Nuclear Science and
lechnology
Ordnance

Physics

Propulsion and Fuels
Space Technology

in COSA‘I’I find/61M 01.03.06,07,08.09.10,11.12.13,15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22

ll. Aeanlabnlity Saueeleat
Eor Official Use Only.

Cones «some 00". .4]!

Limited
Number of Copies Available From JPRS

‘I’HB 'OIM HAY IE ISPIOOUCED

21. Ne. oi Pages
. 192
"
M a '

vsemot uses-Ova
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.1an L/8294
28 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(9000 12/79)

CONTENTS . PAGE

crumncs. was All!) WTIOR TECILNOWGY

Abstracts Free the Journsl 'CYBEBNETICS'
(‘13me m 5. 1978)....0..0...OOOOOODOOOOO...0.000I 1

Kenn-o1. Role 1n Ukrainian Cybernetics Institute Detailed
(mmm’ sap-0c: 78)eeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 9

Glushkov Lists Tests of Young Ultra inmn Cybernetics
Researchers
(V. H. Glushkov; KIBERNBTIXA, Sep-Oct 78)................ 12

cmpmsrcs, ASTRONGI'! AND SPACE

Expert-eats]. Investlgstlone of the Hssnetosphertc Propaga-
tion of Shortvsve Signsls Along en Berth-Earth Path
(8. V. Baking GWIH I MOW“. No 3, 1978)..... 17

Ionospheric Genersuon of Extrenely lav Frequency deistion

(H. s. xevner, et s1.; snowman I AERONGIIYA. _
No 3’ 1978)0000000.00...0....0.00.00.00300000000C000.C0.0 29

Hechsnhss of magnetospheric Propsgstton of. Shortwave
Signals
(N. P. len'kovs. et s1.; GWIDI I Am.
”0 3' 1978)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesseeseeeeeeeeeeeee eeeeeeeee ‘0

Set-oscoustic Hethods in Marine Engineering end Geologtcsl
Surveys
(mmsnmms mom V HORSKIKH Inﬂamm-
cmwcxcuzsum lawman, 1977)...................... 52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued) Page

Cooperation in Space Research
(N. s. Novikov; VESTNIK AKADEHII MUN SSSR. Nov 78).... 63

A Reflecting X—ray Telescope for an Orbital Astrophysical

Stetion
(I. 1.. Demo, et el.; RADIOTBISSIIOPY. samu-

HETROVSKIYB I mmsmz TELESCOPY, V01 77.

197‘)000000000000OOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 72
PHYSICS
Influence of ‘ermlent Atloephere of Have Been Pield
Pluctuatione
(C. Ye. Patruehev; KVANTOVAYA mourn, No II,
1978)....OOIOOOIOIO0......0.00.0IOOOOOI..OOOOOOOOOOOOOO 85
Output Dink Alplifier Stages
(V. N. Alekeeyev. et al.; KVANTOVAIA EMONIXA.
m 11’ 1978)....000000000.000ICOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00...... “
SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS
Liet of Authors Pro- the Journal 'mBRNBTIRA'
(namm. Sep/oct 78)..eoeeaeeeoeeeoeeeeeeoeeoeeeae 106
Nikoley Nikolayevich Pononeeev-Stepnoy
112

(AMAYA DIEGIYA. Dec 78)............................

Soviet-Itelian SeIinnr on the Study of Plane in Toke-eke
(L. G. Colubchikov; AWAYA MONA. Dec 78)......... 116

All-Union Seminar on the Technology of Proceeeing Ores of

Rare. Trace and Radioactive Elenente
(V. A. Pchelkin, B. A. Selenove; ATOHNAYA ENERGIYA,

kc 78,000.000000000000.0.0.0000...OOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOO 116
PUBLICATIONS
Oevelopoent of Materiele Science in Ukrainian SSR Acadeny
of Sciences
120

(VESTNIK mum NAUK $81!, No 10, 1978)...............
Tectonice of the Foundation of the Beet European and
Siberian Platforms
(mm mm INSTITUT. No 321. I978).......... 130
- b -

FOR OFPICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N18 (continued)

Proceedings of 6th All-Union 5-1031' on Statistical
Bydroscoustics

(T301)! SEESTOY VSBSOYUZNOY SHROLY-SEHINARA P0
STATISTICEESKOY GIDROANJS‘IIKB, 1975). .. nu .. . . . ..... . .

Autoutic Oontrol Systena in Space
(IND! VII HEZHDDNARODNOOO SIMPOSIUHA IPAK P0
Immucmtsmm mum V PROSTRANS'NE.

1978).oosssea000.000.0090.asseease...seeossesoeeosooseo

Magnetic Recording in Data Transnission System
(HAGNITNAYA ZAPIS' V 8151mm Pal-Am INPORHA'I‘SII,

1978)..................................................

Conputetionsl Methods and Programing
(VYCHISLITEL'NYYB HEIOD! I PROGRAMROVMIIE XXVI
(SBORNIK RADOTNMMO-ISSLEDOVATBL'SKOGO WCHIS-
LIIBL'ROGO 13mm MSKOVSKOGO UNIVERSITEIA. 1977).....

Physics of Strong Disequilibrium Plane
(PIZIKA SIL'NONBRAVNOVESNOY PLAN, 1977).. .... ..

Laser hission in a ‘mﬂmlent Atnoaphere
(LAZERNOYB Izwcunumz V TURDLENTNOY ATHOSPERE,

1976).use...otosses.assetssaceeeaeoesosseseosseseeseoss

Using Electrons To Study Nuclei
(ISSL‘ZDOVANIYB YADER BLEKTRONAMI, 1977). .......... ... . .

Statics and Dynamics of Rocket Engines
(STATIKA I DINAHIKA MKBTNYKB DVIGATBL'NYKH
Ustmovox' 1978)....000000OOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0....

Conputer Hardware for Statistical Hodeling
(WCHISLIm'NAYA mm DLYA SIATISTICIIESKOGO
mnzLImvaYA. 1978)....0....00.0.00.00.00.0000000000'0

- c —
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

162

158

160

165

168

173

179

183

186
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

manner, commas All) Amml “01110106!

mmcrs mu ms Joumuu. 'mmncs'
Kiev xrsmmn in English .No s. 1978 pp 153-160
[Text] usmc'rs

Certain Problems ..r Creation and Development of the Conputing Engineering
and Cybernetics H-rnods and Means Confronting the Young Scientists of the

Institute of Cybe..- etics of the Academy of Sciences of the Ukrainian ssa.
Glushkov V. H. , pp 3-5 . '

The article deals with the nest important and proeising directions of
the development of computing engineering and automated control systeee.
Iain problem and tasks confronting the young scientists and specialists
of the institute in the field of developmnt of new netth and technical
neans of cybernetics.

UDC 51:681.3.01

0n Transformation of Asynchronous bogica) Circuits
Nikolenko V. ll. . pp 6-8 -

No formal transformations of asynchronous logical circuits are con-
sidered: simltaneous deco-position and superposition. Sufficient conditions
are fomleted for these transformations being admissible in the initial cir-
cuit. Test of these conditions holding is reduced to the test of certain
sinple decompositions admissibility in the some circuit.

2 fig. Refs: 5 titles.

UDC 62-S:681.3:007

Degrees of Unsolvability of Algorithmic Problens Connected with Autoeata
Ops-«ion on Groups.

Salkun L. B. , pp 9-12

The Turing degrees are considered for algorithic problems connected vith
autonata operation on the free Abelisn groups of the rank above unit. The
connection is established between the auto-eta equivalence problem and auto-
mate stopping problem.

Refs: «'0 titles. 1

FOR 01’?!an USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 519.683

Interactive Data Structures Processing

Bublik V. V.. Doroshenko A. 3.. Krivoj S. 1.. Ljabakh V. 3.,
pp 13-18

The paper deals with main principles of the interactive data structures
processing in sarcastic algorithm design. Adjustable language of the data
and its implementation. organisation of computations and main instructions
applied to the interactive processing are described. The examples are
presented for the date language adjustment and application of the developed
means to the programs optimization.

3 figs. Refs: 11 titles.

UDC $18.12
On One Iteration Method for Problems Solution
Gladkij A. V.. Skopetskij V. V.. pp 19-21

A difference analog and iteration method for solution of the boundary
value problems for the elliptical equation in the rectangular region with
. sections are considered. A difference scheme of the second order of approxi-
mation is suggested for the numerical solution. A rapidly converging itera-
tion process is constructed on the basis of the obtained estimates for the
difference operator.

1 table. Refs: 3 titles.

UDC $19.21
On One Model of Two—Level Systems for Information Processing with Interruption
Akimov A. P., pp 22-26

A problem is considered to analyze a two-level system of information
processing with losses. interruption of requirement service. two eimpJest
input requirement flows, restricted number of information storage positions
and exponential rules for distribution of processing times and service
device failures. ’

3 figs. Refs: 3 titles.

UDC 519.9
Structural Analysis in Algebra of Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC)
Nikitin A. N., pp 27-29 -

Algorithmic models are suggested for a wide class of ABC. The models
are written by means of the apparatus of a system of algorithmic algebras
of ADC as an efficient means of the formalized study of ADC. The time-
apparatus characteristics of ADC are determined by the suggested models and
methods of structural analysis.

1 table. Refs: 5 titles.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 681.326.32.00

Optinun Coding of Hieroconnands in Representation of Hicrooperations by
Bl-entary Conjunction

lelitskij R. 1.. Syrov V. V., pp 30-33

A problea is solved for optinun in capacity coding of nicroco-Ianda with
the preset structure of the block to for- controlling signals of the micro-
progran: control device when this logical functions possess the for: of elemen-
tary conjunctions with the preset rank.

1 fig. Refs: 1 title.

UDC 518.12:681.3.01
Specialised Processes Operation Algorithms for Solving Systens of Equations
Tret'jekov 8. 1.. pp 36-36

The paper deals with problem-oriented proceta operation algorithm
for solving ayatena of linear algebraic equations. Peculiarities of the
algorithm consist in replacing the operation of full-digit multiplication
by the shift operation. This sakes it possible to obtain high-efficiency
algorithm and original aiaple structures inpleaenting then.

Refs: 5 titles.

UDC 007:51
Representation of Surfaces in Automatic Design Systens
Hikhajlov V. K., pp 37-50 '

The matrix representations of the three-dimensional graphical objects
in the autonatic design systeas are considered.

In particular. the satrix representation of surfaces of the first,
second order and of approximating spatial quadrangles is determined.

Refs: 3 titles.

UDC 62-50:519.8
Resource Control in Systens of Full-Scale Experiment Data Processing
Kornienlto. G. 1.. Sheverdn. 0. N., pp 61-65 .

A procedure is suggested for controlling external resource of the
system for full-scale experilent data processing. The procedure is based
on the file systes. Analysis is given for peculiarities of the inforaation
environment of the systens for full-scale experiment eats processing which
produce an essential influence on resource control.

2 figs. Refs: 7 titles.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unc 517.2
0n Differentiability of Set-Valued Mappings
Nuninsklj B. A., pp 106-108

The convex-valued multifunctions are considered and the notion of
their derivative is introduced. The differentiability criteria of set-
valued mappings and the derivative relation to the extreme of different
napping functionals are studied.

Refs: 6 titles.

UDC 007:518.9
ﬂethods of Minimizing Functions Satisfying the Lipshits Condition with
Averaging the Descent Directions

Gaul Av He. pp ‘9'51

The paper deals with numerical methods of the centres and conjugate
subgradienta type for ninimizing functions satisfying the Lipshits local
condition. The netth are based on the functions values calculations.

Refs: 5 titles.

00C 517.5:519.8

Algorithm for Finding the Value of Global Extremum» for the Functions of
Several Variables with Preset Accuracy

Babij‘A. N., pp 52-56

A problem is considered on finding absolute extrema for the Lipshits
function of several variables. A new algorithm of finding is presented
and substantiated. the reco-cndetions on its practical application are
given.

Refs: 5 titles.

UDC 517. 5: 519. 8
Nonlocal Minimization Algorithms of Undifferentiable Functions
Norkin V. I. , pp 57-60

A new class of undifferentiable (generally differentiable) functions
is introduced. It includes continuously differentiable, convex and concave
functions. The minimization algorithm is substantiated for such functions
of the generalized gradient descent type.

Refs: 19 titles.

a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 519.8:681.3.06
Principles for Organization of the PIONER Dialogue Optimization System
minnow“: A. A. . pp 61-65

The'hrticle deals with the principles of construction and structure of
the PIONER dialogue system on the basis of the DESK-6 electronic computer.
The system is oriented to solving problems of nonlinear and stochastic pro-
gramming with nonsmooth target and constraint functions. Main functional
capabilities of the PIONER system are briefly described.

Refs: 3 titles.

UDC 62-50:519.8

0n Necessary Optimality Conditions in the Stochastic Smooth-Convex Problem
of Optimum Control with Discrete Time

bordunov N. N., pp 66-63

The necessary optimality conditions are obtained in case when the phase
variables belong to the space L1v and the operator presetting the object
dynamics is not differentiable with respect to Preshe.

Refs: 3 titles.

UDC 518.9

0n Linear Differential Game of Several Persons with the Limited Control
Life

Rappoport I. 8.. pp 69-73

Linear differential game of chaising with participation of several
persons is considered in the presence of integral limitations for the con-
trol. A certain general scheme is suggested to obtain sufficient conditions
of chaising completion for the finite time.

Refs: 9 titles.

UDC 007:518.S

Comparison of Some Methods to Calculate Lower Estimates for Duration of
the Shortest Schedules

Laptin Ju. 9.. pp 7h-78

Two known methods are compared: a method of the Lagrangian factors (or
method of dual estimates) and the Pernandes-Bessel method.
An example is constructed. A modification of the method of dr.‘

estimates is suggested permitting the accuracy of the obtained est.aates to
be essentially improved.

1 fig. Refs: 9 titles.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC $19.21

On One Generalization of the Neunann-Pirson Loans in the Theory of Signals
Identification

Kuk Ju. V.. pp 79-82

The paper deals with the structure of a critical function of statisti-
cal criterion for identifying from noise one or several determinate or
random signals under which the risk of false alarm is mininiaed with the
preset probabilities of signal missing.

Refs: 6 titles.

unc 007:518.9
Methods for Finding Optimue Sets
Gajvoronskij A. A.. pp 83-36

The optimum sets are determined for problces of mathematical programming.
The parametric descriptions are suggested for these sets. The quasi-gradient
algorithms of finding the descriptions for the optinun sets are developed and
their convergence is studied.

Refs: 6 titles.

UDC $19.27

On a Hay to Control the Calculation Accuracy in the Method of Statistical
Gradient

Kaniovekij Ju. M.. pp 87-89

Asymptotic normality of normalized iterations is suggested to be used
for the error estimation. The estimates of a correlation matrix of the
limit normal law are constructed using only the information necessary for
obtaining successive approximations.

Refs: 5 titles.

UDC 519.5
Certain Properties of Antichains of Partially Ordered Sets
Kornilovs L. 8., Vojtishin Ju. V., pp 90-91

An effective algorithm is considered to find the maximum sntichsin
of a partially ordered set. A lee-m is presented containing conditions
necessary and sufficient for the given subset of elements to be the maxi-
mum sntichsin.

Refs: 5 titles.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use 62-50:Sl9.8

Application of the Methods of Stochastic Programming to Problems of
Diffusion Processes Control

Shilo V. P., pp 92-95

The article deals with a continuous problem of optimum diffusion
process control and its discrete analogue. The convergence of the discrete
analogue solution to the solution of the initial continuous problem is

studied. The method of stochastic quasi-gradients design is applied to the
solution of the discrete problem.
Refs: 7 titles.

UDC Sl9.27:681.3

Optimization of Algorithms for Estimating the Random Value Under Different
Operation Conditions of Data Processing
Korzhova V. N.. pp 96-101

The paper deals with different algorithms for calculating mathematical
expectation of a random value using the electronic computer under off-line
and on-line operation conditions. The main characteristics (complete error
estimate. estimates of high-speed internal memory and computation algorithms
operation number) are presented for these algorithms. The characteristics
may be of use when comparing the algorithms to choose the best one.

3 tables. 11 figs. Refs: ll titles.

UDC Sl9.2l
0n the Time of Gaining the a Level Span in the Simplest Markov Random walk
Fal' A. $1.. pp 102-104

As asymptotic behaviour is studied for the mean time of gaining the
n level span in the simplest Markov random walk on the straight line at
n . w .

Refs: 3 titles.

UDC Sl:621.39l
0n Certain Deductive Means of the System for Mathematical Text Processing
Degtjarev A. 1.. Zhezherun A. P.. Ljalestskij A. V., pp 105-107

The article deals with the environment and deductive transformations

operating in it for solving problems in various field using the apparatus
of logical deduction.

Refs: 5 titles.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

uoc éz-so:oo7:s7
Simulation of Certain Oscillatory Bioproccsses
Jatsenko Ju. P.. Pp 108-113

A new model of a biological "predator-victis" cal-unity is suggested
with regard for delay on the basis of V. H. Glushkov's nacroecononical
model. It is shown that the system has a stationary state and admits
variations in the species number. The model is also applied to explaining
variations in the number of one species population.

Refs: 10 titles.

UDC 681.3.06:Sl

ANALITIK-76

Gluahkov V. H.. Grinchenko T. A., Dorodnitsina A. A., Drakh A. H..
Kapitonova Ju. V.. Klimenko V. P.. Kres L. L.. Letichsvskij A. A.,

Pogrebinskij s. 8.. Savshak 0. 1.. Stognij A. A., Fish-an Ju. 8.. Tsarjuk 1. P.,
pp lid-167

An algorithmic language ANALITIK-7b is presented for the description
of calculation processes applying the transformations. The language is the
further development of the language ANALITIK.

6 tables. Refs: 1 title.

BRIEF COMMUNICATIONS

"DC 007:519.8
On a Hethod of Undifferentiahle Optimization
Glushkova 0. V.. Pp 148-150

A miniaization algorithm of convex nonsmooth functions is considered
which combines certain advantages of the relaxation and unrelaxation approaches.
its convergence is proved. This algorithm nakes it possible to accelerate
the process of finding the minimum point as compared to the method of
designing generalized gradients.
1 fig. Refs: 6 titles.

"00 512.9:681.3.06

Algorithm for Electronic Coaputer Construction of Automorphisms and Solution
of the Problem of Finite Groups lsomorphism

Vasil'jev Ju. P.. pp 151-152

An algorithm is suggested for electronic computer construction of auto-
morphisns and finding isomorphous mapping for the preset finite groups. The
constructed algorithm is programmed in the ALGOL-60 language and realized
for the external automorphisms of such non-Ahelian groups of the 26 order
that their square is the internal automorphism.

Refs: 6 titles.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DUHKA". "KIBBRNETIKA", 1978
8

CSO: 1852 roe omcm. use our
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYSERNEI‘ICS. comm AND AUTOMATION TECHEOIDOY

KOWOWL ROLE IN UKRAIHIAN CYBBRNETICS INSTITUTE DETAILED
Kiev KISERIETIKA in Russian No 5, Sap-Oct 1978 pp 1-2

[Text] The Konsonol oi' the Nation of Soviets is sixty years old. The entire
Soviet people greets this anniversary with great labor and patriotic enthus-
iasm. The youth or the Institute or Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Acadew of
Sciences makes up a third or the collective’s scientific potential. The more
than 20 years' history or our institute bears vitness that its young scien-
tists. occupying responsible posts in science. are conducting a bold scien-
tific quest and are doing everything possible to speed up the incorporation
or the results of research into the national econow. They have made signif-
icant contributions in the developent oi' the theory of digital automata and
mathematical machines, in the theory of optimal solutions and of mathematictl
methods of planning and management or the national economy. in computer soi‘t-
vare. system nodeling and the development or automated systeas for control of
industrial processes. enterprises and sectors of the national economy. and in
the development and introduction into production of the KIEV, Promin'. MIR-l.
Kiev-67. MIR-2. Dnepr, Dnepr-z, Iskra, Ros'. MIR-3 and other 83834 [2 series of
electronic calculating nachines] computers.

The Komsonol organization of the Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Aca-
dennr of Sciences has nutured a large galaxy of winners of Konsoaol-youth
prizes and contests. Doctors of Physical and mthemtical Sciences Yu. V.
Kapitonova, A. A. ktichevskiy and V. V. Shkurba and Candidate 0! Technical
Sciences V. K. Kuznetsov became Lenin Konsomol prizeviuners in science and
technology during their Komsonol years. The prize or the republican Komsomol
organization imeni Nikolay Ostrovskiy was received by deputy director of the
institute and Corresponding Member or the USSR Academy of Sciences A. A.
Stogniy. Doctor of Physical and mthematical Sciences 8. N. Pshenichnyy,

Systems Candidate or Technical Sciences 6. I . Kornienko, Candidates of Sci-
ences A. A. Moron», A. A. Kobozev, V. I. V'yun, ‘I. V. Skopetskiy. M. I.
Dianov and V. I. Dianov. and leading designers R. P. Mevanyy, V. H.
Hikhaylov and V. V. Gayduk. Many of the Kcmsomol prizevinners became winners
of the USSR and Ukrainian SSR State Prizes.

In 1978 the title or "Best Young Inventor of the Ukraine" was awarded to Kem-
somol aeuber L. Zubko, and the prize of the All-Union Society or Inventors and
Innovators was von by V. Syrot. winners of the All-Union Conference of

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIi OPFICIM. USE ONLY

Scientific and Technical Organizations prize A. Mikhaylishin and 1.. Saran
are working in the collective.

In 1977 the Koaaonol organization of the Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian
SSR Academy of Sciences was awarded the Diploas oi‘ the Ukrainian Konsonol
Central Committee for its great work in the cos-unist nurturing of youth.
The Konsomol took under its patronage the construction of the Cybernetics
Center of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, an all-union shock Koasonol
project. At present the construction of a scientific experimental plant for
aicroelectronic devices. whose successful startup will nake it possible to
decrease the tile for incorporation of our institute's developments into ex-
tensive practical use. is the subJect of particular attention he. youth.

The work of the Konsono). organization and the Council of Young Scientists and
Specialists of the Institute of Cybernetics in patronage of the develoment
and incorporation of computer equip-ent and automatic control systems is
widely known. The work experience of the Cybernetics Schools of the Institute
of Cybernetics. in which young engineering and technical personnel from
plants and industrial associations who are working with computer equipment
are trained or retrained. has been approved by the Konsoaol Central Comittee.
The Institute of Cybernetics has organized a system for selection and training
of personnel for this country's science. For more than fifteen years.
leading institute scientists and youth have been working actively in the
Iskatel' Snell Acadeny of Sciences for Students in the Crimes. and in the
schools in Kiev which are under their patronage. Each year the finals of the
republican Olympics on "The Student and Scientific and Technical Progress"
are held in the institute. As a new addition, the ”Young Specialists' Days,"
during which neetings with labor veterans and developers of the first doses-
tically-produced computers take place, are being organized.

The Komsonol conittee and the Council of Young Scientists and Specialists
have concluded and are successfully fulfilling agreements on scientific and
technical cooperation with the Komsoaol organizations of plants and factories
designed to accelerate the incorporation of institute developments into the
national econow.

The external ties of the Komsonol organization are extensive and varied.

In April 1978 the Institute of Cybernetics held a conference of young scien-
tists and specialists in honor of the 18th Konsoaol Congress and the 60th
Anniversary of the Zaeninist Kousonol. Its Iain purpose was to stismlate the
creative growth of young researchers. to further raise their scientific level
and to acquaint with modern problems and tasks of cybernetics and draw into
active work on scientific subjects those young people who are making their
first steps in science.

Leading institute scientists were invited to give lectures on problems of
develop-cut of research in cybernetics.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cheirnen or the conference orgenizing conittee Corresponding Menher or the
Uhreinien 888 Acedew of Sciences Ye. L. Yushchenko delivered renerks et the
opening of the conference.

The report or Acedeeicien V. H. Olushkov. "Bo-e Techs in the Creetion end De-
velopment of Cybernetic end Conwter Methods end Bquipent Aveiting Young
Scientists of the Institute of Cybernetics. Ukreinien 88!! Acedesw of Sciences.”
in which he spoke of the neat inportent end pronieing directions of develop-
ment or computer engineering end eutonetic control systems and or the nein
problem end tests in the develoyuent of nev cybernetic methods end equipent
eveiting young scientists end specielists in the institute. vee listened to
with greet ettention.

The work or the conference wee cerried on in six sections: theoreticel end
econoeic cybernetics. technical cybernetice. systee softvere. physical-tech.
nicel end theoreticel problem of conputer engineering. cybernetic engineering,
end biological end Iedicel cybernetics.

More then 150 works. the best or which vere reconended for publicetion in the
Journels KIBERIIETIKA, UPRAVLYAMHCEIYE SISTER I HA8)!!!" end AVTOIIM'IKA, were
delivered et the sectionel meetings.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'ltvo "leukove Duke", "Kibernetike", 1978

8h80
080: 1370

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBEBN‘ETICS. CW8 AND AUTOMATION TECHNOIDOY

GLUSHKOV LISTS TABIG OF YOUNG UKRAINIM CYBERIE'I'ICS RESEARCHERS
Kiev RISERNSTIKA in Russian No 5. Sap-Oct 78. pp 3-5

[Speech by Academician V. M. Glushkov at conference of young scientists and
specialists in honor of the 18th Komsomol Congress and the 60th anniversary
of the Komsomol. held at the Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian SSR Academy
of Sciences in April 1978: "Some Tasks in the Creation and Developent of
Cybernetic and Computer Methods and Equipment Awaiting Young Scientists of
the Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian 881! Academy of Sciences"]

[Text] The current stage of development of cybernetic science is perhaps
characterizable in terms of the most intense utilization of computer facili»
ties. Essential in this connection is the fact that in a single experiment
or study a large variety of equipment. generally developed concurrently, must
be used. This means that present-day cybernetic researchers must have mas-
tered the art of systems programing. This approach presupposes that the
researcher or experimenter have not only experience in working with one type
of computer system or a certain range of equipment for automation of program-
ming and organization of the computation process on the computer. but also
profound knowledge and understanding of the internal mechanisms of operation
of modern computer systems and methods of effectively adapting them or even
restructuring them for the class of tasks in question.

There have been several periods in the history of programing. Each of them
had its own characteristic range of programing facilities. The development
of these facilities involves on the one hand the effort to bring than closer
to the concepts with which the worker is dealing. while on the other hand the
requirements for effective computer solution of problems make these facilities
reflect the characteristics. structural properties and internal (machine)
mechanisms of computer organization. Thus, no matter what program the modern
programmer is developing (whether it be for identification of processes in
an ASU, sample identification, solution of a system of equations in linear
algebra or graphic optimization). he must develop not only a program package
embodying the algorltll for solution of the problem in question. but also a
special control program (or sometimes a special operating system). a dialog
system by which the user can interact with the programs of the package being
developed. and other necessary services. Moreover. for this class of tasks

12

FOR OFFICIAL ‘USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is almpst always advantageous to have a special programing system whose
use significantly increases the programmer's labor productivity.

Prograners may be classified in three categories according to their skills:
systems programsers. working in the area of improvement of programming facili-
ties in the current sense of the tens. prograslsers who know some technology
and can embody the results of their activity in some specific area as pack-
ages or special systems of programs. and finally the broad range of users with
a minimum of programming knowledge who are specialists in a particular area.
Let me note that programing is an essential tool for the modern cybernetics
researcher carrying on computer experiments; the greater his skill. the more
quickly he can arrive at the goal of his investigations.

In our institute, a series of efforts are under way involving development of
new programing facilities. A method of formalizing technical requirements
for program planning has been developed, the State Commission has issued

a PTK (programmer's technical complex. on automated system for production
of programs is under development. and so on.

In addition, efforts to develop and master data banks, in particular for the
Oka. Pal'ma and similar systems. is under way.

An extremely important tasks is that of providing programmers with working condi-
tions under which these systems will be tied" together into a unified complex.

Our computer center is currently passing through a stage in which new working
conditions and new requirements for users are being organized. This is re-
lated to the ma.ior research and experimental work being conducted by the com-
puter center aimed at mastering the new computer equipment in the Unified
Series developed in CM (an agreement in this connection was adopted recently).

In addition. the computer center is planning to increase sharply its comple-
sent of peripherals. particularly large-capacity disks. One of the most im-
portant tasks connected with this is that of complexing the equipment used
with computers. This task must be performed not only for the specific equip-
ment of the Unified Series and equipment of various machines with instruction
systems differing from those of the Unified Series. but also in terms of com-
plexing of programing equipsent. This task is also associated with the nir-
ther conversion of our computer center into a high-output collective-use
remote-access computer center. The participation of young researchers in this
great and important effort is extremely desirable. It should be noted that
the work involves certain inconveniences and difficulties: almost contin-
uous replacement of machines and the almost complete incompatibility of pro-
graming equipment during the transition fras lower-level to higher-level
Unified series models (which in principle should not happen).

Considerable attention is currently being devoted to problems of automating
scientific research. This question was discussed at the first meeting of
the presidents of the academies of sciences of the CM countries held not
long ago in Moscow. The solution of this problem depends greatly on the cor-
rect utilization of computer equipment. It includes not only and not so much
the solution of problems of processing the results of experimental work; it
involves rather a series of other tasks of an investigative and particularly

13
ms nnrctn new nmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an organizational character. such as development of the special programing
systems and packages to which I have already alluded. systematisation of
design work. development of powerful collective-use computer centers. the
development of computer networks including specialised data banks geared to
a special use area. and so on. In particular. the Ukrainian SSR Academy of
Sciences has begun to develop several such data banks. for example in the
Institute of Materials Science. Awaiting us is the task of developing and
incorporating the proper software and hardwa: for this work. particularly for
the Ukrainian 888 Academy of Sciences. The problems of developing a network
of computer centers are interesting because the prerequisites for connection
of our networks to European systems. and through them to America). systems.
are already in existence. This prospect is of interest in terms of t?)
possibility of utilizing new computer capabilities and in terms of unifica-
tion of the efforts of Socialist countries to develop specialized data banks.
In addition this involves the utilisation of international standards of in-
formation science and also the exchange and sale of computer hardware and
software.

He now consider the tasks arising in connection with the development of vari-
ous types of automated control systems. In this area the center of gravity
is shifting to the solution of problems involving development of hardware-
software complexes designed for specific uses. As regards A80? [automated
systems for production control). we must think in terms even of developing
integrated hardware and software complex which will perform not only con-
trol tasks but also tasks of design and of automating the testing of products.
The approaches to solution of this complex tasks still await investigation.
Let me list the levels of integration in control systems: the first is in-
tegration of the information base; the second is integration of organisational
control with control of industrial processes; and the third is addition of
design and testing of products to the existing stages. The Unified Series
already has the hardware to carry out the first level. even though it is in-
sufficiently mastered and perfected. Much still remains to be done on the
second and third levels. Implementation requires the ability to solve prob-
lems of developing hardware-software complexes. here there arises a series
of complex problems. among which I will mention the following: complexing
of hardware and software features of computer facilities. generation of oper-
ating systems for such complexes. solving of problems in unification of
equipment features. and. most important. development of the required inter-
face equipment. Similar taskn arise in the development of systems for auto-
mated planning of various classes.

Out institute is conducting work on automated design systems. I refer to the
PROYEK'I' system (automated computer design). the automated system for design

of construction masters. the system for automation of machine building design
and others. The developent of these systems is associated. first. with
translation to new machines. and second. with expansion of their capabilities
in connection with work on m's and other peripheral equipment. In all this
work and also in the development of hardware-software complexes which will make
it possible to aupportany design bureau. regardless of its size and profile

(in the machine building. instrument making and construction areas). the pro-
blem of unification is particularly important. It requires performance of s

16

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

very large amount of work. both in development of the required facilities and
in specific implementation of the program of scientific experiments by the
Academy of Sciences. Also important in the development of hardware-software
complexes is the development of a BARS [i large-scale automated switching
system]. This programnable multiplexer. let me add. is extremely important
for the performance of automated document circulation tasks. The BARS is a
universal device for s programble interface system for various classes of
input devices. Currently one of the tasks is that of implementing this system
using microprocessors.

The following tasks can be identified in work on minicomputers: l. mastery
of 804's ( system of small computers] and minicomputers which have already
been produced or are about to be produced by industry as components of com-
puter systems; 2. determination of utilization characteristics of mini

and macro computers; and 3. development of new mini and macro computers
which in some sense continue the line of machines in the MIR series. It is
desirable in this connection that the developments should be used in work on
the System of Small Computers. Contiguous with this area is the work on
collective intelligent terminals, which will significantly simplify user
interaction with the computer.

In our work on recursive computers. there still remains the pressing taslr of
deparalleling of control. It is closely connected with the prospect of de-
veloping new types of microprocessors and LSI's. The problem of switching a
large number of processor elements is important. Also interesting is the
trend of work on automated planning of multiprocessor systems. and accordingly
on development of the corresponding automation facilities.

We now consider the tasks arising in work on aritifical intelligence. At
present the institute is c-mducting a series of studies which are still in-
dependent. although their Later gradual integration into a single complex

is planned. One of the most important of them is work on automation of the
search for proofs of theorems and processing of mathematical texts. A labor-
consuming and at the same time interesting Job is the making up of intonation
files of mathematical texts and the improvement of the system for interaction
of the mathematical researcher with the program system to be developed for the
Unified Series. or considerable significance is the beginning of work on the
development of machine models of the "universe." This means, of course. of
limited "universes" and the means of describing them. The aim of these
studies is to use their results for further progress in such areas of arti-
ficial intelligence as robots, pattern recognition. automated translation.
decision making in complex situations and so on. while the model describes

a limited "universe" and accordingly the semantic connections are. as it were,
custom-made. nonetheless effective facilities for solving the problems in
question are possible. Work on the simulation of "universes" is currently
being carried on through developent of program complexes. At the same time
it would be advantageous to expand work on the development of special LSI's
and microprocessors for robots and inhomogeneous systems. But even now we
should be directing our attention to the tasks of unification. classification
and forecasting of components of 151's and microprocessors.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As regards work on mathematical methods. I will not classify then; I will
say only that we have great need or all methods which we are developing:
optimization methods. methods of reliability analysis. large systems simula-
tion. numerical methods of solving equations and so on.

In our work on these methods we must attain two ends: a high worldwide level
of work which will receive the proper ohJective evaluation. and the develop-
ment or the required program packages. i.e. the computer realization of mathe-
matical resources that have been developed. The package organization of these
methods is extremely important.

I have enmerated far from all the tasks on which our young researchers could
work fruitmlly. We expect that with the enthusiasm. persistence and bound»
less enery characteristics of youth they will continue the search for new
ways or developing cybernetic science and its associated areas in the national
economy to the advantage or our Fatherland. '

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Naukova Dunks", "Kibernetika". 1978

8580
C80: 1870

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPNYSICS. ASTNONOHY AND SPACE

uoc 550.388.2

EXPERINNNTAL INVESTIGATIONS OF THE NAGNETOSPNERIC PROPAGATION 0F SNORTNAVE
SIGNALS ALONG AN EARTH-BART“ ?ATN

Moscow GBOHAGNBTIZM l AEXONOHIYA in Russian Vol 18 No 3, 1978 pp 560-647
manuscript received 19 Jul 77

[Article by G.V. Bukin, USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Terrestrial
Magnetism. the Ionosphere and Radiowave Propagation]

[Text] Hith reference to data obtained in the territory of the Soviet Union
and on craft of the USSR Academy of Sciences Space Research Service sent out
into magnetically linked areas. experimental data are discussed. regarding the
magnetospheric propagation of shortwave signals during the period of high and
low solar activity.

As the result of synchronous experiments conducted in the territory of the
Soviet Union and on scientific research vessels (NIS's) sent out into mag-
netically linked areas (Hso's), abundant experimental data have been obtained
on the magnetospheric propagation of shortwave signals. Hagnetospheric
channels trace out on the surface of Earth zones of effective reception with
cross dimensions of from 100 km and less [1]. Therefore. from the viewpoint
of identifying these zones, observations on moving barges are advantageously
distinguished from observations at a fixed point.

The purpose of this paper is to attempt to prove the existence of a magneto-
spheric signal along an Earth-Earth path. for which it is necessary to summar-
ize all the results of our experimental investigations of a magnetospheric
shortwave signal, beginning in 1968, when the NIS "Borovichi" was sent out
for the first time into the H50 toward Gor'kiy. Then these investigations
were continued and were conducted under different forms of solar and magnetic
activity, at different times of the year and at different times of the day
and night. The equipment and methods of processing primary data from trip

to trip have been improved more and more. Shortwave and VLF signals have
been emitted from the territory of the Soviet Union and received on vessels.
and pulsed shortwave signals have been emitted fron ships and received in the
territory of the Soviet Union. where in this instance measurements were made
of the angle of arrival of signals by means of a direction finder [2] and by
means of the 011-2 radio telescope of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences

1?

F03 OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Khar'hov 1” [Institute of Radiophysica and Electronics]. Installed on
vessels were vertical ionospheric probe equipment. riolnetric units. etc.

The analysis of outer-space-probe ionogaas from the "Alouette-l." "Alouette-2"
and "Roms-381" satellites has confirmed the existence of inhomogeneities

In studying the propagation of signals along an Barth-Berth path, the major
difficulty is separating out the msgnetospheric signal against a background
of other anosslous signals. As «mounted by an experiment conducted in
October 1968. when the shortwave transmitter installed in Gor’kiy was operat-
ing in the pulsed lode. emitting pulses with a length of l as with a trans-
mitting cadence of 6 he. and reception took place on the NIS "Borovichi."
sent out into the nso toward Gor'kiy. a great diversity of snoulous signals
has been recorded [5]. Among these have been signals which latch magneto-
spheric propagation with respect to propagation tine. But there have also
been signals of distinctly non-Isgnetospheric propagation with the same title
delays. which has made a definite interpretation of the results iqossible.
Therefore. in 1970 the experiment was repeated. but this tine two 818's were
sent out into the HSDu-the "Borovichi" and "Nevel'" [6-9]. whereby the NIS
"Borovichi" was in the 160 during Novewer. and the NIS "Nevel'" at the sane

ares. Equipment of the same type was used on these vessels. The operating
frequency range of the Gor‘kiy transsitter was expanded from 8 to 13 Ha;
(1968) to 5 to 15 MB: (1970). Investigations of the magnetospheric signal
were nsde both in the period of high and low solar activity.

Period of High Solar Activity

0n the NIS "Borovichi" in 1968 and 1970 nearly eisultaneous measurements were
leads in the SH and VLF (15 nu) bands. of signals emitted from Gor'kiy. In
fig 1 is shown the relationship between the propagation time of magnetospheric
VLP (t ) and sw (t ) radiowave signals “xv - r + t . where r is
the deth of the gnetospheric signal in relagon t the fundamgtal
signal. and t - 39 as is the mean delay time of the fundamental signal).
plotted from dgta for these years. This relationship has already been given
for 1970 in [10]. In fig 1 this relationship has been supplemented with data
for 1968 (three values), whereby t and t were determined with refer-
ence to the leading edge of the sigma. It isKvaious that all values form
three clusters of points: Cluster 1 corresponds to signals re-eaitted from
the American sector. cluster II from the Australian sector. and the third group
of points lies fairly well on a straight line for (ton ) , and it can

be assumed with high certainty that these are sw sign s ofhnagnetoapheric
origin. In table 1 is given the delay tine of magneto‘spheric SH and VLF
signals. the date and time they were observed, and frequencies of the 81!
signal. It is obvious that a magnetospheric SH signal has been observed

only in the morning (0330 hours to 0500 hours "SK [expansion unknown])

and evening (1630 to 2030 hours USK) hours. A re-enitted signal has also

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

een oheerved in the morning nn
reeter tire interval. In 113 2 are given £(t) curvee ob
etc o: 33 tin). ionoepheric prohee on the
The bounderiee or the occurrence of e
f

it Ronni; 3) end et Alec-Ate (k).
As in obvious {roe

frequency of the tren

the eignel onto the ionoephere.
e in the ionoephere. when

field ere periods of pr mean
e tekee piece from one heaiephere to

the trenefe
[n]. M: theee noeente collision

jusete points [12]. This can ree
centretion over a feirly nerrov reuse
ence, which ie neceeeery for the creation of please

end therefore propagation

channels are entered moot effectively at
tekee piece in e m puller L-ehene.

 

during the period of
12.3 an. end e re-enitted signal precticeny
which we eelected.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I I . £3 a I I I I ling I s I
l R g 1‘
31m 05'! )

ﬁgure 2 .

Key:
1. f P2, m2 3. Tine, 65’3
2. Ngvmer 1970

Also of interest is the relationship between t and tw and the K
index for s nagnetospheric signal (fig 3). At 9%.“: to and t erg
reduced with an increase in K to 2.5 to 3.5, and thennghey beginxzo in-
crease (the last point has bees plotted only for one value of t and
t ). This fact finds an explanation in the shortening and streggﬁng out
oIvlines of force in different phases of disturbance. The contraction and
stretching of lines or force can reach for the latitudes considered about
10 to 20 percent [lb]. and. consequently, can explain variations in the
nagnetospheric signal. As far as the linear relationship between t and
is concerned, it can exist only with a synchronous change in “a

t
p9!“ of SW and m rsdiowsves.

Magnetospheric signals along an Barth-Barth path are usually observed with
double nagnetoionic splitting. with At 2 2 to 3 ns, but because of the low
resolution of the equipment used they are usually seen as a single heavily

broadened signal.

20

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1.

Ion ”can 1) 3m nun 2)
mm In “Mm

”may; no: t.

 

 

     
 
  

 

 

7)
47 I7 001. an... 01‘. an. 10.3 50 0.65
24 a 06 W 07 no "A 08 0.70
25 23 IO 30 2| 00 12.0 7‘ 0M
- 6) no.6» «no I’.
7 0 04 (I) 20 on 8.9 74 0.00
7 7 IS (IS 20 oo l2.0 7| 0.”
IO 0 0d 50 23 00 I2.0 0| 0.06
II II 00 35 07 on 8.0 70 0.00
l0 l0 03 35 07 W 8.0 70 0.05
l7 I7 03 00 07 on 8.9 69 0.76
I7 I7 03 33 07 00 8.9 69 0.78
IO l7 0:! 35 23 00 8.9 72 0.00
ID IO 03 38 07 00 0.9 82 |,0
l9 IO I7 35 23 W l2.3 68 0.70
2| 2| IO so N 00 l0.o 60 0.76
2| 2| IO 35 20 00 l0.l 00 0.75
2| 2| 20 33 20 on 8.0 70 0.73
20 20 04 w 07 00 0.0 74 0.0
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

I‘m
1e cm. . 20 cm. u

l’eriod of Lou Solar Activity

 

3741115752.

 

Pigure Io.

Key:
1. t”. I.

During the period of the solar activity mini-us, the concentration in the
equatorial plane in the Iagpetosphere is reduced approxiletely threefold as
colpared with the years of mint- solar activity. as can he concluded fro-
the date of VL? neuurenents. This reoults in the fact that umetospheric
signals arrive very neat. end in order to register then it is necessary to
resort to the pulse storage nethod. In this instance on one oi the vessels
was installed a noncoherent digital pulse storage unit, which ends it possible
to store iron 80 to 9000 pulses.

During the tine oi the 1974:4975 expedition data were obtained which cede it
possible to isolate anoleloua nodes at t - 5.65 rule. The nest important
results of this experinent are given below.

In fig la is shown the nueber of cases of reception alter storing the pulses
of nucleus signals. in relationship to the Iamicude of the relative delay
during the tine the "15 was in the ISO iron 27 through 30 Decedoer 1976.

22

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
. .. FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

The eolid‘line hietogrel includes ell enoneloue earning end evening eignele.
end the deehed-line excludee enoneloue evening eignele oheerved only in
the 160.

For the purpoee or ooeperieon. in fig 6b e hietogren hee been conetructed

(or when the NI! wee neer Kerguelen telend free 27 through 31 Jenuery 1975.

It ie obvioue tron tige be (deehed-line hietogree) end lob thet in the die-
tribution of n(t) there ere two cherecterietic neriue, which reeolve e11
enoeeloue eignele into two groupe: 1—: 4 66 no. end Hut - 66 to 86 we .

It ehould be noted thet the hietogrene. ere einiler (or both obeervetion peri-
ode. Tehing into eccount eignele cherecterietic only o! the use. the nature
of the dietribution of n(t) in fig 6e (eolid line) differe but elightly
Iron the hietogree given in fig 4b. Piret, the renge o! tn increeeee to
93 III. end. then. the eecond minu- eurpeeeee the tiret.

Keving eveileble only tine deleye end eetinetee of the eeplitude end ehepe

of the eignel. it in difficult to eeke e definite interpretation of the

typee of eignele registered on the ms in 1976-1975 in the use end neighboring
regione. Nevertheleee it ie poeeible to conetruct e hypotheeie regerding the
eechenien for the propegetion of theee eignele.

All eigee1e of group 1 were received in ell eeeeione in verioue ereee of the
Indien Oceen. The enelyeie of tine deleye hee uede it poeeible to euggeet the
poeeibility that enoIeloue eignele of gr:- I arrived by eide pethe. with
re-elieeion fro- the Aft-icon Continent or with reflection from poler eurore
tonee. The greeter pert of eignele of group 11 ten be interpreted. ee in
expert-onto in 1968 end 1970-1971. by propegetion elong eide pethe with re-
enieeion free the South Aeericen eector.

Deeerving of epeciel ieoletion ere eignele of group 11 which were received
only in the 160 with t N: 72 to 86 u in the evening (2000 to 2100 houre).
Signele with theee deleye were not received outeide the "SO in 1974-1975
during the intervel of 2000 to 2100 houre. The group II eignele ieoleted
here cen correepond to negnetoepheric propegetion, with 1. ~ 1.9 to 2.3.
The criticel frequenciee. f 1'2 . in the eree of the treneeitter end 3450
during the reception of thege eignele took on ve1uee of epproxi-ete1y 2 to
2.5 Nile. i.e., the ionoephere wee trenenieeive for Iegnetoepheric eignele
et e frequency of 5.65 Mlle.

A epeciel role hee been pleyed by obeervetione which included eeeeuring
the eolid englee of errivel of the Iegnetoepheric eignel. Beceuee of the
unwieldineee of direction finder entenne eyeteu, it ie not poeeible to
eet then up on veeeele. Therefore. powerful trenenittere were in operetion
on veeeele. end eolid englee were neeeured iron the territory of the Soviet
Union. A dieedventege o1 thie aethod ie the conperetively high noiee level
from neerby induetriel eitee.

During the period Iron 8 through 12 April 1976. the rats "Kegoetrov" wee
eent out into the eree oi the use towerd ther'kov (e - 36'5. x - 50'30'8)

23

FOR ORIGIN. USE ONIX
FOR OFFICIAL 083 Oil“

and eaission wee carried out by nuns of s powerful transmitter oi the
"Vysr" type, and reception took place in Khar'kov with the urn-2 radio
telescope of the Ukrainian SSR Acadeay of Sciences Khsr'kov m. The study
continued to 13 April and the objective was to study the solid dissnsions
of the area for reception of the nagnetospharic signal as the "Kegostrov"
left the too. The length oi the transnitter's pulse equslsd about 1 es. end
the trsnsaitting frequency was about 5 lie. The ”Vyee" rsdio trenseittar was
loaded with a non-directional entenns.

Operation took place st 10-min intervals with lo-ein psuses. Observations
were seda iron 0330 to 0520 hours and iron 1800 to 2030 hours. The operating

frequencies selected rsnged free 9 to 16 Mile.

The 10-minute pauses between operating sessions were eeployed for the purpose
of retuning the trsnseitter on‘the "lsgostrov" end the receivers in the urn-2
radio telescope tron one frequency to another, end for calibrating the re-
ceivers. which was done after each operating session.

In the urn-2 radio telescope scanning wss perforssd Eros 60 to 70' to 20°

in the direction from the zenith to the south and back, by asses of a broad
directional pattern in the west-east direction and a narrow one in the north-
south direction.

Observations with the 0111-2 radio telescope in April 1976 were of a research
nature. end the Isin objective of this experisent was to detenine whether
it is possible with this radio telescope to measure the angle of arrival

of a fundanental and anoealous. in particular, a sagnetospheric. signal.

It is obvious free the photorecordings obtained with the radio telescope that
in ell sessions the fundesentsl signal was observed steadily. since the operat-
ing frequencies which we selected were lover then “Eh-£00072. The strength
of the direct signal on the photorecordings practically did not vary and
depended only on the radio noise level. It was snother story with the second-
ary signals. They arrived weaker in Rher'ltov and were apparently received

only by the Iain lobe of the radio telescopr. '1‘...;.~.':.‘.'c, they were observed
with a strictly fixed antenna scanning angle.

or sll the sessions (about 60) only two deserve the highest attention-when
secondary signels occurred: on 11 April 1976 (roe 0610 to 0618 hours (f -
- 12.098 kits) and on 13 April 1976 free 1920 to 1928 hours (f - 10,200 the).
In the first instence the vessel was in the I130 toward lher'ltov. and in the
second began to leave the calculated 1130 in a northerly direction.

In the second instance a secondary signal was observed twice, when the scanning

angle (angle read tree the horitontal line) was about ‘6' (r g 3!. n) and about
5" (r g 36 as). In the second instance it was also observed twice. when the
scanning angle was about 50' (r N. 32 u) and about 60' (1 ~ 63 II). Table 2
contains the angles or arrival or the secondary signal in the vertical plane,

for sessions held on 11 and 13 April 1976.

2‘

POI OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
NR OHICIM. US! ONLY

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

Table 2.
””2“ menu Efﬁe-3: 2???
ILIWM on. £08. an "or mvmo 19'. 20:. an Hot
06 il 20 0 IO 25 r
0‘ I2 so 0 IO 22 ﬂ 0
0t 13 M 0 IO 23 :5 o
06 N 38 0 IO 36 ‘0 o
0‘ 15 42 o 10 25 6 o
06 IS «I M ID no 30 32
0‘ i1 50 "or ID 21 56 “or
0‘ is 5‘ 30 IO 28 no 43
Key:
1. Date 6. Secondary signal In
2. rm oer) s. 0610 More '
3. Scanning engle. degree. 6. None
{who} am: “mango-oi mm (roll-w
ﬁgure 3.
Key:
1. 1926 hour. ’0. Secondary eignel with r~ ~63 u
2. Mdnentel eignel 5. Marker pipe
3. Secondary eignel with
1’ z 32 no

In fig 5 1. given an maple of e diegre-Ietic recording on 13 April 1916
fro- 1926 houre to 1929 houre. At the end of chic recording lurker pipe are

25

m ORIGIN. USE ONLY
NR OWICIAI. US! ONLY

given. ads for this session. which were entered every 10 no. It is obvious
that the fundaaantal signal was observed all the tines the secondary signals
with r g 32 and n as were observed at the beginning of einute sessions at
1926 hours and 1928 hours. which corresponds to angles (cf. table 2) of about

30 and 60’ .

Although for Gor'kiy l. g 2.5!: and for Khsr'kov t. z 2.02, which is a quite
substantial difference because of the great divergence of lines of force.

for re-enitted signals it will be insignificant. Therefore, it is possible to
take advantage of fig 1 and to estiaato the nature of signal propagation. As
is obvious fron fig 1. signals arriving in Khar'kov can be received on account
of re-enission froa the Aurican sector (signal with r g 63 as) and the
Australian sector (signal with r g 32 u). end can also be propagated by
leans of the umetosphore.

Speaking in favor of asgnetosphsric propagation are the wide angles of arrival
of these signals in the vertical plane (about $0 and 60’). As deeonetrated in
[2], along extra-long radio paths direct signals and signals re-snitted from
the Aserican and Australian sectors arrive at angles in the vertical plane
with a aaxiaue at 10 to 12'.

Hagnetospheric signals were observed with heightened aagnetic activity (K n. a).
while in all adjacent sessions it ~ 2 . i.e.. lying on the ascending cur e~
obtained in the Gor'kiy experieane Yfig 3). He tried to explain this pattern
for Cor'kiy by the contraction and stretching of lines of force in different
phases of disturbance. But for Gor'ltiy engnetospheric signals were observed
on different days with different magnetic activity. In Khar'ltov two Iaegneto-
spheric signals were observed practically siaultaneously. This has coepelled
us to suggest that they were propagated through different unetospheric
channels. or that the signal was split into two nagnetoionic coeponents in

the ionosphere and that then each couponent want its own way.

In the case which we have discussed. elementary estimates givec for 1’ ~ 32 :as
(t z 33 as), a path traveled by the signal equaling s x 2010 In , and for
r g 1.3 as t s 3 2.3.10" he . and the estiIaated distance for Khar'kov 1.

S g 2.16.10 h . i.e.. the iapression is created that one signal has settled
on a somewhat sasller L-shell and the other on a soaewhat larger. But these
estisates were aade without taking into account refraction and lag in the iono-

sphere .

Let us note that in an experisent fro- October 1973 through April 1976 at
IZHIRAN [Institute of Terrestrial Hegnetiaa. Ionosphsre and Radiowave Propaga-
tion] treasure-ants were made of the angles of arrival of signals in the hori-
zontal and vertical places, by neans of a radio direction finder. In this ex-
perissnt a eagnetospheric signal was not recorded even once. There can be
three reasons for this: 1) The study with the direction finder was conducted
during a period of mini-us solar activity. when observations of a aagnetoapheric
signal were difficult: 2) the negnetospheric signal could not be observed
because of a high level of industrial and radio noise; 3) it is not known
whether a direction finder generally can naesure such wide angles (50 to 70°)
in the vertical plane with a low signal level.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The entire conbination 0f facta cited above teatifiee to the exietence of
eegnetoepheric propagation oi 8V aignala along an tarth-tarth path.

Conciaely fornulnted below are the Iain reeulta obtained iron obeervntiona
of a eagnetoepheric eignal.

l. A negnetoepharic eignal hae been obeerved in the earning and evening
houra of a Zd-hour period. Thie in apparently related to the periode of
occurrence of the trenefar of photoelectrona iron one heeiaphere to the other.

2. There in a definite reletionehip between the delay tine (t ) of a
eegnetoepheric eignal and the K index. It dieiniahea to K 9'3 . and than
begina to increaae. ‘l‘heee variRtione in '. have found en’e'n'planation in
the contraction and etretching of linea of grce in different phaaea of
geoeegnetic diaturbancea.

3. In the period of neximn aolar activity Iegnetoapheric eignala are obaerved
lore frequently and at higher effective frequenciee than in the period of
Iinilun activity, which ia apparently aaaoclated with the reduction in electron
concentration in the plaeeoephere during the period of low eolar activity.

6. A nagnetoapheric aignel ie uaually obeerved with double ugnetoionic
eplitting. In neaaureeente with a radio teleecope. in two inetancee two
aignala were ohaerved eilulteneoualy: One arrived at an angle of ‘6 to 50'
and the other of SI. to 60‘. To explain thia fact it euet be aeeueed that

the aimal ia eplit into two nagnatoionic coeponente in the ionoaphere and
than each couponant is propagated along its own path on account of ricocheting
along walla with n heightened electron concentration.

The author wiehea to expreaa hie profound gratitude to the leadera and crewa
of veeeele of the 083R Made-y of Sciencee Space Reeearch Service. to the
leaderehip of the Ukrainian 333 Acadely of Sciencea IRE for the opportunity
to lake obaervatione with the urn-2 radio teleacope. to aaaociatee at the
laboratory of ionoaphere phyeice end Iodeling for aeeiatance in thie paper.
to Ye.A. Benediktov. 1M. hityaltov, 0.A. Holchenov and v.0. Repoport for
their ueeful diecueaione. and eleo to v.7. Iryenteav for offering the data
obtained by him during the l97lu-l975 cruiee.

Bibliography

1. Perehhvatov. Yu.K. In "Reaproetraneniye dekanetrovylth voln" [m Rave
Propagation]. No l. Hoacow. Nauka. 1975. p 1.6.

2. Ialikovich. V.v.. Ben'hova. NJ” lryanteev. V.!.. Bukin. O.V.. Hetyugin.

s.n.. Proteahchik. M. and Cherepovitekiy, v.A. emu-rm 1 ammum.
1976. 3;. an.

3. Loftua. 3.1.. Vantendt. 13!. and Calvert. H. ANN. GEOPHIS.. 1966, 33. 530.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

3.

6.

7.

O.

9.

10.
ll.

12.

13.

1b.

Innediktov. YQOAO. Baking OQVt, xu’hn.r.v.uy. Y“.v.. "nt'u'm. 8.N..
HOIQXOV. "0’0. "erhVI‘ov. “1“. “d ’11'01'. HQ”. ””61!”an
ISSWANIYA. 1972. $9.. 302.

Benediktov. Y0.A.. lon'kovo. ILL. Min. 0A).. Octuntuv. 0.0..

You-ova. 1'.V.. Konrakov. 0.7.. HIIyohcv. 8.x" mtyakov. N.A., Perchhvatov.
Yu.K.. Shrubkovn. LA. and Shillov. NJ. omemm I ABRONOHIYA.

1971. II. 252.

Benodtkcov. Y0.A.. Bon'kova. N.P.. Bureau. mm, Dunn. 0.V.. Yoxhov.
A.N.. Kolokolov. L.Ya.. Kombknv. 1.1.8.. ﬁlly-hm. 3.K.. mtyustn. 8.1%.
Hityokov. N.A.. Porokhvuov. ﬁnk. and Saxon”. NA. In "Voprooy ru-
prooennoniyu korotklkh radiovoln" mutation. Relating to Short Radiative
Propagation). Part I, 1mm. Houcov, 1973. 3.

lencdiktw. Yc.A.. Ben'kova. N.P.. lukin. (MI. and Hatyugin. 8.". In
"Vgproay noprounnontyn korotlukh nuovoln." Part I. 1mm. Honcov.
I9 3. 27.

lonedtktov. Yum. Bon’kova. N.A.. Datum. Yu.H.. 30km. c.v.. Huyugin.
3.N.. Mtyakov. ILA. and Perokhvatov. 1.1.1:. In Women, “sprout-meaty.
korotktkh ndtovoln." Part II, IZHIMN. Moscow, 197‘. 3.

Donodtktov. Ye.A.. Bon'kova. N.P.. Bukin. c.v.. Huyusin, 8.11.. lutynkov.
ILA. and Porekhvuov. Yu.K. In "Voprony ruprounncntya korotukh radio-
voln." Part II. 1mm. Moscow. 197‘. 17.

man. 6N. and Holchnnov. (LA. WWII!!! I ”WA. 1976. I_6.. 287.

30km. G.V.. Yevzovlch. N.P.. KuuneI'con. 1.8.. Sukhomkou. B.V..
Yolturev. Yum. and Slukhtin. 01.2. mamas I monmu. 1968.
_8_. 91.0.

noun. G.V.. burovtukty. Int... KoIoltoIov. I..Yc. and Sobolcnho. 0.".
mmcmsxnn ISSLEDOVANIYA, 1971. g. 789.

Bukin. (MI. and Perckhvuov. 10.x. OMWIN I “WI“. 1972. I_2..
621.

mm... 8.1. And Chop-on. s. "Soluechno-u-uya nu " [Solar-
‘rcrrutrul Phyoico]. Part 2. “new. Int, 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'atvo ﬂush. 6W1”! I AROMA. 1978

8831
cso: 8166/0650

28

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICQ. ASTﬂONOHY AND SPACE

UDC 550.388.2
IONOSPBIRIC GENERATION OP IITREHEEY D0" IIBQUENCY RADIAIION

Moscow OIOHAGNBTIZH I ABRONOHIYA in Russian Vol 18 No 3. 1978 pp 666-672
aenuscript received 27 Jun 77

[Article by n.s. Kovner. V.A. Kusnetsov and Ya.l. Likhter. Gor'kiy State
University. Moscow State University. Institute of Nuclear Physics. and USSR
Acedeay of Sciences Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism. the Ionoephere end
ledioweve Propagation]

[Text] An analysis is aede of the results at investigations of the spatial
distribution of BL? radiation at ionospheric altitudes. 0n the basis of

this a hypothesis is advanced regarding the generation of a considerable part
of the BL? radiation observed at altitudes o! 300 to 600 ha and an atteapt is
soda to substantiate this hypothesis theoretically.

Introduction

In this papet. based on an analysis of expariaental date on the spatial dis-
tribution of low-frequency electrosegnetic radiation in the EL? range. obtained
with the "Interkosaoe-S" Isz [artificial Berth satellite]. the hypothesis is
advanced that a considerable portion of aid-latitude BL? radiation is generated
at altitudes of 300 to ‘00 ha. Heeeureaente were nede with the "lnterkoeaos-S“
fro- Deceeber 1971 through April 1972 at altitudes of 200 to 1200 km [1].

It has been established that the energy density of the radiation. V , is

higher during the deytiee then at night; at a fixed L-shell and altitude.
during the deytiae H at a frequency of f - 0.5 kHz depends on the strength
of the local aegnetic field. I z the intensity is markedly higher in areas
with lower values of '0 : the value of H is aaxisel et eltitudeo of h g 300
to ‘00 ks . end with an increase in h to about 1000 he the radiation level
drops by approxiaetely an order of aeguitude. These patterns have not been

observed et 1 z 2.5 the [2].

According to current notions. low-frequency radiation (about 10 H: to 100 the)
is generated at lid-latitudes in equatorial regions of the nagnetosphere.

But it is hard to explain on this basis the experimental facts cited above.
Actually. at h > 1500 he energetic particles and the cold please are balanced

with respect to day and night. Consequently. the conditions for the generation
29

!OR OiPICIAL US! OﬂLY
FOR OPHCIAL ”8! ONLY

of low-frequency noise radiation are identical day and night. Then, it
would seen that the radiation level should be the sale day and night. It

is not possible to understand the effect or the ZQ-hour intensity cycle
observed by a difference in the reflecting characteristics or the ionosphere

in the dnytine and at night. and. besides. absorption is less in the iono-
sphere at night.

The altitude dependence can be caused in principle by features of wave pro-
pasation at altitudes of free 000 to 1000 to 300 to 600 Ins. Since along this
path the concentration of cold plea-a. N (cf. table 1), increases by about
1.5 orders of magnitude. the refractive index. n , increases. and the velocity
0! a wave is reduced. on the aaaulption of retention o! the flux density. the
anplitude of the vavs should be increased:

bun‘u(N.IB.') ‘.

Bari-ates have shown that here H(-b2) should be increased approxiaetely

fourfold. This enact is the ease both (or f a; 0.5 idle and for f - 2.5 km.

But at a frequency of f - 2.3 klit the altitude dependence has not been ob-

served. and at i - 0.5 hilt the level of H on this path changes 10-fold.

Iinally. at high altitudes Barth's easnetic anoIalies are not unifeated and

the relationship between the radiation level and I! does not fit the hypo-
Qerial region.

thesis on the generation of radiation near the equa

Table l.

      

. M 'a'
i 0.00 0.3
2 I 0.1
°* °: 2:.
1.5 0
M 03 0.13
0 0 5.3
M 3 2.1
20 i2 7
O 0 3
23 2| 2‘
9 IO 12
no “0 N
1W 00 60

30

P03 OHICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is possible to explain satisfactorily the patterns gotten above if it

is assused that the BL? radiation observed is generated by energetic particles
of radiation tones at altitudes of the naxinua of the £2 layer (300 to 600 he).
Nb know that wave generation is related to anisotropy of the function for dis-
tribution of particles by pitch angles. The distribution function is neat
anisotropic at low altitudes. At altitudes of h w 300 to ‘00 In . where the
highest level of BL? radiation is observed. the concentration of cold pies-a.
N . is 1.5 to two orders of eagnitude higher in the daytise then at night.
Although the degree of anisotropy of the function for distribution of energetic
particles by pitch angles does not vary free day to night, the conditions for
generi7§on will be different: In the daytise the refractive index is higher
(n-N ). and, consequently. the phase velocities of waves will be lower. and
for S great nusber of particles the kinesatic conditions will be fulfilled for
Cherenkov and cyclotron radiation. In addition. the radiation intensity of
each particle is proportional to n [3]: consequently. the radiation level
must be higher in the daytime than at night.

If radiation is generated by energetic particles at low altitudes, than the
influence of the sagnetic field on the radiation level should be apparent;
in areas with a reduced sngnetic field (sagnetic anosalios) a greater number
of particles descend to low altitudes.

Initial Bquations

At altitudes of 200 to 1000 ha, in the ionospheric please, in addition to
electrons there is a high concentration of hydrogen and oxygen ions. here

the number of collisions is high. and therefore it is not clear apriori whether
the generation of low-frequency radiation is possible. for this purpose.
quantitative estisates were aade of the influence of collisions on the pro-
pagation and generation of low-frequency noise radiation at these altitudes.

The starting equations for the study were equations of electrodynasics with
a self-consistent field:

‘1 ' 1 68
MB - 729s; \'ere(ve)dvs+ 7V. diva-on

(1)

and kinetic equations for particles of the type a - 1.2.3 (protons and
electrons of ionospheric plasla and energetic particles of radiation zones):

31

run OPIICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL 088 MY

0?. or. Ce ‘ ape 0F.
_ '. _ + .m-O + — _ - _ .

[Subscript "eoud" - "collieion."] In (1) end (2). 7°(r.v.t) . e . Ila . end
ere the distribution function. charge. Ieee end velocity of perticlee of

v
the e type. end 3 end B ere eelf-coneietent electric end magnetic
ielde.

In e lineer epproxiution. netting. ee in [A]. eieple hut cunbereone coeputetione.
we set e diepereion equetion for wevee. ~exp i (ut-kr) . propegeted elong

externel field no 1

("‘0‘”) _ ‘_‘ _&o’(”e"(m0/me)we)+00p’(0c"‘(mee)V~) + A.

 

0 (“0‘0“ "V.V,)
(3)
where —
aw.) . . Irv. 0!, k», 3]). -
A - UN. id“! “'0" {(1 ‘7' 70“.”7?‘ (km-note”). ',
(6)

n - cklu end I: ere the refrective end ebeorption indicee.
m,‘-lu+v,*u.,. m.‘-lo+v.$:lo...

0, end a ere the gyrofrequenciee of e proton end electron; v end v
er: the effective nuebere of collieione of protons end electrone with ell
perticlee. including ione (i) . end at end u are the Lennair frequenciee.
Cerried out in A (6) ie the contributgsn of eneggetic perticlee of redietion
:onee to the diepereion equetion (euhecript e ). where N ie their concen-
tretion. The upper eylhol in (3) refere to e left-polerizzd wewe. I. . end the
lower to e right-poleriud. R .

Ae we know. in en electron-proton plane. in the frequency range of u < “Be

(a > w ). cen he propeseted only e right-polerized weve (n2 > 0). the
eoQSellescwhietler node [5]. At the ionospheric eltitude: which we heve etudied
the concentretion of cold pleeee protons. N . ie euch lower then N 3 there-
fore. ee followe from (3). e left-polerired geve cen exiet only in e ﬁerrow
frequency reuse of “B 0-" /Ne) ,3 ago, . end we will not coneider it

further. P P p

32

NR OWICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Per a right-polarized wave, equating the different tcrss in (3). and utilizing
the avaraged nodal of the ionosphere in [6] (table 1), we find:

 

. a _ a “‘3 .. 22‘2“ ______m.,'v,
IJLI n. -(n 0‘) ~ UN» ‘[”‘0M' + ”(n+ﬂl’). 1+6.

(5)

Investigation of Propagation Effects

"a eeauae below that it is possible to disregard the influence of term A

in (5) on propagation. This is penissible in the case when the concentration
of energetic particles is low. i.e. [5]:

|A|<|ﬂ.‘l.

Related to A is only the excitation of waves, and the addition to frequency
I» caused by this term is nasu-ed to be slight. The experinentally obeerved
altitude dependence we relate to the features of propagation and absorption
of BL? waves in the ionosphere between the levels of 300 to 1000 kl.

Let us turn to a discussion of this question. onitting tern A in (5). l'or

the purpose of estimating the attenuation resulting from absorption. we write
equation (5) in the fore:

0(0)-M (0)) IO.
(6)

It is obvious from table 1 and (5) that at the altitudes considered in the
ionosphere

lNWI’IIHHH.

therefore. for the purpose of finding the wave damping constant (11(3)),
we use the "$28)“ disturhesnces. Introducing the sylbola u - u 0 + c .
whge Icl « u and 0(u 0 ) - 0 . and expanding Nu) near frequency

u we find:

e-bl (um) (BO/00‘”) ".
(7)

The change in the mlitude of the wave with altitude as it is propagated
along the magnetic field in the ionosphere we find in a geonetrical optics
approxi-ation [5]. This is peniaeible. since the wavelength A is much
leaa than i . the characteriatic acale at which the concentration changes
markedly (at altitude n 2‘. 600 In and u 3 3-103 v1 . a ~ 2 la). The
a-plitude of the wave is proportional to: "'

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

A

v. _ ﬂ -
been cxp< c Indx)-n‘s '.
a.
(8)
where from (5) and (7)
n-(m’lwoﬂ‘. awe/v... mph/alt. (9)

here v is the group velocity of the waves. The ratio of radiation levels.
for «£51.. at ho - 300 and 800 kn, equals:

b‘(300 xx) n(300 xx)

l

n-INBOO u) -n(8001c.u) '
(10)
Pro- (5), (7) and (9) we find:
1~10"°o"'. (ll)

Utilizing the averaged nodal of a daytise ionosphere (table 1), as the result
of numerical integration in (8) Iron ho - 300 In to h - 800 In we find
that at a frequency of f1 - 0.5 kHz . 11 g 0.5 and at £2 - 2.5 in; ,

1231.

Consequently. the ratio of radiation levels at h - 300 and 800 In for f -
- 0.5 kn: is:

n~[N.(300 ru)/N.(800 mg) ]"'e"~10. (12)

In computing (12) it was taken into account that in the altitude range selected
N. is diminished about 16-fold (table 1).

Thus. the intensity of radiation at t - 0.5 kHz in propagation of a wave
upward along the path considered is diiinished by approximately 10 dB, which
agrees satisfactorily with the experiment. The sane effect should have been
observed also at £2 - 2.5 kn: . The absence of an altitude dependence in
the latter instance is apparently related to the fact that this radiation
arrives from above and the increase in alplitude resulting from an increase
in the concentration of cold plasna electrons (reduction in the rate of pro-
pagation of the wave) is renowned by absorption.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O?PICIAL USE ONLY

Qualitative Discussion of lonosphsric Generation

Equation (3) makes it possible also to study the excitation of electromagnetic
radiation. for which it is necessary to know the distribution function of
energetic particles in the generation region. But at the present tine there

are no sufficiently reliable experimental data on the distribution function

at ionospheric altitudes at mid-latitudes. Recalculating equatorial measure-
ments by employing the Liouville theorem seems unjustified to us [7]. The fact
is that pitch-angle diffusion exerts a considerable influence on the distribution
function of particles vhose velocities lie near the tone of loss, and of quasi-
csptured electrons and protons in particular. In this case this theorem is
invalid.

In view of the above. we cannot give strict consideration to questions of
generation. But this is of fundamental importance for the hypothesis advanced
regarding the ionospheric origin of a considerable percentage of the BL? radia-
tion observed at low altitudes. The fact is that. as follows from the pre-
ceding. tl re exists in the ionosphere pronounced absorption of waves, the
effectiv' number of collisions is rather high (of. table 1). and in principle
the axe -ation of waves can be suppressed by collisions. He have given con-
siderr-ion to the influence of collisions on the possibility of generation by
employing the model function

N. .l «.1...
4» (1+1): %Wl5(vo—v.)+ 6(v.+v,) ),
O

 

F.-
(13)

where v is velocity along the magnetic field of Earth; v is the trans-
verse velocity; v * - v'3‘ll ; v"" is the velocity arrives at by the maximum
in the distributign of Energetic particles. and concentration N was assumed
to be close to that experimentally observed. A certain basis fog choosing

(13) was provided by the fact that at ionospheric altitudes during the magnet-
ically quiet period streams of captured and quasi-captured particles essent-
ially prevail over poured-out and reflected streams; consequently the dis-
tribution function at the ends of the magnetosphere’s magnetic trap has a
distinctly marked maximum at pitch angles close to 1/2.

Substituting distribution function (13) in (k), and integrating, we find:

A-6[ (km-«Fwd °'+ (co-Imam.) "l.
owl. (1+3) (1+2) k'umo'.

(1a)

In the reduced expression the superscript refers to the proton flux (a - p)
and the subscript to electrons (a I e).

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the concentration of energetic particles is low. their contribution.
of course. is considerable in the region of frequencios e at which one of
the round brackets in (1’4) is c1ose to zero. i.e.. the kinematic conditions
for cyclotron resonance are fulfilled. Let us consider first the generation
of waves by proton, traveling toward Barth. In this case, in a :eroth-order
approxiaation (u and k are raa1). from

ku.-o“’-¢o..-0

 

 

 

(15)
and the dispersion equation without taking absorption into account.
clkl/“(On-u 3/0“)
be ”a. (16)
we find the frequencies satisfying the necessary radiation condition:
“to! 0.1““! 0.1““! 9. 0.. s‘
—- H- a:
Day “0.90" [C'Ouwpph .1..(€ MuOL)‘ ]
(17)
215.4 6 -1
Aasuning that “09 ~ 6- 10 and u no 6- 10 s . at ”(O titude of
h-JOOIu fro-(17)vefind. forexao§Ie.vhenv°-0.u (f-
- Q0? Ian) , and when v ~ 3.107 cn-s . ... (0)~ 5° (f ~ 2. s mJPand (o)
:3!“ the addition to 0

~ 0.2 (f ~ 100 s). For the purpoIe of £1
c3usinf theuggn cation (or absorption) of radiovaves. u , on the assu-ption
u

 

that I « Imt , as above we vii]. use the Isthod of disturbances (cf.
also [8]). Then. by taking dissipation into account. we get:
u-eo‘m-bu‘”.
(18)
where
(1+2 1+3 u'“ . v.
13—35 ’ «(2 )1 . “£-
' " (19)

It is obvious from (1) that u > 0 (generation. alplificstion) in the fre-
quency band

0<l‘(o/b)"'. (20)

For the purpose of finding the order of Iagnituda of u we use the experi-
mental data. for example, according to [9], protons with energy of B x
~0. 3too.bﬂev. at l.~2. 5 and Io~0. .Sgsuee . haveaccncentratIon of

36

[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

N ¥ 3-1.0.s can'3 (at h 1.00 he theee dritt tracka deacend near the
a“: lien anonely). Me n; that v. N 1.50103 r1 . iron (17) to (19).
andwith i-2.wetindx u (t-0.Skdr)zaa“1 .

Nonrelativiatic electrone cannot aatiafy condition (15) in the range of BL!
radiation frequenciee. Por relativiatic electrona. with u « “Be . kvo >> a.
the reaonance frequency and increnent. reapactiwely, equal:

“'3—1'3(5-.)'(s.1'$} )3

 

 

(21)
V5 w' ~ :..(z+2)u+3) v... ' %
" 7°~ am...) I‘m— ?)1 "-
(22)
Aaauning. according to [10]. that {or electrone with 3k - 1 rev . N a 3
~ 10“8 ca'3 (1. g 2.5 and 8 z 0.3 sauna) and vole z 0.2 . we find?

2'; 8 Idle and ”101 e‘“1 .
Batinate of Radiation Intenaity

He will make a non-atrict and rather rough eatinate of radiation intenaity
in the following nenner.

“Eh; energy radiated by a single particle per aecond in a Iagnetic field equala
3

P..~ (2/3) (c'lc')nd'.
(23)

where d - v u in the acceleration; us. and w are the syrofrequency

and velocity‘cggponent of a particle perpendicular to Barth'a neurotic field;
e in the charge; and n in the refractive index of the oediuu.

The flux denaity of the radiation energy of particles 3h a concentration
of N in a voluae with a crane aectional area of l and length 1. along
the Janetic field will be

P-N .l.
J" (2a)
Then the apectral flux density of the radiation energy in

S-P/AI. (25)

37

ron OFFICIAL US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 08! 0|!“

The radiation hand. A: . can be round. tor axaapla. iron the changa in tho
giroiraquancy. “Ia . during novaaant along the aagnatic {laid for a diatanca
o 1:

60.. 1 3". ’
--——-— R —--'.
A, 2:! 28M. A 2n Ra
(26)
Aaauaing for protona the valuaa or igloo kn . «up 3 3-103 a"1 . a ~ 3-102 .
he

at g 1 nev . N x 3-10‘5 «‘3 [9], we get for t incoherent radiation:

ap
8-5-10'“ Vlazllo.

If it is aaaulad that in a voluaa A3 particlaa radiate coherantly. than
the flux density of the radiation energy equals:

P~(N.1')'Pu.
(27)

the flux denaity of the radiation energy of a value with a 1-4:.2 croaa aection

and length l. equala:

P ‘ -u .
8-WT‘(‘0 (010") "(-2“!

which approxi-ataa the radiation level observed in the experiment in [2].
Coherent Cherenlnov radiation gives the one in term of order of Iagnituda.
Bibliography

1. Jiiitek. P. et a1. STUD“ GBOPII'YS. ET 6301).. 1973. 1_7_. 63.

2. Vakulov, P.V., Dobrovol‘aka. 3.. Zakharov. A.V.. Kovnar. 11.8., Knrnetaov.
S.N.. Kuznetaova, V.A.. Larkina, v.1. and Likhter, Ya.1. PIS'HA V 8R3”.
1975. 2_2, “l.

3. Syd-an. VJa. mm. 1958. 3_lo. 131.

6. Xavner, 11.8. 12v. WZOV. wronzm. 1960. g, 631, 71.6.

S. Ginsburg. 9.1.. "Raaproatraneniye elektronagnitnykh voln v plane"
[Propagation of mactroaametic Havea in than]. Nauka, 1967.

6. Gurevich. AN. and shvartaburg. AJ. "Nelineynaya teoriya raaproatraneniya
radiovolny v ionoatera" [Nonlinear Theory of Radiovave Propagation in the

Ionoaphera] . Nauka. 1973.
38

ran OHIO!“ US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. Nolchanov. 0.A., Rczntkov. A30. and I'ltgcl'. 0.5. 6W!!!“ I
WWA. 1976. L9, 1123. -

a. mu M. 2m. 1962, 3;. m.
.‘Qﬂ
9. Nihlfbv, 3.0. and “like. ms. J. 630?!!!3. “8., 1966. A. 2207.
10. Vnkulov. P.V., Vorob'ycv. V.A.. Knxnccnov. 8.N.. Logachov, Yu.I..
Savonko. I.A. and Stolpovokty. v.0. KOSHICHISKIYB ISSLIDOVANIYA,
1975. 1.3.. m.

comm: Izdutol'uvo Nuke. OWBTIZH 1 “WA. 1978

8831
cso: 8165/0651

39

'0! OHICIAL 083 OULY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS. mm AND SPACE

000 550.3381
HICIIANISHS 01' HAMIOSPHBRIC PROPAGATION 0P SHOWN]! SIGNALS

hoscow smart I Armour“ in Russisn Vol 18 No 3. l978 pp “8-655
nanuscript received 19 Jul 71

[Article by ILP. Ben‘kova, 0N. buhin. Ins. Gotsakovs and Yu.Ya. Yashin.
0883 needs-y of Sciences Institute of Terrestrial hegmtisn. the Ionosphere
and Radiowava Propagation and Gor°kiy State University]

[Text] A theoretical discussion is presented, of a possible mechanism for

the propagation of a Iagnetoapheric shortwave signal, related to the refraction
of waves at electron concentration gradients. Estimates are given for the lag
in the ionosphere (to altitudes of 1300 la) and in the ugnetosphere.

The possibility of eagnetospheric propagation of shortwave radiowavee has
already been indicated recently (cf.. e.g.. [1]). In recent tines a nuder

of experinental date have appeared in print. confining the possibility of
negnetospheric propagation of shortwave signals between Iagnetically linked
ground points [2-5]. In connection with this. it see-s opportune to lake a
lore detailed investigation of the different probable nechanisns for the pro-
pagation of esgnetospheric 8V signals. In this paper estimates are nede of
the lag of these signsls in the nagnetosphere or when they are crossing the
ionosphere. and also discussed is refraction of a Iagnetospheric signal. Cel-
culations are Isde as applied to experieents in the traneniesion of signals
between the European sector of the USSR and magnetically linked areas in the
Indian Ocean [6]. Consideration is given to the propagation of signals in
strata of the ionosphere. to eagnetospheric propagation of the whistler node
type. and to the channeling of signals in inhonogeneities with reduced ionize~
tion denoity. Cases of the appearance of paired signals are discussed.

1. Let us estilate the tins for signal lag and bean refraction in the propa-
gation of waves in the ionosphere. by ionosphere here is nesnt the region

in which the refractive index of the sw signal diners considerably iron
unity and at the boundary of which the bean is "lastaned to" a line of force
of the geonsgnetic field. In the calculations the thickness of the ionosphere

is conventionally essueed to equal 1500 In. For the purpose 0! estinates of
signal leg tine a lack of strictnsss in detenination of the thickness of the
ionosphere is not inportant. It is only necessary that the upper limit of the

1.0

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 max

lonoephere lie in e reslon where the pleele trequenc of the Iedlun 1e lav
ee coupered with the frequency or the elsnel (no < u . end it 1- pee-lble
to dleregerd the 1n£luence of refrectlon.

he vlll utlllle e model of e plene elngle-leyer ionosphere; the electron denelty.
N . to the next-u- of the P leyer 1e deecrlhed by e perehole. end ehove thle
by the treneltlon layer lea (£13 1):

N-NoH-l (u-h)lhl')ucu 0<y<h. (1)

N-Nu‘ up I 1(v-h) we?» [ﬂu-h) 1""th h<v<v.. (2)

where h in the helt-thlckneee or the leyer. 1.e., the dletence free the lover
limit to the leyer‘e next“: 3! 1e the velue of the concentretlon et the
eexleun; 1 1e e permter cher cterlzlng the thickneee of the treneltlon

layer: y. 1e the thickneee of the lonoephere. 1.0.. the dietence fro- the
lower to the conventlonel upper limit of the leyer; end ll 1e the height of

the lover limit of the leyer.

J - Juli-u

 

Figure 1.

Key:
1. Gor'hly 3. Borovlchl
2. Ionoephere 6. NE

The dlelectrlc conetent of the pleen [5] lo:

t-l-m'lo'-l - __8.06-12'N(v) .
(3)

b1

'03 ORIGIN. 083 OILY
FOR OPIICIAI. US! 01.1.?

ere t a 01/21 is the opereting frequency. Iran the eikonel equetion.
n - C(y) n 0 (here n n 90. where e is the cherecterietic Sanction),
in tekin; into eccount the Snelliue let! for e plenev-leyered nediu (prope-
3etion o! the eignel tehee plece in plene my ). it tollove thet:

n.-n.eln a-eln a.

(6)

where o ie the engle of entry of the been into the ionoephere: no ie
the velue of n helov the ionoephere. end

uneven-ti1-(g-h)'/M|N.uﬁ.o<y<h. (5)

"3'0“. ¢_u‘nmw.l[.m-M+g ]' V1“h<y<l.. (6)

where c - 8.06.107”2 .

He ere intereeted in englee o with vhich e heel. hevins left aerth. cen
trevel into the re ion above the leyer'e mil-um. i.e.. 0 ; a< r 3 where
at - erc coe (II in the criticel male of incidence o! the be. onto the

i nowhere. beginsing vith which e eignel of e epeciiic frequency. reflected
fro- the ionoephere. returns to Berth. Then for horizontel novel-eat of the
bee- in the ionoephere. x (elong the eurfece of Berth). the coebined deley
tine. t . end engle 6 et which the been reechee the upper lieit of the iono-
ephere. we heve:

 

x-einc —+-—In—

u 1 2172+2Ah+s +_1_In (”Ea-zany.”
teen )3 Retail” 115 (2133+8.u+2€) '

(7)

vhere 3 i sine
i- 3-10’elna' ’ emu 1! °

n-[t-itNouKHurl‘. n-explﬂu-m.
S-C(u‘+i) +2(C-—2§N.) u. r.-coe' a-CN“
A-tNJh'. 8--2§N.Ih. C-coe'a.
B.-2(C-2;N.).

62

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
‘1 '- FOR omcm. use om
‘\ u

tor the More or marine x . t end a it it naceeaery to eaaisn the
apaeiiic parenatara entaring into the nodal of the ionoephera. he an example.
in table 1 are given the reaulta tor the exoerinenta deacrihed in [b]. con-
ducted in the {all of 1970 and 197‘. hiaeion took place in Oor'hiy. end
reception at e ugnatically linked point in the Indian Ocean on the R18 [acien-
tiiic reaearch veaaal] "Boroviehi." Therefore. ea the raw date for the iono-
aphere below the aaxiun oi the 1'2 layer vere uead Nh profilea cot-pared fro-
iooograu iron vertical probing in cor'kiy and on the "norovichiJ‘ In the
table are given the veluee oi para-etere ll . h and N . hesnetoapheric
aignala were registered «wally in the aorning end even n3 houre. clone to the
aoaante oi eunriae and «neat. Therefore. the veluee or II . h and II in-
dicated in the table relate to theee perioda of the day. um. lov cola? aeti-
vity (1916), the 8 layer in uaually not ohaerved in the early earning and late
evening hours in October: therefore. the lover edge of the 72 layer (ll - 220 In)
wee taken an the lover linit oi the ionoaphere. A well suited 3 layer in
obaerved in the noming and evening houra of the day with high eolar activity
(1970). Therefore. ite altitude wee taken an the lower limit of the ionosphere.

Table l.

           
  
     
     
     
  
 
 

1 lit-:20 an. A.“ an. mum-I0. and.
) VII-hlt-IO“

Ilo'e ﬁne: nan-one comm. am

tin-(Nu. h-NO In. N uu-w an“.
"Au-n34

"an Ian-Ina tea-nun anemone

8.13 ON ”A 23.5
1 231 7.03

5.93 “8 13.5
7.79 1515 WA

   

     

   
  

w 531 m
1.93 use we a

0.32 .m 23.0
3.0 1% 3.1 27
a
so a
n as
u 8.5
n 35.5
M a

(Key on following page]

#3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kay:
1. f. HM: ‘. “k
2. Period of mininun solar 5. t.rns
activity
3. Period of aaximua solar
activity

Since there were no data on the state of the upper ionosphere in the necessary
r.gions during the periods of recording magnetospheric signele, data fro.
outer-space probeswsresanpled. corresponding to the sane solar and magnetic
activity. at points with the necessary latitude. but with a considerable
difference with regard to longitude. In the table are indicated values of

r d.terained from equation (2). for Nh profiles obtained with an 182 [arti-
ficial Rarth satellite] [6]. In the table are presented values of a. -

- arccoa fri— computed for the lo to 16 Ill: trequency band. and values’rof

t . x and 9 computed from equations (7) for randomly selected angles of

a < . In the 90°-l columns are given the differences between 90’ and

the angles of magnetic dip at the respective geographical points (with coordi-
nates of x. y. ; cf. fig la). This is necessary since the optimal condition
for the capture in a aagnetospheric waveguide of shortwave signals leaving

the ionosphere is closeness of the direction of the outgoing signal and the
direction of the line of force of the aagnetic field (cf. below).

2. Let us consider mechanisms for the channeling of waves in the magnetosphere
and the conditions under which an 5" signal can arrive along a magnetospheric
path at a magnetically linked point. Two of these aechanisns are probably
possible [1.7]: the whistler mode type (reflection fro. inhoaogeneities

with an elevated electron concentration, stretching slong lines of force).

and direct ducting (inside inhomogeneities with a lowered concentration.
stretching along the field). This hypothesis can be verified if it is assumed
that a magnetospheric signal is related to predawn and postsunset effects.

A collisionlass sonic wave is propagated in the magnetosphere at this time
along tubes of force. It can "sweep out" electrons froa a tube. at the bound-
ary of which a layer with an elevated electron concentration is created [6].
Electron concentration gradients perpendicular to the axis of a tube. that is.
can make possible internittent propegation of waves of the whistler type. or
ducting.

The discussion of propagation lechanisaa in this paper is of a semi-qualitative
nature. and its main objective is to determine the physical criteria resulting
in the guiding of SR signals. Calculations have been aade for the two-dimen-
sionsl problen. using a spherical laminar nedim as an example. Let us note
that taking the dipole nature of the geomagnetic field into account does not
lead to qualitatively new results if attention is not paid to gradients of
electron concentration along lines of force. This can be done easily adia-
baticslly. or by very simply dividing the path into a number of pieces with
their own local radii of curvature. or. taking into account the slowness of

the change in properties along a line of force, by utilizing the adiabatic

invariant (similarly to [8]).

66

’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OH‘ICIAI. US! ONLY

In order tor whiatlar node propagation to he poaaihle, there auat axiet

in the direction perpendicular to the linea oi force of the geoongnetic field
a unilateral drop in electron concentration. reaulting in lowering of the
ratractive index (ct. rig lb). Aeaming tor the aalte of einplicity that

the linea of force or the geougnatic iield repreaent perte of a circle. we
aaauau thet the electron concentration variea according to the following law:

N'(r)-N.'+N.'[i-(r:.-_%~ ‘35:] .mp- r.<r<r.. -
N'(P) -.’ VithKra.

(8)

where Ni ia the background electron concentration.

Since the diecuaaion will he conducted for the reflection of wevee from a

wall in the region of r < r < r . the behavior of N'(r) when r > r ie
not iaportant. end therogore no csnditiona are imposed on the ehape of '
h'(r) in the region of r > r . Thue. it in aaauned that in a hologeneoua
plea-a with a background concaRtration of N} there exiete a "blurred plaeaa
wall” with an electron concentration drop of N6 end a half-thickneee of r .
Thie dietrihution for N'(r) can be related to the existence of global con-J.

cantration inhonogeneitiee having a gradient perpendicular to the lines of
force of the geoaagnetic field.

Pros the eiltonal equation. which in thia caae hen the for:
(av/Jr)'+r"(0o/0°)‘-¢(r)-0.

(9)
taking into account the Snelliua law for a apherical la-inar medium we have
n.‘-1-tN'-b‘lr'.

(10)

where the integration conatant for hz - nozr2 ie deter-ined by the equation

5-Poi1-Cdie +NO )0

where 1' ie the radiua o! the aphere iron which the bean departs. at an
angle of. 6 - 1/2 to the direction of the electron concentration gradient.

Let at ease point or origin of r .e I- 0 the bean depart perpendicular to the
direction of the electron concentfatlon gradient (6 - 1/2). it reiracta in
the layer and returne to the aalae altitude at the ease angle of e/2 (aince
the aodel ie apherical laninar). I! there ie a concentration gradient along
the "wall" (dependence Mo) ). ducting conditions can be ilproved or woreened.

rot exnple. if dependence "(0) hae a negative gradient along the line of

195

P0! ORIGIN. USE ONLY
'OR OPPIOIAL US! ONLY

signal. propagation. then angle 6 n all will be achieved with values of
r > r and we have an immanent in ducting conditione. But it the gradient
0! doﬁcndence M0) in poei tiwe. than ducting conditiona are woroened.

rm the aquation to: the been for our nodoi we get the angular diatance
traveled by the bean in a eingle etep. i.e.. the linilul angular dictanco
betwoen two eucccuivc pointo:

 

 

hit-{NJ (BL-“CM“ r
o - - I + 4..
it n (2..vt‘+nr.+zc)- 2"“ r.

(11)

when

4-1-tNo’-IN.'(i-r.'ls.'). B--2(r.'r.'l:..’)tN.’.
C-tN-'r-'ro’In-'-r.'(I-W). n-VFFW. k-I-w.

Note it ie aaaunod that I. > to and (to. tho condition 1’

n [rediue of
toilcction] > to . i.e..

O

-B-18'-MC
2A.

'0'. - > 'g.

(12)

ie gotten tho condition for tho uni-u. poeeiblc width of the duct with
epccific Halli} , to and Ni. x

x.<N.’r./[ i-I(Ne'+No') )-

(13)
The coobined lag tine for tho aigna1 in a einglo atop equal.
1 2n . b a _. “‘
‘n-W T 1-7) -wlnl(8'-MC)/(2nYA+2:Ir.+B‘)I}.
(It)
3

It is obvioue (to! (13) that wi h N'IN' - 1 to 10 percent . to - 3 to 6~10
u . and u' . 103 to 6-103 ca- :33 Jam width or the duct. 2- . can
vary (to. a‘out 1 h to about 100 n. ruttherlore. r dung. vary slightly
fro- : . rot axe-ple. with N' - 6o103 co‘3 and nail" - 0.06 . i1

:0-3.o3uona t-7mt.tan ‘nm'1'°“' z_‘-o.6knna

(06

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1: - 2999.7 lun . a. get °o - 0.0“: red and c - 5.57940" s . m

t8tal.nunher of. steps. n , equals 96 and the toe“ tine. t n . equele

nt r g 59 u. 1: 1: 1. assuasd that r - 6-103 . to 7 ill} . then an -

- 9.6 u. . 2‘ - 0.6 ha and r - 599997 u. . we 3.: oo - 0.0196 rad e

t - 0.00587 . In this cass'the total nutter or steps equals :1 - 218

a“ t - 127 es . for a line or force leaving the surface of Earth at

a magnum latitude of 50‘. r varies over the range of (3 to 6)~lO3 kl.

Thus. with the pare-stare selegted above the total cosbinod lag tine, tpoln
3

lies betveen 56 end 127 as.

A more detailed analysis has shovn that if it is assumed that Ni - 6.103 CI. ,
mam; - 0.06 . than with a variation in frequency over the range of S g f g

_<_ 9 m: and in a. of iron 0.5 to 1.1 It: . with r - 3-103 In and 2999.6 5
< r < 2999.9 kn . t lies within the range 0? 30 1 t 1n 1 80 ns .

f: '0 3 6-103 Inn and “8999.6 _<_ r. 5 5999.8 k- . then so 3 2301“ _<_ 160 us.

3. Reflection tron Two Hells (Ducting)

In this case as the nodal is used a homogeneous concentration, 8" , against
vhoss background there are concentration inhomogeneities stretching along the
lines of force of the geonsgnetic field. which vary according to a quasi-
perebolic lav (fig 1:):

mm -N.”—N."[ I 45:1"; '%].

(15)
Let us consider a bean leaving a point located on the axis of the duct and

reflected from the upper wall. [or this been the following inequalities
rust be fulfilled:

l>[8.08-10'(N.”-N.”) 1*, n..,<n.n./(n.-;.), pg,”

(16)
”us > Will AL -
(R.-z.’) V I-t (NI-Ne")
(17)

Pros: (16) is obtained the condition for the maxim possible width of the
duct:

:n’gno(‘-' ‘(No 7"‘;(IVQ -N.')).
(18)

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In considering reflection from the lower wall of the duct, an inequality is
gotten for perniaaible angles K which is slighter than (17). Therefore.
in considering the total track the inequalities in (17) should be used.

The length of the path and the conbined lag the at s single step are deter-
Iined by the equations:

 

0.- 0' [1+amin—L].
f—T." 2 RJTih—M’C’

1 Edi-C (N."-N.")cos x

.‘rv"_ +

3-10‘ A’

4» “WE, [—2-+arcsin2R. ‘ggsgéq l}.

 

 

 

(19)
where

Rg-RQ'FZ‘. A‘-1-w0"+tNa"(1-R0.Ix-e')v

I I I s
B’-2tN.”——~R'f°, c'--;1v." " ’ '

b.-R. sin xYI-t (NIL-No:i ).

0/0; - 0.02 . n; - 45-103 «‘3 end 1 - 6 1m: . if - 3-103 h .

we get 2 - 0.6 In . and having seemed that z - 0.3 , we have

x - 1.582"?x and for “WM/2) . c r - 0.008476 s and 0° - 0.0230 red.
I? “0 - 6-1 h . we get 2'n w - 0.81 L-l . having seen-ed that a. - 0.7 kn ,
we have x - 1.565 and for mock ,1/2) . c - 0.001210 s and °0 -

- 0.030 “5‘. 1' gr

when N”

As is obvious free the calculation results. the direction of propagation differs
very slightly free the direction of the line of force of the magnetic field

(I: ~ 1/2). Time it has been demonstrated that under certain conditions the
propagation of 8H signals along lines of force of the geonagnetic field is
possible. when on account of refraction at electron concentration gradients
perpendicular to H (or sheet perpendicular) the been "turns down” and
follows along the 1 es of force of the geomagnetic field.

lo. In a nestletospheric 5" signal negnetoionic splitting is usually observed

[lo]. The typical leg tines of the second signal in relation to the first lie
within the range of At ~ 1 to 3 ns . and several tines At ~ 10 as has been

observed .

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Two mechanisms are possible for the purpose of explaining this effect. If
nagnetoionic splitting is taken into account, the difference in the signals'
lag times is determined by the equation:.

Ann" I (iln.-i/n.)dl.
(20)

where c is the speed of light in a vacuum. and the refractive indices of

the ordinary and extraordinary modes are n1 2 x l - v/2 3; VA? cos a/Z . where
v - «a 2/92 ; u - 2M2 and u“ is the gytofrequency. Taking into account
in this equation that v << 1 and Wu << 1 and naming that a - 0 (the
beam travels along line no ). from (20) we get:

A: a] vﬁdS/c.
(21)

By S can be understood the length of an individual line of force of the
geomagnetic field. Taking into account the fact that for the latitude of
Ger'kiy S x 31.000 lun . from (21) it is easy to get At - l to 2 ms .

As the second mechanism let us consider the difference in the path of two
beams in the ionosphere if the latter has a concave boundary section exposed
to a directional pattern of finite width [9]. In this case. on account of
the difference in path between two beams hitting the ionosphere from above
with considerably different angles a . the lag, 6t , can be about 2 to lo ms.

And so. lags between-magnetospheric signals of about 1 to 2 ms can be explained
fully by magnetoionic splitting (ordinary and extraordinary waves). Legs of

up to 4 ms are explained by the relative delay of different beans in the iono-
sphere. which takes place when the finiteness of the directional pattern is
taken into account. For the purpose of explaining lags of about 10 as it is
necessary to assume the existence in the region essential for the propagation

of magnetospheric 8H signals of several electron concentration maxims and minima.

which result in the fact that signals travel along different tracks.

In this case it is possible to estimate the distance in the equatorial plane
between individual lines of force. It turns out to be about 500 to 600 km.

If this effect is related to the rising and setting effect. then these estimates
can be considered also as estimates of the distance between two individual
electron concentration maxima in the magnetosphere in the equatorial plane.

*On the assmlption that the signals are propagated along the same or close
tracks.

49

NR OFFICIAL USE ONEY
FOR OFFICIAL ”SB ONLY

5. with the asemtiona which we have nade regarding the ionosphere, iron
the table it in possible to draw certain conclusiona concerning the filling
of eagnetospheric ducts (regardless of the enchanisal for keeping beans in
these ducts):

a. Not all frequencies can be propagated along a Iagnetospheric path. einca|
capture in a nagnetospheric duct can take place only in the case when the
bsae's exit free the ionosphere is close to the direction of the geonagnetic
field. During the period of siniseul solsr activity a signal can be captured
by a eagnetospheric duct beginning no. 5 to 6 Mlle, and during the period of
maxim solar activity. from 8 to 9 am. since for the lower frequencies the
direction of the gee-emetic field differs froe the direction of the beal's
exit free the ionosphere (bounding fro- below). In addition. low frequencies
simply do not fill the duct, since it is rather narrow and they trigger the
conditions of "criticality" of the waveguide for the wavelength which it can
ednit. Signals can be propagated along a nagnetospheric path uhich are up to
about 12 “ll: during the period of minim solar activity. and up to about

16 m: (cf. equations (11) and (19)) during the period of maxi-u- activity
(upper lieit). higher frequencies will go out into outer space. Therefore.
in the table the possible cases of nagnetospheric signal propagation are
isolated with a solid line. Let us note that certain variations are possible.
depending on the state of disturbance of the magnetic field.

b. Legs in the ionosphere resulting free the difference of the refractive

index from unity. as conpared with when the signal has traveled the sane
path at the speed of light, lie within the range of about 0.9 to 0.6 as, or

(since a Iagnctospheric signal passes twice through the ionosphere) about
1.8 to 1.2 as.

c. The horizontal lovelien: of a bean along the surface of Earth is within

the range of about 1300 to 3300 k- for the period of minim solar activity
and about 960 to 1700 h for the period of maxim activity. which results

in the possibility of a considerable difference in the length of the track.

S , from the length of a line of force of the geomagnetic field corree-
leading to the point at which a transnitter is located on the surface of Barth.

The authors wish to thank I..V. Grishkavich for providing ionospheric date for
Gor'kiy and the teen at the ionospheric physics and modeling laboratory

(1mm [Institute of Terrestrial baguetien. the Ionosphere and Radiowave
Propagationl) for calculations perfoned and the layout of the Ianuscript.

Bibliography
1. be Castel, 1'. 00H”. m. ACAD. SCI. MOB, 1965, 26—1, 1057.
2. Benediktov. Ye.A.. Ben'kovs. 8.?” Bukin. G.V.. Berezin. Yum. at al.

In ”Voprosy rasproatraneniye korotkikh radiovoln" [Questions Relating
to the Propagation of Short Radioweves]. Part II. mum. 1973.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.
‘0
3.

6.
7.

8.

9.

COPY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mn, ON. and Holchanov. 00A. WEIR)! I ABROMHIYA. 1976. I_6, 287.
Nun. 6N. omwmzn I WA, 1978. 3,3. “0.

Ginsburg. V.I.. “Raotprootranentye elekcrougnttnykh voln v plum"
[Propagation o: Electron-suede "urea in Plum]. Hanks. 1967.

“Mounts 1. Iononpheric Data N(h)." 1963. V01 A, No 1. Canada.

Edda. (MI. and Perckhvatov. Yu.K. cmcnmm I AERONHIYA. 1972. 1_2_.
21.

Bari-ow. NJ). and Gunvlch. AN. “Tutoy dokladov XI Vuooyuz. Router.
po raoproatranoniyu rudiment" [menu of Papers at the 11th All-Union
Conference on Radian" hopagauon]. lo. Kazan'. 197$, 79.

Cocukova. Ins. and Yuhin. Yu.Ya. 12V. vuzov. MDIOPIZIKA. 1978, Q.
333.

RIGRI': Izdatel'stvo Ranks. cmcnnxm I ABMMHIYA, 1978

8831

080:

8166/0662

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

MMBICS. new AND am:

SBIMCWS‘HC muons IN MARINE MIMI” All) GBOWICAL SURVEYS

Hoecow srrmmsuqmnr WY V nonsnm WWICIEBKIM
rzrsmxvm in Russian 1977 pp 3-6, 53-61 '

(Pernod, introduction and Section 9 fro. book by A. S. Levin and
V. L. Mirandov. deatsl'stvo “‘l‘ranaport"]

ll‘ortl bong the tasks posed to suitins transport in the "Hain trends for
development of the national econo-y of the 0881! for 1976-1980.“ confined by
the 25th cm Congress, on inoreoso of the capacity of Isritioe ports pri-
eerily due to construction of specialised transloading cooplexos with piers
having a total length of 5.3 ha is provided. This requires a large volme
of research work. a significant fraction of which is related to the use of
oaisooacoutic Isthods of investigations.

Seisnooooustics is a new branch of prospecting geophysics which has occwied
one of the leading positions during the past decade in investigations of the
sea and ocean bottom. Scientists. engineers-geophysiciste. geologists.
hydroongineors, pipeline builders. road builders. bridge builders and any
other specialists are interested in the results of soisnoacoustio profiling.

Moreover. there is es yet no somgraphic edition in the Gnostic literature.
besides Yo. I. Dubrov’s book [31]. which has becooe a bibliographic rarity.
in which one could find tho answers to questions of interest to specialists
of different fields.

This book is called upon to swplonsnt this gap to a known degree.

The dmaractoristic feature of the book is on outline of the theoretical
nterial with respect to consideration of specific practical problem.
Hothoustical apparatus is used in analyzing the considered problem, usually
without detailed coaputations. in a torn suitable for engineering calcula-
tions. The derivations in the Iain sections of the paper are illustrated
by clear results of investigations. photographs and practical angles.

In systonatiring the main principles in this special field of science, which
soisnoacoutics is. it would be iqossiblo to avoid an outline of data from
adjacent fields: acoustics, soisnics, goo-stric optics, the physics of

52
FOR OI’PICIAL USE ONLY
piesoordeels and radio engineering which undoubtedly affected the nature
and sequence of the outline.

The authors ettst ed to reveal the principles related to excitation. pro-
pagation and recording of elastic pulses in water and bottom soils for
practical use of these phenomena in engineering-geological investigations.

All the foregoing permits one to hope that the book brought to the attention
of readers will be useful not only to a wide range of specialists directly
involved in engineering surveys and geological investigations of the coastal
zone of the see. but also to representatives of related fields.

The asteriel for the book was many years of experience of the authors and
their colleagues. generalized in articles, official reports, reports and
also the results of introducing the sethod into survey practice.

Chapters 1 and d and Sections ll. 12, 10 and 19 and also the Foreword and
Introduction were written by A. s. levin, Section 1 end chapters 2 and 3
were written by V. 1.. Mier and Section 5 and the section on suppression
of multiple waves were written by v. 1.. nirandov and A. G. Dlugach.

The authors express gratitude to Doctor of Geological-Mineralogical Sciences.
Professor 1. 8. Konsrov for valuable cot-ante and assistance rendered during‘
preparation of the book.

Introduction

Selenoecoustics (this field of geophysics is sometimes called geolocation)
is a branch of science arising at the juncture of seisaic prospecting and
echo sounding which utilises the theoretical and technical echievenents of
both these fields of knowledge and which is involved with study of the
bottom structure of water basins by using specially generated acoustic
pulses.

The specific nature of the reguiresuents placed on a device for ssisaoacoustic
profiling determines the need to develop special apparatus, setth and
techniques of conducting investigations.

The seissoecomtic method is essentially a modification of sonar and seis-ic
surveying and consists in the following. Elastic vibrations which reach

the bottom and are partially reflected fro. it and which partially penetrate
the soils and are reflected frost the interface in this mass are excited in
the water by means of a special source. The reflected simls are trapped
by a detector -- a piesoarrey -- and. reprocessed in a specific aenner, are
recorded in the for: of a pulse sequence to some intonation carrier. This
pulse sequence fem the seisaoacoustic path.

The process is repeated cyclically. A sequence of paths. celled an echong
or recording. and corresponding to the geological profile along the observa-
tion line, is forud as a result of repetition of the “excitation-recording"
cycle. This is also continuom seisaoacoustic profiling (NSF). An

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

insignificant fraction of energy reaches the reflecting boundaries during
propagation of the pulse in the water and bottoe soils; the pulse intensity
drops as the distance fro: the excitation source increases.

Passage of acoustic pulses through the vatsr and soils is related to three
ssin phenomena dhich in the final analysis determine depth and detail.
(resolution) of the eethcd used in the investigations: 1) expansion of the
pulse (wave) front, 2) absorption of elastic vibrations and 3) reflection

of thee fro. the interfaces. 0f the enuerated factors. the favorable or

in any case that used in ssissio prospecting is only one -- reflection. The
two others deter-ins losses during pulse propagation and they are essentially
different in nature. sxpansion of the wave front is deter-ined only by the
length of the path of travel and is not dependant on the pulse spectrum
while absorption of elastic energy in the soils nainly depends on frequency.

Bngineering surveys for conatruction of hydroengineering cosplexas are
usually carried out in tho coastel zone of the sea, the geological profile
of which can be represented siwly by three media: water. loose deposits

and bedrock. One of the main problees faced by seisnoacoustics is napping
the roof of bedrock mder the layer of detritus. lihis problen is solved

by the reflected wave method. i.e.. by recording the shape and travel tins
of pulses reflected fro. the investigated boundary. since they are recorded
during notion of a ship. the noise related both to the notion of the ship
and to purely physical factors of the ssdiu are also recorded sieultaneously
with the useful signals.

The coaplexity and high cost of nodern hydroengineering complexes require
especially careful sumys: they are carried out at depths (in the soil)
of 20-30 I and in this case the error of tying the deternined boundaries
by depth should not be greater than 2-3 percent. mu. resolution should
provide separation of strata of minim thickness (approxialately l s) in
the profile. These conditions in turn place rigid technical remniressnts
on the apparatus and method of observations.

A special apparatus was developed during development of the selsnoacoustic
Isthod for excitation and recording of elastic vibrations and special
methodical procedures of using it were also developed. 'i'he echogran ob-
tained as a result of seinaoacoustic profiling is a geological profile in

a distorted vertical scaln. The distortions are explained by the fact that.
beginning work, the investigator usually does not have sufficient data on
the propagation velocities of elastic saves in soils. The field echograse
should be reconstructed and presented to geologists in the fore of a
scheeatic acoustic-geological profile. 111s useful waves must be separated
and the interference vaves eust be excluded on the echogran for this. ‘l‘he
useful vevss Iust be tied in to lithological boundaries so that the vertical
scale of the profile corresponds in the final analysis to the real profile.

 

ODepth is understood as the possibility of studying the profile to some
specific depth and detail is understood as the capability of separating
layers of given nini-u thickness in the profile.

5’0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An entire coupler of problem releted to the use of ssiseoecouetics for
solving engineering-geologic“ problens in the consul zone of the see is
considered in the book.

9. Receiving Devices

the receiving devices used in marine seisnoecoustic surveys usuelly consists
of the following nein oomcnentsn the receiver itself which converts eleetic
vibretions to en electric signels. e liquid-filled (cestor oil or diesel fuel)
protective housing, e preemlifier of week signels occurring in the receivers.
for confident trons-lesion of then to the ship or e netching trensfcrner end
connecting ceble.

Piezoelectric end negnetoetriction pressure trensducers were used slost
extensively on detectors. Piezoelectric neteriele for urine operetlons hove
been Ienufectured during the pest few yeers prieerily frcn vericm types of
speciel pierccerenics. The nein edventeges cf pierocerenics is the reletively
low cost. low dependence of pereneters on tespereture. hygroscopioity. neche-
nicel strength, good sensitivity end the possibility of creeting detectore of
my shops. heed rirconete-titenete ('i‘s'i‘s) is Ineinly ueed in modern detectors
encng the any verietles of core-ice in Soviet end foreitm epperetus [20].
The nein properties of rats cerenics very by less then 2-3 percent in the
working tower-stun intervel. The properties of ‘Ps‘l‘s very by not store then
2-5 percent when using en externel voltege in the renge free 105 to lo7 ll/sl2
(i.e.. when e pierocerenic element is subnerged froe see level to e depth

up to 100 n).

We note thet the stebility of pierocerenic properties is achieved only by
conducting speciel 'eging" procedures conteined in the Ienufecturing process
et the plent. Phenasene sieiler to eging, i.e., greduel verieticn cf the
properties of detectors, ere elec sonetines observed during very prolonged
storeys (up to eeverel yeers) due to the effect of e nuber of fectore (the
effect of which hes not been finelly determined).

q I ' b) ’ J I

- :m‘:

## mm:

I ;Illllll’l/IIII‘
1

figure ll. Diegreu of sensing Elements of Detectors Opereting
on the Principle of Universel Conpression (e) end
Bending Deforutione (b). The deshed line shows the
contours of the piezoelenent under the effects of
pressure P: l -- piercelenent: 2 -- incompressible
homing; 3 - eeebrene

Detector design whose sensing eleeents operete in either universel coqree-
sicn (figure ll. e) or in bending deformation (Figure ll. b) nodes ere dis-
tinguished by working principle. cylinders, pletes, disks end other

55

1'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

cowonta of his without tiniahad dooiqn aro rolatod to ”puro" dotootoro
in which tho principlo ot univoroal oooprooaion ia roalirod. Bonding typo
dotoctora aro unuraoturod of flat oonoinq alanonto rointorood on tho ondo
or odooo and only ono aido of tho aonoino olooaat protootod by a ooobrano.
ooooa into contact with tho oodiu and air io locatod on tho othor aido.
Tho-o principal difforoncoa in doaimo aloo dotornino tho aharp diiioronooo
in aonoitivity to proaauro. Tho foot io that an olootric apoca oharoo
occurring on tho odooa of a pioroolonont ia proportional to ito doforootion
duo to tho ottoot of oxtornal toroaa. Damnation or a bonding dotootor
(loo Piguro ll, b) duo to tho offoot of tho oalla prooauro lay obvioualy

bo aignificantly qroator than that of a dotootor with an olooont oporating
in tho univoroal comroaaion nodo.

mo dioadvantagoo of dotootoro oporatinq by tho bonding dofornation principlo
includo opprooiably highor coat and aignitioant dopondonco on tho dopth or
ouhnoroion [67). mo lattor diaadvantago has now boon ovorcooa abroad in
ao- typao of dotoctoro. 'iho otticioncy of bonding dotootora duo to maxim-
por-iooiblo bonding of tho ooobrano ia rotainod at daptha up to loo n,
whoroao opocial doaigno of univoroal ooqroaoion dotootoro i111) rouin
ottioiont at doptho o! aovoral kilo-aura.

Dotootoro whooo aonaing ola-ont ia a hollow Tats cylindor. to tho ando or
whivh aro attachod ooalod pluga of a nonconductinq natarial. aro uaad ar-
tonaivoly in prootioo. Although alight bonding dofornationa aro inhoront

to thio dooiw, thoy aro claaaitiod in tho litaraturo ao univoroal coaproa-
aion dotootoro. Baaidao tho cylindrical dotootoro. various doaigno oporating
in bonding dotoroationa aro rathor widoly diatributod. oainly abroad.

1ho Iain para-otoro or pioudotoctoro includo aonaitivity rr. i.o.. tho
ratio or tho oloctro-otivo forco (o.n.t.) a on tho dotoctor tor-inala to
tho proaauro appliod to tho dotoctor: tho natural capocitanco and vibra-
tional aonaitivity, i.o., tho ratio of o.n.£. on tho torninolo to variablo
accolorationo occurring whan tho dotoctor ia towod in tho wator.

1‘ha aonaitivity of datoctora ia a cleox function of tho troquoncy or
porcaivod vibrationa. 11:. (act ia that a dotactor ia a vibrating unchanical
oyatan with ita own roaonanco froquoncioa at which ita aanaitivity ia mi-
“. Counting tro- tho :oro troquoncy aria. tho tirat aaxim- troquoncy
charactoriotic for a cylindrical olo-ant with radiuo In: in dotorninod by
tho oxproaaion [6]

whore ox ia tho apood or oound in oaranica.

rhia roaonanco corroopondo to that of tho radial vibrationa at tho qlindor
and otbooquont roaonanco Iroqucncioa aro locatod in tho rango abovo to.
o/lindora with radiua on tho ordor of 1-2 on. for which tho apood '

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'1‘ - (Ls-0103 sale. are used in serially manufactured piesodetectors. men.
on the basis of the given expression, fo >35 has. with regard to the
attaching else: sets and the effect of the reduced ness of the surrounding
media. the reel resonance frequencies say differ significantly free that
indicated. but they are always appreciably higher than the recorded range

of frequencies during ell operations by the continuous profiling nethod
using electric-spark emitters. the resolving value for the frequency
characteristic in the low-frequency band has natural capacitance of the
detector and the input characteristics of the aeplifiers and the transnit-
ting cable.

The effect of the vibrational sensitivity of piesodetectors on the quality
of continuous profiling neterials was more distinctly determined rather
recently during detailed investigations of the noise caused by towing the
receiving devices in water (61] . It was established during the investiga-
tions that the horizontal coqonente of vibrations are nest significant.
Jerking of the tow rope (cable) causes accelerated notions of the detectors
in the media, which leads to variation of pressures to different parts of
the detectors end to the appearance of emf. Calculations and aessurenents
(67] show that the noise level reaches 354,000 I” at reel accelerations
of 1-30 We: for cylindrical elements used in marine piezocerenics and the
vibrational sensitivity is hardly dependent on frequency in the frequency
band face 20 to 1,000 a: for doeeetic detectors. All things being equal.
the ratio of pressure sensitivity to vibrational sensitivity increases as
the mass of the detectors increases. It is Also greater for flat elements
then for cylindrical elements.

Special detectors in which the principle of vibrocospensation is used: each
detector includes two eleeents in which self of one sign occurs during univer-
eel conpression and with different signs during vibrations, have been deve-
loped to reduce sensitivity to vibrations. Appropriate joining of these
elements leads to attenuation of the vibrational emf. A schematic diagren
of the pus-21 detector. the sensing eleeents in which are two identical
cylinders separated by a rigid collar. is shown in Figure 12. Due to the
effect of universal pressure P (see Pigure l.‘, a), both cylinders are con-
preesed and identical charges occur on the external plates. During the
effect of acceleration in the direction shown by the arrow. a ccqreesion
none occurs in front of the first cylinder while a negative pressure sons
occurs behind the second cylinder. which leads to the appearance of charges
with opposite signs on the outer edges.

 

figure 12. Sche-etic Diagram of PBS-21 Vibration-Resistant
Detector. no signal polarity due to the effect of
universal pressure (a) and of horizontal accelera-
tion 0:) is: l -- cylindrical piezoelesente: 2 ..
separating collar: 3 - side nufflére

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because of vibrocospeneation. the ratio of pressure sensitivity to vibra-
tional eaneitivity can be inoroved by a factor of 10-100.

Data on the most widely used doueatio and foreign pierodetectore operating
on the basis of rats materials are presented in Table 7.

It ehould be noted that deviations of the paranters of aerial doeeetic
detectors tro- Isan para-store may reach tS-‘I percent in pressure eeneiti-
vity. 110 percent in capacitance and 3100 percent in vibrational sensitivity.
which is explained by the variation of properties or ceramics and the diffi-
culty or selection and installation of identical pairs or eleaents.

It is of interest to analyze the level or the natural noise of a detector
occurring in it due to tespereture fluctuations for analysis or individual
ooeponente or noise in the receiving drannel. Analysis of the expressions
presented in [19] shows that the noise an! of a detector 3.11.9 (or the fre-
quency range or (£2 - £1) ‘4 kHz can be represented in the form

5.... = [4k r. A,(ln /. - In Ml“.

where k is a Boltuann constant equal to 1.38-10'23 erg/deg: '1'. is absolute
teaperature: A; is the parameter of a cylindrical detector with radius r.
length l and wall thickness bu

4:402- l)Ebt¢8/r’l.

where d is the angle of losses.

thus. the natural noise level of the detector decreases it a constant band
is Iaintained with an increase of frequency. Noise reaches a mini-um and
than again increases at frequencies above 4 kHz. For a cylinder of wars
with radius 1, length 5 and thickness of 0.2 cue. the value of 2“,}, in the
frequency band tro- 100 to 1,000 ii: is approxinately 0.05-0.07 Pv at '1' I
- 20'C.

Having cleeted consideration of the natural properties of detectors with
this. let us turn to the problea of signal trans-lesion tro- then through
the cable to the preamlifier. The equivalent soheaatio diagra- ot this
system is shown in Figure 13. Here the detector is replaced by series con-
nection of the an! generator 3 and capacitance Cp (the validity of this sub-
stitution in the frequency range auch below resonance has been justified in
any investigations -- see. for exaeple. [70, 79]). ‘lhe cable is represented
by equivalent capacitance ck and the input inpedance of the preaapliﬂer is
represented by active resistance a... The length of the cable during seism-
acoustic operations usually coqariaee 20-100 a (rarely greater). the linear
capacitance is 50-100 pP/n. resistance is 0.03-0.l ohm/a and inductance is
50-100 pﬂ/a, i.e.. q‘ - 5.000-10,000 p? at the greatest length. which is
quite coapuable to the capacitance of a single detector (see Table 7).

58

I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. i POI! ONICIM. USE ONLY
'l
- feble 7. Cherecterietiee o! Pierodeteotore [20. 67]

    
  

at!
be.

verve-u.»-

W'-

Omnemuﬂ)
moo nu, 70 57 20 ll
:maooo Eng! ii" W88! 11 1g % '3 3 1'5
moo unca- mﬂ‘u ‘1: aoo 5: 12x 02:
3e 3’
- MP- ' 1‘ «no 98 I7 2‘ -
mo ”’3” 1100 Manama 3 “o 6;! 7 0 _
- MP-M' llee lama W N I. I2 -
”0 MIN" “nape new 300 70 XII ‘2 1.0
'gg 2416' ee enema é lg 95 lo It —
. um _ - .. _
moo ﬂ- ' 320 27 20 It 0.5
1m "33% #:‘MM. 1: so u « u 0.2

 

'Deteotore with e1eeente abject to bending detonation.

m.
1. Cepecitence. p? 9. Doeeetic
2. Her): of detector 10. cylinder
3. Sensing e1enent 11. M cylinder.
O. Seneitivity, V/Pe 12. M dieke
5. Length. I 13. toreign
6. Diameter. - 14. M pletee
7. mu. 9 15. P1ete
8. vibretionel eeneitivity. 16. Your dieke

Vlz/GI

reeietence ie equel to 0.3-10 oh- end inductance in 5-10 Ill. The inductive
renotence of the ceble ie eignifioentiy 1eee then ite effective reeietnnce.
which in turn in ouch 1eee than I“. et trequenciee of received eigne1e up to
2.000 In. 'l‘heee eneiyee: e1eo lend to the equive1ent circuit of Figure 12.
let ue limit ourselvee to the one of n ehort ceb1e for whidl c )q: the
nodulue of input frequency cherecterietic, i.e.. the retio of. nodulue
of voltage [an I et input impedance a“ to en! 2 occurring on the pletee or
the detector eey then be written in the {on

”n! =11 + I/(c.n,.,a,--I.,
while the phone ehitt between on end E in deter-ind tron the expreeeion

In: l/-RC..

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0-l'

figuro 13. Equivalont Circuitry of Piorochannol

'l'ho input troguoncy charactoriotic of tho piorochannol io nothing aoro than
tho charactoriotic of tho nc filtor of uppor troguonoioo which providoo
tranoaiooion of troguoncioo abovo tho boundary tromncy In, (at lovol o!
0.707), dotoruinod tron tho rolation

I" - l]?! R, 0..

At tho givon valuoo o! capacitanco c, and tag. thio condition roo that
tho input inodanco of tho arplifior ho no looo than (211!“ cp)‘ . lor
oxauplo. whon uoing a oinglo PIS-d dotoctor (c - 12.000 9'? and I“ - 200 hr.
it io nocoooary that M ?70 um. such oi ficant valuoo of input inpo-
dancoo oro undooirahlo whoa rocoiving woak oignala (at tho lovol of tho
first tono o! Iicrovolto) for tho following roaronoa high input iapodancoo
load to hict natural noiooo o! tho input otagoon thoy roguiro incroaood
cablo inoulating rooiotorop opuriouo inductiono nay oaoily occur on tho-
and ac on. mntcro, oxoopt for opociol caooo in which onall diunoicno
of tho rocoiving dovico aro roguirod. parallol connocticn or oovoral idonti-
cal dotoctoro in a oinglo rocoiving dovico io usually wlmd in practico.
In thio cooo tho total capacitanco cp for a group or n; dotoctoro io in-
croaood rug-fold. which ponito a roduction of input iqodanoo M by tho aano
factor.

I! tho input ilpodanoo a“ io ooloctod groator than rcquirod by tho givon
condition. tho piorochannol nay ho ovorloadod by low-trogucncy oignalo with
cowononto looo than (M and tho uootul oignolo may (all into tho nonlinoar
rogion at tho input charactoriatic of tho alplitior. for than can oc-
authoro [19] rocouond that additional lov-froguoncy tiltora bo placed in
front of tho awlifior.

1ho input oignal lovol can to incroaood by uoing oorioo-parallol connection
at dotoctoro. which pornito an incroaoo of tho voluo of 3p; and co [21).

It tho longth of tho cablo io oignificant. tho ohunting offoct of its natural
capacitanco io oxcludod by placing tho prowlirior in tho imodiato vicinity
of tho dotoctoro.

Various onittor ropoator circuits (band on ordinary and fiold tranoiotoro.
nicrccircuito and no on) which havo low input inodancoo whilo providing
high valuoa of an arc loot froguontly uood ao prowlificrc. The lattor
aakoa it pcooiblo to oliainato tho noioo occurring in tho cablo. ‘i'ho tact
io that tho natural capacitanco of tho cablo can ho variod duo to noohanical
ottocto and tho ottoct of oxtornal olactric tioldo: thio loath to tho
appoaranco o! noioo-induood out on ito conductors. 1hrco-wiro linoo [79) o

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the outer wires of which are connected to a group of detectors and the
central wire of which performs the role of ground. are frequently led fro-
ths receiving device to the aeolifier for this purpose. his line in con-
nected to the input of the differential anplifier at whose output the signal
fron the detector is amplified. while inductions for each pair of lines
(potential end grounding vire) are added in counterphase, i.e.. the induc-
tions are sharply attenuated if the conditions of symmetry of the differen-
tial enlifisr input are observed.

 
  

711373! ‘. IuIIIII [{‘(omlzlublklﬁw

     

Figure 14. longitudinal Section of the Receiving Device of a
Piezoarrayx l - connector: 2 - cable: 3 -- fairing:
4 - storage batteries: 5 - presuplifiera 6 -- spring
shock absorber; 7 -- piezodetectors: 8 -- buoy: 9 --
stabilizer line: 10 -- end cap: ll - valve; 12 -
hose: lJ -- porolon plugs: 14 -- plug, 15 -- connection

1110 form of the receiving device. called a piezoarray or simply 'array'"

is shown in ﬁne lost complex version in l’igure 14. A group of detectors
connected in parallel and arranged at specific distances froe each other is
placed in a protective oil-filled hose. hoses 45-55 In in diameter of
transparent polyvinyl chloride are nest frequently used. Because of the
transparency of the hose, one can visually monitor the safety of the detec-
tors and the integrity of the connections. noses of polyvinyl chloride pipe
of smaller diameter or rubber (Durite) hoses are sonstius used. one detec-
torsocowyonlythecentralpartofthearray endpartofthe freehose

is left in front and back. ‘nuerefors. the detectors remain in the quietest
part of the array at a distance free the disturbance zones caused by the
front and rear part of the receiving device during towing in water.

A valve is located in the rear end cap of the array to supply solar oil
under pressure. The excess pressure inside the hose is usually let (not
nore than 0.02-0.l me). Other grades of oils with high insulating resis-
tance my be used instead of solar oil: transforuer, glycerine and so on.
men oil is supplied to the array, asasures are taken to prevent air and
water entering it. 'l'he following procedure is frequently mloyed for this
purpose under marine conditions. A weight is attached to the front end of
the array and alaost all of it is lowered into the water. oil is then poured
into it through the open rear end and is hslf for a long the (up to 10
hours) so that air bubbles leave. the rear end cap is then inserted with
force and air residues are bled through the valve.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ran onrcm. use ONLY -."
lhs front end cap has a connection for the cable lead. the preanifier is
located in the front part of the array. It is supplied fro. cells or storage
batteries located in the array or is swplied by cable from the ship. Hires

for external recharging of the storage batteries are frequently provided in
the cable.

curing the past few years receiving devices have been supplied with special
shock-absorbing sections, which are a hose reinforced on the inside by a
spring. Shook absorption contributes to attenuation of vibrational noise.
Oil-integrated porolcn plugs are soeetines placed between eadx detector
for the same purpose.

The front end cap of the detector is covered by a fairing which reduces
drag during towing. A halyard with small buoy is frequently attached to
the end of the array during operations with long cables. which ashes it
possible to follow the position of the array with respect to the ship and
to find it if the cable breaks. In the absence of a buoy. if the array
is short in length. the halyard oz: several halyards serve as stabilizers
to reduce vibrations of the array during towing.

During seismacoustic operations. the array is towed directly by the cable:
therefore. it should not only have good insulating properties and elasticity.
but should also tolerate appreciable tensile forces -- on the order of 0.3-
0.6 km.

Good quality of the profiling materials is also achieved at relatively low
towing speeds (w to 5-6 knots) by using the sisplest receiving devices
consisting of 10-20 detectors of type Psx-d or others arranged at a distance
of 5-15 as iron each other. The detectors are placed in the hose closed on
both ends by rtbber plugs. which are wound on the outside by several turns
of soft copper wire. A coaxial cable of type ax-so-n-zl is adlitted through
the front plug. 'me total length of the hose readies 1.5-2.5 In.

common: Goeudsrstvennyy proyektno-izyskatel'skiy i nauchno-issledovatel'skiy
institut aorskogo transports (Soyuz-nomiiproyekt), 1977

6521
€80: 8144/0758

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS, ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

COOPERATION IN SPACE RESEARCH

Moscow vssmzx amen! "aux ssss in Russian No 11. Nov 78 pp 80-87

[Article by N. S. Novikov, Deputy Chairman of the "Intercosmos" Council
USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] The Soviet Union cooperates with many countries in the study and
mastery of space. In 1967 nine countries in the socialist camp - Bul-
saris. Hungary, East Germany. Cuba, Mongolia. Poland, Romania, the USSR
and Czechoslovakia adopted a progran of joint work which was later given
the name “Intercosmos.” National coordinating cos-ittees were established
in these countries (in the Soviet Union, the "Intercosmos" Council USSR
Academy of Sciences). made up of outstanding scientists and specialists.

Within the framework of the "Intercosmos" program there are five perman-
ent nixed working groups: on investigation of the physical properties of
space (space physics), on study of natural resources, on space communica-
tions. on space meteorology, on space biology and medicine. The principal
task of the groups is ensuring the isplementation and further development
of the cooperation program. The groups are examining and solving problems
relating to the feasibility of carrying out different kinds of scientific
research studies and plans are laid for their realisation.

In implementing the "Intercosmos" prograu use was initially made of Soviet
standardized artificial earth satellites, and later automatic universal or-
bital stations (AUOS -— avtomaticheskiye universsl'nyye orbital'nyye stan-
tsii). These carried three or four times more instruments than the preceding
"Intercosnos" satellites. Up to 1 January 1978 a total of 17 satellites

of the "Intercosmos" series and 6 “Uertikal'” geophysical rockets had been
launched under the "Intercosnos" program.

The Soviet Union freely supplies its space and rocket technology to the
socialist countries. The "Intercosmos" progran facilitates the integra-
tion of space research and thereby the creation of nev national cadres.

the development of national science and modern industrial production in

the participating countries. [For information on cooperation of the social-
ist countries under the "Intercosmos" program see: 3. N. Petrov. "The

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lntercosmos' Program. Cooperation of the Socialist Countries," VESTNIK
AN SSSR, No 6. 1977.]

—‘

is

3’
r

 

Docking of the “Shea-3" satellite Soviet carrier-rocket which launch-
(France) with carrier-rocket (USSR) ed the Indian "Arisbatha" satel-
in assembly-test building lite into space (1975)

The USSR is also developing cooperation in the study of space with the cap-
italist countries. France was the first capitalist country with which the
Soviet Union signed an intergovernmental agreement on cooperation in space
exploration (in 1966). The implementation of this agreenent on the French
side was assigned to the French National Space Research Center. Virtually

all the work is carried out in four mixed working groups: on space physics.
on space meteorology, on space cemmunications, on space biology and medicine.
Sessions of the Jerking groups are held annually, alternately in the USSR
and France. At these sessions specialists summarize results, plan new

joint investigations and set the times and methods for carrying them out.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

France is carrying out a major national space program. This country has
[modern space centers and a well-developed aerospace industry. a rocket
launch site at Courou (French Guiana) and a network of satellite tracking
stations. Its scientists and specialists have much experience in the study

of space. All this has a favorable and productive influence on the develop~
ment of bilateral cooperation.

Since the time of signing of the agreement there have been 28 joint Soviet-

French experiments. French scientific instruments have been carried aboard
the Soviet automatic interplanetary stations "Luna-l7," "Luna-21." "Mars-

5," "Mars-6," "Mars-7," "Vensrs-9," "Venera-lO," and aboard the “Prognoz,”
"Oreol" and "Kosmos" satellites. Using French laser reflectors carried on

board the Soviet lunokhods. it was possible to make n highly accurate de-

termination (about 40 cm) of the distance from the earth to the moon.

 

Academician B. N. Petrov and Professor S. Davan (India) shake hands after

signing the agreement on cooperation in work on the Indian satellite "Aria—
batha" (Bangalore, 1973).

Soviet carrier-rockets were used in the launching of two HAS French tech-
nological satellites and the scientific satellite "Sneg—J" (gamma astron-
omy experiment).

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY

In 1975 the extremely complex "Araks" experiment was carried out. Its
objective was a refinement of the model of the earth's magnetosphere. the
nature of behavior of the charged particles in it and the auroral mechan-
ism. During this experiment a study was made of the phenomena causing aur-
oras and the dynamics of charged particles in the earth's magnetic field.
Two Prench "Bridan" rockets were launched on Kerguelen Island. They carr-
ied Soviet electron accelerators and also a complex of Soviet and French
scientific instrumentation. Ground observations were carried out simul-
taneously on Kerguelen Island and at a conjugate magnetic region - in
Arkhangel'skaya Oblast. Very valuable scientific results were obtained and

these are being carefully analysed by the scientists of the Soviet Union
and France.

Within the agreed-upon program. the specialists of the USSR and France
are preparing new experiments for investigating processes in the magneto-
sphere and ionosphere, the solar wind and the interplanetary medium. etc.

In accordance with the plans for research in the field of space biology
and medicine. with the participation of France there was implementation
of international complex biological experiments with the specialized bio-
satellitea "Cosmos-782" and "Cosmos-936." In these experiments a study
was made of the influence of spaceflight factors on living organisms.
Scientists ,f both countries have carried out processing and analysis of
the collected materials.

In February 1978 the "Salyut-6" orbital station was used in successfully
carrying out the Soviet-French experiment "Tsitos" for study of the ef-
fect of spaceflight factors on the kinetics of cell division of microor-
ganisms.

Joint work is successfully proceeding in the field of space meteorology.
0n Karguelen Island there is regular rocket sounding of the upper atmo-
sphere using Soviet H-IOOB meteorological rockets for obtaining data on
temperature. wind and the concentration of atomic oxygen. Using numer-
ical methods, Soviet and French specialists have obtained new data on
mesoscale convective currents for different states of the air flow and
thermal stratification of the atmosphere. Computations have been made
of convective movements in a cyclone. The methods and instrumentation
for rocket sounding are being systematically improved.

In 1977, in the region of the Kourou polygon (French Guiana), specialists
carried out a second series of comparisons of Soviet and French meteoro-

logical sensors used for rocket sounding of the upper layers of the atmo-
sphere. Launchings of Soviet rockets were carried out from the scientific
research vessel "Ahademik Karolev"; French rockets were launched from the
KourOn polygon. There were 11 series of paired rocket launchings.

In 1977, on Kheys Island, the Soviet Union carried out 14 launchings of
H3912 rockets with French and Soviet instrumentation for measurement of
the polar atmosphere by the method of artificial luminescent clouds at

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

altitudes of 130-170 km. The purpose of these launchings was a study of
the polar ionosphere under disturbed and quiet conditions. A French laser
station has been operating on Kheye Island since 1975. It is employed

for probing the upper atmosphere in the polar regions.

In the field of space communications. in 1977 specialists tested the
digital telephonic communication line of the Space Research Institute
USSR Academy of Sciences (Moscow) - NCSR (Toulouse). An agreement was
reached that direct telephonic communication would be established between
the Space Research Institute and the NCSR in 1978.

Cooperation between the Soviet Union and the United States of America in
the exploration of space in actuality began to develop from the very be-
ginning of the space era. The first bilateral agreement between the USSR
Academy of Sciences and NASA in the United States was concluded in 1962.
Joint experiments were carried out for establishing communications through
space. A program was implemented for compiling a map of the earth's mag-
netic field. An around-rhe-clock exchange of information on the state of
the atmosphere on our planet was arranged. A fundamental Joint study an-
titled OSNOVY KOSHICRESKOY BIOLOGII I MEDITSINY (Principles of Space Biol-
ogy and Medicine) was published.

During 1970-1971 there were meetings and discussions between the USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences and NASA, as a result of which a governmental agreement was
signed in 1972 between the USSR and the United States on cooperation in the
investigation and use of space for peaceful purposes. The agreement pro-
vided for the development of coordination in a number of fields of space
research, joint implementation of experiments, and also exchange of sci-
entific information on space. In this agreement a special place was de-
voted to studies on creation of joint means for the rendezvous and docking
of Soviet and American manned spaceships and stations, including work on
preparing the first joint experimental flight of the "Soyuz“ and "Apollo"
ships. [Sec K. D. Bushuyev. “First International Space Experiment." VBSTNIK
AN SSSR, No 6, 1976.]

Joint working groups were established for implementing the cooperation pro-
gram: for studying circumterrestrial space, the moon and planets. for study
of the environment. on space meteorology, on space biology and medicine.

During the time of cooperation much work was done on mapping the moon and
investigating lunar ground. Scientists exchanged samples of lunar ground,
sent one another catalogues of maps and photographs of the moon, and in-
formed one another about the results of investigations and agreed to con-
tinue such work in the future.

A series of coordinated observations of the environment was carried out
with the use of satellite, aircraft and surface apparatus. In accordance
with the coordinated plans specialists in the USSR and the United States

67

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are continuing to study soils. vegetation, agricultural fields and hydro-
logical characteristics in analogue sectors, but also investigations of
the world ocean using space vehicles and special ships.

mring September 1977 a Soviet-American experiment was carried out (within
the framework of an international program) for the synchronous measurement
of tenpsrature of the Atlantic Ocean. Specialists are regularly exchang-
ing the results of investigations carried out during 1976-1977 for study
of microwave equipment. hydrology and oceanology. study of soils and vege-
tstion.

Cooperation is being successfully developed in the field of space eeteor-
elegy: the exchange of maps prepared on the basis of data from rocket sound-
ing stations in the United States and the USSR in the altitude range 35-60
km, and also routine telegrams and sulnaries on rocket launchings. In Aug-
ust 1977. at Hallops Island (United States). there were comparisons of
Soviet and Naerican meteorological sensors used in rocket sounding of the
upper layers of the atmosphere. During synchronous launchings of 22 pairs

of Soviet 11-1003 meteorological rockets and Anerican ”Super-Loci-Datasonde"
rockets measurements were made of wind velocity and temperature at greater
altitudes. Investigations in the field of satellite meteorology were directed
to isprovement of methods for temperature sounding of the atmosphere.

In accordance with the plan for work in the field of space biology and medi-
cine joint work is being carried out for study of the influence of space-
flight factors and especially weightlessness on the human and animal body.
The efforts of scientists in both countries are directed to solution of

a fundamental problem -- the possibilities of man‘s prolonged presence in
space. The information collected on the state and behavior of the htaasn
body in space is being carefully processed and analyzed.

In November 1977 a symposium was held for discussing the problems involved
in laboratory modeling of weightlessness conditions on the earth. ‘lhe re-
ports of Soviet and American scientists gave an analysis of the work done
in each country and laid out the program for further investigations. Then
the NASA Uslleps Flight Center was the site of a session of a joint working
group for examining the results of biomedical experiments aboard the Soviet
biosatellite "Cosmos-936.” aboard the "Soyuz-21" and "Soyuz-26" spaceships.
and also on the "Salyut-S" orbital station. American scientists reported
on the results of work on the ground simulation of flight of the "Spacelab"
orbital station. carried out at the Johnson Space Center in 1977. Great at-
tention was devoted to the problems of predicting man's state under weight-
lessness conditions and the possibilities of presence in space.

In May 1972 an agreement was signed at Moscow between the USSR Academy of
Sciences and the Indian Space Research Organization of the government of
India on the launching of an Indian satellite by means of a Soviet carrier-
rocket from the territory of the USSR. At the request of India. the Soviet
Union agreed to render India technical assistance in the designing of a

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

satellite. and also to construct and supply gratis a number of systems.
including a system for stabilizing the satellite. solar cells. a power
supply systen. and components of the telenetric system. In addition. on
the proposal of the Indian Space Research Organization provision was node
for creating near Moscow a ground station for the reception of telemetric
information from the satellite and for the transmission of comnands.

As is "411 known, the Indian satellite "Ariabatha" was developed and con-
structed in a short time - in two years. On the Soviet side. a large
group of scientists and specialists participated in this work.

The "Ariabatha" satellite (weighing 360 kg) is the largest and most complex
of all the pioneering satellites. On 19 April 1975 the satellite was put
into the computed orbit. It implemented the program and continues to fly.
Indian scientists have obtained valuable scientific and technical inform-
ation in the field of space physics and presented interesting reports at
the Eighteenth COSPAR Session at Verne (Bulgaria) and at the Seventh In-
ternational Seminar on Space Physics at Leningrad.

At the present time. in the outskirts of Bangalore, at the base where the
"Ariabatha" satellite was launched. a center of the Indian Space Research
Organization was organized for creating satellites; it was headed by Pro-
fear U. R. Rso. There specialists are developing a whole series of satel-
lites fpr scientific and practical purposes. including a satellite for ob-
serving the earth's surface (CEO), on the basis of the second "Ariabatha"
flight model. This satellite. like the first. is being created with the
participation of Soviet scientists and specialists.

In April 1975 a new agreement was signed between the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences and the Indian Space Research Organization. This was an agreement

on the launching of a second Indian earth satellite (weight 600 kg) by a
Soviet carrier-rocket from the territory of the Soviet Union. It will carry
scientific instrumentation for investigating the earth's surface. Microwave
radiometers and television cameras with vidicons will make it possible to
register the cloud cover, measure temperature of the ocean surface. obtain
information on the snow cover in the Himalayas. the rate of thawing of the
snow, and also other data important for meteorologists and hydrologists.
This satellite will undoubtedly be of great importance in solving problems
in the national economy of India.

The rendering of scientific and technical assistance to India in the crea-
tion and launching of satellites. naturally, is not the only form of our
cooperation in the investigation and use of space. Over the course of Iany
years Soviet and Indian meteorological rockets have been launched from the
equatorial polygon at Thumbs. During 1977 76 Soviet 5-1003 rockets were
launched for investigating the structure and circulation of the upper at-
uospheru in the low latitudes and also for studying the relationship be-
tween slratomesospheric phenomena and solar activity. Instrumentation of
both countries was carried aboard the rockets.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Both sides regularly exchange information relating to weather forecasting.

During October-November 1977 joint experiments in the field of gamma es-
tronoay were carried out in India. For this purpose at the Hyderabad poly-
non there was a series of launchings of high-level balloons. These invest-
igetions. overlapping the fields of astrophysics. the physics of cosmic
rays and elementary particles. are of great importance in the study of
problems relating to the origin of cosmic rays. the presence of antimatter
in the universe. etc. The high-altitude balloons, with all their auxiliary
equip-ant, were supplied by the Indian side. Soviet scientists constructed
complex scientific instrumentation - gamma telescopes making it possible
to carry out observations with a great accuracy. The information obtained
is being processed at the Physics Institute imsni P. N. Lebedev USSR Acad-
cmy of Sciences and at the Tate Physical Institute of Fundamental Research
at Bombay. Experiments of this type will be continued during 1978-1979.

Soviet-Swedish cooperation in the space field is being carried out on the
basis of the Intergovernmental Agreement on Economic and Scientific-Tech-
nical Cooperation Between the USSR and Sweden (January 1970) and the coop-
eration agreement between the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the
USSR Academy of Sciences. The coordination of joint work is the responsib-
ility of the "Intercosmoa" Council USSR Academy of Sciences and the Swedish
Space Activity Administration.

In 1976 the Physics Institute imsni P. N. Lebedev USSR Academy of Sciences.
the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory and Lund University used the "Inter-
cosmos-lo” satellite for carrying out an experiment for study of solar UV
radiation. Swedish specialists, with the participation of Soviet scientists,
developed and fabricated a unique spectrometer-polarimeter and participated
in studies at the cosmodroae for its installation aboard the satellite.

An analysis of the results of these investigations indicated that the col-
lected data are of great scientific interest.

Preparations are being made for a joint Soviet-Swedish experiment PROHIKS
for investigating the total composition of hot plasma in the earth's mag-
netosphere using a mass spectrometer fabricated by Swedish specialists

with the participation of Soviet scientists. In January 1978 Soviet spacial-
ists participated in tests and acceptance of a working sample of the spec-
trometer at the Kiruna Geophysical Institute. In July Swedish specialists
carried out tests of flight models of the instrument at the Space Research

Institute USSR Academy of Sciences.

This experiaent will be carried out using a high-apogee "Prognoz" autosatic
station, designed for studying solar activity and its influence on the in-
terplanstary medium and the earth's magnetosphere. The planned investiga-
tions are of great importance for the scientific prediction of radiation
conditions in space. In the future there may be a complex experiment for
the study of the physics of magnetospheric pretenses which is more complex

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and promising in scientific respects. There is now discussion of other
joint espsriments for the exploration of space, including space technology.

In 1976 the Soviet Union proposed to all countries participating in the
"Intercosmos" program that international flights be carried out aboard
Soviet spaceships and orbital stations with participation of represents-
tives of these countries. The proposal was adopted. screening of cosmonaut
candidates was initiated, and the first such group proceeded to training
in this same year at the Cosmonaut Training Center imeni Yu. A. Gagsrin.

The first flight with an international crew took place in March 1978 aboard
the "Soyuz-28" spaceship, which docked with the "Salyut-6" orbital station.
The ship co-snder was USSR Flier-Cosmonaut Aleksey Cubarev, whereas the
cosmonaut-researcher was a citizen of the CzSSR, Vladimir Remek. Scientific
experiments were carried_out aboard the "Salyut-6," after which the ”Soyuz-
28" crew completed its expedition and returned to the earth.

In June 1978 the "Soyuz-30" spaceship was launched; it carried a second
international crew: the ship commander USSR Flier-Cosmonaut Petr Klimuk
and cosmonaut-researcher Hiroslaw Hermaszewski. a citizen of the Polish
People's Republic. The ship docked with the "Sslyut-6"-"Soyuz-29" orbital
complex. Once again the manned "Selyut~6"-"Soyus" scientific research com-
plex was created in a circumterrestrisl orbit. The cosmonauts carried out
a major program of scientific research and experiments in the fields of
space technology, biomedical problems and investigations of the earth's

surface in the interests of different branches of the national economy.

The "Soyuz-31" spaceship was launched in August. It carried a third inter-
national crew, consisting of ship com-under USSR Flier-Cosmonaut Veleriy
Bykovskiy and cosmonaut-researcher Sigmund Jaehn, a citizen of the German
Desocratic Republic. The ship docked successfully with the "Salyut-6"-
"Soyuz-29" orbital complex. The cosmonauts carried out biomedical and tech-
nological experiments, investigations of physical processes and phenomena
in the earth's atmosphere, visual observations and photographing of the
earth's surface and the waters of the world ocean for the purpose of

study of natural resourcrs.

The first flights of international crews, successfully carried out. are open-
ing up a qualitatively nvw stage in scientific investigations of space. Cos-
monauts of other countrivs participating in the "Intercosmos" program are
now undergoing training at Star City. In accordance with the plan, all

crews now in training will carry out space flights aboard Soviet ships in

the next few years.

Cosmonautics has gone a long way since the launching of the world's first
artificial earth satellite on 6 October 1957. Today cosmonautics is faced
with new, more complex pnoblems and scientists throughout the world must

still more actively join their efforts for solution of these problems for
the welfare of all mankind.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka," "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR," 1978
S303/cso: 8166 [0707 71

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPEYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

A REFLECTING X-RAY TELESCOPE FOR A“ ORBITAL ASTROPHYSICAL STATION

Hosocv RADIOTBLBSKOPY. SUBHILLIHBTROVSKIYE I RENTGENOVSKIYB TELESCOPY in
Russian Vol 77. 1970 pp 3-13

[Article by I.L. Beygaan, L.A. Vaynshteyn, Yu.N. Voynov. D.A. Goganov,
“.1, Konysk, S.L. Handel'shtan, I.P. Tindo, N.A. Shatskiy and A.I. Shurygin,

published in the PROCEEDINGS OF THE ORDER OF LENIN INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS I“!!!
9.“. LEBEDEV]

[Text] Introduction

The classical tool for studying cosnic X-ray radiation sources is a photon
counter. equipped with a sechsnical collimator system to detect radiation
fros individual sectors of the celestial sphere. Such "collisating telescopes"
were used right at the inception of X-ray stronosy in 1962, and in particular.
in the especially fruitful experiaent with the "Uhuru" satellite [1]. now-
ever, for a nusber of years now. considerable attention has been devoted to
"grazing incidence“ reflecting x-ray telescopes. Such telescopes are partic-
ular promising for research in the soft x-ray region of the spectrua, A >
>10 (B< lKev). At shorter wavelengths, the grazing angle of the bean should
be extresely ssall (< 1'). and to obtain a significant effective area. reflec-
tors are required having a focus of several meters. Studies of soft x-ray

radiation sources have already been carries out using reflecting telescopes
installed in rockets [2 - 5].

The basic advantage of a reflecting telescope is the capability of concentrat-
ing the x-ray radiation free a large area onto a detector with small dimensions.
This significantly reduces the contribution free the cosmic ray background.
Moreover. the detector proves to shielded free the soft electronic conponent.
Finally. an ilportant advantage of a reflecting telescope is the fact that
because of the anall area of the entrance aperture of the counter. thinner
files can be used, something shich is especially important in the soft x-rsy
range. where files of even a few nicrons sarkedly absorb the radiation. There

also arises the possibility of using other types of ssall ares detectors. for
exsaple, channel aultipliers and sssiconductor detectors.

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It stands toreason that the design of a reflecting telescope involves addi-
tional engineering difficulties. These difficulties increase substantially

if the next step is taken, that of going on to the plotting of the X-rsy image
using a coordinate sensitive detector. However, we did not pose this problea
in this case. The small field of view of the telescope with a paraboloidsl
reflector also makes additional demands on the precision of telescope guidance
on an object.

The RT-é reflecting X-rey telescope is described in this paper, which intended
for studying the soft x-ray radiation of discrete sources using orbital astro-
physical stations. Besides the telescope itself, the apparatus has independent
control and astral orientation systems, which are not discussed here. A gen-
eral description of the device is given in Section 1, while in Section 2 there
is a detailed description of its individual assemblies.

1. The General Configuration of the Telescope

The reflecting X-ray telescope is.designed for observations in the soft X-ray
region of the spectrum at 60--60 A. The telescope is designed for installation
in orbital stations, which provide for an observation time of one source of 10
minutes and more.

Agenernlview and the configuration of the telescope are shown in Figures 1 and
2. The x-rey radiation is focused by the parabolic reflector on the input ap-
erture of the proportional photon counter. The stop at the reflector aperture
does not allow direct rays which have not been reflected to fall on the counter.
and also attenuates the soft electron flux component.

The spectral sensitivity range of the telescope is determined by the trans-
parency of the counter window film (2 un polypropylene}*. Moreover, the re-
flector effectively reflects radiation only at A > 15 A.

A rotating.filter; which periodically shutters the x—ray radiation beam, serves
to determine the count level from the penetrating cosmic background and ultra-
violet radiation. The filter is made from quartz, which is transparent for
ultraviolet radiation in a range of A > 1,700 A.

The thin organic film of the counter windows does provide for a coaplete
hermetic seal, and for this reason, during an observation session, the counters
are coupled by neana of an electric pneumatic valve to a tank with a capacity
of 3.6 liters, which contains a gas mixture. Between sessions, the counters
are disconnected from the tank and a significant fraction of the gas flows

* The authors are grateful to V.A. Nazarov for his active participation in
the development of the technology to obtain thin polypropylene films and
to 0.0. Lesnyye (the "Plastpolimer" Scientific Production Association,
Leningrad) for the sanples of the original, high homogeneity nonoriented
film.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

out from the volume of the
counters (. 100 cm3). A
high voltage power supply
regulator serves to assure
constancy of the cell am-
plification factor factor
during the gradual reduc—
tion of the gas pressure in
the tank.

A description of the indi-
vidual components of the tele—
scope is given in the next
section. Here we will deal
only with the data which
characterize telescope sen-
sitivity (see Section 2).

The effectiye reflector area
for A - 44 A, taking into
account the reflection fac-
tor from the Ni coating, is
Sx - 100 cm2. The counter
efficiency at this wavelength
is no - 0.3. Thus, the tele-
scope efficiency is non -

- 3U cm2/photon in a range

of AE - 0.07 Kev.

The minimum detectable flux
depends on the count level
for the cosmic ray background,
C“, the x-ray background cx
and on the observation time.
The use of the reflector
Figure 1. General View of the block permits a reduction in the
of telescope sensors. size of the detector, and
consequently, in the quantity
CN- However, in our first
experiment, this circumstance was not fully utilized: because of the possible
errors in guiding the telescope axis on an object being studied, the size of
the detector should be rather large. The diameter of the entrance window of
the counter was chosen at 3 cm (a field of view of :l.8’. At the present
time, the data on the intensity and energy distribution of the cosmic ray
background in the 0.1 —- 0.6 Kev range of interest to us is inadequate.
Apparently, for a counter with a 3 cm window, one can hope to obtain a value
of CN < 1 pulse lsec (see Section 2, paragraph "b"). Assuming an observation
time of 500 seconds, we obtain a Value (at the 30 level) of Fmin (0.28-—0.20
Kev) - 6 - 10"2 photons/cm2 - sec, something which agrees with a flux density

 

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

of P. (0.28 Kev) I 0.1 photona/cm2 . aec ' Kev. The anticipated count rate
from t diffuse X-ray background in the galactic plane is equal to Ca - 1

pulae/aec.
a Alum-I Photo guide (1)
w It“ all...

    

113$” Photo sud. M (10)
m

Pigure 2. Configuration of the X—ray telescope

Key: 1. Hake-up tank for the counters;

2. Working section of the counter;
3. Anticoincidence section;

6. Blectronica nodule;

5. To telemetry;

6. Diaphragm stop;

7. Parabolic reflector;

8. Filter blind;

9. Fess radioactive source;
10. Reference counter.

2. The Main Components of the Telescope

a) The Reflector

The reflector of the telescope takes the form of a truncated paraboloid.

The parsboloid does not meet the Abbe sine condition, i.e., produces a con-
siderable coma for rays outeide the axis and does not permit obtaining an
image of an object. As is well known, cona can be eliminated by using double
reflection, for example, a peraboloid and hyperboloid in combination. How-
ever. in our case, with a relatively large counter window size (3 ca). there
was no need for this. Besides, the use of two surfaces markedly decreases
the effective area.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reflector has an opening area of 19.7 cm and the distance from the focal
point to the entrance aperture is 62.k cm. The shape of the reflecting sur-
face is described by the equation

th-x2+ﬂ, z-l&6—6L8

(dimensions in cm). The grazing angle for axial beams varies from 8.2 to
b.5'.

The experimental data of [6, 7] on the reflection factors for various mater-
ials show that the optimum coating for the spectral range A > 44K is nickle.

The effective area 8‘ which was calculated on a computer for different di-
ameters with a fixed focal distance shows that when A - 44 X, the diameter
chosen yields Sx - 166 cm2 [8]. This is only 2 less than the area for
the case of the optimal diameter. when A - 77 , s, - 181 cnz. For com-
parison, we shall indicate that the total collecting area (for a reflection
factor of unity) is So I 211 elz.

The reflecting surface of the reflector was fabricated by means of taking
replicas* from a polished, specified paraboloidal shape which was polished
by a standard method. The replica was obtained by electrolytic deposition
of en Ni layer 8 0.1 mm thick, on which copper was then built up to the re-
quisite thickness (3 1.5 mm). Such reflectors are considerably easier than
glass ones. It is not difficult to fabricate several copies from one matrix.

The reflection factor from the surface element of a replica was measured
using an x—ray monochromator. The resulting curve obtained for the reflec-
tion factor as a function of the grazing angle at A - 66.4 K is shown in
Figure 3, along with the reflection factor for optically polished samples
[6]. The somewhat lower value of the reflection factor in our case is ap-
parently explained by the insufficient purity of the polishing of the matrix.

Since the diameter of the entrance window of the counter is comparatively
large, no severe requirements were placed on the quality of the shape of the
surface generatrix of the reflector. The distribution of the intensity in
the focal plane of the paraboloid for a parallel axial beam, measured in the
visible region of the spectrun. is shown in Figure 4. The diameter of a
scattering spot is 3 mm. Its stands to reason that a scattering spot in

the X-rey region can be greater due to the increase in the requirements placed
on the quality of surface polishing.

The field of view of the telescope was also studied in the visible range.
The resulting curve for the flux assa function of the angle the main beam

* The technology for obtaining the replicas was worked out by B.V.
Tver'yanovich (VNIIT, Moscow).

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

makes with the optical axis of the reflector is shown in Figure 5. The
angle between a parallel beam and the optical axis of the telescope is plot-
ted along the abscissa. As can be seen from the figure. the field of view
is :_l.8°. It should be noted that a scattering spot from a point object

is asymmetrical. where the illumination maximum is displaced towards the
axis. This leads to a marked increase in the field of view as compared to
the field of view defined by the geometric center of the spot. The latter
definition was used in the calculations of [8], which yield a field of view
of‘: 1.3‘ in our case. The calculation of the aberrations, which was per-

formed on a,conputer, confirmed the experimental result given above [8].
:

3,.‘,¢ relative units

./
a: .1
u "
0.‘ I
11 /
I z a I accidesrees a
'” '1 ‘ J‘ ﬁlm"
Figure 3. The refle tion factor at Figure 6. The light flux as a function
A - 44.0 . . of the square of the diameter
Key: 1. Nickel replica; Sings: detector entrance
2. Optically polished '
sample [6].

b) The Photon Counter

A SRPP-36 proportional counter was
used in the telescope. The counter
has the shape of a short cylinder,
split into two parallel sections,
where the anode filaments are located
along the diameter of each section

 

I , I ‘ uni (Figure 6).
Figure 5. The light flux as a func-
tion of the 5“, angle The sections of the counter are sep-
with respect to the op- arated by beryllium foil 0.1 mm thick.
tical axis of the re- The upper section is used to record
f1.cc°t. soft X-ray radiation. The lower sec-

tion is connected in the instrument
in an anticoincidence circuit config-
uration with the upper one and serves

for reducing the count rate from the
cosmic background.

77
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 6. The SEPT-36 proportional

2 Key: 1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8a
9.

10.
11

11.

 

X-ray counter.

Housing (AHPs alloy):
Hindow grating (U8 steel);
Bose (AHTs alloy):
Diephraga (berylliua,
0.1 II);

Anode "Eileeenta";
Ceranic insulators:

G ued connection:
Rubber seal;

window (polypropylene.
2 us);

Inlet and outlet con-
nection;

Argon arc welding.

The upper section has the entrance win-
dow, which is covered by a polypropy-
lene tile 2 un thick, supported from
the outside by a steel grating. The
diaaeter of the window is 3 cm. The
'counter is filled with a gaseous nix-
turc o! 90% Ar plus 101 €84 up to a
pressure of l-2 atl.

The gas leaks out through aicroleaks
when the fine organic film is elployed.
An operational node using individual
sessions with intervals of 26 hours and
lore between then is planned for our
telescope. During the tine between

sessions, the gas practically completely

leaves the volume of the counter. For
this reason. the counter is cut off between sessions from the tank with‘the-
gas mixture and is connected to it only during the tine of the session. The
gas filling systea unit is shown in Figure 7. By neans of carefully select-
ing Kiln san lee. success has been achieved in assuring a leakage of no more

than 10"2 ca [min with a pressure gradientof 1 atm.

In this case. gas loss

during the tine of a session amounts to only a small fraction of the counter

volume.

The entrance window filn isolates a spectral range of 0.28-0.20 Kev (64--
60 X). To reduce sensitivity to ultraviolet radiation, the interior surface

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the counter is coated with a graphite layer, while a layer of carbon at
£0 ug/cn2 is deposited on the exterior surface of the entrance window film.
A thin layer of aluninun is deposited on the interior surface to assure con-
ductivity. The transparency of this file to radiation in the 1.800 X region
does not exceed 10‘3.

The cell an lifieation factor amounts
to about 10 . The counter operates
in a proportional mode with pulse re-

cording in an energy range of 0.6-
Osl Kev.

The distribution of the amplitudes for
the case of monochromatic irradiation
with an Fe55 (2.09 X) source is shown
in Figure 8. The distribution half-
width is 252.

 

Figure 7. The gas filling system.

The proportionality of the mean ampli-
tude of a pulse of photon energy was
:23 :éicggg 3;“?01 checked in a range of 0.36-6 Kev. The
2 Filger‘ ’ presence of groportionality permits the
3‘ Pulsed.electricall use of a Fes radiation source for de-
' 0 stated V‘lve y bugging and testing the instrument, where
:1 h ti, 11 it is possible to work with this source
9 c automs ca y at normal atmospheric pressure, in con-
opens when the power trast to the working spectral range of
supply of the in-

strunent is turned about 44 A,

Key: 1. Tank with a quench-

5 :ngb 11 The design value of counter efficiency
. ,gec::,?°"9 as no is defined by the transmittance ro
’

of the window ahead of the K absorp-
tion edge (Bo - 0.28 Kev) and the effec-
tive energy range:

5. Working counter;
6. Reference counter;
7 Drain valve:

8. Filling valve. AE=5.ll-(1+1I=.)":'lv

where To is the optical thickness of the film. It is assumed that 1(3) -

- to (Bo/E)3. The quantity no - Ke“o, where K - 0.5-—0.7 is the transparency
of the grating. For a 2 na polypropylene fila or space + a0 ug/cn2 C, the
design values are: to - 0.7; no - 0.30; and A6 I 0.07 Kev.

The value of no was measured by isolating a narrow range around 0.28 Kev from
the spectrum of the X-ray tube using a filter of thick lavsan [synthetic fiber
similar to dacron] film. A Lukirskiy counter with a known absolute sensiti-
vity seved as the calibration standard [10]. The resulting value of no was
close to the design figure. Thus. the overall efficiency of the telescope

is sxnoas ; 2 cm2 - Kev.

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

0, RV
0,1]
1.0
A! I
I
2.0 '
at. s.
U I. u [.110
Figure 8. The amplitude distribution Figure 9. The uorking voltage
of the pulses for the case of the telescope
of rradiation with an counter as a function
Fes source. of the gaseous mixture
pressure.

Plotted on the abscissa: the numbers

of the pulse analyser channels (which
are proportional to the pulse ampli-

tude).

Shoun in Figure 9 is the working voltage of the telescope counter as a func-
tion of the gas pressure. The voltage is automatically regulated by means
of a "reference" counter of similar design. which is constantly irradiated
by a Fe55 source (see Section ”c”).

c) The Electrical Circuitry of the x-ray Telescope

The major components of the telescope circuitry are:
l) A circuit for measuring the pulse count rate;
2) A power supply voltage regulator for the proportional counter:

3) A control circuit for the filter drive and the blocking of the inputs of
the working and monitor channels;

6) A regulated power supply;

5) A control circuit for lhe pulsed pneumoelectric valve;

6) A pneumoelectric valve and filter position indicator, gas pressure sensor
and temperature sensor.

A block diagram of the telescope is shown in Figure 10.

The measurement circuitry contains the pulse amplifiers 18 and 25 for the
working section of the counter and pulse amplifier 17 for the monitor section,
pulse sampling assembly 21:, count circuits 33 and 310, and the "adders" 32

and 35 - converters for converting the state of the count elements analog
form.

80

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.
12.
13.
1“.
15.
I6.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

am as new

Telemetry Outputs

Figure 10. Block diagram of the telescope

Telescope reflector;
Rotating filter;

Gas line;
Radioactive source;
Pneumoelectric valve;
Bias supply source;
Reference counter;
X-ruy section of the
working counter;
Monitor section of
the working counter;
Photoelectric sensor
for the position of
the filter;

Pilter drive;
Pneumoelectric valve
control circuit;
Tank with the gas
mixture;

Filler valve;

Input stage of the
reference counter
amplifier;

Variable high voltage
converter;

Input stage of the
monitor section am-
plifier;

81

l8.
19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28 .29.
30.

31.
32.
33 .34.
35.
36.

Input stage of the X-ray section
amplifier;

Amplifier for the photoelectric
sensor for the filter position;
Amplifier stage of the reference
counter;

Amplifier stage of the x-ray
section;

Pressure sensor;

high voltage regulator;
Anticoincidence and discriminac
tion circuit;

Pulse driver;

Drain valve;

Temperature sensor;

Blocking switchers;

Control unit for the filter
drive and blocking the inputs;
Regulated power supply converters;
Adder;

Count gate;

Adder;

Valve control commands.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the amplitude of the pulses exceeds the reference voltage, then the vol-
tags at the output of the high-voltage power supply converter of the counter
is reduced. An RC filter with a time constant of I 30 seconds is inserted
in the power supply circuit for the counters.

Under laboratory conditions. the voltage regulator permits maintaining the
amplitude of the counter pulses within limits of 1 102 when the gas sixture
pressure varies from 2.6 to 0.9 atm and when the temperature of the mass of
the block of sensors varies within limits of gpo' c. Interference from the
recording by the reference channel of the background of primary cosmic rays
reduces the upper limit of permissible pressures down to 1.6 atm.

The control circuit for the filter drive and blocking the inputs of the
working and monitor channels, 30, generates the voltage necessary for power-
ing the solenoid, by means of which the filter is moved, and also generates
signals for blocking the inputs of the count gates (by means of diode switches
28 and 29) for the time needed to shift the filter from one position to an-
other. Blocking the inputs prevents interference to the count gates during
filter changeover.

The circuit consists of a generator of second pulses, count gates, which
determine the open and closed position times of the filter, and an amplifier
stage. The sequential exposure time without the filter is =60 sec, and with
a quartz filter in front of the entrance window of the main counter. it is

a 10 sec.

Power supply regulator 31 contains an input voltage regulator, a push—pull
converter and an output voltage regulator. The power supply is designed for
working with an input voltage of 27 + 7 or - 6 volts and provides for the
following output voltage to power the telescope circuits: 6.3 volts 1 51

and 1.2 volts 1 52 to power the count circuits; 12 volts 1’12 to power the
amplifier stages; and 13.5 volts 152 to power the high-voltage converter.
Moreover, the power supply provides for galvanic decoupling of the primary
power source frmatheelectrical recording circuit.

The control circuit for pulsed pneumoelectric valve 12 is designed around

a one-shot multivibrator, which actuates when the power is turned on. It
feeds a pulsed voltage with an amplitude of 27 + 7 or - 6 volts for 0.1 sec
to the winding of the electric valve (resistance of 30 ohms).

The filter position indicator consists of light sources - two miniature
incandescent bulbs, silicon photodiodes and amplifier stages. The output
signals of the unit yield information on the position of the filter.

The free contacts of the valve are used to indicate the position of the
pneumoelectric valve.

82
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A pulse current amplifier with a gain of K - 5 . 10“ is used to amplify the
pulses of the proportional counter. The variation in the gain of the ampli-
fiera with a change in the ambient temperature from -60 to +60‘ C does not
exceed tﬁz. The internal amplifier noise is 3 . 10‘15 k.

The pulse sampling assembly consists of an amplitude gate and an snticoia-
cidence circuit. The pulse sampling provides for the recording by the count
circuit of the working channel of the pulses from the working section of the
counter, which correspond to the photons in spectral range of 0.l-0.6 Kev,

and do not coincide in time with the pulses of the monitor section of the
counter,

Amplitude gating of the pulses is accomplished by means of a circuit designed
around tunnel diodes. The anticoincidence circuit is designed around slaved
blocking oscillators.

Sensitivity changeover switch 21 is inserted in the amplifier channel of the
working section of the counter, where this switch permits reducing the gain
by 50 times. This switch is used in the laboratory alignment of the recording
channel. In the low sensitivity mode, the pulses from the Fe55 source

(S - 5.94 Kev) appear at the lower boundary of the recordable amplitudes of
the working channel.

The count circuits for the working and monitor channels contain four binary
flip-flops each and operate in a continuous mode. The state of the count
elements is converted to analog form by means of summing the currents of

each flip-flop, taking into account its weighting factor in the total infor-
mation. A voltage proportional to the total current of the flip-flop is

fed to the input of the telemetry system. This voltage changes in steps
following the arrival of a sequential pulse to the input of the count circuit.
With a fast interrogation telemetry system, this type of conversion makes it
possible to register the arrival of each pulse from the counter.

The power supply voltage regulator for the proportional counter: during the
time the equipment is in operation. the gas mixture in the tank is gradually
expended, and the pressure falls off, something which necessitates a corres-
ponding change in the power supply voltage to the counter. A regulator is
used for this purpose, which includes a reference source 6, the isotope
Fe55, proportional counter 7, pulse amplifier 15, high-voltage regulator
23, high voltage converter 16 and bias voltage converter 6. The voltage
controller operates on a tracking system principle, which maintains the con-
stancy of the pulse amplitude of the counter irradiated by the reference
source.

The primary and reference counters have a common gas feed from the tank, i.e.,
they operate at the same pressure. The refeeence counter is constantly ir-
radiated by the radioactive source. The amplified pulses of the reference
counter (a count rate of = 103 pulses/sec) are fed to the input of the high-
voltage regulator, where their amplitude is compared to the reference voltage.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1n conclueion. the euthore coneider it their pleaeant duty to expreee their
gratitude to v.1. Shurygin, V.A. 81min, v.1. 8virin, V.A. Drozdovekiy,

A.I. Parehin and V.A. Nazarov for eeaieting in the fabrication of the in-
etment.

BIBLIOGRAPRY

1. R. Giacconi. B. Kellogg, P. Gorenatein, H. Guraky, ll. Tenanhaun. ASTRO-
PHYS. LETTERS, as... 27 (1971).

2. P. Gorenetein, B. Harrie, ll. Guraky, R. Giacconi, R. Novick, P. Vanden Bout.
SCIENCE. m, 369 (1971).

3. D.J. Yentia. R. Novick, P. Vanden Bout. mars. J., l-ﬂ part I. 365
(1972).

’9. D.J. Yentia, J.R.P. Angel. D. Mitchell. R. Novick. P. Vanden Bout. New
Techniques in Space Aetronony (IAU MOS. 61), 1971, p. 165.

S. P. Gorenetein, A. De Caprio. R. Chase. 3. Harris, REV. SCI. 111813.. ﬁ.
539 (1973). '

6. A.P. Lukirekiy, Ye.P. Sevinov, 0.A. Yerehov, Yu.P. Shepelev. cum I
srsxrnosxouu. 1_6, 310 (1961.).

7. 0.A. Yerehov, LA. Brytov, A.P. Lukirekiy, OPTIKA I SPEK‘I'ROSKOPIYA, 2_2.
127 (1967).

8. 1.1.. Beygean, L.A. Vaynehteyn, Yu.P. Voynov. VJ. Shevel'ko, TEDDY PM.
[PROCEEDHGS OF THE INSTITUTB OF PHYSICS 0? m3 USSR ACADEMY 0? 80131638] ,
7_7_, 1a (1974).

9. R. Ciacconi, ".1’. Reidy. 0.8. Vaiena, L.P. Vanapeybroeck, TJ’. Zehnpfennig.
SPACE scr. ms., 2. 3 (1969).

10. A.P. Lukirekiy, LA. Brytov, 0.A. Yerehov, 12V.“ 8883 [PKOCBEDINGS OF
THE USSR ACADEHY 0P scmacas]. PHYSICS SERIES, 17, 646, (1963).

Copyright: Izdatel'etvo "Neuka." 197d

8225
030: 1870

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PﬂYSICS

INFLUENCB OF TURBULENT ATHDSPBBBB 0N HAVE BEAM FIELD FLUCTUATIONS
Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLBKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 5 No II I978 pp 2342-2367

[Article by 6. Ya. Patrushev: "Have Beam Field Fluctuations Upon Reflec-
tion in Turbulent Atmosphere")

[Text] An approximation of the smooth perturbation
method has been employed to derive second moment fluc-
tuations of a wave been field reflected in a turbulent
atmosphere. It is shown that the effect of strengthen-
ing the amplitude level of the fluctuations depends on
the diffraction size of the beam, whereas for phased
fluctuations there is no such dependence. The disper-
sion and spatial correlation of amplitude and phased
fluctuations are examined.

In connection with the development of opticel locating end methods for
long-range sounding of the atnosphere's parameters particular interest is
being paid to the field characteristics of a reflected wave beam. Thus.
in the works [1-3] the influence of a turbulent atmosphere on the median
value of a reflected signal is investigated. Intensity fluctuations under
various sized irradietors and reflectors are examined in [3-6].

The spatial correlation and time spectrum of the fluctuations' amplitude
level of unrestricted flat and spherical waves are examined in [6-8] by a
technique equivalent to the smooth perturbation method (HPVW. In the work
[9.10] with the aid of HPV an eapression is derived for the second moments
of a restricted wave beam field in the form of a three-stage integral and
the effect of stren:thening the dispersion of the fluctuations' amplitude
level and phase for flat end spherica waves in the case of a Karmanov spec-
trum for the fluctuations in the refractive index is investigated.

In this work, for week fluctuations we derive an integral concept convenient
for digital analysis for the spatial characteristics of a reflected Gaussian
wave beam field.

85

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
'de shall define an Gaussian the distribution of a couple: aeplitude for a
field in a plane vith an outeide aperture (no):

u (p)—exp(-v'/2a'). ( I)

where llaz-l/azdk/Pu a. is the effective radiue of the bean; to ie the
curavature radius of the phased zone in the center of the aperture; k-2nl).
is the wave nuher in free space; p--|p|-(y’+zz)‘/z is the nodulua of the

rsdius-vector in the plane, perpendiculer to the direction of the distri-
bution 0!. ‘

He shall place a reflecting plane at a distance and. froe an emitter. then
euch a route according to the diatrihution conditions will be equivalent to
a'douhled (with a length 2!.) straight line on which the fluctuation index
n(x. 9) satisfies the condition

n(x. p)-n(2L—¢, r). (2)

The expression for a couple: phase it, of the bean field having paesed through
a turbulent atneapheric layer with e thicknesn of 2L, and taking into account
the condition (2). say be written in the forts [|l.l2]

mu, 9) - id: Tummy” nun?” (21.. ﬁlm“. 1).

H(2L,1)-ikexp[—i ﬂgﬂx']. 7(0-1'1'51‘5’ﬁy. <3)

;(¥)-?(2l--X).D(2L)-—::—+l “if. -a+!b.

dn(K. x) in the spectral fluctuation amplitude of the refractive index
"(x' ')-Se‘”dn(“. X).

In the future for field fluctuationa of the refractive index along the direc-
tion of propagation we shall use the Herhovskiy approxination which ia cue-

tonary in theee problem. Then for apectral refractive index anplitudee
dn(K. at) one nay note [l3]

(mx.x)dn&u'.x'))-M(u+u')a(»—x')o.(o.x)dxdu'w. (a)

where cum. 3:) is a three-stage spectral fluctuation plane. Using the ex-
pressions (3) and (6) we derive the following formulae for correlative en-
plitude fluctuation levels 33031: pg), (x-Rem) end phases B.(p;, pg). (e-
.Ml):

 

81.491: 90-354910 mH-FMP» 9s).
II. .
Draw» Pa) 72“. Re { air! ”on (“)Us(XQ)l”r=h 10(0) H'ldx, (5)

[Formula 5 continued on next page]

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L c .
Br. 0 (9;. 0.) - 2199 Re f 4:: x0. (x) I a; 9-: «mm Man—70:] x

XII s (“OJ-Ho (”QM-0“ °‘" am ““‘l‘ﬁ” ll. (X91) + 1. (“NB 4".
Q'-v‘(9§_+93-—2m~ s). P'y'oi-i-r’W-zi’w'm-gg Qf=pift03§‘*—
- 4w‘vrm1 Pu-r'ofﬁ'Pi-hrom. Qi-pzr“+93v‘—2'n°ox-o..
P3-oﬁ'+v’o’r—27Fprm-

hers ‘1‘,“on pg) is the spatisl function correlation for fluctustions in
the level of the snplitude end phese of the field slong the direct route
of the line 21. which was derived in [12]; J.(z) is the zero-order Bessel
function of the first generetion. It my be shown that the expression (5)
egress with the results of the works [7,8].

In this manner, on s route with e reflection in the HPV approximation the
secondsry nonsnts of a complex phsse in e wsvs been field are represented
in the forts of the sun of two components, one of which corresponds to the
direct route, end the other is the result of a nutual correlation of the
weve fluctuetions in direct and reciprocal distributions through the very
same discontinuities n(x, p).

Re shell perforn further cslculetions for the turbulence spectrum on“).
which corresponds to the Kolnogorov-Obukhov Law with consideration given
to the inner scsle 1. [II]:

o, (x) ac?“- ' "’e"""‘3- . .4 - 0,033, x.l. - 5.92. (5)

where cg is the structural cheracteristic of the refractive index fluctu-
etions.

Substituting the spectru- (6) in the fornuls (5) and performing the inte-
gration of x. we derive

'I
1'1x «1.. 9.)-5x(m.e.)+7.0680§p(2£) Re {A?"[1F1(--:-. 1:

--—.)+1-+.( 41H 14)

5 ’
+1Fa(-T. lz—Ef-Hldg,
""'+';"7("")+;‘11 Cn-S'+-ﬁ-l?(l-x)-'§'x],

9- "
a" m

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

u:
Qua-Qua (f) a pm- PM (5.?)m' 0:.(2L)- 0.30863m(2L)"".
1P;(u.8.z) is the confluent hypergeoaetric function [lb].

For an unrestricted flat wave in the expression (7) one any perforn an
integration along the route of propagation (lo-0):

8x.(p)-3r.(n)+ae«/2)MI(5IIlune-616. I; arm‘Hm/nmpam—sls. 2;

2w. IPr-Pc |(kI2L)"’-pl2. og-Bz-thm). ‘8’

In the case of a spherical wave it is well to perforn an integration only
for the case of 91-93-0. which gives the following value for dispersion:

0;”(0)-B,(0. o)-o.ao;,(2L).
The dependence of dispersion on the amplitude fluctuation levels o;(0)-

-Bx(0.0) along the axis of e collinated been (b-O) on the diffractive size
of the emitting aperture is presented in figure I. It is apparent that

the general characteristic of fluctuation intensity dependence for a reflec-
ted signsl is analogous to the case for direct propagation. He note that
the maxi-um increase in dispersion in comparison with the normal route is
observed for large values of the wave parameter a. and the least for the
case of a flat wave. The variation for the internal turbulence scale under
conditions s’« I do not change this principle and only slightly flatten it.

The dependence of dispersion intensity fluctuations on the distance from
the axis of the collilated been are presented in figure 2. Here along the
abscissa the distance which has been normalized to the size of Fresnel's
zone is plotted fro. the observation point to the axis of the bean
6-p(k/2L)'/2 . Pro. the results presented it is apparent that the lost

 

Figure 1. Dependence of Dispersion on Amplitude Level
Fluctuations a§(O)/a2 (2L) on the Axis of a
Collinated Point (b-O on the Wave Parameter
a for a Straight Line (1.2) and a Line with
Reflection (3.4) when 33,-0.237ono" (1.3) and
Os] (2")

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm son orncm. use can:

rapid indftase in dispersion by distance from the beam axis occurs in the
case of narrow collimated beams (a-l). when decreasing or increasing the
wave parameter from this value a smooth leveling of the fluctuations occurs.
however. in the case of the Praunhofer diffraction region (a» I) the depen-
dence characteristic. beginning with en‘s, changes to the opposite. The
greatest reduction in dispersion fluctuations occurs in the extreme case of
a spherical wave when, as it is possible to show, be:l the dispersion de-
creases according to the quadratic lav:

oi.=o.8cr’u(2L)u—‘5*).

 

I 41 l9 15 RI it]

Figure 2. Normalized Dis ereion of Amplitude Level
Fluctuations a (p)/ai(0) for a Direct Line
(I-3) and Lines with a Reflection (4-8)
when a-I (1.1.), 10 (2,5), 0.1 (3,6), 10'
7, sg-o.237ouo-’) and l (8, 1..-|.s m)

From the expression (5) it is not difficult to see that the relative con-
tribution of spatial frequencies in the spectrum of refractive index fluc-
tuations to the magnitude of amplitude and phase level fluctuations depends
significantly on the position of the observation point relative to the

beam axis. Thus, for example, when «~90 is the integrand in the expres-
sion for o§(p)-B:(p. p) it is proportional to ¢n(n)x for the case of a
flat. spherical wave and a restricted point, when 9-0. When removing the
beam from the axis it becomes proportional to On(K)K’. In connection with
this we also perform calculations with the spectrum in the form [13]

.. i 2 -
O.(x)-AC:x-""[I _.¢ “hole ”3"?“ “0'2". (9)
where L0 is the so called external turbulence scale.
This very expression is used in the calculation B,(p.. 02), when the most

significant contribution is made by the large scale field fluctuations n(x,p).
Selection of the spectrum (9) was dictated by the convenience of performing

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corresponding calculations insofar as they are derived in this expression
totally analogous to their own structural formulas (5). In addition, the
results of the calculation for the displacements of the beam's center of
gravity from the spectrun of atmospheric turbulence (9) agrees satisfac-
torily with the experiment [l6].

when 9-0 the results of the calculation, as one would expect. agree with
the data presented in figure I. In connection with this we note that the
evaluations presented in [9] for the coefficient for strengthening the
amplitude level fluctuations for the refractive index fluctuations of a
Karmanov spectrum and for the Freunhofer diffraction region relative to the
internal turbulence scale under the condition (KiL/h%« I have values which
do not agree with our results.

As can be seen from the results of the calculation, in the case of narrow
collimated beams (curve 6 in figure 2) the dispersion growth in the hean's
cross section is significantly retarded in comparison with the case which
corresponds to the spectrum (6).

The results of the calculation for the coefficient of amplitude level cor-
relation are:

bxiﬂro pd-BXOB Ps)/¢x(P|)°x(Ps).

when "the center of gravity" for the observation points is located in the
center of the beam is presented in figure 3. As can be seen from these
data. the general characteristic for dependence of the correlation coef-
ficient on the diffraction size of the emitting aperture remains the same
as on a straight line [IS]. For narrow collinated beams (a-l) this result
agrees with the calculation presented in [5].

In the case of phased fluctuation from the expression (5) and (9) following
integration of r and x for flat and spherical waves one may derive the

value -
03(0. 0)-8,(0.0)-4.35€jk‘x;"’o2L.

which exceeds by a factor of two the corresponding value for a straight
line. As the digital calculation have shown, this result holds true also
for a restricted point. The dispersion o:(p) for a spherical wave depends
on the position of the observation point relative to the source, analogous
to the case of amplitude fluctuations. whereupon (MUVz are changed to
the value L0.

The coefficient graphs for the spatial correlation b.(p) a:e presented in
figure 4. As can be seen from these data. in the case of a spherical wave
with a reflection (3) there occurs an increase in the correlation of the
fluctuations conpared to the direct line [9.I0]. whereas for a'flat wave
these values agree. For a reflected been (a-l) the calcutation can be wade
successfully only to the values Koo, which correspond to the two diffractive
bean sizes. where the correlation coefficient is close to unity (0.99).

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100020030-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Correlation Coefficient for Amplitude Level
Fluctuation h (a) when M. s.-o. 237-: :0".
(1-10. (1H2) 0a (3.6) and I (5. 6) for a Straight
Line (1.3. 5) and Linea with a Reflection (2.6. 6)

Thna. the atatiatical cherecteriatica of the alplitude level and field
phaae of the aianal which ie reflected hack free the flat nirror heve the
very aane dependency characteriatic on the diffraction aize of the eaitting
aperture and the poaition of the receivera relative to the heel’a exia
which ia on a atraiaht line. However. in a III-her of caaea there ia e
noticeable quantitative and even quelitative difference which it ia necea-
aery to take into acccunt in correapondin; experieenta.

so»),

Figure 6. Phaae Correlation Coefficient
h.(p) for a Flat (I) and
Spherical (2.3. lg-o) wave.
For a Direct Line 0.2) end
Linea with Reflection (1,3)

    

a w w u M
in conclueion we note that the derived reaulta are dependent on the ereae
of ao-called week inteneity fluctuetiona. Apparently for regiona of atrong
fluctuations concrete reaulta nay be derived on the haaia of a theory which
ia developed in [H.181

The author expreaaea hie thanka to s. s. Ioval' for hie help in perforning
the calculationa.

9].

WI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

‘0

5.

6O

7.
a.
9.

'0.

I2.
l3.

l6.

I5.

'6.

POI! OPTICIAI. USE ONLY

IIILIOCMY

Iclen'kly. II. 6.. and Hironov. V. 1.. KVAI‘NVAYA mm. Ilo 5 (II).
p 36. I972

Vinogradov. A. 6.; Krovteov. Yu. A.; and l'atarekiy. V. l. IMSTIVA
VUZOV. 8n. MDIOPIZIXA. Vol I6. p I066. I973

Vinogradov. A. 6.. and Rravteov. m. A. "Sixth All-Union Sy-poeiun on
Diffraction and Van Propagation. SI-ery Text- of we Iaporte.”
Moscow - Yerevan. Vol I. I973. p 296

Mlnn'kly. II. 8.. and Hironov. V. L. “MAYA mm. Vol I.
I976. p 2253

Akunov. V. 9.; Bonakh. V. A.; and IIironov. V. L. lawman num-
IIKA. Vol 3. I976. P 2266

Snith. 3.; Price. 1.; Skipka. t.; and limiter. 1'. on. soc. “I”
Vol 62. p "83. I972

Snith. J. on. soc. “33.. Vol 63. p l095. I973
Suith. J.. and Price. 1‘. am. OPHCS. Vol l6. p "6]. I973

Lukin. V. P. "St-nry font. of the loportn fro- the let All-Union
Conference on Amnpbcric Optics.” Tout. I976. Part I. p I29

Lukin. V. P. In the collection ”Ila-prontraneniye optichenkikh voln
v neodnorodnykh nredakh.” [Propagation of Optical Haven in a lon-
uniforn Atnoepbere]. edited by 8. S. Ithnelcvtwva. Tout. I976. p I37

Tatar-kiy. V. l. ”lanprontraneniya voln v turbulentnoy atnoefere."
[wave Propagation in Turbulent Atnoephcre]. Honcov. Vania. I967

Inhinaru. A. M010 semen, Vol 6. lo 6. p 295. I969

‘ratarekiy. V. 1.. editor "mornoye izluchcniyc v turbulentnoy amon-
fen." [Later billion in turbulent Atnonphero). IIoecov. Vania. I976

Boytun. 6.. and ardcyn. A. "Vyuhiyc tranetacndontnyye (unkteii."
[Signer transcendental Punctionn). Hoecov. luau. Vol I. I965

Hironov. V. I... and Patrunhev. 6. Va. lZVBS‘l'IYA VIIZOV. SIR. unto-
PIZIKA, Vol I5. p 865. I972

Mironov. V. I... and )Ionov. V. V. IZVBS‘I'IYA VIIZOV. sn. mmuzm.
Vol l7. p 267. I976

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

17. Prokhorov. A. 11.; 3min. P. V.; Cocholuhvui. K. 8.; and Shiuhov.
V. I. m. Vol lilo. p “5. l9“

l8. Prokhorov, A. 11.; Rankin. P. V.; cocholuhvui. K. 8.; and Shiuhov.
V. I. noc. 1m. Vol 63. p 790. I975

oomxcar: Izatel'uvo “sour-kayo radio". ‘Xuntouya clcktronilu".
I978

9082
650: 8 “6/0750

93
POI OFFICIAL USE OIL?
m OWICIAI. US! OIL?

""5105 unc 621.378. 5

OUTPUT DISK AMPLIFIER STAGES
lbscou ““10““ 31mm in Russian Vol 5 No 11. 1978 pp 2369-2375

[Kruclo by v. n. Aloksoyev. A A. m. Ye. c. runway. n. n. Sedov.
A. I). Stariinov. A. D. Tsvotlmy

[fort] mo results are presented of studies into the energy character.
istics of disk alplifiers with 119“. disasters of 90 and 120 In. An
inverse population distribution has been studied in the cross section

of the disk uplifiers and over the disk thickness. Dependencies have
been investigated of the disk aaplifior gain on the pup onsrg. A
cosparieon has been and. of the gain efficiencies of silicate glass

6181 and pimsphate glass 61.821. A greater influence of superluainosoence
and parasitic oscillation on the stored energy value has been found
experimentally at hiyx pulp energy values for phosphate glass. than

in the case of silicate glass. Results are presented of studies of the

influence of edges and sizes of the active ole-onto on the disk uplifier
stage efficiency.

me best approach in building powerful lasers to superheat pleases
appears to be one with a ainieue nulber of holes. resulting in larger
laser output aper s. Either disk saplifiers 5-57 or solid state
laser aspiifiers .27 can be used as output stages in such devices. m.
fox-aes- have sole advantages over the latter in the efficiency of me
pup system Inst is sore. a disk aaplifier, in contrast to solid

state laser uplifiers. is inseneitive to thenooptic distortion.
per-its the reception of a unifore distribution of stored energy at
aperture. and possesses h? self-focusing thresholds, than a
continuous. active aedia 87. Noteworthy. too. is the fact that the
me of absorbent coatings on the disk edges enables the suppression of
parasitic oscillation and s lueinoecence in disk asplifisrs even with
very large nun apertms 9]. lhat is note, the efficiency of disk
alplifiea: pup systees can shoot be bandit up to the pulp efficiency
of rod aaplifiers. In viov of those facts. disk saplifiea: stages appear
lost pro-icing for laser indwed thenonucloar fusion.

96

m OFFICIAL 053 OIL!
FOR OPPXCIAI. US! ONLY

‘lhe results of our studies of 120 an dianeter di k lifiere. nsde of
silicate-'heodyniun glass 6151 are presented in 5 . This anplifi
punp syé'tlen was selected in accordance with the data presented in [g].
which showed that uhen the flash lanp lies transverse relative to the
anplifier axis and extra planar reflectors are used. a high unifor-
punp occurs at anplifier aperture. and the punp systen achieves greater
efficiency than in designs in ﬁnish the flash lanp is tiditly wound
around the disk lengthwise and in spirals. as is done in a nunber of
foreign laboratories.

1he present sork suns-rises the results of studies into the energy
characteristics of inpreved 90 and 120 n disaster disk anplifiers nade
of phosphate neodymiu- glsss GISZi. mese disk anplifiers are used as
output stages for anplifying a 6-stage laced-1]]. The neodyniun glass
was chosen for the disk uplifiers because the thernooptic constants of
this glass are extremly snall. thereby ensuring a high directivity of
laser radiation [13]. Also. this glass has an appreciably larger cross
section for stinulatod transitions. than. for ennple. 61.81 glass.

Features of the Amplifier Pup Systen

The dick anplifiers. examined here. have in «some preserved th
features of the 120 n dianeter anplifiers described earlier [5%

They are slide of four nodules (two active elenents—disks—nounted in
each). Ihe disks. as before. are configured as eight-sided plates. 23 n
thick. and oriented at Brewster's angle in a zigzag across the axis of
the nodule. ‘lhe puap is acoonpliehed by xenon flash lanps. nounted
perpendicular to the optic axis of the nodule on the outside surface of
the disks. 1he flash lanps are set in silver-plated. senitubular glass

reflectors. counter reﬂectors are set on the top and botton inner
surfaces of the nodule.

Sixteen flash leaps are set in each anplifier nodule. 120 In in diantor.
Here the flash leaps. uhen e-ployed. can inpart to the eight-disk sapli-
fier 200 U of electrical energy. stored in the capacitors. Mlve
sinilarlanpsuithashorterdischargegspareused topma90nn
dianeter nodule. ‘lhe narinun pulping energy of an anplifier. consisting
of four nodules. is 100 In]. ﬁle pulse duration of a circuit discharge
reaches 1650 knell at. a 0.5 level off the peak value.

he glass eleaents in the disk snplifier have been nounted to shut off

the ultraviolet conponent of the punp radiation. 1he need to shield
the disk chuber cavity fren ultraviolet radiation is relathd to the

very intensive absorption by atnospheric omen of vacuun ultraviolet

95

IO! omcm. 088 OIILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radiation 53. 197. which partially escapes through the quartz tubing
oi‘ the flash lasp. heating the air as a res t and possibly causing
optical distortions in the "puma been 157.

Methodology. Experinental Results and Analysis

1. Stored energy distribution in the disk asplitier aperture and over
disk thickness. A photographic nethod was used to detanine the density
distribution of stored energy (inverse population distribution) along the
uplifier aperture. 1he distribution was recorded on a 1.0510 nicronetu'
wave at ssall disk anplitier pulp levels. ‘lhe photographs were taken

in linearly polarized light. In this way pulp radiation. reflected iron
the workilc surface of the disks. was eliainatsd. ‘lhis had to be done.

otherwise substantial distortions would have been injected in the true
distribution.

 

4 -2 o 1.51 -6 -: 0 I.”

Figure 1. Stored energy density distribution along 120 an
dis-etu- asplitisr aperture. (1) relative unit

The nain results of neasuring the stored energy density distribution 3;
over a 120 an disaster anplifier aperture are shown in Fig. i. no
commnding‘distributions along the X and Y axes. plotted on the
semantic representation of the disk anplifier. are presented here. 1n.
distributions in other directions. through the center of the alplifiar
aperture. are not presented. but are close to those in Fig. i. Appar-
ently. disk a-plifiers with a large disaster assure highly unifor-
stored energy density distributions at aperture. ‘lhe steep slopes at

the edges of the aperture sake up in all :5 .20 percent of the distribu-
tion.

Siailar results were also obtained for 90 a disaster disk asplitiers.

Figure 2 shows the results of assuming the density distribution of
stored energy over disk thickneu. ‘lhese results were obtained by a
photoelectric eetiwd. The distributions were obtained in the direction

96
FOR OHICIAI. USE OIL!
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the ainor axis of the disk for a section close to its center. In so
far as the size of stored energy in the disk's center for the 61321 glue
mounts to spproxinately 50 percent of the energy stored near its

working surfaces (30 percent pulp energy in the abso tion bands of the
glue puses through the disks aithout being absorbed . one should expect
an increase in stored energy with an increase in concentration of
activators in the glass or in disk thickness. 1he stored energy density
distributions over the disk thickness appear Justifisble for the central
part. mere distribtuions lust becone somewhat uy-etrical the iurthsr
resoved iron disk center. 1m: say be associated with sons illumination
irregularity of the disk surfaces along the naJor axis. and also with a
change in the scan angle of incidence of pulp radiation on the various
sections of the working surfaces of the disks. In “at“ i the broken
line shows the inverse population distribution across the uplifier

when the flash lanps. located on one side of the disk. are operatiru.

t,.e~d(1)

u
u ‘7
45

‘31! 4 -O I 0 [’m

Figure 2. Stored energy density distribution over disk
thickness for 01.81 glue (1) and 61.521 glass (2). (3) rel. unit

2. Disk amplifier gain coefficients and controlling parasitic oscilla-
tions. neasm-ing disk ssplifier gain was acco-plishsd with the aid of
a angle-node nonopulse laser. nude of phosphate needy-it. glass 61321.
no anplified pulses lasted about 20 nanoseconds: the been‘s dis-agar
at disk input was 5 In: the energy density did not exceed 50 nJ/cs
(corresponding to the uplification of a weak signal). has uplified
bean was esitted near the optic axis of the disk uplifiers.

Ihe results of summing the disk alplifier gain for s 120 as dis-etu-
are presented in Figure 3. lbs characteristic shape of cgrve 1 (a
plateau. beginning with a specific pump energy of 35 J/ca ). obtained
for the disks with polished edges. definitely indicates the generation
of parasitic oscillation. ‘lhe course of .curve 2. correspondilg to
disks with a coating that absorbs 1.06 sicroneter wavelength light.
graphically denoustrates the effectiveness of the coating. At naxinun
pulp energy the increase in gain. u Figure 3 shows. reached 37 percent.
However. here also superlulinescence plays a noticeable role, causing

97
'0! OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL 038 ONLY

losses in the inverse population distribution. mis can be seen in
curves 2 and 3. me last seasmsent was obtained with Zpartial screen-
ing of the disks by shutters. sinilar to those used in 5

Mn“

 
  

 

”tram—5755

Figure 3. Gain coefficient K as a function of pulp 0M1?
density for 120 an diameter (1-3) and 90 .- dianeter u.5)
disk alp fiers. 1.u (B)—polished edge disks; 2.1: (u)—
ooated edgeu 3.5—shuttered surfaces.

Figure 3 also shows the gain rescued in 90 a disaster disk anplifiers.
Uith the polished edge disks here. in contrast to the previous case. no
plateau appeared in the experinental curve. indicating an abseme of
parasitic oscillation. I‘m-thea- studies showed that the application of
an absorbent coating on the disk edges has no effect: the experisental
points fell on the previous curve. me gain coefficient achieved here
was less than the maxi-u- gaJ.n in the 120 II disaster disk aaplifiers
and insignificantly higher than the gain. at which the parasitic
oscillation threshold was reached. 1n. fact that the overall disensions
of the large and snall disks. differ by apprexisately a factor of 1.3.
explains the absence of parasitic oscillation in the 90 as dianetsr disk
asplifiers. In truth. for parasitic oscillation to appear in the disk
alplifier the gain aust be 1.3-fold greater than the threshold gain
coefficient of the larger amplifier. which does not occur.

1he lower gain values in the 90 III disk uplifiea: in colparison with
the larger a-plifier. obviously. cannot be associated with the losses
due to superluninescence. As a cospariaon of curves 15 and 5' of Figure 3

shows. superlminemnce reduces very little the level of inversion for
call disk asplifiers.

’In this case shutters with the smallest practical sise were used: 15.5:
15.5 cs. Further reduction in outlet size would cause a reduction in

pulp at aperture center—at point of the asplified boss's transit.

 

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is asoused that tho lower efficiency of the 90 u disaster uplifier
is caused by the lower efficiency of its flash leaps due to the relatively
lsrger inert latter in those leaps 56. 127. It should be noted um

the bendim of curve 3 (Fig. 3). perhaps. is also explained. alom with
the losses due to superlminescence. by the drop in efficiency of the
flash leaps with an increase in charge. It was observed that the lower
efficiency of the sasller leaps can be associated with relatively greater
cross-sectional losses of charge esission for these leaps, so long as
these losses are proportional to the ratio of the cross-sectional areas
of the discharge colusn to its surface area.

W" rum“ (3)
M0 M 1

so 2 4’ 2
4 ﬂ 4:
an a!

0 010MW(3) ” WINZW'M (3)
'

Figure 4. Gain coefficient [(a) and stored energy density 35(b)
as functions of pimp energy density a, for 61.51 (1) and «521(2)
glass. (3) J/cn3

3. Conparison of the gain efficiency of phosphate and silicate neo-
dyaiun glass. For 6181 glass the cross sect n of stisulated transi-
tions equals 1.8x10'ao on. for GISZi—ZJXIO' cs [$7. As Figure b
shows. a large gain is achieved with 61821 glass. while with 6181 there
is a noticeably large stored energy density. 'lhis result is explained
by the fact that phosphate 61821 glass has a shorter upper laser life
span than (“81 glass. lbreover. the former glass experiences greater
losses becagse of superluainescence. so long as the losses are propor-
tional too . 'lhis result clearly indicates that with large energy
densities of the input signal. GISi glass must be sore advag sous
energy wise. than (ll-$21. Using the results. presenéed in ' 1 . one
can conclude that for a signal of approxisately 10' seconds dm-ation.
equalization of gains will occur with an input signal of about 0.5 J/ca3.
For subnamsecond signals gain equalization will occur. obviously. at
sonewhat sealler input energy densities. All the sane. because of
colpsrstively low thresholds of seen-scale self-focusing in the

99
PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0- glass (3-5 hectouatts/on2 629]. i.e.. for ample. 1.5-2.5
J/cn with a pulse duration of 5x10" see). such a gain node is hardly
suitable for use. ‘lhis leads one to conlude that the use of 61-821 glass
in certain dial: uplifiara is sore advantageous energy wise than the
use of 61.81 glass.

It should be noted that shortening the length of the punp signal ﬂ, for
disk asplifiers node or 61821 glass (to ‘t-‘l'p. where 1' is the upper laser
life span) nust result in some increase in the stored energy level.

1;. Subnanosecond signal snplii’ication. Disk anplifiers were also tested
for asplitication of a eubnmseoond signal in a device consisting of
a drivirg oscillator and several uplification stages. The (11'1le
oscillator was a seli‘synctu'onised laser nade of 61.822 glass and an
internally resonating Fahry-Pemot. interfere-eta. A Pockel's cell at
oscillator output isolated a single pulse of «41.6 ns duration 3 the
light bean. ‘nne pulse was asplified in a divergiru been with 10' red
absorption. then colliaated and sent to the disk anplifier input. me
incident bean had a uniforn energy distribution. with a 10 an di tar.
Moreover. the scan energy density in the bean was about ~0.6 J on .
The results of these neasmenents are shown in Figure 5. Here. for
coaparison sake. are shown the gain curves for a weak signal. As the
data shows. oonputed with an allowance for the stntchiw of the

luminescence lines of the neodyniun glass. the corresponding curves
agree quite well with each other.

  

N U
[r J/M’
Figure 5. Gain )1 (ratio of output energy to input energy) as

a function of pulp energy density in disk uplifiers of 120 III
(1.2) and 90 n (3.13) diameter torsg weak sisal (1.3) and for

input. density or a ~o.6 J/caz signal (2.1.) of «6:10-10 sec
duration.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusion

'lhe disk uplifiers examined here perform as suitable efficiency pusp
systens. 'me table presents for cospurison the experisental data
obtained; on the efficiency (Ea/lp) of the pup systess of the three
types '6? saplifiers. 'me results pJesented here are not the ultisste
energy characteristics of disk ssplifiore. Definite reserves for
increased disk seplifier efficiency lie in the choice of optinun
concenh‘sticn of activators in the glass. in the development of nore
efficient flesh naps (especially for 90 en dineter disk amplifiers).
in isproved absorbent edge costings. in increasing the conversion ratio
for converting electric energy. stored in the capacitor battery, into
light energy. i.e.. the choice of optima pulse tors and durstion of
discharge. Further constructive isprovesents of the entire disk sapli-
fier pulp systen are also fessible.

In conclusion the authors thank V. V. Lyuninov. Ye. G. Bordschev. and

c. P. lostoletov for their useful consents end criticises of this article.
and L. I. Hironenko and V. A. Teslenho for help in processing the
nessurseents.

 
   
  

' 6 m...
( he?“ (roéloou)

(7) ﬁne-emu! ne- JII‘C 241-2 25 Bumps-0.2346“- Ll:

new 40x 0 - |.6x an spas 0.42. ml-
xm ss‘ 0.28
(8 was no... men as T93” '3'". I.“

‘Wssyme ata—uewnm as... My.
(10 these muse-nos mere-,2” I: esp-ruse“ us s m
Ion-um. wan-eun- u- may men

 

In”"1. mung: type 9. In center—0.23. nesr edge .
2. Type of less 0.1m, seen over aperture 0.28
3. . J/cs 10. Pulp is scccsplished by 36
u. . J/cs3 flesh mp: uw 250 n
5. sl/sp. X discharge gap. Stored energy
6. Rod distribution in the cross sec-
7. Solid state tion use deternined by photo-
8. Disk mphic techniques and low

level laser been recorder.

101

ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6'

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

1“.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIMRAPHY

Solution. J. ".3 Elect. J. In: Holarlchm. J. Pu ‘I‘renholle. J. B.
rm J. 6-9. 1973. p 922.

bee. P. Nu Tanner. R. L. I- J. 3-10. 197“. p 267.
Santos. J.a Fupmn. 8.: 30059. J.: APPL. OPTICS. Vol 13. 19716. p 2081.

Yoshidn. Kn Sum. T.; Suzuki. K.| Yunnan. Tu Yunnan. C.
TECHNO!" REP. OSAKA UNIV.. Vol 2“. 19716. p 83.

Alekaeyov. V. 1!.3 lhk. A. A.: Plvinaldy. Yo. G.) Sedov. B. ".3
Stu-1km. A. Du Tsvotkov. A. D. KVANIOVAYA mun, Vol 3.
1916. p 226.

K311311811. Yu. A.; u. A. An Stepanov. A. 1. £117. Vol 38. 1968.
p 11 .

Anan'yev. Yu. A.; Sinuwnov. V. 8.. Chernov. V. ".3 Summon
o. A. xvmovm. mum. n. c. Baaov. editor. No 3 (15).
1W3! p 1150

Bax-anon. I. 3.; Bykovokiy. N. You Zel'dovich. B. Ya.; Scratchy.
Yu. V. KVAM'OVAYA mum, Vol 1. 19?“. p 2160.

Ouch. S. APP!» OPTICS. Vol 15. 1976. p 11553.

Vakhmnin. x. 9.. loniov. v. 1.. at am. omm-mmcmun
mmm’r’. 'b 6' IWSO p 730

Alemm. V. "0’ BW. V0 A03 Gluﬂllh' V. A.) @mkhov. A. A.
at am. 13218! non. vn vsasoruz. mm. m mommy I
mummy omits [Bum Reports. vn All-Union Contm on
009371213“ 32:: llon-nnou- Opucg]. Vol 2. mun. Netsniyoroba.

1 . p 2 .

M. A. A0: mt'un' V. ‘no' we. I" "0. 0t 0.1.18. CHIN-m-
CHBKAIA PROHYSWNOST‘. No 9. 1971. p 1&2.

"am“. K0: In, E. Co Yo: Zonbff. H. J. cm. Hits" V01 21'

Elton. R. C. J. "1121.. ENERGY 0.. Vol 6. 1960. p “01.

102

FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY
15.

16.

1?.

18.

19.
20.

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Linton, G. J.; Chan. H. 11.: Glue, J. An Lune. c. 3.: 301m. I“.
APPL. apnea. V01 1”. 1975. p 305?-

Vlaeov, Yu. ".3 Ikonnikov. V. P.; RosanoV, A. P.) Starikov. B. V.
SVEI‘OWKIKA. No 12. 1970. P 23.

Baeov. In. 6.; lhhmw. V. N.) Nation, 6. 1.3 Tokueva. A. L:
Uaova. V. H. RADIOWIKA I WM“. Vol 19. 1971;. p 1702.

Cuba, 8. 8.; Babe, 0. B. TBIBY NIL. XI KDNF. mmnm SPETSI-
ALIS'IOV. hum. GOI. 1W6. P 920

Ibido , p 93.

”ﬂotillhin. A. No; htvoyoup Y“. ‘0’ 01min. 8. Va “WVAYA
WWI“. V01 3. 1976. p 1585.

COPYRIGHT: Imul'atvo “Sowtslmyo radio”. “Kvnntovayn oloktmnilm".

1978

8506

080:

81164] 07 26

103

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIBRTIS'I'S AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIOIS

LIST OF AUTHORS FROM THE JOURNAL 'nmrn'

Kiev KIWIKA in Russian lo 5, Sap/Oct 1978, unnumbered insert at front of
Journal

[List of authors and their affiliations; titles of their articles supplied]
[Text] Authors in this Issue

Akinov, Aleksandr Petrovich. Junior Scientific Staff Member, Institute of
Cybernetics, Ukrainian SSR Acadew of Sciences, Kiev. "On One Model of Two-
Level Systens for Inforaation Processing vith Interrupt."

Babiy. Aleksandr likolayevich. Candidate of Technical Sciences, Junior Sci-
entific Staff Member, Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian SSR Academy of
Sciences, Kiev. "An Algorithm for Finding the Value of the Global. htresun
of a Function of Several Variables with a Specified Accuracy."

Belitskiy, Robert Izrailevich. Engineer. Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian
SSR Acadew of Sciences. Kiev. "Optimum Coding of Microcannnds in the Re-
presentation of Hicrooperations by Elementary ConJunctions."

Bordunov, Nikolay Nikolayevich. Senior Mineer, Institute of Cybernetics,
Ukrainian SSR Acadenw of Sciences, Kiev. "0n Necessary Optimality Conditions
in the Stochastic aaooth-Convex Problem of Optiml Control vith Discrete Tina."

Bublik, Vladimir Vasil'yevich. Junior Scientific Staff Member, Institute of
Cybernetics. Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences, Kiev. "Interactive Data Struc-
tures Processing."

Vasil'yev, Yuriy Porfir'yevich. Candidate of Flo'sical and mthenatical Sci-
ences, Docent, Irkutsk State University. "An Algorithm for Co-puter Con-
struction of Autonorphisls and Solution of the Problem of Finite Group Iso-
morphisms."

Voytishin, Yuriy Valentinovich. Graduate student. Institute of Cybernetics,
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, Kiev. ”Certain Properties of Antichains
of Partially Ordered Sets."

106

son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

GayVoronskiy. Aleksey Alekseyevich. Graduate student. Moscow Physical and
Technical Institute. "Methods of Finding Optimum Sets."

Cladkiy. Anatoliy Vasil‘yevich. Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sci-
ences. Junior Scientific Staff Member. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukraini'dn
SSR Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "On an Iteration Method for Solution of
Boundary Value Problems."

Glushkov.,Viktor Mikhaylovich. Academician. Director of Institute of Cyber-
netics. Ukrainian SSR Acadesn' of Sciences. Kiev. "Certain Tasks in the
Creation and Development of Cybernetics and Computer Methods and Facilities
Awaiting Young Scientists of the Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR
Academy of Sciences" and "AMALITIK-Tlt.”

Clushkova. Ol'ga Viktorovna. Graduate student. Kiev State University. "On
a Method of Undifferentiable Optimization."

Grinchenko. Tamara Alekseyevna. Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sci-
ences. Principal Project Desi er. SKB ms [Special Design Bureau for lath-
ematical Machines and Systems . Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian 883
Academy of Sciences. Kiev. ”AMALITIK-T’I."

Gupal. Anatoliy Mikhaylovich. Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sci-
esces. Senior Scientific Staff Member. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian
$3? Acxdemy of Sciences. Kiev. "Methods of Minimizing Functions Satisfying
the Lipshits Condition with Averaging of Gradient Directions.”

Degtyarev. Anatoliy Ivanovich. Junior Scientific Staff Member. Institute of
Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, Kiev. “On Certain Deductive
Features of a System for Processing Mathematical Texts."

Dorodnitsyna. Alla Aleksandrovna. Candidate of Physical and Mathematical
Sciences. Principal Project Designer. SKB MS. Institute of Cybernetics.
Ukrainian SSR Acadew of Sciences. Kiev. ”WINK-“Ila."

Doroshenko. Anatoliy Yefimovich. Senior Engineer. Institute of Cybernetics.
Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences, Kiev. ”Interactive Data Structures Pro-
cessing.”

Drakh. Arkadiy Mikhaylovich. beading Designer. SK! ”6. Institute of cyber-
netics. Ukrainian SSR Acadesu of Sciences. Kiev. "MALITIK-Th."

Zhezherun. Aleksandr Petrovich. mgineer. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian
358 Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "0n Certain Deductive Peaturcs of a System for
Processing Mathematical Texts."

thlikhovskiy. Aleksandr Alanol’yevich. Junior Scientific Staff Member. In-
stitute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Acadesy of Sciences. Kiev. "Principles
of Organization of the PIOIIER Dialog Optimization System."

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kaniovskiy. Yuriy ﬂarianovich. hagineer. Ukrainian SSR Acadeu of Sciences.
Kiev. ”On a Method of Controlling Coaputation Accuracy in the Statistical
Gradient nethod."

Kapitonova. Yuliya Vladiairovna. Doctor of Physical and lathe-stical Sciences.

laboratory wager. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian 88!! Acadew of Sciences.
Kiev 0 ”MITIK'?“ a "

Klinenko. Vitaliy Petrovich. Candidate of Physical and hthenatical Sciences.
departaent aanager. SKB ms. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Acadeu
of Sciences. Kiev. "MIX-7".”

Korzhova. Valentina likolayevna. Graduate student. Institute of Cybernetics.
Ukrainian SSR Acadew of Sciences. Kiev. "Optinization of Algoriths for
Evaluating the Dhtheaatical Expectation of a Rando- Valuable Under Various
Modes of Data Processing.”

Kornienko, Grigoriy Ivanovich. Candidate of Technical Sciences. Deputy Di-
rector. 8K3 ms. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Acadeav of Sciences.
Kiev. "Resource Control in Data Processing System for Pull-Scale Experiments.”

Kornilova. Imidaila Yevgen'yevna. Candidate of Musical and Hathentical Sci-
ences, Instructor. Kiev State University. ”Certain Properties of Antichains
of Partially Ordered Sets."

Kres, Iconid likitich. Group leader. Scientific and Technical Society.
Corsistenoteklmika [expansion unknovn]. Kiev. “WITH-1h."

Krivoy. Sergey Luk'yanovich. Graduate student. Institute of Cybernetics.
Ukrainian SSR Acadew of Sciences. Kiev. ”Interactive Data Structures Pro-
cessing."

Kuk. Yuriy Vasil'yevich. Junior Scientific Staff Haber, Institute of Cyber-
netics. Ukrainian SSR Acade‘y of Sciences. Kiev. ”A Generalization of the
lleunann-Pierson lea-a in the Theory of Signal Recognition.”

Laptin. Iuriy Petrovich. Senior Engineer. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrain-
ian SSH Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "Conparison of Soae Methods of Calcul-
ating Lover Sstinates for the Nation of Shortest Schedules."

Letichevskiy. Aleksandr Adol'fovich. Doctor of Physical and Hathemtical
Sciences, Senior Scientific Staff Haber. Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrain-
ian 88R Acadeq of Sciences. Kiev. ”mum-1b."

Lyabakh, Vladimir Pedorovich. Senior amineer. Institute of Cybernetics.
Ukrainian SSR Acadelnr of Sciences, Kiev. "Interactive Data Structures Pro-
cessing."

Iqaletskiy, Aleksandr Viadinirovich. Junior Scientific Staff Haber. Insti-
tute of Cybernetics. Ukrsinian SSR Acadelay of Sciences. Kiev. "0n Certain
Deductive Features of a Systen for Processing lbthenatical Texts."

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mikhaylov. Valeriy Mikhaylovich. beading Designer. 8K3 )MS. Institute of
Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "Representation of
Surfaces in Automatic Design Systems."

likitin. Anatoliy Nikolayevicr. Junior Scientific Staff Member. Institute of
Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Acadm of Sciences. Kiev. "Structural Analysis
of Analog-Digital Converter Algebra."

Nikolenko. Vladimir Nikolayevich. Graduate student. Institute of Cybernetics.
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "On Transformations of Asynchronous
Logical Circuits."

llorkin. Vladimir Ivanovich. Engineer, Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian
SSR Acadesv of Sciences. Kiev. "llonlocal Algorithms for Minimization of lion-
differentiable mnctions."

ﬂurminskiy. Yevgeniy Alekseyevich. Candidate of Musical and Mathematical
Sciences. Senior Scientific Staff Member. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian
883 Academy of Sciences. Kiev. ”On the Differentiability of Set-Valued
hppings."

Pogrebinskiy. Semen Beniaminovich. Candidate of Technical Sciences. Deputy
Director. SKB NIB. Institute of Wbernetics. Ukrainian 853 Academy of Sci-
ences. Kiev. "ANALITIK-Yh."

Rappoport, Iosif Simovich. Engineer. Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian
SSR Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "On a Linear Several-Player Differential
Game with Limited Control Resources."

Savchak. Oleg likolayevich. Leading Designer. SKB HIS. Institute of Cyber-
netics. Ukrainian 588 Academy of Sciences. Kiev. ”MALITIK-Tla."

Skopetskiy. Vasiliy Vasil'yevich. Candidate of Physical and Mathematical
Sciences. Senior Scientific Staff Member. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrain~
ian SSR Acadeay of Sciences. Kiev. "On an Iteration Method for the Solution
of Boundary Value Problems."

Smikun, Leonid Dorisovich. Junior Scientific Staff Member. Institute of
Cybernetics. Ukrainian 581! Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "Degrees of Unsolv—
ability of Algorithmic Problems Connected vith the Operation of Automata on
Groups."

Stogniy. Anatoliy Aleksandrovich. Corresponding Member. Ukrainian 881! Academy
of Sciences. Deputy Director. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Academy
of Sciences. Kiev. ”WINK-7h."

Syrov. Viktor Valentinovich. Leadim Designer. 8K8 ms. Institute of Cyber-

netics. Ukrainian 8811 Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "Optimal Coding of Micro-
canands in the Representation of Microoperations by Elementary Conjunction.”

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tret'yakov. Sergey Ivanovich. Junior Scientific Staff Member. Institute of
Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "Operating Algorithms
of Specialized Processes for Solution of Systems 01‘ Equations."

Fal', Aleksey Mikhaylovich. Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences.
Senior Scientific Start Haber. Institute or Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR
Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "On the Time for Attainment of the n-bevel Span
in the Simplest Markov Random walk."

Pishmn. Yuriy Sanuilovich. Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences,
Principal Project Designer, SKI! MB, Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian SSR
Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "ANALI'I'IK—Th."

Tsaryuk. Nikolay Pavlovich. beading Designer. SKB ms, Institute of Cyber-
netics. Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "MALI'I‘IK-Th."

Sheverda, Ole; Nikolayevich. beading Designer. SKB ms, Institute of Cyber-
netics. Ukrainian SSR Acadm of Sciences, Kiev. "Resource Control in Data
Processing Systems {or hill-Scale Experiments."

Shilo. Vladimir Petrovich. Engineer. Institute at Cybernetics. Ukrainian 833
Academy of Sciences. Kiev. "Application of Stochastic Programing Methods to
Problems or Control of Diffusion Processes."

Yatsenko, Yuriy Petrovich. Graduate student. Institute of Cybernetics.
Ukrainian SSR Acadew of Sciences. Kiev. "Simulation of Certain Oscillatory
Bioprocesses."

[photographs of contributors]

 

108

Glushkov. V. )4.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020039-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Skopotskly Glndkiy Nikitin

 

Krlvoy Knniovskiy Lynlecskly

     

Zhel lkhovnkiy Nor-kin Sordunov
109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020039—6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020039-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

Gayvoronakiy Korzhova Bel itskiy

     

Lyabakh Bably antin

   

Numinskiy Gupal Doroshcnko
110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020039—6
Yatscnko Voytlshlr Snikun

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "llaukova Dunks". "Ktbcrnctlka". 1978

111
81:80 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm ”‘70
I‘: FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIWS

uxxom HIKOLAYEVICH POHOHAREV-STBPHOY
Hoscov “MAYA ENERGXYA in Russien Vol 65, Ho 6. Dec 78, p 1.65

ﬁex£7 Professor Nikoley Hikoleyevich Ponourov-Stepnoy. Doctor of Technicel
Sciences, deputy editor-in-chief of the journel "Atomic Energy" end heed of
the Depert-ent of High-Telpersture Energetics of the Institute of Atomic
Physics imeni 1.V. Kurchetov commo-

rsted his 30th birthday 3 December 197d. }? ‘

  

H.H. Pononerev-Stepnoy is e represent- g '
stive or the Soviet school oi etoaic {a
reector engineering founded by LV.
Kurchetov end MP. Aleksendrov. His
contributions to the scientific pro-
gren of establish-sot of the high-
tenpereture reectore progrs- in the
Soviet union include severel theore-
ticel-celculetion studies of the phy-
sics of high-tupereture reectors,
physicei designing of then end de-
velop-eat of progress of experimntel
studies of fundenentel physicel prob-
lems of nigh-tnpereture energetics.
He is perticipeting in droning end
design studies directed touerd de-
velopment of prototypes of reectore
for technologicel purposes. rsdietion
ch-istry. I test breeder reector
with e helium coolsnt end others.

Hikoley Hikolsysvich is involved in studies on the direct conversion of
energy. He is one of the scientific directors end developers of the world's
tirst high-tenpsreture breeder resctor "no-estate." He hes devoted much

112

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an to tho otudy of dii‘ioront aapocta and poculiaritiao of roactora ~-
thono-ooiaaion gonoratora.

Ilia aciontiiic authoritotivouooa. honovolouco. alnplicity and oxactingnoaa
havo oublod Nikolay Nikolayovich to unito tho ranka of tho colloctivo oi
roaoarchora diractod by hill at tho Dopartlont o! lligh-‘i‘onporaturo Buorgotica.
Ila hat a vaat atoro of oaorgy and otticioncy which inopiro thoao around him.
It baa not vithout roaaon that Vaailovich Kurchatov callod him a “(our-wool
drivo.”

Siuca 1956. Nikolay Nikolayovich haa boon toaching at MAI Ebocow Atoaic
Inatitutj u a profoaaor of ono of tho Chain. uo vorko with great croo-
tivo ottort on tho oditoriol board of tho journal ”Atomic Bnorgy” and on
tho aditorial concil of Atoniadat.

Ho haa boon awardod tho Ordor of tho Rod Iannor tvlco and other coda lo.

'l‘ho board of tho luatituto or Atonic Bnorgy bani LV. Kurchatov and tho
oditorial ataﬂ of tho Journal ”Atooic Inorgy" congratulato Nikoloy
Nikolayovich on hia 50th birthday and union hia turthor croativo ouccoaaoa.

MIGHT: Atoniuiat. ”Atmya onorgiya.” 1978

2791
C50: law

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIMIS‘I‘S AND SCIENTIFIC (860112“st

SOVIET-ITALIAN SEMINAR ON THE STUDY OF PLASMA IN TOW
Moscow AMA“ KNBRGTYA in Russian Vol lob. No 6, Dec 78. pp 012-073
ﬁrticla by I...G. Coluochihoz7

ﬁery. Results of developments and research on the Soviet toksmaks T-lO.
T-b, m-J and T-7 and the Italian tokamak ET were discussed at a seminar
held in Prascati (ltaly) l9-23 June l9IB. The sessions met in a new build-
ing which houses the PT tokamsk so that, in intermissions. it was possible
to approach the control desk and observe directly the operational charac-
teristics of the device on a display screen.

The PT device is an averaged sire tohamek (R - 83cm, a I 2lcm) with a strong
toroidal field (H - 100 kB) and power supply from an 120 m percussion
generator. The device is equipped with a modern diagnostic coqlex, a
system of automatic collection or data and is intended for operation with

a frequency of l pulse in 10 minutes. At present, experiments are being
conducted with liquid nitrogen cooled toroidal coils with toroidal field
intensity up to 65 us. The maximal attained I. discharge current is 600 M,
howwer there has been no success yet in achieelng regimes without current
disruption within 2 - 23m after the beginning of the pulse.

The device has a bellows-type liner made from stainless steel and a mclyo-
denun diaphragm which may be replaced without disturbing the vacuum condi;
tions within the vacuum lock. The initial va nus in the chamber is 2.10 III
mercury colts-I in the warm up state and 2.10- In mercury colt-n in the
operating regime. Induction heating up to 300°C is used to remove water
from the walls of the liner. The high initial vacuua is not a guarantee

of a low level of oxygen in the discharge but guarantees slow formation of
oxides on the wells. Additional purification with the help of low tempera-
ture aging discharge of 3 do RA 1‘ a.§ield intensity of 1 k5 provided an
increase of plasma density to 10 cm and reception of rather low 2 f
values. It is important to emphasise the inadequate repetition of dis-
charges especially for such parameters as intensity and response at the time

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of tho low onorgy. X-ray radiation signal. For a typical dischargo of t”
F'l' with H - w and l - 1.06 M (q z 335) is obtainod n (r) 3 1.7.10

(1 - r /.’) a' . 1. «Pa - 3/3) 2x10 °

W, 1‘ (0) 3600 on, 3 =10 u,
z t ‘3 2. TM shops of tho olsctron tonporaturo o is typical for dischargas
wIth doninating light adnixturos.

Attor conplotion of thosa prograns of studios on joulo warm up, oxporinonts
will no startod on supplonontary hosting of plasna at tho fraquoncy of lowor
hybrid rosonanco. plannod for tho and of l9l9. At tho first stago, tho

powor of high-troouoncy hoating will constituto 0.5 m and, if succossfui,
it nay bo incroasod to l aw.

In Praskati. tho dologation visitod laboratorios occupiod in tho dovolopnont
of supor conducting nagnotic systons. llow tho plans of the laboratory aro
boing raoriontod to tho proparation for croating suporconducting systons

for tho tokanak. basic problons at prosont includo tho dovolopnont of supor-
conducting natarials for roalization of poworful nagnotic fiolds in largo
scale davicos and tho study of a circulation noth of cooling tho supor-
conducting nagnotic systons. Laboratory associatos proparod a largo batch
of conductor basod on NbAl with critical curront ot o0 A in a fiold of 36 kc:
and 20A at no Itcs. Studios showod that such a conductor maintains its
proportios with rolativo prolongation of 0.1. - 0.5 porcont. that is. twico
as much as that for niooim-stannic suporconductors.

Aftor finishing tho soninar, tho dologation visitod tho laboratory of plasna
physics at Milan Univorsity, whoro tho ”Tor" tohanok (R - 55cm, a - 16.5 cu,
ii . 10 k2) is boing sot up. Tho dovico was dosignod and constructed in
Kalon laboratory (Croat Britain). Tho first dischargo oxporinonts aro boing
conductod and nagnotic fio ids aro boing corrsctod. Tho dovico is boing
dovolopod for toaching studants spocialising in plasma physics. ‘l'horo is
proposod, in 1979, oxporinonto in supor high troquoncy boating of plasna at
tho froquoncy of oloctron cyclotron rosonanco with tho holp of gyrotrons

of tho ”Varian" Fir:- (powor 100 kVt. wavo longtn ~l on).

COMIC”: Atonizdat, "At-mayo onorgiya.” l97u

2791
050: 18 I0

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIMIPIC MGMIZA‘I‘IORS

ALL-UNION scum (II 1118 “WOW 0! PROCESSING “(BS 0! W, TRACE AND
RADIUM“! 8m

lbscow “MAYA tannin in hussien Vol 65, No 6, Dec 78, pp 668-069
[Krticle by v.4. Pchelkin end LA. Senenovg

[1"er Perticipents in the seniner held in Moscow in hey-June 1978 included
epecielists oi orgenisetions end enterprises of the Ministry of lerrous end
Non-ferrous Hetellurgy. the Ministry of Geology, the Ministry of the Chenicel
Industry end the Ministry of Colleges of the USSR end the AS USSR.

Acedsnicien LN. uehotin presented the opening eddrees. He discussed the
develop-ent of studies directed tower-d the coupler use of reprocessed rew
neteriel heceuee of the creetion end introduction of (low cherte ot the
extrection of non-ferrous. rere. trece end redioective elenents (nolyhdenun,
copper. venediu. eirconiu. gold, rere eerth netsl (ant), etrontiu. isrtil-
ieer end fodder phosphetee) end described the nodernisetion of production
beceuee of the introduction of new types of meteriels, equip-cut end con-
structions. lie described the uide-scele introduction of pressure lseching,
non-iiltrstion sorption netnode. nenhrene techmlogy end the creetion of
new ionites end tlocculents of new equipment end inprovenent of environ-
Ieentsl protection.

Five review srticlee were presented et the first plenery session. LP.
Snirnov end Sm. Pirkovekiy described the use in eutocleve technology of
horieontel b-chenher eutocleves uith uschenicel egitetore end verticel
eutoclevse uith pneuetic pulp egitetore. ‘l‘hey recon-ended the use of
elloyed steel end conerciel grede titeniu es construction neteriels.

Sorption teethods ot isoleting veluehle eseocieted elenents during processing
oi ores tecilitete direct extrection of soluhle components iron pulp of eny
density end guerentee the required degree of concentretion end purificetion
(discussed in eddreeses by 3.8. Leeluorin end LJ. Vodoleeov). As e result
of introduction of these nethode into the industry. the productivity of

116

[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plents wee increesed l'a - 3 times end the extrection of useful components
increesed by 5 - 10 percent. Host of the industriel opsretions hernful to
heelth were elimineted end there wes crested e continuous technology which
ensures couplets complex eutometion with the use of the simplest end most
etcessihle neens of control end rsguletion. -

Processes besed on the use of selective menbrenes meke possible refinement,
seperetien. concentration end neutreliution of different industriel solu-
tions ot.weste weters, the intensificetion of leeching, oxidetien, reduction
end isoletion of mete ls, the seperetion end enricllesnt of gss mixtures were
described in en eddress by NM. Smirnov. In conninetion with other methods,
they pernit the utilisetion of velueble components, their repeated use end
the evoidence of discherge of chenicsl reegents into the etonosphere. -

LA. Yekuhovich in discussing further improvement of seperetion of pulp,
weshing of settlings end filtering of solutions in, hydrometellurgy, smalle-
sized the use of polyecrylemide end other types of tlocculents end else the
development of new meens end methods of intensification of these processes.
There is speciel interest in tlote-flocculetion filtering of solutions end
elso in the epperetus with s fluidised bed in e liquid-solid dispersed
perticles system used for these purposes. The wide extension of filtering
diephregns besed on synthetic meteriels opened prospects for improvement of
seperetion processes both in terms of quentity end in terms of quelity.

0.1. Skoroverov end others, in their eddresses, geve speciel ettention to
the use of non-combustible diluents in extrection processes. The use es s
diluent of extrehents of tetrechloro-ethylene in flow cherts of extrection
purificetion end extrectien of certein non-ferrous end rere motels showed
the edventeges of the developed cherts over cherts which involve the use of
kerosene (increese of the merinel cepecity of the extrshent, increese of
the effectiveness of extrection recovery end others). The use of hydroxy-
oxines end ethers of erylsulfonic ecid's were reconnended for extrection of
copper, cobelt end nickel. Di (2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric ecid end the
thelliun-iodine form of tributylphosphete were proposed for extrection of
lndiun. Reconssndetions were proposed for extrsction of gold from spent
electrolytes with the use of trielkylemines end mixtures of then with
neutrel orgenophosphoric compounds or petroleus sulfoxides. ‘l‘here wes e
proposel to extrect tin tron solutions of processing cessiterite ores with
the use of solutions or tributylphesphets, trielkybenryleueoniechloride
end trielkylemine end netel which tends to the formetion or iso or hetero-
polycompounds (molybdenun tungsten) -- by trielkylenines. The use of e
nixture of trielkylenine end trihutylphosphete wes reconsnded for ertrec-
tion of venedlun.

one of the effective methods of processing low-grede phosphorites is liquid
extrection by orgenic solvents which permits production of both pure phos-
pnoric ecid end industriel selt end high-quality fertilisers. The use of

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inexpensive end reedily eveileble solvents produced by the industry end the
eltectiveness of the process meke it extremely promising. The seminer in-
cluded discussions of en extrection techno logy of processing low-grede
phosphorites which makes possible the extrection end utilization of such
velueble coqonents es fluorine. rsro esrth elements. uranium. strontium
end scenditml.

liethods of producing rere esrth mester elloys on a silicon bese tor modi-
fication of test irons end steels heve been developed. A carbothermel
method of producing mester alloys hes been metered on an experimental
industrial scele. Combined oxides of rere eerths ere used for reduction.
The oxides ere preliminerily briquetted or sheped from cool. The slag-tree.
continuous process is conducted in standard r'erro-elloying furneces. The
extrection of rere esrth motels in the master alloy constitutes 95 percent.
The composition of the mester elloy: rare esrth metals -. 30-60 percent.
silicon . 50-60 percent end the remeinder iron. It was noted, at the
seminar. thet e mester elloy conteining megnesiu is especielly promising
for inoculeted cest iron.

There hes been developed herilliue elloys with e higher combinetion of
mechenicel end tecmologicel peremeters es compered to standerd breads.
Micro-alloyed megnesiu permitted significant improvement of properties not
only of widely used high elloy brends of berilliu bronses with berillim
content of 1.8 - 2.1 percent, but use found to be ertective also in ellcys
with reduced berilliu content (up to 1.6 - 1.8 percent).

The industriel introduction of hydrometellurgicel processes use described
by representetives of the Dnieperpetrovsk Metallurgy Institute, the
Zaporoahkiy Industriel Institute end the Zeporoehkiy Hechine Construction
Institute (”The Use of Rare Berth Hetels tor Inoculation of Cut Irons end
Steels for the Purpose of Improving Their Quelities“), the Chelyebinsk
electrometellurgy Combine (”Development of e Tecmology of Production of
Perro-elloys rrom Rare Earth Hetals in Industriel Vecuus Ovens"), VNIIIOIT
ﬁrpension unknowg7 ("The Use of en Induction Furnace with e Cold Crucible
ror Producing homogeneous Alloys trom Components uith Large Differences in
Physicel Properties”).

Seminer perticipents showed greet interest in eddresses (by V.P. Shulike,
V.V. Orlov, Ye.l.. Psnokhin and others) concerning the introduction of meens
end methods of intenairitetion of processes in hydrometallurgy end pyro-
metallurgy. including optimized technicel decisions of the creetion of ore
werehouses, crushing shops, modern rerinement ep erstus, "Keslud" type
mills. SNK. PIX, IPK end 051 Expensions unkno _ type structures of e
peremetric series of epperetus for leeching, sorption end desorption.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It wee noted at the eeulnar that algnltlcaut work la contlnulog ln calculat-
ing the lllltln; maximal oeruleelble eulaelon of her-ml anoatancea lnto the
emaphere. the renderlng hareleea and utlllutlon of sea and llquld eme-
elona, the opthlutloh of nethoda of deterulnln; toxtc aohatencee in the
etnoaphere. the creataon of new latitude of analytical control tor deter-lu-
lu; tentelua. aloha-a, ladlvlduel rare earth elemente. low concentration
of rare and trace eleIeate tn Itneral raw material. ertraheute la nlneral
(ertlllxera. 1n veete uatere and aloe (or the developent of optl-laetten
of diagram of control of tecmloalcal proceeeea (addreeaee by Yu.K. '
Kvaretellhela. N .8. Tohareva and othere).

Recon-eudatlone of the aeelnar pertlclpeote reflect the euueetlona tor

Improvement 0: technoloay of proceeelns oree. rare. trace and radloactlve
etc-ante.

COPYRIGHT: Ate-taut. "Ate-aye eoerglye.“ 1978

2791
C50: two

119

FOR OFPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "$8 ONLY

manhunt:

nevcwnm 0P mmrm SCIENCE IN mum SSR acawn OF SCIENCES
unecow VISTNIK m: m 883 in Bueeien No 10 1978 pp 47-56

[Article deecribing paper by 3. Ya. Paton: "0n Development of Heteriele
Science in the Ukrainian SSR Acadeey of Sciencee"]

[Text] Academician I. Ye. Paton noted that in hie paper that he would diecuee
only thoee principal ereae of nteriele-ecience investigation the reaulte

of which have found practical application. The epeaker noted that ea early
ae the firet five-year plane echoole of eolid-etate phyeice. phyeicel natal-
iurgy and welding -- in Khar'hov. Dnepropetrovelt, and Kiev - began to fore:
in the Ukrainian SSE eimltaneouely with the develop-eat of fuel power en-
gineering and netellurgy. world-fume ecientific echoole in the area of
welding and epecialiaed electroeetallurgy are eucceaefully operating today
in the Ukrainian SSR Acedeay of Sciencee. end inveatigatione are being con-
ducted on verioue proble- of applied eateriale ecience. eolid-etete

phyeice and cheaietry. and particularly on new nethode of obtaining and
procuring eetellic enteriale in the eolid. liquid and gaeeoua etatee; new
neteriele have been created. including on the beaie of hiMlewlar coe-

pounda .

B. Ye. Paton further diecuaeed the eoet important reeulte of research con-
ducted.

Refining of eetale and elloye. He know that it ie not poeeible fully to
utilize all the ueeful propertiee of the cryetal lattice of eetallic
nateriale, due to harmful inputitiee and defecta introduced into the lattice
at verioue etegee of production and proceeeing of eateriele. Obviouely

one of the principal waye to ieprove the propertiee of eetallic eeteriela

ie to refine the. and inprove their cryetal etructure.

Specialiete in the field of welding were aaong the firet to eeek to obtain
initially "pure" eteel and eubeequently certain other netellic eateriala

ee well. In the l9SO'e they laid the foundatinna of e new branch of
eetellurgicel production -- epecial electronetallurgy. And thie ie underetand-
eble: in fueion welding the solar: netal vigorouely interacte with the
refining eediun. and particularly favorable conditione are created both for

refining the eelt and for ignoring ite cryetanhe etructure. therefore the
netel of a weld eeea. even without any eachining (that ie. in caet fore).

120
FOR OPPICIIJ. USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in eignii‘icnntly euperior in phyaicochenical propartiea to netal of einilar
conpoeition obtained by conventional netallurgical nethode.

One ahould not forget. however, that welding technology in a nicronetal-
lurgical proceee. laconatruction of the conditiona or nelting. refining
and forced cryetalliaation. cheracterietic of the welding proceee. ie by no
neene a einple natter on the ecele of today'e netallurgical production.
There can be no nechanical tranaier or given phyeicochenical and technologi-
cal para-etere free one area to another. Long yeare of joint creative
efforta on the part of acientieta and production epecialieta were required
before epecial electronetellurgy wan created.

Blectroelag renelting beta-e noet wideapread. at firet in our country and
later abroad ae well. The developera of electroelag renelting were awarded
the Lenin Prize. Specialised ehope equipped with dozene of electroelag
turnocee are today producing eteela and alloye of hundreda of grades.

of practically all etructural claeeea and groupe. In addition to narchant
ingote of varioua aection. they are producing eheet ingots. elabe. tube
billate and pipe.

lepecially pure netale and alloya can be obtained by the electron-bean re-
nelting nethod. With this nethod e vacuun eervea no the refining nediun.
and a been of accelerated electrona an the heatin. aource. M a reault of
inventigation of the phyeicochenical proceeeee or .efining in a high vacuu-
and develop-ant of powerful electron-bee- gune and other eaaential equipnent
at the Electric welding Institute. in 196‘ the country'a firet ehop for

the production of eepecially pure niobiun and tantalu- waa eatebliahed. In
eubeequent yearn proceee technology was elaborated and production initiated
on eapecially pure high-etrength. heat-reaieting and preciaion alloye.

The areenal of nethode in epecial electronetallurgy aleo includea planne-
arc reulting. developed at the Electric ﬁelding lnatitute. Helting with
thin nethod ia perforned with the aid of a planna arc, while refining taken
place an a reault of interaction between the nolten netal and a epecial
gaaeoua nediul.

In confornity with the resolution. of the 25th CPS" Congreae, rapid growth
of electronetallurgy in planned, including epecial electronetallurgy. which

in called upon fully to aupply all new branchee of technology with the higheat-
quality netal.

hicroalloying and nodiiication of eteela and pig iron. with all the un-
queetioned nerite of electroelag. electron-bean and plane-arc reuniting.
theee nethode. adding one nore convereion to the rroceae of netallurgical
production. lake the natal nore expenaive. Therefore it in advieable to
refine-renelt only relatively coatly eteele and apecial-purpoee elloye.

The queetion niece of what ehould be done with general-purpose netal. for
its quality aleo nuet be conetantly inproved in order to inprove the
operating characterietice of varioua nachinee and devices. Extenaive

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prospects in this area are opened up by the technology of introducing
aicroedditives to the aolten aetel, which iaprove the crystalline structure
and physigglfaschanical properties of the ingot.

Bork in this area is being perforaed at the Ukrainian 88!! Acadesy of Sci-
ences Institute of Probleas of Casting. At this institute they have studied
asny of the laws and patterns of aodificetion end aicroslloying. have ad-
vanced hypotheses on the physical aechanisas of action of saall quantities
of addition agents and have deterained coapositions of coabined aodifisra
which asks it possible to raise the degree of aasiailation oi the various
alloying sleaents. to reduce content of oxygen and nonaetellic inclusions.
and to iaprove the aschanicsl properties of aetellic asterisle.

This eaae institute has developed a new aethod of aodifying steel in the
process of pouring. with slag-toning nixtures end granules. which include
coabined aodifying additions based on rare-earth aetels. The circulation.
convection and gravitational flows in the solidifying ingot ensure unifora
distribution of aodifying additions throughout the entire ingot and raise
the degree of essiailation of basic eleaents (rare-earth, for exaaple) to
80-90:. which is $0 to 1002 greater than indices achieVed by the conventional
process of aodifying in the ladle.

hploylent of developed coapositions of aodifiers end verious aethods of
their introduction into the aetal ashes it possible to reduce the cheaical
and physical inhomgeneity of ingots. to reduce by 33-60! the content of
oxygen and other nonaetallic inclusions. to increase the density end degree
of dispersion of the crystalline structure. end to alter the fora of the
reasining inclusions in the desired direction.

Modification increases toughness end decreases anisotropy of properties by
epproxiastely 60-701. Replaceasnt of ordinary with aodiﬂed steel reduces
the rolled stock requireaents of the econoay by lS-ZOZ. we can evidently
state that up to 75-”! of the carbon end low-alloy steel produced in this
country should now be subjected to aodification. The technology of producing
coabined aodifying agents has been asstered by industry. and their centralised
production is being set up at a nuabsr or ferroalloy plants.

In the lest 15-20 years the oldest and aost widespread structural asterial
in aschine building - cast iron - has been experiencing a rebirth. By
scans of inoculation aetsllurgists have succeeded in altering the torn of
graphite in cast iron - obtaining spheroidal in place of flake graphite.
This has radically iaproved the aetsl‘s physiconechenical properties: it

has becoae possible to produce cast iron with a strength of 100-150 lug/-2
and aore in place of 15-20 kg].2 , and to increase its plasticity 154040“.
A new relatively cheap structural asterial has been obtained - high-
strength cast iron. which is equal in properties to carbon alloy steel.

Thus aodificstion of steel and cast iron aakes it possible substantially to
inrove the quality of these aost widespread structural materials.

122

FOR OWICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

 

Acadenicisn B. Ye. Paton briefs participants in the 35th Session of the Co-
ordination Council on research projects at the Electric Helding Institute
iseni Ye. 0. Paton of the Ukrainian 888 Academy of Sciences

Synthesis of superhard materials at high pressures. High pressures open

up unique opportunities to study physical and chemical phenomena in solids
and for synthesis of nsw saterials. The Institute of Superhsrd Materials
of the Ukrainian SSR Acadesy of Sciences is working particularly vigorously
in this area of ssterisls science. In recent years the institute has
studied the processes of formation and growth of dis-end crystals and cubic
boron nitride.

Staff menbers at the institute of Superhard haterials, the Institute of
Probless of Materials Science and the Electric Velding Institute iseni

Ye. O. Paton of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. jointly with sci-
entists at the Institute of hydrodynamics of the Siberian Department of

the USSR Acadesy of Sciences, have also achieved diamond synthesis at high
dynamic pressures and direct restructuring of the graphite crystal lattice
without its dissolving and subsequent recrystallization in a reaction
nedium. The density of dialecation in these diamonds is three to [our orders
of ssgnitude higher than in crystals obtained in high-pressure chasbers,
that is. with explosive synthesis a plastically-deformed diamond is forned.
It was discovere’ that diamond generation with this method of synthesis
depends on the location of the graphite particles relative to the direction
of the shock wave.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A technological process of synthesis of higher-strength cubic boron nitride
in increased-volusa high-pressure chambers has been developed on the basis
of a detailed study of the sachanisms of transition of hexagonal to cubic
boron nitride and back, and has been put into production.

high pressures are also employed at the Ukrainian 881! Academy of Sciences
institute of Superhard haterials in producing polycrystalline materials of
powders of covalent substances. Polycrystalline materials with excellent
cutting properties have been created on the basis of diamonds.

further investigation of the sechanical and thermophysical properties of
polycrystalline diasonda has indicated that their utilization is promising
not only as a cutting tool but also as heat diesipatora for active electronic
components. since within the working temperature interval of microelectronic
devices the host conductivity of diamond is five times that of copper.

Refractory metals and alloys. The sost promising as a possible basis of
heat-resisting alloys are refractory metals with a body-centered lattice:
chromium. niobium, molybdenum, and tungsten. Extensive esployment of alloys
based on these metals. however. is limited by the tendency of such alloys
toward brittle failure at low temperatures and their poor high-temperature
corrosion resistance. The physical nature of the cold shortness of refractory
metals and alloys based on these metals has been studied at the Institute of
Physics of lietals. the Institute of Problems of Strength, and at the insti-
tute of Problems of Materials Science. and this has sade it possible to
develop methods of increasing their heat resistance and low-temperature
plasticity. mesa methods include the forming of fine-grain and cellular
dislocation structure and a certain crystallographic texture of the material.
sicroalloying and alloying with large additions of replacement and injection
elements. creation of dispersion-hardened materials and utilisation of
processes of eutectic crystallization.

A theory of breakdown of polycrystalline material has been elaborated. which
takes into account differences in properties of the grain and its boundary.
Removal of injection impurities from grain boundaries during microslloying

of molybdenum with lanthanum and nickel made it possible to lower the
threshold of embrittlemeat of cast metal and metal in the seam of welded
Joints to lOO’C. Development of highly-efficient methods of refining chromiu
made it possible to obtain for the first time in world metallurgical practice
single chromium crystals retaining plasticity at the temperature of liquid
nitrogen. Polycrystalline chromium alloys subjected to refining remelts
retain plasticity at tesperaturea down to -l$0’c.

Composite materials. Co-ercial alloys are no longer capable of meeting
all the complex and diversified requirements of modern machine building.
shipbuilding. nuclear power engineering. and aerospace hardware. One can
obtain the requisite properties only by combining different materials.
that is. creating composite materials. with composite materials one can
specify in advance strength. rigidity. heat conductivity, electrical con-
ductivity. thermal expansion. nuclear properties. erosion resistance. heat

12!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OII’ICIM. USE ONLY

raaiatance. etc. booeting the valuea of theae paranatara to a level un-
attainable in natariale of another type.

The einpleet type of conpoeite natarial ia conpoeite netala. auch no carbon
or low-alloy ateel clad with atainleea or acid-reeiatant ateal. Uith the
traditional proceea conpoaite nateriaia are obtained by the conbined rolling
of atacka. by pouring inaerta in ingot nolda or by rolling built-up atock.
“the advantagee and drawbacka of theae technologiee are well known. Purther
progreaa in developnant of nathoda of producing binatala ha been achieved
at the Blectric welding lnatitute inani Pa. 0. Paton. The inatitute hae
developed totally new. unique nethode of obtaining hisatala and trinetala

with the aid of autovacuun preeeura welding, electroalag and electron-
bean depoaition.

Pibroua and diapereion-etrengthened nateriale are in a nore coupler clue

of conpoaite natariala. Developnent of ouch nateriala requiraa eolving a
nunber of highly-couples: technological problene. It in eaaential to obtain
high-etrength. high-nodulue fibera and particlee with epecified phyaical
propertiea, to place than in the natrir with varying orientation. to pack.

and to predeternina degradation under nechanical, thernal and other

atreeeaa. Research in thin area in concentrated at the Ukrainian SSR

Acadany of Sciencea lnetitute of Problene in Hateriale Science — the country'a
principal organization in the field of powder netallurgy.

Metallic conpoaito neteriala have now been developed which are beaed on nag-
neaiun. eluninun. copper. beryllium titaniun. cobalt. niobinn. nolybdenun.
tungeten. ea well an baaed on alloya and cowounda of theae netala with

the introduction of netallic and nonnatallic fibara and particlea. Such
inportant indicatora ea tenaila atrangth. nodulua of elasticity, heat reaiatance.
all resisting to ﬂannel ahock have been increased by two to threefold. and in
nany caace an arch an lO-lZ-fold in conperiaon with traditional elloye baaed

on the aene netala. Alloys with npecifiad phyeical properties have aleo

been developed - heat conductivity, electrical conductivity, nagnetic
characterietice. reaiatance to eroaion. refractorineae. etc.

Coating. axtrueion and preaeing. The inatitutea of the Ukrainian SSR
Acadeny of Sciences have obtained certain reeulta in the area of outing
and dafornation under high hydroetatic preaeur

In the proceea of caating the nolten natal interacta with the aabient air
during novenent fron the nelting unit to the eating nold. Oxidising.
nitriding. and beconing eaturated with hydrogen. Therefore an a rule an
effort in nade either to abield the natal in the proceaa of ita transfer in
the atnoaphere or to place the entire nelting-caating unit in a chanber with
a controlled atnoaphere or even in a vacuun. Blectronagnetic tranafer of
nolten netal haa proven nore advanugeoua. however. The Ukrainian SSR
Acade-y of Sciencea Inatitute of Problena of Coating hen developed a new
fanin of electronagnetic punpa for effecting ouch transfer. which have nnde
it poaeible totally to iaolate the transferring natal fron the atnoephere.

125

P08 OFFICU‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Another way to effect no-oxidation transfer of molten setal, which makes

it possible simultaneously to improve the quality of the castings. is con-
trolledclsw-pressure casting. with this method of casting the salt is

fed froe a ladle contained in a sealed chamber. forced under excessive

gas premsdre. through a metal transfer channel into the casting mold

cavity. The rate of solidification of the melt increases by 20-30:. density
of the castings increases. and their stress-strain properties isprove.

Also extremely prosising are developments achieved at the Institute of
Problems of Casting connected with active influence on forming of the
structure of castings by introducing into the melt dispersed particles of
nitrides and carbides of titanium and zirconium. It has been established,
for example, that treatment of heat-resisting foundry alloys with dispersed
particles increases heat resistance. creep resistance. thermal fatigue and
fatigue strength. and toughness across a broad range of temperatures.

There is an appreciable increase in the durability of castings treated with
dispersed particles.

In recent years a new casting process has been developed on the basis of
electroslag remelting at the Electric welding Institute imeni Yo. 0. Paton -
electrosleg casting (BShL). It consists essentially in the following: a
shaped casting is obtained fros metal which has undergone electroalag refin-
ing as a prelisinary process. The simplest variant of this process, which

is sufficiently effective. is melting of the metal directly within a metal
air-cooled sold. This process is now being employed in this country to

make are valve bodies for thermal and nuclear electric power stations.
crankshafts. pressure vessels together with flanges and inlet-outlet
connections, large pinions and other parts.

The most important advantage of BShL is an extremely high coefficient of
metal utilisation, close to l. The fact is that with BShL m taphole systes
is not required, and the head of the casting is just as dense as the
bottom portion. As regards properties of the metal, an BShL casting is

the equal of a forging or drop forging. The need for more rapid develop-
ment of EShL in coming years was noted at the 25th CPSU Congress.

Mydroextrusion - extrusion by means of a liquid - is a commercial method
of deforming materials under conditions of high hydrostatic pressure.

This method makes it possible to obtain high mechanical forces and it also
possesses important technological advantages: it ensures a high quality of

surfacing. the absence of press residue and scale, elimination or reduction
of sachine-tool operations, etc.

The Donetsk Physico-Technical Institute of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of
Sciences has elaborated the physical principles of metalworking processes
and control of properties of materials, and has proposed a new process for
pressure-working metals - nonstationary hydroextrusion.

126

e

FOR 0F?ICIAL USS ONLY
IO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Different vsrients of industriel processes and methods of processing struc-
turel end tool meterisls heve been developed on the heels of scientific
resesrch. Record-setting perforeence cherecteristics hsve been obteined

for sustenitic steels in e nonmsgnetic stete (ultimete strength wee
doubled). while retsining plesticity. Methods of reducing the temper
brittleness of steel heve been developed. end possibilities of plestifics-
tion of cost brittle bodies and replecement of slloy steels with less short-
supply steels heve been demonstrsted. hydroextrusion hes nede it possible
to mechins composite esteriels. to eliminete porosity in end increese
strength of these esteriels.

Holding. 3. Ye. Peton steted thet ell steels end elloys ere deeigneted
chiefly for febricsting welded structures. Therefore welding specislists
perticipete directly in the development of metel meterisls. while sdvences
in meterisls science require the developnent of welding technology, end
perticulsrly expension of the technologicel cepebilities of welding
processes.

Specielists st the Electric ﬁelding Institute imeni Ye. 0. Peton hsve
developed e nu-ber of highly-efficient welding processes which heve esrned
widespreed recognition both in this country end ehrosd. They include
electrosleg welding. which hes mode it possible to join psrts with e weld-
seem cross section of up to 10 us2 end which hes become the basis for
development of e lerge nueber of no: nenufecturing processes in metallurgy,
welding in cerbon dioxide, friction welding. explosive welding, pulse-ere
end diffusion welding, underweter src welding methods. high-frequency weld-
ing utilising the proximity effect, etc. Heny treditionsl welding processes
have been given new life thenhs to technical inproveneuts.

There hes been successful development in recent yesrs of pieces end micro-
plesme welding end cutting. ultreeonic welding. verioue pressure contect
welding techniques. including fleshing-off butt welding. Electron-bee- weld-
ing occupies e specie]. plece. A sherply-focused electron been, renging from
tens of wetts to 100 kilowetts or more in power. is s versetile tool suit-

sble both for performing the finest precision operations end for joining
thick-welled workpieces.

leportent results heve been schieved in the eres of eutonstion of welding
processes, results which crests the preconditions for welding production
to trensition to s new end higher technicel level.

Protective costings. Protective costings isprovs working efficiency end
extend the life of Ietel Interiels end reliebility of nechinery, equipment

end instmnents. Their utilisetion nekes it possible to reduce irretrievsble
losses of setels end slloys.

In the lest 10-12 yeers there hes arisen the need to protect the surfsce of
high elloys of iron. nickel end titeniue. which ere widely utilised in
power engineering end chenicsl mechine building. Due to e leck of relieble

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

high-temperature protective coatings in the world aerospace industry.
refractory metals and alloys based on refractory metals have not come into
widespread use up to the present time.

A coating should not only possess a certain combination of properties

which engble it to withstand the effect of aggressive environments: cor-
rosion. epidation. wear. erosion. oVerhsating. etc - but should also be
compatibla_with the protected surface in such parameters as thermal ex-
pansion coefficient. modulus of elasticity. etc. Compositions of protective
coaches and methods of applying them to surfaces are being developed at

the Electric Welding Institute imeni Ye. O. Paton. at the Institute of
Problems of Materials Science. and at the L'vov Physico-Hechonical Institute.

heat-resistant coatings of complex compmntion have been developed for
operation at temperatures of 900-1200’0. which are capable of forming a
dense. high-adhesion oxide film. Electron-beam equipment and a process of
applying multiple-component coatings to gas turbine blades have been
developed. This process makes it possible to build versatile continuous-
operation units applying protective coatings to loving strip and wire. The
first continuous-action industrial unit was built in 1975 and is being
successfully utilized today.

Composite coverings of metallic and nonmetallic materials. particularly of
the laminated type. possess excellent protective properties. Particularly
promising are composite coverings which are capable to a certain degree

of "self-adjustment." for example. capable of closing up cracks which oc-
cur in operation. or capable of "sweating out" and evaporating certain
coating components when the surface overheats. These coverings or coatings
consist of a porous metallic or ceramic frame and a metallic filler. which
at certain boundary temperatures transitions to a liquid state.

Considerable success has been achieved in obtaining coatings with the aid
of plasma and detonation methods of metal spray coating.

Metal. cermet and ceramic coatings formed on the surfaces of various items
with the aid of the above-described methods are common in shipbuilding.
the aircraft. automotive. and chemical industry.

Investigation of the durability and work capacity of materials and struc-
tures. The Physics-Mechanical institute and the Institute of Problems of
Strength are doing considerable work on study and prediction of the ef-

ficiency of metal materials under conditions of various loads in various
environments.

In the course of basic research scientists have elucidated the influence of
the features of the operating environment on the physical and mechanical
properties of structural materials. Criteria have been developed which
make it possible to predict the brittle failure of materials. and principles
have been formulated for increasing the useful life of machine parts and
structural components utilized under conditions of simultaneous effect of

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONICML USE ONLY

force factors. aggressive working sedia. radiation. high or low tempera-
tures. Unique tasting installations and test beds for testing structure
specisans and assemblies have been built.

Standnrds have been detereined on the basis of these studies for calculat-
ing the strength of a nusber of itass. such as propeller shafts. urine
ship hulls, drill string conponents subjected to the action of drilling

nud end aggressive subsoil water. end high-pressure vessels costing into con-
tact with aggressive sedia end condensate.

A large nuaber of research projects have been conducted for the needs of
nuclear power engineering. Scientists have studied. in particular. the
physical and enchanical properties of refractory eetals and alloys based
on refractory eatele as applied to the operating conditions of various
reactors and generators.

New nethode have also been developed for increasing the resistance of
nachine and equip-ant parts as well as structural conponents to corrosion
dseage and eechanical failure (special sachining. ultrasonic machining.
friction-hardening treateent).

3. Ya. Paton noted in conclusion that the Ukrainian 883 Academy of Sciences
is planning in the near future to expand in its scientific establisheents
work on problems of eaterials sciences, strengthening the facilities of
eaterials science institutes. establishing new laboratories and scientific
research areas.

In particular. there will be further developnent of research on solid-
state physics and chesietry siesd at developing new naterials with special
physical properties: seliconductors. superconductors. radiation and cor-
rosion resistant eateriels.

3. Ya. Paton aphasized that in order to achieve successful develop-eat of
all these areas of research it is necessary to exasine the question of
setting up in Kiev under the auspices of the Ukrainian SSR Acsdeoy of
Sciences an interninisterial (interrepublic) metallic ssterials center.
assigning it the task of coordinating all tutorials-science investigations
being conducted in the establish-eats of the USSR Acsduy of Sciences and
the acade-ies of sciences of the union republics. as well as work on
practical adoption of coepleted research.

COPYING”: Izdatel'stvo ”ﬂanks". "Vestnik Akadelii nsuk SSSR", 1978

302‘
650: 1870

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

TICTONICS 0? INS FOUNDATION OF THE EAST EUROPEAN AND SIBBIIAN PLAT?0RHS

Hoecow TRUDY GEOLOGICNESKIY INSTIIUT (Horka of the Geological Institute):
TRITONIKA FUNDAMENTA VOSIOCNNO-YBVROPEYSKOY I SIBIRSKOY PLATIORH in Russian
No 321. 1978 signed to press 1‘ Dec 77 pp 3-10. 209-210

(Introduction. annotation and table of contents free book edited by
H. 8. Markov. Izdatal'atvo "Nauta". 211 pages. 850 copies]

[Text] General aspects of early Precalbrian tectonics are
exaained in the book. Structures and features of the fbraation
of the Precaabrian foundation of the East European and Siberian
platforas. characterized on the basis of the conception of the
stage by stage formation of the earth’s continental crust as
the result of aetanorphosis of the ocean crust of the geologic
past, are described. The iaportance of horizontal aoveaonts

in the foraation both of the continental crust and of structure
is emphasised. New scenarios regarding the structure and tec-
tonic zoning of the foundation of the East European and
Siberian platforas are offered and the stages and phases of the
development of their continental crust are presented. The text
is acceapanied by 4 tables. 42 illustrations and 463 biblio-
graphic references.

Introduction

Precaabrian rocks. as is well known, coaprise nest of the earth's consolidated
crust within the continents. Areas made up priaariiy of sediaentary and
aagaatic rocks of the foundation of the ancient platter-s alone constitute
four-fifths of the continental area of the earth. The period of genesis of
Precambrian crust covers an enorlous span of tine, at least 7 tines longer
than the Phanerozoic. Nevertheless, general theories of the developaent of
geological processes in all fields of earth sciences have been developed
and continue to be developed primarily on the basis of analysis of the
Phanerozoic history of our planet. The appearance in recent decades of new
Icthods of investigations and more detailed analysis of the regional
geology of the Precanbrian and publication of various theaatic works on
those aost ancient foraations have greatly expanded the prospects for

130

FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

understanding the ancient stages of the formation of the continental crust.
investigations of this problem and the solution of various problems of the
development of geologic phenomena during the formation of the earth's crust
in time and space since the earliest stages of the formation of its mantle
certainly will provide a key not only to a better understanding of the
general theory of the formation of the earth's crust. but also to a know-
ledge of the principles of localization of mineral resources, which are so
numerous and diversified in Precambrian rocks.

The most important aspects of the tectonics of the ancient formations of
our planet are those pertaining to the formation of various mantles of the
earth's crust and the question of the genesis and development of Precaabrian
structures. which is closely related to it. The views held by researchers
engaged in the analysis of these questions diverge very strongly at the
present time.

There is an independent scientific trend, according to which the geologic
development of the earth in the Archean, with a top geochronological
boundary of 2500-2700 million years. differed so strongly from its more
recent development that tectonic processes have no continuity on that
boundary. The advocates of this belief feel that the so-called nuclear
stage of development. during which domes and done-like tectonic structures,
with the complete absence of linear structures, formed on an extremely
ancient basitic baseaent, corresponds to the earliest stages of the form-
tion of the earth's crust. The genesis of the nuclear mantle within the
continents culminated in the formation of a granitic-metamorphic stratum.

it is specifically on that strata. starting at the Lower Proterozoic, that
geosynclinal systens, similar to analogous systems of the Phanerozoic, began
to develop in some cases. and protoplatform mantles, which either ultimately
survived to our time. or which even participated in subsequent geosynclinal
development, developed in other cases.

in opposition to the nuclear conception stand the no less widely held and
traditional views on which 6. Shtill's hypotheses are based. These
hypotheses state that the earth's crust and its structures formed in these
ancient times in the same direction as the Phanerozoic. and the geosyn-
clinal process occurred universally on the continental crust.

36th of the described conceptions contain elements of fixism. They are
based on the concepts of the pre-eminence of vertical tectonic movements.
which govern the formation both of different mantles of the earth's crust
and of structural forms inherent to them. Only a comparatively few hori-
zontal displacements of rocks, leading to the appearance of small-amplitude
upthrusts and, in exceptional cases. to nantles just as small in amplitude.
are admitted. The role of large lateral displacements of large plates and
blocks in the formation of early Precambrian structures is denied, and it is
assumed that the crust and its structural forms evolved in a position fixed
or all time.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To those concepts is closely related the hypothesis of the basification of
the earth's crust in a form such that the continental crust evolves into
the oceanic crust as a result of physicochemical metamorphosis. Tho
hypothosi of basification at first explained the formation of the modern
oceans ih‘ghe Mesozoic, but then it began to be applied to early Precambrian
structures in cases when they are characterized by a thin granite-meta-
morphic layer, or when such a layer does not exist at all.

Individual researchers have tried in recent years to explain the formation
of the Precambrian crust and its structures from the standpoint of the“hew
global tectonics. Just as for the Phanerozoic, they identified lithospheric
plates and zones of moderately sized oceanic ridges, presumed to have existed
in the Precambrian, from which movements of these plates, due to spreading,
resulted in subduction and obduction. However, these interpretations are so
hypothetical for the early Precambrian that they have not gained much recog-
nition. Aside from them, however, no analysis of the structures and condi-
tions of the formation of the crust for the Archean and Proterozoic has

ever been undertaken in the light of the scientific concept of mobilism.
Large lateral displacements of lithospheric plates and blocks, accompanied
by crustal formation processes, have not been discovered or described, just
as phenomena of the destruction of the crust, which evidently occurred in the
deep Precambrian, and which were caused by the formation of new specific
tectonic forms, have not been discovered or described.

The present status of tectonic research on Precambrian formations bears
testimony to the fact that many fundamental aspects of the structure of the
crust at the beginning of the geologic development of our planet still have
not been investigated sufficiently. This behooves researchers to concen-
trate their attention on studies aimed at explaining the basic laws of the
conditions of the formation of the crust and the development of structures
of various tectonic categories, inherent to it. -

Analysis of Precambrian tectonics understandably has always been based on
progress in this field of geologic disciplines for the Phanerozoic. A new
scientific trend emerged recently, related to the discovery of the fact that
the foundation of the earth's crust was the oceanic crust of the geologic
past, and that geosynclinal development is a process of the formation and
redistribution in space and time of the granitic-gneiss mantle, which
ultimately culminated in the development of the continental earth's crust.
Ophiolites, the bottom member of which is the so-called malanocratic base-
ment, made up of ultrabasites, gabbroids and amphibolites, which alternate
everywhere in the stratigraphic series, belong, as is known, to the type of
ocean crust that appears in Phanerozoic folded formations. Graywacke,
flysch and andesite formations, and plagiogranitization processes and the
formation of dierites and plagiogranites, are especially characteristic of
the transition stage of geosynclinal development. And, finally, molasses,
volcano-plutonic complexes, potassic metasomatesis and the formation of
potassic granite massives typify the orogenic stage, which concluded the
geosynclinal process.

132

FOR OFYICIAL U58 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nearly all researchers. engaged in the analysis of the structure of the
early Precambrian crust. identify large blocks. among which adjacent blocks
are characterized by different ages of conplexes of rocks inherent to then.
different compositions and different degrees of netamorphisa. In these
blocks attention should be focused on the order of fonation of the
different coaplexes of rocks. their differences from the Phanerozoic col-
piexes and the possibility that they belong to the three above-mentioned
stages of formation of the crust. This approach to the analysis of the
structural principles of the early Precambrian crust has been used by cer-
tain geologists. not without success. Nevertheless. there reaain aany
unresolved questions, pertaining to various aspects of the siailarity and
difference of cross sections of the Phanerosoic and Precaabrian crust.

All subdivisions of the ophiolitic association. characteristic of folded
structures of the Phanerozoic. are also known to exist in folded structures
of the Precambrian of any age. However. the structural localization and
position among aeianocratic foundation rocks of souetiles large bodies of
anorthosites. which are found extensively in the Precambrian. but are
virtually nonexistent in Phanerozoic fornations. reaain aysteries. Nor is
there any reliable infomtion about the stratigraphic position and rela-
tionships with analogs of the melanocratic foundation of early Precambrian
crystalline schists of different coaposition. in which sole of the principal
rock-producing minerals are pyroxenes. and souetimes olivine. The same can
be said of various eclogites and other ultrabasic and basic rocks. There is
hardly any doubt that the often strongly aetamorphited basic vulcanites and
jaspilites. associated with their strata. are the Precambrian comterparts
of the upper members of the ocean crust of the Phaneroroic.

in the deep Precambrian cross sections various crystalline schists and para-
gneisses evidently were deposited over fonations of ocean type crust. These
meta-orphized series include a series of unusual strata. for which it is hard
to find aetamorphized counterparts among Phanerozoic sediments. Anong these
strata. for example, are various high-almina crystalline schists --
disthenic. cordieritic. siliiaanitic. staurolitic, etc. They probably are
the result of the metamorphosis of a special type of terrigenic sediments
and volcanogenic for-nations with a sharply higher concentration of alumina
oxide. which did not form later during the for-tion of the Phaneroaoic
crust. with strata of high-alumna crystalline schists also are often
associated aetanorphized vulcanites. the prilary coqaosition of which correo
sponds to andesitic basalts, andesites and more acidic varieties. These
vulcanites probably do not differ fundaaentally froa siailar volcanogenic
formations of the Phanerozoic. There is reason to believe that all these
terrigenous and volcanogenic formations correspond to the transitional stage
of the for-ation of the Precubrian earth's crust.

bf special inportance is the position of strata similar to flysch and
:olasses in cross sections of the early Precambrian. These strata evidently
do not exist in the Archean. and the conditions of the gensis of the oldest
sections of the granitic letaaorphic layer of the continental crust differed
substantially from the conditions that existed afterward. in both the Pre-
caabrian and Phanerozoic.

133

FOR OFFKCIAL USE ONLY
'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. by applying to folded foraations of the Preca-brian the sac hotbed
of analyzing the stage by stage develop-eat of the earth's crust as is
applied to folded fomtlons of the Phanerozoic. it is possible to explain
the basic principles of its evolution in tine and space.

The Iodern structure of early Precaabrian fornations is extremely coaplex.

it has long been known that early Precambrian ophiolites in nest cases are
deposited in the fora of linear bands. which separate the above-aentioned
higher large blocks. Soviet scientists showed recently that these bands

are characterized by an lubricate structure. caused by nuoerous upthrusts.
which. in coubination. produced aonoclinal tectonic for-s. These Ionoclines
occurred before the min granitization phase. which covers thee and is
especially extensive in adjacent blocks, in which the basic fields of various
granitoids are concentrated. These new findings refute the idea that ophio-
lite bands for-ed on a gneiss bed in the fora of linear narrow troughs. which
in the structure of the uodern shields comprise a ltlnd of synclinoria with
well developed liabs. There is hardly any doubt that the cross sections of
the ocean crust that once (before folding processes and as a result of the
crowding together of rocks) participated in the formation of the aodern
structure of lubricate Ionoclines. filled vast spaces between sections, Iade
up of lore nature crust, i.e. , of crust of the transitional type, and in

sone cases of the continental type. The features of the priaary association
and of subsequent structural transforaations of such spaces with these sec-
tions deserve careful analysis.

Granitic gneiss dues in the deep Precaubrian belong to a special category
of structures. The fact that they are done shaped is confined not only by
direct observations in the field, but also by aerial photographs and satel-
lite photographs. The internal structure of the doses is exceedingly cou-
plex. Many researchers aphasize that the axial planes of the nmerous
plastic folds of rocks. inherent to them, often slope fun the periphery of
the done toward its apical part. The doses are run through by autochthonous
and allochthonous granitoids of different coaposition and origin to their
very leucocratic varieties of potassic specialization. Manifestations of
granitization and aigaatization are just as coo-on. The dooes souetiaes
occupy large areas. are close together and in plan reseable unique “flocks"
or ”swans" of oval tectonic fons. The parts between the clones are usually
also aade up of gneisses with a very couple: plicatlve and disjunctive
structure. Apphibolite seams and acobers are often encountered in the
bottom part of the gneiss doues. The fact that the plaglogncisses of the
dooes were deposited on various volcanic and sedimentary sedinents is well

doculentcd and is confined by outcroppings in which these rocks retain
their rellct textures.

All researchers who have investigated the gneiss doaes conclude that they
underwent a long period of hereditary develop-eat, and it is not hard to
agree with this conclusion. They undoubtedly forled in the Archean and
early Proterozoic on a basitic substratu. Gneiss doaes are also known to
exist in rocks of the Riphean and Paleozoic. and even of the Mesozoic. It

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OWICIAI. USE ONLY

is obvious. nevertheless. that as geologic tine passed gneiss doaes occurred
less and less frequently. and the period of tile during which they were
foraed steadily decreased. However. aany aspects of the aechanisa of the
forlation of gneiss doaes and the causes of their independent developaent
along neighboring and contenporary linear structures reaain uncertain.
These questions obviously are deserving of investigation and resolution.

An analysis of geologic laps, in different scales, of individual regions of
the Baltic shield and of other ancient platfons leaves no doubt that in

the deep Precanbrian (Archean and early Proterozoic) there occurred beds
just as large as bed structures of the Phanerozoic in terns of the aaplitude
of their horizontal displaceaent. and quite probably even larger. 0f excep-
tional iaportance is the fact that rocks of the ocean crust in Phanerozoic
bed structures often lie on the continental crust, just as individual sub-
divisions of the ophiolitic association in bed structures of the early Pre-
caabrian probably lie on plagiogneisses and crystalline schists associated
with then. These ancient beds evidently soaetiaes retained their initially
level sedilentation in the fora of variously sited tectonic residual out-
croppings and rather large individual plates. These allochthonous
structures obviously were repeatedly dislocated in places into flat syn-
and antiferas and underwent aetanorphisa.

All these questions about the ancient bed structures of the earth require
proper analysis and the gathering of facts that conclusively confin then.
it aust also be said in this connection that individual researchers. engaged
in the geology of the early Precaabrian, view large residues of these beds,
Iade up of ultrabasites at the botto. and of a banded couple: of gabbroids
of the Ielanocratic foundation at the top, as stratified intrusions into the
gneiss base-ant and colpare the. with the well known stratified alkaline
intrusions of ultrabasic and basic coaposition. which occurred during the
forlation of the aantles of the ancient platforas. Judging by geophysical
data. however. these are crust-free intrusions, which confirm the fact that
they belong to bed structures. “any fields of granitic-gneissic doaes in
the aodern structure of the early Precaabrian obviously also occupy an

allochthonous position; they were autochthonous tectonic for-s only during
the tiae of their formation.

Beds and upthrusts lead to the foraation of destructive structures of the
earth's crust, since extention inevitably occurs in their wake, followed by
disintegration of crustal aantles and. eventually, by the forlation of sec-
tions from which other lea-bets of these aantles are separated. Destructive
(riftogenic) structures of a different kind have also been identified in
recent years in Phanerozoic geosynclinal systas. These structures occurred
as a result of unilateral or bilateral displaceaent of the previously for-ed
granitic-gneissic actuorrhic aantle and of the completely nature conti-
nental crust. indications of these structures are facies of a special type.
represented by various coarsely fractured rocks (congleaerates. gravelites,
sediaentary breccia and sand), alkaline vulcanites and ultrabasic alkaline
intrusions. These systems are also now being found in early Precaabrian

1.35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
em, roa omcm. use om
J’s.-

forutions‘. However. aethods of recognizing destructive structures of this
ltind still are not well developed. During the development of letth of
identifying these structures it is iaportant also to deter-inc what role
they played in the overall process of structure function in the early Pre-
caabrian. ‘

According to geophysical data. on the shields and foundations of the plates
of the ancient platform there are large and snail regions of different
configuration in plan, which are devoid of a "granitic" strata of the crust
(the Preeaspian sag-ant. for exam“). Three possible cases of their origin
are plausible: l) residues of the primary ocean crust; 2) exposure of the
ocean crust to the rear of large bed structures. fragaents of which survive
to this day; 3) fraguents of the ocean crust. which also still exist, but as
a result of extensions (destruction of the second kind). which tool: place in
the continental crust. All these cases of the function and survival of
parts of the crust. on which there is no granitic strata, not only are
plausible, but they evidently also reflect reality. The problel is to find
structures of this kind. describe the. and explain their role in the form-
tion of the continental crust.

The space and tile principles of such structural categories. so co-on in
the Phanerozoic. as fringe depressions. fringe volcanic belts with their
characteristic volcanoplutonic fonations and certain other tectonic for-s.
have not been explained for the early Precambrian. Exceptional i-portancc
is attached to the couplete and careful revision of all existing geophysical
data and drilling data on the ancient platforms. especially of the East
European and Siberian plat for-s, in the light of the scientific principles
on which this worlt is bastd.

These principles are the following: i) recognition for all ages of the Pre-
caabrian of the priaitiveness of the ocean crust in relation to the conti-
nental crust; 2) developlent of the continental crust during the process of
geosynclinal develop-ent, both by the “nation of new structures and by
lateral redistribution of previous parts of the crust; 3) progressive growth
of the continental crust in space and in tile, but irregular on different
parts of the earth's surface; 4) recognition of the iaportant role of hori-
zontal lovelents in the forlation of the structure of aantles of the crust
in addition to vertical noveaents, such that the aaplitude of horizontal
movement: ulti-ateiy is any tiles greater than the limit of vertical dis-
place-ents; S) irregular Ianifestation of these two categories of tectonic
displaceoents; 6) directed periodicity and phasing of the structural develop-
Ient of our planet, affecting it simultaneously. but manifested differently
in any of its segnents and even helispheres.

Aspects of the creation and evolution of the continental earth's crust in
the early Precaabrian are emined and the role of lateral tectonic dis-
placeuents during the process of its development is denonstrated in this
book. The lechanisl of the fomtion of the granitic-octanerphic bed and
of the continental crust of the ancient platfons is coupletely explained by

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
10R OHIO!“ 038 ONLY

way of analysis of the early Preeaabrian tectonics of certain structural
elenonts of the foundation of the Bast European and Siberian platforls. This
is the first experience in the extensive application of a new principle of
structural analysis. developed during compilation of the tectonic nap of
Eurasia (Peyve. at al. 1976), to early Precubrian fornations.

The first part of the book pertains to analysis of the structure and history
of the forwation of the continental crust of the Baltic shield and the
eastern part of the Russian plate. This portion is analyzed in the section
written by N. A. Shtreys. A. S. Novikov, A. A. Savel‘yev. 6. l.. Goroshenko
and V. P. Nartynova .. "0n the Bed Structure of the Baltic Shield," in which
an atte-pt is ads to apply to an analysis of the tectonics of the Baltic
shield the principle of the stage by stage develop-em of the continental
crust of Phanerosoic folded zones. and in which is also proposed a funda-
nentally new ache-e of the structural zoning of the shield. which explains
the close relationship between phone-ens of granitoidal aagaatisal and
lateral structuring. It is shown by example of an analysis of the Sveco-
karelian seglent of the Baltic shield that its function occurred during the
process of the progressive buildup of the tranitic-aetanorphic layer of the
earth's crust. both in space and in tile. The stages of develop-ant. Iarked
within the aentioned segment of the plate. which occurred at different

tines -. the oceanic, followed by a stage of transition to the continental
("island are"). turned out to be next to each other, which undoubtedly

was the result of their lateral convergence. Narrow strips of oceanic
cross sections of iabricate-upthrust structure often are traced in zones
where plates of different ages join together. Sole features of the tectonics
of the riftogenic structures of the Svecokarelian segnent are also described
and their space and tine relations with the continental crust are analysed.

The Sveconorwegian province occupies a special position along the tectonic
ale-ents of the Baltic shield. Modern data contradict widely held notions
of the Archean-Svecofenian age of develop-ant of its continental aantle and
subsequent regeneration in the Gotskiy (early Riphean) stage. The second
part of the Ionograph: "The Structure and llistory of the Forution of the
Continental Crust of the Sveconorwegian Province of the Baltic Shield."
written by A. S. Novikov and Sv. A. Sidorenko, pertains to an examination of
these new aaterials on the geology of southern and central Sweden and of
southern Norway and to a generalization of the results of field excursions
in Sweden. The authors show that the southwestern fringe of the Baltic
shield exhibits all the elelents of the fornation cross section that are
inherent to the continental. transitional and oceanic stages of development
of the earth's crust. The exaained segment is unique because an abbreviated
type of crustal cross section for-ed there. Much ilportance is attached to
the fact that the strongest nnifestations of granitoidal lag-atisl are
linked in tine with bed-upthrust structuring. each tile preceding granitiza-
tion and ultraletanorphisl. These conclusions. derived on the basis of geo-
historical analysis of the structure of the Sveconorwegian province. agree
satisfactorily, by and large. with isotopic geochronology data.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third part, written by K. A. Klitln, "The History of the Pornation of
the Earth's Crust of Scandinavia in the Riphean Based on Data of Isotopic
Geochronology." deals with a generalization of data fron numerous deterlai-
nations of ages of actanorphic and magnetic rocks by the Rb/Sr and WM
aethods in different laboratories around the world. It is shown that the
earth's crust in western Scandinavia was formed over a period of any
hundreds of aillions of years, enbracing the early and niddle Riphean. 'The
geochronoi0gical boundaries of the fornation of letuorphic rocks go back
to 1.2 and 1 billion years; the 850-900 aillion year level of the aassive
appearance of potassic and nor-a1 granites is also identified. Soae aspects
of the relations between geosynclinal formations and rocks of the nelano-
cratic baseaent are discussed in the work.

The study of S. V. Bogdanova and R. A. Gafarov "The Coaposition and Structure
of the Foundation of the Eastern Part of the Russian Plate and Solo Features
of the Fomtion of the Continental Crust in the Early Precanbrian" (Part
Four) is the first study of the history of the for-ation of the continental
crust of the foundation of the eastern part of the Russian plate. Major
differences in the evolution of endogenous processes in the Archean niddle
nassives and linear late Archean-early Proterozoic folded zones are disclosed
on the basis of a thorough analysis of the conposition and features of for-
nation cooplexes and of the petrophysical characteristics and structural
relations of early Precanbrian fonations of the nest fractured Volga-Ural
region. Early Archean volcanogenic sedilentary strata are found to have
played a special role in the develop-eat of the Archean Iassives. and deep
upthrusts. which split aassives and linear zones. also played an iaportant
role. A geological-geophysical zoning of the eastern part of the Russian
plate is presented.

The second part of the book "The Tectonics and History of the Formation of
the Continental Crust of the Siberian Platforl" consists of two sections.
The first -- "The Tectonics and Major Stages of the Develop-eat of Conti-
nental Crust of the Southern Part of the Siberian Platforl in the Early Pre-
calbrian" -- belongs to A. M. Leytes and V. S. Fedorovskiy. The authors
reanalyze the structure and ilportant stages of the formation of the earth's
crust of the Aldanian shield. In the continental crust of the Aldanian
shield, which forned up until the Iliphean, they identify fornation cooplexes
and structures of a protoletanorphic granulitic basitic layer at the 3.5-3.0
billion year level. the nelanocratic basenent and sediaentary volcanogenic
aantle of which were subjected to granitization and regressive renetanorphisl
in the early Proterozoic. The coaplexes and structures of the for-ation and
developocnt of the granitic-mtanorphic stratum are represented by zonally
netanorphized series of riftogenic troughs, for-ed by the oceanic, transi-
tional and continental stages. In the cooplexes of the transitional stage
are identified sedilentary volcanogenic "island are" series. sedi-

lentary strata of the protocontinental base-ent, slope and shelf and
internal depressions of the protocontinent. as well as aassives of granitoids
of plagiogranitic gneiss and granodiorite-granite foroations, and volcano-
plutonic series, conbined with late nolasses. are found in the conploxcs of

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

the continental stage. The Iain tectonic irregularities of the early
Proterozoic. which coaprise a "protocontinent-ocean" system. in south-
eastern Siberia are identified. A lateral series of structures in that
systel. including an internal protocontinental trough. protocontinentai
shelf. slope. foot. island arc and oceanic region. and a lateral series of
the corresponding aetaaorphlted prinary sediaentary end sediaentary-volcano-
genie fomtions. is identified and analyzed. It is shown that no priaordial
continental crust of the Phanerozoic type existed in southeast Siberia. The
first nature continental crust appeared there only by the beginning of the
Riphean, l.8-l.6 billion years ago. It is explained that its forlation
occurred during stages analogous to those established by an analysis of the
processes of develop-ant of the continental crust of geosynclinal folded
systeas of the Phanerozoic. This provides new opportunities for correlating
the processes and couplexes of the Precambrian and Phancrozoic. which is
essential for the developent of a unified theoretical Iodel of the develop-
Ient of the continental crust.

In section two "The Structure of the Foundation of the Siberian Platform and
Certain Features of the Developeent of Its Continental Crust." R. A. Gafarov
and Yu. I. Prozorev, on the basis of generalized geological and geophysical
aaterials, present a tectonic zoning of the Siberian platfora, which. fro-
the standpoint of aobilisn, gives an idea of the stage by stage develop-ent
of its foundation. Large segncnts of two types of lithospheres are found.
The first type of segpents, which have a nature continental crust, are con-
fined to its fringes. The second type of segaents. aade up prilarlly of a
granulitic-basitic protonetaaorphlc strata. colpriscs the central part of
the foundation of the Siberian platfora.

Major questions of theoretical tectonics, aimed at explaining the general
principles of the foraation of the continental crust of the ancient platforas
in the deep Precaabrian. are exaained in the Ionograph in new light. The
solution of any such probleas would require the analysis of voluninous
coaparative material on the foundations of the ancient platforls, located
outside of our country. Even a cursory exuination of the tectonics of
these platforls indicates that each of then, and sole of then taken together,
possess specific and unique structural features. The ancient platforls of
Gondwanaiand are particularly ilportant. They. as is known. have folded
zones of the Rlphean. which not only extend along the edges of the platforl.
but within then as well. There is reason to believe that an analysis of the
tectonics of the platforns of Gondwanaland, along with data on the tectonics
of the platfon’s of the Northern lie-isphere, will provide an answer to the
question of the principles and periodicity of the development of the conti-
nental crust in the earth's entire Precaabrian annals.

Table of Contents

introduction (N. a. Shtreys) 3
Part One
Structure and Problea of the Continental Crust Fomtion of the
Baltic Shield and the Eastern Part of the Russian Plate 9
139

FOR OFFICIAL USR ONLY
FOR OHICIAL 1188 ONLY

0n the nappe structure of the Baltic shield (N. A. Shtroys.
A. S. Novlhova, A. A. Savei'yov. G. L. Coroshenko. V. P. Martynova)
introduction
Svocokarellan segnont
Noldosersko-East-Karelian piato
Giaoi-Kalovaiian plate
KuhIo-lsainian plate
Svokofenian plate
Pohjanaao plate
lesterhotten (western nothnia) plate
Destructive ferns of the Svecokareiian allochthono
Conclusion

Structure and History of Foraation of the Continental Crust of the
Sveconoruegian Province of the Baltic Shield (A. S. Novihova.
Sv. A. Sidorenko)
introduction
Sveconoruegian segment
Pregothian gneisses of the south-western Sweden. Varborg series
Gneiss conplexes of the Kongsberg-Danhle region of southern
Norway
Gneissos of the Dua series and Anal-Kroppefjall granitoids
Daslondian
Telemark formation
Elements of tectonics of the Sveconoruegian seglent
Svecoharelian seglent of the region of central and south-
eastern Sweden
Conclusion

History of Formation of the Scandinavian Earth's Crust in the
Ripheon Tine According to the isotopic Geochronoiogicai Data
(K. A. Klitin)
introduction
Sveconorvegian seglent
Telemark Inssif
Pregothian massif
Moro-Ronsdal gneiss lassif
Conclusion

Coaposition and Structure of the Base-ent of the Eastern Part of
the Russian Plate and Sole Peculiarities of For-ation of its '
Continental Crust in the Early Precalbrian (S. V. Dogdanova.
LA.&ﬁmv
introduction
Stratigraphy and a for-ational section of the aajor structural
eleaents of the base-ent of the eastern part of the Russian plate
Couplexes and stages of for-ation of the continental earth crust
in the early Precalhrian
Deep faults and structural relationships between complexes of

the baseaent of the eastern part of the Russian plate
Conclusion

160

'01 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12
13
14
15
18
2d

25
30

30

33

38
40
42
46

50
54

SS

56
S9
63
65
68

71

73
99

105
107
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Part No
Tectonics and History of Poraation of the Continental Crust of
the Siberian Platfor-

Tectonlcs and tho Principal Stages of Formation of the Continental
Crust of the Southern Part of the Siberian Platform in the Early
Precambrian (A. M. Leites. V. s. Pedorovsky)
Introduction
Coaplexes and structures of tho early stage
Melanocratic basement
Nelanocratic basenent (pri-ary earth's crust) and analogs of
foraations of the oceanic stage, not differentiated
Conplexes of highly Iota-orphosed sedilentary-volcanogenic
mantle of the prilary earth's crust
Coaplexes and structures of the later stage
Coaplexes of the oceanic stage
Conplexes of the initial stage of opening the oceanic
structures
Conplexes of the transitional stage
Volcano-plutonic coaplexes and late molasses
Sone aspects of tectonics of the Aldanian shield
Conclusion

Structure of Saseaent of the Siberian Platforn and Sue
Peculiarities of Pomtion of its Continental Crust (R. A.
Gafarov. Yu. I. Proxorov)
introduction
Regional geophysical characteristic of the Precambrian folded
couplexes of elevations of the Siberian platforn baseaent
(Aldanian shield. Anabar aassif)
Couplexes of the early stage
Conplexes of the late stage
Tectonic subdivision of the base-ent of the Siberian platfor-
Charsko-Aldanian area
Vilyui zone
Oleneh area
Anabar-Baikalian area
Mguska area
Deep faults and structural relationships between conplexes of
the Siberian platforl baseaent
Conclusion

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1978

7872
680: 1870

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MLICATIGIS

'NC!‘

PROCEEDINGS 01' 6th ALL-UNI“ SEMINAR on STATISTICAL HYDROAOOUS‘IICS

hovosibirsk mm 8338101 VSBSOYUZNOY mou-smum Po STATIS'l'IaiBSKOY
GIDRDAKUSTIKE (Proceedings of the Sixth All-Union School-Seminar on
Statistical Hydroscoustics) in Russian 1975 signed to press 20 June 75 pp 2.
388-390, 379-387

(Annotation, table of contents, and bibliographic list tron book, N. G.
ngoruyko. V. V. Ol'ahevskiy, and S. V. Pasechnyy, editors, lad-yo In-ta
hatesatihi 80 AN SSSR. 700 copies. 390 pages]

[Text] This voluae contains the proceedings of the 6th All-Union Seminar on
Statistical hydroacoustics, orgsnised by the hydrophysics Council of the
Presidium of the USSR Acadely of Sciences. the Institute of Mathematics of
the Siberian Depart-eat of the 0881! Academy of Sciences. the Acoustics
Institute. Kiev Polytechnic Institute, and the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Applied Physical and Radio Hessureosnts. The seminar was held

at the latter institute in Septe-ber 1974 in the town of Hendeleyevo.
Hoskovskays Guest. The papers contained in this voluae deal with probleas of
nathenatical description of randos fields and signals, stutisticsl aessare-
cents. probleas of nodeling. and the results of uperiaentel investigations.

The asterisls in this voluse are of interest to specialists working in the
area of hydroacoustics. radio engineering, instrussnt analysis of randos
processes and fields. as well as students in these areas of specialization
at higher educational institutions.

Content: Page
Ol'shevakiy, V. V. Modeling in Statistical hydroacoustics 3
Taradanov, L. Ya. Sons natures of Hydrophysicsl Modeling 25

Ksptyus. A. A.. and Ol‘shevskiy, V. V. Some Hsthelaticsl Aspects
of Hodeling in Statistical liydroacoustics with the Aid of s Con-

puter 33

Genie. V. 1., Obosnenko, I. I... and Taradanov, 1.. Ya. Optimization
of Conditions of Experimntsl Investigations in llydrophysical
Modeling 65
162

FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
Veyeean, I. 3., end L'vov. K. P. Digital Modeling of Reeponee Punc-
tione for Complex Signele, Utilizing e DP? Algorithm

Ol'ehevekiy. V. V. end Penfilov. V. A. Digitel nodeling of See
Reverberetion

Kirilov. Ye. V.. 01'shevsltiy, V. V. end Sevinov, Ye. A. Digitel
Modeling of e Selective Eneeeble of e Mon-Stationery Rsndoe
Proceee

Dokunin, A. Ye.. Kovtunenko. S. V.. Saprykin, V. A. and Cherepltov.
N. I. Applicetion of Generel Demonic Analysis in MydroscOuetics

Shtetlend. D. S. Problene of Nonlineer nitration, Interpolation
end threpoletion for Rende- Pields

Levin. V. M. Leeunovskiy. V. P.. end Meelov, V. K. Application of
Methode of Multivariate Stetieticel Anelyeis in Mydtoecoustic
Diagnoeis

Ioffe. M. I. On Criterie of Markovien Neture of Acoustic Random
Proceeses

Touehpol'ekiy, Yu. V.. Rybin, A. I. One concept of en Intergrsl
Function of Reyleigh's Bllipticel Distribution

Beloueov. A. A.. end Deloue, V. V. 0n determining the correlation
mnction of Amplitude-Moduleted Rende- Interference by the Method
of Sign Congruatce

Cerenin, V. A. K" Equivelent of the Hiener-Khinchin ‘l'heoren for
e Non-Mowgeneoue Mon-Stationery Rende- Veve Field

Krukovekiy-Sinevich. K. 3., end Mikheylovekiy. V. V. Influence
of Discretization of Quentiution on the Cherecterietics of e
Digital Qusdreture-Oorrelation Detector

Krukovskiy-Sinevich. K. 3. Synthesis of Mydroacoustic Signels in
the Ares of Strong Correletion of Velocity-Deny Indeterninecy
Function

Dronkin. B. 1.. Krukovskiy-Sinevich, K. 8.. end Mrechkovekiy, O. D.
On the Megnitude of the Mituel end Generelized Punction of On-

certsinty
Belousov. A. A.. Vol'f. V. M., Gelsnenko, V. 3.. cetkin. N. 6.,

Kovelenko. 1.. IL. Kovalenlzo. 1.. 8.. end Pesechnyy, S. V. Punc-
tions of Uncerteinty of Certein ”pee of Complex Signele

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35

59

66

76

06

91

97

103

106

109

112

117

137

160
Padsrno. V. I.. and Ronnnovskaya. I. R. Evaluation of the Pulse
Characteristic Curve of a Nydroacoustic Channel

Kudryauhov. V. M. Acoustic Fields in Neveguides With a Statistical-
ly Uneven Surface

Kudryavtseva, 0. P. and Ol'shevskiy. V. V. Bnergy Quarncteristics
of Sea ReVerberetion free a Scattering Layer Taking Into Account
the Influence of Reflecting Boundaries

Rudryavtseve. 0. P. and Ol'shevskiy. V. V. Energy maracteriatics
of Sea-floor Raverberation Taking Into Account the Influence of
Reflecting Boundaries

Belousov. A. A. and nelous, V. V. Intensity of mitiple Sea-Ploor
Reverheration

Novikov. A. R. Classification of Acoustic Noises on the Basis of
‘l'heir Probability Representations

Dragan. Ya. P., and Yevorskiy, I. N. Description of the myth:- of
Sea Swell

Vaydruk. B. 5., Narodnitskiy. G. 1.. and Paritskiy. A. S. Amplitude
Glaracteristics of Surface Scattering During Local Radiation

Anan'yev. A. B. SonnStatietical Characteristics of Non-Stationery
Narrow-Band Gaussian Interference

Geranin. V. A., Prodeus. A. N.. and Shotskiy, B. I. Sea Reverbera-
tion Spectrum as a Non-Stationary Randon Process

Gatkin, N. 6.. Kovalenko. L. N., Kresnyy, L. 6., and Pasechnyy,
S. V. Optinal Detection of Multiple-Nave Signals

Artenenko, B. A.. Geranin. V. A.. Karnovskiy. H. I.. Prodeus. A. N.,
and Sinonova. c. D. Spectral-Correlation Analysis of an Antenna

Situated in a Non-Nonegeneous, Non-Stationary Nydroacoustic
Field

Chaykovskiy, V. 1. Detection of Signals and Spatial Localization of
Their Sources on the Basis of Spectral Analysis

Derthevln. A. N., lespalov. L. A.. Sokolov. 0. I... Borenshteyn.

0. Yu.. and Strochilo, A. C. One Method of Determining the Co-
ordinates of a Local Noise Pield Source

P'yenov. V. H. Investigation of the Interference Resistance of a
Standard Detection Circuit in Receiving a IVs-Couponent Signal
Nith a Narrow-lend Noise Conponent

1“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1148

156

169

I79

185

190

197

207

212

220

225

237

242

251

255
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nakhmon, c. 8.. and Pavlov. V. V. 0n Detection of Signals Uith Un-
known Parameters on n Reverberetion Background

Libenson. Ye. D. On the Response Pareneters of a Matched Filter
Hith Ooﬂinad consideration of Doppler Velocity and Acceleration
of Motion Applicable to wide-Bend PM Signals

Geresilenlto. 0. N.. Ovayenik. V. P., and Pasechnyy, S. V. Stabilisa-
tion of e False Alarm in Uydroacouetic Detection Circuits

Brezhnev, B. P.. Dubovets, V. D.. end Dalagin, V. V. Suboptinel
Detection of Hydroecoustic Signal Echoes on a Computer

Kurzenev. V. A.. and Perov. V. P. On the Possibility of Utilizing
a Generalized Criterion in Problem of Statistical Hydroecoustics

Belonorhko. c. N. end 01'shevekiy, V. V. Survey of Methods of
Adaptation in Problems of Statistical llydroecoustice

Sidorov. Yu. Ye. Algorithms of Processing Soner Intonation Under
Conditions of A Priori Uncertainty

Gatkin. M. 0., Kalyurhnyy. A. Va, and Kresnyy. 1.. c. Nonparaletric
Methods of Processing Hydroacoustic Inforlation

Tarasenko, P. P. On the Possibility of Employing Methods of Non-
paruetric Statistics in Sonar

Vegin. V. P., and Petukhov, V. D. Algoritt-s of Signal Recognition
With Incomplete A Priori Information

Krasnyy. L. 6. Optimal Detection and Differentiation of Signals
Under Conditions of Limited A Priori Intonation

Lbov. c. 3., and Kotyukov. V. I. Sequential Procedure of Identifica-
tion in llydroncoustic Investigations

Gol'dnan, R. 8.. Nikolayev, V. V.. end 'ritov, M. 8. Diagnosis and
Classification of brine Objects Vith Utilization of rest Theory

Solov'yev. D. K.. and Krasinskiy. P. Ye. Suppression of Antenna
Radiation Pattern Side bobes with a Method Based on Orange of
Aperture Size on a Tine Axis

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

263

270

277

288

295

298

320

328

366

368

351

361

366

372
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

List of Papers Published in the Preceding Five Volumes of Proceedings
of the All-Union Seminar on Statistical Hydroacoustics (1970-1976)

Proceedings of the First All-Union Seminar on hydroacoustica.
Irdatal'stvo Ranks. Siberian Depertsent of the USSR Acede of Sciences.
Novosibirsk. 1970.

Contents Page

01'shsvskiy, V. V. Hethenatical Models and Statistical Descrip-
tion of hydroacoustic Signals 3-33

Dendebera. N. D. Hethod of Canonical Representation of a Random
Field with Arbitrary Spatial Characteristics 310-38

Paperno. A. I. Investigation of the Spectral Characteristics of
Sea Reverberation During the Hove-ant of Acoustic Antennas 39-65

Shotskiy, V. I. Correlation Function and Reverberstion Spectrun
of FM and ‘Ione Pulses 66-50

Paderno, V. 1., and Paperno, A. I. Influence of Hove-ant of a
Narrow-Band Acoustic Signal Detector (Radiator) on Signal
Frequency Spectrum Vith Signal Propagation in an Undervater
Sound Channel 51-54

Aleksandrov, I. A.. and 01'shevskiy. V. V. Statistical Descrip-
tion of Several Types of Non-Gaussian Processes in hydro-
acoustica 55-73

Klyachkin. V. I. On Hydrodynamic Excitation of Elastic Shells 74-97

Tsvetkov. B. I. Problems of Statistical Hessurenents in Hydro-
acoustics 98-112

Zufrin, A. H. Methods of Measuring Current Coordinates of Signal
Sources 113-154

Gatkin, N. G. Flocessing of Rydroecoustic Intonation Hith Gaussian
Non-Stationary Interference 155-180

Avetisov, G. Sh. A Specialized Digital Conputer for Correlation
Analvsis 181-185

Zagoruyko. N. c. Inage Recognition Methods and Possibilities of
Their Employment in Rydroacoustics 186-193

Kurilov. B. H. On a Parametric Representation of Quasi-Harlonic
Signals 194-195

Gadi, T. N., and Kotyukov, V. I. bastion of an Infomtive
System of Signal Recognition Criteria 196-200

ma ontcrii‘uss ONLY
Proceedings of the Second All-Union Seainar on Statistical Ilydroacoustics.
Nauka. Siberian Department of the USSR Acada-y of Sciences. Novosibirsk.

19"].

Kudryashov. V. ll. Vava Hodals oi liydroacoustic Pields in Have-
guides Hith Statistically Uneven Soumlaries

Voytaehhovakaya. S. A.. Kaydsnov. Yu. I... and Saprykin. V. A. The

Problen of Yield Representation by the Sampling liathod

Dardyahsv. V. 1.. Garshssn. S. 6.. Valikanov. A. 11.. and
Kryshniy. V. 1. Investigation of the Relationship Between
Ocean Underwater Noise and Hind Velocity

Klyachkin. V. 1. 0n Gustacteristic Punctionals of Several Iiydro—
acoustic Pields

Usoskin. c. 1. Statistical Properties of Radiation Fields of
Plastic Systems

Zufrin. A. H. Adaptive listth of Measuring Coordinates of Signal
Sources

Ol'shevskiy. V. V.. and ‘l'svetkov. B. I. Problans of Theory of
Statistical Heasuresents in Hydroecoustics

Geranin. V. A.. Gorbenko. V. 5.. Hironov. N. A.. and Pasechnyy.
S. V. Analysis of Accuracy of Measuring a One-Dimsional
Density of Probability of a Non-Stationary lando- Process

Gorelova, G. V.. and Halyshev. N. G. Deteninstion of Errors of
Stationarisation of Non-Stationary Rando- Processes

Novikov. A. K. Mutual Spectrum Analyzers

Strelkov, A. Di. Generalized Model of a Signal Detector.

Analysis and Synthesis of Detectors of Signals of A Priori
Unknown Shape

Paderno. V. 1.. and Paperno. A. I. lstiaating the Velocity of

Scatterers by liaasuring the Prequsncy Spectrum of Sea
Reverberation .

Yeael'yanenlto. l. V.. Libenson. Ya. 3.. and Paperno. A. 1.

0n Pluctuationa of Envelope Sea Raverberation um. Long Tone
Pulses

Nsl'gachev. V. 3.. Boltottw, S. 9.. and Shilovich. I. I. Cor-
relation Characteristics of Reverberation

1‘7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3-31

32-52

32-59

60-90

91-102

103-130

131-1100

161-146

167-151
152-171

172-191

192-196

19 7- 199

200-204
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gersnin. V. A. Analysis of Non-Stationary lando- Processes 205-220

Geranin. V. A.. Gonchnrova, A. You Nironov, N. A.. and
Frodeus. A. N. 221-228

Voloshin. 6. Va. Sons Problems of Theory of Niersrchic
Recognition Systens Applied to Processing of Nydtoncoustic
Signals 229-266

Makhonin. G. 11.. Orlichanko. A. 11., end Rizhov. V. P. Methods
of Measuring Signal/Noise 267-262

Gntkin. N. G. Space-Tine Optinsl Processing for s Signal
Hith Pluctuating Alplitude 263-270

Lbov. 6. 8. 0n Optinization of Functioning of llydroecoustic
Heesurcnent System 271-282

'I‘rokhen, A. N. InVnstigation of the Chsrscteristics of 'l‘ur-
bulence by Optical Methods 283-297

Krasnyy. 1.. 6. Detection of Signals Under Conditions of Incon-
plete A Priori Infomtion on the Correlation Function of
Interference 298-306

Reznik. A. N. Sone Questions of Nessurenents in the Froblen of
Recognizing Sound Innges 305-313

Yudenkov. I. F. Characteristics of Clipping Detectors Nith
Correlated Interference 3110-320

Proceedings of the Third All-Union Seninsr on Statistical Nydroscoustics.
Izdstcl°stvo VNIIPTRI, Noacov. 1972

Colin, 8. P. On Correlation Cherscteristics of 3 Have Field of e
Non-Honochronatic Radiation Source in Media Vith Rando- Pere-
Ileters A-Zo

Calanenko, V. 3.. end Ksrnovskiy, H. 1. Correlation and Direc-
tionsl Properties of Fields of Non-Stationary Inhonogeneoua
Sources 21-30

alok. A. V., and 01'shevskiy. V. V. 0n the Influence of the
Paraneters of minted Signals on the Frequency and “Pine

Characteristics of Sen Reverberation 31-65
01'shevskiy. V. V. Ststisticsl alsracteristics of See Be-
vsrberation Uith mutual-Correlation Processing 66-60
168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Yekovlev, A. 8. Results of an Experinental investigation of
Statistical Characteristics of Reverberation Signals in a

River

Kudrynshov. V. E. On the Problen of Features of a Have Hodel
of a Sound Field in a Shadow Zone

ll'ichev. V. l. A Statistical Hodel of Origination and Occur-
rence of Hydrodynasic Cavitation and Acoustic-hydrodynaaic
Phone-ens

Lesunovskiy, V. P.. and Khokha. Yu. V. 0n Noise Modulation
During hydrodynaeic Cavitation

Halyshav. K. l. 0n Transaission of Hydroacoustic “information
Under Conditions of Multiple-Have Propagation

Gatkin. N. 6. Optical Hethods of Space-Tine Processing of an
Additive Hixture of Detersined and Rando- Signals

Csianenko. V. 8.. Ksrnovskiy. H. l.. and Krasnyy, L. G.
Statistical Analysis of Bandoa Acoustic Pields

Galanenko. V. 3.. Gatkin. N. 6.. end Krasnyy. L. c. 0ptinal
Space-Tina Processing of Signals in a Gaussian Interference
Pield

Geranin. V. A. Past Pourier Transfer: and Possibilities of
its Utilization in Statistical liydroacoustics

Hekhonin. G. H. One Hethod of Processing Rydroncoustic Signals

Zufrin, A. )1. Adaptive Methods of Measuring Current Coordinates
of Signal Sources

Idin. V. V.. and Kakalov. V. A. One liathod of Bsti-ating the
Interference Resistance of a Hide-Band Signal Detector
Under Conditions of e Non-Stationary Interference Pield

01'shevskiy, V. V. Problem of Planning Experinental Investiga-
tions and Statistical Measure-eats

Col'dshteyn. 6. 1a.. and 01'shevskiy. V. V. Problems of

Evaluating the Effectiveness of Scientific-Technical
Proposals

Rosenberg. V. Ya. Classification of Rando- Processes and
Their Transformation Operators

1109

FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY

61-60

69-76

77-100

101-108

109-116

117-135

136-16 5

166-156

157-196
195-206

207-229

230-237

238-255

256-262

263-280
Aleshchenlto. 0. H.. and Yudankov. I. P. On A-plification of a
Receiving Mtenne Array in e Multiple-Comment lntartarence
Pield

Ryshov, V. P. Application of the Consolidation hethod for
Processing Signals Under Conditions of Significant A Priori
Uncerteinty

Rogorovskiy. 0. A. On Constructing Optinsl Polyhernonic Signal
Detectors Vith Non-Rayleigh Distribution of Ilarsonic Alpli-
tudes

P'yenov, V. H. Interference Resistence of en Optinl Bcho Signal
Detector in Detection of an Bcho Signal

Kehekov. 1.. S. The Role of Plenary in Hultiple-Prese Signal
Detection

Voloshin. 6. Vs. One Method of ”mltiplying" Hydroacoustic
Signal Reeliutions

Gershsskh, 8. 6. Prikhod'ko. V. P.. and Svet. V. D. A
Statistical Method of Patinating Non-Lines: Distortions
in llydroecoustic System end Co-unicstion Channels

Votsekhovsksys. S. A. Statistical Cherecteristics of en
Acoustic Pield Arising es a Result of the Pomtion of Ice
Cover Prectures

Polyensksya, ‘l'. V., end Skips. H. I. Models of llydroacoustic
Signals Per-ed in the Vicinity of the See Ploor

Vesel'yenenko. I. V.. Libenson. Ye. 8.. Paliy. A. P., end
Peperno. A. I. Sores Results of Experisentsl Investigstions
of Sen Reverberntion During deistion of Couple): Signels

281-283

286-291

292-301

302-309

310-316

316-321

322-327

328-337

337-363

363-367

Proceedings of the Pourth All-Union Seniner on Statistical Hydroecoustics

(SC-6), Izdstel'stvo of the Siberian Department of the USSR Acadely

of Sciences, Novosibirsk. 1973

Isvetkov. B. I. System Engineering Kethods in Statisticel
Hydroscoustics

Zsyezdnyy, A. H. Classification of Signals Propegeted in a
Vster Msdiun, Desed on Processing The: According to Struc-
tursl Properties

Solodovnikov, V. V.. and Dirgokov, V. P. Opti-sl Processing
of Non-Stationery Rsndos Ilydroscoustic Signals

150

M OFFICIAL USS ONLY

3-13

16-22

23-32
Yudenkov. I. P. Sons Integrel Reletione Connected Hith Ordering
Bendoe Vector Couponents

Ol'ehevskiy. V. V.. end Pelevin. V. P. The Influence of Un-
predicted Veter Hediu Absorption couponent on the htuel Gor-
reletion of Reference end Useful Signels

Ol'shevskiy. V. V.. end Spiteyn, Ye. I. lbdels of llydroecoustic
Chennele end Signele end ‘l'heir Correletion mrecterietics

Cerenin, V. A. Spectrel Representetion of Non-Stetionery Rendon
Processes

Kudrvnehov, V. H. The Problen of Porting Sound Pields Under Con-
ditions of Per-etion of Shedov Zones

Horns. 'r. A. Correletion Cherecteristics of See Revsrberetion
Pro- s Sound-Scettering Leyer

Petrov. V. V. llydroecoustic Signel Discretizetion

Veker, K. 3.. end Rthevkin. V. R. Physics). Principles of Hodeling
Signels Under Conditions of s Coupler Acoustic Field Structure

Veker, K. B. Kirillov, Ye. V.. end Ouchinnikov. N. 1. Energy
Chsrecteristice of bong-Benge Reverberetion

Kekelov. V. A. "ensure-eat of Glencing Angles of mltiple-Vevc
Signel Cowonents

Den'yenovich, V. V.. nrlik, Ye. 8.. end Senenov. V. V. Results
of Experinentel Investigstions of Verticel Angular Sound Field
Spectre

Chuprov, S. ’1'. The Problen of Optinizetion of Signels in (br-
rclators Hith Conanicetions Vie Hydroecoustic Cbennele With
Perueters Chenging on e The Axis

Colin. 3. P. Propegetion of e Hoduleted Noise Signel in e
mitiple-Heve Quennel with Constent Pereneters

Aleksendrov, A. P., end Vnyndruk, 8. S. Sons locel Chsrecter-

istics of Ultrasonic Scetter by e Surface-Adjacent Aereted
See Leyer Hith Vertical Probing

Vsyndruk. B. 5., end Peritskiy. A. S. Pastures of Surface
Reverberetion During locel See Have Irredietion

Cntkin, N. 6. Algorithm at Optinel Spece-‘l'ine Processing of
Random Fields

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

33-35

36-66

67-59

60-75

76-83

86-92
93-95

96-106

105-109

110-121

122-129

130-138

139-167

168-157

158-167

168-200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Getkin. N. 6.. Gorbsnko. V. 8.. Zelisnyek. S. N.. Kraenyy. 1.. 6..
and Shner. l. 1. Detection of Noise Signals in a Field of
Distributed and Local Interference

Dozhok. Yu. 0.. Gathin. N. 6.. Kernovekiy. H. 1., lireenyy.
L. 6., and Paeechnyy S. V. The Punction of Uncertainty in
Optilel Space-Tine Signal Processing

Cochin. N. 6.. and P'yanov. V. H. Interference Resistance of
Optimal Detectors for a No-Conponent Signal

P'yanov.’ V. H. Characteristics of Detection of a Standard
Channel when Receiving a M-Conponent Signal

Gettin. N. 6., and Krasnrenko. V. 1.. Signal Detection in the
Presence of Non-Gaussian Interference

‘raradenov. 1.. Ya. The Problen of Conputing Correlation Punc-

tions of Echo Signals Pro. a Circular Cylinder of Finite
Height

01‘shevskiy. V. V. end Pivovarov. S. L. Accusulation of Pluctuat-
ing Pulse Signals Nith Differing Probability Distributions

Vorob'yev. V. 1. Application of Spectral Analysis for
Processing Hydroscoustic Signals

Orlichcnko. A. N. Algorithm for Signal Detection in Noise
of Unknown Intensity

Rokotov, S. P., and Vablonskiy, Yu. N. Cooperative Analysis
of the Interference Resistance of Several Types of

Manipulation in ‘l'rsnenitting Telenetry Information by a
Nydroecoustic Chanel

Reznik. A. H. A Systems Approach to Constructing Dynamic
Models in Hydroacoustics

Libenaon. Ye. 3. Sons Output Response Characteristics in a
Hyperbolic Prequency Modulation Signal Processing Systen

Vaysun, I. 3., and L'vov. K. P. Ritual-Correlation Process-

ing of Narrow-band Signals on the Basis of a Past Fourier
Transform

Pederno, V. I. and Rolanovskaye, I. ll. Effectiveness of
Evaluation of an Unknown Para-eter in a Problem of Hydro-
acoustic Measure-ants

152

P02 OFFICIAL USS ONLY

201-212

213-220

221-227

220-236

235-260

26l-263

266-250

251-255

256-266

265-270

271-280

201-290

291-293

296-299
l'OR OWICIAI. US! 031.?

Kerpov. N. V.. end Yeroshenko. V. V. 0n Dininiehina the Influence
of Multiplicative Interference by boloynent of Autonetic Gein
Control 300-306

Kerpov. N. V.. end Peshkov, V. P. On Errors in ﬂeesurins Signal
Cherecteristics During Conservation Hith "emetic Recording
Devices 305-312

Shilovich. I. 1.. Zenskov. A. 11.. lieksrenko. Yu. P.. end Li.
P. Ye. Processing Sole Non-Stetionery Processes on e Digitel
Oonputer 313-321

Hiroshnichenko, V. 8.. end Ponesorenko. V. K. lncreeeing Ac-
curecy of Coeputin; Honents of nigh Orders of Rendon Processes
Hith e Finite Renae of Veluee 322-327

Proceedings of the Fifth All-Union Seliner on Stetisticel Hydroecoustics
(SO-5). lrdetel'etvo SO AN SSSR. Novosibirsk, 1974

Klyechkin. V. I. Punctionel Methods in Stetieticel uydroecouetics 3-25
Novikov, A. K. Synthesis of en A Posteriori Ibdel of e Rende-

Procese According to the Stetieticel Cherectcrietice of e

Selected Function 26-30

Pederno. V. 1.. end Rolenovelteye, I. R. Some Results of In-
vestisetlon of frequency Clurecteristics of e mitiple-

Have Hydroecoustic Chennel 31-35
Kudryeehov, V. H. Acoustic .Pields in e Hevezuide Vith e

Statistically Uneven Surface 36-50
Culin. r. P. Sone disrecteristice of Noduleted Signele luring

Propesetion in ﬂedie with Rendon Pere-etere 51-60
Culin. E. P. Pulse Signel Spectral in e mltiple-Veve Chennel 61-72

Hslyehev, K. 1. Influence of the Frequency Reletiomhip of the
Spatial Attenuetion of Sound on the Correletion Receiving
of Hide-Bend Signals 73-76

Yelieeyevnin. V. A. Frequency Correletion of e Heve Propegeting
in e Turbulent Medina. in the Cese of Intense Fluctuation 77-81

Slrnelev, A. S. Averege Unov-Poyntina Vector of e Sound Pleld
During Scettering on e Rough Surfece 82-86

Antonov. V. P., Horoxov. ‘l'. A., end 01'shevsltiy, V. V. Results
end Problem of Investigetion of Stetlsticel Characteristics
of See Reverberetion 87-106

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V‘l " FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
‘ N.

Kopyl, Yei'A. 0n Sound Scattering by the Ocean Surface with
Snell Olancing Anqu

Grachav. R. N. Scattering of Haves on a Statistically Rough
Curvilinear Surface in the ﬁnalists Zone

Dragan. Ya. P.. and Yavorskiy. I. N. Distortion of Hydroacoustic
Signals Hith Reflection Pros the Sea Surface

Blank. V. K.. and lofts. H. I. Application of Theory of Harkovisn
Processes in Acoustic Proble-

Kovtunenko. S. V., Levin. B. A.. Saprykin. V. A.. and Cherepkov.
N. I. The Prohles of Representation of llydroacouatic Signals

Geranin. V. A. Spectral-Correlation Structure of Continuous In-
ho-ogencous Non-Stationary Have Pields

Taradanov. 1.. Ya. Sole Correlation Properties of Echo Signals

Guberev, V. V.. and Khusnutdinov. G. N. Application of Con-
puter Modeling in Theory and Practice of Statistical Data
Processing and Statist icel “assure-ants

Bogotov. V. K.. Hironov, I. 1., and Perevertkin, S. H.
Prelisinary Analysis of Statistical Properties of Realize-
tion of Rsndos Non-Stationary Processes

Bespalov, Ii. A., Derrhevin. A. li., Sokolov, O. I... and Kur‘nin.
V. A. Reasonable Selection of Criterion of Investigation of
Inhomgeneity of a Noise Field by Dispersion

Lihenson, Ye. 3. Evaluation of the Function of Uncertainty of
Hide-Band F"! Signals

Ovchinnikov, V. P.. Pskhodtin, B. I.. Ryzhov, V. P., and
Pilatov. K. V. Experisental Investigation of the Spectral
Characteristics of Sea Reverberation in Studying Couples:
Signals -

Antoshin, V. A., and Kropotov, S. V. Evaluating Hydroacoustic
Signal Pilter Spectral Analyzer Error

Zalesskiy, V. V.. Kogsn. S. I... and Lykhov, I. P. The Optimal
Porn of Carrier Signal "adulation in Hydroacoustic Measuring
System

lbrozov, V. P. Utilization of Ejection Characteristics in
Exanining Cavitation Phone-ens

1510

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

107

106-110
111-112
113-115

116-119

120-128
129-136

137-163
166-167
168-151
152-156
157-161

162-165

166-168

169-171
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Koaerov. V. A.. and Senenov. V. 1’. Efficient Distribution of
‘l'rnnenieeion Energy Between Spaced Channels Nith Binary No-
Redundency Inforaetion Coding

Godzieshvili. Yu. 0.. end lleoekin. 0. I. Influence of the
Paranetere of e Nultichennel Neeeuring Systen on Evaluation
of Space-Averaged Noise Field Inteneity

Kendeleki. D. V.. and Kueneteov. G. N. Stetiaticel Characteristics

of Occurrence of Nydrodynenic Ceviteion

Gerenin. V. A., Novilrova. '1'. 1.. Prodeue. A. N.. Sononove, G. D..
end Struekiy. The Influence of Non-Geuaeien Cheracteristice
on Accuracy of Spectroeetry of Stationery lando- Proceeaea

Kereveyev. V. V.. end Seunov, V. V. Theory of Neaeuraaent of
Have Field Peraaetere in a Systa of Non-Ideal Coherent
Detectors

Perov, V. P.. end Solodovnichenko, N. B. Stationery Filtration
of Non-Stetionery Proceaees

Antoehin, V. A.. end llubichev. N. A. Evaluating the Influence
of Non-Stationerity of Nydroecoustic Signels on Error in
Measuring-Their One-Dineneionel Laws of Dietribution

Furduyev. A. V.. end Chuprov, S. D. Sone Olaracteristics of
Noise Field Sources in the Ocean

Arte-cake. E. A. Accuracy of Heeeurelent of Several Probebili-
ty Oterecterietice of Nydroacoustic Fields

Gelybin. N. N. Deterninetion of the High-Frequency Portion of
the Spetial Spectrum of See Swell Vith the Aid hf Deep-Hater
Explosions

Petrov. V. V. Kellenov Filtration Methods

Krasnyy, A. 6. Principles of Optimal Adeptive Proceaeing of
Nydroecouetic Infomtion

Gatkin. N. 0., Kovelenko, L. N.. and Kraanyy. L. G. Adaptive
Detection of Signals Vith Unknown Pereneters

Bozhok, Yu. 0., Gethin, N. 6., Kraenyy. L. 6.. end Peeechnyy,
S. V. Quesioptinel Nethod of Detecting Signele in a mltiple-
Couponent Interference Field

Cereeinenko, O. N., Ovayenik, V. P. end Paeechnyy. S. V. Deter-
nining Paranaters of the Non-Stetionerity of Rando- Processu
in the Preeence of Pulee Interference

155
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

172-173

176-178

179-182

183-187

180-190

191-192

193-191.

195-202

203-207

208-210
211-230

231-266

265-269

250-255

256-260
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Karlik, Va. 8., Kovnleva. A. P.. and Senenov. V. V. Interference

Resistance of Plsne Phased-Array Antennas in Receiving a Hultipls-

Have Signal Under Conditions of Anisotropic Interference

Danilova, Ye. A., end Ol'ehsvskiy. V. V. Correlation Processing
of Echo Signals with Random Centrnl Spectrum Frequency. Taking

Into'ncount the Influence of Noise and Reverberetion Inter-
reuse. '

Ye-el'yanenko, I. V.. Libenson, Ye. 3.. end Paliy, A. 1’. Sons
azaracteristics of Reverberation Interference at Matched
Filter Output

OI'shevekiy. V. V., and Pimarov, S. L. Signal Detection on a
Background of Noise end Poverberation Interference with
Quadrature Detection

Krukovskiy-Sinevich. If. B. Quasioptiaal Reception of n Slowly
Pluctueting Echo Signal Hith Velocity Averaging

Ovchinnikov, V. P., Rythov, V. P., and Piletov, K. V. Sons
Algoritlns of Quesioptinal Processing of Requency Modulated
Signals

Karavayev. V. V., and Saronov, V. V. Theory of Frequency
Aperture Synthesis in Sonar

Balsgin. V. V., and Brezhnev. B. P. Isolating Useful Hydro-

acoustic Echo Signals on e Conputer With Utilization of
"Past" Algorith-

Ilekhneson. G. 8. Accuracy of Evaluating a Signal Paraaeter on
a Background of Rsverberstion and Correlated Interference

Gol'dlan, R. S., and ‘l'itov, H. 8. Diagnosis and Classification
of Sea Objects Hith Utilization of Test Theory

Rounenko, Ye. V. Sone Futures of Dolphin Sonar

Borisov, I. K.. Kovtunsnko. S. V., and Saprykin. V. A. Aural
Perception of Acoustic Intonation

Zayezdnyy, A. H. Hetrological Pundenentals of Processing Hydro-
acoustic Information According to Its Structural Properties

Kaptyug, A. A. An Adaptive Procedure of Plotting an Efficiency
Indicator for Measuring Systens

Ksptyug. A. A. Axionatics for en Adaptive Procedure of Plotting
an Efficiency Indicator for Measuring System

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

261-267

268-2710

27 5-277

278-288

289-296

295-298

299-301

302-307

308-310

311-315
316-331

332-338

339-350

351-355

356-366
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vayaun. I. 3.. and L'vov. K. P. Patterning a Hilbert Transform
on a Digital Conputar Utilizing 3?? [Expansion Unknown] 367-368

Colovanov. H. A.. and Spitayn. R. l. Invoctiaation of tha

Maxim Accuracy of ?haaa Mounting Davicea ﬂith Distorted

Structura of Raccivad Signala 369-373
comm-r: Notica Rot Available

302‘
mo: sub/om

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.'.0" FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUDLICATIONS

wmnc comm. 31mm m snot

Moscow RUDY VII HBZHDUNAIODNOGO SMOSIUHA IPAK P0 AVIOHA‘I‘ICHBSKOW
UPIAVLBUIYU V PROSTMNS‘I‘VB (V mm mm) 1'0)! I (Works of the 7th
International 1PM Simposium on Automatic Control in Space (in 6 volumes)
Volume l) in Russian I978

[Table of Content: from book]
[Text] 003133118 Page
Preface 5

Shall, J .. and Hoots. J. (USA) "Role of Automatic Control
in Interplanetary Plights of the Future" 7

Pourne, H. P. (Prsnce) "‘l'achnical-Bconomic Optimization for
Space Projects in the Distribution of Functions Between
m [spacecraft] and Ground Control Center" 69

Houseman. V. (USA) "Control Requirements for Space Transport
Ships in Conducting Experiments" 57

De Bra. (USA) "Control Requirements in Space Experiments
Concerning the Theory of Relativity" 65

Petrov. l. “.3 Lopstin. V. 1.; Hitroshin, 8. 1.; Vssil'yev.
V. A.; and Pavlenko. A. I. (USSR) "Stochastic Terminal
Control of Space Transport Ships" 69

Nikolayev, Yu. A.; ‘l‘eryayev. Ye. 0.; and Shamrikov. B. H.
(USSR) "Digital Stabilisation System for ltecovereble

Spacecraft" 76
Sakhrsmi. K. A. (USA) "Control System for the 'Hariner
Jupiter - Saturn' Spacecraft" Cl
158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Patrov. S. 11.; Sharaut'yavakiy. N. It; Danilov-Nituaov, U. IL; and
Voynbarg, D. M. (USSR) "Blactronnchanical Syatnn for Orientation
and Stabiliaation of Autonououa Hodulaa and Light Space Stationa”

Solodobnikov, V. v.; Daitriyov. A. “.3 and cridnav. G. P. (USSR)
"Identification of Conatant and Variabla Para-nun for Flying
Craft by Projaction nothoda"

Patrov. S. 11.; Viktorov, V. A.; Lunkin. a. V.; and Sovlukov. A. S.
(USSR) "To tha Qnaation Concerning Maaaurmnt of Oxygan
Suppliu in tho Lita Suppott Syatau of Spacacraft"

Alakanndrov. A. 0.. and 'l'aaturyan, K. 'r. (USSR) "Projaction
of an Adaptiva Syatu for Improving the Piloting Charac-
tariatica of Spaca Tranaport Shipa"

comzca'r: Iadatal'atvo "Nam". l97S

9082
(:50: 8166/07“

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

89

95

102

108
FOR 0?FICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLIC!!!”

WC moms IN DATA “941881“ SYSTENS

Hoscov WMYA WIS' V srsmmm PW! INFORMATSII (Magnetic Recording
in Data Transmission System) in Messiah 1978 signed to press 19 Sep 77 pp 2-6.

303-306

[Mnotatiom foreword and Table of Contents fro. book by naksim Vladinirovich
Gitlits. Izdatel’stvo 'svyaz‘”. 7,000 copies, 305 pages)

[hart] 'l'he boo): is devoted to problem of using magnetic recording apparatus
(M12) in data processing and transmission system. The relationship between
the fidelity of various methods of recording and the design parameters of
the apparatus is analysed and relations which deter-ins the requirements on
the recording systems are presented.

The book is intended for engineering-technical personnel engaged in develop-
ment and operation of negnetic recording apparatus and will be useful to
students of WZ'S‘

Foreword

The vigorous developnent of science and technology at the modern stage of
the scientific-technical revolution. penetration of nan into space and into
the ocean depths and careful study of the natural resources of our planet
lead to creatiOn of large volmes of intonation, the need to transmit large
information flows over co-unications channels and to present it in a form
suitable for perception by an or processing by machine. Special intonation
systems are being developed to receive. transnit and process data. the
nudnr of which includes audio and television broadcasting comlexes, coe-
aunications and telemetry systems, the information swaysteu of AS!) and

so on.

The type of transmitted signals varies repeatedly during data transaission
over long and especially ultralong distances. mications channels dif-
ferent in capacity require matching and problens of matching the rates of
reception, processing and storage of the received information occun me

enumerated problems and aany others cannot be fulfilled without storage
devices, as which Iagnetic recording apparatus (M2) are used. Modern mz
are couples devices which include large radio cosplenes and which provide
the capability of their functioning. me can say without exaggeration that
such modern trends of science and technology as coseonautics, coeputer

160

can Renews-vac o..— u. .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tochnol ulmtry and control and scientific meta-eat building would
be avian. without an.

Magnetic recording is being developed at the juncture of many sciences ~-
olectronico. precision mechanics. automation. physics and chantry. mo
ooaploxity of interaction of individual ”12 odoueesblioa is determined by
this on the one hand and the complexity of analyzing the phenomena occurring
during the record-playback process is determined on the other hand. This
explains the foot that specialists of different profile are involved in
dovelopsent of W. moreover, those who. for exasple, are engaged in design
of the transport mechanism or in development of the recording carriers.

due to the inevitable specialization, do not always have a sufficiently
clear idea of what require-onto the selected method of signal conversion
places on the m2 stbusodlies being developed by them. Due to this ope-
cieliaation, the main publications in the field of magnetic recording are
devoted to individual aspects of recording theory and technology. mile the
developers of the apparatus are usually interested in the problem of how
variation of the parameters of individual blocks or subaosodalies of the
m affects the resulting characteristics of the system as a whole. what
requirements should be placed on the m2 amassedalieo in order to provide
the required astrological characteristics of the apparatus with minim-
oxpenditure of funds and no on.

The users of M2 are in an even more cowlicated position. In solving the
problem of the applicability of the M2 in the designed system. they are
forced to use the complex of indicators given in the certificates for the
M2 ouch as aqlitudo-frequency characteristic. nonlinear distortions.
coefficient of velocity fluctuations and dynamic range. however. from tho
consuera' viewpoint. of greatest interest is analysis of how much the
signal is distorted by a given criterion during recording-playback Md how
these distortions are reflected in the resulting astrological characteris-
tics of the cleex as a whole. If one takes into account that even the
some apparetu may be "accurate“ or 'inaccurate' as a function of the type
of output sigml processing. the causes of many failures and even of the
bitter disappointments experienced by specialists who atteqted to regard
the M2 as a ”black box' and to use haphazardly the taken apparatus in
developed data processing and transmission systems, become clear. It is
also no accident that am very frequently are the greatest "bottleneck“

in large radio coaplexes and therefore limit their capabilities.

The purpose of this book is to attth to “build bridges" first between

the developers and users of N12 and second between the developers of indivi-
dual an: mun and those the Mine theme subesoennies into a
unified comlex and to show vhich parameters of the system and in uhat
manner they affect the fidelity of magnetic recording with different

methods of massage processing.

Systems are analyzed on the esagle of am used in data transmission and
procuring system. However. where it was possible and logical. the author
attewted to regard the systes in general form without indication of its
specific designation.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The outline is constructed so that the reader has no need to refer to other
sources with eystelastic reading of the books to study one or another inor-
tant problem. although the previously described materials are outlined as

coqactly as possible.

Mover. the fact that readers nay have questions for which they are unable
to find a direct answer in the book is inevitable. since its framework is
lilited and the topic is very broad. In these cases it is useful to refer
to the special literature, a very detailed bibliography oi which is pre-
sented at are and o! the book.

The useful advice, recomndatione and triendly support oi I. Ye. (Boron.

v. c. Korol'kov, 0. V. roritskiy, A. I. Vichee, Yu. v. skalin and any other
colleaguee and coarades at work rendered invaluable assistance to the author
during work on the nanuscript. to who. the author feels it is pleasant duty
to express deep gratitude. A. I. Viches aade materials on measurement of
the channel characteristics. partially used in the appendix, available to the
author. no author is grateful to the scientific editor or the book v. A.
Vateenko mad the reviewer N. IO. slepov, whose labor and useful advice con-
tributed to a significant degree to inrovensnt or the contents of the book.

Contents Page

romtd O O I 0 O 0 O O O O O O O O 0 D O O O O o O O o I O O I 0 O 3
Hainnotations........................... 5
Chapter 1. Data Transmission Systems and “types of signals . . . . . . 6
l.l. Block diagram or the data trans-lesion system (SP!) . 6
1.2.51MI‘JIWS’I............o.o.. 10

1.3. Analyzing data transnieeion fidelity . . . . . . . . 21

10‘. “Item may.‘. 0 O O C O O C O O O O O O O I I C 25
1.5.8pectralanalyeis.................. 3;!
1.6.Correlationanalysis................ 35

1.7. Determining the parameters of pulsed procee . . . 36

chapter 2. Magnetic Recording Apparatus in SP! . . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.1. Designation of magnetic recording apparatus in SP: . 37

2.2. Predetector and postdetector recording . . . . . . . 43

2.3. ms dlannel and magnetic recording channel . . . . . 47
2.4.Diroctrecording.................. 49
2.5.nodulationrecording................ 50
2.6.Digitalrecording.................. 63
2.7.hdaptivelothodsofrecording............ 80

2.8. mat characteristics of mz oust one know? . . . . . 81

Chapter 3. Static Characteristics of the Record-Playback Channel . . 83
3.1. An idealized recording-playback channel . . . . . . . a:
3.2. “fact of static defects of heads and technological
tolerances for Isnutacturing accuracy on the wave
characteristiceotduechannel ........... 86

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Onepter d.

Captor S.

Oupter 6.

Chapter 7.

3.3.

30‘.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

effect of inaccurate eetting of the heed on the
wevecherecterietic.................
Mlitude end wove cherecterietice of the recording
m1 0 I O O O O O 0 O O O O 8 C O O O O O O O O O
Pulee cherecterietice of the record-playback chennel
Correction of the wave (frequency) and pulse choreo-
terieticofthethrcughchenml. . . . . . . . . . .

Dynamite of the Recording Carrier Treneport and Its
Reletionehip to the ‘rrenenieeion rector . . . . . . . . .

‘01.

4.2.

4.3.

4.4.

Nature of fluctuaticne created by the carrier during
trmrt O I O J O O O O O o O o O O 0 O o 0 O O O I
Reletionehip of the etatietical cherecterietice of

fluctuatione of the deeim perentere of the chennel
to etatietical cherecterietice of the trenenieeion

In“: 0‘ O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O I O O 0 O 0
Structure). noiee of Iagnetic tapee end contect noiee
ofrecording ..
Velocity ﬂuctuations and tine errore . . . . . . . .

Paeeege of Continuous signele ‘Ihmugh the Record-Playback
ml 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 0 0 O O O O O O O O

5.1.
5.2.

5.3.
50‘.

5.5.

Effect of lineer dietortione of the chennel on con-

tinuoueeignelpare-etere..............
rluotuetione of continuoue eignal eeplitude caueed by
peeeege of the. through the record-playbook channel .
Pheeeendfrequencyfluctuetione ..........
Bffect of correction of «plum-frequency cherec-

terietic on the value of pheee fluctuatione . . . . .
Coebineticn noiee end dietortione . . . . . . . . . .

Pauege of Puleed signale mm the Record-Playback
m1 .........................

6.1.
6.2.

6.3.
6.4.

6e5e
6.6.

Hatching puleed eignal epectre to channel perentere
Hethodeofpuleeeheping
Requireaenteonehepere...............

1ypeeofehepere
Threehold eheping end problem of neeeure-ent end

diecrininetion of the lengthe of equare-vave puleee .
Threshold eheping in pulee detection problem . . . .
Zeroehapingof thederivetive . . . . . . . . . .

Peeeege of coqlex puleee through the record-pleybeck
chennel..

Magnetic Recording fidelity in mlitude hnelyeie Problem

7.1.

7.2.

7.3. Bffect of channel noiee on the probability cheracterie-

affect of noiee on the informative parameters of a

eignel .
Analyzing fidelity in problem of measuring phyeicel
veluee .......................
ticeoftheeignal .................

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

91

94
104

11‘

123
123

131

138
140

1‘7

147

154
158

171
173

179
179
181
181
182

187
193
196
201
211
211
212

220
Chepter 9.

Cup“: 9.

70‘.
705.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aspects of reproduced eignsl dietribution . . . . . .
Incressing recording (ideiity uhen using sdsptive
mu” 0 O O C O O O O I O O O O O I O O O O O O O O

“emetic Recording fidelity in Spectre]. end Correietion
mxni. m1.“ 0 0 0 l O O O O O O I O O O O O O 0 O 9

8.1.
8.2.

8.3.
8.4.

Spectre]. end correietion cherscterietics or the
reproduced eignsi during direct recording . . . . . .
street of dietortions of the simel specta- on the
resultcfepectreienslyeis. ............
m mmng O O O I O O O O O O O O O O O I O 0 C 0
Specific errors of spectrsi enslysis in cyclic
'mrdmg “v1“. 0 O 0 t O O O O O O O 0 O O 0 O O O

Dependebility o! Digitei Hsgnetic Recording . . . . . . .

9.1.
9.2.

9.3.
90‘.
9.5.

9.6.
9.7.
9.8.
9.9.

min problems which occur during analysis of digits).
recordingdependebility...............
Determining the per-issible density of recording by
perenelcode....................
”mm“ ““1 O O O O O 0 O O 0 0 O O O O O O
Pheeereccrdingchsnnel...............
Vectors sitecting the dependsbility o! digitei
rmmng O O O O O O O O O 0 O O O O O O O O O O I
Hothods of neuuring end eneiyring dependability .
Dependebiiityotm-recording . . . . . . . . .
Increesing recording dependebiiity . . . . . . . .
Dependebilityotphseerecording . . . . . . . . .

Appendix. ﬂeesuring the (berating (hereoteristice of A32 . . . . . .

Bibiiogrephy .
commas-r:

6521
C80:

1870

eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Irdstei'etvo “Svysz' " . 1978

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

229
230

234
234

243
249

250
251
251
254

257
261

269
274

202
288

295
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

CMU‘MTIWAL mans AND PROGRAMME

Moscow watrstmt'm mom: I PIOCWIROVAMIYB XXVI (smut RAM
NAUCINO-IBSLBDOVATBL'SKOOO wcmtm'uooo TSENTIIA MKOVSKOGO UNIVERSITB‘IA)
(Computational Methods and Programing, 26: Collected Papers by the
Scientific-Research Computer Center of Moscow University) in Russian

1977, signed to press 28 Sep 1976. pp 2, l9l

[Annotation and table of contents from book edited by V. V. Voyevodin and
V. A. Morosov, Moscow University Press, 2,7lo0 copies, l9l p27

freq] This collection consists of two parts. Part One contains papers
dealing with analysis of the problems associated with the effect of rounding-
off errors and data in the principal problems of linear algebra: The solution
of systems of equations, the computation of eigenvalues and singuler numbers,
eigensubspeces and root subspsces, etc., as well as with the construction of
algorithms for the solution of the Cauchy problem for ordinary differential
equations, for the optimisation of the selection of nodes at spline inter-
polation, and for methods of computing multiple integrals. Part No contains
papers dealing with research into methods for the solution of weakly stable
and incorrect problems arising in the solution of contraction-type equetions,

extremal problems. the Cauchy problem for a quasilineer psrebolic equation,
etc.

The collection is designed for scientific workers, upperclsssmen, end graduste
students majoring in computetionel methods.

stle of Contents

Page
Part 1. Numerical Methods for the Solution of Problems of Algebra and
Analysis
The Asymptotic Theory of Perturbations in Problems of Linear Algebra. 3

V. V. Voyevodin.

Conversion of Meterence Values on Variation of Step in Multistep Methods 17
for the Solution of Ordinary Differentiel Bqustions. V. M. lerlinltov.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPPICIAL US! ONLY

Po

Solution Error Estimates for Systems of Linear Algebraic

Equations. V. V. Voyevodin. 2
Uniform Distribution of Fractional Ports. V. V. Voyevodin. 2
Computer Operations Prom a Hathematicien's Standpoint.

V. V. Voyevodin and c. D. Kim. 3
Investigation of o class of Discrete Distributions.

V. Ya. Calkin and H. V. Ufimtaev. 3
Caputstion of Integrals of Rapidly Oscillating Functions.

Ya. H. Zhileykin and A. B. Kukarkin. S
Computation of llultiple Intergals. Ye. ii. Zhileykin and

Yu. I. Pedoeeyeva. 6
Numerical Solution of the Cauchy Problem for Ordinary Linear

Homogeneous Differential Equations Hith Large Integration

Sewnts. S. P. Zoletkin. 8-
Accuracy of Elementary Computer Operations in the Floating-

Point Mode. N. A. Ismailove. 8

Part 2. nethods for the Solution of weekly Stable and Incorrect Problems

Optimal Regularization of Linear Operator Equations with

Random noise. H. V. Aref'yeva. 91
liethod of Quosisolutions in Incorrect Extremal Problems.

P. P. Vasil'yev. ll'
Smoothing L-Splines of One or Many Variables. V. P. Voyevudskiy. 12‘

Solution of Incorrect Cauchy Problem for a Quasilinear Parabolic
Equation. N. L. Col'dman.

A Packet of Hacromodulee for the Solution of Problems of Mean

Square Approximation of the Functions of Several Variables.
H. K. Simarin. IS!

166
FOR 031'!an 053 max
'0! OI'PICIAI. 088 MY

Selection of Rodeo at Interpolation of Function. by L-Splinoo.
A. I. Grebennikov.

Hininiution Algorithm. H. V. blinina, Ye. n. Hyokiohevo.
1'. I). Noouohchnovo, V. s. Orlov ond ‘l‘. L. Mnovo.

WRIGHT: lzdotol'otvo Hookovskoao universitoto, 1977

I386
030: 1870

167

'03 OPPICIAL [58 ON“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

PHYSICS 01' 8M6 DISEQUILIBRIUM PLASHA

Moscow PIZIKA SIL'MNERAVNOVESNOY PLAZHH Physics of Strong Disequilibriu-
Plssna) in Russian 1977 signed to press 17 May 77 pp l-lo, 346-3107

[Annotatiom table of contents. and preface fron book by A. A. Ivanov,
Atonizdat, 2,200 copies. 352 pages]

[Text] This book exanines the phenonena and processes studied in plasna
physics in solving the probles of controlled thermonuclear synthesis. The
author devotes principal attention to description of linear and nonlinear _
conditions of plasss instabilities and their influence on please contain-eat
and heating. The author discusses in detail problems which arise when
heating please with powerful beans of electron. as well as possibilities of
initiating a thernonuclear reaction with a powerful laser pulse.

This book is intended for specialists in the area of plasss physics as well
as graduate students and upper-division undergraduates in the corresponding
areas of specialization.

Contents Page

Preface 3
Chapter 1. Electron and Ion beans in Please 5
1.1. Quasineutrality of Plans 5
1.2. Collisions in Please 6
1.3. Collisionlese Kinetic Equation 8
1.6. Instabilities of Cold Plans 11
1.5. Bess Instability 16
1.6. Current Instability in Please 17
1.7. Influence of Thernal Spread on Please Stability 18
1.8. lon Bean Instability in Please 23
1.9. Kinetic Effects 25
1.10. Boundaries of llydrodynasic and Kinetic Descriptions 31
1.11. Quasilinear Approximation 33
1.12. Self-Sinner Solutions 39
1.13. Synthesis of Self-Sinilar Solutions 66

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
101‘.

1.15.
1.16.
1.17.

1.18.

1.19.
1.20.

1.21
1.22.

1.23.

1.26.
1.25.
1.26.

Chapter

2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.6.
ZaSa
2.6.

2.7.
2.8.
2.9.
2.10.

2.11.
2.12.

2.13.
2.16.
2.15.
Olapter
3.1.
3.2.

3.3.
3.6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Liaits of Applicability of Ono-Dimensional Self-

Siailar Theory

Stationary Electron Benn Injection Into Plaaae
Interaction of a Honoenergetic Electron Beam With Plaaaa
Interaction of a Honoenergatic Electron Bean With Danae
Plasae

Nuaarical Modeling of Interaction Between bean and

Dense Flea-a

Experiaental Investigations of Dean Relaxation in Plasaa
‘l'hree-Diasnsional Relaxation of an Electron Been in
Please

Relaxation of a bow-Density Ion Bean in Please
M-Diaensional Nuaerical Modeling of Interaction of an
Electron Bean With Collisionlaaa Plasaa

“mo-Dinensional Nunerical Modeling of Interaction of an
Ion Bean With Collisionless Plasaa

bow-Frequency Oscillations oi Plaaaa in a Hagnetic Pield
Integration by Trajectories

Quaailinear Relaxation of an Ion Bean in a Plasaa Gon-
fined in a Hagnetic Field

2. Confining Plasaa With Hegnetic Fields

Plea-a Trap With lugnetic Plugs

Channel Instability

Effect of Stabilization of Channel Instability

Drift Instability of Plasls When kb1<<1

Drift Instability when ulna

Ion-Sonic and wclotron Inatabilities of Inhoeogeneous
Plane

Derivation of a Systel of Quasilinear Equations for an
Inhoaogeneons Plea-a

Initial Stages of Qiasilinear Relaxation

Diaplaceaent of a Wave Packet Into the Region kzi3l>l
Propagation of Noise in Wave number Space

Plasaa Fquilibriua in a Magnetic Field

Stabilization of Drift Instability in Traps With
Miniat- lal when 'r.>>'r

Stabilization of Instatility of a Slightly Inhoeogeneous
Iaotheml Places in a 'l‘rap

Quaailinear Relaxation of the Unstable Function of
Particle Distribution in a Field With Mini-m |u|
Stability of a Plasaa Colu-n

3. Interaction a! ﬂigh-Frequency Fields With Plasaa
Basic Term and Qualitative Appraisals

Integration by Trajectories in a nigh-Frequency Field
Universal Drift Instability

Drift-Tuperature Instability

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

68
$0
53

55

57
65

69

95

98
101
106

112
118

118
122
127
130
138

166

151
155
156
160
163

166
169

176
182

188

188
196
201
202
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.5. Drift-Dissipative Instability 205
3.6. Discussion of Results in Stabilization by Magnetic-
Sonic Haves . 208
3.7. Parametric or Disintegration Inatebilities 209
3.8. Disintegration Instability of Magnetic-Sonic Haves 215
3.9. Kethods of Theory of Real: Turbulence and Disintegration
Instability 221
Gunter 6. Turbulent ﬂeeting of Plasma 228
6.1. Have Interaction 228
6.2. Nonlinear Have-Particle Interaction 237
6.3. Abnormal Resistance 250
6.6. Nonlinear Plasma Hovuent 258
6.5. Collisionless Thermal Haves 266
6.6. Beam heating of Electrons in a Probkotron 277
6.7. heating of Electrons by Cyclotron Resonance 282
Onapter 5. Laser and Beam heating of Solid-Target Plasma 293
5.1. Powerful Dean of Relativistic Electrons in Plasma 293
5.2. Cooperative Decelaration of a Power Beam of Relativistic
Electrons in Please 305
5.3. Compression of Matter by Laser Radiation 316
5.6. Effectiveness of Absorption of Power in a Target 326
5.5. Mechanism of Transfer of the Energy of Langmuir Oscil-
lations to the Electrons in a Plasma 327
5.6. Effectiveness of Laser Heating 331
Bibliography 335
Alphabetic Subject Index 363
Preface

This book represents an attempt to encompass a number of interesting
phenomena and processes studied by plasma physics, both from a scientific
and applied aspect. The rapid development of plasma physics, caused by
an attempt to create a controlled thermonuclear reaction, led to the
developnent of new methods of investigation in theory and experiment.
methods which have made a substantial contribution to some areas of both
physics and chemistry. In particular, study of instabilities of plasma
and their nonlinear conditions has proven to be very important for areas
which at first glance seem far removed from one another. areas such as
astrophysics and solid-state physics, high-temperature chemistry and
problems of controlled thermonuclear synthesis, gas discharge physics and
the problem of magnetohydrodynamic energy conversion, gas and solid lasers,
powerful relativistic electron beams and accelerators.

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many studies have been written on all these problem. but they are frequently
of an excessively specialised nature. while there has been no book which would
unify the sbova-enuersted problass. which essentially involve one end the
ease physical basis. This iapedes the develop-ant of general concepts on
please physics and leads to narrower specialization of investigators working
in the various areas of planes physics. Therefore publication of e book

such as this seess quite timely.

At the dawn of developsent of please physics, theory and experinent were
separated from one another to a great degree, since theoretical research was
being conducted chiefly within the franework of linear approxisation, while
experinents for the nost part involved neasuraeent of para-stars of
developed nonlinear conditions of a given instability. As theory developed
nethods were created which make it possible to investigate nonlinear

or collective effects in please. which could be sore reliably cospared with
experisentsl results. This does not seen that the role of linear approrins-
tions in plssna theory has dininished. Linear theory sakes it possible not
only to deter-ins the thresholds of instabilities but also to predict the
influence of unstable oscillations of sufficiently great asplitude on
averaged systee characteristics. One more isportent nethod of studying
phenonena in plasma has been developed in the last decade - nunerical
nodeling, which has proven to be an extremely inportsnt addition to theory
and occupies and internediste position between experisental and theoretical
investigations.

Thus in order to avoid fragmentary coverage. and. as already sentioned, ex-
cessively narrow specialization. we shall describe the phenonena in please,
not dividing then into linear and nonlinear. utilizing thereby the most
adequate nethods.

Blenentary processes in please (Coulod collisions, collisions between
electrons and ions on the one hand and atom and nolecules on the other,
and collisions of neutral particles) have been fairly thoroughly studied
[1, 2], and therefore they are not specially described in this book.

Various approaches have been utilized in describing phenonena in pluses;
the nethod of investigation is described in a fair snount of detail. but
without excessive detailing, which the reader can find in already-pub-
lished sonogrsphs. Principal attention is focused on the interaction of
electron and ion beans with a fully-ionized and weekly-ionized please.

the interaction of high-frequency fields with plssna. the problen of please
confine-ent and stabilization in segnetic traps, the problen of turbulent

heating of please, and the interaction of powerful laser radiation with
please.

In describing these phenonene. the author discusses the conditions of

realization and the present situation principally in the area of controlled
thernonuclear synthesis.

17].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

D

The author would like to express his profound thanks to all participants of
the sesinar held by Aceds-icien H. A. Leontovich, at the Atosic Energy
Institute ineni I. V. Kurchatov. with when he has discussed on nueerous
occasions the problem presented in this book, as well as to 'l‘. K. Soboleva
for her assistance in preparing the manuscript for publication.

(”WRIGHTX Atoeizdst. 1977

3026
GO: 1870

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mxcnnons

IASBR HISSIW I" A W AMP!!!”

Moscow WY! ram V W! AMPS!!! (Laser billion in a
Turbulent Abosphere) in Russian 1976 signed to press 29 Nov 76 pp 1-6.
276-277

(Annotation, Table of Contents. Preface and Introduction free book by h. s.
Gurvich, h. !. Ron. V. L. Mironov and s. s. lhnelevtsov, Indetel'stvo Nauka,
1400 copies, 280 pages]

[Text] The physical bases of the effect of atmospheric turbulence on laser
enission are considered in the book. Main attention is devoted to solution
of problem related to determination of the nean intensity and intensity
fluctuations in laser beam. The effect of turbulence on the phase fluctua-
tions of ligt waves and distortion of spatial coherence is considered.
nethods of determining turbulence para-store by laser snission fluctuations
are outlined. Along with theoretical investigations of sleotronagnetic
wave propagation in randonly inhonogeneous nedia. data on atnospherio tur-
bulence and on netth of describing turbulent fields are presented in the
book. Results obtained by approximate mnerical nethods are presented.
Experimental data and generalizations of then. required for practical appli-
cations in design of laser systens, are extensively represented. The outline
relies to a signifith degree on original results obtained by the authors
during the past 10 years. .

The book is intended for a wide range of readers -- specialists in electroe
nagnetic wave propagation in the ataosphere and in rando- nedia. geophysicists
and designers of laser systens. It say be of interest for teachers and post-
graduate students.

Contents Page
Preface............................... 3
lama!” O O O O O O I 0 O 0 O 0 O 0 0 O O O 0 O O 0 0 0 e O 0 0 ‘
chapter 1. Field Structure of the Refractive Index in the Atnosphere 7

1.3andoaanddeterlninedfunctions............ 7
2. Structural functions and their spectra . . . . . . . . 9
3. Correlation and spectral functions of randon fields . . 18

173
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
chapter 2.

Chapter 3.

Chapter 4.

Chapter 5.

chapter 6 .

Gupta: 7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. me refractive index in the atmosphere . . . . . . . .
5. Iturbulence kineaatics and the field structure of ten-
peratureandtherefractiveindex. . . . . . . . . . .
6. mo nicroneteorology of the surface layer of the
.mw.“ I I I I I I I I I O I I I I I I I I I I I I
7. Optical properties of turbulence in a free atmosphere .

theoretical Methods of Investigating Light Propagation in
a whale": M“ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I O I I
LHIthodofllalldllturbmm.............
2. Parabolic equation and method of smooth disturbances .
3. Aaplituda and phase ﬂuctuations of light waves in a
turbulentnediua ...................
4.1haﬂuygens-xirchhoffnethod . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.8arkovapproxination .................

Phase Fluctuations and Disruption of Coherence in Laser
8.... I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I

l.Phasafluotuationsinlightbeans. .. . . . . . .. .

2. Disruption of coherence in laser beams . . . . . . . .

3. Effect of atmspheric turbulence on the operation of
opticalheterodyningsyatens .............

Mean Radiation Intensity in a Laser Ben . . . . . . .
l.Acoharentlightbean...............
2. Mean intensity in beansonaninhonoganeous path .
3.Apartiallycoherantbean.............
4. Effect of the dimensions of optical system on for-ation

oflightbeans .

Random Displacements of Light Deals in a Turbulent uadiu
l. Derivation of the aain formla for randon displacenent
ofabean.......................
2. Dispersion of displacements of the center of gravity
ofallghtbelll...o................
3. Correlation functions of been displacements . . . . . .
4. Vibration of laser basis during propagation in the
surfacelayeroftheabosphere . . . . . . . . . . . .

Pluctuationsofnadiationlntensity . . . . . . . . . . .
l. Calculations of fluctuations of the logarithm of intan-

sitvinrestrictedbeasa ...............
2. Approximate calculations of strong fluctuations . . . .
3. Probability distribution of intensity fluctuatiom . .
4. Experimental investigations of intensity fluctuations .
S.Randonspatialintansitysurges. . . . . . . . . . . .

Averaging Effect of Transmitting and Receiving Apertures .
l. Bffect of the receiver on intensity fluctuations in
planaandsphericalvaves...............

24

26

35

48

56

60

77

95
101
106
106
112
116
118
123
123

126
133

139
1“
144
159
177
186
211
217

217

2. Pregnancy spectrum of fluctuations of total luainous flux 224

1710
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'I'ICIAL USE ONLY

3. flickering of noncoherent sources of finite angular
“uni” O D I O O O O D l O O O O O O O O O o O O O 227
4. Averaging fluctuations in a spatially restricted been
byanelongatedobjective............... 231
5. flickering of isages in the focal plane of the objective 23$
6. Experimental investigations of the averaging effect of
thereceivingaperture................ 240

daapter 9. Optical ”assure-ants of Ahospheric Turbulence Parassters 240
l. Heesuring the structural characteristics of fluctuations
oftherefractiveindex................ 248
2. Mplitude measurements of the turbulence spectra in the
dissipationrange................... 261
3. Phase measurements of the turbulence spectru- in the
mt” tn” 0 O O D I 0 O O O I O I O O 0 0 O O O I O 271

Preface

Considerable attention has recently been devoted to investigations of laser
enission propagation in the at-oephere with regard to the potentially
possible applications of laser technology. ‘lhe effect of randos 1m-
geneities of the refractive index. caused by atmoepluric turbulence. may

in sons cases be a factor which limits the capabilities of systems utilizing
laser emission. The inhomogeneities of the refractive index caused by tur~
bulence are reflected in laser ssission parameters to a greater degree, the
higher the “quality“ of emission, i.e., the less its angular divergence,

the greater its spatial and tasporal coherence and so on.

A number of monographs is devoted to problems of electrosagnetic and sound
wave propagation in a redh- vith randon inhomogeneities. ”sever. the
results of numerous investigations carried out during the past few years
are not reflected in them. further development of the principal aspect of
the considered proble- was achieved in some of these papers. which made it
possible to apply theory to the case of significant fluctuations of the
radiation field. inortant to practice. Moreover, experimental investiga-
tions were carried out, the results of which per-it one to find a nuber of
universal functions which cannot yet be obtained by calculation. finally.
there is a large group of papers in which various parameters of laser be.
propagated in a turbulent atmosphere are calculated. the most simificant
of the ant-stated new results have been entered in the proposed sonograph.
It should be noted that many of the results presented in the book can be
used without special difficulties for analysis of electromagnetic and

sound wave propagation: in other randomly inhomogeneously media (for exaqale,
sound waves in the auosphere and ocean. radio waves in the ionosphere,
interplanetary audit. and so on).

me material c‘? the book mainly relies on investigations carried out at the
Institute of Physics of the htnosphere of the 05551 Academy of Sciences and
at the Institute of Optics of the Atmosphere of the Siberian Department of
the 0581! Academy of Sciences.

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chapter 1 of the book was written by A. s. Gurvich. chapters 2. 5 and 7
were written by A. 1. Icon. Chapters 3 and 4 were written by A. I. Ron and
1‘. s. hhmslevtsov and Chapters 7 and 8 were written by A. s. Gurvioh and
v. L. hirenov. Sectiqu 7 of Chapter 1 and 6 of chapter 7 were written by
v. L. Mironov.

Introduction

mbulent fluctuations of the refractive index lead to distortion of the
liﬁt waves propagated in the amephere. mis phenomenon has long been
known to astronomers since it limits the opportunities to observe astronomi-
cal objects by using large optical instruments. Study of fluctuation inter-
ference occurring during light propagation in the atmosphere has now become
especially timely with regard to the extensive use of lasers in optical
co-unications lines. range-finder and goniometric devices and in a nusber
of other applications. Turbulence disturbs the coherence of laser emission
and in some cases limits the capabilities of using devices in which co-
herence is esployed (for example, in formation of pencil light beams). In-
tensity fluctuations occurring during light propagation in the atmosphere
cause extensive fading of signals in co-unications lines. since the auto-
sphere is essentially always turbulent. the possibility of interference

due to the opticul inhomogeneity of the atmosphere must be taken into
account when designing optical devices and the system parameters must be
selected so as to attenuate this interference to the maximum extent possible.
In those cases when interference limits the maxim- capabilities of optical
systems (for era-pie, resolution), technical requirements may be formulated
on the basis of the actually achievable characteristics of the systems when
they are operating under atmospheric conditions.

Investigation of wave propagation in a turbulent medium was begun in the
USSR by A. h. omkhov and V. A. Krasil‘nikov. Investigation in this direc-
tion subtequently continued to be developed actively in the USSR and the
results are outlined in two monographs: that of L. A. Chernov (1958) and
v. I. ‘ratarskiy (1959). later translated into mglieh. References to these
monographs are contained in almost all publications (both in the USSR and
abroad) devoted to wave propagation in a medium with random inhomogeneities
of the refractive index. ll'he second momgraph of V. I. Tatarekiy "Have
Propagation in a Turbulent Atmosphere" (1967) has also now been translated
into English. Along with the mentioned monographs, a large nuﬂaer of ex-
perimental and theoretical papers devoted to investigation of laser emission
fluctuations during propagation in the atmosphere is punished annually,
especially abroad: specifically, the special issue of the journal RADIO
some: was ptblished in 1975.

ﬁre published monographs are mainly of a theoretical nature and they are
outlined at a level not always accessible to engineers. Moreover, the
experimental material on laser measurements is not generalized in the
pmluhed monographs since similar experiments had simly not been conducted
by the moment of their writing. Indivile special problem are naturally
considered in articles published in journals.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OWICIM. USE ONLY

problem comrise the contents of V. Ye. myev's monograph “Atmospheric
ll‘rensperency for Visible end Intrered Bee-ﬂ published in 1966 end where
they are rather fully outlined. Moreover. the fluctuation phenocsne ceused
by turbulence ney be considered independently in most cases and they are of
independent interest.

he proposed nonogreph generelires and considers {roe a unified View the now
available «perinatal dete on fluctuations of the pare-eters or a light
wave propagated in a turbulent etnoephere. “the book is prinerily eddressed
to redio engineers, redio physicists end optical specialists end should per-
nit one to calculete fluctuation interference during operation or optical
systole with laser emission in the atmosphere.

11:. greatest attention in the book is devoted to experi-entel results obtained
during the past few years with laser light sources. The Iain data obtained
during the past few years by the authors end by collectives of research
associates of the Institute of Physics of the Atmosphere or the USSR Academy
of Sciences end of the Institute of Optics or the htnoephere of the Siberian
Depert-ent or the nssn Made-y of Sciences on investigation of phenomena
related to ”strong fluctuations'I are outlined. "Strong fluotuetions' occur-
ring on rather long runs were first investigated in work carried out at In
[Institute of Physics of the Ahosphere] of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
‘Ihere is still no sufficiently developed theory which describes 'strong
ﬂuctuations." however, concepts of similarity and approxinate nethoda o!
calculations nade it possible to systematire the numerous experinental re-
sults (or this practically inortant case end to obtain rather eisple eqiri-
cel relations and graphs suitable for engineering calculations.

Considerable attention was devoted to the calculation of the mean intensity
in leeer bee-s end to analysis of detocueing caused by turbulence. A reduc-
tion of coherence due to turbulence is rather dependably calculated for
practically any possible conditions of propagation in the atlospture, which
has been confimd by numerous experiments.

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

f
Tho rooulto of inmtiootiono of both Soviet and foreign opooiolicto on"
tluotuotiono occurring during liwt propagation in o turbulont atmosphere.
publicho'd in tho pron, voro uood oxtonoivoly in tho book. 1M outlino of
tho "35!“. o! oxporinontc and thoototicol calculation in ditoctod not only
tovcrd Mlopinq o oonoopt of tho state of tho problou, but oloo ponito
ono to utiliu thou data for onginooring proctico.

In View of tho fact that dot. on tutbulcnco and tiold otmcturo of tho
rotrootivo indox in tho otnocphoxo io oontoinod in opociol invootigationo
intondod (or hydroonginoon and goophyoicioto. a dupto: on tho structuro
of turbulonco. tho typical voluoo of its intonoity ond nothodo of dour-
nining porn-actor. mponoiblo for the occurrence o: fluctuations in a light
vovo is incluaod in tho givon Ionogroph.

COPYRIGHT: Imul'otvo "llnuko", 1976

6521
680: 1870

178

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UDC_539.l7l:539.l71.2:539.128.5
USING ELBCTRONS TO STUDY NUCLBI

Moscow ISSLEDOVANIYB YADER mm in Russian 1977 signed to press
17 Jan 77 pp 1-1., 207-208

[Annotation, Table of Contents and Preface from book by Il'ya Senenovich
Gul'karow, Atomizdat, 1800 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] The book deals with the study of nuclei by the method of scatter-

ing of high-energy electrons. Examined in greatest detail are processes of
elastic and inelastic scattering of electrons by nuclei with excitation of
discrete levels. and particularly giant resonance. The author discusses
electric and Iagnetic scattering. scattering by isotopes. and processes that
accompany elastic and inelastic scattering of electrons. It is shown that
the method of electron scattering is preferable to photonuclear reaction
aethods for studying giant resonance in nuclei. Nuclear models are briefly
discussed. Other problems are also considered -- radiation and dispersion
corrections. methods of measuring the spectra of scattered electrons. quasi-
elastic scattering with pro-pt neutron knock-on.

The book is intended for advanced students. graduate students. physicists
working in the field of the atomic nucleus. and those who are interested in
the latest advances in nuclear physics.

Figures 52. tables 2. references 255.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Preface 3
Chapter 1. Elastic Scattering of Electrons by Nuclei 5
l. Scattering of Electrons by a Point Nucleus. Nott Formula 6
2. Scattering of Electrons by Nuclei of Finite Dimensions.
Form Factor of the Nucleus 8
3. Models of Charge Density Distribution in Nuclei 12
179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Model-Independent Method of Analysing Elastic Scattering
Isproved Born Approximation

High-Energy Approxisat ion

Phase Analysis

Magnetic Scattering. Rosenbluth Foraula

Quadrupole Scattering

Elastic Scattering of Electrons by Isotopes

Analysis of the Radii of Nuclei

Processes that Accompany Elastic Scattering of Electrons by
Nuclei

Methods of Measuring the Spectra of Scattered Electrons

Chapter 2“; Excitation of Discrete Levels of Nuclei

110.

15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.

Porn Factor of Elastic Scattering of Electrons and Transition
Density

Neln's Phenonenological Model

For- Factors in the Shell Model of the Nucleus

Calculations Based on the Nydrodynanic Model

Nodal-Independent Method of Data Analysis. Transition Radius of
the Nucleus

Inelastic Scattering of Electrons by Isotopes

Partial-Nave Analysis of Inelastic Scattering of Electrons by
Nuclei

Chapter 3. Investigation of Giant Resonance in Nuclei

21.
22.

23.

0'
has

25.
26.
Chapter
27 .
28.
Conclus
Appendi

A.

Monopole and Quadrupole Giant Resonances in Nuclei
Investigation of Giant Resonance in Nuclei with Electron
Scattering

Models of the Nucleus that are Used to Explain the Mechanisa of
Excitation of Giant Resonance

Results of Measure-ants and Theoretical Interpretation
Integral Characteristics of Giant Resonance in Nuclei with
A560

Magnetic Giant Resonances in Nuclei

6. Quasielastic Scattering of Electrons by Nuclei
Differential Cross Sections of the Reactions (e. e') and
gsuitz)“ Measuresents and Interpretation

ion

C28

Charge Density Distribution of Nuclei of the ls-lp and Zs-ld
Shell and Fermi Charge Density Distribution

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

26
27
28
31
33
61
65
52

59
69

75
77
81
85
89

97
101

103
112
113
120

122
130

1106
152

l 57
158
166
1 79
183

183
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

3. Radiation Corrections for Electron Scattering 187

C. Porn Factors of Nucleons 189
References 192
PREFACE

This book deals with investigation of the structure of atomic nuclei by the
method of scattering of high-energy electrons. The earliest research on
nuclear structure was done in the United States. and then in the Soviet Union.
France. West Germany. Canada. Japan. Italy and the Netherlands. Research
results are presented chiefly in journal articles. and therefore it is
necessary to collect the accumulated material in a single book to facilitate
the study of the rapidly developing field of nuclear physics.

This book exaaines problems relating to processes that arise when electrons
interact with nuclei. The study of nuclei by electrons is one of the
effective methods of studying the structure of nuclei since the nature of
interaction of the electron with the nucleus (electromagnetic interaction) is
well known. when an electron interacts with a nuclear field set up by
nucleons and their currents. scattering of the electron is not accompanied

by strong distortion of the nucleus. lf consideration is given to radiation
and dispersion corrections (the latter are associated with virtual excitation
of intermediate states of the nucleus). such interaction is elastic scatter"
ing. In the case of inelastic scattering. we know only the lepton part of
the vertex in the diagram that describes the interaction of the electron with
the nucleus. The advantage of using electrons as compared with photons is
that in the case of real photons. the momentum q transmitted to the nucleus
is determined by the energy c transferred to the nucleus, whereas in the

case of virtual photons (electrons). different values of q are admissible.
This enables us to study the matrix elements of the distributions of charges
and currents in the nucleus in a large interval of transmitted momenta.

Chapter 1 examines elastic scattering of electrons by nuclei. which is one of
the precision methods of measuring the radius of a nucleus and the charge
density distribution in nuclei. by studying elastic scattering of electrons
by nuclei we can explain the influence of neutrons on charge distribution in
nuclei. This chapter also examines scattering of electrons with consider-
ation of the sagnetic and quadrupole tenants of nuclei. as well as the
processes that accompany elastic scattering of electrons by nuclei (radiation
and dispersion corrections). Methods of measuring the spectra of scattered
electrons are considered here also.

Chapter 2 deals with excitation of discrete levels of nuclei. which may take
place with inelastic scattering of electrons. By analyzing measured form
factors. one can determine many characteristics of nuclei in the excited
state -- reduced probabilities of transitions. vibrational parameters.
transition radii and so forth.

181
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chapter 3 is devoted to one of the urgent problems of nuclear physics --
investigation of giant resonances in nuclei. An examination is made of
electric (dipole and quadrupole) and asgnetic giant resonances in nuclei.
The main feature of the eethod of electron scattering is the possibility of
neasuring the for- factor of giant resonances as a function of the trans-
mitted momentum. The aschanise of this excitation is explained by using
different models of nuclei: Goldberger-Teller. Dance and Greiner. the shell
model and others. This same chapter gives the results of measure-cuts made
by the method of inelastic scattering along with their theoretical inter-
pretation.

in chapter.b an examination is made of quaeielastic scattering of electrons

by nuclei. By investigating quasielastic scattering we can study the momentua
distribution of nucleons. determine their binding energy and get an idea of
the correlation between nucleons. An examination is also ends of reactions
(e, e'x) in vhich the scattered electron and the knock-on particle from the
nucleus are simultaneously registered.

The conclusion contains a brief discussion of the outlook for using electron
linacs on high energies to study the structure of nuclei.

The author is sincerely grateful to Professor 6. Ya. Unarov for continued
interest, support and attention in the work. and also to reviewers Candidate
of Physical-Mathematical Sciences 3. P. Semenko and Yu. I. Titov for their
nany valuable coaments that were conducive to improvement of the content of
this book.

COPYRIGHT: Atonizdat. 1977

6610
880: 1870

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

STATICS AﬂD DYNAMICS OP ROCKET BIGIRBS

Hoecow STATIKA l DINAHIKA RAKETNYKB DVIGAIEL'NYEB "SlAﬂovOK (Stetice end
Dynenice of locket Enginee. Pent I) in Rueeien 1978 Vol 1 pp 220-221

[Tehle of contente fEOI book by Ye. B. Volkov. T. A. Syriteyn end 6. Yu.
ﬂeeing, Heehinoetroyeniye. 221 pegee]

[Text] Contente Pege
Introduction.’OOO0.0.0......00....IOOQOOOOOOUCO.CICOOOOOOOOOOO.90.... 5

Section I. Stetic Cherecterietice of Liquid Fueled Rocket Enginee
Chepter 1. Generel Engine Cherecterietice........................... 7
1.?. ZhED [liquid fueled rocket engine] cleeeificetion end
.chmtic.00000.0000000000QOOOOOIOIIOCOII.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 7
1.2. Engine cherecterietice....................................... 13
1.3. Cherecterietice of en engine without geneteto: geee
r.h..tin80..00.0...I0O...OOOOIOOOIOOOOOOCOOO00......0"...O '9
1.0. Optinul engine Che-be: preeeure with e dieplecenent
injection .y.t“0000OI...000.000....OOOOOOCOOOOOOODOOOCO... 22
1.5. Engine chenber preeeure threehhold with generator gee

r.h..‘in8eeoeeloneeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeoeeeeeee 25

Chepter 2. Anelyeie Hethode end Celculetion of Stetic Cherecterietice 36
2.]. Operntins we perturbation...u...........-................. 3‘
2.2. Anelyeie nethode end celculetione of the influence of

perturhetione on the engine's cherecterietice.............. 39

Chepte: 3. Stetic Equetione for the Engine Aeeenhliee............... 62
3.1. Engine chenher end gee generetor equetion.................... $2
302' Pmeqmtion.0000000.0.0.00.0.0.000...OOOOCOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOO ‘a
303e T'lrbin. equations...nu...“n...u......................n. ‘6
30‘. Pu.l line .qu‘tion.0000000-I...0.0....OOOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOCO. ‘9
3.5. Preeeure tenk equetione...................................... 52
3.6. Grewitetionel cherectetietice................................ 54

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Static Engine Characteristics............................
‘0'. c.“er.1 .olutionOOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOO0.00.0.0.0...0.00.00.00.0000
6.2. Model of an engine system with a fuel displacement system....
6.3. Model of an engine without gas generator reheating...........
6.6. Engine with gas generator reheating (schematic C - 2h).......
6.5. Engine with gas generator reheating (schematic G ~G).........
6.6. Engine characteristic generalisatione........................
6.7. Time threshhold for engine system operation..................

Chapter 5.“ Static Analysis of the Operational Precision of en

Busine._00.000...'lOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOCOOOOOOOOOIOOOOII'OOOOOOOOO
5.1. Distribution laws for the parameters of the operational
proc...OOOIOOIIOOOIO0"...OCOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...OIO~OOOOOOOOOO
5.2. Static characteristics of prscision..........................
5.3. Efficiency conditions of the engine..........................
5.6. Regressive analysis of precision.............................

ch.Pter 6. Engine Mju.cuntﬂ..IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIO0.0.0.0000...O.
6.l. Problems and methods of adjustment...........................
6.2. Individualized adjustment....................................
6.3. st‘tic “ju.mut.l.o.0.000IQOOOOOOI0.000QOOCOOOOOOOOQOOOOOIO
6.6. Comparison of the methods of adjustment......................

Section II. Static Characteristics of Solid Fueled Rocket
Engines
Chapter 7. Operational Characteristics of DDT? [solid fueled
r0ck.‘ .nsin..].0.000000000.000......O....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00......
7.|. Solid rocket fuels and basic EDIT schematics................
7.2. Empirical law of the combustion velocity of solid rocket
fuels under static conditions..............................
7.3. Law for altering the surface combustion of the grain

by tiusseeseeeeeeseeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeaseseeseeeseee

7.6. Determination of the operational parameters and character-
istics of RDTT under zero-dimensional problem definition...

7.5. Determination of the operational parameters of RDTT under
single-dimensional problem definition......................

7.6. Determination of operational parameters of RDTT with the
grains of a graduated variation of the transfer section....

Chapter 8. Anomalies in the Operating Parameters of RDTT in the
Areas of an Assigned Hode..........................................
8.1. The relationships of anomalous RDTT operating parameters

in the erees of an assigned regime for e zero-dimensional

V.riantiI.I.0OOIOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOO0.00IOOODOOOOOOOOCQOOOOOO
8.2. The relationships of anomalies for RDTT operating para-

meters in the areas of an assigned mode in the case of

a single-dimensional solution..............................
8.3. Selection of optimum values pi and Ah........................

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

55
55
57
6|
63
66
70
73

77
77
s:
st.
9:
97
97
I00

l08
I09

II6
Il9
123
|28
I35

I38
I38

I62
I67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 9. Factors Hhich Perturb the Operating Mode of RDTT......... 153
9.1. General survey of perturbing factors......................... 153
9.2. Influence of overloading on the RDTT operating regine........ 154
9.30 "0::1..r°.i°n0000O.'0...0.0.0.0....00.0.000000000000000.0... '58
9.4. Perturbations in the operating regime of RDTT and its

resultant characteristics connected with the entrain-

ment of heat shielding materials........................... 161
9.5. Calculating heat losses and the incompleteness of fuel

cm.ti°n000000.0.0.0....O...0.0.0.000...OOOOOOOOOCOOOOOQO '63

Chapter 10. The Influence of the Initial Grain Temperature on
the Characteristics of RDTT and Adjusting the Engine............... 168
10.1. Dependence of the RDTT characteristics on the initial
8r.in tmt.tux°000000000OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOO'IO '68
10.2. Objectives and media for adjusting RDTT...................... 171
10.3. Adjustment of IDTT nozzles for constant pressure............. 173
10.6. Adjustment of IDTT nozzles for constant thrust............... 176
10.5. Adjustment of RDTT for constant consumption.................. 178
10.6. Reasons for the irregularity of the grain temperature
field and the time of its compensation..................... 180
10.7. The influence of irregularity of the grain teeperature
field on the RDTT operating node........................... 183

Section III. Static Characteristics of hybrid Rocket Engines
Chapter 11. Schematics and Characteristics of the Operating
Processes of Hybrid Rocket Engines................................. 190
11.1. Schematics of hybrid rocket engines.......................... 190
11.2. can [hybrid rocket engines] fuel combustion.................. 196
II03. 6RD chwor .qution...5....OI...OIOOOOOOOUOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOC. 2m
11.6. Equations for liquid fuel systems............................ 202

Chapter 12. Static Characteristics of GBD........................... 206
12.1. The influence of external and interal factors (perturba-

tions) on the operating parameters of 6X0.................. 206

12.2. Adjusting hybrid rocket engines............................. 21$

Bibliography..u”nun...”.u...”noun...".............o...... 2'8

COPYRIGHT: Notice Not Available

9082
C50: 8166/0748

185

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

COMPUTER WARE I-‘OR STATISTICAL MDBLING

Moscow WCHISLITBL' NAYA rmmn DLYA STATISTIGIBSKOGO mDBLlROVANIYA (Com-
puter Bauipmen pment for Statistical Modeling) in Russian 1978 318305 to Pie“
29A": 7 pp 2. a. 308-310

[Annotatiom excerpt from introduction. and table of contents from book by
V. N. Chetverikov. B. A. Bahamich, and A. V. Hen'kov, Sovetskoye Radio,
11,250 copies, 312 pages]

[Text] This book deals with problems of building controlled probability
elaaents and controlled probability converters, which constitute the prin-
cipal structural elements of stochastic machines and models. The authors
examine questions pertaining to selection of the parameters of these devices,
evaluation of the accuracy of their operation. etc. The authors select the
moat expedient structure of a stochastic model for investigation of complex
systems, describe the circuitry of the principal component units of the
model and present modeling results.

This book is intended for persons dealing with development of probability
devices. control system. as well as for underyaduates and graduate students
at higher educational institutions.

[Excerptl Introduction

This book consists of an introduction and six chapters.

The first chapter deals with examination of various aspects of implementation
of the method of statistical tests on a general-purpose computer. This
chapter also contains information on methods of forming flows of random num-
bers on a computer.

The second chapter examines the structural features of existing experimental
models of stochastic and analog computers which implement methods of
statistical tests: models of queuing systems. models of network systems, etc.

The third and fourth chapters deal with investigation of uncontrolled and

controlled probability elements, with principal attention focused on analysis
of original circuitry of probability elements.

186
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fifth chapter presents results of investigation of controlled probabili-
ty converters, both original (recently developed by the authors) and ones
utilized in experisental nodels of stochastic devices.

In the sixth chapter the authors exasine the rational structure of a
stochastic nodal for examination of coupler systass, substantiate the ex-
pediency of constructing aggregated stochastic sodels and describe unique
aggregated stochastic devices.

Knowledge in the area of probability theory and cosputers at the college
level is adequate for reading this book.

This book is intended for persons working with the develop-eat of probability
devices, control systess. as well as for undergraduates and graduate
students at higher educational institutions.

Chapters three through six can be read independently of the first two chapters.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Introduction 3

Chapter 1. Method of Statistical Tests

1.1. Essence of Methods of Statistical Tests 9
1.2. Types of Random Realizations 12
1.3. Porning of Randoa Events and Discrete Random Quantities 16
1.6. Per-ing of Continuous Randon Quantities 18
1.5. For-ing of Randon Vectors and Rando- Punctions 21
1.6. Methods of Forming Multidinensional Distributions 24
1.7. Application of the Method of Statistical Tests for

Solving Determined Problems 29
1.8. Utilization of the Method of Statistical Tests in Design-

ing Coupler Systems 36

Chapter 11. Stochastic Cowuters and Models

11.1. built-1n Stochastic Models of Queuing System 63
11.2. Stochastic Models of Network Systems 107
11.3. Specialised Probability Computing Devices 1.8

Chapter 111. Equal Probability Units, Equal Probability Unit
Correction Circuitry

111.1. Classifications of Methods of Constructing Equal—

Probability Units 53
111.2. Equal Probability Units With a Non-Autonomous Source
of Primary Random Process 61
111.3. Equal Probability Units Based on Isolation of Equal-
Probability Anplitude Zones 67
187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
111.6.
111.5.
111.6.
111.7.

111.8.
111.9.

111.10.

111.11.
111.12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equal Probability Units Based on Isolation of Temporal
Equal Probability Zones

Method of Constructing Equal Probability Units Based on
Recording Equal Probability Events

Porming Randoa Equally-Probable Binary Nmbers by
Translating Pulse Sequence According to Module 2
Classification of Methods of Constructing Equal-
Probability Unit Correction Circuitry

Basic Mathematical Relations

Analysis of Correction Circuits Based on Translation
by Module 2

Analysis of a Method of Combining Direct and Inverted
Representations

Analysis of the Neumann-Tocher Method

Correction Circuit With Cyclic Shift Register

Chapter IV. Controlled Probability Elements

IVals
1V.2.
IVIJC
1V.6.

117.5.
1V.5.
1V.7.
Iv. 8.
1V.9.
(Ihspter V.

Va 1.
v.2.

v.3.
v.6.
v.5.
V.6.
v.7.

v.8.
v.9.

Primary Random Pulse Plow Generators

Binary Noise Source Poisson Pulse Flow Generators
Methods of Controlling Intensity of Poisson Pulse Flows
Flow of Infinitely Short Pulses. Basic Terms and
Definitions

Controlled Probability Gate of the First Type
Controlled Probability Gate of the Second Type
Controlled Probability Gate of the Third Type
Controlled Probability Gate Hith Input Delay
Correlation-Dependent Events Plow Generator

Controlled Probability Converters

Classification of Probability Converters

Controlled Probability Converters Based on Disjunctive
Forming of Probabilities

Method of Logical (Machine) Forming of an Output
Alphabet

Controlled Probability Converters of the Recurrent
Type (Variant of Determined Quantization)

Mathematical Model of Controlled Probability Con-
verter Operation (Variant of Random Quantization)
Controlled Probability Converters Based on the Prin-
ciple of Conduct of Flows of Random Tests

Controlled Probability Converters of Series Craf
Stochastic Machines

Matrix Controlled Probability Converters

Controlled Probability Converter of the EASMU Electronic
Stochastic Analog Machine

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

72
78
83

9b
102

108
116

120
126

129
135
138
163
166
160
166

172
183

187
191
197
200
217
2310

268
251

2510
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100020030-8
FOR OWICIAL l'T-F ONLY

Chapter VI. Structure of an haunted Stochastic Mel
V1.1. Principal Mel Speciﬁcations
V1.2. Haunting Equip-eat of mtegetod Stochutlc Mel
V1.3. Structure of node]. base Unit
V1.5. Utilization of the Ptlnclple of Clustering for Gon-
ctructtn; Mela of Couple: Syste-

Vl.$. Models of mltlchnnul System
V1.6. Sale Mult- of Hodelln;

bibliography
Subject Index
COPYRIGIT: Iadetel'otvo "Sovetekoye “die". 1978

3026
C50: 1870

189

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY