FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPFIS L/10153
2 December 1981

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 20/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/1015
2 December

USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(P000 20/81)

CONTENTS

FUELS

Infrastructure Development of Heat Siberian Oil and Cu
Couples: Described

(Aleksey Davidovich than-m; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, Aug 81) ..

Present, Future of Pipeline Transport Bxaninsd
(v. n. Chernyayev; usnmma Pmsmsunosr': 33mm
TRANSPORT I WM?! KEPT! I nmnonumov, No 8, 1981)

Book Surveys Electrical Methods of Prospecting in Existing Hines
(Stepan Vsrdkesovich Dadalyan, et a1.; PODZBHNAYA
BLEKTRORAZVEDKA NA RUDNYKB NESTOROZWIYAKR WI, 1980)

- a - [III - USSR - 37 Pl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS

INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT OF WEST SIBERIAN OIL AND GAS COMPLEX DESCRIBED

Moscow VOPROSY BKONOHIKI in Russian No 8. Aug 81 (signed to press 11 Aug 81) pp 35-45

[Article by Aleksey Davidovich Khaytun. candidate of economic sciences. head of
laboratory of the Institute of Economics and Management of the USSR Ministry of
Construction of Oil and Gas Industry Enterprises: "Rest Siberian Oil and Gas
Complex: Socioeconomic Aspect"]

[Text] Development of the Heat Siberian oil and gas complex is the largest terri-
torial-production program for developing natural resources for the next decades.

The north is viewed as a zone of production and economic development of natural
resources. It is distinguished by remote geographical location from inhabited
economic regions and industrial centers. by harsh natural conditions which prevent
the development of agriculture and impair the development of many industrial sec-
tors. by increased outlays of human and reified labor for work done here. by
natural. climate and socioeconomic conditions that are unfavorable for permanent
settlement. and by low population density.

The basis for development of production in the developed northern regions is the
extracting industry. Its specific weight for Siberia is 2.3-fold higher than on
the average for the country. The refining industry develops at the later stages of
development. although it is often economically more advantageous to create a whole
complex for extraction and refining. The population of the north is mainly con-
centrated in the foci of development. The distance from the main production and
economic centers. the vastness of the territory, and the lack of development of

the road network limit the transport accessibility. Transportation expenditures
comprise a considerable part of the price structure. Transporting construction
freightto the 0b' area in the Tyumenskaya Oblast. for example. reaches 571 of the cost
of the construction and installation work in building up the oil fields. The
expenditures rise significantly in the extreme north. therefore. valuable raw
material. gold complex ores, etc. are mainly exported. The largest freight of the
north. timber. is chiefly shipped by water. Selection of the timber areas is
associated with the presence of natural communications passages. Transporting oil

and gas is an exception. however. It reduirea construction of a'powerful and
expensive system of main pipelines.

During focal development. the industries gradually join up with a complex of
service sectors. A local. social and production infrastructure is created which is
relatively less efficient since it is characterized by small-sized enterprises

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

designed for considerable cuntingents for maintaining and repairing the equipment
of the main industries; by limited local raw material base because of a lack of
farming and animal husbandry; by labor intensity and high cost of the products
because of the small scales of production, increased wages and high transportation
costs.

Water transportation and long-distance truck hauling are the most developed. Hater
shipping under northern conditions is limited. however. by the periods of naviga-
tion, difficulties in reloading cargo from sea to river transportation. the insuf-
ficient number of ports, piers and the poor development of the warehouse system.
Truck hauling is done during the winter on frozen rivers and swamps ("winter roads").
This doubles the cost as compared to shipping on automobile roads. The specific
capital outlays for building railroads and roads doubles and triples as compared

to the European sector of the USSR. Construction of airports is complicated and
expensive. In this case it should be taken into consideration that air trans-
portation operates with interruptions because of the northern weather conditions.

Thus. the main characteristics of the northern economy are: orientationiniextrac-
tion of highly efficient minerals. focal nature of the development of the assimi-
lated regions; need to guarantee autonomy of the foci of development in local
infrastructure. All of these factors are fully inherent to development of the
northern oil and gas regions, which. however. have additional specific features.

Focal development of natural resources occurs simultaneously in different places

of the vast region. Whereas a focal nature is inherent to development of an
individual field or group of fields. interrelationship of elements. interdependence
of the periods for development of each local center of development and the entire
region are inherent to the development process as a whole. The infrastructures

that accompany the main branch industry. although they have a closed nature and are
created to primarily service the local needs. are united together by many bonds
into the infrastructure of the region of development. The same is true for the
social infrastructure. It has common elements and is included in a unified
developing system of settlement.

The oil and gas complex is distinguished from other regions of northern development
by the volumes of transporting of the finished product. Up to 300 million tons of
oil were transferred from West Siberia on gas pipelines in 1980. The average
distance of shipping exceeded 1000 km and the gas pipeline productivity rose by
more than 350 trillion cubic meters per kilometer.

Build-up of the oil fields requires shipping by general-use carrier of no less than
20 million T of freight each year. Construction of only one branch of the main
large diameter gas pipeline from the northern regions of the Tyumenskaya Oblast
requires hauling about 5 million T of freight. The transportation system which
unites the specialized pipeline transport of finished product and general-purpose
transport (railroad. roads. waterways. aviation) thus integrates the foci of
development into a unified national economic complex. This is guaranteed not only
by the direct organizational function of transportation. but also by the fact that
during the construction and operation of the powerful transportation systems. an
infrastructure is created in the "corridors" of supply lines which supplements

the focal structure as the binding link of the complex.

2
INJRIOFIWCIAL UﬁiitﬂVLY
FOIIDFFHJAI.USE(NWLY

The shortage and national economic importance of natural resources of the oil and
gas complex also determine such a feature as its rates of development. There is
essentially no time interval between the discovery of the fields and the beginning
of build-up of the industry that is sufficient for the successive evolution of a
supply system base for the main industries.

The general plans of the cities and settlements are in effect for over 20-25 years.
Selection of the location of the population area. exploratory work and city
designing and building are also associated with lengthy periods. At the initial
stage of exploration of the oil field. it is difficult to define its expected
output, to plan for tie-in of the production base. and to establish the need for
labor resources. that is. the initial information needed for city designing and
building. As shown by experience. if a newly discovered oil field has industrial
importance. it will be involved in intensive production development in the shortest
periods. Its characteristics (reserves. productivity. methods of extraction and
transportation. etc.) are pinpointed during the process of construction and
operation. City designing and building therefore inevitably includes temporary
solutions of its initial stage as an important element.

The period of effective operation of the oil field. depending on its output. is
counted in 10-15 years. after which extraction diminishes. however. this docs not
signify a proportional reduction in the need for labor resources. In order to
maintain a stable level of extraction at the fields which are becoming depleted it
is necessary to drill additional oil wells, have forced maintenance of the formation
pressure by flooding and injecting gas. etc. On the contrary. automation of oil
extracrion reduces the need for workers to run the fields, and at the same time
construction work to build-up the field is cut back. In individual. local zones
of development. the period for optimal functioning of the base production around
which they are formed is consequently reduced. and even more so. the period for
increased demand for labor resources. Finally. the natural features of the West
Siberian oil and gas complex includes an extremely limited number of areas that
are suitable for the formation of permanent settlements. The northern area of
West Siberia is characterized by vast peat bogs and widespread permafrost. The
oil and natural gas fields in many cases are located under such conditions that

it is not expedient to build a city or workers' settlement in direct proximity to
them. In some cases the created population area is not able to expand since this
is associated with expensive work for engineering preparation of the territory
(building up the ground. special measures to preserve the permafrost. etc.).

The majority of developed fields are located on swamps. lakes and flooded sections1
(in Z of the total field area):

Field Swamps Lakes Floodplain
Samotlor 60 15 A
Ust'—Balyk 50 12 67
Hamontovskiy 40 6 9
Var'yeganskiy 37 35 —
Pravindsk 40 3 10

Thus. the process of developing the northern Tyumenskaya Oblast is characterized
by a monoresource type of development which is based on extraction of hydrocarbons
(oil. casing head and natural gas). by large scales and rates of development. by

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the creation of powerful pipeline systems and transportation trunklines of general
use, and the related unification of foci of development into a territorial complex.
by short periods of operation of individual fields and by indefiniteness of the
outlook for development of the associated population area and the infrastructure in
the foci of development beyond these periods.

Production development is viewed as the first stage of the subsequent settlement of
the territories. It is often implied that settlement is precisely the basic
socioeconomic goal of forming production forces of new industrial complexes. At the
same time practice does not confirm the universality of this thesis. In particular.
after working forest tracts, the lumber industry settlements are closed in many cases.
The permanent population is significantly reduced. 0n the contrary. all the pre-
viously discovered large oil fields have become the center of development for a
system of permanent settlements. while the largest ore fields (Hagnitogorsk. Noril'sk)
have become the base for the creation of modern well-built and fairly large cities.

It is expedient in this respect to examine the correlation between the concepts of
development of a territory and its comprehensive development and settlement. Terri-
tories and regions that were not previously settled and are characterized by an
undeveloped infrastructure and the lack of a production base are subject to develop-
ment. Settlement of the territory. in turn. depends on the historical conditions
and level of development of the country's production forces. Permanent settlements
have currently been set up in near-polar regions of the European North that were
previously considered unfavorable for the development of large cities (for example.
Murmansk and its associated system of cities and settlements). Individual regions
in East Siberia. in particular. the zone of the Angaro-Yenisey power engineering
complex. are characterized by roughly the same process of transition from the stage
of development to permanent settlement.

In our opinion. a condition for settlement is the availability of a permanent pro-
duction base which guarantees specialized employment for the population for a long
time, as well as the level of development of the infrastructure. primarily. munici-
pal engineering structures. road network and housing fund. and auxiliary production
sectors.

A distinguishing feature of the settlement stage is expanded reproduction of the
local population. Migratory processes of Siberia are characterized in individual
periods by a negative balance. that is. an efflux of labor resources to the European
sector of the country. Total growth in population is guaranteed by a natural in-
crease. The labor resources are supplemented to a considerable measure because of
the native population. the Siberians of the second and third generations. In this
case the socioeconomic and natural-climate conditions which guarantee expanded re—
production of the population are the definitive prerequisite that creates the
possibility of a transition from the stage of development to permanent settlement.

When these conditions are present. development can be viewed as the initial stage
of subsequent settlement of territories which are suitable for permanent resi-

dence. The Nest Siberian oil and gas complex does have these regions. Permanent
settlement of them after exhaustion of the main natural resource is inexpedient
at the given stage of development of the productive forces.

l.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of the West Siberian oil and gas complex is characterized by contra-
dictions between the resource nature of the production development and the need

to comprehensively develop the social infrastructure which are objectively inherent
to the socioeconomic development of the north; by the limited periods for effective
development of the foci of development on the basis of oil and gas. and by the

long-term nature of settlement; by the need to set up a complex of socioeconomic
conditions in a short period and by the rapid rates of production development; by

the focal nature of development and by the need for balanced development of
the complex as a unified whole.

It has been suggested that the expediti -watch method of developing new territories
be used to resolve these contraditions. The use of this method. as well as the
Correlation of interregional and intraregional use of labor resources depend to

a considerable measure on the specific socioeconomic and natural conditions of the
different regions.

The West Siberian oil and gas complex encompasses the regions of the Tyumenskaya
Oblast and part of the northern regions of the Tomskaya Oblast. This territory is

customarily divided into seven regional territorial production complexes: Tyumen'-
Tobol'sk.Centra10b' area.$os'vinski¢r°b' area. Kondinskiy Ob' area. Nizhneobsko—

Yamal'skiy3 Nadym-Tazovskiy and Vasyugan-Tymskiy which are at different stages of
formation.

The majority of TPC [territorial production complexes] are associated with the
gas and oil industry. of the new branches of economy. one can only isolate the
industry of construction materials and power engineering ( Central Ob' TPC) in the
structure of the northern TPC at this time. Reindeer breeding is traditional in
these regions (in Central Ob'ares . meat and dairy animal husbandry with foci of
farming). as well as forestry and fishing.

The development methods used in these TPC have a similarity. Depending on a number
of natural-climate and economic factors. including the level of development of the
transportation systems. however. one can also reveal definite differences. For an
understanding of the specific nature of development of the oil and gas complex in
West Siberia and the creation of a system of settlement associated with the complex.
the suggested zoning of the region is excessively fragmented and impairs a detection
of the main laws.

It has been suggested“ that four main zones be isolated in the oil and gas regions
of West Siberia. They are distinguished in the set of economic and natural factors.
and correspondingly. the methods of production and social development. These
factors include: I) climate. relief and soils. hydrographic characteristics; 2)
minerals (primarily oil. gas. gas condensate); 3) transportation system and infra—
srructure. level of development (industrial development. settlement. social infra-
structure); 5) medical and biological assessment of the suitability of the terri—
tory for permanent residence.

The suitability for permanent residence depends on the sanitary-hygienic conditions
which have a stochastic nature. Nevertheless. assessment of them which is based on
an analysis of morbidity and physiological studies, is possible and desirable if
only to determine the original level of economic stimulation of migrants. The
remaining factors depend on the degree of study of the natural resources and the

5
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJAL.USE(MQLY

stage of development of the territory. The natural-climate conditions can be
taken into consideration in the medium-range prediction of socioeconomic develop-

in this case).

The set of natural. economic and social conditions which influence the course of
production assimilation and development of the system of settlement even now deter—
mines the zonal differences in the assimilated oil and gas regions of the Tyumenskaya
Oblast.

The first zone is the territory of the Yamalo-Nenetskiy autonomous okrug. The main
natural resources are fields of natural gas. condensate and oil. The country‘s
largest Urengoy field is partially located on the southern boundary of the zone.
Formation of the country's most important base for natural gas extraction will
begin in the llth Five-Year Plan in this zone.

Freight is mainly transported over the northern sea route (with unloading onto the
ice), on rivers and "winter roads." It is also possible to ship freight on the
railroad through Vorkuta,and further on winter automobile roads. Construction of
a system of gas pipelines from the northern fields and build-up of the largest
natural gas fields are planned. The population in this zone is small and is
mainly concentrated on the southern borders. river banks, as well as near the

developing fields. The zone is considered practically unsuitable for permanent resi-
dence and acclimatization of the ecdemic population according to the set of climate

conditions and the development of municipal settlements. The population change,
according to medical studies. is required every 1-3 years.

The second zone is the southern part of the Yamalo-Nenetskiy okrug and the Siberian
Urals. This is a zone where the largest natural gas fields and industrial fields
of gas condensate and oil have been explored in the intefluvial area of Nadym,

Taz and Hessoyakha. The county's main base or gas extraction was started here in
the 10th Five-Year Plan. Over 150 billion m were tracted intheOb'area in
1980. The gas reserves already exceed 10 trillion m . The cities of Nadym and
Urengoy. as well as the administrative capital of the okrug, Salekhard. have begun
to develop in the regional gas fields. Change of the ecdemic population in this
zone is expedient every 3-7 years.

The third zone is CentralOb' area. Oil fields have been explored here and a new

base has been formed for oil extraction in the country. Khanty—Hansiyskiy autono-
mous okrug. and the northern regions of the Tomskaya Oblast belong to this zone

according to administrative division.

Oil fields have been explored inOb' area including the Samotlor field. Fedorovskiy.
Mnmontovskiy, Yugauskiy and others. The urban population. according to a census.
rose in [0 years by more than 400.000. Large cities of Nizhnevartovsk. Surgut

and Nefteyugansk have been formed.

This zone is at the Stage of intensive development and assimilation. According to
the natural-climate conditions. the territory is suitable for permanent settle-
ment. however, as a result of the insufficient development of the infrastructure,
including a base for the construction industry and supply lines. city designing and
building is difficult.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fourth zone is the southern regions of the Tyumenskaya Oblast that are adjacent
to the oil and gas zones. These are regions with developed agriculture, formed
cities (Tyumen'. Tobol'sk and others). and a climate favorable for the population.
Routes of oil pipelines and trunkline gas pipelines (Urengoy-Chelyabinsk) pass
through the southern Tyumenskaya Oblast. Here there is a production base of the
sectors of the oil and gas complex. planning and scientific organizations. and
administrative-managerial apparatus of the central boards and associations. All of
this allows us to view the southern zone as the base for development and to rank

it territorially in the Nest Siberian oil and gas complex.

Zoning of the territory is necessary in order to pinpoint the plans for development
of the region and to plan the most efficient methods for developing the region and
each zone. These methods are significantly governed for the future by the already
noted development trends since they are based on the previously created production
base and the formed infrastructure. The process of further development is there-
fore predetermined 3 great deal by the decisions that were made in the beginning

of the period. There have been changes in the rates of development of industry
over the zones of the oil and gas complex. in :he correlation of the specific weight
of these zones in capital invescments and production of the final product, and

in the population and dynamics of population increase. The approach to the methods
of development which depends on the features of each system has correspondingly

cations between the base cities and the watch settlements. The focal nature of
development of the north in the watch method acquires the features of a group
sysrem whose production structure unites around the organizational-economic center
of the zone of labor activity. The social infrastructure is correspondingly
divided into zones of the concentrated base settlement and the zones of mobile
settlement. The group system under the watch method is mainly closed within the
region of development. obtaining material resources from the outside. and reali-
zing the final product beyond the limits of the region. The labor resources in this
case are used within the group system. while the social infrastructure of the base
settlement must be designed for all the workers of the development region and their
families. The infrastructure of the mobile zone primarily encompasses those
working by the watch method.

The interregional or interrayon use of labor resources in limits of a large region
distinguishes the expedition-watch system of development from the watch method.

As applied to West Siberia. the labor collectives. and in certain limits. the
production plants are distributed between the zones or group systems of development.
The social infrastructure in the expedition-watch system of developing new regions
is divided into zones of mobile, base and supporting settlement.

The zones of mobile settlement include the watch settlements and field cities of
builders which are grouped around the base cities and the workers' settlements.

The facilities of production activity are correspondingly grouped around the
organizational-economic centers. The supporting zone and the centers of settlement
can be located both beyond the limits of the zone. and beyond the limits of the

region. in inhabited regions of the country. This system of development can have

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

a simpler structure: the direct transportation links between the supporting and
the mobile zones. This is characteristic for construction of main pipelines and
geological exploration. The mobile zone in this case is formed by the field
cities and expedition settlements which have great autonomy and short periods of
existence. The links between the supporting and mobile zones are correspondingly
organized for relatively short periods. are designed for lower intensity of use.
and are therefore less stable.

The zone of the base settlement and the organizational-economic centers fulfill
additional functions of linkage with the supporting city. They act as central

points on the movement route of the labor resources. The base cities simultaneously
acquire importance of supporting centers for further advance to the north and
development of new fields by the expedition method. Interaction of the group systems
of development is implemented through these cities.

The traditional method of development is oriented on stable centralized settlement
near the facilities of labor activity on the territory where the development of
permanent settlements is most likely in the future. The network of these settle-
ments forms the population points of varying specialization. In the traditional
method, the zones of labor activity and residence are isolated to a slight degree.
They are separated in the boundaries of the forming populated area: city and
workers' settlement. The focal nature of development of the north is manifest
especially clearly.

The correlation of methods of development also depends on the stage of development
of the zone. From the beginning of formation of the West Siberian oil and gas
complex. the main capital investments have been directed to the oil industry and
the accompanying infrastructure of Central Ob' area. New cities and settlements
have been intensively built here.

The near-polar zone of the Tyumenskaya Oblast began to develop later. It initially

lagged both in rates and in scope of development. The near-polar zone began to
develop at advance rates in the 10th Five-Year Plan. in addition to the intensive

development of Central 05' area. The country's largest base for natural gas
extraction is being created here. all fields are being developed. and cities and
settlements are being built.

The following stages are characteristic6 for the development of the systems of
settlement of the assimilated regions: preparatory stage when regions of primary
assimilation are defined and a model is formed for the development and placement of
the productive forces; beginning of expansion of the production and social infra-
structure. appearance of centers of regional importance. development of regional
ties. and correspondingly. a system of regional planning; intensive industrial

and social development. the appearance of all links in the taxonomical system of
settlement . the supporting and base centers of group and centralized systems;
establishment of stable intrasystem bonds. designation and isolation of boundaries
in the system of settlement. stabilization of the system and slowing down of the
growth rates; further development of the settlement system.

The transpolar zone is in the first stage of development. The near-polar zone is in
the second, and Central Ob' arcais in the third. The southern regions of the

Tyunenskayn Oblast do not completely fit into this classification since according
to the level of deveIOpment of the infrastructure and length of settlement they

belong to the comparatively inhabited regions.

8
FOR‘0FFNJAL.USE1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interregional use of labor resources is employed most widely at the initial stages
of development. In this case the first stage is characterized by the combination
of expedition and expedition-watch methods. while the second. by the expedition-
watch. watch and traditional methods. The specific weight of the interregional
use of resources is further reduced.

The development methods are influenced by the traditions for organization of
production in different sectors. In the oil and gas complex. the geological
explorers and line builders of the main pipelines are the lost mobile. Intra-
regional distribution of resources is inherent to the oil industry. however the
rapid rates of development of the northern fields required the use of the expedi-
tion—watch method as well. In the gas industry. which is relatively less labor-
intensive. the development of new forms of labor organization and the watch

method occur slowly. Finally. industrial and housing construction. transportation
and power engineering still do not use the new methods of development.

The following concept is thus formed for the development of the regions of the
West Siberian oil and gas complex: simultaneous use of traditional. watch and
expedition-watch methods. expansion of the scales of use of the expedition-watch
method as an advance to the north is made; use of the southern zones of west
Siberia and other inhabited regions of the country beyond the limits of this
region as the base for development of the northern regions; formation of cities
of the Ob' region as base cities of the zone. and simultaneously supporting for
the more northern zones; demarcation of development of cities in the near-polar
region. use in the structure of these cities of mobile elements; use of the cities
of the southern area of West Siberia as supporting for the norther zones and the
Ob' region; development of the transpolar zone primarily by the expedition-watch
method with base in the cities of the Ob' region. south Siberia and beyond the
limits of the region. It is desirable that this zone avoid building cities and
major workers' settlements.

The chief shortcoming of traditional city designing and building development of
West Siberia is low efficzency of the housing-civil construction because of decen-
tralization of the construction industry base for a large number of simultaneously
developing settlements and small cities. The watch method guarantees high concen-
tration of housing-civil construction and drastically reduces the transportation
expenditures of the construction organizations. The social-general services are
also improving for the population of the created cities. This method does not
eliminate many contradictions in the rapid socioeconomic development of the regions
of new development. since it is necessary to completely provide all the popu-
lation of the developing regions with a housing fund in the cities. and at the same
time. a housing fund in the watch settlements. This is economically quite expedient
since it is covered by the saving of capital investments through concentration of
the construction sites. however. it results in diversion of the facilities of the

construction organizations to the watch settlements. and at the same time. slows
down the development of the base cities.

The expedition-watch method and interregional use of the labor resources make it
possible to conduct a labor-conserving policy to a greater measure. and to limit
the growth or the northern cities with simultaneous concentration of the housing
construction. At the same time. the social aspects of this method are associated

with a significant change in the lifestyle. A higher level of production organi-
zation is also required.

0

a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the whole. despite the limiting effect of the. new methods of development and the
high percentage of those involved in the leading sectors (up to 641 of the
population in 1980), the region‘s population is rising rapidly. in subsequent
years it will lead the rates of increase in oil and gas extraction. This is
explained, besides the production factors. by the process of urbanization, develop-
ment of the service sphere. that is. development of roots of the region. As a
consequence. the specific indicators of production of the final product. oil and

gas, reduced to comparison fuel. were stabilized at the end of the 1970's, and
their further decline is predicted:

 

 

 

 

Specific annual production 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990

(in ‘l‘ of comparison fuel) plan prediction
___________ __

Per one employed 431 11038 1711 1266 1080

Per one person in the popula-

tion 280 1060 1090 700 580

The data in the table show that the growrh trends (and the predicted indicators)
depend on the program of extraction and the plan for use of. the labor resources.

Because of the rapid growth in the population of the oil and gas complex, the problem
of accelerated housing-civil construction is advanced as the most important. The
provision with enterprises of the general services for the oil and gas regions of
West Siberia was 862 in 1978. housing fund 88!, the density of the transportation
supply lines on dry land was 227.. power transmission lines 151 from the central to

European sectors of the RSFSR. In the Tyumenakaya Oblast. the corresponding indica-
tors in 1979 were:

 

 

Item Total Including for the complex sector§
oil gas geology construc-
industry industry tion

Provision with housing fund (in m2

of total area per person) 10.6 7.8 5.5 7.3 5.8

Provision with children's insti-

tutions (in Z of need) 70 43 50.8 39 100.8

Provision with schools (in Z

of need) 84.5 73 51.1 36 -

The formed situation in housing-civil construction requires urgent decisions to be
made. They primarily include build—up of cities and workers' settlements with
wooden. log. block. prefab, panelboard and other houses that meet the local natural

conditions. In this respect a base should be created for wooden panel house building
in Tyumen'. the komhinats operating in the oblast should be expanded. and the
start-up of facilities of prefab and packaged-unit buildings should be accelerated

in Ukhta, Saynogorsk. Pyzhm and other cities. The time has come to create plants

to produce mobile, container and prefab h using based on modern technology. The
region's need for them is 2.5-3 million at per year. based on our calculations.

It is believed that mass use of wooden houses in the build-up of the northern
cities and settlements aesthetically deteriorates their architectural appearance.

These houses have comparatively little comfort and are not durable. They require

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

considerable labor expenditures at the construction site. Standard drafts have
currently been developed.however. for wooden buildings of improved architectural
appearance and sufficient comfort. As for durability. beyond the limits of the
general period, the need of the gas and oil complex for personnel and the associ-
ated population will diminish. The use of the comparatively nondurable housing
fund will reduce the outlays. bearing in mind that in the future it will be
necessary to guarantee the residence of only the necessary minimum population in
regions with unfavorable and extreme natural and climate conditions.

The social infrastructure. and primarily. the housing-civil construction currently
has the greatest influence on the social aspects of development of the complex and
determine the nature of the demographic processes. It is planned to triple the
annual introduction of housing in the period 1980-1983 as compared to 1979.

and in the a years to build over 7.2 million m2 of housing area, schools for
41.500 students. children's preschool institutions for 31.800 places. hospitals
for 4.200 beds. and other cultural-general facilities. Involvement of shift-
worker brigades from the inhabited regions in construction sites and the enter-
prises of the construction industry. and build-up of construction-installation
organizations in them may be forms of the expedition-watch system in housing con-
struction. The legal aspects of this system have chiefly been defined.

The brigades of the house-building kombinats can operate on the expedition base.
Experience in building housing in the zone of BAH [Baykal-Amur Trunkline]. KamAZ
[Kama Motor Vehicle Plant] shows that the radius of action of the kombinats
can reach a thousand kilometers. After completion of construction of the
Surgut-Urengoy railroad. this method became effective in building up the base
and supporting cities of Rest Siberia. including the near-polar zones.

The 26th CPSU Congress indicated that the complexity of socioeconomic development
of the regions of Siberia and the East is necessary to provide skilled personnel.
to regulate migration and for efficient use of labor resources. Large-scale pro-
jects have been provided for the rapid resolution of social problems of the oil
and gas complex which take into consideration the dynamics and uniqueness of the
processes. and local conditions. Maximum reduction in the interruption of
theoretical studies and their practical implementation is required.

FOOTNOTES

1. See I. I. Nesterov. ct a1. "Problemy razvitiya neftedobyvayushchey promysh-
lennosti Zapadnoy Sibiri" [Problems of Developing the Oil Extracting Industry of
Rest Siberia], Tyumen'. 1970.

2. The expedition-watch system also includes methods of organizing production and
a method of interregiona] use of labor resources and social infrastructure. In
this article. the expedition-watch method is analyzed as applied to the tasks
of socioeconomic development of the new territories.

3. See 8. T. Bud'kov.; and V. B. Nefedova. "Sever Tyumenskoy oblasti ["Northern
Tyumenskaya 0blast"]. Tyumen'. 1977.

[1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

See B. S. Vaynshteyn. and A. D. Khaytun. "In the Interests of Accelerated
Development of the 011 and Gas Complex of West Siberia," EKONOMIKA I ORGANIZA-
TSIYA PROHYSHLENNOGO PROIZVODSTVA, No 10, 1979; B. B. Prokhorov "Geographical
Conditions of Development of the 0b' North," "Sbornik trudov Instituta geo-
grafii Sibiri i Dal'nego Vostoka" (Collection of Horks of the Institute of
Geography of Siberia and the Far- East]. Irkutsk. 1975.

V. V. Kadnikov. "Osobennosti gradostroitel'stva v neftegazovykh rayonekh
Tyumenskoy oblasti" [Features of City Designing and Building in the Oil and Gas
Regions of. the Tyumenskaya Oblast]. Leningrad. 1973; Ye. P. Pertsik. "Rayonnaya
planirovka" [Regional Planning], Izdatel'stvo Hysl'. 1973.

See 5. A. Hilcnina.; K. I. Morozova,; V. P. Smirnov "Problems of City Designing
and Building of the Extreme North and Oil and Gas Regions of Heat Siberia,"
ARKHITEKTURA SSSR, No II, 1976.

In city designing and building. by taxonomy is meant the distribution and
hierarchical systomatization of population areas depending on their importance

in the system of settlement. The following taxonomy is suggested in the
development of West Siberia: supporting regional center (city)--base center--

permanent settlement--vatch settlement—-expedition settlementnfield city.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomlki". 1981

9035

C50:

1822/l0

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS

UDC: 622.692.“.338.986.2
PRESENT, FUTURE OF PIPELINE TRANSPORT EXAMINED

Moscow NEPTYANAYA PROHYSHLENNOST': SERIYA TRANSPORT I KBRANENIYE NEFTI I
NEFTEPRODUKTOV in Russian No 8.1981 pp 2-3

[Article by V. D. Chernyayev, Glavtransneft': "Results of Development of Oil Pipe-
line Transport in the 10th Five-Year Plan and Tasks for the 11th”)

[Text] The Principal Directions of Development of the USSR National Economy for 1976-
1980, ratified by the Decree of the 25th CPSU Congress, specified a substantial in-
crease in oil production and movement of 15,000 kilometers of oiltrunk pipelines on-
stream during the five-year period. Rapid development of oilfields in Western
Siberia, Kazakhstan and other parts of the country, as well as plan targets pertain-
ing to expansion of existing and contruction of new oil refineries dictated the
necessity of accelerated growth of the Soviet Union's oil pipeline network and
determined their geographic distribution.

The principal goal of development of oil pipeline transport during the years of the
Five-Year Plan was to provide capability to handle a concentrated flow of crude oil
from the new fields in Hestern Siberia to the traditional centers of oil refining
and transshipment for export. in connection with this, growth of the oil pipeline
network was accomplished at a rapid pace. Total mileage of oil pipeline doubled
during the 10th Five-Year Plan. Pumped oil volume increased by 20 percent during
that same period, while freight turnover increased by 85 percent.

Such high-capacity oil pipelines as the following went into operation during the
10th Five-Year Plan: Nizhnevartovsk-Kurgan-Kuybyshev; Omsk-Pavlodar; Anzhero-
Sudzhensk-Krasnoyarsk; as well as the Kuybyshev-Ukraine oil pipeline system, which
includes the following pipelines: Kuybyshev-Lisichansk; Lisichansk-Krenenchug.
Snigirevka-Odessa. Construction was begun on the Krasnoyarsk-Irkutsk and Surgut-
Polotsk. This made it possible to increase the rate of growth of oil pipeline
transport freight turnover, which exceeded the oil transfer volume growth rate;
the average conveyance distance steadily increased, reaching a figure of 1,874 km
by the end of the five-year plan.

Each year volume of oil hauling by other modes of transportation is decreasing.
In the last five years, for example, oil hauling by rail declined by 40 percent.

Oil pipeline transport is one of the most capital-intensive segments of the industry.
In the last five-year plan volume of capital investment on construction of oil

13
FOR OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pipeline transport facilities totaled 3 billion rubles, as a result of which fixed
assets in trmt pipelines increased 25-fold, reaching a total of 6.3 billion rubles.
Construction of new, large-diameter oil pipelines has become the principal em-
phasis in technical reequipping of this industry. Approximately 30 percent of all
oil pipelines brought on-line in the 10th Five-Year Plan were 1,020 and 1,220 mm in
diameter. The Soviet Union is a pioneer in the construction of large-diameter
pipelines; the USSR boasts the world's largest average oil pipeline diameter. The
trend toward an increase in the diameter of pipelines in the USSR is due to their
economical operation and the necessity of concentrating flows of crude 011.

An improvement in the technological level of munk oil pipelines made it possible to
improve the principal indicator characterizing the overall performance of pipeline
transport - cost of transfer.

Methods of rapid, continuous pipeline laying and industrial-type modular unit con-
struction of pumping Stations were widely adopted during the 10th Five-Year Plan,
which made it possible in a short period of time sharply to improve efficiency of
construction output and capital investment in oil pipeline transport, to shorten
construction time and to reduce labor outlays.

A total of 79 modular unit oil pipeline pumping stations were brought on-line in the
10th Five-Year Plan.

Automated process control systemshave been adopted on more than 35,000 kilometers of
main oil pipelines. A total of nine automated production management systems have
been adopted at the oil pipeline administration level, which have made it possible
to automate basic functions pertaining to control of the financial and management
activities of oil transport enterprises. At the branch automated management system
level, the first unit of an oil transport subsystem has been incorporated, which
handles problems of dispatcher operational control, energy resources record keeping,
etc.

The Principal Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-

1985 and the Period Up to 1990 specify crude oil production (including gas condendate)
of 620-645 million tons in 1985, with accelerated growth and development of the oil
production industry in western Siberia, in the Kazakh SSR, and in the northern part
of the European USSR. Increased demands are imposed on pipeline transport under
these conditions. Pipeline transport is targeted for accelerated growth and
development, especially for conveying crude oil, refined products and natural gas,
with improvement in the quality of construction of pipeline facilities and ensuring
their reliable operation.

The main task of transportation in the current five-year plan continues to be full,

prompt and timely satisfaction of the national economy's transport needs, as well as
improvement in efficiency and quality of transport system operation. The following

is essential in order to accomplish this main task:

to improve organization and management of the transport process;

to improve the level of utilization and operational reliability of transport
equipment;

1‘
FOR 0F11C1A1.US£1DNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to improve coordination of the operation of all modes of transportation and
their interaction with other branches and sectors of the economy, and to adopt an
improved transport process in combined-mode service;

to strengthen transportation's material and technological base. to accelerate
the adoption of new equipment, advanced processes and automated control and manage-
'ment systems, and to improve the level of total mechanization of freight handling,
repair and maintenance operations;

to achieve reduction in the adverse effect of transportation on the en-
vironment.

In 1981-1985 there will be an increase in oil refining volume by construction of new
oil refineries and renovation of existing facilities. New oil refineries will go
into operation in Achinsk,Chardzhou and Chimkent, and oil refineries in Khabarovsk,
Lisichansk, Hazheykyay and Pavlodar will be expanded.

A further increase in oil production is targeted for Western Siberia in the llth Five-
Year Plan, with northern areas of Tyumenskaya Oblast to cos-once development. The
bulk of the produced Western Siberian crude is to be piped to the European USSR.
Conveyance of Western Siberian crude up to 1985 will be handled by building and
bringing on-stream the Verkhne-Tarskoye-Kalinovoye-Parabel', Perm'-Al'met'yevsk,
Tyumen’-Yurgamysh, Pavlcdar-Chimkent, Chimkent-Chardzhou, and Cbardara-Fergana
pipelines, together with pipeline pumping stations, as well as completion and start-
up of pumping stations on the existing Aleksandrovskoye-Anzhero-Sudzhensk, Anzhero-
Sudzhensk-Krasnoysrsk-Irkutsk, and Ur'yevskiye-Yuzhnyy Balyk oil pipelines.

Preliminary targets call for bringing on-line in the llth Five-Year Plan a total of
9,240 kilometers of oil pipeline and 97 pumping stations.

Automated oil transport process control systems will undergo further development.

In conformity with the comprehensive program for 1981-1985, in addition to the
development of new industrial process automated control systems, principal attention
will be focused on the development and improvement of automated control systems
developed in the 10th Five-Year Plan. Work is to begin on development of the in-
tegrated Transneft' automated control system.

Plan targets include further development and improvement of industrial construction
methods in oil pipeline transport. execution of an aggregate of measures to improve
main and auxiliary oil pipeline equipment, development of open-sir pumping stations,
designing of arctic-model pumping stations, and industrialization of construction of
service lines and service base facilities.

In addition to the adoption of advanced methods and techniques of equipment servicing
and maintenance, the unit-assembly method of repairing pumping station equipment will
come into use in 1981-1985. The level of centralized performance of minor repairs
and major overhauls (by mobile field service crews) will increase during the llth
Five-Year Plan from 38 percent in 1981 to 65 percent in 1985.

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organizatsii, upravleniya i
ekonomiki neftegazovoy promyshlennosti (VNIIOENG), 1981

3024
C50: 1822/33

15
FOR‘OFIWCJAL USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS

BOOh SURVEYS ELECTRICAL METHODS OF PROSPECTING IN EXISTING MINES

Yerevan PODZEMNAYA sumrnonazvsnu NA nunnvxn ussroaozunamuxa ARMENII in Russian
1930 pp 3-7_, 211-215

(Annotation. table of contents, introduction and conclusion from the book. "Under-
ground Electrical Exploration at Armenia's Ore Deposits." by Stepan Vardkesovich
Badalyan, Georgiy Oganezovich Gazaryan and Bagarshak Bagdasarovich Gamoyan of the
Order of Labor Red Banner Institute of Geophysical and Engineering Seismology of
the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo AN [Academy of Sciences] Arm-
yanskoy 553, 1.000 copies, 222 pages]

[Text] The book examines methods of underground electrical exploration-the natunﬂ
field (YeP). earth currents (BT), induced polarization (VP) and the superlong-wave
variant of the radiokip [radio—comparator and direction-finding] (SDV-radiokip)
method-~whieh are being further developed in operations of the Institute of Geophy-
sics and Engineering Seismology (IGIS) of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences.

The physical bases for these methods are given and the apparatus, the methodology
for making measurements and interpretations of the data. and the results of a test
of the methods that was made while solving prospecting and exploration tasks at
Armenian ore deposits are described briefly.

This monograph is intended for geophysicists and geologists, but it can also be
useful to students of geological-exploration faculties who are specializing parti-

cularly in the area of ore geophysics.

Table of Contents Page

Introduction............. ..... ........ ..... ................................. 5

Chapter 1. The Natural Electric Field Hethod............................... 8

1.1. Characteristics of observations of natural fields in underground
workings and in holes drilled underground......................... 9

1.2. The methodology and equipment for observing the natural field in
underground mine workings and in horizontal holes drilled
underground....................................................... 29

1.3. The structure of natural electric fields at mine deposits of the
Armenian SSR and certain questions of interpreting the results of
underground observations made by the YeP [electric-field] method... 31

Chapter 2. The Induced-Polarization Method................................. 44
2.1. The theoretical foundations for the underground variant of the VP

(induced polarization] method..................................... 45

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

2.2. Distorting factors during VPdmethod operation in underground mine
workings........ ...... ....... ......... . ................ .......... 63
2.3. The methodology of observations and interpretation of the results.. 88

Chapter 3. The Earth-Currents Method...................................... 108
3.1. The nature of earth currents..... ........ . ............... . ........ . 108
3.2. Methodology and equipment for making observations by the earth-

currents method.................................................. 115

Chapter 4. The Superlong-wave Variant of the Radio-Comparator and
Direction-Finding Method..................................... 127

4.1 The normal SDV [superlong—wave] field under the ground............. 128

4.2 The anomalous field................................................ 138

4.3 Apparatus for the underground variant of the SDV-radiokip [SDV
radio-comparator and direction-finding] method............ ....... 155

4.4. The methodology for field operations and interpretation of the
results obtained with the underground variant of the SDV-radiokip
method. ................................ oacoeoaceeoooesoacooooeo. 160

Chapter 5. Examples of the Use of Underground Electrical Bxploration..... 175

5.1. The Akhtal'skoye barite-and-polymetal field....................... 175
5.2. The Shamlugskoyc copper-pyrites deposit........................... 187
5.3. The Zodskoye gold-ore deposit...... ...... ......................... 195
5.4. The Kafanskoye copper-and-polynetal deposit......... .......... .... 202
5.5. The Dastakertskoye copper-molybdenum deposit...................... 204
5.6. Questions of integrating the tested methods of underground
electrical exploration........... ...... .. ....... ................ 208
Conclusion........................................ ..... ................... 211

Bibliography.............................................................. 214

Introduction

The directives of the 25th CPSU Congress set for geological exploration organiza-
tions the task of increasing the extraction of useful minerals, mainly in the eco-
nomically developed regions of the Union, which reduces capital-investment expendi—
tures. Because of this. the problem of prospecting and exploring for deep-lying
ore targets is posed in all its vastness. This is caused by the circumstance that.
in regions that have been well known for a long time, ore raw-material reserves
that are located close to the earth's surface not only have been explored already
but in some regions have already been completely extracted. Therefore, all future
prospects for growth in rescrvesareincreasingly associated with the detection of
ore targets that are deposited at great depths. As experience has shown. the solu-
tion of this problem can be achieved by integrated geological and geophysical
studies.

The existing geophysical methods of study from the earth's surface often do not
allow the detection of geological targets that lie at great depths because of the
insignificant values of the anomalies they create.

Possible ways for increasing the depth capabilities of geophysical methods of ex-
ploration are as follows: increase the sensitivity of the geophysical apparatus
and apply simultaneously the newest methods for processing geophysical data, and

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

introduce geophysical and certain other methods into underground geological explor-
ation practice.

Increasing the depth capability of research by increasing the sensitivity of geo-
physical apparatus often proves to be impossible because of the great influence of
interference that distorts the physical field (the relief-visible and buried.
inhomogeneities in the overburden and weathered crust, earth currents and so on).
Therefore, one of the branches of geophysical research. which has geen given the
name "underground geophysics" [133] and is characterized by geOphysical observa-
tions made in mine excavations and holes. has been developing successfully in re—
cent years. This will permit perturbing objects that lie at great depths and are
inaccessible to observation from the earth's surface to be brought closer. the
anomalous effects to be increased, and the influence of surface inhomogeneities to
be reduced.

Almost all existing geophysical methods that are used to explore from the earth's

surface can be used in underground variants. However, because of the specifics of
performing geophysical Operations at existing mines of various types, the task of

developing new apparatus, methodologies. operating techniques and special methods

for interpreting the results of the observations is brought to the fore.

In the past decade the following methods have been developed most in underground
geophysics: radiowave, underground recording of cosmic radiation. gravity explora-
tion. thermal exploration, magnetic exploration, seismic exploration. and a few
other methods [133].

Underground physics is being further developed in two directions: the improvement
of existing methods, and the study of the potential for using methods and modifica-
tions not previously used underground [133]. The problem of their integrated use
in combination with geological. geochemical and engineering methods for prospecting
and exploration is even more important. The latter is the main task in raising the
effectiveness of prOSpecting and exploration at existing enterprises.

Among the various physical fields that can be used in underground mine workings and
holes. natural electrical fields are attracting attention. These fields enable the
distribution of the ore substance within deposits to be studied. Moreover, they
are measured with simple apparatus and great expenditures are not required for
studying them. Therefore. the development of an underground variant of the natur-
al-field (YeP) method is of great practical significance.

As the technology for upgrading ore raw materials develops, industry increasingly
uses ores with a low useful-component content. Ore bodies in this case are often
represented by veinlet, veinlet—impregnation and impregnation mineralization. As
geophysical research experience has indicated, the induced polarization (VP) method,
different modifications of which enable ore bodies to be discovered and the ele-
ments of deposition within them to be identified. plays no small role with such
ores. Therefore, use of the VP method underground can be of practical significance
in solving tasks of the geological exploration and development of ore deposits.

The radio-comparator and direction-finding method that uses mainly the field of
superlong-wave radios that operate in the 10-30 kilohertz frequency band occupies
an important placeinlﬂgh-frequency electrical explorationllsd. The SDV-radiokip

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kuperlong-wave radio-comparator and direction-findinglmethod permits geological
surveys and prospecting to be performed at small expense in money and time. Be—
cause superlong radiowavcs penetrate rocks to great depths. the method can also be
applied successfully to underground conditions. expanding its potential consider-
ably. The development and use of this method underground involves simplicity of
surveying and uncomplicated apparatus and methods of interpretation.

As is known. intense mine-operation electrical interference or earth currents (BT),
which often hamper the use of various electrical-exploration methods. are observed
at operating ore mines. As the miners' use of technical equipment expands. the
presence of earth currents within the ore fields being worked becomes an ordinary
phenomenon. Because of this. the thought arises naturally about using mine-opera-
tion electrical fields in underground mine workings to prospect and explore for
useful minerals.

Along with other Union organizations. the Institute of Geophysics and Engineering
Seismology (1615) of the Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences is taking an active part
in developing underground electrical exploration methods. It should also be noted
that underground geophysical research in Armenia. aside from IGIS's.is being
fruitfully employed by geophysicists of the Geological Administration and Geologi-
cal-Exploration Operations Trust of the Administration for Nonferrous Metallurgy
of the Armenian SSR Council of Ministers.

This work is thus dedicated to the development and testing of YeP. VP. BT and SVD-
radiokip methods as they apply to underground conditions.

This monograph consists of an introduction. five chapters. and a conclusion. The
introduction, conclusion and chapter 5 were written by s. V. Badalyan. G. 0. Oscar-
yan and V. B. Gamoyan, chapters 1 and 3 by V. B. Gamoyan. chapter 2 by S. V. Badal-
yan and chapter 4 by G. 0. Gazaryan.

while writing the book. the authors benefited from valuable advice by Candidate of
Geological and Mineralogical Sciences and Yerevan State University Lecturer G. a.
Vantsyan.

The authors will consider all readers' remarksandchommendations with gratitude
and ask that they be sent to: 377500. Leninakan, Leningradskaya Ulitsa. 5, 1618.

Conclusion

The results of studies of the development of the YeP. VP, BT and SDV-radiokip meth-
ods of underground electrical exploration and of their testing at various types of
deposits permit the conclusion that the use of these methods will increase consid-
erably the economic effectiveness of geological exploration.

It was established that in underground conditions. filtration fields and fields
associated with metallic underground mining equipment possess. as a rule. small
intensity and can be considered as simple processes. Distortions of the fields
introduced by nine workings are amenable to recording on the basis of the appropri-
ate calculations. Thus gives rise to realistic conditions for wide use of natural-
field observations for the practical purpose of detecting new bodies of are in the
vicinity of workings and for tracing known bodies between workings.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In an environment that is uniform in polarizability, neither a mine working nor the
surface relief has any influence on the results of underground observations by the
VP method. However. in an inhomogeneous environment, the influence of the mine
working and the relief of the earth's surface is observed. Rails that have been
laid along a mine working raise the polarizability level by 3—8 percent.

when trolley—wire electric locomotives move in mine workings that are zoo—1.000
meters from the object being studied. the possibility of using the VP and YeP meth-
ods is completely precluded. observations by these methods are possible only if
the mine's electric current is turned off. In the opposite case, use of the earth
currents method, which enables geophysical research to be conducted without dis-
turbing the working rhythm of the industrial enterprise (the mine). is desirable.
The method developed for studying earth currents enables the influence of the mine
workings. metallic mining equipment and other interference to be precluded or
reduced.

It was established that superlong-wave radio signals are received reliably in
underground mine workings at depths of 300-350 meters, where the field intensity at
certain deposits is 20-25 percent of that recorded at the earth‘s surface. The
influence of the various types of interference caused by metallic mine structure

on an SDV field is insignificant and is excluded by comparatively simple
methods.

The YeP Method. The nature of the distribution and intensity of natural fields is
determined by the type of mineralization. the size of the ore targets, their loca-
tions relative to each other in space. and the texture of the ores. The actual
linear dimensions of the field are 1.4-fold to 1.7-fold greater than the linear
dimensions of the ore bodies. New bodies can be detected and known bodies traced
by means of the natural field at distances up to 100 or more meters from the mine
working being surveyed. The ratio established between the linear dimenions of the
negative and the positives areas of the field, which is 1/3 to 1/5, will
enable a forecast to be made, in accordance with the result of a study of the
field over a certain portion, of the dispersion of the ore by depth. and, there-
by, an assessment to be made of the deposit's prospects. The nature of the
field's 3-dimensiona1 structure is associated with the type of-mineralization, and
it can be used to obtain the appropriate geological information.

A study of the natural fields at deposits has shown the dependence of the spa-
tial distribution of the chemical elements in waters upon the 3-dimensional
structure of the field.

The VP Method. A comparison of the computed and the experimental curves of VP
fields for oblong bodies of arbitrary cross-section indicates satisfactory coinci—
dence. In interpreting the results of underground observations, the circumstance
is considered that the distribution of the electrical field occurs in absolute
space, and the geological object can be situated higher or lower than or on the
same horizon as the profile of the observation. The VP method for proSpecting and
exploring for ore bodies has been defined, and its potential for solving geologi-
cal—structure tasks has been proved.

The RT Hethod. By means of a methodology of observations that has been developed
which permits the ratio of gains of potentials to be determined, the electrical
fields of mine-operation earth currents can be studied for prOSpecting and explora-
tion purposes. Practical observations have indicated a potential for tracing ore

20
FOR‘0FFNJAL.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bodies between mine workings and also for observing them in the vicinity of the
workings being surveyed.

The Superlong—Wave Radio-Comparator and Direction-Finding Method. Based upon the
general theory of the propagation of superlong radiowaves, approximate expressions
for nonmal and anomalous fields have been obtained for underground conditions, tak-
ing into account peculiarities of the relief. the trend of the profile. and the
location of the exciting object.

This has enabled the following prerequisites for determining the position of the
object being sought to be established:

1) during observations in underground mine workings, the minimal value of the in-
tensity of the magnetic field's horizontal component corresponds to a conducting
object that occurs above the working, while the maximum value corresponds to one
that is below it; a chart of the intensity of the vertical component Hz has in both
cases one and the same configuration and the position of the exciting object can-
not be determined from it;

2) when measuring the field in a vertical hole, the maximum value Hz is observed
where the horizontal plane is the earth-air interface in the area of the ore object
while the Hp curve has a maximum above the edge of the ore object and a minimum
value below it: the spatial position of the ore object cannot be established by
these curves; and

3) when measuring the field in slanted and vertical holes, the spatial position of
the ore object relative to the hole's axis can be established in accordance with
the H2 and Hp curves where the plane of the earth-air interface is an inclined

plane.

when organizing underground geophysical operations, special requirements are laid
on the apparatus used (imperviousness to water and dust. and portability). In this
connection a hole apparatus has been developed for the SDV—radiokip method with
probes that permit the axis and the normal to the axis of the magnetic-field compo-
nent to be measured in the hole. An instrument for measuring the ratio of the
gains of earth—current potentials has been developed. The possibility of using
the VP-59 electrical exploration set, Ertsprospcktor instruments, the ESK-l and
other equipment for underground work by the VP and Ye? methods has been

demonstrated.

In conclusion, it can be noted that use of the methods of underground electrical
exploration that were tested in proSpecting for new and in exploring known ore bod-
ies is a realistic method for expanding the prospects of existing mining enterpris-
es. A basic task for further development of underground variants of YeP, VP. BT
and SDV-radiokip methods should be both their introduction into production and
improvement of the theoretical, methodological and equipment bases of the methods.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo AN Arm. SSSR. 1980

11409
650: 1822/32 gun

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY