FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10118
16 November 1981

Mongolia Report

(FOUO 3/81)

STATUS OF E LECTRIFICATION

OF THE MONGOLIAN NATIONAL ECONOMY

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR¢0FFHJA1.USE(HVLY

JPRS L/10118

16 November 1981
IHONGOLIA REPORT
(P000 3/81)

STATUS OF ELECTRIFICATION
OF THE ”ONGOLIAN NATIONAL Ecouonv

Moscow AKTUAL'NYYB PROBLEHY SOTSIALISTICEBSIOY INDUSTRIALIZATSII “NR in Russian 1980
(signed to press 3 Oct 80) pp 68-97

[Ehapter 3 by Tserengiyn Gurbadam from book "Urgent Problems of the Socialist In-
dustrialization of the NPR." Izdatel'stvo "Ekonomiha", 1,500 copies. 127 page§7

lfextf Chapter 3. The Electrification of the National Economy

Electrification is playing an important role in the solution of the problems of the
completion of the building of the material and technical base of socialism and the
introduction in production of the latest achievements of science and technology.

The scientific analysis of the development of the productive forces and the trends
of development of technology enabled V. I. Lenin to draw the conclusion that elec-
trification is the basis of technical progress. V. I. Lenin emphasised: "Iconnmnism
is Soviet power plus the electrification of the entire country] 13h italicg7."l

Lenin's ideological legacy is also of invaluable importance because, in personally
supervising the work on the formulation of the plan of the State Comndssion for the
Electrification of Russia, he not only substantiated the need for the electrifica-
tion of the country as the decisive material condition of the transition to commu-
nism, but also defined concretely the principle concerning the role of electrifica-
tion in the creation of the naterial and technical base of socialism and the accomp-
lishment of scientific and technical progress. Along the path of electrification.
which was indicated by V. I. Lenin, the Soviet Union made noteworthy gains in the
building of socialism. Historical practice confirms that it is the only correct
path of the development of productive forces.

In the European socialist countries the power base of mature socialist society is
being formed on the basis of the achievements of the present scientific and techni-
cal revolution, while in the Soviet Union power engineering is being developed under
the conditions of the creation of the material and technical base of communism. The
experience of these countries convincingly shows that only on the basis of electri-
fication is it possible to solve such complicated aocio-economic probleas as the
overcoming of the substantial differences between mental and physical labor, the
city and the countryside, the creation of the material and technical base of social-
ism and its transformation in the future into the material and technical base of
communism.

 

l. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. aoch." liomplete Horhéj, Vol 62, p 159.

1 [III - ASIA - 106 FOUO]
FOR‘OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
a \II V. I IVIRL Vi’l‘o Vl‘lsl

A fundamental relationship. a specific sequence in development exists between the
electrification and industrialization of a country and the development of the mate-
rial and technical base. It is possible to consider the electrification of the
economy to be, on the one hand. s prerequisite and the basis of industrialization
and, on the other, the result and a criterion of industrialization and scientific
and technical progress. Electrification has become the heart of the building of
the economy of socialist society and plays a leading role in the development of all
the sectors of the national economy and in the accomplishment of technical progress.

In its economic policy the NPR? is steadfastly guided by the main principles and
deductions of the theory of Harxism-Leninism on the role of electrification in the
creation and development of the material and technical base of the new society. It
believes that the successful solution of such important socio-econnmic problems as
the industrialization of the country, the acceleration of scientific and technical
progress, the increase of the efficiency of social production, the change and im-
provement of the structure of the sectors of the national economy, as well as the
acceleration of the rate of development of the productive forces of the country,
the gradual convergence and equalization of the level of economic development with
the level of highly developed countries is directly dependent on the scale of the
work on the electrification of the national economy. The main directions of elec-
trification were reflected in the HPRP Program. The need for the leading rate of
development of the fuel and power industry is also indicated in it.

The problems of creating a reliable fuel and power base of the national economy and
of building electric power stations and electric power transmission lines were de-
fined concretely in the decisions of the 16th and 17th NPR? Congresses and in the
long-range and current plans. This is making it possible to strive for the more
and more complete meeting of the increasing needs of the national economy and the
population for electric power and fuel.

1. An Analysis of the Level of Electrification of the National Economy

In prerevolutionary Hongolia manual labor predominated, livestock served as the
motive power and means of transportation, while firewood and pressed dung served as
the main sources of fuel and power.

This attests that Mongolia of those times with respect to the power base was at the
lowest level of development.

In the process of building the material and technical base of socialism the new
power industry was created. whereas in 1921 only 800 tons of coal were mined at the
only coal mine of the country and 12,000 th of electric power were generated at the
only diesel electric power station, now a fuel and power industry has been created,
which has become one of the technically most advanced sectors of the national econ-
omy. It accounts for one-third of the fixed capital, more than 10 percent of the
industrial production and the number of workers in industry. Approximately 40 per-
cent of the capital investments being channelled into industry go for the develop-
ment of this sector. In 1967 the first electric power system was established in

the Central Region of the NPR. In this region one-third of the total population of
the republic resides and fourth-fifths of the electric power are generated. There-
fore the creation of the power system is of great importance for the accelerated
development of the economy and culture of this most important economic region of

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFKHAI.USE(NVLY

the country. The connection of the Central Power System with the power system of
the Soviet Union promoted the further development of the power base of the HPR na-
tional economy. This is another vivid confirmation of the international importance
of the indication of V. I. Lenin that "modern advanced technology requires [the
electrigication of the entire countEy--and e Enaber of neighboring countries/ 13h
italicg/--according to a [single] Lin italics] plan...."2

and the centralization of electric power supply are being implemented gradually.
whereas in 1965 the installed capacity of the largest electric power stations was
36,000 kw, in 1980 it was 1b8.000 kw. The construction of high-voltage electric
power transmission lines with a tension of 35, 110 and 220 RV, the length of which
at the end of 1978 exceeded 1,700 km, is being carried out at the same time as the
work on increasing the capacity of electric power stations. Great changes have
also occurred in the technical equipment of electric power stations.

A national labor force of workers. employees and engineering and technical person-
nel, who are successfully working at modern electric power stations and mines and
are solving complex problems of the management of production and the development of
the sector, has been trained during the years of popular power.

As a .esult of these qualitative and structural changes the level of electrifica-
tion is increasing rapidly. During the past decade alone (1970-1980) the genera-
tion of electric power increased 2.65-fold and its average annual growth was

10.2 percent. Such a rapid increase of the generation of electric power is making
it possible to reduce the gap in the indicators of the per capita generation of
electric power in Mongolia as compared with countries which are developed with re-
spect to power engineering.

Hith respect to the main indicators of electrification the NPR is among the 10 coun-
tries of Asia best supplied with power. As is evident from Table 7, in the early
1970's the NPR was considerably ahead of the countries of the Near East, Far East
and Africa in the average level of such most important indicators as the per capita
consumption of energy resources and electric power and the installed capacity of
electric power stations per 1,000 people. Here it is necessary to note that in the
1950's with respect to these indicators the economy of the HPR was at approximately
the average level or even below the average level of these countries.

During the Sixth Five-Year Plan (1976-1980) a number of most important measures,
among which are the construction of a large-capacity coal pit at the Baga nuur de-
posit, the renovation of operating mines and pits, the construction of a large-
thermal electric power station and the increase of the capacity of Thermo-Elec-
tric Power Station No 3 in Ulaanbaatar, are being implemented for the purpose of
further strengthening the power base of the country. In 1980 the volume of coal
mining will come to 4.6 million tons.

In 1980 the generation of electric power will exceed 1.5 billion kWh. More than
half a century following the triumph of the People's Revolution was needed for this
achievement. In accordance with the anticipated growth rate of electric power con-
sumption not more than 5 years will be needed to generate the second billion, and

only 3 years for the third billion.
2. V. l. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 44, p 280.

3
FIN!(MHH(JA1.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFICJAI.[EHZCNULY

Table 7

Indicators of the Level of Electrification of the NPR and Other Countries‘

-—————n—_—_—.——__—___—

Per capita consunp- Per capita consunp- Installed capacity
tion of energy re- tion of electric of electric power

sources, kg of con- power, kWh stations per 1,000
ventional fuel people, kw

Countries Years 1950 1960 1970 1974 1950 1960 1970 197‘ 1950 1960 1970 1975

NPR. . . . . . . . . . 122 540 888 [0&6 29 111 613 528 15 66 175 179
Countries of Far East. 130 238 688 552 76 166 623 515 19 37 91 123
Countries of Near East 167 340 804 1023 32 98 315 634 12 33 86 113
Countries of Africa. . 189 256 309 359 7b 156 247 309 18 39 67 75

 

*
Calculated according to the data of the UN statical collection "Horld Energy Sup-
plies 1950-1976," United Nations, New York, 1976.

All these facts vividly attest to the increase of the scale of electrification of
the national economy. However, along with these obvious gains there are also un-
solved problems. This is especially evident if we proceed from the tasks of com-
pleting the creation of the material and technical base of socialism.

Taking into account the diversity of processes of electrification and the lack of a
universally recognized method of determining its level by means of a single general-
izing indicator, it is expedient to use a system of indicators for analyzing the
level of the electrification of the national economy. It is possible, in our opin-
ion, to express the level of the electrification of the national economy quantita-
tively by a system of such indicators as the total volume of production of all types
of energy; the potential capacity of the fuel and power complex; the per capita
generation of power, including electric power; the power-worker and electric power-
worker ratios; the structure of the power balance; the degree of coverage of the
territory by the power system; the density of the generation and consumption of
electric power per kuz of area of the country; the indicators of the electrification
of agriculture, industrial technology and transportation. Let us dwell on these
indicators in more detail.

The Potential Capacity of the Fuel and Power Complex and the Per Capita Generation
of Power. The scale of development of the power base to a large extent depends on
the degree of study of energy resources and their development. By early 1980 the
geological prospecting at nearly 60 coal deposits had been completed. The detailed
exploration of the coal reserves at the Taban-Iolgoy deposit is being carried out.
Mongolia is rich in coal, which both now and in the future will be the basis of
power generation. In 1979 50 percent of the coal was consumed by thermal electric
power stations, about 20 percent was consumed in construction and industry, 25 per-
cent was consumed in municipal services; the remainder was used as fuel in agricul-
turc.

Highly mechanized coal pits, for example, the Sharyn Col pit, have been built and

are in operation in the republic, new powerful coal pits are being built. The de-
velopment of coal mining is ensuring the increase of the capacity of electric power
stations. By the beginning of 1980 there were 7 thermal and more than 1,300 diesel

h
FORi0FlIC1Al.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFIICIALVUSEloNLY

electric power stations, the total capacity of which is about 360,000 RH. They

supply electric power to all cities, aymag, semen and state economy centers and a
large portion of the agricultural brigades.

The volume of the generation of electric power in 1980 will have increased as com-
pared with 19b0 by more than 70-fold, while the production of coal will have in-
creased by nearly 15-fold. The generation of electric power doubles approximately
every 5 years, while its average annual growth rate during the period of 1950-1979
was 13 percent. Let us note that in recent years the average annual growth rate
of the world generation of electric power was more than 7 percent, and the volume
of world electric power consumption doubles every 10 years.

In 1980 in the urn the per capita generation of electric power will be 1,100 kwh,
which is less than in the CEHA member countries.

Mongolia, although among the countries with a low per capita consumption of electric
power, in the per capita production of coal exceeds the average world level and the
level of the member countries of the European Economic Community (EEC).

Table 8

Per Capita Production of Coal, kg of Conventional Fuel*

____————————__————_____———_—__—————_-———————_—————___———————————-————_——————————

1965 1970 1975 1976

——_—_—_____.__——_——_————-——-—————-——-—

HPR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 586 910 1065 1142
CEHA member countries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2052 2118 2185 2208
BBC member countries s o o o e s e o s e o s e o s e e e 1795 1375 1‘87 1073
World average. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 667 652 656 650

 

*
Calculated on the basis of the data of the Central Statistical Bureau attached to
the NPR Council of Ministers and the statistical yearbooks of the member countries

of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance of the corresponding years.

The Structure of the Power Balance. The power balance of the “PR during the years
of popular power has undergone significant quantitative and qualitative changes.
Hhereas on the eve of the People's Revolution firewood, all kinds of scrub and
pressed dung were the main fuel and power resources, in 1979 in the overall struc-
ture of the power balance coal made up more than 60 percent and fuel of petroleum
origin made up 25 percent. The trend toward the "mineralization" of the power bal-
ance by the systematic replacement of organic fuel with high calorie mineral fuel
is continuing.

The Degree of Coverage of the Territory by the Power System and the Density of the
Generation and Consumption of Electric Power Per km2 of Area of the Country. As

has already been noted, an electric power systeuh which covers more than 10 percent
of the territory of Mongolia, is in operation in the central part of the republic.
Small—capacity electric power stations, which are isolated frorleach other, operate
in other regions. The electric power system in the aymag centers is based for the
most part on diesel electric power stations. A system of centralized heat supply
is being developed in the cities of Ulaanbaatar, Darhan, Choybalsan and Erdenet.

A heat supply system has also begun to be developed in aymag centers, although in

5
FOR oar-1cm. use ontv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

them there is still no unified centralized heat supply system and numerous small de-
partmental boiler houses are being preserved. The efficiency of the use of fuel and
energy resources can be increased substantially with the development of centralized

heat supply.

As of 1978 there are 0.2 kw of electric capacity and about 900 th of electric power
per km2 of territory of the HPR. Such a situation, on the one hand, is explained

by the vastness of the territory and the low population density of the NPR and, on
the other, characterizes the inadequacy of electrification, especially in rural re-
gions.

The Electrification of Agriculture. By 1978 the total power capacity in agriculture
came to 2.1 million hp. Its total exceeded by many times the installed capacity at
the electric power stations of the country. This attests to the rapid development
of nonstationary power engineering in connection with the "motorizetion" of the la-
bor of rural workers. The mechanization of the labor of livestock breeders and the
further development of farming will undoubtedly lead to an increase of the consump-
tion of electric power in agriculture.

2. The Main Directions of the Further Electrification of the National Economy

The state of the economy of the country as a whole and the level of industrializa-
tion substantially influence the rate of development, the structure and the dis-
tribution of the fuel and power complex. In turn, the level of its development,
the provision of the needs of the national economy with energy resources and the
economic indicators of the production, transportation and consumption of electric
power and fuel have a decisive influence on the development of the economy.

In the area of the electrification of the national economy the new gains indicated
in the MPRP Program have to be coped with.

It is a matter of the assurance of the leading rate of development of the fuel and
power industry by the maximum utilization of internal resources, the increase of the
number and capacity of electric power stations, the construction of high-voltage
electric power transmission lines, the organization of centralized power systems in
a number of regions of the country by the working of deposits of hard coal and the
use ofother typesof fuel and sources of energy, as well as of the more and more com-
plete satisfaction of the demands of the national economy and the population for
energy and fuel.

It remains, first, to complete the initial period of electrification and to improve
substantially and strengthen the existing power base of the national economy; sec-
cond, on this basis to carry out extensive electrification; third, to shift gradual-
ly to the solution of the problems of thorough electrification. Of course, con-
siderably more time will be required for the accomplishment of extensive and thor-
ough electrification than for the completion of the industrialization of the country.

The prospects of the development of electrification in the NPR have already been
studied in a number of works. Thus, "The Plan of the Power Supply of the “PR for
1965-1970 With Allowance Made for the Further Prospect," "The Plan of the Develop-
ment of the Power System of the Central Zone of the HPR for 1971-1975 Hith Allowance
Made for the Prospects to 1980" and "The Plan of the Heat Supply of the City of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ulaanbaatsr for the Period of 1971-1975 With Allowance Made for the Prospects to
1980" were drafted jointly with planning organs of the USSR. A group of specialists
of the CEHA member countries elaborated a forecast to 1990 of the fuel and power
balance of the NPR and "Preliminary Considerations for a National Program of the
Development of Electric Power Engineering of the NPR to 1990.“ The main directions

of the development of power engineering of the country for the future are being
elaborated with the assistance of scientists of the Soviet Union.

The questions connected with the forecasting of the long-range level of consumption
of fuel and power and the more precise specification of the fuel end power balance
on the basis of the study of the reserves of fuel and energy resources were taken
into account first of all when elaborating the prospects of the development of elec-
trification. The careful substantiation of the plans of the power supply of the
country, the heat supply of the main cities and centers, the location of fuel and
power enterprises and the use of water resources in power engineering and the analy-
sis of the trends of development of power engineering were also carried out.

The consideration of new trends is necessary, for example, when selecting the types,
capacities and sites of electric power stations. Whereas previously heat and elec-
tric power stations were built directly in the regions of the consumption of power
and ran on brought-in fuel, under the conditions of the vigorous development of
electric power engineering the need for their construction in the immediate vicinity
of deposits of fuel has arisen. This circumstance is dictated by the need to re-
duce the expenditures on the delivery of fuel, as well as to decrease the level of
pollution of the air basin.

The question of the establishment of such basic technical and economic ratios as

the coefficient of the lead of the growth rate of the output of the fuel and power
industry as compared with the growth rate of the national income and the gross in-
dustrial output, the proportion of the capital investments in this sector in the
total amount of capital investments in the national economy, the proportion of stand-
by capacities in the total amount of capacities of power equipment and so on is of
theoretical and procedural importance when formulating the long-range and annual
plans of the development of power engineering.

At this stage of development the establishment of the coefficient of the lead of
the development of power engineering with respect to the need of the national econ—
omy for power is a fundamentally new question which is governing the development of
this sector during the current five-year plan; at the same time this question is
closely connected with the specific nature and economic potential of the country,
which requires a comprehensive calculation and study, on the basis of which its
optimum value could be determined. Here a careful study of the experience of the
fraternal socialist countries and other industrially developed states is necessary.
Some scientists of the Soviet Union consider correct an increase of the generation
of electric power by 15-18 percent for every 10 percent increase of industrial out-
put. According to data of the United Nations, a 1 percent increase of the indus-
trial gross output of world production accounts for a 1.3-1.6 percent increase of
the generation of electric power.

By the end of the current, initial period of electrification of the NPR a relative-
ly developed power base should be created in the Central Economic Region of the
country, the supply of rural inhabitants with high calorie, transportable fuel, as

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-UII ON'KTIAI. USE ONLY

well as the supply of electric power should be improved substantially in all the
economic regions.

here the concentration of the capacity at electricpower stations, the increase of
the voltage of electric power transmission lines and the centralization of electric
power supply will be of great importance. Of course, the concentration of capaci-
ties in electric power engineering depends to a very great extent on the concentra-
tion of the capacities of the consumers. Therefore the concentration of electric
power engineering of the “PR has and will have its specific features and difficul-
ties, since the power consumers of the NPR are characterised by great diversity;

a low density of the electric power loads transferred over the entire territory of
the country distinguishes them.

Under such conditions the possibility of concentration is limited.

The appearance in the future of new industrial centers with a comparatively large
consumption of power creates, as was stated above, not only the condition of the
concentration of the capacity, but also the condition for the centralization of
electric power supply and the development of the power system. For example, the
creation of a power system, which will cover the territory of 13 aymaga. is planned
in the Central Region of the NPR. The creation of such a power system will make it
possible to complete in the shortest possible time. with fewer expenditures and at
a high technical level the initial period of the electrification of the NPR and to
transfer electric power from the Central Region to the eastern and southern parts
of the country. This, in turn, will have a decisive influence on the improvement
of the distribution of the productive forces in these regions, the use of natural
resources and their comprehensive development.

The search for means of using efficiently natural and secondary sources of energy
and, consequently, the improvement of the structure of the power balance are one of
the most important national economic tasks. Here the formulation of a long-range
power balance, which would be the basis for the determination of the feasible loca-
tion of new industrial enterprises, is of great importance.

In the solution of the problems of improving the structure of the power balance of
the country the intensive expansion of the open-cut mining of cool, the launching of
prospecting work for the exploration of such natural energy resources as petroleum.
natural gas and oil shale and the establishment of the energy resources of rivers
are the priority directions.

At the present stage of the industrialization of the NPR the rapid development of
the coal industry is of especially great importance. Coal should become the main
type of fuel. The problem of the gaaification of coal and its treatment for the
obtaining of liquid and gaseous fuel and of the liquefaction of coal by means of
hydrogeneration or heat dissolution is arising. In this respect coal should be-
come for the HPR not only the main type of fuel in the next few years. but also the
fuel of the future.

Hydroelectric power stations would play an important role in the improvement of the
structure of the power balance and the meeting of the peak part of the load curve.
However. the reserves of water resources as a source of power have been studied
little. According to preliainary estimates, the basins of the Orhon, Selenge

8
FORiOFFRJAl.USE1ONLY
and Mnrun rivers and the Egiyn Col hold energy reserves in the amount of 3.3 million
kw. while the Onon and Kerulen rivers hold reserves of about 0.6 million k".

The most efficient means of electrifying NPR agriculture are: the connection of
some portion of the stable consumers to the central power system, the construction

of diesel electric power stations, as well as the use of the latest achievements of
"small-scale power engineering."

Here it is necessary to take into account the fact that under the present condi-
tions of Mongolia, where for the present a portion of the population still leads a
nomadic way of life, it is impossible to electrify all the regions in a short time
by the building of electric power transmission lines and large electric power sta-
tions. In this connection the need is arising to perform research work on the
study of the feasibility of building small-capacity electric power stations and of
using all possible sources of energy. The introduction in the daily life of rural
inhabitants of the achievements of science and technology presumes the search for

advanced methods of heating, lighting, as well as the supply of power for household
needs and household equipment.

The creation and efficient organization of a system of the power supply of small
consumers who are dispersed over a large distance, especially livestock breeders
living in yurts. are a complicated scientific and technical problem of the develop-
ment of power engineering of the NPR.

For these purposes it is possible to use extensively coal and brick fuel, as well
as to introduce gradually in daily life heat-retaining electric ovens, liquified
gases and so forth. Along with this in regions poor in fuel, such as the Gobi, the
use of electric boilers for centralized heat supply is of great importance. More-
over, such new sources of energy for the NPR as the energy of smell rivers, the
wind and the sun can be used for the supply of electric power to local small con-
sumers.

The energy of small streams is one of the renewable sources. In the massifs of
Arhangay, Bayan-olgiy, Ubs, Hobsgol and Hentiy Aymags there are more than 3,500
permanent streams with a total length of about 60,000 km. The use of mobile micro-
hydroelectric power stations on these streams seems possible.

In recent years a pilot batch of mobile hose nicrohydroelectric power stations with
a unit capacity of 0.5 and 1.5 kV, which are designed for the supply of electric
power to dispersed agricultural consumers with a small unit load, was developed and
produced in the USSR. These plants meet the conditions of the supply of electric
power to nonstationnry agricultural consumers. Using large natural inclines, the
head of water, which is necessary for the operation of the microhydroelectric power
station, is created by means of a flexible hose. The use of a flexible hose, which
is a part of the assembly of the microhydrolectric power station, eliminates the
performance of excavation and earth moving.

The results of the tests conducted in the USSR on the pilot batch of microhydroelec-
tric power stations under generating conditions (among shepherds and herds-en)

show that the installation of these hydroelectric power stations is accomplished in
2-3 hours. The microhydroelectric power station is simple, reliable and safe in
operation. Under winter conditions it operates reliably to a temperature of -3S°C.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The resources of solar energy are another source of renewable energy resources in
the NPR. According to the data of the altas of the heat balance of the world, the
total solar radiation a year on the territory of the NPR is 100-160 keel/cm2 a year,
while the number of sunny days a year is l00-300 more than in the zone of the USSR,
which is at the same latitude as the NPR. The resources of solar energy in the
NPR are making it possible to use solar energy extensively for the desalinization

of water, its heating. the drying and cooling of various items, the cultivation of
vegetables and fodder plants in hothouses.

In some regions of the country there are opportunities to use the wind as a source
of energy. The wind is a free energy source. Therefore among some people the
opinion still exists that the power obtained by means of a wind mill is also prac-
tically "free." A peculiarity of the wind as an energy source consists first of
all in its variability, the great changeability of the velocity and, consequently,
the energy. Wind power plants are used most often as a power drive among agricul-
tural consumers, for example, as watering places, mills and so forth.

in recent years wind electric power stations, including high-speed wind electric
power stations like the Berkut, as well as units of the series of general-purpose

wind electric power plants (UVEU's) with a unit capacity of 6 and 16 kw, have been
produced in the USSR.

The main drawback of this type of sources of electric power is their dependence on
the availability and velocity of the wind. Therefore their use for the supply of
electric power to agricultural consumers with set schedules of electric power con-
sumption is possible only when batteries and standby sources of electric power are
available.

It is quite understandable that the use of the enumerated sources, which are united
under the overall concept "small-scale power engineering," may be mainly of a sea-
sonal nature. Therefore the more reliable supply of power to numerous nonstation-
ary consumers in rural areas is necessary. In all likelihood it is possible to con-
sider gasoline and diesel electric power stations as one of the main reliable
sources of electric power for such consumers.

Gasoline and diesel electric power stations of a small unit capacity. which it is
possible and more convenient to use for the supply of electric power to nonstation-
ary agricultural consumers, especially for the needs of livestock breeders, are be-
ing produced or are being developed in the CENA member countries and other countries.

The accomplishment of electrification is, in the words of V. I. Lenin, "the first
important step on the path to the communist organization of the economic life of
society." He believed that "electrification is the most important of all the great
tasks facing us."3 In carrying out this behest of Lenin, the NPRP and the Nongoli-
an people are gradually solving the problems of the electrification of the country.

3. The Complete Nechanization and Automation of Production Processes, the Improve-
ment of Production Technology on the Basis of Electrification

At the present stage of the building of the material and technical base of social-
ism in the NPR the problem of increasing labor productivity is acquiring particular

3. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 60, p 156.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

urgency, since the available manpower resources cannot ensure without this the nec-
essary scale of development of production and the nonproductive sphere. The in-
crease of labor productivity is being achieved primarily on the basis of the intro-
duction of advanced equipment and technology, the automation and complete mechanize-
tlon of production processes and the electrification of production. These direc-
tions of the development of production are interconnected.

The works of the classics of Marxism-Leninism contain valuable assumptions and
methodological approaches to the study of the problem of the improvement of the
technical base of production and the change of the nature and conditions of labor

in the case of the mechanization and automation of production processes on the basis
of electrification. Speaking about labor productivity as the most important and
main thing for the triumph of the new social system, V. I. Lenin emphasized the need
for the extensive use of technology, this decisive means of increasing labor produc-
tivity.

"The more highly technology is developed," he wrote, "the more the manual labor of
man is supplanted, being replaced by a series of more and more complex machines....""
K. Marx repeatedly emphasized the importance of machine technology and its role in
the acceleration of the rate of progress of productive forces and in the use of
scientific knowledge in production. "As a machine the means of labor," K. Marx
noted, "acquires such a physical form of existence, which governs the replacement

of human power by the powers of nature and of empirical routine techniques by the
conscious application of natural science."5

The saving of national labor by means of technology and the facilitation of the la-
bor of workers are being achieved first of all by means of the complete mechaniza-
tion of production processes. Complete mechanization, in turn, is a mandatory pre-
requisite of the automation of production in all sectors of the national economy.
New technology presumes the use of an advanced processing method. Only in this
case is it possible to achieve a significant increase of labor productivity.

The development of the complete mechanization and automation of production is being
carried out on the basis of its electrification. Electric power is the only power
carrier which is capable of providing the required speed and connection of produc-
tion operations in the case of the complete mechanization and automation of pro-
duction.

The HPRP and the MFR Government attach great importance to the further improvement
of the technical base of production and to the increase of the level of the mechani-
zation and automation of production processesuthe basis of the increase of produc-
tion efficiency and labor productivity and the improvement of product quality. The
importance of technology, which always played an important role in the development
of social production, is especially increasing during the present period, when the
problems of completing the building of the material and technical base of socialism
are being solved. As a result of the steps taken in all the sectors of the national
economy modern technology is being introduced extensively, the number of completely
mechanized industrial enterprises is increasing with each year. In 1979 about

 

4. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 1, p 100.

5. K. Marx and P. Engels. "Soch." Lﬁorkg7, 2d edition, Vol 23, p 397.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

250 complete automated and semi-automated lines, more than 1.000 auto-«(lo machines
and semi-automatic equipment were in operation at industrial enterprises.

The level of the mechanization of production in the national economy has increased
significantly, first of all at power, coal, mining and wool processing enterprises,
in flour milling and at meat combines. According to the level of the mechanization
of labor-consuming jobs and the automation of production processes power engineer-
ing holds one of the leading places. Practically all the processes at electric
power stations, except the unloading of coal from cars, today are completely mecha-
nized. At Thermo-Electric Power Station No 3 in Ulaanbaatar this process was
mechanized after the placement into operation of a car tipper.

The main and auxiliary equipment of electric power stations is equipped with elec-
tronic governors and technological protection, automatic field rheostats have been
installed on the generators, electric power transmission lines are equipped with
high-speed relay protection and automatic reconnection equipment, the substations
of key consumers are equipped with automatic connections of reserve power supply.

Such features of power generation as the simultaneity of generation and consumption.
the brevity of technological processes and the ever increasing demands on the reli-
ability of power supply dictated the need for extensive automation along the entire
"generation-transmission-distribution and consumption” chain of electric power and
thermal energy. With respect to the level of automation of the main production
processes at heat and electric power stations (management, protection, monitoring
and warning) the NPR is at the level of the other CEHA member countries.

tion of the labor of miners have been taken at coal and mining enterprises, which
have labor-consuming production processes. One of the major achievements of recent
years in the area of the mechanization of labor in the coal industry is the use of
mechanized stope complexes with small-cut continuous miners, which considerably in-
creased the labor productivity of the miners. The average daily productivity of
one longwall increased b.2-fold as compared with a longwall equipped with a wide-
cut continuous miner and wooden supports. Powerful walking excavators and other
types of modern mine transportation equipment are being used in open-cut coal min-
ing.

The mining industry of the country is a sector which is equipped with highly pro-
ductive modern equipment. The new stage in technical progress in the sector is
connected with the establishment of joint Hongolian-Soviet enterprises. Thus,
powerful highly productive equipment, which is produced in the USSR (excavators,
drilling rigs. dump trucks with a load capacity of 40 tons and other equipment),
is being used at the Erdenet Mining and Concentration Combine for the performance
of mining. The labor productivity here is at the level of the best foreign enter-
prises of this sort. Highly productive Soviet-made equipment is also being used
at the mines and open pits of the Hongolsovtavetmet Association.

A number of measures on the increase of production efficiency, the improvement of
the quality and the enlargement of the assortment of goods on the basis of the in-
troduction of advanced equipment and technology have been implemented in light in-
dustry, owing to which considerable progress has been achieved in the area of the
mechanization and automation of production.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the wool processing industry, for example, twin-blade carpet loom, highly pro-
ductive spinning and doubling machines, draw looms, automatic and semi-automatic
spinning machines, machines for the dyeing of wool and chemical fibers under pres-
sure, units for nonwoven materials and other model equipment hava been introduced

end assimilated. The complete mechanization of the transportation of wool between
the operations divisions has been carried out.

Highly productive and special sewing machines, semi-automatic machines and ironing
presses and presses for sizing have been introduced in the sewing industry.

Considerable technical progress has been achieved in the leather footwear and fur
industry as a result of the introduction and assimilation of individual types of
modern equipment, for example, vibrating staking machines, polishing and dust-
removing units for the surface coloring of leather, electronic measurers of the
area of finished goods, machines for the lasting of the toes of footwear by the
sizing method and the forming of a shoe which has been stretched on a last, inte-
grated machines for the production of lasts, hydraulic presses, equipment for hot
vulcanization and others.

In the food industry integrated equipment of automatic action is being introduced,
large mechanized refrigeration services and highly productive flow lines are being
established.

In spite of the definite gains in the mechanization and automation of production
processes in many sectors, as a whole the state of mechanization and automation
does not meet present requirements. In industry about 50 percent of the workers
are engaged in manual labor. The level of mechanization at aymag food combines and
brick plants is especially inadequate. The inadequate mechanization of repair,
loading and unloading operations and intraplant transportation is the moat charac-
teristic bottleneck in the mechanization of production in all the sectors of the
national economy.

The mechanization of production processes in such an important sector of the na-
tional economy as animal husbandry is acquiring particular importance.

Difficult physical labor is still being retained in the performance of some basic
and auxiliary operations. Along with the introduction in production of automated
and mechanized assembly lines, loading and unloading operations and intraplant
transportation should also be mechanized by means of the use of mobile materials-
handling devices.

Although machines and equipment, which make it possible to completely mechanize and
automate production processes, are being introduced in all the sectors of the na-
tional economy, the production process as a whole at enterprises often is still not
covered by complete mechanization. The partial mechanization or automation of pro-
duction processes at times has the result that it is necessary to increase the num-
ber of those working in that area of production, in which labor is still not mecha-
nized. The advantages of individual highly mechanized processes in some sector of
the national economy to a considerable extent are reduced by the presence of proc-
esses with a low level of mechanization.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in some sectors of the national economy with an extensive list of items, an individ-
ual nature of production and a great complexity of technological processes the com-
plete replacement of manual labor in basic production is not achieved even with
complete mechanization. The point is that the expenditures on the development of
machines for some operations exceed by many times the impact from their use. The
level of mechanization in this case is determined both by the technical potentials
and by the economic feasibility. For the NPR with its small population practical
and theoretical research on questions of the effectiveness of the automation and
mechanization of production and management is of especially great importance. The
study of the economic problems of mechanization and automation and the drawing up of
the corresponding proposals are of no less importance than the development and im-
provement of equipment.

The conditions characterizing complete mechanization are not stable. The technical
base of production is constantly being improved. On the basis of the definition of
mechanization as the process of the replacement of manual labor by the work of
machines, as well as of obsolete machines by improved machines, it is expedient to
distinguish, first, primary mechanization, which comes to replace manual labor, and,
second, the secondary, higher stage of mechanization, when its level is increased
by the replacement of functioning means with new, more productive means.

in the former case it is a matter of the development of mechanization "in breadth,"
in the latter it is its development "in depth," which pertains to both partial and
complete mechanization.

This differentiation is of substantial importance for the study of the nature of the
mechanization of production, the choice of its ways and means and the evaluation of
the socio-economic results. At present primary mechanization, which is character-
ized by the introduction of machines in the main production processes, is being im-
plemented in many sectors of the HPR national economy. Much work has to be done on
primary mechanization in auxiliary processes and operations.

As a result of the implementation of primary mechanization labor productivity is
increasing sharply. It would be incorrect, however, to believe that primary and
secondary mechanization should proceed in a strict sequence. In the NPR they are
being implemented both in sequence and in parallel or even without the first stage.

The higher level of mechanization is characterized by the fact that some types of
machines are replaced by others, by equipment of greater capacity and productivity.
Now along with mechanical connectors hydraulic, pneumatic, electronic, electromag-
netic and other connectors are being used extensively in the designs of machines,
which ensures a high stability and quality of the machines and in the end substan-
tially increases the productivity of the tools of labor.

whereas the release of workers of manual labor is decisive in mechanization, for
automation this is not the main specific trait. In the changeover to automation
the center of gravity shifts from the problem of the replacement of the manual 1a-
her of man in the technological process to the problem of the replacement of his
mental functions by equipment. Moreover, in the case of automation it is important
to ensure the continuity of the production process in the case of an advanced tech-

nological mode.

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At all the stages of the improvement of automation equipment, in the use of semi-
automatic and automatic equipment and automatic lines we have attempted to increase
the degree of continuity of the work. A qualitative jump was recently made in this
direction. The development of automatic equipment with a feedback system (machines
with automatic control and adjustment) increased significantly the continuity of its
operation.

At the present stage of the building of socialism in the “PR both the complete
mechanization and the automation of production processes are equally important.
This is also the heart of the technical policy in this area. The scientifically
sound planning of the construction of new industrial enterprises, the renovation
and modernization of operating ones is of great importance for the pursuit and im-
plementation of such a policy. The drafted plans should ensure the complete mecha-
nization and automation of production processes. Taking into accounting the great
social and economic importance of automation, when constructing new enterprises its
level should correspond to the level of the enterprises of developed countries. In
industry the development and adoption of automated control systems of technological
processes will also be of great importance.

Complete mechanization and automation are making it possible to radically improve
and facilitate working conditions, to eliminate difficult physical. and then all
unskilled, manual labor in the performance of basic and auxiliary production opera-
t ionSe

Under present conditions, when the number of production enterprises and the list of
products being produced by them are constantly increasing and multilateral rela-
tions are developing on the domestic and foreign markets. the problem of the mecha-
nization and automation of computing and calculating work and the mechanization of
administrative labor as a whole is pressing. As the achievements of scientific and
technical progress are introduced in different sectors of the national economy, the
need arises for the automatic control and regulation of various technological proc-
esses and the operating mode of machines.

The effectiveness of the management of the national economy is inseparably con-
nected with the questions of the development of automated control systems, the in-
troduction of modern computers for the gathering, storage and processing of infor-
mation, as well as the extensive use of mathematical economics methods. A State
Computer Center is already in operation in the “PR.

A computer station, which is equipped with small Robotron-1720 and Robotron-4201
computers for the primary and integrated processing of information and the produc-
tion of machine carriers, is being established in the production association of the
leather footwear industry. An automatic control system of production is being
adopted for the first time at the joint Mongolian-Soviet Brdenet Hining and Concen-
tration Combine. The use of modern automatic data processing equipment and mathe-
matical economics methods will make it possible to increase the effectiveness of
the solution of the main problems of the management of the production operations of
the combine.

The establishment of computer centers and computer stations is the begining of much
work on the improvement of the management of the economy and the automation of the
processing of economic information. However, the organization of the centers does

15
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
EDI OFFHCJAL USIZCNVLY

not entirely solve the problems of the centralized automatic processing of state-
wide, scientific and technical information and the mechanization of the calculating
work of industrial enterprises and institutions. Therefore, the establishment of
collective-use computer centers and computer stations, which are equipped with
modern computer hardware, and the mechanization of data processing on the basis of
the extensive use of small computers are an immediate task.

In addition to the technical aspect, the complete mechanization and automation of
production have an aspect which is connected with the change of the nature of labor
and the role of man in the production process. The new equipment and technology
require a new worker. A person, when participating in the production process, now
does not directly affect the object of labor, but is linked with the latter through
a complex technical system. The worker is removed, as K. Marx predicted, from the
technological process itself. The number of workers engaged in mental labor, which
is saturated with a great intellectual content, is increasing rapidly. With the
development of science and technology profound structural changes are occurring in

aggregate national labor, the use of simple labor is decreasing and the area of
application of complex labor is expanding considerably.

This process takes the form of the gradual increasing of the proportion of skilled

and highly skilled personnel and the decrease of the proportion of unskilled work-
ers.

Under the influence of technical progress all the components making up the produc-
tion process undergo progressive changes. Technology is one of the most important
components and at the same time is often the most "conservative."

The technology of industrial production up until the last decade was developed
along the line of the greater and greater subdivision of operations. The mechani-
cal methods of machining--cutting, grinding and so on-played the main role here.
A turn in production technology, which was simultaneously both a consequence and
a prerequisite of the efficient use of new means and objects of labor, is now tak-
ing place. Production technology is being developed by the changeover from dis-
crete (noncontinuous) multioperational processes of machining to continuous proc-
esses of high precision, which are based on the physicochenical and biological proc-
essing of the objects of labor in the presence of closed flow charts with the com-
plete processing of the intermediate products. As practice shows, the automation
of the production process without a change in the production technology does not
provide the proper impact.

The radical improvement of the technological principles of the processing of mate-
rials is a social necessity, it serves at the same time as a powerful stimulus for
the designing of new tools of labor. In this connection we should quote the words
of K. Marx, who directed attention to the importance of not only tools of labor,
but also the technological process. "Economic eras," he wrote, "are distinguished
not by what is produced, but by /how it is produced] lib italich (emphasized by
us—-Ts. 6.), by what means of labor."6 The importance of the technology of "how
it is produced" is especially increasing in our times. The changeover from modern
tools of labor to fundamentally new tools can be accomplished only on the basis of
a comprehensive approach, the introduction of fundamentally new technological

 

6. K. Marx and F. Engels. "Soch.," 2d edition, Vol 23, p 191.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
processes. The technology predetermines the nature of the interaction between the
tool of labor, the object of labor and the worker, which is subordinate to the main
goal--to transform the object labor into a finished product by neans of the tool of

level of its technological effectiveness are being advanced as one of the main fac-
tors of the acceleration of the development of the productive forces of the NPR.

of new technology has not yet found a comprehensive solution. The use of chemical,
biochemical, electrical, physical and other advanced technology is typical of new
and renovated enterprises. At the same time mechanical technology still predomi-
nates in some sectors of industry. Thus, at a number of enterprises of light and
the food industry the group of processes with a mechanical technology is more than
55 percent, while the proportion of chemical technology fluctuates within the range
of 2-9 percent and that of electrical technology-2-6 percent. The predominance of
mechanical technology at such enterprises causes the incomplete processing of raw
materials and materials and lenghtens the production cycle. The improvement of

violations of the flow charts, which are still encountered.

the need to perform a certain amount of work on the use of currents of superhigh
frequency, ultraviolet and infrared radiation, ultrasonics, superhigh and superlow
temperatures, electron and ion beams, laser and radioactive rays and other methods,
which are based on electric power. This especially pertains to works, which use
fast-spoiling raw materials and produce products which are not to be stored for a
long time. The treatment of food products with ultraviolet rays, that is, the use
of the so—called method of cold sterilization, promotes the preservation of the
quality of fast-spoiling food products during the period of storage in warehouses
and at stores in the presence of temperatures above 0° c. with the treatment of

17
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run UI'l-lt IAL USE ONLY

rcfrlgchtnrs. Thv sucrcssful solution of this problem will lead to major changes
In the technology of the present refrigerating industry.

Such methods of rapid thawing (methods of internal heating) as the microwave, di-
electric and electrocontact methods, which are based on the dielectric properties of
the frozen products themselves, are being used in industry. These methods differ
from traditional methods by the prevention of the excessive increase of the tempera-
ture in the surface layers of the product, the decrease of the moisture loss and

the shortening of the duration of the process of thawing.

The deep freezing of food products in a medium of liquid nitrogen and khladon-lZ
(freon-12) in recent years has proven itself to be a promising method of processing
food products.

The great shortening of the duration of freezing, the decrease of the drying, the
simplicity of the used equipment and the improvement of the public health state of
production are an advantage of this method, which in the end increases the quality
and cost effectiveness. With the introduction of this method under the conditions
of the HPR particular attention is being devoted to the problem of the creation of
a refrigerator chain from the producer to the consumer, without which it is impos-
sible to solve the problem of the complete retention of the initial qualities of
food products.

The use of infrared radiation for drying and heating is important in the production
technology of a number of sectors of industry. The use of this type of radiation
when drying products notonly requires considerably less time as compared with the
method of steam and hot air drying or with the ordinary natural method, but also
makes it possible to free production areas, to improve working conditions, to in-
crease the product quality, to decrease the production cost and, finally, to change
over the production process to a continuous flow system.

In the food industry the use of ultrasonics makes it possible to eliminate high
temperature sterilization, which guarantees the complete retention of all the nu-
tritive and taste properties of products.

Chemical technology is affording new prospects, since a large portion of the chemi-
cal processes take place continuously in closed equipment; semimanufactures and
finished products are transferred by the least expensive type of intraplant trans-
portation--pipelines. Chemical technology is being used more and more extensively
not only at chemical plants, but also at enterprises of the most diverse sectors of
industry, as, for example, the leather, the shoe, the sewing and the food industries.

The increase of the level of chemicalization can be accomplished by the assimila-
tion of new chemical methods of the production of output and the improvement of ex-

isting technological processes. The use of enzymes is urgent. In highly developed
countries enzymes have already found application in more than 30 sectors of indus-

try. The use of enzymes shortens the production cycle of many types of products
and increases their quality noticeably. In particular, it is possible to use the
enzyme method in tanning when treating hides, which increases the yield of plant
wool and improves working conditions. For the improvement of bread and meat prod-
ucts it is also necessary to conduct further research on the use of enzymes. The

pilot experimental center for microbiology and entomology attached to the meat

18
FOR.OFIWC1AL USEiOBﬂLY
canning combine in Ulaanbaatar has begun the production of various enzymes and bio-
logically active substances from endocrine-enzyme raw materials.

An enzyme shop, in which new modern technology is used, is in operation at the al-
cohol, starch and molasses combine in Dzuunharaa.

The production of enzymes and biologically active substances and their use in pro-
duction are the basis of the creation of a new and advanced microbiological sector.

In the technology of tanning in recent years more attention has begun to be devoted
to the improvement of the combined methods of tanning with the use of chromium,
aluminum, zirconium and titanium salts and synthetic tannins, which are not harmful
to the health of man. The complete use of valuable scraps and the improvement of
technological processes when coloring products with cold-resistant and polychromatic
bright dye are also one of the main tasks of the leather industry.

Chemical methods of attaching the sole of a shoe have practically replaced the tra-

ditional method. Thus, in 1963 the glue method was introduced; in 1979 it accounts
for nearly 90 percent in the total volume of output.

Table 9

Proportion of Methods of Binding Shoes
(percent of total)

 

Methods of binding 1960 1970 1979
6109. e a e o s o o e e o e e s e o n e e o e s s s e e o '- 40.9 89.2
open. a e s s e e a e s e s o o a s O o s e s s e e c e o 340‘ 21.0 ‘-
Welt. o e e o o o o o o s s e n e . a m o e a o o s e s a 65.6 3105 10.8
sandal. e s e e a e e e e s e s e a e w e w s e w e e c e - 603 --
Underslde e e a e e e s e s e o e a o o e a a s o e s o .- 0a3 '-

 

The use of new materials for the sole is another direction of the chemicalization
of the technology of producing shoes. The production and processing of microporous,
as well as leatherlike rubber are comparatively inexpensive. Hhereas 35,000 man-
hours are required for the processing of the leather for the production of 2,000
pair of shoes, 3,400 man-hours, or one-tenth as much, is required for the sewing of
the same number of shoes with the use of material produced by the chemical method.

Along with the introduction of new types of advanced technology the skillful combi-
nation of traditional methods of the production of consumer products with scientific
and technical achievements is also required. In Mongolia, for example, the tradi-
tional method of producing dried meat (borts), which is based on the principle of
natural sublimation--under the conditions of the lower atmosphere pressure and low
air temperature during the winter period-has been used since times of old. The
combination of the traditional method of producing dried meat (borts) with modern
freeze drying will make it possible to expand the production of this valuable food
product. A number of favorable techniques, which make it possible to use efficient-
ly the components of milk, exist in the domestic technology of producing Mongolian
national dairy products. For the purpose of improving and mechanizing this tradi-
tional technology two specialized plants have already been built in the country.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPIILJAL 03!. ONLY

The improvement of the technology of repairing equipment and producing spare parts
is an urgent problem. The machine processing of parts should be replaced by elec-
tric processing: electric welding, electromachining, the electric-spark and elec-
trohydraulic machining of metals.

The creation of closed technological processes, of so-called waste-free technology.
which ensures the complete use of raw materials. is another important direction of
the improvement of technology.

it is important to combine the introduction of advanced technologies with efficient
means of the reuse of waste products, especially those made of agricultural raw
materials. For example. the waste products of the meat, dairy, milling and eleva-
tor, alcohol and other sectors of the food industry upon further processing are
valuable fodders for livestock.

The introduction of the results of scientific and technical progress in production
in many ways is governed by the level of the improvement of the methods and means
of the technological preparation of production. The higher its level is, the more
rapidly and economically the assimilation of new items is accomplished and the
higher the quality indicators of production and the output being produced are.

The creation of a unified system of the technological preparation of production will
promote the increase of production efficiency. This is an important problem, the
solution of which is conducive to the shortening of the length of the entire cycle
of planning and the preparation of production for the output of an item with stable
indicators of quality, which meet the needs of the national economy. The improve-
ment of the system of the technological preparation of production not only provides
an appreciable social and economic impact, but also is of decisive importance for
the adoption of automated control systems and the improvement of the management of
the national economy.

The party and the government are persistently pursuing a policy of the systematic
updating of the products being produced and the increase of their technical level
and quality. By the beginning of 1980 16 percent of the industrial output was be-
ing produced with the State Seal of Quality. A number of measures aimed at the in-
crease of product quality and the improvement of quality control have been imple-
mented in recent years. A unified system of the certification of product quality
and a system of the planning and stimulation of the increase of product quality

have been set up. The organization of the quality service at all levels of manage-
ment of the national economy has been improved, a system of product quality control
is being adopted at individual enterprises. The development and adoption of an in-
tegrated quality control system according to the experience of leading Soviet enter-
prises and the development on this basis of a unified product quality control system
in the national economy are a pressing problem.

inc role of standardization and state standards as the technical standards base for
the most efficient use of the available resources and the practical introduction of
the latest achievements of science and technology is increasing. By the beginning
of I980 97 percent of all the products being produced were regulated by state and

sectorial standards.

In recent year a unified state system of standardization has been set up, the plan
of standardization has become a component of the national economic plan, intersec-
torial systems of standardization are being developed.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The turihvr improvement or the system of standardisation and the increase of the
scientific and technical level of standards are of fundamental importance for the
increase of the efficiency of social production and the improvement of product
quality. The systematic updating of the standards, the elaboration of advanced and
leading standards. the carrying out of overall standardization and the introduction
of the goal program method of planning in the work on standardization are an impor-
tant condition of the solution of this problem. The increase of the organizing
role of standardization is inseparably connected with the adoption in practice of
the standards of enterprises. The main function of the standards of enterprises is
the assurance of the effective adoption and strict observance of state and sectorial
standards by the appropriate correlation of their requirements to the specific nature
of the enterprise.

The solution of the main problems of the improvement of production technology will
increase not only the technical level of products, but also the overall technical
level of industry of the NPR and thereby will play an important role in the in-
crease of the efficiency of social production.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Bkonnmika", 1980

7807
C50: 1819/! END

21
FOR OF11C1AL USEINNLY