FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10234
4 January 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY
(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appi“nriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes 5 31in the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSKIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(moo 1/82)

CONTENTS

ELECTRIC POND!
Economics of Electric Power System Pomtion

(I. M. Vol'kenan; at 81.; mean MANIA
mummcm 81m, 1981) 0.0.0.0....OCOICIOO.

Recent, nature Searches for Tataria 011, Gas Described
(1e. D. Voytovich; GWHA NBFTI 1' GAZA, No 9, 1981) ....

-a- [III-USSR-37!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORE?

ELECTRIC POWER

ECONOMICS OF ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEM FORMATION

Moscow BKONOHIKA FORHIROVANIYA ELBKTRO-BNBRGBTICHBSKIKR SISTBH in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 20 Nov 81) pp 1-8, 320-321

Linnotation and introduction by l. H. Vol'kensu, A. a. Zeyliger and
L. D. Khabachev from book "Economics of Forming Electric Power Syn»
tems". edited by A. A. Troitskiy. lzdatel'stvo "Bnergiya", 3,500

copies. 320 pagesl

LTeng This book outlines 'he technical and economic aspects
of forming and developing electr‘c power systems. Primary at-
tention is devoted to the technology, methods and mathematical
models of the technical-economic justification of solutions

for developing electric power systems during the designing
stage. The book also reviews questions having to do with the
economics of forming and developing the USSR's Unified Electric
Power System.

The book is intended for specialists engaged in planning and
designing the development of electric power systems; it may
also be useful for students in institutions of higher learn-
ing who are specializing in electric power.

INTRODUCTION

The concentration of the production of electric power at powerful re-
gional electric power stations and the centralization of the supply
of electricity from the overall high-voltage network of the electric
power systems (res) are the determining principle for the development
of the 0858's power industry. This principle was first outlined in

the GOBLRO plan.

The basic factors which determine the efficiency of this trend in the
development of electric power are:

-the conserving of capital investments in the power industry by in-
creasing the capacity of power units and electric power stations and
by making rational use of the capacity of hydroelectric power stations.
and by decreasing the needed reserve and reducing the combined maxi—
mum oi the power load as compared with the total maximum loads of in-
dividual systems, and by lowering the ccst of construction;

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-the conserving of operating outlays by reducing the relative expend-
itures of fuel and the number of personnel required for operation dur-
ing the introduction of large, highly-efficient power units. and also
by optimizing the use of different kinds of electric power stations
within the electric power systems;

-the conserving of labor resources in operation and construction;

-increasing the reliability of the electric power supply by coopera-
tion of the power systems in the event of various unfavorable events
in the individual systems.

At different stages in the formation of the BBS some of the above fac-
tors come into play, but all of them, to a varying degree. are con-
atantly at work during the development of the BBS.

The creation of the BBS and their mutual joining together in accordance
with this principle is the basic direction in the development of the
Soviet Union's electric power industry. As a result at the present
time more than 97 percent of the USSR's electric power production is
accomplished at large electric power stations. which are joined toge-
ther into 93 regional electric power systems (BBS). the networks of
which caver nearly 80 percent of the populated territory of the Soviet
Union. Most of the RBs's (more than 85 percent oy capacity of the
electric power stations) function within the II unified BBs's (OBS).
nine of which are in turn joined together into the ﬂational Unified
Electric Power System (YeBS). The joint work of the power generating
and power consuming units within the electric power systems. which is
characterized by the generality of the process of production and con-
sumption of power and its synchronism and continuity, is subject to
known physical laws, which determine several technical limitations in
the modes of using the electric power stations and electric networks.
The observation of these limitations during each moment of time is
necessary to ensure the qualitative and uninterrupted supply of elec-
tricity to consumers and the reliable operation of the BBS.

This feature of the electric power industry as a technical system
substantially complicates the management of the development of the
sector, requiring that the conditions for the development and func-
tioning of facilities in the BBS both during the planning of the de-
velopment of individual facilities and the designing of individual
facilities be taken into consideration. The need to execute this re-
quirement has led to the apportionment within the structure of the ma-
nagement of the development of the electric power industry of a very
important independent link. which has come to be called the designing
of the development of electric power systems. the task of which is to
justify the solutions which determine the composition. basic parame-
ters and sequence of the development of electric power stations and
electric networks and the means for their operation and management
based upon the conditions of the optimal development of the electric
power system on the whole. These solutions serve as the basis for
both the planning of the sector's development and the designing of

individual facilities.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In accordance with the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Mini-
sters decree of 12 July I979, which concerns "improving the planning
and strengthening the influence of the economic mechanism upon increas-
ing the efficiency of production and the quality of work", in present
day conditions the drawing up of a set of measures aimed at ensuring
the efficient use of capital investments in developing the sectors of
the national economy and achieving high final national economic re-
sults becomes especially important. This applies fully to the elec-
tric power industry. where one of the ways to realise these require-
ments is to improve the methods and technology of designing the devel-
opment of electric power systems. while considering the specific fea-
tures of the power industry.

In the I930's and l940's V. I. Veyts. S. A. Kukel'-Krayevskiy. V. V.
Bolotov, Ye. A. Ruasakovskiy and other Soviet scientists began the de-
signing of the development of the 288's. These scientists were the
first ever to do research on the principles end methods for justifying
the development and joining together of electric power systems. They
also laid the groundwork for the future development of the Yeas. At
this same time the foundations of the modern organisation and technolo-
gy of designing BBs's were laid and the first drafts of the formation
of power systems were drawn up.

The further development of methods for designing 388‘s came in the
I960's, when. on the one hand, the process of creating in the Soviet
Union large power associations and the formation of the YeBS was un-
dertaken on an intensive basis. 0n the other hand. there was also an
opportunity to make use of mathematical models and computers at this
time. As a result the scientific collectives headed by D. A. Arsamaa-
tsev, A. A. Beschinskiy. V. A. Venikov. V. H. Gornshteyn, I. H. Har-
kovich, L. A. Melent'yev. S. S. Rokotyan, L. V. Tsukernik, 0. V.
Shcherhachev and other scientists have in the past IO to IS years
drawn up methods. algorithms and programs which make it possible with
a high degree of accuracy to conduct a technical analysis and economic
evaluation of variants, and in several instances to also accomplish a
comprehensive optimisation of the development and functioning of the

388's.

During this same period. L. A. Helent'yev and his school developed the
basic concepts of the theory of large power systems. which can serve
as the scientific basis for improving the overall methodology of de-
signing BES's. They ensure the correct posing of the task of design-
ing a system on the whole and the sound division of the task into a
hierarchical series of sub-tasks. the selection of optimal methods

for their solution and the rational organization of the entire process

of designing 388's.

During the designing of the development of large power associations
and the YeES the results of the listed scientific research were devel-
oped snd firmly established. As a result it became possible to create
common methodological bases for the formation and designing of the de-
velopment of electric power systems as an independent field of power
science and engineering practice.

3
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR uFFICiAL 055 out:

This book represents an attempt to systematically outline from the
abovementioned initial positions the technical-economic bases for the
formation and designing of the development of electric power systems.

The book can be broken down into three basic sections.

Chapters I and 2 deal with the common methodological questions of de-
signing BBs's: the first chapter cites the characteristic of an 388
as one of the large power industry systems which are incorporated into
a general power system (a fuel-energy complex) on a national level;
the first chapter also provides an analysis of the process of managing
the development of the electric power industry and its role in this
process of designing the development of BBs's. The first chapter al-
so researches the hierarchical structure of the tasks in designing
835's and examines a common technological diagram for their solution
in conditions of initial information that is constantly being kept up
to date. This includes questions dealing with the use during the de-
signing stage of mathematical models and the creation of an automated
designing system. The second chapter provides an outline of several
questions regarding the methodology oftecmicel-economic justifica-
tions, which are very important for the practice of designing EBS's.
but which have not been standardised or are inadequately understood

in special literature. Included in such questions are the methods

for considering the dynamics of the development of the system and the
ambiguity of the intial information and reliability in conjunction
with the technical-economic justifications.

Chapters 3 through 6 review the basic power and technical-economic
tasks of designing EBS's - determining the system's need for generat-
ing capacity. justifying the development of electric power stations
and the basic networks. analysing the power modes of the 888s' opera-
tion. Along with the sequential outline of modern methods and tech-
nology for solving these tasks. including questions having to do with
the use for this purpose of mathematical models and computers, these
chapters also list general recommendations on rational trends in the
development of electric power stations within the 883's, the use of
which makes it possible to limit the field of searching for optimal
solutions during the designing of the development of specific OES‘s.

when considering that the technical-economic questions on selecting
circuits and parameters of electric networks of 35 RV and higher.
just as the purely technical problems connected with their formation
and functioning. are adequately covered elsewhere, the basic content

of the chapter devoted to electric networks in this book. apart from the analysis
of the overall diagram of the management of the development of electric networks,
consists ofa review of certain specific questions on the justification of the
development of electric networks, which are connected with the development of the
system on the whole to a greater extent. This includes questions on
determining the estimated power modes of loading networks, consider-
ing the system reliability when selecting their carrying capacity and
configuration and several others.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7 sheds light on the technical-economic questions that deal
with the formation of the YeBS. These questions augment. illustrate
and make more specific the material in the preceding sections.

All of these questions are examined in the book as they apply to the
level of future designing, on which the basic criterion for making.de-
cisions is to achieve a minimum of national economic expenditures.
This does not include a review of the economic-organisational aspects
of management. the organizational structures end cost accounting in-
terconnections between the individual enterprises and associations.

The material of the book is based upon a generalization of the many
years of experience that the authors have had in designing and per-
forming scientific research in the lnergoset'proyekt electric power
system network designing7 institute. The book also cites the results
of research which the authors conducted together with their institute
co-workers: Ye. A. Volkovs (paragraphs 6.6. 5.2), 0. N. Kuznetsova
(paragraph 5.3), P. A. Halkin (paragraphs 3.‘. 3.5. 6.2), V. s. Shery-
gin (paragraphs 6.4, 5.2. 5.4) and V. D. Shlimovich (paragraph 2.3).

In outlining thecommonmethodological questions on designing 338's

and the principles and methods of using a system of mathematical mo-
dels for this purpose. research results were used, which were execut-
ed in cooperation with A. s. Hakerova. L. s. Belyayev. V. A. Khanayev
(from the Siberian Power Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences)
and A. I. Lazebnik (from the Power Institute imeni G. H. Krzhishanov-
skiy).

The authors are indebted to candidate for the degree of doctor of
Technical sciences A. s. Hekarova fortheircareful review of the manu-
script and their comments which were taken into consideration during
the preparation of the manuscript for publication.

The introduction and Chapter I (except for paragraph 1.4) and para-
graphs 2.3, 2.A. 3.6, 3.5. 5.l. 5.3 and 6.2 were written by A. N.
Zeyliger, chapter A and paragraphs 3.1. 3.2. and 3.3 by L. D.
Khabachev, paragraphs 1.“. 2.l. 2.2. 5.2. 5.4. 6.I were written by

A. N. Zeyliger and L. D. Khabachev. and chapter 7 by I. H. Vol'kenau.

All comments and requests regarding the book. which the authors will
accept with gratitude, should be neat to the following address:
113116. Hoscow. H-llb, Shlyuzovaya Rabereahnaya. 10. Isdatel'stvo
"Bnergiya".

5
FOR OFFICIAL us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction easssossaseemasaossssasoasstassoaeoseeosseooaaaaoo 3

Chapter I: Bases for the organization and technology of de-
signing the development of electric power systems ............. 9

l.l The general characteristic of electric power systems and
organization of the management of their development ........... 9

[.2 Hierarchical and organizational structure of designing
electric power systems ........................................ 23

l.3 Technological diagram of designing the development of
electric power .y.te.. OOIOQOOOOOIQ0.0IOOOOO$0.00....OOICOOOOCO 3‘

[.4 General principles of constructing a system of mathemati-
cal models for solving tasks connected with designing electric
Power system. lI..00I.00......0.00...I.OOIOIIOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOO ‘0

Chapter 2: Methods for the technical-economic justification of
solutions during the optimization of the development of electric
power .ylte" OIOOIOOOOOOCIOOOO0.00.DOOOOOOOOOIIOGCO00.0.00...G ‘8

2.I Criteria of optimalization of the development of electric
Power sysceua OOOCOOOCCOUQOQDOCOOOO0.0....O'DI'IO....I.$.OOOO.U “8

2.2 Principles and methods of forming and comparing variants
in the development of electric power systems .................. 59

2.3 Principles and methods of considering the reliability
during the technical-economic justification process on the
development of electric power systems ......................... 80

2.4 Methods of technical-economic justification oi solutions
when initial data is ambiguous ...............................- 88

Chapter 3: Technical~economic bases for determining the need
of electric power systems for the introduction of generating
capacity 00.0.0...00000¢...00....00.000.000.00...OOOOOOOOOOOIO. loo

3.! Determining the future levels of consumption of electric
and thermal power ............................................. 100

3.2 Determining the electric power consumption modes and the
maximum loads of electric power systems ....................... IO9

3.3 Capacity balances of electric power systems .............. I20

3.6 Determining the economically sound reserve of capacity in
a concentrated electric power system .......................... 126

3.5 Determining the reserves in Unified Electric Power Systems 138

6
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6: Methods of estimating the work modes of electric
power stations during the designing of the development of
electric Power ‘y.teu. aesesessassssassess-easeaeseseeseaeeeeeas

6.! Types of electric power stations and their operating char-

acteri'tic’ ssasseeeeeeeessssseaoeeoseseesseseeeseeessseomwseeee

6.2 Basic postulations of estimating the work modes of electric
power stations during the designing of electric power systems ..

6.3 Methods and mathematical models of optimising the 24-hour
work modes of electric Poue' 3t.ti°n. esseseasssseeeeeeeesaeeese

4.6 Optimizing the annual work modes of electric power stations
and compiling the energy balances of the electric power systems

Chapter 5: Justification of the development of electric power
station. in electric Power .y.tcl. eseseeeeeeeeeesaeesaasaeseeas

5.! Technological diagram of the justification of the develop-
ment of electric power stations in electric power systems ......

5.2 Analysis of the comparative efficiency of equipping various
kinds of electric power station‘ easeeassesaseessseaasessseseees

5.3 Economics of concentrating the capacity of electric power
stations and their basic equipment ................-............

5.6 Mathematical models for optimizing the structure of generat
ing capacities of electric power systems .......................

Chapter 6: Justification of the development of the basic elec-
tric networks of electric power systems.........................

6.! Determining the estimated power modes for selecting the
carrying capacity of the basic electric networks of electric

Power OYOCCIIO seaseasseeeaseeseeseeaesaaeoeeesasoeeeaaeeeesseooe

6.2 Technology and methods of justifying the development of the
basic electric networks of electric power systems ..............

Chapter 7: Bases of formation and development of the National
Unified Electric Power System (Yeas SSSR) ......................

7.] Stages in the formation of the ress SSSR and the basic di-
factions in it. developn.nt sssessesassassseseessseeessesseesese

7.2 Structure of the generating capacities of the rats SSSR ...

7.3 Arrangement and concentration of the capacity of condensate
electric power stations within the Yeas SSSR ...................

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

165

I65

I66

I76

I87

I96

I96

206

2|5

229

26I

241

256

270

270
283

296
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.4 Formation of the basic electric networks of the 1088 SSSR 301
’ibliosraphy OOOOOOOODOOOIO...U0.00.00.33.00.00IOOCICOIOOCOCOOO 3'5

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Energiya". I981

8927
cs0: l822/27

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS

UDC 553.982:550.812(470.4l)
RECENT, FUTURE SEARCHES FOR TATARIA OIL, GAS DESCRIBED
Moscow GEOLOGIYA NEFTI I GAZA in Russian No 9, 1981 pp 1-7

[Article by Ye. D. Voytovich (Tatneftegazrazvedka [Trust for Gas and 0il.Explora-
tion in the Tatar ASSRJ): “Results and Trends in Geological Exploration for oil in
Tataria")

[Text] During the last fiveﬁyear plan Tataria's oil explorers carried out the main
technical and economic indicators for deep drilling and core drilling. In all.
445,000 meters of prospecting and exploratory hole and 1.2 million meters of cored
hole were drilled. that is. 102.3 and 107.2 percent. respectively, of the plan
task. The construction of 289 prospecting and exploratory holes was completed
under a plan for 260. During this period 10 oilfields and 51 deposits were dis-
covered. One hundred highs [109 percent of the plan) in Lower Permian sediments

were prepared for core drilling.

During the 10th Five-Year Plan Tatneftegazrazvedka Trust continued to prospect and
explore for oil in Devonian and Carboniferous rocks in the main proaising areas of
the east of Tataria--the westenn slope of the South Tataria. arch and the eastern
side of the uelekess depression. This is where 63 and 30 percent. respectively30f
the total neterage was drilled during the five-year plan. In other areas. includ-
ing the southeastern and northeastern slopesof the South Tataria arch. 20.148 and
5,585 meters were drilled. in the Udnurtskaya ASSR, there were 10,543 meters of
exploratory drilling.

1n explorational areas, 8! highs were introduced to deep prospecting drilling, and
58 of these were prepared by core drilling in the Lower Permian sediments and 23 by
seismic exploration. using reflecting horizon v (the Lower Carboniferous). Sue-
cesscs in prospecting at Persian structures reached 90 percent, 78 percent based on
seismic pioSpeeting. New fields and deposits were discovered, as a rule. with the
first prospecting hole. This testifies to the reliable preparation of the highs by
core-drilling and seismic-exploration methods. Despite the high degree of study of
the land, the general conversion to the napping of areas ﬁiﬂlutilization of a den-
ser network of core holes and of seismic logs indicates that the number of local
highs observed increases as their dimensions decrease. So it can be presumed that
the promising areas of East Tataria possess a definite reserve for the finding of
new anticlinal traps.

Thanks to the use of more modern standard practices for prospecting. the pace of
preparation of highs and the effectiveness of deep drilling were raised during the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10th Five—Year Plan. in comparison with the Ninth Five-Year Plan, the success rate
for prospecting increased from 70 to 91 percent, and the percentage of productive
holes rose from 58 to 74, which includes a rise from 54 to 89 percent for pros-
pecting holes.

Important geological results and substantial increases in oil reserves were ob-
tained on the western slope of the South Tataria arch and on the eastern side of
the Melekess depression, thanks to a concentration of operations in - - promising
areas which are situated in the side zones of the Kama-Kinel' system of troughs.
Small but sharply expressed high-amplitude reefogenic-type highs were distributed
widely here in Carboniferous sediments. In practically all of them-as. oil deposits
were confined in carbonaceous and terrigenous: sodiments-o£c' owereand liddle Carbon-
iferuus complex 5. A high degree of correspondence of '...e Lower Permian and the
Carboniferous s..ructural plans favored the finding of oil-bearing traps with core
drilling. highs that were submerged and sharply flattened upward in the cross-
section were prospeeted successfully with seismological exploration by the OGT
[comon depth point] method. During prospecting for anticlinal traps, data about

the propagation of PrcVisean and Vereya erosion breaches were considered. of espe-
cially great signifiance for oil prospecting is the discovery and tracing of Previ-
sean breaches, since the development of high-capacity sandy collectors is associat-
ed with them. Areas of intersection of the breaches and local highs are primary
targets for siting prospecting drilling. Experience in prospecting and exploration
at the Arkhangel'sk, Vishnevo-Polyanskoye, Stepnoozerskoye and other fields indi-
cates that oil accumulation zones can be associated with such areas. Even the
terrigenous Devonian sediments in the region being examined. especially its eastern
part, are promising. But here, apparently, minor deposits basically of the litho—
logie and lithological-structure types have developed. The consistent confinement
of most of the oil deposits to structurally uplifted elements of ancient Devonian

terraces that are encircled along the strike by graben-shaped troughs is noted.

0n the western slope of the South Tataria arch, 278,000 meters were driven. includ-
ing prospecting drilling equal to 125,000 meters (45 percent). during the 10th
Five—Year Plan. The construction of 180 holes was completed, and oil was obtained
at 130. The success rate for deep drilling reached 72 percent. Under exploration
were 48 highs, 42 of them in the Lower Permian. and 6 had been prepared by use of
reflecting horizon V in seismic exploration. Positive results were obtained at
46 highs. Prospecting and exploratory drilling was performed at the Ul'yanovskoye.
Yamashi, Urat'minskoyc, Shegurchinskoye and Cheremshan areas, which are located
within the zone of distribution of good-quality crude.

The Arkhangel 'sk field is the most significant of those fields at which exploratory
drilling has been conducted. It consists of several like-type oil-bearing local
highs of common strike which form a single swell-shaped zone in Carboniferous sed-
iments. The field intersects a deep Previsean erosion breach that has been filled
up with Tula horizon sandstone of increased thickness. Petroliferousness has been
established in the Turna. Tula, Alcksin, Bashkir and Vereya sediments. In all, 22-
deposits were discovered. More than half of the industrial reserves of oil were
concentrated in Tula horizon sandstone. The oil is of comparatively good quality,
with a viscosity of 20—50 centistokes.

At the Krasnooktyabr' field, 22 holes were completed by drilling, 6 of which were
prospecting holes. In the Carboniferous and Permian sediments, the structural plan
of the field is presented in the form of a swell—shaped zone of northwest strike,
which includes six isolated highs. In the center of it is the large Poselennoye

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ML!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high, with an amplitude of 30-50 meters. The terrigenous Devonian layers have
basically a gently sloping monoclinal deposition. An area of the Poselennoye high
has been complicated along the Devonian complex by a small structural terrace. The
presence of Previsean and Vereya erosional breaches has been established by drill-
ing data. Industrial deposits of oil have been feund in the Pashiyskeya and Kynov-
skiy horizons of the Devonian. in carbonate collectors of the Turna and Bashkir
stages and Aleksin. Vereya and Kashira horizons. and in sandstones of the Bobriki
and Tula horizons. Abundant oil shows have been recorded in the carbonate rocks of
the Kashira and Podol 'sk horizons. A highly productive deposit has been observed
at a PoselennOye high in the Pashiyskaya horizon, which is confined to a sandy
formation of increased thickness. As a result of short-term testing of it, an oil
gusher with a flow of 100 tons per day, using a 9-millimeter flow bean. was ob-
tained. Subsequent exploration showed that this deposit is small and belongs to
the lithologic type.

The Dachnoye field includes a group of local carboniferOus highs. to which deposits
in the Turna, Bobriki , Bashkir and Vereya sediments have been confined. oil shows
have been noted also at domelike-structure areas in the Kashira horizon. A de-
posit in the Kynovskiy horizon has been found at the Kutemskiy high, which is weak-
ly reflected in Devonian rocks. Oil has been discovered here that“flows frosts
sandy formation at the rate of 35 tons per day. with the use of a 7-millimeser
I'low bean.

The multiple-formation Iskra field consists of three isolated highs. which were
prepared during the prospecting stage by OCT-method exploration, using reflecting
horizon v. In all. 11 holes have been drilled in the area and the presence of a
sculptured high along Carboniferous sediments has been confirmed. In the Pashiy-
skaya horizon two formations of oil-bearing sandstone that total 7 meters in thick-
ness have been discovered. When they were tested jointly, a gusher of high-quality
oil with a flow of more than 100 tons per day on an 8-millineter flow bean was ob—
tained. The deposit was of the arched, bedded type. In the Bobriki horizon of the
Carboniferous. a second formation of oil—bearing standstones 10.8 meters thick was
discovered. As the result of a test, a gushing flow of oil was obtained. Indus-
trial oil-bearing objects have been found also in the Turns and Vereya-Bashkir sed-
iments. The occurrence of a basement at a depth of 496 meters was discovered by
well 663. An analysis of the geological data enables the following conclusions to
be drawn: the structural position of the well at the basement corresponds to the
axial zone of the graben-shaped Bagan trough: the basement rocks are characterized
by strong fracturing. but fluid-l iberating permeable intervals are lacking among
them; no oil or gas shows have been obtained in visual observations or the gas log.

At the Yamashi area, prospecting and exploration have been perfomed at the Tyuge-
ycvskoye and Onbiyskoye fields. The multiple-formation Tyugeyevskoye field com-
bines seven local highs with proved petroliferousness. Productive fomations have
been found in the Kynovskiy horizon. the Turns stage. the Bobriki and Tula hori-
zons and the Vcreya-Bashkir sediments. The main object of development is a high-
ly productive deposit in Bobriki sandstone. The field has been put into industri-
al operation.

At the 0nbiyskoye field the construction of 23 holes has been completed. The field
has a complicated structure and includes 9 local Carboniferous highs with proved
petroliferousness oi‘ the Turna. Tula-Bobriki and Vereya-Bashkir sediments. In the
northern part of the field, in the hynovskiy and Pashiyskaya horizons lithologic

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

type deposits have been found. Minor lithologic-type deposits which are complicat—
ed in structure and limited in reserves have been dispersed in the extensive Ni-
zhneurat'minskoyc structural terrace. oil-bearing formations have been found also
in the Turns and Bashkir stages and the Bobriki, Tula and Vereya horizons of the
Carboniferous. Industrial reserves of oil are localized witnin Carboniferous

highs. As a result of prospecting and exploration, the Butkamanskoye and Hel‘nin-
skoye fields and 10 deposits were discovered.

an the whole, the degree of promise of the Urat'minskoye area, especially its nor-
thern part, have proved to be lower than what had been presumed. The development
of highs.small in dimensions and extremely flattened. which form low-capacity traps
with restricted oil reserves, turned out to be negative.

At the Shegurchinskoye area, as a result of the work dons, two fields with highly
productive deposits in carbonaceous collectors of the Turna stage and the Aleksin
horizon at the Novotroiskoye high were discovered. The industrial petroliferous-
ness of the new fields is linked with Carboniferous sediments. of them. the more
significant Krasnogorskoye field includes six like-type highs, which are grouped
into one structural "knot." oil-bearing formations have been confined to the Turna
stage, the Tula and Bobrik horizons and the Verey-Bashkir sediments. The field has
been prepared completely for development work.

At the Cheremshan area, prospecting and exploration drilling have been performed in
small amounts. The work was concentrated in the Amal'chinskoye field region. A
new oil deposit in the Bobriki horizon was discovered when a sheshna Lower Permian
high was introduced to drilling. To the south of the area, 16 local highs have
been mapped. The presence of a stock of prepared structures will permit the amount
of prospecting drilling in this definitely promising region to be sharply increased.

A zone of heavy and viscous crudes (Carboniferous deposits) are confined to the
eastern side of the Helekess depression. During the 10th Five-Year Plan. 130,000
meters were drilled through. The construction of 91 wells was completed, oil has
been obtained from 75 of them, and the success rate of deep drilling reached 83
percent. Work has been done at the Stepnoozersk0ye and Kutushsko-Kadeyevskoye
areas.

At the Stepnoozerskoye area. prospecting and exploration drilling has been oriented
to Carboniferous sediments, but the first prospecting wells, which were located in
the arches of highs, extended down to the crystalline basement. As drilling has
proved, the terrigenous sediments of the Devonian are devoid of industrial accumu-
lations of oil. A wide stratigraphic spectrum of oil shows has been established

in rocks of the tower and Middle Carboniferous, and eight productive horizons have
been found. The deposits are confined to distinct local highs. A substantial por-
tion of the oil-bearing targets, which are represented by carbonaceous rocks, are
characterized by low productivity, which reduces the recovery potential of the
fields. During the five-year plan, 25 highs at the Stepnoozerskoye area were in-
troduced to deep drilling, of which 13 had been prepared by using horizon V seis—
mic exploration. Positive results were obtained at 24 structures. As a re-
sult, 2 new oilfields (the Kamyshlina and Brodovskoye) and 15 deposits were
discovered.

Important revisions have been introduced into notions about the petroliferousness
of Carboniferous deposits. The presence of productive formations in the Kashira

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Pudol'sk horizons.at arch sections of the structures.has been proved. High
promise has been established for the Vishnevo-Polyanskoye and Akanskoye structural
zones. where a favorable combination of local highs and Previsean breaches. which
are filled with thick sandy formations,wenenoted. Along with prospecting for oil.
a large amount of exploration drilling has been done at the Vishnevo-Polyanskoye.
Zyuzeyevskoye. Kamyshla. Akanskoye. Gorsk. stepnoozerskoye. Krivoozerinskoye.
Pioner and Brodovskoye fields. with a view to preparing them for development. The
flow rates of wells at the Stepnoozerskoye area are low. and the oil's viscosity is
high. Because of this. prospecting and exploration in the area has been curtailed.

At the Kutushsko-Kadeyevskoye area. the construction of five wells. which recorded
a distinct high in Carboniferous sediments. has been completed. oil-bearing forma-
tions were found in the Turna stage and the Tula and Vereya horizons.

0n the southeastern slope of the South Tataria arch. a limited amount of work has
been done on the Azevo-Salaushskoye swell and at the Bakeyevskoye structural ter-
race. In all, 20.148 meters were drilled. the construction of 11 wells was com-
pleted. and oil was obtained from 6 of them. Two Lower Permian highs——the Arzamas
and Urazayevskoye--were introduced to deep drilling. At the first the presence of a
high-amplitude high of the reefogenic type was established for the Carboniferous
rocks. The main oil deposit of large-scale type was associated with Carboniferous
sediments of the Bashkir-Serpukhov series. and the petroliferous story is equal to
50 meters. For the Lower Carboniferous beds. the amplitude of the high reaches 80-
130 meters. but the trap is devoid of industrial accumulations of crude. In the
terrigenous Devonian sediments. a positiveOIOBed structure is lacking. The Arzamas
high has an analogous structure. but the productivity of the deposits in the Middle
Carboniferous is more limited.

within the northeastern slope of the South Tataria arch (the Menzelinsk-Aktanysh
area). the Karachevskoye, Severo-Baylyarskoye and Hiyashevskoye highs. which had
been prepared by seismic exploration. were introduced to deep drilling. In all.
the construction of one well was drilled to 5,585 meters and completed. At the
Karachevskoye high. the drilling of deep well 20005 with a designed depth of 4.500
meters continues. the goal of which includes a study of the Paleozoic and the more
ancient Eocambrium reef sedimentary formations. 0n 1 August 1981 the face of the
well reached a depth of 3,794 meters. According to geophysical data a formation
of oil—saturated sandstone is singled out at the Tula horizon of the Carbonifer-
ous. Reef sediments were found at a depth of 1.890 meters. The upper part of the
log was complicated by an GOO-meter series of variegated-color sandstones and
aleurolitcs. and then followed a clayey-sandy member 600 meters thick. which con-
verts lower down to quartzitic sandstones. At a depth of 3,463 meters the hole en-
tered a dike of crystalline rocks, which were represented by Congo diabases.

Simultaneously with the prospecting for oil, exploration was conducted to study
bitumen-bearing Permian sediments. During the five-year plan. 417 special holes
were drilled. 30 bitumen deposits were found. 9 deposits were explored in detail.
and 10 deposits were prepared for the estimation of resources of categories 02
and D. The new data confirms the high promise of Ufa's bitumen-bearing complex on
the western slope of the South Tataria arch. The degree of promise of the Kazan'
bitumen-bearing complex has proved to be much lower than presumed by the apprais-
als. because of the complex lithological facies structure of the formation's
components.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An analysis of geological results for 1976-1980 pen-its the following conclusions
of basic importance to be drawn:

1. Positive results of oil prospecting were achieved at all exploratory areas as a
whole. The main discoveries were associated with fields and deposits in Lower Car-
boniferous sediments, which are of comparatively small size and contain heavy, vis-
cous crudes. The flows of the crude from the wells have low flow rates.

2. An essential difference between modern methods of prospecting and exploring new
fields and those applied in the past consists in the necessity to prospect for oil
deposits that are small in area and in reserves and that require substantial
amounts of drilling to prepare them for development. Prospecting and exploration
were conducted more successfully in those areas where deep drilling was performed
not at solitary highs but at several of them that were associated with Previsean
breaches, which control the spacing of the higher capacity sandy collectors.

3. Highly productive deposits in nonanticlinal traps were discovered, along with
the well-known traps of anticlinal type in the Devonian terrigenous complex. Traps
of combined type were found in the Lower Carboniferous complex in zones of distri-
bution of the Previsean erosional breaches.

4. Abundant oil shows that were established in a broad stratigraphic band--from

the Kashira to the Hyashkovo horizons of the Middle Carboniferous inclusively-in
the Stepnoozerskoye, Ul'yanovskoye, and Shegurchinskoye areas-amerit attention.

The recovery potential of the deposits in these sediments and types of traps re-

quire further study.

5. In recent years seismic exploration has increased effectiveness in the prepa-
ration of highs for Carboniferous sediments. The experience of geophysical opera-
tions at the Yenoruskoye, Kutushskoye and other fields indicated that, in applying
the OCT method, problems of exploring in detail oil deposits of complicated struc-
ture and of preparing them for development also can be solved successfully.

In accordance with the integrated plan for performing geological exploration during
the 11th Five—Year Plan in the main areas, where more than 80 percent of all deep
drilling will be concentrated, there remain the western and southeastern slopes of
the South Tatariu arch and the eastern side of the Melekess depression, which is
restricted by a zone of distribution of relatively light crudes in Carboniferous
sediments. The following are recommended for other directions of operations: the
northern and northeastern slopes of South Tataria and the southeastern slopes of
North Taturia arches. Prospecting for oil should be performed in Devonian and
Carboniferous sediments, but the main promise for increasing oil reserves is linked
with the Lower to Middle Carboniferous complex. Based upon an analysis of geologi-
cal and geophysical data, prospecting and deep drilling on the southeastern
slope of a North Tataria arch and in the Menzelinsk-Aktanysh region will require
a considerable change, by way of an increase. In all, it is planned that during
the 11th Five-Year Plan Tatncft' Association will drill 600,000 meters of prospec-
ting and exploration holes, 500,000 meters of it by Tatneftegazrazvedka.

A further increase in prospecting effectiveness is being linked with the integra-
tion of core drilling and seismic exploration and with improvement of the quality
of preparation of highs in Devonian sediments by the OCT method. A skillful com-
bining of these methods will enable their potential for further increasing the

ll:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inventory of structures to be taken into account more completely, the tasks of de-
tailed exploration and preparation of oilfields of complicated structure for devel-
opment to be solved, the zones of distribution of higher-capacity sandy collector:
to be forecast, and the arsenal of favorable geological prerequisites that are
used for increasing deep-drilling effectiveness to be greatly expanded.

At the oil-prospecting stage, a most important measure for providing for an in-
crease in the pace of preparing new reserves should be a systematic expansion of
the front of prospecting drilling and an increase in its volume to 70-80 percent.
The main task of oil prospecting is to find deposits in anticlinal traps in all
exploration regions of Tataria where there are prepared highs. Substantial amounts
of prospecting and exploratory drilling must be concentrated on those promising
areas where a combining of several favorable geological prerequisites is presumed:
the grouping of local highs and reefogenic-type structures, the presence of Previsean
breaches and buried protrusions of basements, and so on. Such promising objects
include the Yuzhno-Ul'yanovskaya, Mel'nikovskaya and Yuzhno-cheremshan groups of
local highs. In planning operations at objects with known reserves under categor-
ies C2 and D, the degree of their "activeness" after transfer to industrial cate-
gories, that is, the possibility of rapid involvement in development, should also
be considered.

Because of small sizes and limited reserves, it is recommended that lithologic
traps in terrigenous sediments of the Devonian be explored, incidental to drilling
at local highs. Combined-type traps, which are characteristic for side areas of
the Previsean breaches, will be prospected for and mapped jointly with the main
arch-type deposits in Carboniferous formations. A further concentration of pros-
pecting and exploration at targets of complicated structure that are distinguished
by small amplitudes of the highs and a predominance of traps of the nonanticlinal
and combined types, is related to the development of new standard procedures.
Decisive significance is attached here to seismic exploration.

At the detailed-exploration stage, the task of the accelerated preparation of a
large number of minor oilfields (25 fields are planned for the 11th Five-Year Plan)
for development should be solved by means of development and producer wells and the
enlistment of a small amount of exploratory drilling.

In order to clarify fundamental questions of the deep structure, which will deter—
mine thc prospects for further progress in prospecting work, a large set of studies
is to be performed.

In the area of study of the Eocambrium reef formations at the Ienzelinsk-Aktanysh
area, the drilling of well No 20005 is to be completed, the hastily prepared geo-
physical description of the cross-section and the stratigraphic tie-in of the re-
flecting horizons is to be refined; and area seismic exploration by the NOV [re-
flected—wave method] and DOT method are to be restored with a view to obtaining a
reliable geophysical foundation for putting down a second deep well, No 20002, in
the zone of maximum thickness of Prepaleozoic rocks. At the edges of the lensing-
out of ancient sediments it is recommended that the designed well No 183, which
is confined to the Suranchan seismic high, he deepened to the basement. The indi-
cated wells will be situated on the line of a profile that is oriented transversely
to the strike of the monoclinal slope; this will provide maximum information on the
area being studied. The data obtained should create the necessary base for fur-
ther detailing work.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to study the crystalline basement. it is planned to place solitary pros-
pecting wells on local highs and ledges and on places of presumed cleavage of
rocks. The purpose of drilling these holes is to clarify the possibility of the
accumulation and migration of UV's [hydrocarbons] into crystalline rocks from the
sedimentary complex. Drilling into the basement is combined with prospecting for

oil in Paleozoic sediments. The depth of uncovering of the Precambrium basement is
500-700 meters.

Fulfillment of the tasks posed for the 11th Five-Year Plan should provide for a
further rise in the effectiveness and quality of geological exploration of
Tataria.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Nedra”. "Geologiya nefti i gaza" 1981

11409
cso: 1822/46 END

16
F0 OFFICIAL USE ONLY