APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: CIA-RDP02-00000R000100050010-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100050016-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 14/8445

8 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR RESOURCES
(FOUO 10/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050016—8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Naterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
II are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

ﬁle contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS CWERNING WNERSIIIP 0F
“ATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS we:
8 May 19‘.

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(POUO 10/79)
CONTENTS P
ELECTRIC mm AND PWER EQUIPMENT

Economic Training--An Important Factor in Energy Resources
(0. x. Pisarev; momsnmunua mmm, Har 79)

Natural Gas and Thermal Power Economy-d Problem of

Primary Significance
(c. I. Ibragimov; mmsnumm mm“, Mar 79)

Standardization of Electric Power Consumption by the
Industrial Enterprises
(I. S. KopytovasPRMSHmNAYA mum, Mar 79) .....

FUELS AND RELATED EQUINE”

Planni Gas Exploration Operations
I. P. Zhabrev, et a1. ; GEOWIYA RSI-'1'! I CAZA, Feb 79).

Predicting Oil and Gas Reserves by the Development Curves
(H. G. Iaeybson; GEOWIYA NEFTI I OAZA, Feb 79) ........

Predicting Content, Composition of Condensate, Condensate
mt Coefficient
(T. D. Ostrevskaya; GBOWIYA NBFTI I om, Feb 79) ....
FOR OFFICIAL IlSh’ ONLY

ELECTRIC PMR AND I’M}! EQUIPHBNT

UDC 658.26.006.18
BCONOﬂIC TRAINING--Aﬂ IMPORTANT FACTOR IN ENERGY RBBGJRCBS

Moscow PROHYSIILENNAYA CUBICBTIKA in Russian No 3, Her 79 p 2

iitrticle by Engineer 0. It. Pisarev. Ukrainian SSR Ministry of the Coal
Industry]

[Text] In the letter to the Central Cousittae of the CPS", the USSR Council
of Ministers. the All-Union Central Trade Union Council and the Central
Comittee of the All-Union Lenin Vouag Co-unists League "0n the Development
of Socialist Conpetition for the Fulfill-eat and Overfulfillnent of the

1978 Plan and Intensification of the Efforts to .uprove Production Efficiency
and Operating Quality" it is pointed out: that to achieve greater efficiency
it is necessary to save the national wealth, to reinforce the economy

regine in every possible way and especially with regard to fuel and electric
pover.

In solving the problels of the utilization of economy reserves. an impor-
tant role has been assigned to the econoaic education of workers. At the
enterprises of the Ukrainian 83!! Ministry of the Coal Industry. econolic
training is being offered; the primary organizational force are seminars,
econonics schools and schools of conunist labor. Offices and study areas
for econaic education have been set up to help the trainees.

The activity of the schools of advanced experience for widespread propagation
of such principles as the struggle to achieve a 100 ton/day or lore load

on the working face. effective use of nining equipment. the study of the
experience in high-efficiency operation of individual collectives. is worthy
of praise.

The entire country knows about the work experience of the brigade of

V. C. Hurzcnko at the Krasnyy Partisan Hint of the Sverdlovantratsit
Association. It has fulfilled its obligations in honor of the 61st Anniver-
sary of the Great October Revolution six days ahead of schedule, delivering
up 3 million tons of anthracite since the beginning of the five-year plan.
0n the average the brigade has extracted 3,261 tons of coal daily. At the

present tine this count of fuel is being extracted by an average nine with
2.500 people.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHCIM. USE ONLY

The utilization of the economy reserves depends to a great extent on the
management personnel. the level of their professional knowledge, skill

in combining economic and educational work: therefore the leading specialists
of the Ukrainian SSR Ministry of the Coal Industry and the production
associations are being sent to the institute for advanced training of
management workers and specialists of the USSR Ministry of the Coal Industry.
The workers of the power machine services of the mines and the enrichment
plants are undergoing training at the Donetsk and the Voroshilovgrad
branches of the second institute. For two days the auditors study the
urgent problems of Marxist-Leninst theory and economic strategy of our

party on the modern level.

A great deal of attention has been attached to the economic education of
the workers operating and maintaining the electrical equipment. In the
first half of 1978. 66 chief mechanical and power engineers of the nines
and 230 mechanical engineers from the sections underwent training at the
Institute for Advanced Training and its branches. The auditors note that
the training permits deeper analysis of the production process and more
complete utilization of the possibilities of modern mining equipment.

The economic training is improving the activity of the workers in the annual
all-union competition for best proposal with respect to economy of electric
and thermal power. The results of the economic training are especially
perceptible during the socialist competition of the enterprises with respect
to electric power economy.

In the mines of the Donets basin a great deal of attention has been given
to the use of gas (previously discharged into the atmosphere) from the
degasing of the coal beds. At the present time more than 25 boiler rooms
are operating on this gas. which provides a saving of more than 120,000
tons of coal. The conversion of the mine boiler rooms to gas from degssius
has been basically completed. In the mines where the methane concentration
in the mixture is less than 30 percent, the developers of electromechanical
services are performing experimental work with respect to the use of methane-
air mixtures with methane concentration to 2.5 percent for blowing during
operation of the boilers on solid fuel. which permits up to 25 percent of
the coal to be saved.

During two years of the Tenth-Five Year Plan the enterprises of the coal
industry of the Ukraine saved 261 million kilowatt-hours of electric power
and 68,500 tons of provisional fuel as a result of reducing the specific
consumption and 753 million kilowatt-hours of electric power and 102,200
tons of provisonsl fuel as a result of implementation of organizational-
technical measures.

COPYRIGﬂT: Izdatel'stvo "Energiya", "Promyshlennaya energetika", 1979
108é5
050:1822

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POHBR AND POHER EQUIPMENT

UDc 662.69.003.1
NATURAL GAS ARD THERMAL POHBR BCONOHY--A PROBLEM OF PRIMARY SIGNIFICANCE
Moscow PROHYSBLBNhAYA BNBﬂGBTIKA in Russian No 3. Her 79 pp 9-11

[Article by Engineer 0. I. lbrsgiaov. Moscow Territorial Inspectorate of
Gosgnznndzor]

[Text] Natural gas is acquiring more and lore significance in the fuel
balance of the country. Its use in the national econoay is pro-sting the
acceleration of technical progress, an increase in productivity of labor

and improved standard of living for the people. The reliable provision of
the enterprises with natural gas eust be realized not only by increasing the
extraction but also by more efficient use of it. The solution of this
problee is unthinkable without inproving the technical-economic indexes

of the operation of the gas-using equipment. It is here that the greatest
reserves for saving thermal power are hidden.

in the resolution of the Central Coalittee of the CPSU on the organizational
and political work of the Keenrovo oblast Gulaittee of the CPSU for econony
of fuel and energy resources at the enterprises and construction sites of
the oblast. "it has been proposed that the ainistries and depart-eats
persistently expand the application of technically substantiated norms for
the consuaption of fuel and energy resources at the enterprises and in the
organizations. that they develop aessures to strengthen the state control

of the use of fuel and energy in the national econoay and also improve the
consuaption accounting systes and the material incentives for econoay."l

The enterprise and organization leaders are being faced with great problems
in the Tenth Five-Year Plan with respect to nobiliaation of all of the
reserves for saving energy resources and accounting for their consuaption.
ln industry lore than one third of the total boiler and furnace fuel
econoay is to be obtained as a result of introducing new equip-ent and is-
proving the econony of the operating equipaeat, the iaprovcnent and in-
Lansificstion of the technological processes. the introduction of the
energy technology processes vith a simultaneous increase in unit power of

 

l. PRAVDA. 16 March 1978.

3
FOR orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the units, improvements of the gas burning units, automation of the
productlon processes and use of secondary energy resources.

The investigations performed by the Moscow Territorial Inspectorate of
Gosgaznadzor [The State Gas Inspectorate] at the industrial enterprises
indicates that many of the plants and factories are working hard in this
direction. It must be noted that the problem of gas economy is being solved
successfully wherever there is high production, most improved production
output processes. a high level of technical equipment of the enterprises

and innovations are being introduced. As an example we have the work being
done at the following production associations Voskresensktsement, Karbolit
(Orekhovo-Zuyevo). Minudobreniya imeni V. V. Kuybyahev (Voskresensk). At
these associations measures are being developed systematically for efficient
utilization of energy resources. The implementation of these measures is
being monitored. A great deal of attention is being given to the introduction
of advanced processes, mechanization and automation of the production pro-
cesses. As a result of the performance of organizational-technical measures
and qualified servicing of equipment. a high level of use of natural gas

has been achieved.

The Moscow oblsst is one of the greatest gas users in the country; therefore
gas economy has been given constant attention here on the part of the party,
Soviet and economic agencies. At a number of the industrial enterprises,
the reserves for saving fuel and energy resources have not been completely
used. The overconsumption of natural gas is permitted. and secondary energy
resources have not been fully utilized.

By the results of the inspections of 178 industrial enterprises of Moscow
Oblast in 1977, including 71 enterprises inspected more than once. deficiences
were discovered in the natural gas utilization. Secondary energy resources
are not being used at 12 of the enterprises, and exhaust-heat units to use
the products of combustion have not been installed at 10 of them (the
Lyuberetskiy cumaercial Machine Building Plant, the Lyuberetskiy Construction
Materials and Structural Element Combine, the Podol'sk Machine Building

Plant lmeni s. 0rdzhonikidze, and so on). at the Proletariy Tin Cloth Plant
(Serpukhov) the exhaust-heat units are not in operation. At these enter-
prises the temperature of the exhaust gases after the boilers reaches 300° c
which leads to overconsumption of gas and a 4-6 percent reduction in boiler
efficiency.

At 10 of the enterprises there is no automatic adjustment of the combustion
in the boilers (the Balaahikha Cotton Spinning Plant, the Lyuberetskiy
Building Materials and Structural Elements Combine. and so on); at 89 of the
enterprises the automatic equipment is not operating (the Shchelkovskiy
Sheet Rolling Plant. the Blektrostsl' Heavy Machine Building Plant. the

Likinskiy Bus Plant. and so on).

At 166 enterprises there is not quality control for burning of gas in the
boilers. Gas analyzers have not been installed at 111 of them (the

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shchelkovskiy sheet Rolling Plant. the Lyuberetskiy Farm Machine Building
Plant imeni Uhhtomskiy. and so on). and they are not in operation at 35
at them (the Podol’sk Machine Building Plant imeni S. 0rdzhonikdse. the
Nnrofoma Silk Combine. and so on).

At 76 of the enterprises. the gas using equipment is operating without
regime-adjustment tests and regime charts (the Serpukhov Structural Elements
Combine, the Glukhovskiy Cotton Combine. the Silikatnenskiy Reinforced
Concrete Plant, and so on). At 7h enterprises it is the fault of the service
personnel that the boilers are operating with deviations from the existing
regime charts (the Shchelkovskly Sheet Rolling Plant, the Elektroatal'

Heavy Machine Building Plant. and so on). which leads to significant gas
losses. The adjustment and operation of the boilers with respect to the
monitoring and measuring instruments provides about 5 percent fuel economy.

The aging. uneconomical boilers (60 to 80 percent efficiency) are in operation
at the Lyuberetskiy Building Materials and Structural Elements Combine. the
Katuarskiy Ceramic and Tile Plant. and so on; as a result. up to 20 percent

of the burned fuel is lost.

Measures have not been developed for gas economy at 29 of the enterprises
(the Podol'sk Municipal Dairy Plant. the sovkhos imeni Lenin. the production
enterprise combine of the Mosoblstroy Trust Mo 26 of the Ramenskiy Rayon.
and so on).

The absence on the part of the superior organizations of proper control of
theobservationof the economy regime. the planning of specific fuel con-
suaption standards and implementation of them will lead to unsubstantiated
increases in them by comparison with the standards. Thus. the specific
provisional fuel consumption standards have been raised at a number of the
Clavmosoblstroy enterprises (the production enterprise combine of the
Mosoblstroy Trust Mo 26. by 25-30 kg/gigacalorie, the Shchelkovskiy Health
Building Combine. by 30-35 kg/gigacalorie. and so on) and the Glavmosoblstroy-
materialov (the Butovskiy Building Materials Combine. by 30-40 kg/gigacalorie;
the Bronnitskiy Brick Plant. by 30-d0 kg/gigacalorie. and so on).

It has been established that at 66 enterprises the specific fuel consumption
standards have not been technically substantiated or have not been developed
in general. The basic fuel consumption measure-~the standard for its
consumption established in accordance with the production output volume--
must be technically and economically substantiated. Otherwise it is im-
possible to determine the effectiveness of the utilization of the energy
resources. However, at the Lyuheretskiy Experimental Plant for compact
purification units of Clavmosoblstroymaterialov, at the enterprises of the
RSFSR Ministry of Agriculture (the sovkhoz imeni Mossovet. poultry farm,
Mirnaya. Tomilinskiy Poultry-Raising Association. and so on) the specific
norms were not presented during the inspection.

Gas is used uneconomically at the Domudedovskiy Reinforced Concrete Products
Plant. Modern boilers of the DKVB type have been installed at this

5
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPiCIAL USE ONLY

enterprise, but they are not equipped with automation for regulating com-
bustion or exhaust-heat units for utilizing the heat of the combustion
products. Regime-adjustment tests have not been run on the boilers. there
is no quality control of the fuel consumption. there is no accounting for
the released and consumed thermal energy. The overconsumption of gas
amounts to 710 thousand m3 annually.

Similar deficiencies are characteristic of the Pushkinskaya Light Furniture
Plant and the Serpukhov Reinforced Concrete Products Plant. The gas losses
at these enterprises amount to 6 to 8 percent of the annual gas consumption.

In 1977, at the Moscow territorial inspectorste of Gosgeznsdzor a test was
run on the implementation of the previously issued prescriptions with
respect to increasing the efficiency of gas utilization at 71 industrial
enterprises of Moscow Oblast. It was discovered at 19 of the enterprises
the necessary measures were adopted to improve the use of gas. and the
inspection suggestions are being implemented in a timely manner. Never-
theless. at a number of the industrial enterprises not only is there no
initiative being exhibited in the problems of improving the efficiency of

the use of fuel and energy resources. but the inspection recommendations
are not being implemented.

The unsatisfactory situation with regard to the utilization of fuel and
energy resources is also explained by untimely provision of the enterprises
with modern gas using equipment. exhaust heat recovery units. instruments
for automatic regulation of combustion and accounting for the consumption

of gas and thermal power. Moreover. a significant part of the installed
exhaust-heat recovery units the automation and gas analysers for the
combustion products frequently are not operating as a result of insufficient
qualification of the service personnel. Thus, at the Domodedovskiy Building
Materials and Structural Elements Plant in 1974 the inspectorste proposed
the installation of instruments to monitor the temperature of the exhaust
gases and account for the generated thermal energy. to set up accounting

for the returnable condensate and monitor the composition of the exhaust
gases. However. in the inspection made in 1977 it was established that

the indicated deficiencies had not been eliminated. As a result. the gas
losses at the enterprise amount to more than'200 thousand m3 per year.

In order to improve the reliability of equipment of the users located far
from the gas sources, reserve fuel management enterprises are being or-
ganized inasmuch as it is impossible to create gas reserves separately

at each user. when inspecting the industrial enterprises, special attention
has been given to the work with respect to the construction and preparation
of such enterprises for operation. The inspection demonstrated that at

the Shchelkovskiy House Construction Combine and the Tomilinskiy Poultry-
haising Production Association the planned deadlines for the introduction

of reserve fuel enterprises into operation have not been met. Serious
disturbances-of the fuel situation at the Kudinovskiy Elektrougli Plant

and the Mozhayskiy Municipal Pasteurized Milk Plant are creating difficulties
for normal gas supply of tho communal-domestic users. and they are also

6
son orncru. us: 0qu
lowering the operating reliability of the enterprises themselves in the
case of emergencies on the gas lines and freezing weather.

A rhythmic. stable gas supply is impossible without observing strict gas
consuption discipline, especially under the conditions of constant growth
of the use of gas and removal of the users from the supply sources. A
daily gas consuption standard has been established for each enterprise.
However, at a nuaber of the enterprises overconsumption of gas is permitted
(the Clukhovskiy Cotton Combine. the Krasnogorsh Cement Machine Building
Plant, the Krasnogorsk Mechanical Plant. the Kucha Ceramic Block Plant.

and the Akrikhin Chemical-Pharmaceutical Plant, and so on).

The basic areas for improving the efficiency of the use of natural gas at
the industrial enterprises are as follows:

Performance of planned preventive repairs on the gas and heat using equip-
ment and also regime-adjustment operations, combustion of the gas in ac-
cordance with the regime charts (fuel economy 3 to 5 percent of the annual
gas consumption by the enterprises);

Introduction of systems for automatic regulation of combustion with cor-
rection for the composition of the combustion products (economy l-Ia percent);

Effective recovery of the exhaust gas and low parameter stem heat (economy
[4-8 percent);

Reduction of heat losses by improving the insulation of the lines and the
heat-consuing equipment (economy 10-15 percent);

Conversion of the enterprise heating from steam to hot water (economy 3-4
percent);

Reconstruction and improvement of the heat supply systems, automation and
adjustment of the heating and ventilation systaas (economy 10-15 percent);

Improvement of the gathering and use of condensate (economy 5-10 percent);

Replacement or modification oi the obsolete. low-efficiency and uneconomical
gas using equipment (econwy 5-10 percent).

The economy of rat! saterials. materials, electric power and fuel must be
provided for in the socialist obligations. the performance of which must
be taken under strict control.

In order to mobilize the efforts of the enterprise and organization collective
in the efforts at further improvement of the economy conditions. the All-
Union Central Trade Union Council, the Central Conittee of the All-Union
Lenin Young Cos-unist League and the USSR Gossnab have adopted a joint
resolution for performance of the All-Union Social Inspection of the Ei-
ficiency of Utilization of Rev Material, Materials, and Fuel and Energy

7
son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reuuurces in 1978-1980. The industrial enterprises and design organizations
must develop and inpleuent the organizational-technical measures promoting
the fulfillsent of the nssigments with respect to economy. estsblishmsnt

of contacts with the VNIIprongsz Institute. which is the head organization

in the problem of gas utilization and the test center for gss burning devices
with the corresponding departments of the Hoscov Institute of the Petro-
chenicel and Gas Industry ineni I. H. Gubkin and also with the adjustment
organizations.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Bnergiys". "Pronyshlsnnnys energetiks". 1979

10845
(250: 1822

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POWER AND POWER EQUIPMENT

STANDARDIZATIGI 0P ELECTRIC POHER CONSUMPTION BY THE INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
Moscow PRMSIILWAYA ENERGETIKA in Russian No 3, Mar 79 pp 45-406
[Article by I. S. Kopytova]

[Text] On 18 May 1978, a meeting was held of the "electric power supply

of industrial enterprises" subsection of the section on industrial power
engineering of the Scientific Council of "higher Engineering and Electrifica-
tion" of the State Co-ittee of the USSR Council of Ministers on Science

and Engineering devoted to the problens of standardizing the electric power
consumption by the industrial enterprises.

At the meeting reports were head by Yu. V. Kopytov ﬁosenergonadaor) on
"Improving the Standardization of Energy Consumption in Industry," by Yu.

I. Kerb-an (WIIPIenergopron) on "Co-parison of the Specific Electric Power
Consuption for Production Output in the USSR and Abroad." by L. A. Shevchenko
(Scientific Research Institute of Planning and Standards of the USSR Gospian)
"Methodology and Procedural Support of the Standardization of Electric and
Thermal Power," by V. K. Zhubit (Cher-etenergo of the Ministry of Ferrous
Metallurgy) on "Standardization and Efficient Utilisation of Electric Power
at the Enterprises of Ferrous Metallurgy," by V. I. Islinin (the Main
Adninistration of Power Engineering of the USSR Ministry of Nonferrous
Metallurgy) on "Standardization of the Consumption of Electric Power at the
Enterprises of Nonferrous Metallurgy," by N. G. Derevyanov (Administration
of Repair of the Enterprises of the Chenical Industry and Equip-eat of the
USSR Ministry of the Che-ical Industry) "0n the Work of the Ministry of

the Chenicel Induatry in the area of efficient and econoeical consumption

of energy resources." and also by P. P. Yaatrebov (the Voronezh Institute

of Technology). V. 1.. Groeova (the USSR Ministry of Light Industry).

Ye. M. Priltlonskiy (State Scientific Research and Planning Institute of the
Nitrogen Industry and Products of Organic Synthesis). V. V. Mikaylov
(VNIPIenergoprosI Institute). A. A. Tayets (Management Institute ineni S.
0rdzhonikidse). P. I. Golovkin (Energosbyt of Mosenergo). and V. I. Krupovich
(VNII’I Tyarhpronelektroproyekt Institute).

At the subsection meeting the following were noted:

9
FOR ontcuu. use any
FOR OFT-‘ICIAL USE ONLY

I. The goal of the utnndardizatinn of electric power consumption by the
industrial enterpriscn is to ensure efficient consumption of its electric

power during production output.

2. The development of advanced. scientifically substantiated standards for
power cunsumption is an important work providing for the theoretical and
procedural studies. the application of the required accounting systems
requiring special technical training of the workers. giving rise to the
necessity for the creation of the corresponding structural subdivisions

in the ministries. the branch scientific-research organizations and at the
enterprises.

3. The problems of improvement and bringing order into the standardization
of electric power consumption at the industrial enterprises under the
conditions of intense fuel and energy balance are acquiring especially
important significance: as means of advanced planning and the design of
power equipment and as an it for of the efficiency of energy use.

6. The ministries. the departments. the industrial enterprises and the
scientific research organizations are working to improve the standardization
of electric power consumption at the industrial enterprises. This has made
it possible to save about 60 billion kilowatt-hours of electric power in the
Ninth Five-Year Plan and to provide in the Tenth rive-Year Plan for the
reduction of electric power consumption by 5 percent as opposed to the
electric power consu-ption standards in 1975.

5. Nevertheless. in the field of standardization of electric power consumption
there are a number of significant deficiences:

a) The majority of the electric power consumption norms have been developed
by the statistical reporting method; the standards determined in this

way even with realistic corrections in practice do not discover the non-
productive losses of electric power at the enterprises. and they cannot
serve as an index of efficient electric power consumption;

b) At many of the enterprises. the structure of the norms has not been
detersined. in connection with which undulation is permitted when compiling
the reporting documents with respect to the fulfillment of the established
consumption norms. This distorts the statistical data and introduces
errors into the energy consumption plans;

c) in spite of the requirements of the "basic principles with respect to
sanitation of fuel. electric and thermal power in production" approved by
USSR Cosplan on 1 April 1966. the majority of ministries and departments
have developed branch instructions with respect to standardization of the
electric power consumption for the production of a significant part of the
products;

10
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d) when designing new enterprises and rebuilding the existing ones the
master planners have not developed optimal complex energy balances or
efficient standards for the use of the energy resources on the basis of
introducing advanced technology: they have not provided for accounting
systems required for operative monitoring of the electric power consumption
and compiling the actual energy balances which under the operating con-
ditions will lead to the necessity for using the statistical accounting
method and the randomly developed energy consumption structure to work up
the standards; insufficient attention has been given during overall planning
in the selection of energy-saving equipment and advanced processes;

e) The operating system of providing economic incentives to the workers in
the power services of the enterprises and departments is providing insuf-
ficicnt utilization of the energy resources available to the enterprises.

In order to improve the standardization of the electric power consumption
at the industrial enterprises. the subsection decided the following:

I. To ask the USSR Cosplan to exonerate the regeneration of the "basic
principles with respect to standardization of fuel consumption. the
consumption of electric and thermal power and production." approved on 1
April 1966.

2. To consider that the electric power consumption norms must have scientific-
economic substantiation, they must be compiled considering the current and

the prospective energy balances of the enterprise. the energy character-

istics of the process equipment and provide incentive for taking measures
aimed at lowering the consumption of the shorter and more expensive types

of energy. The development of the standards only on the basis of the
statistical accounting indexes with deep. comprehensive analysis of their
structure is inadmissible.

3. To recommend the following to the ministries and departments:

a) To investigate the normative materials effective in the branch. and in
the absence of them to develop and inttsduce branch instructions and
prurcdures into effect for 1979 to 1980 for the development of the standards
for the consumption of power reserves for production output, providing for
a scientifically substantiatcdapproach to the gggndard1zgt1on of the page:
consumption and promoting the introduction of advanced technology and
equipment with more economical indexes for the energy resources consumption:

h) To determine the lead organization of the branch responsible for the
coordination of all of the operations at the enterprises of the ministry
to improve the standardization of the electric power consumption. compile
branch instructions and procedures with respect to standardization and
application of systems for energy consumption accounting:

c) To introduce the coapilation of the optimal prospective energy balances
of the enterprises into practice. and on the basis of these energy balances.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fur the develop-cut or the plnnu fur five-year and annual plans: or economic
mul mu-lnl develop-«m to provide sanuurea nlned ut laprnvlng the efficiency
of the use of the fuel and energy reserves.

d) To develop basic areas of reducing the electric power consuption in the
branch. providing above all for the elimination of nonproductive energy
losses and the iaplenentation of the generally accepted neasures decreasing
its consuaptien:

e) To obligate the subdepartaental enterprises and organisations to develop
current (for 1979) and prospective plans for the organizational-technical
seasures with respect to saving fuel and energy resources and considering
their effectiveness. to approve nor-s for specific energy consupcion;

f) To iaprove the quality of accounting and to intensify the control of the
consumption of the power resources. in 1979-1980 to develop an accounting
systea at each enterprise for the consumed electric and theraal power.
using the «nation circuits or the auto-ated information and aeasuring
Ionitoring and accounting systess for the energy const-ption (including
with the application of computers).

6. To reco-end that the scientific research organizations expand the
develop-en: of the theoretical probleas of detersining the energy charac-
teristicc of the precess equipsent, compiling and calculating the energy
balances (planning. prospective. nor-sliced) of the enterprises of the
different branches of industry. calculation of the energy const-ption nor-ts.

5. To reco-end to the design organizations that they do the following:

a) when planning and designing the process systeas to be oriented toward
advanced technology. ensuring the highest level of efficient use of energy
resources;

b) Hhen developing the designs of the newly built and reconstructed enter-
prises. to develop the normalized energy balances of the enterprises. and

on the basis of then to calculate the substantiated advance energy con-
stssption norms. the fulfillsent of which in operation can be ensured for
optimal process conditions and exclusion of the nonproductivu energy losses;
planning norms for energy consuption must he coapared with the ones approved
for the analogous advanced enterprises of the given branch. and the advanced
achievesents of science and engineering lust be taken into account;

c) On the basis of the normalised energy balances of the enterprise and
the technical-economy calculations:

To realize efficient selection of the energy carriers for the technological
processes and the devices. to substantiate the option procedures and
volumes of use of secondary energy resources;

12
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To plan efficient energy supply systems. to substantiate the selection of
the parameters of the power installations and equipment on the network:

d) when designing and planning the power supply for an enterprise. it is
necessary to develop a system for accounting for the used energy. providing
for monitoring of the satisfaction of the energy consumption standards. and

to make a comparison between the actual and calculated energy balances
of the enterprise;

e) To use the advanced. scientifically substantiated energy conauption
norms to check out the correctness of the calculation of the proposed loads.
the selection of the parameters of the elements of the electrical and thermal
networks of the designed enterprise.

6. Considering the great economic significance of the problems of standardiz-
ing energy consumption in industry. the expediency of solving the problems

of efficient consumption of electric power by the enterprises (beginning with
their design stage). to request the USSR Gosstroy to introduce the cor-
responding corrections into "The Instructions for the Development of Plans
and Estimates for Industrial Construction" (SN 202-76). "The instructions

for Planning and Designing the Electric Supply for Industrial Enterprises"
(SN 176-75). and the instructions with respect to designing enterprises oi
different branches of industry, providing for the required development of
optimal energy consumption balances and standards for energy consumption

for unit production output. accounting systems providing for operative
monitoring of the observation of the approved general plan and technological
norms for electric power consumption in the plans for the newly built
enterprises.

7. To request that the USSR Ministry of Instrument Making:

a) Increase the output of automated electric power accounting and monitoring
systems and continue the work on improvement of them;

b) Organize the manufacture of the instruments considering the electric power
of high precision class. Ensure a metrologic base for the production.
operation and maintenance of such instruments.

8. Request that the scientific research institute for planning and standards
of the USSR Gosplan and the VNIPIenergoprom Institute intensify the work

with respect to the development of the basic areas of improving the standardi-
zation of the energy consumption by the industrial enterprises. the pro-
cedural recommendations with respect to calculating the standards and
organizing the work with respect to standardization in the various branches

of industry. the generalization and spread of the advanced experience in the
field of normalisation of the energy reserves.

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'stvo "Energiys". "Promyshlennaya energetika". 1979
10865

C50:1822

13
roe orncm. use onu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON!”

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

UDC 553.981:551.812:658.5
PLANNING GAS EXPLORATION OPERATIONS

Moscow GEOLOGIYA NBPTI I GAZA in Russian No 2. Feb 79, pp 2-7

[Article by I. P. zhabrev. Ministry of the Gas Industry. V. I. Yersakov.
H. Ya. Zykin. V. P. Stupskov, H. 0. Khvilevitskiy. All-Union Scientific
Research Institute for Gas]

[Text] As is known. the basic indexes of the current system for planning
gas and oil exploration operations are the nature of the reserves in cate-
gories A+B+c1 and the voluaes of capital investsents. The analysis of

the sodern state of the art with respect to gas exploration operations
indicates that the developed planning systel does not in the sajority of
areas. especially in the old gas extraction areas. ensure the required
rates of davelopaent of the raw aaterial base of the gas industry. This
is caused primarily by the following:

a) The lag in regional research within the prospective territories and the
absence of data for selecting the nest effective areas for exploration work
connected with this lag;

b) Insufficient preparation of the areas for deep exploration drilling;

c) Excess veluue of exploratory drilling, delaying the developsent of the
deposits;

d) failure to take into account the specific nature of the preparation of
the reserves in the old gas extraction areas:

e) Luw requiresents in the effective classification of reserves to sub-
stantiate category c . which causes a reduction in quality of preparation
of the areas and ef ectiveness of the oil and gas exploration work.

The experience in performing regional and exploratory operations and also
the data with respect to a large number of gas deposits where experisental
industrial operation has been started will par-it formulation of a number
of proposals for iaproving the planning systes to increase the gas reserves
and the conditions for conversion of the deposits to experilental industrial
operation.

1h
ma ontcuu. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Regional studies in full volume and on a modern procedural level must
precede the development of exploration operations in each new area or new
gas bearing stage in the partially assimilated areas. The effectiveness and
the improvement of the regional study stage eust be evaluated by the con-
version of reserves from subgroup Dz to D‘.

The lag in regional operations will lead to a sharp reduction in the effectiVe-
ness of the exploration work in sany areas which is expressed above all in

the slow conversion (or depletion) rate of the predicted reserves from Dz.
Under these conditions these reserves in Dz can significantly predominate
with respect to volume over the reserves in subgroup DI and higher categories.
Now in the Predkavksz'ye Region. for example. in spite of the prolonged

period of geological exploration work. only 23 percent of the predicted gas
reserves belong to subgroup D . This unfavorable ratio of reserve subgroups
in this region has continued for the last 10 years and is connected with a
sharp lag in regional studies. As a result. the effectiveness of preparing
the reserves of the industrial categories is very low here. and the nature

of the reserves does not make up for the decreasing gas extraction.

The regional studies are lagging in such gas extracting areas as the Komi
ASSR. the Kalmytskaya ASSR. the western Ukraine. and so on. At the present
time. in Heatern Siberia. in spite of the shorter times for development of
the territory. with a total significant magnitude of predicted gas reserves
80 percent fall in subgroup 91' It is known that the effectiveness of the
exploration work in this area is very high.

0n the whole throughout the country at the present time an unfavorable
ratio of categories and groups has developed in the structure of the po-
tential gas reserves: the explored gas reserves A+B+C1 make up a small part
of them at the ease time as the predicted estimates according to subgroup
02 exceed 50 percent. It is necessary to consider that in the case of
prospective planning. the forecasting estimate with respect to subgroup D2
is not taken into account. in connection with its low reliability.

The prospective plan for the development of the raw material base of the
gas industry up to 1990 provides for high growth rates of the explored
reserves with respect to categories A+s+c1. At the same time, it has been
established that the confirmation of the gas reserves in category C; for
many regions ooes not exceed 30-d0 percent. and subgroups 01. 20 to 30 per-
cent. Accordingly. the available reserves in category C; and subgroup

”1 must be considered inadequate. For reliable planning of the development
of the raw material base for the future, it is necessary to at least double
the gas reserves in subgroup ”1'

In order to improve the results from the regional studies and regulate their
volumes. when forming any five-year plans for gas and oil exploratioa work
it is proposed that the conversion of the predicted estimate for subgroup

D; to subgroup ”1 be planned and the effectiveness of the regional work
with respect to the results of this conversion be estimated. In order to

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organize the annual accounting for movement of reserves through subgroups

01 and Dz. it is necessary to organise an interdepartmental cosmission

(the USSR Ministry of Geology. the Ministry of the Oil Industry, the Ministry
of the Gas Industry) with the authority to confirm the gas reserves with
respect to these subgroups.

2. In many gas-prospective areas of our country. both the quantity and
quality of preparation of the structures for deep exploratory drilling are
inadequate. The Stavropol' and Krasnodar krays, Orenburg Oblsst. the
Ukraine. Eastern Siberia. Uzbekistan. the lower Volga Region. and so on
are presently experiencing an explicit “structural hunger." These regions
are characterized by complex geological-geophysical conditions and the low
quality of preparation of the structures or poor conformation of the dia-
cuvurcd geophysical anomalies caused by them.

The search forupliftsthatareprospective for gas has been performed in
recent years almost exclusively by using the seismic study methods.

Among the seismic structures discovered in the Ninth Five-Year Plan. 71 zper-
cent are small positive anomalies. the area of which is less than 50 km2 .
The probable cause of this is the high background of seismic interference
which is variable with respect to area and breaks up2 a broad territory of
large tectonic uplifts (hundreds and thousands of km2 ) into small sections
within the limits of which the interference behaves relatively stably.

In the Ukraine and lelorussis. the area of such sections is from 10 to 50.
in Lithuanian and Tadzhikistan. predominantly to kmz. There are no large
uplifts in the stock of prepared ones with respect to the Orenburg,
Saratov. Rostovskiy. Kaliningrad and other regions of the RSPSR. The area
of established seismic explorations in the Caspian Basin of subsslt struc-
tures varies from 25 to £2, and suprasalt, from 3.5 to 15 km2 . and so on.

It is clear that the "breaking up" of the united tectonic uplifts (for

example. the Orenburg swell. the Astrakhaa arch, and so on) into small

seismic anomalies disorients the subsequent exploration work. it prolongs

the time of reliable evaluation of the reserves of the large deposits and

the introduction of them into experimental industrial operation. This
theoretical deficiency of the seismic exploration work can be overcome by com-
bining the latter with other geophysical methods. joint quantitative

processing and optimal smoothing of the complex of data using a computer.

For the districts of Saratov. Volgograd and Astrakhan oblasts. for example.

where the area of each of the local structures discovered by the reflected
wave method or the common depth point method of seismic exploration amounted
to 3-10 km , it was established that the application of the set of geo-

physical methoda (aeiseic exploration in different versions. seismic ex-

ploration and high-precision grnvimetry) increases upto 70 km and more.

The areas of the submerged uplifts in the Lower Volga Region. according

to the data from quantitative combination 20f drilling. seismic and gravimetric
information. as a rule. exceed 200-300 kmz .

16
roe orrtcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. in many areas that are prospective for gas the conditions for
complex analysis of the geophysical data in practice still have not been
created. for the exploration work using the "easy“ geophysical methods
(high-precision gravimetry and magnetic exploration. electrical exploration
using variable fields. and so on) log significantly behind the seismic
methods or are not implemented at all. Taking this into account. it is
proposed that:

a) Plane be made to prepare the areas for exploratory drilling by a complex
of geological-geophysical methods efficient for the given region and to
consider this preparation appropriate only after the performance of all types
of operations and joint interpretation of the results;

b) In addition to the geophysical work in natural indexes. the exploration
organizations should also plan the number of prepared structures and their
minimum dimensions.

3. A significant increase in the geological effectiveness and reliability
of the seismic structures can be achieved also in the phase of exploring
the fields where the coordination of the seismic observations with respect
to area is controlled by a sufficient number of deep wells. The first
experiments in performing detailed seismic studies in the Komi A883 and the
Tyumen' Oblast demonstrated that they permit the exploration times for the
deposits to be reduced by one and a half to two times. no less than 10
million rubles to be saved at each site as a result of reducing the number
of exploratory wells and to obtain more complete information about the
structure of the investigated deposits. The seismic details included an
increase in the density of the seismic profiles to 3.5-6 km per square km
of structure (the density of the seismic exploration vork usually is on the
order of l km/kmz). the performance of the well type seismic observations,
checking and reinterpretation of all of the available seismic materials.

The possibilities for still greater optimization of the process of exploring
the gas deposits are covered in the use of the digital recording and pro-
cessing of seismic oscillations. the analysis of the absorption and pro-
pagation rate of the elastic veves. and improvement of the frequency of

the recordings. and so on. The complete realization of the information
possibilities of modern seismic exploration by the common depth point method
will in the near future provide for the solution of an entire series of

such “unstructured" geological problems as: the comparative estimation of
the oil and gas bearing nature of the structures, the outlining of the
deposits. the investigation of the region of propagation and the uniformity
of the collectors and also the integrity of the gas confining beds; a study
of the parameters of the deposits (porosity. effective poser, gas saturation.
and so on). All of these data combined with the materials from the ex-
ploratory drilling can serve as a reliable base for estimating the gas
reserves of the open deposits and compiling substantiated plans for the
exploitation of them. However. at the present time detailed seismic
operations have still been insufficiently developed; their specific veight

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

does not exceed 1 to 2 percent of the total volt-e of geophysics? operations
for gas and oil. For accelerated evolution of this research. it is proposed
that exploratory and detailing seismic operations be planned by the geo-
phynica expedition separately. and within the framework of the large geo-
logical exploration associations, it is recommended that complex (drilling
and seismic) enterprises be created insofar as possible specialised in

the exploration of the discovered gas bearing structures.

a. At the present time the operating system for planning the increase in
gas reserves providing for the preparation of the reserves with respect to
categories A+b+c is used identically both in the old oil and gas extracting
regions and in t a new prospective territories under the initial stages of
development. Nevertheless. there are theoretical differences in the
ﬁpecific nature of the preparation of gas reserves and the requirements for
detailed exploration of the deposits in these areas.

In the new prospective areas where the basic goal is the creation of a raw
material base for subsequent construction of gas line network. it is ex-
pedient to retain the existing system of planning increased industrial gas
reserves basically with respect to categories Cl and B in the respects
provided for by the instructions of the USSR State Coamiaaion on Mineral
Resources. within the territory of the USSR, these areas include Eastern
Siberia and the Far East. the Yanalo-Gydanskiy Region of Western Siberia
and the Arkhangel'sk Oblast.

wherever there are favorable conditions for fast completion of the explora-
tion of the newly discovered deposits by experimental industrial operation

and subsequent immediate introduction of them into development, it is proposed
that we go over to the new system of planning the increased gas reserves with
respect to categories c1 and CZ.

At the present time the organizations of the Ministry of the Gas Industry
have accumulated a large amount of experience in the application of the
accelerated methods of exploring the gas deposits. the completion of their
exploration by the methods of experimental industrial operation. Thus.

In the areas of developed gas extracting industry (Ukraine. the Caucasus
foothills. Turk-ania, the Lower Volga Region and so on), after obtaining
positive results from testing the first exploration wells, the gas deposits
are converted to experimental industrial operation on the basis of reserves
in categories C1 and 0;. Hithin the limits of the Dneprovsko-Donets Basin
alone. after obtaining the first inflows of gas. more than 20 gas fields
were put into experimental industrial operation. and as a result their
exploration was completed without additional drilling. The gas extraction
during the experimental industrial operation amounted to more than 30 billion

m3. The period of development of the open gas deposits was reduced by 2 to
3 times.

The positive experience in the accelerated introduction of the deposits based
on the reserves in categories c1+c2 indicates the necessity for changing the

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system of planning the increased gas reserves in the gas extraction regions
regions.

The basic principles of the proposed planning procedure reduce to the fol-
lowing:

l) The basic planning index of activity of the geological exploration organi-
zation is considered to be the increase in gas reserves with respect to
categories c2 and 61 in the following ratios: cl--from 30 to 50 percent,
cz-from 70 to 50 percent; here category C; includes the gas reserves in

the reliably discovered structures in the deposits. the productivity of
which was established by testing the exploration wells, including the bed
tester;

2) During the process of exploring the deposits. conversion of part of the
gas reserves free category 62 to Cl is realized; the proportion of the gas
reserves in category c1 must on the average amount to 30 percent. and for
the deposits with complex geological structure. it increases to 50 percent;

3) In order to increase the reliability of estimating the reserves with
respect to category 02 simultaneously with the exploration drilling, detailed
seismic operations are performed (see above), which constitute an inseparable
part of this phase of the studies;

6) The reserves in categories C2 and 61 and their achieved ratio with respect
to the exploration results are confirmed by the USSR State Commission for
Mineral Resources:

5) When discovering a large gas field with conditional hydrogen sulfied
content which can be the base for the creation of a gas-chemical complex,

the adopted procedure for planning the increased reserves with respect to
categories A+B+C1 is retained; in the areas of effective large gas-chemical
complexes.'the newly discovered fields are explored by the proposed planning
system with the preparation of reserves with respect to categories C; and Cl;

6) The gas reserves in the structures and the prospective areas before ob-
taining the industrial inflows of gas are estimated with respect to sub-
group D1 and the geophysical organizations are to plan the number of pre-
pared structures and their average size.

The proposed system will somewhat complicate the planning and accounting
for the exploration work inasmuch as it requires a separate approach to
the territories and the objects. however. this acceleration is justified.
for the new planning system will promote increased efficiency of the geo-
logical exploration operations as a result of the following:

a) A sharp increase in the volume of exploration and parametric drilling in
the old gas extraction regions as a result of reducing the number of pros-
pecting wells:

19
re: orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b) Acceleration of the preparation and introduction of the deposits into
experimental industrial operation and elisination of unjustified colbination
(overlap) of this phase with the exploratory drilling phase;

c) anurance of accelerated discovery of new gas reserves in order to main-
tain the achieved levels of extraction.

5. The classification of reserves of the oil and fuel gas fields put into
effect on 13 Hay 1970 has a nusber of deficiencies. First of all this
refers to the category C; reserves which include the seat different gas
reserves with respect to degree of study and preparation for industrial
development. The prospective reserves in this category in the discovered
fields on the average throughout the country have been approxisately 30 _
percent confirned. At the same tine the category 62 reserves in the new
structures (in the lover lying prospective beds. in the untested blocks,and
so on) are on the average no more than 10 percent confirned, that is.
they turn out to be approximately 3 tines less reliable than the reserves
in the discovered deposits.

The require-ants imposed by the present classification on the category 61
reserves do not always correspond to the conditions of accelerated developsent
of the gas industry and can lead to over-exploration of saall deposits with
respect to reserves. In particular. it is necessary, in our opinion, to
consider in category c the reserves of the deposits, the gas bearing nature
of which has been established on the basis of obtaining a gas inflow only

in one well if no more than three or four wells are required for development.
In addition. it is expedient to assign the gas reserves in the beds posi-
tively characterized by logging and with the limits of the deposit between
the beds free which the industrial gas flows are obtained. in this category.
For the rest. it appears to us the requirements on categories C1 reserves
should be left unchanged.

The reserves in the new structures and within the boundaries of the oil

and gas bearing regions. the productivity of which has not been confirmed
by testing in vells. must be considered insubground D1 of the predicted
reserves in the future. The requireeents on the category C2 reserves which
must becose the basis for planning the increased reserves for the explora-
tion organizations must be more precisely determined and increased. In the
old gas extracting regions the gas deposits in this category must serve as
the base for the completion of exploration by the methods of experilental
industrial operation and to a defined degree. the base for gas extraction.
In particular. the gas reserves in the untested tectonic blocks and beds,
especially in the lower-lying beds not revealed by the wells. must not be
included in category CZ.

The introduction of the proposals advanced in this paper will proeote a
sharp increase in exploration work. acceleration of the preparation of the

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reserves of the industrial categories and uprovenent of the effectiveness
of geological exploration work a a whole.

OOPYRlGHT: Izdltel'etvo "Neda". "Geologlye neftl 1 gnu", 1979

108105
080: 1822

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND WED EQUIPMENT

PREDICTING OIL AND GAS RESERVES BY m DEVELOPMENT CURVES

Moscow GEOLOGIYA NBFTI I GAZA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp 7-13

lArticlcl

hyli. G. Leyhson. VNIOR Institute]

[Text] The nethods of casparative geological analysis and the volt-etric-
genetic analysis permitting snore or lessobjective quantitative character-
istic of the prospects of oil and gas bearing nature to be given from the
geological and geocheaical points of view are widely used to predict

the oil and gas reserves.

However, there is a geological-economic aspect (in the broad sense of this
concept) of the prediction estimate. The direction and intensity of the
geological exploration activity (just as the representation of the in-
dustrial significance of a field and the balance reserves themselves) are
affected by the factors of an econoaic orderuthe demand of the country for
oil and gas, the effectiveness of the geological exploration work. the
scientific and technical progress during the exploration work. the pros-
pecting and development of the fields. and so on. The realization of the
predicted reserves—conversion of the. to industrial categories-«I111 always
appear as the result of geological exploration work. that is, the application
In an efficient sequence of defined nethods and technical means with limited
expenditures. without the required consideration of the economic factors.
aaong which it is necessary to include the substantiation of the extraction
coefficients of the oil and gas, estiuathn of the predicted reserves of

the latter can turn out to he idealised. Therefore it is necessary to
supplement the traditional methods of quantitative evaluation of the pros-
pects for oil and gas hearing by another one based on the analysis of the
effectiveness of the preparation and dynasics of the development of the
reserves. It must be based on the following scientific prerequisites.

The oil and gas reserves are finite. The oil and gas bearing beds are of
a regional nature. The deposits are concentrated in zones of predominant
oil and gas sccuaulation. The deposits can he encountered throughout the

 

i. For discussion.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

entire section of the sedinentary aantle and in the upper erosion zones of
the basement. forming the oil and gas bearing complexes. As a rule. the
basic industrial «emulation of oil and gas- is associated with one or two
such conplexes within the linits of the average depth range (1.5-3 km).

The greater part of the deposits (about 80 percent) are concentrated in a
relatively call nunber (up to 10 percent) of large and largest deposits
which also deter-ins the economic significance of the oil and gas bearing
areas [6. 8. ll].

In this history of the investigation and industrial development of the oil
and gas bearing provinces it is possible provisionally to isolate several
time phases distinguished by the state of exploration. the relations between
the search and exploration operations and the effectiveness of preparing

the reserves. The large deposits usualy connected with broad contrast

traps are discovered in the initial phases of operation with the proper
strategy [3].

The effectiveness of the geological exploration work and also the level of
extraction of oil and gas depend to u high degree on the aagnitude of the
potential reserves, their concentration. and the conditions of their oc-
currence. therefore in principle it is entirely logical to state the in-
verse probleaudeternination (more precise definition) of the potential
reserves with respect to the given dynamics of- the effectiveness of the
exploration work or with respect to extraction.

The quantitative relation between the potential oil reserves, the dyn-ic
nature of the increase in reserves and extraction was described earlier
(H. K. Hubbert. l9“). and it was used to estimate "the probable" and
"possible" reserves in the United States.

The analogous studies were performed also in the 0889. in connection with
the necessity for prospective and long-rane planning of the search and
exploration [6, 9].

The generalization of the geological-statistical materials with respect to
nsny of the oil and gas bearing regions of the world [7] has demonstrated
the significant effect of the historical peculiarities of the development
of the geological exploration work and the conjuncture of the oil and gas
densnd on the nature of the develop-ent curves of their reserves. In the
areas with different history of develop-eat. the maxim- oil extraction
level is 2 to 3 percent (nore rarely, l to 1.5 percent) of the potential
extracted reserves. and it is established at 65 to 75 percent of the
exploration of the latter.

The effectiveness of the search and exploration work reaches a maxi-m at
15 to 25 percent exploration of the potential reserves, and it drops by
three times at 50 percent [5]. '

23
ms onrcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The presented relations permit not only planning of the effectiveness of
the exploration operations and their volumes. but also judgment of the
reliability of estisating the potential reserves and the sign of the error.

These relations can be used reliably if the exploration of the individual
parts of the region or its oil and gas bearing complexes takes place without
great interruptions in time. Within the lisits of the province or the
region, the analyzed relations must be determined by each area and the
complex individually under the condition that the latter differ sharply with
respect to degree of study.

However. it is necessary to keep in mind that the disproportion between the
exploration of the potential reserves and the effectiveness of the geological
exploration work can be caused not only by significant errors in estissting
ihe predicted reserves but also a nuber of other causesnimproper planning
uf the search operations (concentration of them in relatively low-prospective
areas). association of a significant part of the predicted reserves with

the deeply submerged deposits that are difficult of access. by the inef-
iicient method of search and exploration.

For purposes of long-range planning of the geological exploration work.
there is a theoretical possibility of predicting the number of beds under
the corresponding reserves which will be opened up during the process of
continuous and uniform exploration of a prospective territory [2]. The
curves reflecting the growth of the explored reserves flatten out as their
x axes approach the magnitude of the extracted potential reserves of the
given area. The probability-statistical simulation permits sufficiently
highly accurate prediction of the reserves of the provinces and large
regions in the presence of the required initial information about the opera-
ting efficiency and the statistical distribution law of the deposits with
respect to area and reserves.

1he initial potential oil (gas) reserves with respect to the area as a whole
or with respect to individual prospective complexes can be determined:

i) By the coefficient of exploration oi the potential reserves, corresponding
in the maximum effectiveness of the exploration work or the greatest annual
extraction:

2) Hith respect to the curves characterizing the dynamics of the preparation
nf the reserves or extraction (graphical method):

)) Hlth respect to the probability-statistical models (analytical method).

lhe first method is the simplest and most approximate. By the actual data
on the dynamics of the effectiveness of preparation of the reserves or by
the saximum oil (gas) extraction in the region and the corresponding ex-

ploration factors adopted by analogy. the magnitude of the potential reserves
is established.

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Exaaple. The effectiveneee of the operatione in the area with reepect to
the explored coeplexen of depoeite hae ceaeed to be uxinelnto correapond
to 20 percent exploration of the potential reeervee. The total eagnitude
ol’ the extracted explored oil reeervee (categoriee Mm J ' :trection) on
the date of achieve-eat of the aaxieue effectiveness ie 00 nillion tone.
The extracted part of the potential oil reeervee in the area by the aane
couples: aeounte to the following: 10030.2 - 500 eillion tone.

The eetieate of the potential reeervc: with reapect to the lotion. extraction
level ia eore reliable aa a reeult of greater reliability of the initial data.
Thue. whereae the eaxieua annual oil extraction in the area waa 2 Iillion
tone and it wae aeeueed that thie value correeponde to 2 percent potential
extracted reeervee. the aeount of the latter ie deter-ined at 500 million
tone. The reliability of the reeulte obtained depende on the correctneee

of the eelection and eubatantiation of the retioe (detenined by generaliza-
tion of the actual eaterial with respect to a large nuaber of oil and see
bearing areae of the world) between the potential reeervee and the extrual
indexer of their develop-ant.

The deficiency of the procedure ie that it doea not reflect the dynanica of
the aeeieilation of the reeervee. and it doea not perait eieulation of thia
proceea coneidering the proapecte for the introduction of new equip-ent
and technology. The eoat probable eetieate error ia 350 percent.

The eecond procedure ie baeic. lt requirea the conatruction of the curvee
for the development of oil and gee reeervee (graphical eodele). the initial
aegaente of which are drawn by the actual data. and then they are extrapolated
to aleoet caplete eeoothing out. It ie very ieportant to eatablieh the
poeition of the characteriatic pointe of the curvae (eaxina. inflectione.
lieita of extrapolation). The reliability of the extrapolation dependa
above all on the objectiveneee and the repreeentativeneee of the actual
eateriel. it with reepect to the areae and coeplexea of depoeite the
mint. effectiveneee of preparation of the reeervee or the higheat level
of extraction are achieved. the extrapolation can be done quite reliably.
and the potential reeervee are detenined with relatively high accuracy
(error to :30 percent).

The effectiveneea of the geological exploration operatione ie expreeeed by
the increaae in reeervee and depende on the concentration of the letter in
the large and largeet depoeite. If it becoeee obvioue that the largeet
depoeite are already diecovered in the area and beeically explored. then
it ie poeeible quite exactly to determine the mint- efficiency of the
preparation of the reeervee and the higheet level of extraction which in
practice ia aleo done when coepiling the proepective plane.

The effort to conetruct the approxi-etion oodel of the preparation of the
reeervee. depending on the drilling voluaee, wee undertaken previouely

[I]. For extrapolation of the curvee for aeeinilation of the reeervee,

a eodel ie eelected or vereione of the eodele correeponding to the geological

25
rot ontcm. use our
FOR OfPICIAL 082 ONLY

and econoaic conditions of the investigated area, the historical peculiarities
and trends in its develop-ant. In the developeent aodels. the possible
scientific and technical progress in the procedure. the technique and the
organization of operations with respect to the preparation and extraction of
the reserves. the variation of the geological conditions of perforling the
operations (unfortunately the scientific and technical coaponent of the
forecast reaains procedurely poorly investigated) lust be taken into account.

   

~—_—_——‘

Reserves,
extraction. tons

 

Degree of exploration of potential reserves. 2

Flgure 1. Standard curves for the dyneaics of the increase in the reserves
(AR). extraction (0) as a function of time (A) and the relative
effectiveness of the exploration work (8. 2) and rate of selection
of the potential reserves (Q. 1) as a function of the exploration
of the potential reserves (3). lntegrel curves: tR--total explored
reserves; tn--total extraction. The cross-hatched area under the

differential curve is numerically equal to the potential reserves
“900 °

The reserve develop-cot curves depend on the indexes by which they are con-
structed: if the curve is integral (co-piled by the su-nary data). then

the magnitude of the potential extracted reserves is nuserically equal to
the y-axis of its horizontal section; if it is differential (co-piled by
the annual data), then it is canal to the area bounded by this curve and

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the x-nxis. The differential curves usunlly are characterized by one peak
shifted in the direction of the y-axis: the integral curves have inflection

points and asymptotically approach the horizontal straightline corresponding
to the finite extraction of ainerals (Figure l).

The nain difference in the shape of the curves for the effectiveness of ore-
paration of the reserves and oil extraction consists in the fact that their

critical points do not coincide in tine: the peaks are at lS-ZS and 65-75
percent respectively of the exploration of this potential reserves. There-
fore the extraction reaches the highest level when the effectiveness of
preparation of the reserves becomes somewhat below its naxinul.

The third procedure is reconsendedforuseinrelativelyesrly stages of prepara-
tion. in the absence of actual data for construction and reliable extrapola-
tion of the reserve develop-ant curves. on the basis of the available data

on the structure and the prospects for oil and gas bearing of the region
considering its analogy with other cooperatively well investigated territories.
the probability-statistical nodel of the exploration of the reserves is
selected.

The correct point of view is the proposition that the distribution (the
frequency of encounter) of the deposits vith respect to size (reserved)

in the overall set is subject to a statistical law [2. 12]. Sons of the
researchers consider that the pobability of the distribution of the deposits
with respect to size is subject to a log noraal law.

The discovery of the deposits and. consequently. the increase in the reserves.
depend on the volunes and placenent (direction) of the exploration work.

Being given different rates of the latter. it is possible. beginning with

the adopted distribution function of the reserves. to establish the corres-
ponding increase in then. lnasauch as the probability of the discovery

of large deposits of the greatest. they will be discovered first of all.

with an increase in exploration on the average the probability of dis-

covery of smaller deposits increases. that is. the efficiency of the operations
is lower. and the integral curve for the preparation of the reserves. on
leveling off. approaches the initial potential reserves on the graph.

The aethod of estinating the potential reserves by their assinilation curves
theoretically say be used in the oil and gas bearing regions of any sscle.
including the Volga-Ural and western Siberian regions. However. the enaller
the area. the sore uniforn it is with respect to structure and degree of
exploration. the greater the regularity characterizing the reserve preparation
and extraction curves and the sore certainly it is possible to extrapolate
then. The estiaate of the potential reserves is found to be reliable when
the decrease in effectiveness of the exploration work caused by exploration
of the largest deposits begins. The nethod of the assiailation curves can
be successfully also in the early stage of investigation in coabinstion
with the transitional aethods if in accordance with the set of geological
dots and by analogy there are prerequisites for predicting the discovery

of large deposits. The reserves of the large deposits predetersine the

27
Iron orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR O?FICIAL US! ONLY

level of greatest efficiency of the exploration work in the region. and
the accuracy of estiaating the reserves will correspond to the reliability
of predicting the discovery of these deposits.

Thus, the main limiting factor in the application of the method is the
state of geological investigation of the region and exploration of its
basic deposits. The exploration of a field is determined by the voluaes
and the arrangement of the operations. Accordingly. it is necessary

to discuss two theoretically different strategies (systems) for geological
study and exploration of deposits--sliding and bunching.

The essence of the forner consists in the extreme nonuniformity of or-
rangeacnt of the voluaes of operations which. after discovery of the first
industrial accumulations are concentrated in one to two zones for the
fastest growth of industrial reserve. Hhen a sharp decrease occurs in the
efficiency of the exploration. the displacement of the operations to other
projects takes place. Therefore the discovery of the principal cones and
regions of oil and gas accumulation and the achievement of the greatest
efficiency of the exploration occurs not in the initial stage of the ox-
ploration process. The stepped nature in the study of the region can be
nanifcsted not only with respect to area. but also with respect to the
section and types of traps. The dynamic of the efficiency of the operations
is characterized by the curve 1 (figure 2). The "sliding" strategy of the
exploration to one degree or another holds up the discovery of the po-
tential possibilities of the rajority of oil and gas bearing provinces.

The application of it often is dictated by the limited econoaic and pro-
duction possibilities and to a great degree by the existing system of planning
of geological exploration work.

The "bunchinf‘ strategy of exploration is based on the principle of studying,
"framthegeneral to the special" by uniform placement of the volulss of
geological exploration work throughout the entire territory in order to
discover all of the basic tones of oil and gas accumulation with respect to
the entire section of the sedhaentsry mantle in the initial stage of the
investigation. After discovery of the structure and estimating the prospec-
tiveness of the oil and gas bearing beds by geological-geophysical operations
and prospecting drilling. the exploration is concentrated in the richest
zones of oil and gas accumulation. including the large and largest deposits.
As the oil and gas bearing province (region) is developed. the exploration
work oecoaes more consolidated in the less rich tones and also in the
complex structures. it aust be noted that sufficiently reliable information
about the structure and the prospects for oil and gas bearing nature of a
region as a whole is obtained in the initial phase of the investigation.
which ensures optiaal choice of the direction of exploration work and the
highest effectiveness on the average for the entire period of realization

of the potential reserves.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

  

Reserves effectiveness

Figure 2. Characteristic curves for the preparation of reserves for dif-
ferent systems of exploration of a region. Integral curves for
the increase in the reserves or the folloving kinds of systems:
l--sliding. 2--bunching; curves for the dynssics of the effective-
ness of the exploration work for the following systens: 3-sliding.
éo-bunching; tins of achievesent of the lasisus effectiveness
for the syste-x tu-sliding. tc--hunching.

In the initial phase of exploration by the "hunching" systea the increases
in the reserves of industrial categories are sasll inaasuch as the entire
voluae of drilling is spent on finding the deposits. As the exploration
operations and their place-ent in the largest deposits grow. the effective-
ness increases sharply and reaches a easiaus appreciably earlier than for
the "sliding” ayatae. Then on eating the transition to exploration of the
less rich tones and deposits. the intensity of the increase in the reserves
decresses regularly (see Figure 2. curve 2).

For all of the advantages. the ”bunching" strategy for exploration also has
deficiencies: it is not alveys applicable in very large, little-exploited
and difficult of access regions; it requires a united. long range progra-
of geological exploration vork on the scale of the entire region. the
concentration of significant scans for a nuaber of years only on geological
exploration vork and correspondingly. during these years. refraining froe
exploration and increasing the reserves of industrial categories.

In the broad territories of the type of the Siberian platfors obviously the
optisnl strategy vill be a nixed or coabined strategy of exploretion:
"sliding” for the province as a vhole. "bunching" for individual regions of
it.

Pro. what has been stated it is clear that the scat favorable conditions
for predicting the reserves by the aethod of assieilation curves are created
in the cases vhere the strategy for studying the oil and gas prospective
region is ”bunching." The reliability of the estisstes in this case is very

29 _
FOR OP?ICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high already in the initial exploration stage. Hith the "sliding" system
its application is expedient in a relatively later stage of exploration
when the effectiveness of the latter has passed its highest level.

The method assimilation curves can play an important role in the systee for
separate prediction of the oil and gas reserves in regions such as the
Ural-Povolrh'ye region. Predkavkaz'ye. Timano-Pechorskaye Province. Hestern
Siberia. Central Asia. Sakhalin. and so on. not only as independent. but

in coabination with ordinary geological methods of predicting the reserves.
For the regions and complexes of deposits with high exploration indexes

the error in estimating the potential and forecast reserves by the investi-
gated method insignificantly exceeds the average error with respect to the
total category reserves. Therefore the assimilation curves are recomaended
for use for estimating the potential reserves of the standard sections.
substantiating the densities of the reserves. haproving the methods of
analysis and more precise determination of the numerical values of the
accumulation factors and other parameters used in the methods of cooperative
geological analysis and in volumetric-genetic analysis.

The method of assimilation curves of the reserves cannot replace the geo-
logical forecasting. for without discovering the laws of spatial arrangement
or the oil and gas deposits. it gives an idea only of their total reserves.
However. its broad use. just as the ilproveasnt as applied to various
geological conditions. will undoubtedly promote an increase in reliability
of predicting the oil and gas reserves and consequently. improvement of the
efficiency of the geological exploration work.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Baluasov. V. A., and Kamenetskiy. S. 6.. "Some Procedures of the Method
of Predicting Explored Reserves of Oil Fields." REF. NAUCH.-TEKNN. SB.
VNIIOBNG. SBR. EKONONIKA NEFTYANOY PROMYSHLENNOSTI (Reviews of the
Scientific and Technical Collections. VNIIOENG Institute. Economics of
the Petroleum Industry Series), No 9. l977. pp 26-28.

2. anymukhametov. K. 8.. and Sattarov. H. H.. "A Probability-Statistical
Model of Predicting the Growth of Oil Reserves.“ GBOLOGIYA NEPTI I GAZA
(Oil and Gas Geology). No 3. 1976. pp 27-32.

1. Vesninn. T. H.. "Probleas of Econonic Evaluation of the Geological Oil
and Gas Exploration hark." GEOLOGIYA-NEFTI l caza. No 6, 1976. pp 31-39.

6. Llndrrop. N. T.; Anfilntova. E. A.; Duitriyeva. Ye. A.; and Shvartsman.
A. 0.. GEOLOGICHESKIY£ ZAKONOMERNOSTI RASPROSTRARENIYA KRUPNYKH
HESTOROZHDENIY NEFTI l GAZA 2A RUBEZHOH (Geological Laws of the Spread
of Large Deposits of Oil and Gas Abroad). Leningrad. Nedra. 1970.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

9.

10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stesenltov. V. V.. Zhuravlovs. P. 1.: Krylov. N. 1.; and Kuvykin. Yu. 8..
“Prohln of Predicting the Bffectiveneaa of Oil and Gas Exploration
Work." RBI. mum-1mm. SB. VIIIIOBNG. 38R. semen. 0801.. 1 680712.
(Scientific and Technical Abstracts Collection. VNIIOENG. Oil and Gas
Geology and Geophysics Series). No 9. 1976. pp 3-5.

Hodslevskiy. H. 811.. and Ostryy. G. 3.. "Goupatibility in the Develop-
nent of Large 011 Extracting Regions." NWT I 612 um: (Oil and Gen
of 'l'yunan‘). No 1. 1969, pp 9-15.

Modelevskiy. H. Sh.; Baliyev. S. A.: Selitskiy. A. 6.. et el. "So-c
Geological-Econonic Prerequisites of Long-Rsnge Forecasting of the
Develop-em of Oil and Gas thrsction." SOVETSKAYA GBOLOGIYA (Soviet
Geology). ho 8. 1975. pp 17-26.

Nesterov. 1. 1.; Poterysyeva. V. V.: and Sal-enov. P. K.. ZAKONGIBRNOSTI
RASPRBDBLBMYA nurm IBSTOROZRDENIY NE”! 1 cm V 29010! KORE

(Laws of Distribution of Large Oil and Gas Deposits in the Earth's Crust).
Moscow. Nears. 1975.

Oatryy. G. 5.. and Poteryaysvs. V. V.. "Geological-Econoaic Problem! of
the Develop-ant of the Oil threcting Industry of western Siberia."
BKSFRBSS-HFORHA‘I‘SIYA WIIOENG. 83R. NBH'BOAZ. 6201.. I OBOFIZ.
(Bxpress Intonation. VNIIOBNG Institute. Oil and Gas Geology and
Geophysics Series). No 21-22. 1967. pp 8-11..

Kazakov. D. 3.; Nesterov. 1. 1.; Poterysycvs. v. V.; and Rostovtsev. N. 11..
"Potential Reserves of the western Siberian Lowland and the Direction of
Geological Exploration work." N2?!" 1 cu m1. 110 1. 1969. pp 15-20.

Preobrathenskaya. G. 8.; Klychsva. N. Yu.; and Ivanova. K. P.. GEOLOGI-
CHESKIYB ZAKONMRNOS‘I'I RASPROSMENIYA KRUPm 113810me "EFT!

I cmvsssn (Geological sts of Propagation of Large Oil and Gas
Deposits in the 088R). Leningrad. Nedra. 1971.

Shpil'aan. V. 1.. “Procedure for Predicting the Sizes of Deposits."
TRUDY ZAPSIINIGNI (Horus of the Hestern Siberian Scientific Raasarch
Gen and Oil Institute). No 53. 1972. pp 18-126.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nears". "Geologiys nefti 1 gets", 1979

10845
(280:1822

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

UDC 553.981.6:551.762(57l.1)

I'REDICTIN COMM, common OP COHDBNSM'E, CUIDUSM'E 0111‘ COEFFICIEM'
Moscow GEOLOOIYA NBPTI l GAZA in Russian No 2. Feb 79. pp 33-37

[Articlelbyr. D. Ostrovakaya. Central Laboratory of the Glsvtyunen'geologii
Adainistration]

[Test] The analysis of the materials of the investigation of the gas con-
densate deposits aade it possible to detect a nulber of general laws with
respect to the solubility of high-boiling fractions in strstal gas. that

is. prediction of the condensate content in the prospective areas. The
efforts to find the relation of the potential condensate content in the
stratal gas to the individual factors have been node by a nuaber of researchers
ll. 2. A]. In particular. the dependence of the concentration of oil and
gas C5 + the higher fractions in stratel gases on the depth of occurrence

of the deposits [1] and also the cumulative effect of pressure. teaperature.
coeposition of the stratsl gas, condensate and oil (in the presence of
margins of the letter). the conditions of forastion of the deposits on the
actual condensate content in the gas [2] were desonstrsted.

Considering the nt-erous factual data. we have established the relation of
the group hydrocarbon coapoeition of the condensates with teaperature and
pressure in the deposit (Figure l). The graphical dependence of the po-
tential condensate content on the thernobaric conditions of finding the
deposits and the group hydrocarbon conposition of the condensate was also
illustrated [6]. The discovered laws provided the basis for this paper.

Previously [3] a separate forecast was node of the phase state of the oil
and gas in the deposits in the little-studied territory of the northern
part of the Tyuaen' Oblast; aaps were constructed of the predominant spread
of oil and gas condensate deposits.

The presence of oil deposits in the lower and niddle Jurassic iornstions
was proposed in the northwestern region-.in the northern Yanal'skaya oil and

 

1. For discussion.

32
ran omcm. use om
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gas bearing region and in the northwest of the southern Yanal'skaya Region.
in particular in the Nurninskiy negaawell. in the Kharasaveyakiy Done. in
the ntructurea of the Nakhar'yakskiy and the Ust'-Yerkutyayakhskiy swells.
in the Preobrazhenskiy and Hegiyginekiy local anticlinale. In the reaaining
regions of the northern part of the Tyunen' Oblast and the Krasnoyarak Kray.
deposits were predicted with predoninant single phase (gas) content--gae
condensate or gas condensate with oil aargins. A forecast is nade of the
condensate content in the stratsl gas end its hydrocarbon composition.

The procedure used in the work consisted in the following. For local uplifts,
by the structural nap the stratal pressure was calculated in the proposed

gaa condensate deposits. and by the geothermal gradient nap. the etratal
temperature. Then using tigure l. the hydrocarbon composition of the con-
densates dissolved in the gases of the forecasted deposits was deternined.
The results of the calculations are presented in Figure 2. Considering the
infornation about the thernobaric conditions of the occurrence of the
deposlts and the group hydrocarbon coaposition of the condensates. we
predicted the enount of condensate in the atratal gas by the previously
discussed procedure [4].

 
 
 
   

3

Stratel pressure. kg-torcelcn2

8385

Stratal teaperature. 'c

Figure 1. Variation of the group hydrocarbon composition of condensates
under various thernodynanic conditions of the occurrence of the
deposits. Hydrocarbons: l--arosatic; 2-naphthcne

33
ron orncrat. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2.

Predicting the group hydrocarbon coaposition of condensates in
the deposits of the lover and middle Jurassic. Zones of pre-
dominant propagation of the beds: 1--3as condensate (including
with oil margins). 2--oil; boundaries: 3--oil'and gas bearing
regions. 4-oil and gas bearing regions; Se—hydrocarboos (Z).

in the nuaerator--naphthene. in the denouinator-arouatic.

Oil and gas bearing regions: l--Northsrn Yaaal‘skaya, II-Ust'-
Yenisey. III--NadyI-Purekaya. IV—-Pur-Tazovskaya, V—oSouthern
Yanal'akaya. VI-Sredneobskays [Central Ob], Vll--Payduginskaya.
VIll-Prolovekaya. IX--Priural'skay [Ural Region].

Key: A. Solekhard
I. Berezovo
C. Khanty-Hanskiysk
D. Surgut
E. Dudinka

3%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Forecaatin; nap of the variation of the potential condensate
content in the atratal gaa of the depoaita of the lower and
aiddle Juraaaic. 1-Potentia1 condensate content in the
atratal gee. 3/I3, remaining provisional notation, aee Figure 2.

Key: A. Salekhard
B. Berezovo
C. Khanty-Hanaiyak
D. Surgut
8. Dudinka

35
NR ontcm. us: om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

ate return of the deposits of the lover and middle Juruo'tc.
1—Condcnute return factor. Running notations on Figure 2.

Key: A. Salaam-d
B. Beremo
C. Kinny-Hana): tyak
D. Surgut
E. Dudinkn

36
m orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As Is obvious fru Figure 2. the condensates will he different with respect
to the group hydrocarbon conposition: aroutic hydrocarbons in then 5-25
percent. and naphthene 20-70 percent. Clear unality is observed in the
variation in the hydrocarbon group content with respect to area. The greatest
concentration of aromatic hydrocarbons (> 20 percent) was noted in the
condensates associated with the subserged zones of the investigated territory:
in the Vengepurovskiy. Nadyuskiy. Urengoyskiy, Gydanskiy and the Sredneyanal'-
skiy oil and gas bearing regions, in the northern part of the Surgutskiy
(Aykhettinskoye. Verkhnenadynskoye end the collective done uplifte) and also
in Lyeninskiy. Rith respect to direction of the side parts of the Hestern
Siberian platform. condensates will be encountered with low aroeatic hydro-
carbon content. In the Karynskiy (Frolovskaya Ohlaet) and Tamskiy
(Per-Taxovakaya Ohlsst) oil and gas bearing rayons. the arenatic hydrocarbons
will be 10 to 20 percent. The zones impoverished with respect to eronstic
hydrocarbons (< 10 percent) are predicted in Ust'-Yeniseyskiy and Kras-
nosel'kupskiy rayons. in the Pur-Tezovskaya oil and gas bearing oblasts and
the Priural'skays Oblast.

The nature of variation of the concentration of the naphthene hydrocarbons
in the condensates is somewhat different (see Figure 2). In the suhnerged
regions in the northern part of the Western Siberian platforn, condensates
can be encountered with low naphthene hydrocarbon content in the group
hydrocarbon conposition (to 25 percent). In the side parts of the platform.
their quantity increases sharply (to 50-70 percent).

0n the basis of the fluctuations in the hydrocarbon cot-position of the
condensates, variation of the content of the latter in the stratal gas of
the deposits is predicted (see Pigure 3). In individual deposits it will
vary potentially within the linits free 5 to 500 g/s3. Its highest con-
centrations (1000-500 kln3) are observed in the stratal gas of the Gydanskiy
and the Sredney-al'skiy rayons and the northern part of the Urengoyskiy
Oil and Gas nearing Rayon (Olikuslinskiy Swell) of the Nadyl-Purskaya
Oblsat. '

In the oil and gas bearing rayons of Urengoyskiy and Nedylaskiy (Nadya-
Purskaya Oblast) and also in the 'l'azovskiy Rayon (Cbaael'skiy Hegaswell
in the Pur-‘l'azgvskaya Oblast) the condensate content in the stratal gas
is 300-350 g/n .

In the Vyngapurovskiy Ayvaaedopurovskiy (Vyngapurosvskiy and Southern
Ayvasedopurovskiy swells in the Nedyn-Purskaya Oil and Gas Bearing Oblast)
and in the Tszovskiy (Srednenessoyakhskiy and Hessoyakhskiy swells in the
Per-razovsksya Oblast) rayons there will be 250-300 glut of condensate in
the stratal gas.

The territory with condensate content of 200-250 3/.3 occupies a significant
area (see Figure 3). This includes the structures of the Solpatinekiy Swell
(Bol'shekhetskiy and Verkhnetazovskiy oil and gas bearing rayons) and all of
the Yuzhno-Yanal'skaye Oil and Gas Bearing Oblest.

37
ms current use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hithin the linits of the Krasnoleninskiy and Lyaninskiy rayons (Prolovskaya

Oil and Gas Hearing Oblast) probably the stratal gas includes 150-200 k/n
of condensate.

In the deposits located in the side sections of the platforn. a low content

of condensate is predicted. Thus. in the oil and gas bearing rayons
Kellogskiy and Kostrovskiy (Pur-Tazovskays Oblast), Shuginskiy (Frolovskaya)

it does not exceed 150 g/n3. The lowest condensate concentration (< 50 gan)
is proposed in the Priural'skays Oil and Gas Bearing Oblast and the Nizhnekhet-
skiy Rayon of the Ust'-Yeniseysksya Oblast.

The extracted condensate reserves are calculated on the basis of the conden-
sate return factor.

There is a clear graphical relation of the condensate return coefficient
to the group hydrocarbon composition of the condensate in the initial poten-
tial content of the latter [5]. Considering this dependence. on the basis of

Figure 2. 3. a forecasting nap is constructed for the variation of the coef-

ficients of condensate return for the beds of the investigated deposits
(Figure 6).

As is obvious from Figure 6. the coefficients of condensate return will

vary within broad limits (from o.as to 0.95). Clear :onality is determined
by the magnitude of this factor. Its low value (< 0.6) occur in the deposits
with the greatest potential condensate content--in the Gydsnskiy, Sredne-
ynnal'skly and Tazovskiy oil and gas bearing rayons.

in the northern part of the Surgutskiy Rayon. in the Lyaninskiy and the
Yuzhno-Yanal'skiy rayons and also in the southern part of the Nadya-Purskaya
Oblast the condensate return factor is 0.6-0.7.

In the side sections of the platfors-~in the Prlural'skaya. Ust'-Yeniseyskaya.

Pur-Tazovsksys (eastern part) oil and gas hearing ohlasts. high condensate
return factors are predicted (> 0.8).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Savvina. Ya. 0.. and Velikovskiy. A. 8.. "Liquid-Vapor Equilibria in
Binary Methane Systems with Hydrocarbons of Different Groups."

FlZKﬂlHIYA AN SSSR (Physical Chemistry of the USSR Acadely of Sciences).
Vol 30. No 7. 1966. p 1596.

2. Starobinets. I. 5.. CBOLOGO-KNIHICHESKIYB OSOBENNOSTI GAZOKONDENSATOV

(Geological-Chenical Peculiarities of Gas Condensates). Leningrad.
Nedra, 1974.

3. Ostrovsksya. T. 0.. ”Predicting the Phase State of Hydrocarbons in
western Siberia by the Ther-odynanic Conditions of Occurrence of the

Deposits." GEOLOGIYA NEFTI I GAZA (Geology of Oil and Gas), No l. 1976.
pp 60-50.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OfPICIAL USE ONLY

h. Ootrovokayu. T. 0.; Khudyakov. 0. P.: and Yuohkln. V. V.. "Laws of
the Content of High-Bolling Hydrocarbons in Strata! Case. of the
Gnu-Condeneoto Dopooito of the Northern Port of the Tyunen' Oblaot.“
WMBO‘I‘KA OAZOWIGI I OAZOKNDENSMNYKR HESTOROZIIDENIY (Develowent of
Gun and Gan-Condensate Fields). Hoocow. 1976. pp 23-32.

5. Ootrovokoye. T. 0.. and Yuehktn. V. V., "Graphical Method of Determining
the Condensate Return Factor." GEOLOGIYA NBPTI I GAZA. No 9. 1977.
pp 60-62.

COPYRIGHT: Izdotel'otvo "chro". "Geoloslyn nofti 1 auto". 1979

10845
C80:l822 END

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY