FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/10481

27 April 1982 '

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
3m publications contain inforntion priaarily fro- foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fro. news agency
transaissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- !nglish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, vith the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itsn, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornation was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sunsrized or extracted.

Unfaniliar naaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or naaes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate eith the source. lines within icons are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, viewa or attitudes of the 0.8. Govern-ant.

COPYRIGFI‘ LAWS AND REWTIONS commmc WHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE m1- 1318831411“le
0? 1.1118 PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED M OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(7000 7/82)

CONTENTS
FUELS

Conference Held in Volgograd ‘ro I-prove Design, Financing
of Oil-Well Drilling
(V. V. Zenorov; EMMYA PMSWS‘I' SERIYA
ROMA MANDY PRMSHLBWOSTI, No 12, 1981) .......

ﬂoat Proniaing Area in Ukreine for Oil, Gaa Proapecting Naned
(A. H. l’aliy; GBOLOGIYA mm I GAZA, Feb 82) ...........

Raye To Improve Heat Siberian Oil-Hell Drilling Deacribed
(V. I. Nazarov, et ll. ; nmmu Pmmsr'
sniYAmIn.ml, 1982) 0.000000009000000.IOOOOOOCI.

Better Procedures . larder Drill Bite Speed Up Penetration
at Kuban' Oil Vella
(0. P. Kol'taov, et al .; "EMMAYA "MW!“
mn‘mn.nolz’ 1981) OI0.0.0.0000...OOOCOIIOOOOO
PIPELINBS
Textbook Publiahed for Main Gaa Pipeline Operator

(Viktor Vasil'yevich Gronov, Vitaliy Ivanovich
onlonkiy; OPERATOR WISM'W GAZOPROVODOV, 1981) .

- a - [III - USSR - 37

MOFFICMLUSEONLY
UDC 622.24.003.1

CONFERENCE HELD IN VOLGOGRAD T0 INPROV! DESIGN, FINANCING 0F OILFNELL DRILLING

Moscow NEPTYANAYA PRONYSHLENNOST' SBRIYA EKONONIKA NEPTYANOY PRONYSHLENNOSTI in
Russian No 12, 1981. pp 2-3

[Greeting ofv. V. Zamorov (Volgogrsdskays Oblast Committee of the CPSU): "Improve-
ment of the Financing of Drilling work (an Introductory lord)"]

[Excerpts] Dear Comrades I

Permit me, in the name of the Volgogradskaya Oblast party co-ittee and the city
ispolkon, to greet the participants in the conference on improvement of the finan-
cing of drilling operations in the oil. gas and geological branches of the coun-
try‘s industry. which is being held in the hero city of Volgograd!

Your conference, which is dedicated to the problea of improving the design and fi-
nancing of drilling work, will be of great importance in further raising the effec-
tiveness and quality of geological prospecting for oil and gas, and it will also
enable the advanced experience of the country's best drilling enterprises in
achieving high indicators at least expense to be further developed. Allow me , rep-
resentatives of the economic and technical drilling-support services of three sini-
stricsulinnefteproa [Ministry of Petroleum Industry]. Mingazprom [Ministry of Gas
Industry] and Iingeo [Ministry of Geologyl—to wish you great successes in solving
the tasks that confront you.

COPYRIGIH‘: Vsesoyuznyy nsuchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organizatsii, upravleni-
ya i ekononiki neftegszovoy proayshlennosti (VNIIOENG), 1981

11409
050: 1822/124

l
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 553.98:660.812(477)
MOST PROIISING AREAS IN UKRAINE FOR 011.. GAS PROSPECTING NAMED
uoscow GBOLOGIYA warn I GA“ in Russian No 2. Feb 82 pp 1-4

[Article by A. II. Paliy (ukssa lingeo [linistry of Geology]): "The Prospects for
Searching for New oil and Gas Fields in the uxssnul

[Text] One of the basic tasks in developing the 0333': national econow during
1981-1985 and during the period up to 1990 that were defined by the 26th CPSU Con~
gress is that of strengthening the country's raw-aaterials sinerals base. primarily
of increasing explored fuel and power reserves.

During the 10th Five-Year Plan. UkSSR Mingeu organizations did such work to build
up the raw-oaterials base of the republic's oil and gas recovery industry. Thirty-
seven oil and gas fields. two of then offshore, were discovered.

The najor share of growth in W Hydrocarbon] industrial reserves occurred in the
00V (Dneprovsko-Donetskaya depressionI—the Ukraine's chief oil and gas bearing re-
gion. The aain growth in oil and gas reserves was obtained here during exploration
of Lower Carboniferous sedisents. five new areas of oil and gas accuulations were
found: the Yablunovsko-lloshevoyskaya. Kotelevsko-Berssovskaya. Senentsovsko-Aba-
zovskaya. Rtishchevsko-Korobochkinskaya and Sakhalinsko-Kachalovskaya zones. Re-
gional productivity of the Lower Viaean-‘l‘urney and Serpukhov sedimentary forsationa
was confined.

six new c5]. and gas fields were discovered in the republic's west. In the Bori-
slavako-Pokutskaya zone, the petroliferousness of the pericline of folds screened
by lateral faults of the Ciscarpathian trough was established, and the prosise of
the southwest line of deep folds that are overlapped by the Carpathian overthrust
was confined by discovery of the South nonastyretskiy field. In the northwestern
part of the Bil'che-Volitskaya zone. the prospects for searching for hydrocarbons
in middle Jurassic terrigenous sediments and the Paleogene-lesozoic cosplex under
the Pokutsko-Bukovinslq Carpathian overthrust were detersined. The principal geo-
logical achieveuent was the detection of the Lokschinskiy gas field in liddle De-
vonian rocks of the Volyno-Podolin: the industrial petroliferousness of this area,
which still is practically unexplored. was proved for the first tine.

0n the Kerch' Peninsula, sose deposits were discovered in Lower naykop sediments.
the distribution of reefogenic foraations in the Upper Jurassic. at the eastern
plunge of the Gornyy Krys'. was confined. In the western Black Sea region. a flow
of oil was obtained free Upper Devonian rocks. indicating the desirability of con-
tinuing to prospect in this area.

2
POIOFHCIALWEONLY
Fulfillment of the plan to increase oil and gas reserves is the result of a sub-
stantial acceleration in the pace of discovering and exploring fields. For the
first time, the main increase in reserves was obtained not through large, previous-
ly discovered fields but through the study mainly of medium-size or small fields
that were discovered during the 10th Five-Year Plan. The increase of prospecting
effectiveness in recent years is explained by the growing role of the regionally
productive Lower Carboniferous complex of the DDV, where the coefficient of indus-
trial discoveries has its maximum value.

A further buildup of industrial reserves of oil, gas and gas condensate is expected
during the 11th Five-Year Plan, through acceleration of the prospecting and
exploration pace. Planned development of this work is based upon hydrocarbon re-
serve forecasts which exceed the explored reserves 2.5-fold for gas and 1.7-fold
for oil. Not only doesthemagnitude of the republic's forecast and prospective
reserves testify to the promise of a buildup in the extracting industry‘s raw-
materials base but so does the degree of the conquest of hydrocarbon reserves in
the DDv. The potential resources of Lower Carboniferous gas deposits. which lie at
depths as great as 7,000 meters. have been realized here by only 15 percent.

Prospects for the discovery of oil and gas fields in the Ukraine are associated
mainly with study of strata of the DDV's Lower Carboniferous, with sediments of the
Lower Visean-Turney and Serpukhov, whose industria? petroliferousness has been
proved in many areas in recent years, having special significance.

A study of the Lower Carboniferous rock. with a view to finding industrial reserves
of hydrocarbons, can be most successful in regions where thick sedimentation strata
haVe developed. An analysis of the three-dimensional distribution of oil and gas
in the depression indicates that all the main fields are situated in zones where
the deposits are more than 7-6 kilometers thick-~the Chutovsko-Raspashnovskaya and
Lyutenskaya bottom depressions.‘ The 1977-1978 finding of the Yablunovskoye field in the
zhdanov depression and the Lyutsenkovskoye and ShuassOye fields on the slopes of
the Srebnenskiy trough can be considered the start of the assimilation of the large
promising depression zones of a region that makes up about 20 percent of the
DDV’s area. Prospecting drilling in the large depressions. the most promising
parts of whose cross-sections have practically not been studied, will enable oil
and gas fields to be discovered in the next few years and a basis to be created
for further promoting geological exploration. It aust be noted that drilling here
should be done to a depth of 6.000-7.000 meters. and seismic exploration should
raise the quality of mapping of structures in deep Lower Carboniferous horizons.
Prospecting for promising features is complicated by the great amplitudes of the
structural traps. and the nonlinearity of their location. The great depths (5.500-
7.000 meters) of deposition of the regionally petroliferous Serpukhov. Upper Visean
and Lower Visean-Tumey complexes are hampering the promotion of prospecting also in
another highly promising region of the depression-the northern side zone, at a
section from the Stepovoye field to the Shebelinskoye field. It is because of
the difficulties of drilling at great depths, under AVPD [anomalously high forma-
tion pressure]. that evaluation of the extremely promising Solokhovsko-Oposhnyan-
skaya zone of uplifts along the Lower Visean-Turney complex is lagging.

The Lower Pennian-Upper Carboniferous complex within the more promising lashevsko-
Shebelinskiy regions has already been explored to a significant extent. Industrial

'5. P. sﬁpaE. S. V. Tkachishin and M. G. Manyuta. "0n the Siting of and conditions
for Forming oil and Gas Deposits in the Dneprovsko-Donetskaya Depression."
GHOLOGIYA NEFTI I GAZA [The Geology of oil and Gas]. 1980, No 9. pages 34-41.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
discoveries here should be associated mainly with the forebody sections. The prom-

ising area of this complex can be expanded later through the Bakhmutskiy and Kai'-
aius-Toretskaya lobes, which have not been studied by regional research.

The petroliferousness of the Middle Carboniferous deposits in the region's western
part will, as usual.beevaluated coincidentally with drillingintoLower Carbonifer-
ous formations. In the depression's central parts the promise of the Middle Car-
boniferous complex, which lies at depths of s,5oo-e,5oo meters, has been reduced
somewhat because of the variability of the rocks' reservoir properties.

Fields might also be found in Devonian sediments during the 11th Five-Year Plan.
Industrial and semi-industrial flows of oil and gas have been obtained in some are-
as. The most interesting regions for prospecting Devonian fields include: the
northern side zone of the depression in the Naksaki-Dmitrovka section, where upper
salt-bearing strata have developed and there are practically no effusive formations;
the oil and gas bearing Akhtyrskiy region, since even the saltfree cross-sections
here of the Devonian are promising; and the south side region in the Sagaydak-Za-
tyshnyan section, where the develOpaent of upper ssliferous strata has been fore-
cast and, apparently, effusive formations are absent.

In speaking about the prospects for searching for new oil and gas fields in the
DDV, the discovery of which is expected mainly at depths that exceed 4,000 meters.
the possibility of detecting industrial accumulations of hydrocarbons also in the
upper horizons of the sedimentary mantle should be emphasized. forecast hydrocarbon
reserves are distributed at various depth intervals as follows (in meters): 17.9
percent down to 2,000. 23 percent from 3,000 to 4,000, 23 percent from 4,500 to
5,000. and 36 percent from 5.000 to 7,000. These data testify to the considerable
promise for prospecting at great depths, especially within zones where nonanticli-
nal traps have developed, the standard practices for the mapping of which by geo-
physical methods still have not been worked out.

In order to discover oil and gas fields in the western Ukraine, efforts should be
concentrated on new areas for prospecting and exploring. One of the most important
tasks is conquest of the Volyno-Podol'skaya edge of the East European platfonm.
Sediments ofthe Devonian, Silurian and Cambrian, whose structure had not been
studied adequately until recently, are promising. As the experience of recent
years indicates, the use of multiple and areal systems of observations in seismic
exploration and integration of the latter with structural drilling will enable tar-
gets to be found for organizing later operations and the necessary inventory of
structures for drilling to be prepared.

In the Bil'che-Volitskaya zone of the ciscarpathian trough, the liocene complex has
been explored to some extent up to the present. Further prospecting for deposits
of gas is desirable in the Sarmatskiy sediments of the Krukenchskaya depression to
the northwest and southeast of the 2aluzhanskoye field, at structures at the edge
of the Samborskaya overthrust zone, and in the belt that lies adjacent to the Kra-
kovetskiy fault. In order to find new fields within this zone, geological explora-
tion should be developed in new areas that are associated with searches for hydro-
carbon traps in reefogenic formations of the Upper Jurassic and terrigenous sedi-
ments of the Middle Jurassic and Paleogene-Iesozoic complex at the Pokutskiy-Buko-
vinskiy Carpathians overthrust.

In the Borislavskiy-Pokutskiy trough zone the prospects for searching are associ-
ated with study of deep Paleogenic stores of the second and third structural stages.
It is planned that prospecting will be pursued in the northwestern part ofthezone.

b
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
It is also necessary to clarify the prospects for searching for industrial hydro-
carbon accumulations in the Lower Cretaceous sediments of the Skibovoy zone of the
Carpathians and in formations of the Paleogene zone of the Krosno. which still have
not been studied well by geophysical methods.

In the Transcarpathian trough. prospects for the petroliferousness of Miocene
mantle rocks and of Mesozoic formations of the folded bottom will be clarified.
Previous seismic studies gave extremely rough information about their structure.
However. oil and gas fields have been found under similar geological conditions in
regions of contiguous countries. and they are especially substantial in the lesozo-
ic formations of the folded bottom.

In the republic's southern areas. the main directions of searches for oil and gas
fields have been refined as a result of a reevaluation of the prospects for vari-
ous regions and stratigraphic complexes.

In the Indolo-Kubanskiy trough hydrocarbon accumulations should be sought in
anticlinal and combined type traps in Lower Maykop-Upper Eocene. Middle lsykop and
Neogene sediments. within the Kerch' Peninsula. the Neocomian-Aptian rocks and the
Upper Jurassic reefogenic formations on the eastern continuation of the Gornyy
Krym' deserve special attention. In the cisdobrudzhskiy trough. carbonaceous sedi-
ments of Silurian, Early Devonian and Late Jurassic ages are of prospecting inter—
est. In the central and southern parts of the trough. terrigenous rocks of the
Middle Jurassic and the subjacent Triassic-Paleozoic formations deserve attention.

A rise in the effectiveness of geological exploration is impossible without the
direct and immediate participation of science, without the accelerated introduction
of its achievements into practice. UkrNIGRI [Ukrainian Scientific-Research Insti-
tute for lining] and IGiGGI of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences should increase the
reliability of the prognoses and scientific substantiation for prospecting for '
large and medium-size deposits, primarily in the DDV. based upon clarification of
the laws of their three-dimensional location. including those confined to traps of
the nonanticlinal type. and should develop standard-practice bases for prospecting
for them and for exploring them.

In so doing, special attention should be paid to solving the problem of the inte-
grated geological and economic evaluation of large zones and sections for purposes
of the most rapid prospecting of the more promising structures and the ensuing con-
centration of exploration.

The wide introduction into practice of standard procedures for forecasting the
pctroliferousness of traps for the rapid exploration of fields, especially of de-
velopments for optimizing the siting of exploratory wells in an area. choice
of the main level for exploration. and so on. should play no small role.

In the area of geophysics. the effectiveness of seismic work in studying the
structural layouts of deeplying horizons in aruas with complicated geological
structure must be raised.

COPYRIGNT: lzdatel‘stvo "Fedrs". “Geologiya nefti i gaza, 1982

l 1409
C50: 1822/124

5
Ft”!(ﬂﬁﬂ(]Al.USE¢DNLN
“vs 10 Iwraovz wssr 513mm OIL-nu. DRILLING osscnmso
Moscow NEFTYANAYA ansuisrmos'r' ssazn suasum: in Russian No 1, 1932 pp 2-4

[Article by V. I. Nazarov, I. A. Serenko and N. A. Sidorov (VNIIOENG [All-Union
-Scientific-Research Institute for the Organization. lanageaent and Econoaics of the
oil and Gas Industry]): "Reserves for Increasing Drilling Operations Effectiveness
in West Siberis"]

[Text] The industry's drilling organizations are to do a lot of work during the
11th-Five-Year Plan in constructing production oil wells and in increasing oil re-
serves, in order to provide in 1985 for the recovery of 620-645 million tons of oil
(including gas condensate). in accordance with "The Iain Directions for Economic
and Social Development of the USSR During 1981-1985 and During the Period up to
1980 [as printed]," which was approved by the 26th CPSU Congress.

In so doing, the main growth in the recovery of oil (and of gas condensate), in the
amount of 72-82 million tons, is to be obtained from West Siberia. The oil-recov-
ery industry in Kazakhstan and in the north of the European part of the country
will also be developed at an accelerated pace.

The task of increasing drilling effectiveness during the period 1981-1985 and up to
1990 can be solved only on the basis of further developing science, accelerating
technical progress. impro\ing work organization. and disseminating widely the work
experience of innovative brigades and advanced production workers.

At the same time. drilling work effectiveness will grow substantially if. while
introducing aeasures that have been worked out as a result of scientific develop-
ments and while accelerating technical progress. the potential capabilities of ser-

ially produced equipment. which is still not being utilized completely. is put to
full use and if the whole process of constructing wells is well organized.‘

In the indicated plan. the work results of the industry’s best drilling and derb
rick-erecting brigades. which exceed average results for the region as a whole
2-fold or sore. are typical. Thus, in lest Siberia the collective of the drilling
brigade of foreman Hero of Socialist Labor 6. I. Levin (now chief of Surgut UBR
[Drilling Administration] No 2 of olavtyunenneftegaz [lain Administration of the
oil and Gas Industry of Tyumenskaya Oblast]. using existing equipment and

'N. A. IaI'tsev. “The USSR's Oil Industry in the New Bra." NBPTYANOYE KHOZYAYSTVO
[The Petroleum Bconouy 1. Moscow. No 4. 1981, Nedra.

6
FOI‘OIIICIAI.UEEI(HVLY
technology. in 1980 drilled through more than 100,000 meters of rock at an average
net effective drilling speed of VR . 9,000 meters per rig per month.

However. there are drilling brigades in this region whose penetration per year is
60 percent of the annual penetration achieved by foreman G. I. Levin's brigade, de-
spite the fact that the geological conditions. technical resources for drilling
wells, parameters of the drilling regime. and organization of work for all brigades
are about identical. In this connection. a comparison of the time spent perfonming
various operations, which will reveal the particular areas in which leading bri-
gades achieve high indicators in savings of time. is of practical interest.

Hells drilled by fore-an G. I. Levin's advanced brigade (43 of the 51 wells drilled
in 1980 and by foreman V. N. Borisov's brigade (32 of 33 wells drilled) have been
selected. Foreman V. N. Borisov's brigade, which drilled through 10,000 meters of
rock in 1980. has work indicators that are average for Nizhnevartovsk UBR No 1.

The average work indicators of these two brigades are shown in the table.
The following are evident from the table:

1) In both brigades. the time spent on round-trip operations Tc . mechanical
drilling 13, and treating the wellbore and adding drill-string piBe Tuap are about
equal;

2) G. H. Levin's brigade spent much less time than V. N. Borisov's brigade on cas-
ing wells; and

3) The time spent on preparatory and on completion operations (tu ) was much less
in c. H. Levin's brigade than in V. N. Borisov's. p
The dependence of net effective operating speed (Vk) on tiae spent on preparatory
and completion operations (t.' ), which is shown in the figure. indicates a direct
dependence on the level of V the value of t., ). when t is reduced. V in-
creases, and when twap valueb are equal, there ispno essentia difference in the
net effective 0 cratin s eeds.

 

The Dependence of Net Effective
Operating Speed on Time Spent on
Preparatory and Completion Opera-
tions for Hells Drilled by:

I. G. M. Levin's brigade.
2. V. N. Borisov's brigade.

Key:
Vk-net effective operating speed.
m/ct, mec-qaeters per rig per month.

A. Time spent on preparatory and
completion operations. hours.

 

7
FOR OFHCML USE ONL'I'
11.703
9,442

 

9
0

55
53

 

392.8
354

For the 10 best

V

4 2 04
5.7 2.137

 

 

308.6 45.0
257 43.5

For all of them

string pipe.

-time spent on preparatory work and completion

-—time spent treating the wellbore and adding drill-
o rations.

Ts ap
7n 9

V” is the on-bottom penetrating speed; ‘l‘k is calendar time; and Tpem

The numerators are the indicators for G. I. Levin's drilling brigade, the denominators are those for
at effective drilling speed.

V. N. Borisov's brigade.
o-time spent on round-trip Operations.

h is the penetration per bit;
is the time spent on repair wo

m/ct-mnc-meters per rig per month.

1;-mechanical drilling tine.

Comments.

1.

2.
T
v51...

Thus, an important reserve for rais-
ing net effective operating speed in
west Siberia consists in reducing the
time spent performing preparatory and
completion operations: the tiaely
conduct, without delay. of geophysi-
cal atudies; proper preparation of
the casing string and provisioning of
cementing equipment and plugging aa-
terials; and the timely delivery of
spare parts for equipnent, chemical
reactants and other materials and
tools.

In the drive to achieve maximum pene-
tration per drilling brigade per year.
in addition to the indicated reserves,
timely preparation of a work front
for drilling brigades plays a aajor
role,'for it helps to avoid idle time
during well construction while wait-
ing for a new well-starting point.
This is graphically confirmed by the
successes of foreman G. I. Levin's
brigade. during whose work, as a rule.
there have been no "gaps" while
awaiting new starting points.

Consequently. solution of the most
iaportant tasks-raising the effec-
tiveness of drilling work in Nest
Siberia-depends greatly upon the
work-organization level

of the derrick-erecting brigades.
geophysicists. transport workers.
pluggers. and others.

A considerable reserve for raising
drilling effectiveness in West Siber—
ia consists in the wide dissemina-
tion of the work experience of Belo-
russia's UBR's. which use five-sec-
tion A7Sh turbodrills with low-liter
regime for circulation, for which one
slush pump with lsoqmm cylindrical
liners is used (a second pump is held
in reserve). In this case, the tiae
spent on repair is reduced and drill-
bit operation indicators are raised:
in the upper interval-at depths down
to 1,700 meters-penetration per bit
increases by 30 percent. mechanical

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
penetration speed by 19 percent. while at the lower levels (1.700-2,450 aeters)
these parameters increase by 8.5 and 2 percent, respectively. Transport costs are
also reduced by raising the operating reliability of the turbodrills with small
drillingqsud consumption.

The creation of lore effective and reliable geophysical equipment for slant di-
rectional wells is also an important reserve for reducing well-construction tine.
The use. for example. of A388 (era-s) special greases with a view to eliminating

cases of failure of casing-string seals will be of help here.

Raising the work indicators of average brigades to the levels of the advanced ones
is coapletely realistic. however. an indispensable prerequisite for successful
solution of this task is timely provisioning of all drilling brigades with the
equipsent. aaterials and tools needed for well construction. It should also be
pointed out that, all other conditions being equal, the achieveaent of high indi-
cators is unthinkable without increasing vocational skills, coordination in work.
thriftiness. the observance of labor and production discipline, enthusiasa and con-
scientious creative work by all workers engaged in the drilling sphere. The nest
iaportant prerequisites for success are high levels of planning and performance and
labor discipline, as linister of Petroleua Industry N. A. Ial'tsev points Out.

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyusnyy nauchno-issle60vatel‘skiy institut organizatsii, uprav-
leniya i ekonoaiki neftegazovoy pronyshlennosti (VNIIOENG). 1982

11409
CSO: 1822/125

9
INDR‘OFFICJAI.1EIE(M‘LY
UDC 622.24 .082
BETTER PROCEDURES, HARDER DRILL BITS SPEED UP PENETRATION AT KUBAN' OIL WELLS
Moscow NBP'I'YANAYA PROHYSHLENNOST' SBRIYA BURENIYE in Russian No 12. 1981 pp 2-4

[Article by 0. P. Kol'tscv, V. F. Klisun. I. I. Biberman and I. w. shtoupel'
(VNIPItermneft' [All-Union Scientific-Research and Design Institute for Thermal
Treatment of oil Wells) and NPO Soyuzterlmeft' [All-Union Science and Production
Association for Thermal Treataent of oil Wells]): "Raising the Effectiveness of
Drilling Wells in Krasnodarskiy Kray"]

[Text] The aain efforts of NPO Soyuztermneft' and Krasnodarneftegaz [Association
for oil and Gas Recovery in Krasnodarskiy Kray] workers during the 10th Five-Year
Plan were aiaed at further improving drilling technology and work organization and
reducing well-construction time.

work to perform these tasks was conducted mainly in three areas:

a search for optimal drilling-regime parameters, based upon the sinking of coabina-
tion exploratory and production wells;

the development and introduction of standing orders for the operating of rock-
breaking tools of new design; and

wider use of Is! [Institute of Superhard Itaterials] drill _bits. taking into account
the abrasive properties of the rocks that make up the log of Krasnodarskiy Kray
fields.

In 1972-1974 two combination exploratory and production wells (O'l‘S's) were drilled
in the Severskaya area; and Krasnodarneftegaz Association. with a view to improving
drilling regimes, worked out and issued operating reconcndations in accordance
with the results of the sinking of these holes. Two 015's were also completed by
construction in 1975-1977 in Talen' Peninsula areas, where a definite alount of re-
search was perforaed and similar recs-endations were developed.

During the first 4 years of the 10th Five-Year Plan. 12 wells were sunk in accord-
ance with the cited reccasendations. Total penetration during this period was
44,183 meters. The uain alount of drilling (72 percent) was done in areas in the
west Kuban' trough (in the Severskaya. Afipskiy and North Novyy Dmitriyevskoye
areas). lore than 12,500 actors of rock were drilled through in 'l'aaan’ Peninsula

areas (Kuchugury and Pontalovskaya).

10
“OFFICIALUSEONLY
An analysis of the technical and economic indicators of sinking wells in the areas
indicated above showed that wide introduction of the drilling technology that had
been developed in accordance with the results of the 075 drilling and substantial
improvement in work organization and in the supplying of materials and equipment
had enabled penetration per bit to be increased 1.2-fold to 1.3-fold, down time for
organizational reasons to be reduced 14-17 percent, and on—bottom penetration speed
and net effective drilling speed to be increased, respectively, 1.2-fold and

1 e‘-f°1d o

It is planned that during the 11th Five-Year Plan prospecting and exploration for
oil in Krasnodarskiy Kray will be conducted at fields that are related to four main
geological-structure zones. Paleogeno sediments (the Nest Kuban' trough; a complex
of Cretaceous sediments (Taman'), a complex of subsalt sediments of the Jurassic
(the East-Kuban' depression and the Adygeyskiy bench, and Eesozoic sediments (the
Northwest Caucasus).

As was noted above, work has already been finished at the fields included in the
first two zones by the construction of several combination exploratory and produc—
tion wells. and basic measures aimed at improving the technology have been worked
Out. In order to optimize drilling-regime parameters, it is planned to sink two
OTS's at fields included in the two other zones during the 11th Five-Year Plan.

The development of rock-breaking tools of new design and the introduction of
standing orders on their operation have helped to raise technical and economic in-
dicators and to reduce well-construction time. The use of bits that meet COST
20692-75 requirements began in 1975. During 1975-1979 these bits drilled through
135,400 meters of rock, or 31.6 percent of total penetration for all roller bits.

Table 1 shows the basic indicators for the operation of these bits.

Table l
Indicators 1975 1976 1977 1976 1979

Total penetration, meters.......... 10,824 26,260 21,610 33,210 41,500

Expenditure of bits, each.......... 296 716 519 604 1,072
Average penetration per bit, meters 36.6 39.4 45.4 41.3 36.7
Average on-bottom penetration

speed, meters per hour........... 2.32 2.48 2.30 2.22 2.15
'Average depth of well completed by

drilling, meters................. 3,675 3,664 3,869 3,676 3,869

It follows from table 1 that total penetration in 1979 increased 3.6-fold over
1975. However, 1977-1979 saw a reduction in mechanical penetration speed that was
caused by an increase in the average depth of the wells completed by drilling.
Another no-less important factor was the slightness of use of bits 269.9 and 295.3
millimeters in diameter, which was 22.9 percent. Most drilling was done by 215.9-
millimeter bits. These bits penetrated 69,956 meters, or 66.4 percent of the total
penetration, 46,147 meters (51.3 percent) during exploratory drilling, where they
are being used to drill to depths of more than 3,000 meters. And, finally, a third
factor was the less than full use of the service lives of $6 and no type bits be-
cause they were used to drill through rock that did not accord with the indica-
tors in physical and mechanical properties of the rigging of these bits.

11
IN)! OFFIChtl [EHBCHVLV
ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050057-9

2007/02/09:

-
3

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

. oo.ao
No a” o~.ao~
oo.on

ao.- .o~.-~
oa.vn

-.ag oo.oo
. o~.o~
as «0 nn.oo
o~.os

ne.an oo.en

I||

:32 mo '33.:

3536:» Jim» can: «cm
.uuma rm“ uncomoc .cowu
acmoauohu
L: 39....

Iasuocun mo
.3 you auooo

 

mn.N
ho..—

gal

.aouuon
use

. voumn

.3395

v Nlmzaoaxmn acme-r...

 

 

 

o n
o4. v.37: have:
o.~o «taxmauxmu ocmnasa
o.v« >oumo.m-HHH anaaom
o.~vo.~ numuoszmu oedaaaa
a.» 218.32: P38.
o.o«n.u «unnamxmu campusa
o.o~ >ahumn.na~unu agave:
o.nov "umuawxmn ocmnaaa
9: 5.8.32: 52
in you cospo-
cogauu auovmunmaov mam
uocom . nudmgn

EONMhOp—
SaVIoonv «82-3:
OGOOON
CONDIOOQV : ..
“ﬁnal.” N MN .. ..
I 85.3... «:3
saw" mean :uau uoxoa
tadcoguma
OMOI‘h

oon~u~n- Isa noun:

 

 

Pm...»
uwuauum

1.23:...
ucdﬁgdua

£933
£5.33

33:.
293...“...

nag—u
ccaauuoz
logs»

2?:-
I>o§mon

«in

nix—3.3%

 

GOB¢

own

01

an

O:
a «03

 

12

FOIOII'FICIALUSEONLY

ClA-RDP02-00050R000500060057-9

2007/02/09:

.
.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
with a view to raising the operating efficiency of these bits, much work was done
in the areas of detailed forecasting of the physical and mechanical characteristics
of the rock that is included in the logs of West ciscaucasian fields and of respon-
sive revision of standing orders for operating the bits in accordance with the
drilling conditions that actually exist. Moreover. a substantial increase in the
industrial introduction of ISI bits has helped to raise drilling operating effec-
tiveness. The use of these bits began for the first time in Krasnodarskiy Kray in
1968. but they began to find their widest use in the 1970's. In 1972 penetration
with their use was 5-7 percent of the total amount of penetration by bits of all

types.
Table 2 shows the basic indicators of ISM bit Operation during 1976-1979.

Table 2
.____________________________.________________._______________________________
Indicators 1976 1977 1978 1979
_______________.________.________.______. .__. ___. ___. ___.
Total penetration, thousands of meters........ 7.1 7.1 9.8 11.7
Expenditure of bits. each..................... 41 39 31 25
Penetration per hit, meters................... 113 180 313 451
On-bottom penetrating speed, meters per hour.. 4.17 4.40 6.60 6.90
Exploratory drilling ﬁncluded above)..... 1.78 1.82 1.87 2.24

 

——-—-————————_—_——_—_

It follows from table 2 that total penetration during drilling with Isa bits rose

' 1.6-fold in 1979 over the figure for 1976; on-bottom penetration speed during
exploratory drilling and penetration per bit increased. respectively, 1.26-fold and
2.6-fold.

with correct choice of intervals for using ISM bits, the indicators for their oper-
ation increased much more than the indicators for roller bits.

Table 3 shows the comparative indicators of bit operation in various stratigraph-
ic subunits for certain wells.

1t is evident from table 3 that the best penetration results at depths down to
3.300-3.500 meters are achieved with the use of ISM bits, in combination with tur-
bine drilling. The rotary method is more effective at greater depths.

The indicators noted above were obtained thanks to a scientifically substantiated
approach to the development of standard practices for choosing rock-breaking tools
and operating regimes for them. Its bases were laid on the results of research of
abrasive wear of the superhard material slavutich. with which the tooling of IS!
drill bits has been strengthened for the destruction of rocks.

Thus. the introduction of the operating recommendations on optimization of drilling
regime parameters that were worked out on the basis of sinking combination explora-
tory and development wells. the wider introduction of standing orders for the oper-
ation of rock-breaking tools. and an increase in penetration with the use of ISM
bits to 30-40 percent of total penetration are enabling the technical and eco-
nomic indicators of sinking oil and gas wells in the Kuban' to be raised.

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organizatsii. uprav—
leniya i ekonomiki neftegazovoy promyshlennosti (VNIIOENG). 1981

11409
CSO: 1822/125 13

FOI‘OFFNJAL.USE|DNLY
['05 UPrMIea. we. Una-s

PIPELINBS

TEXTBOOK PUBLISHED FOR MAIN GAS PIPELINE OPERATOR

Moscow OPERATOR MAGISTRAD'NYKB GAZOPROVODOV in Russian 1981 (signed to press
3 Apr 1981) PP 1-5. 255-268

(Annotation. foreword, table of contents and new books announcement from book
"Hain Gas Pipeline Operator.” by Viktor Vasil'yevich Gromov and Vitaliy Ivsno-
vich Kozlovskiy. lzdatel'stvo "Nedra," 8,300 copies. 248 pages]

[Text] This book presents the basic infatuation regarding the chief structures
of nain gas pipelines. compressor and gas-distributing stations. equipment of
the line section of the gas pipelines and underground gas storage stations. con-
trol and measuring instruments and automatic systees which is sufficient for
the duties of main gas pipeline operators. Questions are examined of using the
sachines and mechanisms for minor maintenance of the pipelines and conpressor
station equipeent. pressure and regulating fittings. the optimal regine for
running and operation of the facilities of the nain gas pipelines and the
compressor stations. Questions hre covered of work safety. accident prevention.
industrial hygiene and fire-prevention neasures.

The book is designed to train and improve the skill of main gas pipeline opera-
tors.

Ten tables. 53 illustrations, 68 bibliographic entries.
Foreword

Extraction of natural gas increases every year in the country and a branched

gas transport systen is being set up which supplies gas for the raw material

and technological needs of the chenical industry. ferrous. nonferrous metal-

lurgy. nachine construction. construction netsrials industry. oil and gas in-
dustry. and residential-communal services.

Gaaificetion is the most inportant factor and accelerator of scientific and
technical progress. inprovenent in quality and efficiency of production. and
growth in productivity of social labor and the national welfare.

Natural and casing-head gas are over 20 percent of the country's fuel and energy
balance. The cyst rising denands of the national economy for natural gas can
only be satisfied after guaranteeing high rates of developnent of the gas
industry.

FOI¢OFFHJA1.USB(HILY
The modern methods of burning gas ensure complete combustion with very high

thermal loads of the furnaces and stoves and allow the implementation of
advanced technological processes in the oil. metallurgical. machine construc-

tion. glass. textile.food and other sectors of industry.

The use of natural gas in steel smelting production reduces the sulfur con-
tent in the maltable steel. perfects its heating methods and thermal treatment.
reduces the cost of the metal and drastically improves the working conditions.

The use of natural gas in place of coal at power plants reduces capital invest-
ments needed to build them. improves the efficiency of the plant boilers and
diminishes the cost of the generated electricity.

The use of natural gas improves even more the efficient operation of small
steam boilers of industrial and communal units.

The use of natural gas in the chemical industry to produce hydrogen. synthetic
ammonia. nitrogen fertilizers. carbon black and a number of other products of
primary importanceis especially efficient.

The use of natural gas allows us to solve a number of important national econo-
mic tasks: reduce the expenditures of labor and material resources needed for
extraction and shipping of fuel. reduce the coat of fuel. improve the useful
duty factor of fuel. intensify the operation of power engineering and produc-
tion units. completely eliminate pollution of the environment by ash. sul-
furous compounds and considerably diminish the discharge into the air basin

of carbon monoxide. harmful organic substances which form nitric oxides during
incomplete fuel combustion. and significantly improve the working and daily
life conditions of the population.

The use of natural gas is effective not only in industry, but also in agri-
culture. Ue will examine certain areas of its application.

Capital investments to greenhouse farming total hundreds of millions of rubles.
Half of them are spent on heating units and outlays for heating reach 20 percent
of the cost of the vegetables grown in the greenhouses. It is efficient to
use low-potential heat of power engineering stations. industrial enterprises.
compressor stations and main gas pipelines to heat them. The majority of
greenhouse farms currently operate with the use of different types of fuel

for heating.

The use of gas in greenhOuse farms is especially efficient. however. since
two problems can be comprehensively resolved: heating of the units of pro-
tected ground and supplemental feeding of the plants with carbon dioxide con-
tained in the combustion products of the sulfur-free gaseous fuel. The air
usually contains only 0.03 percent 002 by volume. therefore. it is easiest of
all to intensify the process of photosynthesis through increasing the C0
content in the air in protected ground units. hothouses. greenhouses andzhot-

beds. The use of carbon dioxide fertilizers accelerates growth. maturation
and improves the harvest of vegetables and other crops.

The use of gaseous fuel permits heating and ventilation of animal husbandry

and poultry farms. Maintenance of the optimal temperature and air humidity
on the farms improves the efficiency of animal husbandry and poultry raising.

15
ltll(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE10NlM
PW WI‘NIQL 031'. URL!

Units for drying grain. oil-yielding seeds. tea. tobacco. fruits and other
agricultural crops are major consumers of fuel. The drying units mainly
run on liquid and solid fuel. The use of gas in the process of drying agri-
cultural products is very desirable since it improves the output of the
dryers. reduces the specific consumption of fuel and eliminates the possible
contamination of the.dried food products with sooty substance'

The need to transport large quantities of gas from the extraction site to the
consumption site caused the rapid development of main gas pipelines. when
gas is transported on pipelines. the losses of pumped product are the mini-
mum because of the high degree of hermetic sealing of the pipelines and the
pumping equipment.

The gas industry is developing towards maximum centralization of gas supply.
The gas which is extracted in this country is centrally distributed through
a unified gas supply system (386). This guarantees the possibility of
maneuvering the gas streams, economic distribution of the loads between the
gas pipelines and fields according to their technical and economic charac-
teristics. A reliable gas supply can be ensured by different technical and

power engineering resources. including improving the reliability of the £56
elements.

The task of determining the optimal volumes of reservation for the 886. its
territorial and functional subsystems is one of the most important. The 856
is resetved by using the reserve elements (units. parallel lines. wells),
whole subsystems (intersystem and ring gas pipelines). individual gas fields,
underground gas reservoirs. liquefied natural gas units. and second fuel
services of the consumers.

The extensive use of underground gas reservoirs to create a national economic
reserve and switching of a number of fields located close to the gas con-
sumption regions to a regime of underground gas storage will efficiently
solve the problem of stable gas supply to the entire country and provide the
assigned gas reserve in the minimum time and with the least capital invest-
ments.

Guarantee of the reliability and efficiency of the £56 functioning in the
country. optimisation of the processes of extraction, transport and distri-
bution of gas. and improvement in the technical and economic indicators for

the sector's development require the resolution of the most important tasks
for long-range planning and rapid dispatcher control of the 836 based on the

implementation of a program of comprehensive automation of the production
processes and the extensive introduction of automated control systems with

the use of computers.

Comprehensive automation and tele-automation as the technical base for
introducing automated control systems at all levels and an the whole for the
sector automated control system are the most important means for improving
reliable gas supply.

Control questions are presented after each chapter to repeat the material
which has been covered.

16
FINIINHHCIA1.USE(NVLY
Contents

Porevord

Chapter 1. Main Structures of Main Gas Pipelines
Purification of gas froa mechanical admixtures
Purification of gas from hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide
Drying of natural gas
Separation of condensate
Imparting odor to gas

Chapter 2. Main Require-outs for Main Gas Pipelines
Classification and categories of main gas pipelins
Selection of route for main gas pipelines
Construction requirements for main gas pipelines
Passages of main gas pipelines through natural and
artificial obstacles

Chapter 3. Equipment of Line Section of Main Gas Pipelines
Pipes. assemblies. items and connections
Pressure and regulating fittings
Means of corrosion protection
Means of cleaning gas pipeline cavity
Insulating. laying. packing and lubricating materials
Lines of technological communication of main gas pipelines

Chapter 6. Compressor Stations of Gas Pipelines
Purpose of compressor stations
Types of drives of gas pumping units
Production plan of compressor stations
Maintenance of gas pumping units of compressor stations

Chapter 5. Gas-Distributing Stations of Main Gas Pipelines
Purpose and main GDS units
Production plans of GDS
Operation of CBS

Chapter 6. Stations of underground gas storage (8068)
Purpose of 8008
Main and auxiliary SUGS equipment
Plan of technological connection of SUGS
Operation of underground gas reservoirs

Chapter 7. Operating Regime of Main Gas Pipeline
Maintenance of planned gas pipeline parameters
Throughput of gas pipeline
Methods of increasing throughput of gas pipelines
Determination of temperature and pressure in gas pipeline

Chapter 8. Control and Measuring Instruments. Systems of
Automatics and Remote Control
run W'ILML WE UI‘LI

Control and measuring instruments of CBS and measurement points [62

Instruments and systems of technological control of CS 170
Tele-sutonation of main gas pipeline facilities 18‘
Maintenance of systess of control and measuring instrunents
and auto-stics 190
Chapter 9. Operation of Main Gas Pipeline and CS ripelines 19$
Line-operational service (L03) and its tasks 195
Care of route of gas pipeline in summer 198
Measures to guarantee reliable operation of gas pipelines
in fall-winter period 200
Flood~prevention measures 200
Control of hydrate-formations in main gas pipelines 201
Maintenance of pressure and safety fittings 203
Maintenance of gas pressure regulation points 207
Maintenance of measuring assemblies of compressor station 208

Chapter 10. Drawing Up and Management of Technical Documents

for Execution of Repair Hark 216
Order of drawing up and tolerance for fulfillment of gas-

dangerous and fire work 216
Order of drawing up and execution of maintenance on

pipelines and apparatus of CS 219
Order of acceptance of main gas pipelines for operation 220
Order of connecting gasificstion facilities to 608 222

Chapter 11. Industrial Hygiene and Accident Prevention at Main

Gas Pipelines 226
Basic statutes of Soviet labor legislation on industrial

hygiene and safe working conditions 220
Basic properties of gases and their compounds 226
Classification of rooms for fire and explosion danger 227
Features of storing fuel and lubricants 229
Electric lighting in explosive rooms 230
Fire-prevention regime and fire extinguishing tools at the

CS. SUGS and CBS 232
Features of using certain chenicals 236
Means of individual protection 237
First-aid to victina 238

Bibliography 263

Respected Comrade! The "Nedra" publishing house is preparing new books for
print.

Klinovskiy. Ye. M.; Kaganovich. M. “.3 Refel'd. I. Ye.: et al. ”Kontrol'
kachestvs avarnykh soyedineniy truboprovodov dlya nefti i gaze" [Quality Con-
trol of welded Connections of Oil and Gas Pipelines]. translation. 1 ruble.

A broad circle of questions is examined regarding quality control of welded
connections of Iain and field pipelines. Attention is focused on the effect

18
IIIICHWHK1A1.USI(NVLY
of technological defects of pipeline welding on their strength. and the
reasons for the development of these defects. Requirements are stated for
the quality of the welded connections and different methods are presented

for monitoring their welded seans. Questions are covered of pressure testing
the pipelines. Testing nethods (hydraulic and pneunatic). stages and parame-
ters for testing individual pipeline assemblies. and a technique for

finding and elininating defects are indicated. The prospects for developing.
control aathods are reviewed.

It is designed for fore-en who are building pipelines. It may be of use to
engineering and technical workers of operational organisations.

Khenarner. V. l. "Tekhnicheskiy nadsor na stroitel'stve nagistral'nykh
truboprovodov" [Technical Inspection in Construction of Main Pipelines).
12 pages (Library of the Main Pipeline Builder). 60 kopecks.

Experience is generalised of technical inspection at all stages of building
main pipelines. including their washing. blowing-through and testing for
strength. A technique is described for checking and inspecting the quality
of work at the construction of Iain pipelines (welding-installation, earth-
noving. insulation-laying. in the construction of junctions and pipelines

under conplicated climate and geographical conditions. as well as during the
installation of the line section. conpressor station and gas-distributing

station) with regard for the use of new materials. technology and methods of
construction.

It is designed for a broad group of readers involved in building Iain pipe-
lines. It say be of use to specialists in organising and managing technical
inspection and atep-by-step control of both the construction-installation and
operating organisations.

You can acquire the books you are interested in at the local bookstores which
sell scientific and technical literature. or order then through the nail order
department of the stores: No 17. 199178. Leningrad. V. O. Sredniy prospekt.
61; No 59. 127612. Moscow. Korovinskoye shoase. 20.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nedra". 1981

9035
cs0: 18221127 am)

19
FINItﬂﬂﬂClAl.USI(NVLY