APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007IOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ OOOZOOOG-A
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020004-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8259

2 February 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020004-4
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
0F TNIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROPFICIAL USE ONLY.
I. Auhods)

     

.- :«lousin. Quaint-on Rep.
o.

9. Paton-m; (us-nudes Non sud Manes IO. hoierc/Tssh/Voql Unit No.
Joint Publ icstions Resesrch Service _
1000 North Globe Rosd _
Arlington, Virginie 22201

 
  
  

      
    
 
   
 

l2. Soon-«is; Oussiutios Nun sod Awe-s l1. “Inn .1 Rem or Period

Coveted

As shove

IS. Suppleuusay Nous

l6. Mmucn

This serial report contains information on energy. fuels and related equipment;

fishing industry and marine resources: water resources. linersls, timber. snd
electric power.

. Key ads sod ore-rot Asslysis. o. Duelist-n

USSR

Nstursl Resources

Electric Power

Energy

Energy Conservstion
Fisheries
Fuels
Minerals
Tinber

Water Supply
m. Momlkuslweovﬁn‘icd Tet-s

"Hosanna/amp SC, 10, 210, 26. 80. 2F

——.—__.____.
ll. Auulab-luy ﬁnches!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited hulber of
Copies Available From JPRS

2|. No. 0‘ Pan
41

 

'°"“ *"“’ """ ""’ rms toss an or senooucro '"°“"°‘ “"""'
I-‘UR ()l-‘PICIAI. USI-Z ONLY

JPRS L/8259
2 February 19

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(moo 3/79)

Courems I
ELECTRIC PURSE AND POWER EQUIPMENT

Reeeerch in Power Conetmction
(1.. I. Kudoyerov; macancuasxorz srmmausrvo,

No 9' 197a) OO...CO...CC...COO...CCCCOUIOCICOOCOCCCOCCCCO

Increued Effectiveneu of Power Contraction
(C. A. Deniaov, et 11.; ENERGB‘IICIIESKOYB STBDI‘I'EL'S‘WO,

No 9, 1978) O0.00‘COOCOOOCCOUOOOOOCCCOOCOOCOOOOOCCOOOOOOO

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

Main Problem in Strengthening the Rev Materiel Base on
the Coal Industry

(v. r. Cherepovekiy; somst 0901mm, Nov 78)

Proepecte of the Oil- end Gee-Bearing Cepecity of
Carbonate Depoeite of the Siberian Pletforn
(A. V. Ovchnrmko; SOVETSKAYA 6301061“, NW 78) 0.00.000
POM OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POHBR AND POHBR EQUIPMENT

UDC 621.31.001.891
RESEARCH IN POWER CONSTRUCTION .

Moscow BNBRBBTICNBSKOYB STIDITBL'STVO in Russian NO 9. 1978 pp 79~80

[Article by Candidate of Technical Sciences L. l. Kudoyarov: "Problens of
Adninistering Scientific Research in the Pield of Power Construction")

[Text] The decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress nap out the basic directions
of intensifying the adoption of key scientific advances in the national
economy. They include: Conversion to program-goal planning of science.
concentration of research on the most promising the-es. cost-accounting
organization of research and develop-ant. and improve-ant of the systes of
economic incentive for the assimilation of nev equip-ant and systees of
wages paid to scientific personnel.

All national econosy development depends on the country's power base. and
a sector such as power construction determines the effectiveness of this
development. .

The resolution of current tasks facing pouar construction and the transi-
tion to new directions relating to the accelerated construction of ABs's

and the creation of naneuverable generating capacities in CAES's in the
European regions, the development of a cluster CRBS running on lansk-Achinsk
and Ekibastur coal. the construction of large 635’s in Siberia. and also

the transsission of large quantities of electricity over great distences.
require substantial and completely new scientific studies.

Science. as a modern production force. must be fully involved in the pro-
cess of the reproduction of the power engineering base, fully responsible.
aorally and saterielly. for the results of accosplishsent of assigned tasks.
Under the present system of planning of scientific research. unfortunately.
science frequently stands aloof from the resolution of urgent probless.

and indicators of its effectiveness hardly depend at all on the successful
accosplishnent of assigned tasks.

At present. the basic shortcoming in the planning of scientific research is
the financing and allocation of the wage fund based on the principle of
the actual sccosplished level and the securing of the completed base. This

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

leads to a situation in which the results of previous investigations and
accomlisheente are utilized, while not enough attention is focused on the
resolution of new. urgent tasks. As a result. science becomes inert. pas-
siva under conditions of changing situations in the sector.

In the author's opinion. the allocation of appropriations to support science
should reflect long-range capital invest-ants in the developnent of indi-
vidual directions. In the next five-year plan. for steeple. it will be
necessary to invest basic fmds in the deaelopnent of nuclear power. the
creation of aaneuverable capacities. the construction of large 633's in
regions of 100 teaperatursa and per-afrost, and the construction of super-
poverful transeission lines. For this reason. it is necessary now to fi-
nance science in such a nannar as to reflect in percentages. at least ep-
proxiaately. the prospective distribution of capital investments. This
Bill guarantee the concentration of scientific research on promising direc-

tions: it will asks it possible to achieve a substantial national-econo-y
effect froo investments in science.

1he proper detenination of praising lines of scientific research is a con-
plex task. It can be resolved only on the basis of long-range sector
planning. At present. all sectors have develop-ant plane generally extend-
ing 15 years. and develop-ant forecasts even farther into the future. “these
aust serve as the basis for detersining the necessary levels and basic direc-
tions which can serve as the basis of the sector's scientific develop-ant
after a certain aaount of confirnation by directive agencies. Plans of
long-range sector developsent can also serve as the basis. and inseparable
couponent part. of the long-range plan of develop-ant of individual scien-
tific efforts.

At present. for crawls. the ltey hydroengineering institutes-cidroproyeht
[All-Union Order of Lenin Planning-Survey and Scientific-Research Institute
ieeni S. ta. Zhuk]. the All-Union Scientific-Research Institute of hydro-
engineering iaeni 3. Ya. Vedeneyev. and the Georgian Scientific-Research
Institute of Power Engineering and lydroengineering 8tructures--have already
worked out such plans extending 15 years in the Iain scientific directions.
They are based on a specific anlaysis of the Jon-range plan of construc-
tion of 035'. up through 1990. The progran oi‘ as construction includes
about 60 long-range projects to be built in different areas of the country.
An analysis of this prograe sakes it possible to detersine the seat pronis-
ing types of hydroengineering structures and pover equip-tut. to set forth
specific tasks of a technological nature. and to formulate the require-ants
on other sectors of the national scone-y vith respect to supplying the
hydroengineering builders with eodern squipnent and naterials.

Such long-range plans in science cannot be drawn up correctly without a
detailed analysis of the technical level of the subsector as of today. with-
out a cosparison of the planned indicators of projects against sisiler in-
dicatorn taken froe both Soviet and foreign scientific-technical duct-enta-
tion. The sccueulstion of date characterising the present technical level

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

must be handled by the key institutes in accordance with a unified procedure.
Then these data must be submitted to the subsector'e head scientific-
research institute for sumaarization and systematisation. At present there
is a large number of surveys. card files. and reference manuals which fre-
quently contain the same information but do not make it possible to correct-
ly analyze the sector's technical level. Hork on analyzing the sector's
technical level must go on constantly rather than being confined just to the
time of compiletion of the 15- or 5-year plan, because the dynamics of in-
dicators of the sector's technical level make it possible to determine more

graphically the feedback between planning and the development of new equip-
ment and its adoption in practice.

In this way. having unequivocal data concerning the present technical level
and proceeding on the analysis of prospective power construction. it is pos-
sible to determine both the themetics and the volume of necessary scientific
research. The assembly of selected scientific-research themes will make it

possible to draw up a substantiated five-year program of scientific-research
work for each scientific direction.

The inclusion of a theme in this program of projects for the subsector must
be preceded by the compilation of a T20 [Technical-Economic Substantiation],
which must include a brief description of the project, procedures for carry-
ing it out. an analysis of the prospects and timetables for adopting the
results, and a chart of the technical level with indicators of patent clear-
ness and the project's economic effectiveness. In addition, the T20 must

contain a consolidated calculation of labor outlays on completion of the
project.

In determining the range of problems which must be resolved by individual
institutes of the subsector. it is necessary to take account of the scien-
tific profile of their specialists. In addition, bolder use must be made
of their abilities to resolve new tasks facing Soviet science. In the
author's opinion, in the sector institutes it is most rational to set up a
problem-solving structure in which a number of specialists of differing
profile in the institute form a collective designed to resolve a specific
urgent problem. The list of problems laboratories should be revised once
every five years in order to enhance the creative vigor of the scientists

and raise their motivation in resolving assigned tasks effectively and
promptly.

The experience of the USSR Ministry of Electrical Equipment Industry and
Ministry of Heavy and Transport Machine Building indicates that progremr
goal planning yields the maximum effect only when combined with conversion
to the new system of planning. financing. and economic incentive. At
present, the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification's Glevniiproyekt
[Main Administration of Scientific-Research and Planning Organisations] is
actively preparing to convert scientific-research. planning-design. and
technological organizations to the new conditions of planning and economic
incentive.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICML USE ONLY

it must be admitted that the lack of seriality and the long time it takes
to build unique power facilities make it impossible to make full use of

the experience of adopting the new system in organizations of the Ministry
of Electrical Equipment Industry and the ministry of Power Machine Building.
But a number of valuable recoumendstions worked out as a result of analysis
and generalisation of the experience of scientific administration in these
ministries should be studied comprehensively and utilized.

The fundamental principles governing the work under conditions of the new
system are: Integral planning of the whole cycle of projects, financing of
than from a unified scientific and technical development fund. and making
incentives for collectives of institutes and each scientific worker depen-
dent on the national economy effect gained by the adoption.

To ensure unified principles of planning at all stages of development and
adoption of new equipment it is necessary to convert from the present sys-
tem of thematic planning to the order plan. The order plan for NIOPKR
[Scientific-Research and Experimental-Design Hark] is not just a document
specifying the makeup. timetables. and volume of work to be completed but
also an indispensable part of the inatitute's thematic plan. The order plan
obligatorily stipulates the stage of adoption and designates the object of
adoption. the source of financing. and the economic effect of NIOPKR.

Depending on the volme of outlays. the order plan must be approved by the
ministry management or the main abiniatration involved in the adoption.
The distribution of projects mug the coexecutor organizations must not

be made at random. at the whim of the client. but centrally via the
scientific-research institute designated as the head institute for the par-
ticular project or mission. The order must be renewed periodically for the
head institutes. and its implementation must be monitored closely.

of even greater importance is the centralization of funds in the head
organisation when carrying out projects within the fruswork of vital
scientific-technical problems. To this day a number of institutes are still
dealing with petty themes. his is happening not only as a consequence of
the variety of sources of financing but also because of the poorly-considered
{repentation of scientific directionality in the activities of sector

institutes. substantial duplication in their efforts. and poor ministry
control over the inclusion of sector institutes in adjacent scientific-
technical programs.

Conversion to the new system of planning and incentive in science promises
to strengthen the role of the economic considerations in the unified science-
planning-production chain. In the first link of this chain it is necessary

to strengthen the connection between wages paid to scientific personnel and
the success rate of their labors.

I.
FOR OH-‘lCIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One nessure of the success rate of scientific-research work should be the
extent to which its reconnendntions are adopted in the practice of power
construction and the technical-economic effect gsined es a result. "Adop-
tion" should seen the use of the results of scientific-research work in

construction projects. in approved technicsl documentstion. nor-stive-
procedursl documents. and certificates of authorship.

An obligatory condition on enhancing the efforts of science personnel should
he s competitive syste- carried out on the basis of the results of couple-
tion of five-year plsns. end the Iain criterion should be the econonic ef-
fectiveness of the work done and the results of adoption.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Energiys", "Bnergeticheskoye stroitel'stvo". 1978

6856
080: 1822

5
F0? UPFlCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC MEI! AND rowan EQUIPMENT

UDO 621.31.001.89].

INCREAS. EFFECTIVIRESS 01’ PO"!!! CONSTRUCTION
Moscow HWGIBSXOYE STROITIL'S‘I‘VO in Russian No 9. 1978 pp 76-78

[Article by G. A. Denisov. Ye. A. Gel'nen, and Ya. t. Sokolov, engineers:
"Introduction of New Equipeent-u-A Hay to Raise the Effectiveness of Power
Construc tion" 1

[Text] At the 25th 6930 Congress the country's power engineers were assigned
the job of substantially raising labor productivity in the construction of
power facilities-«hat is. reducing the anomt of builder and installer
labor outlays per kilowatt of instelled capacity and per kiloeetar of in-
stalled power transeission lines.

‘lhe reduction of specific labor outlays should be sccowlished by optieally
increasing capacities of power plants under construction. unit capacities
of power equipnent (boilers, turbines. reactors. trensi’orners. and so on),
and layout designs of power plants in order to shorten utility lines. re-
duce the nunber of separate buildings in the power plant couple: by block
construction. and so on, inproving the structural design of power lines,
introducing new and advanced technology, organization, and adeinistration

in the construction end installation of power facilities. and new tech-
nological structures of buildings and facilities of Iain and auxiliary power

equip-eat.

Analysis shows that in the next few years one of the nain ways to boost
labor productivity and effectiveness in power construction will be to intro-
duce advanced technology in construction and installation work while simul-
taneously isproving structural tedmological effectiveness.

“the develop-cut and introduction of new technology should be accoeplished
through the use of:

advanced integrated technological processes. sonstiass requiring changes in
facility design;

highly-productive nechanisns developed by Soviet industry;

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

special machinery for power construction developed and manufactured by
organizations and plants of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification
and Soviet Industry;

new building materials.

It should be noted that in this regard the Ministry of Power and Electrifica-
tion has done considerable work. For example. in capital construction from
197‘ through 1978 in accordance with approved plans financed from central
funds for the development of new equipment, 339 items yielding a total eco-
nomic effect of 225 million rubles were introduced. compared with total
outlays of 52.9 million rubles on research and development.

The introduction of new equipment in leading construction and installation
organizations of the Ministry of Power and Electrification has substantially
reduced the cost and shortened the construction timetable of facilities
while simultaneously reducing labor outlays. The introduction of new struc-
tural coaponents and technologies of building pile foundations in the con-
struction of the Kama Motor Vehicle Plant made it possible to shorten the
zero cycle by 1.5 years and reduce labor outlays by $00,000 man-days.

The extensive use of the new technology in pouring concrete mix in the build-

ing of the dams of the Cherkeys and Tbktogul’ 688's tripled labor productiv-
ity in concrete work.

Gidroproyekt [All-Union Order of lenin Project-Survey and Scientific-Research
Institute imeni 8. Ya. Zhuk] developed floating foundations for crossing
supports of 330-kilovolt power lines; these foundations were installed in
1977 in the construction of the Zaporozh'ye GRES--Mikopol' Power Line across
the Kakhovskoye Reservoir. The economic effect from the adoption of the new
works method. compared with the project plan variant of building around the
reservoir, came to more than eight million rubles.

Orgenergostroy [All-Union Institute for the Project Planning and Organiza-
tion of Power Construction] developed. and the Kuybyshev Elektroshchit Plant
started the series production of, KTPB [expansion unknown]. In the Ninth
Five-Year Plan. 2,279 35 to llO-kilovolt substation sets were produced,
making it possible to save 16,500 tons of metal and 8,500 cubic meters of

cement: labor outlays were reduced by 292,000 man-days. The total economic
effect over the five years came to about 31 million rubles.

The Ministry of Power and Electrification plans the development and intro-
duction of new equipment centrally in capital construction. For this pur-
pose. new equipment plans are approved every year. one of which calls for
construction industry enterprises and machine building plants to start the
production of new items, while the other calls for new technology in the
implementation of construetion-installation work. Both plans are financed

by centralized deductions from construction-installation organizations and
ministry enterprises.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL (ISIS ONLY

In addition. every year the ninistry issues an Order increasing labor
productivity. which stipulates the basic naasurcs involved in introducing
new equip-ant and nanufacturing new nachinery and coaponento in the sinis-
try's enterprises.

This systen of planning has a nunber of drawbacks which ispalr the effective-
ness of introducing new equip-ant in capital construction. The plans call
only for the developsent and assimilation of new technologies and conponents
by construction-installation organisations. They do not include plans for
the sanufacture of the necessary esperinental nodels of sachinery. gear.

and cosponents necessary for this. Because soot of the construction trusts
do not have sufficiently powerful and well-equipped nachine plants or an
adequate systes of conponent acquisition. the develop-ant of experimental
models either drago on for years or is never cowleted. In this way. a
large nusber of uncoqleted although generally effective solutions are ac-
cuulated. This is the basic reason for failure to further develop certain
effective solutions (such as. for exaspla, autonstic welding of technological
piping and cowonents. cenent and sorter storage facilities that can be set
up rapidly. and new. econonical natal forns). block-built substations that
can be set up rapidly are not being introduced at a fast enough pace. and

so on. Yet considerable funds have been spent on their develop-ant.

Another defect in the present systea of adopting new equip-ant is the ab-
sence of adequate. highly-qualified appraisal to deter-ins the effectiveness
of new equip-est designs proposed by the institutes. For this reason. 25
to 30 percent of the seasures on new equip-ant for capital construction
adopted by way of experinent fros I973 shrough 1977 failed to yield the
desired effect and. for this reason. cannot be reco-ended for estensiwe
adoption in the ninistry's construction projects.

A umber of experinntal sodels of sachanian necessary for the adoption of
new equipnent are not being nanufactured on tine. which in the long-run leads
to delays in the experisental adoption of certain advanced scans and netth
of organizing the work in power construction. A nunber of other experimental
nodela of consonants and sachinery developed and mufactured in accordance
with the plan of assinilation of new equipsant of the niniatry'a industry
have not been accepted for series manufacture because of inadequate analysis
of effectiveness.

The use of concrete based on liﬂntweight claydite or aggloporite fillers

for power line supports sakes it possible to reduce their uses by 20 percent.
Investigation and experinental work on the adoption of such supports have
been underway in cmmiws [Georgian Scientific-Research Institute of Power
Engineering and hydro-Engineering Structures] since 1975. with the corres-
ponding anterial outlays. But these supports have not yet become widespread
in use.

It oust be pointed out. noreever. that the systen of ssterial incentive
for the adoption of new equip-ant has not been organised properly. This is
indicated by the fact that only about 20 percent of the item included in

8

, ma OFFICIAL use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the new equipment development plans in capital construction are included in
bonus orders. so that insufficient use is being made of the central bonus
fund for the assimilation of new equipment in the ministry.

The ministry has failed to arrange a system of extensive use of the most
effective possible applications with regard to new technologies of
construction-installation work and scientific and technological advances
already assimilated by other ministries and departments.

For example. the institutes of the Ministry of Fever and Electrification

are working on several designs for the welding of non-rotating large-diameter
type joints. but the experience of the Ministry of Construction of Petroleum
and Gas Industry enterprises is not being utilized sufficiently. Insuffi-
cient use is being made of the experience of the construction ministries
with regard to the adoption of ductleas heating systems.

According to estimates by ministry organizations. the annual reduction in
the cost of construction of power facilities through the adoption of new
technologies just according to the plan financed from the central fund
should amount to at least 100 to 120 million rubles. In practice. however,
the annual reduction amomts to a considerably smaller sum. Therefore.
substantial improvements are required in the planning and organization of
the adoption of new equipment in power facilities.

In order to eliminate these defects and to make more effective use of cen-
tral funds in capital construction and industrial activities. the Rain
Production-Technical Administration for Construction and Organergostroy have
drawn up proposals calling for the development of a unified system of plan-
ning applications and the adoption of advanced technologies in construction-
installation work. new machinery and equipment. and component items.

“hey call for the formulation of a unified plan with the following sections:
development and assimilation of new equipment in capital construction;
development and assimilation of new equipment in industry enterprises;
manufacture of experimental models of new equipment;

payment of bonuses for the adoption of new equipment.

For the plan section financed from the central fund for new equipment in
capital construction, the following are being worked out and adopted:

technologies of construction-installation work and experimental models of
effective construction components;

technologies and gear for the installation of prototypes of equipment;

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘illi OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

experimental colpnnenta for a nunher of power facilities;

non-aeriea and non-atandard nechinery. equip-ant. and gear relating to the
new technology for structural deaigno of power facility etructurea;

atructurea of package-unit and atationary huildinga for construction haaee
and peraanent hence for conetruction induatry trueta;

layout and structural deeigne of regional and eupply beaee. eleo advanced
for-a of organieation and adniniatretion of conetruction. including Asu'a.

In accordance with that aection of the plan financed iron the central induc-
trial activities fund. the following are developed and adopted:

experinentel eodela of nachinery. equipment. and gear intended for aeriea
manufacture;

inatrunental gear and technological proceeeee of ita nenufecture;
laprovenente in the technology of iten production;

prototypea of standard autonatic linen. elao new and advanced tom of
organization and adainietration of production. including ASU'e;

nonnative docuente and eatinate calculationa of prime coat of nanuiactur-
ing new itene.

work coapletion by all eectione of the plan in nonitored every year. and
tinetahlee are coordinated aa follow.

If the develop-ent of an advance technology in conetruction requiree the
developeent of new nechinery or the nodernieation of previoua itena pro-
duced by induetry. the aection of the plan dealing with the aaainilation
of new equipeent includee the appropriate itene with reepect to the devel-
opnent of auch nachinea. Convereely, the developnent and aaeinilation of
the production of new conetruction nachinery or conponente are incorporated
in the plan if it in poaaihle to lake extenaive uee of then on projecte
under conetruction. The eection “Aeeinilation of New Equipnent in Capital
Conetruction" includee the appropriate itena with reapect to the experi-
mental adoption of new nodele of conetruction nachinery and new conponenta
in conetruction. Both eectiona indicate the develop-ant. nanufacture. and
adoption tinetahlea.

Experience haa ahown that when an experinantal nodel of a new iten of equip-
ment in nenufactured at one plant while the expert-anal batch or aeriee of
the acne iten ia nanufactured at another. the tine neceeeary to introduce
the new unit in extended by at leaet one to two yeare. Thia circunetance
euet be taken into account in the planning of the nenufacture of new
nachlnery. equip-ant. and cowonenta. The propoeed object of their adoption

10

POP. Ol‘l-‘XCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(conetruction project. enterpriae) nuat be decided on two new before the
iten ie realized. Verification of the workability and reliability of
aaeeebliee of machinery. equipment. end conponente or technological pro-
ceeaea which require additional inveetigation prior to beginning the ennu-
focture of the experinental eodela or the experimental teating of the tech-
nology. are also taken into account in the plane. the machinery. equipment.
end couponente are to be tested at the Kuybyehev Experieental-‘l'eeting Plant.
the Solnachnogorek Scientific-Experimtel Couple: of Orgem-rgoatroy. or
other experimental baeee of the ministry. and are coordinated with the tile-
tablea for the production of experieentel eodele. Specifications on coupo-
nent parts end eateriale for the manufacture of the experinental nodel. alao
the nanufacture of an experieental batch of iteea. are to be aubeitted to
Clevenergokoeplckt (Main Meinietration for the Supplying of Oomlete Sete
of Power Bquipeent to Power Plants. Subetatione. and Networka] end Glavanab
[Main Meinietretion of Material-Technical Supply] by the general project
planner not later then 1 April of the year preceding the planned year.

In the author‘e opinion. it would be adviaable to net up e apecial earmarked
eaterial-reeource fund in the USSR hinietry of Power end Electrification'e
Glavaneb and Clevenergoltoeplekt which could at any tine allocate eateriela
end component parta for the manufacture end introduction of new cquipnent.
lt ehould be pointed out that theee purpoeee would require not sure then two
to three percent of the total value of funda allocated to the ninietry for
capital conatruction. end for thie reeeon the propoeel ie quite feeeible.
‘l‘hie will eake it poaeible to reaolve tore efficiently probleea involved in
the adoption end aeaieilation of new equipeent (at preaent. eateriale. coe-
ponent parte. end equip-en: for the nnufacture of experinentel nodele of
new equipeent are allocated free the funda of the client Iain edeinietra-
tione). -

For more efficient planning of the adoption of new equipment. it ie ad-
vieable to have composite and local plane. The cmoeite coordinated plan

for the five-year period (ace chart). drawn up on the baeie of ordere of
conetruction-inatellation organizations and inetitutee. ia approved by the

ninietry'a nanagenent. 0n the basic of thie plan, the client eein edninia-
tratione drew up two-year local plane. The cowoeite plan nuat be approved
in the third quarter of the year preceding the planned year. while the
local plane are to be drawn up in the fourth quarter.

The Job of coordinating the work of formulating cowoeite plane and aub-
eitting then to GPTUS Main Production-Technical Meinietretion for Con-
struction] ehould be eeaigned to Orgenergoatroy. which ia reeponeible for:
organizing the collection of ordere on ite- fomletion;

preparing plane of developeent end aeeiniletion of new equip-ant;
organizing the conducting of appraisale and conclusiona concerning the

advisability and effectiveneae of item to be iaplenented in accordance
with capital conetruction and induetry plane;

11
FOR Ol'FleAl USE ONLY
Ordeto of inetitutee
and eubunito of Ministry
of Power and Electrifica-
tion

&
Coneultation on oevoral
iteeo with 69108

[——

6
Formulation of two-
year plan for the
nanufacture of experi-
oental aodolo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ordoro of construction

and inatollotion truoto
6

Ordero of conatruction
and inetallation loin
adainiatrationa

i

For-ulation of coepooito
plan in Orsoneraootroy

6
Examination of coapoeite
plan by coeniooion of
Miniotry of Dover and

Electrification
&

Bxanination of coapooite

plan by GPTUS and approval
by annexe-ant of Hiniatry
of Pouor and Electrifica-

tion

e
Ibraulatioo of two-year
plane by client Iain ad-

-ainiatrationo for tho

aanufacture of experi-
aootal aodolo

_7

y
Pbraulation of two-
year plane by in-
otitutao and aub-
unite for the draft-
ing of project

docuaentation
‘ o o
Ioouance of plane to Iaeuance Iaeuanco of
aanufacturin; plento of ordera targeto for
i for the acientific-
Adoption of now Ianuiac- reooarcb
equip-ant turo of work
erpori-
aantal
nodola

Structure of For-ulation of Coapooite Plan for New Iquipnont

analyzing the effectivonooo of the adoption of new equipooot by coaploted

projecto (iteao);

vorhing out apccific propooalo for the oxteneive dieeeninatioo of advanced
experience on other conotruction projecto.

12

FOR OFF161AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ISIS ONLY

The advisability of including itens (capital construction and industry) in
the plan for new equipuent must be determined by a special con-ission made
up of appropriate representatives of institutes. to be designated by the
ministry‘s sanagenent.

The rapid resolution of all organizational problems dealt with in this
article will nuke it possible to substantially reduce the aaount of time
from the beginning of project planning through to the adoption of new equip-
sent in power construction.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Energiya". "Energeticheshoye eroitel'stvo", 1978

6855
680: 1822

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFICIAR. USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

UDc 553.94.00l.12
MIN mounts IN WING Tm: RAH MAW SASS 0? m can. INDUSTRY
Moscow SOVBTSIUWA cmwcm in Russien no 11, Nov 78 pp 14-21
(Article by V. P. cherepovekiy. Ministry of Geology of the USSR]

[Text] A great deal of ettentioe. wee devoted in "Mein trends of development
of the national scone-y of the USSR for 1976-1900“ to strengthening and
expending the fuel-energy base of the country. The structure of the fuel-
energy belence oust be improved and verious types of fuel out be efficiently
coebined for this (coel. shelee, water power and atomic energy oust be used
nore widely along with oil end gee). Further development of other branches
of industry, egrioulture end trensport depends on successful solution of this
most inportent problem.

Coel production should be increesed to 790-810 million tons in 1980 conpered
to 700 million tone in 1975 end prospecting for coking end energy ooel fields
must be intensified. especially in the European USSR. Open-pit coel nining
in the eestern regions of the country should be extensively orgenited during
the 10th rive-Year Pl'an end during subsequent years. It is planned to ecce-
lerate development of the Southern Yekutsk coel region end to organize opera-
tions for ecoelereted developnsnt of the Kansk-Achinsk fuel-mercy (Joule:
and core conplete development of the aribestue Basin to significently in-
crease the fuel-energy resources in the future. elong with development of
existing coal beeins -- the Denote. Kurnetsk. maqanda, Pechora and others.
In this reqerd a lerqe volume of production and scientific research work
must be cerried out. directed pri-srily towerd strengthening the nineral-
reer material base of the USSR end toward further iqroveunt of the methods
of prospecting to increase the efficiency of geologicel prospecting work

for coal. ‘

‘ihe reserve of proven fields created in all coel basins end coel-beering
regions of the country and of sections for construction of new coal enter-
prises in totel ensure the develop-mt of the coal industry planned for the
10th end future fivedyeer plans. At the use time one cennot but take into
account that the growth rates of coal mining during subsequent yeers will
increese even nore with expension of the sphere of its use. his deter-inns

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the need for accelerated construction of new coal enterprises in proven areas,
the nuber of which cannot meet the demands of developing industry in nest
basins. according to preliminary calculations. The nest significant gap
between the need for coal and the possibility of increasing mining of it is
expected in the mrcpern USSR and that for coking coal is expected in other
basins. In this regard it was planned to prepare a reserve of proVen sec-
tions in l97§-l980 for total capacity of 254 million tons. including 55.3
million tons of coking coal, and to confirm reserves in the amount of l3.6

billion tons of coal in the cm [state Comission on Mineral Resources) of
the USSR.

It should be noted that not enough was done during the first 2 years of the
current five-year plan due to irregular distribution of confirmed reserves
and due to an increase of proven capacities by years for the period 1976-
1980. therefore, fulfillment of the geological tasks in coal is the main
requirement for the closing years of the five-year plan.

High rates of geological prospecting operations are being uintained in the
Donate Basin during the 10th Five-Year Plan. It is planned to couplets ex-
plorations for coking coal in the outlying regions (the Southern Dcnbass).
where new industrial sections have already been determined. Work in the
eastern regions of the basin must be continued. where new promising areas
with high-quality anthracitee have been established during the past few
years, which will make it possible to significantly expand the raw material
base of this scarce fuel and also to intensify exploration and prospecting
for coking coal at deep horizons. _It is planned to prepare sections with
a total shaft capacity of more than 40 nillion tons.

Detailed prospecting of the large Usinsk field of matabitmainous coal for
construction of mines with a total capacity of 9 million tone is being
cowleted in the Pechora Basin. study of coal-bearing deposits on the
northeastern edge of the basin mt be continued here with regard to the
extremely limited possibilities of developing the mining of :oking and lean
agglomeration coal in the European USSR. Specifically. the prospects of the
deep horizons of the Vsrkhne-Syr'ysgin field of coking coal for more complete
geological-economic analysis of it should be refined and explorations for
hiﬁmly metamorphisized coal in regions adjacent to the Arctic Urals should
also be carried out. Exploration of an area to a dapth of 1.200 m containing
coal suitable for coking is feasible in the Verge-shor-Usinsk strip. Moreover,
geological-consrciel analysis of the gaseous coal reserves of the Pechore
series in the region of the Usinsk megasyncline must be carried out during
the next few years. Despite its high ash content. this coal is distinguished
by hi9: heat of coslmstion (9" of 23.000-25.000 ltd/kg) and can be widely
used in power engineering.

The possibilities of increasing coal mining have been essentially exhausted
in the Moscow Basin. Fields with coal seams of reduced sulfur content lying

at depths up to 150 II have been mainly depleted. Preparation of those sec-
ticns in whid: the quality of coal and mining-geological conditions will be

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

similar to exploitable conditions is required to neintain the level of mining
achieved (epproxieately 35 million tons). Construction of deeper nines due
to low-quality coal and snail sire veins is not yet feasible.

me coal reserves in other well-known basins of the European part of the
country -- Dneprovsk. L'vov-Volyn' end in the Dale - are also lisited.
Only the northern regions. where lower Carboniferous. Persian and partially
Jurassic deposits, still studied extremely weakly. are developed. are
apparently more practising for determining new payable coal-bearing areas.
Further study of Jurassic coal-bearing sedimnts is planned on the eastern
edge of the Urals, but establishment of a sharp subsidence of then toward
the Host Siberian lowland linite the possibility of determining fields for
strip mining. ‘lhe most promising for nesting the needs of the Urels for
energy fuel. except the zkibastur field. are the fields of the forgay Basin
in Kazakhstan. It is planned to coqlete study of fields. economically sore
favorable for dovelopeent. in these regions during the current five-year
plan.

The nest rapid solution of the problem of deep concentration and cornercial
use or hiya-ash coal is of inortant significance to increase the reserves
of tho coking coal of the Karaganda Basin.

It is' planned to increase coal lining free 130 to 160 lillion tons throughout
the Kurnetek Basin during the 10th Five-Year Plan. The plan provides for
an increase in the values of the geological prospecting work Iainly to
study regions proeising to determine scarce reserves of coking coal. The
nest interesting in this regard is the southeastern part of the besin.’slhsre
wide distribution of coking and lean caking coal is assusd along the wick
veins of the Upper nalakhon tornation. lying at depths fro- 300 to 1.000 s.
Overlepped by red: of the Xurnetsk and younger for-etions. they are very
prcaising for determination of significant resources of scarce coking coal.
The coal of the lower Belehhon retention on the southwestern edge of the
basin (the nererovo field) also Isrit attention. It is planned to continue
operations during the 10th rive-Year Plan to develop a reserve of large
sections with estabituinous coking coal and to detereine and procpect for
new fields for strip lining. It is planned to prepare sections for con-
struction of nining enterprises with a capacity of d9 aillion tons in the
Kurbass. which will provide significant develop-snt of coal in this basin
with regard to the existing reserves of prepared sections.

Geological prospecting work in this direction with regard to the planned
growth of coal raining rates should be intensified in the Kansk-nchinek and
Irkutsk basins of eastern Siberia. depsite the significant reserve of proven
fields for strip nining. Exploration of new fields for strip nining under
favorable geographic conditions and also sore careful study of the quality
of coal and the acccwanying einerals are ecooqlished for these purposes.
The resources and technological properties of caking coel of Sayano-
Partiranskiy Rayon of the Nanak-Minsk Basin nust be sore dependably ana-
lysed.

16

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Especially isportant attention should be devoted to investigations on the
complex use of Iinerals: refining of hydrogeneous co‘, the use of waste
gases in the chenicel industry. liquid fuel production technology and so on.

a number of timely problems on expansion of the mineral-raw material resources
of the Arctic regions of siberia and the Par Best is advanced by construction
of the mksl-Amur Mainline Railroad. One of the first large objects planned
for industrial development in the 8M region is the Southern Yakutsk Basin.
The need for its high-quality coking coal is high. Fulfillment of the plan
on an increase of the proven reserves in the Southern Yakutsk Basin is re-
lated to great difficulties due to the low coal density and unexposed coal-
bearing content. In this regard a significant increase in the volumes of
geological prospecting work to refine the prospects of the basin and to
determine large fields in nldsno-chul'eanskiy and other rayons, more acces-
sible for development. is provided here in this regard. New sections for
mining enterprises with a total capacity of 6 million tone will be explored
during the five-year plan.

A tense situation with fuel resources has developed in the southern regions
of the Far East with regard to depletion of the Raychikhinskcye lignite

field -- the Min supplier of energy coal. The hydrogenous coal proven during
the past few years in Murskaya Oblast (Svobodnoye and Sergeyevskoye
fields for strip mining) have both lower economic and qualitative indicators
conpared to the aaychihhinskoye field. ‘i‘herefore. continuation of wide
exploration for new cool fields in hmurekaya (blast and Khabarovskiy and
Primorskiy krays renains one of the main tasks of geologists during the

10th rive-Year Plan. Special attention should also he devoted in this case
to regions adjacent to the am which have still been little studied geologi-
cally. We note that the promising Lianskoye coal field. exploration of which
is planned for completion prior to 1980. has already been discovered in
khabarovskiy Kray inediately near the am route.

here are essentially no adequate reserves of proven fields for development
of lining on Sakhalin. Almst all the fields developed here are distinguished by
a oosplex geological structure and mining of then is related to high
material expenditures. Moreover, one of the largest fields of high-quality
energy coal on Southern Sakhalin -- Gornoravodskcye (Nevel'skoye) -- has
been underexplored up to the present time and has not been prepared for
design of a larger mining enterprise. Couplers exploration of this field
will significantly isprove the fuel-energy base of Sakhalinskays (blast.
Along with couplets exploration of the industrially developed fields of
Sakhalin. it is feasible during the next few years to begin exploration

of adjacent well-known coal-bearing areas to create a reserve for construc-
tion of new modern sining enterprises.

The forecasted estimate of coal reserves in the (158R, made in 1968. indicates

the cowatively limited possibilities of sharp expansion of the coal-

bearing areas with coking coal in exploited basins. the problem of intensi-

fying geological prospecting in scientific research work to study new basins
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prosising for determination of large technological coal fields. especially
scarce coal -- coking and lean caking. is present in this regard. The exis-
ting need of industry for these types of coal during the next few years and

primarily to support the European part of the country cannot be satisfied
without creation of new raw material bases.

One may conclude on the basis of the cospleted investigations that determina-
tion of large reserves of coking coal is possible only in the northern basins
of the country, of which the most promising is the Taymyr, located in the
iseediate vicinity of the Northern Sea Route. The Pyasinskoye field located
in the lower course of the Pyasina River. navigable for ocean-going ships.
should primarily be studied here. The predicted reserves of prisarily
coking and lean caking coal only to a depth of 600 s cosprise sore than

1 billion tons, and throughout the westem part of the basin as a mole

they conprise 5 billion tons. Additional investigations of 1.09! (Leningrad
Oblsst Pedagogical Institute] of the USSR Academy of Sciences and of 16!
[Institute of liineral fuels] of the Ministry of the Coal Industry of the
USSR. carried out in ”74-1976. confirm the presence of coking coal here.

It is feasible for the Krasnoyersk Geological Administration to provide
drilling of two-three lines of boreholes in the Pyasinskoye field during the
current five-year plan in order to obtain dependable data on the quality of
the coal and of its prospects. aploration to determine coking coals and
estimates of thee in the Mguss. hens and zyryansk basins should also be
continued.

It is planned to expand work to analyse the resources of fuel shalee, study
of which was restricted for a long tine only to industrially developed
regions of the Baltic area, with regard to the enormom significance of all
types of fuel for development of the national economy of the country. the
main task of these investigations should be to determine the possibility of
revealing large fields of fuel shalee in shale-bearing formations of the
Phanerosoic on the territory of the country.

A large couples of scientific research work for further isprwemsnt of the
methods of study. search and exploration of fields to increase their effi-
ciency and quality and also to increase the dependability of data must be
carried out for successful fulfillment of the decisions of the 25th CPS!)
Congress.

Attention sust be concentrated in the following main directions in the
field of science.

Development of the fundamentals of this study. which is the theoretical
foundation of a ccsplex of search and prospecting for solid fuel minerals.
should be continued in the field of study of coal-bearing formations. All
stages of geological study, search. exploration and exploitation of coal
basins and fields should be based on cmcepts of coal'bsaring formations.
The main task of study of the latter in general for: is to determine and

18

P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

refine the regularities of location, conditions of formation, the history
of development and all subsequent changes. this problem can be formulated
more concretely as determination of the conditions of formation and variation
of coal sears. their peregenesis with country rock and to deter-nine the
principles of arrangement in space and time. Understanding these principles
makes it possible to predict the coal-bearing content, the behavior of the
coal scans and variation of the properties of coal on a sound basis in
genetically different types of coal-bearing formations. Investigations

must be continued to isprove the methods of lithological-facial and forma-
tion analysis, methods of studying the structures of fields, conditions of
formation and transformation of organic matter, physical, chemical and
technological methods of investigating coal and fuel shales and more atten-
tion should be devoted to working out the genetic and geological-industrial
classification of solid fuel minerals and to establishing the regularity of
arrangement of peat, coal and fuel shale fields.

There are important advances in investigation of the coal-bearing foraations
in the USSR: the slain principles of their structure and conditions of forma-
tion have been established and the real cosposition and quality of coal of
the main basins has been studied in general form by methods of coal petro-
graphy and coal chesistry: the regularity of the manifestation of regional
coal metamorphism and the epigenesis of country rock have been established
with high reliability and the principles of developssnt of folding and
faults and the forms of manifestation of nagnatism, clearly zonal in nature,
have been studied; several schemes for classification of coal-bearing depo-
sits, basins and fields have been proposed and the fundamentals of genetic
classification of coal-bearing formations by a cosplex of genetically re-
lated features have been worked out.

n. achievements of Soviet coal geology made it possible to lay the scienti-
fic bases for couple): formation analysis of coal-bearing passes in which the
paragenetic relationships between the main genetic features of coal-bearing
formations are used; thickness, phase composition, evenness, coal-bearing
content. the metasorphism of coal and the epigenesis of country rock, tecto-
nice and magratism. Taking into account and using the variations of these
features are the basis for developing methods of exploration and scientifi-
cally based prediction of the coal-bearing nature both by area and by depth.
1he term "formation” is understood in most cases abroad as formation. series
and other stratigraphic subdivisions and does not include the concept of
formations as regularly structured geological bodies, accepted by most
Soviet coal geologists.

"owner. there are still many debatable and unresolved questions in all
fields of coal geology. Specifically, there is no generally accepted
definition of the concept ”coal-bearing formation.“ The phase cospoeition
of coal-bearing deposits is frequently determined subjectively and contra-
dictorily due to the absence of a generally accepted method of lithological-
phase analysis: much has not yet been tied together in the understanding of
evenness (cyclicity) of coal-bearing masses and in establishing the quanti-
tative relationships of it to coal-bearing content, which plays a primary

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

role in predicting the latter. Sosa problem of the phenonenon of coal
metamorphism, the role of one or another factors (pressure. tins and so on)
are unclear. All these and other unresolved problens in the field of coal
geology require further, sore extensive study.

Investigations to determine the optimal density of the exploration network

in specific geological-industrial regions of the main basins of the USSR
should be intensified in the field of search and exploration methods. Hany
problems in the field of exploration of coal fields met be solved. as is
said, not so much in words as in skill. Unfortunately. geological prospec-
ting organizations in sons cases proceed along the path of extreme constric-
tion of the borehole systen and an increase of the voluaes of drilling and
laboratory investigations without inadequate basis for this. In this regard
scientific jmtificaticn of the density of the network at each stage of the
geological prospecting process is prinarily required with regard to obtaining
sufficient intonation about the geological structure and the lining-geologi-
cal conditions of fields.

he before. the coin thing in solution of the indicated problems reaains
drilling boreholes -- a method wines resolution is very low. it correct
this situation, serious measures lust be imlensnted on technical reequip-
ping of drilling operations for a sharp increase of the sinking rate and to
increase the yield of the core by the sineral. Horeovsr, the method of
conducting geological prospecting operations for solid fuel minerals nust
be essentially improved and introduction of the latest advances of geophysi-
cal. nuclear. electronic and mute: technology met be accelerated.

One of the cost inortant problees of prospecting coal fields is timely
prediction and establishing fault disturbances in coal fields 'for optim-
planning of ruining operations using hiﬁlly efficient aachmized eguipnmt.

The exploration ccqles, uhich includes drilling of boreholes and investiga-
tion of then by geophysical methods (logging). does not now provide deter-ina-
tion of disturbances with anlituds less than 15-20 I. which caprise a sig-
nificant fraction of all the disjunctive upsets encomtsred in the nine
field.

Geological data on the dislocation of veins acquire very isportant signifi-
cance at the modern stage since the veins of almst all coal basins are sub-
ject to this process. Widely distributed snall faults (with aaplitm less
than 10 n) are essentially not deternined even with significant concentra-
tion of boreholes. ‘mis is explained by the fact that they are located
beyond the range of resolution of the test borehole nebvork. lov-asplitude
displacenente remain \mdeternined even on the drilling lines of so-callsd
reference profiles. Geophysical investigations nust surpass geological
prospecting work and must be widely utilized (smcially seisnic radioscopy.
radar nethode and so on) during the period of turning over prinary sections
for operation and exploitation.

There is a need to develop essentially new methods of prospecting and con-
version fron study of single points to study of an area by volmetric, three-

2"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dimensional methods. me problem of illuminating the interborehole and
near-borehole space is extremely isportant. In this regard investigations
must be continued on further improvement of prospecting methods, being
oriented mainly toward geophysics. The oktyabr' Branch of VNIIgeofisika
[All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Geophysics] in the Kuznetsk
Basin has begun working out methods of seismic prospecting to determine and
trace faults of coal seams in the interborehole space and in mines. Pre-
liminary data indicate the high potential capabilities of geophysical methods
in increasing the information content of prospecting date. However, problems
of predicting tectonic displacement during exploration have still not been
clearly resolved. DonbassNZL [Donbass Scientific Research Laboratory),
VNIIgeofizika and production administrations must intensify scientific
research in this field in order to work out dependable procedures and hard-
ware which permit an increase of the dependability of determining vein dis-
placements during prospecting.

Attention has now been intensified toward comlex development of fields and
isplemsntation of environmental protection measures. Complex coal and

shale refining made it possible to organize industrial production of valuable
chemical try-products. However, only 60 percent of the resources of by-produc
components contained in coal is now being developed (for exasple, only 0.5
percent of the sulfur is utilized). Methane resources are now taken into
account primarily by coal mining enterprises. more is a need for sore ex-
tensive study and analysis of the resources of this gas, specifically, the
objects of study may become gas-coal (medians-coal) fields. Utilization

of lay-product methane will be helpful in the struggle for gasification of
the mines and will help to improve working conditions.

Investigations to determine the regularities of variation of the material
composition and metamorphism, which determine in the final analysis the
properties of the extracted fuel, must be intensifim in the area of studying
the quality of coal and fuel shales. A leg in study of the material and
chemical compositiOn and also of the technological properties of coal delays
solution of the problem of the interchangeability of coal of one basin with
that of another.

Requirements on energy coal for powdered burning in the cesbustion cheaters
of large boiler units where impurities of easily sublimated cospounds of
alkali metals have a harmful effect, have increased. Study of the material
cosposition of this coal must be carried out at the modern level with re-
gard to the need to solve an entire complex of problems related to that of
utilization of highly mineralized waters and the use of coal of unusual

composition. An examle of this coupler study is the aogdanmkoye field
in the Donbass.

Inprovemsnt of the methods of determining the optimum complex and volume of
sapling and study of fuel minerals, which ensure receipt of the universal
characteristics of their quality and all possible directions of use, should
be continued at all stages of geological operations.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Efforts must be concentrated in the field of studying mining-geological
conditions on iuproving the methods and technology of gas sampling since
the effectiveness of investigations of the natural gas-bearing content of
coal seams is still low. Up to so percent of the samples are not rejected
because of their nonrepresentative nature due to the imperfection of the
hardware and methods. As a result the characteristics of the gas-bearing
content of coal seams by area and depth are of little value in some cases.

Along with isprcving the existing methods of predicting the gas-bearing
content of coal fields and the stability of country rock. special attention
should be devoted to development of methods of predicting the blowout danger
of rock and coal by geological prospecting data. improvement of existing and
development of new hardware for study of gas-bearing capacity.

New, more effective methods of studying the physicomechanical properties of
rock, the geothermal regimes of future mines. hydrogeological conditions and
the direction of using the water of coal fields must be developed.

Introduction of new methods of studying the borehole profile and interbore-
hole space, detailed lithological division of profiles. determination of the
coal cowlex and the physicomachanical properties of country rock. determina-
tion of low-amplitude displacement, disintegration and washout of coal seams
must be provided in the field of geophysical investigations. Work to intro-
duce methods of field geophysics (seismic, gravimetric. electronic and mag-
netic prospecting) with the use of their results at all stages of geological
operations -- from determination of new fields to refinement of the struc-
tural details of the mine field or section -- should be sharply intensified.

The complex of geological-geophysical methods of prospecting to increase
the completeness and dependability of investigations. primarily on forecas-
ting displacements of coal seams. study of the morphology of seam, the gas-
bearing capacity and blowout danger of coal and also of country rock must
be further isproved and measures to increase the geological and economic
effectiveness of coal operations must be developed, specifically. the reso-
lution of exploration methods now used.

This is far from a couplets list of the problems faced by coal geology.

Unanimity of science and practice is required new as never before. In this
regard I would like to turn special attention to the need for extensive
study of the enormous factual materials at the disposal of the science of
exploration practice. The science of coal cannot be successfully developed
without relying on this richest information which requires deep analysis.
However, preliminary processing of incoming materials and core sasples are
poorly accomplished in some cases, which leads to a loss of valuable infor-
mation which permits one to recognize and decipher many natural phenomena.
Deep geological interpretation of logging diagrams and a coupler approach
to analysis of primary input materials are required to correct this situa-
tion. We are talking about joint geological-geophysical documentation and
about costining the efforts of geologists and geophysicists and their methods
to obtain the maxim information.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Search-exploratory operations for coal can in turn not be effective if the
specific principles of tomation and epatiai arrangement o! auch diverea
coal fields in their etructuro are not taken into account and if progreeeiva
aothode of e'Xpioration and the latent hardware which contribute to an in-

crease of th'e 'level a! geological proepecting and acientific reeearch work
are not utilized in daily practice.

mo teak posed by the 25th CPSU Congraae for a aiqnificant increaee of fuel-
energy roaouroee will be eolvod eucceeetully. his will be a weighty con-
tribution of nining geologists to atrengthening and development or the
nineral-iaw Iaterial baee of the country.

COPYRIGHT: lrdatel'atvo “Nedra'. "Sovetekaya qeoloqiya", 1978

6521
C80: 1822

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND REMTED EQUII'NSNT

00C 553.982.2(57l.5)

PROSPECTS OF THE OIL- AND GAS-BPJUUMS CAPACITY OF cannon"; DEPOSITS 0? THE
SIBERIAN FLAVOR”

Hoecow SOVBTSMYA ctomcm in Mulen ho ll. Nov 78 pp 22-34
(Article by A. V. Ovcharenko. Ministry of Geology of the men]

(hut! The Siberian Plattorl say in the future Deco-e a new large base or
the petrolewl and gen induetxy. Gan fields have been discovered here within
the boundary Henozoio depreuiona of the Yoniaey-xhatanga trough and the
Vilyuyek eynecline. ‘l'he Meaoroic-Upper Paleozoic terrigeneoul depoaita are
mainly productive.

Poeitivo reoulte have been achieved during the pest :ew year. along the
‘Nngusueyn cmcliae and the Nepeko-ootuohinehaya antealice. 'lheir area
cowrieeo nore than one-third of all the pronieing lands of the Siberian
Nation and the profile canal-ta of primarily carbonate dapoeite or the
late Riphean and tower Peleoloio.

Several mall oil and gas tielde -- Suhho-‘Nnguukoye. hithneletninekoye
and Volodinakoye -- havo been diecovnrud in the Mgunakuye aynccliee within
the Kureyeko-utninokiy arch. the “in hydrocarbon depoeita are conﬁned
to cracked dolomite. or the Lower Canhrian.

Oil and gas inflow. (ro- dolo-itee of Mphean age have been found in the
eouthern part or the Mmekayeeynecliae in the Win-ken area. A note
cowlete profile of lower Paleozoic depoeitn he: been revealed in the eastern
perte of the Mguokaye eynecliae o! the Vanaverekaya parentric well and

I peytble oil inflow hae been found in thie well fro- the undo or me
Motekaya rotation.

however. the coat nignificant geological reeulte have been obtainod ulong
the Nepoko-aotuohinakaya antocliae, within which the Srednebotuobinnkaye,
Verkhnevilyuchanokoye and Vilmak-Dtherhinekoye gen fields and aleo the
nukovnkoye, Yaraktinakoye and Ayah-hove gas-oil iielda have been diecovered
in the Yehutekaye assn and Irkutakaya able-t.

2‘
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁrm! damn Mud

Figure 1. 011- and Gal-Bearing Capacity of Carbonate cowlem

of Siberian nation: 1 -- gee-on fieide in carbonate
coQiex I: 2 .- gee field. in carbonate ooqlex 1:

oil and gae uniteetationa: 3 -- in eagles I: 4 -- in
toque: m 5 -- in mm In. 6 -- in m1“ Na
boundaries: 7 -- o! Siberian Platter-m 8 - o! largeat
atmcturee of aedinentary auntie eleaente: 9 -- of main
arched uplilte: 10 -- eeotione of the abeenoe of a «di-
nentary mantle: the figurea on the chart are the nain
arched up1itte: 1 -- ltanovekoye: 2 -- Vanavarakoyo:

3 -- nepekoye: 4 -- burninekoyea 5 -- Suntankoye:

6 -- Iliqeyakoyea 1 -- Chun'ekoyu e -- Gumekoye;

9 -- Iakhtinekoye; 10 ~- Surinqdakonekovye; 11 --
Kochochmkoye: 12 -- Yukteniyekoye: 13 - Aymkoye:
14 -- udyanekoye: 15 -- Olenakekoye: 16 -- mm

1. Yenieay-Khatanga mm 7. Vilmak aynec1iee

2. Leno-Anabel: trough 8. Priaayano-Yenieeyekaya em—
3. WORIYI eynecliae cliee

4. Anabarekeya antecliee 9. Nepeko-aotuobinekeya antecliae
5. Priverkhoyanek trough 10. Amara-lane terrace

6. Voetodmo-Yenieey terrace 25 11. Aidanakeya antecliee

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The main gas and oil depoeite in all the enumerated tielde are confined to
eandetonee of the lower Camden. Wendian and Ripheen. lying at the bane of
the eedinentery mantle. No eigniiicant depoeite were determined in the car-
bonato profile, the traction of mid: mprieee approxieately 80 percent of
the entire thickneee o! the eedieentery nantle (LOGO-2.500 e). eince geolo-
gical proepecting work was primarily oriented toward lower Paleoeoic end
Hendian-Riphean terrineneoue dapoeita.

However, geological data have appeared during the past few years which pernit
a higher eetinate or the proepecte of the oil- end gee-bearing capacity of
tho carbonate profile of the Siberian Platform. It won eetabliehed that the
Hendian-Ripheen end lower Cambrian carbonate depoeite of the eedil-ntary
mantle are univereally devaloped. hey are a thick eaee o! lieeetonee end
dolomitee which alternate with eelt benchee expoeed over the entire area of
the platform.

The carbonate rock in regionally oil- end gee-bearing (Figure 1). oil end
gee features end treguently inflowe of then were ueually noted directly under
salt-bearing etreeke which eerve ae dependable covere. Local oil- and gee-
accumlation eonee are eoaetieee controlled by etreake or other denee rock
-- ergillaceoue lineetonee end dolouitee. eeperete leneee of gypem. anhy-
dritea or ealte. Stratigraphic depoeite are known where ergillaceoue rock
playe the role of a ehield.

Four 011- and gee-bearing coeplexee can be dietinguiehed in the carbonate
protilo of the Siberian Plattore (ﬁgure 2). The propagation characterie-
tice or there coeplexee caueed by each other indicate eeveral independent
~;cles of oil and gee (creation and oil and gee eccueulation to which the
carbonate fomtione included between regional oil and gee berriere corre-

epond.

The most ancient oil- and gee-bearing coeplex 1 ie repreeented by Ripheen-
lower Cambrian carbonate dopoeite and terrigeuow. rwk in also found among
then on eectione of inteneive domwarping. thie couple): ie ehieldod on the
entire Siberian Platter. by e lSO-Ieter eelt bench in the upper part of the
erl'ekaya (creation of the lower Cambrian.

Poroue-crecked dolomitee and lieeetcnee of Riphean age. expoeed by deep
boreholes only in the Xuyubinehoye field. are depoeited at the baee of the
couplex. A rather coupler etructure of a Riphean productive naee hae been
eetabliehed here in which eeveral oil and gee poole are included. Judging
by the poeition of the wateroil and oil-gee eectione in the profile. the
poole are hydrodynaeicelly unrelated to each other, which indicatee the
preeence of etreahe o! denee leper-able rock between then which fulfill
the role or local oil and gee barriere.

uphean lineatonee and dole-itee of the Kuyubinehoye fiend are dietinguiehed
by a couple: etructure of porous epace. he indicated t; eanpling remake.
the yielde oi individual welle differ char-ply tro- eath other. Productive
horizons eeeentielly do not correlate even in adjacent welle.

26
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ IWPIMM. USE ONLY

    
   
  
 
 

:3
8

13'! V

II
l‘

[in
{$1
£3.35:

jlﬂm
E 3
mg.
9E3
I95g
:3;

=1: 3 , 2:".
=5? ' iii -‘LL Wm" 9.92
( :Tia:"':: u I '1. Lu- (25 m =—;
2 . 1:18.21! “ﬁght". =_:-':

5.35 1913:. (33 ' E:— (RGE E's-5;“
.: i an ““
5-... : :‘L— ,‘.,‘.-h_-_*:n_. (32 __
52g 399% (no :1“ is
m..- :35: :——: -=
5": ~ 3—:_ 3% -17};
7'3 E 1«=*‘::.;—57s E52
5-: a Eu E
5—3 m" 3351": m 1!!!
5—___ g __ (35 “9-1.- .232“;

=== .235 ”.m "‘--"I_-: l

:__—: ‘g 5.1.: *‘AW‘. ,-=-_-.-.:.
-_"= 43.—-= : 5—2: '3 -==-
:r'" Lin: (‘3 r ”1:3 EE-EE
“° 55? 2:": ”4-5-1: «6 LEE
1‘ =-_-=—' 5;: 3: -—— . 2::

‘ " 3 4 2:2 at a: E:

U
.-
Q.

Pique 2. mutton Diagram of Pronu- of Cuban-to «pout.
of smart.» Platform 1 -- on- And qua-boating
mutton“; 2 - lmcmu 3 -- dolomite-a d -

1. kaiy Rayon 14. Mguskayt and ucvtnw
2. madam-my myon 15. Anguukuyu and utvtnw
3. Irkutsk muchuur 16. monotony

L Souﬂmoum Yakuuya 17. uncanny.

S. Syn.“ 18. Bony-xiv

6. ton-nation 19. Bunyan”

7. ﬂortwn 20. Muddy

8. analogical comm 21. Bil'chtukuyc

9. on- and gas-boating cowl“ 22. Ichonml

10. autumn 23. Belay-my.

n. Many-Ray: 24. Birkmkiy

12. Vorldmumluyu 25. Chas-kw:

13. Vcrnuuluukay- 26. Oink-Inch”

continued on {alluring par)

27
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V0" OFFICIAL USE ONLY

27. Cambrian 38. Oeinekiy

28. Kcetinekaye 39. Yuryakhekiy

29. Bel'ekeya 40. Riphean-Hendian-Caabrian
30. Bel’ekaye 41. Platonovekaye

31. Atovekiy 42. Hotakaya

32. 'nolbachanakeye 43. Hotekaya

33. lthrietoforcvekiy 44. Uet‘kutekiy

34. Uecl'ekaya 45. Preobrethenekiy

35. erl'ekaya 06. Tinncvekaya

36. Oeinekiy 47. Ripheen

37. Ynyedeyekaye

Carbonate depoeite of the Notekaya formation of the bower Canbrien are de-
poeited within the myuﬁinekcye field directly on Riphean lineetonee and
dolonitee with eiqnificant interruption in the eedinentary eccmlaticn.
rotation of an independent oil- and gee-bearing coeplen controlled by
hotekeya claye and ergillitee. ie poaeible in the lower carbonate naea of
the Riphean in the part of the Siberian Platform where terrigenecue depoeite
are maintained in it.

Carbonate rock of the hotelzaya fornticn. revealed in the myunbinekoye
field directly above Riphean foreaticne. are followed over the entire re-
aaining territory of the Siberian Platform In this caee their maxim
thicxneee (300-000 a) coincidee with acnea of inteneive eedinent accmla-
ticn (the central garte cf the hn'gara-una bench of the PriaayanoYenieey
aynecliee). Reduced thickneeeee cf thie nee (120-170 a) have been eate-
bliehod in the nore uplifted eectione of the Nepekiy and neovekiy archee.

The carbonate depceita of the hotekaya formation are oietinquiehed by re-
gional cil- and gee-bearing content. Oil and gee inflcwe of different

inteneity were obeerved in practically all drilled walla in the northern
part of the momkaya aynecliee within the mreyeho-letninekiy rampart

when they were erpoeed.

M productive bode have been determined in the central part of the Nepekiy
arch in the carbonate depoeite of thie formation. ‘lbe Preobradtenekiy
horinon. from which a can inflow with a yield of 62,000 ﬁlm and a anall
quantity of oil have been produced in an area of Irkutekaye Obleet of the
eeme name. hee been determined in the central part of the formation. A
payable gee inflow could be produced from then only after hydraulic-acid
treatment.

The Dev-Rut horizon hae been determined in the upper part of the hotakaya
formation in the Precbrathenekeye area. A on inflow with a yield up to
7.000 n3/day and an oil inflow up to 1.8 t/day were obtained upon euplinq
of it. all and gee featuree were elec noted in the Herkcvakaye and vet‘-
Kntekeya areas.

he greeteet meter of oil and gee manifeetatione and elec of hydrocarbon ~
poole in the lower carbonate ccqlex in confined to the necl’ekaye formation.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Coelperetively thin bunches of rock salt. With performs the role of e shield
for the Preobreehenekiy end Uet'-Kutskiy productive horizons lying below,
hevo been estebliehed in sone arses at its base. In those locations where
it is ebsent, feetures of oil- and gss-beering content in the upper port of
the Hotskeye formation hove not been established.

oil and gee ere found primarily in the lower port of the Usol'skeye formation
consisting of e lOO-lSO-neter thickness of cerbonete rock. 'No productive
horizons -- the Yuryekhskiy end Osinekiy -- heve been determined here. The
Yuryekhekiy horizon hes been esteblished only in the northsestern part of
the Nepsko-Botuobinskeye entecliso in the Verkhnevilyuchenskeye aree end
consists primarily of dolomites end doloeitized linestones epproxinstoly

20 a thick. Geo ihnowe with yield up to 120,000 u3/day were obteined when
they were sespled end insignificant inflows of gssified oil were also noted
together with gee in sous coses.

me Yuryekhekiy horizon is shielded by e master bench of strongly ergilla-
ceous linestones, ebove which gas-setursted porous-cevernous-crecked line-
stones end dole-ites of tho Osinskiy horizon are primarily deposited.
Lithologicelly, both horizons do not essentielly differ from oed: other

end the bench of ergillecoous liusotones sopereting then is not distributed
everywhere: therefore. tho horizon eey be regerdod es the lowest pert of the
Osinskiy oil- end ges-beering horizon found on the entire territory of tho
Siberian Pletforu.

Corbonate deposits of the Osinskiy horizon ere located directly under e
thick selt-beering me on the greeter pert of the pletforn, vhich provides
dependable isoletion of the oil end gee pools formed in the cerbonete rock.
the nature of the collectors is coupler and porous-crooked end cracked-
porous-cevernous typos predominete. Individual streeks or lenses of in-
creeeed cepecity are uouslly distributed enong oreckod cerbonete rock with
low porosity, as a result of vhich the productivity of productive vells
frequently does not correspond to dots of field geophysics or core sapling.

Considereblo improvelont of the collector properties of productive deposits
in the zone of tectonic displscenents end elso in sections of developoent
of orgenogenic end equifer liuotonos among cerbonste rock of the Oeinskiy
horizon hes been esteblished by drilled wells. The letter indicates the

possible presence of riphogenic systems in the carbonate deposits of the
Siberian Pletforn.

The greatest nutter of oil end gee nenifeststions in deposits of the
Oeinskiy horizon we: noted in the territory of Irkutekeye (bidet. This
is roleted to the large volumes of drilling oporetione cerriod out here.
Whereas the Osinekiy horizon has been topped by lore then 300 wells in
Irkutskeye Oblest. the ni-ber of these wells colprises $6 and J2. respot~
tively. on the territory of the Yekutsheye ASSR end Kresnoyerskiy Krey.

Host deep vells which expose cerbonete depoeite of the Osinehiy horizon hove
been drilled in the herkovskoye field. Oil inflows with e yield free severel

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

tens of liters to 306 t/day have been obtained in 16 of then. Many investi-
gators explain these differences in yields by the wide range of variation

of the collector properties of the productive nass. however, such factors

as the effect of flushing fluids and methods of tapping and saspling on the
filtration properties of productive beds are not taken into account to the
proper extent in this case. At the ease time work' carried out during the
past few years at Yakutneftegesrazvedka and Krasnoyarskneftegasrazvedka
trusts to establish the potential capacities of the collector beds under
optieun conditions of tapping end sanpling of then showed that the enmerated
factors considerably affect the productivity of the wells.

Payable oil and gas inflows free the Osinskiy horizon were also found in the
Ilinskaya, Potapovskaya, Atovska-Js, Khristoforovskaya. Osinskaya and other
areas. Confineeent of oil and gas pools to local uplifta is typical for
all of thee. Bede of increased capacity have been determined among cracked
rock in tapped profiles of the Osinskiy horison and their thickness and

porosity increase toward the arch.

A gusher inflow of gas with a yield of lore than 1eo,ooo Ia/day has been
obtained from carbonates of the Usol'skaya forution in the Irkutsk area.
located in the southern. more developed part of the oblast. Search-explora-
tion operations carried out previously for terrigeneous deposits of the
Hotskaya formation did not yield positive results since the latter do not
contain oil and gas pools with regard to the significant flmhing of the
profile.

here are far fever data on the oil- and gas-bearing content of the Osinskiy
horizon in Krasnoyarskiy Kray. However, this circustance. as already noted
previously, does not indicate in any way the lower prospects of oil- and
gas-bearing content of the described pass in the given region. Profiles

of Casbrian carbonate deposits for individual wells are rather clearly
correlated with rock of the Irkutsk alphitheater of the sale age. Several
promising carbonate lessee have also been deter-ined in than which are
controlled by thick regional oil and gas barriers consisting of salt-
bearing formations.

As indicated by sampling results. there is porous rock favorable for oil and
gas accunulation in the Osinskiy horizon. a stratal water inflow with a
yield above 50 n3/day has been found in the Tsyninskaya parametric well
upon testing of lieestones of Osinekiy horizon. a characteristic feature
of the profile of the Usol'skaya for-ation within the Priseyano-Yenisey
syneclise is light gasified oil saturation of li-eatones of the Osinskiy
horizon (the Sutysginakaya well).

The payable gas content of the Osinskiy horizon has also been established in
the eastern part of the Nepeko-Dotuobinskiy anteclise in Yakutiya. Porous-
cavernous type collectors are widely developed here in the Srednabotuobinekcye
gas field. hey are represented by limestones for-ad as a result of re-
crystallisation of priaary dole-itee and replacement of lissstones and also

30
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organogenio limestonos with lixiviation cavities and caverns. Gas inflows
of different intensity have been found upon swling of them. The mim-
yield was 200.000 e3/day, but the inflows were nonpayable in nest wells.

Carbonate-halogen deposits of the Bel'skaya formation are located above the
Usol’skaya foreation which form the oil- and gas-bearing coupler II. The
fonation is divided into three subformetions -- lower. Iaiddle and upper --
by.lithological features. The lower and middle eubfornatione consist pri-
narily of carbonate rook up to 400 m thick. They include the main produc-
tive horizons of this coaplex. halogen-sulfate formations of the Upper
Bel'skaya stbfornations are noted above which serve as a regional oil and
gas barrier. This structure of the Bel'sksya fornation is maintained in
practically the entire Siberian Platform. Its analog in Yakutiya is called
the Talbadnenekaya formation and the upper part of the Kostinskaya fornation
corresponds to it in 'Nrukhanskiy Rayon of Krasnoyarskiy Kray.

Deposits of the Bel'skaya formation have been studied more in lrkutskaya
Oblast. M productive horizons have been determined in its lover part
here. The lower khristoforovskiy horizon is located directly at the base
of the formation and consists mainly of dolomitos with sparse linestone
streaks. Its thickness is usually 50-60 I and is q: to 140-150 m in the
northwestern part of the Irkutsk awhitheater. The Khristoforovskiy
horizon is shielded by carbonate rock which. unlike the productive profile.
is less cracked and more argillired.

The oil- and gas-bearing content of the horizon was first established in

the khristoforovskaya area. where intensive degaeification of the clay lid
with periodic oil discharges was noted upon tapping of it and a weak oil

and gas inflow was obtained upon sapling. Superficial oil and gas mani-
festations upon tapping of this horizon were also noted in the Balykhtinskaya.
Uat'-Kutskaya, herkovskaya. Verkhnetirsksya, Kasatkinekaya and other areas.
Tapping was accoapanied in many cases by intensive absorption of the clay

mud. which indicates the presence of porous beds.

The Atovskiy productive horizon consisting of dolomites and limestones

up to 45 m thick was determined in the roof part of the carbonate profile
of the Bel'skaya formation directly under the halogen formations. The
secondary pores formed in carbonate rock as a result of their lixivistion
and sulphatirstion comprised the main capacity of the productive profile.
noreover. high porom intervals have been established in different parts

of the productive mass in the profile of the horizon. Their total thickness
increases in the arched parts of local uplifte (thristoforovakoye and
nirkinskoye). In this regard the large uplifts are of primary interest

for oil and gas prospecting in deposits of the Bel'akaya fornation.

The clearest oil and gas features in the htovskiy horizon were noted in die
nirkinskaya and Atovakaya areas. The clay and was intensively degasified
upon tapping of the horizon in the first of them. Gas inflows with a yield
up to 10.000 m3/day were obtained upon sampling of the horizon. The rock of

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the htovohiy horizon hon irproved collector proportion in all tho drilled
wollo. The horizon dooo not contain gar ovorywhoro in the htovakaya aroa.
lnflowa of it woro obtainod only in ono of aight drillod wollo.

Intoneivo gao nanifeotationo tron tho htovrkiy horizon woro rocordad in the
Bol'ohorazvodnaya and Khriotoforovokaya oroao. significant aboorptiono (up
to 140 n3/hr) of tho flushing fluid (won 8. Nikitokaya. and woll l2,
Khriotoforovakoya) woro noted in my aroao upon tapping of tho horizon.
1hio is obviomly rolatod to tho abnormally low bod prooaureo in tho pro-
ductive bodo.

mo dopooito of tho Bol‘okaya forution and ito analogo aro widely dovoloped
on tho siborian Platform. but data on tho lithology, phyoicol-collector
proportion and oil- and goo-bearing contont of tho productivo profilo aro
booed on oatorinlo of individual wollo throughout Krasnoyarahiy Kray ond
Yokutiya. Concepts of the proopecto of the oil- and goo-bearing oontont

of the carbonate profilo of aol'okaya formation aro bored on fragmntory
data on omerficial goo mifootationo upon tapping by individual paranotric
wollo.

’l‘hua. porous-cavarnoua dolooitoo with nunorouo inclusiono of liquid bitquno
through the nicrocracko. pores and small cavorno have boon toppod in tho
“lynyookayo toot woll and in ono of tho oalt-oxploration wollo drillod within
tho Prioayano-Yoniooy oynoclioo within the lowor and niddlo parts of tho
aol'okaya formation. A hot gaa inflow with yiold of approxintoly 12.000
n3/doy woo obtoinod upon mpunq of thou. 1ho dolomitoo of u». Bel'akaya
(oration aro aloo irpregnatod with bitunono in tho fodinokaya para-attic
well. uil oaturation of dololnitoo of tho Bol'okaya forution hao aloo boon
ootablizhod in the noro northorly regions: of Kraonoyarokiy Kray. mun,
oil-ilprognatod dolooitoa waro upliftad froo the control part of the for-a-
tion in oevoral wollo in the mywbinohoye oil and gas fiold. atomivo
devolopaant not only of crackod but aloo of porous-cavomoua rock to which
tho loot intonaive oil and gao oanifootatione oro oonfinod war rooordod in .
this caao.

Tho depooito of analoqo of tho Bol'olzayo foroation -- the ‘lblbodlanokaya
and zl°qanokaya formations - havo not boon oawlod in Yahutiya. although
oil foaturoo woro notod in tho ooro oarplo upon tapping of thou in tho
Nelbinokaya and ml'dyuharokaya para-attic wollo. Incroaaod goo indiu-
tiono woro rooordod simultanoouzly with thin in tho lotto: woll upon poooago
through tho uppor part of the lblbochanohaya formation.

Abundant oil aaturation of the lioeotonoo and dolooitaa of tho molbochanahoya
formation wao eatabliohod in ono of tho coro-tarplo holoo drillod to tho
north of the Srodnabotuobinokoyo field. A goo inflow with yiold of approxi-
natoly 6,000 o3/day waa obtainod horo tron the unooparatod our of tho
mlochmokaya and Bl'ganokaya for-nations.

hora oxtonoivo oil distribution in that part of tho mlbochonokayo for-ation
which in locatod diuctly under oalt-boaring forutiono io typical for tho

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

described profile in Yakutiya. Besides the previously mentioned wells. the
bitumen content of carbonate deposits was noted in the Hurbayskaya parasmtric
well drilled in the northeastern part of the Nepsko-Botuobinskaya anteclise.

The halogen-carbonate formations of the ael'ekaya formation are overlapped
everywhere by carbonate rock of the nulayskays formation sufficiently Iain-
tained in thickness which col-prise oil- and gas-bearing coupler III. The
salt-bearing deposits of the Angerskaya foruation approximately 200 n thick
located above perform the role of regional oil and gas barrier.

Carbonates of the Bulayskaya formation are characterized by considerable
constancy of thickness (120-l90 m and are found in practically the entire
area of the Siberian Platfors. Similar deposits in western Yakutiya are
called the Olelusinskiy horizon, while the upper part of the Roetinskeyu
formation also consisting of carbonate rock corresponds to then in the
northwestern part of Krasnoyarekiy Kray.

Deposits of oil- and gas-bearing complex II! have been studied in were de-
tail in the Irkutsk amphitheater, where they have been tapped by more than
350 wells. The Bulayskaya formation is universally represented by cracked
dolomites with nus-rem porous-cracked limestone streaks. Thin salt seams
sosmtimes appear among carbonate rock in the sore subeerged regions.

Gas-saturated limestones maintained along the strike. which have been named
the Birkinskiy horizon. have been established in the profile of the
aulayskaya formation in the Birkinskaya and thistoforovskaya areas of
lrkutskwa delast. Gusher inflows of gas with a yield up to 80,000 l3/day
and condensate with a yield of 7 n3/day have been obtained upon saspling
of then.

Increased gas indications (the Krivoluhskaya, Osinskaya and Potepovskaya)
were noted in many areas won tapping of Bulayskaya formation. The rock is
inremted with liquid gasified oil in deposits of the Bulayehaya formation
in individual wells drilled primarily in the northern part of the oblast
(Harkovskaya, Napekaya and so on). Tapping of the carbonate deposits of

the fomtion was frequently accoapanied by catastrophic absorptions of the
clay mud (up to 95 ﬁlm), which indicates the presence of porous strata

in its profile.

The prospects of the oil- and gas-bearing content of the described complex
and in Yakutiya. where it is represented by linstones and dolomites of the
olehninskaya formation, have been positively evaluated.

'Ihe regional oil saturation of the Olehninskaye formation has been established
in the northeastern part of the Nepsko-Botuobinskaya anteclise (hurbayskaya
and Ml‘dyukarskaya areas). lie-aver. no oil inflows could be obtained in
a single well upon testing. .It is obvious that this was caused by signifi-
cant cooling of the interior of southwestern Yekutiys, where the bed tespera-
turs at the depth of deposition of the olekninskiy horizon (9004.000 Is) does

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
not exceed 2-4‘0. mi. circumstance undoubtedly leads to a significant in-
crease of the viscosity of oil in the bed and lakes it difficult to extract
it to the surface without using some secondary methods of acting on the
bottom zone.

Moreover, intensive gee manifestations were noted in the carbonate ease

of Bulayekiy age at the bottoes of eone wells and a gas discharge with yield
of nore than 300,000 m3/day occurred in the Varkhnevilyuchenskoye field upon
tapping of the absorption sone confined to the cracked limestones of this

coupler.

Gas manifestations from this coqlex were also established in the
syul'dyukarekaya parametric well and absorption zones of the flushing fluid
are confined to it in the Srednebotuobinskoye field. as in the
Verkhnevilyuchanskoye field.

he prospects of oil- and gas-bearing content of the Bulayekeya formation
in Krasnoyarskiy Krey have been studied considerably less. Thick benches
of carbonate rock. primarily limestone, have been tapped by individual
welle. Porous-cavernous dolomites with a sharp petroleus odor were found
in the 'reyginekaya and Kuyuﬂeinskeye parsntric wells. the total thickness
of the oil-saturated rock is approxi-ately l50 n.

wider development of porous collector rock and a decrease of the total
thickness of halogen formations, including those in the lower part of the
Angerskeya formation, are typical for the carbonate profile of Krasnoyarekiy
Krey. the total thickness of oil-saturated limestones increased signifi-
cantly in the Kuymbinskoye field because of this.

‘Ihe carbonate profile of the Siberian Platfon crowns the oil- and gas-
bearing coqelex IV with a total thickness up to 600 a. 'lhe deposits of
the coupler, dated to Angerskcye and Litvintsevskoye ties. are developed
elaost universally and are represented by limestones and dolomitee with
halogen rock streaks. aha letter jointly with the wper lying argillaceoua
deposits of the Verkbolenekaya formation per-fora the role of an oil and gas
barrier.

111s described structure of coqler IV is essentially present over the entire
area of the Siberian Platform. Analogs of the hngarskaya and Litvintsevekaya
for-etior -- carbonate deposits of the Charekays. mar‘yelekhekeya.
ldnerekeya and Hetegerekaye formations -- are related to productive struc-
tures within Yakutiya (Hirninskiy arch) and the Verkhnekoetinekaya subforma-
tion whose oil and gas saturation is controlled by ergilleceous rock of the
letninskeye formation, is related to productive structures in kraanoyarekiy
"”0

Deposits of the upper oil- and gas-bearing cowlex in lrkutskeya Oblaat have
been studied more. Carbonate rock coqrises a fraction of 150-200 a with
total thickness of 600 n of the hngerskaya and Litvintsevekaye forlations
whid: coqrise it. ‘lhe latter are deposited prilarily in the upper part of
the described coqlex. alternating with benches of sulfate-halogen rock.

36
m OFFICIAL OS! OILY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Several productive horizons are localised in the carbonate profile due to
the shielding effect of salts. enhydrites and gypsum. ‘lhe ail'ohirskiy
and Kellorskiy horizons and a stratus of algal dole-lites have regional
distribution within the cblast. All the named horizons have such in cos-ton
in the lithologicel plan -- they are represented by dolositee and linestones
and porous-cracked, cracked and porcus-cavernom collectors. 'lhe productive
horizons are located between this): benches of rock salts. 'lhe letter are
not universally distributed end joining of separate horisons into a unified
productive carbonate ness is possible in sections where their thickness and
outcropping are reduced.

The same oil and gas nanifestaticns as in the nore ancient carbonate nasses
-- oil saturation of the core eagle. absorption of flushing fluids and

surface unifestations during drilling up to gas discharges - are noted in
the given couples. However, the greater distribution of gas manifestations
with significant gas inflows reaching 100.000 n3/day or acre throughout the

area cowared to the previously considered complexes lust be noted in this
case.

Obviously, such intensive gas nenifestaticns are explained by the shallow
depths of deposition of productive deposits and by the wide development of
lixiviation of carbonate rock in individual sections. due to which harsh
and isproved collector zones are formed.

Deposits of oil- and gas-bearing coupler rv within the northeastern part of
the Nepsko-Botucbinskaya anteclise in Yakutiya have been tapped by sparse
parametric and core-saspling wells. Hora extensive development of sulfate-
helogen streaks is typical for them, due to which determination of a large
nmr of productive horizons cespsred to the Irkutsk amphitheater is
possible in the carbonate profile.

Inprovenent of the porosity and permeability paraneters in the lower part of
the carbonate profile -- in the charskaya formation -- is typical for oil-
and gas-bearing coupler IV. he most intensive gas sanifestations in core-
samling boreholes. drilled in the imdiate vicinity of the
Srednebotuobinskoye field, have been obtained free: here. besides gas satura-
tion, inclusions of solid and liquid bitumens and in some cases intensive
iapregnetion of cavernous carbonate rock by liquid oil have been noted in
the carbonate deposits of the Charshaya formation.

Materials on the oil- and gas-bearing content of the upper part of a car-
bonate profile. related to the lcherskaye and hetegerskaya fomtions.

are sparser. There are only data on the absorption of the clay sud in the
Nelbinskeya parametric well with intensity up to S e3/hr. which indicates
the presence of porous rock here.

Deposits of the Hetegerskaya and Icherskeya foruations are characterized
by universal distribution of absorbing horizons in southwestern Yakutiya.
A stratal water inflow with gas was obtained upon saspling of one of then
in well 610 of the Verkhnevilyudzanskaya fomticn: the gas yield exceeded
1,000 s3/dey and the water yield coaprised approriaately 400 s3/dey.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ﬂWICIAL USE ONLY

Solid bitunens were noted in the‘ core smle taken fron both formations in
core-swung and hydrogcological boreholcn in the inediate vicinity of the
Hurbeyskaya para-atria well. oil entered along with water in slight quanti-
ties upon testing of individual watarhbearing horizons and deteninatione of
lanthane gas were also observed.

similar gas manifestations during sanpling of both horizons were observed
upon testing of the hydrogeological boreholes also drilled in sore southerly
regions. All these facts indicates the regional develomezt of the .
Ichersksya and Hetegerskaye fornaticns and of their possible oil- and gas-
bearing content.

Undoubtedly, foreation of oil and gas pools depends to a significant degree -
on retention not only of collectors but also of covers in the profile. since
displacements of the oil and gas barrier structure and unsealing of the gas-
oil pools are possible due to the shallow depths of the productive ease and
of the dense rock overlapping than.

the deposits of the mar oil- and gas-bearing couples in Kresnoyarskiy Kray
have essentially not been studied. There are only date on the general sini-
lerity of the carbonate-halogen profile of the nngarskaya and
Litvintsevekaya foraations of the Mgmskaya syneclise and of the
Angarskaya bench. achiever, taking into account the previously given charac-
teristics of the oil- and gas-bearing content of the upper carbonate cowl»:
in Irkutehaya «blast, one can optinistically estimate the prospects of its
analog in Krasnoyarekiy Krsy as well.

the given aateriale indicate‘the regional nature of the oil- and gas-bearing
content of the carbonate profile of the Siberian Platforn. As can be seen
froe Figure 1, its oil and gas satmtion has been established in practically
all areas of the region where deep'boreholee have been drilled. oil and gas
features and their payable inflows have'been noted in the entire ease of
carbonate rock froa the Riphs'an' to the roof of the tower Caabrian. The oil-
and gas-bearing content is c6nfined in nest cases to carbonate rock lying
directly under regional oil and gas barriers. Oil and gas aanifeetations
have also been found in individual dolonite and liaestcne benches where rock
siailer in coeposition. but with higher density and less cracking. is located
above then. ‘ '

Rather contradictory asterials'cn the oil- and gas-bearing content of the
carbonate profile may dttsntilin‘to itself’in‘those areas where several
deep wells have been drilled‘l‘fWil or gas' features-here frequently not
established in the presence span and gas nenif'e'etations or even of hydro-
carbon inflowe froa individual‘ intervals in'one or two wells in eiailar
sections of the profile of the mining wells. llany investigators explained
these cases by the absence of. persistent strata with high capacity parameters
and by the development of primarily created collectors in the carbonate pro-
file. However, the previously" described correlation of regional oil and

gas barriers and the persistence of individual carbonate cowleaes end oil-
and gas-bearing horizons over thi entire area of. the Siberian platforn
contradict these concepts. "

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ()H-‘ICIM. USE ONLY

111. low geological effectiveness of study of the described profile is ex-
plained mainly by the fact that nein attention was devoted for a long tine
to the terrigeneoua deposits of the Hendian and niphean at the base of the
sedimentary mantle. me carbonate deposits of the lower Cambrian lying
above were drilled mainly without core sewling and they were essentially
untested with regard to overlapping by technical core aaaples. Study of
the oil- and gas-bearing content of the carbonate profile was also carried
out within limited volunes during drilling due to the large diameters of

the boreholes and the absence of the appropriate equipment for teetingthe
boreholes.

The carbonate ieposits in the boreholes were affected for a long title by
the drilling red as a result of orientation of deep drilling toward the
lower horizon of the sedimentary mantle located in the upper part of the
profile. Penetration of the mud filtrate into the stratum occurs as a result
due to capillary hydrodynamics and the filtration parameters of the stratus
decrease. Since nuaerous halogen streaks in the carbonate profile lead to
a significant increase of mineralization of the drilling mud, the depth of
filtrate penetration into the stratum increases significantly and its
physical-collector characteristics are reduced. The volumetric parameters
of the strata also deteriorate due to plugging of the pores with slurry and
by forution of an ergillaceous crust.

A clear exanple of deterioration of the filtration properties of productive
horizons due to prolonged contact of the stratum with clay mud is the re-
sults of testing well 1 of nelykhtinskaya formation. A gas inflow with a
yield of approximately 50,000 n3/day was initially obtained in it upon
saspling during drilling of the dolomites of the xhristoforovshiy horizon.
However. no gas inflow was noted into the exploitation column prior to the
tested interval after coupletion of the well by drilling and subsequent
saspling. ‘ihe results upon testing of the Oeinshiy horizon in the
Srednebotuobinekoye field are sinilar. Gusher gas inflows with a yield

up to 400,000 n3/day were obtained here immediately after it was tapped

in acne wells (wells 9, 36 and so on) upon testing of the pronising profile.
However. the gas inflows decreased significantly upon testing of the some
intervals after the wells had been driven to the planned depths and they
were cospletely absent in some cases (wells 2 and 4).

The situation is aggravated by the fact that the productive horizons of the
carbonate profile, especially of its upper part. are distinguished by a bed
pressure deficit. ‘lhis leads to absorption of the drilling stud and to sharp
deterioration of the volunetric paranters of productive horizons and to
loss of filtration properties.

Besides plugging the pores by filtrate and slurry. absorption leads to mixing
of the sodiul chloride of the absorbed mud with natural highly concentrated
brines. As indicated by the investigations of a. Ye. Zhelernova. h. N.
Zolotov and L. V. Nikolayeva, salt crystals which reduce the porosity and
permeability parameters of the productive bed may be forned due to this
mixing in the rock pores and cracks.

37
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Significant deterioration of the collector proportion of productive horizons
during tapping and samling of them may also be caused by precipitation of
the salts in the borehole shaft and bottom zone of the bed due to disruption
of thermodynamic equilibrium in the interior. It is shown in ll, 2] that
the bottom zone around the borehole shaft is cooled by the drilling mud
during drilling and testing and the pressure in it fluctuates sharply. The
salts in the water-bearing strata and in horizons containing brines with

gas or oil may also precipitate out as a result of the effect of both factors
in the borehole waft and bottom tone of the bed.

Intensive saturation of the productive carbonate profile by a filtrate of
highly nineralised drilling mud leads to distortion of the true cornercial-
geophysical characteristics of oil- and gas-bearing horizons and to approxi-
mation of it to the parameters of water-bearing strata. Because of this
frequently proeising intervals of the profile in the wells were not deter-
mined by field-geophysical metlwds and were not tested in tine.

All this explains why large oil and gas pools have not yet been found in
the carbonate profile. At the use time the great thickness of this rock.
nuerom oil and gas manifestations and other features permit one to talk
about the significant prospects of the oil- and gas-bearing content of the
described senses. 1he lack of discoveries of large oil and gas fields indi-
cates the absence of a scientifically developed method of finding the car-
bonate profile rather than of the low prospects of the described collectors.
Development of a method of tapping and study of the oil- and gas-bearing
content of carbonate deposits least be accelerated. using scientific-practical
devslepunte roalited in other regions of the 0883 (the Volgo-Urale and
Tim-”chore oil- and gas-bearing provinces). It oust be taken into
account in this case that the oil- and gas-bearing carbonate rock is less
infer-native than terrigensous collectors.

for accelerated and dependdale analysis of the prospects of the oil- and gas-
bearing content of the carbonate profile .of the Siberian Platform, it has
been proposed that a coqlex of geological-technical assures be carried

out. the most inortant of which are the following.

1. An increase of core sanpling from the productive profile and study of

the arrangement of the more volumetric porous and porous-cavernous collec-
tors in reserves in the carbonate messes. Determination of the biogenic
formations, development of which may indicate the presence of Riphean system
in carbonate coeplexee of the caabrian. is of isportant significance in
investigation of the core sasple.

2. Expansion of the existing complex of field-geophysical investigation

of boreholes by inclusion of neutron methods. acoustic and induction logging
in it which are lore effective during investigation of carbonate productive
horizons.

3. Extensive use of direct geophysical methods of 2532 [expansion unknown)
and seismic investigations by the “Zalesh” program. used to determine the

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contour of oil end gee pools end thm reduce the number of deep wells drilled
to explore the fields.

4. Study by colonic prospecting, besides the reflecting horisons in terri-
geneous deposits of the Wendien end Ripheen. of the wave cherecterietice of
cerbonste deposits with regerd to the presence of productive sense in then.

5. Drilling speciel boreholes with plenned depths of LOGO-1,500 n in indivi-
dual. lerger erees. The purpose of this drilling is quelitetive study of

the 011- end ges-beering content of the upper cerbonete couplexes without
losses of liltrstion prorerties of promising horizons es s result of sinking
wells to deeply submerged deposits. for this purpose it is retionel to use
light drilling rigs or type 30-80 end Ian-2000.

6. Developnent of e reticnel technology of tepping end testing oil end gee
pools in oerbonete deposits with deficit bed pressure. upping siuiler
productive horizons in lightened lauds end invert emleione should occupy
e speciel plece in this.

7. Pessing through the intorvels of the profile with expected cerbonete

beds with subintervsl testing of IP. Verious depressions end the etendinq
ties in the inflow to determine the optima sespling conditions eust be

used in this cese. his method made it possible to estimate the productivity
end sceles of an oil- end ges-beering content of the Ripheen cerbonete ness
under conditions of neinteining its main volumetric pereneters even et the
drilling stege in the Kuyusbinskoye field.

Development end imlenentetion of e concrete scientific-production prong
to isprove logging. tepping end sespling of the cerbonete profile will asks
it possible to obtein essentielly new geologicel infomtion on the leeet
studied. but higlly promising pert of the sedimentery nentlo c! the Siberien
Pletton.

'me prectice of seerduing for e cerbcnete protile when nein:ettention wes
devoted during the first etege of exploretion primerin to the terrigeneous
profile end when the cerbonete rock begen to be cerefully studied only site:
e reduction of the geologicel ettectivenees of seerch operetions. should not
be repeeted during seerda-exploretory operetions on the siberien Pletforu.
‘I‘he csrbonete profile should be studied with regerd to its lithologicel-
texturel cherecterietics end simultaneously with the lower pert o! the
sedimentery lentle consisting of terrigeneous rock.

BIBLIWRAPRY

l. Anteiferov. A. 5., 'Precipitetion oi' Salts Prom lower Cesbrien end wendien
Brines in the Irkutsk Asphitheeter.‘ GBOIDGIYA m1 1 cm, No. d, 1974.

2. Puke, B. 3., v. V. menskiy, 1‘. I. Hoekelets et el., “Tepping end lusting
Productive Bede of the Lower Ceebrien of Bestern Siberie." 690me um:
I one. No. 2, 1977.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

4.

s.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Drobot. D. 1.. A. N. zolotov and A. 2. “atomic!“ ”Gaokhmmaakiya
Mum ouankt ponpakuv nattaguonoanoati dokaabrlyaktkh 1
nzmmuy-nkh otloabanty ma “turnkey platfonly' [The Gaochaucal
cum“ for Evaluating ma Proapaota o! the 011- and Gas-Boating Content
of Pun-brim and Iowa: Mttan Dapoaiu of tha Southern Saharan
’1.c‘oﬂ]l MOM. “Carl. 191‘.

Manama. A. 8.. N. v. Hal'ntkov and v. s. sumal'uav, “on and Gas
Gaologtcal nagionauaauon of tho Siberian Platform" mm m: 1
can. No. 2, 1976.

sa-onov, v. V., 'kautakty natugazonoanyy buaayn" [ma Irkutak 011- and
Gu'hmnq Bath]. IXMICIK, VOOC.'81b. kn. ltd-V0, 1975a

Tron-uh. A. 5.. ”ma Proapacu at finding on and Gas in Bantam mum
did in tho lot But.‘ WIYA m I can, No. 5. 1971.

comm: Imul‘aevo 'Nadra', 'Sovaukaya qaologlya". 197a

6521
C50: 1822 END

60
'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY