FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10422

30 March 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 5/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[OTB

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIG'IT LAWS AND RECUIATIONS GOVERNING MERSHIP 01’
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICT- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(rouo 5/82)

Coureurs
ELECTRIC POWER
Kurpuyakaya CBS Design, Construction Report
(Yu. P. Kornev; GIDROTEKHNICIIESKOYB STROITEL'S'NO,
"011’ 1981) 0..t0.0.000.000.0000000000000000IOOOOOOOO0.0.

FUELS

Searching for Petroleun on the Siberian Platform
(1’. G. Gurari; GEOLOGIYA KEPT! I GAZA, Nov 81) . . . . . . . . . . .

Oil, Gas Prospecting in Kirghiz SSR
(n. n. Khainov, ec n1.; GEOLOGIYA m1 1 cm,
12 NOV 82) 0.0.000000000000000000000.00IOOOOOOIDOOOOOOOOO.

Oil, Gas Extraction in Caspian
(Rh. 3. Yuoufznde; GEOWIYA KEPT! I GAZA, Nov 81) .......

Br £2 £0
Paleogeonorphological Atlu

- a - [In - ussa - 37

-~- 4....-. - -u... -~o.o.
Moscow GIDROTBKHNICHESKOYE STROITEL'STVO in Russian 80 ll, I98] pp 8-13

LKrticle by lu.P. Kornev, engineer: "The Kurpsayskaya 638 on the
Naryn Riverll

LTex£7 The Kurpsayskaya CBS is located on the Naryn River in the
Kirghiz SSR and is a part of the cascade of the Nishnenarynskiy hydro-
electric power stations. Being the second stage of the cascade, the
Kurpsayskaya 635 will operate in the runoff of the Naryn River, which
is regulated by the reservoir of the Ioktogul'skaya 088 with a useful
capacity of la cubic-kilometers, which provides for the regulation of
the runoff over a span of several years.

The Kurpsayskaya CBS is to cover the loads and ensure a reserve with-
in the Central Asian Unified Power System in a regime ranging from
the base (summer) to the peak (winter).

In designing the Kurpsayskaya GES special attention was given to in-
corporating the advantages of cascade construction, primarily by mak-
ing maximum use of the production base of the Toktogul'skaya GES as

well as the reliability and economicalness of the dam of the Kurpsay-
skaya GES.

Technical-economic indicators of the Kurpsayskaya 638:
"Pu mark, in meters sesseoosesoaesseseesooseseasons-ceases l24.0
Pull reservoir capacity, millions of cubic meters ........ 370.0

Usable capacity of the reservoir for generating electrici-
ty, in millions of cubic meters .......................... 35.0

Estimated expenditure of the CBS, cubic meters per second 972.0

Head. in meters:
Maximum once-ssaooeeeessec-coonoseosoeeeeesosessssssn l0|.0

Estimated O...DOIOOOOOOIOOOII...IDIIOCOOIOOOIOIOOIOOO 9'05
Maximum (when Q - 1800 cubic meters per second ...... 88.0

Rated capacity, thousands of kilovolts ................... 800.0

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ava\ va'a swans. 09a. Usvhl

Average electric power output over a period of years. in
‘uillions of kilowatt-hour. sseoeoooeoooooeoeoeeese assesses 2630.0

Number of hours of use of rated capacity, in hours ......... 3280
Capital investments, in millions of rubles ................. l81.l6
Annual outlays. in million. of rublel oesseeseeesesesasessas 3e4l

Relative capital investments. in rubles:

Per kilovolc of r.ted capacity COOCIIOIOOOCC'OOOCOOOUOO 22600
Per kilowatt-hour of generated electricity ............ 6.9
Production cost of electric power. kopecks per kilowatt-hour .l30

Number of years to recover investments ............... (less than year)

Basic amounts of work for the power facility:

Excavation of earth, thousands of cubic meters ........ I650
Hounding of earth, thousands of cubic meters .......... 387.0
Concrete and reinforced concrete, thousands of cubic

meters DDll.IIOIQIOOOOOOOOOOI.0......Ill-OOOOIOOICOOI. '08400
Hetal structures and underground mechanisms, tons ..... 72I7.0
Equipment. ton. 0.0.0...00.0.0.0....OOOCOOIIOOOCOOOUOOI 8925.0

Natural conditions. The runoff of the Naryn River and its main tri-
butaries are formed in the central Tyan'Shan Mountains by the melting
of snow and ice in the high mountains. The average outlay over a
period of several years in the section of the Kurpsaysksya CBS for
general needs is 39! cubic meters per second; and the average runoff
over a period of several years is l2.373,000 cubic meters.

The climate in the vicinity of the Kurpsayakaya CBS is strictly conti-
nental. The average annual air temperature is plus l2.8 degrees c;
the minimal temperature is minus 30 degrees c and the maximum is 46
degrees C; the average duration of the frost free period is 220 days
and the annual precipitation is 378 mm.

The constant runoff for the Kurpsayskiy reservoir is insignificant
and will be formed by an insignificant lateral influx.

Engineering and geological conditions. The length of the river in
the section of the hydrosystem has the shape of a deep symmetrical
V-shaped canyon with individual widenings in the places were the la-
teral tributaries feed into the river. In the section can be found
the basic structures are, the sides of canyon rise above the river bed
to 180 - 380 meters. The grade of the slopes is 25 - 60 degrees.

To the north of the hydrosystem's sector at a distance of approximate-
ly 60 kilometers the Talasso-Perganskiy regional fault passes. Toward
the area of this fault are confined the epicenters of several strong

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

earthquakes of recent times. The construction site of the Kurpsayskiy
hydrosystem for a length of 8 kilometers sits within a seismically
quiet structural-tectonic area of a class II, restricted from the
north by the deep Kyz-Kurganskiy fault and from the south by the deep
Karasuyskiy fault.

This area is included within a 9-point zone of seismic activity. The
basic rock formations within the sector of the main facilities are
represented as an interstratifiedzfdysch rock mass of sandstones and
argillites, the strata of which intersect the valley almost in half,
with a drop toward the upper water race at an angle of 50 to 65 degrees.

In the section of the hain facilities the basic rock formations are
broken down into small lumps by several systems of fractures. Accord-
ing tr the lithologic composition of the rock formations and the degree
of fracturing within the massif there are strong and weak sectors.
Among the weak sectors are the layers which are folded by thin-bedded
argillites with layers of thin-bedded sandstones, the areas affected
by the tectonic fissures of class IV and V and rock formations within
the centers of the folds. In tne contour of the trench of the dam

the weak sections comprise nearly 20 percent of the area. In the
river channel the capacity of the alluvial pebble bed does not exceed
one to two meters.

The rock formations in the location of the section differ in their
high strength in the specimen independent of the zone and groups of
preservation. The temporary resistance to cempression in air for the
sandstones is 145.5 “Pa on the average and for the argillites it is

76.2 MPa; in a water saturated condition these figures are Ila and
5t.7 MPa, respectively.

In designing the dam the following indicators for resistance to shift
and deformation characteristics were used: tg9-.9 and 0-.3 HPa,

Bdef-ZOOO “Pa and Bdin' 8000 MPa, which were ootsined by carrying out

a set of field research by the department of geology of Sredazgidro-
proyek: LCent:al Asian State Institute for the Planning of Hydroelec-
tric Power Stations? and the department of rock excavation work of

the Gidroproyekt igtate Institute for the Planning of Hydroelectric
Power Stations]. :

The water permeability of the massif is dissimilar; the water absorp-
tion changes from thousands of particles to several liters per minute;
there is no noticeable loss at depth.

Basic facilities of the hydrosystem: In the natural and construction
conditions of the Kurpsayskiy hydrosystem the most logical variation
was one having a concrete gravity dam for the following reasosn:

I. A gravity dam is little affected by the low-module foundation,
which has been weakened by layers of argillites.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.uu a-Oooono- van- an...

2. within the body of a gravity dam are positioned the spillway facili-
lies and also the facilities of the discharge station complex. which

provides a substantial reduction in the cost as compared with other ver-
sions in which these facilities are installed individually in the sides

of the gorge.

3. The high reliability of gravity dams that are constructed in seis-
mically dangerous regions. (2) Also. the requirements placed upon
the concrete of gravity dens are lower than for the material used in
arched dans. This creates favorablerconditions for the rational use
of the concrete pouring operation of the Toktogul'skaya CBS and a re-
duction in the amount of time required for the construction of the

Kurpsayskaya 635.

a. The complete and efficient use of the Toktogul'kiy continuous-
cycle method, which is highly mechanized. for pouring concrete and
for its further improvement at the Kurpsayskaya 685 with its version
of a hydrosysten with a gravity dam.

The construction organisation possesses a progressive and effective
technology for the construction of gravity dams and has the needed

equipment.

The layout of the basic facilities of the hydrosyaten represents a
complex of facilities that are almost interconnected with the dan.

The hydrosystem's facilities include: a concrete gravity dam, surface
and deep spillways, a couple: of GBS facilities with the station build-
ing attached to the dam as shown in Figure I, and an open distribution

device (080) of 220 and I10 kv.

Figure I. Schematic diagram plan for the construction of the Kurpaay-
skaya GES.

      

 

7 I
IN;
‘ 11%
1'11-
131 -
:1: A u”. “us A.
UL. ‘z. E! \ .-
Y5 . .: “(milling \ 9“ \ é;
' ‘ S\

FOR OFFICIAE USE ONLY
PORiﬁWICU“.USB(ﬁﬂX

Key: I - Upper coffer; 2 - Construction tunnel; 3 - Concrete plug;
a - Lower coffer; 5 - Approach entrance no I; 6 - Approach entrance
No 2; 7 - Dam; 8 - Hater intake; 9 - Deep spillwsy; IO - Surface
spillway; ll - GBS building; l2- Administration building; I3 -
Lubricants storage; 15 - VL 220. -

The dam. The gravity dam has a maximum construction height of ll3 me-
ters with a triangular profile with a small influx toward the upper
water race below the 33 mark in order to approximate the cementation
screen and drainage toward the header front. The header face of the
dam is vertical, the laying of the lower face for the bed sections is
m -.7, for the side sections m I .75 o .8. The length of the dam is
364 meters along the crest. The dam is broken down into 13 sections
by the temperature-shrinking seams: two river bed sections with a
width of 19.5 H (according to the amount of the aggregate assembly);
two river bed sections and coastal sections with a width of 30 H with
an additional breakdown of sections by seams on the upper and lower
faces.

According to the geometry of the canyon (relation - L/H - 3) the dam
is designed by taking into consideration the spatial effect, i.e.
transferring part of the stress to the sides. The interaction of the
neighboring sections is provided by a system of vertical toothings in
the deformation seams.

The foundation of the dam in the river bed sections at the mark of its
footing is horizontal. The foundation of the coastal sections in the
direction of the axis of the dam is executed by several sloped sur-
faces with a placement varying from m - .5 to l.6. In addition, to
increase the rigidity on shift the foundation of the coastal sections
have been inclined toward the upper water race.

The drainage of the body of the dam is accomplished by using a system
of vertical wells, which have been drilled in concrete made of po-
ternes. The poternes are located on four layers (Figure 2).

In the design of the dam the following features have been incorporated:
a) the zonal distribution of concrete: the internal zone of the dam
is made of concrete H-l50180V4180; the external underwater zone and

the zone that adjoins the cliff is made of concrete H-200'80V6l80;

the summit and the lower face of the dam is made of concrete "-300
HRZ ISO; the outlets of the spillway facilities are made of con-
crete M—boolao. The concrete is prepared in cement TGTs-300 and

TGPTs-300;

I80

b) the use of ready-made reinforced concrete for the inter-sectional
seams. drainage and cementetion poternes. shafts and facilities for
the pumping station;

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a‘VA Uff‘bm "JD vsuu

Figure 2. Cross-section of dam and CBS building by axis of the
turbine water conduit.

’l’

w r nun-NVr

egg: "I I

I

 

Key: I - 633 water intake; 2 - ranterne for the fastening cenenta-
tion; 3 - Joining and depth cenentation; 6 - Drainage.

in the event that they develop and to limit their spread. The average
expenditure of fittings per cubic meter of the body of the dam is 2.7
kg. The estimated reinforcenent is required in the water intake of
the CES, the deep spillwsy, and the cap of the surface apillvay;

d) the elimination in the foundation of the den
cliff of intensive wind erosion;
the foundation of the den;
and the drainage screen.

of a layer of the
the strengthening cenentation of
the anti~filtration frontal cenentation:

The strengthening cenentstion is perforned throughout the construction
site to a depth of IO meters. The double-layer frontal cenentation

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF3ICIAL USE ONLY

in the river bed section is performed to a depth of 65 meters. In the
lateral abut-ants, beneath the upper two thirds of the dam, frontal
cementation is performed in a single row.

The spillwsy facilities of the bydrosystem. The hydrosystsm'a facili-
ties include provision for surface and deep spillways, which together
with the CBS turbines ensure the passage through the hydrosystem of

the maximum estimated expenditure - 3,680 cubic meters per second.
which is taken as the sum of the maximum passage from the Toktogul'skiy
reservoir - 3,000 cubic meters per second (I) and the maximum expendi-
ture of lateral influx on the Toktogul-Kurpsay sector of one percent

of the utilization, which is equal to 380 cubic meters per secOnd.

The maximum expenditure is distributed among the facilities in the
following manner: the surface spillwsy - 1,680; the deep spillwsy -
|,074; and the four assemblies of the CBS - 972 cubic meters per
second.

The division of the spillwsya makes it possible to have two independ-
ent outlets for the water, which increases the reliability of the hy-
drosystem on the whole.

The deep spillwsy is in the form of a single-aperture pipe measuring
5X7 meters and placed in the section of the dam that adjoins the power
station building from the right side. At the outlet the pressure
gallery is equipped with a flat emergency repair and regulating seg-
mented gates measuring 6X5 meters, which are installed in a specially
devised chamber of gates, which adjoins the lower face of the dam.

The head is 80 meters. The spillwsy has a metal frame. The deep
spillwsy is used to regulate the filling of the Kurpsayskiy reservoir
during the period prior to the start-up of the 683's first section.
for the passage of construction expenditures during the rigging of the
plug in the construction tunnel, and also for the passage into the
lower water race of the water expenditures for irrigation needs during
the temporary operation of the 653 when water levels are reduced.

The surface spillwsy handles a significant portion of the spillwsy
runoff and is a simple to operate facility with a cap that is complete-
ly accesible for repairs and inspections. The surface spillwsy, just
as the deep spillwsy. is located on the right-hand side of the shore-
line and is adjacent to the side of the dam. The runoff with an inlet
front of l6 meters has a smooth narrow section in a plane with the
transit to the outlet tract with a width of 10 meters. A working seg-
mented gate measuring ISXI3 meters is installed on the runoff. The
outlet tract of the surface spillwsy is an inclined tunnel. which is
horizontal on the right side of the gorge. The joining of the outlet
tract with the river bed is executed in the form of a funnel design
with a jet-deflecting nozzle.

Facilities of the power station complex. These include the water in-
take, the turbine water conduits, the CBS building. The water intake
is of the deep type with a head of 44 meters and is situated on the
upper face of the dam and consists of four sections by number of units
in the CBS building. The cleaning of the grating and the maneuvering

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVA VER‘VL“ Uﬁb bills!

of the repair gates is accomplished by a gantry crane from the sum-
mil of the dam with a lifting capacity of 2XI00 tons. The water feed
into tne turbines is accomplished by four lines from the steel rein-
forced concrete pipelines, which have been relegated to the lower face
of the dam beyond its profile. The eliminates inconvenience in the
carrying out of work, which are connected with the removing of debris
from the dam; the erection of the dam does not depend upon the in-
stallation of the pipelines.

The diameter of the pipelines is 7 meters. The steel reinforced con-
crete facing of the pipeline is accepted as a full dynamic head. The
thickness of the reinforced concrete casing is one meter. The power

station building with a single-row positioning of the four units ad-

joins the dam from the lower water way. The entire underwater massif
is designed in the form of a single unit.

Inside the power station building are installed the type R0 115-810-
V-SOO units with a rated capacity of 200,000 h" each. in metallic
spiral chambers with type V68 1090-225-46 generators with a rated ca-
pacity of 200000/235 in an umbrella-like shape. The machinery room
and the the installation area measure 20xll4.5 and is served by two
bridge electric cranes with a lifting capacity of 360 tons. The four
type TTs-ZSOOOO/ZZO power transformers are situated on supports on
the side of the lower water way. In the lower water way of the power
station building provision has been made for the grooves of the repair
gates of suction pipes, which are serviced by gantry cranes with a
lifting capacity of 50 tons. The administration building is located
within the 688 building site not far from it.

Passage of the construction outlays. The topographical conditions of
the section predetermined the tunnel method for the passage of con-
struction outlays (Figure I). Included in the facilities for the pee-
sage of construction outlays are: the construction tunnel. and the
upper and lower construction coffers. (3)

The estimated outlay of the construction period in the technical
draft has been reduced to l,800 cubic meters per second against the
everyday outlay of one percent of the utilisation of 2,980 cubic me-
ters per second through the accumulation of a part of this outlay in
the Toktogul'skiy reservoir.

In constructing the tunnel consideration was given to the fact that
the Toktogul'skiy reservoir was not filled prior to the start of con-
atruction work on the Kurpssyskaya 688. This made it possible to re-
duce the estimated outlay of the construction period to 1,100 cubic
meters per second and to decrease the sectioning of the tunnel.

Special features of organising the construction. In developing the
basic solutions for organising the construction use was made of the
favorable situation that had evolved following the completion of two
power stations of the cascade of the lower stage (Uch-Kurganskaya ass
No I) and the upper stage (Toktogul'shaya CBS) in this area. The

8
FOR OFYICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction materials industrial base that has been well established
here is partly located in Shamaldysay and partly in Karakul. A settle-
ment has been created for the builders; the population of this city
reached 20,000 just prior to the start of the construction of the Kurp-
sayskaya 68$.

Through the section of the construction passes a llO kV high-voltage
power transmission line. All incoming cargoes srrive at the Shamaldy-
say railroad station, from which it is delivered to the construction
site by truck. Equipment weighing more than 60 tons comes to the un-
loading point for heavy cargo, from which it is trailered to the
Kurpsayskaya 638.

At the construction site it is planned to create only sectional organ-
izations with a reduced work program. The design calls for the use of
the existing concrete and gravel organizations, which are located near
the city of Karakul, which were built for the construction of the
Toktogul'skaya GES. Prior to the start of the construction while car-
rying out the design work in the years I972 through I975, the NIS
LScientific-Research Construction Trust? of Gigroproyekt and the Sred-
asgidroproyekt and the Naryngidroenergostroy Lharyn River Hydroelectric
Power Station Construction Trus£7 performed research in production con-
ditions on the possibility of transporting a concrete mixture over long
distances in the conditions of the hot and dry climate without reducing
the basic characteristics of the concrete mixture and the poured con-
crete.

The research fully confirmed the possibility of supplying the construc-
tion of the Kurpssyskaya 688 with a concrete mixture from an existing
concrete plant of the Toktogul'sksya CBS. The estimates were based
upon the possibility of erecting a concrete laying of the dam without
pipe cooling.

The pouring of concrete for the dam just as the dam of the Toktogul'
skaya CBS is being done under the protection of a self-raising tent.
The upper face is below the threshhold of the deep spillway and is
protected from the outside effec;s of the temperature by a filling of
earth and a fixed heated concrete form. The lower face is being con-
creted in a console concrete form, which is heated when it is cold.

In the summer months on the lower face a water casing is created; in
the winter a heat-reflecting drag is rigged below the concrete form.
which shields the freshly-poured concrete from sharp drops in tem-
perature. A special feature of the concrete work on this dam is the
fact that as the horizontal construction seams are being prepared and
the concrete is being poured from the lower unit, within the limits

of the internal zone the cement film is not removed. This solution
has been confirmed by research done b the VNIIG Lnll-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Hydrotechnologi; imeni Vedeneyev with the parti-
cipation of Sredasgidroproyekt.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The pouring and mixing of the concrete mixture are done by a concrete
pouring equipment set: the "Naryn" dump truck, an electric bulldozer
and an electric tractor with a package of IV-90 vibrators. The moist
maintenance is employed with the poured concrete - in the summer months
an intensive surface cooling is performed.

Basic stages of construction. The execution of a set of preparatory
work in the construction of the Kurpsayskaya GES began in I976. Dur—
ing the preparation period a llo kV high-voltage power transmission
line was extended from the area of the river sector, the sector admin-
istrative organizations at the construction site were built, the trans-
purtstion and construction tunnels were built, and the construction
coffers were built, etc. Simultaneously with the start of the con-
struction work Sredazgidroproyekt and Naryngidroenergostroy developed
an additional set of measures, which made it possible to reduce the
amount of time required for the preparatory period and to speed up the
construction of the basic facilities. The measures included the re-
jection of the cable-crane for pouring concrete, which eliminated the
need to execute complicated and significant amount of rock excavation
beneath the scaffolding of the cable crane above the trench of the
dam; the partitioning of the surface and deep spillways; and a sig-
nificant reduction in the amount of rock exeasation in the contour of
the trench of the dam.

Early in May I978 the span over the Naryn River was completed and

the by-pass of the outlays into the construction tunnel was completed.
The upper construction coffer was constructed along with the build-up
of the irrigation draw-downs from the Toktogul'skiy reservoir.

Combining the work on the laying of the construction tunnel and the
development of the trench of the dam made it possible as early as the
end of 1978 to completely finish the rock excavation in the contour
of the trench and to pour the first cubic meter of concrete in the
body of the dam.

The intensive pouring of concrete began in March I979 with the arrival
of warm weather. Concrete pouring began in earnest in the section of
the dam with the deep spillway and the installation of the metal struc-
tures of the deep spillway. During 1979 2I5,000 cubic meters of con-
crete were poured into the body of the dam and 35,000 cubic meters

went into the CBS building. The average monthly growth in the height
of the dam for the year was 2.5 meters. In 1980 the growth rates of
the dam increased - approximately 300,000 cubic meters of concrete

went into the body of the dam and another 50,000 cubic meters went

into the G88 building

At the start of I98! the dam was approaching the start-up elevations.
Concrete pouring was completed in the unit of the CBS building with

the installation site. The installation of the pipeline of the start
unit was completed. Work was finished on securing the outlet channel
of the 688. In the middle of January I981 the concrete plig was in-
stalled in the construction tunnel and water expenditures were switched
to the deep spillway: the Kurpsayskiy reservoir began to be filled.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusions. 1. The composition of the facilities and the type of
dam for the Kurpsayskiy hydrosystem were accepted in close coordina-
tion with the specific nature of cascade construction in mountainous
rivers. Among the advantages of cascade construction in these con-
ditions are: the possibility of using a ready production base with
the technology already in place; the lack of the need to construct
housing at the construction site; the construction is done by an
organization having personnel who have had invaluable experience in
concrete work during the construction of the Toktogul'skaya 688.

The realization of these advantages made it possible to sharply re-
duce the time periods for the preparatory work and to speed up the
creation of the hydrosystem within a minimum of three to four years.

2. The gravity dam of the Kurpsayskaya 638 was designed for a speci-
iic technology of its construction (the Toktogul'skiy method). The
design of the dam is distinctive for its economicalnass of profile

and its high technological effectiveness. In the body of the dam one
spillway facility has been abandoned - the deep apillway.snd the pipe-
lines hsve been placed outside the limits of the profile of the dam3
to its lower face; the design of the seals of the deformation scams
has been substantially simplified; the network of drainage poternes
has been reduced in height; the pumping station for the drainage sys-
tem has been placed outside the profile of the dam; facilities with-
in the body of the dam, including stairwells and elevator shafts. have
been reduced to a minimum.

since the Toktogul'skiy method makes it possible to make good use of
the possibility of zonal distribution of concrete, materials are be-
ing economically used in the Kurpsaysksya CBS dam - the expenditure
of cement in the concrete of the internal zone for grade ISO has been
reduced to ISO kg per cubic meter of concrete.

3. During the construction of the Kurpsayskaya 633 the technology

for using concrete in single-layer applications from the upper to the
lower faces of the dam was significantly improved. Among the measures
taken which simplify the process of using concrete the following should
be noted: the rejection of the use of pipe cooling of the body of the
dam; the use of an almost un-cooled concrete mixture with a tempera-
ture in the summer time up to plus 26 degrees c; the automation of

the thickening of the concrete mixture; and the rejection of the pro-
cedure of removing the cement film from the herézontal construction
seams in the internal zone of the dam.

REFERENCES

l. K.K. Kug'min and S.A. Berezinskiy: Toktogul'skaya gidroelektro-
stantsiya lloktogul‘skayg Hydroelectric Power Station7. Gidrotekhni-
cheskoye stroitel'stvo Lﬂydrotechnical constructiong I972, No 5.

11
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
2. lhnsmn K.D.. Rocha L.H. The response of concrete done to earth-
quakes. Hster Power and Dam Construction. April I979.

3. V. F. Ilyushin, V. L. Kupernan, V. a. Hostkov. and others: Stroitel-
uyy tunnel' s oblngchennoy obdelkoy ns Kurpssyskoy Gas [Construction
tunnel with s sinnlified finish at the Kurpsaysksys GBSI. Gidrotekh-
nicheskoye stroitel' StVO-a 1980.80 5.

4. H.N. Rozin, A.V. Korenistov. and L.M. Yushkovskiy: Otrsbotks

kotlovsnov Kurpsayskoy 688 be: ostsvleniya zashchitnogo sloye u

osnovsniya Aﬂorkins the trenches of the Kurpsnysks a CBS without

abandoning the protective lsyer at the foundation7z Gidrotekhnicheskoye
stroitel' stvo, I98]. No 6.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdst, "Gidrotekhnicheskoye stroitel'stvo". I981.

8927
050: |822l70

‘31..
FOR OFFICI USE ONLY
SEARCHING FOR PETROLEUM ON THE SIBERIAR PLATFORH

Moscow GEOLOGIYA NBFTI I GAZA in Russian lo 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received 2 Jun
81) pp 1-5

[Article by F. G. Gurari (SNIIGGiMS): "Some Problems of Oil and Gas Prospecting and
Exploration Activities on the Siberian Platform“]

[Text] The historic resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress emphasize the enormous
significance of the fuel and energy industry for further successful growth and
development of the Soviet Unionls economy. For this reason the congress.decreed:
"Secure accelerated development of activities pertaining to geological study of this
country and increasing proved reserves of raw mineral resources, particularly fuel
and energy resources. Take measures to discover oil and gas deposits in Western
and Eastern Siberia...."

For the first time the Siberian Platform is named in resolutions issued by our
country's highest party forum. This was fostered by the results of prospecting

and exploration activities being conducted here, discovery of a number of oil and
gas deposits, obtaining of commercial-quantity flows of hydrocarbons in many areas,
and the rather favorable structural features of this vast region, which are becoming
increasingly more clearly delineated. Forecast estimates of potential oil and gas
resources calculated by scientific organizations constituted the basis for planning
projects to initiate oil production and increase gas production in this region in

coming years.

At the present time, however, prospecting and exploration activity on Siberian
Platform has not been very effective. No large oil deposits, on which the begin-
ning of oil production could be based, have been discovered, prospects for discover-
ing such deposits in the next few years are not yet very clear, and proved reserves
of natural gas are growing slowly. Influencing factors included the region's dif-
ficulty of access and harsh climate, as well as the slow increase in volume of

deep drilling and geophysical exploration. The main factor, however, is the excep-
tionally complex geologic structure of practically all sedimentary complexes on the
platform which are promising from the standpoint of oil and gas. The Siberian
Platform is more complex than any of the other oil and gas regions of the USSR.

For this reason prospecting and exploration methods should correspond to the
character of the target structures. It is also essential that these exploration ac-
tivities be fully equipped and thorough, with a high level of scientific processing

13
ltﬂlCﬂﬂﬂC1A1.U8£¢NVLY
productive sedimentary complexes have been fairly easily determined within the
boundaries of the platform. Directions of subsequent prospecting and exploration
work and methods have been specified, and areas have been proposed for sinking
wells on a priority basis. These materials, which are the result of the joint
efforts of Siberian production organizations, Siberian and central scientific
institutes, have been fairly fully examined in numerous articles [9, 10], and have
been discussed inareceutly published major monograph [3], and in a comprehensive

program of geological exploration for oil and gas on the Siberian Platform, drawn
up by a number of production and scientific organizations.

At the same time it seems important to discuss problems which are not yet at-
tracting considerable attention but which may prove to be extremely important.

The first of these involves the geotemperature conditions of the Siberian Platform.
The cryolithic zone, that is, the zone in which the rocks are at or below zero
degmesCelsius during the entire year, covers more than 80 percent of the area in
oil and gas promising regions. The base of the cryolithic zone extends as deep as
1500 meters, and over a fairly substantial area [3]. The meager data available in-

only of geometry but composition as well. And yet it is absolutely essential to
take this variability into consideration at all stages of the geological exploration
process, including when mapping out the development of discovered oil and gas
reservoirs. He [6) long ago pointed Out the necessity of studying subsurface tem-
perature conditions in prospecting for oil and gas on the Siberian Platform. P. I.
Mel'nikov and his colleagues at the Institute of Permafrost Studies of the

Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences discussed this subject in great
detail at a conference on Siberian productive resources (Novosibirsk, 1980). They
pointed to the existenceixathe cryolithic zone of abrupt changes in the physical

so-calied cooled rocks at a temperature below zero degrees Celsius but containing
liquid brines (kriopegi). Such nonuniformity of physical properties will un-
questionably affect conditions of obtaining and interpreting geophysical exploration
materials, particularly resistivity and seismic prospecting.

Unusually low temperatures in the productive zone, which run 6-l3°c, for example,
in the Srednebotuobinskays area, and which do not exceed lO-lS’c in the majority of
other areas [1, 3], sh0uld affect the mobility of fluids and the quality of
reservoirs. It is true that in the Srednebotuobinskoye field crude at the margin of
the Botuobinskiy horizon is comparatively light (density 0.84-0.87 g/cm3) and low-
viscosity, with a low solidification point (-30'c). In the very complex con-
ditions of the Siberian Platform, however, crudes with various parameters will un-
doubtedly be encountered, including those for which low temperatures may exert
decisive influence on their ability to flow to the wellbore. Knowledge of geo-
temperature conditions is even more important for predicting the phase state of
gaseous hydrocarbons. 0n the northwestern margin of the Vilyuysk structural
depression -- the most promising area for prospecting for new gas deposits -- data
indicate that some of the promising Mesozoic horizons may be situated in the zone

14
IKIICHNHK1A1.U§E¢HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of hydrate formation. Naturally a special method should be employed in locating
and developing such deposits. There is reason to assume that hydrate formation in
productive Riphean-Cambrian horizons also took place on the Nepsko-Botuobinskaya
arch [1]. It is therefore absolutely essential to add geotemperature investiga-
tions to the mandatory aggregate of prospecting and exploration activities on the
Siberian Platform. In order to conduct long-term observations it is essential to
establish a fixed network of condition-monitoring boreholes of those in which
drilling was completed with negative results. Production organizations should be
provided with the necessary equipment. apparatus and methods instructions. A
program of geotemperature studies extending over many years should he adopted.
Such a program, drafted by Siberian production and scientific organisations of
USSR Hingeo [Ministry of Geology], with the participation of other agencies, fol-
lowing examination and approval by RSFSR and USSR Hinges, will become a mandatory
document and will make it possible to obtain the necessary information in short
order.

Elaboration of a detailed and paleontologically well substantiated stratigraphic
diagram of Riphean-Lower Cambrian sediments, promising from the standpoint of find-
ing oil and gas, is another, no less important problem. In spite of an extended
period of study and a large number of wells drilled to and through these formations,
their subdivision into lithologic-stratigraphic subunits and correlation of sec-
tions of pre-Usol'sk sediments reached by deep wells in the southern part of the
Siberian Platform [12]. Up to the present time there is no well-substantiated and
generally accepted scheme of correlation of productive sandstone beds in Riphean-
Cambrian sediments on the Nepsko-Boruobinskaya arch. In the majority of discovered
fields the productive sandstones bear their own names, derived from the field name
[3, 9, 11]. The picture is even more complicated as regards correlation of car-
bonate reservoirs in.de Hadimeambrian Kostinskaya and Platonovskaya series [3, 5].
For this reason it isinmossble at the present time to construct with assurance
paleogeographic maps for the time of accumulation of the reservoir horizons, and
conclusions on their genesis and distribution are very difficult to reach. Con-
sequently, prediction of the presence and quality of reservoirs in new. as yet un-
drilled areas is very unreliable.

The prevailing situation is connected to a significant degree with lessening of
attention toward stratigraphic-paleontologic investigations in oil and gas promis-
ing areas of the Siberian Platform, as has already been stated in the press [8] and
in resolutions adopted at a meeting of the regional geology section of the Sci-
entific and Technical Council of USSR Hingeo (Leningrad,June 1976). The situation
has changed little for the better in the last five years. Very disturbing is the
fact that in many Siberian production and scientific organizations a great many ex-
perienced paleontologists and stratigraphers are ceasing their investigations as
they reach retirement age, while a replacement generation has not yet been trained.
Also disturbing is the fact that Siberian geological higher educational institutions
are training practically no specialists in the field of stratigraphy and
paleontology. It is quite obvious that future development of oil and gas prospect-
ing and exploration activities on the Siberian Platform requires a reliable and
highly detailed stratigraphic faundation. Therefore the status of paleontological-
stratigraphic investigations in this region should become the focus of special con-
cern on the part of officials of production and scientific organizations. Consider-
able attention should be devoted to the study of microphytolites, acritarchs and

15
FOI‘OFFMJAL.USE(MHLY
m u" a....-.-~ u...- uni..-

other groups of Hendian-Cambrian organisms, which are playing an increasingly im-
portant role in correlating geologic sections.

A third important problem is the study of pre-Cambrian, Paleozoic and Mesozoic
reservoirs, especially those involving Riphean -Cambrian carbonate, frequently or-
ganic sequences. The very primary nature of such reservoirs determines multiple

causality and a highly complex structure and distribution of interstices in
these reservoirs.

The situation is aggravated by the great age of these sediments and the active
tectonic conditions of the Siberian platform. During repeated successions of deep
subsidences ani no less active uplifts in many areas of the platform, subsurface
thermobaric conditions have changed substantially, and large fault zones have
developed, which could not help but affect the phase state and composition of the
waters and gases saturating the reservoir horizons. Complex, often irreversible
processes of dissolving or cementation of rocks, enlargement or decrease (to com-
plete elimination) of interstices occurred in reservoirs. Considerably younger
traprock, invading Lower Paleozoic sequences, exerted an enormous and highly
diversified, depending on the concrete geologic situation, and as yet very little
studied effect on reservoirs. Many investigators have already pointed to the high-
ly complex structure of Riphean-Cambrian reservoirs, the interstices of which
depend not so much on sedimentogenic primary conditions as on the manifestations
of tectonic movements and diversified secondary processes [3, 5, 7, 11]. On the
Siberian Platform not only carbonates but also terrigenous reservoirs, both
Paleozoic and Mesozoic, are of complex structure. Therefore the overwhelming
majority of hydrocarbon deposits are associated with combined structural-lithologic
traps. whereby the lithologic factor is frequently dominant.

The patterns of occurrence in contemporary space and geologic time of the diversi-
fied and complex processes which formed reservoirs, their intensity and correlation
with processes of hydrocarbon generation is just beginning to be clarified. The
mechanisms stopping the migration of fluid have also been little studied. Success-
ful resolution of these problems requires considerable amounts of lithologic in-
vestigations, performed in a skilled and qualified manner, employing the most ad-
vanced methods. The complexity of a structure determines the complexity and man-
datory combined approach of the scheme of investigation [5, 6]. Unfortunately
neither the number of lithologic teams of the Siberian P60 [expansion unknown] and
s.- ientific research institutes, nor laboratory facilities, especially in the P60,
are adequate to the difficulty of the problem. The 5th All-Union Conference on
Reservoirs and Fluid Traps held in Novosibirsk in November 1980 noted a number of
serious of deficiencies in investigation of the reservoir and trapping properties
of rocks [13]. They apply in full measure to Siberian oil and gas exploration
organizations. He should add that there are very few or no lithology teams in a
number of Siberian PGO (for example, in the Yeniseyneftegazgeologiya PGO).
Siberian scientific organizations, both of USSR Hinges and the USSR Academy of
Sciences. do not have adequate manpower and resources to perform the required very
substantial volume of diversified and complex investigations. Nor do I believe
that enlistment of Moscow and Leningrad scientific research institutes and higher
educational institutions will fully resolve the problem. It is necessary to es-
tablish appropriate laboratories and qualified teams of lithology specialists in
all PCO conducting oil and gas prospecting and exploration activities on the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Siberian Platform. And this mat be done as quickly as possible, until the planned
sharp increase in volume of deep drilling is fully accomplished.

Of course the problems which must be resolved on the Siberian Platform are not
exhausted with the above enumeration. There are many additional problena in this
area of geophysical exploration, organization and technology of deep drilling. As

I am nor competent in these matters, I shall not discuss them. I am convinced, how-
ever, that without serious efforts directed toward resolving the problems raised in
this article we cannot substantially improve the effectiveness of prospecting and
exploration activities. But this is urgently demanded by the tasks assigned by the
party and government to those persons engaged in geologic exploration of the
Siberian Platform -- this very promising but as yet little known region.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Bol'shakov, Yu. Ya., "Features of Hydrocarbon Accumulations in the Botuobinskiy
Area as a Consequence of the Influence of Processes of Hydrate Formation," in
the volume "Voprosy neftegazonosnosti i uglenosnosti tsentral'noy i yuzhnoy
Yakutii" [Problems of Occurrence of Oil, Gas and Coal in the Central and
Southern Parts of the Yakut ASSR], Yakutsk, 1980, pp 63-66.

2. Vorob'yev, V. N., "Types of Oil and Gas Reservoirs in Pre-Cambrian and Lower-
Paleozoic Sediments of the Siberian Platforn," GBOLOGIYA NBPTI I GAZA, Ho 1.
1980, pp 1—5.

3. Antsiferov, A. 5.; Bakin. V. Ye.; Varlamov. I. P.; et a1, "Geologiya nefti i
gaze Sibirskoy platformy" [Oil and Gas Geology of the Siberian Platform], Hos-
cow, Nedra, 1981.

lo. Gurari. P. 6., "Northern Slope of the Alden Range," in the volume "Osnovnyye
cherty geologicheskogo stroyeniya i perspektivy neftenosnosti Vostochnoy Sibiri"
[Principal Features of Geologic Structure and Oil and Gas Prospects of Eastern
Siberia], Moscow, 1956, pp 156-203.

5. Bogdanova, V. H.; Gurova, ’1‘. H.; Yergacheva, ‘1'. IL; et al, ”Reservoir Properties
of Carbonate Rocks of Lower Cambrian Productive Horizons of the Siberian Plat-
form," ‘l'RUDY SNIIGGiHS, Issue 280, 1980, pp 63-58.

6. Bogdanova, V. N.; Gurova, ‘1‘. 11.; Kondrina. K. 8.; er. al, "Lithologic Pre-
requisites for Occurrence of Oil and Gas on the Siberian Platform," TRUDY
SNIIGGiHS. Issue 284, 1980, pp 21-35.

7. Shashin, s. G.; Buddo, L. A.; Kemerov, N. 1.; et al, "Lithologic-Petrophyeical
Criteria for Predicting Zones of Improved Reservoirs in Pre-Cambrian Sediments
in the Seuthern Part of the Siberian Platform," TRUDY SHIIGGilS, Issw 280,
1980. pp 59-65.

8. Savitskiy, V. Ye.; Krasnov, V. 1.; Sennikov. V. PL; et al, "On the Status of

Paleontological-Stutigraphic Work in the Areas of Siberia," TBUDY SHIIGGiHS,
Issue 258, 1978, pp 5-13.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

COPY

3024
C50:

[UR Vl’l'l‘yll‘h 09‘- U|‘Isl

0vcharenko, A. V.. and Bakin. V. Ye.. "Prospects of Exploration Activities in
the Southwestern Part of the Yakut ASSR," GEOLOGIYA NEPTI I GAZA, No 1, 1979,
pp 1-7.

Kontorovich, A. 8.; Surkov. V. 3.; Trofimuk, A. A.; et a1, "Principal Direc-
tions and Methodology of Regional and Oil and Gas Prospecting and Exploration
Activities on the Siberian Platform in 1981-1985." TRDDY SUIIGGiHs, Issue 286,
1980, pp 4-20.

Vorob'yev. V. 8.; Afanea'yev, S. A.; Kondratenko, I. 0.; et a1, "Productive
Horizons in Cambrian and Riphssn Sediments of the Siberian Platform." TEDDY
SNIIGGiHS. Issue 266, 1978, pp 98-107.

"Resheniye II Seminars po korrelyatsii produktivnykh gorizontov ploshchndey
glubokogo bureniya Leno-Tungusskoy neftegazonosnoy provintsii“ [Resolution of
the Second Seminar on Correlation of Productive Horizons in Deep Drilling

Areas of the Lens-Tunguska Oil and Gas Province], Irkutsk, 1980.

"Resheniye V Vsesoyuznogo sovsshchaniye po kollektorsm i flyuidouporsn" [Resolu-
tion of the 5th All-Union Conference on Reservoirs and Fluid Traps]. Novo-
sibirsk, 1981.

RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", "Geologiya nefti i gsza", 1981

1822/94

18

FIHICNWNC1A1.USB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS

UDC: 553.98:550.812(575.2)"1980-1985"
OIL, GAS PROSPECTING IN KIRGHIZ SSR

Moscow GEOLOGIYA NBFTI I GAZA in Russian No 12,Nov 81 (manuscript received 6 Jul 81)
pp 3-6

[Article by R. N. Khaimov, Yu. G. Pedder, R. A. Khodzhayev (SredAzNIPIneft'); E. G.
Bazarbayev, Yu. P. Pekin. and G. I. Rudnev (Kirgizneft'): "Geological Exploration
for Oil and Gas in the Kirghiz SSR in the 11th Five-Year Plan“]

[Text] Geological exploration activities in the search for oil and gas in the
Kirghiz SSR are being conducted in two regions which differ in geologic structure -
the Fergana basin and Northern Kirghizia. Up to the present time 11 oil and gas
pools have been discovered in the Kirghiz SSR. All of them are located in four
structural zones of the Fergana basin. The Changyrtash, Suzak, Chigirchik. Beshkent-
Togap. and Karagachi fields are situated on the Southern bench; the Haylisu-IV-
Vostochnyy Izbaskent, Haylisu-III. Izbaskent, and Kyzyl-Alna on the Naryn; the
Hayllsny (with off-balancesheet oil reserves) -- on the Namangan. The Northern
Knrakchikum field is associated with the Central Fergans ncsasyncline. Three
regional oil and gas complexes are distinguished in the Hesozoic-Censaoic sediments
of the Pergana basin: Paleogene -- for the most part oil-bearing; Cretaceous and
Jurassic -- primarily gas-bearing. Commercial-category reserves in this region com-
prise only 32.6 percent of potential resources. Therefore in this area all con-
ditions exist for increasing commercially-recoverable oil and gas reserves. In con-
nection with this, the following areas of geological exploration activity are
specified in the 11th Five-Year Plan for the Pergana part of the hirghiz SSR:
Jurassic sediments on the Naryn structural bench; Paleogene and Cretaceous sediments
on the Central Pergsna megasyncline; Paleogens (Karagundsy structural prominence)
and Mesozoic (Suzak-Chigirchik uplift zone) sediments of the Southern structural
bench; Mesozoic sediments of the Naukat, Kurshab, and Uzgen troughs.

The main thrust of geological exploration by the Kirgizneft' Association in the
11th Five-Year Plan, providing the bulk of growth in oil, condensate and natural
gas reserves, involves prospecting and exploration for oil and gas pools in
Paleogene and CretaceOus sediments within the boundaries of the Karatau structural
prominence, situated in the southwestern part of the Pergana basin. A number of
all and oil-gas fields have already been discovered in this region (Karagachi,
Beshkont-Togap). 011 seeps associated with outcrops of Paleogene sedimentary
rocks at the heart of the Karatau structural prominence suggest that its plunge
from the Togap field on the west to the Aksaray gas field on the east is a highly
promising zone. Structural-profile drilling (see figure) is recouended for

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anticipated effectiveness of geological exploration by the Kirgizneft' Association
in the 11th Five—Year Plan remains urchanged. But effectiveness greater than that
achievedvs phuuud ﬁr the principal area, that is, within the boundaries of the
Karatau prominence and the Tuzluk fault.

As of 1 January 1981 the Kirgizneft' Association had seven structures with prelimi-
ruries completed for deep drilling. Six of these were in the Pergana basin and one
in the Eastern Chu basin. In order to ensure a stable planned annual growth in oil
and gas reserves, deep drilling must be conducted in the five-year plan on 14 new
structures, preliminaries on which are to be performed by the Kirghiz Combined Ex-
pedition (KKGZ) .

The Karatan and Karagunday structural prominences are primary areas for readying
new structures for deep drilling. In the areas of the Eastern Fergana, however
(the Naukat, Kurshab, and Uzgen troughs), practically no preparatory prospecting
and exploration work has been conducted. Therefore plans call for intensification
of geophysical exploration, with the aim of establishing a backlog of structures
ready for drilling. In 1981-1985 the Kirgizneft' Association plans to prepare two
areas -- Tamchi and Tashravat - with structural drilling. Regional geophysical
(seismic) exploration is to be conducted in a substantial amount within the Fergana
basin. Such activities will be conducted within the boundaries of the Kurshab-Uzgen
and Naukat troughs and the thisu structural prominence. Detailed geophysical ex-
ploration is to be conducted within the boundaries of the Karatau, Karagunday and
Haylisu structural prominences, where the discovery of non—anticlinal oil and gas
traps is possible.

Regional and detailed geophysical exploration has been conducted in the basins of
Northern Kirghizia since the middle of the 1950's. and deep parametric and ex—
ploratory drilling since 1960. Up to the present time 33 deep wells, totaling
approximately 115,000 meters, have been drilled in the Eastern Chu, Issyk-Kul,

and Naryn basins. In spite of a considerable amount of geophysical and drilling
activities, no commercially-significant oil or gas pools have been established in
the basins of Northern Kirghizia. Negative results from deep drilling, however,
are no proof of absense of commerical quantities of oil and gas. As an example

we might note that the presence of oil and gas in the Amn Darya structural
depression was finally proven by obtaining a commercial-quantity flow of gas in the
Sctalan-Tepe area in April 1953, by the 113th deep well drilled in this area.
Analysis of drilling in the basins of Northern Kirghizia indicates that practical-
ly none of the 17 areas in which drilling was begun met the requirements imposed on
structures with completed preliminary work. Deep wells were drilled on an insuf-
ficiently reliably structural basis. Geophysical structures were not confirmed by
drilling either as regards depths of reference horizons or morphology of structural
forms. The reason for the sharp discrepancy between geophysical and drilling data
is the low degree of effectiveness of seismic exploration by the correlation
method of refracted waves and the reflected wave method, due to the complex
aeismogeologic conditions of the region. Deep drilling produced additional data
confirming the possibility of finding oil and gas in Paleozoic and Cenozoic
sediments in Northern Kirghizia. The extensive occurrence of Cenozoic lacustrine
rocks, which may be oil and gas productive, has been established in the interior
ports of the basins. An important substantiation of the possibility of oil and

gas formation in lacustrine sediments is the discovery in recent years of oil pools

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU. Vl‘l‘dbll‘h 00‘ 01‘]...

tions of this region, more reliable data on deep structure can be obtained as a
result of conducting seismic prospecting by the mcr [expansion unknown] method,
together with parametric and structural drilli . With the objective of developing
a new method of identifying and performing preliminary work on structures, drilling
of two or three paranetric boreholes, with a total footage of 10,000 meters, is
planned for 1981~1985 in the basins of Northern Kirghizia. Prom two to three MGT

gas in Paleozoic sediments in Central Asia. The debate over this question has been
going on for 50 years now. Some investigators continue to consider them unpromising
in regard to finding counercial-quantity accumulations of oil and gas; others, on
the contrary, place certain hopes in this regard on pre-Kesozoic formations. While
the debate has been running on for years on the pages of the press, more and more

dcpression) and methane (Cugurtli, Ortalyk, etc) gas composition, but also comer-
cial—quantity and close to conercial-quantity accumulations of oil occurring in
these sediments (Boston and Alash 1! tie Fergus basin, Xars-Kuduk on the Ust Urt, etc).
In addition, investigations by A. M. Akhramkhodzhayev have proven the secondary
nature of hydrocarbon fluids‘in terrigenous (sandstones) Lower-Middle Jurassic
sediments of the Ust Urt, which migrated there from the underlying Paleozoic
carbonate sediments Therefore in our opinion one should approach the study of
Paleozoic sediments or Central Asia from the standpoint of the possible existence

of a new, completely uninvestgated oil and gas complex. It is necessary to conduct
both regional (including orientation and parametric drilling, as well as high-quali-
ty geophysical exploration) and, subsequently, detailed geologic exploration, with
step-by-step study of the material composition of Paleozoic rocks, history of the
region's geologic develop-ant. and the existence of oil-producing formations in
these sediments, identifying possible zones of origin and accuaulation of hydro-
carbon fluids, as well as areas with a possible concentration of secondary accumula-
tions caused by flow of hydrocarbons from adjacent, hypsonetricslly lower productive
Tertiary and Mesozoic sediments. Only purposeful oil and gas exploration activi-

COPYRIGHT: lrdatel’stvo "Nedra", "Geologiya nefti i gaze", 1981

302k
C80: 1822/96 22

FOR OFl-‘IGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS

UDC: 550.812:622 .276(262. 8l)"1‘.‘75-l985"

01L, GAS EXTRACTION 1N CASPIAN

Moscow GEOLOClYA NEFTI I CAZA in Russian No 12, Nov 81 (manuscript received 16 Feb
81) Ph 6-11

[Article by Kh. B. Yusufzade (Kaspmorneftegazprom): "Results of Exploration Activ-

ities in the 10th Five-Year Plan and Development Prospects for Offshore 011 and Gas
Production in the 11th Five-Year Plan in the Caspian Sea")

[Text] Fourteen oil and gas fields with various geologic and production features
were being operated in the Caspian Sea in the 10th Five—Year Plan. Ten of these
(Artema Island, b. Darvina, Zhiloy Island, Gryazevaya Sopka, Neftyanyye Kami,
l’eschanyy-more, Sangachaly-more-Duvannyye-more-Bulla Island. Bakhar, Yuzhnaya,
Bulla-more) were in full-scale production, while four (I). Zhdanova, b. Lam, b.

Apahcronskaya, and imeni 28 April) were in experimental couercial production
(Figure l).

'- Imumo (1)

I Q " 9‘"
' 2., <2)
(1.) 5A!!! J 5’ “ye g
’5 ’ II n 3 j 9 ‘
5 a7 9.?” 9%]: Kncgozolrl ‘ up 9’
o J? C [1 Q" ’7 ' a £5
J: ””0” ° we "” on
150 ’7 \‘ ”I! 2 97C:
m g :0
m: 21 25
2‘
I Q é
’ El“ .5 [:10 cgd Q”
Figure 1. Schematic Hap of Caspian Offshore Oil and Gas Fields
Fields: .1 -- oil; h -- gas; c -- oil and gas condensate; d -- structures under ex-
Mutation
23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(tigurc l on preceding page, cont'd)

Structures: 1 -- b. Apsheronskaya; 2 —- b. Darvina; 3 -- Artema Island; a --
Cyutgynny-more; S -- Zhiloy Island; 6 -- Lokbatan—more; 7 -- Peschanyydmore; 8 --
uakhar; 9 -- Yuzhnaya; 10 -- Yuzhnaya-Z; 11 -— imeni Azi-Aslanov; 12 -- Neftyanyye
Kamni; 13 -- Neftyanyye Kamni-Z; 14 -— imeni 28 April; 15 - ineni Kaverochkin;

lo -- imeni 26 Baku Commissars; l7 -- Promezhutochnaya; 18 -- Lovanova-zapadnaya;

l9 —- Livanova-tsentral‘naya; 20 -— Livanova—vostochnaya; 21 -- imeni Barinov; 22 --
lmeni Gubkin; 23 -- b. LAM; 24 -- b. Zhdanova; 25 -- Cheleken dome; 26 --
Zapndno-Ogurchinskaya; 27 - Zapadno-Erdeklinskaya; 28 -- Zapadno-Okaremskaya; 29 —-
SingachaJy-more; 30 -- Duvsnnyy-more; 31 -— Alyaty-more; 32 - Bulla Island; 33 —-
ineni Samcdov; 34 -- Shakhovo-more; 35 -- Garasu; 36 -- Bulls-more; 37 -- b.
Andreyeva;38 -- Kamen' Persiyanina; 39 —- Kamen' Ignatiya; 40 -- Kornilova—Pavlova;
41 —- b. Golovacheva; 62 -- Skalistaya; 43 -- Peschanouysskaya; 44 -- Peschanomysskaya-
yuzhnnya; 45 -- Sarzha-more; 46 -- Zapadno-Rakushechnaya; 47 -- Rakushechnsya-more

Key:
1. Shevchenko 3. Krasn0vodsk
2. Mangyshlak Peninsula 4. Baku

 

During this period oil and gas production in the above-named fields increased from
19.7 to 22.5 million tons. With a slight decline inlhe haul of production of

crude, natural gas production almost doubled. This was promoted by the discovery
and development of new gas condensate fields and reservoirs, while crude oil
production for the lost part involved fields which have been in production for some
time. All principal oilfields were producing with maintaining formation pressure.
Extensive adoption of various systems and methods of water flooding promoted in-
tensification of the exploitation process. For example, approximately 75 percent
of total crude oil production came from formations being affected by water flooding.
Hater injection in the amount of more than 60,000 m3/day made it possible to
produce an additional 2.5 million tons of crude oil per year.

In addition to intensification of oil and gas field exploitation, considerable
attention is devoted to adding proved reserves.

In the 10th Five—Year Plan offshore geologic exploration activities were conducted
in the Azerbaijan, Turkmen, and Kazakh parts of the Caspian Sea. In conformity
with the five-year plan for geologic exploration activities, deep exploratory
drilling continued in the oilfield areas of the Apsheron-Pribalkhanskaya uplift zone
and the Southern Turkmen shelf, primarily for the purpose of locating new and
mapping previously discovered oil and gas pools in the Productive Sequence (PT)
(Azerbaijan sector). the Middle Pliocene redbeds (Turkmen sector), as well as in
the Kazakh part of the Caspian to determine the occurrence of oil and gas in
Mesozoic sediments (see Figure 1). Deep exploratory drilling was being conducted
In a total of 27 areas. including 18 in the Azerbaijani, 7 in the Turkmen, and 2 in
the Kazakh parts of the Caspian. Four new oil and gas fields were discovered: the
oilfield imeni 28 April, and the Yuzhnaya-Z gas condensate field in the Azerbaijan
part of the sea, as well as oil and gas condensate fields -- the Cheleken dome and
the field imeni Barinov in the Turkmen part of the Caspian. In addition, 6 oil and
gas pools were discovered.

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1075 the average depth of completed wells was 4590 meters, while the figure was
3250 meters in 1980. At the present time almost all wells begun in the Azerbaijan
part of the Caspian have a planned drilling depth exceeding $000 I.

In the 9th Five-Year Plan 42 percent of completed wells were deeper than 4500 m,

while the figure was 77 percent in the 10th Five-Year Plan (Figure 2).
ﬁx

   

Int-1mm I!7l!75r.r. five-year plan

Mr mnurmu 3-1 "murmur M-a "magma
Figure 2. Diagrams of Principal Results of Geologic Exploration Activities, 1966-

1980

a -— average depth of exploratory wells. m; number of wells with depth exceeding
1.500 m: b -- completed wells; c -- producing crude or natunl gas

In 1980 Well 38, on the Bulls-more structure, produced from a depth of 6200 meters,
3 record depth for the world's offshore fields.

During the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan the following basic results of geologic
exploration activities promoting the growth of oil and gas production were obtained.

The Apsheron Archipelago and western part of the Apsheron-Pribalkhanskaya uplift
zone. The following oil and oil-gas condensate fields are in production here:
Neftyanyye Kamni, Bakhar, Yuzhnaya, b. Darvina, Artema Island, Zhiloy Island,
Cryazevaya Sopka. etc.

Offshore exploration activities were conducted in the following areas: Bakhar
(simultaneously with development), Yuzhnaya-Z, and imeni 28 April. In the Bakhar

field the presence of oil and gas was discovered during the five-year plan in
sediments of the "Discontinuity" formation, the Nadkirmakinskaya sandstone (NKP)
and Podkirmakinskaya (PK) formations. In addition to wells 56 and 66, which.es—
tnblished the presence of accumulations of oil and gas on the northeastern flank,
Hell 73. drilled in the central part of the fold, produced a flow of crude in ex-
cess of 400 t/day and gas at a rate exceeding 400.000 m3/dsy.

The presence of gas in the NKP formation was established in the Yuzhnaya-Z area in
1976, when a flow of gas with condensate was obtained from Hell 2 for the first
time from the depth interval 4740-6690 meters, while a crude flow of 25-30 tons/day
was obtained in 1978 from the Kalinskaya formation in Well 3.

Discovery of the Oilfield imeni 28 April was the most important result of Caspian
exploration activities in recent years. During testing of producing zone 10 of the

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lintUFFKJAL.USEioNLY

Hr hulukhanskaya formation in Hell 4 in depth interval 3455-3623 n. a flow of crude
was obtained, at a rate of 300 tons/day through a 9 mm connection. with

phuf=10 HPa. A second directional well was drilled from this same platform, Num-
bcr n, to determine presence of oil and gas in sediments down to and including the
NKP formation. Due to problems with the wellbore, drillers reached only the upper
part or the "Diseontinuity" formation; testing .. the depth interval 3b83-3b43 m
produced crude oil with a flow of 300 t/day through a 10.5 mm connection, with
pbuf=10.8 HPa. This signaled discovery of a new oil pool on this structure and
confirmed that the field contained multiple pools.

Another well is scheduled to be drilled from the same platform, to a depth of 3950
meters, down to and including the NKP formation. In addition, 8 exploratory wells
are to be drilled from 3 platforms and several wells from a semisubmersible drill-
ing rig in 1981-1983 in order to estimate this field's oil and gas reserves.

In the 11th Five-Year Plan exploration is to be conducted in the promising Shakhovo-
more area of the Apsheron Archipelago, and a number of structures in the Apsheron-
Prihaikhanskaya zone -- imeni Kaverochkin, imeni 26 Baku Commissars, and
Promezhutochnaya. The propinquity of the latter to the Neftyanyye Kamni and imeni
28 April oil and gas fields certainly predetermines their oil and gas prospects.
Exploration on these structures is to be conducted only with semisubmersible rigs,
since the sea depth in the area exceeds 100 meters.

Considerable attention in this area will be devoted to continuation of work aimed at
intensification of oil production in fields which are at a late stage of exploita-
ﬂiuu. the percentage share of which in total production volume will remain high.
There is to be a further improvement of the water flooding system. with employment
of various physicochemical methods, adjustment of exploitation by making the well
grid denser, drilling of wells to residual crude and "pillars."

In spite of the fact that the Neftyanyye Kamni oilfield has accounted for a large
part of total oil produced, this field has reserve potential for boosting
production. In the 11th Five-Year Plan work is to continue on tapping pools for
residual crude and "pillars."

Special attention will be devoted to pools with worsened geologic-physical and
thermodynamic characteristics. Achieving a high oil yield from such reservoirs
will require application of sore sophisticated recovery methods. Pools maximum
extraction of hydrocarbons from which should be accomplished with the employment
of surfactants and micellar systems have been selected on the basis of existing
criteria of applicability of physicochemical methods.

In the ﬂnkhur field, in order to maintain a high rate of production in the llth
FiVe-Year Plan it will be necessary to resolve the complex problem of maintaining
formation pressure. At the present time this is the only offshore vertically-
stacked multiple-pool gas condensate field with an oil fringe where enhanced
recovery methods will be employed.

The Baku Archipelago. In recent years, as the Sangachaly-more. Duvannyy-more,
uulin Island and Bulls-more fields have come into production. a new oil production
area has been established in the Caspian, which in level approximates the fields

26
F0!(Nﬂﬂ(1ﬂllﬁﬂi0hﬂ1’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hr the Apsheron Archipelago. Exploration activities for the most part have been
conducted in the above—named fields.

The oil pool margin in producing zone 7 and the gas pool margin in producing zone
3 on the northeastern limb of the structure have been expanded as a result of ex-
ploration conducted in the Duvannyy-more field. Bell 547, which made it possible
to extend the oil pool margin in producing zone 7, went into production after a
flow of crude at a rate of 150 t/day was obtained from the depth interval 5351-
5318 n through a 14 an connection at pbuf-lOO HPa. In view of the fact that on
the northeastern limb of the fold zones 7 and 8 contain oil and gas, a number of
wells were drilled on the southwestern limb (Bulls Island) in order to determine
the occurrence of oil and gas at these horizons. Testing in the 5755-5721 meter
interval in Hell 554 (the deepest oil well) produced a flow of crude yielding

300 t/day through a lOImm connection, with pbuf-10.5 HPa, and the existence of an
oil pool was established in PT horizon 7 on the southwestern limb of Bulla Island.
The latter was confirmed by Hell 557, testing of which in the 5451-5427 meter
depth interval (horizon 7) produced a gas flow of 700,000 m3/day through an 11 mm
connection, with pbuf'35 MPO, which attested to the presence of a gas cap in this
pool.

in the lith Five-Year Plan exploration activities will continue on mapping the oil
pool in producing zones 5 and 7 and on prospecting for new reservoirs at PT
horizon 8.

At another field in this archipelago -— Bulls-more, intensive work was conducted in
the 10th Five-Year Plan on tracing oil and gas reservoirs in producing zones 7 and
5 and in locating reservoirs in zone 8 and the PK formation. The task of studying
zonelland the PK formation is being accomplished by drilling wells in the crest—
adjacent part of the structure.

rhe reservoir in producing zone 5, mapping of which was completed in the 10th Five-
Year Plan, is of limited dimensions, and is a gas condensate pool with an in-
slgnilicant oil fringe.

The high degree of gas saturation of zone 7 has been confirmed by testing data on
IS wells. where zone 7 lies at demhs ranging from 5300 to 6200 meters in the in-
vestigated part of the structure.

in 1980, according to test figures on Well 38, which produces a natural flow of
up to 700,000 m3/day of gas and 200 tons/day of condensate, the gas surface in PT
zone 7 was at a depth of -6l72 m.

In the llth Five-Year Plan mapping of the zone 7 pool is to continue,|1usa search
for pools at these levels (8 and PK formation), drilling wells to planned depths
of 5000-6500 meters.

Exploration will continue in one of the promising areas of the Baku Archipelago --
h. Andreyeva, situated to the southeast of Bulls-more, where a well is presently
being drilled, with a planned depth of 6500 meters, for the purpose of seeking oil
and gas in PT zone 7. Plans call for drilling 6 or 7 exploration wells here to a
depth of 6500 m.

27
FOR‘0FFK]A1.US£ZON1¥
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. USE UNLY

Thrrc will also be further exploration in Bulla-more—Z, established by seismic
fruspucting. The primary target here is zone 7, and a few wells will be drilled
to commence study of PT zone 8.

in addition, the search for oil and gas reservoirs in the PI sequence is in
progress in the Alyaty-more field. Drilling of individual wells is scheduled for
the Kamen' lgnatiya, b. Kornilova-Pavlova, and b. Golovacheva areas.

Detailed geophysical, geochemical and other types of investigations are planned in
connection with deep exploratory drilling to locate structures in this oil and gas
field area.

In addition, in 1981-1985 plans call for continuing work on improving the system
of development of the archipelago fields production in which will continue to be
substantial.

One of the factors which determine the magnitude of crude yield from producing
rotmutions in conditions of the complex-structured reservoir of the Sangachaly-more-
huvnnnyy-nore—Bulla Island field is the ratio of viscosities of the crude and water
in formation conditions and distribution of injected water vertically thrOugh

the formation. In this field polymeric water flooding and dosing of surfactants in-
to the injected water will be employed. work will continue on regulating produc-
tion by developing a denser well grid and by drilling standby wells as part of the
idonud resuve inventory. This will make it possible to achieve a high rate of

crude production (4.5-4.6 percent) within the current five-year plan and, in addi-
tion to bringing into production pools in producing zone 8 and the PK formation

in Bulln-more. to maintain the production level in the Baku Archipelago area.

Turkmon part of the Caspian Sea. in recent years the b. Zhdanova, LAM, cheleken
dome, h. Livanova-Vostochnaya and imeni Barinov fields have been discovered in this
area. The first three are in experimental-commercial production. In these areas
it is planned to continue exploration activities in order to map already dis-
covered pools and to find new ones at deep horizons underlying the redbeds.

Prospects of discovering new oil and gas fields in this part of the Caspian are
connected with continuation of exploration activities in the b. Gubkina area and

initiation of deep exploratory drilling of such structures as Zapadno-Okaremskaya,
Xanaduo-Ogurchinskaya, Livsnova-tsentral'naya, Livanova—zapadnaya, etc.

Bringing b. Zhdanova into commercial production, equipping the b. Livanova-
vostochunaya and imeni Barinov fields with lines and equipment, alongside con-
tlnuiug exploration in these waters will make it possible to establish another
oil production area here in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

in the Kazakh part of the Caspian exploration activities have been conducted on
structures of the Hangyshlak Peninsula. the prospects of which are focused
primarily in Permian-Triassic, Middle Jurassic, and Neocomian sediments.

Thu offshore continuation of the Beke-Bashkuduk arch has been investigated in de-
tuil hy seismic methods, revealing a number of local structures. Structural bore-
hnlvs as well as a few exploratory wells were drilled on some of them (Aralda-aore,
Zapadno-Rakushechnaya, Rakushechnaya-more) to gain more data.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'n Ihr Illh Five-Year Plan exploration activities are to continue on the
Knkuuhvchnaya-more and Zapadno-Rakushechnaya structures, with commencement of ex-
ploratory deep drilling in the Skalistaya, Inna—more, Sarzha-more, and ~
Pcsnhanonysskaya-more areas.

Regional geophysical exploration conducted up to the present time has.established
that the Northern Caspian offshore area contains the southern end of the pre-
Camhrian Russian platform and the young Scythian-Turan platform. The presence of
these geostructursi elements, filled with Paleozoic and Mesozoic sediments, which
contain commercial-quantity pools of oil and gas on adjacent onshore structures,
attests to the good prospects of the offshore Northern Caspian, but this offshore
area is a protected environment zone. In addition, a number of technical problems
must be solved: development of the shallow—water areas, preventing pollution of
the sea, etc. After this plans call for commencing geophysical exploration (in-
cluding gravimetric, electrical resistance and seismic survey, signal-generator
seismic exploration, airborne magnetic and geologic survey) for studying the deep
structure. detailing the boundaries of large geotectonic elements, and identifying
local structures within these large elements.

The principal geologic exploration activities. promoting the development of Caspian
offshore oil and gas production, will emphasize these areas of investigation.

Bringing new fields into production and drilling of additional wells in existing
fields, alongside improving the oil and gas field exploitation system, will make it
possible to achieve the targeted growth and development of Caspian offshore oil and
gas production in the llth Five-Year Plan.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", "Geologiya nefti 1 gets", 1981

3024
cso: 1822/96

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VI‘ ‘II‘I'ISII‘I— ‘h’I'. VI‘UJ'

FUELS

BRIEFS

PALEOGEDMORPHOLOGICAL ATLAS--The USSR Acadeny of Sciences Institute of Geography
and the Aerogeologiya Association of USSR Ministry of Geology announce publication
in 1982 of an atlas entitled "Karty epokh regional'nykh kontinental'nykh pereryvov
(palcogeomorfologicheskiy atlas SSSR)" [Maps of Bpochs of Regional Continental
Hiatuses (Paleogeomorphological Atlas ofthelBSD].Sixty naps. Approxinate cost

6 rubies. These maps present for the first tine comprehensive characteristics of
pnlwtopography, sediments and exogenous cos-arcial mineral deposits contemporary
with the paleotopography, fornation of which took place during various continental
epochs of the Phanerozoic period. The atlas contains naps of the paleogeonorphologi-
cal conditions of distribution of a number of connercial minerals (bauxites, oil.
gas, etc). The naps are accompanied by an explanatory text. The atlas is intended
for a broad group of specialists: geologists, geosorphologists, paleogeographers,
lithologists. etc. It may also be of interest to teachers and students of geology
and geography faculties. This atlas may be ordered fron: 101890, Moscow,
Krivokolennyy pereulok, 10, USSR Ministry of Geology "Geolkniga" specialized book-
store. lText] [Moscow, GEOLOGIYA NEFTI I GAZA in Russian No 12, Nov 81 inside
back cover] 3024 '

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", "Geologiya nefti i gaza", 1981

USU: 1822/96 END

30
FOI‘0F11C1A1.USEGDNLY