FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10359

2 March 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infomtion was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sumaxized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. ‘l‘ines within ite-s are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, View or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGl‘I LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSRIP 0?
lﬂTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAI DISSEHINATION
01" 13115 PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(P000 3/82)

CONTENTS
FUELS

oil Exploration in Central, Western Azerbaijan To Be Streaaed

(A. N. Guaeynov. 8h. 8. Kocharli; 68011)an mu
1%. wt 81) 0......OOOOCCOCCCCCCI.‘O.’

‘eeeeeeeeeeeoeeeee 1

Safety Regulation in the Geo Service

(N. 8. Beraenev, et al.; PRAVIIA “20PM?! v
GAZOVOH WOZYAYSM. 1980)

eeeeeeeeeeooooaoeeeeoeeeeoeaeaeoo 12

GENERAL

CHM Fuel, Energy Problem
(Anatoliy Ivanovich Zubltov; VOPRDSY mm, Oct 81) ‘15

- e - [III - USSR - 37 P000]
FOR 0'11CJAI.IE“£(MVLY

FUELS

OIL EXPLORATION IN CENTRAL, WESTERN AZERBAIJAN TO BE SMSSED
Moscow GEOLOGIYA NBPTI I GAZA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 7-15

[Article by A. N. Guseynov and sh. s. Kocharli (Asneft' [state Association of the
Azerbaijan Oil Industry]): "The Main Areas for Prospecting and Exploration by the
Azneft' Association During the 11th Five-Year Plan"; passages enclosed in slant-
lines printed in italics] -

[Text] The total area of Azerbaijan's land area that holds pronise of being oil—
bearing is 47,000 knz (or 54 percent of the total area). These areas are con-
fined to the republic's lowlands and pied-ant areas, and they include the following
oil and gas bearing basins or depressions. which experienced intense subaergence in
Mesozoic-Cenozoic tine: the Tersko-Caspian depression and the Caspian-Rubs area;
the South Caspian depression and the Apsheron, Gobustan and Lower Kura zones; the
Yevlakh-Agdzhabedi depression and the Kirovabad and Saatly-Geokchay zones; the
Iori-AdzhinOur depression and the Adzhinour zone; and the Kura and Iori interfluve
(figure 1). '

The indicated regions.and zones are not identical in degree of exploration. prosise
of the sediments, or development of the resources. This was considered in the
Integrated Design for Geological Exploration for Oil and Gas in the Transcaucasus
for 1981-1985. '

At the present time the most studied re ion is the Agsheron Peninsula. where the
extent of exploration is 2.060 meters/kn and 0.? kn /well.

In the Lower Kura lowland and the Caspian-Rubs region, where the presence of oil
and gas was established cosparatively recently. the degrees of exploration are.
respectively, 350 and 260 asters/kl2 and 8 and 7L6 Rig/well.

As for the central and western regions of the republic, particularly the Kura and
Iori interfluve and the Adzhinour district. their depths have practically not been
studied at all with deep drilling. The degrees of exploration there are. respec-
tively, 7 and 3 leters/knz.

Neither have the logs of individual oil and gas bearing regions been studied uni-
fonnly: thus. on the Apsheron Peninsula. about 99 percent of all drilling is at
depths of less than 5 kn, where liddle Pliocene (PT) deposits prisarily have been
developed.

FOR<OFFKJAI.UBE(NVLY
s was urn‘uuonu vat. \ll‘hl

Figure 1. Schele
of the Oil and
Gas Bearing
Regions

Key:

*Iran.
**Ca3pian Sea.
#Baku.

 

##Tbilisi.
1. NGO's [oil and gas bearing areas]. Axial lines:
1. Northern Apsheron.
II. Gobustan-Apsheron. . 3. uingechaur~$aatly-Talysh interbasin
111. Lower Kura. uplift.
IV. Yelakh-Agdzhabedi. 4. Yevlakh-Agdzhabedi depression.
V. Iori-Adzhinour. 5. Oil and gas fields.

2. NGR's [oil and gas bearing regions]. 6' L°°‘l “Plifts‘

4. Kusary-Divichi .
6. Shenakha-Gobustan.
B. Apsheron.
1. Apsheron Archipelago.
a. Lower Kara.
e. Baku Archipelago.
”t. Muradkhnnly, Saatly-Geokchay
zone.
3. Kirovabad.
u. Lenkornn'.
K. Adzhinour.
Jﬂ. Kura and tori interfluve.
N. Mirzaani.
H. Nakhichevan' (possibly oil and

gas bearing).

1. Tslabi.

2. Agzybirchala.

3. Leninsbad.

4. Astrskhsnovks.

5. Kyzylagach.

6. Kala-adyn.

7 . Muradkhanly .

8. Zardob.

9. Sovetlyar.
10. Tarsdallyar.
11. Gyurzundag.
12. Sazhdag.

13. Adzhinour.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In other oil and gas bearing regions. the share of penetration to the more ancient
sediments is somewhat higher, although in the total balance it is still very low.
The degree of develop-ant of oil resources in Azerbaijan's land area is 65.6 per-
cent. However, this has been achieved thanks mainly to the degree of exploration
of the resources of older regions. particularly the Apsheron Peninsula (96.? per-
cent). In the Lower Kura lowland the resources have been developed by 53.7 per-
cent. in the Caspian-Kuba region by 46.6 percent, in the Saatly-Geokchay zone by
28.7 percent, and in Gobustan by 6 percent. In the Kura and Iori interfluve and in
Adzhinour the resources still have not been explored despite a positive evalua-
tion of what is underground.

Recently the Azneft' Association executed a redeployment of exploratory drilling
from the eastern regions to the less studied central and western regions. In so
doing, the results of an analysis of the geologico—geophysical data and of an
evaluation of the degree of promise of individual lithologico—stratigraphic com-
plexes in the new oil-geology regionalization of promising ground were considered.

The preliminary results of exploration have confirmed the correctness of the chosen
areas. Detailed exploration and introduction into development of the luradkhanly
field has created a new oil region in central Azerbaijan, the Zardob, Duzdag-Gedak-
boz and Kalamadyn fields have been discovered. and high promise for the presence
of oil and gas in variOus areas of western Azerbaijan has been proved.

In accordance with the “Integrated Design," during the 11th Five-Year Plan pros-
pecting and exploration will be accomplished in three main directions: the Mesozo-
ic, the Paleozoic-Miocene and the uiddle Pliocene.

During 1981-1985, 700,000 meters of exploratory hole are to be drilled.

Apparently the most effective direction of geological exploration during the 11th
Five-Year Plan will be the Middle Pliocene. This proposition is associated with
the fact that the exploratory drilling at discovered fields of the Lower Kura
depression occupy the main place in the amount of penetration in the indicated
direction. while in the other two directions, prospecting and appraisal drilling
occupy the main spot because of the low degree of study of the new areas of the
republic's central and western regions.

/In the Lower Kura lowland/ the oil and gas fields of Kyurovdag, Karabagly, Khilly,
Neftechala, Hishovdag, Kyursangya. Kyursangya-South. Kalmas, Pirsagat and Kalama-
dyn were discovered in recent years in sediments of the Middle and partially of
the Upper Pliocene. and they were introduced into development. Small deposits of
oil and gas were found in various tectonic blocks in the Pirsagat. Byandovan,
Bol'shOy and Halyy Kharani, and Babazanan-Durovdag areas, and in other areas.

The log of the PT correlates well with the logs of the Apsheron Peninsula and the
Dzheyrankechmesskaya depression. In the lowermost strata of the PT such sandy
benchmark horizons as the XII, XV, XVII and xx (the suite of "discontinuity")
horizons. as well as analogs of the NKP and PK suites of the Apsheron Peninsula,
are being singled out.

Because of the multiple-formation nature of the PT,‘and also its great capacity
and depth, these sediaents are being explored 'individually in three stages: the
first stage covers horizons I-VII. the second stage horizons VIII-XVII, and the
third stage horizon XVII and below.

3
IIHlCHHHKJAI.USE(MVLY
- wo‘ v. a ayes... unit. VII-.1

The first stage exploration has now been basically completed, and deposits were
found and are being developed. There remained the tracing of the deposits de-
tected in the southwestern wing and the crest zone of the Karabagly and Kyurovdag
areas and the crest portion of the Hishovdag field. The borders of the previously
discovered deposits were greatly expanded in the southeastern direction during the
later drilling of development wells in 1918-1980.

In 1978 the Kalamadyn oil and gas field was discovered in the northwestern side
portion of the Lower Kura lowland during first-stage exploration of the PT. Four
deposits that were established for the area at shallow depths (soc-1,450 meters)
must be promptly mapped and turned over for development.

Deposits of oil and gas previously discovered still have not been mapped for

the sccond stage of exploration of the PT in the Kyurovdag, Karabagly and Kyur-
syangya areas. Yet this task is one of the basic ones to be fulfilled in order
to carry out tasks concerning the preparation of oil reserves. However, because of
the considerable lag in driIJing work, it is being resolved extremely slowly.

The obtaining of an industrial flow of oil and gas from analogs of the suite of
"discontinuity‘ (horizon xx) at the Pirsagat area has been the foundation for
expanding prospecting and exploration in other areas of the Lower Kura lowland. It
was established that in the areas of Mishovdag, Kyurovdag and Karabagly, horizon XX
was represented by coarsely broken facies and by clayey sand in areas more to the
southeast.

oil gushers from horizons xx and XIX of the PT in the Neftechala area (holes 705
and 733) confirmed the industrial petroliferousness of the lower part of the FT
log. Because of this, the 11th Five-Year Plan calls for a concentration of drill-
ing here in order to prepare reserves and involve them most rapidly in development

Geophysico-geological data also indicate that during the third stage of exploration
prospects are high that oil and gas are present in the Kyursangya and Kyursangya-
South areas, which are associated with deposits of oil and gas-condensate in adja-
cent areas of the Baku Archipelago. However, the practical execution of this task
is possible where holes 8,000—6,500 meters deep are drilled.

The Kyzylagach area, which is theextremesoutheastern element of the Kyurovdag-
chtechala zone, is also considered no less promising in the lower horizons of the
PT. The drilling of prospecting hole No 10 at lower horizons continues in the area.

/Thc Saatly-Geokchay zone/ of uplifts embraces the northeastern side of the ch-
lakh-Agdzhabedi depression.

During the Eighth and Ninth Five-Year Plans, a number of submerged Mesozoic struc-
tures that were grouped in the Saatly-Dzharly-Sorsor-Karadzhally and lil'skaya-
Muradkhanly-Zardob-Amirarkh folded belts were prepared here and introduced into
seismic exploration.

In the Saatly-Karadzhal zone, which has proved to have few prospects for oil and

gas because of the presence of a large discontinuity in sedimentation, from the
Upper Cretaceous to the Sarmat inclusive, exploration for oil and gas has ceased.

I.
IN)! OWWWCIAL.USHEIJBHUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During 1974-1980 exploration was concentrated in the nil'sko-uuradkhanly-Zardob-
Amirarkh uplift zone. At the Muradkhanly field the petroliferousness of effusive
formations that had previously been established in the crest zone was significant-
ly expanded in the western and northeastern directions. According to drilling data
and the operating and geological characteristics of the holes, it was established
that the oil saturation of the effusive rocks changes sharply with area and cross-
section: this change is apparently associated with the block structure of the area.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan the main tasks for prospecting and exploration
drilling at the luradkhanly field will be those of mapping the deposits of the
Upper Cretaceous effusive Paleogenic formations that were found and of prospecting
for new ones in carbonaceous rocks of the Upper Cretaceous, within the southwestern
wing of the fold. The petroliferousness of the Maykop and Chokrak sediments will
be assessed coincidentally.

In April 1981. the Zardob field. which is located to the northwest of the Iurad-
khanly area and has a geological structure similar to it. was discovered. The dis-
coverer of the field was hole No 3. from which an industrial flow of oil was ob—
tained by a fonmation tester from the 4175-4225 meter interval (the Middle Eocene
member above the marl?).

The Zardob area was prepared for drilling by seismic exploration in 1968 and was
introduced to drilling in 1971. However, an assessment of the area's petrolifer-
ousness has been hampered greatly because of the elimination of holes Nos 1 and 2
for technical reasons. In 1974 additional seismic work was performed here which
refined the area's structure. Aside from an anticlinal trap in the southwestern
wing, which faces the Yevlakh-Agdzhabcdi depression,fbrmations that lensout,strati-
graphically also are singled out in the log of Eocene sediments. Holes Nos 4 and
7, in which oil is being obtained from Eocene and Upper Cretaceous sediments, are
now being completed.

An intensification of prospecting and exploration for the purpose of mapping dis-
covered deposits, an assessment of the presence of oil and gas in the Lower Eocene
and Upper Cretaceous formation, and the conduct of additional seismic exploration
for purposes of refining the tectonics of the area, especially within the right
bank of the Kura River. are called for.

It should be noted that a number of volcanogenic benches throughout Mesozoic sedi-
ments. which are of great prospecting interest, were discovered by highly precise
gravimetric studies of the southwestern plunge of the Zardob—Muradkhanly zone that
were conducted by the Southern Division of VNIPIgeofizika [All-Union Scientific-
ﬂescarch and Development Institute for Geophysical Operations]. These will be
introduced to drilling as their structure is refined and the collectors in effusive
and carbonaceous rocks of the Upper Cretaceous are developed.

To the northwest of the Zardob area is the Amirarkh structure. which has been pre-
pared for drilling by seismic exploration for Upper Cretaceous carbonaceous forma-
tions. A fold has been superimposed on the monoelinally uplifted northeastern side
of the Yevlakh-Agdzhabedi depression. The prime portion of the latter in the sec-
tion that is being examined is represented by the huge Lyaki-Agdash Mesozoic uplift

Eocene and Upper Cretaceous carbonaceous sediments have been discovered at hole
No 2, which is situated in the crest portion of the structure. 0n sampling the

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Uﬁ UI'I‘ILIAI. USE. ONLY

uiddle Eocene marl aember with a formation tester, oil with a flow rate of 20 m3
per second was obtained. However. the engineering state of the hole did not per-
mit this cross-section to be assessed.

The Integrated Design for Geological Exploration During the 11th Five-Year Plan
calls for the institution here of a number of prospecting holes that will enable
the question of the area's petroliferousness to be resolved unambiguously.

In the northwestern part of the Saatly-ceokchay uplift zone. aside from the smir—
arkh area. several submerged uplifts and benches (the lursal'akaya, Garkhunlin-
skaya, Gedakkobi. Shakhsuinskaya and others) have been discovered by seismic ex-
ploration and are being prepared for drilling. They face the Yevlakh-Agdzhsbedi
oil and gas bearing basin and occupy a position that is suitable for oil and gas
accumulation. The latter will be involved in drilling as new geological and geo-
physical data are obtained.

The West Carasuinskoye uplift was prepared by seismic exploration and introduced
into deep drilling at the junction of the Saatly-Geokchay zone and the Lower Kura
depression. Middle Pliocene and spreading Hiocene-Paleogenie sediments have a fin-
ished structural shape here, at a time when the Upper Cretaceous (according to the
seismic P horizon) sediments are marked by a monoclinal plunge in the direction
of the Padarskiy fold.

/The Kirovabad Zone/occupies the southwestern side portion of the Yevlakh~Agdzha-
bedi depression. 'The development of the small oilfields--the Kazanbulag. Hirbashin
Adzhidere. Naftalan and others-—that were discovered in the northwestern part of
the zone, in Maykop and Eocene rocks, has been suspended because of the wells' low
productivity. and they have been mothballed.

During the 1970's the Eocene and upper Cretaceous sediments here were explored in
the Shirinkum. Sovetlyar and Duzdag-Gedakboz areas. An oilfield (Eocene) with the
same name as the latter was discovered in 1979.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan, in addition to the mapping of a deposit in the
Duzdag-Gedakboz area, the Eocene—Upper Cretaceous sediments at the Sovetlyar.
Shirvanly, Lcmberan and South Agdzhabedi areas will be prospected and explored for
petrolifcrousness.

/The Kura and Iori interfluve/ occupies the southwestern side of the Iori-Adzhinour
depression, and it is characterized by a low degree of study underground. Previous
geological-survey work and structural drilling found Oligocene-Miocene structures
here. However, because of complicated seismo-geological conditions and the lack of
deep-drilling data. the structure of the Eocene-Mesozoic sediments that held prom-
ise that oil and gas were present was not studied.

The promise of the Eocene-Upper Cretaceous sediments in the Kura and Iori inter-
fluvc is substantiated by the establishment of their petroliferousness in adjacent
regions of the Middle Kura lowland (the Muradkhanly and Zardob areas on the east
and the Sangori area to the west). An analysis of the actual data indicates that
in the southern side portion of the Iori depression-the Kura and Iori interfluve
and the Tbilisi region (the Sangori)-uiddle Eocene rocks are represented primarily
by the redeposition of coarsely fragmented formations (a horizon of "intricate
stratificatiavﬁ and. in the Yevlakh-Agdzhabedi depression, by terrigenic carbonates
(figure 2).

6
FOI'OFFHJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.338 83.. 35.35% .v

.2303. Loan: .u .5 oz 03: near—an .n
.2303. 02.3: .m .N oz 30: canaoauomouamaao .N
.A0mcou05303 26006995 noun: .< .n oz 30: «noun—am .a
rho:
has“.
.nucoawvom o 000.: 033: and some: on» .«o saunas 532028 .~ 0.23:
. 3-2;.
‘5...» wazhkonw .§~.~§o. wat\~\“ weights»

      

x311. ..........

 

..¢...R<(:{r.\....l

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a «as us a swans. U09 VI‘LI

During the 10th Pivewvear Plan, in accordance with the program that is specified.
geophysical research will be integrated with the drilling of a profile of appraisal
holes and with the subsequent concentration of drilling in the prouising areas.

In particular, the profile of the laaedtepe-Damirtepe-Udabno-Sazhdag-Armudlu holes
was drilled over.

In the submerged portions of the depression, in the Sazhdag area (the Miocene-oli-
gocene complex) and the Armudlu area, where hole faces were 4.000—5,000 meters
deep, the holes did not leave the Oligocene-niecene sediments. after having estab-
lished their great thickness, the presence of overthrusts and blankets and diapir—
ic introductions of rock. and so on.

In the side portion of the depression an abbreviated thickness of Oligocene-Miocene
and Paleogenic.sediments and a comparatively shallow deposition of a surface of
Upper Cretaceous rocks (2,547 meters) were recorded in hole No 1 in the lamedtepe
area. During testing of the hole, a nonindustrial flow of gas and oil from Upper
Eocene foraations was obtained.

Conditions are more favorable for the presence of oil and gas in the intermediate
belt, in the Daairtepe-Udabno and Sazhdag (lesozoic coaplex) areas. In the Damir-
tepe-Udabno area, liddle Eocene sediments-the horizon of intricate stratification,
which is represented here by an alternation of terrigenic. carbonaceous and rede-
posited volcanogenic facies-—were discovered in holes Nos 1 and 2. with discovery
of the horizon, an intense absorption of the flushing fluid and oil and gas shows
were observed, and the oil-bearing soils were uplifted. Oil with a flow rate of

5 n3 per second was obtained in hole No 1 at the 4,095-4,011 meter interval. A
log that was similar but 450-500 meters higher was discovered in holes 3 and 4 in
the Sazhdag area. which had been prepared for drilling by seismic exploration. A
concentration of prospecting drilling is called for, taking into account the new
data from seismic exploration and drilling in the Sazhdag and Daairtepe-Udabno
areas.

In the eastern part of the Kara and Iori interfluve, the Gyurzundag, Palantekyan
and Molladag structures have been prepared for drilling by seismic exploration,
and the Tarsdallyar. Western Gyurzundag and other areas were found and have been
prepared. In the southern side portion of this region prospecting structural
drilling is also being conducted with a view to preparing structures and solving
regional tasks.

/In the Adzhinour zone,/ where the log and deep structure for proaising sediments]
complexes remain completely unstudied. the drilling of appraisal hole No 1 was
started, based upon Mesozoic sediments. in 1979.

Because of a thick buildup of pebble formations (1.5-2 km). geophysical aethods of
exploration. particularly seismic. proved not to be very infonaative here. There-
fore. structural drilling into the complex, with geophysical methods of explora-
tion, will be increased in the eastern part of the zone in order to resolve
regional problens.

/The Dzhalilabad region/ also is included in the poorly studied lands of Azerbai-
Jan, although the prospects that it bears oil and gas have been confirmed by struc-
tural-prospecting holes previously drilled here. In order to study the log and the

8
FOII€MHHC§AI.[EHE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possibility of the presence of oil and gas in the Mesozoic and Cenozoic sediments.

it is planned to lay down appraisal holes in the shirinsu, Turmarkhanly and Agdash
areas, and also to conduct geophysical operations of a regional nature, during the
11th Five-Year Plan.

/In the Gobustan-Sheaakha region/ it has been established that oil and gas are
present in the rocks of the Lower and Middle Miocene, in the central part thereof
(Umbaki and Adzhiveli) and the Middle Pliocene to the southeast of the Dzheyran-
kechmesskaya depression (the Duvannyy.Dashgil', Kyanizadag and others).

work was done here in southeastern Gobustan during the 10th Five-Year Plan for pur-
poses of prospecting for deposits of oil and gas in the Oligocene and Miocene sedi-
ments and in central Gobustan, in order to study the log and the possible presence
of oil and gas of the Mesozoic sediments.

After discovery of the productivity of the chokrak sediments in the Duvanny area.
and in consideration of the regional presence of oil and gas of Oligocene and Mio-
cene deposits in the western Apsheron and in the Baku Archipelago (the Sangachaly-
offshore field}. areas of Duvannyy-Mest, Dashgil' and Solakhay were introduced to
exploratory drilling. Despite the discovery of Miocene sediments through holes
(hole No 60, Dashgil') that were characterized positively by cores and by electri-
cal logging, industrial flows of oil and gas were not established. This was caused
by the high degree of disturbance of the Miocene sediments (coals with a dip that
sometimes approaches 80-90 degrees), by the erosion of their summits. and by par-
tial destruction of the deposits. Because of this, during the 11th Five-Year Plan
exploration work will be conducted at those areas where there are no sharp struc-
tural disconfornities and the sequence of the log-is retained (the Duvannyy and
Eastern Cheilakhtarna).

In central Gobustan, holes that had been drilled in Mesozoic sediments in the
Unbaki, Adzhiveli, Kelany and Nardaran-Suleynan areas, where the depths were 4.500-
5.500 meters, did not emerge from the Oligocene-Miocene or Eocene rocks, after
confirming the deep submergence of the surface of the Cretaceous formations.
Therefore. it is planned that drilling in Gobustan will be conducted at the Shcy-
tanud, Leninabad, Karadzhyuzly and Astrakhanka and other areas.

The poor infbrmativeness of geophysical methods. particularly seismic exploration.
tells negatively on the results of exploratory Operations.

Exploration work on the Apshcron Peninsula, where PT resources are being fully
explored. has been performed in limited amounts in the Miocene and Mesozoic scdi-
ments.

0n the northern wing of the Karadag area (the southwestern part of the Apsheron)
the borders of a previously discovered oil deposit in Miocene rocks was greatly
expanded. A prospecting hole is now being drilled in the Bibi-Eybat area. and it
is planned to sink new wells in the Kala. Puts and other areas.

Appraisal hole No 1 at Kyurdakhany in the northwestern Apshcron was drilled into
Mesozoic sediments.

In this hole, the Upper Cretaceous rocks. which were represented by an alternation
of clay and marl, primarily of flysh habit. without signs of oil or gas, were found

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a "I «a o 9.....- UUI’. Vl‘h.

at the 2.414-4,210 meter interval. The dip of the coal formations increased sharp-
ly with depth, from 30-40 to 70-90 degrees.

The sinking of new wells here depends upon the conduct of additional geological and
geophysical studies.

/In the Caspian-Rubs region/ exploration went on during the 10th Five-Year Plan in
the Tengino-Beshbarmak anticlinorium. the siazan' Paleogenic monoeline. and the
low-lying part of the region.

The main work volume was concentrated in the Siazan' monocline, in order to trace
discovered deposits in the northwestern direction. The borders of the deposits of
Paleogenic sediments were expanded in area and depth when an industrial flow of
oil was obtained in holes 1105. 1264, 1390 and others.

However. as a result of the strongly broken-up and forested terrain and the com-
plexity of the geological conditions, exploration is going on slowly here be-
cause of the lag in the buildup of field facilities. Unsolved problems include the
absence of a standard procedure for interpreting oiliield-chphysical data and sub-
stantiating the estimated parameters of the deposits for the steeply dipping
collectors.

In the Tengino-Beshbarmak anticlinorium, drilling was conducted in the chirakh-
Kala and Chinarlar areas, where Cretaceous and Upper Jurassic sediments were dis-
covered in carbonaceous-terrigenous facies. Since negative results were obtained,
the sinking of new wells here is not planned.

In the foothills part of the region, in the Talabi-Kaynardzha area. work was
performed at Paleogene-uiocene and Mesozoic sediments. The positively described
log of Eocene rocks with signs of oil and gas discovered at Talabi's hole No 26
deserves attention and requires further study.

Appraisal hole No l of Agzybirchala. 3,558 meters deep. emerged from the PT into
dense sandstones. aleurolites and argillites that hypothetically were of Jurassic
age, and. from a depth of 4.700 aeters to the hole face at 5,142 meters. dense mag-
matic rocks of the Triassic were found (217 millions years in absolute
geochronology).

Aside frOm tracing the Siazan' monocline's deposits, exploratory work will be con-
tinucd during the 11th Five-Year Plan in the Caspian-Kuhn district in the Khudat,
Sitalchay, Talabi and Agzybirchala areas (in the submerged sections). The conduct
of exploratory work here will depend upon the results obtained in mastering the
technology of drilling holes to great depths.

Thus, during the 11th Five-Year Plan, the main direction for prospecting and
exploration for Azneft' Association will be the Paleogcnic-Mesozoic in the repub-
lic's central and western regions.

With a view to raising the effectiveness of geological exploration in solving the
geological tasks that have been set and of providing for the planned amount of

growth of reserves, for purposes of stabilizing the Azneft' Association's level of
oil recovery, the following are necessary:

10

INDR‘OFIWCJAI.I£§EGNNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. To improve the quality and effectiveness of drilling work by improving the de-
sign of holes and the choice of optimal parameters of the flushing fluid, and to
provide for high-quality discovery and testing of productive intervals.

2. To raise sharply the annual amount of exploratory drilling, bringing it uputo
150,000-160,000 meters.

3. To develop a standard procedure for the preparation of structures in accordance
with the data of field geophysical research in the Gobustan-shenakha region. the
Adzhinour region. and the Kura and Iori interfluve.

4. To develop a standard procedure for interpreting oilfield geophysical data on
effusive, carbonaceous and finely alternating and steeply dipping reservoirs.

5. To redeploy drilling enterprises into regions of operation, and to provide for
the full buildup of facilities in new areas that have been introduced into
exploration.

6. To provide the Azneft' Association with equipment for drilling holes 6,000-
6.500 aeters deep.

COPYRIGHT: Izdltel'atvo Nedra GBOLOGIYA NEFTI I GAZA 1981

11409
cso: 1822/66

11
F0I40FFHJAL.USE‘DNLY
It'ltlﬂﬁtlklllililVLY

SAFETY REGULATIONS IN THE GAS SERVICE

Moscow mvna nmmsnosn v cazovou nomrsrva in Russian 1980 (signed to press
20 Nov 79) pp 1-2. 166-168

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Safety Regulations in the Gas
'Ssrvice ." edited by N. S. Bersenev et al., State Scientific and Technical
Inspection of Mining of the USSR. Iadatel'stvo "Nedra," 675,000 copies. 167 pages]

[Text] The regulations provide for safe working methods in the construction and
operation of gas pipelines. gas regulation points,and units and gas equipment in
cities and other populated areas when gas is used by industrial and agricultural

consumers. as well as public enterprises and enterprises of public utilities and
social services. Safety regulations for the operation of liquefied gas-filling

stations are presented.

The review of the regulations took into consideration the requirements of newly
issued standards documents for the designing. construction and operation of

gas supply systems and facilities, as well as the accumulated experience of
operational and construction-installation organizations. and the suggestions
obtained from the scientific research and planning organizations.

These regulations are not retroactive and cannot be applied in a control order

to structures ﬁor previously active regulations and standards for gas pipelines
and gas supply structures to evaluate their construction. manufacture of struc-

tural components. sated-working pressure and testing.

Hith the publication of these "Safety Regulations in the GOD'Service." the
"Safety Regulations in the GasService " approved by the USSR Gosgortekhnadzor
[State Scientific and Technical Inspection of Mining] on 28 October 1969 becone
ineffective.

The regulations have been approved by the 0553 Gosgortekhnadaor and are manda-
tory for all ministries. departments and organizations that operate gas lines
and gas equipment.

Developed by the State Scientific Research and Planning Institute "Giproniigaz."
of the RSPSR ninistry of Residential and Connunal Services.

Agreed upon with the AUCCTU on 16 November 1978. with the USSR Gosstroy on
16 February 1979. .

12
IIILCNWHCUU.USEIXVLY
FIIICHNHCJAI.U§E(NNLY

aroved by the USSR Gosgortekhnadzor on 26 June 1979.
Contents
General Conditions

External Gas Pipelines
Special Requirements for Installation of Gas Pipelines Made of
Nonnetal Pipes

Internal Gas.Equipnent

Industrial. Goa-unal and Agricultural Enterprises

Public Enterprises and Enterprises of Public Utilities and
Social Services (Communal-General Facilities)

Residential Buildings

Gas Regulation Points and Gas Regulation Units

Construction of Gas Pipelines

Pipes and Materials

welding Operations and Quality Control
Insulation Operations and Quality Control
Electrochemical Protection fron Corrosion
Gas Pipeline Testing

Gas-Filling Stations, Gas-Filling Points, Automobile Gas-Filling
Stations

Gas-Filling Stations of Liquefied Gases

Evaporation and Mixing Units

Gas-Filling Points

Autonobile Gas-Filling Stations

Cylinder and Reservoir Units of Liquefied Gases

Individual Cylinder Units
Group Cylinder Units

_ Reservoir Units
Gas-Dangerous Operations and Emergency-Dispatcher Service

Operation of the Gas Service

Acceptance for Operation of Facilities of Gas Supply Systens
Connection of Newly Built Gas Pipelines to Active and' Turning
On of Gas

Operation of Gas Pipelines

Special Requireaents for Operation of Gas Pipelines Made of
Nonmetal Pipes

Operation of Gas Regulation Points

Operation of Gas-Filling Stations, Gas-Filling Points and Auto-
mobile Gas-Filling Stations of Liquefied Gases

Firing

Special Requireaents for Operation of Automobile Gas-Filling
Stations

13
lNDR‘OIIﬂClAl.lEﬂZ(l§LY
10.

Operation of Group Cylinder and Reservoir Units

Operation of Gas Equipment of Industrial. Agricultural and
Cos-lunal Enterprises

Operation of Gas Equipnent of Public Enterprises and Enter-
prises of Public Utilities and Social Services and Residential
Houses

Operation of Devices of Auto-ated Control Systels for
Technological Processes (ASU TP)

Additional Requirements for Construction and Operation of Gas
Supply System under Special Natural and Climate Conditions
Territories To Be Worked Over

Seisnic Regions-with Heaving and Sagging Ground

Appendices

COPYRIGHT: lrdstel'stvo "Nedra" 1980

9035
680:

1822/67

16

FOI1OFFKJA1.UBE(lVLY
CEHA FUEL, ENERGY PROBLEMS
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOMIKI in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 93-99

lzrticle by Doctor of Economic Sciences Professor Anatoliy Ivanovich Zubkov, chief
of a department of the Institute of Economics of the world Socialist System of_the
USSR Academy of Sciences: "The Fuel and Energy Problem in the CEMA Countries2/

[jext7' One of the central places in the documents of the past congresses of the
Cmmnunist and Workers Parties of the socialist countries and in the plans of social
and economic development for 1981-1985 and the distant future is assigned to the
solution of the fuel and energy problem. Much attention is devoted to the questions
of the energy supply of the CEHA countries in the fuel and raw material long-range
goal program of cooperation. which is intended to continue until 1990, as well as

in the process of coordinating the national economic plans for 1981-1985. At the
35th meeting of the session of CEHA (1981) it was emphasized that the integration

ties of the CBMA countries are playing an important role in supplying the national
economy with fuel and raw materials.

The supply of the CEHA countries with fuel and energy is taking place under domes-
tic and foreign economic conditions which are becoming more complicated. 1n prac-
tically all these countries the increase of fuel production and the development of
power engineering require increasing investments, which are connected with the
worsening of the conditions of the working of deposits, the increasing use of low-
calorie fuel, the increase of the expenditures on environmental protection and so
on. For the countries, which import fuel and power, the expenditures on their pur-
chase have risen considerably as a result of the increase of the foreign trade
prices and the need to participate in investment construction projects on the ter-
ritory of the states which are suppliers of fuel and energy resources. The impor-
tance of the economical and efficient use of energy resources and the assurance of
further economic development with the systematic decrease of the power-output ratio
of production is increasing in this situation.

National programs or decrees of directorial organs, which orient the national econ-
omy toward the highly efficient use of fuel, energy and other material resources,
have been adopted in the CEHA countries.1 The set of measures on the saving of

. energy is a component of the national economic plans of these countries for
1981-1985. The measures in this area are aimed at the elimination of the unproduc-
tive and wasteful consumption of energy resources within the framework of the pro-
duction technology already being used in the national economy. Along with this

the retooling of a number of sectors and the introduction in them of an energy- and
fuel-saving technology are planned. A considerable set of measures is also being

15
FIHICMHWCIAI.USE(MVLY
...._ so-.. Vol.1.

planned in the area of structural rearrangements and the updating of the products
list in the directions of the limitation of the growth of some power- and fuel-

consuming works and the preferential development of less power-consuming sectors.

considerable allocations are being earmarked for the assurance of the economical
and efficient consumption of fuel and power. The effectiveness of such investments
is much greater as compared with the expenditures on the increase of the amount of
additional energy resources. For example, in the 608 the assets being allocated
for the efficient use of energy are from one-third to one-half of the expenditures
connected with the increase of the consumption of energy resources.

The economical consumption of fuel and energy in the CEHA countries is being en-
sured by the introduction of revised standards, the limitation of the consumption
of resources, the increase of economic sanctions, the raising of wholesale prices
and the use of other levers. Thus, in Hungary the motor transport managements are
obligated to pay from the profit a large fine for the deadhead run of heavy-duty
trucks. In case of the evasion of this the fine is collected in 10 times the
amount. In the GDR hundreds of new norms of the consumption of energy have been
drawn up, which have gone into force as new standards. A decrease of the consump-
tion of energy by evaporators by 14-35 percent, by equipment in ceramics production
and baking by 15-17 percent and so on, for example, is called for by them. State
limits of the consumption of energy and penalties, in conformity with which the

users pay 10 times the amount for its excessive consumption, have been introduced
here.

Measures of an organizational order, which ensure the efficient use of energy re-
sources, have acquired primary importance. They include the setting of a differen-
tiated temperature in buildings, regulate the consumption of electric power in the
lighting of streets, roads and buildings, stimulate the consumption of power at the
works and in housing and municipal services during the periods of the minimum load
of the power supply network and so on. In transport the operation of worn out
trucks is being reduced and the multishift operation of economical vehicles is be-
ing introduced, the fleet of official passenger cars is being reduced, norms of
their total kilometers logged and operating time are being established, the maximum
traffic speed on roads is being restricted. The retail prices for gasoline and the
charge of fuel and power have been increased in a number of countries. The revi-
sion of the wholesale prices for fuel and energy is stimulating economic organiza-
tions to use them efficiently, and since in this case the prices for imported ener-
gy carriers are increasing more rapidly than the prices for domestic fuel, the
stimuli for its preferential use are being increased.

Such a direction of the increase of the efficiency of the use of fuel and energy

began to be used extensively in the late 1970's and is continuing in the 1980's.

It does not require large investment outlays and yields significant results. At

the same time the redistribution of energy resources among the sectors of the na-
tional economy yields the greatest results at the initial stage. Then these re-

serves csn be reduced and their importance can be decreased, since the technical

and technological bases are little affected when implementing these measures.

The introduction of new technology and equipment. which ensure the economical and
efficient use of fuel and energy, is more capital-intensive than the above-
examined measures. The development and introduction of energy-saving technology
also require a long time. In the CEHA countries this direction has been developed

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on a limited scale, but may become one of the basic directions in the 1980's and
the more distant future.

During 1981-1985 the CEHA countries plan to continue the retooling of sectors on an
increased scale, which will promote the further increase of the efficiency of ener-
gy consumption. The renovation of obsolete thermal electric power stations and the
reequipment of industrial furnaces, boiler houses and other installations for the

purpose of the most complete utilization of domestic solid fuel are envisaged here.
A policy of decreasing the power-output ratio of products on the basis of the im-

provement of the design of items, the introduction of new materials and their sub-

stitutes and new technology, the use of secondary energy resources and so on has
been adopted.

Technological modernization will become one of the factors of the saving of fuel

and energy. In hungary the annual saving of all types of energy resources by the

end of 1981-1985 will be equivalent to the cost of 1.5-1.7 million tons of petro-
leum.2 In the GDR during the current five-year plan it is planned to save 65-70 mil-
lion tons of lignite.3 In the CSSR by the and of this five-year plan the saving of
energy resources in the national economy should come to not less than 12 million

tons of conventional fuel.“ In Romania the task is being set to save annually by

the end of the current five-year plan more than 3 million tons of conventional fuel
just by the increase of the cogeneration of thermal energy and electric power and

the development of the central heating network.

Whereas the organizational measures on the efficient use of fuel and energy to a
considerable extent can be implemented by means of national efforts, in the case of
the retooling of production, the development and introduction of energy-saving tech-
nology the greatest impact is achieved in the direction of the mututal cooperation
of the CEHA countries. In this area definite achievements exist in a number of di-
rections. For example, the use of the results of joint research on the development
of highly efficient means of using gas and the creation of gas-using equipment, ac-
cording to a preliminary estimate, is providing a saving of natural gas in all the
CEHA countries, on the basis of the level of its consumption in 1980, in the amount
of up to 10 billion m3, while up to 15.5 billion m3 of gas are fed annually through
the Soyuz gas pipeline from the USSR to the European CEHA countries.

Various forms of joint activity. which are oriented toward the elimination of
losses.of fuel and energy both during their production and during their consumption.
can be mutually advantageous in a number of instances. For example, as a result of
the operation of the joint society of Hungary and Poland, Raldex, it was possible
to eliminate the coal-containing dumps in Silesia, which had accumulated over a
century, and to obtain many millions of tons of high quality coal, as well as con-
struction materials from the accompanying rock.6

An extensive set of measures on the develOpment and production of the latest mining
machinery and energy-saving equipment is outlined in the fuel and raw material long-
rsnge goal program of cooperation. Their implementation is opening new prospects of
the intensification of socialist production by means of the further rationalization
of the use of fuel and energy resources. At the same time the gradual and thorough
retooling of sectors is a constant process. Having undergone considerable develop-
ment, it will also be continued in the distant future. This process can be devel—
oped most successfully on the basis of a comprehensively coordinated technical
strategy of the socialist countries.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. . -...... wavy v-‘a'o

in the future the structural rearrangement of the economy of the CEHA countries,
first of all of the importers of fuel and energy, will act as one of the more and
more significant factors of the efficient use of energy resources. The national
economic complexes of these countries during the decades of their formation were
built up as multisectorial complexes, having also included power-consuming works
(chemical, metallurgical and others). During the period when fuel and raw mate-
rials were inexpensive, in most instances this justified itself. Now such a means
of development burdens the economy, decreases its efficiency and leads to an in-
crease of foreign indebtedness. A number of countries are faced with the objective
need to set limits to the development of fuel- and energy-consuming works and to
begin structural rearrangements in the economy, taking into account the new world
situation in energy supply. This rearrangement can be accomplished during the fur-
ther intensification of the international socialist division of labor and the de-
velopment of the joint planning activity of the CEHA countries. Such an approach
guarantees the supply of the markets of the socialist countries with the necessary
products, including fuel- and power-intensive products.

The socialist countries have gained considerable experience in the coordinated and
interconnected development of the structures of production, which can also be used
successfully in the changed economic situation. For example, the cooperation of the
USSR and ﬂungary in the development of the aluminum industry, which was expanded
extensively in the 1970's, made it possible to increase the mining of bauxites and
the production of alumina in Hungary and to increase in the USSR on the basis of
Hungarian deliveries of alumina the production of aluminum and its export to Run—
gary. As a result in Hungary, which is experiencing a shortage of domestic energy
resources, by means of such cooperation up to 2.6 billion kWh of electric power are
being saved annually, which corresponds approximately to its expenditures for
household needs. The measures of the fuel and raw material long-range goal pro-
gram of cooperation, which provide for the location of the production of high power-
intensive products in the USSR and low power-intensive products in other socialist
countries for their mutual exchange and the meeting of increasing needs, are pron-
ising.

The structural rearrangements in the national economy and first of all in industry
are connected mainly with the change of the intrasectorial proportions, but subse-
quently they may also affect the intersectorial proportions. In 1981-1985 a number
of CEHA countries in conformity with the new energy situation will begin to adapt
their economic structures to the changing conditions of the supply of fuel and
energy.

In Bulgaria the progressive structural changes in the economy are recognized as one
of the primary economic problems of the current five-year plan, and in this connec-
tion the output of small-tonnage chemical products, electronic equipment and other
relatively nonpower-intensive types of goods is undergoing leading development.
Intraworks structural changes, which ensure the saving of fuel and energy, are en-
visaged in Hungary. In the GDR the investments to a considerable extent are being
concentrated in a highly efficient industrial structure (microelectronics, the pro-
duction of robots, electronic machine building and so on). In Romania the growth
rate of fuel- and power-consuming works in metallurgy, the chemical industry and
other sectors is being limited. A long-range orientation toward the decrease of
the growth rate or even the volumes of the output of power-consuming products is
planned in the 0888.

13
ron omcuu. use onu'r
F0R10FFKJAL.US£(NVLY

The process of improving economic structures, particularly by the limitation of the
development of power-consuming works, of course, does not eliminate the increase of
the needs for the corresponding products. For example, the need for high quality
steel, including electric steel, as well as for light-weight nonferrous metals,
especially aluminum, will increase. Therefore the restriction of the development
of such works in some countries, apparently, should be accompanied by their in-

crease in others, owing to which the importance of the coordination of the national
economic plans of the CEHA countries_is increasing.

In the socialist countries economic growth depends to a greater and greater extent
on the efficiency of the use of fuel and energy, and not only on the amounts of the
commitment of their natural resources'to the economic turnover. In the European
CEMA countries (excluding the USSR) during the 1970's the average annual rate of
decrease of the specific power-output ratio of the national income, according to our
rough estimates, was 1.2-1.3 percent, while the average annual rate of increase of
energy consumption was about 4 percent. Approximately 25 percent of the economic
growth was provided by the decrease of the power-output ratio of the national income
and 75 percent was provided by the increase of the consumption of fuel and energy.

Nevertheless during this period the reserves in the area of the efficient use of
energy resources remained very significant. According to rough estimates, in the
late 1970's the power-output ratio of a unit of national income of the European
CEMA_countries on the average exceeded by 30-60 percent the corresponding indicator
of the leading EEC countries (the PRC, England, France and Italy taken together).
Thus, in the 0883 20-50 percent more energy resources were consumed per unit of na-
tional income than in other developed countries.8 In comparison with the indicated
four West European countries the specific power-output ratio of the national income
was substantially higher in Bulgaria, the CDR and Poland, at approximately the level
of these countries in Romania and slightly lower than this level in Hungary.

The analysis of the basic indicators of the development of the national economy of
the European CEHA countries for 1981-1985 attests that approximately 30-40 percent
of the increase of the national income will be provided by the decrease of the
power-output ratio of a unit of national income and 60-70 percent will be accompa-
nied by an increase of the consumption of energy resources. During the current
decade the average annual rate of the decrease of the specific power-output ratio
of the national income will be, apparently, not less than 1.5 percent, while in the
GDR and the CSSE this decrease will be even more significant.

The economic development of the socialist countries, which is being ensured to an
increasing extent by the economical and efficient use of energy resources, also pre-
sumes the further increase of the consumption of fuel and energy. However, whereas
in the 1970’s the average annual increase of the national income by 1 percent was
due to the average annual increase of the consumption of primary energy resources
by about 0.8 percent, during the 1980's the latter indicator may decrease to approx-
imately 0.7 percent. According to the most reliable estimates, the consumption of
primary energy resources in the European group of CEHA countries in 1978 came to
560-580 million tons of conventional fuel.9

During 1981-1985 the average annual increase of the national income in Bulgaria is
planned at the level of approximately 6-6.5 percent, in the GDR--5-S.b percent, in
the CSSR--2.7-3 percent, in Hungary-~2.7-3.2 percent and in Romania-6.7-7.6 per-
cent. As a whole for the European GINA countries during the 5-year period this

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
o “-0 V. I 0900... V9“ ”I‘D.

indicator will thus be approximately 6 percent. If in the listed countries in the
future to 1990 the h-percent average annual growth rate of the national income is
taken into account, an average annual increase of the consumption of energy re-
sources by 2.8 percent should correspond to it. In this case their total consump-
tion in 1990 may increase to approximately 800 million tons of conventional fuel.

A higher rate of economic growth will cause a further increase of the consumption
of fuel and energy and, on the contrary, a slowing of the rate of economic grow may
decrease the need for energy resources. Other things being equal, economic growth
will depend on the amount of energy resources which the countries have available.

The interrelationship of economic growth and energy consumption in Cuba, Vietnam
and Mongolia is distinguished by a special feature. In this group of socialist
countries in the 1980's the proportion of industry and especially of its base sec-
tors-~the mining, fuel and power sectors, some metallurgical works, the construc-
tion materials industry-~will increase, modern types of transport will undergo de-
velopment, the mechanization of agriculture will be intensified. During such de-
velopment the increase of energy consumption usually leads the increase of the na-
tional income. The trends being revealed for the 1980's in the development of the
national economy of Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam make it possible to expect that in
them for every l-percent increase of the national income the increase of the con-
sumption of primary energy resources may be not less than 1.2-1.5 percent, that is,
the average growth rate of the consumption of fuel and energy here may be several
fold greater than in the European CEHA countries.

The further increase of the use of fuel and energy at a faster rate in Vietnam,
Cuba and Mongolia and at a slower rate in the European group of CEHA countries is
causing the need for the involvement in the economic turnover of large additional
energy resources.

In the future nuclear power engineering will become the most important direction of
the development of the fuel and power management of the CEHA countries. By 1990
nuclear electric power stations with a total installed capacity of up to 37 mil-
lion k“, which is equivalent to the consumption of up to 70 million tons of conven-
tional fuel a year, will be built on the territory of the European CEHA countries.
The production of the equipment for them and the building of these projects are be-
ing carried out on the basis of mutual cooperation. As a result, the role of nu-
clear electric power stations in the total generation of electric power is increas-
ing considerably. Thus, in 1985 in the CSSR nuclear electric power stations will
account for approximately 20 percent of the generation of electric power in this
country and in Bulgaria--about 26 percent of the generation of electric power in
this country.

The CEHA countries are cooperating in development in the case of the building of
thermal reactors with a unit capacity of 1 million k“, which should replace the
569,000-kﬂ reactors now being produced. However, as Academician A. Aleksandrov
notes, thermal reactors cannot ensure the development of nuclear power engineering
for the distant future, and science proposes a radical means-the development of
fast breeder reactors, since only in this case is it possible to approach nuclear
power engineering which is self-sufficient in fuel for an unlimited time.10 The
first reactors of this type have been built in the USSR. The pooling of the ef-
forts of the CEHA countries is making it possible to expedite the work on the as-
similation of these reactors and to turn to the development of nuclear power engi-
nearing in the new direction.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The construction of the Khmel'nitskaya and Konstantinovskaya AES's with a total
capacity of 8 million k" is planned by joint efforts on the territory of the USSR.
The amount of deliveries of electric power from them to the European CEHA countries
by 1990 may be increased to 20-22 billion kWh a year, which is equivalent to the
annual use at thermal power stations of 7-8 million tons of conventional fuel. The

ides of creating large nuclear power complexes, which was advanced by Soviet scien-
tists, is of interest for the more distant future.

During the present decade the generation of electric power in the CEHA countries
along with the development of nuclear power engineering will be based to a signifi-
cant extent on thermal electric power'stations. Here at the electric power stations
liquid fuel is being replaced by domestic solid fuel (brown coals, lignites, shale).
Thus, in Romania the proportion of coal-powered electric power stations will be in-
creased in the generation of electric power from 35 percent in 1980 to 55 percent

in 1985. The mining of brown coals in the GDR and the CSSR and of lignites in
Bulgaria is increasing.

The increase of the production of raw materials in the majority of OSHA countries
is being accomplished under mine working and economic conditions which are becoming
more complicated. Thus, in the GDR the specific capital outlays per unit of in-
crease of the production of raw materials in the 1970's increased by 50 percent,
while in the 1980's they will increase by more than twofold as compared with the
1960's.12 With the development of the mining of coals and lignites their ash and
moisture content increase, the calorific value decreases. This leads to a substan-
tial decrease of the service life of power boilers, unplanned shutdowns and repairs
of equipment and a considerable excessive consumption of fuel. The purification of
fuel at the site of its production provides a large economic impact in transporta-
tion and power engineering, which exceeds the expenditures on cleaning. Coopera-
tion in the development and production of equipment for the preparation of solid
types of fuel for use in power management makes it possible to decrease the effect
of this unfavorable natural factor on the indicators of the development of power
engineering of the CEHA countries.

In the 1980's it is planned to expand the use of water resources, including by
joint efforts. Thus, several powerful hydroelectric and pumped-storage power sta-
tions will be built by mutual cooperation on the territory of the European CEMA
countries. Along with this the use in some countries of the water power potential
of small rivers, especially in mountainous regions, is possible.

The rising costs in obtaining petroleum and its increasing value as a chemical raw
material and motor fuel are leading to the more and more limited consumption as
boiler fuel of the residues of petroleum refining (fuel oil). The.degree of the
refining of petroleum in many CEHA countries is 45-50 percent. As estimates show,
an increase of the degree of refining to 65-70 percent makes it possible to addi-
tionally obtain in these countries up to 15 million tons of light petroleum prod-
ucts and lubricating oils and to decrease accordingly the yield of fuel oil. 3 In
conformity with the agreement on the specialization and cooperation of the produc-
tion of advanced types of sets of equipment for the heavy refining of petroleum in
the CEHA countries, including the USSR, in 1981-1990 it is planned to produce vari-
ous units with a total refining capacity of about 190 million tons of petroleum a
year. Cooperation in the production of units which ensure the refining of petro-
leum according to the most advanced technologies (catalytic cracking, hydrocrack-
ing and others) is of particular importance.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the 1980's the CEHA countries intend to expand the geological prospecting opera-
tions and cooperation in this area. Thus, the joint Petrobaltic organization, which
was created by the CDR, Poland and the USSR, is carrying out exploratory drilling
for petroleum and gas on the shelf of the Baltic Sea within the territorial waters
of these states. Cooperation in the performance of geological prospecting and the
recovery of petroleum and gas on the continental shelf of Vietnam is envisaged in
accordance with the 1980 agreement between the USSR and Vietnam.

The use of new methods of recovering petroleum may be of great importance for the
CEHA countries. Thus, in Romania the treatment of petroleum in the beds with bac-
teria was successfully tested, which made it possible to increase substantially its
extraction in a number of depleted fields. Here it is planned to increase the co-
efficient of the petroleum yield of the beds fzom 31.5 percent in the late 1970's
to 37 percent in 1985 and 40 percent in 1990.1 In the USSR the experimental and
pilot industrial use of polymers and other reagents, intrabed burning and high-
pressure steam in recovering petroleum has begun. Experience attests that the new
methods will make it possible to increase the coefficient of the petroleum yield

to 55-60 percent.

The cooperation of the CEHA countries in the intensification of the use of petro-
leum resources can be developed in several directions. for example, the coordi-

nated development of the production of the chemical reagents necessary for this,

their reciprocal deliveries, the sharing of experience in the working of reserves
and so on will be of mutual interest.

The large reserves of coals, lignites and shale in the European CEMA countries make
it possible to direct attention to their versatile use, including as raw materials
for obtaining liquid fuel. This problem is especially urgent for the USSR and
Poland, on the territory of which the largest coal fields are located. These two
countries have concluded an agreement on cooperation in the development of methods
of obtaining liquid fuel from coal.

The production of natural gas in the USSR will be developed in the future. As was
reported in the Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th
party congress, for the socialist countries their participation in the increase of
the recovery and transportation of Western Siberian natural gas may be of substan-
tial importance. The large reserves of gas in this region of the USSR and the ex-
perience of the construction by the socialist states of the Soyuz gas pipeline are
making it possible to aim at the joint working of these reserves and the increase
of the deliveries of Soviet gas to the European CEHA countries.

In the CEHA countries the losses of accompanying liquids, which are a valuable raw
material for the chemical industry and a high calorie fuel, are considerable in the
recovery of natural gas. The losses mainly at small- and intermediate-capacity
fields, as world experience attests. can be reduced by several times by the means
of modern technology. Equipment of the unitized type, which is tailored for moving
from some relatively small fields to others as the production of gas increases or
decreases, is required for this. The production of such equipment, which is based
on international specialization and cooperation, and its efficient use are making
it possible to commit additional reserves of raw materials to the economic turnover
of the CEHA countries.

22
non omcm. use omiv
The further development of the domestic energy base of the CEMA countries, includ-
ing Mongolia, Vietnam and Cuba, will be combined withthe importing of fuel and
energy, including from developing countries. The USSR remains the main exporter of
these products to the CEMA countries. However, the increase of deliveries of fuel
and energy from the USSR is undergoing substantial change. Whereas in 1976-1980

the exports of energy from the 0888 to the CEMA countries increased as compared with
the preceding 5-year period by 63 percent, in 1981-1985 it will increase as com-
pared with l976~1980 by 20 percent. Thus, the energy resources, which the CEMA
countries have during the current 5-year period, are limited and require their very
efficient use for the assurance of the necessary rate of economic growth.

Thus, in the 1980's an overall strategy of the solution of the fuel and energy prob-
lem by the CEMA countries is being formed. It is based on the economical and effi-
cient consumption of energy resources, the adoption of energy-saving technology and
structural changes in the economy, which ensure the systematic decrease of the
power—output ratio of production; the structural rearrangement of the balance of
primary energy resources, in which the proportion of atomic energy and solid types
of fuel is increasing; the slower increase of production and the consumption of
primary energy resources as compared with the preceding decade; mutual cooperation,
which is oriented toward the decrease of the power-output ratio of production and
the efficient consumption of energy resources, which encompasses the field of the
study of new resources and sources of energy, and also includes the continuation of
deliveries of energy resources from the USSR to the other CEMA countries.

The rate of economic growth of the CEMA countries in the 1980's along with other
conditions will be determined by the progress of the implementation of this strate-
gy and its individual components and by the intensity of cooperation in the main
directions of the solution of the fuel and energy problem.

FOOTNOTES

1. See, for example, "Decree No 28 of the Council of Ministers of the People's Re-
public of Bulgaria of 28 June 1979" (D"RZHAVEN VESTNIK, 13 July 1979); "Decree
of the GDR Council of Ministers on the Efficient and Economical Use of Electric
Power, Thermal Energy, as Well as Solid and Liquid Fuel" (NEUES DEUTSCHLAND,

21 September 1979): ”Decree of the State Council of the Socialist Republic of
Romania on the Taking of Steps on the Proper Management and the Reduction of the
Consumption of Electric Power, Thermal Energy and Natural Gas" (SCIENTEIA,

31 July 1979); "Decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of
Ministers 'On the Intensification of the Work on the Economy and Efficient Use
of Raw Material, Fuel, Energy and Other Material Resources'" (PRAVDA,

4 July 1981).

2. NEPSZABADSAG, 20 January 1981.
3. muss omscmm. 15 April 1981.
lo. nuns muwo, 7 April-1981.

5. "Romania. Documents--Events," Bucharest, AGERPRES, No 37, 1979, pp i6, 19.

23
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
run urn-nun. USE ONLY

6. RUDE PRAVO, 23 January 1980. -

7. See 'Toplino-ayr'yevaza problena v usloviyakh aotaialiaticheakoy ekononi-
cheakoy integrateii" [the Fuel and Raw Material Problem Under the Conditions
of Socialist Economic Integratiog7, Izdatel'atvo "Nauka". 1979, pp 37-38.

8. RUDE PRAVO, 8 April 1981.

9. SPRAHY MIEDZYNARODOHE, No 9, 1980, p 26; ”Energy Problems and Cooperation in
the EOE Region." Statistical annex. Economic Oo-iaaion for Europe. Energy
(R 10), add. 1, 16 December 1980. "

10. See KOHMUNISI, No lo, 1981, pp 89-90.

11. See BKONOHICRBSKOYB SOTRUDNICEESTVO smN-cmnov SBV, No l, 1977, p 72.

12. "IRISCIMPTSHISSENSCRAPT, No 10, 1980, p 1176.

13. See msammn TORGOVLYA, No 10, 1980, p 17.

16. See PRAVDA, 12 January 1981.

mPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo ”l’ravda". "Voproay ekononiki", 1981

7807
880: 1825/28 END

2!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY