APPROVED FOR RELEAOE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ 00020028-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020028-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8283
20 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(FOUO 11/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100020020-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. more no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
'0
I. grater-Is. Organisation lest.
a.
. Perla-is. Omanlauloa Nata: and Mama )0. hoker/Task/Isvk Unit No.
Joint Publications Research service

1000 North Glshe Mad ' meomm/ an Ne.
Arlington. Virginia 22201

- - saris; Organization Nun sad Minn i3- ‘l’ypa 0‘ Repeat a Period
Could
As above

ls. Supplcuncuy News

l6. Absmeu

This aerial report contains information on energy. fuels and related equipment;
fishing industry and marine resources; water resources. minerals, timber, and
electric power.

- :7 Your «a ore-rat Asa you.

058R

Natural Resources
Electric Power
Energy

Energy Conservation
Fisheries

Fuels

Minerals

richer

Hater Supply
”5. Heuiﬁers/Opee-Endel Tea-s

l15COSATIFiold/Glovo 5c, 10, 210. 20, 86, 2?

It. Ava-labnlnly Srarrual ' ' 1" “0- 0' "it”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of . , , 35

Copies Available From JPRS " m

to... suns-n «ICU. l-tu Ta“ '0“ “A? a: REPRODUCED ”cows: urn-In
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 8281
20 February

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(9000 4/79)

CONTENTS

WRIC m MID roam mm

Economic Effectiveness 01’ Substituting Liquid Boiler
m1 With Con]. in Electric Power Plent- or Moran
Ruuie

(L. I. Yerkine, et u; man mooso comm,
"On, 1978) .00...0..OU.Oll...OOOOOOOOOIOCIODOOOOIODO

mmmmmm

Collaboratim Between TW' and mm
(A. V. ﬁrm; 3mm, J” m) ODDIOOOOOOIDOODUOOOOI

mm Contribution to Tymen' Drilling Practices
(’0 00 mm, m, Jun 78) eeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeee

GRW', mm Collaboration in Inning Technology
(v. v. “tr“; m, am 78) .OOOIOODIOIOODOOOOOI

Developnent, Spread of Electric Drilling
(Ye. A. Gel'rget, et no.3 ems, Jun 78)

Ulu‘einien Coal Industry Results for Nine Months
(mob. M’ me 78) 00.00090...OOOOOOOOOOIOIOOIOI
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC PWER A!!!) MR EQUINE!“

ECONOMIC EFFECTIVENESS 0P SUBSTITUIIIB LIQUID BOILER P031. arm COAL IN
ELECTRIC I’WER mums OF EUROPEAN RUSSIA

Moscow numA TVBRDOGO TOPLIVA in Russien No 6, 1978, pp 15-19

[Article by l.. I. Yerkina, o. In. Ibregiuov, o. r. Kirsenove l. s. Krapchin,
s. A. Peygin. and 1'. Ye. Prolova, Institute of Mineral Puelsj

[Text] The present shortege or energy-producing fuel in the Buropeen part of
the USSR'will continue during the subsequent periods of planning. In order
to mske up for this shortege. it is necessary to include the Kansk-Achinsk
coels end the products of their processing into the fuel balance. At the
present time, e considerable volume of vork hes been done on improving the
quelity of these varieties of coal by thermal treatment (semicoking in the
units of the Power Engineering Scientific Reseerch Institute imeni G. H.
Krzhishenovskiy (ERIN), thermal treetment in the vortex cheaters of the
Institute of Mineral Fuels (101)). In the first case, the main type of the
output product will be senicoke. end in the second-case -- thermocoel.

Semicolte and thermocoal can be trensported in reilroed csrs or by special
types of trensportetion and used as energy-producing fuel.

Definite successes have been echieved in the improvement of the quality of
these types of coal by the hydrogenation esthod. As e result of this, a liq-
uid low-sulfur boiler fuel suitable for trensporting by reilroad and through
pipelines will be obteined. In order to determine the economic effective-
ness of substituting liquid boiler fuel with other types of fuel in the Euro-
pcen part of the 088R, technical end economic indexes of six possible veri-
nnte were computed and conpered:

the first verient envisages the mining of the Kensk-Achinsk cosls, production
of electric energy in the eres of their mining, end its trensmission to the
European pert of the country through a direct-current electric pover trens-
mission line (1.2?) of 2500 kv end a cryogenic LBP;

the second variant envisages the mining of the Kensk-Achinsk coal, its trans-

portation by railroed, and production of electric energy in the European port
of the USSR;

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
the third variant envisages the production of therlallytrested coal (thermo-
coal) at the place of mining of the Kansk-Achinsk coal, its transportation
by railroad and through a pipeline with its subsequent burning at the elec-
tric power plants of the European part of the USSR;

the fourth variant envisages technological power conversion of the Renal-
Achinsk coalsin the area of their mining and transportation of powdered
tarred semicoke by railroad andapipeline to the European part of the coun-

try;

the fifth variant envisages conversion of the Kansk-Achinsk coal in a hydro-
genation process and obtaining a synthetic boiler fuel and motor fuels,
transportation of the boiler fuel by railroad to the European part of the
country with its subsequent burning at electric power plants;

the sixth variant envisages transportation of the western Siberian oil through
n pipeline to the European part of the country, its light processing in order
to obtain motor and boiler fuels, and the burning of liquid boiler fuel at
electric power plants.

Technical and econooic indexes for the variants being coepared were calcu-
lated on the basis of fuel supply for a condensation electric power plant
(RES) of 2600 Hw using its installed capacity for 7000 hours situated either
in the mining region of the lansk-Achinsk coal, or in the European part of
the country (conditionally, the city of Ryaran').

The output of electric power at a RES of the above capacity is 16,800 million
kwh a year, electric power consumption for the plant needs is 6.11 for plants
operating on the run-of-nine Kansk-Achinak coal, 3.261 for plants using
thermocoal or senicohe. and 2.71 for plants using petroleum boiler fuel.

The production of l kwh of electric energy requires 330 g of reference fuel.
The annual consumption of reference fuel at a [BS of the above-mentioned
capacity is 5,316,000 tons.

Production of Electric Energy at Electric Power Plants Using Run-Of-Hine
Coal

In this case, run-of-nine brown coal with 351 moisture content and a com-
bustion heatof 3500 keel/kg is used as fuel. In order to satisfy the needs
of a K38, it will be necessary to mine the coal in the following amounts:
12.2 million tons (if energ; is transmitted through an IE? of 2500 kv), 10.9
million tons (if energy is transeitted through a cryogenic IEP), and 11.2
million tons (if the plant is located in Ryasan' and fuel is transported by
railroad). In these conditions, the econolic indexes of the electric power
plants will be characterized by the date given in Table 1.

Production of Electric Energy at Electric Power Plants Located in the
European Part of the Country using Thermocoal or Tarred Selicolte1

IThe process of obtaining thermocoal is being developed in 101, and process

of obtaining senicoke is being developed in ERIE.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l
Bcononic Indexes of Electric Power Plants Using Run-of-liine
Kanslt-Achinsk -.

   

Variant 1!

mm!—
Blectric Power Trans-is Coal Trans-
sion Line ported to Europ-

Direct Current. Cryo- ean part by
2500 ltw enic r il - d

Indexes

Totel capital investments, mil-

lion rubles 080.3
Including:
extraction of brown coal 132.7
transportation of energy
or fuel 39.1
production of energy 302.6
additional expenses on power
compensation. 6.1
Total operation expenses, nil-
lion rubles 115.6
Including:
extraction of brown coal 12.7
transportation of energy or
fuel 72.2
plant expenses 29.7
expenses on power compensa-
tion 1.0

Thermally treated coal (thermocoal) is e fuel containing over 50% of fine
fractions of 0.5 II in sire and lower combustion heat of about 6200 keel/kg.
The yield of thernocoel from the feed coal with a working noisture content

of 357. is 527.. Thernocoal in its natural form can be transported in open
nll-netel freight cars if its surface in covered with a hydro-amt filn

according to the technology developed at tel. Senicoke. just as thermocoel,
is a fine-grained fuel.

According to calculations, operating costs of obtaining thernocoal (without
the cost of the raw material) are 1.26 rubles/t n.f.2.

Through thermal decomposition of the run-of-aine coal with a 32% moisture
content it is possible to obtain (1): se-icoke 31.6; tar 5.2; high BTU gas
12. The rest is coal dust, gas, and water. The production of one ton of

semicoke requires 2.8 rubles of current expenses and 16.3 rubles of capital
inveetnents.

————.__—.___
2 t n. f. -- tons of natural fuel.

3
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2
Economic Indexes of Electric Power Plants Situated in the
Euro- an Part of th. 0888 which Use Th rmocosl or Semicohs

    
 
 
   
   
 

Indexes

Total capital investments, mil-
lion rubles
Including:
extraction of brown coal and
its improvement
fuel transportation
electric power production
additional expenses on power
compeneation
Total operating costs. million
rubles
Including:
extraction of brown coal and its
improve-ent
fuel transportation
plant expenses
additional expenses on power
compensation

Table 3

Economic Indexes of Electric Power Plants Situated in the Buropeen
Part of the USSR which Use i« id 8- thetic and Petroleum ' .ls
Bl_ctric Power Plants vain:
Liquid Synthetic Petrolet-
‘,-1 Boiler Fuel

 

  

' Indexes

   
  

        
 
     
    
     

Total capital investments, million
rubles
Including:
fuel production.cnd transporte-
tion
production of electric power
Total operating costs, million
rubles
Including:
fuel production and transports.
tation
plant expenses

1239.7 (1721.1)* 990.5 (1979.0)

12m (1712.0
266.1. (266.1.)

937.3 (1818.7)
302.6 (302.6)

259.‘ (320.1) 195.8 (285.9)

226.7 (289.0)
30.7 (30.7)

168.7 (258.8)
27.1 (27.1)

*First figure -- evaluation of petroleum by average expenses for the in-
dustry; second figure -- evaluation by the maximum expenses.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     
  
 
      

In Siberia, transported to
Central Region via a 2500

W 18?; 0.92
by a cryogenic 1.3? 0.70
On run-of-mine coal trans-
ported to Central Region by
railroad 1.06
On theraocoal transported to
Central Region by railroad: 0.90
by pipeline 0.77
On senicoke transported to
Central Region by railroad; 1.01
by pipeline 0.87

On liquid synthetic fuel trans-

ported to Central Region

by railroad 7.58 (10.5)* 1.57 (1.95)*
On petroleu fuel transported

to Central Region by pipe-

line 6.06 (12.1)
On Moscow area brown coal 4.07

2.108 (3.20)*

1.19 (1.75)
0.72

1.92 (3.20)
1.21

"irst figure -- evaluation of petroleue by average expenses for the in-
dustry; second figure -- evaluation by the naxinuln expenses.

The operation of electric power plants on theraocoal and senicoke instead

of the run-of-nine brown coal will require substantial changes in the en-
gineering design of the electric energy production process, which will lead
to a reduction in the need of capital invest-nuts in electric‘power plants.
This will be achieved as a result of lower expenses on the defrosting devices,
warehousing facilities, drying, and dust preparation.

Specific fuel consumtion will also decrease since the burning of thermcoal
and senicoke requires less expenses on the evaporation of moisture fro. the

coal and less electric energy for the plant's needs (fuel supply and dust
preparation) .

The econolic indexes of electric power plants using theraocoal end tarred
senicoke delivered to the European part of the country by railroad or a
pipeline are shown in Table 2.

Production of Electric Energy at Electric Power Plants Using Synthetic or
Petroleum Boiler Fuels

FOR OFFIC?AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The bulk of the synthetic boiler fuel obtained after the hydrogenation con-
version of the brown coal of the Kanah-Achinsk basin in combination with the
Western Siberian oil at a ratio of 3.6:1 can be used at thermal electric .
power plants. Studies have shown that combined processing of brown coal and
oil can yield (1): gasoline AI-93 -- 6.1; diesel fuel -- 9.0, and low-sulfur
boiler fuel --N 25.0. The combustion heat of synthetic boiler fuel is
9000 kcal/hg. In order to ensure fuel for a as of 21000 M, 6,216,000 tone
of such fuel will be required. For this it will be necessary to build a
plant in the coal mining area with a capacity of 16.9 million tons of the
total raw materials (13.2 million tons of coal and 3.7 million tone of oil).
According to calculations, the production costs of one ton of synthetic
boiler fuel (including the mining costs) will be (rubles): capital 217.8
and 335.6; operating 10.? and 61.13. It is assumed that the us will also
use boiler fuel obtained at a petroleum-processing plant (M) as a result
of light processing of the Western Siberian oil. The combustion heat of the
boiler oil is 9500 keel/kg. The electric power plant will require 3,881,000
tons a year. The capacity of tie m was set at 8.6 million tons for or-
dinary petroleum The specific production costs of boiler fuel at the m
were determined as follows: capital -- 162.9 and 1017.6 rubles, operating --
100.9 and 64.1 rubles/t n.f. The economic indexes of electric power plants
using the types of fuel described above are shown in Table 3.

The results given below make it possibl: to establish the comparative effec-
tivenese of the variants examined above and to conclude on this basis
whether or not they are promising. The couson criterion for the evaluation
of the variants are the calculated costs «1 1 kwh of the delivered electric
energy.

The results of the calculations are shown in Table ls.

The analysis of the data given in Table lo made it possible to make the fol-
lowing conclusions.

1. Among the examined variants of the use of the brown coals of the hush-
Achinsk basin, the most economical variant was the one providing for the
construction of a RES in the coal mining region and the transmission of elec-
tric energy to the European part of the country through a cryogenic LBP.

2. The comparison of the variants of the production of electric energy on
the basis of improved Kanek-Achinek coals has shown that the most favorable
results will be yielded by the production of electric energy with the use

of thermocoal (calculated costs were 0.77-0.90 hopech/hwh and 11% lower in
comparison with senicoke). Pipeline transportation will lower the calculated

production cost of l kwh of delivered energy by 11.1 in comparison with rail-
road transportation.

3 The first figure gives the evaluation of oil by average costs of the in-

dusrry, the second figure is the evaluation by the expenditures of the
poorest fields.

6 Data for an electric power plant seemed to be using Moscow area coal are
given for comparison.

6
ms omcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The use of the Hoscov eree coel is less economicel in comparison with
thermocoel. eemicohe, end the run-of-mine Kensk-Achinek coel.

lo. The cowerieon of the veriente of the production of electric energy on
the besis of synthetic end petroleum fuel showed the folloving. when petro-
leum ie evelueted by the everege costs of the industry, it ie lore economi-
cel to use petroleum fuel (celculsted costs ere 23% lower). Hhen evelueting
petroleum by the uni-an costs, the electric pover plents which are being
competed will be identicelly econoeicel (3.20 kopecks/kvh).

5. Considering the ehortege of energy-producing fuel in the European pert
of the country end the limited petroleum fuel resources, the improvement of
the Kensk-Achinsk coels by the hydrogenetion processing method for the pur-
pose of obtaining liquid boiler fuel ehould be considered very promising.

COPYRIGHT: lrdetel'etvo "lleuke," "Khimiye Tverdogo Toplive," 1978

10,233
cso: SIM/0521*

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

U00: 622.24.08
COLLABORATION BETWEEN TATNEFT' AND VNIIBT

Moscow BURENIYB in Russian No 6, Jun 78 pp 3-5

[Articﬁe by A. V. Perov (Tatneft' imeni V. D. Shashin): "Fruitful Collabor-
ation"

[Text] The decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress assigned the country's
drillers the task of shortening the construction time of petroleum and gas
walls by 25 to 30 percent in the 10th Five-Year Plan.

in the first two years of the five-year plan, Tatnoft' [Tatar Petroleum
Production Association] shortened the construction time of operational wells
by [9.5 percent; this was achieved largely by shortening the well assimila-
tion time.

A certain rise in time outlays has been noted in the drilling stage, due
primarily to the fact that Tataria's drillers are carrying out this task
under more complicated mining-geological conditions of well drilling as a
result of increased volumes of drilling in older areas having higher forma-
tion pressures not only in Devonian but also Carboniferous productive de-
posits.

Drilling there is being carried out from drilling platforms built earlier,
and [or this reason all of the wells are controlled-directional, with the
bottom-holes deviating up to 800 meters from the vertical. The rise in the
volume of controlled-directional drilling and the resulting increase in

time outlays necessary for additional work are lengthening the well con-
struction times. hence the necessity of developing the equipment and tech-
nology for the drilling of controlled-directional wells with high technical-
economic indicators.

In the opening of productive horizons, use is made of loaded muds of up to
1.7 g/cm density. First of all, this reduces the bit performance density
indicators; secondly, it requires more reliable insulation of the absorption
zones. Outlays of time and resources to combat absorption go up not only
because of the additional work necessary to increase the reliability of the
well shaft but also because of the increased number of absorption zones to
be insulated.

0
FOR OFFICIAL use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tatarie's fields are multistratal. 1n the process of their exploitation
using perimenter and contour flooding, formation pressures in the oil-
beuring strata have not risen uniformly. At present. the difference betwe n
formation pressures in water and oil bearing strata ranges up to 80 kgf/tm .
Hhere distances between strata are small. the problem of separo

ating them is quite complex.

At present, low-yield. small oil deposits confined to Carboniferous depos’:s
are being put into production in order to maintain a high output level. The
quality of exploitation of these deposits is largely determined by the method
and conditions of stratum opening.

In order to increase the volume of explored oil reserves. drillers have been
assigned the Job of detecting deposits in the upper horizons in the process
of exploitation drilling. Their tasks include the removal of larger-diameter
cores. testing of the strata during the drilling process by means of forma-
tion testers inserted in the pipes, and other additional studies.

This is by no means a complete list of the problems that must be resolved in
order to carry out the tasks successfully.

As is well known, increasing labor productivity in any sector of industry
largely depends on technical progress. The giant leap in_the rising drill-
ing rates during the years of Tateria's oil development is due to the con-
stent and systematic adoption of advanced equipment. progressive technology,
and organisation of drilling operations (the introduction of the turbine
drilling method, the use of industrial water for well flushing. conversion
to small-diameter bit drilling. the introduction of an array of Zlb-milli-
meter diameter hits, the adoption of industrial methods of rig construction,
and so on).

The assimilation of new equipment and technology is a complex matter requir-
ing a serious and well-considered approach. It is very important to unite
the efforts of the scientific-research and production organisations. This
largely determines the amount of time necessary to incorporate the results
of scientific-research and design efforts in production.

As u positive example, we may cite the constant close collaboration between
Tatneit' and VNllBT [All-Union Order of Labor Red Banner Scientific-Research
institute of Drilling Technology]. The association's many successes are

the fruit of this collaboration.

Tetneft' maintains routine and close ties with practically all divisions
and l1boratories of VNllBT. Together they discuss production problems and
the findings of scientific-research and design work; they draw up programs
for testing experimental models and adopting series machinery. Tatneft'
is a huge. complex testing ground for VNllDT. It is the association's
operations which determine the performance and effectiveness of the use of
many of VNIIDT's designs, which are then put into production.

9
son orrxcm. use ONLY
At present, all of the country's oil regions are making excensive use of
turbine whipstocks, sectional spindle turbodrills, and various low-speed
bottom-hole engines, whose designs were perfected during the drilling of
wells in the fields of Tataria.

In the course of collaboration, several unified creative groups have been
formed, made up of personnel from VNIIBT including A. A. Asan-Nuri, A. c.
Kalinin. M. T. Gusmen, R. A. ioennesysn, Yu. 8. Vasil'yev, B. H. Kurochkin,
N. H. Kes'yenov, l. i. Kusnetsova, and others. During discussions of in-
dividual problems, new ideas and original solutions come into being, which
later serve as the basis for the development of new designs and the working
out of new technology.

Several years ago, for example, Yu. S. Vasil'yev's laboratory recommended
regulating the dynamic load on the bit by using wave RBK'e [drilling string
separators]. Experience in drilling with RBK's has confirmed the useful-
ness of regulating dynamic load. But the low reliability of the RBK's
made it impossible to use them widely. The idea came up of using a KBK
[combined drilling string], consisting of steel and low-alloy drill pipes,
instead of the ﬂux. At present, KBK's are being extensively used not only
in Tatneft' but also in other oil regions, for example, Permskeye Oblast
end Western Siberia. In Tetneft' alone this makes it possible to save more
than 2.000 bits per year.

The efforts of the unified creative groups have resulted in the development
of n spindle whipstock and an automatic whipstock guide on the borehole
bottom. At present, work is underway on the development of nipple inter-
sectionsl stabilizers, also conical radial supports; the introduction of
these will boost effectiveness and increase the range of application of
series-produced spindle turbodrills.

An excellent example of close creative collaboration with VNIIBT is the

plan of experimental work in Tetneft’ areas to seek out ways to improve

the technical and economic indicators of drilling operations, to shorten

the well construction time. Plans call for using the experimental find-
ings to introduce all of the necessary correctives in the equipment, techno-
logy, end organisation of drilling operations. Implementation of the
experimental findings will help to shorten the well construction times in
Tntaria to the planned level in l930.

Let ue discuss briefly the implementation of the joint experimental project
plnn.

As is well known, labor productivity in drilling largely depends on the in-
dicators of bit performance, and so the association is focusing considerable
attention on this problem. Researchers are collaborating with VNIIBT on
field studies to determine the optimal parameters of drilling operations.

‘ These studies have made it possible to determine the rotation speeds and
axial loads on the bit making it possible to double the amount of drilling
series-produced bits can do.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VNIIBT has developed low-speed 02-172H, TRH-l95, 3T88hl-l95 bottomnhole
engines designed to maintain specified drilling operation specifications.
Experience has shown that when the bits are outfitted with helical bottom-
hoie engines and geared turbodrilis. the amount of drilling per bit doubles.
Recently, VNlluT has designed fundamentally new bits with oil-filled support--
Sh-215.9HZGNU. 8h-215.952NHU, Sh-215.9TKZGNU. and 8h-2l5.9KcNU. In well
drilling operations in Tataria in [976, 36 bite outfitted with helical

engines were used. In 630 hours of mechanical drilling they completed 6,328
meters. Compared with series-produced bits used in combination with helical
bottom-hole engines. the amount of drilling per experimental bit was 2.a

times longer; the mechanical drilling speed was 1.16 times greater. and the
round-trip speed was 69 percent greater. In 1977, the association's enter-
prises received and work-tested more than 100 bits with oil-filled hermetically-
sealed support. manufactured not only by VNllBr plants but also by the
Kuybyshev Bit Plant. in l978 the association plane to adopt about 1,600

of these highly-efficient bits. and in 1980 it will convert entirely to these
bits. Undoubtedly, complete conversion to drilling with AN series bits

will make it possible to substantially increase the speed of well drilling

and the effectiveness of drilling operations in Tatneft'.

Very useful Joint work has been done to determine the feasibility and the
range of application of bits outfitted with synthetic diamonds. It has
been found that when drilling below the Carboniferous horizon the best in-
dicators have been achieved through the use of MKTSI-lesb bits. The
mechanical speed in this case is almost double the speed in the cases of
using 13" type bits. Especially effective when using HKTSl-2l286 bits is
the practice of drilling at intervals of l.l00 to 1,700 meters, flushing

by means of loaded clay mud. The number of series-produced three-cone bits
needed per well has been reduced by 30, and the time necessary to drill one
well has been shortened by four full days. These bits can be used to drill
wells utilising devices to carry out lowering and raising operations and
for drilling under conditions of intensive water seepage. Hhen such wells
are drilled using series-produced cone bits, after two hours of mechanical
drilling or 30 to 35 meters of completed drilling the workers have had to
carry out the lowering and hoistings operations while being "showered" by
formation water. The use of bits outfitted with synthetic diamonds prevents
this, improves working conditions. and boosts productivity.

Further increasing the volume of drilling by means of these highly-effective
bits .s being hindered by the lack of more powerful and reliable drilling
pumps.

The above is by no means everything that has been done in recent years. Sn-
cournging results have been achieved, for example, in drilling accompanied
by flushing the borehole bottom with aerated fluid. Positive results have

been achieved by the adoption of differentiated specifications-increasing
the power transmitted to the bit as it wears down.

In the process of well drilling. the association's workers insulate three

thousand absorption zones every year, expending about 75,000 hours of calendar
time to combat them.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considerable difficulties urine in the insulation of zones of intensive
absorption. Overall. the quantity of conpiicationa in not large~-not more
than six percent, while tine outlays to insulate then in the overall bal-
ance of tine outlays necessary to combat complications run as high as 30
percent. The association has also accomplished considerable success in
this regard. Thus. excellent results have been achieved through the use of
a plugging mix with high water—yield, developed by the unified creative
group of Tatneft' and VNilBT. In 1977 this mix was used to insulate more
than 30 intensive absorption zones.

The association has collaborated with the VNIIBT on successful efforts to
improve the quality of the opening of productive strata and the well casing.
A special unit has been built to prepare invert-emulsion muds. and their
effectiveness and range of application has been determined.

Summarizing the overall results, we may say that the jointly-conducted
experiment has been successful. But a critical stage loous ahead-the nas-
sive introduction of discovered reserves. Let us hope that VNIIBT will
provide the necessary aid to the association in the series assimilation of
all the highly-effective equipment developed by the institute.

COPYRIGRT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organizatsil.
upravlonlya i ekonomiki neftegazovoy pronyshlennosti (VNIIOBNG), 1978

685A
080: [822

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBbs AND RBLATBD EQUIPMENT

UDC! 622.26.08.622.203.23

VNllBI CONTRIBUTION TO TYUNEN' DRILLING PRACTICES
Moscow DURBNIYE in Russian No 6. Jun 78 pp 6-6

[Article by P. c. Arrhenov (Glevtyumenneftegas): "VNIIBT's Contribution
to the Development of Western Siberie's Oil and Gas Pields"]

[Text] Close and extensive collaboration between the drillers of Tyumen'

and the scientists of VNIIBT [All-Union Order of Labor Red Banner Scientific-
Research Institute of Drilling Technology] began with the development of
Hestern Siberia‘s oil fields. The first task that had to be resolved was
that of substantially improving the equipment and technology of drilling
controlled-directional walls, which had to serve as the basis for the devel-
opment and introduction of cluster drilling. Unless this task were resolved.
it would be impossible to hope for the rapid end successful development of
the new oil region.

Under the difficult climatic conditions that are typical of western Siberia,
where vast areas are covered by swamps and lakes and are frequently flooded
by river runoff, cluster well drilling and exploitation represents if not

the only possible then at least undoubtedly the most economical end rational
method. One of the most important advantages of cluster drilling under such
conditions is the possibility of eliminating the seasonality of drilling
operations, thus making it possible to substantially shorten oil field dev-
elopment time and enhance the effectiveness of capital investments according-

ly.

Nowevor. the first attempts to drill controlled-directional wells there in-
volvedsubstantiel difficulties, chiefly due to the lack of the necessary
equipment and technology. In order to resolve the problem of extensively
adopting cluster drilling in Western Siberia as quickly and efficiently as
possible, essential organisational measures were promptly taken in VNIIBT.
Thus. a controlled-directional well drilling laboratory was set up and
manned with highly-qualified specialists; in effect, it became the center
of scientific-research and design work in this domain.

Since that time, the drillers of western Siberia have shared all their
success with the collective of VNIIBT. which has developed, tested, proved,
and successfully adopted reliable technical devices for the massive drilling

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of controlledcdirectional wells. The success has come about due to the close
cooperation between institute scientists and Siberian drillers and their
integrated approach to the resolution of this problem: in addition to de-
signing models of new equipment (turbine whipstocks, layouts with calibra-
tors, stabilizers of the STK type, the STT-loh telemetry system), improVements
have been made in procedures of designing the profiles of controlled-
directional wells, the drilling technology, the technology of making and
controlling the quality of the drilling muds, and methods and means of
controlling the deviation parameters. All of these measures have brought

it about that cluster drilling has been completely mastered end is being

used extensively in Hestern Siberia. Despite considerable deviations from
the vertical (2,000 meters or more), and with productive strata lying at
2,200 to 2,600 meters, the cost of drilling controlled-directional wells

has now approached that of drilling vertical wells.

At present, the technical means and technology of drilling controlled-
directional wells developed by VNiiBT in collaboration with SibNiiNP [Siberian
branch of the Scientific-Research institute of Petroleum industry] and the

drilling enter rises of Glavtyumenneftegas [Main Tyumen' Petroleum and Gas
Administrations, are the most sophisticated in our country and have pract-
ically no equals.

A major and perhaps crucial factor in the successful and really extensive
adoption of cluster drilling in Siberie's oil fields has been the fact that
VNIIBT has not only developed but also organised, in its own plants, the
manufacture of special equipment and drilling tools necessary in all stages
of drilling, including items not relating to the institute'a profile, and
supplied them to the drilling enterprises in the necessary quantities. For
example, in order to conduct drilling operations under conditions of high
pressure differential on the bit, the institute had its own experimental
plant organise the production of high-quality pistons, gaskets, cylinder
bushings for the drilling pumps, and also bit nozzles.

Before proceeding to other aspects of collaboration between Hestern Siberia's
drillers and the VNilBT collective, mention should be made of a basic fea-
ture of this collaboration, one which defines the whole style of the in-
stitute's work with production enterprises: when addressing a task, the
institute as a rule does not ask but gIVes. This principle of collaboration,
in which the institute supports all links of the chain, starting with the
idea. its theoretical and experimental study. the designing and stand test-
ing of experimental models of equipment, and ending with the manufacture

of the first experimentai~industrial batches and subsequent work-testing
under conditions of production, is, in our opinion, the most rational. This
is backed up by the many years of practical collaboration between VNIIBT

and Glavtyumanneftegas. This principle of collaboration has become possible
thanks to the fact that the institute has been working diligently and pur-

posefully for many years on the creation of the necessary production-technical
base.

ﬂow the institute has well-equipped laboratories, a large test-stand complex,
and an experimental proving ground. VNiiBT includes two machine-building

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plants and a branch in Perm', which also has a machine-building base and

e test-stand facility. A substantial contribution to strengthening ties
between VNIIBT and production and accelerating the adoption of new applica-
tions is being made by new equipment and technology testing divisions which
the institute has in nine basic oil-producing regions.

In summarising the results of the work of VNIIBT in collaboration with enter-
prises of Glavtyumenneftegae with regard to the adoption and improvement of
controlled-directional drilling. we may state that at present 95 percent of
the operating wells in Tyumen' are being drilled in clusters. -CIusters of
five to twelve wells or more constitute production-technical facilities in
which drilling and oil production are carried out without seasonal interrup-
tlons.

Another important problem being resolved with the active participation of
VNIlBT is that of increasing the amount of drilling per bit. The fact that
during the 9th Five-Year Plan the amount of drilling per bit within clev-
tyumenneftegaz rose by 75.5 percent represents a substantial contribution
by the institute, which took account of the specific nature of the geological
profile of Hestern Siberia's oil fields in designing the LV-215.9H26 bit.
This made it possible to drill wells of 1,800 meters in the Samotlor field
with just two bits,and wells of 2,600 meters using just four; this was
preceded by the drilling of wells with hydraulicfmonitor bite at high pres-
sure (220 to 250 kgf/cmz. At present, the planned volume of such drilling
is 500,000 meters per year.

in order to comprehensively study the effect of mud pressure on drilling
effectiveness, the institute has set up a unique test-stand complex. To
get an idea of the scale of the work, it is sufficient to note that a spe-
cial building had to be built to accommodate the complex.

The institute is doing a great deal of work in Glavtyumenneftegas to perfect
turbine drilling equipment. It has proposed and delivered to the drilling
enterprises low-speed spindle turbodrills of the 3TSSh-l95TL type with
precision-cast turbines, which can be replaced by plastic turbines when
necessary.

The complex is also testing new types of turbodrills in order to further
enhance the effectiveness of drilling operations.

As is well known, successful exploitation of oil and gas fields, also the
yields and service life of the wells, to a large extent depends on the
reliable segregation of oil, gas, and water bearing strata. Since 1971
the institute has been working to enhance the quality of well cementing by
means of hydraulic packers. All of the institute's applications in this
domain have been tested in western Siberia-at the Samotlor, Var'yegan,
Hikhnayskoye, western Surgut. and other fields.

Hydraulic drilling packers of the PPO type for installation outside the
string have been adopted, and at present work is underway on the adoption
of more sophisticated hydraulic packers of the PCP type.

15
roe orrtcm. us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Acceptance tests have been completed on container packers of the PK type
and packers of the PCB type for the hermetic sealing of the casing shoe.

By now, about 300 packers have been used in Clavtyumenneftegas. In order

to meet demand for this type of item, the institute has expended considerable
effort on speeding up the practical production of rubber gaskets for packers
at the Kasan' Industrial Rubber Coeds Plant, also the production of shells
and metal components of packers and the Kelush Nefteburm: hramont [Petroleum
Drilling Machinery Repair Plant]. VNIIBT is also manufalturing experimental
batches at its own plant in Kotovo.

An analysis of the results of operating wells equipped with packers designed
for installation inside the casing in Clavtyumennaftegas fields has confirmed
the high effectiveness of using these packers, because they eliminate the
negative influence of the plugging mud on the properties of the productive
strata and increase well yields and extend the service life. The economic
effect due to the use of one packer exceeds 12,000 rubles per year.

New and complex tasks face the drillers in the 10th Five-Year Plan.

One of the most important tasks involving the active participation of
VNIlBT scientists is the development of an automated complex for the drill—
ing of controlled-directional wells using bottomnhole engines. This work
is coming to be of increasing importance, considering the fact that already
it takes two bits to drill a well at Samotlor, and in the future it will
take one bit. In order to do this it will be necessary to drill the well
along the projected trajectory without lifting the tool and inserting the
measuring apparatus to determine the bottom coordinates in order to further
correct the direction of the borehole.

Another very important task is that of resolving a complex of problems with
regard to perfecting the technology of opening productive strata at the
Salmyskoye Field under complex geological conditions. Work is already under-
way on the selection of special drilling muds, the development of bottom
engines (turbodrills and volume engines), and assured possibility of main-
taining balance between formation and hydrodynamic pressures.

During the 9th Five-Year Plan, the commercial drilling speed in Clavtyumen-
neftegas rose by 27.5 percent. In the current five-year plan, this indicator
will continue to rise. The volume of drilling operations, which almost
tripled during the 9th Five-Year Plan, will also rise.

Further progress in drilling in Western Siberia is impossible without con-
stant modernization of the equipment and improved technology--that is, with-
out the adoption of new scientific advanCes. Successful and fruitful
collaboration between science and production, an excellent example of which
is the many years of joint efforts by Clavtyumenneftegaz and VNIIBT, is the
guarantee of successful implementation of the crucial tasks assigned to the
drillers by the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organizatsii.
upravleniya i ekonomiki nettegasovoy promyshlennoati (VNIIOENC),

1975 16

68510 i
cso: 1822 ma orncm. [SE om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUEL AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

"DC: 622.26.08: 622.241.6

GROZNEFT', VNIIBT COLLABORATION IN DRILLING TECHNOLOGY
Moscow BURENIYE in Russian No 6, Jun 78 pp 8-ll

[Article by V. V. Petrov (Greeneft'): "Collehorstion Between Science end
Production on the Hey to Hestering Greet Depths"]

[Text] Greeneft' [Grosnyy Petroleum Production Association] is one of the
oldest in the Soviet Union. Probsbly meny drillers heve heerd of the com-
plex conditions of drilling wells in thet eree. Precticelly ell types of
complications thet cen erise in drilling ere encountered there (mud ebsorp-
tion, ceving. borehole nsrrowing. seepege, end so on).

Steeply-sloping strete with dip engles of 20 to 80 degrees, the elternetion
of tones of ebnormslly-high (AVPD) end sbnor-elly-low (ANPD) formetion pres-
sures. and high bottom temperetures sometimes running es high es 160 to 230
degrees C et projected depths, considerebly complicete the drilling
process es well es the prevention end eliminetion of complicetions thet
srise.

In recent yeers. chiefly deep wells heve been drilled in erees of Grosneft'.
It.is sufficient to note thet of 76 drilling crews opersting in the essocie-
tion, 63 ere drilling wells with projected depths of more then 6,500 meters.

The msximum depth so fer-7,501 netsrs-—wss reeched in the drilling of
well No l (Burunneye).

All of the wells heve multi-string construction providing for the insertion
of five or six cesing strings.

The drilling of deep wells is s compliceted process which requires the
hendling of many problems. Neturelly, these problems cennot be resolved
without the undertsking of scientific reseerch end experiments on the basis
of the ebundent production experience of leeding collectives end crews.
Efforts along these lines ere underway in e number of scientific-reseerch
institutes.

Let us focus on the results of colleboretion between VNIIBT [All-Union
Order of Lebor Red Bonner Scientific-Reseerch Institute of Drilling Technology]

snd Crozneft' in the domein of deep-well drilling.

17
son orrtcm. use ONLY
in connection with the massive conversion to deep-well drilling, the asso-
ciatlon's collective faced the task of increasing commercial drilling
speeds and sinking boreholes to the projected depths. To do this, they
enlisted the help of VNIIBT.

All of the work was carried out in close contact between Grosneft', VNIIBT,
end SevkavNIPIneft' [North Caucasus Scientific-Research and Planning
Institute of Petroleum]. Together they carried out a profound analysis of
the status of the equipment end technology of drilling operations in that
region and found a number of basic problems which had to be resolved:

1. The formulation of measures to prevent borehole deviation at all inter-
vals, especially when drilling borehole segments of 394, 190, and 140
millimeters diameter.

2. The development of a highly-productive rock-breaking tool in order to
substantially increase the amount of drilling per ram.

3. Development of the technology and technical means for drilling with
regulation of the pressure differential in the well-strata system under
conditions of AVPD and ANPD.

a. Development of the technical means to make it possible to optimalize
drilling specifications using cone bits of new design and bits in series
production. '

5. Development of the technical means making it possible to improve the
quality of the cementing of easing strings under conditions of small
annular clearances (six to eight millimeters).

in order to find the most effective technical means to prevent well devia-
tlon, Crozneft' collaborated with VNIIDT and SevkalePIneft' to draw up a
program of projects to test this equipment. The program included layouts
of the drill string bottom designed by VNIIBT, including RTB's [jet-turbo
drills]. rvx-zao turbodrills with rotating body, pilot reamers of the R00
and R0? type in combination with high-torque A9CT, A9GTSh, and rvx-zao
turbodrills. and also a number of layouts for rotary drilling.

As a re ult of these efforts, the optimal ranges of application were found
for the technical means and methods of drilling, making it possible to drill
boreholes of 396 millimeters diameter down to depths of 3,000 to 3,300
meters under complicated geological conditions with dip angles of up to 30
degrees.

The technical-economic indicators achieved in adopting these technical means
and methods of drilling make it possible to assert that the task of preventing
deviation of the borehole under the first JZk-millimeter intermediate string
has been practically resolved. Solutions have also been found for problems

of preventing pipe abrasion as a result of bends. failure of the strings to
reach the projected depth. and so on.

18
ron orrrcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Between February 1974 and October 1975, the association's drilling enter-
prises were all outfitted with high-torque sectional turbodrille and jet-
turbine drills of the latest design.

it is no less important to maintain borehole verticality when drilling in
Cretaceous and Jurassic deposits with bits of 140 and [90 millimeters. The
geological-technical conditions are such that in some cases borehole devia-
tion ranged as high as 35 to 60 degrees, and the rate of increase in zenith
angle ranged between 8 and 10 degrees per 100 meters. Drilling under such
conditions was complicated by the formation of grooves in the wells of the
wells, resulting in legging and jamming of the drill tool.

In order to prevent deviation, the load on the bit was reduced to 3-4 tf
for wells of 160 millimeters diameter and 5-6 tf for wells of 190 diameters,
but of course, these loads were not optimal.

VNIiBT developed and, in collaboration with the association, tested under
industrial conditions a technology of rotary drilling using bits of 140 and
l80-l90.5 millimeters diameter with on-bit stabilising devices of the NSU
type. 0n the basis of experimental drilling it was found that in compliance
with this technology the load on a conical bit could be increased by 2 to
2.5 times compared with the load created on bits during drilling without the
use of "50's, keeping the intensiveness of deviation of the borehole within
the allowable limits and at the same~time approximately doubling the amount
of drilling per'bit and the mechanical drilling speed.

The rotary drilling technology. using "80's, was recommended for adoption.

The multi-string structure of the wells and the presence of rocks differing
sharply in hardness made it necessary to use a large array of bits in well
drilling. it is sufficient to note that the diameter of boreholes ranges
between 490 and 105 millimeters, and the bit type ranges between H and T.

As is well known, the proper selection of bits substantially speeds up the
drilling of deep wells and makes them cheaper; for this reason, much atten-
tion has been focused on testing new bits in recent times.

in collaboration with VNIIBT and SevkalePlneft', the association tested
more than 15 type-sizes of new bits of series AN and AV between 1975 and
1977. During the testing of all the bits, the amount of drilling per hit,
mechanical drilling speeds, and durability were increased by 25 to 220 per-
cent compared with series-produced bits.

Within Grozneft', the volume of drilling by means of loaded muds comes to

70 to 72 percent of the total. The solid phase content in these muds ranges
between 50 and 60 percent, sometimes reaching 80 percent. Host advantageous
under such conditions is the use of cone bits of the 2AM and 3AM series having
hermetically-sealed oil-filled support with slide bearings.

JAN-290.5HZG hits were tested in the drilling of Yastrebinaya Hell No l06
and Andreyevskaye Hell No l007 in Lower Haykop deposits. In the drilling

19
ma orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of well No 106 between 6,560 and 4,962 meters, the amount of drilling per
JAN bit exceeded that of the lAN bit by 6.5 times while increasing the
durability of the support by 2.9 times. In the drilling of well No. 1007,
flushed by means of mud with a density of 1.98 glcm3 the '
interval 5,055 through 5,120 meters was completed by one JAN bit in 5b
hours. The amount of drilling with a Romanian-made bit was only 13 to 17
meters--that is, 6.5 to 5 times less.

In the drilling of Stsrogrosnenskaya Hell No 712 with a ZAN-l90.SSZGU bit,

326 meters were drilled in the 3,893-h,217 meters interval in Upper Cretaceous
deposits at a mechanical speed of four meters per hour--thet is, the work
indicators of the series-made bits were exceeded by five times.

Adoption of the JAN and 2A" series bits now undergoing industrial testing
will unquestionably improve the technical-economic indicators of drilling.

Above all, reducing the number of bits used means preventing weer end tear
on casing strings, which in turn makes it possible to simplify well con-
struction and to reduce the amount of time spent on casing work as well as
auxiliary operations and idleness due to the preparation of casing pipes
for insertion. All of these time outlays add up to 25 percent of all cal-
ender drilling time.

In 1976-1977 there was an increase in volumes of drilling using diamond bits
outfitted with both natural and artificial diamonds. This is due, on the

one hand, to the greater well depths, which more fully reveal the advantages
of unsupported bits having tougher implements, and, on the other, the im-
proved technology of drilling for the opening up of Upper Cretaceous deposits
characterized by potential absorption.

It should be pointed out that the use of HDR-llSST-l diamond bits developed
by VNIIBT and the Institute of Super Hard Materials made it possible to ex-
tend the bottom of Burunnaya Hell No l to 7,501 meters. '

An analyses of the operating results of diamond bits has demonstrated their
high potential. Thus, in the drilling of Braguna Hell No 73 one “DI-lGOST-l
bit completed 610 meters in the Upper Cretaceous deposits (the interval
between 4.776 and 5,186 meters). In the drilling of Oktyabr'skaya Hell No
250 one blt completed 350 meters in the 4,576-5,068 meter interval in the
same deposits. Using just one or two bits it is possible to open up the
Upper Cretaceous deposits throughout the entire interval.

However, expansion of the domain of application of diamond bits is being
held back by the limited availability of high-strength weighted drill pipes

and pipes of 73.89 and [16 millimeters diameter equipped with threaded safety
connections.

Among the most promising trends in increasing the technical-economic indica-
tors of deep-well drilling are the work-testing and adoption of drilling
technology utilising regulation of the pressure differential in the well-stratum

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system. Efforts to resolve this complex problem with regard to the con-
ditions characteristic of Grosneft' oilfields at present are now jointly
underway with the collaboration of the association, VNIIBT, SevkavNIPIneft',
KOVNIIpromneftegeofizika [Caucasus Department of the All-Union Scientific-
Reseorch Institute of Petroleum Industry Geophysics]. and Greeneftegeofirika
[Grosnyy Petroleum Geophysics Trust]. They have drawn up an integrated
program of scientific-research work.

In 1976-1977, the technology of drilling with regulation of differential
pressure when drilling through AVPD zones was used in part in the drilling
of some of the segments of 2amankul Hell No 86 and Breguna Hell No 76. The
results of these efforts are quite encouraging.

In the drilling of Hell No 86, in the interval between 4,120 and “.392
meters, the amount of drilling per bit and the mechanical drilling speed
were approximately doubled, while the amount of chemical reagents consumed
and other outlays were reduced; overall, this made it possible to save 610
rubles per meter in the interval of application.

In drilling between 1,913 and 4,880 meters in Braguna Hell No 76 it became
possible, thanks to careful compliance with optimml correlations between
pressures in the well-stratum system, to avoid all complications, to sub-
stantially raise the technical-economic indicators, and to simplify the
well construction compared with the project plan.

It should be mentioned that the technology of drilling with regulated differ-
ential pressure has been widely tested in the opening up of Upper Cretaceous
deposits, and in same areas the use of this.technology alone has made it
possible to open up the entire interval of these deposits, making it possible
to explore lower strata.

In the process of drilling deep wells within Grozneft' it is necessary to
drill through six or seven intervals that differ in terms of drillability,
which accounts for the multi-string structure of the wells.

Failure of any of the strings to reach the stipulated depth makes it impos-
sible to sink the well to the projected depth. At the same time, the in-
sertion of strings in cases of small annular clearances and substantial
seepage under the shoes requires considerable time to prepare the borehole
(repeated gauging and testing of the borehole using complicated layouts).
Moreover, the desired results are not always achieved.

Difficulties due to snmll annular clearances also arise in the cementing
of inserted strings.

VNIIBT has proposed an expandable reamer designed to increase the diameter
of the borehole over the dimensions of the inserted casing string. The use
of this reamer provides a practical solution to the above problems.

Reamers have been designed to fit the conditions of drilling in Grorneft'
oilfield areas; they make it possible to enlarge the borehole from [90 to

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
230 millimeters under the shoe of an inserted 219-millimeter casing string
(RRB-l90/230), also RRB-ZkS/285 and RRB-295/365, designed to enlarge the
borehole prior to inserting casing strings of 219 and 273 millimeters.

The RRB-l90/230 has undergone acceptance tests, and the RRB-295l365 is un-
dergoing tests. in all wells where these reemera have been used, the insertion
and cementing of 273-millimeter casing strings have gone without complications.

Unquestionably, increasing the volumes of the use of RRB reamers will make
it possible to resolve one of the most complex problems involved in casing
deep wells.

It should be mentioned that the fruitful collaboration between Grosneft'
drillers and VNIIBT has been largely facilitatnd by the considerable organi—
zational work carried out by the association and the VNIIBT department set
up in Grosnyy.

At present. the pattern of conducting tests on new equipment works this way:

All UBR's [administrations of drilling operations] receive detailed informa-
tion concerning the availability and technical specifications of new equip-
ment or concerning the technological process as a whole. 0n the basis of
this information, they make suggestions as to which objects can make the
most effective use of this equipment or technology for testing and adoption.

Suggestions made by the UBR's are examined jointly by the association's
drilling technology division and the Grornyy division of VNIIBT and are then
incorporated in the testing schedule plan to be approved every month by the
association's management. Implementation of the scheduled plan is the re-
sponsibility of the chiefs of the technology divisions of the UBR's jointly
with the Grosnyy division of VNIIBT.

The results of the tests are brought to the attention of the engineering—
technicel personnel of the UBR and discussed at various seminars.

The program of instruction for drillers and assistant drillers in the train-
ing-coursework combine now includes a section for the study of new VNIIBT
equipment that has completed or is undergoing tests in the association's
oilfields.

Thus, extensive creative collaboration between science and production is

substantially enhancing the quality of testing of new equipment, speeding
up its inauguration into series production, and helping to facilitate the
adoption of new technological applications.

According to forecasts, most of the petroleum reserves which will serve as
the basis in the current five-year plan and in later years for the develop-
ment of the republic's oil industry are confined to the interval between
5,500 and 8,000 meters; this gives rise to many problems, the solution to
which will assign a key role to scientists of VNIIBT.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL 088 ONLY

COPYRIGHT: Vaeaoyutnyy nnuchno-lulodovatol'nkiy lmtltut orsuntuuu.
uprnvlonlya l okonoulkl nettegnovoy prouynhlnnnoul (VNIIOBNO). 1978

685’:
6501 [822

23
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

"DC! 622e2l¢3e92
DEVELOPMENT. SPREAD 0P ELECTRIC DRILLlNO
Noecow BURSNIYE in Rueeien No 6. Jun 78 pp i7-l9

[Article by Ye. A. Gel'iget. P. N. Fonenko. end A. F. Kononov (VNllBT):

“Stntui end Prospective Developnent of Electric Drilling of Oil and Gee
Hells"

[Text] VNllBT [All-Union Order of Lebor Red Denner Scientificsneseerch
Institute of Drilling Technology] hes been involved with problems of develop-
ing equipment end technology for electric drilling since the institute wee
crested, thet is. since 1953.

Until l966, problems of designing verious kinds oi electric drills of 166,
l70. 215. end 250 nillineters dieneter. end their testing under industriel
conditions. were the concern of SKID: [Speciel Design-Technology Bureeu

fut the Plenning of Electricel Equipnent]. which wes set up in the eiectricel
equip-ent industry system.

Leter on these projects were continued in SKTBB while VNIIBT beceee involved
with the development of electric drilling technologies: determining the
retionel doneins .2 its epplicetion end the power end technology pereneters
of electric drills. fornuleting the technical specificetions on electric
drills and other equipment involved with electric drilling, conducting tests
of technicel devices. eccepting then for series production, end working out
the technology of drilling utilizing the new technicel devices.

The enount of electric drilling in all oil end gee wells since i963 through-
out the sector es e whole comes to 0.5 niliion meters. At present. electric
drilling is used in Beshneit' [Beshkir Petroleue Production Association].
Turkmenneft' [Turkmen Petroleum Production Associetion], Asneft' [Aserbeydshen
Petroleum Production Associetion], end Ukrneft' [Ukrainien Petroleum Pro-
duction Associations: experiments! work on its utiiisetion is underway in
clnvtyunennefteges Hein Tyunen' Petroleun end Gee Administration].

The present inventory of electric bottom engines includes high-torque electric
drills of 166. 185, 2&0. end 290 millimeters dieeeter with verieble bit
rotetion speeds renging between 700 end 70 RPM. This breed renge of rotetion
speeds hes been echieved through the use of oil-filled geered inserts produced
in series eiong with the electric drills.

2%
FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
The possibility of regulating the bit's rotation speed at high torque and
the loot that the power parameters are independent of the type and quality
of the working agent circulating in the well make it possible to conduct
drilling operations under very complex geological conditions while maintain-
ing the optimal correlations of bit load and number of rotations to achieve

good results.

To improve electric drilling indicators. use is made of other technical
meansi

bottom-hole telesystems which. in conjunction with current feed. make it
possible to control and effectively direct the well's trajectory;

deviation mechanisms of lob, 185. and 2&0 millimeters diameter making it
possible to bend the borehole at the rate of one to three degrees for every
ten meters;

double-deviation mechanisms of lob and 2&0 millimeters diameter making it
possible to bend boreholes at the rate of tour to seven degrees for every
ten meters. to be used in drilling manifold-horizontal wells;

diesel—electric units providing independent power to the electric drill in
regions without electrificiation.

The following are in the development stage:

multi-electrode logging probes for carrying out a complex .°‘ field-geophysical
work in gently-inclined boreholes:

a complex of electric drilling equipment and drilling tools for drilling
operations using an electric drill of l2? millimeters diameter in vertical.
inclined. and manifold-horizontal walls;

a variable whipstock.

These technological characteristics and technical devices of electric drill-
lng have made it possible in recent years to achieve high technical-economic
indicators in well drilling and to motivate a number oi oil-producing associa-
tions to adopt and further develop this means of drilling.

the lollowing domains of advantageous application of electric drilling have
been determined:

the drilling of wells down to 3.000 to 5.000 meters in depth using loaded
mods of densities of up to 2.3 glcm3;

the drilling of controlled-directional wells;

the drilling of manifold-horizontal wells;

25
roe orrrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 098 outv

the drilling of wells using gsseous egentsi
the drilling of reference-technology wells.

Using the exenple oi Turk-enie it is possible to denonstrete the scononic
effectiveness of electric drilling under couples geological conditions using
loeded nude. At present. electric drills ere being used successfully there

to drill s nunber of deep wells in erees with ebnorneliy high formation
pressures: Kotur-Tepe No 808 (5.0&2 meters). Kotur-Tepe No 809 (8.700 meters).
end Komsomel'skeye No 27 (b.803 meters). The best results were schieved

in drilling the letter well: compared with the best indicetors ethieved in
drilling berse-cel'nes well No 52 by the rotery method under siniier condi-
tions. the coenerciei speed wee increesed by 1.8 tines (see tsble).

indicators Berse-Oel'nes Hell Konsonol'sheye
No 52 Roll No 21

Depth. meters b85l 0803

Connerclsl drilling speed. 222 600

meters per rig-month

Technical drilling speed. 386 600

neters per rig-eonth

Hechnicsl drilling speed, 3.04/J.80 5.80/6.08

ueters per hour*

Round-trip drilling speed. l.60ll.70 2.20/2.$b

meters per hour’

Amount drilled per bit. 33.00/35.00 35.05/‘3.$0

neters*

 

*The nuneretor indicetes the well es s whole (including core bite): the
denominstor indicetes only the bits for full-hole drilling.

nigh technicei-econonic indicetors hsve been echieved in the electric
drilling in this sree. using bits oi dliierent dieueter-39h, 269. 21k, end
i90 millimeters.

In the drilling of controlled-directionsl wells. the effectiveness of electric
drilling is incressed even more; for this resson. silos: ell such wells in
Turkmenneit' ere drilled with electric drills in conjunction with bottom-
hoie telemetry systems.

Electric drilling is being used nest extensively for controlled-directional
wells in 8eshneit'. Thsnks to more thorough working of the bits. the ed-
vantages of directing the treJectories of controlled-directionsi wells. end
the possibility of using nud fillers when pessing through ebsorption sones
(including the use of iosded nods). electric drilling schieves higher coa-
merciei speeds st less cost then in the case of turbine drilling.

26
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
In 1916, nsshneft' used electric drills to complete ll9,000 meters; in [977.
the figure was [10.0003 in 1976. the planned figure is 150,000.

Bottomnhole telemetry devices, effective whipstocks. and the possibility of
controlling the operating specifications of the bit and carrying out field-
geophysical measurements in a gently-inclined borehole have given electric
drilling advantages which make it possible to consider this method as
being the best possible one for drilling deep controlled-directional wells.
especially in complex geological conditions.

it is for this reason that the Dolina 03R [Administration of Drilling Opera-
tions] of Ukrneft' is using only electric drills to sink controlled-directional
wells. while a number of wells drilled by means of turbodrills had to be
converted to electric drilling because of the substantial difficulties in-
volved in deepening operations (Spas No 001 and 7b. Dolina No 693. and Severnaya
Dolina No I60 and 129).

For the same reason. in [977 directional deep-well No 77 in Borislav UBR
was also converted from the turbine method to electric drilling and was
successfully completed at 3.500 meters. Plans also call for converting of
more controlled-directional wells to electric drilling. and such wells will
now be started by means of electric drilling.

The technological advantages of electric drilling areevennnre sharply
manifested in the drilling of ten manifold-horizontal wells 3,000 meters
deep in the Dolina UBR. The drilling of all these walls under complex
geological conditions was completed in accordance with the calculated pro-
file. Moreover, a substantial economic effect was achieved. The daily
outputs of some of the wells ranged between 70 and lSO tons of oil.

The possibility of using air and foam to clean the bottom hole in electric
drilling has made it possible to drill effectively through hard rock and

to open up absorbing horizons. thus raising the technical-economic indicators
of drilling controlled-directional wells under complex geological conditions
through the use of integrated technology.

For example, in Nadvornaya UBR of Ukrneft' the amount of drilling per bit was
increased by six to ten times and the mechnical drilling speed was increased
by three to five times in the drilling of a number of controlled-directional
and vertical wells by means of electric drills and air-blasting in the
0-2.000 meter interval.

For use in the drilling of controlled-directional wells, a telemetry system
has been developed that is capable of operating at a high vibration leval.

In 1917 in the Zagly-Zeyva area of Arneft'. drilling was completed on a
cluster of three controlled-directional wells of an average depth of 2,200

meters; two of them involved the foam clearing of the borehole bottom in the
0-l.l00 meter interval. Indicators of the drilling of these walls were
substantially higher than those achieved earlier with the turbine method.

27
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in particular the connercial speed rose by 1.67 tines. The economic
effect in drilling the experimental cluster amounted to l28.900 rubles.
The accuracy of the direction and the quality of the boreholes were con-
siderably improved.

The experimental electric drilling. in 1976. of a cluster of wells in the
ust'-Balyk area gives reason to assert that this nethod can be utilised
effectively in western Siberia thanks to the high accuracy of drilling
wells in this profile. reduction in the amount of tine spent on geophysical
work thanks to the use of geophysical apparatus inserted into the drill
pipes. and higher bit performance indicators.

This latter is due to the fact that the drilling can be accomplished under
any technologically essential axial loads and speeds of bit rotation. while
differential pressures on the borehole bottom are reduced thanks to lower
hydraulic resistances in the annular space. because with electric drilling
it is permissible to reduce the amount of mud consumed.

In western Siberia. the electric drilling method should obviously be used
to drill controlled-directional wells more than 2,500 meters deep. when
standards of accuracy for the borehole trajectory are higher. and also for
the drilling of Ianifold-horisontal wells.

Considering the results achieved in recent years. it is advisable to con-
tinue to increase volumes of electric drilling in regions where it is being
used now and to start using it in regions where we nay anticipate a sub-
stantial economic effect.

COPYRiGhT: Vsesoyuanyy nauchno-issledovatel'skly institut organizatsii.
upravlenlya i ekononiki neftegasovoy promyshlennosti (VNIIOBNG). [978

6856
680: [822

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL 088 ONLY

FUELS AND REMTED mum

UKMINIAN GOAL INDUSTRY 3380118 FOR NINE norms
Kiev UGOI.’ UKRAINY in Russian No 12. Doc 78 pp 50-51
[Articles "Coal Industry of the Ukrainian 888 for 9 Months of 1978"]

[Text] In 9 aonths of 1978 the liners of the republic brought to the surface
158.09 aillion tons of coal. The plan for coal lining was successfully ful-
filled by the associations Donetekugol' . Ordzhonikidzeugol'.‘l‘oreaantratsit.

Krasnodonugol'. Pavlogredugol' and Ukraapadugol'. According to the Uta-einian

SSR Ministry of the Coal Industry the plan for coal aining for coking was
fulfilled by 99.%.

According to the condition on 1 October 1978 the Ukrainian 88!! coal industry
had 1.591 active working faces. the average nonthly progrese of the faces was
37.1 a. and the average daily load on the longwall--3?3'r (table 1). As
coapared to the analogous period of 1977 the nunber of coaprehensively esche-
nized working faces rose iron “63 to 1162 at the strata with angle of inci-
dence to 35°. and free hi to 1&3 at the strata with angle of incidence over
35'. In the comprehensively aechanized longwelle on sloping and inclinded
strata 73.03 aillion '1‘ of coal were nined. or 3.} acre than in the analo-
gous period of last year (table 2)| in the longwalls equipped with grading
units-0.62 million ’1‘ of coal, or 31.“ less than in January-Septenber of
1977. In the comprehensively aeohanized working faces at strata with angle

of incidence over 35° 2.21 nillion 'r of coal were extracted. or 20.8 sore
than in the 9 months of 1977.

In the exasined period of the current year 2169.9 he of all the preparatory
shafts were sunk in the nines of the Ukraine. including 1M9.” kn of strip-
ping and preparing (table 3). As coepared to the data for 1977 the volune
of footage of all the shafts was lower by 3.6 ha. while of stripping and
preparing shafte--higher by 12.8 kn. The values of footage of the prepara-
tory shafts with nechanized loading of the coal and rock was 11070.6 kn. which
is 0.15 greater than for the 9 nonths of 19?? (table 16). A considerable
part of the shafts-4612.2 kn were sunk with the use of some advanced lining
drillirg technologynconbines. At the concentrating factories of the '
Ukrainian 88! Ministry of the Coal Industry 99.51 aillion ‘l‘ of coal were
processed and 60.161 aillion 'r of concentrate were produced (table 5). The

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table i.

 

"gunman-mu sens-mm

 

 

 
     
     
   
 

....'n

(1)

 

“‘5

. Mm
Hung-nun Iinﬂuence-me m
emu-yuan I 1-
... mmmusu- spa-a

 

  

    
  
   
   

G) 1mm loom-s. 1

”HI",-
.... .. l«-1as,=-- 1.)
“01111111th $929.10an 111; 32.111 31.1 301 2911
numeral» "70!! 130 21.75 32.3 323 3310 '
ﬁucuoqmcﬂcuywst; 81):: . . leg; I? I”: 3.1 :31: $3
POIIIMH.‘ f 1 o 1 1 1
H....,m..’ff3) us: m 21.11 32.: 153 2321
[111.111.111.11111Hro1. 11).. 1o: 99 10.116 31.1 m 1159
aucmwmnpe 11 1 9916 10! III.” 35.0 372 1900
“mu-11111111111 C13. 11 m 89 I330 32.! 360 20:11
11. 1.11.11111ou1m( ('17) no: 72 12.03 40.6 159 am
11331232313. 1 3331' '33 I12”. 33': 333 1333
Koscnoanytou 0709 65 1:60 “:0 ‘89 2181
guarantors"! . '33:: lg; 22.330 :3; 39' $9.:
U our! Ill 7 1 1
11.331.11.13. . . . . 6610 53 7.32 58.0 530 3206
Monsanto» . . . . 11m 92 ".69 52.9 631 2236
11.111.111.111...» 25) . . . “6| 1: 0.96 63.0 211 am
1111",...an men (36). . mm 1597 211.11 31.1 m 2511

     

Key1

10.
11.

   

Production association

Goal lining. thousand T
"usher of active working faces
Hesn active line of working
faces. kn

Hesn nonthly sdvance of active
working faces. a

Daily load. '1‘

for active face

for nine pit (adn. unit)
Donotskugol'

Hakoyevugol'
Krasnoarneyskugol'

      

12.
13.
1‘6.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

g.
25:
26.

    

Dobropol'yeugol‘
Artonugol'
0rdzhonikidseugol'
Shskhterskantratsit
Torecsntratsit
Voroshilovgrsdugol'
Stskhsnovugol’
Pervoasyskugol'
Krasnodonugol'
Donhasssntrstsit
Sverdlovantratsit
Pavlogradugol'
Ukrzapadugol'
Aleksandriysugol'
Ukrainian SSR Hlnistry of the
Coal Industry

plan for processing coal on units of nechnnizsd sorting was fulfilled by
100 7%. The plan for the production or coal hriquets was eastered by 101%.
and the plan for production of lignits briquots by 811. 55.

Due to the unsatisfactory work of individual enterprises the plans were
utwleri‘uli‘illed for a number of economic indices, with the exception of the
plan for labor productivity of a worker for lining, which on the whole for
the Ukrainian 88!! Ministry of the Coal Industry was fulfilled by 100.3.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
Table 20

(1) (zrwmucr‘ggwm'.zmh m:':‘:'ﬁ3”“m“

linemen-muse “HI-Ilene WWW—
Ieuu eesetsus ee- nu. use so

”‘mu" '1 u scum c

oweuxyroes g). .
ewmytone( .

w. a 2 ii

.3

0‘0

{loéeonoauytone .1
Uempcuwtpe

It 1).....
mnmmmn$§§niegfg

Ctuuoeyrens
lleeaoweﬂcnyms . .
Kewuoaonyme (.16
llendeccanweuwt
ﬁnwneoumpeuw 1 )
”lot a: tone .
Vnounznwyows . (20)
Mewcelupweyrons . (21)

47:55....“ VCCP (22)

‘9'0

A”
=:*~a§§a=2s

83832::8838383

3"»

 

1. Production association 11. 'Shakhterekantretsit
2. Comprehensively sechanized faces. 12. Torezantratsit

equipped with oosbines and graders 13. Voroshilovgradugol‘
at strata with angle of incidence 1n. stakhanovusol'

to 35° 15. Pervosayskugol'
3. Number 16. Krasnodonugol'
16. Mining, thousand '1‘ i7. Donbassantratsit
5. x of mining no- active working 18. Sverdlovantratsit
faces at strata with a< 35' i9. Pavlogredugol'
6. Load on longwall. T 20. Ukrsapedugol'
7. Donetskueol' 21. Aleksandriyeugol'
8. Hakeyevugol' 22. Ukrainian SSR Hinistry of
9. Krasnoarseyskugol' the Coal Industry

10. Dobropol'yeueol'

"any collectives of the leading worker brigades rave labored successfully
this year. The socialist couitnents for the examined period were fulfilled
by the lining brigades of A. D. Polishchuk iron the nine "hudovskaya" of
the association Donetskugol' that nined 779.700 ‘1‘ of coal. of II. N. Ski-y-
nik iron the nine iseni Prunze of 'the association Donbassantratsit

$812,500 '1‘). of V. I. Isnst'yev iron the sine ”Krasnolinmskaya" of the
association Dobropol'yeugol' (169.500 '1'). of G. I. Hoteak iron the Kosso-
navty nine of the association Donbssesntratsit (1:89.000 '1'). of V. H. Bori-
sonko from the Lenin sine of the association Voroehilovgredugol'

(1‘23. 100 '1‘). and others.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3.

   

"puma-mutual“ Museum

 

1’011 099101“. 1183 ONLY

 

ﬂaunt-«1.9% ‘

umymn.
Kooacuolpueuex

Amen 3,31% (01): .....

Oamounwtyton
ll woman”
Tomutpmn {1‘
nonhuman-pl:
Crux-henna“ .
ﬁtpeoulauytou :0
Koecuoionyms
HMIGICCIIiWIIM
Cacao-muons:
ﬂumpeaytoa
yxpnnaayroat'tz 23
.\ .-RICIII.1’I|I)10 1|.

2:252.) .
121*) - 3

Mum-tampon YCCP (.25) .

 

 

 

10.0
100.0 100.9 00.0 11 1.0 11.1 99.0
190.9 111.0 00.0 119.9 90.0 00.9
104.0 120.9 90.0 90.0 79.0 07.0
200.9 902.0 09.0 120.0 190.9 100.1
100.0 100.0 - 90.5 04.4 00.1 97.0
100.7 107.2 1%} 71.0 72.0 IN}
91.0 97.9 104.1 00.0 00.2 99.0
101.0 199.4 90.0 70.7 70.0 100.1
100.9 101.0 101.7 91.0 90.0 101.9
120.1 I 10.0 90.9 04.2 01.0 905
90.0 90.0 97.4 01.0 09.1 97.4
909.0 190.4 90.! 10“ 101.1 99.0
70. 7 107.0 04.0 09.0 97.1
33-: .233 .33. 3.1.2.313
1
90.1 21.3 100.2 21.2 22.0 105.2
. 2194.7 2109.0 90.9 1009.7 1109.4 97.9

     

«puma sonata-mum: “pun“

 

    
  
   
     

Roy:
1. Production association 1‘}. Shakhtuskantratsit
2. Driving of preparatory shafts 15. Toresantratsit
3. of all 16. Voroahilovsradtgol'
1;. of stripping and preparing 1?. Stakhanovugol'
5. Plan. kit 18. Pervcnayekugol'
6. Actual. 10: 19. Krasnodonveol‘
7. S of plan 20. Donbassantratsit
8. Donetekugol' 21. Sverdloventratsit
9. Hakeyevugol' 22. Pavlogradugol'
10. Krasnoerneyskusol' 33.1ncrzapadueol?
11. Dobropol' yeugol' . Aleksarrlriywsol'
12. Artenugol' 25. Ukrainian 8811 Ministry of the
13. Ordzhonikidzeugol' Coal Industry

There has been a significant increase in the nunber of brigades that are

driving preparatory shafts by high-speed Iethods.

and this year 183 brigades drove 318.07 kn of shafts.

In 197? they nmbered 165.
In the 9 months of

1978 the planned volume of state capital investments was aseinilated on the
whole for the Ukrainian 8811 Ministry of the Coal Industry by 965. including
the plan for construction and assembly work by 97$! for facilities of pro-
duction purpose the plan for the assimilation of capital invest-ants was

fulfilled by 9%. including the plan for construction and aesonbly work by

32
ran orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Table 11.
(1)

"sonata-«um “nu-ss-

       
 

'wm e ununuusanﬂ mutton

”$1.111:-
se Mme- W'm

   

Wat-110 “WWII

           
     
  
   
  
   

  

“I. ll

7 ..... 111.0 1 m
53:33.?“ a) 113.1 111.”: 71.1
)klpscnospueacs 10§9)€.:E ' ’35.; '13.: a: :2; 3%.:
A 1411.311": ’Tf! . 12017 11011 3.1 1.0 131
I0 anonmuseyrm.‘ ). . 49.0 81.1 .2 0.8 0.0
.... 1 :1: 3.1 3-1 '11 '11
liopomnosrpltr (15);; m m 78.4 1129 119
(‘nxanoommﬂu [516) 101.0 110.1 00.1 1.0 1.1
[11:11»quth )(1'7)'I 11.1 m 10.1 111 1.:
Kpmomymsh 1'8) . . 03.11 05.1 m 13.5 12.1
lloIOaccalvpsun.(519)10I.ﬂ m 68.2 5.1 1 o
Caoououurpsnut( 81.0 10.5 00.0 L2 0.l
ﬂaunorpaayrou (g ). 8|.O no.4 m 11.1 m
.prunnmab( 83.0 86.2 82.1 «.4 16.0
hem-amp“. 2'3)I.'.10.1 19.1 11.1 11.1 191

 

 

varacnpou VCCP (218.) . .

 

Koy1

1. Production association 11. Arte-ugol'

2. Driving of preparatory shafts 12. Ordshonikidzougol'
with nochsnizod loading of coal 1 . Shakhtsrskantratsit
and rock 1 . Torsssntratoit

3. Plan. km 15. Voroshilovgradtgol'

11. Actual. 1111 16. stakhonovugol'

5. S of total length of driving 1?. Porvomyskugol'

of shafts whore loading is ro- 18. Krasnodonugol'
quirod 19. Donbssssntutsit

6. including 111th combines 20. Svsrdlovanuatait

7. Donetskugol' 21. Pavlogradugol'

8. Hakoyovugol' 22. Ukrzapadml'

9. Krasnosrneyskugol' :3. Alekssndriyaugol'

10. Dobropol'ysugol' . Ukrainian m linistr;

the Coal Industry

33
ton 01-11mm. use 0111.11
Table 5
(1)

"OIOINII

neoopwotn mu an
060111 in «a.
um . .
leoepldotn mm as

mallow: automa-
oouluu
doom
Mung)“

nunycn men ”75
max I (mm-x um
81 In. Imam.

Key:
1. Indie»
2. Plan. thousand '1‘
3. Fulfillment of plan
u. thousand?
5. S of plan
6. S of 9 months of 1977