FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10397

7 March 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFl-‘IGAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENERGY
(r000 4/821

CONTENTS

WRIC POWER

Expansion of Hydroelectric-Power Indrstry in 11th Five-Year Plan

Described
(L. P. Mkhwlw; IZVBTIH vxssnm! mum ZAVEDEIIY-

mmm, N0 8’ 1981) oo-oueoe-oec-Io-oono0.0000000... 1

FUELS

Handbook on Casing of 011, Gas Hells Published
(SPRAVOCEHIK P0 KREPIHIYU nmmxn I GAZOVYKB SKVAZHIII.

1981) 0.0.0000...to..000...our.00.00.000000.000.00.00... 1.2

PIPELINE

Increased Role of Pipeline Transport Bystu 1n USSR
(V. G. Dubinskiy; NEFTYANAYA PMSHLMOST' smIYA EKGGEKA
WANG! PROMYSHLMOSTI, Oct 81) ..................... 18

- a - [III - 088R - 37 3000]

- ROI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
summon“

ELECTRIC POWER

UDC 621.22.338.92
EXPANSION 0F HYDBOBLBCTRIC-POWBR INDUSTRY IN 1111! FIVE-YEAR PLAN DESCRIBED

Hoscow IMSTIYA V‘ISSUIKH UCHBBNYKH ummu-suncmnu in Russian No 8, 1981
pp 66-76

[Article by L. P. Hikhaylov. candidate of technical sciences of the Gidroproyekt
Institute imeni S. Ya. Zhuk: "Hydroelectric Construction in the 11th Five-Year P1sn"]

[Text] With respect to scale and the technical level of hydroelectric-power engi-
neering and hydroelectric power plant construction, the USSR can be regarded as one
of the most developed countries in the world.

The installed capacity of operating hydroelectric stations on 1 January 1981 was
52.3 million It". The generation of power at GBS's in 1980 was 182 billion huh.

The relative contribution of hydroelectric stations to the total installed capacity
of the country's electric-power stations is equal to 20 percent. That portion of
the total power generated in the USSR contributed by GES's amounted to 110 percent
in 1980.

with respect to the amount of installed capacity at operational hydroelectric power
plants. the USSR occupies second place in the world behind the United States. It
ranks third behind the United States and Canada with respect to the generation of
electric power. -

The major factors determining the efficiency of hydroelectric power plant construc-
tion in the USSP. are the low cost of electric power, the conservation of fuel. the
contribution of these stations toward covering uneven loads on power systems, the
saving of labor reserves. the creation of an infrastructure in developing regime
and the complex nature of water-current utilization.

The cost of energy from GBS's is lo to 6 times less than from thermal electric-power
stations. In 1980. for example, the cost of power at 638's was 0.143 kopecks per
kWh as opposed to 0.76 kopecks per kWh at thermal electric-power stations.

Power generation at GBs's is an important factor in the conservation of fuel and
the improvement of the comtry's fuel-and-power balance. Hydroelectric stations
in 1980 provided a savings of more than 70 million tons of conventional fuel. In
the postwar period alone, hydroelectric stations have conserved more than one billion
tons OI. conventional fuel for use in other sectors of the economy. A significant
question in the development of the power industry is the problem of covering peak

mmmmv
M OFFICIAL USE ONLV

electric loada--a problem which grows ever more acute. Hydroelectric stations are
well suited to cyclical operation, since they can react very rapidly to any load
fluctuation. Med-storage power stations [GAES's] possess particularly good maneu-
verability. During the hours of peak power-system loads. pumped-power stations work
in the turbine mode. generating electric power. During the night, GAES's consume
electricity. freeing therml electric-power stations from forced shutdowns.

In connection with the high degree of automation and the absence of labor expendi-
tures to obtain power resources, the operation of a hydroelectric station is charac-
terized by a higher level of labor productivity in comparison with other types of
electric-power stations. The savings of labor resources provided by GEs's in 1980
amounted to 360,000 men.

The construction of hydroelectric stations makes it possible to create' an industrial
and sccial infrastructure. contributes to the formation of territorial production
complexes and accelerates the growth of production forces in newly developed regions.

Hydroelectric power plant construction in the USSR is a leading factor in the inte-
grated utilization of water resources. This construction is always carried out
based on the development of the irrigation potential, the restoration of the river-
transportation network, the reduction (or total elimination) of the threat of disas-
trous flooding and upon other water-resources mnagement measures. It is partic-
ularly important to note that about 6 million hectares of arid land are being irri-
gated from the reservoirs that have been built. 1111a exceeds by a considerable
margin the agricultural area flooded by the CBS reservoirs.

The "Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-
1985 and for the Period to 1990" proposes that we "carry out the construction of
large-scale hydroelectric power station on the rivers of Siberia, the Far East and
Central Asia, based on the integrated utilization of hydraulic resources, as well
as the construction of prayed-storage power plants in the European sector of the
USSR." The "Basic Directions" also point out the necessity of "provid. ‘3 for the
growth of electric-power production in the European sector of the USSR, primarily
at nuclear and hydroelectric power stations."

The development of the hydroelectric power industry in the 11th Five-Year Plan will
take place in the presence of a qualitative change in the structure of the country's
fuel-and-power balance. a gradual depletion of hydraulic-power resources in the
industrially developed regions of the European sector of the USSR and the necessity
for regulating the current flow in the interests of integrated utilization of water
resources with a simultaneous increase in the severity of environmental-protection
requirement 5 .

The development of the hydroelectric-power industry in the 11th Five-Year Plan
throughout the regions of the country can be character ‘zed in the following manner:

in the European sector-maximum utilisation of hydroelectric power resources to
relieve the strain on the fuel-and-power balance in this region and the construction

of special maneuverable pinned-storage power stations to increase the quality and
reliability of power-system-operation;

FOIOFHCIALIISIONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Siberia--the construction of large-scale hydroelectric stations on the Angara
and Yenisey. envisioned as a most important element in the largest fuel-and-power
base being built in the east to provide electric power not only to regions of
Siberia but also the European sector of the USSR. The utilization of the most
abundant hydroelectric power resources of Siberia is associated with the creation
of an industrial, social and institutional infrastructure and territorial production
complexes and with the accelerated development of new regions;

in the Far Bast-~the construction of 633': on the Bureya and the Kolyms for creating
a stable power base for the development of the economy in the RAM zone and in remote
areas of the northeast;

in Central Asia and Kazakhstan--the construction of hydraulic systems of integrated
function which provide regulation of river flows for the generation of electric
power and the development of irrigated farming.

In the European sector the "Basic Directions" provide for the introduction of capa-
cities at the Chebok rskaya and Nizhne-Kamskaya GBS's.

The erection of the Cherboksarskaya CBS is the concluding step in the creation of
the Volga-Kama cascade of hydroelectric stations [1]. The following economic prob-
lems will be resolved after the comissioning of the Cherboksarskaya CBS:

the installed capacity of electric-power stations in the Unified Power System in
the European sector of the USSR will be increased by 1.406 W and the average peren-
nial generation of electric power by 3.5 billion kWh;

an annual fuel savings of 1.15 million tons of conventional fuel due to the intro-
duct ion of the Cherboksarskaya 688;

the Volga waterway from Moscow to Astrakhan will be restored. and the efficiency
of river and sea transportation to the countries of Europe. North Africa and the
Near and Far East will be improved; "

a highway bridge across the category-one Gor'kiy-Kazan' waterway will be built
via the structures of the hydraulic system. In the absence of the hydraulic system,
it would be necessary to build a special bridge costing more than 80 million rubles;

the reservoir will store 8 percent of the average perennial natural flood waters
of the Volga. As a result. it will be possible in the future to utilize the
cherboksarsltaya CBS reservoir (effective volume of 5.6 km’) to increase the depend-
able water supply for irrigation of farmlands in the Povolsh'ye by 250,000 to
300,000 hectares.

The dam of the Cheboksarskaya Gas raises the water level by 15 II. An increase in
the water level will extend 31:0 km along the Volga to the site of the Gor'kiy CBS.
150 km along the Vetluga. 190 km along the Sura, 180 km along the Cite as well as

along their tributaries. The surface area of the reservoir formed will be 218,000

hectares. The area of flooded land will be 168,000 hectares. including 54.200
hectares of arable farmland.

roaornaALussoNLv
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

A comparison of indicators for the Cheboksarskaya reservoir with other reservoir .
built alo'pg the Volga CBS cascade shows that the relative losses for flooding are
less and the compensation greater. The flooding of arable farmland amounts to
39,000 hectares per million kw of installed capacity for the Cheboksarskoye reser-
voir, 61.900 for the Saratov, l33.000 for the Volgograd. 120,000 for the Kuybyshev.
etc.

The relatively smaller losses of agricultural lands can be explained to a great
degree by the many protective measures.

Hithin the limits of the protected area, plans have been made to carry out a sequence
of reclamation operations to develop overgrown and swampy regions and intensify
agricultural production. These measures will increase the area of agricultural

lands in the protected zone by a factor of 1.5. Agricultural production will increase
by more than a factor of 2.0. Plans have additionally been made to develop. reclaim
and irrigate lands outside of the protected zone. Measures for the protection. de-
velopment and intensification of production will make it possible to compensate fully
for the agricultural losses due to flooding. The total cost of these measures will
be 150 million rubles, including 95 million rubles for engineering protection of the
flood plains.

An integrated approach is also being taken to solve the problem of transportation
development on the reservoir and in the adjacent territories. River transportation
along the line of the Cheboksarskaya hydraulic system will soon exceed 50 million
tons annually.

The reservoir will be extensively utilized for recreational purposes. New sanitoriums.
rest homes, tourist centers. holiday hotels and pioneer and youth camps are being
built on its shores. while older existing facilities are being modernized.

The Cheboksarskaya CBS is an economically efficient installation. A little more than
four years will be required to recover the capital investment in this 635. Capital
investment per kw of installed capacity is 260 rubles, while the cost of power at the
628's busbara will be 0.28 kopecks per kUh.

The Nizhne-Kamskaya CBS-«the fourth stage in the hydroelectric-station cascade on the
Kama River--will solve the following important economic problems:

improving the reliability of the power supply to the central region of the European
sector of the USSR;

increasing the generation of electric power within the power system by 2.71 billion
kWh in years of average precipitation. This will make it possible to conserve
annually 1.2 million tons of conventional fuel and to free labor reserves on the
order of 5,200 men during operations;

creating a continuous. deep—water route along the Kama River as well as increasing
the depth of the navigational channel for 200 km along the Delays River;

improving water-supply conditions in regions adjacent to the- reservoir [2].

FOIOFHGALWONLY
FOR1OFFKJAJ.IEEIONLN

The reservoir floods 115,800 hectares of arable farmland. The design provides
for the protection of 20,000 hectares of farmland.

Losses of agricultural production associated with the flooding are compensated
for by the development of new lands, the irrigation of lands being utilized and
by a number of other reclamation measures.

Calculations which have been carried out testify to the high economic efficiency
of the Nizhne-Kamskaya CBS.

The "Basic Directions" make provisions for the construction of pumped-storage power
stations in the European sector of the USSR. Two GAES's are now being built in
this region-~the Zagorskaya and the Kayshyadorakaya.

The potential for CABS construction is not associated with the presence of large-
scale rivers. They require considerably less dispossession of land than river
electric-power stations. In contrast to other types of electric power stations.
GABS's are simultaneously generating sources and consuming regulators; that is.
they provide for a reduction in nighttime gaps in the electric-load schedule.

Consuming less than 0.3 kg of conventional fuel per kWh when drawing electric power
from thermal stations to recharge at night (when charging from nuclear power stations.
the consumption of fuel for charging is even less), GABS's displace maneuverable
gas-turbine electric-power stations burning fuel oil at the rate of 0.45 to 0.5

tons per kWh in covering the load schedule. Thus. GAES's provide for a considerable
savings of scarce fossil fuel [3].

As an example, we will present data on the economic efficiency of the Kayshyadorskaya
CABS constructed within the Unified Power System in the northwest [A].

The Kayshyadorskaya CABS with its installed capacity of 1,600 HR and eight reversing
units is situated near the reservoir of the Kaunasakaya 638, which is utilized

as a lower storage basin. The estimated head is 100 m. The annual production

of electric power in the generating mode is 2.6 billion Rub, the consumption of
electric power is 3.3 billion kWh annually. The effective volume of the upper
storage basin is approximately 37.5 million m’, which insures the utilization of

the total installed capacity of the GAES five to six hours per day.

The capital investment in a CABS, minus the cost of roads. communications lines,
repnyoble sums for construction equipment and local and municipal facilities, is
estimated at 270 million rubles.

The efficiency of the Kayshyadorskaya CABS was determined in comparison with the
gas-turbine electric-power station it replaced. The expenditures cited for the
Kayshyadorskaya CABS are approximately 17 percent 1ess than for a.gas-turbine sta-
tion. The period of time necessary to recoup the additionfcapital investment in
the Kayshyadorskaya CABS is a little more than three years. The data cited point
out its high economic efficiency.

The construction of the Zagorskaya and Kayshyadorskaya GAES's is being given partic-

ular attention in connection with the fact that they should be pilot installations
for a long series of similar electric-power stations with heads of 100 m. Their

FOI'OIHKJAI.USE¢MNL¥
designs provide for the standardization of the concrete structures-water intakes.
conduits, CABS buildings. retaining walls as well as structural elements in the
dikes around the basins. The use of preaasseabled cast-in-situ structural elements
makes industrial methods of construction possible.

The "Basic Directions" as applied to the country's eastern regions specify: "Essen-
tially conclude the construction of the Sayano-Shushenskaya (:38. Expand construction
of the Boguchanskaya GES. Continue the construction of the Bureyskaya CBS and
couplete the construction of the Kolymskaya CBS-l."

The Sayano-shushenskaya CBS is a hydroelectric-power structure on the Yenisey River,
unique with respect to its size and the couplexity of construction. when the con-
struction on this CBS is couplets, it will become the basis of the developing
Sayanskiy territorial production complex [5].

The Sayano-Shushenskaya 688 uses a section of the river with a drop of 200 m from

the city of Kyzyl in the Tuvinskaya ASSR to the city of Sayanogorsk (the former
settlement of Oznachennoye).

Ten power units, each with an output of 640 H". are being installed at the hydro-
electric station. With an installed capacity of 6.6 million Hi. the station's
average perennial generation of electric power will be 23.5 billion kWh.

The connection of electric transmission lines running from the Sayanskaya 638 to
Siberia's unified power system is being carried out using four SOO-kv high-voltage
lines. No will be directed toward the Kuzbass, while two lines of increased capa-
city will go to the region of the Sayanskiy territorial production complex.

With the construction of the Sayano-shushenskaya hydraulic system. a reservoir
will be created. the backwaters from which will extend 312 km. The greater portion
of the reservoir will be situated within the Sayanskiy canyon where its width does
not exceed 3 km. Only in the 'l‘uvinskaya basin where the reservoir will have the
form of a lake will the width of the reservoir reach 9 km in places.

The reservoir of the Sayano-Shushenskaya czs will regulate the water flow for the
water-management complex, including power production, water transportation, water
supply and the protection of population centers from flooding.

In order for the Sayano-Shushenskaya CBS to provide daily and weekly regulation of
the current flow, provisions have been made for the construction of the Maynskaya
GES downstream. Its reservoir will equalize the discharge after the Sayano-
Shushenskaya 6138.

In October 1978 the bottom passages of the first stage were closed off. Filling
of the reservoir began in order to create a head which would insure the normal
operation of the first hydraulic turbogenerator unit with its repaceable impeller.
On 19 Deceaber 1978 the first unit of the Sayano-Shushenakaya 638 was put under
industrial load.

The capacities of the Sayano-Shushenskaya 688 are slated for introduction in two
phases: eight units will be commissioned at first. The introduction of the last
two will take place somewhat later, when the necessity for additional electric
capacity develops in the Siberian unified power system.

6
POI elm“. USE ONLY
The construction of the Sayano-Shushenskaya CBS provides new examples of the communist
attitude toward work. During the construction of this hydroelectric station. social-
ist competition was begun by 28 Leningrad enterprises and has received the warm
support of workers in Krasnoyarskiy Kray. At the present time more than 170 enter-
prises from Leningrad. Krasnoyarskiy Kray. Belorussiya. the Ukraine, Azerbaijan

and other union republics. krays and oblasts in the country are taking part in

labor cooperation under the management of party organizations. The "Working Relay"
has made it possible to accelerate the pace of construction work on the hydroelectric
station. insured high-quality work and provided a great economic impact.

The output of the Sayano-Shushenskaya 688 will be utilized to provide electric
power to the Sayanskiy territorial production complex now under construction as
well as to enterprises of the Kuzbaas.

The formation of the Sayanskiy territorial production complex began during the
10th Five-Year Plan in accordance with the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress.
As part of the complex. mining and chemical industries will be developed on the
basis of phosphate rock and asbestos deposits. Also to be developed are electro-
metallurgy, railcar construction and the electrical-equipment. lumber and wood-
working industries. In Sayanogorsk will be built the Sayanskiy aluminum plant
equipped with powerful electrolyzera.

The commissioning of the Sayano-Shushenskaya 638 will create the necessary conditions
for insuring a reliable power supply to the adjacent regions.

The Bureyskiy integrated hydraulic system is located in Amurskaya Oblast on the
Bureya River--the left tributary of the Amur, flowing into it below the city of

Blagoveshchensk.

This hydraulic system is designed to supply electric power to industry in the region
as part of the unified power system of the Far East and for combating flooding in

the lower reaches of the Bureya and the central section of the Amur. Consumption

of electric power will also increase considerably according to the future development
of the region. The first units of the Bureyskaya GES should be commissioned after
the Zeyskaya GES goes on stream.

The installed capacity of the Bureyskaya CES is 2,000 H" in six power units. The
generation of power is 7.16 billion th. Two units will operate in a 220-kV circuit
and four in a SOO—kV circuit. Electric power will be sent to Khabarovsk, Urgal-
Komsomolsk and the local region along three transmission lines.

The frequent floods cause considerable damage in everyday life. High-water regula-
tion by the Bureyskaya CES will protect about 15,000 hectares of land in the region's
farming industry from flooding and will insure the further future development of

more than 20,000 hectares of land in the valleys of the Bureya and the central Amur.
It will also make it possible to reduce capital investment in constructing levees

for the flood plain and population centers as well as the operational outlay for

such construction.

The reservoir created will provide for slight long-term regulation of current flow.
In order to combat floods. plans have been made for the reservoir to possess an
nntiflood volume. The technical and economic calculations which have been performed
point out the high economic efficiency of construction at the Bureyskaya CBS.

7
IIIICINHCIAJ.IIHB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

The Kolymskaya CBS-l is being constructed under extremely complex natural condi-
tions [6].. Dense permfrost, the extremely severe climate. high degree of seismic
activity. the considerable remoteness from industrial centers and the difficult
transportation system complicate considerably the construction of the hydraulic
system. The rock-fill and earth dam is the largest in the USSR built under perma-
frost conditions.

The introduction of the Kolymskaya CES will make it possible to exploit new deposits
which previously had been considered to possess an insufficient yield because of

the high cost and shortage of electric power. The electric power available to
mining enterprises will be increased sharply.

The reservoir of the Kolynskaya 61-18 will accomplish long-term regulation of the
current flow in the interests of power production and water transport. The reser-
voir's operation provides for the organization of special passage during the naviga-
tional period. This will make it possible to fundamentally improve the transporta-
tion utilization of the river.

Calculations which have been carried out point out the high economic efficiency of
construction at the Kolymskaya 638.

Further hydroelectric power plant construction has been proposed in areas of the
Caucasus and Central Asia. The "Basic Directions" provide for the completion of
construction of the Zhinval'skaya hydraulic system. the continuation of construction
at the Khudonakaya CBS and the beginning of construction at the Namakhvanskaya CBS
in the Caucasus. The co-issioning of the Shamkhorskaya 085 has also been proposed.
In Central Asia, it is expected that the construction of the Kurpsayskaya CBS will
be concluded. the Tash-Kumyrskaya and Baypazinskaya CBS's will be commissioned and
the construction of the Rogunskaya GBS will be expanded.

The largest of the installations mentioned will be the Rogunskaya CBS.

The Rogmskiy hydraulic system will have integrated irrigation and power-generation
functions and should play an important role in the further development of the terri-
- torial production complex in the south of the TsJik SSR.

The electric power of the Rogunskays CBS will be delivered to the Central Asian
Power System and will insure the further development of the entire Central Asian
economic region. It will make it possible to conserve about 4.8 million tons of
conventional fuel annually, which is equivalent to 4.0 km’ of natural gas. The
output of this hydroelectric station (3600 m in six units) will be utilized to
cover a considerable portion of the peak loads in the Central Asian Unified Power

System.

The irrigation-management significance of the Rogunskiy hydraulic system for the
Amudar'ya is very great. The connection of the Rogunskoye reservoir to the system
will insure guaranteed irrigation of the lands in the Amudar'ya basin. Although
the level of water consunption in 1985 was provided for through seasonal regulation
at the Nuts]: and Tyuyamuyunskoye reservoirs, the level in 1980 can be achieved only
through the long-term regulation of the flow of the Amudar'ya, carried out with the
aid of the Rogunskoye reservoir.

MOWWONLY
I‘llClﬂﬂCJAl.1Eﬂi(ﬂ'LY

Provisions have been made to plant cotton primarily in the expanded irrigated lands
in the basin of the central and lower reaches of the Amudar'ya. In this case.
about 470.000 tons of cotton will be obtained from the new lands irrigated by the
waters of the Rogunskiy reservoir [8).

The calculations which have been carried out testify to the high economic efficiency
of construction of the Rogunskiy hydraulic system.

Thus. an extensive program of hydroelectric power plant construction is to be carried
out in the llth Five-Year Plan. Moreover, during this period there will be a contin-
uation of the planning and surveying and scientific research studies associated

with the development of the hydroelectric-power industry in the 12th and subsequent
five-year plans.

At the “meter (1979) Plenum of the CPSU Central Comittee Comrade Leonid Il'ich
Brezhnev said: "our duty is to think in advance about the power industry of the
future. on which in many ways the economic growth of our country depends."

In examining the hydroelectric-power industry of the future, we must first of all
note the great hydroelectric-power resources of the USSR's eastern regions which
can be used to cover not only local power demands but also the growth in the demand
in the country's European regions.

Experience in developing the hydroelectric-power resources of Siberia indicates
that hydroelectric power-plant construction is here not only a source for electric-
power supply but also plays a pioneering role in developing the natural resources
of this region.

The most efficient structure for the development of northern Siberia is the formation
of territorial production complexes using hydroelectric power plants as a basis.
These complexes insure the highest degree of labor productivity, the greatest savings
of capital investment and a reduction in construction times.

The utilization of the lower reaches of the Yenisey and the Lens for power-generation
purposes acquires particular significance beyond the 11th Five-Year Plan. The
Turukhanskaya and Igarskaya GBS's. the Osinovskiy Hydraulic Complex. as well as

the Nizhne-Leninskaya 688 can also be built here. Their total installed capacity
will amount to 35 million kw, while their total power-generation will be 180 billion
kWh. The annual savings of fuel provided by these hydroelectric stations will

be equal to 65 million tons of conventional fuel or 130 million tons of Kansko-
Achinsk coal.

Power production in the European sector of the USSR in the upcoming decades will
be developed through the preferred construction of powerful ABs's which function
most economically and reliably in base-load operation. They should organically
augment pumped-storage stations designed to carry out maneuvering functions in
the power system.

In addition to the Zagorskaya and Kayshysdorskaya pumped—storage stations mentioned
above. design work is currently underway on the Leningrad, Dnestrovsksya, Kanevskaya,
Central and Zhigulevskaya pumped-storage stations. The majority of them have heads
of about 100 meters with outputs of 1,000 to 1,600 MW. Proposals have been made to

ﬂ0I1OFFHﬂAl.USE(IVLV
standardize these stations, which would have a considerable economic impact. Some
of these GAES's are designed for peak operation. Their operational zone in the
daily load schedule will be 4 to 6 hours, while some of them will be semipeak,
capable of operating in a 10 to 14-hour zone.

0n the territory of the European sector of the country, 22 of the most promising
sites for locating GAEs's have been selected from a umber of sites previously
identified. Pumped-storage power plants with a total output of 35 million k" can
be located here. Plans have been made to switch in the future to the construction
of GAES' s in mountainous regions with heads of 200 to 600 n, as well as GABS' s
with underground basins having heads of 1,000 In and more.

Of considerable interest is the construction of GAES'a which use the cooling reser-
voirs of nuclear power stations as storage basins.

This will make it possible not only to reduce the construction costs of such a
power-product ion complex by approximately 15 percent in comparison with the indivi-
dual construction of its components, but also to reduce the number of operations
personnel by jointly locating many services and structures. Planning-and-surveying

and scientific research studies will also be conducted on the first tidal electric-
power stations.

Thus, hydroelectric power plant construction in the 11th Five—Year Plan as well
as in the foreseeable future will make a worthy contribution to the construction
of comunisn's mterial-technical base.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Makarov, V. 3., "The Cheboksarskaya GBs-Conc1uding Stage in the Volga-Kama
Cascade." NAUCHNYYE TRUDY GIDROPROYEKTA, No 70, 1980.

2. okorochkov, V. P., "Construction of the Nizhne-Ksnskaya Hydroelectric Station."
GIDROTECHNICHESKOYE STROITEL'S‘NO. No 12, 1978.

3. Dotsenko, T. P. and sheyman, L. 3., "Prospects for the Construction of Pumed-
Storage Power Plants in the USSR," NAUCHNYYB TRUDY GIDROPROYEKTA, No 70, 1980.

lo. Sheynan, L. 3.. "Gidroakkunuliruyushchiys elektrostantsii" [Pumped-Storage
Power Plants], Moscow, Energiya, 1980.

5. Nikhaylov. L. P.. Grigor'yev. Yu. A. and Sadovsltiy, s. 1., "Gigant energetiki
v Sayankh“ [A Power-Industry Giant in the Sayanyl. Moscow, Energiya, 1980.

6. Neporozhniy, P. 8., "Gidroenergetika Sibiri i Dal'nego Vostoka" [The Hydroelectric-
Power Industry in Siberia and the Far East], Moscow Energiya, 1979.

7. Boyarskiy, V. H., Grigor'yev, Yu. A. and Teleshev, V. 1., "The Bureyskiy

Hydraulic System on the Bureya River," GIDROTEKH'NICIESKOYE STROITBL'STVO.
No l, 1977.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. Vutsel'. V. 1.. Kornakov, G. I. and Osadchiy, L. 6., "An Integrated Irrigation

and Power-Production Hydraulic Syster-The Rogunskaya CBS." NAUCHNYYB TRUDY
GIDROPROYKKTA. No 70, 1980.

9. Baburin, B. 1., Dotsenko. T. P. and Hikhaylov, L. P.. "The Current State and

Future Develop-en: of Hydroelectric-Power Engineering," NAUCHNYYE TRUDY
GIDROPROYETA. No 70, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: "Izvesciya vuzov SSSR-Energecika", 1981

9512
C80: 1822/77

POI 0M“. USE ONLY
Fill(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAI.USE(MVLY

FUELS

unc 622.245.1(083)
HANDBOOK on CASING or OIL, GAS WELLS pususasn

Moscow SPRAVOCHNIK P0 KREPLBNIYU NBPTYANYKH I GAZOVYKH SKVAZHIN in Russian 1981
(signed to press 3 Jun 81) pp 1-5. 239-240

[Annotation, table of contents and introduction from book, "Handbook on Casing oil

and Gas Hells" (2d edition, revised and supplemented), by Anatoliy Ivanovich Bula-
tov, Lazar' Borisovich Izmaylov, Viktor Ivanovich Krylov, Yevgeniy Noiseyevich Lev-
in and Aleksandr Iosifovich Ovechkin, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra,"9,300 copies. 240 pages]

[Text] Designs for wells, methods for analyzing casing string, and the appropriate
operating processes are examined. The sequence in performing these operations, de-
pending upon the method of running and cementing the string, are cited. Methods
for monitoring the quality of well casing are described. Basic principles for the
safe conduct of the work are reflected.

This second edition (the first edition was dated 1977) describes new plugging ma-
terials. additives thereto and chemical reactants.

For engineers and technicians of drilling enterprises of the oil and gas industries.

The book contains 67 tables, 82 illustrations and a bibliography of 40 items.

Table of Contents Page

IntmuctionOOOOII0.0.0.0...O...CIOODDIOCO0......OIOOOIIOOIOOOOIIOOUI00...... 3

chapter I. well Design (A. I. Bulatov, L. B. Izaaylov and V. I. Krylov)..... 6
1. Basic factors that determine well design..............................
2. Standard-practice instructions on choice of designs for oil and gas

wells.sooxsaaaosseee‘eeoseeseea...ceases-ea.eeamasemesoeemeeseeeeeeoe a

3. An example of the choice of some casings strings and the depths to
which they were run................................................. 12

chapter II. Casing Pipe (L. 8. Izmaylov).................................... 13
I. Casing with threaded joining e1ements................................. 13
2. The preparation of casing for running into the hole................... 32
3. Lubrication for threaded casing joints................................ 33

chapter III. Plugging Materials (A. I. Bulatov)............................. 3d
1' classification..OOIOIOOIOOOOIOOOOOIIIOIOOOOOOCIIOOIOOOOOIOOIOOOIIIO... 36

2. The organization of laboratory monitoring and methods for testing
plugging materials.................................................. 44

12
FOR OiiﬂCIAI.USE(N§LY
3. The characteristics of plugging cements (per COST [All-Union state
Standard] 1581-78 and approved TU's [Specifications]).............

4. Plugging cements that expand while hardening........................

s. Hydraulic activation of old cements.................................

Chapter IV. Plugging Solutions and Reactants for Treating Them (A. I.

Bulatov)....................................................
1. Basic properties of cement slurries and hardened cement.............
2. Oil-emulsion plugging solutions that have been converted...........

3. Adjustment of the properties of the cement slurry and the hardened
cement by means Of reactants..o............o.......-...........o..
4. The determination of thickening time for plugging solutions.........

5. The determination of cement-setting time at high temperatures and

pressures.OCOO.IIOOOOCOOOIIIO......0......OOIOIIIOOIOIOIOOOOOOCIO.

chapter V. Displacement Fluids (A. I. Bulatov)............................
1. Basic recommendations on choice of displacement fluids..............
2. Determination of amount of displacement fluids required for cementation
3. Types of displacement fluids and the technologies for using them....

Chapter VI. Operational Rigging of Casing strings (A. I. Bulatov. Ye. M.

Levin and A. I. Oveohkin)...................................
l. Casing shoes........................................................
2. Check valve for easing strings......................................
3. Cementing collar for the "feet"....................................
4. Centralizers........................................................
5. Scrapers............................................................
6| Turbulator300000000000OOOOOOOO...IOOIIOOOOIOOOOIOOOI0.0IIIOOOOOOOOOO
7. Divided cementing plugs.............................................
8. Schemes for placing equipmentonthe casing stringwhencasing wells..
9. Couplings for stage cementing.......................................
10. Arrangements for easing wellswithliners and casing-string sections.
11. Cementing heads.....................................................
12. External packers for easing strings.................................

Chapter VII. Analysis of Casing Strings (L. B. Izmaylov)..................
1. Analysis Of a production strin‘oooaaec'evueceeoceaaeeaoecoeeeeeeeece

2. Principles of designing casing strings for various geological
conditions........................................................
3. The determination of the external pressure on a casing string.......
4. Analysis of intermediate strings....................................
5. Analysis of the tension of easing strings...........................

Chapter VIII. Analysis of the Cementing of Casing Strings (A. I. Dulatov,
V. I. Krylov and A. I. Ovechkin)..........................
1. Determination of the configuration and volume of a well's bore......

2. Determination of the amount of materials required for cementing
casing string and the amount of overflush fluid...................
3. Hydraulic analysis of cementing.....................................

Chapter Ix. The chhnology of Running Casing Strings (A. I. Bulatov. V. I.
Krylov. Ye. M. Levin and A. I. 0vechkin)....................

1. Analysis and calibration of the well bore...........................

2. Running the casing string...........................................

3. Running liners and casing-string sections...........................

13
FOR¢0FFKJAL.USB(NVLY

54
60
61

64
64
67

69
77

84

89
89
90
92

98

98
105
107
108
120
121
122
127
128
130
153
153

161
163

170
172
174
180

182
182

165
187

196
196
198
201
l-UK UI'I‘ILIAL USI. ONLY

Page

4. Connecting and joining an uncemented (removable or swiveling) section

of casing string................................................... 204
5. Determination of optimal speed for running casing string............. 206
6. Monitoring the condition and determining the amount of wear of easing. . . 208
7. The revolution and replacement of uncemented section of casing....... 211
5. Some peculiarities of the technology of slanted directional wells.... 212

Chapter x. The Technology of Cementing Casing String (A. I. Bulatov and
A. I. Ovechkin)................ ............ ................... 213
1. Preparatory operatiOns............................................... 213
2. Recommended schemes for fastening cementing equipment under field
conditions......................................................... 215
3. The cementing of easing string in one procedure...................... 218
4. Special methods for cementing casing string.......................... 220
5. The cementing of easing string equipped with external packers........ 223
6. Concluding operations after the cementing of easing string........... 224

Chapter x1. Complications During the Casing of Wells (A. I. Bulatov and
v.I.MyMVL.n.u.n.u.u.n.u.”.".. ..... .n.u.u.u. 2%
l. The absorption of drilling mud and plugging solutions during the
casing of wells.................................................... 226
2. Pressure testing the well bore prior to running the casing string.... 227
3. Preventing sticking of the casing string............................. 228
4. Preventing thickening of mixes of drilling muds and plugging solu-
tions during cementing............................................. 229
5. other types of complications during the casing of wells.............. 233
6. Some recommendations for preventing complications from occurring
during the casing of wells......................................... 235

Bibliography.eeeeeeeeeeeeteamaeeeeeeoeee-aeemeeaeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeee-eeeeee 237

Introduction

The concept of "easing a well" includes the consecutive conduct of a number of pro-
duction operations and processes that are associated with preparing the bore. tools
and casing string. running the casing string into the well, cementing the casing.
and executing the concluding operations.

In domestic field practice, three main methods for running casing string into the
hole are used:

in a single procedure, when the whole drilled bore of the well, from face to m0uth.
will be covered by the casing string;

in several procedures, when the bore is to be covered in part by separate sections
of casing string, carried out consecutively after completion of the full cycle
for easing each section; and

the running of easing string in the fonn of a liner. which will cover only a part
of the bore. at a previously chosen interval of the well. without removing the
string up to the well mouth.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.uc methods enumerated

technoIOgy for carrying out the operations and require the use of
sting equipment.

Casing string into
wells.

Key:

4. In one procedure (the final
stage of the string).

6 ando. In two procedures (the
final stages of the first
upper and lower sections of
connected casing).

9. Casing with a liner (final
stage).

1. Casing strings.
2. Drill strings.
3. Hardened cement.
4. Drilling mud.

Sectional cemented plug.

ace and sides, the values of the fa

ies of the formation fluids, the deviation of the b0
avcrnous, and other factors.

 

, differ in the

specialized oper
‘
Figure 1. Diagrams of Methods
for Running ,.
l dqzainn ul HM. «using .' "
analysis of its strength that consxders the effect of ’
that can occur during the casing process and also later, during

 
 
   
  
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
  

rocedure (in one stage),

ing in one p
ring from the

>unped into the casing st
space at the prescribed depth;

stage cementing, when the plugging fluids ar

two (or more) procedures
or stages consecutively,
at first through the cas-

ing shoe, then through

special devices-—the

the string
distance from th
- in this case. the

‘ fluids accumu—

he height of

space to t
the bore. consecutive-
ly, ' break in

Schemes for

Figure 2.
Cenenting Cas—

Methods for
ing Strings:

Key:

4, ‘5 and 0 Direct cc-
mcnting in one proced-
ure (the start. middle

and concluding pro-
cess, respectively).

in B ande. Stage cement—
ing (the first and

second stages and con-
clusion of the pro-
cess, respectively).
Reverse cementing.

u and k. Cementing of
a liner ' ‘ '

rior to cementing and

the start and conclu—
sion of the operation,

respectively).

”.

16
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
the cementing of liners and casing-string sections, when the plugging solutions
are pumped into the space beyond the string by means of the drill-string shoe;
and

reVerse cementing, under which the plugging solutions and the overflush fluid are
pumped from the mouth of the well into the annular space by the cementing string,
with exit of the circulation through the casing string.

Each of these cementing methods is shown schematically in figure 2.

The cementing methods mentioned can be carried out in the following variants:

cementing of a casing string that is in a state of repose at all stages of the
process;A

thc cementing of a string freely suspended (on a block-and-tackle system),with a
certain axial displacement thereof during OZTs [waiting on cement] when the
loading on the hook is changed; and

cementing of the string with reciprocation or revolution while the plugging solu-
tions are being pumped and squeezed through.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", 1981

11409
CSO: 1822/76

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PIPELINES

INCREASED ROLE OF PIPELINE TRANSPORT srsm Ill USSR

Moscow NEPTYANAYA PROHYSHLENNOST' SERIYA RONG‘IIKA NEFTYANOY PROMSEENNOSTI in
Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 30-33

[Article by V. G. Dubinskiy, Giprotruboprovod: "0n Further Enhancement of the Role
of Trunk Pipelines in the USSR Unified Transport System"]

[Text] The "Basic Directions of Economic. and Social Development of the USSR for

1981-1985 and the Period up to 1990" specify accelerated development of pipeline
transport of crude oil and refined petroleum products.

The CPSU Central Conittee and 058R Council of Ministers Decree entitled "0n Im-
proving Planning and Strengthening“ Influence of the Economic Hechenisn on Im-
proving Production Efficiency and Uorlr. Quality" calls for a radical improvement in
the organization of transport of goods as well as increased influence of the
economic mechanism on the end results of the operations of transport enterprises
and organizations.

These tasks should always be carried out on the basis of optimal development and

distribution of a unified transport system as a whole and of each component mode
of transportation.

An important problem in this connection is that of further development and ex-
pansion of the area of employment of trunk pipelines for conveying a broad variety
of petroleum and other co-oditiea.

Freight traffic exceeding 6,000 billion ton-kilometers per year is presently being
achieved by the unified trensport system -- rail, pipeline, maritime, river, motor,
and air transport. Various hulk goods are carried by these modes of transport,
other than pipeline: coal, coke, oil and grain, ores, mineral building materials,

nineral fertilizers, etc. They account for approximately 80 percent of total
transport of goods.

Pipeline transport today includes trunk crude oil pipelines, products lines, and
natural gas pipelines, extending a total of approximately 200,000 kilometers. Crude
oil and products lines total approximately 70,000 kilometers.

In the inediate future the transport problem in the USSR, in conditions of a rapid-
ly expending economy and growing floss of various goods in all directions, should be

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

solved by development of traditional and new modes of transportation, by expansion
of the realm of application of existing economical and reliable modes of transpor-
tation for hauling bulk goods, including trunk pipelines.

Pipeline transport has not yet experienced adequate development, in connection with
which refined products are not being pipeline-transported in a full volume and
variety. As a consequence of this, up to 90 percent of light refined products are
being transported by rail, as well as all residual fuel oils and lubricating oils.

Pipeline transport is not participating in developing the conveyance of other,
non-petroleum bulk goods.

The extensive technical and economic possibilities of pipeline transport as a
specialized mode, possessing advantages over other modes of transportation, are not
being fully utilized. And yet trunk pipelines can carry practically all types of
bulk goods in any quantity: pipelines can be constructed in all parts of the
country, extending any distances, along the shortest route; pipeline operation is
independent of climatic, environmental and geographic conditions, time of year or
day; goat of various types and grades can be pumped through a single trunk pipeline;
trunk pipelines provide continuous, uniform delivery of goods, creating conditions
for dependable, continuous operation of the enterprises they serve; full automation
and remote control of pipelining processes is possible; pipelines provide a complete
seal and minimal losses of conveyed goods; in most cases the technical-economic per-
formance indices of trunk pipelines are better than those of other modes of
transportation; it takes less time to build pipelines and bring them on-stream than
is the case with other modes of transportation; pipelines can convey goods directly
from points of production to points of consumption, without unnecessary transfers
or with a minimum number of transfers.

A wide variety of various bulk goods can be transported by trunk pipeline. Speciali-
zation of pipelines is possible, taking into account the most economical area of
their utilization for conveying an individual type or group of goods. The technical-
economic advantages of specialization of trunk pipelines are evident in the example
of trunk lines which transport crude oil. Specialization of oil pipelines provides
the capability to handle flows of crude of r ‘v amotmt and grade, directly from the
oilfields to the refineries, in all direction. of crude oil flow; maximum utiliza-
tion of a pipeline's throughput capacity; employment of optimal pipeline parameters
and design, high-output equipment, fittings, automatic control, remote control, and
control system; continuous improvement in crude oil transport equipment and tech-
nology; extensive utilization of industrial methods of construction; improvement of
pipeline technical—economic performance indices. Thanks to specialization, trunk
crude oil pipelines have the lowest crude oil transport cost figure of all modes of
transport employed to carry crude oil. Today oil pipelines link this country‘s
principal oil refining and oil producing centers and handle 90 percent of all crude
transported.

The following goods specialization of pipeline transport is possible.
All flows of crude oil, with the exception of high-viscosity crudes and a small

quantity of high-grade crudes the physicochamical properties of which could be ad-
versely affected by sequential pumping through the same pipeline with other crude

19
FOR'OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR(NW“JAI.USE(MNLY

grades, can be assigned to trunk crude pipelines, just as at the present
time.

Trunk products lines and terminal tape from these lines shOuld be used more ex-
tensively than at the present time to deliver directly to the customer a full
variety and volume of refined products, namely: automotive gasoline, diesel fuel,
kerosene, furnace fuel oil, bunker fuel, and petroleum lubricating oils. In the
near future, with construction of the requisite network of products lines in all
parts of the country, delivery of refined products should be accomplished as a
rule by combined pipeline-motor transport.

Chemical products trunk pipelines can be used to transport carbonic acid, ammonia,
. ethylene, a broad spectrum of light hydrocarbons and other products of the chemical,
oil refining, petrochemical, and gas industries.

Pipeline batch-container systems can be used to convey high-viscocity and other
crude, various types and grades of crudes, refined products and chemical products,
conveyance of which through specialized trunk lines is unprofitable, coal and coke,
grain and other agricultural products, mineral building materials, mineral
fertilizers, mail and other goods.

Coal (specially prepared) can be conveyed by trunk coal pipelines.

Trunk pipelines designated for other products of various branches and sectors of
the economy can handle the flows of the goods of these branches and sectors and
be spprorpiately designated.

Matters of pipeline specialization should be determined on the basis of technical-
economic justification.

The possibility of utilizing trunk pipelines for transporting a wide variety of
bulk goods will make appreciable changes in the area of utilization in coming years
both of pipeline transport proper and of other modes of transport. This dictates
the necessity of combined solution of a most important economic problen -- deter-
mination of future optimal paths of development and distribution of trunk pipeline
transport in the USSR.

to accomplish this task it is advisable to draw up a specific, comprehensive
program of development and distribution of trunk pipeline transport in the USSR,
which should incorporate elaboration of the entire range of technical, economic,
and organizetional-management problems for each type of pipeline transport, as well
as rail, maritime, river, motor, air and other modes of transportation and the
unified transport system as a whole, taking into account wider participation in the
conveyance of bulk goods of trunk pipelines of all types and designations, as well
as other modes of transport.

Since this will be the first time such a specific comprehensive program is put to-
gether, it is necessary to present some considerations of its composition and direc-
tion of development, while making no claim to completeness.

There should be slabozeted as part of a specific comprehensive program, among
other materials, a basic, uniform procedural method which is common to all modes of

20
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USIZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is necessary to elaborate, on the basis of current scientific and technical sd-
vances and projected future development and deepening of scientific and technologi-
cal advances, rough designs of the most advanced, dependable, economical technical
means (vehicles, permanent installations, etc) for each type of pipeline transport.
as well as rail, maritime, river, motor, air and other modes of transport for carry-
ing out the transport process in coming years. These rough outline plans must
specify, applicable to the technical solutions adopted in them, the parameters and
technical-economic indices for each mode of transportation. They should be progres-
sive and utilized for substantiating optimal specialization and the area of employ-
ment of pipeline and other modes of transport. Preliminary designs should serve as
a standard for a given mode of transport and the unified transport system as a
whole for an extended period of time. The most efficient area of utilization of
each mode of transport for carrying goods in the various parts of the country

sunption and efficient flows of goods in all areas and on all routes, distributing
them among the individual types of pipeline and other transport, taking into con-
sideration the optimal area of employment of each of these for carrying given types

Special attention should be focused on the presently existing elaborate network of
trunk pipelines, and care should be taken to ensure fully loading its throughput
capacity.

A specific comprehensive program should provide for joint construction and operation
of power generation, auxiliary, housing, cultural-services and other facilities
common to each node of transport and other branches of industry and the economy
located in the same areas.

A specific comprehensive program should present the required comprehensive, co-
ordinated development and distribution of trunk pipelines of all types and
designations, rail, river, maritime, air and motor transport for fully handling the
flows of goods distributed among them; volumes of work on construction of new and
renovation, expansion and modernization of existing transport means; technical-
economic indices; requirements in material-technical, financial and labor resources
for accomplishing this development; tasks assigned to all other branches of industry

for prompt and expeditious support of production and construction of the specified
technical transport means.

21
FOR OFFHJAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

These measures should be distributed by sequence and periods of time, with their
implementation on a priority basis in those areas and on those routes with large
flows of goods, a lack of reserve transport capacity, as well as innew areas of
development and location of productive resources.

There should be elaborated in a specific comprehensive program a rational, flexible
organizational structure of management of the USSR unified transport system. This
program should include investigation of the question of forming a national-level
transportation agency, which would provide the following: coordination of the opera-
tions of each mode of transportation and the unified transport system; distribution
of flows of goods between the individual modes of transportation, proceeding from
the most economic area of utilization of each; elaboration of materials on future
development and distribution of transportation; efficient utilization of transporta-
tion; uniform technical and financial-economic policy in transportation and, in

particular, in distribution of conveyance of goods among modes of transportation.
and resolution of other matters.

In view of the nature and direction of this work, prospects for technological ad-
vances in transportation, a realistic assessment of decisions and research
results, need for financial,material-technical, and labor resources, possibilities
of their allocation as needed, and the lack of a single agency for coordinating
the operations of all modes of transportation, a specific comprehensive program
for development and distribution of USSR trunk pipeline transportation should be
carried out under the direction of USSR Gosplsn, the USSR State Committee for
Science and Technology. interested ministries and agencies. Its elaboration
should be assigned to branch lead design and scientific research institutes.

Elaboration of a specific comprehensive program will not per se ensure growth and
development of pipeline and other modes of transportation. Practical implementa-
tion of the substantiated recommendations and proposals contained in the program is
required. This should be achieved by basing on this program, and after its ap-
proval according to established procedures, elaboration of a national economic plan
for development and distribution of transportation, allocation of requisite
financial, material and labor reuources, and construction of planned technical
transport means. It is necessary realistically to view transportation as an in-
separable part of the concrete production facilities, complexes. and areas served
by transportation, and to permit expansion of existing and construction of new '
facilities, in the absence of appropriate reserve capacity of existing transporta-
tion for the future, only with development of the modes of transportation servicing
them mutually coordinated in carrying capacity and timetable, specified by the
specific comprehensive program. Refined petroleum products pipelines and chemical
products pipelines, for example, must be designed and built together with oil
refineries. petrochemical and chemical plants, with pipelines and plants coming on-
stream at the same time, without permitting even temporary hauling by other modes
of transportation those goods planned for pipelining.

Growth and expansion of the area of utilization of trunk pipelines will promote
solving the transport problem more rapidly and at lower money. material and labor
costs than with utilisation of other modes of transportation, freeing rail transport
from hauling many bulk goods and assignment to rail transport the hauling chiefly
of passengers and those goods conveyance of which by pipeline and other modes of
transportation is not justified economically.

22
FOR1OFFHJAI.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The approved specific comprehensive progra- should he used as the basis for

drawing up proposals on radically improving organization of hauling of goods and
increasing the influence of the music nechsnisn on the end perfomsnce results of

transportation enterprises and organizations, developnent and distribution plans
for pipeline and other nodes of transportation.

COPYRIGHT: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno—issledovstel'skiy institut organizatsii, upravleniys
i ekononiki neftegszovoy pronyshlennosti (VNIIOENG), 1981

3024
(30: 1822/80 3“”

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY