APPROVED FOR RELEASE: ROOYIOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO‘I00030037-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030037-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8334

13 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(FOU0 6/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030037-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
encloaed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
0F IRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
_ ‘ °“"“"°“
O.

O. l'nloI-uu Ousnuouon None and Addie” I0. ProIecI/TaIi/Iul Unit 8.,
Joint Publications Reeearch Service
1000 North clebe Road

Arlington, Virginia 22201

    
 
      
       
   
 
   
 
   
     
   

    
   

ll. Contact ’01.. No.

   

la. Spanner-n. Ouoauuion Nan: aad Mesa II. Type oi [upon a Peliod

Contra

As above

Is. Supplement-41 Notes

‘0. Abstracts

This serial report contains information on energy. fuels and related equipment;

fishing industry and marine resources; water resources. minerals. timber, and
electric power.

. Key I’evda and Dore-rot Ana yaia. e- Ductile“

USSR

Natural Resources
Electric Power
Energy

Energy Conservation
Fisheries

Fuels

Hinerels

Timber

Water Supply
In. Idem-lms/Opra-Enled Tet-o

In.cosnrlrwunau¢ 5c, 10, 210, 2C. 86, 2?

ll. Maui-May Summon . emy Ian ( is 1|. No. ol Pun
yon orncm. use ONLY. Limited number of "W" . .. , 62
Copies Avai table From JPRS ' 7.1!"! mu m m

' Q I
vouv ~v-a n Iltv. I'M- uicmoe nun-Du

THE '0”! MAY BE KEP'ODUCED
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/B
13 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(P000 6/79)

CONTENTS
FUELS AND RENT- EQUIPMENT

Equipment for Removing Hater and Salt Pro:- 011
(PROMYSLOVAYA PODGOTOVKA NEPTI. 1977) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Tyunentransgaz Association During 10th FY?
(LG. Zhuzhgovs; GAZOVAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' SERIYA:
EKONOMIKA GAZOVOY PROHYSRLENNOSTI, Jan 79)

Economic Efficiency of Newly Introduced Natural Gas Deposits
(s.v. Dubrova; GAZOVAYA PRMSHLENNOST‘. SBRIYA:
EKONOHIKA GAZOVOY PROMYSHLBNNOSTI. Jan 79)

Prime Cost of Gas Deposits
(NM. Soshnin; GAZOVAYA Pmsmmsr'. SERIYA:
EKONOHIKA GAZOVOY PROHYSEEENNOSTI, Jan 79) .........
n FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUINE“

EWIPHENT FOR WING HATER AND SALT FROM OIL

Moscow PRCMYSLOVAYA PODGUIOVKA N3”! in Russian 1977 pp 72-109
[Chapter II]: from the book "Promyslovaya Podgotovka Nefti. Nedra]
[Test] Hydrodynamic Coalescers (Drop Formers)

The hydrodynamic drop formers are designed to rupture the nrmoring shells
or stratal water globules. the enlargement of the globules and the
stratification of the stream into oil and water before standing of the
emulsion. The consolidation of the drops takes place directly in the oil
flow, on the walls of the drop formers or on the built-in hydrophilic
elements under the effect of turbulent pulsations.

The volumetric and tubular drop formers are distinguished (see Figure 29).
The volumetric drop formers are hollow or have rigid hydrophilic elements.
In the hollow volumetric drop formers. the collision and coalesence of the
globules are achieved by introduction of the emulsion into the volume of
the equipsent through nozzles directed at diffe~ ‘o'. angles to each other

or turbulieation of the flow inside the equipmev hy mechanical or other
means. For intensification of the processes of lescence of the globules.
the additional coalescent elements have been int uuced into the emlsion
flow. for example, in the form of drops of draina.,e water which are easily
removed from the flow with subsequent standing. and the problem of their
regeneration are not created (in contrast to shavings, glass. and so on).
The version of intense coalescence of the drops by turbulization of the
emulsion in the volume of the drainage water (the hydrophilic medium)

by mechanical means is possible. The application of volumetric drop formers
with developed hydrophilic coalescing surface made up of corrugated, platy
or tubular elements operating. in contrast to the other materials (balls.
shavings) in the self-cleaning mode is prospective.

The tubular drop formers are structurally made of bundles of tubes of cal-
culated length and dineter. The linear and sectional tubular drop formers
are distinguished. The linear drop formers are made of tubes of idrntical
diameter. In the sectional drop formers the tube diameter increases from
section to section [9b. 111. 163. 191]. This permits successive enlargement
of the drops to the given sizes. Just as in the volumetric and in the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sectional drop formers. the application of a moving hydrophilic coalescing
medium is possible in the form of drops of drainage water. centrifugal
swirlers of the flow which throw the globules agaimt the walls of the drop
formers and built-in rigid plate or tubular coalescing elements operating
in the self-purification mode.

The advantages of the volumetric hydrodynamic drop formers are the following:
high specific output capacity. small size. low metal consuption, the pos-
sibility of their use as autonomous elements or elements built into a
settling tank and also the possibility of the application in projects with
small process sites and under especial 1v crowded conditions. The advantages
of the linear and sectional tubular drop formers are the following: the
possibility of their use simultaneously both as coalescing units and as
communication lines between the heat exchange and settling equipment. the
settling tanks of the first and successive stages. the settling tanks and

the comercisl tank parks. and so on. The advantages of the hydrodynamic
drop formers over the electrical coalescers are the following: the possibility
of calculating the enlargement of the drops to a given diameter, the pos-
sibility of control (regulation) of the coalescence process by connection
and disconnection of the required number of sections. the low cost and metal
consumption. the low consumption of electric power. the simplicity and safety
of servicing. and operating reliability.

Breakdown of the Emulsion in the Drop Formers

The linear drop formers. their peculiarities and nature of breakdown of

the emulsions in them have been investigated in the literature [85, 107.
147, 168]. The first experimental model of the sectional drop former was
investigated on the Bablinskaya thermochanical units and subsequently on
the Biryuchevskaya thermochemical units of the Tstneft' Association. The
drop former had three sections made of thermally insulated tubes located on
the lower supports and the horizontal plane. Their diameter increases froa
section to section in the direction of move-ant of the treated mlsion.
The first section is designed, just as the ordinary linear drop for-er.

for breakdown of the armoring shells of the globules of stratal water and
their consolidation with high parameters of the turbulent flow both in the
volume of the treated emulsion and on the walls of the tubes; the second
section is for coalescence of drops to larger dimensions with lower values
of the Reynolds parameters; the third (last) section was designed for
investigation of the theoretical possibility of stratification of the flow
into oil and water in the pipeline for values of the Reynolds parameter
above critical and holding time of the oil in the equipment less than 10
minutes.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 29.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Schematic Disgrans of Hydrodynamic Drop Porters and Tubular
Settling Tanks:

Volumetric Drop Pot-era (s, b. c, d, s. f. g):

1--Enulsion input; 2--Housing of the drop formers; 3--Nozzles;
4--Housing of the settling tanks; S-Ter|inal distributing
liquid input and output; 6--water discharge; 7--Drsinsge water
input; 8--Distributing baffle; 9--Settling tank; lO-Hixer;
ll--Sheet coalescing elencnts; 12--Tubular coalescing slenents.
Tubular Drop Formers (h, i, j):

l--Tubular drop former with settling tank; 2-Settling tank;
3--£mulsion input.

Tubular Settling Tank Module (k):

l--£nulsion input; 2-Verticsl distributor; 3-Horitontal
distributor; 4--Sections of the drop former; 5--ﬂorizonta1
header; 6--Vertical header; 7--Enulsion output.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The studies of the nature of the breakdown of the emulsion in the drop
former of the Biryuchevskaya thermochemical device demonstrated (see Figure 30)
that standing of the oil taken at a distance of 20 meters from the beginning
of the first section of the drop former (the tube diameter 250 am.

8- 53.000, q - 35 g/ton. t I 60' c. H I 10-15 percent, movement time 20
seconds) ends on after 1.5 hours. The increase in standing time does not

in practice lead to further separation of the water. The residual water
content in the oil is on the average 3.58 percent. This indicates that in
the initial section of the drop forner the finely dispersed part of the
stratal water globules remains undisturbed, and the emulsion is characterized
by a finely disperse structure. Increasing the emulsion processing time in
the drop former to 2.5 minutes (sampling point at a distance of 200 meters.
section diameter 250 mm) led to significant reduction of the water content
in the oil while standing (the residual water content in the oil in this
case was on the average 1.17 percent). A further increase in the emulsion
processing time in the drop former to 3.5 minutes (sampling at a distance

of 500 meters. section diameter 250 mm) led to a still greater increase in
depth of destruction of the emulsion. After the oil sample at this point
stands for an hour. the residual water content in it is 0.53 percent which
is 6 times less than the water content in the oil taken from the initial
section of the drop former (Figure 30, a) with a standing of 1.5 hours.

Attention is attracted to the uniformity of the emulsion structure with
respect to the cross-section of the first section of the drop former. The
water content in the oil and the depth of dehydration during standing of

the emulsion samples taken in different cross-sections are in practice
identical. Still more efficient consolidation of the drops of water free

of the shells in the first section was achieved in the second section of

the drop forser. As a result of sharp consolidation of the water drops
during movement of the emulsion through this section for 1.5 minutes, the
time required for the oil to stand was reduced to 30 minutes. Simultaneously,
the residual water content in the oil was cut in half (after 30 sinutes of
standing it was 0.3 percent. which characterizes the oil as deeply dehydrated).

Thus. inclusion of the second section of the drop former with processing of
the emulsion in it for 1.5 minutes makes it possible to cut the standing
time in half with simultaneous improvement of the quality of the oil. It
should be added that a tendency of the emulsion towards stratification has
been detected in the second section. This is manifested in increased
water content in the lower ssnple, faster and deeper suppression of the
water front the oil during standing.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 30. Nerhtton 1n Degree of Dehydration of the Water Smlee Taken

along the Length of the Drop toner Characterized by Different
Flow Pare-etc".

r-le I 53,000. t I 20 seconds, D I 250 n, v I 2.6 u/eec;

b-lle I 53,000, tI 2.5 ninutu. D I 250 n. v I 2.6 n/eec;

c--le I 53,000. t I 3.5 Iinutee, D I 250 u. v I 2.6 I/eec;
dwle I 36,000, t I S minutee, D I 350 n, v I 1.3 I/eee;

ens. I 9 100, t I 5 minutes 50 seconds. D I 11000 II. V I 0.08
I/oec; f"'M I 36,000, t I 6 limiter. D I 350 II. v I 1.3 due.
a. b. c. d. e. f--Sup1e taking points; :ﬁrm for the eeulsion
to move from the beginning of the drop for-er; Damneter of .
the drop for-er; I—ﬂeter content in the emleions, 1; thount
of utter re1eeeed, Z; 3-Ree1due1 water content, I.

\

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0““

     

‘33 d m" 14.x
a —: to
so ' I .10
on I 1.0
:0 .‘ 1,0

0 " 0
N N m :5 L,"

Figure 31. Variation of Degree of Delqdretion (E) and Residual Water
Content in the Oil Sanples (A H) with Respect to Length of
the Sectional Drop Former L'with an Emulsion Consumption of
1.60 n3/hr.

In order to eetinate the possibility of stratification of the aeulsion flow
into oil and water in the settling tanks with ninisun folding rise of the
oil. a 7 cubic seter tank was installed as the third section of the drop
former, the design of which made it possible to discharge the separated water
free the lower section of it. The flow turbulence was characterized by

a Reynolds nusber of 8800. The oil saples taken in this section with
respect to the flow cross-section demonstrated that its stratification
during standing in less than 2 minutes in the equipment is impossible for
the given degree of turbulence. The first signs of stratification were
detected for values of Re 3 5.000 and confinenent tins of the oil in the
apparatus of 2 minutes.

It is obvious that these two pars-stars are sutually compensated within
defined limits, and increasing the tine the oil is in the apparatus to

10 to 15 minutes permits discharge of the stratal water for large values of
the Reynolds nunbers.

The dependence of the depth of dehydration of the oil on the length and
diameter of the tubes of the sectional drop forner is illustrated in Figure
31. From the graphs it is obvious that with an increase in length of the
drop former with simlteneous stepped increase in tube diameter from section
to section in the direction of motion of the elulsion, the efficiency of
treating it increases. which. in the final analysis, lakes it possible to
obtain in practice water-free oil from the settling tanks.

Fran Figure 31 it follows that if the length of the first section of the
experimental drop former turned out to be twice as high as necessary it can
be decreased. Connection of the drop forner to a 200 cubic meter settling
tank produced oil with a residual water content of 0.1-0.2 percent for an
output capacity of 660 n3/hour.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
/

 

Figure 32.

:3.

  

0. trillion of

B38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

r

D, an

".50 60 JP

”'20”

   

 

E

Ncmogram for Calculating the Diameter of the Haas Exchange
Section of a Drop l’ormer, the Drop Size and Other Parameters:
Q—Output capacity; D—Diamater of the drop former; q.“ ia the
maximum stable diameter of the globulee (intermediate uglue);
dau 1a the maximum stable diameter of the globulea: u is the
viacoaity of the diaperaion median (oil). 011: 1--Romaahka
(coal-hearing); 2--Bav11nakaya (coal-bearing): 3—-Roaaahka
(devonakaya); b--Zapadnoaurgutakaya; 5--Uat'-Balikakaya;
6--Samotlorakaya; 7nHangyah1akakaya; 8—Ar1anakaya; 9--
Kraanoyarekaya

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculating hydrodynamic Drop Formers

For proper selection of the equipment ensuring effective destruction of the
emulsion by the thermochemical method under the most favorable hydrodynamic
conditions, it is very important to have definite methods of calculating
it. In connection with the rapid increase in extraction of dehydrated

oil and the necessity for building a large number of new oil preparation
units, it is necessary to learn how to calculate the parameters of such
units as the sectional drop formers. The application will permit the
output capacity of the settling tanks to be increased in the stages of
removing water and salt from the oil, the number of settling tanks on site
and their metal consumption to be decreased, the size of the process areas
and number of monitoring and service points to be decreased, and the
stability of the oil preparation processes to be improved. In this case
the processes of removing the water and salt from the oil can take place at
low temperature, with low consumption of the emulsifiers and fresh vash
water. The construction time for the units and the cost of preparing the
oil are reduced. The productivity of labor is improved.

In the modern oil preparation process in the desalination and dehydration
stages, broad use is made of mass exchange and coalescence sections, each
of which is specially designed.

Determination of the Parameters of the Drop Formers in the Dehydration Stage

The supply of the reagent to the globules of the stratal water and the
destruction of the protective shells on their surface in the mixing units
of existing structures (valves, gates, nozzles, and so) are not efficient
for the following resons:

Insufficient mixing time (fractions of seconds, seconds);
Extraordinary fractionation of the drops (to 1-2 microns);
Impossibility of monitoring the process.

The mass exchange processes, as a rule, are realized outside these units in
the lines between units, and they take place spontaneously. Their efficiency
is determined by the random parameters of motion of the emulsion. Under
these conditions a significant number of drops with unrupturad protective
shells reach the settling tank, lowering its operating efficiency. The

mass exchange section of the drop former is designed for effective mass
exchange between the globules of stratal water and the drops of water
containing the emulsifier reagent (with probability of 0.999 and more) under

conditions ensuring the possibility of existence of drops of a given size
in the flow.

In contrast to the usual type mixers. in the mass exchange section of the
drop former, the delivery of the reagent to the globules of stratsl water

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the destruction of the protective shells are realized under the con-
ditions of Interfering processes of fractionation and coalescence of the
drops. the given site of which is controlled by the flow regise charac-
teristics. This permits excluoion of the possibility of redispersion of

the drops and ensures rapid consolidation of them in the coalescence section.
Only the results of the collisions of the drops within the oil are taken

into account in the calculations. The mean exchange processes which take
place on the walls of the sections, which play the role of inverting screens.
are not taken into account. This takes it possible to obtain a reliability
coefficient for the calculated data on the order of 1.7 [153]. In order to
ensure completeness of the seas exchange process in a technologically
acceptable time. an effort is made to fractionate the drops in the flow to
defined dimensions selected as a function of the water content of the oil

to be treated. Beginning with the conditions of equality of the distances
between drops in the emulsions with different water content it is recosmended
that the following calculated values of the diameters of the water drops in
the oil treated in the mass exchange section be used:

H. 1..................l 5 10 lb 20 30
d. microns............5 10 22 27 36 68

These values are taken into account when deternining the diameter and the
length of the mass exchange section.

The diameter of the mass-exchange section D is determined by the given or
known parameters Q. n". on. dmean- 0, using the nomogram in Figure 32 or
from the expression:

0- M u. (62)

drr“"‘l':"l'u
. 'mean

where o is the surface tension at the oil-water interi. .. dynes/cm; u,
and u" are the dynamic viscosity of the water and oil respectively. poise;
dmesn is the gversge diameter of the drops. cm; u is t e mean volumetric
flow rate. cm /sec: on is the density of the oil. glcm .

The value of o is determined experisentslly the known procedure on a staleg-
mometer after dehydration of the oil at the process temperature for the
adopted flow rate of the reagent under actual conditions. The determination
of the diameter of the mass-exchange section using the nomogram in Figure 32
is made as follows. The intersection point of the horizontal and perpendicular
drawn from the corresponding given values in the C quadrant is found by the
known values of u is the D quadrant. From the point V obtained. moving
parallel to the dyrecting curves, the intermediate axis dun, is reached. and
a perpendicular is drawn free it to the intersection with one of the curves
corresponding to the value of o in the V quadrant (point ll). Drawing a
horizontal line from the point I! to the left into the quadrant A to the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intersection with the curve corresponding to the given value of the output
capacity 0. the point 1 is obtained. The perpendicular free this point to
the D axis gives the desired value of the mess exchange section diameter.

ln the case of noncoincidence of the value of the diameter with the standard
value. the next highest value of the standard tube size is assumed the
curves in quadrant 3 correspond to the values of the surface tension coef-
ficient ol’ 5, 10. 20 and 30 dynes/ca. Curves 1-9 of quadrant D express

the viscosity-temperature function for the oils of different oil-extracting

parts of the country. For exuple. for 01 - 3 millions/year. u“ - 30
centipoise. decan - 35 microns and o -' riynes/cn the diameter of the uses
exchange section turns out to be equal to 22 cm (the reckoning scheme as
noted by the arrows on the noeogran).

dine.“ fie-ram

W31. " \ .6
u '1‘")
:2 - w '
I . I i!

5 5

  

o meagxw nu "Luna 1:3". 5
.n In"
*Ll int - intenediate value of line length.

Figure 33. Neeogran for Determining the Length of the Mass Exchange of the
Drop Former or the Process Line:
H“ Hater content: dump-Average size of the globules;
L1 nt is the intenediate value of the line length.
“l is the correction factor for the notion regimen. The
point of introduction of the deaulsifer into the flue:
l--0n group units; 2--0n the head sections of the collecting
lines; 3e-In the terminal stages of separation; hul’or
reception of raw material pumps; 5--Be£ore the pups;
6--At the entrance to the mass exchange section

The calculated length of the seas exchange section can he deter-ined by
the nenogralt in Figure 33 or by the formula [151]

"'[(-“"“"')I("'—:.“i)]

I . .
1.. = Wan—— , .500, (63.

‘li’ ‘3'}

 

 

where h' is the flooding of the oil (in relative units): "p0 is the aeount
of introduced reagent solution (in relative units); it is the mum of
water in the oil enriched by the reagent as a result 8! the ease-exchange

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processes during novesent in the section (usually given as 0.999); K1 is
the collision efficiency constant; dIesn is the nean drop die-eter. cs;
D is the dineter of the ease exchange section. cn; v is the kinematic

viscosity of the oil. stokes; Q is the flow rate of the treated oil. cIe3

/ sec.

The mean drop size is selected as a function of the water content of the
treated oil: with an increase in water content the drop disaster is seemed
to be large. which subsequently facilitates the operation of the coalescing
section. The length of the section is determined with the help of the
nonogras (see Figure 33) in the following way. The given value of U is
found on the flooding axis. and a curve is drawn free it parallel to the
lines with equal flooding to the intersection with the perpendicular dropped
from the selected value duesn (point 1). Drawing a horizontal line from
the point obtained to the right to the intersection with the selected
collision effectiveness curve. point 11 is obtained. Dropping a perpendicular
from it to the L1 axis. the internediate value of the length of the ease
exchange [.1 int is reckoned. The total length of the section is deter-ined
considering the coefficient of the notion reginen (:1 and the section for
establishnent of the (luv Al. - 20 D. The value of n1 is deternined using
the auxiliary graph in Figure 33 by the known value of the Reynolds nuber
which is calculated by the fomla

4')
Re =t am. .

 

where “e is the kinematic viscosity of the emlsion. stokes.

Ll - a'lqnp + 200-

Depending on the reagent feed point in the process system for preparation

of the oil various curves are used for the collision effectiveness constants.
In particular, when feeding the reagent on the group devices curve 1 is
used; on the head sections of the collecting lines. curve 2, in the terninal
separation stages. curve 3; for the crude oil material peep intake cutveb;
before the pulping elenents curve 5; directly before the ease exchange
section curve 6. For exasple. for dnean - lO nicrons, w - 1.5 percent,

n I 22 ca (the reagent is amt to the crude oil materiel puap input), and (3.2
nillion tons/year by the nonogrsn in Figure 33 in the internediate value of
the length of the seas exchange section [.1 int turns out to be 28 Ieters.
For the calculated value of Re - 20,000. a - 0.86 meters, (111.1 int - 33.8
neters. For D - 22 co the value of ALI - .b Deters. The total length of
the uses exchange section is defined as

,q -a|,.ln,+L‘lag-23-5+4.‘-27.9 ".
Determination of the Parameters of the Coalescing Section
The output capacity of the settling equip-ent increases proportionally to

the square of the dianeter of the stratel water globules. Therefore before
arrival of the enulsion in the settling units it is necessary to see that

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the globules free of the protective shells coalesce to the largest dimensions
possible. The basic parameters limiting the possibility of unlimited increase
in dimensions of the water globules are 0. D, u“. s [154, 207. 217. 222].

The calculation of the coalescing section is realized considering the hydro-
dynamic parameters of the flow ensuring the possibility of obtaining the
largest size drops with the exception of the possibility of premature
stratification of the emulsion as a result of gravitational settling. This
ensures the possibility of prolonged interaction of all the drops in it,
constriction of the spectrum of the drop diameters and maximum possible
approach of them to the optimal value. In order to prevent stratification

of the emulsion in the coalescing section. the turbulent regime is saintsined
on the level where the vertical component of the velocity pulsations will
exceed the rate of gravitational sedimentation of the water drops. This
condition is also assumed as the initial condition limiting the consolidation
process.

The maximum size of the water drops not subject to fractionation in the
turbulent flow of oil and the size of the drops which have been suspended

in this flow are defined for various values of Q. up using the aomogram in
Figure 25 constructed for fixed values of o - lO dynealcm in the coordinate
d - f (D). For the given value of Q and u“ with respect to the intersection
of the curves of maximum drop size (1-7) with the curves of the drop diameters
(l'-7') which can be suspended under the given conditions, the position of
point I on the graph is defined. Dropping the perpendicular to the axis of
the tube diameter. its value of 011. is defined. The effect of the values
of the surface tension differing from 10 dynes/cm is taken into account
using the correction factor “a which is defined by the formula

In
Kd-(T‘L') . a
where o is the actual magnitude of the surface tension. dyneslcm.

The final diameter of the coalescing section is written as D - Dggnxo. and

the least size with respect to the standard is assumed. The graphs of the
nonogram in Figure ZSa-e correspond to the oil viscosity of 50, 30, 20, 10

and 5 centipoise. Curves 1-7 and l'-7' were constructed for the productive
section of 0.5, l. 2, b. 6, 8 and 10 million tons/year. For example. for

Q - 2 million tons/year and u“ - 10 centipoise. on the corresponding graph

of the nomogram in Figure 25 we find the intersection point of curves 3 and

3' and determined the diameter of the coalescing section D - 38 cm. The least
standard size is assumed; in the given case 0 - 35 cm. The maximum drop size
not subjected to fractionation by the turbulent oil flow and in the suspended

state is 900 microns. The length of the coalescing section is defined by
the formula

(3’ ”In ' 4n

’-= 'W 767+?” (66)
12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

where do and d are the initial and final sizes of the drops respectively.

The magnitude of the collision effectiveness constant K; was assumed equal
to 0.0001 [154]. For acceleration of the calculation of the length of the
coalescing section. the nomogran in Figure 36 was constructed. The required
initial data were as follows: D. Q, d and v. From the known values of

d and D. a line of equal diameters and the perpendicular to the mutual
intersection are drawn respectively (point I). The horizontal line to the
right to intersection with the curve of given output capacity gives the
point ll. Dropping a perpendicular to the L2 int axis. the intermediate
values of the length L; int are reckoned. Then the value of the coefficient
o2 is found on the auxiliary nosogram graph by the known value of the
viscosity. Then the length of the coalescing section is determined from

the following expression considering the section of establishment of the
flow:

L2 - 02L2 int + 200.

The curves 1-5 of the nomogram in Figure 34 correspond to the output capacity
of the section at 0.5. l, 2. 5 and 10 million tons/year. Thus. for D - 30
cm, 0 - 2 million tonsiyear. d . 370 microns. L2 int - #9 meters. For

v - 20 centistokes o - 1.07; hence L2 - 59-10.? + 20'0.3 - S6 esters.

Determination of the Parameters of the Drop Formers in the Desalination Stage

The determination of the diameter of the section of the desalination stage

is made in the same way as the coalescing section in the dehydration stage.
The boundary conditions also include the possibility of the suspension of
all of the drops of water in the flow for given Q, w and other parameters.
Beginning with this. the diameter of the section D is determined by the
nomogrsn in Figure 25. The maxi-um drop size is found by it. The length

of the line on which the given degree of encospassing of the globules of
stratal water by freshwater drops is achieved with a probability of the
process of 0.999 is determined using the nomogran in Figure 35 or the formula

u[<—r ——~>1

1” .” +200. i*atrstsl (65)
"'(W ‘Ml‘l

   
 

    

where H is the water content of the oil after introduction of fresh flushing
water into it; "stratal 0 is the stratal water content in the oil after the
dehydration stage: "stratal is stratal water content in the oil after the
desalination stage. having made contact with the fresh flushing water K3

is the collision effectiveness constant; d-ean is the mean drop size cm;

D is the diameter of the desalination section, cs; v is the kinematic 3
viscosity of the oil, stokes; Q is the flow rate of desslinated oil, cm Isec.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to determine the length of the desalination section using the
nosogrsm in Figure- 35. the given value of the volume of the flushing ester
is found on the "lie axis. and on the an," axis. the mean drop size which
cnn exist in the flow in the suspended state for the given regime of motion.
From the point of intersection of the curve for the freshwater flow rate
with the perpendicular dropped from dmesn (point I). a horizontal is drawn
to the right to the intersection with the curve of the collision effective-
ness constants of the drops (point Ii). Dropping the perpendicular from this
point to the 1.3 axis. L3 1 is reckoned. The total length of the desalina-
tion section is found consﬁering the coefficient of the motion regimen

o (the auxiliary graph of the nomogram) and the section of establishment

o the flow Al. - 200:

  
   

L3 - 031.3 int 4- 200.
1cm
d, 31.50 60.10 20 0
crons
50
¢ 00
:23
U0
0 a mzmm m a wzouoasm
L2.” t-untistokes

Figure 36. Nomogram for Determining the Length of the Coslescence Section

of the Drop Former or the Process Line:

L--Section dimter; dL--Drop size to which it is required

to consolidate the globules; L2 int is the intermediate length
of the section. o2 is the correction factor for the viscosity
v i, 2. 3. 6.5 is the flow rate of 0.5. l, 2, 5. 10 million
tons/year.

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

d...n; licrona , —"
00 new mom a

V

   
 

c 0%}
0
a:
Q6
40
a:

l.
a sum on m 230 iguana I 2 1.303

Figure 35. Nomogran for Determining the Length of the Coslescing Section
of the Drop Ponner L3 in the Desalinatin Stage:
"11‘ is the amount of wash water used, 2; no is the correction
factor taking into account the notion regiae: 1, 2. 3. a. 5
are the various degrees of breakdown of the enulsion and ratio
of drop sizes of the introduced flushing and stratal water.

From the nomogram it in obvious that the sane degree of trapping of the

drops of stratal water from the oil can be achieved for different flow ratea
of the fresh water. with a decrease in the freshwater flow rate. the

length of the section increases. Considering the expenditures on acquiring
fresh water and subsequent purification of it exceed the depreciation reckoned
from the cost of the desalination section, for the calculations it is neces-
sary to select the least acceptable level of freshwater flow rate. for
example. 2-3 percent. This should correspond to the degree of dehydration

of the oil in the preceding stage characterized by the residual water content
in the oil of 0.1 to 0.2 percent. Thcoectionof the curve for the collision
effectiveness constants depends on the method of introducing the wash water
into the oil. the nature of the mixing and the ratio of the stratal and
freshwater drop sires. Depending on the existing conditions. it is reconmended
that the calculations be made using the following curves: S—-for an unsatis-
factory dehydration process characterized hy the content of a large number

of globules with undisturbed shielding shells in the flow; 6-with mixing

of the oil with fresh water on the mixing valves and the pressure gradients

of 0.5-1.5 hg-force/cmz; 3. 2. l--on introduction of the previously dispersed
fresh water into the flow of crude (drop size detratal < dlim‘ datrstal - dlia;
“stratal > d11-. respectively).

In order to obtain drops of fresh water of the required sire. autonomous
tubular mass exchange sections are used. the parameters of which are selected

with the help of the noaograms in Figures 32-33 or forcing with the calculated
nozzle parameters.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 36.

Schematic Diagrams of the Settling Tank Installations of
Various Types:

s-Rith perforated grating; b-Hith lover distribution input
of the emulsion under the drainage water level and upper
distributed removal of the oil; c-Hith sectional drop for-er,
lou distributed input of the enulsion and upper distributed
removal of the oil; d--Vertical with sectional drop former and
low distributed input of the emulsion under the layer of
drainage water; e--Hith and distribution units for introducing
the emulsion and removing the oil: (“With overflow baffle and
flushing of the oil in the drainage water layer.

Key: (1) Emulsion
(2) Oil
(3) Drainage water

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Settling Equipment

Voluaetric Units

the problem of creating highly efficient settling equipment has in recent
years become one of the most urgent problems. The high rates of increase in
the volumes of oil extraction and preparation. its concentration in enoraous
seounts at the central collection points have required the creation of
high-output settling equipment. The application of the settling equipment
vith previous technological process characteristics unavoidably leads to the
creation of expensive and natal-consuming industrial complexes, the involve-
aent of large plots of ground in the process sites. the use of a significant

amount of control and regulating equipment and fittings, coaplication of
servicing. and so on.

Until recently the improvement of the structural design of the settling
installations has developed along two basic lines:

Improve-eat of the hydrodynamics inside the units for more coaplete utilita-

tion of their useful volune (distribution units, baffles. and so on) (see
Figure 36);

lntenaification of the process of coalescence of the globules of stratal
water and separation of it from the oil (baffles which change the direction
of flow. the introduction of emulsion under a layer of water. the applica-
tion of an electric field. the application of vibrations to the boundary
layer. and so on) (see Figure 36). However. here the achieved level of
output capacity turned out to be low. and the problem reasined as before

in practice unresolved. Thus. the loading of the best settling installatiOns
with respect to fluid to a volume of 200 n9 amounts to 1.2-1.3 million tonal
tons/year. The problea consists in creating equipment with an output

capacity exceeding this level by several tines. The theoretical prerequisites

explaining the possibility of achieving this level reduced to the following
[130].

The output capacity of the horizontal units of cylindrical shape can be

calculated by the formula suitable for drops less than 0.1 II in size (the
sedimentation regime in laminar):

rﬁm¢iMﬂ44lﬂ¢V§ﬁF:§Hn—M
‘ "Pm

     

04 "" ' (66)

where Q: is the output capacity; g is the gravitational acceleration; d is the
diaaeter of the stratal water globules; do is the difference in water and
oil densities; L is the length of the unit; 8 is the radius of the unit; h

is the height of the water cushion; v is the hineaatic viscosity of the oil;
“a is the density of the oil.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For h - 0 the formula assumes the form:

OIMUtlna-L
(u- ——\,§-—'- . (67)

From formula (67) it is obvious that the output capacity of the settling
tank depends on the dimensions of the stratal water globules to the second
power. Thus. the increase in drop size by only 3.3 tines leads to an
increase in output capacity of the settling tanks by 10 times. The other
parameters influence the output capacity of the settling tanks linearly.
Hence it follows that in order to increase the output capacity of the settling
tank unit the letter must be equipped with devices capable of consolidating
the drops before the emulsion enters the stagnation zone. This must be
preceded by completion of the ease exchange processes with respect to
bringing the reagent to each globule of stratal water and destruction of the
protective shells in then. With an increase in the drop size to 0.1 mm or
more the sedimentation rate increases, the sedimentation regime becomes
turbulent and the output capacity of the settling tank is determined by

the formula

:ann V3733
0

" Va. ' (63)

The analysis of for-ulee (67) and (68) and also their comparison indicates
that QT is two orders more than 0‘. Consequently, theoretically the output
capacity of the settling tanks can be increased by 100 times under the
condition of preliminary consolidation of the drops. If we consider a number
of factors lisiting the possibility of increasing the output capacity of

the settling tanks to this level under practical conditions, the possible
loading of the units turns out to be 10 times higher than that achieved on
the average with respect to the branch.

Therefore it is necessary:

To realize preliminary consolidation of the emulsion drops before their
introduction into the stagnation zone or stratification of the emulsion;

Ensure the and uni(orn input of the liquid with respect to the cross-section
of the unit and also the uniforl sampling of the liquid;

Maintenance of a low level of the water cushion or in practice exclusion of
it;

Exclusion of the operation of "flushinﬂ' the emulsion through the drainage
water layer from the settling zone.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The devices which permit the drop size to be increased before the which
reaches the settling zone can be the hydrodynasic type tubular and voluaetric
drop for-era. The tubular drop for-era have already becoae widespread in
the deposits; the volumetric ones are in the developsent stage. Their
application has in individual cases ends it possible to increase the output
capacity of the settling tank unit with a values of 200 s3 to 6.05 million

tons/year (the Biryuchevskaya Themchelical Units of the Tatneft' Associa-
tion).

Hhile keeping the output capacity invariant. the use of the drop formers
permits improv-ent of the quality of the oil by 5 to 10 tines. The flushing
of the esulsion through the water layer during processing of the undisturbed
emulsion unconditionally has played a positive role. for it has promoted a
reduction in strength of the protective shells on the drops of stratal water
and transition of a significant nulber of the. to the drainage water tank.
During the processes of breaking down the emulsion and coalescence of the
drops in the drop for-ers the necessity for flushing is raoved. and its
exlusion per-its the output capacity of the settling tanks to be increased.

for in this it because possible to rescue part of the drops by the ascending
oil flow.

The output capacity of the settling tanks with rectangular cross-section
under the condition of nation of the liquid perpendicular to the direction
of the gravitational force (the terminal input) is determined by the equality:

Q. :.‘. Fﬁ.‘.
where weed is the sedimentation rate.

The saxinun output capacity of the settling tank with the tap at the top is
deter-ined by the equality of the velocities of the ascending flow and the
settling of the drops in the vicinity of the oil-water phase interface,
the size of which is taken into account when calculating

Q'-Fu;;.

where of.“ - “'sed - on uid is the resultant sedinentation rate; ”liquid
is the speed of the ascending flow of liquid.

However,
I
"liquid ' r ‘
f rats which
n - I _ 9.
u sed u: sed I"
consequently:

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or
0'“ I‘ms’ .
The ratio Q'IQ” gives the expression
rel. =.
Flor '

2

Eros which it follows that the output capacity of the settling tanks with

end distributed input under actual conditions can be twice the output capacity
of the settling tank with low input distribution operating with a water
cushion inasmuch as "'sed > Jud. The s-i-industrial tests desonstrsted
that the output capacity of the setsling unit with a drop for-er and terminal
input can be brought to 9 sillion a [year (see Figure 37).

6W."

 

Q Nae.“

Figure 37. 011 Quality as a Function of the Output Capacity of the
Settling Tank Installations:
l--Settling tank with low distributed input and flushing
of the csuleion in a layer of water; 2—Settling tank with
sectional drop former and end distributed input; All—residual
water content in the oil

The neximus output capacity of the settling tank achieved under practical
conditions in the dehydration stage is lo million tons/hour. In the desalina-
tion stage for Devonian oil (Ronsahka) settling tanks have been tested with
an output capacity of 2.1 to 3.6 nillion tons/year. If we consider that

the average load of the settling tank installations on such units as the
Karsbashkaya DICPN Refinery is 0.167 million tons/year then it bees-es iepor-
tant how many reserves industry has its disposal. For oil with increased
viscosity. s sonswhat different picture has been put together (the Bondyuth-
akaye oil). here the minus: output capacity was 2.7 aillion tons/year.
which. however, is not the lilit.

Selection of the Volumetric Settling Tank Installations
The output capacity of the settling tank installation of field and plant

units for treating oil is determined by the degree of dispereenees of the
drops of water. the viscosity of the oil and other parameters influencing the

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stratification rate of the oil and water emulsions. The technological
procedures directed at the degree of consolidation of the stratal water
drops before the enulsion stands have a decisive effect on the increase in
output capac..ty of the settling tank installations under equal conditions.
When a large number of drops settle. the rats of constricted fall as is de-
ter-iced not only by the parameters entering into the expression for the
Stokes Last. but also the ratio of the emlsion phase volumes. In reference
[25], on the basis of the experimental studies of the constricted sedisentn-
tion. an espirical relation is presented which takes this factor into ac-
count and which. after sons trensforaations, can be represented as follows:

Aprd' (I _'wv- '3

| ‘n M! All
_— _ ’l 7‘
v: p. (1 H)

(on

  
  

   
   

' (69)

where "B is the actual viscosity of the oil, poise; do is the difference
in density of the water and oil, glen-3; g is the gravitational acceleration;
d is the drop disaster, a; H is the relative water content of the oil;

v.) is the kinuatic viscosity of the oil. stokes: p“ is the oil density,
g cm .

The first cofsctor in formula (69) is the sedinentation rate of a single
particle in accordance with Stokes Law. and the second cofactor is a cor-
rection for the conditions of constricted ssdiaentation. It has been
established that for calculating the stratification in the settling tank
unit of water and oil eaulsions. expression (69) can be siaplified.

The following values are presented in Table 2

a- 11/[1+w1/{-1§1 “7‘: (l—W)‘-"

calculated for the characteristic conditions: 9a - 0. 8 glen
v“ - 0 1 stokes.

3:93-1ﬂ13/m;

The data obtained nake it possible to arrive at the conclusion that for ester
and oil eaulsions it is possible to neglect the value of B, and during the
sedimentation calculations, to use the fornula

“35$ (1—ww-. (7o)

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Table 2

" Value of 0 for voter
drops size, microns

w _________-—
so l we zoo l we too

0.03 0.008 0.005 0.086 0.003 0.000

0.1 0.000 0.000 0.088 0.001 0.055

0.2 1.000 0.007 0.001 0.075 0.005

0.11 1.000 0.008 0.0% 0.001 0.015

0.‘ 1.000 0.000 0.000 0.087 0.082

0.5 1.000 1.000 0.000 0.002 0.000

0.0 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.000 0.000

The error for the ronge of variation of the water drop size froa 50 to 500
microns does not exceed 5-5 percent. The nonogram constructed considering
the shove-investigated factors will perlit rapid determination of the type
and required nuaher of settling tanks. In this case the calculation of the
settling tank units reduces to determination of the number and type of
settling tanks required for dehydration and desalination of the oil for the
given technological process paraseters and the selected sections of the
drop formers. The required initial data are as follows: d, “I! (or ‘1', °c).
V--voluae of the settling tank installation, m3, and H—relative volumetric
content of water in the oil.

The procedure for calculating the number of units for a degree of dehydra-
tion is as follows: being given the drop size at the output from the drop
former and the viscosity of the oil. the sonogram in Figure 38 was used to
determine the intersection point of the perpendicular reproduced from the
value of ”H vith the curve for the given drop diameter (point I). Drawing
a horizontal line to the right fro- the point obtained to the curve cor-
responding to the selected volume of the settling tank installation, we
obtain the point 11. The perpendicular from this point to the 0 axis gives
an output capacity of the settling tank of the selected volume 01 . The
correction for the restricted conditions of sedimentation It,“ taking into
account the water conten': of the crude oil going into the settling tanks

is selected on the auxiliary graph 0 of the nomogram in Figure 38. Finally,
the output capacity is defined as

Q I QliI/Klt '

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II' llll IIII I'III

IIIII Big IIII’IIIHIIII

aicrona "III
“ ‘ “III IIIIIII IIIIIII‘IIII
IIIIIIII IIIIII

IIIIIIIIII "II/[III IIIIIII III

IIIAIII IIIIIIIIIII
.I:::II IIIIII III IIII

  
 

            
 

 
      

            
 
 

 

0

T.’t III 0»? mo

I‘P' "_ 0'11: f
one o

”'2’ a: :alyear

,0 ,, 1-

50001920100 1 to :0 sq
I‘m antipoiae K”

Figure 38. Nomogram for Calculating the Output Capacity of the Settling
“rank inatallationa:
Quadrant A: drop aize curvea; Quadrant B: l-h-Settling tanke
with a volume of 28. 50. 100 and 200 I? end tanke with a
volume of 2,000 and 5, 000 :3 ;Quadrant C: 1-9--Viacoaity u
a function of the temperature reapeetively for the oil of the
Romaahka coal hearing. Bavlinakaya coal bearing. Roeaehka
Devonian. Zapadnoaurgutakoya. Uat'-Balykel:aya; Samotlorakaya;
Hangyahlak; Arlenakaya; the red Yar depoaite.

The required type of aettling tank inatellatidn ie eelected beginning with
the output capacity of the unit. the eizea of the area for inatallation of

them and other factora. The number of aettling tanka is determined by
the formula

II I Q/V.

Curves 1- 6 of the nomogram in Figure 38 correepond to the volume of the
aettling tanke of 28.50.100.200 III3 and the tanka 2.000 and 5, 000 m3.
Curvea 1-9, which are the oil viacoeity of different oil extracting regiona
no a function of temperature. are analogoua to the curves on the nomogram

in Figure 32. For example. on coneolidation of the dropa in the coaleacing
eection to a value of d - 700 ni:rona. the viacoaity of the oil "I! - 20
centipoiae and the water content [I - 20 per ant, the eettling tank with a
volume of 200 m3 haa the output capacity (I lhr):

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”(In
0 ~Tu-300.

with an output capacity of the dehydration unit of 2 million tone/year it

is necessary to use one settling tank with a volume of 200 m3. The procedure
for calculating the settling tank installations for the deaai' ntion stage

is the same as for the dehydration stage. Here the drop sizes can be taken
into accOunt which can exist in the flow at the exit from the section of

the desalination stage. For both stages it is proposed that we use a re-
serve settling tank. the fittings for which make it possible to connect

it when necessary both to the dehydration stage and to the deaslination
stage.

The Operation of the Settling Tanks in the Optimal Monitoring Mode

One of the conditions ensuring operating reliability of the process equipment
and stability of the regimen parameters of the devices for field treatment

of the oil is precise regulation of the oil-phase water interface in the
settling tank installations. This to a great extent determines the quality
of the oil treated on the unit and the discharged waste water. Therefore
each settling tank installation or eiectrodehydrator is equipped with

level regulators. Since on the standard oil treatment units up to 30
settling tank installations are used (the Karabashsknya UKPN with a capacity
of 6 million tons/year). the servicing. preventive maintenance. repair and
level regulation are greatly complicated. Accordingly. the flow charts

for hooking up the settling tank units permitting a significant decrease

in the requirement for level regulators and a reduction in the degree of
their influence on the operation of the units and quality of the oil prepared
in them are of significant interest. with a decrease in the number of

level regulators in the settling tank unit. not only does the number of
service points diminish. but better quality preventive maintenance and
reliable monitoring of the operation of the latter become possible. Hith
respect to the optimal monitoring scheme the following are provided for:

The installation of a level regulator in one or two units with realization
of hydrodynamic connection between these operating settling tanks:

Return of all of the drainage water to the process cycle for preparation
of the oil.

With respect to the flow chart for the dehydrating unit operating in the
optimal monitoring mode. the quality control is realized on the stratal water
in the stage of preliminary discharge along with control of the quality of

the oil at the exit from the settling tank 10 operating in the flow strati-
fler node (see Figure 39). In accordance with this scheme. the well production
treated with reagent in the field lines reaches the separator 3. The emulsion
which has been degased and broken down in advance is sent through a hydro-
dynamic drop former 6 into the preliminary water discharge settling tank.

The introduction of hot drainage water into the emulsion flow ahead of the
separator 3 or the drop former L ensures purification of it to the degree

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

permitting it to be pumped into the bed. it promotes consolidation of the
globules of stratal water and fast separation of the phases in the settling
tank 5. At the exit from the latter. the quality of the discharge drainage
water is monitored by using the analyzer 19.

with a content of pollutants in the water ahsve the adsissible norms. it is
purified in the settling tank 16 using the liquid hydrophobic filters. The
oil leaving it with a water content of S to 7 percent is heated in the heat
exchanger 7 to a temperature of ‘0‘ c and is fed by the pump 6 through the
drop iorner 8 to three out of four of the available settling tanks 9 and
then to the water separator settling tanklo, the fittings of which permit
inclusion of it in series and in parallel with the settling tanke 9. The
setting tank 10 is hydrodynamicelly connected with the settling tanks 9.

It can be in the same unit with it. and it is regulated by the quality of
the oil coming out of it. The regulator of the interface level is installed
in this settling tank or in another one of them. The active drainage water
is fed to the intake of the separator 3 after the units 9-10.

 

Figure 39. Flow Chart of the Fittinge of Settling Tanks for the Oil Treatment
Unit Operating in the Optimal Monitoring Node:
l--Demulsifier batcher; 2--Line used for breaking down the
emulsion: 3--Separator: 6--Cold stage drop for-er; S--Preliminary
water discharge tank; 6-Pump; 7--ﬂeater; 8-Hot stage drop former;
9--Settling tank; lO--Tank for water discharge; ll-Gas drier;
lZ--cas line; lJ--Drainage water meter; lb--Heter and quality
analyzer of the prepared oil; lS—-Purified water line to the
PUIP: l6--Settling tank with hydrophobic liquid filter; 17--
Buffer tank; 18--Pump; l9--Heter and quality analyzer for the
drainage water; 20--Hydrodynamic tubular coalescer.

The layout by this (low chart excludes the necessity for quality control of
the drainage water discharged iron the settling tank. for the latter is
purified in the oil preparation process cycle where the drops of oil removed
with the water are returned to the common flow of incosing production of

the wells. The investigated process permits significant improvement of the

system, monitoring of the quality of the water and oil and a siaultaneoua
decrease inthe total number of required level regulators.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tubular Settling Tanks

Fran the above investigated materials it follows that in many cases the
volumetric sstiiihu tanks can be replaced by tuhular ones. It is easy to
demonstrate that the output capacity of the settling tank with radius R is
equal to the sum of the output capacities of the group of settling tanks
with radii r1, r2. ....rn under the conditiOn that

Ii Sr. and I." -I.(r.. r,. r.).
"I

indeed. if we set:

(him; 0. AA;
Or A"; (hr/if".

where A is the coefficient equal to the numerical value of the remaining
parameters in the formula for the output capacity of the settling tank
and we take the sum from Q1 to Q“. we obtain

2'. 1 ‘Air,+r,+r,+ +r.).

For R - rl + r2 + r3 + ... + rn. we obtain

EQI=AR;

n-l
hence. it follows that

in other words. one unit of radius R can be replaced by banks of tubes with
small diameter of the same length under the condition that the sum of the
radii of these tubes will be equal to the radius of the large settling

tank. This opens up the way to the creation. for example. of small. portable
and nonmetal consuming settling tank installations. It is natural that the
increase in output capacity of the settling tank installations is connected
with the necessity for varying the hydrodynamic flow regime and increasing
the speed of the liquid in them to values characterizing the turbulent flow.
The factor limiting the output capacity of the settling tank units with
properly selected hydrodynamic characteristics is the transverse pulsation
components of the velocity operating against the gravitational forces.

in Figure 27 (curves 1-4) a graph is presented for the turbulent flow pul-
sntions as a function of the diameter of the unit with a Reynolds number of
10.000 from which it follows that the diameter of the settling tank under
other equal conditions. for example. average flow velocity. is one of the
defining parameters influencing the possibility of stratification of the

emulsion with moderate turbulent regime characterized by the Reynolds numbers
of order 5.000 to 20.000.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ OPPICIM. "Si-2 ONLY

In accordance with [2ll]. the length of the settling tank unit on which the
process of stratification of the emulsion can be completed in the laminar
regime of motion. is defined by the following expression:

‘ "mas

where um.x is the speed of the laminar flow along the axis of the settling
tank; uc1 is the gravitational sedimentation rate of the drops; 0 is the
diameter of the unit.

For settling of the drops on the bottom of the tubular settling tank from a
flow moving in the turbulent regime. the required length of the unit is
determined by the expression:

I

”not 7“ i '

1., .. --..-— o. (72)
where vn.‘ is the maximum flow velocity: x is the turbulence constant; “0
is the dynamic settling rate.

Figure 28 shows the length of the unite of different diseeter as a function
of the water drop size required for stratification of the turbulent flow of
the emulsion characterized by the Reynolds number of 10,000 for an oil
viscosity of 0.044 poise.

As was pointed out earlier. there is a limiting size of the drops which can
settle in a unit of given diameter. This fact is reflected on the curves

by a sharp increase in length of the unit when the drop diameter approaches
the maximum. with an increase in drop diameter, the length of the settling
tank required for stratification of the flow is significantly reduced.

The analysis of the curves in Figure 28 makes it possible to draw the con-
clusion of the possibility of rapid stratification of the emulsion in the
horizontal tubular units. the diameter of which is appreciably less than

3 meters. The preliminary consolidation of the finely dispersed part of

the emulsion will permit realization of this process during its movement

in the turbulent regime with high output capacity. Thus. for example. the
stratification of the emulsion with drop sizes of 600 microns turns out to
be identically attainable both in the settling tank with a diameter of

50 cm. the length of which is small--near 3 meters-and in the standard
settling tank with a diameter of more than 3 meters. In the latter case the
required length of the settling tank is 2 meters. 0n consolidation of the
drops to 8 microns the settling of the water from the oil becomes possible
in the settling tanks with a diameter of 20 and 10 cm respectively. Hence.
it follows that the realization of the principle of preliminary consolidation
of the drops before sending the emulsion to the settling tank opens up the

possibilities for the creation and use of small high output water separating
equipment made of tubes.

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”SE ONLY

The theoretical possibility of stratification into all and water of the
emulsion with dropa consolidated in advanCe in the tubular elements under
turbulent conditions was checked out under industrial conditions at the
ELOU-l NGDU [oil and Gas Extraction Adninistrstion] Bavlyneft' (Tstnett'
Association) which processes oil iron the coal-bearing horizons.

The breakdown of the emulsion and the hydrodynamic consolidation of the

drops before the water settles out of the oil were realized using the
sectional drop former. and the stratification of the flow into oil and water.
in the cxperinentel tubular settling tank. The sectional drop forner con-
sisted of the series connected heat irsuletcd tubular eleaents 150 and 250
an in dianeter laid on a foundation. The heat insulated tubular settling
tank was ends of tubes 350 In in diameter. At the end of the settling tank
there were two taps for discharge of the separated water and tapping the
desalinated oil. The unaeparatcd nixture of water and oil from the inter-
mediate turbulence zone was renoved through the central tube 150 II in
diameter. It usually quickly atretifies with subsequent finish of the
settling. The flow rate of the prepared oil and drainage water tapped off
was controlled by the Volt-an meters. The time for movement of the oil
through the first section of the drop for-er was 5 Iinutes (with Re - 21.000):
in the second section. 1‘ minutes (with Re - 16,000) and in the turbulent
settling tank, 12 minutes (with Re - 8.000).

 

a . a
\
I: t \ 7
" 3
I
l 7 3 2 J c 5‘ 7 '
I .- j 9
i
c 5 d 12 o ‘ 2 y
2 g 7 a
-' -
3

 

Figure 40. Tubular and Combined Settling Tanks:
a--Hcrizontsl, single row; b--Vertlcal, nultirou; c--ﬂorizontal
two-way. nultirow; d--Hultilayer. horizontal, two-way. nultirow;
l--0utput eaulaion; 2--ﬂorizontal distributor; 3--Vertical dis-
tributor; 6--Tubular settling ale-eats; 5--Vertical collector:

6--Horizontal collector; 7--Tank: 8--0ll output; 9--Uster dis-
charge.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The oil was treated by the following flow chart. The oil from the coal bearing
horizon (3.500-4.000 tons/day) with a water content of 30 to 60 percent reached
the tank for preliminary discharge of the water and hence. with a residual
water content to 12 percent end the reagent introduced into it (from calcula-
tions of SO g/ton) it went to the heat exchangers where it was heated to

60' c and then, passing through the sections of the drop former, it went to
the tubular eettling tank.

Observations have demonstrated that for deep destruction of the protective
shells and preliminary enlargement of the globules of the emulsion in the
drop former sections. the stratification of the flow into oil and water in
the settling tank 35 cm in diameter is realised for values of the Reynolds
numbers on the order of 8.000. Hence it follows that up to these values of
the parameter Re the output capacity can also be increased (or the standard
settling tank installation. It was noted that a layer of pure drainage
water moved in the lower part of the tubular eettling tank. lta central
section. including the contact zone with the water was represented by oil
dehydrated to 1.6-2 percent. and the upper section. dehydrated oil. The
intermediate zone itself contained no more than 2-6 percent water. Here it
turned out that the stratification of the mixture of water and oil picked
up from this zone takes place in 15 minutes with a temperature of 65' c.

Analogous results were achieved when using a tubular complex also in the
desalination stage. In this case the fresh water. calculating 8 percent of

the treated oil. was supplied at the beginning of the drop former section
150 mm in diameter.

It was established that during the process of the joint movement of the coal-
bearing oil and fresh water through the sectional drop former. effective
desalination of the oil takes place and, on reduction of the turbulence level
to a value of Re - 16,000 (at the end of the section of the drop former

250 mm in diameter), the basic amount of wash water is isolated in the lower
part of the drop former. The process of stratification of the emulsion

with he 0 8.000 is completed in the tubular settling tank in the section

10 meters long. The total amount of desalinated oil to 50-120 mglliter
picked up directly from the tubular settling tank reached 25 percent of the
output capacity of the unit. Simultaneously. 85 to 90 percent of the drain-
age water was discharged out of its total content in the oil [78, 179. 191].

The unstable mixture of water and oil from the intermediate zone. for the
stratification of which no more than 15 minutes are needed, was picked up
through a separate line.

The calculations demonstrated that the modular tubular complex including

the two-section drop former and the settling tank with an expanded with an
output capacity 1 million tons/year weighs 25 tons. The series settling

tank units operating under analogous conditions with the same total output
capacity weight 164 tons. that is. 5 times more. The savings from introducing
one tubular eettling tank with a drop former (with an output capacity of

1 million tons/year) amount to $3.000 rubles/year.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The increase in output capacity of the existing settling tank equipment can
be achieved also by using the advantages characteristic of both the volumetric
and tubular settling tanks (see Figure 60). it is necessary to consider the
possibility of using the volumetric units simultaneously as a distributing
device and a drop former and also a stratifying tank suitable for picking

up oil and water in large amounts among their advantages. The quality of
the water in this case is such that it can often be pumped into the bed
without additional purification. The advantages of the tubular units come
from their low metal consumption. simple installation and convenience. The
creation of the combined units provides for combined installation of the
tubular and volumetric elements in a -rabination which corresponds to the
stated process goals. For example. several tubular settling tanks with drop
farmers can be blocked with one large volume settling tank, and included in
it as in a separating tank.

The use of the above investigated principles and the creation of the highly
productive settling equipment on the basis of it equipped with tubular drop
fonmers has made it possible to bring the problem of the complete seal of the
collection and transportation of the well production in the "well-oil
treatment complex" interval to a practical level. For the solution of the
problem [91] it was proposed that part or all of the settling tank equipment
in the first stage of the desalinating units equipped with drop formers

be used as the preliminary water discharge units. In the latter case. quite
deep dehydration of the oil must be achieved permitting desalination of it

in the subsequent stages. here the transportation of the emulsion from the
field is realised by the scheme providing for pumping of it directly into the
unit. bypassing the preliminary discharge tanks. The existing settling tank
equipment and drainage system for the units in this case must be suitable

for discharge of the entire volume of water reaching the complex with the
oil. The preliminary water discharge unit in this case is excluded from the
set of field equipment.

0n the whole. the prospects for increasing the output capacity of the settling
tank installations. the creation of modular small-sized equipment on the

basis of this for treating oil and water with high output capacity and low
metal consumption and also obtaining pure drainage water directly from the
process units for treating the oil are connected with the observation of

the following process principles:

Consolidation of the drops of stratal water to desalination of the flow into
all and water in the process of movement of the emulsion from the wells to
the settling tank installation and the use of the field collection systems
and built-in drop formers for these purposes;

A reduction in the flow turbulence with respect to direction of motion of the
emulsion toward the settling tank units;

Realization of terminal distributed input and pickup of the oil in the
settling tank units:

30
FOh OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The hook up of the settling tank installation so that the drainage water is
returned to the head of the process for primary purification and delulsifica-
tion of the oil and its operation in the optimal monitoring regime.

Modular Demuleifiers

The industrialization of the structures for field treatment of oil by using
factory-built nodular automated equipment will theoretically make it possible
to find efficient solutions to many of the problems connected with field
equipment. in particular. a reduction in capital investments. metal con-
sumption. a reduction in construction time. decrease in size of the process
sites. and so on [66]. however, these problems can be solved only if the
output units have high capacity and ensure that high quality oil is ob-
tained. Industry has built a large number of demulsifiers in different
versions. many of which have operated for a long time. Depending on the
methods used to break down the emulsion. the demulsifiers can be classified
in two groups. corresponding to the second and third levels of treating the
oil. As has already been noted. the second level corresponds to the process
and the equipment (in addition to the settling operation) providing for the
application of some means of intensifying the breakdown of the protective
shells on the globules of atratel water (heating. treatment with demulaifier.
use of drainage water). The third level corresponds to the units and the
process in which. along with the n':ed ones. various methods of coalescence
of the drops are used (the coalescing filters. electric field, hydrodynamic
coelescera and drop formers).

Considering that the modern process of preparing the oil is reckoned at

six levels. it is easy to see that the demulsifiers produced by the industry
of different countries have become obsolete and are in need of modernization.
The characteristics of certain types of demulsifiers developed by the American
833 Company are presented in Table 3. From the data in the table it is
obvious that the output capacity of the units permits their use in small
formations. but in medium and large ones. too large a number of them would

be required to dehydrate the oil. In addition. the units are designed for
obtaining oil with a residual water content of about 2 percent. which at

the present time cannot be considered satisfactory.

Analogous equipment used in the Soviet fields also fails to provide high
output capacity with high quality of the treated oil.

The analysis of the flow charts for the oil treatment units1 which include
the type SP units. has demonstrated that out of 97 SP-lOOO (SP-2000) de-
mulaifiers. less than 25 percent have operated in the mode of dehydration of
the oil with a degree of treatment noted at the output from the unit to

1-2 percent. The remaining SP-lOOO (SP-2000) emulsifiers in the oil treat-
ment units were used as heaters before the preliminary water discharge

tanks (NCDU Shaimneft'. Nizhnevartovskneft') or ahead of the settling tanks
and the tanks for preliminary discharge of the water.

1. Performed at the VNIISPTneft' Institute.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

Table 3

 

lumen-ante II-h-(II.

(l) (2) (3) (’0) (5)

:3.qu an :lmuyavamn I' . menu. I _ 6 7 (8)
y un mna- “n m..." nu r.I I1.
3 '4 ' '5'"!- 30er ','_"
'53 n .cyt x .cyr
It

 

 

   

(9) Hugh “manna“ run 5 1.20 x (1.0 1.5—0 50—2! Raﬁ—mt 30-360
mamas
(11) Creme oﬁxnuu‘cunn run I.2x 5.3 l.5-3 01—21 15.5— Iii—M"

I rap-ostraanun. rep 2—4 370 102—! 20—200
wIIIWlﬂI“
Key: (1) Emulsion (7) Hith respect to oil. a3/day

(2) Demlsifier (8) :sth respect to gas. thousands of
(3) Dimensions. meters Iday

(lo) Pressure. ltg-force/cn2 (9) Normal

(5) Output capacity (10) Vertical type 5

(6) With respect to the liquid. (11) Stable

m 3[day (12) Thermochemicsl type N

(13) Horizontal . thermochemical

With the exception of the oil preparation units of Clavtyumenneftegaz and
N000 Tadzhikneft' Administration in which the output capacity of the units
reached 1. 300 to 2. 000 m 3lday. the actual load of the unit turned out to be
2 to 3 times less than tht projected load. However. even under such con-
ditions the SP-lOOO (SP-; )0) separators turned out to be ineffective both
as dcmulsifiera and as heuters (Table b).

In contrast to the type SP units. the 000 type demulsifiers were designed
for a large output capacity (to 3000 m 3lday). Some of the results of their
operation are presented in Table 5.

It is inexpedient to use the UDO-ZH and 000-3 units in the heater node. for
the thermal efficiency of these units and their other technical-economic
characteristics are much lower than for the NN-2,5 and NN-6,3 nodular heaters
(see Table 6). The thermochemical demulsifiers which do not have effective
coalescing devices and both in the Soviet oil refineries and abroad are
being forced out by the improved electrical dehydrators of various types
fhorizontali vertical, ball) quite completely investigated in references

8 198 66

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
 

surm-
N
V

"personal-n:

‘51:"

men-ms m

   

lea-Inunvuﬂ

(5)

 
 

”um-numb

61““??"1’. . ’C

i

 

k
c
j.

    

Table A
(1)
Waning”. Ill‘ll)‘
9 HI y 3. "mew- .....
(in; (lb’a‘lIﬂm-Fww Csnsummhu
' WI.
Mr V 9 6s . . .
<1” 89.1%:5’ﬁW3
I
(14) Oﬁwmnmmol)" rfuuuﬁm lll‘lu'
Aunts-"nub Inhi- ......
(15) (KIWI-mus 1IWL.IIUKY
( ‘yIIN-Inmhv. ........
(16) lll'IlllI' III-[m
2 “7”“? 55:53 :’§.':.";":'§:
(19) “"1””: .....

Key: (1) NGDU Association
(2) Output capacity.
(3) Denulsiftsr

n3/dsy

 

(12)
(13)

(6) Hate: contsnt 1n the oil. 2 (16)

(5) Hester

(6) Tenpersturs, 'c
(7) At the luput

(8) At the output
(9) H600 Udnurtnsft'

(10) Sakhalinnsft' Association

(11) NGDU Vostokneft'

-(15)

33

(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)

P“
S
g
I
5
E

  

 

17.8 no 2 5—“ so
20 no ‘-10 W
10 no 3 12 30
0—” no 3 17 32
(2—50 2—8 23 (0-6
_. — 8 3
_ — In (I)
_ -— 18 35
_ — 22 ‘3

NGDU Bkhablne f t '
lslsrusnsft' Association.
NGDU Rschltssnsft'
Uzbsknsft'_Assoc1stion.
NGOU Andi. zhsnnsf t '
Tstnsft' Assoctstion, NGDU
Suleyevneft‘

Pernnsft' Association
“600 Oslnsknsft'

N600 Kungurneft'

N600 Tsdzh 1km! t '

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a ”gm.

nqu con-v3.9.3:

AoNv anyway—~23:

   

Ocuv
GB Quad-all

gay!!-

  

      

Uo . rd ray—ESP

anon:
aqueous-Uh
Manna:

anon:
.uuocsaﬂsuxucnx
.uuoaxouuo> ago:
.aouunuoouu< .uuocaunqnsqm
ouoxauwvozuu< ago:
.guunwoooz .uwouxuanﬂgocﬁuz
uuoxasuao>uu anon
ouocgnouono>uum 3:02
ao«»n«u¢.n< .uuo:>0unuum

=8: Lug—332.528
.guunwooog .quEF—UL
.uuocgwamuasogo

boo.— ..couuouuoog .uuocsonn

acuunuuoan<

                

PCT:

  

 

nwuv
Away

Acuv
Aauu

“any
“say
nouv
Anny
Aedv
Anny
.NHV

Auuv

{run-4...“..- 3...}?
o. . ulﬁ. .
than“? v 3 5

. uuou . .— 339 .502
.guu-JUOQ: Bum-5:.
032—00

Aonv

u§«:OnH0u «Au 0» mauvuoo

non acoanuavo «nu no
acouuuvcoo noun-hose
0o .ouauduonilh
uznuao as» u<

name“ as» u<

u .u«0 us»

an acouaoo moan:

anvx a

.Auuuqauo uaaumo
henna:

onus

=82 aqua-«00.:

aov
any
nnv
now

any

how
any
ANV
Aﬁv "aux

AaAv

Asav
Aouv

:3333-3' 2:83.580
............ 45.8320

Anny
a~qv
Anuv

nouv

...........

art-5.29

.33: {RTE-n... «sign: .

........... ‘éagfo
a2: .22: £2.25. 3.355,.

.2....= ....._.:.3..f.¢

any

    

3k
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the socialist republic of Roesnin, the electrodshydrstor of the system
developed by Engineer Nikodinesku is used which is constructed on the basis

of s not opersting on industrial frequency currents (Figure A1) at atlas-
pheric pressure. The electrodehydretor has four horizontal electrodes forning
three electric field zones [68]. The diameter of the electrode.uydretor is

12 esters. the height is 7.86 esters. and the volune is 855 s3. The reticuler
electrodes 7 are connected to the feed sources, and the electrodes 6 are
grounded. The voltage between the electrodes 7 reaches 35 kilovolts. snd
between the electrodes 6-7. about 17.5 kilovolts.

The oil is heated using coils through which steel is feed. The electrode

6 is node up of a solid sheet of steel. and. in addition to the prinary
role. it also plays the auxiliary role of a shield which changes the direc-
tion of the flow along the electrodes. This has made it possible to do away
with the distributing heed end avoid the consequences of the dispersing
effect of the pressure gradient at the exit free it. In addition. in the
snnuler clearance between the electrode 6 and the well of the unit, in
connection with the increase in flow velocity in this zone. the coalescence
of the drops under the effect of the electric field is supplenented by their
consolidation under the effect of the velocity pulsations.

stle 6

 

0-) (2) Boom. uses 3) licensee-top

nl‘lmm'ﬂi —
mm | Nil-«.3 UBO“ uoo-a

(4) lipase-cementum“ no
capes) mm uqessnsw'c

 

 

(5) T n Mussels N96. slcyr 3000 soon 1000 saw
Wmmm.

. mm ...... 2.5 «.3 1 3.5

36; 3:12.: ......... 21.2 55.0 51.59 56.1

7 ‘ 36f”? .°.1°.'mm'° .13”: 21.7 35,2 «.3 «.9

Key: (1) Indexes
(2) Modular furnaces
(3) Demlaifier
(6) Output capscity with respect to crude oil when heating to 100' C
and with water content at 30 percent. tons/day
(5) Thermal output. millions of keel/hour
(6) Kass. tons
(7) Factory cost, thoussnds of rubles

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 41. Nikodimesku Electrodehydrezor equipped at the Tank lose:
l--Oil input; 2-Tank; 3-0il output; baTrsnsformer; 5-Insulator;
6--Additional electrodes and solid baffle; 7—Blectrodes;
8. 9--Input and output coils of the steam heater; lO—-Vater dis-
charge.

The electrodehydrators in the United States vere initially used only for
desalination of the oil at the lento. The output capacity of one unit varied
from several hundreds to 2500 m /day. The residual salt content in a number
of cases reached 1 mg/liter. Then the devices began to be used for dehydra-
tion in the fields. Their output capacity was from 167 to 16,700 I3Iday

with a residual water content to 0.5 percent.

Depending on the output capacity, the units have dimensions from 1.8 meters
in diameter and 3.6 meter» in length to 3.6 meters in diameter and 26.1.
meters in length. The electric power coneusption during dehydration depends
on the conductivity of the emulsion. Usually for processing or e least
conducting emulsions. 3.0 kilovatts are required for each 1.000 m /day of
output capacity of the unit. 0n the average the cost of treating the oil

on the Petreko electrodehydrators is about 1.12 cents/n3 of dehydrated oil.

The oil is present in the unit for 20 minutes. The cost of the electro-
dehydrators is from 6 to 2‘ dollars/a3 of daily output capacity, and it
depends on the parameters of the oil. The large units are note economical
when treating heavy oil. Thus. the Petreko unit on Lake Maracaibo in
Venezuela removes voter from the oil treated with demlsifier at the natural
flow temperature (67' C)3 For dilensions of the unit of 3 meters at 6.2
meters. a volume of 103 m and an output capacity of 2.000 m3lday (730,000
n3/year). the water content in the oil drops from 50 to 0.3 percent. The
electrodehydrators 3.7 x 12 meters in size. depending on the density of the
oil. ensure an output capacity from 830 to 1240 m /day. The units in a
variable electric field develop an output capacity of 15.200 m3lday (o I 0.87)
and 11.450 m3/day (p - 0.9). Hith a length or the unit or 10 meters and
about 1.0 percent water content in the oil. the designed output capacity

is 3.3 million :- [year with a heating temperature of 37° C. The demlsiiiers
of different type are developed by many companies. The electrodehydrators
developed by the 353 company (for stable emulsions) have the follouing
characteristics.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Type 1 Type 11 Type I Type II
Type of de- horizontal Output capacity:
mulsifiar
Dimensions. a: with raspsc to
Diuaeter 1.8 3.0 liquid. a [day 167 5.300
Length 3.6 15.0 with re act to
Pressure. kg- oil. m [day 67 3.300
force/cm2 3.25 1.5 with respect to
gas. thousands
of Ina/day 100 20.000

The Petrolight Company also manufactures chemical electrodehydrators. the
coat of which. depending on their output capacity. can be determined by the
data presented below:

Output capacity.

thousands of m 3[year 150 300 600 900 1200 1500 1800 2100
Cost of equipment.

thousands of dollars 10 15 20 2h 30 35 36 36

The electrostatic horizontal demulsifiers built by the NATCO Company calculated
{or dehydration of oil are beginning to be widely used. The primary ad-
vantage of these units is that the dehydration process can be realized at

n lower temperature than when using the ordinary type dehydrators. as s
result of which the fuel gas is saved. the oil composition is improved. the
corrosion of the equipment and scale formation are reduced. At high oil
temperature in the wells. the need for heating is in practice eliminated.

The fire hazard of the objects is reduced. and the environmental protection
is improved. The data on the dimensions and designed output capacity of

the electrostatic demulsifiers built by the NATCO Company are presented in
Table 7. The lower limit of their output capacity corresponds to treatment
of high-density emulsions (0.966) not containing free water: the upper limit
corresponds to the treatment of unstable emulsions of light oil (0.815) in

the units with a high amount of free water. The purity of the released
water is not guaranteed. The company produces electrostatic demulsifiers.
the designed (advertised) output capacity of which reaches 12 million m 3lyear
(Figure 62). however. models confirming the operation of the demulaifiers
with such high output capacity are in practice still unknown.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F011 (WI-1121)“. USE ONLY

Table 7

         

 

    
   

‘ ' . ‘

(1) 3.; (3) gig (lo) Ilpoum-nuvenw-en a). a:

I on ‘5 “ 8°; 3:2.
IJQ‘ICD I Inns 3 a. a ,.

“nu" 2.‘ 0°13) nun w eon mt [£8

g ‘53 at: n'll'ca I n'ima ' £33.

a 28. 7233 (5) (6) =38

 

     

 

1.2 x 3.1 113 1-10.11 8.7—2“ 3 11—47 2
1.! x 1.0 130 1-45.? 20.1 410 11—28 '1
1.8 X 0.1 232 1-15.? 11-28 5
2.1 X 1.0 150 1-014) 70—251 12—57 5
2.6 X 1.0 277 245.7 42—57 5
7.1 X 11.1 378 1-01.13 12-57 5
2,0 x 0.1 (‘00 2—5.7 110- 321 12—57 5
2.1 x 7.0 370 1-01.11 12—57 5
2.1 x 7.6 567 2-15.? 175-350 12—57 5
3.1 x 0.1 50‘ 2-‘5J 57-85 5
3.1 x “.1 1‘60 2—01.13 lﬂ-Sﬂ 57-05 5
3.1 x 0.1 750 3-6.7 57-85 5
3.1 x 7.0 101 2-55,? 57—85 15
3.1 x 7.0 '03" 2-111." 210—505 57-83 15
3.1 x 7.6 7.3!: 3—“.7 57085 15
3.1 X 0.1 3-01 2—15}! 51—86 1'-
3.1 x ".1 630 2-01.11 300-“ 57—85 1'»
3.1 Y. 0.1 756 3-15J 57-86 15
3.1 x 10.7 756 2-01.11 280—“ 57-85 15
3.1 >. 10.7 9‘5 3-5.7 57-85 15
3.1 x 12.2 9‘5 2-0111 85—112 25
3.1 x 13.7 1200 2-61.0 190-900 05-112 25
3,1 x 15.2 1512 2-01.11 85—112 25

Key: (1) Size of housing (DxL). aeters
(2) Capacity of the heating tubes. 1000 keel/hour
(3) Number of ball tubes with outside diameter. cl
(5) Output capacity
(5) Oil. thousanda of I3/ ear
(6) Hater. thousands of m /year
(7) Gas. thousands of I3/year
(8) Rated transformer power. kilovolt-amperea

The electrostatic demulafiera operate on 16.000 volt DC current with a strength
of 0.2 amps. The output capacity of such demulaifiera is 15 to 20 percent
higher than the capacity of the AC electrodehydrators. and they cost 2 to

3 percent less than the latter. The nain part of the electrostatic coalescar
--the basic element of the electrostatic demulaifier--ia the transformer

6 with aatured core. The unit has the property of transforming power from

the feed line in accordance with the required load depending on the con-
ductivity of the oil treated in each instance. If the load becomes too

great. the transformer reduces it to the admlsaible level. The operation of
the equipment in the self-adjustment mode excludes the problem of

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0!?!CIAL USE ONLY

short-circuiting and the disconnection of the feed systea by protection
which can he cannon to it and the transforaer.

Figure b) shows the usual schenatic for creating an electric field in an
electrodehydrstor and in an electrostatic deaulsifisr. The esalsion to be
treated is fed to the AC field (see Figure 43) created hetueen the electrodes
[-2. lnssnuch as the water in the lover part of the unit had a potential
equal to ground potential. it also acts like an electrode 3. The eauleion
flowing off the oil-water phase interface is first subjected to the effect

of the variable field vith low voltage gradient and the basic slount of the
water settles out. After passage through the electrode to the emulsion

goen into a higher voltage zone in which the basic amount of water remaining

in the oil coalesces. In a large nusber of cases the oil undergoing treat-
ment in this zone contains no sore than 0.1 percent water.

Figure 63. b shows the circuit diagran for the new electrostatic denuleifier.
The sale transformer is used here. but there are two lines at the output
leading through the rectifiers to the positive electrode l0 and the negative
electrode 9 respectively. This creates an extraordinarily high DC voltage
between the electrodes 9-10. In this equipment the oil-water phase inter-
face has the sane potential as ground. and it is a third electrode 3. The

interaction with the electrodes 9-10 in this zone creates a variable field
with low voltage gradient.

 

h

   

Figure a). Schematic of the Arrange-ent of the Electrodes and the Directions
of the Lines of Force in the Electrodehydratora of Different

Structural Designs:

a--In the usual type equipnent; b-ln the electrostatic dehydra-
tor: l. 2. 3--Upper. middle. and lover electrodes; b--Direction
of notion of the emulsion: 5--Direction of notion of the enlarged
drops of water: 6--Transforners: 7--Rounding; 8-Rectifiere:
9--Negative electrodes; lO--Positive electrodes; ll-Direction

of the lines of force of the field.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the operating process. only the positive part of the cycle cones to

the electrode 10. If the oil between the electrodes contains a snail esount
of water, leaks of the charges fro. the electrodes 10 or 9 will not occur.
and the voltage gradient will be quite high. It the water content in the
oil increases. port of the charges will be lost. and the voltage gradient
will drop sutonstically. Although the voltage gradient decreases and is
restored 60 times a second, the direction resales constant. which creates

0 DC voltage field. Hith this design. we have the possibility of using a
variable field in the zone of increased water content between the electrodes
and the surface of the water and a DC voltage field with high parameters in
the zone of reduced water content. whl"h permits coalescence of the smallest
drops. This combination of the electric fields isproves the operation of
the dehydration units which are highly superior with respect to efficiency
to the traditional units. 0n the majority of units with moderate output
capacity only "traces" of water re-ain in the oil.

 

Figure 66. Output Capacity and heating Teaperature as Functions of the
Oil Density:
1--Blectrostatic'dehydrstors; 2--Usuol type electrodehydrator;
3--Thersochelical settling tank.

LO
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

”I! U 0.3 W 3.01.865'

Figure AS. Residual Hater Content in the Oil AH as a Function of the Heating
Temperature for Oil with a Density of 0.8698:
l--Thernocheaical settling tank: 2-Blectrostat1c dehydrator.

The study [202] points to the possibility of a significant increase in
equipment productivity with the use of electrostatic dehydrators in con-
parison with thersochenical settling tanks or ordinary electrode-
hydrators.

In Figure 40 it is obvious that when treating oil with a density of 0.87 the
theoretical load on the thermochemical unit 180 s3 in voluse exceeds 3 sillion
a3/yeer. the ordinary type electrodehydrator, 4.8 Iillion n3/year and the
electrostatic dehydrator. 5.5 million e3/year.

According to the data of R. V. Koggins [51], the degree of dehydration of
the oil on the units utilizing an electrostatic field also increases by
comparison with the ordinary theraochenlcal settling tank (see Figure 45).
For equal heating tenperature the degree of dehydration of the oil using
the electrostatic dehydrator increases by 6-8 tines.

If we compare the graphs in Figures 66 and 65 and try to find the relation
between the output capacity of the units of different types and the degree
of dehydration of the oil at equal temperatures. it turns out that for oil
with a density of 0.859. the following relations will be valid.

For a heating tenperature'of 68' C, the residual water content in the oil
during treatment in the thernochesical settling tank with an output capacity
of 3.7 sillion e3/year will he 3.0 percent. when treating the oil in the
electrostatic deuulsifier at the same tesperature the residual water content
will be 0.5 percent. and the output capacity will exceed 5 million n3/year.
Hence. it follows that for the given parameters of the oil treat-cut 1n

the thermochemical settling tank, it is not ensured that conditioned de-
hydrated oil be obtained. or in the electrostatic dehydrator, desslinated.
Obviously this turns out to be possible only when working with equip-ant
with an output capacity appreciably less than the usxisua values which are
presented in the graph in Figure hi.

‘1
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8

 

Hyman-sun Inn's yr"-
nnsw. 'A. mun Inn-rum
mar mun: Inna I n in
Tall-rpm,” '

 

 

n-rpr-s. 'c
O. I 93 0.2%
no l0" I75
W ISO 210
50 ' ' I70 2‘5
00 2|" run
70 2‘5 -

Key: (1) Heating tenpereture. 'c
(2) Output capacity of the unit. I. for a residual water content in
the oil of

Note. The output capacity of the unit at T - 30’ C and a residual water
content in the oil of 0.1 percent is taken as 100 percent.

Table 9

——————

Knuﬂh‘llﬂ Meir-
uuu m. not. '..
"I" “WW
Ila-mm". Inn-cu. ‘1'.
"'0" __

 

Key: (1) Oil density
(2) Amount of connercial oil, lass percent. at a heating telperature
of, ’c

The output capacity of the units essentially depends on the heating tenpera-
ture and the area of the electrodes. Table 8 gives the data on the increase
in output capacity of the electrostatic dehydratora as a function of the
heating tenpersture.

In the electrostatic denulaifiers the oil can be treated at a teaperature
of 8 to 15' C. which will pernit a significant increase in the output of
connerciel oil. Table 9 shown the values calculated according to the data
of reference [202] for the variation in the amount of connerciel oil as a

#2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

function of its density and heating temperature: hence. it is obvious that
with an increase in temperature its losses can be significant. especially
for light oil.

The operating expenditures on electric power depend on the site of the unit
(the area of the electrodes) and the electrical conductivity of the oil.
With an increase in electrical conductivity of the oil. the expenditures on
the electric power increase. with an electric power cost of 03¢ cent per
kilowatt. the expenditures on electric power when treating l.m of oil are
on the average (for the average oil of the Gulf of Hemico). 1.2 cents.

On the whole. the advantages connected with the operation of the electro-
static dehydrators usually include the following:

High output capacity of the units:
A decrease in size of the process sites;

The possibility of carrying the process out at low temperature and with low
consumption of fresh wash water:

Fuel saunas:
A reduction in losses and an increase in volume of the commercial oil.

Hithout discussing the structural problems with the third level demulsifiers.
let us indicate a number of decisive deficiencies characteristic of the
equipment of this type as a result of which basic structural reworking of

the equipment is necessary from the point of view of the modern concepts of
the optimal conditions of breaking down emulsions:

Absence of mass exchange and stratifying section intensifying the demulsifica-
tion process (and for the second level equipment. also the coalescing medium):

Failure to observe the principle of the optimal sequence of operations
(heating. treatment with reagent. destruction of the protective shells.
coalescence of the drops and stratification of the flow) and realization of
them simultaneously with the same hydrodynamic unfavorable conditions of
movement of the flow (more frequently, laminar);

Technologically inefficient combination of operations connected with heating
the emulsion and its standing in one unit:

Realization of low distributed input of the emulsion through the layer of
drainage water. in connection with which the output capacity of the unit
is limited to the settling rate of the drops of stratal water suspended in
the body of the oil directed opposite to the flow.

This results in low output capacity of the units. increased fire hazard. the
necessity for shutting down the entire unit in case of a failure in any

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPIC!AL USE ONLY

section, increased densnd for uonitoring and automation cquipnent and also
regulating and valve fittings. and the necessity for using s high number of
units st tho high-output installations

COPYRIGNT: Izdotel'stvo "Nsdri'. 1977

10845
C80:8344/0812

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED BOUIPHENT

TYUMENTRANSGAZ ASSOCIATION DURING 1011! FY?

”oscow GAZOVAYA PRONYSHLENNOST' SFRIYA: EKONOHIKA GAZOVOY
PROMYSHLENNOSTI in Russian No 1, Jan 79, pp 1-5

[Article by T. n. Zhuzhgova, Tyumantransgaz Production
Association

[Text]ln accordance with the targets set in the ""ain Directions
for the Development of the National Economy of the USSR Busing
1976-1980", in 1980 it is planned to extract 435 billion I of
gas and increase gas extraction by 145.7 billion a . Of this
total, growth in Tyunenskaya Oblast will amount to 120 billion m3,
in 1980 the entire annual increase planned for the nation will

be attained from gas deposits in Tyumenskaya Oblast. During the
current five year plan the volume of gas trans orted b the
association will increase 2.6 fold, i.e. fron 7.2 bil ion ’3

in the Ninth Five-Year Plug it will increase to 344.6 billion m3,
a growth of 257.4 billion m

While in 1975 consumers in the Urals and the center of the nation
obtained 31.5 billion m3 of Tyumen gas, in 1980 they will

receive 82.6 billion m3 through the association's gas pipelines,
annual deliveries of gas will amgunt to 225.8 million m , (in
1975 the figure was 86 million a J.
In order to transport this quantity of gas 2,964.2 kilometers

of gas lines and 21 conpressor facilities will be built ( of this
figure, 7l7 kilometers of lines and 6 facilities were intro-
duced in 1976). Capital investments will total 1,916 million
rubles and fixed capital valued at 1.072 million rubles (see
Table) will be introduced. By the end of the five-year plan

the value of fixed productive capital will amount to 3,404
million rubles. i.e. an increase of 2.7 fold in comparison

with the corresponding data in 1975..

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tahle: Technical-Economic Indicators of Tyunentransgaz During
the Tenth Five-Year Plan

1 1 1 8 as
Report Report Report Plan percent of
1977

Commercial gas 31.47 41.74 59.18 78.39 132.5
billion p
Value of fixed
ca ital, million
ru les 1,247.9 1,634.7 1,670.8 2,486.7 '-
Capital invest-
ments, million
rubles 463.7 319,5 310.1 202.5 65.2
Prine co t per
10,000 m of 885,
rubles 25.08 24.56 23.68 23.66 100.00
Profits, million
rubles 16.27 33.20 26.42 32.32 122.00
Profitability,
percent 1.3 2.03 1.3 1.29 99.2
Output/capital
ratio, rubles 0.23 0.24 0.26 0.26 100.00
Ratio of ﬂaterial
Incentives Fund to
Wages Fund, percent 11 10.1 8.76 9.50 108.5

The output/capital ratio of fixed productive/cépital will be
reduced somewhat by the end of the five-year plan (from 0.23
to 0.21).

The output/capital ratio, characterizing the efficiency of
fixed capital utilization, has especially great significance
in pipeline transportation, since practical experience has
shown that the introduction of compressor stations lags behind
the introduction of gas lines and the tile required to attain
the planned productivity of gas lines is increased. In other

words, the growth rate of fixed capital exceeds the growth rate
of the amount of gas tranSported.

66
EOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of the production association, similar to the

transportation subsector, is being increasingly influenced by

negative factors. The main ones are the increased average dis-
tance of gas transportation, and natural-climatic conditions.

These factors are to a considerable extent, causing deterior-
ation of such indicators as prime cost and profitability.

By the end of the five-year plan prime cost for the association
will increase by 24 Kercent, and the output/cagital ratio will
drOp by 9 percent. T e number of workers per 1 0 kilometers of
gas, computed on a single line basis, continues to grow,
although it is felt that it should decline. Insignificant
increases in gas line distance have been accompanied by sizable
growth in the number of GPA and the number of workers in gas
transport is increasing primaril in the compressor service
area: gas compressor station, KI and A (Control and measure-
ment equipment and automation), and EVC (Computers). For
example, in 1976 717 kilometers of line were installed. The
number of workers in gas transportation during this same period
increased by 421; of which 144 were at the gas compressor
stations, 59 at the RIP and A, sections, and 64 at the BVS
section. There are 44 people directly engaged in servicing

the line sections of the system, 10 percent of the total increase
in personnel.

By the end of the five—year plan the number of workers will
increase 2.9 fold and amount to 9,724 (in 1975 it was 3,327).
Pipeline distance will increase by 66.7 percent -7,407 kilo.-
meters. By 1980 economic incentive funds will have practically
doubled. In 1975 the FMP material incentives fund was

869,000 rubles, in 1980 it will he 1,683,100 rubles.The PM?
is usually planned as a percentage of the FZP Wages fund and
if examined from this perspective, everything is normal, i.e.
the FMP is 10 percent of the FZP. However, if one looks at

FMP payments per worker, then this indicator has deteriorated
in I975 it was 296 rubles, in 1976 - 281, and 1980 - 173.

In order to solve the problems facing the nation in the Tenth
Five-Year Plan it is necessary to carry out a complex of
measures directed at revealing reserves, and improving the
efficiency of fixed capital utilization and equipment oper-
ation reliability.

Specialists at the association have developed a five-year plan
for improving the management system with these goals in mind.

The economic effect from implementing measures in this plan
amounts to 202.7 million rubles. Implementing the measures
will cost 159.5 million rubles.

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic measures in the plan for improving the management
system are:

1. ImprOVements in organizational structure - an economic effect
of 3.8 million rubles.

2. Reductions in nonproductive expenditures and losses - an
economic effect of 1.2 million rubles.

3. Increases in the reliability of equipment operation - an
economic effect of 1.2 million rubles.

4. Measures for the acceleration of scientific'technical
progress - an economic effect of 192.0 million rubles.

S. The mechanization and automation of management work. This
section contains measures to provide workers in the management

apparatus with management equi ment, which includes computer
hardware, equipment for prepar ng and copying documents, all

types of communications. In 1975 the amount of equipment avail-
a le for management work was worth 3,692 rubles per worker,

and by the end of the five—year plan it will reach 7,100 rubles,
i.e. a growth of 1.9 fold. This same section includes the intro-
duction of automated management systems. The economic effect

of measures for the mechanization and automation of management
work is expected to reach 2.6 million rubles.

6. Reduction of the relative share of workers in the management
apparatus by 22.3 percent in comparison to the norm and
reductions in apparatus maintenance expenses through the intro-
duction of a set of measures reflected in the management im ro-
Vement plan. It is expected that the economic effect from t is
will amount to 1.9 million rubles.

In 1975 the number of workers in the management a paratus
amounted 18.7 percent of the total, and in 1976 t e figure was
17.9 percent, a reduction of 4.3 percent.

In the Tenth Five-Year Plan of efficiency and quality, the
intensification of the conservation, rational and thrifty use
of raw materials, other materials, and fuel and energy
resources is very important.

Collectives at many enterprises in the sector have outlined and

are implementing specific measures to reduce the material inten-
sity of output, and conserve the use of materials, energy and

other resources. In 1976 the Board of the Ministry of the Gas
ordered an All-Union review of the efficiency of the use of

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

materials, and fuel and energy resources at enterprises and
organiZations in the ministry.

The Tyumentransgaz Association, including all LPUMG, participated
in the review. In 1976, during the course of the inspection,

S31 suggestions were made, or this number 491 were implemented
and the economic effect from their introduction amounted to

171,500 rubles. Ninety-nine tons of turbine gil. 19,500 kilowatt
hours of electrical energy and 6.6 million m of gas were
saved. The following measures were implemented:

Nadymskoye LPUMG Line production administration for main gas
pipelines - additional feeding of hot air into the compressor
Shep through redesigning oil coolers. This ensures the ..
reliability of the compressor station machinery hall heating
systems and increases the temperature in the facility by

5-6 degrees.

Krasnotur'inskoye LPUMG - sold excess materials and equipment
amounting to 26,000 rubles.

Kazymskoye LPUMG - heated production facilities at the field
site through utilizing heat of reserve boilers. This reduced
gas consumption for its own needs.

In order to develop the scientific and technical creativity of
young people and to more extensively enlist young workers,
specialists, engineers and technicians, a scientific-technical
review of youth creativity was announced for 1977-1980.

A review commission of nine individuals chaired by the
association's chief engineer has been created.

An integrated program for engaging young workers and Specialists
in scientific creativity has been developel.

In order to improve the standards of technical creativity of
young collectives competition has been organized among young
creative brigades to attain the best indicators for e ficiency
promotion. In 1977 the results showed that during the first stage
of the review the better indicators were attained by the

brigade of young innovators at the Long~Yuganskoye LPUMG, in
which T. I. Zakharov, V. 6. Nimchenko, and A.S. Vorob'yev.

The better works of young innovators are included in the collect-
ion "Rationalization Suggestions" published by the Tyumentrans- x
gaz printing office and recommended for introduction at other
LPUMG.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thirty-nine young specialists underwent training at courses

and institutes for improving qualifications in Moscow, Kiev,
and Kaliningrad.

Innovators participated in the seminar: "Experience in the
Utilization of Automated Management Systems at Enterprises in
the Sector" conducted at the VDNKH Exhibit of the Achievements

of the National Economy ; at a conference of young specialists
in Tyumengazprom A11 Union Production Association, held under

the slogan "Enthusiasm and Creativity of Youth in the Tenth
Five-Year Plan", and in the Fourth Creative seminar in Urgench.

COPYRIGHT: WIIEgazpron, 1979

11,57h
080: 1822

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

ECONOHIC EFFICIENCY OF NEWLY INTRODUCED NATURAL GAS DEPOSITS

Moscow GAZOVAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' . SERIYA: EXONOMIKA GAZOVOY
PROMYSHLENNOSTI in Russian No 1, Jan 79 pp 20-21

Mrticle by S. V. Dubrova, Komi Branch VNIPI All Union
Scientific Research and Planning Institute for the Gas Industrﬂ

[Text1 In compiling designs of OPE and developing gas deposits,
the comparative efficiency of their operation is determined

by comparing costs for the exploration, extraction, ind trans-
portation of gas with the closing costs at the site of its

use (1 ). Using such comparisons, even very capital-intensive
deposits are more efficient than coal extraction.

However, if one calculates the absolute efficiency of the gas
extracting enterprise and the time required to recover capital
investments in gas extraction, not every gas field's profits
justify expenses for project development within the norm period.
Thus, with reSpect to cost levels, the majority of small and
medium deposits in the Timano-Pechora province of the Komi

ASSR are lower than closing costs, but have low profitability
or even losses. The time required to recover investments am unts
to 8-27 years, with an average cost of 6 rubles per 1,000 m

of gas (see Table I)

In connection with work on the new system of economic incentives
now being conducted, the profitability level indicator has

great significance in evaluating the economic activity of gas
enterprises. It is computed as the ratio of total profit to

productive capital and shows the profit society obtains per

ruble of productive resources expended. However, in the practical
work of p anning deposit development, this indicator is still not
widely used. It permits relating the efficiency of capital
investments in deposit development with the system of

enterprise profit and loss indicators and gives consideration

to real investment recovery periods for deposit development (1).

51
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
P011 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l. Indicators of the Efficiency of the Development
of Promising Dcnosits in the Koni ASSR

o...-

Unrepentant no
polar-n Ipouzlun

(I‘)

 

    
      

 

mm (71
of canons» -
"III "II no
OMIIOIII C

       

oﬁ.lg%19
1 0 )Ma m-hpcul .
$10 - 11mm". s.a 1.3 e 4.5 «.6 w x3 . 7.8
(10 . ZWIMIOI 6.4 {.3 6.5 15.2 ”1.8. 11 7.9
(1 0 . 3 IMO. 7.5 ‘08 ‘os 1‘o3 so? 8 90°
1 0 . 4 I“ 9.: ‘o: ‘05 I," . so! 5 1006
$1 1130 eoumopoul . .
1 l . 1 ocean-oxen 9.2 6.1 4.5 19.0 5.2 ' C 10.7
‘ 1 . 2 ml“ 9.3 ‘0‘ ‘os 19.9 3.1 ‘ 10.3
$1 1 . 3 nume- 14.7 6.1 0.5 25.3 -2.3 - 16.2
1 2 )Cpuno-Imowul
‘1 2 ,1 venom-cannon. 13.9 3.0 4.5 22.2 0.0 . 3 15.4
(1 2 o zﬁ‘. - no: 30' ‘05 3°08 '1.“ . ' ‘ 2‘00
(1 2 - 3323”” 01.5 ‘ 3.3 1.5 49.3 ~25}: ~ - «3.0
Key: 1. Deposit by 10. Nar'yan-Marskiy
Region of 10.1. Layavozhskoye
Province 10.2 Vaneyvisskoye

2. Calculated Costs, 10.3. Vasilkovskoye

rubles per 1,000 m3 10.4. Kunzhinskoye
3. For extraction ll. Verkhne-Pechorskiy
11.1. Rassokhinskoye
4, For geological explor- 11.2. Pachginskoye
atory work and trans- 11.3. Kur'inskoye
portation to Ukhta 12. sredne-Pechorskiy
S. For transportation from 12.1. Pechorokizhvinskoye
Hkhta to Center 12.2. Pechorogorodskoze
6. Total 12.3. Zapadno-Soplyas oyc
7. Effect from the use of

gas in cowparison with
closing cost fuel.
rubles per 1,000

. Profitability

. Minimal necessary transfer
price for enterprise.
including deductions for
geological exploratory
work. rubles per 1,000 m3

‘OCD

52
FOR OFFICIAL. L'SE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The profitability 1eVe1 involves many interacting factors which
depend on initial reserves, well productivity, development
conditions, gas extraction technology and processes, production
organization, and others. It is related to the coefficient of
the economic efficiency of deposit development, E, which is

the relationship of profit to capital investment. If, as a
result of the measure. suggested. the coefficient of efficiency
is lower than the norm (En) the expenditures are not justified
within the sector pay off period. For example, if in industry
En - 0.12, the production profitability level should not be
less than 12 percent, i.e. the margins for the economically
rational development of a deposit are determined by the

conditions E is greater than or equal to 0.12, or T is less
than or equal to 8.3 years.

As practical experience has indicated, at large, high production
rate deposits the coefficient of efficiency is quite high, while
at medium and small production rate deposits it is low. Small
and capital intensive deposits will have coefficients of effic-
iency less than 0.12 (see Table 1).

At the Timano-Pechora province several groups of promising dep-
osits are distinguished by the level of prime costs:

Low cost hydrocarbon resources (2-3 rubles per 1,000 m3) -
Layavoznskoye, Vasilkovskoye, Vaneyvisskoye;

Medium cost (4-5 rubles per 1,000 m3) - Kur'inskoye,
Rassokhinskoye, Pechginskoye:

High cost (6.7 rubles per 1,000 m3) - Kur'inskoye, Pechorokozh-
vinskoye';

Very high cost (9-15 rubles per 1,000 m3) - Pechorogorodskoye,
Zapadno-Soplyanskoye

The efficiency of developing the majority of these deposits

is beyond the limits of the cut off for capital inVestment
recovery. However, the enterprise price for gas (6 rubles per
1,000 m ) does not give an objective evaluation of the absolute
efficiency. Since part of the gas field profits are used by

the enterprise to tranSport gas, some authors (1,2) recommend
calculating the coefficient of capital investment efficiency
not within the framework of a single deposit, but from the
perspective of the gas sector (50). Table I shows the coeffic-
ients of efficiency for the developing of deposits with con-
sideration given to costs and profits for transportation enter-

prises in the sales of gas to consumers in the Komi ASSR and
the Center of the nation. The total efficiency of capital invest-

ments calculated in this way is higher than for a gas field,

however, E0 is greater than or equal to En only for three
deposits in the province. 53

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In connection with the nation's growing scarcity of gas, espec-
ially in the European sections, one should attempt to find con-
ditions under which develonlng the low production rate deposits
would he economically ustifiable. A recovery period within the
norm can be attained t rough increasing well flow and reducing
the cost of well installation and field development. However,
this is not now always doneu

Changes in existing enterprise transfer prices for gas could

also help improve profitability. The minimal transfer price, P
for obtaining the necessary rofit and compensating for enter-
priSe expense! is found hy t e recOVery formula.

T- K

-——_——-

(Qr(p ' 5)

 

- K .
p Qrwr .8 ”$8.8“

Where: K - Total capital inVestments for the development
of the deposit

kud . Relative capital investments

T - Norm pay off period (8.3 years)
Q8 - Annual gas extraction
5 - Prime cost for the extraction of 1,000 m3 of gas.

That is, product transfer price should, at a minimum be equal

to calculated costs and differentiated for enterprises with
regard to their size. In gddition, it is necessary to increase it
by 1.5 rubles per 1,000 m in order to compensate for costs for
geological exploratory work (GRR). Thi means that if gas prices
were increased to 8 rubles per 1,000 m , the development of the

Layavozhskoye and Vaneyvisskoye deposits would become feasible
if increased to ll rubles per 1,000 m , then the development of

the Kumzhinskoye, Rassokhinskoye, Pachginskoye deposits, etc.
would become feasible (see Table I).

To the extent that the marginal value of prices are closing
costs, reflecting the level of socially necessary costs to
satisfy requirements in cases of lack of output (I), the problem

of the Kossibility of increasin enter rise gas transfer prices
should e soIVed on the basis 0 the d fference between costs

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for closing output in regions of its consumptiou and calculated

costs for the exploration. extraction. and transportation. of
gas to consumers.

Calculated cests for geological exploration work and transport-
ation of gas from the city of Ukhta and then on to the Center
of the nation are calculated for four arbitrary regions of
the Komi ASSR. The difference between closing cost and these
costs determines the maximum allowable calculated costs for

gas extraction in the region of the deposits (Table 2). or
the limiting maximum price for gas sales.

Table 2. Calculated Costs for Gas Extracting Regions of
the Timano-Pechorskaya Province

—————-—_—______—____

Costs Nar- an Verkhne- Credne- North

Mars oy Pechorskiy Pechorskiy east
________________________________________________________________

Calculated Costs
For geological

exploratory

work 3,4 5.7 3.8 6.5
For transportation

to Ukhta 0.9 0.4 - 0.5

For mainline trans-
portation from Ukhta
to the Center 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5

Maximum allowable cal-
culated costs for gas
extraction 14.2 12.4 14.7 11.5

Closing costs 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.0

In comparing the calculated minimal necessary price for the
enterprise (see Table l) with the marginal cut off for cal-
culated extraction costs by region (Table 2) we come to the
conclusion that these prices cannot be set for all deposits

in the province. For the last four (see Table l) the necessary
prices exceed the maximum allowable costs (or prices) for gas

extraction. Consequently, one can See that their development
is not now advisable.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In solving the problem of deposit development efficiency. it

is not sufficient to estimate the national economic efficiency
only through determining comparative efficiency. It is necessary
to simultaneously determine the absolute efficiency of capital
investments in development, comparing the coefficient of

efficiency (or profitability)with the normed efficiency coeffic-
ient of the sector.

For deposits where E is less than or equal to En one should
look at conditions under which their development will be
sufficiently profitable. This includes the possibility of
Changing transfer prices for field output. f this requires
setting a transfer price hi her than the allowable cost

for gas extraction (closing? in the region of consumption minus
costs for geological exploratory work and transportation, it

is not economically adv sable to develop the deposit.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Urison, a. s.. Tyshiar, r. s., khosh, n. u. "Ekonomikn
razrahotka azov Rh mestorozhdeni " (Economics of the
eve opment o .as epos ts bscow, Nedra, 1973, p 297.

2. Brents, A. 9., Gandkin, V. Ya., Urison. G. S. "Ekonomika
azodob va ushcbe rom shlennosti'") (Economics of
the Gas Extraction Industry) Voscow Nedra, 1975, p 248
3. Gandkin, V. Ya., Shamis, L. V., Shpakov. V. A., "Economics

of the Efficiency of Degosit Development and Introduction"
EKONOMIKA GAZOVOY PROMY HLENNOSTI, Moscow, VNIIBgazpron,
1976, No 5, pp 3-6.

COPYRIGHT: VNIIEgezprom, 1979

11.576
C50: 1822

56
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

UDC 622.279.S.003.14

PRIME COST OF GAS DEPOSITS

Moscow GAZOVAYA PRONYSHLENNOST'. SERIYA: EKONOMIXA GAZOVOY
PROVYSHLBNNOSTI in Russian No 1, Jan 79, pp 25-29

[Article by N. M. Soshnin (Sevkavniigaz, G.S.Urison-(VNIIga:)]

[Text1 in accordance with the presently existing organizational
structure, the majority of gas field administrations (CPU) for
gas extraction, or administrations for gas extraction and trans-
portation (UDTG) include several gas deposits. For exa la. in
976 the Kuban'gazprom[ Kuban gas industry Association had
developed 25 gas and gas condensate deposits, including the
Krasnodarskoye UDTG - lo, the Kanevskoye GPU - 12, and the
Maykopskoye DOT - 3. In existing report rocedures expenditures
are considered for the GP" as a whole wit out distribution to
individual deposits. The GPU's individual deposits differ sig-
nificantly with regard to their geological and technical charac-
teristics, and correspondingly their economic characteristics.
In order to analyze economic activity, determine deposit develop-
ment efficiency, and ascertain basic directions for the inprove-
ment of economic indicators it is necessary to define costs for
each deposit under examination. Such studies are being Iade by
workers at scientific research organizations or gas extracting
enterprises. However, the methodology for allocating costs has
not yet been developed and studies uSe different methods for
allocating overall costs between individual deposits. A simpli-

fied method for determining costs for individual deposits is
suggested.

in accordance with existing instructions, the planning, account-

ing and calculation of gas and condensate extraction prime costs

is carried out by the following computational class of
expenditure:

Auxiliary materials (reagents)

Basic. supplementary wages and deductions for social
of productive workers;

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Expenditures for production preparation and deVelopment;

Well amortization;

Expenditures for the maintenance and operation of field equipment;
Expenditures for preparing (compressing) gas;

Expenditures for the intr field transportation of condensate;

Shop expenditures:

General field expenditures:

Other field expenditures;

Non-production expenditures.

Some of these classes - wages, amortization of wells, costs of

as preparation - can be calculated directly for each deposit.
Expenditures for auxiliary materials can also be determined by
calculation: by multiplying the quantity of gas extracted at
deposits and the relative expenditure of auxiliary materials.
Expenditures for intrafield transportation of condensate are also
calculated directly if they are spent tor one field. If, howeVer.
condensate transportation is for a group of deposits, costs

for individual deposits are determined preportionally to the
amount of condensate trans orted. In calculating gas extraction
prime cost, well amortizat on has its own section. The amort-
ization of other fixed capital is included under the expend-
itures for maintenance and operation of field equipment, and
under shop and general field expenditures. However, in the
"Estimate of production costs", the total sum of amortization

is calculated. By subtracting well amortization from it one can
determine the amortization of other fixed capital for GP".
The resulting figure is broken down into individual deposits

proportionally to the value of fixed capital (without wells) of
one deposit.

Expenditures for all other classes of costs - shop, general

field, for the maintenance and operation of field equipment (minus
amortization) are all comprehensive. They should be distributed
among individual deposits. The magnitude of these costs depends
upon a number of factors, however, the most important are the
number of oKerating wells and the volume of gas produced. To
determine t ese expenditures for individual deposits the following

formula can be used: pi 0i
x- “-".
0 P q
._______________
2
Where:
K0 - Is a coefficient reflecting thesshare of wells and

gas extraction of individual deposits in the
total amount of wells and gas extraction in the

administration, in shares of units

Pi and p - Operating wells by deposit and administration
Qi and q - Gas and econdensate extraction by deposit and CPU
58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI‘.I ONLY

Table 1 presents the calculation of gas extraction prine costs
for the Kuban'gazpron Association and individual gas field
administrations, Table 2 giVes the structure of operating expend-
itures calculated according to the suggested classification.

Table 1. Calculation of the Prime Cost of Gas and Condensate

by Administration of the Kuban'gazprom Association
for 1976

   

  

  
    

     

craru sarpar 13.0%» ' = -- . n °
1 "'“u also”; lune-one. lasagna
‘ ’ (4‘3" )’
(6) (”.221‘333‘” ””9”" «o m m m
7 (know I mammal - .
( ) napeostaan naara apaaalaaor-
"W "assumes.
i3:::::' 1165 266 sea 215
(3) messages" ' °°' 23 - a e 7
(9) “ems-m eauua mm :6“ 33m 2826
norm? rammed. - -'
'J’o‘pﬁzugu ' men we - mo mo
(llm‘ﬁ'uﬁagi'w onea'r'ao- ' 15:2 - 85 ' (7
12 «was». mean {046 1591 1654 ~ 801
El 3 a "enemas psalms I9 I! 'I G

Total zsocs mm 12m 566!
Note: £5§¥§ cost calculated without compensating for GVR

Key:

1: Class of cost 11. Expenditures for

2. Association intrafield transport-

3. Krasnodarskoge ation of condensate

4. Kanevskoye G U

S. Maykopskoye 12. General field expend-

itures

6. Auxiliary materials 13. Other field expend-

(reagents) itures

7. Basic and supplementary
wages of production workers
including deductions for
social insurance

8. Expenditures for production
preparation and development

9. Well amortization

10. Expenditures for the maintenance
and operation of field equipment

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Breakdown of Operating Expenditures for Gas Extract-
ion Following Recommended Methodology (Percent of

Total)
Administration
Class of rnsno ar- anevs oye ay ops oye
Expenditure skoye UDTG GPU UDTG
Auxiliary
materials
(reagents) 1.3 1,4 2.2

Basic and supplem-
entary wages of pro-
duction workers.
including deductions

for social insurance 2.4 5.6 3.8

Well amortization 50.5 27.3 49.9
Amortization of

other fixed capital 16.9 29.8 21.2

Other expenditures 28.9 35.9 22.9
WWW—

As can be seen from tables 1 and 2 the prime cost structure

is dominated by expenditures for well amortization. maintenance
and operation of field equipment (the latter section includes
expenditures for installing low temperature separation equipment
and gas collection networks). Outlays for these two classes
amount to about 80 percent of operating expenses.

Using this methodology, calculations were made of gas extract-

ion prime costs in the largest deposits in the Kuban'gazprom
Association (Table 3)

It is obvious from Table 3 that gas extraction prime costs for
individual deposits differ significantly from the average for
the CPU. Thus. gas extraction prime cost at the Starominskoye
deposit, was 3.3 fold and for t e Leningradskoye 4.6 fold higher
than the average prime cost.for the Kanevskoye GPU, while at

the Kanevskoye and Kushchevskoye deposits the figures were
1.8 - 1.9 fold lower.

Thus. the suggested method for allocating operating expenditures
permits calculating costs for the development of individual
deposits and determining the economic economic efficiency, as

well as setting the most important directions for the imprOVe-
ment of gas field administration management activity.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. Calculation of the Prime Cost of Gas Extraction
for the Kuhan'gazprom Association in 1976,
Thousands of Rubles.

Inromom no gnpu- radon. Q)
man

°'¢°"'"' nnmn- u run ‘ A
W“) tom ”‘33" W

   
  
 

 
  

   
      
  
 

(1) .
001‘.“qu no. more ram 169 668 w
(11) a to- uou no noto-
wmnunu ,

(12) mmoa m so me as no.0 1257 1.00
13 mm». ma 4 125 .as «3.0 221 [MS
14 Wu. . m v as 345 289 191 4.60
15 from.“ 1426 6 9’) one 422 223 10.79
16 mm 1416 a? 82 an an 666 1.75
17 Wm rm :6 112 m 651 as: 2.5"

(1 3 Manama 1111‘.er [(268 146 266 .1664 1200 3265 10m

(19 I 1:- MM no WYO-

puma-nu

(20) Boom-o. 3244 46 SI 1475 571 I“! 9.36
21 communion 601 I! 20 . 559 It" ‘90! 9.4?
22 Holman 2m 46 a? L250 434 612 7.17-

( 3 Iuoaeaao rm. more 5664 123 . 216 was 1m 1;»!!! 13.10

( 24) 3:33; Wm“ "33°“ can m m 2065 an 1154 30.91

 

Totam am 430 mu n-a'is «no we 5.37

x) Includes expenditures for gas and condensate

extraction
Key:
1. Deposit (by 12. Kanevskoye
administration) 13. Leningradskoye
2. Annual operating 14. Chelbasskoye
expendituresx 15. Staroninskoye
total 16. Kushchevskoye
3. Including 17. Krylovskoyc
4. Auxiliary materials 18. Krasnodarshoye UDTG, total
5. "ages 19. Including the following
6. Well amortization deposits
7. Amortization of other 20. Berezanskoyc
fixed capital 21. Serdyukovskoye
8. Other costs 22. Nekrasovskoye
9. Prime cost of gas 23. Maykopskoye UDTG. total
extraction, rubles 24. Including the Maykopskoye
per 1,000 m deposit
10. Kanevskoye GPU total
11. Including the following
deposits
copvnmrr: VNIIEgazpron, 1979
1157!.
cso: 1822 END
61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY