FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10385

I5 March 1982

South and East Asia Report

(FOUO 1/82).

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR omcw. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SOUTH AND EAST ASIA REPORT

(£000 1/82)
Coureu'rs
INDIA
Btiefo
Anti-Ship “upon Sync-
INDONESIA
Bucuciom, Peu’ecution (teatime in But Tim:
(33".un Olﬂiozm1M-Asn, 28 so, 81) 00000000000000000
0! Sign. Biuut rude audit to 1960000210
(Richud Cowper; muncm. ms, 1 tab 82) ...............
KMEMGEA

Comopondant Vida hunched; Interview nut: 80!!
(8m max. 13 ’.b 82) 0.00...OOOOOOOOOQOOOIOOOOOO.I...

-a- [III-ASIA-IO'
BRIEI’S

ANTI-SHIP moss SYSTEM-Judie plans to purchase an anti-ship haliborna weapons
systea. At least two competing system have been considered for this important
purchase. Aerospatiale (France) has proposed the Exocet-Super Puma of which it is
the sole producer. This systen consists of the AS.332 heavy helicopter with a
loaded weight of 7.6 tons and a carrying capecity of 3.8 tone which includes two
Exocet AH 39 air-sea missiles (or four As 15 TI light niesiles with a range of 15
kilometers). The All 39 missile weighs 658 kilograms. is 6.7 meters long with a
mxieun range of from 50 to 70 kilonstere depending on the launcher and the altitude.
This systen has already been used in combat by Iraq to sink three Iranian warships.
Hatra (France) and 010 Helara (Italy) have submitted the Otouat-Sea King systen
for which they are co-producere of the missile. This is the first presentation of
the air to sea version of the Otonst on which research began several years ago.

The sea to sea version of the 0toeat has a range of frost 100 to 160 kilmtera
depending on whether or not it is launched with an in-flight booster. India has
already purchased the French Magic. Durendel. 'etc. rocket launchers and missiles
and is presently negotiating the purchase of Mirage 2000 aircraft. [Text] [Paris
AIR ET COSMDS in French 20 Feb 82 p 65] [COPYRIGarz A. a c. 1982]

t 0: 4200/24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

muons, P08360110! CONTINUE IN 3481‘ mm
Perie AFRIQUB-ASIB in trench No 249, 28 Sep 81 p 30

[Article by Enrique anrio: "silent Death"]

[Text] "Any government or organivzion which gives aid and
aseiatance to the government of Indoneeia ie guilty of.
coqlicity in aggreaeion. Convertely. any govern-ent or

any organization which given aid and aeeietance to Beat Tinor.
the aggreeaor'e victin, ie only carrying out ita inter-
..national duty." .(Perlenant Tribunal of the Peoplca - June 1981)

 

Between one-eixth and one-third of the Hanbere people
liquidated by the Indonesian

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

East Timer, located at the and of the Sunda Archipelago, stretches over 19,000 sq

kn. It has had as any as 700,000 inhabitants. It was a Portuguese colony for
3 centuries.

After the Portuguese revolution of August 1975. a confused situation case about in
which mm. the people's novenent of the Maubere nation. took control of the
country with weapons in hand. On 28 nova-bar 1975 the Denocretic Republic of East
Ti-or was set up, providing itself with the inatrunanta of govern-ant. but was not
recognized by Portugal.

0n 7 Decenber the Indonesian and forces invaded the new state. The battles were
bloody and brought about the death of sons 200.000 Tinnrians. In 1976 Indonesia
annexed Beat Tinor, asking it the 27th Indonesian province. Since then the fighting
has continued, and so has the attaapt to annihilate the laubere people. in silence.

Could it be that East Tinor's Haubere people, a poor people anong poor peoples, are
an accursed people. as legend has it? The fact renains that since Dace-bar 1975
the Indonesian military dictatorship has been continuing the genocide of the

Tinorian people with the sane brutality it had brought to bear on its own people.
and anid nearly global indifference.

Starting on 6 Deceder I975 Indonesian troops dual-barked at Dili, the capital. And
the massacre began i-ediataly. At nine in the morning 27 civilians. nest of then
woun, were shot on the docks in the presence of a large crowd smelled to witness
the execution. In the afternoon 59 nan were again shot in the sane place. Then
there were the Chinese, gunned down by the dozens.

Indonesians do not take prisoners of war. They are all shot. According to the
International Red Cross, there has been a practice of axterninating entire

families of FRETILIN officials up to the third generation. Thus. in July 1979 seven
persons were executed: father, anther and five children related by narriage to
loboto, the head of PRETILIN.

As for political prisoners. their fate is a terrible one in the 60 prisons in which
they undergo torture and are alnost coapletely deprived of food.

This policy of terror, which is exacerbated by mum's strong resistance, is
acconpanied by the systenatic pillaging of the country. For exane, nearly all
fern vehicles and tractors have been seized and sent to Indonesia. Residential
districts are looted and than shelled. Entire villages are destroyed and their
populations nassacred, noved out or chased into the nountains. About 200,000 to

300,000 people have been placed in this fashion under pernanent supervision in
"resettlensnt areas.”

As of 1976 the Indonesian Church eetinated the nuﬁer of deaths at 100,000. my
free organized starvation. According to the Australian diplonet Jin Dun [as
published] the Indonesians were said to have liquidated between a sixth and a
third of the Haubere population. This genocide is continuing, benefiting on the

one hand fron the complicity of Western govern-sets and on the other hand fro. the
lack' of knowledge and indifference of najor currents of opinion. Who knows any-

thing about the Haubera people? And how Iany people one talks to can even say
where Bast Tiasr is located? Silence has been effectively naintained by nearly
all international udia.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anerican Military Aid

To be sure, the issue has been put before the United Netiona. But starting with
the Under 1976 General Madly the United States has been able to iwoae the
one point of view of the fascist Indonesian nilitary.

Over and above this diplomatic aupport,the Indonesian invadere have had the benefit
of constant and sizable financial and military aid, coming in the first inetence
from the United States. For 1975 alone the Americana eupplied 16 anti-guerrilla
aircraft, 65 tanka. and 3 0-130 heavy transport aircraft for the ‘rinor war. Be-
tween the beginning of the aggression and 1979 Washington supplied $250 million of
military aid. Then, while Portugal failed by abmdoning the Timorians to their
executioners, other governmenta gave political or nilitary aid to the Indonesian--
Australia. Great Britain. France. the tederal Republic of Germany, end Rolland.

All supplied specialised military equipment or aaeured Djakarta'e leaders of their
support.

At the conclusion of an investigation. the Per-anent Tribunal of the Peeples was
able to eeteblish in June 1981 that the govern-ant of Indonesia has been guilty of

hr crises and genocide and that the government of the United Stetea ha been
ﬂilty of coaplicity in aggression.

Bowever, if world opinion does not seize on the fate of the Haubere people. soon
there will not be anything more than a few slaves and mean graves left in East
Timor. -

comm: 1981 Afrique-Aaie

9631
080: 6200/2

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Uri-lulu. use. URL!

MIA

UK SIGNS BIGGEST TRADE CREDIT T0 INDONESIA
P11011509 London FINANCIAL IDES in English 1 Feb 82 p 26
[Biepetch by Richard Cowper: "UK Gives Indonesia 125}! Pound Credit"]

[Excerpt] Jakarta—Lord earrington, the foreign secretary. signed Britain's
biggest ever trade credit to Indonesia at the weekend.

He is in Jakarta on the first leg of a two-week tour of countries belonging to
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASBAN) .

He also lent weight to a British industry bid to boost trade and invest-ent with
ASBAN's largest and potentially richest nation.

The credit agrth will provide up to $225 to help pay for a sun expansion
of Indonesia's oil refinery st Balikpapan in east Kalinantan. The British sub-
sidiary of the Marian-owned Bechtel group won the contract to construct a
200,000-berrels per-day refinery expansion last year following the successful,
solution of a najor trade dispute between Britain and Indonesia over textile
quotas. ‘

Announcing the deal Lord Csrrington said Britain had a skittish in Indonesia in
1980 over textile inports. but that now relations between the two countries had
never been better.

"More than 100 British firms will supply a wide variety of goods for Bechtel
(Great Britain) the Iain contractors, I think this is a striking esranple of the

increasing conpetitiveness of British financial services and of British nanufec-
turers," he said.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1982

080: (0220/226

FOIOFIICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

musmm;mmm
msmmmmamiamu [pagenotgiven]

[Interviewbynideom Mathis-easier) “www.mputyl’renierof
WWthateendpleoemtgiml

[Text] Ever since the invasion of Phnon Penh by Vietnan Forces
in January. 1979, the "Government of Democratic Kanpuchea"
has obstinately been countering Vietnam and its lackey regime
by means of long-term guerrilla warfare. I held an interview
with IENG SARY, a leader, in the jungle in embodia, where the
disasterous situation continues in the midst of the violent war
fires.

It was on January 16 that Vietnamese troops occupying Cambodia invaded
Thai territory. Heavily equipped units of 300 men atteupted to attack
troops of Democratic Kaupuchea which are dispersed in the border area.

Violent battles which began all of a sudden resulted in terrible
confusion in the border area. 300 villagers who were involved in the war
fires became refugees. flowing into Thai territory. The Thai Government
Forces finally intervened to push the Vietnamese forces back into Cambodian
territory. Battles finally calned down on the 20th of this month.

M days later, or on the 22nd. I headed frown Bangkok to the embodian
border by car. My purpose was to see the leader of the Government of

"Democratic Kanpuchea" which commands guerrilla warfare against the
200,000-nan Vietnaeeae Forces.

He drove for about four hours at 100 kiloueters per hour to enter
Aranya Prsthet, a town on the border. At the edge of the town, there
were trenches, and Thai soldiers were keeping an eye on the border with
their hands on heavy nachine-guns. Trucks of the Thai Government Forces,
fully loaded with soldiers and materials, were busily rolling back and
forth. We were approaching the front where embers from the battle had
not burned out yet.

Our automobile which had been running down a flat, straight road,
which is particular to Thailand, suddenly entered a side-road. The desolate

6
FOR OFFICIAL NEWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plain was the scenery of the area: We drove down an unpaved rocky road for
a_ while. There was astream in front of us.

It was a stream called Klang Luk (TN: phonetic) which divides Thailand
from Cambodia.

A man appeared innediately. lie was LON NORIN (TN: phonetic) of
the Foreign hinistry of "Dewczutic Kanpuchea." He visited Japan as the
head of a delegation from "Democratic Kampuchea," last year.

"I have not seen you for a long time. Release to Kanpuchea."
He stretched out his arms with a warm smile.

There was a bridge made of woven bamboo stalks across the stream

The bridge squeeked when we walked on it. We took a few steps to cross
the bridge. We were in Canbodian territory. Banana forests spread as
far as our eyes reached. There were several houses as if they were
trying to hide behind the big banana leaves. The pillars were made of
bamboo stalks, and the roofs were covered with thatch. Villagers whose
facial expressions were calm, as if they did not know about the war
going on, were watching us leisurely.

 

He passed the banana forests, and took a path into the jungle. The
tropical sunshine was piercingly hot, but it was cool in the shadows.
After we walked for a while, an open area which was made by clearing the
jungle appeared all of a sudden. There was a small but with a thatched roof.
It seems that this is the "guest house" of the Government of "Democratic
Kampuchea."

We waited for a while. Then, a nan slowly appeared from the jungle.
His big physique was wrapped in gray pants and a blue sweater. He wore
vinyl sandals. He is IENG SARY, the Vice Premier and Foreign Hinister
of the Government of "Detnocratic Kampuchea."

"0h, Hr. SARY! Are you alright?"
I run up to him on impulse. His big hands firmly grasped nine.

Fighting Spirit of Vietnamese Forces Declining

Lunch was ready at the place of our interview. IDIG SARY served us
Cambodian dishes, which his soldiers brought in. Hhile eating, we heard
guns roaring. It was said that battles were continuing in a place
approximately 35 kilometers from this place on that day, too.

Our talks began, as we were having lunch.

-- Will you tell us the combat situation?

”MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The Vietnamese Forces are deploying approximately three divisions in
the neighborhood of the Thai border. After January 16, they sent 300
men under cover of darkness into Thai territory in an attempt to flank us,
front and back,and attack us. Their purpose was to occupy the area where
we are now. The enemy fired 130 millimeter-guns at this place. However,

because we fought back fiercely, the enemy has now retreated to Mt.
Phnom Malay (TN: phonetic) in the South.

-- Have the battles against the Vietnam Forces developed in your favor?

"Some areas are being occupied by Vietnamese troops. They are
successfully publicizing the fact in a big way to international society.
However, as a whole, we are enlarging the areas under our control."

-- Hill you explain that to me a little more in detail?

"There was an offensive by Vietnamese Forces in the North in
November, last year. As a result, we lost many villages. However,
after December, we continued our counter-attack to liberate the occupied
villages. In the Kompong Sham District in the Nest, our troops re-
captured several important bases. Our continuous attack is harassing the
Vietnamese Forces. They deployed a big unit near the Mekong River, but
were forced to move it. At present, we can operate freely.

"In the Kho Kong (TN: phoentic) District in the South, persistent
attacks by our forces were too successful for the enemy to do anything.
The sixth and eighth Vietnamese Divisions stationed in the District exhausted

their strength as a result of our frequent attacks. Their combat power
is weakening."

-; How about Vietnamese Porces' fighting spirit?

"It is declining. For example, their offensives used to be limited
only to the dry season. However, they could not take any action even
during the dry season which began in October, last year. We have a
military advantage. The Vietnamese Forces deploy about 5,000 soldiers
along the border. Because they have been stationed in a foreign land

during the past three years, they are suffering from malaria in the jungle
and their fighting spirit is declining."

A young man interpreted into English for me IENG SARY's answers in
the Cambodian language. The Vice Premier continued talking quietly and
slowly. A bird was singing in an outstandingly beautiful voice in the
nearby forest.

Hill Not Accept Promsals for Anti-Vietnam Lhited Front

Ever since spring, last year, there has been the upsurging motive
for forming In anti-Vietnam‘ lhited front, for which all danestic anti-
Vietnam forces will concentrate in order to counter the 200,000 Vietnamese
troops who have been sitting in Cambodia since the invasion.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

._ -—

Consequently, three factions of the anti—Vietnam group in Cambodia
(Democratic Kanpuchea troops = former POL POT Regime, miner Serika (TN:
phonetic) = sown SAN Faction, and the Khmer Isarak (TN: phonetic) =
SIHANOUK Faction continued consultations as often as nine times in
Bangkok, Thailand. Accordingly on November 2n. last year, the following
were proposed:

(1) At the Coalition Government of Democratic Kanpuchea, which is
to be established at this meant, each faction will maintain its own
character, and also will be able to publicize its own political platform
freely in connection with the future of Kampuchea.

(2) The Coalition Government will strive to attain two major points,
namely (a) the early withdrawal of the Vietnamese Forces and a political
settlement, and (b) the declaration of an international conference on
Cambodia which will enable the Kampuchean people to decide on the form of their
Government in accordance with free elections held by the UN.

Because the Proposal was drafted by the Foreign Minister of Singapore,
it is called the "Singaporean Proposal."

The SIHANOUK Faction and the SONN SAN Faction agreed to the ‘proposal
in principle, while only Democratic Kampuchea alone sought a grace period
of two months in order to look into the Proposal.

The deadline for a reply was only the next day. Would the "Anti-
Vietnam united Pront" be formed successfully, or not? World attention
was drawn to "Demcratic Kampuchea's" reply.

Hhen I held an interview with Prince SIHANOUK in Pyongyang, North
Korea in April, last year, the Prince said "I will take action in the
near future in order to protect my homeland. If the three anti-Vietnam
factions rise, we will be able to expel the Vietnamese Forces." The
statement was made iunediately after the talks between the Prince and
Prime Minister KHIEU SAHPHAN of Democratic Kampuchea.

I started talking about it.

-- The deadline for replying to the Singaporean Proposal is
tomorrow, but . . .

"Under the present circmstances, it is regrettable that our people
and our Forces cannot accept the Proposal. However, we greatly appreciate
the fact that various people in the ASEAN countries are-concerned about us."

IENG SARY's words were very frank.

-- Will you tell us why you do not accept the Proposal?

"th do we not accept even such a loose coalition? If you went to the
front and gather opinions held by people who are fighting on the battle-

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

field, you should be able to understand clearly why the Proposal is not
acceptable to us. Both the general masses and our soldiers, or all the
people who are combatting the Vietnamese invaders, share the opinion. I
intend to reply firmly to the sincere leaders of the ASEAN countries. We
are trying to create a coalition government by disbanding the Khmer

Rouge (Cambodian Communist Party) for the survival of the people. As long
as time permits, we intend to pursue that.

I think that the Foreign Minister of Singapore will understand that,
if we explain it to him."

Impermissible Suppression by Militﬂ Power

He made his posture clear to us before he makes an official reply
to the ASEAN proposal which was presented by Singapore as a representative.

0n the night when the talks were held, I returned to Bangkok. At a
press conference there, I announced the "reply." Local and Japanese news-
papers reported that "Democratic Kampuchea rejects Proposal." However,
this is wrong. IENG SARY's reply did not mean to reject the Proposal.

It means that he will continue to strive to form a united front,

henceforth, too. ' W‘
The ASEAN countries quickly reacted to the "reply" which I 3"
brought. On the 23rd, a Thai Government source announced right

away that "Persons of the ASBAN countries in charge of the problem will
hold consultations."

"hat is important is the military situation inside Cambodia. The“

200 ,OOO-man Vietnamese Forces are forced to wage difficult combat. Also,
the Forces of Democratic Kampuchea are proud of the reality that they are
the ones who actually combat the Vietnamese forces. I think that because
they are in a militarily favorable position, they are confident of
thinking that at this moment it is not necessary to accept the Singaporean
"woposal- Incidentally, the strength of each group is as follows:

Democratic Kampuchea" 100,000-60,000 men, "miner Serika" 2,000-u,ooo men,
and "Khmer Isarak" several hundred men. Thus, there is no room to
doubt that "Democratic Kampuchea" is overwhelmingly strong and is actually
undertaking anti-Vietnam struggles.

In any case, we should not tolerate a foreign country sitting in a
neighboring country by means of military power, whatever reason there may
be. The Soviet Union insists obstinately that the country has advanced
into Afghanistan in accordance with a request from the Afghanistan Govern-
ment. In the case of Cambodia, it is said that that is because the P01. POT
Government acted cruelly. However, however rhetorically things may be
expressed, one cannot erase the fact of suppression of another ecuntry by
means of military power. In a village in the liberated districts of
"Democratic Kampuchea," I saw girls sharpening bamboo. 'mey were to be
buried at the bottom of pits. The Cambodian people are continuing to
resist Vientam, just like the Liberation Front resisted the US Forces
during the Vietnam War. Vietnam is being tormented by Cambodia in the
same way as Vietnam once used to torment the US Forces. Is this not the
fate of the "invader?" m

copmear: Kobunsha 1982 10

C50: 4105/66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY