FOR OFl-‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10598
18 June 1982

East Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

LFOUO 9/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
aation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/

18 June

EAST EUROPE REPORT

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(1’0th 9/82)

Coureurs

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

Church Seen Gaining 'Self-Awareness' Through Peace Movement.
(Dieter Bub; 8m, 15 Am. 82) ooooeeooo-oooooo-ooooocc

HnANb

Wroclaw Underground Response to Martial Law Reported
(THE SUNDAY Tms, 21Peb82) [COOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00....

Radio Luenbourg Envoy Reports Poland Visit
(Olivier “8391.01.18; LE POINT, 1"? Mar 82) o o o o o o o o I e I I o

-a- [III-EE-SB
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

CHURCH SEEN GAINING 'SBLP—AHARENBSS' THROUGH PEACE MOVEMENT

Hamburg STEIN in German Vol 35 No 16, 15 Apr 82 pp 2110,2132, 2M;

[Article by Dieter Bub: "GDR: The Cross With Peace--Hith the Church's
Support a Broad Peace Movement Is Being Formed in the SED Statn--Parﬁy
Leadership and State Security Service Intend to Suppress the Disarmament

Initiative"]

[Text] 0n Easter Saturday. thousands of young Christians prayed for peace

in Berlin and Potsdam. On 13 February. the anniversary of the destruction of
Dresden. 5,000 young people met at a peace forum in Dresden's Church of the
Cross. In Halle. 500 members of the Young Christians Movement marched through
the city in silence after a church service. 1.000 GDR citizens have so fer
signed the "Berlin Disarmament Appeal" of Pastor Rainer Bppelmann: in the
GDR too. a peace movement is forming-to the annoyance of the party and
closely watched by police and the State Security Service.

As early as 1965 the GDR bishops stated that refusal of military service-a
punishable action in the GDR-or the alternative service in the construction

units of the National People's Army (NVA) are more in keeping with the "peace
commitment of the church" than service with arms. One of these "construction
soldiers” was Rainer Bppelmann. the GDR peace pastor. After learning the
masons trade, Bppelmann was drafted in 1966 and was shortly afterwards
sentenced to 8 months in prison for refusing to obey orders. At that time
he decided to study theology. In 1975 he became pastor of the Good Samaritan
Parish in Berlin-Friedrichshain.

Ever since 1979 Pastor Bppelmann has been organizing youth church services
that were first attended by 250 people and now draw from 4.000 to 5.000

young people from all over the GDR. In songs, sermons and discussions the
participants deal with topics that are taboo in the GDR: the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan, e.g. was used to discuss the question of how the super powers
endanger peace. In the fall of last year. the strongly committed pastor-
puhlished the "Berlin Appeal." In it Bppelmann pleads for a cone free from
nuclear weapons in Europe, the "withdrawal of occupation forces from the GDR
and PRC" and the "neutralization of Germany."

But these demands oriented on the GDR supported 1957 plan :‘ the then Polish
foreign minister Adam Rapacki today seem dangerous to the SED leadership. In

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a telegram to the party basic organizations Erich lionecker called the Berlin
pastor an enemy of the state. Rainer nppelnann was arrested. interrogated
for 2 days and released only after intervention by the church leadership.

The first signers of the appeal were likewise sumoned to the State Security
Service and their apartments were searched. But the shock effect failed to

materialize. Up to now. 1.000 GDR citizens have signed the appeal. Their
number is growing each day.

The political comitment of the Berlin pastor is suspect not only to the SRD
but also to many GDR church conservatives who. especially in Saxony and
Thuringia. had avoided conflict and made compromises with the party leader-
ship. In the church of Berlin-Brandenburg. too. Rainer Eppelnann at first
found more opponents than friends. in spite of the fact that he does not want
to be a dissident and spokesman of a new 60!! opposition movement. He does not
want the role of either the CDR critic Robert Havemnn or of an underground
church leader of rebellious GDR youths. If he lived in the ERG. he would have
been among the opponents of nuclear power at Brokdorf and Hyhl. and one of

the peace demonstrators in Bonn last October.

Rainer Eppelnann has become the syli>ol of a new generation of pastors. vicars
and parish workers. They are the spokesmen for a Young Christians Movement
that is looking for a new orientation in socialist society.

To this movement belongs also Guenter Wonneberger. pastor of Dresden's
Weinberg Church. In the fall of 1980. his Young Christiana Movement caused
a stir with its demand for a special social service program (SOFD). The
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saxony and its Bishop Johannes llempel tried to
keep the explosive document out of circulation. But it was passed from
parish to parish and became known to the public at the Dresden Ecumenical
Conference last summer. During the following months, church leaders and
District Synods received 500 letters from groups and individuals who were
likewise in favor of a program for military service outside the National
People's Army.

But party and government leaders brusquely rejected the demand for a social
peace service program. Herner Halde. first secretary of the Cottbus Bezirk

management. called the wishes of the 801'!) followers "dangerous to peace" and
"hostile to the constitution." And Erich Honecker stated that alternate

military service has long been possible in the WA construction units.

Nevertheless, the Dresden initiative for a peace service program had its
effects. When on 13 February 5.000 persons from all over the country net at
the first peace forum of the GDR. many of then wore headbands with the slogan
"Hake Peace Without Arms." And on their coats they had sewn patches with
the slogan "Swords Into Plowshares." This disarmament slogan comes from the
Old Testament book of the Prophet Micah.

Klaus Gysi. state secretary for church affairs. was annoyed to notice at a
dance in Thuringia that these patches have meanwhile become "a regular
fsahion." Gysi requested that the church leadership prevent production.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distribution and use of these patches. Cysi was afraid that peace initiatives
disturb public order. They suggest that the state has an insufficient com-
mitment to peace. The GDR leadership. however. will not allow any limitation
of military power and its treaty obligations.

In about the same way as in the PRC. the CDR government directed a campaign
against the supporters of the peace movement. Radio GDR called them "blind,
deaf and hypocritical.” The official PDJ newspaper JUNGB WELT [Young World]
called the goal to make peace without arms "a suicidal illusion in view of
the aggressive aims of imperialism." In the GDR DEUTSCHB LEHRERZEITUNG

[German'Teachers' Journal] writer Wolfgang Tilgner spoke out in favor of
military strength and against disarmament: "Doesn't the formula 'Hake Peace

Without Arms' transform itself. as if at the hands of magicians. into man's
total capitulation before the very real-~because they are armed to the

teeth--forces of evil?"

In a speech before the Volkskammer, Defense Minister Hoffmann explained the
new and more stringent military service law by saying that the GDR needs
both swords and plowshares. And an SEE propaganda campaign for the National
People's Army is directed specifically against the peace movement: "Peace
must be defended-—peace must be armed!"

At the same time. the government exerts massive pressure against young people
wearing the patch "Swords Into Plowshares." In businesses. schools and
universities it is forbidden to wear peace symbols. In the streets, police
force pedestrians to remove peace patches from jackets and overcoats. In
Rudolstadt young people were beaten up in the streets by officials--just
because they wore the peace symbol. Students who did not remove the patches
were expelled from schools and universities.

The Protestant Church reacted to this massive pressure by the government with
unusual severity. A decision of the Hecklenburg Church states: "Orders

against wearing this symbol of worlddwide peace commitment destroy confidence
and do a disservice to internal peace." Especially older church members are

invited to become witnesses themselves and show their commitment to peace in
public.

The Thuringia Evangelical Lutheran Church Synod says in a letter to the
parishes: "Attacks against this symbol do not hit individual young people
alone but the entire church. The church stands beside the yOung people
wearing this symbol."

The Protestant Church in the GDR, which a year ago was still hesitant and
indecisive, has found new self-awareness and a new political challenge through
the members of the Young Christians Movement. A statement by the GDR Peder-

ntion of Protestant Churches declares that: "The commitment articulated in
the new peace movement has its roots in the entirely political realization
that contrary to all hopes it was not possible to counter the ever increasing
rearmament policies during the 35 years since the end of the Second World War
with effective and corrective peace strategies. The system of preventing

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

war through military deterrent as well as the concept of political detente
are subject to progressive erosion."*

In the leaflet of a Dresden initiative. distributed last week. GDR Christians
are called upon to oppose reamment and confrontation: "I want peace without
arms and force! I will not submit to ideologies but obey my conscience. I
will not believe in may images because the may image conceals the human
image."

*“Priedenbevesung in der DDR" (Peace Movement in the (:03), edition transit.
Scandica Publishers. Battingen, 12.80 marks

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG 5 Co

8889
cso: 2300/260

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

I HROCLAH INDERGMWD RESPONSE TO MARTIAL LA" REPORTED
1.0211100 London 1111?. SWDAY TIMES in English 21 Feb 82 p 9

[Text] Since martial law was declared in Poland more than 2 months ago,
the strength and determination of the outlawed Solidarity resist-ice
movement have been hard to measure, despite the lifting of censorship.
Now, from Poland's fourth largest city, Uroclaw, in Lower Silesia, cons
the first authentic account of the clandestine response to the military
takeover. Cal McCrystal reports.

These are extracts from the first full run of daily secret reports from a
Polish Regional Strike Counittee to reach the Rest. Snuggled out in a
parcel, they are a chronicle of events observed by the workers in the remote
university town and river port.

The extracts, from the underground canittee's newspaper from day to day,
show that popular support for Solidarity remains formidable, despite
attempts by the nartisl law authorities to flush out all resistmce.

--Issue No 18 (15/16 January): On 13 January, a Mass requested by the
Regimal Strike Comittee was celebrated by three priests at Wroclaw
Cathedral. .. One of the priests delivered a honily about Herod and his
atrocities.

...1{erod's people. he said, have gone through Poland, armed with pistols,
seizing from their homes the nation's best sons... A collection was taken
up for families of internees. The baskets overflowed.

".01 10 January at 10:15 pm 20110 stopped a can in the street and asked for
his papers. When he tried to take them from his pocket, he was hit on the
back of the head and on the eye with a truncheou. An ﬁulance took his:
to the hospital.

...ZOMO people then visited him in the hospital and examined him. One of
then said: "Oh, there's hardly any blood. He can't have been beaten
properly." The beaten man had been on his way to work and had a pass. He
will probably lose the sight of one eye.

5
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFF-10“. USE ONLY

...0n Poznanska Street two soldiers and a ZOHO were disarmed by the people
of Wroclaw. They set the soldiers free but the 20m nan was beaten up.

-Issue No 20 (20.21 January): PAPAHAG (Railway Works) was "pacified"

on 16 Dace-her. This is what-happened: At a meeting at noon most of us
vote for strike action. At 1 pa we hear tanks approaching. A 2080 colum
arrives on the bridge. Sane of the intelligentsia leave the plant after
the first appeal to "citizen workers." Others of the intelligentsia stay
on with the workers.

Barbara Litwiniuk (perhaps a Solidarity activist) has a chance to escape
but decides to share the plight of the others and stays. She sings and the
workers join in the national anthem, drowning out the voice of the 20m
officer with the loud-hailer. The production floor vibrates u m attack
in a wedge, grabbing Barbara and threatening the workers. Voices call out:
"peace, peace." The national snthen is sung again-never before has it come
so much from the heart. A IDHO officer threatens to use force. There is
silence. We are made to return to our respective sections...He cannot
believe what is happening.

...On 30 Decenber, Pranciszek Tyszko was returning hone from the grocery
shop. where_he is manager, on Ruska Street. It appeared that he had had a
drink. In front of his own door he was stopped by a zero patrol and beaten
up...He was taken to a drying-out clinic where he was hit twice in the
stomach. This burst his intestines.

After many days of great pain he died on 9 January in the railway hospital.
His family have been warned not to dislose the cause of death.

...In primary schools, the Militia and the Security Service question the
children--even those in first grade.

—Issue No 21 (22/23 January): Roman Skawinski, lecturer in political and
social sciences at the medical school (and a party medaer), was sacked after
appearing before a "verification comittee." On 12 January he was asked to
declare his loyalty to the party. lie replied: "In order to agree to this
loyalty oath I would have to place myself on the side of betrayal, atrocity.
falsehood and deprivation."

--Issue No 22 (28 January): On 27 January, zouo and the secret police
"pacified" the Municipal Transport Service's three largest depots--on
Tramwajowa Street and Grabiszynsks Street (where Solidarity's Lower Silesian
section had been formed). They searched all vehicles and offices. It is
not hard to guess they were hmting [for] (Hladyslaw) Frasyniuk (a Solidarity
leader). They consoled themselves by removing seven rolls of printing
paper. They are tilting at windmills....Hedical personnel who tried to
help the miners (at Hujek Mine) wre beaten by police. The report of the
Department of Health in Katowice says: "During the action in the mines,
intervention of the police affected medical personnel who helped injured
'niners. Five ambulance drivers and four nurses were beaten. Personnel
were dragged from the ambulances even though they wore white miforns.
Injuries were inflicted.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"From one albulance an injured miner was dragged out and was seen being
carried to the river...20n0 and doctors fought each other for injured miners.
zouo wanted to kill th-...A|i>ulances managed to evacuate only seven
dead..."

—Issue No 25 (110 Peburary): FADROHA (Construction Machinery) Plant--
workers pretend to work. They tell military personnel: "He are too
hungry, we have no energy."

.. .At Bialoleka internment carp, the prisoners decorated a snowman to
resemble General Jaruzelski, with dark glasses, epaulettes, etc. (The
Polish word, balwan. can mean both "snowman" and "retarded person"). The
carp comandant noticed the reselblance and shouted: "This is Jaruzelski."
The internees said: "No, no, it's a snowman."

"I say it's Jaruzelski."

"Not so. It's a snowman."

The counsndant then went into his office and consulted someone. He
re-emerged. demanding that the snowman be demolished.

The internees cried: "But this is Jaruzelski."

"No, no. it's a snowman," the oomandant said and threatened them all with
solitary confinement and other sanctions.

One of the internees then approached the snowmm, agreed that it was indeed
Jaruzelski, removed the cap and epaulettes and with a swift blow chopped

off the head.
mPYRICHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

CSO: 2020/ Mo

7
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

RADIO LUXEHBOURG BIVOY REPORTS POLAND VISIT
M41023 Paris LE POINT in French 1-7 Mar 82 pp 58-59

[Article by Radio Luxeubourg special envoy Olivier Hazerolle: "Poland:
The Street Is the Only Shelter for Preedom"]

[Excerpts] The Poles are suffering, waiting, conscious that 13 December

was only a stage. Is it a stage on the way to neo-Stalinism or to a realism
which is a rough and ready cospronise between the needs of the Eastern Bloc
and the population's aspirations? Nobody can answer that. In an interview
published secretly Zbigniew Bujak, a mesber of the Solidarity leadership.
states: "It is now impossible to assess the situation in order to fix a
future course of actim. We do not know whether we have to prepare ourselves
for many years or a few months."

At present the repression in Poland is' not brutal, although there are some
exceptions, nor is it on a large scale. Many people who were arrested

13 Deceliaer were only held for a few hours. Mistakes were made in assessing
the umber of internees. Today, the oppositionists admit that the govern-
ment's figure (4,000 internees) is probably not far from the truth. That
is both a great deal and not many. In an attempt to make me understand the
difference from other periods, one of the people interned 13 December and
released after a few weeks explained to me: "In Stalin's day people were
killed as readily as they are interned in Poland today."

The trade union's action is being devised day by day at the local level.

The central organization has been smashed and the few members of the national
leadership who escaped arrest have no contacts. Since 13 Decenber the
militants have been trying to prompt actions involving the population without
making them rm too many risks. For instance, in Warsaw an actor who had
rallied to the regime was prevented from speaking a single line by a
frenzied audience showing sarcastic enthusiasm. Since then the actor has

not appeared on the stage. In Simik [presmably misprint for Swidnik]

near Lublin, the inhabitants openly turned their television sets toward

the street at 1930 hours when the news was presented by men in uniform.

In Warsaw the trade union is urging the inhabitants to all go out carrying
big bags in order to make the checks less efficient by making the "searchers"
waste time. Although very distrmtful about the calls which led to the
Gdansk and Poznan demonstrations. Solidarity has nonetheless succeeded

8
FOR OMGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in staging strikes. In Wroclaw many enterprises were paralyzed by a
30-minute strike at noon on 29 January to protest the price increases.

Some 50 clandestine pamphlets are apparently being produced in the country.
"There were 6,000 during the war," a militant humbly told are. "That shows
how much we still have to do." After the seizure of many cyclostyling
machines these pamphlets are usually typed on copying paper and copied.

in Warsaw, however, the NOWA clandestine printing works has succeeded in
printing two books since 13 Decenber and has just printed an issue of
TYGOMIK HAZOWSZE (The Mazowsze Weekly). This newspaper, the ptblication

of the Solidarity organization in Warsaw, contains in particular an article
signed by a famous Polish writer and an interview with Zbigniew Bujak,
chairman of the trade union in Warsaw, who is at present on the rm. Bujak
warns his fellow citizens against spectacular actions: “For the time being
that would be pointless," he says. "The strikes in Wroclaw against the
price increase did not change anything. There were already too many ineffec-
tive actions before December. They tired people. The result was that whai
there should have been a general strike after the proclamation of martial
law it did not work. We lost the martial law battle. Today. we must work
to have it lifted, show our rejection by constant resistance with individual
act ions and fight for the trade union's existence even with a limited sphere
of action. Aside from that we will have to wait mtil the struggle can be
waged without any risk of bloodshed."

Individual action. according to Bujak, is action like that at the Ursus
tractor factory (his factory). for instance, with the workers preventing
Polish television cameramen from filming scenes aimed at showing that
everything is nomal. I met with two Ursus workers. One criticized Bujak
for his lukewarm attitude. "He is cut off from people and does not know
how much we want and need to act," he said. The other Lnderstands the
caution shown: "Several of our leaders have been arrested. Workers have
been moved to different workshops. Others are being forced to follow
political courses instead of doing their job. But it is true that aost
are working normally. In present circuastances organizing some action
would be craxy. We must first restore links and spread information so that

‘-

people know exactly what the situation is."

In the universities, aside from Poznan University, the rectors freely
elected before 13 Decenber are still in office. So far they have succeeded
in preventing the expulsion of students. "Moreover," one professor, an
active Solidarity member, told me. "the military seem to want to avoid
deliberately provoking yomg people, whose reactions they fear."

The fear of terrorism does not exist only on the authorities' side but also
within the trade union. Seweryn Jaworski, one of Bujak's assistants, has
launched an appeal for calm in his cell. The students I net said they had
no taste for terrorism: "Our parents have raised us to respect courage
but also to criticize the mistakes made during the Warsaw Uprising in

1946. We realized that deaths are often pointless."

9
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Solidarity national leadership nenbers held at Bialoleka, near "area,
have been "informed" that their departure to a foreign country would not
raise any difficulty. For one of then, however, the threat was more specific:
If he refuses to play a role in the new trade union he will be tried for
treason. Halesa, who is apparently isolated in a luxury villa and has

grown a beard as a sign of protest, is still refusing to go on television

and nake the statement which the authorities and also the (hutch are urging
him to make adnitting Solidarity's mistakes. "If he did so, I would no
longer believe him," a Lodz worker told 1:. "But he will not give in.

After all, he nearly won the Nobel Prize."

The population totally rejects the authorities. General Jaruzelaki probably
does not want to be drain into the spiral of massive repression. But how
will he be able to overcome the disgust which he and his aides inspire?

He is comting on an iuprovenent in daily life. 'lhe price increaes have
made the lines outside Warsaw food stores vanish; elsewhere they seen to
have grown shorter. That may make people more patient but it will, of
course, not settle anything.

But the flame is burning in people's minds even if the rate at which it
burns has been deliberately slowed down. "For 16 months we lived through
our greatest national insurrection," a Solidarity leader writes, "and it

was a bloodless insurrection."
mPYRICHT: 82 "Le Point"

C50: 3100/ 659

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY