and East Asia Report

(FOUO 7/81)
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS COVERNINC OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SOUTH AND EAST ASIA REPORT
(rouo 7/81)

Comems

KAHPUCIIEA

Sihanouk Describes Differences Among Coalition Forces
(Norodon Sihnnouk; PARADOXBS. Autun 81) ...................

Correspondmt Describes International Aid, m Infrastructure

Development
(Christian Sceaso; AFRIQUB-ASIB. 23 Nov-6 Dec 81) . . . . . . . . . .

-e- [III-ASIA-107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOB OFHGAI. USE ONLY

WUCEBA

SEANOUK DESCRIBBS DIFFERENCES MONG COALITION FORCES
Paris- PARADOXBS in French Autumn 81 pp 66-72
[Article by Norodom Sihanouk: "The 'Problem of Cambodia"']

[Text] Who is still concerned with Calimdia at a time when
attention is focused on Poland, on the Near East, on Iran, or
on Mexico which is promoting an attempt at reviving the North-
SOuth dialogue? It is now a good 3 years that the Vietnamese
army entered Phnom Penh. Today, Vietnam and its protegeea in
the People's Republic of Knpuchea may be in control of "use-
ful Cambodia" but are still being viewed askance by the inter-
national communityuwith the exception of the Soviet bloc and
India—while the "democratic Kampuchea" of Mr Pol Pot, having
withdrawn to the area along the border with Thailand, con-
tinues to represent the country legally. In democratic and
military term, the situation has hardly changed any since the
international conference which was held last owner but the
problem of Cambodia must be raised once again during the next
session of the UN General Assembly which is to open in New
York within several days. Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who today
lives in the south of France but who continues every day to
keep track of the situation in the region with the idea of pre-
paring for the future, has been kind enough to communicate to
the readers of PARADOXBS his thinkings on the conditions under
which, when 'the moment comes, Cambodia could resume its place
in the ranks of sovereign countries. .

"hat is called "the problem of Cambodia" as a matter of fact involves only the
Cambodian people who, in their vast majority, only want peace, independence, and
excellent relations with all powers, in the East and in the West.

"The problem" is due to the death struggle taking place on my country's territory
between two hostile commie-a, the conunism of Peking whose "spearhead" is the
Khmer Rouge army of Pol Pot and the communism of Hanoi, supported by Moscow, which
seeks to impose the "puppet" government of Ileng Samrin.

These two branches of Asian connunism which are hostile to each other at this time
are fighting over power in Cambodia after the United States was forced to abandon

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'D“ 0"“.th 03.. URL!

the "Khmer Republic" or Lonuol in April 1975 to its sad fate along, furthermore,
with nationalist South Vietnam and Laos.

The fight against the United States, in the course of the second war in Indochina,
was conducted by the Indochinese resistance fighters supported in every possible
way by the two big red powers, that is, the PRC and the Soviet Union.

These powers had barely completed the American defeat when each of them undertook
to reach for Cambodia which occupies an important strategic position.

Neither the Khmer Rouge, nor China, nor the USSR wanted to turn my country into a
"buffer state"-a neutralized state which would have contributed to the stabiliza-
tion of Southeast Asia.

Of course. with their hypocrisy which we are so familiar with, most of the big
powers (and some medium and small powers) accepted the fiction according to which
the "Democratic Republic of Kampuchea" of Pol Pot was a "nonaligned" state.

In fact, the Chinese, with the approval of the Khmer Rouge, turned Cambodia into

the Indochinese "bastion" of anti-Soviet communism. The Soviets and the Vietnamese
in turn decided to do everything to make sure that my country would not fall "from
the American Charybdis into the Peking Scylla."

Starting in 1977, the Red Khmer and the Red Vietnamese began to clash militarily
in initially secret battles and later on, starting at the end of December 1977,
in open fighting in the border areas between Cambodia and South Vietnam.

I would like to introduce a parenthetical remark here to point out that, after
their victory in 1975, the Khmer Rouge of Pol Pot never ceased to kick out the
"enemy agents" from their own ranks, that is to say, those who were not in agree-
ment with the team of Pol Pot, Ieng Sary, and Khieu Samphan in order to tie
Cambodia ideologically to China and to fight against "Vietnamese expansionism" and
"Soviet hegemonism."

Between April 1975 and the end of 1977, the Khmer Rouge liquidated several tens of
thousands of their own comrades. To escape this physical liquidation, the current
head of state of the new regime in Phnom Penh, Hr Heng Samrin, with many other
"anti-Chinese"and"anti-Pol Pot" Khmer Rouge cadres, was forced to flee to Vietnam
in 1977. We know that in the wake of the military victory of the Hanoi army, early
in January 1979, over the army of Pol Pot, Hr Reng Samrin and his supporters, chased
out by the Polpotians in 1977, returned to the country in the "wagons of the
foreigner" to found what is now called the "People's Republic of Kampuchea"-the
other Cambodian communist state, the state of Pol Pot, being called "Democratic
Kampuchea.”

The main phases of the big-power struggle over possession of Cambodia can be sum-
marized in the following manner:

(a) First phase: struggle against the United States, on the one hand, and the
communist powers (PRC, USSR, and Vietnam) on the other hand.

2
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFTWCJAI.USHE(NHLY

(b) Second phase: after the American defeat, struggle against China and the Khmer
Rouge. on the one hand, and the USSR and Vietnam on the other hand, with the
Chinese and the Khmer Rouge taking control of Cambodia from 17 April 1975 until

6 January 1979; the Vietnamese and Soviets managed to seize my country on 7
January 1979.

(c) This brings us to the third phase. the phase in which China and Khmer Rouge
received (and this only very logical) backing-~which does not surprise me--from
the United States, from ASEAN (Association of Noncommunist Countries of Southeast
Asia. Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines), Japan. and
some other powers in the free world (the PRC, in particular).

The United States wanted revenge against Vietnam who defeated it in 1975 and natural-
ly is interested in "stopping" the advance of the Soviets and the Vietnamese toward
noncommunist Southeast Asia. The United States and China consequently agreed to
support (in the UN, etc.) and to aid (materially) "democratic Kampuchea" (Khmer
Rouge) whose very tough guerrilla fighters serve as cannon fodder for the anti-
Soviet and anti-Vietnamese camp.

Directly threatened by the danger from Vietnamese expansionism and Soviet imperial-
ism (Thailand in particular now has a very long common border with Vietnamized and
Sovietized China). the ASEAN countries are naturally getting together with China
and the United States in helping and (very strongly) supporting the Khmer Rouge in
their fight to keep "democratic Kampuchea" in the United Nations and to drive the
Vietnamese out of Cambodia. The PRC, Italy, and some other Western powers have
also joined the anti-Vietnamese, anti-Soviet, and pro-Chinese camp for reasons that
are easy to understand. These are the same reasons that guided Japan which, with
China and the United States, is the most dynamic in the militantism in support of
"democratic" and anti-Vietnam "Kampuchea" (Japan went so far as to cut food sup-
plies off to the Vietnamese people as punishment inflicted upon Vietnam for'oc-
cupying Cambodia). The United States, Japan, the ASEAN, the FRG, etc.. find this
policy very easy to pursue as they are all in the same boat especially since China,
for them, is a vast potential market capable of absorbing a large part of their
industrial and agricultural products.

The Khmer Rouge have an extremely bad reputation due to the odious crimes which they
committed against their own people in 1975-1979; the anti-Vietnam camp desperately
seeks to improve this very bad image of "democratic Kampuchea" both in the eyes of
the Cambodian people and in the eyes of the international community, urging

Norodom Sihanouk and the former premier of Cambodia, Son Sann to agree to join the
state and government of that "democratic Kampuchea" which is still considered the
legal state and government of the people, the nation, and the country of Cambodia
by the UN, by UNESCO, etc.

On a September 1981. ASBAN managed to obtain the signature, at Singapore, of a
"joint declaration" by the president of the Khmer Rouge state (Khieu Samphan) and
the two principal leaders of the nationalist "patriotic forces" (Son Sann and my-
self). This declaration states that three Khmer leaders desire to unite their

patriotic forces in the struggle against the enemy of the fatherland, Vietnam.
who must be driver Out of Cambodia. An "ad-hoe cmmaittee"--made up of nine members
(three Khmer Rouge, three followers of Son Sann, and three followers of Sihanouk),

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was established and is now working in Bangkok (Thailand) in an effort to put to-
gether, not a united front, but a"tripartite government," a so-called "coalition"
government.

A real coalition among the three movements. the Khmer Rouge (extreme left-wing),
the Sonsannians (extreme right-wing), and the Sihanoukists (center), could not

be put together any time soon because the following obstacles have always been and
always will exist on the road toward the materialization of this coalition which is
so desired by ASEAN:

(a) Insurmountableanimosity,not to say hostility, between the three movements for
reasons of an ideological nature (confrontation between three incompatible ideo-
logies: atheiatic and murderous communism, reactionary, republican, and anti-
monarchist right wing, and more or less royalist Sihanoukiam) and for reasons of
a personal nature (it is impossible to deny that the Khmer have a predilection for
hating each other and even tearing each other to pieces and that explains why they
lost Cambodia in the end). -

(b) Serious difference between the various approaches, that is to say, the concept
for the solutions to the "Cambodian" problem. The Khmer Rouge and the Sonsannians
believe that they can in the long run defeat the Vietnamese army and kick it out
of Cambodia. I think that a political solution is more reasonable than the search
for a military solution which I consider to be impossible. For me. the only chance
for Cambodia to get Vietnam to give it back its independence resides in the com-
plete neutralization of the Khmer country which would prevent its slipping toward
China or any other power, the disarmament of all Khmer factions and their replace-
ment in Cambodia with an "international peace maintenance force"--in English:
"International Peace Keeping Force"--and the promise of general elections under
international control in which even the pro-Vietnamese and pro-Soviet Khmer could
participate (the Khmer Rouge do not agree that the pro-Vietnamese and pro-Soviet
Khmer should have any place in the Khmer society of tomorrow).

(c) The widely differing treatment given to the armed forces of the possible tri-
partite coalition by the powers which say they are in favor of this coalition. The
Khmer Rouge are getting massive aid from China. China gives aid in many ways to
Son Sann and his front and on the other hand gives only significant aid (3,000
small arms) to the fighting Sihanoukist groups; this Chinese aid furthermore is
currently "blocked" by Thailand. The United States and Japan give considerable
"humanitarian" aid to the Khmer Rouge and to the Sonsannians and give nothing to
the Sihanoukists. ASEAN supports the Khmer Rouge and Son Sann much more than
Sihanouk. The Sihanoukist movement in Thailand cannot grow because Thailand much
prefers to aid the Khmer Rouge and the Sonsannians. In short, China, the ASBAN,

and the United States, without really.aiding him, are trying to get Sihanouk into
the "coalition" for the simple reason that, according to surveys and frequent

investigations on the spot, it appears that Sihanouk remains very popular among
the little people of Cambodia.

(d) Conflicts of interest between the Khmer Rouge and the Sonsannians, both of

whom are very ambitious and demand "full powers" (sic) for their own movements in
a so-called "tripartite" coalition government. The Khmer Rouge are ready to let
Son Sann and Sihanouk into the state or government machine of their "democratic

1.
FIHICMWHCJAL USEZCHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kampuchea" only if the latter two agree to play the role of "puppets," good enough
only to lend respectability and pepularity to their regime which is so hated in
our country. Mr Son Sann on the other hand demands almost dictatorial powers
for himself, while Sihanouk refuses to cooperate in fact with the me: Rouge and
(symbolically) will stay in the possible coalition only if his supporters get more
substantial aid from China, the United States, and the ASEAN.

I want to emphasize that I agree to participate in the anti-Vietnamese guerrilla
novement in Cambodia or. the condition that this will not be ever that is "fought

for the sake of war" but rather a war for peace and for honorable cowromiae with
Vietnam, that .is to say. that we must cause the foreign occupier in our country to
face such difficulties that Vietnam and the USSR will agree to go to the conference
table in order peacefully to resolve the "Cambodian problem" with us.

(e) Stiffening of the position of the Khmer Rouge following their very brilliant
political and diplomatic successes in the UN (they got 77 votes in Septelber 1981
against 71 votes "for" in 1980). The Khmer Rouge thus are not at all interested

in getting together with Son Sann. It will therefore be up to him to make a choice
between refusing to join the coalition government and joining it with his supporters
while agreeing that the Khmer Rouge should continue to be the real and only masters
of "democratic Kampuchea."

The prospects regarding the future of an independent Cambodia are not encouraging.
Here is why:

(1) Unless the Chinese and Americans decide to intervene physically in Cambodia,
by sending "volunteers" to help the Cambodians get rid of the Vietnamese (and the
Russians)--as far as the Chinese are concerned, such an eventuality is a priori
improbable and as far as the United States is concerned, it is inconceivable--

One cannot see how the Khmer Rouge (who are fighting) and the Sonsannians (who are
armed and uniformed but who do not dare face the Vietnamese army) could, in short-
range, medium-range, and even long-range terms. drive out the very numerous and
very well-equipped Vietnamese soldiers.

(2) Here is something that is extremely important: the vast majority of the Can-
bodian people, humiliated though they may be by the fact that their country is no
longer independent, but has become a Vietnamese "protectorate," very clearly pre-
fers to remain--until the new order is established--under Vietnamese armed pro-
tection rather than getting the Khmer Rouge back in power in Phnom Penh. The vast
majority of the Cambodian people strongly disapproves the "joint declaration" of
the three Cambodian leaders in Singapore on lo September because it states that a
tripartite coalition will only give the Khmer Rouge more of an opportunity to
seize power in Cambodia. Because he signed that declaration with Khieu Samphan,
the Khmer Rouge. Sihanouk himself is in the process of losing his popularity among
the little people in the interior.

(3) The Vietnamese, supported by the USSR, are serious when they definitely re-
Ject all attempts by the UN to get them to abide by the UN resolutions and other
resolutions urging them to evacuate Cambodia. They have a good reason to rmin
stubborn in this respect: they know that, while they do not love them, the Khmer

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL [SE ONLY

inside Cambodia are so afraid of the ﬁner Rouge that they gladly agree to have
then stay with then to give them vital protection. The situation thus will not
change inside Cambodia and this is true regardless of the maneuvers of China. the
ASEAN, the United States. Japan, and other powers, so long as the Khmer Rouge
mortgage has not been lifted once and for all.

In conclusion I must render sincere haulage to France who refused to participate

in the troublesome games of both opposing cups that are fighting over ny un-
fortunate country. On the humanitarian and economic level, France is generously
and constantly aiding my fellow citizensuwithout any political afterthoughts—-

who need to be assisted (I am talking here of the refugees and also the [hear

people in the country's interior). 0n the political level, France is absolutely
right in abstaining from voting, in the UN and elsewhere, for "democratic Kampuchea"
which is the assassin of its own people or for the "People's Republic of Kampuchea"
which only represents Vietnamese-Soviet colonialism France's abstention in the

UN is a gesture of respect toward the Cambodian people. It means that France
demands that this nation should have the right to have its own government which will
really be worthy of symbolizing its legitimate aspirations for peace. liberty,
independence. and a life without fear. poverty, and humiliation.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Compagnie Europeenne d'Editions et Publications Periodiquea, Paris

5058
(‘80:6200/10

6

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.UBE(MVLY

KANPUCHEA

CORRESPONDENT DESCRIBES INTERNATIONAL AID, PRK INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 253, 23 Nov-6 Dec 81 pp 34-35
[Article by Christian Scasso: "Living Again in Cambodia"]

[Text] Three million. Three million martyrs out of a nation of seven million.
That is the sad heritage bequeathed by the bloody Pol Pot. Nearly half of the
population of Cambodia eliminated in the name of independence without anyone being
able to justify the blind thoroughness, the destructive madness. Today, in a coun-
try just returning from the hell of the dead, the survivors of the genocide are
beginning to lift their heads. to look a little beyond the ground covering so many
hidden graveyards, to live again, to create a present made of hope and fear. It

is difficult to learn what freedom is again when that freedom was emptied of mean-
ing.

Hope also means believing that the world, which closed its eyes to the massacre,
will not again refuse to look at the reality of the survivors. Words cannot wipe
away the horror. Beyond the expression of good will, international aid must be
developed and expanded. For the time being, a few associations are working on the
spot, trying to build a future for the country. Among them is ADRAC (Association
for the Development of Relations With Cambodia). ADRAC1 is above all one man, one
will: Father Yves Buannic, solidly built, a kind but firm expression, a handshake
that cannot leave one indifferent. Totally distinct from the stereotype of the min-
sionary fathers on a quest for religious expansion, Father Buannic is above all a
humanist, of the kind that does not dream. The reality of Cambodian life is there

to put things back into their proper perspective.
Horror of Genocide

It all began in July-August 1979. Liberated Cambodia gave the'world the spectacle
of an unspeakable genocide. The world watched, dumbfounded, bewildered. Almost

everywhere, people of good will banded together to try to do something. Thus, ADRAC
was formed around Father Buannic, who was joined by doctors, lawyers, journalists.

France was not yet ready to respond to Cambodia's needs because of obscure political
reasons, because of an international diplomatic ballet staged around the interests
of peoples.

Extending the action of the Red Cross, UNICEF and.the People's Aid Society, ADRAC
set two objectives for itself: reconstruction of the Pasteur Institute in Phnon
Penh and aid to Cambodian children, two gigantic tasks, judging by the existing

1 Box 610, 75025 Paris, Cedex, CCP, No 1326-31, Paris 5.

7
FIII()FIICLAL llﬂE(MUlY
FOI<OFFKJAL.USE(MULY

need. For Father Buannic, ”200,000 orphans out of a population of 4 million is

an enormous total. They represent that country's future, its live forces which
absolutely nust be helped."

There could be no question of having them adopted by Hestern families, as requested
by dozens of letters from well-intending families. Uprooted, cut off from their
brothers and far fron their homeland, these young people would have to endure more
trauma. No, their place was in their own country. The future of Cambodia depended
on them. There was a solution, however: individual or group sponsorship of chil-
dren or orphanages, a practice that is now spreading. For its part, the Cambodian
Government is doing everything possible for the orphans. "Structures are gradually
being set up. People trained_on the spot are helping others, providing medical
care, but also working in education. The older ones are learning trades, acquiring
professional training. The others are the responsibility of the community."

Nothing is left of the Pasteur Institute in thon Penh. what was once an imposing
building is now tumble-down, abandoned ruins, bearing witness to the witless obstin-
acy that destroyed everything down to the last test tube. Five floors of labora-
tories were completely looted. Everything must therefore be rebuilt from scratch.

The Pasteur Institute in Paris has confirmed its wish to participate in the effort,
particularly by sending doctors, teams of officials. The only problem, an exceed-
ingly complicated one at that, is finding the funds needed to rebuild the buildings
and obtain new equipment for the laboratories. The importance of the existence of
the Pasteur Institute is cardinal for Father Buannic, "because this country now
risks experiencing the endemic epidemics characteristic of Asia. Every effort made
in the past 2 years could be wiped out overnight if a major epidemic were to occur.
There are no vaccines available at present. If they are needed, they are sent for
from France or elsewhere. It is consequently necessary, indispensable, to promote
local production. While it is impossible to rebuild everything at once, we shall
start up a few laboratories in order to meet the most urgent needs: cholera, dysen-
tery, and other diseases."

Living Heb

The medical infrastructure is taking shape little by little. The school of medi-
cine is open once again. Some 50 doctors are already practicing, unable, no matter
what they do, to meet the demand. Students who survived the Pol Pot regime are
resuming their studies, more intensive, more practical now. Here again, the French
presence is very noticeable. "It is the French who helped get the medical school
going again. Instruction is in French, the documents are in French and even the
school supplies come from France," Yves Busnnic emphasizes.

France, always France. People talk only of France, without completely understanding
its political position or its scarce eagerness to participate in the effort to re~
build the country. And yet, everything bears the stamp of the close tonds that

link France and Cambodia: the railroad, destroyed by Pol Pot but whose infrastruc-
ture and equipment are of French origin; the culture, which, through the use of the

French language, continues to weave a tenuous but living web of mutual understanding
between two peoples joined by history.

FORIOFEKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFHKJAI.USE(HVLY

For the time being, the French presence is semi-official, discreet but effective,

because doctors, surgeons and pediatricians come one after the other to spend
several months in Cambodia.

And yet, in the Cambodian governmental team, one constantly hears the same con-
plaint: "He cannot understand why you would drop us like that in the United Nations.
We thought that you were friends, when in fact, you are still following behind the
United States."

Things do not seem quite mature between the two governments, which Father Buannic
bitterly notes: "I do not believe that France is ready to recognize the current
government of Cambodia. Naturally, cooperation between the two countries will grow,
particularly in the cultural field, with aid to restoration of the Angkor Vat site,
but caution remains the prime rule of French politics."

If that caution continues, it will cause France to lose, in the long run, the privi-
leged place it now enjoys in this region of Southeast Asia.

At the present time, any change in the situation seems to run up against the Viet-
namese presence in Cambodia. The argument goes as follows: "If the Vietnamese
leave Cambodia, our recognition of the current government will be immediate and
our aid to reconstruction substantial."

Cooperation of Vietnam

Here again, the response of a high Cambodian official is not long in coming. It
reflects all the suffering of a people seeking its future: "We are the survivors
of genocide, of an unspeakable nightmare. Re are all going to die. The notion

of 'nation' had no more meaning because there was no more future for us. There

was a single question: Who will save us? You did not come. They, the Vietnamese,
came. He said 'thank you'." How can they s.t those men to leave, when 40,000
Khmers Rouges are waiting for nothing more to invade Cambodia? "We are in a hurry
to do just one thing," continues that same official. "Rebuild our army, our admin-
istration, in order to handle things by ourselves."

The army, nonexistent only a few months ago, is being rebuilt. The administration
at all levels no longer requires the physical presence of Vietnamese advisers.

The Cambodian minister of foreign affairs, far from excusing that Vietnamese pre-
sence, justifies and explains it: "Naturally, we cooperate closely with the Viet-
namese, our neighbors. We want only one thing: to be independent one day. We
will be. But we cannot move too hastily. Look at the situation our country is in.
we need money to rebuild a minimum infrastructure, hospitals, schools. If you
French would help us, we could go much faster."

In Cambodia, the survivors of the living hell are learning what life is again, its

rhythms, the gestures and words of every day. They bear witness to our past si-
lence and appeal with all their nigh: for the humanitarian aid which, on the excuse

of politics, is so long in coming. "Big politics determines many things," Father
Buannic observes. But this time, one can no longer refuse to see the truth or

close one's eyes to the burial grounds uncovered every day, the schools whose class-
rooms were turned into torture chambers by Pol Pot.

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Every Cambodian has seen death up close. It is right that they now know that a

future exists. And the future depends on us, on our will to make everything
available to this nation being reborn.

"The country is being born again; it is almost miraculous. At the time of my

first visit to Cambodia in July-August 1979, Phnom Penh was empty. Not a cat, not
a single person could be seen. The streets were deserted, the furniture on the
sidewalks, the buildings gutted. There was no water or electricity. Six months
later, at Christmastime in 1979. everything had changed. The city was once again
inhabited. There were a few scooters in the streets. By June 1980, life in Phnol
Penh had resumed: motorscooters, motorcycles, merchants and a little traffic
could be seen. By August 1981, the Phnom Penh market was busier than the one

in Ho Chi Hinh City. The birth rate is growing. Children play in the streets,"
Father Buannic says.

Relations must be normalized between France and Cambodia. Exchanges me: be devel-

oped and people must remember that Cambodia has a great deal to offer the world,
at every level.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

11,464
CSO: (0200/12 END

10
FOIOFFICIALISEONLY