FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10541 .-.

26 May 1982

East Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 8/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOT!

JPRS publications contain information prinnrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fro. news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied ss appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of on
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIﬂBT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNBRSRIP OF
MATERIALS RBPRODUCED HEREIR REQUIR£ THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT
POLITICAL. SOCIOLoeICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(F000 8/82)

CONTENTS
HUNGARY

'TH! TIMES' Vieva Pacifiat Tranda in Hungarian Church
(Patricia clough; THE TIMES. 3 ﬂay 82) ................

Gyula Born Interviewgd on PCI, Poland
(Gyula Horn Interview; LA STAHPA, 13 Apr 82) ..........

POLAND

Solidarity Complaint on Aid Diatribution Cited
(Neal Aacheraon; TH! OBSERVER, 21 Feb 82) .............

London Paper Reports on Haraav Univeraity Atloaphoro
(Charles Gana; THE 8080A? TIMES, 21 Feb 82) ..........

- a - [III - BE - 63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"THE TIMES' VIWS PACIFIST TRENDS IN HUNGARIAN GURG

"031011 London THE TIMI-IS in English 3 May 82 p 8

[Undated dispatch by Patricia Clough from Budapest: "Why Bmgary's Priest
of Peace It at War Hitn His Bishops")

[Text] The Christian pacifist: which is fuelling anti-nuclear novements across
Europe has sprung up among Catholics in Emgary, and is being bitterly fought
by their church.

It is spreading among the more radically-minded of several thousand tiny
Catholic groups which were formed during the long years of religion perse-
cution, meeting secretly in one another's houses to pray, meditate, hear
mass and keep the faith alive.

Although the official church, to which about 60 percent of Bulgarians
theoretically belong, has enjoyed relative freedom for the past 10 years

or so, these groups still flourish, suspected by the hierarchy and the state
alike, who feel they elude their control.

Both are alarmed above all by a growing constellation of about 100 groups
inspired by Father (bmrgy Bulyani, a stocky, whitehsired priest in his

early 60's, who believes Catholics should live like Christ and his disciples,
poor, humble and nonviolent.

In the past 18 months the non-violence among his 1,500 or so followers has
developed into demands—considered rank nutiny in a couunist state--to do
social work instead of compulsory military service. Several have been
jailed for refusing to serve and three priests have been suspended for
preaching conscientious objection.

Bishops and state have also been disturbed by the occasional sudden appear-
ance of many thousands of yomg Catholics, awed by a kind of bush
telegraph, at pilgrimage places to pray, sing and discuss nonviolence.

At present the groups are mainly opposed to bearing am. Although they
object to Soviet as well as western missiles, nuclear weapons are not an
issue mg Hungarians, who seem to have a greater fear of conventional war.

1
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Radical and moderate Hungarian clergy alike are convinced that it is a
spontaneous phenomenon, not influenced by the west. But at the sane time
they see it as the Hungarian version of a spirit which, like the 1968
student unrest, is spreading across the continent and which shows that,
although militarily divided, Europe is still very much a living entity.

The mood is somewhat similar to that in the Netherlands, where religious
objections have so far prevented the government from accepting NATO missiles.

In Heat Ger-my, Christians, with ecologists and left-wingers, are one of
the main threads in the peace movement which is challenging the government’s
defence policy and souring relations with the United States. in communist
ant Germany young Protestants are opposing missiles in East and west and
demanding an alternative to military service. "Our movement is entirely
original and autochthonous," Pather Bulayni says. "but we are glad when we
read that other people in the Christian world think as we do. 'lhere is such
a thing an. the zeitgeist, the spirit of the times, which makes the same
thought crop up in different places at the same time."

Professor Tamas Nyiri, head of the Catholic Theological Academy in Budapest,
says: "Thousands of years of colleen European history cannot be wiped out
in 37 years of division."

The pacifism of Father Bulyani and his followers has set off a tense,
three-sided struggle between thsnselves. the conservative church hierarchy
and the regime.

while the groups insist their motives are purely religious, the state sees
them as clear political opposition. But cleverly. instead of cradting down
and damaging its own relatively liberal image, it is exerting in-ense
pressure on the bishops to stag: it out themselves.

Hr Inre Hikloe, the state secretary for church questions, says sirily:
"his is an internal affair of the church." But he is believed to have
warned the bishops that there will be no further improvements in the
church's still very difficult endstence unless they succeed.

So while the East German Protestant bishops are defending their pacifists,
the Hungarian Catholic hierarchy has angrily attacked Father Bulanyi and
denanded that he come to heel. It avoids mentioning nonviolence. but
accuses him instead of "erroneous theological teachings." The accusation
has been rejected by Rome and the bishops' efforts to get Father Bulanyi
transferred abroad by his teaching order have failed.

Gently, with a charming, slightly crooked smile, Father Bulanyi says he
has no intention of toeing the line. "He do what our consciences tell us."

lie and many less radical Catholics accuse the church, and in particular
Cardinal Laszlo Lekai, the primate, of servility to the state. They feel
he should fight harder for more rights and religious freedon. Cardinal
Lekai and other bishops were appointed in a cospromise arrangement between
the Vatican and the government and, many believe, it shows.

POIOFHCIALUSEONLY
Throughout Hungarian history, they say. the Catholic hierarchy has always
identified with the state and been part of the establishment. enjoying power
and riches. Now. they feel, it has a similar relationship with the co-mist
regime. "The alliance of throne and altar," Father Bulanyi conteqatuously
calls it.

Heanwhilc fewer and fewer people. he says, are going to church. "Sitting
in a pew and listening to what a priest says is an activity for 60 and
70-year-olds. What irritates Cardinal bekai is the fact that we do not want
passively to accept what he says but to think with our own heads.”

Caught between the two millstones is a goodhearted, lovable former parish
priest who fomd himself heading a badly depleted church in an atheist
state. desperately short of priests and mas, its few activities strictly
controlled by the state and with religious life more intense in the small
groups than in the parishes.

Cardinal Lekai's colleagues suspect that his cautious line is partly prowted
by memories of persecution. the years of iqriaonasnt, threats. harassment
and fear. lie maintains that the church will gain nothing by fighting for
everything at once and insists on progress by small steps. But they are

so small and slow that even the Vatican itself has urged him to he tore
courageous.

Even small steps--he wants to be able to ordain nore priests. to we lay
catechiets. to hold religious classes in vicarages instead of the churches
where the secret service can keep an eye on them—nay cone to nothing if
Father Bulanyi is not tamed.

A split in the church would evidently suit the regime, on the principle
of divide and rule, and Father Bulanyi and Cardinal Lekai are clearly on

a collision course. But Professor Nyiri doubts that it would cm to that.
"Nobody on either side wants a schism," he says.

mPYRIGﬂ‘l‘: Times Newspapers Limited. 1082

(ISO: 2020/ 1.2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O V“ V. O I‘rtee- 54.- Vl‘I-C

1!me

GYULA HORN INTERVIMD (1‘ PCI, POLAND
"1201145 Turin LA STAMPA in Italian 13 Apr 32 p 3

[Undated interview in Budapest with Gyula Born, der 'ty director of the
Hungarian Socialist workers Party (ism) Depart-int of International
Relations by Frane Barbieri: "Radar Pilgrimage to Warsaw"]

[Text1 Budapest—Radar will be the first of the Eastern bloc leaders to
visit Jaruaelski in Harsaw, which is still under martial law. he Hungarian
leader will visit the Polish capital as early as the end of this month.

The news, still mofficial, prompts two kinds of consideration. The

author of the most stable and contented fora: of socialise is bringing,

with his visit. legitinisation to the most notable I‘ld saddest at the
regimes of real socialise. Their contribution to the fsnous international
solidarity is now becoming burdensome for the prudent Hungarians. Radar,
who has never been fond of traveling, would probably have preferred to

niss this visit too. The tribute to Jaruselslti can also be regarded fro.

a nore attractive viewpoint, however. In other words, as the expression

of the hope that Poland will succeed in releasing itself fron its national
tragedy in the ace way as the Hungarians did. By choosing Radar as his
first guest Jaruzelaki is indicating the experience that he wishes to follow:
Kadarism, in the sense of redewtiou, fron hmiliation to national accord.
Jaruzelski has everything to gain fron presenting himself as the Polish
Kadar. It remains to be seen how much Kadar will gain by approving hin—if
for no other reason the) the miforn that sets them apart.

Perhaps in no other Eastern bloc comtry have the events in Poland so
strongly influenced feelings and the political atmosphere and prowted
such widespread fears. Furthermore, of all of then, the Hungarians have
gained the east, have the nost to lose. If Solidarity had won it would
suddenly have revealed the discrepancy betmn economic and political
refornisa which Kadar's gradualisn can conceal but not reconcile. If,
however, the military regine now fails to find a political path to reformisn,
all the liberalwtype tendenciesu-and Kadarism first and foremost-4m the
risk of being overwhelaed by an authoritarian revival, under suspicion of
their destabilizing the socialist can. Thus we find Kadar's traditionally
cautious interco-mist diploaacy being employed with respect to Poland
twice, exceeding customary practice. The Hungarian Trade Uxion was the
first and only one to send a telegram establishing a dialogue to the
Solidarity Congress. Now Kadar is the first Eastern bloc head of state

to visit Harsaw.

summon“
It is no coincidence that the conflict between [PCI Secretary General]
Berlinguer and Moscow has also had more far-reaching effects in Budapest.
Obviously there could have been no doubts about whose side Kadar would

take. But this alignmnt was full of nuances, and sometimes even contradir
tions. For instance, the first article in the party newspaper seemed

very possibilist toward the PCI. A second one, however, punished in the
same party's theoretical journal, seemed to rule out any kind of dialogue.
Despite this conflicting stance, a personal envoy from Kadar left for Rome
immediately. Following talks at PCI headquarters he left immdiately for

Moscow. It seemed that moderate Budapest was attelpting to mediate between
Berlinguer and Brezhnev.

However secret it night have seemed at first, we did not find it too
difficult to discover the nature of the triangular mission. In the ultra-
modcrn Central Connittee building on the Danube enbarnkment we met with the
envoy himself: The Budapest-Rome-Hoscow mission was performed by Gyula
Horn. deputy director of the Department of International Relations. who
is in charge of relations with the western parties, a kind of Hungarian
Vadim Zagladin [first deputy chief of the CPSU Central Comittee Inter-
national Section].

[Question] Hay I ask what was said in Rome and Moscow?

[Answer] Obviously, we cannot accept the stances of our PCI friends.

If we did accept them we would have to abandon our principles. He expressed
our stance clearly. We consider the PCI's stance unrealistic inasmuch as
it takes no account of the specific circumstances that led to the Polish
[imposition of martial law] 13 December. The Italian friends failed to
perceive the danger of a comterrcvolution and civil war, whereas we did.
If the Poles had not taken this step, civil war would have broken out and
the intervention of the other Pact countries would have been inevitab.‘ e.
Only an idealist could believe that it could have been avoided. He can
see that this step was in fact carried out by the Poles alone, and that is
what counts. Obviously, socialism does not imply the need to stabilize

a situation by military means, but in socialism God only knows what means
can be used. It is unrealistic for the Italians to maintain that a
democratic dialogue which no longer had any chances of success should have
been continued.

[Question] Berlinguer's assessment 4 Soviet policy seems more realistic,
however.

[Answer] Indeed, the other matter discussed in Rome was the fact that the
ltalians issued a very harsh verdict on the USSR's foreign policy. To
some extent the PCI equates U.S. policy and Soviet policy. We cannot
accept this. not only as allies of the USSR but also because we are
involved in implementing this policy.

[Question] Do you too feel directly affected by Berlinguer's criticism?

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Answer] Yes, we also discussed the negative assessment of existing socialise
issued. Nobody denies the problems and the worries—indeed. the increasing
problem within the sphere of socialisr-hut to judge the whole of real

social isa and all its associated phenonsna as essentially negative seeas

to us frankly unrealistic. Neither we ourselves nor the socialist countries
as a whole can accept it.

[Question] So was there complete disagreemt during your visit to Rene?

[Answer] No. these are tough, weighty lad serious setters, but it is
essential that interparty contacts survive even in situations where
positions contrast harshly. In practice these conversations demonstrated
the desire to continue the dialogue. [Answer ends]

Next we discussed Hoscow. Horn assured us that his two visits were
mconnected. that he left none for Moscow within the franework "of regular
exchmges."

[Question] Technically speaking, your triangular visit, taking place in
such a short space of tine and in the aidst of the polenic, inevitably
seemed like a mediation bid: To say in Rose and Moscow that which they
could no longer tell each other directly.

[Answer] Is it possible to inagine that the Soviets need to use anyone
as an intermediary or messenger?

[Question] An autonosous attempt at aediation seeas consistent with
Ilmgarian policy. since the other two sides are on such bad terns.

[.‘nswerl I state categorically that there was no nediation and that none
was needed. He did not request any preliainary advice from anyone. The
Soviets are very well acquainted with the Italian position and do not need
us as a source. Especially since contacts still exist aid are still
taking place between the PCI and the CPSU.

[Ques‘ion] Even what you are telling us suggests a certain difference
between the ngarian and Soviet stmces. According to the Bulgarians, the
Italian position, despite its harshness and erroneousness. still falls
within the interco-mist dialogue. For the Soviets, the Italian position
rules out any possibility of dialogue.

[Answer] No, such a Soviet stance does not exist. The PCI has already
expressed its criticism several tiles. 111a Soviets were entitled to
reply. but that did not cause as to believe that they do not want contacts
and dialogu.

[Question] But this tine a Soviet article has stated that the PC! has
isolated itself.

[Answer] But nowadays whence is it possible to expel anyone. or to expel

oneself? There is no center, there is no organise; there are autonomus
and independent parties. Hho can be excluded. and from where?

MWUSEONLY
[Question] Nevertheless, what is being said does not seen exactly like
a dialogue.

[Answer] The Soviet reactions are really strong and fiery. But you lust
try somewhat to put yourself in the CPSU's place. If someone else says

of you that everything that you have done in your life is evil ("You are
not a socialist country," "you are not a col-mist party"-I as saying this
plainly) what can you reply: Can you issue a calm or cool response?

Such charges are intolerable. [Answer ends]

80 the nediation is one that did not take place but which nevertheless

had an effect. It demonstrated once again that Hungary adonts the sale
stances in a different mner. It falls in line and distances itself at

the ease time. Another Central Connittee meter insisted to us that he
rejects as incongruous Berlinger's profuse oo-plimnts regarding the
successes of the ﬂmgarim nodal and his simultaneous accusations against
real socialism. his party intellectual assured us that there is no special
model and no difference fron the other socialist countries. So Berlinguer's
acknowledgements are inappropriate. Having said that, the Hungarians are
always trying to earn further recognition. Though with his visit to

Warsaw Kadar risks not earning nuch.

(DPYRICHT: 1982 Editrice LA STAHPA S.p.A.

CSO: 3104/202

7
FOR OFPCIAI. USE ONLY
SOLIDARITY 0mm ON AID DISTRIBUTION CITED
1.0210949 London THE OBSERVER in English 21 tab 82 p 6
[By Neal Ascherson]

[Text] The West should stop sending food to the Polish Red Cross. according
to a Solidarity group in Poland.

A message which has reached the observer from the underground Solidarity
leadership in Wroclaw. Lower Silesia. conplains that the local Red Cross is
failing to distribute relief to those who need it.

The message alleges that the Polish Red Cross is subordinate to the Ministry
of the Interior, which also co-snds the police. the zone riot force and
various arIy units.

"Food aid sent by the International Red Cross to the Polish Red Cross is
getting into the wrong hands." it says.

"Those who really benefit are the families of top officials, and even of selhers
of the nilitery government. the zouo or the police.

"Only remnants are left for those who really need the aid. which is. in
addition. badly and chaotically distributed (not always out of ill-will but
partly because of lack of Ian-power and local problems)."

Huge queues of mothers with small children. Hroclaw Solidarity goes on. "wait
for hours to receive. for exauple. two packets of baby food. As a rule they
benefit only once from this aid, at the cost of their health. strength and
time.”

The message concludes: ”The only institution which properlyusoaetilses excel-
1ently--organises aid for the interned and arrested and their families and
for others in need, is the Catholic Church.

"it is. therefore, better that food aid to Poland fro. abroad should go to the
archbishops' offices, or directly to parishes. rather than to the Polish Red
Cross."

COPYRIGHT: The Observer Ltd 1982

(:50: 2020/40

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LONDOH PAPER REPORTS ON HABSAH UNIVERSITY AIMOSPHBRE
PN131051 London TIE SUNDAY TIMES in English 21 Feb 82 p 9

[Charles Gene Warsaw dispatch: ”Fear Keeps Polish Colleges Quiet But Only
on the Surface"]

[Text] "hen classes reamed at Harsaw University. students found some special
additions to the noreal curriculw-coupulsory lectures in all departments
that might best be entitled: "Introduction to Martial Law." In the lectures.
loyalist faculty meters or army officers from the ca-pus Military Liaison
Department read out new restrictive university regulations and attenpted to
explain that martial law was necessary to avoid 'bloodshed.

A fourth-year student of Roeance languages said her class was decidedly
inattentive. As an any officer expounded the official line. students sat

in the lecture hall knitting. reading or eating apples. When no one volun-
teered any questions the officer asked: "liow do you imagine your future?"
After a chorus of guffaws. a voice from the back said: "If you're talking
about the i-ediate future. I'd just like to have a smoke because we've already
been sitting here an hour and a half listening to you."

A graduate student in sociology said: "Hhen there was hope you could talk
about the future. but now we don't talk about it any more. I don't even know
what will heppen in two nonths' time. so I just worry about finding enough
money to survive froe month to eonth."

Although the authorities feared trouble when the universities reopened. the
camus has been fairly quiet.. Despite the strict martial law regulations.

there have as yet been no big shakeups in the faculty or curriculue. About
50 faculty nembers and students have been interned or arrested. but mostly

on account of of f-calpus activities.

Perhaps the lost obvious difference is in the atmosphere on caapus. Now that
the l6-nonth-old experiment in democratising university life has ended. the
shared feeling of joy and hope among professors and students has vanished. to
be replaced by an ateosphere of mistrust. uncertainty and fear.

A junior staff meaber who was active in Solidarity fears that she will lose
her job if a verification process takes place. meaning that she will have to
take some boring job just to support her child.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fears that at the first sign of trouble students might be drafted into military
service or the universities might be closed have so far proved a more effective
policing mechanism than any number of troops on campus.

last week. Warsaw University faculty members worked hard behind the scenes to
dissuade students from staging any demonstrations to mark the first anniversary
of the signing of the Lodz Agreements that gave birth to the Independent
Students' Association. now dissolved.

Now faculty members and students alike complain of the "oppressive" atmosphere
even though there are almost no police or soldiers on campus. Staff members
take turns checking the identity of visitors to all departments. Students
cannot stay on campus after 8 pm and must be back in their dormitories before
the doors close at 9 pm.

officials at the Ministry of Higher Education insist that such discipline is
necessary just to make up for the two months lost as a result of November's
student strike and the delay in reopening campuses following martial law. but

a senior official added: "We want to make students work so hard that they'll
forget about all political commitments which would turn the authorities against
them."

This official claimed the government still intended to enact a long-discussed
reform permitting limited university autonomy and other changes. "He won't be
back to the situation before August 1980 (when Solidarity was born). nor will
we abide by everything that was agreed to under the strike pistol a year ago
in Lodz," he said. There were no immediate plans for s wideranging "verifica-
tiun" of faculty.

However, there are fears that Warsaw University and other institutions might
become a victim of the power struggle now raging between centrists and hard-
liners within the party leadership. At a recent closed door meeting with party
activists from local colleges. the Warsaw party chief, Stanislaw Kociolek.
called for immediate dismissal of several rectors and a thorough verification
of all staff. He lashed out at the academic community as enemies of the
socialist system.

Kociolek singled out for particular criticism the Harsaw University rector,
Henryk Ssmsonowicz. an internationally-known historian who led the movement
to democratise university life and founded the now-suspended Conference of
Recturs.

Faculty members involved in university administration are in a moral dilemma.
"I have no idea how i shoud behave." said one. "I feel responsible for doing
everything possible to protect the university against provocation."

"At the same time I feel that I'm just giving up and playing their game. By
lullowing their orders I'm just a special kind of policeman."

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited. 1982

680: 2020/39 3ND

10
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY