FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10673
21 July 1982

South and East Asia Report

[FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms publications contain information primarily froa foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Ileadlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in content.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIG'K‘I' [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 0F
MTERIALS ”PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINA‘IION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SOUTH AND EAST ASIA REPORT
(moo 5/82)

CONTENTS

BANGLADESH

Role of Violence in Bangladesh folitics Discussed
(Buyetullah Khan; FAB EASTER]! mane mm, 2 Jul 82). 1

Armed Forces' Role in National um" Elsbonted
(s. Kaneluddin; m mm mane mm. 2 Jul 82).... h

KAKPUCHEA

Military Conditions, m-sav Relations Noted
(awe 83cm; 13 NM MAM, 8 m 82) eeeseseee 6

PAKISTAN

Correspondent's Confrontation Hith Zia Reported
(Em; 9 Ju 82) 0......IOOOOOCIOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOO 18

-s- [III-ASIA-107PC

l-‘Oll OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WGWBSH

ROLE OF VIOLENCE IN BANGIADESH POLITICS DISCUSSED
Hong Kong PAR “STERN acmauc REV/IE" in English 2 Jul 82 p 24
[Article by Bnayetullah Idaanl

[Text] The profile of Bangladesh is painted red with violence. The people
of this land have lived with terror from colonial tines through the genocide
of 1971, the horrors of the sheilch Hujibur Rehnn era, and the subsequent
nsyhen of coups, nutinies and fretricide.

The face of terror chanted fron the veiled to the bare wile its application
varied contingent upon the character and coapulsion of the ruling establish-
ments. The instruments, too, underwent changes, both qualitatively and
quantitatively in direct proportion to the strength or otherwise of the uses
base for social change.

But terror renined the chief weapon in the ernoury of the ruling establish-
nents. As such, it produced its own reaction of violence iron the an in
the street. From ties to tine in the nation's history, he would try to
edaody history in his own person end assert his inalienable riﬂit to live
honourably. But things never happened the say he intended. Bis sovereign
will and quest for freedon becane casualties in the hands of successive
ruling establishments. Violence end vengeance succeeded each other.

The scars of genocide, the brutal elimination of dissent by dictatorial
regimes, the vicious class ear glorified by some as the "unfinished revolu-
tion" and the slaying of two presidents at their posts seen to prove the
dictum that no gentleness can efface the marl: of violence: only violence
itself can destroy violence.

Bangladesh has seen 11 tumultuous years of great aspirations and greater
tragedies in silich the ruling establishments never shirked fron violence

to repress the noses. The regines of liujib and Zieur Rahnn testify to

this in different ways. The key questions with both the regimes and their
helnsnen were how to use the sacrifices of the people to secure absolute
power to theuelves and how to satisfy the dennds of the politico-bureaucratic
class at the expense of the nation‘s labour. Both used cheriau as a screen
and fake ideologies es opiun for the noses and both applied the instruments
of terror to suppress or elininate patriotic political dissent.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE (”LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zia' inherited these instruments of terror but took the process of violence
a stage further. His one-Inn rule became the hub of gun-toting killers,
muscle-fleeing bandits and a motley crowd of political pirates. He
incorporated violence into the body-politic with the active support of the

state nehinery. Zia's use of terror and violence was less institutional
than under Hujib.

The spectre of violence cannot be contained like the mythical genie in the
bottle. It also spilled over into the arnsd forces themselves. Thus over
a period of six years between the slayings of liujib and Zia, the nation
went through roughly 18 coup bids and mtinies, 500 esecutions of mtineers
and the lynchings of two generals.

Meanwhile, the plunder of resources by the politico-bureaucratic retinue of
the regimes went unchanged. Mujib tribalised corruption and expropriation
through his family group and a coterie of party faithfuls. The transparent
greed of his new connissars would not even spare relief materials sent by

various countries for the succour of the people of war-ravaged Bangladesh.

Zia, on the other hand, like a skilful surgeon with gloves on, kept his own
hands and those of his i-Iediate kin clinically clean. But he institution-
alized corruption to cement his power structure. The mssive edifice of
his Bangladesh Nationalist Party was built brick by brick with the surpluses
of a poor nation-«the spill-over of aid and grant noney and exactions from
the public sector enterprises. Every sack of wheat or development dollar
for the rural poor was subject to depredation. Power was used to acquire
cash which bought more power.

Such exercises in accumulation of power and profits were bound to become
antithetical to ptblic order. The subordination of public institutions to
personal authority or the creation of surrogate institutions to suit the
designs of absolute power gave rise to chaos. Horst of all, it produced

the phenomena of counter-violence and all-pervasive anarchy that ultinately
led to the deaths of Hujib and Zia. This was the exact reverse of what a
poor, war-ravaged nation needed--strong institutions and social consciousness
among the leaders.

The violent ends of the two regimes, however unfortunate they might have
been, proved the transitoriness of political power twice over. Now after
11 long years, the rule of violence and absence of order hopefully appear
to have run their full course. The latest political change in which the
nilitary took over state power in a pre-dawn strike in March was at least
bloodless-ea fact that has so untypical of Bangladesh.

The recent emergence of the military as a countervailing force to persoml
and group aggrandisement is owed to its relative organisation and its
involvement in various phases of the national struggle. The military faces
the task of creating a new order to supercede the elective institution of
the presidency which had been tailor-nude for Zia alone and did not provide
the democracy it promised. The military in Bangladesh did not eractly come
riding on horseback as a disinterested, now-partisan saviour of the nation.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE GIL?

But as Lieut-Gen ll.M. Ershad said in Noveniur last year, barely 13 days after
the election of Abdus Sattar as president: "Hhat is important is the funda-

mental concept of recognising the politico-military problems and finding a
permnent solution in a constitutional approach."

The statement put the subsequent coup into context. The coup differs quali-
tatively from the usual rhetoric of military takeovers with their copybook
pledges of returning to civilian rule. The thesis is that military inter-
vention in politics should be converted into military participation in

politics. The aim: to contain both military and political violence and to
create public order and stable institutions.

Thus the military is there not as the force behind personal rule but as the

only body organised enough and broad enough in composition to form the basis
for fair, firm and honest government and provide the stability necessary
for political and social institutions to develop.

Zia had used the check-and-bslance strateg of keeping the military at bay.
In doing so, he created jealousies and suspicions which resulted in the
proliferation of military violence in the form of attempted coupe and mutinies.
These culminated in the mtiny led by the late njor-general Abul Hanaur

and leading to the assassination of Zia at Chittagong in Hay last year and
shook the very foundation of the military as an institution. But events

also showed that existing political institutions including the ruling party,
were in even worse shape, reeling in corruption.

Thus the recent military takeover was an almost inevitable result of the
situation itself rather than a result of Bonapartist editions on the part
of the generals. The military moved in by default to reclaim its vanguard
role in the construction of the nation.

Violence still remains a psychic force in the Bangladeshi polity and the
military. The creation of order remains a distant and difficult task. God
speed to the military in its gallant attempt.

COPYRIGHT: Hong Kong PAR “STERN BCONOHIC REVIEU 1982

cso: «220/227

3
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE om:

WISH

ARMED FORCES' ROLE IN NATIMAL AFFAIRS BIMORATED

Hong Kong PAR BASE!!! acmc REVIEW in English 2 Jul 82 pp 22, 23

[Article by s. Kamluddin]

[Text] beech-Bangladeshi strongmn Lieutenant Gen 3.“. Brshad has hinted
at power-sharing by the armed forces by bringing about ”structural changes
in the country's economic and social order," and said that his govert-ent
will introduce a system to and people's sufferings arising out of what he
called unfair politics.

In an hour-long interview on Bangladesh TV on June 20, Brshad said the
long-tern changes being conteqalated by his government will be very different
fron those of previous martial law regines. he discussed the govern-ent's
policies at length, including certain basic structural and adninistrative
changes which led mtg people to believe that these changes would be
incorporated in the Constitution now suspended.

However, he did not elaborate on how these changes would be brought about or
whether his goverment was going to frane a new constitution. All the sane,
he appeared to have firmed up his views on the type of political system which
should be encouraged in Bangladesh. He said that while clemency as such had
not failed, “imitation of foreign politics has failed in our country."
Referring to Singapore, South Korea and Japan, he said these countries have
developed their own political system in accordance with their requirements.

"But," he went on, "unfortunately, we could not introduce the politic.
suitable to our own age which could take the nation forward...l ledGI
democracy as a state system which will carry Bangladesh to the path of
lasting progress."

Asked why anrtial law was imosed in March, Ershad said that it was inevitable.
he added: "A great anarchy was prevailing in the adsdnistrative system...
Nothing tangible for the iaproveaent of the admnistration could be done
because of the pressures of the ruling parties on various occasions. Fake

industrialists were being given licences and permits because they contributed
tourds party funds.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"miscreants, masquerading as touts of political parties created a reign of
terror in society. The parties in power actually used to appease these
elements. That is why no political party after coming to power could bring
about any meaningful changes. On the other hand, poor people had been
enduring....silently...lln fact, there was no my out of this situation [other]
than impowing mrtial-law rule.“

0n the question of structural changes, he said: "In q opinion, the
permanent changes that this regime is thinking about would distinguish it
frum the other martial law governments in the past." Cowaring the polit-
ical systems of the United States and Britain, Ershad said that no political
party in Bangladesh had ever voluntarily abandoned power in the past and all
of them had failed to realise that no party can remain in power without the
support of the people.

he said that the mjor failure of the political parties was not building up
an institution over the years which could have earned the confidence and
respect of the people. "rhe Constitution introduced by the party in power
was subsequently scrapped by another party after coming into power. Thus a'
total uncertainty prevailed in the politics of our country," he added.

0n the question of the armed forces' direct participation in politics,
Ershad’ referring to the liberation struggle of 1971, said that the Bangla-
deshi armed forces were born to fulfil the hopes and aspirations of the
people, which basically were political objectives. Apparently int he
meant was that the armed forces should be given an effective political role.

This, however, is not a new development. In a controversial statement on
Novesber 27, erhad outlined a similar role for the armed forces saying that
they had fought a liberation war and thereby had become highly politicised.
As they had a stake in the country they should he allowed to play an effective
role in running it. he also thought that this participation would help build
an institution which would also eliminate the possibility of any adventurism
within the armed forces.

0n the role of the armed forces, Brshad said in his ‘N interview that they
could work as a balancing force. With their skill and potentialities,"
Ershad said, "the armed forces could help replenish the shortfall in the
country's administrative, technological and engineering sectors. They
should naturally, be utilised for rebuilding an integrated powerful and
unified nation."

He felt that the role of the armed forces would be accomplished when the
programs undertaken by the present government were implemented. Sticking
to his earlier time-frame, he hoped that his government's responsibility
would be met in about two years.

COPYRIGHT: Hong Kong PAR PASTE“ toomc REVIEW 1982

C50 : 4220/ 227
VOIOFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY

WUCHBA

MILITARY MDITIGIS, PBX-SIN RELATIONS norm

mm 1.3 mum. 033mm in French 8 May 82 pp 130-131, 136, 139. 143, 145.
147-148, 151

[Article by Rene Bachann: "Cs-bodia: The Price of a Liberation")

[Text] Seven years ago, on the norning of 17 April 1975,
thousands of little nen dressed in black. their long plaid
krana around their necks. went into Phnon Penh. Loaded
down with cartridge belts and their AK 67's (Chinese con-
bat rifle) over their shoulders. they looked exhausted.
Seuingly caning out of the walls. they i-ediatsly took
up positions at all the intersections. tense end indiffer-
ent to the uncertain 8.1.1.8 of the population. They were
the ﬂiers Rougea. Tive days earlier. Anerican Anbassador
John Dean, protected by 300 sarines arned to the teeth.
had fled the besieged city by helicopter, the Stars and
Stripes folded under his are.

The nightmare had begun in Canbodia. In that "China as

Seen by Idiots." as Halrsux called it. "it lasted 3 years
and 8 nonths, 3 years and 8 months of sxoduses. torture,

nassacres, nadness. Over a nillion nan, wonen and children --
1 out of every 6 Canbodians -- were savagely sacrificed

during the self-genocide. the first in the history of the
planet.

To put an end to the horror, it took nothing less than a
Vietnanese military intervention. And the Csdodians are
now paying the price of that salvation: Over 200,000
Vietnuese, soldiers and civilian "advisers," are capped

on their soil. as saviors and occupiers. In this convales-
cent Canbodia. torn fron the grip of fanine by international
aid, nainly Western, Rene Bachann spent two weeks, traveling
over 1,000 kiloneters. free: the Vietnamese border to the

Thai border. Here is his travelogue:

POIOIFICIAIJBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I . Vietnamese Everywhere

I met the first Vietnaasse in Cambodia on the Air Vietnam Tupolev 13!. that
makes the flight from Ho Chi Kinh City to Phnom Penh every Monday in 35 minutes.
That weekly shuttle is a veritable symbol. Except for the planes of the
International Conittee of the Red Cross (CICR) and the British Oxfam organi-
zation, which make the connection with Bangkok and Singapore once a week, the
Air Vietnam flight is the only link between Cambodia and the rest of the

world. In other words, lie Chi Hinh City is a forced stop on the road to

Phnom Penh. tron time to time, an Aeroflot aircraft flies in from Hoacow and

a tiny Yak loo trijet arrives from Vientiane: That is all.

That day, there were only about 15 of us on the Tupolev: a Mexican university
professor, enormous and mustachioed, going to Angkor to continue hie compara-
tive study s.‘ the Aztec temples and the Kisser sanctuaries; a French business-
wonan based m Bangkok, entrusted by the Arab oil-producing nations to nego.
tiate with the Cambodian Government concerning construction of a new mosque

in Phnom Penh - there are 100,000 malim Chane in Cambodia; the wife of a
Soviet diplomat who had gone shopping in llo Chi Hinh City and who was returning
to Phnon Penh with her young son; and a dozen Vietnamese. There were two
soldiers in green uniforms, with their kits and sacks stuffed with provisions.
Then there were about ten "technical advisers" in their white shirts. short
hair and businesslike look, also loaded with sacks and thick satchels.

Nearly invisible in the city, they are everywhere, these Vietnamese advisers
who have taken up headquarters in the Cambodian administration. From agri-
culture to health, every Cambodian minister is aided by a team of experts
who "guide" the high officials. as it is discreetly put in l’hnoe Penh.

"Call it what you want," one of them told me, refusing to be identified but
accepting my Lucky Strikes, bought on the black market in Vietnam. "He say
that it is technical assistance or cooperation. This country has practically
no cadres left. Those that were not killed left. When we arrived at the be-
ginning of 1979, there was nothing left. He had to build a new administration.
Now one exists. The institutions have been set up. The country is becoming
stabilised. Our task now consists of helping the administration of Kampuchea
to train cadres...."

Piece by piece, it is a kind of transfer of their political, economic and
social system that the Vietnamese advisers are bringing about in embodia.
The constitution of the People's Republic of Kampuchea is a copy of the
Vietnamese Constitution. In its most ninute details, the Vietnamese have
imposed their model. The form for customs declarations that has to be filled
out in duplicate upon arrival in Phnom Penh is the exact translation. in

Cambodian, of the form distributed before landing at Ho Chi Hinh City. Even
better, when one leaves Phnom Penh. the document, stamped by the Cambodian
customs officials, is picked up at the Ten Son Nhut Airport by their Vietnam-
eae colleagues. "A sinplificstion of relations between our adninistrations,"
explains a Vietnamese official.

The Vietnamese soldiers are as visible as the civilian advisers are discreet,
in the city as well as the country. It is true that they in no way try to hide.

”WWW!”
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY

how any are there? It is iapossible to know. According to officials fron
international organisations based on Phnon Penh and circulating in the country,
their nunber can be put at around 200,000. It is difficult to stroll around
in the city without running into then, these be dai dressed in olive drab
combat uniforms, wearing the traditional helnete. They can be seen during the
day. in pairs. walking along the sidewalks, squatting around the steaming
cauldrons of the soup vendors, lost in the noisy narkat crowds. Or they are
doing hard bargaining at the Intel Honorom intersection over the price of a
ride before piling three or four into the tiny rickshaws pulled by cyclists
that are the taxis of Phnoa Penh. I even ran into three of th- one evening
at the Vat Phnom. the oldest Buddhist teaple in the capital and one of the
only ones spared by the Khan Rouges. After leaving their regulation no Chi
Minh sandals on the first step of the sanctuary, they were silently looking

at the naive frescoes. a bottle of Coca Cola in their hands. At night, it is
the armed be an who take over for the Cambodian soldiers at the nain cross-
roads. The same thing happens as soon as an official delegation arrives at
the airport: The road is janed with green uniforms. They are not aggressive.
these little green men who do not hesitate to hail you with a "Ballot" and

use their rudinentary l'rench or English when they spot a Heetemer in order

to trade a few Caabodian filtered Smki for one or two Anerican cigarettes.

Abundant in the city, the Vietnamese military presence is even nore spectacu-
lar in the country. On the swthern road that winds toward Takeo and the
Vietnamese border. I found two major military camps in less than 15 kilometers.
At the first, at the very gateway to Phnom Penh. groups of soldiers were fin-
ishing construction of wooden hangars that would house about 30 heavy Aaerican
GHC trucks and about 20 H 113‘s, also American. In the other were some 30
tanks: half Soviet m l's; half H 113‘s. enouflaged under branch shelters.
here also. soldiers were carrying tree trunks. Others, in blue shorts, were
playing volleyball along the road. I also saw other camps while noving toward
the northwest. near Konpeng Chhnang, around Pursat. Everywhere were light
tanks. troop transports, often American. Everywhere. soldier-carpenters were
carrying beans. building barracks, shelters. Hanifestly, the Vietnamese Army
continues to establish its foothold. ~ '

Wherever one goes. when leaving Phnou Penh. one finds these rural canps near
the road. housing one or two companies of infantrymen. But in practically
every large village. smaller military posts were found: a few barracks

covered with banana leaves or tin, chickens. one or two pigs. a tiny plot of
vegetables. a dozen armed nan with their Kalachnikovs. nachine guns and

Soviet RPG 7 rocket launchers. All along the 300 kilometers of rutted roads
that run between the railroad and the banks of the Tonle Sap toward Battambang,
Sisophon and the Thai border. one cannot go more than S or 6 kilonetara without
encountering a green helmet with the gold star against the red background.
Every old Dodge or DeSoto bus that speeds through the potholes carrying nearly
as nany passengers on the top among the bundles as in the seats hauls its little
group of bo dai on leave going to Phnom Penh or to their units in the conbat
zones in the northwest.

It is difficult. when one does not speak miner and when one is generally accom—
panied by an official guideointerpreter, to evaluate the real nature of the

MWLUSEONLY
FOI¢HHHK1ALIEHEON1Y

relations between the Cambodians and their "liberators." One thing is certain:
The historical heritage of Cambodia, the collective aamory of the Cambodian
people are not inhabited by serene memories. Between the year 1000, when

the Khmers built their empire on the land which the Vietnamese considered as
their steps to the south, and the 19th century, when the emperor of hue,

Minh Hang, sent Gen Truong Hinh Giang to Cambodia ordered to ”cut recalcitrant
Cambodians into pieces," the history of relations between the two countries
has been woven of sore hatred and defiance than reciprocal gestures. Moreover,
Inn “01 and Sihanouk have never hesitated, when they needed to, to awaken and
exploit the hatred of the Youns (Vietnamese), which lies dormant in their
fellow countrymen. As for the Vietnamese. as a former National Liberation
Front cadre who had returned to civilian life told me, they have "never had a

high opinion of those ignorant peasants, whom you in the Heat consider to be
.peaceful people, when they are capable of being more cruel than we are."

Under such conditions, it is not surprising that relations between the Vista.
namese and Cambodians are not overly warm. One would have to be of bad faith
not to observe that the Cambodians congratulate themselves for having been
delivered from the lhmers louges. but one would also have to be blind not to
see the weariness, resignation and anxiousness that veil some looks.

11. Return to Phnom Penh

The Khmers Ranges wanted to empty the cities, which they considered to be
hotbeds of perversion, and scatter city dwellers who could be rehabil-
itated in the rice paddies. And they nearly succeeded: Between 1975 and
1979, Phnom Penh went from over a million to nearly 30,000 inhabitants. Today,
there is a reverse save-ant. Over three-fourths of the city dwellers are
people from the rice paddies. Host of them had never before lived in a cement
house. Some had never even seen a large city.

They have brought their customs to the commercial streets in downtown Phnom
Penh, once lined with shops, restaurants, open air displays. Hammocks are
stretched under the arcades on what was once Monivong Avenue, now Sonrﬂgoc
Minh. The women, surrounded with half-naked children, light charcoal fires on
the sidewalks to prepare their soup. Families have filled the old shops,
piling their store of wood, a few jars and three or four kettles on the empty
shelves. It is a poor capital, mutilated, disfigured, pock-marked by the bombs,
rockets, shells, grenades, machine-gun bursts, the looting and systematic
vandalism of the Khmers Rouges. In the final analysis, except for the big
concrete bridge over the Tonle Sap, destroyed before the arrival of Pol Pot‘s
troops, and a few buildings on the periphery, the victims of bombs or shells,
the "American war" of the Lon Nol period did much less damage in the city

than the "Khmer Rouge peace." Two or three old Phnom Penh natives, still
dumbfounded, waivering between pain and relief, told ne what their city looked
like "before": sidewalk cafes, Cambodian, Chinese, Vietnamese, French restaur-
ants. showcases overflowing onto the sidewalks, shaded, flower-lined boulevards,
the pagodas, the crowds milling around the Old Market built in 1937 by the
French, the promenades along the river, near the Palace.

Ill! OFFICIAI.I£5E:(MILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Kin-ere Rouges had tried to make an agricultural production center out of
this beaten, empty city. In the schoolyards, public parks and around the
houses in the residential section, fruit trees were planted. Sidewalks were
dug up to make room for banana and nango trees between the old palms. Vege-
tables grew along ruins of pagodas, churches. in the middle of lawns, between
sidewalks and roadways. houses and buildings were looted, the furniture
thrown out windows onto the sidewalks to supply wood for construction or heat-
ing.

Today the schoolyards are once again schoolyarde; the public parks public
parks. The Old harks: is back in place and the vegetable plots are now
flowerbeds. But the city is still in a pitiful state of decay. Buildings
hit by shells and half standing have not been cleared away and debris and
piles of old furniture block the sidewalks. Everywhere between the trees one
sees the pitted facades of buildings. Sewers are clogged and garbage piling
up all over. Around the markets, one wades in layers of rotten fruit and
vegetables. For 500,000 inhabitants, fewer than 300 employees work for the
streets and roads department. There is a curious system of priorities: A
few weeks ago, s little group of municipal road workers spent hours righting
a palm tree buffeted by the wind. while 200 meters away, rats as big as cats

foraged in an enonrous garbage pile right in the middle of the street. It is
true, however, that the palm tree was on the Avenue de l'Union des Republiques
Socialistes Sovietiquesl

In many districts. water does not reach the second floor. The electric
powerhouse, repaired by Vietnamese technicians, operstes only s few hours a
day. According to French engineers sent to Phnom Penh by the Order of Malta,
25 percent of the electric power distributed is lost in countless short-
circuits to illegal connections. After filling the city's buildings haphazard-

ly, the new inhabitants of Phnon Penh have hooked up to the municipal system,
hitching wires to the electric cables with banboo poles.

A crowd of free-lance businesses has-appeared. Inner tube repairnen have

set up shop on a eat at the nain intersection downtown. with a few cans of
rubber patches, a pot of solvent and a tiny press. A little further on, an
"independent" mechanic mends a bicycle chain. Over his head, tires, pedals,
mudguards, rims and frames hang fron the branches of a mango tree resembling
a surrealistic plant. Hairdressers, barbers and dentists have taken up resi-
dence in the empty downtown shops. But the handymen are king. Sone collect
the lead from the batteries found everywhere. Others use pieces of foam to
make motorcycle seats. Old wrecked furniture is turned into new. A photo-
grapher has opened up a shop near the Hotel Honorom. He takes black-anddwhite
photos with an old casts and in a few hours, gives you a version in Hollywood
technicolor, done in gouache. Tailors, vendors of soup, fritters, spiced
pineapples, cigarettes and flavored ice cream fill the downtown sidewalks.

It is formidable and noving, this capacity for improvisation, this vitality
of the new residents of Phnom Penh, who have transfer-ed a skeleton city

into a convalescent one crisscrossed by hundreds of tiny rickshaws pulled
behind motorcycles or scooters.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Entertaiment is rare, however. Movie theaters still open show films sent

by friendly countries — that is. essentially the Soviet Union. from time to
time, a soccer game is organised on the field of the National Sports Complex.
where De Gaulle delivered his famous speech. 0n the first floor of the School
of Pint: Arts, between rehearsals of a militant ballet evoking Cambodian-
Vietnamese friendship and the victory over imperialism, students of the dance
have regained the fluid gestures of the Angkor baa-reliefs in an Apsara exer-
cise. In the street, passers-by stop when they hear the forgotten sounds

of the kong, the waist and the aka. the cymbals. xylophone and drum that
accompany the traditional dances. The music of yesterday. And of hope?

III. “or Not Over

Along the vital Phnom-Penh-Sisophon road. as everywhere else in Cambodia.
every bridge is guarded. host were demolished or damaged and have been re-
placed or reinforced by metal beams. On this rutted road cut by tens of
rivers, streams and canals, protection of the bridges and footbridgee is of
cardinal importance. Sometimes the guard is symbolic: a young militiamen
about 15 years old armed with an R 16 or an old Kalachnikov. That was the
case north of Pursat. where the country seems calm. The plain, covered with
rice paddies, does not lend itself well to infiltration and guerrilla warfare.

Further south. between Pursat and Ila-pong Chhnang. where the road goes througt
an area of thin forests and runs along the Cardamomes hountains, the tradi-
tional haunt of the Ktuers Rouges, things are lore serious and reveal the

hand of the guerrilla - and counterguerrilla -- experts which the Vietnamese
are. Every bridge. no nutter how small, is protected by a veritable anti-
sabotage fortification: a double row of pointed posts between which thorn
branches are piled and in which "we buried a few surprises," as one Vietnamese

soldier whom we met over a dish of chicken stew in the village of Kroko ex-
plained. ' ‘

"The country is peaceful. but you have to be very cautious. Avoid traveling
at night. If we leave, the Pol Pot people will be here the next day. The
inhabitants of this region have hesitated a long time before caning back.
Six months ago. you did not see a house along the road." This information
was supplied by a bus driver who spoke a hilarious. chaotic “pidgeon French."
Here, in the tiny bridge guard towers made of dirt and tree trunks, there
are always at least two or three bo dai among the Cambodian militiamen and
soldiers. 'he threat is deemed to be so real that for 200 meters. on both
sides of the road, all the trees have been cut down and the brush burned in
order to facilitate surveillance. The patrols that leave the main road are
made up of about 20 powerfully armed men: rocket launchers. machine guns,
light machine guns. and this about 100 kilometers from Phnom Penh.

It is not easy to learn about the military situation in Cubodie. The offi-

cial line goes something like this: "Host of the country is calm. Alon: the
Thai border. there are always raids by Pol Potists and bandits against which

our armed forces. aided by our Victnmaese comrades, are pursuing cleanup
operations."

MWWWLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By putting together information gathered throughout the country by represen-
tatives of international organisations who are authorized to sove about,

by questioning silitary cadres in the field. cadres better trained in the use
of rocket launchers than in conventional language. one nevertheless finally
fits together another picture. Serious military probluss exist in Kompong
Chhnang. Pursat. Battabang. Odar Hesn Chey. Sien Reap. Preah Vihear. Kolpong
Thom. Stung rend and Ratanakiri provinces. forming a kind of horseshoe
around Tonle Sap. Threats remain in the provinces of Knpot. Kompong Speu
and Takeo. The great offensive of the dry season. launched in Decanber by

the Vietnamese expeditionary corps. was still not coupleted a month ago
along the Thai border.

By the end of the south of Hatch. the guns were sounding constantly. day and
night. around Sia- nsap. near the Angkor teaples. During the same period.

one representative of an international organization who was to go to the north-
eastern region of the country was asked to sake a detour through Vietnasese
territory in order to avoid problus. Only a few weeks ago, a bridge was
blown up near Konpong Thom. less than 200 kilometers from Phnol Penh. A group
of doctors fro. the French Red Cross who were to set up at Pursst between
Tonle Sap and the Cards-ones Mountains was finally replaced by a Bulgarian
team and the International Red Cross received an inportant shipnsnt of nadi-
cines and nedical equipment for Yurset iron the Ministry of Health.

"There are wounded sen in the hospitals of practically all provinces." one
foreign technical assistant says. "Except along the Thai border. the Killers
Rouges do not nount real Operations and are content with individual attacks
on the roads aimed at Canbodian civil servants or Vietnamese soldiers. Above

all, they try to blow up the bridges in order to upset the country's econonic
life."

Sisophon: To get there from Battanbang. one had to obtain a special military
pass. On that nearly rectangular road that runs between the rice paddies.
traffic is limited for reasons of security. Sisophon is only abbot 30 kilo-
neters froa the Thai border. There are snall groups of [bars Rouges scat-
tered throughout the region. which does not prevent horrendous snuggling.
Everything can be found at the Sisophon aarket. froa quarts watches to the
125 cn3 Hondas and including medicines stolen fraa UNICEF. tents stolen fro-
the High Co-ission on Refugees (ace). clothing. shoes. canned goods. cosme-
tics, calculators. transistors. pirate cassettes of Thai and disco ausic,
Thai and American cigarettes. Everything cones iron Thailand after having

escaped the antipersonnel minefields. the Thai rangers. the ”nets Rouges and
the Vietnaner soldiers.

A little ways from the nsrket. the staff is set up in a lovely traditional
house perched on brown wooden pilings. Lt Pich Ruolos. 31. is sitting on the
balcony at a big table. Hhile one soldier serves tea. he goes through his
report notebook. taken from a leather briefcase: "13 March. ens-y shelling of
the village of top, 45 kilo-eters from Sisophon. toward the northwest. The

gunfire cane from Thai territory. Three shells fell on the village. The same
day, a Thai reconnaissance plane flew over the region. On 1 February. about

100 Khners Rouges attacked the village of Bosbov. 19 kilometers fron Sisophon.

12
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WISCONLY

They used 60- and 82m mortars and 3-40 rockets, all Chinese-nade. They
wounded eight villagers, took away the young people between the ages of 16 and
15 and stole all rice reserves in every house, sons 15 to 20 kilograns per
house. When our troops arrived. they fled toward the Thnor Poh district.

Also on 1 February. shells were fired on the village of like, along with 107-
and 122-1- rockets. 0n 5 February, a truck carrying rice wee attaeksd near
Hka. The More Rouges. who could not carry off its load. burned it. The
next day. we launched a big sweep that is still continuing. we seized Alt-67
rifles and it 16's, along with antitank nines and Chinese rockets." While the
lieutenant read his notebook. soldiers went to get the spoils of war. The

AK 47's were practically new. The nines and rockets were nade in 1978 and
197'7. Everything was free China.

"He spotted 12 canps of Killers Rouges in the region," Lt Pich Ruolos continued.
"All are in Canbodian territory except for one. Rok nanhung, which straddles
the border. Phnon Chat is the logistical canp. He learned tron prisoners
that Pol Pot hineelf recently went to Phnon Chat. Dian Del, chief of staff

of Son Sann.1 is also at the border. There are three distinct zones here.
First of all. north of Poipet. there is a strip of land about 60 kilometers
long. where you will find both the people of Son Sann and those of Sihanouk.
To the north. around Phnon Chat is the first Kl-sr Rouge zone. And, south

of Poipet, there is a second [her Rouge area in the Phnon Halei brush. You
in the west tend to forget it. but the Khners Rouges still exist!"

IV. Pol Pot: the Exterminator

Adding up the bodies. subtracting the refugees and totaling up the survivors:
Such bookkeeping ic smehow nauseating, as if the reality of the liner Rouge

holocaust were based solely on the balance sheet of the nassacre and not on
the political and ideological delirium that led to the nightnare. The deporta-

tion and esternination of the Jews was an integral part of haziisn. The de-
portation and externination of those who had been in contact with foreign
cultures were the foundations of the'nner Rouge "ideology."

At the end of the "American war" in 1975. Canbodis had nearly 7 nillion inhabi-
tants. According to one nenber of the 'governnent questioned in Phnon Penh,
there are now 6.8 nillion. According to the UN high Cousission on Refugees.
220.000 Canbodians who fled to Thailand under Pol Pot have returned to their
country since 1979. Over 110,000 nore returned tron the western provinces of

Vietnsn. The population balance sheet for the past 3 years shows between
600,000 and 900.000 births. In other words, the meters Rouges elininated

between 1 nillion and 1.3 nillion of their fellow countrynen. In 1979, the
American State Departnent put the amber of victins at about 1 2 nillion.
which scene to be a reasonable- figure.

The traces of the massacre are everywhere: "Out of the 38 members of ny
fuily." Iluor. a civil. servant in latte-bang. explains, there are only 13
left. I nust now support 10 nieces and nephews. plus Iy father. Three of
ny 5 children died of starvation." Every province has its charnel house.
I saw the one in Khu- Ruolos. about 10 kiloneters southwest of. Phnon Penh.
Nearly 9,000 persons were wrdsrad and buried there, in 129 co-on graves.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLV

Bones are still scattered all over. One walks among tibias, wrists tied to-
gether by wire or electric cable. From a distance. as I approached the narrow
little dusty path lined with sugar and areca palms that winds between the rice
paddies, I thought that the big wooden frane ahead contained coconuts, but

the round forms were actually skulls. "Exactly 8,982.” the militia-an walking
with us. hie u 16 in his hand. explained. "He counted then when we dug then
up." The site had once been a little park. There was even a cement kiosque
with benches in one corner. Behind a curtain of banana trees, one could hear
children laughing. "That is Choeung Bk School." he explained. "It was re-
opened in 1980. Before that. there was no school in the village. The Pol
Potists did not like schools."

"Weren't the villagers curious about what was going on here?"

"Under Pol Pot, the peasants worked from #:00 in the morning until 11:00 at
night, watched over by armed guards. They could not come and go as they
wished. And even if they suspected that something terrible was happening here,
it would have been very unwise for them to ask questions."

Most of the men and women killed and buried at Khun Ruolos came from Tuol Sleng
Prison in Phnom Penh. Before the lhmers Rouges came to power, Tuol Sleng had
been a lycee. the Tuol Sway Prety Lycee. The new masters of Cambodia turned
it into a center of detention and torture. It was left as the Vietnamese
found it when they entered Phnon Penh. with the traces of blood under the
beams used for torture, the places of torture, bathtubs. little wooden cages
where the tortures raised the scorpions they put on the female prisoners‘
breasts. Some 16.000 prisoners had been there. How many escaped? The class-
rooms had been divided up into tiny cells 1 by 2 meters by brick partitions.
Rings were atta~hed to the ground to hold the prisoners. In one room. the
filthy, blood-stained clothing found in the prison was piled up. Four or

five more rooms were payared with photos of the men. women and children nur-
dered here. In the courtyard, the gymnastics apparatus turned into an instru-
ment of torture rises like a threat. here, the victims were hung by their
feet and their heads plunged into a huge bucket of water and excrement. I
could not stay over a half hour in such surroundings. As I left, I met the
director of the lycee-prison-museun. He had been a prisoner there. He had

no fingernails left: They had been torn out by his tornentors.

Kraing Ta Chan: a little village near Takeo in the southern part of the
country. Here also. near a thicket of sugar palms, is another cemetery. It
was not discovered until 1980 and the graves have still not all been emptied.
An atrocious stench hangs over the little mounds of earth. The village chief,
an old man without teeth wearing the black pyjama, his krana wound around his
neck. had coconuts brought to us. The village was peaceful: about ten wooden
houses mounted on stilts in the middle of the banana and coconut trees. The
chief's wife was weaving a beige silk sarong on an old patched up loom. "He
knew what was happening there." the chief said. pointing to the charnel house
300 meters away. "because one night, the teacher Sak 0n climbed up into a
coconut tree to see where all those trucks we could hear arriving went. he
saw soldiers beating people to death with iron bars. In January 1979. after

FOI1DFFKJA1.U§E¢MULV
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Vietnamese came through, we found one of the liner Rougee heeds of the
sector. His name was Cheng. We killed him, but we did it cleanly."

V. Honey Pumped In

Daring the year 1980 alone, $500 million were spent to keep the country alive.
It was the first time in history that such a sum had ever been spent by the
international couunity for an aid operation. One can now say that interna-
tional assistance saved Cambodia.

In 1979, after the Vietnamese military intervention end the establishment of
the Heng Surin regime in Phnom Penh, aid first came from Vietnaa, the Soviet
Union and "friendly countries." The first UN plane landed in August. -In
Nova-her, a progrma of aessive assistance was set up. A few weeks later.
19 barges began to go up the uekong, loaded with rice, medicines, trucks.

Today, one has but to open one's eyes to see that while c-bodia ie under

the tutelage of Vietnmn militarily and politically, it is also the charge of
the international cos-unity. The Land Rovers and Toyotas housed in the hotel
Samaki (Solidarity) garage bear the initials of MC”, the World Food Pro-
gram, the World Health Organization, the IMO. the BOB, the International Com-
nittee of the Red Cross, the British humanitarian organization Oxfam, the
Ecumenical Council of Churches, the Lutheran World Service, the French Co-it-
tee of Medical and Sanitary Aid, the Church World Service, the American organ-
izations CARE and World Vision, the American Quakers and the CIDSB (Interna-
tional Cooperation for Development and Solidarity).

The big Isuzu trucks that one sees everywhere, loaded with bags of rice sup-
plied by the European Conunity, were given by the Japanese Government. Swiss
doctors work at the Kompong Chem Hospital. In Svay Rieng, they are Norwegian;
in Prey Veng, Danish; in Kompong Chhnang. Swedish; in Pursat, Bulgarian; in
Tak Hau and Phnom Penh. French; and in Kampot and Takeo, Czech. A French
architect, Charles Fejto, was in Phnom Penh a month ago to study the construc-
tion of a hospital financed by the French Red Cross. A French doctor and

technician have opened a workshop that lakes prosthetic devices.

"Because of the mines and polio mainly," they explain, "there are about two
handicapped persons for every 1,000. In a year and a half, we provided arti-

ficial limbs for 1,000 persons and at the same time, we are training Cambodian
prosthesists." The Austrailian Governaent provided 60 powerful agricultural
pumps which a technician is setting up in the rice paddies.

The Ecumenical Council of Churches delivered seed, fertilizer, trucks, bull-
dozers. agricultural machinery, tractors. "Since 1979,” emplains Pastor Jean
Clavaud. its representative in Phnom Penh, "we have spent $17 million. This
year, we expect to have at least another $2 million."

Vietnam has sent hydraulics engineers and aeteorologists. The Soviet Union

has provided trucks (civilian or military?) and aid for the establiebent of
pilot agricultural stations.

I703 Oﬂldfl USE ONLY
FOI‘0F11CJAL.US£|DNLY

The Soviet Union does not enjoy a sterling reputation in the corridors of the
Hotel Samaki. where the little foreign cat-vanity in Phnom Penh camps. "In
1980," uplains one western expert. "they promised over 120,000 tons of grain.
They delivered about 90.000. And it was mainly corn. which the Cambodians

do not like. That same year. westerners supplied 250,000 tons of grain. In
1981. the Soviets promised 90,000 tons. They delivered 55,000. That year.
the westerners supplied 75,000 tons, plus 35,000 tons of seed. Beyond their
official speeches on their unswerving friendship, these are the things that

the leaders here will never forget. Despite a doaestic situation that is not
very good. the Vietnamese have made a greater effort."

VI. "Pay in Dollars"

I have under ay eyes a loZ-page document: "Reports to the party congress on
work objectives for the years ahead and on the economic and cultural program
for 1981." The document is dated 26 Hay 1981. At the bottom of page 8. I
found the following phrase: "Inediately after liberation, we moved on to
intensive preparations and in March 1980. the new bank note was placed in
circulation in the People's Republic of Kaapuchea. The circulation of bank

notes was achieved speedily and with order throughout the country and the riel
became the sole means of exchange in Kmapuchea."

Actually. while the old SO-riel notes are turned into wrapping paper and bun-
dles of ZOO-riel notes are sold. brand-new. as souvenirs. the new notes,
decorated in the edifying socialist realist style. have been in circulation
for 2 years. They were printed in the Soviet Union. It was also the USSR
that promised to rebuild the Central Bank. an enormous reddish building blown
up by the Klaners Rouges.

And yet, it was in American dollars that I was asked to pay my interpreter- '
guide from the Ministry of foreign Affairs. and for the Soviet Leda 1500 fur-
nished by the government. And also my hotel bill at the Honorom in Phnom
Penh. Even in Battamhang, where the hotel is an old girls' boarding school
turned into a storage depot by the liners Rouges and then very su-arily
converted into a hotel after the fall of Pol Pot -- there is not even any
running water -- I had to pay in dollars.

The official exchange rate is lo riel for a dollar when entering c-hodia, but
upon leaving. one has to pay 8! 0n the black market. one can even get up

to 22 riel for a dollar. It is impossible to live without the black aarket.
The average salary of a goverment employee is around 120 riel (180 francs).
A kilo of fresh fish c'osts lo riel; a kilo of driedfish, 6 riel; a kilo of
beans, 5 riel; a cauliflour . Io riel. 0n the average, a Cambodian family
with 5 or ‘ children spends nearly 30 riel a day. There is no other solution.
consequently. but to add an additional and illegal job: driver, porter.
soup vendor - to one‘s official job and engage in trafficking. One example
of the lucrative trafficking is gas. There are practically no more service
stations operating in Phnom Penh. The gas. strictly rationed, arrives from
Vietnam by barges that come up the Mekong. Naturally. there are few auto-
mobiles and trucks -- in addition to those of the goverment and international

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

organizations, which have their own supply -- but there are many lightweight
notorcycles and already a few snall Japanese notorbikea (10.000 riel at the
official price; $450 on the black market). The gas, stolen fru govern-eat
depots or those of the Vietnanese Amy, is sold by the liter openly, on the
sidewalks, at 11 riel (about $3) a bottle.

“or is this the only contradiction in Cambodia. In this convalescing country,
where the mere Rougea tried to abolish noney and where the govern-ant stores
are empty and pitiful, one can find everything or alnost everything at the
narkets: agricultural products and handicrafts, rice. vegetables, fruit,
dried fish, earongs, nets. baskets, vegetable dyes, soap, pale sugar and

even ganja, the local narijuana, which is sold freely. But in addition -

and this is even lore surprising -- there is a whole host of goods sunggled

in across the Thai border or by sea to the island of Koh Kong, northwest of
Ito-pong Son, which has because a kind of "wildcat" nini Hong Kong. A goodly
share of such nerchandise: concentrated nilk, flour, oil, rice, canned goods,
aedicines, notebooks and pencils. was furnished free by UNICEF or various
hunanitarian organizations to the governments of Thailand, Canbodia or Vietnan.
Sone of the crates and packing eaterials still hear the mes of the donors
and the warning "Not For Resale.". The rest: tape cassettes, clothing, shoes,
tools, soap, toothpaste, cosnetics, fabrics, watches, American and Thai cigar-
ettes. radio parts, electronic coeponents (and bowl), file, Polaroids, cooking
utensiles, detergents, whisky, delicacies, is mggled in Iron Thailand. Singa—
pore and Vietnam. '

The authorities avert their eyes from this vast network of trafficking and
mggling that covers the country. What do you expect?" one official says.
"Until the government has set up the distribution syetaae, the people have to
get what they need. And further-ore, after 1: years under the miners Images.
the Cambodians have the right to a little leniency." But how long will the
Vietnaneae go along?

FOOTNOTES
1. The military opposition to the Vietnamese presence in Canbodia is nade up
of three groups: the Killers Rouges, the National Liberation Front of the
Kisser People (WK), headed by Son Sann, prine minister under Sihanouk,
and Sihanouk's forces, united around the FUNCIPBC (National Unity Front
for an Independent, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia).

COPYRIGRT: 1982 "lo Nouvel Observateur"

11,464
080: 4200/42

17

FOIOWICIALUSEONLY

.. x:

a m .mmmwwumMmummmm.
“$3? a.“ m
mmwwgmmm