FOR ()FFICIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10229
31 December 1981

Korean Affairs Report
(FOUO 6/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language

sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
KOREAN AFFAIRS REPORT

(POUO 6/81)

Coursurs

SOUTH KOREA
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

'SEKAI' Examines Japan-South Korea Relations
(otsuh Shinji; SM, “CV 81) OOOOOOOOCOOOOOO0.00.00.00.00.

-a- [III-ASIA-IOE

POI? ﬂFl-‘IﬂAI HQ? 0N! V
FOR (WI-"KIM. “SI-T "NIX

low/POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

[okyo SM! in Japanese “0v 81 pp 122-128

{Article by ASABI News Reporter Otsuki Shinji: "‘lhe Focus of New Collusion Between

Japan and Korea: Rush to Seoul"]

{Text} Japan-South Korea Relationship Enters a New Phase

The llth regular session of the Japan-South Korea cabinet conference in Seoul
edent of a joint declaration and concluded on an

(10—11 September) broke the pres
unexpectedly discordant note. Following the neeting between the two Foreign Hiniaters,
d round" of the Japan-South Korea govern-

SOnoda and No Sin-yong, in August, the "aecon
mental level negotiations ended in disharnony. The general interpretation is that
d for a while. The Japanese Govermaent declared

fornsl fence—sending will be delays
ting stance for the tint being. "We will rest a .
I

bit.... I think it is sufficient that
(12 Septenber, Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiyazawa)

Despite the ostensible confrontation. "Japan and South Korea are in basic agreemnt
with regard to the perception of the international and regional situations. It has
been a meaningful conference in that we were able to devote our real and effort to
it and that we were able to obtain bright hope and anticipation for the future."
(Foreign Minister No's speech at the closing ceremony of the cabinet conference)

Thus it is true that Japan has steadily advanced toward advocacy of the Cbun Doo Ewan

administrations. ’lhe joint press release of the cabinet conference, conpiled after

much parley to avoid the impression of a split, sta
conditions, the Japanese cabinet nembera appreciate
efforts are contributing to the maintenance of a balance of power on _
In order to contr d and neighbor,

ibute to Korea's nation-building efforts as a frien
Japan “111 offer economic cooperation insofar as it can." with regard to the passage
recognizing

that there is a tense situation on the Korean Peninsula, Japan's original
draft contained a phrase regarding "the presence of American forces in Korea." At

e. Japan agreed to strike this passage. According to

the last stag
sources. South Korea‘s argument was that "it would not be appropriate
United States in a discussion involving Japan and Korea." But it is clear that the

true intent was to give a close-up focus to Korea‘s defense efforts.

Behind the recognition of tension on the Korean Peninsula and the evaluation that
contributing to the balance of power and pronotion

South Korea's defense efforts are
of the Fifth Republic's nation-building effort under the Own Doo Ewan administration

through econonic cooperation can be seen a blueprint for the Japan-U.S.-South Korea

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1‘1“. I‘SF (i's'l \

division of labor in Northeast Asia strongly advocated by the Reagan administration.

The basic tenor is very different from the joint declarations of the 10 previous cabinet
conferences, which gave high marks for promotion of North-South talks and other tension-
mitigating efforts and expressed hope for peaceful unification in the future. Although
the press release does not go as far as "economic cooperation for security," in Japan-
South Korea relations the dimension of fence-mending has been superseded, and we are
about to enter a definite new phase.

Rush to Visit South Korea

The shift toward "security mindednesa" in the Japan—South Korea relationship can be
seen as a logical development resulting from the Japan-0.8. declaration that in order
"to promote peace on the Korea Peninsula as an important factor for the peace and
security of East Asia, including Japan," Japan will accept appropriate responsibilities.
and from the Ottawa summit declaration which concluded that "we need a strong defensive
strength ourselves"-a conclusion based on a cautionary spirit against Russia. But we
must not forget that an important factor which is supporting South Korea's strong
negotiating posture is South Korea's offensive assault on Japanese political circles.
Foreign ministers conferences, regular cabinet meetings, coordination by administrators—-
are all legitimate avenues for pressing its (South Korea's) views. At the same time,

it is generating a mood of "acceptance of South Korea's position as resonable" among
Liberal Democrats, Democratic Socialists and even Komeito Party members. That is,

South Korea is pressuring governmental, Foreign Ministry policy decisions by inundating
the outer perimeters.

For approximately half a year after Chun Doo Evan's takeover-Septeaber l980-—there
were practically no visits by South Korea officials to Japan, and Japanese politicians'
visits to South Korea were limited to a few pro-Korea Kishi/Fukuda faction members,
and those were infrequent. The inauguration of President Chun on 1 September was
attended by Japan-South Korea Cooperative Council Chairman Shinsuke Kiahi; Secretariat
Director-General Shun Hasegawa; Director Kazuo Yatsugi; representative of the Japan-
South Korea Diet Members League chairman, Kasuyuki Kasuga; and Japan-South Korea
Friendship Association Vice Chairman Masahide Kanegama. 0n 26-26 September 1980,
former Prime Minister Fukuda visited Korea accompanied by Liberal Democartic Diet
members Shintaro Ishihara, Noboru Sato, Mutsuki Kato, Yoshiaki Mori and others, and
met with President Chun. Prime Minister Shin ﬂyon Mwack, Prime Minister Mam Tok-u

and Foreign Minister No. At President Chun's inauguration under the new constitution
on 3 March this year, Foreign Minister Masaki Ito attended as the (Japanese) Govern-
ment's representative. Aside from him, however, the delegation was the same-Kasuga,
Japan-South Korea Diet Members League Executive Secretary Matsuhei Mori and so on.

The situation changed dramatically around early June, when the regular session of the
Diet ended. First of all, the traffic of Japense and South Korean politicians expanded
significantly. In particular, the Japanese politicians' pilgrimage to Seoul took on
proportions worthy of the term "rush." Secondly, there was a significant broadening

of the class of politicians going to South Korea--in terms of age, the appearance of
younger men in the middle echelon; in terms of Liberal Democartic Party factions,

Daito of the Tanaka faction; and it culminated in the first ever visit by Komeito

Party Chairman Tnkeire. These phenomena may be interpreted as a significant weakening
of the traditional Japan-South Korea pipeline.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the context of Japanese circumstances, the tentative conclusion of the Kim Jae Kyu
trial became the springboard. "In January 1981, the current South Korean Government
recommended that the Supreme Court's death sentence be reduced and Japan declared that
it applauded South Korea's action as promoting Japan-South Korea friendship and
cooperative ties." (Diplomatic Blue Book) the interpretation was that "there is no
longer the stight of the Kim Jae Kyu incident." Nevertheless, the Chun Doo “wan
administration was responsible for initiating the new contacts with covert intentions.
After the presidential election under the new constitution on 3 March, Chun Doo Ewan
was inaugurated. By transferring the second man in power-Nationa1 Armed Forces
Security Chief Mo Tae-u--to the post of second minister of state and so on, he consoli-
dated the new order and he established as the most important prerequisite for the time
being the goal of obtaining from Japan a 6-billion-dollar economic cooperation agree-
ment tied to the security pact. Hhile trying to negotiate through official diplomatic
channels, South Korea also started to lay the foundation for directly influencing the
Japanese political process.

The first group to visit South Korea after the close of the ordinary session of the
Diet was the Liberal Democractic Party's policy study group (Kisaragi Club) of hideshi
Aizawa (9-12 June) at the invitation of the South Korea-Japan Diet Members League.

The visiting delegation of the Liberal Democratic Party Policy Affairs Research Council
(15-19 June) led by Council Chairman Shintaro Abe was invited by South Korea's new
party in power, the Democratic Justice Party. A group of nine national Diet members

of the Japan-South Korea Diet Members League headed by Chairman Ken Yasui (14-16 July)
was invited by President Chun. House of Representatives Steering Committee Chairman
Motoaki Yanashita and five other Diet members (21-26 July) were invited by South Korean
Assembly Steering Committee Chairman Yi Chong-chan. Vice Secretary General of the
cabinet Chikara Kawara and other parliamentary vicelninisters (besides the Secretariat,
the delegation, which visited 11-13 August, consisted of the Foreign Ministry, MITI,
Transportation, and Self Defense Forces vice ministers) was invited by the South Korean
Government. Komeito Party Chairman Takeire's visit to South Korea took the form of an
invitation from South Korean National Assembly Speaker, Chong Nae-hyok. Indeed, they
were literally surrounded by the Chum Doo Hwan administration. An organized, colla-
borative, well-thought-out diplomacy-by-invitation could be clearly detected in their
moves.

Shadow of Younger Leaders

The prime minister, Vice Premier Sin Sung-hyon (Economic Planning Agency chief),
National Defense Minister Chu Yong-“0k, National Security Planning Agency head

Yu Hak-song-a11 the major ministerial members of the Chun regime--South Korea-Japan
Diet Members League Chairman Yi Chae-Hyong, Chief Secretary Kim Yun-hwan all those

in charge of dealing with the visiting Japanese delegation spent time in conference
with them, bombarding them with South Korea's claim: "The threat from Russia is
making the East-Nest military balance uncertain. The defense efforts of South Korea
holding off the "North“ are contributing to the balance of power on the Korean Peninsula.
As a result, South Korea pours 6 percent of its GMP and 35 percent of its national
budget into national defense. It can no longer rely on the United States economically.
since Japan benefits directly from South Korean security, Japan should consider South
Korea's situation as its own problem.” 'The trade deficit that accumulated in the

past 15 years since normalization of diplomatic relations totals 19 billion yen. There
is pent-up grievance within South Korea that what Japan has been doing is not economic
cooperation but a profit-motivated commercial transaction." When appropriate, the

3
FOR 0F1IC1AI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ()Nl.\

Fifth Economic and Social Development Plan and the Second Military Build-Up Plan

are explained in detail. The 6-billion—dollar economic cooperation request has been
made unofficially through Policy Affairs Research Council Chairman Abe and Japan-
South Korea Diet Members League Chairman Yasui. "Seeing is believing" is South
Korea's motto. A secret tunnel 40 kilometers north of Seoul that the "North" dug for
invasion of the South and outposts along the Demilitarized Zone are included in the
Japanese delegations' itinerary, and the North‘s "rapacious penetration" is repeatedly
detailed.

A group of the Blue House [The official residence of the ROK President] secretaries,
which forms the nu:leus of the Chun Doe Ewan administration, the military and the
National Assembly members who are nearly all freshmen representatives-many of these
men belonged to the hangul [Korean language] generation and received thorough anti-
communist, anti-Japanese education under the Syngman Rhee rule. It is the generation
that opposed normalization of Japan-South Korea relations. Therefore, rather than the
individual pipelines acting as healing catalysts, reliance on "rational, mutual
understanding" (South Korea-Japan Diet Members League Chief Secretary Kim Yun-hwan)

is strong on the South Korean side. The fact that South Korea did not bend its claim
and handled the negotiations with Japan regarding the economic cooperation question
in a "straight beeline fashion" (without compromise) is based on this kind of hard-
nosed stand. Members of the South Korean delegation to the cabinet conference disclosed
that "since they are diplomats, they know that there is a settlement point in neogita-
tions but the men behind them (middle echelon, younger members of the administration)
must be persuaded; and they are like a wall."

Exchanges Between Japan»South Korea Diet Members League and South Korea-Japan Diet
Members League

The central figure in the Diet member's intercourse is still the Japan-South Korea
Diet Members League and its Korean counterpart, the South Korea-Japan Diet Members
League. The South Korea-Japan Diet Members League was officialy founded by 197 Diet
members on 10 June, and the lineup of actors has changed completely. Many influential
politicians were arrested by the authorities and banished from political activity.
President Chen Doo Hwan, who assumed his seat through the National Conference for
.Unification election set forth under the new constitution, ordered his political
council. which he controls directly. to prohibit 835 old politicians from activity.
Although 270 were exempt from the regulatory sanction, former Prime Minister Kim
Chong-pil. a long-time chairman of the South Korea-Japan Diet Members League, and
another former prime minister and the National Assembly Speaker, Chong Il-kwon, who
attended Prime Minister Maaayoshi Ohira's funeral--politicians who have had close ties
with Japan-left the public sphere. Administrator—at-large Yi Sung-hi, who formerly
handled all dealings with Japan and was regarded as the shadow foreign minister, is
now concentrating on his post as the Asia Basket Association President, and he has
not had any contacts with Japanese politicians since participating in the Japan-South
Koren Diet Members League's special plenary session in December 1979.

The new principals are Chairman Yi Chae-hyong, First Vice Chairman Kwon Chong-tal
and Chief Secretary Kim Yun-hwan. Chairman Yi is a politician who held the position
of vice president of the New Democratic Party, but thereafter he switched to the
economic world and returned to the political arena as the ruling party's (Democratic
Justice Party) delegate under Chun Doo Hwan. He is 68 and is the elder stateman. He
has not been involved in past liaisons with Japan, but he attended Chuo University

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘OR OFFN'I \I I'S‘l 0K1 \

and is quite fluent in Japanese. These, then. are his curriculum vitae which qualified
him for his new post. Vice Chief Secretary Kwon is a 15th class graduate of the Army
Officers' School and is chief of National Military Security Information and a power
behind the Chun Doo Bush (11th class) administration. He now holds the position of
operational chief (chief secretary) of the Democratic Justice Party, which he helped

to form. Prior to his state visit to the United States this August, he stopped in
Japan and discussed the cooperation issue centering around the Japan-South Korea

Diet Members League. Chief Secretary Kim transferred to the post of the Democratic
Justice Party Assembly member from the CHOSEN NIPPO editorial staff, at which post he
acquired experience as the correspondent in the United States and in Japan. Bis
strengths are. his many acquaintances in Japan. his inherent energetic personality

and his flawless Japanese. Hhen he came to Japan in May and again in June to present
his credentials and to attend the fifth Japan-South Korea Friendship Society conference,
he not only called on former Prime Minister Fukuda, Foreign Ministers Sonoda and
governmental and Liberal Democratic Party leaders, but he also got in touch with
Komeito, Democratic Socialist and New Liberal Club [Shin Jiyu Kurabu] Party members

as well.

In response, on 3 June the Japan-South Korea Diet Members League chose former House

of Councillors Speaker Ken Yasui (Liberal Democrat) as chairman to fill the seat left
empty for 2 years by the death of Chu Funada. But Alternate Chairman Kasuga and
Secretary General Mori and the other leadership-level participants have not changed

much. Aside from the new chairman, the addition of Policy Affairs Research Council

Vice Chairman Abe and Defense Agency Director General Nobumoto Ksnemaru have been the
only significant changes. According to sources connected with the Japan-South'Korea

Diet Members League, South Korea strongly advocated the appointment of former Prime
Minister Pukuda to the chairmanship and has said privately that if possible, the other
lineup should be changed completely. But Mr Fukda declined firmly and instead recommened
Mr Yssui. Those around Mr Yasui comment that "although he has always been interested

in the Japan-South Korea issue. he is not a traditional Korea hand. Perhaps his

prestige as speaker of the House of Councillors was the deciding factor in his appoint-
ment...." In any case. Japan did net agree to change the leadership lineup altogether.
During President Pak's time, narrow, individual pipelines were thought much of and

they became hotbeds of corruption. For the new Japan-South Korea relations, South

Korea wanted broader ties at newer levels. However, Japan did not undergo a revolu-
tionary reorganization; therefore, there was no basis for criticising Japan's traditional
roster.

South Korea's impetuosity caused much bewilderment and displeasure to the Japanese.
when the Japanese delegates to the cabinet conference visited President Chum, one

of the influential cabinet ministers said to him: 'This may be uncalled for, but I
would like you to hear me out. Perhaps it will serve as a point of reference.... I
have been connected with the exchange of Diet members and have come to South Korea a
number of times. But on this trip, I discover that my acquaintances have either
vanished or been demoted. South Korea appears to have removed the people who have
done wrong in the past and I do not defend the assembly members who were clearly
proven to have done wrong, but those who participated in the Japan-South Korea trans-
actions before and who did not err or who might have erred but now are sorry, should
be put to effective use, perhaps in civilian roles...." His coaments reflect the
Japanese attitude.

5
roe omcut use ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL I'SF ONLY

In any case, the activities of the Japan-South Korea and South Korea—Japan Diet

Members Leagues have made a good start, and iamediately after the conclusion of the
regular session of the Japan-South Korea cabinet conference, the Kineth South Korea-
Japan Diet Members league Joint Assembly was held in Seoul on 16 and 17 September.

The joint declaration published after 2 days of debate "expressed deep concern regarding
the shared recognition that the abnormal increase in the Soviet military might is
creating aany uncertainties in various regions of the world. The assembly recognised
that in East Asia, there is constant crisis arising out of noticeable military buildup
and constant aggressive acts by North Korea and there is severe tension on the Korean
Peninsula as a result." In addition, the Japanese Diet delegation "expressed appreci-
ation for the defensive effort of the Republic of Korea and thorough understanding of
the difficult econoaic situation it faces as a result of the heavy burden of national
defense cost," and promised “that (Japan) will give economic support in all sincerity.
The logical construction that South Korea repeatedly reiterated at the foreign ministers
conference and the cabinet conference was enumerated pretty much in its original form.
It can be said that the realistic role of the Japan-South Korea Diet Members League,
'backed-up" by the Chun Doo Ewan administration, has clearly been detailed.

Tanaka Paction's Movements

But as pointed out before, one of the characteristics of South Korea's attempt to
create new contacts is its sudden intimacy with the Tanaka faction, which had been
relatively distant--in comparison to the Kishi, Fuhuda, Shiina, Nskasone factions.
House of Representatives Steering Committee Chairman Yamashita. who visited South
Korea at the invitation of the South Korean National Assembly Steering Committee
chairman, was accompanied by Tanaka faction politicans Yoshiro Yayashi, Tesaburo D01,
and Noboru Tawars. From 23 to 26 August, Moboru Iakeehita, Keizo Kobori, Masaharu
Gotoda, and Seiroku Kajiyama-a11 belonging to the same faction--visited South Korea.
Foreign Minister who came to Japan for the foreign ministers conference, was scheduled
to call on former Prime Minister Tameka as well as Miki and Fukuda, but was unable
to find time in his schedule as Tanaka was at Karuizaws. There is no question that
South Korea is well acquainted with political cliques and the powerful influence of
the Tanaka faction over the policy decisions of the Suzuki administration.

0n 3 September the same former Prime Minister Tanaka scolded the younger members of

his faction for “getting excited over 6-billion-dollar aid." South Korea was greatly
heartened by his comment. As a matter of fact, a Japanese participant at the Japan-
South Korea cabinet conference disclosed that the South Korean Assembly members and
journalists often told him that "6 billion dollars worth of economic cooperation tied

to the security pact is quite natural in view of the Japan-U.S. joint declaration

and the Ottawa summit. And besides, former Prime Minister Tanaka says it is all right."
He was embarassed by this excessively high appraisal of former Prime Minister Tameka.

Currently there appears to be vigorous pressure applied through the South Korean
Embassy in Japan to get Liberal Democratic Party Executive Board Chairman Nikaido to
visit South Korea. Mr Nikaido has been in China and has just completed the task of

a special emissary of the Japanese Government in bringing the Sino-Japanese plant
exportation question to a de facto conclusion. Although the general scenario was
already written by undersecretary level personnel, the 300-billion-yen capital fund
cooperation that Mr Nikaido took with him was hastily decided in a last-ditch nego-
tiating session among the governmental agencies to synchronize with his visit to China.
It was said that his close tie with Prime Minister Suzuki was the decisive factor. In

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um "I Hi I“ I‘Sl UNI \

view of his position as the highest executive of the Tanaks faction, it is no wonder
that South Korea has high hopes regarding his influence. In any event, South Korea
considers Fukuda and Tanaka as the two pillars supporting the Suzuki administration.
South Korea is attempting to cement the bond of friendship with the Pukuda faction
through the Japan-South Korea Diet Members League and related pipelines; at the sane
time, separate invitational diplomacy is being used to approach the Tanaka faction.

It appears to be a carefully planned strategy based on an astute analysis of the
clique configuration within the Liberal Democratic Party.

It has been stated previously that the striking advance of middle—echelon, younger
Liberal Democratic Party members into center stage is also a new trend. Following
Hr Aizawa's "Kissragi Club's" visit to South Korea, freshmen and sophomore Diet members'
(Shizuha Kamei, Akio Karino and so on) "Tadpole Club," too, went to South Korea.
Assistant Chief Cabinet Secretary Kawara and a group of other parliamentary vice
ministers' group, President Chun expressed his hope that "Japan and South Korea have
maintained friendly relations thus far, but hereafter we hope that we won't merely
follow the old ways but will create friendly relations through new methods." In
addition, he asserted that the consciousness of ordinary citizens needs to be revolu-
tionized. That is to say, Korean nationals have entirely too strong an anti-Japanese
sentiment because of unfortunate incidents of the past, and likewise, Japanese under-
standing of the actual state of affairs in Korea is insufficient. Thus, "in order to
resolve this lack of understanding, I (President Chun) hope that you will persuade
your people.“

Chairman Takeire Visits South Korea

Komeito Party Chairman Tskeire's visit to South Korea symbolized the widespread and
varied nature of the new ties between Japan and South Korea being formulated now.
Traditionally, the intercourse with Korea by the opposition was the exclusive domain
of the Democartic Socialist Party, and that at the discretion of aide-de-camp Kasugs.
But although South Korea has taken quite a hawkish diplomatic stance, it realized that
the Japanese public opinion building offensive should not be restricted to the Liberal
Democratic Party and the Democratic Socialist Party. South Korea decided that "in
terms of numbers, the L0? and DSP together may be sufficient; but the index of public
opinion in Japan may be more faithfully represented by the utterances of the Komeito
Party." (South Korea-Japan Diet Members League leadership) Consequently, South Korea
spurred on Takeire's visit to Korea.

The Chun Doo Hwan administration's efforts in lobbying the visiting Komeito Party group
reaped unexpectedly good results. The Komeito Central Committee meeting on 7 September
focused on a speech which elucidated the constitutionality of the Self Defense Forces,
and Mr Takeire characterized the militarily tense situation on the Korean Peninsula

as an objective reality and affirmed that although there is a tendency to downgrade the
improvement of Japan-South Korea relations, the Chun Doo Ewan administration's advocacy
of a new people-based friendship, quite detached from present and past experience, is
appropriate for the new era and should be cultivated. Policy Board Chairman Hasaki
touched on Japan-South Korea economic cooperation and spoke in favor of special consider-
ation: "Juding from the location of the two states across a narrow strait, it would

be difficult to give aid as we would for all other countries of the world. It is
necessary to take some steps."

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "VHF! \I I'SF UNI \'

The shift of Komeito to n pro-South Korea stance created complex reactions among

the various opposition parties. It appears that there may be polarization within the
opposition coalition over the Korean Peninsula policy. In full agreement are the
Democartic Socialists. They are happy because they have gained supporters who would
give prominence to South Korea. The Communist Party has a contrasting reaction.
Although the Socialists would not overtly criticize on account of their alliance with
Komeito, in reality, their views are similar to those of the Communists. That is to
say, they agree that Komeito's line is a clear elucidation of the "member of the Nest"
concept and that it leads to promotion of the Japan-U.S.-South Korea military system.
Within the Socialist Party, especially, there is a concern that since the breach over
the South Korea policy has become so marked, alliance (between Socialists and Komeito)
would necessarily fall apart.

An important condition for the success of the middle-of-the road coalition is an
agreement regarding the national security and defense policies. The salient issues,
needless to say, are: the role of the Self Defense Forces, continuation of the
Japan-U.S. security pact system and the Korean Peninsula policy. As one aims for

a middle-of-the-road coalition with a view to participation in the administration in
the near future, one must deal with affirmation of the national security/defense policy.
The Koneito Party's pro-South Korea stance patterned after the Democratic Socialist
Party's symbolizes this fact. Then, what were the reactions of the New Liberal

Club and Social Democratic league.

New Liberal Club representative Tagawa disclosed at a press conference on 4 September
that "on defense policy and South Korea policy and the like we cannot go along with

the current Democratic Socialist Party's views," thereby aborting the chance of forming
a coalition in the Diet among Komeito, the Democratic Socialists, the New Liberal Club
and the Socialist People's League.

The truth of the matter is that a speech by Democratic Socialist Party adviser Kasuga
at a television debate implying that securityumotivated economic cooperation is proper
and just was interpreted by Tagawa as a show of bad faith, and he in turn decided
against joining the coalition led by the Democratic Socialist Party. The Japan-South
Koren issue had an important impact on the middle-of-the-road coalition movement.

In the meantime, the Socialist People's League has continued to have intercourse with
the North. For example, representative Tagawa visited North Korea during April of
this year. At the same time, the league's position regarding the Kim Jae Kyu incident
is that so far there has been no definitive political solution, including the return
of the status quo. It shows no inclination to agree with the Democratic Socialist's
stance nor with Komeito's change of heart. Although South Korea's shakeup of the
Komeito Party was successful, it rather invited negative results as far as the New
Liberal Club and the Socialist People's League are concerned.

South Korea Has the Initiative

Finally, 1 would like once again to touch on the issue of economic cooperation tied

to the security agreement. According to Foreign Ministry sources, after the conclu-
sion of the cabinet conference, the South Korean representatives began adopting the
following lines: "Cement donated for social development will enable construction of
highways for moving troops and encampments. Receiving rice and apportioning it to
soldiers does not constitute military aid." The fact that Japan praised South Korea's
defense efforts created the basic flow of things, and there is indication of a decision
that the rest-disposition of the total amount—~is a matter of political settlement.

8
INJR OFllCJAL USEZCNHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With regard to Japan's declared avowal of separation of security consideration and
nation-building economic cooperation, it appears that the distinction between the
two has become quite blurred. But avoidance of "economic cooperation tied to security
consideration" was founded on the concept that in view of Japan's adherence to a
peaceful constitution, it would be impossible to provide aid which is really a tran-
fer of defense cost. Another significant element is (Japan's) diplomatic policy of
cumulative contacts (commercial, ecoaomic, cultural) with the Democratic Republic of
Korea (North Korea) and through them, opening up avenues for communication. Still
another is the recognition that the maintenance of the status quo on the Korean
Peninsula is a matter of mutual concern to China and the USSR [as well as to Japan
and the two Koreas], and that China and the Southeast Asian states must also be
included in the consideration. That is to say, kyohi kaito [the "refusal"] was not
based solely on the principle of economic cooperation-that governmental development
assistance be directed toward the developing nations with a low income level or that
cooperation between Japan and South Korea be, in the main, a civilian effort and

that the aid is intended for stablizing civilian life and improving people's welfare;
and that there can be no guarantee of any comprehensive figure and so on.

Of course. there is need for broadening the avenue for Japan-South Korea communication
at various levels, including political intercourse, and deepening of mutual under-
standing. Compared to the murkiness of the Japan-South Korea relations under the

Pak regime. the current state of affairs at least is an improve-ent. But the loud
chorus urging "appreciation of South Korea's position" composed not only of Liberal
Democrats but of Democratic Socialists and Komeito as well, acting as a "cheering
section" for the Chun 000 Even administration, ties the hands of Prime Minister Suzuki
and Foreign Minister Sonoda, who are trying to refuse aid that is coupled with the
security issue; and there is danger of that chorus being used to destroy their
political base. Already, the symptoms are apparent and the axis of coordinates has
shifted considerably to a pro-South Korea position (in favor of the military govern-
ment). We must not translate "ideological mutual understanding" into recognition

of the Soviet's or the North's threat, or view and approach the Japan-U.s.-South Korea
security pact in Northeast Asia and the division of labor between Japan and South
Korea with "South Korean eyes."

COPYRIGHT: Iwanami Shoten 1981

11h60
CSO: 4105/16 END

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY