FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS Ll10195
16 December 1981

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 30/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J'PRS L/1019!
16 Decenber

USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(P000 30/81)

Couteuts

INTERNATIONAL

Li Discusses Political Sums-structure of Socialist-(Vienna

Countries
(V. F. L13 VOW ”mm, “D 81) ooooocooooooooooooooo.

REnIONAL

Stow of National Relations at 26th CPSU Congress
(A. 088thsz AZARBAIJAH WIS'H, Jul 81) ............

Ethnic Status of mountain Jevs' Reviewed
()1. Ye. Hatatov; sovmm WMA, Sop-Oct 81) .......

-a- [III-USSR-35PO‘
I1II(HWHCJAI.USI(IVLY

INTERNATIONAL

LI DISCUSSES POLITICAL SUPERSTRUCTURE OP SOCIALIST-ORIENTED COUNTRIES
ﬂoscow VOPROSY PILOSOFII in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 3—16

[Article by V.F. Li, doctor of historical sciences, professor. sector chief at the
institute of Eastern Studies of the USSR Academy of Sciences: “The Political Super-
atructure in Societies with a Socialist 0rientstion"]

[Text] The emergence and intensive development of a socialist orientation as a
unique form of non—capitalist development for previously oppressed countries and
'peoples is one of the outstanding phenomena of the present day which requires the
most serioustheoretical and methodological interpretation. The national democra-
tic revolutions which evolved in these countries destroyed the foundations of
imperialist and feudal domination, cut short the establishment of capitalism at
its formative stage, and took a non-capitalist path of social progress. During
the course of the radical reorganization of pre-capitalist or early capitalist
structures a gradual process began of the draving together of a socialist orien-
tation and popular democratic social development.

As the practice of these countries shows, the revolutionary power which comprises
the leading element in the structure of the new political superstructure of the
transitional society is the basic instrument of radical social transformations.
Some of the elements of the new superstructure have their genesis at the stage of
the anti-ieperialist revolutionary struggle. Nevertheless, the real formation of
the new superstructure begins only after the victory of the revolutionary forces.

Destroying the old superstructure, as it becomes established the new revolutionary
power increasingly performs constructive functions which are aimed, as is empha-
sized in the Summary Report of the CC CPSU to the 26th Party Congress, at "provid-
ing the people's state with the command heights in the economy and shifting to the
planned development of the productive forces, encouraging the cooperative move-
ment in the village,"1 and creating solid foundations for the socio-economic bases
of a non-capitalist path of development. The key positions in the new socio-polit-
ical structure of the state with a socialist orientation are occupied by the van-
guard revolutionary parties which proclaim their program goal to be the construc-
tion in the future of a socialist society free of all forms of oppression and ex-
ploitation.

FOR‘OFFHJAI.UBIGINLY
WOI‘OFFICJAI.USEINNLY

The Contradictions of ﬁnittal lnstitutionalization

Objective conditions and subjective factors. the international climate and domestic
political conditions, the character of the political culture of society and the
level of the political consciousness of the masses, and the inability of the
"elite" to rule in the old way and the open unwillingness of the "lower classes”
to accept an outmoded social order manifest themselves in a specific way in the
post-colonial structures and give rise to an extraordinary typological diversity.
As is noted in the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress, the liberated countries
which have taken the path of sovereign developnent and modernization differ funda-
mentally fron one another. and this applies in full measure to the political system
of the states with a socialist orientation.

It is quite obvious that the differentiation of post-colonial societies by no means
signifies the disappearance of the general laws of their development which are de-
termined by the complex interaction of objective conditions and of the subjective
factors of the national-democratic revolution. Laws of this kind can be traced in
almost all of these spheres of the transitional society. including the party-polit-
ical structure in whose evolution at least the following basic features can be
singled out.

[n the vast majority of developing countries there are. as a rule, socially multi-
strata political parties--conglomeratee which bring together in their ranks the
most diverse representatives of the middle strata, the non-proletarian strata of
the workers, the local bourganaie,and the traditional aristocracy and products of
the lower strata. This conglomerate nature reflects, in its turn, the incomplete-
ness of the processes of class differentiation in the transitional society and the
profound antagonism between the extreme poles of social stratafication--the pro-
letarian-peasant pole, on the one hand, and, on the other, the elite-bureaucratic
pole. The incomplete internal differentiation of the social structure of the post-
colonial society does not weaken, but, on the contrary, in its own way concentrates
and strengthens social antagonisas which become organically interwoven with the
contradictions between modernism and traditionalism. between democracy and author-
itarianism, and between genuinely revolutionary and reformist methods of resolving
urgent social problems. The socially conglomerate nature of the different non-
proletarian parties and the outer similarity of their political and ideological
declarations makes it very difficult to discover their class orientation which,

as a rule. is of an extremely veiled character. For this reason, the social essence
of these parties is revealed only on the basis of the kind of methodology which re-
quires not only an analysis of their social base and of the essence of their pol-
itical leadership, but also a consideration of the objective consequences of the
state policies of one or another group which has come to power independently or

in a block with other socio-political forces.

The socially multi-strata character of the non-proletarian political party-conglo-
merates is to a large extent combined with their internal organizational and pol-
itical friability, although this quality is also to a considerable extent the

result of the relative "youth" of many (both ruling and opposition) of the political
associations and groups which arose during the period immediately preceding the
proclamation of the national independence, or during the first years of independ—
ence. The deformed socio-class base of the political parties, the lack of clarity

FOR‘OIIICIAI.I£NE¢IULY
P“! “111‘“ "5" mn \'

n their ideological and political orientation, the strong influence of various
,raditionalist factors (including conservative ones), and an acute inter—group
Itruggle give rise to the extreme instability of the positions of even those mass
>srty-fronts which at one time successfully led a broad anti-colonial and anti-
lsperielist movement of peoples. As a rule, the grass rootsnstwork of local or-
ganizations of the party-fronts are extremely weak and ineffective: they operate
rather as grass roots groups in the parliamentary struggle. and not as united asso-
ciations of like-minded people who are conducting a systematic struggle for the
education of the masses and for their involvement in the channel of independent

national development.

The acute fractional inter-party struggle and the low effectiveness of the trad-
itional multi—party bourgeoisparliementarystructure (which as a superstructural
institution has the task of ensuring an Optimal reproduction of bourgeois social
relations) has impelled the ruling circles of a number of countries of bourgeois-
land owner development (Indonesia, the Philippines. Turkey, and others) to change
over to a "non-party" or one-party structure of authoritarian rule, which, un-
doubtedly. is one of the inportant manifestations of the profound crisis of the
bourgeois-bureaucratic political system which is incapable of solving the urgent
problems of social progress.

And, finally. one other important characteristic of the formation of the new
party—political structure in the liberated countries is connected with a special
type of charismatic leadership (Hahatma Gandhi, Sukarno. Hudshibur Bakhman. and
others) which is the product above all of the enormous influence of traditional
paternalism on the political culture of the lower strata of society. In practice,
this type of leadership in a political organization which lays claims to the
realization of a national modernization engenders very contradictary phenomena.

0n the one hand, a charismatic appeal to the masses rapidly inflames their spontan-
eous "revolutionary" enthusiasm and greatly strengthens the destructive potentials
of a social protest movement. however. charisma which is based primarily on a
social utopia and on certain conservative religious ethical ideas is not capable
of realizing a constructive program of the fundamental revolutionary reorganization
of society. Of course, social utopias in the present-day national liberation
movement are by no means abstract and senseless fantasiaing; they may include not
only reactionary but also certain progressive tendencies. however, the practical
bankruptcy of the social utopia leads to a profound disillusionment and to polit-
ical passivity, and frequently also to the embitterment of the numerically huge
agitated masses. The consequences of such a crisis are of a many-aided character:
the collapse of the old and the emergence of new political party-conglomerates.

petit bourgeois generation of leaders. and a review of political—ideological orien—
cations in the direction of strengthening the nationalist-traditionalist (including

religious) orientation.

To what extent do the above-considered general laws of the formation and evolution
of non-proletarian political systems exercise an influence on the political super-
structure in states with a socialist orientation? It is obvious that the latter
cannot be free of the influence of political environment, level of political cul-
ture. extremely powerful manifestations of national-ethnic disunity, and so forth.
IIII(IWNCJAL.USE(NVLY

The social. political, ideological, and cultural influence of the most diverse
nationalistic. reformist. traditionalist, and other non-proletarian forces on the
formation of new leadership groups in the ruling parties of socialist orientated
countries is extraordinarily great.

These parties had come up to the end of the 1970's and beginning of the 1980's

with some very conplex ideological-political and social-class baggage. Corres-
pondingly, in characterizing the ruling revolutionary groups in states with a
socialist orientation. at the least the two basic paths of political institutional-
ization have to be distinguished.

The first of then reflects the process of the formation of vanguard workers' par-
ties which have adopted scientific socialism. including the idea of proletarian
power, for their ideological and political arsenal (the Yemeni Socialist Party.
People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan, the Party of the People's Revolution of
Benin, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Labor Party, the Moss--
bique Liberation Front of the People's Republic of Mozambique. the Congolese

Labor Party, the Conmission tor the Organization of an Ethiopian Horkers' Party,
and others).

in Ethiopia the Program of the National Denocratic Revolution emphasises that the
previously semi-feudal and semi-capitalist Ethiopia will have to pass through a
difficult stage of the national democratic revolusion which has the task of "laying
the foundations for the transition to socialisl." At the sane time. the leaders
of the Commission for the Organization of a Workers' Party of Ethiopia believe

that an organic connection between the struggle for political independence and the
struggle for economic independence reflects a fundamental line of the national
demogratic revolution which is being guided by the strategy of scientific social-
ism.

The other path of the political institutionalization and, consequently,of the for-
mation of the political superstructure is connected with national democratic dev-
elopment in which a number of anti-imperialist parties and organizations proceed
from the perspective of a transition toward a socialist goal on the basis of a
revolutionary unification of the working masses and. first of all. of the pea-
santry under the leadership of petit bourgeois democracy. The borders between
these forms and paths of institutionalization are. of course, very mobile.

So substantial a differentiation of the heterogeneous political forces of countries
with a socialist orientation is one of the indicators of the profound inner contra-
dictoriness and uneveness of the process of the development of a national democratic
revolution into a socialist one. The above-noted dialectic of the revolutionary
process has found a concrete historisl manifestation above all in the fact that a
large number of African and Asian countries (Afghanistan. South Yemen. Angola.
Mozambique, Ethiopia, and others) which emerged on the path of a socialist or-
ientatlnn only in the second half of the 1970's have already proceeded to the for-
mation of a political superstructure of a qualitatively new type. Moreover, the
practice of these countries once again confirms that the process of gradual trans-
ition toward the socialist goal, bypassing capitalism, cannot develop successfully

FOI.OIIICIAI.lﬂiI(l'LY
IIIICINWCIAI.USE(HVLY

' .

without a highly organized political structure which has armed itself with a scient-
if is socialist theory.

The emergence in the group of socialist oriented countries of vanguard type politi-
cal parties is one of the basic indicators of the onset of a new stage in the net-
ioual democratic struggle of their peoples. Practice has shown that many of the
old mass anti-colonial fronts which are political associations with the widest so-
cial spectrum (from pauperized elements to individual representatives of the tribal
elite) have begun under the new conditions of a shift in the center of gravity to-
ward a struggle for social progress to gradually lose their ideological and pol-
itical leadership in society. As a result of their unrestricted all-national re-
presentation, organizational-political friability, ideological eclecticism, and
bourgeois-bureaucratic degeneration of part of their administrative cadres, some

of these party~fronts have begun to lose effective control over the state appar-
atus. the armed forces, the economic management structure, and the diverse spheres
of natnnul culture. The deformation of the political structure has resulted in neg-

ative changes in production relations in which bureaucratic, neo-comprador capital
is beginning to dominate.

It is precisely in this kind of critical situation that toward the mid-1960's the
leadership of the People's Convention Party of Ghana (whose membership at that

time of 2.5 million people was enormous for a country of that size) found itself.
As a result of the immaturity of social class relations and the extreme weakness of
the revolutionary democratic current in the party which on the whole gravitated
toward scientific socialism, Ghana‘s important achievements in the anti-colonial
and democratic struggle and its authority on the international arena were not ob-
jectively evaluated politically and ideologically by Kwame Nkrumsh and his immed-
iate party-state entourage. The leadership of the People's Convention Party of
Ghana not only did not put up an effective opposition to the dangerous growth of

a new bureaucratic bourgeusggand to the wild corruption in the state apparatus, but
did not show the necessary energy in the fight against anti-socialist elements
within the party which was in need of an immediate radical purge and a fundamental
reorganization on the principles of a genuinely vanguard workers' party. "The many
years that K. Nkrumah was in power made the people accustomed to a cult of his per-
sonality, and produced in him himself a desire for one-man rule and to decide issues
by means of issuing decrees."s True. under the influence of world events and of

an exacerbation of the class struggle K. Nkrumah began to gradually depart from

the petit bourgeois nationalistic platform, but his ideological-political evolution
clearly lagged behind the rapid regrouping of social forces in Ghanaian society.
Moreover, K. Nkrumah proved to be unable to fully evaluate the prospects of the
left-democratic current in the People's Convention Party of Ghana which was grouped
around the leading nucleus of the newspaper SPARK which came out against, albeit
not always consistently, the growth of national capitalism and a national-reformist
interpretation of socialism and for a resolute mobilization of the masses to defend
the revolutionary socialist gains.

Despite the officially proclaimed socialist goal. the state apparatus in Ghana be-
came a means for personal enrichment, the ruling People's Convention Party of
Ghana became an instrument of political careeriem, and militant revolutionary demo-
cratism which had been born during the course of the anti-imperialist struggle

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USI(NNLY
IN?! (HHHCIAI.[ENE(HVLV

gradually was pushed out by official political phraseology which was bereft of gen-
uinely revolutionary content. This profound domestic crisis which created favorable
conditions for a reactionary military coup resulted in the complete collapse of the
once influential and authoritative all-national political party and in the collapse
and destruction of the revolutionary elements in the country's political super-
structure.

A temporary ebb of the revolutionary wave in Egypt, Ghana, Mali, Somalia. and cer-
tain other countries which has been above all a consequence of a critical gap bet-
ween the.on the whole,favorable objective conditions of the social revolution and
negative factors of a subjective character has caused serious damage to a common
struggle of the peoples for independence and social progress. At the same time,

it has been a very instructive lesson for new leading groups of the national and
revolutionary democracy which has emerged as a militant and dynamic political force
on the arena of social revolution in the 1970's.

The Party--The Vanguard in the Structure of Revolutionary Power

The revolutionary practice of the left flank of the socialist orientation makes it
possible to distinguish various paths of the formation of vanguard workers' parties
which is at the same time reflected in the complex and contradictory processes of
the formation of the new revolutionary power. Certain vanguard parties have arisen
as a result of the internal reorganization of single anti-imperialist fronts (the
Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-—Labor Party, the Party of the Mozam-
bique Front). others on the basis of the cooperation, coming together, and political
organizational consolidation of revolutionary democrats and Harxist-Leninista(the
People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan, the Yemen Socialist Party), and still
others on the initiative of the revolutionary military leadership which has taken

a course aimed at the establishment of solid relationships between the working
masses of the city and the village (the Party of the People's Revolution of Benin,
the Commission for the Organisation of a Horkers' Party of Ethiopia).

However, whatever the regional or country peculiarities of the genesis of the van-
guard socialist oriented parties may be, it is still probably too early to speak
about the emergence in these countries of completely mature scientific socialist
political parties. The leading elements of these parties have basically come to
Herxist-Leninist theory, while a substantial part of the rank-and-file party masses
are at the approaches to such positions. The establishment of this fact by no
means depreciates the historic mission of the vanguard workers' parties in the net-
ionai democratic revolution.

The vanguard workers' party is the leading political institution which arms itself
ideologically with the Marxist-Leninist doctrine and bases itself on a broad so-
cial coalition of the toiling peasantry, the working class which is being formed,
non-proletariun strata of the workers, the democratic intelligensie, and other
non-exploited strata of the people. Its difference from national-democratic par-
ties and organizations is in its resolute break with petit bourgeois (frequently
utopinn conservative) social political doctrines. At the same time, with regard
to the level of the maturity of its cadres, its ideological-political experience,
and the degree of its revolutionizing influence on the broad masses, the vanguard

FKIICMNWCIAJ.IENECMILY
NOR 0511(1Al.lﬂl!(l¥l¥

uorkers' parties are for the time being different fro. the communist and workers'
parties. I believo that to a large extent A.V. Kiva is right when he writes:
"Strictly speaking. parties of this type are not entirely revolutionary democratic
parties; in some of their features,evmifmtsomany of them, they are siailar to
Harrist-Leninist parties. in the sane way, many of the leaders of these parties at
in a certain respect still revolutionary democrats, but in others they are already
Marxist.'

what is the social nature of this transitional state in which in the ruling party-
state structure and, consequently, in the political superstructure which is being
formed there is a capricious conbination of the most diverse elements of social
relations? why has the revolutionary practice of most of the socialist oriented
countries not created from the very beginning a "pure" party of the proletarisn,
Harxist-Leninist type? i believe that the search for an answer to this question
is connected with the disclosure of the iaportant characteristics of the maturing
and develop-ant of a revolutionary situation in the liberated countries. These

The formation of a number of vanguard workers' parties in socialist oriented states
reflects a deepening of the national democratic revolution, an intensification

of the revolutionizing influence of real socialism, and an exacerbation of the
crisis of bourgeois reformist and petit bourgeois doctrines and practices of "nat-
ional socialism." in essense, the ideological-political turn of the broad non-
proletsrian masses of workers toward scientific socialism reflects the inability
of the non-Marxist theories of "socialism" to achieve genuinely realistic actions

the most consistent supporters of the vanguard parties and the reformists and petit
bourgeois doctrines of "national socialise" and "special" paths of development.
Thus, the advanced leaders of the African countries with a socialist orientatioa
have persistently put forward the idea that there is not and cannot be a special
"African" and "national" socialise. ”There is one--scientific socialism, Marxian-
Leninisa. And it is because it is scientific that it is applicable to African
society. as it is to any other society. An analysis of any reality, including
African reality, has to be scientific. Otherwise, we would have to speak about
European, Asiatic, and American socialism because it has been victorious in coun-
tries which are located on all of these ccntinents.... He make all of these things
clear to the masses and explain that it is precisely Marxism-Leninism which elu-
cidates all of these problems and makes it possible for them to analyse then from
a scientific point of view."

The gradual establishment of the ideological principles of scientific socialism in
the process of the construction of the vanguard party of the new type is inseparahly
connected with the introduction of the principles of democratic centralisa in the
intro-party life of such parties. In striving to ensure the maxi-um ideological-
orgenizational unity and stability of party ranks and the effectiveness of their
influence on the mechanism of adopting political decisions and Ianaging society,

a number of vanguard workers' parties strive for the intensive introduction of the

FOI10FFKJAI.USE¢NNLY
FOI:0FEKJAI.USE(HVLV

principles of the election ol lending party agencies. the collectivity oi party-
state leadership, the responsibility of executive-managerial party institutions
to the party and the vast nsjority of its members, and so forth. It is these or-
ganizational-political principles which were at the basis of party construction
in the People's Democratic Republic of Yelen. Angola, Mozambique, Ethiopia, and
other socialist oriented states. The problem of an optimal combination of party
centralization and party democracy proved to be especially difficult under the
unique condition of a socialist orientation. In order to bring the broad masses
out of their age-long political lethargy the Program of the Yemen Socialist Party
provides for a "comprehensive expansion and developnent of democracy, and for the
enlistment of the broad masses of workers in participating in the management of
the national economy, especially in the sphere of production. and in the impls-
mentation of state power and the correct solution of urgent public problems."

The practical paths for realizing such an ideological-political position take
account of the national specific nature of various countries, the level of the
political culture of society. and the traditions and characteristics of the so-
cial psychology not only of the party but also of the non-party naeees.

The Program of the Popular Hovenent for the Liberation of Angola-Labor Party em-
phasizee the urgent necessity for combining party-state centralization with an
increased role for the party masses. Representing the vanguard force of an alli-
ance between the working class, the peasantry. revolutionary intelligeneia, and
other laboring strata, the party is waging a resolute ”struggle against all re-
actionary ideological trends such as racism, tribslisa. and regionalism, and

against all of the defects of the colonial way of thought such as superiority

and inferiority complexes and a disdainful and haughty attitude toward the people."9

Among the serious obstacles which the political mobilizing and ideological activ-
ities of the new revolutionary power come up against are the many conservative
survivals of patriarchal-communal and tribal-kin relationships. In many of the
rural areas of the socialist oriented countries a very great influence is still
exercised by various ethno-social barriers. traditional norms of social life. and
also tribal leaders. The policy of a frontal assault on the positions of the tri-
bal elite does not always bring positive results. For this reason, along with ideo-
logical and political organizational actions to limit the socio-political prerogc-
tives of the traditional leaders. the ruling revolutionary parties in Hozambique.
Angola. and certain other countries with a socialist orientation tried to attract
some of these leaders to the side of the popular power, or, aetaphorically speak-
ing. to turn some tradithmal leaders who usually possess a definite minimums of ed-
ucation into "folk elders."

One of the most important preconditions for increasing the role of the vanguard
parties in the struggle for a socialist orientation is a steady increase of the
proportion of workers and toiling peasants in their structures. An intensively
developing proletariat is the reliable social base for the vanguard revolutionary
parties. As was noted at the Fifth Plenum of the People's Democratic Party of
Afghanistan (March 1981). approximately 25-30 percent of the new members 18d
candidate members of the party were regular workers and toiling peasants. Taking
account of local conditions. in Mozambique the lost active participation in the
selection of candidates for the Party of the Mozambique Liberation Front is taken

I!Il(lﬂﬂC1Al.lEI!(lULV
90.40FFKJAI.USE(IVLY

by the entire labor collective which discusses in detail every candidate who has
expressed a desire to join the party. As a result of this policy. "the class can-
sciousness and sense of organization of the workers is steadily increasing and,
aoreover. with the develOpment of industry and the increased role of workers' coun-
cils at enterpriiis. the workers are steadily turning into the lending force of

the revolution."

The nest advanced and conscious groups of the national, patriotic, and democratic
intelligensia play a most active role in the foraation of vanguard workers' parties.
in South Yeaen, Angola. Hoaaabique. the Congo, and Afghanistan the revolutionary
intelligentsia played a leading role in propagandiaing scientific socialism and in
its practical unification with the practice of the national democratic revolution.
Moreover, not only the civilian but also ch! military intelligensie is drawn in-

to the processes of social radicalization.

The establishment of national democratic power and vanguard parties has been accoa-
panied by an internal demarcation within the ranks of the national intelligentsia.
A part of it. not having becone aware of the dialectics of revolutionary progress,
withdraws iron the active struggle; however, the movement is joined by new detach-
ments of the intelligentsia which not only recognize the {gading role of the van-
guard party. but regard it to be an objective necessity. It is on this kind of
ideological-political basis that the mobilization of wide circles of the progressive
intelligentsia (along with other social classes and strata) into the ranks of the
National Fatherland Front was begun in Afghanistan where various organizations of
the creative intelligentsia which have the task of participating in the development
of profound cultural transfornations have begun to successfully operate.

Cadres of the national intelligentsia which are especially connected with the uses
information media are playing a very substantial role in the aobilization of broad
public opinion in support of the principles of the unity of the National Deaocretic
Party of Afghanistan and of a resolute struggle against fractional sa, sectarianisn
and other negative phenoaena which are hostile to the revolution.1 The patriotic
intelligentsia which has adopted the ideas of scientific socialism and the princi-
ples of proletarian solidarity is gradually becoming an organic part of a new rev-
olutionary intelligentsia of a proletarian-internationalist type.

Although the possibilities for maxi-um candid self-criticise are to a considerable
extent limited by the hostile reactionary nationalist and neo-colonialist encircle-
aent. one of the important political criteria for a strengthening of the internal
aaturity of the vanguard workers' parties is their endeavor to more soberly and
critically evaluate and reinterpret their practical line in the eocio-econonic
sphere.

in analyzing the docuaents and materials of the vanguard parties during the second
half of the 1970's one's attention is struck by a critical reevaluation of the
basic directions of socio-econonic development which are connected. first of all.
with subjective aonenta and with the level of econolic—organizational leadership.
Thus. in the aaterials of the First Congress of the Yeaeni Socialist Party it was
noted that as a result of an acute shortage of national cadres, the leadership of

9
liﬂttlﬂﬂ‘lkl."§£1ﬂ'l¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

certain state Institutions and enterprises wound up in the hands of insufficiently
trained people who possessed neither the appropriate abilities nor the necessary
qualifications and, consequently, were incapable of effectively participating in the
necomplislusent of the difficult tasks of the people's democratic state. The ruling
party and people's power suffered especially great damage as a result of a bureau-
cratic attitude toward certain groups of qualified specialists of the old school,
which, in its turn, caused a definite weakening of the ties between the ruling
party and the national intelligentsia.

"Methods of subjectivist leadership have caused important dalage to the systen of
economic-cultural and administrative-political Ianagement. Errors were made in
the selection and placement of economic cadres and in defining their functions....
Certain leaders did not use the official channels which had been established for
connections between the leadership and the leases. This gave rise to violations
in the work of certain administrative bodies. end subjectivist and ollniteeriat
methods replaced the established laws. decrees, and instructions."1 Serious nie-
calculations in management resulted in the swelling of production expenditures.
the poor use of a number of production capacities. and a break between the policy
of increasing wages and raising labor productivity. These deformations and crisis
tendencies put a sharp brake upon the creation of the new socio-econoaic basis and
disturbed the already weak connections between the econonic and political fronts
of the socialist orientation.

Given the constant pressure of the petit bourgeois element and the subversive act-
ivities of neo-colonialisn, any kind of political organizational instability which
is engendered by a break by part of the party-state leadership free the masses be-
comes a "nourishing soil" for secrarianism and fractional and conspiratorial activ-
ities by anti-socialist elements. Analysing in this connection the reasons which
led to a dangerous attempt at a counter-revolutionary coup in Angola on 27 Hay 1977,
the Popular Hovenent for the Liberation of Angola noted: "Indeed, the poor organi-
zation and insufficient purposefulness of political and ideological work. a cer-
tain liberalism in organization as a result of which dangerous elements were not
excluded from our aovement in tins, and insufficient political boldness by individ-
ual leaders and rank-and-file aembers of the Movement and the state apparatus in
the face of an infiltration by these elements--these are sons oi6the reasons for
the fractional activity which developed into tragic events...."

The ideological and political unity of leadership groups in the socialist oriented
states on the basis of scientific socialise depends to a large extent upon the
stubborn and painstaking work of the vanguard party on the ideological front and
upon the depth of Lhe introduction into the work of these parties of scientific so-
cialist political urganizaiional principles. In forming the structure of the top
party-state system. selecting and providing ideological and political training for
leading cadres, and setting up strong and stable relations with ease organizations.
most of the vanguard workers' parties try to asks federal use of the rich political
organizational experience of the ruling comeunist and workers' parties.

In the establishment of the leading groups of the vanguard workera' parties one can
trace a complex combination of modern and certain traditional forms of political
Culture with which the consistently revolutionary forces in socialist oriented
states cannot but reckon. Thus, the Charter of the African Party for the Independ-

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ft"!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(M€LY

ence of Evinea and Cape Verde makes the special stipulation that membership in the
vanguard party is incompatible with any kind of negative influence from tribal,
ethnic, clan, and personal relationships. In another case, in accordance with the
Charter of the Party of People's Revolution of Benin, a CC Plenun which is called
to elect the Politburo is usually chaired by the most elderly member of the party's
leading body. There is no question that this decision reflects the definite influ-
ence of traditional society in which elders and very old people have high social
prestige and enjoy the respect of the rest of society.

0n the basis of a creative assimilation of the revolutionary experience of the in-
ternational communist and workers' movement, the vanguard parties are developing
an increasingly active struggle for the education of party cadres of a new type
which are capable of being genuine builders of the new society. The most resolute
participation in the struggle against all manifestations of the squandering and
mismanagement of public resources. corruption, bribe-taking, and against arbitrari-
ness and bureaucratic formalism is demanded from every one who joins the ranks of
the vanguard parties. As is emphasized in this connection in the Charter of the
Congolese Labor Party, party members, and especially leading cadres, are obliged
to be simple and modest in their everyday lives, to be sensitive and attentive

to the needs of the workers, and. at the same time, "to wage a resolute struggle
against all manifestations of bourgeois ideology, private property psychology,
petit bourgeois egotism and individualism, ,ribal and religioussundmﬂa, and the
prejudices of the past and superstitions."1

The problem of interaction between theverious elements of the new party-political
structure is one of the most difficult and contradictory problems of the establish-
ment of the young vanguard parties. If the structure which is being examined is
arbitrarily broken into three basic elements-leading, mass, and intermediate,-

it is possible to uncover a number of specific interactions which are characteris-
tic of transitional societies with a socialist orientation.

A definite separation of the leadership group from the socio-class base of the
party both with regard to its ideological orientations and to its practical act-
ivities is without question one of the forms of the contradictory interaction be-
tween the party vanguard and the party masses. Already subtly noted by F. Engels
on the basis of the historical example of the plebian-revolutionary party of
Thomas Hunzer in Geruany, this problem has received a very interesting treatment in
a joint study by USSR and COR scholars as it applies to the present-day conditions
of post-colonial societies: “One of the laws of the vast majority of revolutions
consists in the fact that at the moment of revolutionary enthusiasm the revolut-
ionary vanguard has a tendency to "run too far ahead," which is expressed in attempts
to advance and be in to accomplish tasks for which the objective conditions have
not yet matured." 8

One or another aspect of the poor connections between the party vanguard and the
party masses shows up especially at the initial stages of the revolutionary move-
ment in almost all of the socialist oriented countries. They manifest themselves
in an overestimation of the proletarian element in the democratic dictatorship of
the people, and underestimation of the revolutionary potential of the non-proletar-
ian masses of workers and small property holders, an endeavor to force the sociali-

11
FOI‘OIINCIAI.UBECN‘LY
FINICMHNC]AI.USE¢MVLY

cation of the means of production and the cooperation of small producers, an under-
estimation of the goal of traditional, including religious, factors in the peasant
consciousness, and an underestimation of the international factors of the anti-im-
perialist revolutionary struggle.

The complex and multi-stage process of the formation of the ideological and politi-
cal platform of parties with a socialist orientation is by no means free of certain
deviations which do not correspond to the real tasks of the social revolution.

Dangerous relapses of the "ultra-left" sickness which have found one or another
expression in the activities in a number of young revolutionary parties that have
been under the influence of an enormous mass of lumpens and petit bourgeois ex-
tremists have caused considerable harm to the revolutionary struggle of the peoples.
However. most of the vanguard parties succeed in blocking this dangerous sickness,
which makes it possible to substantially accelerate the process of the establish-
ment of the new revolutionary party and of the new political system of the social-
ist oriented society.

Progressive Changes in the Political Culture of the Transitional Society

Under the conditions of a socialist orientation one of the key problems of the for-
mation of the new revolutionary power is connected with the necessity for achieving
fundamental changes in the political culture of the society which is transitional
to socialism. The many millions of workers of the town and country who in the

past stood outside of active politics are intensively brought into the realisation
of profound revolutionary transformations. Overcoming step by step their many con-
servative prejudices and mastering literacy and the scientific system of political
knowledge, ever new strata of the laboring people become accustomed in practice to
the new political culture of socialist orientation and become a genuine subject

of the revolutionary process.

The consequences of the introduction of the new political culture and, above all,
of new ideas about people's power, democratic centralism, the interaction between
the ruling party and the state, and the significance of international factors in

the national democratic revolution are very many-sided. However, the most signi-

ficant effect of the penetration into the masses of the principles of the new po-
liticol culture can be found in the formation of revolutionary cadres.

As is known, at the initial stage of non-capitalist development the basic leading
nucleus in the vanguard revolutionary democratic party is formed from the most ad-
vanced circles of the national intelligentsia. However, as the new revolutionary
power is formed this narrow group of ideologists, organizers, and politicians is
not capable of fully performing the growing functions of social management. From
this follows the urgent necessity for the development of a wide front for the train-
ing and retraining of the party-state cadres of the revolutionary parties through
the system of party schools which are already in operation in the metropolitan
centers of the socialist oriented countries.

The attention of the revolutionary parties to the political mobilization problems
of a social orientation. to the problems of thoroughly strengthening the connec-

12
itﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1A1,USEiﬂVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEINVLY

tions between the leadership group and the toiling masses, and to the rapid train-
ing of professional cadres notmlymthe basis of domestic potentials but of broad
international assistance is already exercising a positive influence on the forma-
tion of the new party-state structure. Correspondingly, important aocio-political
changes have occurred in these countries which reflect the transition to popular
democratic forms of power which, during the course of the subsequent development
of the national democratifgrevolution into a socialist one, can acquire a class
content adequate to them.

The forms of international cooperation between the CPSU and the revolutionary demo-
cratic parties are of an extraordinarily rich and diverse character, including
constructive negotiations on the highest party-state level, the conclusion of in-
ter-party cooperation agreements, the exchange of party delegations, mutual part-
icipation in the work of party congresses and in other important state and pol-
itical measures, an exchange of experience in party organisational and ideological
work, the coordination of action in international organizations, and, as has been
already been noted above, 2Scoperation in the training of party-state and adminis-
trative-managerial cadres.

As is known, the educational institutions of the socialist states accept emissaries
from the developing countries regardless of their social-class, national-ethnic,
religious, and so forth membership. Nevertheless, the very logic of social de-
marcation results in the fact that the children of the local traditional aristoc-
racy and of other exploiting groups prefer to receive their education, as a rule,
in western universities, while the socialist countries are chosen basically by

the representatives of non-priviledged worker families and of the middle social
strata. For this reason, the vast majority of the Asian and African students in
the socialist countries come from the families of hired workers (workers, employees,
technicians, engineers, workers in the service sphere, agricultural proletarians,
peasants, and so forth), or from the families of small producers (small tradesmen,
peasants, artisans, and so forth). The sons and daughters of middle-level entre-
preneurers (rural farmers who employ hired labor, the owners of medium and large
sales, credit, and commercial institutions) make up only a negligible part of the
students. (of course, membership in the more well-to-do strata of the transitional
society is by no means some kind of insurmountable barrier to the penetration into
this social milieu of progressive, revolutionary democratic, and socialist ideas.)

It is very interesting in this connection to compare the political culture of net-
ional and revolutionary democracies, the former of which played a prominent role
in the revolutionary movement of the Asian and African peoples during the 1950's
and 1960's, while the latter occupied leading positions in the 1970's and the be-
ginning of the 1980's.

The national democrat. as has already been noted above, is a revolutionary
of the petit bourgeois type. The patriotic progressive and democratic ideals of
his political culture are in sharp antagonism to his class-limited approach to
the practical tasks of the social revolution, which is expressed above all in his
inability, and, sometimes, in his unwillingness to base himself on the working
masses, especially the working class, and to fully appreciate the importance of
international interaction in the national democratic revolution.

13
F0!‘0FFHJAI.USIIHULY
F0810FFKJAI.USI(NVLY

The revolutionary democrats who came out onto the arena of political struggle in
the 1970's avoided many of the "illnesses of growth" of the previous generation

of fighters against imperialism and domestic reaction. Thus, the political culture
of the leading groups in the vanguard working parties is characterized by an ob-
jective evaluation of the relationship between national and international factors
in the social revolution, a scientific understanding of the problems of the trans-
itional transformations of a socialist orientation, and by the acceptance not only
in theory but also in practice of the Harxist-Leninist doctrine.

In other words, in studying the problems of the formation and evolution of the new
political superstructure in the socialist oriented countries it is necessary to
take full account of the deep processes of domestic social demarcation in these
countries and of the ever increasing uneveness of the development of the societies
which have now emerged in the front line of the liberation, revolutionary struggle.
in one group of the left oriented countries the new political system actively
assists the formation of transitional (non-capitalist) production relations, the
radical renewal of the social structure of society, and a consolidation of the rul-
ing vanguard workers' parties. At the very sane time, the other echelon of social-
ist oriented countries in which political regimes of the middle social strata, and
especially of the petit bourgeois forces, have been established is experiencing
seriOus crisis and dead-end tendencies which, in the final analysis, reflect the
class-limitedness of present-day petit bourgeois nationalism. The profound anti-
imperialist and anti-feudal and, partially, non-capitalist transformations in these
':;ntries are frequently combined with negative tendencies and dangerous anti-
communist relapses which contain a serious threat of further deforming the very
process.of a socialist orientation.

The ruling socialist oriented parties possess an approximately single-type socio-
class basis which is characterized by the predominance of peasant-artisan masses
and of non-proletarian strata of workers and by the relative weakness of the nat-
ional proletariet combined with increased activity by petit bourgeois elements.
How is one to explain in this case that in one situation right-wing nationalists

come out of this environment, while in others it is revolutionary democrats and the
supporters of Marxist-Leninist doctrine?

It is a profound socio-political contradiction when social conditions which are
outwardly of the same type and a very similar historical situation engender very
dissimilar and sometimes diametrically'opposed types of political leadership and
exercise a very serious and frequently decisive influence on the character of the

national democratic revolution and on the process of its interaction with world
socialism and the world anti-imperialist struggle.

Directing the attention of philosophers and students of the Best toward a study

of political culture which frequently provides a very unique reflection of other
key spheres of social development-—economic, social, ideological, foreign political,
and so forth--could become one of the approaches to the problems of social pro-
gress and, especially, to the formation of the new political superstructure in
these countries. The temporal and spatial differences of political cultures will

help to deepen our understanding of general sociological laws in the situation of
the very "belated" historical development of the Asian, African countries.

I!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ€1al.ﬂ§li0tﬂdf
INDI.(Iﬂﬂ(JAI.lEiE(MVLY

Various regional-country, national-ethnic, traditionalist, modernist. and other
factors and. finally, historical "accidents" form, in the final analysis, the con-
crete social reality which determines not only one or another type of political'
consciousness among the masses, but also the character of the political leadership
and a definite type of interaction between the ruling groups and popular masses
and, consequently, the political superstructure of the transitional society. The
variations of interaction between the most diverse elements of political culture
and social reality are practically unlimited in the national democratic revolution.
For this reason, frequently the very same forms of political organizations and
methods of political actions (for example. the vanguard workers' party, a military
coup, the taking of power by peaceful means, a partisan war, and so forth) which
are doomed to failure at one phase of social development produced a genuinely re-
volutionary effect in a different historical situation. As practice shows, the
process of political institutionalization in the socialist oriented countries

frequently has a "zig-zag" character and falls and backward movements are possible
here.

Thus, the formation of a new superstructure in the socialist oriented countries

together with general sociological laws (the organic interconnection with the socio-
economic base with production relations which are transitional toward a social-

ist perspective, and so forth) reveals certain important specific features. Above
all, the degree of the relative independence of the basic superstructural institu-
tions and, first of all, of the revolutionary state is extraordinarily great. This
objectively increases the importance of the subjective factor-~the role of the
ruling vanguard workers' party in the political system of the transitional society.
The process of the gradual drawing together of the socialist orientation and pop-
ular democratic development (which should not be identified with the process of

the development of one type of social revolution into another) unfolds without the
establishment of political power of a proletarian type; that is. without the direct
entrance of these countries into the world socialist system. At the sane time, in
the struggle for the complete victory of the national democratic revolution the

ruling vanguard parties base themselves on the enormous and decisive support of the
countries of developed socialism.

By giving optimal assistance to the formation of new productive forces which accord

with the basic criteria of the scientific and technological revolution, of new

transitional (non-exploitation) production relations, and of a new social structure

with a leading role for the workers of town and country, the superstructure of so-

cialist orientation laysthe foundation for the subsequent transition to socialism.
FOOTNOTES

1. "Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress," Moscow, 1981, p 12.

2. v.c. Khoros, "Ideological Currents of a Popular Type in the Developing Countries,”
Moscow, 1980; A.S. Shin, "National Democratic Revolutions," Moscow, 1981.

3. “Basic Documents of the Ethiopian Revolution," Addis-Ababa, 1977, p 3.

15
sosomauustonur
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

COPY

2959
C50:

FCHICIHﬂCJA1.USE(NMLY

"The First Congress of the CDPHB,” Addis-Ababa, 1980; ”The Ethiopian Herald,“
19 Decenber 1979.

R.A. Ul'yanovskiy, "Political Portrait," Moscow, 1980, p 125.
A.V. Kiva, ”Countries with a Socialist Orientation," Moscow, 1978, p 138.

D. Sassu-Ngeseo, "The Congo andthe Chief Tasks of the Present Stage," PIODLEMY
MIRA 1 SOTSIALIZMA. Mo. 4, 1978, p 76.

"Materials of the First Congress of the Yemeni Socialist Party," Moscow, 1979,
p 71.

"First Congress of the People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola,“ Moscow,
1978, p 110.

Babrak Kernel, "The Report of the Fifth Plenun of the PDPA CC," KABUL MEI TIMES,
Kabul, 29 March 1981.

"Building the Potty in Mozambique," "African Communists,“ London, 1979, pp 60-61.

"The intelligentsia and Social Progress in the Developing Countries of the Best,"

Moscow, 1981; “The Ideology of the Revolutionary De-ocrets of Africa," Moscow,
1981.

"Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Repub1ic of Afghanistan," Kabul, 1960;
"Collection of Bebrak Karlal's Speeches (1979-1980). Published in Kabul by the
Ministry of Information and Culture of DEA. KABUL NEG TIMES 20, 21 April 1980.

"Relations of Revolutionary Solidarity and Fraternal Cooperation," "Information
Bulletin," No.1, 1981, pp 26-29.

"Materials of the First Congress of the Yeleni Socialist Party," pp 60-61;
"Basic Directions and indicators of the Second Corrected Five-Year Plan for Econ-
omic and Social Development for the Years 1981-1985," Aden, 1980, p 6.

"First Congress of the People‘s Movement for the Liberation of Angola," P 23.
“Charter of the Congolese Labor Party (March 1979)." Cited Pron M.D. Kosukhin,
”The Formation of an ideological-Political Strategy in African Countries with

a Socialist Orientation," Moscow, 1980, p 210.

”Party and State in Countries with a Socialist Orientation," Moscow, 1972, p 12.
Yo. N. Prinakov, "Countries with a Socialist Orientation: A Difficult but Real

Transition to Socialism," MIROVAYA EKONOMIKA 1 HEZMDUMARODNYYB OTNOSMBNIYA,
No. 7, 1981. p 14.

For More Details: K.N. Brutents, "The Liberated Countries in the 1970's," Moscow,
1979, p 142.

RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo PRAVDA, VOPROSY PILOSOFII

1807/11 16

F0!iOIIIC1Al.USE¢HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mow.

STUDY OF NATIONAL RELATIONS AT 26TH CPSU MORBSS
Baku AZARBAYJAN MIST! in Aseri So 7, July 81 pp 63-58

[Article by A. Deshdanirov: "The 26th CPS" Congress on Objectives in the Study of
National Relations. International and National Processes in the 0883"]

[Text] The scientific understanding of real social processes, essentially the de-
velopnent and Iutual relationship of the nations and peoples in our comtry, consti-
tute one of the lost i-portant aspects of the ideological work of the Con-mist Par-
ty. The unity of theory and practice is a rule for all the activity of the 6980.
This has been even more brilliantly presented in the decrees and documents of the
26th party congress which was en inortsnt contribution to revolutionary science and
which opened up a new stage in the coqrehension and changing of reality. In the
report of the CPSU Cc aade by Comrade 1.. I. Brerhmv at the congress. new theses
were suhsitted which deeply analysed the dialectics of contenorary develop-est and
enriched the theory of Marxian-minim.

The naterials of the 26th CPSU congress represent the mlti-faceted substantiation
and active iaplenentetion of the dialectics of haninisn which are a revolutionary
nethodology of change and cosprehension of reality. By means of scientifically ad-
vancing a theoretical comprehension of social processes and the duties standing be-
fore the party and Soviet people. the ways which have been opened to achieve all the
duties in the nae of successfully advancing the forward manner of every nation
and people, of all society, towards co—anisn constitute an organic unity.

The dialectical principles of Lenin have been eabodied in the decrees of the con-
gress. in the analysis and disposition of fundasntal questions of the building of
cos-union and in their relationship to problems of our develop-ant. Por ample,
we give the first requirenent of dialectical logic expressed by v.1. Lenin: "Truth-
fully, in order to understand nost acutely one oust grasp and study all sides, all
relationships and 'chsnnels' of it” (v.1. Lenin. Dorks, v32, p.89). This require-
aent is based on analysis of the object under consideration in its entire condition,
on the nulti-faceted study of its internal content, external relations and mutual
influence; in other words, the entire cowl“ of the elements of which this object
is coaposed and their sutusl relations.

Collamicating the coupler character of objective social processes and their practi-
cal requirenents define the necessity to theoretically coqrehend the. and work the-
out. The socio-historicsl practice of developed socialist places such problem be-
fore sociological thinking that they urgently denand mlti-faceted analyses on

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FT"!(HWN(1AI.USE13NLY

different levels and the conducting of complex research. The intensification of
material production and perfecting the social structure of our society. working out
and perfecting a supply program, perfecting the material and spiritual bases of our
way of life and the establishment of other very important and complex duties create
a basis for the complex examination and achievement of these complex duties. The
situation in all realms of the great socio-political and ideational-educational work
implemented by Lenin's party in the process of the building of communism is the same.

All these completely pertain to fulfilling the active and theoretical duties in the
national relations sector as well as to the sphere of activity of the principles of
socialist internationalism.

I

As demonstrated at the 26th CPSU congress, the rebuilding of all social relations
based on the principles of collectivism internally specific to a new structure in a
period of developed socialism is coming to an end. This rebuilding encompasses all

facets and "levels" of national relations which are a specific sector of the social
life of our society.

In a society of developed socialism, national relations. by striving for the factual
unity of peoples in decisive sectors of social life. by the processes of the equal-
ization of levels of economic development of the Soviet republics and by strengthen-
ing the single character of their social structure, acquire a new historical quality
characterized by a deep and multi—faceted spiritual-political unity. The maturity
of socialism means raising the level of the economy and culture of every one of our
peoples to an unprecedented height, broadening the historically creative scope of
the workers of all nations, and an even further manifestation of their social and
spiritual force. The new historical unity which embodies the fundamental socio-
economic. state—political unity of ideas of our nulti-national society -- the Soviet
people - is the most important manifestation of the quality of the condition and
level of development of inter—national mutual relations in mature socialism.

The constant concern shown by the Leninist national policy of the party, by the par-
ty for the interests of every people separate from and connected with the interests
of the unity of all the Soviet peoples. consideration of both the basic and daily
interests of every people in the structure of the stats and in economic and social
policy for: an internationalistic relationship of national interests with all-Union,
all-people interests in social development.

In L. I. Breshnev's congress report the achievements of the Soviet republics in the
10th Five-Year Plan and during the entire 1970s were deeply generalized; the situa-
tions and prospects for the development of national relations were analysed. and a
precise political evaluation was given to the high level of international unity of
fraternal peoples. It was especially noted at the congress that the fraternal friend-
ship of the peoples of our nulti-national Fatherland is being unceasingly strengthen-
ed. that national cultures progress and enrich each other mutually, that a culture

of a unique Soviet people is being formed. At the same time, the congress demonstrat-
ed thc necessity to increase attention to problems emerging in these ongoing process-
es and to resolve them on time.

LU
F0R10FFKJAL.US£(MNLY
F0! OFFK’IAI. USE ONLY

The ideas and claims put forth at the congress enriched the theoretical-methodolog-
ical bases for the scientific administration of national and international processes
and further defined the road of development of the princi,-es of Lenin's national
policy of the party creatively to accord with a new historical situation. These-
ideas and assertions are to mobilize scholars -- philosophers, sociologists, histor-
ions and ethnographers -- and demand that they increase their efforts in working out
and solving new problems scientifically. The theses and results of the 26th con-
gress give researchers a precise methodological position and show them the main ques-
tions to which they should direct their creative efforts.

Perfecting socialist democracy in the sector of national relations, strengthening
the unity and state structure of the Soviet people, developing friendly and frater-
nal relations of workers from all the nations in all sectors of social lutual influ-
ence from the country's broadest scope down to mutual relations in a labor collec-
tive, harmoniously relating the national and international aspects of the way of
life of Soviet men and finding a solution for the significant obligations of socio-
economic development of the republics - these are the concrete positions in the ac-
tive implenentation of the contemporary national policy of the party.

L. I. Brezhnev said: "Our line is to make maximum use of the entire potential in
order to increase the material and spiritual potential of every republic and simul-
taneously for the harmonious development of the entire country. On this path we
have truly made historical achievements." (Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress.
Baku. Azerbaijan State Press, 1981, p. 73). The unswerving implementation of Lenin‘s
national policy has incomparably hastened the socio-economic progress of the repub-
lics. All of them have entered the 1980s with a highly developed economic structure.
The results of the 10th Five-Year Plan prove this clearly. Per example, the volume
of industrial production grew 142 percent in Belorussis, 127 percent in Uzbekistan.
141 percent in Georgia. 167 percent in Azerbaijan, 127 percent in Lithuania, 132 per-
cent in Moldavia, 129 percent in Tajikistan. 156 percent in Armenia and 12‘ percent
in Estonia. The process of the intensification of agriculture in every union repub-
lic continues. Processes in the spiritual progress of the nations and peoples of

our country have reached a new height. The 26th party congress highly regarded the
help given the unique complex of the country's economy fron workers of the Ukraine,
Belorussia and Kazakhstan. Transcaucasia. Central Asia and the Baltic states and by
all peoples of the USSR.

As said at the congress, in the past major changes took place in the location of pro-
ductive forces; territorial-production complexes were formed in the European part of
the RSPSR. the Ursls. Siberia. the Far East, Kazakhstan and Tajikistan; construction
of the Baykal-Amur Mainline has continued successfully. All these dynamic and aulti-
faceted processes create profound. serious changes in the content and structure of
national relations. strengthen the internationalisation of social life and find their
reflection in an ethnic unity.

within the processes of fornat;on of the social homogeneity of our society a new his-
torical unity is further strengthened; inter-national mutual relations and mutual in-
terdependence are reinforced. The 10th Five-Year Plan was a new great step forward
in developing and deepening indestructible international connections and friendship,
fraternal and mutual aid of nations and peoples of the 0883, of progress in their

1
Il)R!0lWﬂ(1Alf‘ﬂSli(NVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

social and spiritual powers. and the strengthening of international processes. All
these are ineradicably linked to the creativity and dynamic inlemsntation of Lenin's
principles in the national policy of the party by the CPS!) CC and a result of active-
1y fulfilling decrees of the 26th patty congress.

In the congress aaterials of union republic co-xnist parties. important generalisa-
tions were made on the experience of active implementation of the party's national
policy and on results of the socio-economic and spiritual development of different
peoples of the country. These materials. which reflect past successes of fraternal
peoples of the 088R. must be deeply and scientifically analysed and culminated in
our work.

The disposition of such questions by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev from the tribunal of the
26th CPSU Congress acquire a special actuality based on the significant evaluations
given to the results of party organisational activity in the cities of lioscow and
Leningrad and many republics, oblasta and regions of the country. For sample, the
26th CPSU cc. gave the highest evaluation to the work of the Azerbaijan party organ-
ization: “In mobilizing the workers to achieve the quotas of the 10th rive-Year
Plan ahead of schedule. the activity of the Azerbaijan Commist Party is worthy of
a positive evaluation."

This circumstance requires deeply studying the experience of Azerbaijani co-lnists
who proupted an active. competent party leadership in all sectors of economic and
cultural building and of the social and spiritual development of the republic work-
ers.

Materials and documents of the 30th congress of the Azerbaijan Cmist Party, which
encompass all sectors of the left and work of our republic, have a great socio-poli-
tical and scientific worth fron this point of view. The basic political and socio-
cconouic results of the development of Azerbaijan in the 10th Five-Year Plan and in
the 1970s as a whole were deeply generalised.

The Azerbaijan SSR. first among union republics, achieved the 5-year plan regarding
industrial and agricultural development in 4 years and 2 months. The republic im-
plemented in 6 years the 10th Five-Year Plan regarding the growth of national income.
In 5 years national intone increased 66 percent instead of the planned 32 percent,
and industrial production increased 67 percent instead of 39. The average yearly
growth of production in agriculture grew 47 percent instead of the planned 21.

As a whole. industrial production increased by a factor of 2.2, and general agricul-
tural production twofold. The specific importance of Azerbaijani industrial products
within the general voluae of the country‘s industrial production increased 31 per-
cent. The share of our republic in the total general agricultural growth was 3.1
percent in the 9th Five-Year Plan and 6 percent in the 10th; in other words. it grew
roughly twofold.

Reaching the quotas of the 10th Pive-Year Plan ahead of schedule was noted by a high
award of the Fatherland -- out their Medal of Lenin. Due to results of All-union
socialist competition in 1980 and the 10th Five-Year Plan Soviet Azerbaijan was
awarded the Red Banner of the CPS!) CC, the USSR Council of Ministers. the ADCCTU and
the Komsomol Central Co-ittee.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These data conspicuously characterize the growth of the rspublic's economic poten-
tial and .1 rise to new heights of progress in all sectors of the life of the Azerbai-
jani people. As a result. all these were reflected in the growth of aid to the unit-

ed economic complex of the country by Soviet Azerbaijan and in the broadening and
enriching of its socio-econonic and scientific-technical relations with all the fre-
ternal republics. Progressive changes in the structure of the dynamic development
and naterial structure of industrial and agricultural production stimlated process-
es perfecting the social structure of the republic. As a result, the same type of
social structure in Azerbaijan was strengthened through the structure of Soviet so-

ciety, and the international relations of the Azerbaijani people were broadened and
enriched.

As demonstrated at the 30th Azerbaijan Col-mist Party Congress, these successes
were gained under the leadership of the Con-mist Party thanks to its wise national
policy and constant sulti-faceted help. It was stated at the congress of the repub-
lic party organization: "The 1970s proved brilliantly the great strength of Lenin's
national policy. Lenin's national policy manifested itself under the concrete con-
ditions of each Soviet republic in all its variety." (Materials of the 30th Con-
gress of the Azerbaijan Jo-unist Party. Baku. 1981. p. 16).

In the 10th Five-Year Plan all this found its embodiment in the USSR Constitution
and the constitutions of union republics. in specific decrees. in the new law on an-
tononous regions in the RSPSR. in the expansion of Central Asian irrigation systems.
in the developnent of reindeer culture in the Far East and of sheep husbandry in
Kirghizstan. in the protection of the resources of Lake Seven and in the economic
and cultural development of the peoples of Abkhazia, ‘l'uva. buryatia and the North.
Leonid Illich said at the 26th CPSU Congress: "The mere recitation of decrees ac-
cepted in the report period and measures taken by these decrees on a daily basis
show how broad and multi-faceted are the questions which occupy the CPSU cc and the
government when they timely analyze problems regarding the developing all republics
in our country and strengthening the USSR."

Special decrees on the development of the most important sectors of Azerbaijani in-
dustry and agriculture accepted in the 9th and 10th ﬁve-Year plans by the CPSU Cen-
tral Conittee and the USSR Council of Ministers brilliantly exemplify the concern
and attention given to every republic by the party and government. These decrees
defined the comprehensive analysis and long-term prospects of najor socio~economic
developsent probless of the republics in every stage of the struggle to implement
decrees of the 26th and 25th CPSU congresses.

The active isplenentation of these decrees. which are historically important for the
Azerbaijani people. assured the fundamental elevation of the entire Azerbaijani econ-
omy in the 1970s, the rapid development of industry and agriculture. the attaimsent
and overfulfillment of plans and socialist obligations and the significant improve-
aent of quality indicators in every sector of the economy.

11

National relations, perfected and developed through revolutionary change of social
life. manifests its active influence on the character and pace of social progress
and helps them gain impetus. The peoples of the USSR, pooling in every circumstance

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their economic possibilities and resources, give the resources of new regions for

use through joint efforts that help equalize the develop-ant of different republics
and oblasts; in this any they increase the economic power of our country.

all-union, inter-republic and inter-national levels. a lulti-facsted relationship in
the building activity of fraternal peoples and a closer unity of the nulti-national
Soviet people in this area.

temporary conditions. The necessity to strengthen the relationship between scien-
tific-technical progress, the growth of the centralisation of production and the
further internationalization of productive forces by all channels arise out of this
because this relationship significantly defines the further developeent of the ob-
jective basis of the internationalising processes of social life. Changes nov oc-
curring in the content and structure of national relations through the influence of
scientific-technical progress are sons of the nest isportant signs of a developed
socialist society; these signs are reflected in the reinforcenent of the life activ-
ity of Soviet sen and in strengthening the inter-national bases in all sectors of
their daily way of life.

Internationalization at the stage of nature socialisn creates qualitatively new suiti-
fsceted relations between nations and brings about their rspproehenent. This opens

a wide arena into the lost valuable aspects and points of stability in the synthesis
of the life and traditions of different peoples, and into the new international forns
of social life, culture and living standards. The perfection of the internationali-
2at10n of national relations plays an active role under conditions of socialise.

At the stage of developed socialise the qualitative change and perfection of the na-
terial international bases and social forss of the entire standard of living regard-
ing the unity within it. of life activity. occupies an increasingly broader arena,
possesses a complex character. and creates new possibilities for the even closer
unification of all society and every socialist nation, and for their nulti-faceted
full and harnonious developnent. Additionally. the legitinate denand to deepen by
every channel the international processes of the objective conditions of our soci-
ety's developnent is revealed even sore clearly: ace the intensive scone-1c and
satin-cultural develop-eat of fraternal peoples continue even sore quickly based on
these processes.

An important scientific-practical duty energes fron the consideration and study of
the internationalizing processes in social life; the results eserge clearly in the
changes in the structure of national relations, in the way of life, in the torus of
the cos-mnity. in customs and drives. and in een's naterial and spiritual needs.

22
F1)RiOFFICIAL UGEZfNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The increasing growth of internationalization in different facets of the life of
each of the Soviet peoples, the elimination of traditions and vestiges of the past.
the strengthening of the general. international. common Soviet indicators connected
to progressive national characteristics - all these processes in their complexity
duly grow out of socialist social relations and pass into co-mist social rela—
tions. From the point of view of theses put forth at the 26th CPSU Congress, these
processes must be deeply and scientifically analyzed.

The friendship of fraternal peoples is a powerful source of the rapid elevation'to
the summits of building socialism and communism in the land of the Soviets. As
shown at the congress. this friendship assured the successful implementation of the
party's program responsibilities regarding the national question and helped the na-
tional provinces of the Russia of the past quickly reach the level of development of
the center.

In this work the gratuitous help of the Russian people played a very important role.
While advancing our society along the road of building communism. the international
union of workers from all nations is further strengthened. and the friendship of
peoples becomes richer and more fruitful. The dialectics of this rare spiritual-
politlcal event are thus: first, towards the mutual help of these people through

the very great and fundamentally unilateral help of the Russian people to all other
peoples who had been oppressed and backward in development. Now the friendship of
peoples finds its enbodiment in the exchange of material and spiritual resources
which unite dozens of nations and peoples in variegated. multi-faceted relations in
development and conradely competition. Today. the friendship of peoples is at the
core of collective experience and wisdom which serve the building of a new life for
the peoples. Today, the friendship of peoples means the concentration of the efforts
of nations and peoples in the most important decisive sectors and objectives in build-
ing communisn at the present period.

Every stage of our forward movement is marked by construction on the all-union scale
by shockworkers and the growth of help in works common to the people by every nation
and people. The party recommended the development of the Non-chernosem of the RSPSR
as one of the important orientation points of the joint efforts of all peoples of
our country in the period prior to its congress: ”For a number of reasons this re-
gion is in a difficult situation relative to some other regions. The CPSU cc and
the Soviet government have taken broad measures to develop the hon-chernozes zone
under consideration and have implemented then. This duty is so complex and urgent
that it must be done in the shortest time possible through the joint efforts of all
the republics. For us this kind of experience is a rewarding experience. We recall
extending the Turksib, constructing Ural-Xuzhas. exploiting the virgin lands and re-
storing Tashkent. One must work with the same effort and solidarity in the Non-cher-
nozem zone." This work was broadened in the 10th Five-Year Plan. Azerbaijani work-
ers made a worthy contribution to the development of the Non-chernozem zone. Now.
international cooperation has taken on an even greater scope. There is no doubt
that the call of the party will increase the efforts of fraternal peoples and unite
them even more closely in the name of a great goal.

2
FOR OFFKJAI?USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

111

Thus. the 19709 were a new great step in the further progress of nations and peoples.
in their rapprochement with each other and in their close unification into a new
historical unity -- the Soviet people. It was noted at the 26th congress that today
the unity of Soviet nations is stronger than ever. Certainly this is not to say
that all questions in the national relations sector have been resolved. L. I. Brezh-
nev said at the congress: "The development dynanics of a large anti-national state
such as ours raise significant probleas demanding the concerned attention of the
party." Lenin's party always keeps problem of the development of national rela~
tions at the center of attention and resolves them in a manner appropriate to the
interests of every republic and every nation individually. These and results which
develop and concretiee Leninist national policy principles of the 26th CPS“ Congress
are conbined with deep respect for the national characteristics of peoples and a
concern for further strengthening their friendship and unity.

The 26th CPSU Congress paid special attention to one of the lost imrtmt aspects
of the socialist national relations which evolved in our country. The discussion
was about relations between nations on the scope of the different republics, ob-
lasts and krays and about the unswerving ilplansntation of Lenin's national policy
principles under the specific conditions of the corresponding regions. It is clear
that these questions were not raised by chance. But first one must examine the
question of the scope and level of the mutual activity of nations and peoples, be-
cause national relations are always formed from these. Then, the channels and meth-
ods of the relationship to international processes, their study, generalisation and
administration depend on the level of national relations. their "degree," geography
and whatever the specific subject is.

National relations constitute a special sector of social relations and reflect the
society's social-ethnic structure. The mtual activity of nations is turned into
a structure in which the basic elements of the social system in the national rela-
tions complex exist according to the basic patterns of social unity; in other words
the discussion is about the economic. territorial-production. ethnolinguistic. spir-
itual-ideological and satin-psychological aspects of this Iutual activity.

National relations in the USSR are anti-schematic, and their different levels re-
flect in this or another form the variety and many-sidedness of the ethnic conposi-
tion of Soviet society. Nations and peoples which are the basic populations of
union and autonomous republics. autonomous oblasts and national regions are differ-
entiated between the subjects (or transnitters, participators) in national relations.
0n the territory of the majority of the national republics and oblasts and in all
the large cities of the country a significant population of different nations exist
in mixed fans and participates in mtual inter-national activity. Social-class,
personal, fanily-narriage, state-political. etc. structures differ in the national
relations system.

Elements of national relations do not have the same content but are connected to one

arother in a complex. mutually subordinate form. With then social-class relations
among nations and peoples play a decisive role.

Relations between Soviet republics are the fullest. broadest, most organized sector
of national relations; the Soviet socialist state plays a basically subjective role.
In the activity of our state the principles of socialist federaliss are organically
related to Soviet national state building.

2!;
POI! omcut use ONLY
“OR 0FﬁK1Al.USEIDNLY

The Soviet state plans and organizes the development of nations and national rela-
tions. The role of the Soviet federation which interconnects national relations
reveals itself here. The federation administers national and international process-

es by means of its own state government and state administrative organs on the wid-
est scale.

The state leadership of the mutual activity of nations and peoples encompasses the
most important channels of cooperation in the economic and cultural sector and in
social and political development. Thus. relations between republics are not limited
only by state activity. The special importance and benefits of other forms of inter-
national relations among workers of different republics at the stage of mature so-
cialism is steadily growing.

Relations between nations on the scope of individual republics and oblasts is com-
pletely another kind of characteristic of international mutual influence. They are
differentiated from national relations formed on the level of the whole society ac-
cording to structure and scope. Such relations are even more naturally transmitted
into the content of social life of an individual republic or city, and many of their
facets were strengthened in the corresponding accial structures. Here the number of
the population subordinate to each other, the nature of the location of national
groups, the degree of their internal unity and mutual proximity acquire great impor-
tance.

The composition of the population in Soviet republics is multi-national. Related to
this. the mutual relationships of nations are an important structural element of the
social organization in every republic. Inter-national and ethnic intergroup ties
which are strengthened in the social structures and local characteristics of the pat-
tern of life encompass the most diverse sectors of life and activity from production
collectives to family-marriage relations.

National relations within the republics under conditions wherein international pro-
cesses are strengthened have an even greater importance as an active factor in de-
veloping the republic's economy and culture. The strengthening of the multi-national
character of the population together with the growth of the local populations of re-
publics. changes occurring in the ethnodemographic structure, the broad development
of all forms of communication between nationalities. the growth of situations involv-
ing a change in a dwelling place among the population of republics, migratory pro-
cesses and natural assimilation processes characterise significantly the dielectics
of the development of national relations both within and between republics. The
growth of marriages between persons of different nationalities is a manifestation of
the unceasing rapprochement between nations and peoples.

All these progressive processes are not equally meaningful by their character or man-
ner of manifestation. These processes, where attention is slack towards ideationsl-
educational work or the specific needs and demands of the people, or international-
istic norms are disregarded in cadre education. can lead to situations of conflict

or contradiction.

At the 26th CPSU Congress it was stated: "In recent years the number of citizens
who are not natives of local nationalities has grown significantly in a number of
republics. They have their own specific demands in the language. culture and

25
roe omcm. use ONLY
I!!! (bl-1"“ 'IAL USE ONLY

festyle sectors. It is a responsible duty of republic party organizations to
influence these types of questions profoundly, to show ways to resolve these ques-
tions opportunely, to ensure the necessary representation of all nations in party
and state organs, and to take the enterprising and ideational-spiritual qualities
of everyone into consideration at this time.

An orderly process such as the well-rounded development of nations and their rap-

prochement to each other influences all sectors and realms of the life of our soci-
ety. This process found its brilliant embodiment in the international unity of the
workers of every Soviet republic. The feeling of exclusiveness of different nations
in territorial, socioncultural and life style is long past. how the nulti-national

population of republics is a friendly work collective living by the laws of the so-
cialist way of life.

lntcrnationalism. friendship and brotherhood of peoples in Azerbaijan dominates the
mentality. The Azerbaijan Co-unist Party, which is faithful to the international-
istic traditions of the party and the Soviet people. unceasingly follows Lenin's
national policy, always shows concern for the social and cultural development of
all nations living in the republic. attentively studies their specific demands in
regarding language, culture and life style, and seriously implements international-
ism in cadre questions.

Experience shows that such practices increase the growth of the nesses' socio-po-
litical activity. their help in economic and cultural building and. as a result.
strengthens the ideational-spiritual potential of inter-national relations. As not-
ed in the 30th Congress of the Azerbaijan Coemunist Party. in the 1970s "the inter-
national unity of nulti-national Soviet Azerbaijan was strengthened further, and the
international fraternal relations of dozens of nations living in our republic was
deepened and diversified further." This nentality of inter-nationalism, friendship
and brotherhood, which rules in the republic, is one of the most important factors
in the workers' successes and achievements.

ideas and principles of internstionalisn, which have firm roots in all sectors of
our life. have raised national relations in the USSR to such a spiritual height that
national and ethnic differences can no longer interfere in men's relations. Thus.
the growth of the scope of comnity among workers who are not only not close eth-
nically but from dozens of nations significantly different from one another brings
forth many problems; solution of these problems depends to a significant degree on
the development of a culture of internationalist relations and education in tact and
ethics in inter-national eutual activity.

The cultural-living. ethnolinguistic and social psychological characteristics of
different nations are reflected in the conceptions, relations, and interests of men.
The intensive social and international processes in society today considerably
change these characteristics. The moral and spiritual resources of peoples are be-
ing created, developed and strengthened to join together even more harmoniously and
to mutually influence other general aspects in the living pattern, in common Soviet
traditions and in men's nature and relationships. Thus, the party speaks out both
against not taking national differences into account and against exaggerating them.
The 26th CPSU Congress declared: "we are against tendencies directed at the arti-
ficial elieination of national characteristics. But we also consider it unacceptable

26
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NQLY
FOR'OFFKJAI.USEIONLN

to exaggerate these characteristics." In all its work, lenin's party conducts an
uncompromising struggle against such manifestations as chauvinisu and nationalism
which are foreign to national feelings and the nature of socialise which respects
the worth of every man. As willed by the great Lenin. the party speaks against
"petty nationalistic limitation, isolation and individualism,“ and definitely
against national egoism and arrogance; these negative situations reveal themselves
in tendencies towards occasional localism, attempts to glorify remnants of the

pest. nourishing a non-class point of reference in evaluating historical events,
etc.

Eliminating all manifestations of nationalist mentality is in line with the inter-
ests of all the nations and peoples of the country which form the basis of the USSR
Constitution. An implacable relationship to all manifestations alien to interna-
tionalism and an uncompromising struggle against them are among the most important
stances in perfecting national relations, strengthening the friendship and brother-
hood of peoples in the USSR and educating the new man.

The demands of building communism, the ever deeper influence on international pro-
cesses in all sectors of the life of nations and peoples and the dialectics of de-
velopment of national relations at the present stage are raising scientific re-
search into mutual influence in sectors of the social and cultural conceptions of
nations and national groups as well as in interwnationel calmmuty psychology, and
setting up and working out the national-psychological characteristics of men to
the highest priority. Studying the position and role of the personality in the
system of national relations and in international and national processes acquires
special importance.

The party, following Lenin's directive regarding subordinating "the interests of

the specific to the interests of the gener " gives special importance to the inter-
national education of Soviet men. L. I. Brezhnev said: "It is the sacred duty of
the party to educate the workers in the spirit of Soviet patriotism and socialist
internationalism and in the spirit of pride in belonging to the one, great Soviet
Fatherland." (Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress, p. 75).

The emergence of this patriotic feeling of all our peoples, while dependent on the
social conception, psychology and culture of socialist peoples and nations that
bring together a new historical unit of men and that are occupied with solving gen-
eral unique duties in sectors of economic, socio—politicel and cultural building,

is an important idcational-political and emotionaldmentsl result of their developing
and enriching each other. The study of the origin, content and prospects for devel-
opment of the feeling of mutual national pride of Soviet man, and working out the
active educational obligations connected to this is a broad comprehensive problem in
the Harrist-Leninist theory pertaining to society.

In moving the question of the mutual national pride of Soviet man to the center of
attention of Soviet philosophers and sociologists, one is forced to see that it op-
ens up another important area in the sector of studying the Soviet people as a new
historical entity. The emergence and development of this unique quality in the
social concept of the entire aulti-national Soviet people, this manifestation com-
mon to the psychology of Soviet men of every nationality reflects the high level

of unity of the Soviet people; this unity is based on a very firm socio-economic,

2
FOR 0!1ﬂ€1AI.USE¢DNL¥
FOR1DFFK3A1.USEIONLN

state-legal, and cultural-ideological foundation. In this context, the mutual na-
tional pride of Soviet nan strikes the eye as a product of the achievements of
Soviet society in solving the national question socialistically, as an emotional-
spiritual sunnit of the friendly and cooperative relations of workers free all na-
tionalities and as an already-foraed international concept of the Soviet people.

Examining the objective conditions of the origin, source and fornation of the mutual
national pride of Soviet man and scientific analysis of its sociocultural content

can significantly help the conmunist education of the workers, essentially in the
work of educating the- in Soviet patriotism and socialist internationalism. The
responsibility of philosophers, sociologists and other soical scientists is to broad-
en this kind of research and help develop and deepen the mutual national pride of
Soviet nan in the generation growing up and among all the workers.

IV

As stated at the 26th CPSU Congress, "the experience gained in solving the national
question in our country. the successes gained by the nations and peoples of the USSR
in economic and social development has great iaportance among peoples." (Materials
of the 26th CPSU Congress. Speech of Conrade G. A. Aliyev, NGCIRHST 26 February
1981). Our historical experience gained in elindnating centuries-old backwardness
and creating a nodern economic structure and culture is valuable for young national
states, especially for states opting for a socialist stance.

At the 26th congress our party generously talked about its long experience in revo-
lutionary change and showed that this experience was never accepted involuntarily
and that a non-creative relationship to selecting channels of thoughtful revolution-
ary change is alien to the internntionalistic position of conmunists. Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev said at the congress: "...All socialist countries implemented their revo-
lutions in forms special to the-selves which energed relative to class forces with-
in each of then according to national groupings and external conditions." If those
talking about "parallels" today or accepting forms and schsaa by force, or those
juxtaposing connunist parties according to whether the paths selected or not selec-
ted were through the rebuilding of society, if they interested the-selves in the
countries of socialism, specifically with the multi-faceted, varied experience gath-
ered in the sector of building socialism in our country and in all the Soviet re-
publics, it would not be bad.

The dialectics of national and international characteristics in the change of social
relations by revolutionary means and building a new life holds an important place in
the materials of the 26th Party Congress.

V. I. Lenin taught: "All nations will cone to socialism, this is inevitable, but

all of then will not arrive at it in the sane way; every nation will create something
specific in this or another form of deaocracy and this or another type of the diets-
torship of the proletariat and at this or another tempo of socialist change of dif-
ferent sectors of social life." (works, v.23, p. 68). The actuality of these theses,
which have been confirmed by historical practice, was noted with a new force at the
26th CPSU Congress; the Congress showed that the successful logical application of
general principles and rules according to definite concrete historical conditions is
a necessary condition for successfully achieving the duties of building. Such a

28
FORIOFFKHAI.USE(MULY
F0R10FFKJAI.USE10NIX

thesis, which is important in principle, of the theory of Harsism-Leninism forms
the basis of this requirement so that the major general rules of building a social-
ist revolution and socialism do not manifest themselves in a pure form in specific
historical truth but in changed forms which the great diversity of historical, '

socio-economic, national, cultural life styles and other characteristics and trad-
itions create.

The mechanical repetition of principles and methods of building socialism is foreign
to proletarian internationalism. Proletarien internationalism revolves around broad-
ening the scope of social creativity and the capacity to search for and find a real-
istic way to attain general international goals under specific national conditions.
Conducting an ill-considered struggle in the question of the relationship to the
processes of building socialism and communisa, being unaware of specific conditions
and national-historical traditions, disregarding the most important foundations of
Harrism-Leninism and not paying attention to general rules of building socialism
and communism cannot and must not occur. Vladimir llli'ch Lenin taught: "Those
conducting a struggle for specific questions without resolving the general questions
will inevitably 'run up against' these general questions at every step. To blindly
run up against these in every specific situation condemns their policy to the worst
wavering and lack of principle." (V. l. Lenin, Complete works, v.15, p. 607).

Acting on Lenin's directives, our party is founded on a deep understanding of the
general laws of social development. By taking concrete circumstances into account
there is a way, studied and confirmed through all practical experience in the world
revolutionary process, to establish these laws.

General characteristics of the stimulating multi-faceted experience in developing
our society have been organically joined to aspects expressing the historical char-
acteristics and national qualities of this or that sector of social reality. Also,
as practice has shown, the sphere of general international aspects in the advance
toward: ccnnunism is being regularly and unceasingly broadened. while the sphere of
specific aspects is being circumscribed.

The historical experience of world socialism irrefutably proved the general impor-
tance of the basic laws of building a new society, laws which were revealed by Marx-
ism-Leninism and which were embodied in the assiduous activity of Soviet communists
for the first time. This experience concerned Lenin's idea of the necessity of
taking specific living conditions and characteristics of different peoples into
consideration in order to attain general, historical international objectives.

The 26th CPSU Congress helievably proved the party's faithfulness to the Leninist
revolutionary methodology in the complex solution of different, complicated objec-
tives of the economic. social and cultural development of the USSR peoples. The par-
ty's concern for developing each Soviet republic and the entire USSR is clearly re-
flected in the Basic Directions of Economic and Social Development Until 1990 and

in the 1981 plans for all union republics. These plans open broad new possibilities
for further progress and closer rapprochement of nationalities and for strengthening
the Soviet people's unity.

2
FOR OI1WCJZi.lEﬂE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The. great successes and achieveunts of the USS: peoples and their unshekeable
friendship and brotherhood are the lost valuable achieve-eats of our society and a
great historical achievesent praised by all. But life does not stand still; social-
ist national relations vill develop further. will deepen and be perfected. This
demands that scholars, researchers, propagandista and organizers approach the sen--
ifeststioos and processes of sodern national relations attentively. purposefully

and creatively. The 26th CPSU Congress put forth a m: of pri-ary theses char-
acterizing deeply and mlti-facetedly the national relations of a society under de-

veloped socialism in isportsnt political and theoretical «laments. Studying and

transmitting these theses are nov one of the isportent duties of our entire ideo-
logical work.

1831/ 109

30
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
ll!!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lliE(lILY

REGIONAL

ETHNIC STATUS OF 'WNTAIN JBHS' REVIEWED
Moscow SOVETSKAYA BTNOGRAFIYA in Russian No. 5, Sap-Oct 81 pp 109-112
[Article M. Ye. Hatatov: "0n the Question of the Tet Bthnos"]

[Text] The nationalities question has been and continues to be one of the most
difficult problems of social development whose broad historical solutions were
only made possible by the October Revolution. Lenin's theory of the nation and
Leninist principles of the organization of nationality relations have become the
basis for the successful solution of the nationality question. They have found
their embodiment in real socialism and in the fact of the formation of a new in-
ternational and socio-political community-the Soviet people.

The Tsts--a small people which lives in Azerbaijan and in Dagestan-have a com-
plex history. Their distant ancestors together with other Iranian speaking tribes
cane iron the north. In the beginning of the first millennium 3.6. these tribes
lived a nomadic life on the vast steps of Eurasia stretching from the Dnepr to

the Ural Steppes. In the seventh century 3.6. they penetrated into the Caucasus
and Iran and occupied vast areas there.

The distinguished Soviet specialist in Eastern studies 1.“. D'yskonov believes that
the Tats, Tslyshi, Hazanderantsy. and Gilyaki to this day speak dialects "which
represent remnants of the lndo-Buropeen language" which was originally the lan-
guage of eastern Hidiya. and that the opinion that tge rate and ralyshi were sub-
jected to Persianization is fundamentally incorrect.

The well-known Dagestani historian R.H. Hagomedov also connects the origin of the
Tate with the infiltration of Dagestan from the north by Iranian speaking tribes
which later, during the period of the rule of the Sasenids, settled in various
areas of the Caucasus. Subsequently, this scholar believes. the "Tate devgloped
as an individual ethnic group in the general mass of other ethnic groups.”

Like many other peoples of the Caucasus, the rats were completely illiterate and
their way of life was semi-patriarchal. One of the peculiarities of the Tats is
that before the revolution they, despite their small numbers, professed three re-
ligions: Islam. Christianity, and Judaism (the latter was professed by 95 percent
of the Tate of Dagestan). Moreover. only the followers of Judaism, the so-called

ﬂountain Jews (deg-chufut), were separated into a special people on the basis of
this religious characteristic.

31
IOIiDIFIJAl.UBIIMNLY
FOIflﬂﬂClALlﬂlEONlY

The dominant opinion is that a people is characterised by a common language and
territory, a czmmon economic, political, and cultural life, and by ethnic self-
consciousness. 0n the basis of these characteristics, all of the Tats. regardless
of their religious beliefs. were classified as a single people as early as the
1930's. Since time immemorial they have been living in Azerbaijan and Dagestan,
they speak a single language, have common cultural traditions, and since time
immemorial have maintained friendly relations with one another, which was noted
by many pre-revolutionary travelers and investigators. Under Soviet power the
rats created their own writing and literature for the first time. A Statute on
the Tats as a single people was put into the Constitution of the Dagestan ASSR
which was adopted by the llth All-Dagestan Congress of Soviets in 1937, and con-

firmed by the presently operating Basic Law of the republic which was adopted in
1978.

The decision to give a single designation to the Tat language groups of the pop-

ulation was of exceptional importance in strengthening the freindship of the peo-
ples of Dagestan.

As is noted in the Decree of the CC CPSU "On a Further Improvement of Ideological
and Political Educational Work,“ imperialist propaganda is constantly waging a
fierce assault on the minds of Soviet people in order to undermine the international
friendship of the peoples of the Soviet Union. This same goal is served by the
attcupts of the Zionists and their supporters to number a.l people who profess or
prof-seed Judaism, including the Tats. among the ”world Jewish nation." v.1. Lenin
had already regarded this propagandistic conception as being "completely invalid
scientilically" and “reactionary in its political meaning."

when one examines the history of the formation of the Tat people from the position
of Lenin's theory of nations and coepares the indisputable facts of the past, one
cannot but come to the conclusion that the version regarding the membership of some
of the Tats. namely the Judaic Tats, to one of the biblical "Tribes of Israel" is
without grounds historically, ethnographically, and antropologically.

Hhere. then. did the Judaic Tats come from? As is known, the first migrations of
ancient Jews from Palestine took place many centuries before our era. After con-
quering the Israeli Kingdom and its capital of Samaria (722 3.0.), the Assyrians
expelled 27.000 Jews. The Babylonians, after the subjugation of Judas and the
destruction of Jerusalem (568 B.C.), also expelled 15.000 people (the so-called
Babylonian Imprisonment). According to historians. these two streams of migrants
bchxupdbasically to the upper. well-to-do strata of Jewry and were put by their
conquerors in the economically developed areas of Ancient Dvurech'ye (present day
iraq) and in the cities of Hidiya (today Iranian Azerbaijan) and includ in the
commercial and artisan urban population of their countries of residents. Soon
after the Persian King Kir allowed them to return to Palestine. According to the
data of A.l. gymenuv. al.360 people with 7.000 slaves of other nationalities re-
turned there. As for the third expulsion of the ancient Jews from Palestine--
during the era of Roenn dominion (second century 8.0.). --it sent them into the
countries of the Mediterranean and, consequently. has nothing to do with the
question which is being examined.

32
FOI1OFFIJA1.USE(NNLY
FOI1DFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Could people who had come from Palestine enter into the Tat language tribes of the
northern borders of the ancient Persian empire? T50 Tats lived for I long til! in
isolation in reaote rural areas on the northern border of the ancient Persian state
and were engaged exclusively in agriculture. But right up until the 20th century
the Jews in Persia did not have the right to change their places of persenent res-
idence. Consequently, close contacts between the Jews, on the one hand. and the
Tats, on the other. and. especially, ethnic airing, were impossible. To a certain
extent this is also confirmed by the anthropological data. At the beginning of
this century K.h. Kudrov classified the Tat Hoglena and the Tat Judaic tribes in
the same anthropological group--Central Asian.

The Tats were by no means the only non-Jewish people which has been subjected to
Judaization. It is sufficient to recall Yemen of the sixth and seventh centuries
and the Khazar Kingdom on the Lower Volga and the Northern Caucasus where Judaism
was adopted in the ninth century, and today the Karaimi, certain Berber tribes in
the south of Morocco. individual groups of Indian, Chinese, and Negro origin, and
so forth. All of these ethnic formations, of course, have nothing in cosmon either
with Palestine or with the Zionist "world Jewish nation." It should be enphasized
that until relatively recently the Tats of all religions preserved their pagan
beliefs and rituals which are widely dissesinated also among the other peoples of
the Caucasus. All of then believed in the trans-aigration of souls into various
animals and in the existence of clean and unclean spirits.9 Until the relatively
recent past a very archaic burial rite was preserved among the Judaic Tats which
was clearly in contradiction with any monotheistic religion. Even the prayer
houses, the so-called numazi. of the Judaic Tats differed sharply from European
synagogues. and. as N. Chernyy. has noted, were "built in the Tatar taste." 0 I.
Anisinov has written that polygamy is widespread among all {ate and that they know
incest and other custons which do not exist along the Jews. 1 It is characteristic
that the European Jews who settled in Dagestsn after its unification with Russia
were compelled, for example, in the city of Derbent, to built a prayer house for
themselves, althOugh a prayer house already existed there in which the Judaic Tats
prayed-~so different were these buildings themselves (a synagogue is a tall build-
ing with large windows, a nuns: is a low long building with a flat roof) and the
rituals and customs of these two essentially different peoples.

As we see. the story that some of the Tata have their origin in the "promised land"
is scientifically groundless. And it could not be otherwise. for to deduce the
concept of nation or people not from its socio-econonic content and not from its
real interests. but from spiritual characteristics. that is. in this case the tra-
ditional religious self-consciousness of a part of the Tate, "leans," G. Ye.

Glezerlan has noted. "to_finally abandon the solid ground of science which studies
real social processes.”11 .

in this light the conception of H.H. lkhilov, an associate at the Institute of
History, Language, and Literature of the Dsgestan branch of the USSR Academy of
Sciences looks quite strange. Using the religious characteristic as a criterion

for determining nationality, and uncritically repeating views which are widespread
in the obsolete literature. he without any foundation at all divides "by origin"

the single Tat people into two peoples-~the Tats themselves and the Mountain Jews.13

33
FOR1DFFKJA1.USE¢NVLY
FOI1OFFIJA1.USE(MVLY

If one were to adopt 8.“. Ikhilov's point of view and be consistent, then in the
past the Tats would have to be divided into three peoples: the Tat Hosleas, the
Araenian-Gregorian Tats. and the Judaic Tats. The groundlessness of such a con-
ception is obvious. There are numerous generally known examples of different net-
ions and peoples professing the ease religion and, on the contrary, there are net-
ions and peoples which profess various religions. The Soviet investigator P.l.
Puchkov who works on the problen of the relationship between religious and ethnic
communities has pointed to the isparaissibility of confusing these concepts and
substituting a religious for an ethnic community. ‘

A resolution of the 16th Congress of the Communist Party of Israel emphasises that
Marxists have always rejected as reactionary and as having nothing in com-on with
reality the Zionist theory of the existence of an "world Jewist nation.” Inci-
dently, this conception is opposed not only by Marxists, but also by certain well-
known bourgeois scholars. Thus, Juan Komas. a professor at the National Univer-
sity of Mexico. subdivides the peoples which profess Judaisa and which live in
various countries into three groups: the descendants of immigrants fron Palestine;
the "product" of the airing of Jews with other ethnic groups; and believers in
Judsisn who have nothing in cannon ethnically with the Jews of Palestine.15

As for the origin of the Judaic Tats, according to the data of most historical
sources, they cone fron Tats who at one time in the past adopted the Jewist re-
ligion which had apparently cone from the north-from the Khaears. This point of
view is reflected in the third edition of the Great Soviet Encyclopedia where all
of the groups of the population of the Azerbaijan 553 and the Dagestan ASS! which
speak the Tat language regardless of their religious membership.are classified
saong the Tat people.16

The mixing up of ethnic and religious membership which is characteristic of Zion-
ist propaganda is harnful both practically and theoretically. "The CPSU has fought
and always will resolutely fight," L.l. Brezhnev said at the 26th Party Congress,
against such things as chauvinisn and nationalisn which are alien to the nature

of socialism and against all netio-alist excesses, be they. for example, anti-
Semitism or Zionisa."1’ Strict compliance with Lenin's theoretical propositions
on the nationality question is a true guarantee against these excesses and the
basis for strengthening the international friendship of the peoples of our country
in the name of the triumph of Columnism.

FOOTNOTES

1. E.A. Crantovskiy. "The Early History of Iranian Tribes in Anterbr.Asis,"
Moscow. Hanks 1970, p 355.

2. I.H. Dyakonov. "The History of Midiya. From Ancient Times to the End of the
Fourth Century A.c.." Moscow, Leningrad. 1956, p 92.

3. 8.“. Hagonedov, "The History of Dagestan. From Ancient Tiaes to the Beginning
of the 19th Century. Hakhachkala, 1968, p 80.

POI¢0FFIJA1.UGB¢I1LY
10.

11.
12.
13.
16.

15.
16.

17.

COPY

2959
CSO:

ItII(MﬂICIAl.USE(N‘LY

"Leninisn and the Nationalities Question Under Present-Day Conditions," Moscow,
Politizdat, 1970, p 44.

v.1. Lenin, "Complete works," Voluae 8, p 76.

A.l. Tyuaenev, "The Jews in Antiquity and the Middle Ages,‘ Petrogrsd, 1922,
pp 60, 179.

ma, 1) 72.

K.M. Kudrov, "The Tats of Dagcstan," RDSSKIY ANTIDPOLOGICIBSKIY ZHDRIAL, Nos.
3-6, 1907, p 65.

I. Sh. Anisinov, “The Caucasian Mountain Jews," Moscow, 1988, pp 39-60.

I. Chernyy, "The Mountain Jews. A Collection of Inforaation on Caucasian
Mountaineers," Tiflis, Issue 3, 1970, p 61.

i. Sh. Anisinov, op. cit., p 5.

G.Ye. Glezernan, "Classes and Nations," Moscow, Politizdat, 1977, p 20.

"Peoples of the Caucasus. Ethnographic Essays," Volume 1, Moscow, 1960, p 556.
P.I. Puchkov, "0n the Relationship Between Confessional and Ethnic Coanunities,"
80V. ETNOGRAPIYA, No. 6, 1973; P.I. Puchkov, "A Modern Geography of Religions,"
Moscow, Nauka, 1975, pp 167-181.

"Zionisn: theory and Practice," Moscow, 1970, pp 153-154.

"The Great Soviet Encyclopedia," Third Edition, Volume 25, p 299.

"Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress," Moscow, Politizdat, 1981, p 157.

RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hanks," "Sovetskaya Btnografiya," 1981.

1800/83 END

35
lili‘ﬂliﬂtlkl.ll§li(ﬂ0l¥