FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10691

27 July 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 27/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAI DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(POUO 27/ 8 2)
Coureu'rs

ALGERIA

Develomt of South Supported
(mucus 11(0le 21' Elm. 18 Jun 82)...........

JORDAN

Proninent Figures Criticize Syrian Role in Lebenon
(AL-“ATM Alf-'MI. 18-2‘ Jun 82)...cenooooeeoooeeeeeoeeee

LMN

Beshir Al-Junnyyil Interviewed
(B. eI—Juleyyilg L8 NOVEL OBSERVA‘rwR. 19-25 Jun 82)......

mnocco

Foreign Trede in 1981 Reveals Growing Deficit
(HARCBBS TROPICAUX B‘l‘ mums, 25 Jun 82)...........

Labor Union Chief Describes Philosophy, Covet-uncut
(AL‘HATAR “0"MI. 18-2‘ Jun 82)....eeoeoeceoeooeeoeooeee

Livestock Reining, Mont, Milk Production in Maghreb Mined
means TROPICAUX rr Harms, 25 Jun 82)...........

19

22

25
DEVELOPMENT OF SOUTH SUPPORTED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1910, 18 Jun 82 p 1553

[Text] It is one case out of every twenty, or rather, every one hundred: an‘
oasis in the southern region of the Algerian High Plateau. Thirty years ago,
carts left from that oasis carrying vegetables to the north. Today, that same
road is traveled by trucks from the north carrying essential commodities to
the south.

The causes are many and their systematic analysis remains to be conpleted.
And yet, any new attempt at development should be based on such a study.

In the absence of such a methodical procedure. one must resort to the explana-
tions given by local residents. who do not always even agree.

First of all, the population of the oasis has doubled. The way of life has
changed somewhat and needs have grown. But some resources have emerged: money
sent from the many native sons who have emigrated; local purchases by newly
assigned civil servants, who are paid by the government and who spend their
money in the area. However, the traditional means of production seem to have
declined: A foggara, an underground pipe bringing water from the mountains,
has not been maintained and the flow is scanty; distribution canals are par-
tially filled with silt; the average age of rural workers has risen consider-
ably; and too many plots of ground resulting from the division of large land-
holdings are now in the hands of incompetent or negligent owners.

And yet. "the future of market garden crops is in the south," Minister of
Hydraulics Brahimi Brahim told officials from his ministry and hydraulics
experts from the governorates of Adrar. Bechar, Laghouat, Ouargia and Tamanras-
set on 21 April. Irrigated areas must be expanded and developed. he said.
using snall water projects. utilising recycled water and organizing a drinking
water supply for populated areas.

Disappointments and Encouraging Projects

At In Char. near In Salah. volunteers have cleaned out and reactivated a
foggera. The minister congratulated them. But is such an effort possible
everywhere. for example, where the very long underground pipes are broken
down? Right in the center of the governorate of Adrsr. the main foggsra that
once enclosed the parks of the chief town has been abandoned since 1976 and

FOIfHﬂﬂCIALIﬂﬂEONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the governorates in general, the foggara now supply only 4 cubic meters a
second. The people living in the fortified villages believe that the solution

lies in increasing the number of wells equipped with small electric pumps.

The fact is that since the unfortunate experiments with the huge irrigated

area of Abadia, there is little confidence is large dams. The five villages
set up there to use the Djebel Torba reservoir have been able to begin develop-
ment of only half of the 12,000 hectares planned. First the overloaded dam
was "tapped," probably too heavily, as a result of orders from afar. Then the
lack of rainfall this winter kept it from being refilled. In addition, it is
silting up and since the bank of the basin of the Guir Hedi is in Morocco,
there can be no question of trying to reforest it. Only the rainfall in April
stopped the exodus of a discouraged population.

In some cases. as in that of the Brezina Oasis south of El Bayadh, one could
envisage the "inferoflux" type dam, which makes it possible to supply and raise
the level of the phreatic layer downstream. But the experts are hesitating:
Northwest of Laghouat, a dam of this type was built in 1948 and it made it
possible to irrigate 610 hectares. Today, the water flow seems to have dropped
off by nine-tenths and only 160 hectares are being cultivated. The orchards
have been abandoned and barley is being planted.

Careful maintenance of existing projects undoubtedly constitutes a priority
of greater importance than new construction: for example. on the traditional

dams. sufficiently early use of dredging valves. In the long run, however,
the solution consists in development of the basin bank to prevent erosion,

through the construction of terraces and tree planting.

This long-range work has been undertaken in some valleys, but a great deal
remains to be done. Priority has been given to the creation of the green
belt, that broad new forest zone that is to halt the advance of the desert.
in many places in southern Algeria. one can see the extent of the project
undertaken. Work is actively underway. In 1981, a million hectares were
treated and over 20 million trees were planted. Despite the caterpillars and
risks of fire, the Upper Plateau forest has become a reality.

The local climate will most likely be improved and in the long run, new re-
sources will emerge. But will the expansion of the desert truly be checked?
Some experts doubt it. The sand that threatens to submerge the High Plateaux
is evidently not, as has previously been believed, from the Sahara and driven
by the wind from the south. It is most likely produced locally by erosion

of the gritty terrain. The usefulness of the green belt will therefore lie
less in its function as a barrier than as a vast wooded area.

Saving Pasture
Moreover, Algerian experts know that the problems of the steppe and the pasture
it must provide must be faced again. The error was probably to launch this

"third phase" of the agrarian revolution in the governorate of H'Sila. the
most mediocre one, the least well equipped, the least likely to succeed in

2

FOR Ol-‘ﬂCIAI. USE ONLY
such an experiment. More money will have to be spent to resume the third
phase. Conditions for the new beginning must be studied more carefully.

The Algerian steppe covers 12 million hectares and some experts believe that
from 2 to 3 million can already be considered as lost. Every year, tractor
plowing. which must henceforth be effectively prohibited, destroy 200,000 hec-
tares of "volunteer“ plant cover. Every family ruins 1 hectare per year for
its domestic needs. meaning that 150.000 hectares disappear every year. Final
ally, when rainfall is abundant, the owners of large herds let them get dis-

proportionately large, meaning overgrazing which becomes disastrous in the
dry years that follow.

The Commission on Grazing set up in Djelfa is to take up these problems from

the standpoint of the socioeconomic advancement of the people living on the
steppe.

Along with the grazing effort and the development of roads. there is more
systematic thought about railroads in the south. To date. the south has been
served only by "penetrating" lines from the north. The plan would therefore

be to build an east-west railway in the High Plateaus. work would begin on
15 June at Ain Touta in the governorate of Batna. The existence of such a

railroad in the south would make it possible to relieve the current line from

the north. which is greatly overloaded. and, together with the road system,
help stunulate this steppe area heretofore paralyzed by the excessive cost

price of transport for heavy goods (iron. cement, machinery. and so on).

The vastness of the Saharan and sub-Sahara regions in Algeria requires an
ambitious program systematically adhered to. After local improvisation, with
some success. and after meeting the most urgent needs while generally postpon—
ing what is essential. the need is now felt for a sore methodical approach.
However, seen from this angle. the evaluation of needs points to enormous
requirements and it will undoubtedly be necessary to wait a long time for
investments to pay off.

COPYRIGBT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
C50: 6519/221

3

FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE1ONLY
PROMIN‘ENT FIGURES CRITICIZE SYRIA}! ROLE IN LEBANON
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 279, 18-21. Jun 82 pp 29, 30

[Zruciu "Jordan Condemns Syrian Collusion: They Have Not Been Fighting, But They
Did Confiscate Blood Supplies in nor'atf]

[Text] Among Arab arenas, Jordan is the one which has been the nest affected and the
most agitated by what has been happening to Lebanon and the Palestinian resistance

in Lebanon. In Amen, there are increasing expressions or condennation and vindictive-
ness against the negative Syrian role on the Israeli invasion.

AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI talked with _a nuaber of major personalities in Anan on the
situation and developaents in it.

The chairman of the National Consultative Assembly, Hr Sulayman 'Arar, former minister
of the interior, said, "The position of the political leaders in Syria regarding the
cease fire reninds us of the truce and cease fire decrees after every Israeli
invasion, from the catastrophe of 191.8 to the invasion of Lebanon.

"'Je had expected that Syria, which had entered Lebanon under the umbrella of the
League of Arab States with the objective of preserving Leganon's unity and territory,
would have retained a strong partisan of the resistance and the Joint forces and would
have played its part in defending the territory of Lebanon and the Palestinian cause,
so that the Arabs could forget the aassacres of Tall al-Za'tar and Tripoli and other
acts. However, what has caught us by surprise was that the duration of the Syrian
forces' confrontation of the Zionist forces (if there was any) was less than that

of the war in Bush, which lasted 18 due."

Concerning the cease fire decree, he said "That was not accompanied by a clear

decree on withdrawal within a specific period on the part of Israel or Anerica. If
the period of negotiation over withdrawal conditions goes on, this decree will result
in the establishment of a fait accompli in the areas the Zionist any has occupied,

a separation of forces, and the creation of a corresponding situation through which

it will be possible to eliminate pockets of resistance. This period will also probably
lead to the emergence of disputes on the Lebanese stage, which it will be possible to
use in service of the Zionist invasion.

"One of the first practical results of the cease fire was the prohibition of; Arab,
Jordanian and Palestinian volunteers from entering Syria and passing through it to

Lebanon. That proves that that was one of the conditions for failing to consolidate
the position of the resistance. we do not know whether there were other conditions

6

F0! 0mm USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for failing to consolidate it by arms, 1." the agreement contained conditions like
these.

"Among the important results this decree has underlined has been a ventilation of

the spirit that has become widespread in the Arab and Islamic worlds and among all
peaceloving peoples against the Israeli invasion, putting the cause in a vicious
circle of wondering who will break the cease fire, who will commit himself to it,

and what its conditions and practical applications will be, since we will fail to
achieve international concensus, condemnation, the demand for an mediate withdrawal,
condemnation of the aggression and perhaps the adoption of disciplinary measures
against Israel.

2-!e said, "This issue affects Jordan directly. The government of Jordan is maintain-
ing constant coordination with other Arab countries in adopting a position on an
Israeli withdrawal and the cessation of the Israeli attack and its effects. The
government's position has been clear from the first day, since Jordan was the first
Arab country to facilitate enlistment in the emergency force of combatants in
Lebanon, and it Opened centers for donations and committees in this regard."

ﬁiknat: Ho Justification

Mr l‘ahir Hiknat, chairman of the Legal Committee of the National Consultative As-
sembly and a former minister, said "The cease fire operation entailed great frustra-
tion. It does not only mean giving the Israeli forces a free hand to liquidate the
resistance; if we add the restrictions on going into Lebanon, the serious situation
arising from this operation appears just as great and clear, and one cannot accept
it the way Syria did.

"I do not believe that there are any terms or ideas in the Syrian publicists'
lexicon which can justify the Syrian posi ion. One must bear in mind that the
Syrian authorities have stopped volunteers' buses for 3 days on the Jordanian-
Syrian borders and sent them back to Jordan."

Al-Ruwa‘oidah: A Scenario

Mr 'Abd-al-Ra'uf al-Ruwabidah, member of the National Consultative Assembly and a
former minister, said "The fact is that Syria did not declare war on Israel but con-
fined itself to skirmishing upon direct encounters with the invading Zionist forces,
and this did not develop into real combat. Therefore one can interpret the cease
fire a: a lack of desire to get into a battle to protect Lebanese territory and
protect the Palestinian resistance on this territory, 'hich is the basic purpose of

the Syrian presence on Lebanese soil, and goes beyond participation in the deter-
rent force: .

"A; for the issue of Syrian missiles in the Biqa' valley, they were basically Just
for show. not to deter any air aggression."

(b
I.)

:i axed, "h‘nat can one expect now, as far '23 you are concerned?”

said, "I magi-1e that the scenario that Philip iiabib is running, in the indirect

neg tisticns between sync. and Israel, especially after the advent of the Israeli fer-
ces, their deployment on Lebanese territory and their attempt to effect :. pincer;

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
covenant against the Palestinian and Lebanese resistance, will lend to an internatioznl
quest to restore the legitimacy of Lebanon. It is a demand that no one can reject

and one of its bases and exaggerated points will be the fact that there should be

no arms or armed persons on Lebanese territory except the Lebanese army, which will
result in the reduction in the status of the Palestinian resistance and the loss of

the territory it is standing on.

"People have set their hopes on having the Palestinian resistance fail to endorse
this scenario by persevering with the struggle and emerging from the framework of
cooptation by Syria."

il-‘Ibadi: They Confiscated Blood:

In Mamdu'n al-‘Ibadi, a senior member of the Physicians' Union in Jordan, spoke about
the way Syrian authorities treated volunteers, including doctors, saying "They
threw them out on the public road in Dar'a for 1.8 hours, exposed to air raids,
without water or food. The volunteers were 500 in number. They then brought them
back to Jordan, in spite of all their attempts to get permission to go throw: Syria
to Lebanon.

"It got to the point where packages of blood that had been sent to the Palestinian
‘resistance by the Jordanian Physicians' Union were confiscated."

He said, "There is a general spontaneous feeling that the Syrian position has reached
the point of conspiracy against Lebanon and the Palestinian resistance.‘I

am al-Ghuri: A Conspiracy

Hr alil al-Ghuri, for a long tine a well known person in the context of the Palesti-
nian cause, said, in response to our question on the Syrian position, "The fact is
that this question provokes sorrow and sadness, although it is difficult to answer
it in these circumstances because of the events and developments which have «cared
recently in Lebanon.

".1 group of well informed Arabs and Arab politicians believe that it is or was in
Syria': power to have a role different from its present one as far as the events
in Lebanon and the occupation of southern Lebanon go. However, it hasfailed to
play this role, for nmerous reasons, including Arab disputes, ideological disputes
and the desire of the regime there to survive and keep going. There is no doubt
that it would have been in Syria's power to take a truthful nationalist position,
seek to save Lebanon free its ordeal and prevent the occupation of southern Lebanon
by the Jews.

"This is hearing in mind that we have grown up with the policy of not interfering
in the internal affairs of any Arab country. Palestine and its cause need to have
all Arabs reach agreement on supporting them. However, we can only refer to what
reliable bodies are saying. to the effect that there is an Arab conspiracy to liqui-
date the cause of Palestine and the Palestinian resistance. Syria is one of the

bodies that are taking part in this conspiracy. The people naJdng the accusation
find evidence to justify this belief in the positions and actions Syria has taken

6
'50! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

via-apvis Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan, the occupation of southern Lebanon and the occupa-
tion of Golan. There is no doubt that me desire to keep the existing regime alive
and in power was one of the main elements in Syria's acccuodating role.

"The Jews have a well known plan, which is to establish a greater Jewish state free
the Nile to the Euphrates. They are on their way to carrying out this project in
accordance with their scheme, for which various stages of action have been set
forth. ter they took over all of Palestine and incorporated Golan, they have now
occupied Lebanon (and will not leave it), and Lebanon will not be the last, unless
the Arabs strive to rid themselves of their rifts and rivalries and regain the will
to fight, confront and oppose."

'Je asked, "'Jhat is your opinion on Egypt's position?“

He replied, "The position of the Egypt of h'usni Mubarak gives good tidings of Egypt's
imminent return to its distinguished position in the Arab group. However, restric-
tions have been imposed on Egypt, as a result of the Camp David agreements, which
inhibit it from resuming its political role in the Arab world. If the Egypt of
Z-lusni Mubarak manages to extricate itself from these restrictions - and it can,

if it wants to and is determined to - it will be one of the most nationalistic of
Arab countries.

"Syria, in its current situation, like aidiadhdhafi's jamahiriyah, is as far from
Arab nationalism as anyone, and is its most intense eneay and its strongest opponent.
If what is said to the effect that Syria and Libya have supplied Iran with arms and
naterial is correct, and it appears that it is, that is proof of the extent to which
they are alienated Iron Arab nationalism. How can they be nationalistic Arabs when
they are helping the enemies of the Arabs, Iran, against Iraq, which is defending
Arab nationalism?

"The events in Lebanon are to a large deg ee connected to the Iraq-Iran war.

"In any case, the position of Husnl Mubarak's Egypt regarding the Iraq-Iran war is
more nationalistic and more Arab than that of the Sceadfastnese and Confrontation
Front states.

"Finally, the only nationalistic group that can be called a true nationalist mup
in the war, defending Arab nationalist: and trying to pro-etc the status of the Arabs,
is the Iraqi-Jordanian group. I am confident in the knowledge that Iraq, in spite
of its preoccupation with the Iranian war, is still observing its national respon-
sibilities vis-a-vis the Palestinian cause, and that if Syrian opposition to Iraq
ended it would be able, in spite of its war with Iran, to assume a serious responsi-
bility toward the Palestinian cause and the Lebanese crisis."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HAM AL-'ARA3I

1.1387
680: 4404/ 551
BASHIR AL-JUHAYYIL lﬂTBRVIEHBD
Paris LB NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR in French “0 919, 19-25 Jun 82 pp 106-122

[Interview with Bashir al-Junayyil, leader of Christian camp, by Guy Sitbon:
"Lebanon: One People Too Many"]

[Text] he is the leader of the Christian camp, an arned csnp
whose nelbers succeeded in carving out -- at gunpoint -- the
only relatively secure enclave in that besieged country which
Lebanon is. A few weeks before the Israeli invasion and the
lightning war that have just reshuffled the cards in a way nak-
ing it iapossible to measure the consequences, Bashir al-Juaayyil
received Guy Sitbon in Beirut and told his: "There is one people
too nany: the Palestinians." But he added: "He are not being
aided by Israel," and then: "Those who accuse us of wanting
partition are insane." That voice, in the bloody inbroglio, now
has strange echoes. what did al-Jusayyil know about Israel's
intentions? to he really Begin's nan, as some think he is?

what is his true relationship with the Syrian occupiers? These
are all questions to which this interview with one of the key nen
in the Arab theater brings singular clarifications.

[Question] The war in Lebanon has entered its eighth year. will it continue
for 10 or 20 more years? Is the end in sight?

[Answer] The final sprint has not yet begun.
[Question] Is there hope for peace?
[Answer] As soon as we lose hope, we shall lose the war. Over the past seven

years and at the beginning of this new year. there is new hope every norning;

every morning a new leap of hope. That is what has enabled us to hold on so
long, to bear our suffering.

[Question] It is often said that this war will not end until the conflicts in
the Near East are solved. So that could last....

[Answer] Two thousand years.

INJR OFFICIAI.IEHE(HVLY
FOIIOFFNJAI.USE(HULY

[Question] So you have embarked upon c 2,000-year-long war?

[Answer] I don't think so. There is a light at the end of the tunnel. Look
at what is now happening in Best Beirut. in the so-called Muslin districts,
in the north. in Tripoli.

[Question] What is happening?
[Answer] A war has begun between Muslims and Palestinians.
[Question] Why this new war?

[Answer] That is simple: Why have we Christians fought against the Palestin-
ians? There is one people too nany in this part of the world, a people that
is trying to gain a foothold in lebanon where it is and that is being rejected.
The rejection came first of all from the Christians. Today. it is also a
Muslin rejection.

[Page 108 missing]

[Question] [portion of text missing] Three men: your father, Pierre al-Jumay-
yil. head of the Kataieb (the Falangists), Camille Chamoun and Soleinan Pran-
gie. resolved to get rid of the Palestinians because the Iebanese Government
could not do so. That was not completely out of the question, but they did not
foresee that they were pushing the country into an endless war.

[Answer] Those accusations. that slander. do not affect us. We are tough-

skinned. Don't worry: Go ahead and insult us, call us American agents. the
agents of Israel.... -

[Question] You mean that it is not true, that the Christian parties did not
start this war? ‘

[Answer] I do not say they did or did not. 1 do not respond to slander; I
do not even listen to it.

[Question] Then tell me how the war began.

[Answer] Re were attacked and we defended ourselves. That's all there is
to it. The whole world has called us every nane. The insults rained on us

from the Palestinians, the Syrians, half of the Lebanese, but also from America.
the Vatican and France. Every crime on earth has been attributed to us, but

we fought, without even realizing what they were accusing us of. First of all,
we had t. live, to live and put together an existence that goes back over

6.000 years. I did no: want to wander around like the boat people or land in
a refugee camp.

[Question] Like the Palestinians.

[Answer] I will never be like the Palestinians, no natter what.

IND! OHWWCIAI.IEIE(HULY
FOR Oﬁ'ICIAI. USE ONLY

[Question] How old were you at the beginning of the war?
[Answer] Wenty-eight. I am 35 now.
[Question] When did you first go to war?

[Answer] At 2:00 in the afternoon on 13 April 1975. as soon'as I learned
what had happened. I was practicing at the stadium, as I did every Sunday,
between 10:00 and 1:00. I went home and showered. A little later, I felt

that something was wrong. The bodyguards of Shaykh Pierre, my father, with
whom I was very close. seemed tense. In the afternoon, we were supposed to
go to the christening of a 2-month-old baby, Bechir Abou Assi. His father
was the first victim of the war, killed in the Ain el-Romsneh bus incident.

[Question] That was your first battle.

[Answer] A new church had just been consecrated in Ain el-Romaneh. in the
presence of Shaykh Pierre. A bus filled with armed Palestinians wanted to
drive in front of the church. A police barrier tried to dissuade them so _
they would not meet up with the group of Kataieb at the church doorway. Al-
ready at that time, we were not on good terms with the Palestinians. The

bus drove through the barrier. In front of the church, our young people in
clmrge of maintaining order asked the bus to go back and were machine gunned
in response. Joseph Abou Assi and Antoine Houssaini were imediately killed.
There was a skirmish and the 30 Palestinians in the bus were....

[Question] Were killed.
[Answer] That is how it began.
[Question] You learned about it at 2:00. what did you do?

[Answer] I stood for nothing at the time. I was just a party member, head .
of the Achrafieh district. I was beginning my career as a lawyer. After the
incident. we all met at the headquarters of the Kataieb, in Ain el-Romaneh.

I then heard conversations that had a big impact on me. Shaykh Pierre begged
the president of the republic, the cannander in chief of the army, the head of

the Second Bureau, to bring in the army to force the Palestinians to respect
the law. The response of these leaders was: "He don't dare; the any will

disintegrate." In our own districts, the Palestinians shot at us and our
only could do nothing to defend us, for you have to remember what Bast Beirut

was like in 1975. Three Palestinian zones existed: Tell el-Zaatar. Jisr el-
Pacha and the Quarantsine.

[Question] They were camps.
[Answer] Not camps. They had rented a bunch of apartments, stores and
garages. There was a whole apparently harmless infrastructure: a boutique, a

kiosque. a dormitory. We were naive enough not to realize what they were
planning. The people living in the region were very happy to have "tenants"

10

me MAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY -

who paid double and who overnight turr..-d out to be Palestinian narksnen.

The army could do nothing to defend us. I inediately understood, as did
other young people, that.the arny could not guarantee our security, any more
than it can today.

[Question] What did you do?

[Answer] I asked the partisans present then to leave the political discussions
to others and to go out in the field. He had to make up for the nllitary

deficiency in the field as soon as possible in order to have a nininal struc-
ture. The whole structure. that you see 7 years later cane out of that little
group and its action.

[Question] And the sen that were with you then are still?
[Answer] Those that did not fall in battle are still with ne.
[Question] Many have died?

[Answer] Thirteen hundred have died fron anong the elite of the Katsieb youth

and there have been 5,000 deaths, 5,000 nartyrs among the ranks of the Leban-
ese resistance.

[Question] Civilians?

[Answer] No. soldiers from the different parties and organizations of the
Lebanese forces. Our party alone had 1,300 killed. Nearly 1,100 civilians
have been killed. In Danour alone, 5,000 of then fell.

[Question] There was also the Quarantai me, where hundreds of Muslims were
massacred. "are you responsible?

[Answer] Re are all responsible for what happens. At the tine, the battle
was waged by the people. He did not have a disciplined any as we'do now.
For years, Christians had suffered unimaginable things free the Palestinians

in the Quarantaine before the beginning of hostilities. 0n the Quarantaine
bridge, 196 of our civilians were nurdered. What do you think those whose

brothers and nothers'were killed on the bridge were going to do when they
went into the Quarantaine?
[Question] Here nsny Palestinians killed that day?

[Answer] About 30. The whole world blues us for then. He lost 5,000 in
Danour. but no one accuses the Palestinians.

[Question] Could you have avoided the Quarantaine nassacre?
[Answer] I would have-tried. when I arrived, it was all over.

[Question] And at Tell al-Zaatar? Sone 1,000 Palestinians were nurdered
after the fall of the camp.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICJAI.USE(MVLY

[Answer] Are you sure that there were 1,000 deaths? The International Red
Cross was there, but that it not what it says in its report.

[Question] "hat was your first battle?
[Answer] I have been in them all.

[Question] After a year and a half of war, you were losing. In Beirut. in
the mountains, your lines were crumbling.

[Answer] I see what you are getting at. But to be specific. in Beirut, the
front had been stabilised. It was in the mountains that we were in trouble.
You naturally want to tell me that we were the ones who called on Syria.

[Question] In the city. you had already retreated quite far.

[Answer] Indeed.

[Question] The adversary: the Palestinians and the progressive Muslims,
was more powerful.

[Answer] Better equipped and better trained. The Palestinian cadres had
just come from East Europe; others had been trained by the English in Jordan,

while ours knew nothing about bearing arms. They did not even know how to use
the equipment. The weapons the other side had was much more sophisticated:.
RPG's. the douchkas, it took us six nonths to understand what they were. We

didn't even know their names.

[Question] You have learned. Now you are known as one of the best military
leaders in the region. How did you learn?

[Answer] By trial and error.

[Question] In other words. you flipped through the weapons catalogues saying.
"hey! That's not bad!"

[Answer] The catalogues from the weapons merchants came to us from our Pales-
tinian enemies. who were our main suppliers. They stole from their own stock
and sold to us at a ridiculous price. Furthermore. that is still going on for
some products not available to us on the narket.

[Question] Could you cite specific cases?

[Answer] No.

[Question] What do you think of this military career? Do you like it? Do
you like war?

[Answer] I hate it. No soldier likes war; you can be sure of it.

[Question] What about the exhilaration of combat?

12

ROR‘OFFKJAJ.USE(I'LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Do you think it is exhilarating to see your people lose their eyes
or their legs? My best friends fell right beside ne.

[Question] It is said that every soldier feels like a supernan because he
has the guts to defy death. while the average nan is afraid of it.

[Answer] One pays too dearly to have such sentiments. And you inagine things.
I as not the nilitary leader you think I an. I lead the Lebanese forces,

where the military man is only perforning a duty.

[Question] The fact is that on that aountain. where your people have survived
for centuries....

[Answer] Lived, Hr Sitbon. lived completely, as free sen.
[Question] In short, you were losing.

[Answer] We were losing territory, not the war.
[Question] You than called on the Syrians.

[Answer] Let us be clear: He called on no one. especially not the Syrians.
It was the Syrians who provoked the war. Assad admitted it one day in a

speech.
[Question] "hat was Syria's purpose? To absorb Lebanon?

[Answer] Don't forget that in 1975, the peace process had quietly begun
between Egypt and Israel. In ny opinion. there was a race between Egypt and
Syria to see who would reach a Canp Davia type peace first. hafiz al-Assad
thought he was in the best position. First, he had to nuzzle the Palestinian
in order to speak in his behalf. Add to that the stern of political dissolu-
tion in which Lebanon found itself and the obsessive dream of a Greater Syria.
All helped give the final attack on the Lebanese Republic. Kanal Junblatt
then said: "All we need is five Palestinians to throw the Christians into the
sea." The Syrians therefore cane to hasten the process and gather the fruits.
Everyone asked us to legalize the Syrian presence: the Americans, the Vatican,
France, the Arab countries. They considered Syria to be the stabilizer of the

region. He were thus given to Assad as a payoff.

Then Sadat went to Jerusalem. Assad was immediately reduced to the status of
a district leader. Everything took place alongside him. At that tine. in
order to take a place for himself. Assad tried to kill some Lebanese. starting
with the Christians. He bonbed us for weeks in 1978 and 1981. we did not
yield. Now they are not killing any more Christians: It is the turn of the
Sunnites and Shiites. They are also resisting and are beginning to understand
the leaning of the fight that we have been waging since 1975 and the position

we take.

13

F0.‘0€FKJA1.USE(N‘LY
[Question] which is that an understanding can be reached.

[Answer] At first, to do away with any foreign occupation of our country.
Then we will see.

[Question] You have remained allied with Syria for how long? Three years?

[Answer] I have never been an ally of Syria. As long as it is in my terri-

tory, I will fight it. There was a political-type agreement between Syria
and a Lebanese government that since 191.3 has led the country to the 1975

catastrophe. Corruption, the mercantile spirit and compromise governed.
It was only later that we began to change people's way of thinking and even

the people themselves.

[Question] You are the son of Pierre al-Jumeyyil, the founder of the Palange.
the Lebanese Forces. on the side of the Christians. 0n the other side is

Halid Jumblatt. the son of Kamal Jumblatt, who is the leader of the Muslims.
How can one explain that?

[Answer] what surprises you? That people have children?
[Question] And that the children are leaders like their fathers.
[Answer] We are in the East; don't forget that.

[Question] But at the same time. you say you want to break with tradition
and change ways of thinking.

[Answer] And we shall continue to break that patriarchal system. If a bag

or a zaim has a stupid child, he is first of all a stupid person. New genera-
tions are coming out of the universities, from our people. We need to break
once and for all the Ottoman heritage that keeps the Lebanese man as a subject
and not as a citizen.

[Question] To arrive at that rejuvenation, you simply eliminated many people
from your own camp.

[Answer] For example?

[Question] The son of President Prangie, Tony, was murdered along with many
other people in the north. You are blamed for it.

[Answer] History will judge. You know that in the north. jus priuae noctis
still exists? Did you know that in the north, it is forbidden to have a
school or hospital outside the control of the beg? In 1976. after the Chris-
tian population defended itself, the Christian begs also tried to take back
the weapons they had won? He would have had to go back to jus primes noctis.
The people refused: they had freed themselves in the war. Neither you nor

1 nor anyone else can stop the movement. The affair of which you speak is a
time in their emancipation fight. not a family quarrel. not a clan struggle,
but a social liberation phenomenon.

1‘

FOI‘OFFHJAI.USEINNLY
POI OFFIGAL USE ONLY

[Question] You also elininsted the li‘ itary force of President Chanoun. th?

[Answer] In order to cut out a gangrene. Look at west Beirut: It is anar-
chy, looting, generalized insecurity. (in our side, it is the sale thing.
There had to be a surgical operation to restore order in our csnp and unify
our sued forcus. Today. mug us, personal security is guaranteed.

[Question] You have suddenly nade a bunch of personal enemies. “any people
want to kill you. Did you [mew that?

[Answer] Only too well. I lost sly daughter in an attack aised at as.

[Question] Can you continue to live normally and go about your business while
knowing that so easy guns are aiaed at you?

[Answer] They have often tried to kill ne. That does not bother ne, not
because I an a supernan. but sinply. as I was telling you in the beginning.
because every morning. there is new reason to hope. Gods gives us courage and
I hsve an easy conscience. He had nothing to do with that affair in the
north, the nurder of Tony Frangie.

[Question] On your side, was the fight waged on the basis of Christianity?

[Answer] As I often say, we were attacked as Christians and we defended our-
selves as Lebanese. We have never tried to set up a Christian state and
Christian feelings have never been a political force.

[Question] Crosses on guns....

[Answer] There was a religious thrust, but in a national fight. There were
crosses because there cones a tine when one has to absorb an overdose of spiri-

tuality .

[Question] In this connection, it would appear that drugs are often used in
your units during the fighting.

[Answer] That has never been a serious probleu.

[Question] Does that help — the drugs — when going to the front?

[Answer] They think it does.

[Question] Does one continue to be afraid when one is on the front line?
[Answer] Lesa so now. We are beconing nore professional. better organized.

better equipped. Today. an affair like that of the Quarantsine would not

happen; our col-sand keeps its troops in line. And we no longer have the pri-
vate arnies. The guy with two guns and 30 sen who wages his own little battles,

the little local leaders who fight between thuselves over a refrigerator:
All that is over with.

marmatmoutv
[Question] There is no more banditry in your region?

[Answer] No. but on the other side, that's the general rule. Not with us any
more. The order we have established in our territory is for the purpose at

reaching that point: a single army. The PNL [expansion unknown] of Camille
Chanoun exists. and other parties also.

[Question] But you have liquidated their military forces.

[Answer] To put an end to the reign of the war lords, to enable people to move
about in peace. It was necessary._ Between the nightmare of Heat Beirut and
the peace on our side. 1 would opt for our side. This operation of internal

purging cost us 96 victims. It was expensive; it was a very hard decision to
make.

[Question] It was you who made it?

[Answer] Yes. Ninety-four victims to obtain order is a great deal, but on
the other side. there are 96 every day.

[Question] Very good. Civil order does exist in this part of Lebanon. You
are in the nidst of an economic boon. The price of ground has never been so
high. Isn't that a gigantic illusion?

[Answer] Naturally. This Liechtenstein will not be able to live. Those who
accuse us of wanting partition are insane. Our nation would collapse if it
were mutilated. This region is a symbol for all Lebanon when it is free.

And if anyone wants to back us up into those 50 kilometers of coastline and
those 2.000 square kilometers. we will refuse. He will get out. Either the

10.é52 square kilometers will be like these 2,000 or Lebanon will not be worth
the trouble of fighting for.

[Question] And to get where?

[Answer] To rebuild a new Lebanon in which religious and ethnic conunities
will be able to coexist. That is what the soul of Lebanon is. Obviously.
each community will enjoy complete freedom and complete security. Our tradi-
tions, our values. permit us to set our sights high. we no longer want to be
a people of merchants and courtiers, but a nation like any other. "hen the
Syrians and Palestinians leave our country. we shall set up the structures of
a new state along with the Muslims.

[Question] Hill the Muslims not be afraid that the force you have created
here will dominate then?

[Answer] Let them choose. Let them choose between my force and that of the
Palestinians and the Syrians together. The Muslin cannot continue to eat
at every table and believe that he is going to win every tine.

[Question] For the time being. you alone against the Syrians are not enough.
If they wanted to liquidate you. they would infiltrate you and there would be
no more talk of Lebanese Forces.

16

FOI‘OFFNJAI.08810NLY
INJI!0F11C1A2.lJSEZ(HNLY

[Answer] They have 2,000 tanks; we have 20. They have 3,000 guns; we have

30. They have 300,000 troops; we have 3,000. The ratio of forces is clear.
And yet. we have brought off our resistance war and perfectly. The liberation
will depend on an upheaval throughout the Near East. France was freed from the
Germans by a planetary war. Our core of resistance is 2,000 square kilometers.
a mobile arned force. a fast navy. effective information. I believe that that
resistance will never be quelled. Could the Syrians invade us? Do you be-
lieve they did not try, in 1978. in 1981? I do not want to overestimate us,
but against a united population, tanks and artillery cannot do much. They
tried to conquer Zahle and to Islamise the whole Bekaa plain. but they failed.

[Question] Why do you have so much prejudice against Islam, against the Arabs?
You are Arab yourself. Why do you deny your Arabness? For me. you are an Arab

[Question] He have never denied or proclaimed our Arabness. We do not know
what it is.

[Answer] A language, a culture and membership in a universe. You are what
Arabness is.

[Answer] If that is what it is. alright. But most people include religious
obedience. That is where we disagree. religiously and philosophically.

[Question] You are aided by Israel.

[Answer] Hhat proof do you have? Re are not aided by Israel.

[Question] I.don't believe it. I know that the Israelis are helping you.
[Answer] You have your convictions; I have mine.

- [Question] If you lean more toward Israel than toward the Arab world, as I
believe, isn't that just one more gap between you and the Lebanese Muslims?

[Answer] we lean only toward Lebanon.

[Question] In a word. you are a minority in a Muslim world. Is it not in
your natural interest to accept that and to resign yourselves to your status
as a minority?

[Answer] There are 7 million Coptic Christians in Egypt. several hundreds of
thousand Christians in Syria and Iraq. They eat, drink, work and have children
Their condition comes down to that. Politically speaking, they have no rights.
Their security is that of aniaals, I would say. They are at the mercy of the
slightest incident.

[Question] The minister of foreign affairs in Egypt is Christian.

[Answer] "hat is his name?

[Question] Boutros-Ghali.

17

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Answer] And his title?
[Question] Minister of state for foreign affairs.

[Answer] Re is not a minister but only a sinister of state, which in Egypt
corresponds to the rank of undersecretary of state. He is in that post because
he is the only one to have dared signed the Camp David Accord with Sadat.

And he still did not get a full sinistry. That is the fate of the Copts.

[Question] The Copts have existed forever. They number in the aillions. with
their families. their churches.

[Answer] nave you been to see their churches? Are they still presentable? Do
they have the right to repair them? If a bell tower falls down. do they have
the right to replace it? Go see then; go ask them. Here it would be the sane
thing. They are willing to tolerate us, to let us live and work in a state

of dhinutude. The dhini. do you know what that Ileana in our regions? It is
the second-class citizen, the non-ﬂuslis. If we had given in, the problem
would have been solved. But when I lost ny freedom. I will no longer have any

reason to live.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "le Nouvel Observateur"

11.466
CSO: “019/20

18

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOREIGN TRADE IN 1981 REVEALS GROHING DEFICIT

Paris means rnoprcwx 21' MEDITEWS in French No 1911, 25 Jun 82
pp 1696-1697

[Text] Completing the information supplied within the framework of its provi-
sional balance sheet for 1981 (HARCBES TROPICAUX. 28 Hay, p 1388), 030138

[Socio-Bconomic Research and Information Center], an organ of the CGEH (Moroc-
can General Economic Federation). now returns with the following study on
Morocco's commercial trade last year.

Deficit

Horocco's commercial trade with other countries showed a final deficit of

10.4 billion dirhama (l dirham - 1.05 francs). with exports (12 billion dirhams)
covering 53.4 percent of all imports (22.4 billion dirhams). An analysis of
this deficit by groups of noteworthy products shows that it can be attributed

to all headings, with the exception of unfinished products. for which Horocco's
sales cover its purchases with a percentage of 196.4. It should be noted that
while unfinished products constitute only 10.9 percent of Moroccan imports,

they make up 40.2 percent of all exports.

Foreign Trade 1981 (in millions of dirhams)

Imports CI? Exports P08
Category Amount Percent Amount Percent Balance Cover 2
Food, beverages, tobacco 6,613 20.6 3,040 25.3 - 1,573 65.9
Energy, lubricants 6.125 27.3 543 4.5 - 5,582 8.8
Unprocessed products 2,457 10.9 4.825 60.2 + 2,368 196.6
Semi-finished products 3,890 17.3 2,096 17.5 - 1,796 53.9
Capital goods 3,860 17.2 29 0.2 - 3.831 0.7
Consumer goods 1.510 6.7 1,670 12.3 - 60 97.3
Total 22.555 100 12,003 100 -10.652 53.6

Morocco's purchases mainly involve unfinished products of animal and plant ori-
gin (1.596.000.000 dirhams) rather than of mineral origin (861 million dirhams).

They essentially include unprocessed vegetable oils (508 million dirhams).
wood (470 million dirhams). synthetic fibers (169 million dirhams). artificial
fibers (98 nillion dirhams) and sulfur (589 million dirhams).

19

FOR OiIWCIAl.USE(NVLY
rum oer-sun“. var. URL!

with respect to exports, the mineral cubstances are preponderant (6,688,000,000
dirhams, including 3,827,000,000 for phosphates), while shipments of unfinished
products of animal and plant origin are relatively low (337 million), mainly
including paper pulp (125 nillion) and cotton (57 million). Compared with

1980, an analysis of the structu:e of Moroccan imports in 1981 shows an in-
crease in the respective shares of energy and food purchases to 27.3 and 20.6

percent compared with 23.6 and 16.8 percent respectively. This shift came
about to the detriment of the shares of other purchases, which went from 11.7
to 10.9 percent for unfinished products, from 21.1 to 17.3 percent for semi-
finished products, from 18.2 to 17.2 percent for capital goods, and from 7.8
to 6.7 percent for finished consumer products.

Energy and food bills alone absorb nearly 90 percent of all export receipts.
The latter essentially come fro. unfinished products (60.2 percent), food
products (25.3 percent), semi-finished products (17.5 percent) and to a lesser
extent, from finished consumer goods (12.3 percent). Compared with 1980, the
structure of exports has changed somewhat in the direction of a reduction in
the shares of the first two to the behefit of the last two.

Geographical Structure of Trade

Most of Morocco's commercial transactions with other countries are with Europe,
mainly the BBC. The rest is, in descending order, with Asia, particularly the

Middle East, America, Africa and Oceania.

A total of 57.7 percent of all Moroccan imports are from Europe, which also
absorbs 76 percent of the exports. The balance shows a deficit for Morocco and
amounts to nearly 6 billion dirhans. However, the rate of cover is relatively
high (70.5 percent), compared with that of Morocco's trade with Asian and
American countries.

Morocco gets 60.7 percent of its imports from the BBC, to which it ships

69.2 percent of its exports. France heads the EEC countries, with 5.55 bil-
lion in imports and 2,616,000,000 in exports. Morocco's other top trading
partners among "the Ten" are the Federal Republic of Germany, in second place
with 858 million dirhams and Morocco's fifth-ranking supplier with 1,078,000,000
dirhams; the Netherlands, with 669 dirhama in Moroccan exports and 552 million
in imports; and Italy, with 596 million dirhams in Moroccan exports and 973
million in imports.

Outside of the 23C, Morocco mainly trades with Spain and the USSR. Spain is
in third place among customers with 836 million dirhams and in fourth place
anong suppliers with 1.56 billion dirhams, following the United States

(l.572,00),000 dirhama) and Saudi Arabia (3,386,000,000 dirhams). The Soviet
Union is in fourth place among Morocco'e customers with 686 million dirhams

and in seventh place among suppliers, with 861 million dirhams.

20

FOR‘OFFKJAI.US€(NNLY
Geographic Distribution of Trade (in millions of dirhals)

Countrz

Europe

BBC

EPTA

CEHA*

Other countries
Asia

Middle Beet

Other countries
America

North America

Other countries
Africa

Maghreb

Other countries
Oceania
Total

Inports Exports
Alount Percent Amount Percent
12,932 57.7 9,113 76
1.131 60.7 5,902 69.2
807 612
1.388 1,657
1.606 1.362
6,665 28.8 1.765 16.6
6,963 260
1,522 1.685
2.661 11.8 509 6.2
2,122 200
539 309
386 1.7 627 5.2
82 326
326 301
ll 9
22,665 100 12,003 100

Balance

- 3,819
- 3.229

- 6,720

- 29152

- 261

- 2
-10.662

Cover 1

70.3
66.6

27

19.1

162.6

81.8
53.5

* (IRMA (or CMCON): German Denocretic Republic, Bulgaria. Hungary, Polend,
Ronania. Czechoslovakia, the USSR. Cuba and Vietnam

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11.666
C80: 6519/221

21

IOIIOIFKJA1.0831NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

man man cam mas mm, m
Porio AL-IIA‘IAI AD'MI in Arabic no 279, 18-“ JD 82

latticlo: "A Horoccan Trado Unionio; moo an Accuoation: tho Socialioa or loo
proooion llao ﬂavor Boon Conat—otodﬂl

lxoxgl ‘l‘tado union activity in Morocco gooo hack nany yoara hotoro indoponionco.
m firat attoqta at union organisation waro oada in 1934. whon tho lato loaoor
Allal Bl Paoai otartod to organito a union for taxi ownora to dotond poopla'a
ordinary righto, which, a a union chioi in Horocco oaya, aro alightly dirforont
fro- tho puhlic righto that politico roproaanto.

Aftor tho oatahlioh-ont o! tho Union of ball taxi Ownoro. tho roaary wao rotold
and pooplo in tho liharal profoooiona within tho national monont atartad Conant!-
ing the organization or nniono which would guarantoo th- thoir righto.

Aitor Horocco'o indapodonco. trado union activity aoauad a mo cqrohonoiwo
otructuro. ‘l'ho trado union loadoro «name that mltnral activity wa kopt aopar.
ato tron political action and that tralo union laadorohip ho kopt apart tron nation-
aliat loadorohip, oopocially iollowin; tho rifta that had appoarod in tho ratio of
tho lotiklal Party in 1958. tho uniona conoidorod that it woo nocaoaary that thoy
acquiro political gaina and that tho union loadarahip rotain an oacalatin; ocalo
thatwould guarantoo thonthoooxaina. thiahroushtanownniontopro-inonco.
and thoro thon waro two (adoration of labor nniona in tho Kinula of llorocco.

‘l‘ho firot, which had accoqaniad tho national mt oinco ito .argonco. waa
callod tho Gonoral Union of Horoccan Uorkara; tho aocond ia callod tho lloroccan
Labor Padoration.

"oh-nod lonjolloun Andolooooi, nonhu- ot tho Control emittoo of tho latiklal
Party, aadaor or tho onocntivo co-ittoo of tho Gonoral Union of noroccan Workaro
and tho oocrotary gonaral of tho Yroo Uniworoity of ﬂotation, told wanna Al.-
'Ml. ” ‘ho ritto that occurrad within tho Iotiklal Party waro not tho roanlt of
idoological diapntoo. hocanao thia would aoan a contradiction hotwoon ono approach
and anothor. rho Iotiklal Party loodorohip at that tino conoidorod that a polit-
ical otruulo could ho intanatod only it it woo also! at nakin; tho poor proapor-
out in tho tint placa an at aproadin; about tho notion of jnotico and concilia-
tion and worlono oaana oi hriuin; mtnally onpportivo gronpo touthor. ‘l'hat io
tho goal or traoo union activity. Othorwioo, idaology will rogrooo no la; hohind

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
its proper progressive positions, which hows the goel first of ell of nobilising
the entire netionsl struggle for the ettsinnsnt of workers‘ rights."

The Birth of the Union

Benjelloun went on, "After the Gensrsl Union of Horoccen Horkers wee ssteblished
in 1960 in wrocco, in circles in the tree University of lducetion, where the first
of the union's lebor union cells wee foned, the process of reconsidering the
netionelist view of union sctivity wee begun, with the goel of getting the workers
to cosIIit theneelvss to this develop-set, beceuse they, thet is, the workers, when
they nske e union co-dtnent, slso co-Iit the-selves to politicel notions thet csn
rid the:- of wretchednsss, distress end ell kinds of exploitstion. ‘i'be esteblish-
nent of the Generel Union of Barkers wee plennsd to thwert the conspirecy thet wee
eined et reducing the workers' effectiveness, since this union wee born of the
blood of nsrtyrs, prisoners, exiles end oppressed persons. Abdelezis Bendiss, one
nertyr, when the Istiklel Perty considers the nertyr of the working cless, use the
first brick in the edifice of the union. Iran the first nonent of its birth, he
procleined the Istiklel Perty's politicel couitnsnt, beceuse we consider thet the
psrty believes in e struggle beeed on netionel vslues fer renoved free provocstion
end eggrevstion. Provocetion neens thet the union becones e neens for eoving the
nschine, wherees it is the petty, eny perty, thet should strive for thet. this
process of provocetion is concentreted in Int-serous slogens, posters end phreses
eined st depriving people of the setting of the holy wer they met wege with thee-
selves to sttein totel consciousness.

"we in the union heve found, through our co—itnent with the Istiklel Perty, thet
the provocstion process is very sinle, since it is my to tell people thet it is
through struggle thet socielisn end squelity will be reelieed, end so forth; how-
ever, we believe thet for truly sctive, fighting people, go isplsnting ewereness
ten be reelieed only if these people ere conscious of the vslues they represent es
persons end the vslues the struggle represents."

Regerding the socielist notion of lebor unions, benjelloun seid "Rhee we sey
'eocielisn,’ we met ewhesirs e specific concept, e netionelist notion end s his-
toric struggle, slong with e clesr vision of the future, end then we will he ehls
to judge whet eocielisn will do in our country. The socielien thet sone people
ere speaking shout here end whose books they reed hes never been reslired, especi-
el ly not in eccordence with the contente of these books. tether, whet hes heppensd
in more then one piece is thet there wee s historic process end e historic prectics
which provided the theory end geve s concept end s nene; the nuns did not precede
it. This canon edeptetion which we witness free tine to tine cen only do sons-
thing; either it fortifiss the working cless with nore sensitive nethods or it
nobilizeo the toiling cless by diluting the struggle. ‘l'hus e struggle thet does
not heve s specific goel end specific objective end does not rely on e process of
steges will becone e neens of dilution end s nsens for fregnenting the cubetive
power of the toiling cless."

Concerning the ideology of the Gsnerel Union of horoccen workers, he seid, "Vs
believe thet the working cless feels thet Islen, es s religion, brings ebout Just-
ice end equelity end thet it is necessery to epply Isl-it principles in order to

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL FSF. ONLY

attain the legitimate rights of every Lndividual. Therefore we are working for
the sake of the moral enlightenment which Islam has revealed, in addition to the
proper nationalist enlightenment. The exploitation of human labor is one of the
greatest sins in Islam. 'dhen this feeling becomes widespread and there is proper
religion in the spirits of people, then a development occurs in the core and aa-
sence of human relations.

"'l'herefore, to us, the equation has been to achieve a revolution of conscience.
The concerns that workers experience in their beliefs, ideas and lives are the ones
that cause upheavals within them, leading then: to hecone elements in the struggle.
Struggles that are concentrated on techniques of provocation and conandoea camt
be continuous and effective; rather, they become millscones grinding down the
people who con-nit the provocation while not benefiting the people who are provoked.

"We wish to bring about workers' participation in factories and peasanta' partici-
pation in free agricultural organizations through a dialogue with the governsnt
and via all the denncratic means of pressure. We are also struggling so that the
labor courts nay become a means for putting pressure on ewloyers who ignore work-
ers' human rights and expel workers for any reason whenever they like. The Hin-
iatry of Labor must play a part in this area and the government and eqloyara mat
not forget that the worker's interests are the plant's interests, that the peasant'a
interests are the interests of the land, and that oppression by any financial
authority mat be lifted from the workers and peasants and consequently the working
and productive sectors. We are also struggling against the hiring of any persons
on a tenporary basis, because temporary hire means disguised mloynent lumen
exploitation of workers, and the atteupt to impose future poverty and hunger on
their families. We are also denanding a national retirement fund and requesting
that all workers have some my to enable their families to live on in the event
workers are exposed to harm. The union's representatives in the Chamber of Deputies
are trying with all their effort to intr duce conpensations into the basic salary
as far as the retirement law goes. He are striving to turn all social reform in
the labor sectors into a means for raising and improving production so that the re-
sults will be proper. This reform, and its results, can cone about only through a
general freedom of union activity, and this takes place through enlighteuent of
the workers and their institutions and the political agencies in the country, with
the objective of bringing about the greatest possible amount of gains both in the

context of the workers and factories and in the linited general context of the
government, in the shortest possible period of time."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-WATAN AL-ARABI.

"887
C80: 4504/37]

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LIVESTOCK RAISING, HEAT, MILK PRODUCTION IN HAGHREB BXAHINED

Paris HARSHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBIHS in French No 1911, 25 Jun 82 pp 1633-
1635. 1637, 1639

[Text] The dominant climate in the Maghreb is Mediterranean, with autumn and
spring rains. However. as soon as one leaves the coastal regions, the aridity
of the land permits_only extensive livestock raising. Under 600 mm of rainfall,
one finds semi-nomadic goat and sheep raising.

In the arid regions (under 200 mm). livestock raising can only be practiced on
the move or on a nomadic basis. The extent of the arid or semi-arid regions
explains the importance of livestock raising, but with low yields and high mor-
tality rates (epizootic, drought). Many nomadic herders who were once cara-
vaneers are now semi-sedentary.

Cattle raising is developing in the sore fortunate regions that are richer in
pasture land: the plains and mountains of'Atlantic Morocco and northern Tunisia.

In Morocco..the western regions and the westward-facing mountain slopes receive
the heaviest rainfall (Tangiers: 833 mm), but it gradually decreases as one
goes south (Agadir: 225 mm). Differences in temperature are great and it
freezes in the mountains.

Agriculture juxtaposes two sectors: one, traditional, with 95 percent of all
rural people; the other modern, partially oriented toward exports.

As lor the mountains and oases in the south, the farmers raise small animals
on the move. 0n the Atlantic plains, cattle and sheep raising uses fallow land

since the crop growing system is based on biennial rotation.

Livestock raising retains its traditional place, with mediocre yields. Smaller
livestock (15 million sheep. 8 million goats) is the most common in the interior,
while cattle raising is the rule on the Atlantic plains, where there are some

3.6 million head.

Sixty percent of the active population (over 3 million persons) engages in an
activity linked to livestock raising, with over one-third being breeders.

Traditional livestock raising (cattle. sheep and goats) occupies over a million
breeders. whose herds are either of one type of animal or two or three combined:

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

some 600,000 breeders raise cattle exrlusively, while 300,000 have both cattle
and sheep, 150,000 have herds of all three, 70,000 raise only sheep, 70,000
raise sheep and goats and another 30,000 have herds of only goats.

The number of livestock breeders thus looks impressive, but such a presenta-
tion might give a false ides of the situation. One should specify that these
are people who engage in livestock raising activities in general - along
with others -- and that many of them have only a few animals.

The size of the herds provides a clearer picture. For cattle raisers. for

example, 760,000 have from 1 to 5 head. while 125,000 have 5 to 10, 27,000 have
10 to 20. and only 200 have over 100 head.

One should add that there are four ranches in Morocco and that their operation
is satisfactory.

As far as sheep are concerned, intensive breeding is confined to a few rare

industrial breeding and extensive grazing operations, which occupies the inter-
ior areas on the plateaux and mountains and employs some 575.000 persona. Of

these. 230,000 have 10 head at most, while 270,000 have from 10 to 50, 55,000
have fron 50 to 150 and 17,000 have over 150 animals.

Goat raising is essentially found in the southern provinces (Harraksch. Agadir,
Ouarzazate). It is also found in the Rif (Tangiers, Tetouan) and part of
eastern Morocco (Taza). The average size of the herds is about 20 head.

Moroccan animal production has greatly suffered from the catastrophic drought
lasting throughout the final quarter of 1980 and the entire year of 1981.

It is therefore difficult to describe the current livestock situation, as
the data remains incomplete.

Official statistics available for Morocco show substantial drops in the size
of herds.

The number of cattle, long stable at around 3.6 nillion head. was only 3.6 mil-
lion for 1980 and dropped still further in 1981.

Moroccan Livestock (number of head)

lam 22.1291

Cattle 3.396.000
Including: Local breeds 1,136,000 919,000
Crossbreeds 146,000 133,000
Imported 72,000 66,000

Sheep 16,860,000
Including: Ewes 8,692,000 7,400,000

26

FOI!OFFKJA1.USE(M‘LY
(cont.)

Coats 5.100.000
Including: Females 2,856,000
Draft animals
Horses 300,000
Mules 350.000
Donkeys 1 ,400,000

Source: Moroccan statistics

The FAO figures coincide-for cattle. but are substantially different for sheep
and goats. According to the PAD. the number of sheep, 17.1 million in 1970,

fell to 15.6 in 1979 and then rose slightly in 1980 to 16.1 million head.

The number of goats went from 8.5 million in 1970 to about 6 million in 1979
and 1980.

One can see that the order is the same and that the figures give a good idea of
the relative size of the herds. whatever the sources.

Morocco has a great livestock raising potential because its livestock produc-
tion represents over one-third of total agricultural production. However, that
production is still inadequate to meet its own needs.

Morocco has two types of livestock raising: livestock raising for milk. essen-

tially cattle; and livestock raising for meat, where one finds sheep, goats
and local cattle.

Cattle Raising

Cattle raising is of two types: intensive and extensive. Extensive cattle
raising uses grazing land and fallow fields. The breeds are mainly local:
Atlas Browns and the Guinea. The areas where it is practiced are the dry
(arming zones and the mountains, of mediocre interest, where productivity is

low. E forts are now being made toward genetic improvements and toward pro-
viding good feed.

Intensive cattle raising essentially involves improved imported purebreds
(Fricsians. Holstein). It is practiced on state farms (COMAGRI [Moroccan

Farm Management Company]. 8008A [Agricultural Development Company],
SOCETA [Agricultural Land Management Company]. experimental farms) and private
farms in irrigated areas. The departments of the Ministry of Agriculture

are in charge of organization, particularly with respect to shelters and animal
health and preventive medicine.

Productivity is good and the performance of the cows constantly improving.
particularly because of efforts made toward genetic improvements.

27

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NHLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Viewed on the whole, cattle raising performances are poor as a result of the
extensive and traditional nature of the activity (90 percent local breeds).

Nevertheless, the development of forage crops and the spreading of more modern
raising mathoos have resulted in substantial improvements. Still. there are
marked differences because of the breeds.

For example. the age of the first calving of a Pie Moire cow is 28 months,
compared with 39 months for a local breed. A local cow will give 450 kilo-
grams of milk a year; a Pie Moire, 6.000.

Sheep

Sheep raising is essentially for the purpose of providing meat and wool. The
milk is almost all used by the lambs.

Four main breeds are found:

the Timahdit, of average size (.60 meter high; 60 to 50 kilograms), a dark-
headed sheep mainly found on the western slope of the Middle Atlas Mountains,

with good resistance to the cold and bad weather thanks to its long, less kinky
fleece (weight of fleece: 1.8 to 2 kilograms).

the Sardi. a large sheep (.60 to .80 meter high; as to 60 kilograms), with

black spots on the head, ears and legs. Lambs grow rapidly. Fleece weighs
from 1.5 to 1.8 kilograms. It is found on the Moroccan central plateau.

the Deni-Gull, a small breed (.50 to .60 meter high; 35 to 40 kilograms).

with a brown head and brown or spotted legs, very firm fleece and very sought-
after meat; a very resistant breed and able to transform cellulose. It is
found on the high pleateaux of the Algerian-Moroccan territories.

the D'mane, a good breeder and an excellent milk giver. This is a "population"
more than a breed. The types are diverse and not specific and are generally

of mediocre conforme"on. The ram has no horns. This is the sheep of the
northwest Saharan 0|!u5.

Only a few years ago, research advised that the Merino breed be spread to the
Moroccan oases and its introduction is still sometimes encouraged in the coun-

tires of the Maghreb. to the detriment of some local breeds, particularly the
D'mane.

This type is an excellent breeder, with two lambings a year and frequent multi-

ple births. It has swat-ed over a rather broad area: the palm plantations of
Tafilalet. Draa, Sarro, Todra, Ferkla, Cherie and Guir; the Dades Valley.
and also in the Middle Atlas and on the edge of the Atlas Mountains (Marrakech).

It is generally raised in small herds by families of sedentary farmers. In
the oases, it is often stabled in buildings that are part of the dwellings.

It is rather small: 50 to 45 kilograms for eves and 65 to 85 kilograms for
rams.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
its appearance is very distinCt: The males have no horns. the animal is long
and light in the body. with a fine. aquiline head. long. drooping eats. a long.
thin neck. and the fleece is long and coarse. The wool is varied in color. with
black and white dominating.

its qualities are remarkable: a very good breeder (190 days between two lamb-
ings); two lambings a year; natural aptitude for having twins (or triplets);

new eyes are apt to reproduce in a year and are very fertile;'and ewes can suckle
three lambs.

For the Saharan regions. they constitute a major element in development.

The D'mane fits perfectly well into palm agriculture and it would be most un-
fortunate to lose an animal so well-adapted genetically. even if its short-range
advantages may seem less attractive than newly introduced breeds.

Fortunately. the Royal Domains Directorate has made it possible to set up a
ranch in Tafilalet. to be used to preserve and improve the breed.

One should also mention the Mediterranean-type found in the mountains. in
Morocco as well as Algeria. It is known by different names: the Atlas breed.
the Rif sheep. and so on. Small. the ewes weigh from 25 to 35 kilograms.

It has long. curly rather than kinky fleece and the wool is white. It is a
good milk giver and can stand cold and intemperate weather.

The pastoral tradition of the Maghreb dates from ancient times and North Africa.

with some 35 million sheep. is one of the greatest sheep-raising regions in the
world. .

The Haghrebian breeds are excellent and well-adapted to their milieu. "The
introduction of foreign breeds is of little interest and emphasis should rather
be placed on the best local breeds.

Selection has already obtained excellent results and based on a common herd.

one needs but 3 to 5 years to achieve substantial results. However, the applica-
tion of simple. inexpensive measures would bring about a considerable increase

in the production of local flocks. Provided that suitable sootechnic measures

are taken and by using mere selective breeding. Moroccan (and Maghrebian) live-
stock has excellent production potential and should easily meet the Haghreb's
needs for mutton.

the basic actions include adequate water. salt within reach. some supplements
and proper feed. Research should be aimed at more numerous births. a reduction
in pre- and postnatal mortality. larger lambs. increasing resistance to drought
and speedier growth.

All of this implies the spreading of techniques and proper training.
Application of basic measures helps the flock rapidly. but also lays the way

for the future through the obtention of animals that are stronger and more pro-
ductive (at an earlier age. fertility. weight).

29

FOI'OFUKJAI.USE(MVLY
we WHQOAI. USE ONLY

Heat Production

Heat production was by and large adequate until 1976. but the conbination of the
drought and population growth nade it inadequate. In the forn of neat and offal.
it totals an estimated 350,000 tons for 1981. up 6 percent over .980. but predic-
tions for 1982 show a drop of from 7 to 8 percent: to 326,000 tons. This is
because of the drought. but it is still a lesser evil because for red meats

alone (cattle. sheep and goats). official statistics show the following figures:
1980. 196,000 tons; 1981. 236,000 tons; and 1982. 166,000 tons (estimates).

It is poultry that will sake the difference. with the great been in industrial
poultry raising. Figures for poultry production are as follows: 100,000 tons
of neat in 1980; 75.000 tons in 1981; and 153.000 tons in 1982 (estimates).

Beef production. announced by Horoccan statistics at 107.000 tons in 1980 and

132.000 tons in 1981. is expected to total only 90.000 tons in 1982. Production
of lamb and mutton: $5.000 tons in 1980 and 65,000 tons in 1981. is also ex-
pected to drop substantially in 1982 (35.000 tons). .

The damage of the drought is manifest. Cattle provide 56 percent of all red
meat production, but one must note that if one is talking about total aninal
protein (red naats. offal. poultry), they represent only 26 to 27 percent. with
the expanding poultry sector accounting for 47 percent by itself.

The carcass yield is low: The average weight of a carcass is 117 kilogram for
cattle (average for Africa: 139 kilograns) and 11 kilograms for sheep‘(average
for Africa: 13). however. these are national averages. Near the large cities.
supplied by ranches with improved breeds. the carcasses weigh free 170 to 200
kilograms.

Poultry production has developed greatly and contributes more and more to the
effort to sake up for the meat shortage in Morocco.

The traditional poultry-raising operations represent some 50 percent of all
production. according to the most recent estimates available to us. The other
half cones fron nodern poultry farms (nearly all of them privately owned). The
ncdern sector uses very productive strains and is essentially oriented toward
production for neat.

Annual production of poultry meat. estimated'to total 70,000 tons in 1977 (it
had increased over 60 percent since 1970), was 100.000 tons in 1980. But a
drop occurred in 1981. when the total was 75.000 tons. Nevertheless. the very
great effort underway in the sector points toward a doubling of production for
1982 (estiisted 153,000 tons).

Egg production in 1980 was 613 million.

Develop-en: of the poultry sector presunes the existence of poultry slaughter-
houses and developsent of a cold storage facility. now not sufficiently in use.

30

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE¢MNLY
Milk Production

From 420 million liters in 1971, milk production in Morocco went to 530 million

liters in 1975 and an estimated 780 million in 1980. This is clearly not enough
because in 1980. Morocco imported the equivalent of 630 million liters.

Because of climatic uncertainties. production varies greatly from one year to

the next. However, what is even more remarkable, it is very irregular during
the year also. There are two distinct periods: heavy milk production (Pebruary
to August) and low silk production (September to January).

This very specific phenomenon is directly related to the birthing season, which
is itself related to the availability of fodder.

In 1975. only 20 percent of all production went to processing plants and 30 per-
cent went for family consumption.

in 1977, the amount of milk produced was 620 million liters and imports of milk
products (butter. concentrated and powdered milk. cheeses) totaled the equivalent
of some 350 million liters, representing a total consumption of about 1 billion
liters. or 55 liters per person (60 percent from national production). Since
that time. these levels have progressed substantially due to the greet effort
made to develop livestock raising: infrastructures, the establishment of collec-
tion centers (76 in 1975; 214 in 1980). an intensification of genetic improve-
ment efforts (artificial insemination, breeding stations. importation of dairy
stock). subsidies. and so on.

At the same time. emphasis was placed on the related industries, with an increas-
ing number of processing plants in milk producing regions. with efforts tending

to regionalize these units so as to permit the development of production by re-
gions and encourage collection under the best possible conditions.

Zootechnic measures (controlled breeding. supervision of lambing, choice of
rams. ewes and lambs) and sanitary measures (vaccination, prophylactic care,
control of parasites) are an indispensable complement to development.

Coats

Coats are the third element of Moroccan livestock raising. Although the herd

has decreased in the past 10 years, it still represents some 11 percent of all
animals. Along with sheep. goats are the animals most able to take advantage

n' the pasture available. especially in mountainous regions (southern Morocco,
forests of the Upper Atlas and the Rif). They are generally found in the arid
and semi-arid zones. Their hardiness is well-known but their productivity

remains low. Meat production is about 5 to 6 kilograms per female kept for
breeding per year. In 1971. the official statistics put Moroccan goat lilk
production at 62,000 tons. 95 percent consumed locally.

31

roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other Types of Production
"001

Wool is produced locally by different breeds, especially crossbreeda (60 per-
cent). It is often coarse and uniform. An effort at selection is being node in
regions considered as the Iain origins of the breeds.

The FAO gives production figures of about 5,600 tons, while calculations based
on the number of head and the basis of 1.6 kilogr-ss of wool per head per year
give a theoretical production of 20,000 to 25,000 tons.

Crosschecking based on the needs of handicrafts and industry lead one to think
that Moroccan figures are more accurate. Actually. the need for wool totals

an estimated 16,000 tons, net as follows: 15 percent by local production. which
yields 20.000 x 15 percent - 3.000 tons; 80 percent by inputs, or around 11,000
tons.

For 85 percent of the local production - a nininun of 15,000 tons - it would
be interesting to learn the final use.

Hides

They often have flaws due to parasites (scabies, tics. warblss), certain viral
or bacterial diseases, nechanical causes 0 accidents or inproper skinning.

The amount of production is shown by the following figures:

1977 1980
Cattle hides 700.000 800.000
Sheep and goat skins 6,160,000 6,500,000

Livestock feed includes: local production,

Local production: grazing. 6.6 billion forage units; fodder production from
forage and leguninous crops (687 nillion forage units); fallow land. straw and
stubble, grain. bran. pulp. cakes. and so on (6.12 billion forage units); and

inported fodder and livestock feed, whether on a regular basis (corn, oil cakes)
or circusstantial basis.

Horoccan Livestock Raising Policy

Moroccan livestock raising policy corresponds to an objective of an annual con-
sunption of 20 gr-s of sni-al protein per person by 1985. with self-sufficiency
achieved through increased national production and isproved quality.

The nsin guidelines are: an increase in production and productivity: greater
incose for the livestock breeder and Horoccanisation (ownership of fares is re-
served for nationals and national conpanies); professional training of livestock
breeders and supervisory personnel; and a balance between production and process-

ing .
32

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Emphasis is clearly placed on cattle and mainly on genetic improvements through
crossbreeding with imported animals. In addition, some purebred stock is being

imported. especially milk cows. Finally, an effort is being made to select the
best local stock.

Introduction of Purebred Stock

The introduction of foreign livestock. especially milk cows, is the short-term
answer to immediate needs. Purchases come from the following sources: animals
imported outright (27.800 pregnant heifers imported during the 1973-1977 Plan).
with an annual general program reviewed every year; COHAGRI "nurseries."
COMAGRI turns out a thousand heifers a year and its model ranches serve as a
means to spread modern intensive livestock raising methods.

Selection Farms

Six cattle selection farms keep purebred herds of select Moroccan stock. Pro-
ceeds are returned to breeders.

Artificial Insemination and Breeding Stations

Artificial insemination for cattle is systematically organized on a national
scale with two national centers. one at Ain Djemsa. which oversees the southern
provinces, and the other at Kenitra, which oversees the north. The breeding
stations now serve only regions where there are not yet any local artificial
insemination centers.

Public Supervision

The support organizations for this policy are national. paranational and private
(of a cooperative nature). They involve:

1) research. teaching and technical assistance, under the National Institute
of Agronomic Research (INRA) in Rabat. the Hassan II Agronomic and Veterinary
Institute in Rabat and the National School of Agriculture in Heknes.

The departments of the Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform: the Direc-
torate of Livestock Raising and regional departments (regional offices of agri-
uu'tural development and provincial agricultural directorates).

It is the Ministry of Interior which oversees the municipal slaughterhouses
and the administration of collective grazing land.

2) state organizations:

the National Livestock Development Company (SHOE). whose task it is to set up
livestock raising units (meat or milk) of the ranch type on national lands;

the Moroccan Farm Management Company (COHAGRI). which manages national land and
whose main task is the production of pregnant heifers for return to livestock
breeders (Friesians, Holsteins. Tarentaise);

33

F0.‘0FFKJAI.US£(N‘LY
FOR OMCIAL [BB ONLV

the Agricultural Land Hanagenent Conpany (SOGETA) and the Agricultural Develop-

aent Conpany (soon). which nanage state land, with very inportant aninal pro-
duction, and which also produce breeding stock to return to breeders; and

the National Agricultural Credit Bank (0110A), 50 percent of whose loans involve
livestock raising.

3) cooperative organisations:
the National Milk Cooperatives Union (UNCAL);

nilk pickup cooperatives (200 collection centers; 10.000 nebers), centers for
the disseaination of intonation and health and development support;

agrarian refers cooperatives; and

associations of purebred livestock breeders, whose core was set up in Casablanca
and whose expansion is planned.

Organization of Market

Stats sector: production of breeding stock and seed; dies-ination of tech-

niques (SNDB, COHAGRI, SOGB‘IA, 8003A); S3 nunicipal slaughterhouses. The
largest handled a total of 56,000 tons of nest in 1980 (Casablanca, 30,000

tons; Rabat. 8,700 tons).

Cooperative sector: the agrarian reforn cooperatives, on recovered land; the
dairy cooperatives, which include several nilk collection centers; end the

caudal circuits: livestock sarkets (eouks). wholesale butchers, butchers
supplying urban zones; livestock markets with slaughterhouses at narkets for
rural areas; nilk collection centers; sun the organization of poultry narkets

now underway.
Budgets and Projects

Horoccan livestock raising contribute 35 percent of the agricultural GR? and
sakes up 15 to 25 percent of the GNP.

The portion of the national budget devoted to livestock raising is regularly
increasing and is making a real leap in 1982: 1980, 61 nillion dirhns;
1981, 68 nillion dirhass; and 1982, 200 million dirhans.

For the 1981-1985 Plan. out of the 10 billion dirhass provided for eqnipnent
credits tu the Ministry of Agriculture, 1,156,000,000 concern livestock raising.

Along with an intensification of sanitary and health action, the 1981-1985 Plan
aphasizes the expansion of forage crops, the improve-eat of paeturelsnd and
genetic inprovuents and every sector is the target of specific projects.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct Cie Paris 1982

EN!)
11,666

680: 6519/220 3‘

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY