FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1o115
13 November 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 748

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English- language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA REPORT

FOUO No. 748

Coureurs

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

East Bloc Economic-Political Aiaa. Actiona in Africa
(Pierre Voillery; JEUNE APPIQUB, 30 Sep 81) ..............

CAMEROO“

Cocoa Season Begins; Producern' Price To Incraaae
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS, 25 Sep 81) .........

CONGO

Soviet Economic Impact in Congo 'Pairly NiniIaI'
(Bryan Pearaon; NEH AFRICA”, Oct 81) .....................

‘EQUATORIAL GUINEA

Opposition Leader Diacuaaea Political, Bconoaic Situation
(Daniel Oyono Interview; CAHDIO 16. 28 Sep 81) ...........

Regine Said To Be Undergoing Profound Deterioration
(Gonzalo San Segundo; CANDID 16, 28 Sep 81) ..............

Spanish Official Diacuaaea Spaniah Aid to Regine
(cmto 16. 28 sep 81) OOOOOOICOOIO.DOCOOOO'OOOOOOOOOOOOOO

GABON

Briefa
Suggested Bluff

IVORY COAST

Briefa
Coffee, Cocoa Caupaigna

-a- [In-unea-iza

FOR OFFﬂ3A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

Diouf Diacusses Recent Developments in Political Situation
(Abdou Diouf Interview; moon-A313. 28 8ep-ll Oct 81)

TANZANIA

Ujauaa Said To Be Backed by Vast Hajority
(Omar Al-Anoody; m AFRICAN, Oct 81) ..

ZAIRE

western Countries Continue Support; Opposition Liquidated
(Jacques Him; POURQUOI PA”, 26 Sap 81) .................

ZAMBIA

Austrian Development Project Described as Successful
(Honika Brenner. Reinhardt Engel; m AFRICAN, Oct 81) ....

Bumper Maize Crop Politically Helpful for Kaunda
(Guy Arnold: mmtm. at 81) 00.00.....COCOOOCOOOOOCI.

'0 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0I40FEKJAI.USE<DNLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

EAST BLOC ECONOMIC-POLITICAL AIMS, ACTIONS IN AFRICA
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1082, 30 Sep 81 pp 56-h?
[Article by Pierre Voillery: "A Lung for Moscow"]

[Text] Nillingly setting ideology aside, in Africa the countries
of the Soviet bloc are interested first of all in strategic raw
materials.

The military interventions in Africa by the Soviets and their allies have brought to
light, in recent years, that continent'. importance to the Kremlin. with more dis-
cretion but just as much effectiveness, military advisers are officering and train-
ing the arned forces of certain countries in accordance with a model characteristic
of the Warsaw Pact: the Russian directs, the Bulgarian transmits, the Ger-an organ-
izes, and the African...executea. But while these facts are of great importance,
they tend to conceal a fundamental reality: the economic and technical relations be-
tween Africa and the Soviet bloc.

The USSR and its allies of East Europe, linked to 39 OAU member-countries, have con-
siderably increased the financial volume of their trade with Africa over the last
decade: from index 100 in 1970, they have reached 260 today for exports and 232 for
imports. Nevertheless, this growth is far lower than the growth of exchanges with
the Third World as a whole (OPEC countries included): the proportion for Africa-

25 percent of exports and imports in l970--was in 1980 only 15.5 and 16 percent, re-
spectively.

For certain countries (Angola, Benin, Ethiopia, Liberia, Hali, Sierra Leone, Somalie
Zambia), this growth is synonymous with greater indebtedness; for others (Congo,
Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda, Senegal, Tanzania, Zaire), trade exchange is in balance; and
for some, finally (Ivory Coast, Caneroon, Ghana, Cunies, Sudan, Togo), there is a
positive balance.

East Europe, as one sees, favors its exchanges with the wealthy countries, suppliers
of strategic products, independently of their political options: along its big trade
partners, Morocco and Nigeria are close to Algeria and Libya.

Inversely, of the five African countries that the World Bank places among the poor-
est in the world (Chad, Ethiopia, Kali, Burundi, Upper Volta), only Ethiopia bene-
fits from considerable East Zuropean aid.

In a word, investment is being made in the countries capable of furnishing what it
needs (or will need). Algeria, Libya and Nigeria will alleviate the energy diffi-

l

F0!!0FFKJA1.USE(IVLY
FOR'0F11C1AI.USE(MNLY

culties that the USSR may encounter in the coming decade and that certain people's
democracies are already experiencing. A few weeks after Colonel Qadhafi,and the Niger-
ian minister of external affairs, Ishaya Audu, made a tour of the capitals of the
socialist bloc, with a matter of oil doubtleasly involved. As for Morocco, its
phosphates will enrich East European and Soviet agriculture, which is seriously

short of fertilizers. On the other hand,last Europe is inaposition to provide cer-
tain African countries not only with credits (which are rare) but also with tech-
niques and technologies, and to provide for the training of their cadres.

The USSR is present economically in more than 30 of the continent's countries, Bun-
gary and Romania are proving very dynamic there, and Poland was also until recently.
And last July, Bulgaria entered into some 30 bilateral agreements with Angola, Mo-
zambique, Tanzania, Guinea, the Congo, Ethiopia, Algeria and Nigeria. Multilateral
agreements have been made with the African countries of the CEMA [Council for Eco-
nomic Mutual Assistance]: Angola, Ethiopia and Mozambique. In certain cases, highly
specialized action is involved: from April to July 1980, for example, the CEMA coun-
tries sent 79 veterinarians to combat an epidemic of brucellosia, and Bulgaria regu-
larly supplies Algeria and Ethiopia with sizable contingents of doctors.

Speculation

The USSR and its allies are getting established in places where the Heat is slow to
do so. belks at the idea, or is prevented. The credits granted vary from a little
to very large amounts, depending on the creditor's interest: in 1978, Morocco ob-
tained a loan for $2.089 billion, and Mali got only $1 million.

Specialization is the rule. Thus, Bulgaria works in the agricultural, geological
and maritime fields (Angola, Congo, Ethiopia, Libya, Mauritania, Mozambique, Somalia
Tunisia), and in a secondary way in industry (Tanzania) and building construction
(Nigeria). Hungary is involved in mines (Algeria, Sudan, Togo), roads (Libya), and
community facilities (Nigeria). East Germany installs factories (Algeria, Angola,
Mozambique), as does Poland (Algeria, Morocco. Nigeria), which also does equipment
projects (Algeria, Libya, Nigeria, Senegal). Czechoslovakia also does them, as well
as studies (Algeria, Ethiopia, Libya, Nigeria, Zambia). As for Romania, which is
established in Algeria, Burundi and Mauritania, it builds dams, manufactures engines
and organizes agriculture.

Direct investment is not excluded from this cooperation. Romania is present in 31
companies, Poland in 14, Bulgaria in 12. The USSR owns all or part of 8 companies;
the number for Hungary is 6, and for Czechoslovakia, 6. East Germany, for its part,
declines to export its capital. Out of 75 enterprises and companies whose capital
comes from the European countries of the OSHA, 20 are installed in Nigera, 9 in
Libya, 8 in Morocco. In Africa as elsewhere, money attracts money: those who pay
well get the investments--and all the more so if they settle their debts in strong
currencies, which the countries of the East need for their exchanges with the Heat.

The number of cooperation personnel and civilian technicians varies significantly:
while there are 22,000 in Libya, 11,000 in Algeria and 1,600 in Nigeria, there are
only 125 in Sudan, 95 in Ghana, 20 in Sao Tome and Principe, and so on.

But there is a marked difference between the "allies“ and the others. In Mozam-
bique, for example, the CEMA has begun development of metallurgy and steelmaking in

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(IVLY

Tete province, as well as development of the Limpopo and Inkomati plains. In Ethio-
pie, an agricultural improvement plan has been launched.

The desire to get established politically in Africa is linked to the overriding
search for an area capable of absorbing know-how and solid technology, of making use
of products that are difficult to get into the more demanding Restern market, and of
procuring strategic raw materials. Little by little, Africa is becoming a lung for
East Europe, which, turning to account its political ruptures with Egypt and Somalia
is henceforth accentuating its establishment in the rest of the continent.

The world crisis and the specific problems of the Eastern countries have shown that
those countries do not for: a bloc free of faults and rivalry.

In certain of them, the desire for independence takes on an economic form. 0n the
occasion of the recent tensions over raw materials prices (oil, coffee. etc), the
USSR and Bulgaria did not hesitate to speculate, building up stocks, closing down
the domestic market, and reselling raw products, derivatives or processed products
to the western countries at high prices.

In others, African foreign trade constitutes the underpinning of an original poli-
tical project. Romania for a long time, and Hungary more recently, have been plan-
ning to use their African positions to play a role as intermediary favorable to the
Third world in the North-South dialogue.

Profit

For East Europe, military presence and strategic control are therefore not the only
two feundations of its approach to Africa. This approach is above all, of course, a
political phenomenon. But the partners never lose sight of the economic-financial
interests. Nevertheless, even among faithful allies. the national interest always
takes precedence over socialist solidarity. In this sense, the African countries'
ties with East Europe are hardly different from those they have with the Heat: pro-
fit and interest outweigh the serious reality of the unequal development of Africa.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

[1267
C80: 4719/80

FOR‘OFFKJAI.U§E(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0000A SEASON BEGINS; PRODUCERS' PRICE to INCREASE
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX 31‘ moms in French No 1872, 25 Sep 81 p 2449
[Text] The 1981-1982 cocoa season was opened 16 September in all producing areas.

At a meeting of the governors and prefects concerned. the Cameroonian minister

for economic affairs and planning. Hr. Youssoufa Daouda. urged the growers on

12 September to "arm themselves with courage and devote themselves faithfully and
zealously to cocoa cultivation, so that the next harvest will be a positive response
to the ceaselessly repeated appeals of the head of state." The minister of eco-
nomic affairs and planning asked the administrative authorities in the cocoa areas
to give cocoa growers training "sufficient to encompass all aspects of cocoa culti-
vation particularly the operation of plantations. timely harvesting. fermentation,
drying and sorting. in such a waythat the product to be marketed is of good quality."

The minister noted the figures on the 1980-1981 season: 117,000 tons. compared

to 122.000 tons in 1979-1980. The minister said: "This slight. 5.000-ton decline
is basically the result of the phenomenon of letting land rest fallow. and of cli-
natic conditions. In reality. the poor distribution of rainfall. both in time

and in place, impeded the progress of the cocoa growers and thus brought about
reduced production. It should also be acknowledged that a certain number of irreg-
ularitieswere noted in the geographical distribution of fertilizers and in the
provisioning of agricultural supplies to the growers.”

For the upcoming season, Hr. Daouda put the accent on the decision by the head

of state to raise the price paid to producers per kilogram of Grade 1 and Grade

2 cocoa to Fr CPA 310. The minister noted the particularly difficult international
situation. In that connection. he said that "the trend toward decline in world
market prices which we have witnessed since 1977 has been aggravated during the
1980-1981 season, which ended with price levels we havenmt seen in 5 years. while
during the same period of time all production costs have considerably increased."

The decision by the head of state to increase the price paid to producers by FR
CPA 10 per kilogram of cocoa shows his concern to preserve the real purchasing
power of the growers. It is also intended to provide and lay the foundations for
harmonious economic development based on agriculture. in order to discourage the
rural exodus and move toward a redistribution of income without which "the govern-
ment's goals with respect to social justice would remain nothing but words."

I.
FORiOFFﬂJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The price paid for substandard [cocoa] has been held to PR CPA 100, in order to
discourage nixing different grades of cocoa and dirty tricks thereby providing
further incentive to inrove the quality of the product. In tanden with these
measures to improve quality. Hinister Dsouda said that efforts to provide for a
successful restoration of agricultural productivity will be pursued without let-

up during the upcoming season. "In that connection." he disclosed. "a sun of approx-
intely FR CPA lo billion will be devoted to fighting capsids. fighting brown-rot.

to setting rural young people up in agriculture. to the crestion and nintenance

of cocoa roads, and to cowetitinn for recognition as the best plantation."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Peria 1981.

9516
(:50: 4719/73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOVIET ECONOMIC IMPACT IN CONGO 'PAIRLY HININAL'
l

London N3" AFRIM in English No 169,0ct 81 pp 30, 31

[Article by Bryan Pearson: "Frustration Lies Behind Contented Brazzaville")
[Excerpts]

THE RHYTHMlC sound of OK Jan
blares out nightly into the warm Brena-
ville sir. Socially it appears to be a
contented city. But cosmetic gaiety fails
to hide completely the economic and
political frustrations of the people.

The Congo hen seen more than its
share of changes in recent years. Yet
despite an oil income. the promised
rewards have yet to ﬁlter through to the
people.

Second conquest

The "revolution” planned by Marion
Ngouabi and the National Revolutionary
Council in the late 1980s never really
took root. The centenary celebrations last
year to commemorate the foundation of
Brazzaville by the French colonialiet
Savorgnon de Brena in 1881. are witness
to that. Many called it the 'second con-
quest”.

Oil output has risen by «.6 percent in
the last six months. and figures for the
lost [8 months have been encouraging.
But apart from civil servants receiving
their salaries regularly rather than sev-
eral months in arrears. and a series of
skyscrapers now growing daily. little isto
be seen of the wealth

There is an Interesting story behind
the centenary celebrations. France. an-
nious that such a landmark in the history
or its old colony should not be missed.
promised the government of Donna Sas~
sou N'gueeso that it would install street

6

lights and traillc lights throughout—d1?
my free of char-es. on condition that a
great carnival was arranged 1he m
WM ‘00 tampons and the government.

espite its anti-oolonialist Marsist.
”INN“ Wilt. agreed to the deal.
In one month. imported French inan-
P°""'- Wm all hours of the day.
installed an impressive array of gm
“rhu- and mm: "this around the city.
It wasnmammoth tult. well done. but
thspoliticalprieetotheCongowassteep.
anditlehthepsoplealittleconmseduto
their government’s avowed socialist
intent. ,_ _

The Congo today More from a north?
south divide. President N'guesso heads a
predominantly northerner government.
whose ascent to power can be traced to
the French student unrest in the late
1980s. At thattime. the northerners were
the "boothoys‘ in the army of Manon
Ngouabi. a southerner. Ngouabi's error
was ln ﬁlling the army with the norther-
ners whose business acumen was not
rated.

Socialist ideals

The consequence was that they slowly
grew in power. if not in stature. and
eventually many went to France to study.
They returned fully inculcatad with
socialist ideals. Theirstrength within the
army ranks ensured them the leadership.
as Ngouabi's socialism stuttered.

Today. the roads to the north of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070030-7

COPY RIGHT:

680:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

country are good. yet the route from
Brazzaville to Pomte Noire - the
economic nerve centre of the country - it
still in poor ahape. unpaaeable in the
rainy season. The eouthernera. who were
Just as guilty when they were in power.
resent the northern dominance and aeetn
reluctant to throw their weight into
national economic development.

A unique aspect of the economy ie that
employment is not overwhelmingly
agriculture-based as is the cane in moat
African countries. Worryingly though.
agricultural production ie falling and.
inevnahly. importa are rieing. Freeh veg-
etablee are not as easily available in the
capital as they were. Only recently have

state Marketing Board: begun to pay
farmer: a reasonable price for their pro-
duce.

Previoualy. uneconomic pricee had
reeulted in a decimation of the agricul-
tural eector. end had heightened the
problem of urban over-population at
many young. productive workers ﬂed
from the rural areas in aearch ofa living.

The government hae ehown iteelf to he
awareofthia and has reeponded by giving
the largeet aingle elice of the national
investment budget to the Ministry of
Rural Economy. If this In euetained.
agricultural production should he eeen to
nee again. and the seemingly endleee

1981 1c Magazines united

4700/19“

7

 

tide of urban immigrant
etemmed.

Central Akiea it no
indeed. if carefully
reeoureee point to it be
wealthy region in Atria
in attracting the fill“
meat and technology.

Elohim

At'preeentthe oil com
in the country and itet
Elf of Franoeeﬁ‘nd All
reportedly yi ng not
outright prollta per hal
though the governme
increaeed the equity 1

partner. with ltaly. W
the United Staten follo'
It in mistakenly belie“
Union is a powerful eon
country. Apart from
emhaaey compound - p
largeat in the world - It
appeere to be fairly mix
a pragmatiet. and h
encourage the Soviet
valuable input of Wee:
He playe their gain
overdoing it.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070030-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

OPPOSITION LEADER DISCUSSB POLITICAL, womc SITUATION
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish No 513, 28 Sep 81 pp 63, 66

[Interview with Daniel Oyono, former minister of the Macias government and opposi?
tion leader in exile, by Gonzalo San Segundo in Paris; date not specified]

[Text] He was an all-powerful man under the Macias dictatorship. He held the posts
of minister to the presidency, minister of finance, security, information and
tourism. Now, he is in the opposition, heads the Executive Co—ittee of the
Revolutionary Comnd Council of Patriots and Guinean Socialist Cadres (003068)

and sees himself as one of the most representative and charismatic leaders among
the Guinean people. Bis name is Daniel Oyono, 36 years of age, married, father of
two daughters and he gave an exclusive interview to CANDID 16 in Paris.

CAHBIO 16: From being a minister under Macias, you have become the leader of the.
opposition. That is somewhat unusual.

Daniel Oyono: You are right. But there you have Adolfo Suarez, the man who brought
about the political transition in Spain. And if it can happen in Spain, then it
should be much more logical to happen in Guinea where we only have a handful of
qualified men.

C16: In 1976, you created INFOR‘I'URS now integrated into the CCRCGS alongside with
the Socialist Front and the Front of Independent Duocrats.

0.0.: Yes. this is a movement formed by young cadres from the army, the civil
service and the population of Equatorial Guinea. It was set up as an alternative
for change. In 1976, it was dismantled and most of its leaders and mdnrs were
arrested.

C16: Including you?

0.0.: Including me. That is why I was in jail from November 1976 until June 1977.
I lost all my posts except for the portfolio of finance.

C16: Being Macias' "heir apparent" as well as his nephew, you were very powerful.
in Guinea.

D.0.: First of all, I am not Macias' nephew. I was not born in his native village
and I am not directed related by blood to him. My grandfather was a matter of the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sangi tribe which was also Macias' tribe and the tribe to which the current presi-
dent, Teodoro Obiang, belongs. It is true that there was a tins when I was his
protege, the reason for that being—and you will excuse me if I sound presumptuous--
that I was one of the few people in my country who knew about finances. That is

why under the present regime I becane secretary for international econonic relations,
governor of the World Bank, delegate to the BBC and governor of the African
Development Bank until August 1980 when I resigned from all ny posts and voluntarily
left the country where I have secretly returned on three occasions.

(:16: It is said that you are one of those responsible for the anti-Spanish
campaign launched in Guinea during the Macias period.

0.0.: I am surprised that the Spanish Govern-eat remains silent when I an attacked
in the Spanish press, unless these slanderous reports originate from the government
itself. I was the only metier of the Macias Governlent who kept close relations
with the Spanish Essay in Malabo. I was also the only one who-=darad to accept an
invitation from the Spanish Many to attend the celebrations marking the first
anniversary of Juan Carlos as King of Spain. At that function, I made a speech
calling for noml relations between Spain and Guinea. It cost as to be penalized
with a 10-month salary suspension. But I also got my reward in August 1980 when
King Juan Carlos congratulated me as he gave an audience to a delegation from

my country after Col Teodoro Obiang's military coup. His Majesty told me that he
would not forget that I was the only naber of the government who cans to the
Spanish Babassy during the most difficult days in the relations between Spain and
Guinea and he publicly spoke out in favor of normalizing relations between our two
countries.

C16: It is also being said that you are pro-Soviet.

D.0.: I have a Spanish education up to the pre-miversity level. After that. I
went to Milan to study law. I have a degree in International Relations and Public
Administration. I have a European education and no liking whatsoever for communion
or tyranny.

C16: What do you think of the step taken by President Obiang to the effect of
banning the reading of three Spanish publications, including CAMBIO 16?

0.0.: It is one of the worst mistakes nade by Obiang who is under constant pressure
from the men who come from the Mongomo district. ’lhirty-two of the 35 members of
the Military Jmta and government are from Mongoao.

C16: You were recently in Guinea. How did you find your country?

0.0.: Yes, this last August I entered the country clandestinely and we set up the
CCRCGS. Virtually, there has been no inprovannt. I could almost say that things
are worse than they were under Macias. There is no specific political program or
economic system. The goverment is bogged down by incompetence and the Bquatorial
Guinean people are deep in poverty. Neither the president nor his team know the
meaning of denocracy.

016: And what happened to the Spanish aid of about 6 billion pesetas?

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

D.0.: Nobody knows. It has disappeared into thin air. It has gone into the pockets
of some nae-hers of the Military Council and of some Spaniards who were in charge of
channelling that aid to the people of Equatorial Guinea. The leading embers of

the Military Council have accounts in foreign banks. President Obiang and Vice
President Florencia Kaye are major shareholders in the country's main enterprises.

016: Some of you conpatriots and unofficial sources in the Spanish administration

claim that you do not have nuhh popular support in Guinea and that you have lost
all your prestige there.

0.0.: In the interior of the country, in Rio Huni (a region which President Teodoro
Obiang has never visited and where there are tribes which are not aware of the fact
that Macias he overthrown and is now dead) there is no opposition worthy of the
name. But the leaders of the FDNALIGB [National Hovuent for the Liberation of
Equatorial Guinea], the HUNG! [National Union Hoveuent of Equatorial Guinea] and the
1698 [Popular Idea of Equatorial Guineal—parties created before my country became
independent which merged into the Horkars' National Single Party (FONT) in 1973-
are now in exile and they enjoy great prestige in the interior of their own account
and because they can mobilize the country. Our CCRCGS is established in every dis-
trict of the country and enjoys credibility and respect among the various tribes

in the interior.

C16: And inside the government as well?

0.0.: we know that part of the Military Council and half of the amed forces are
opposed to Obiang and in favor of setting up a provisional governnent of national
union as a preliminary step to holding free and democratic elections. And that is
our goal.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Infomcion y Revistas, S.A.

8796
(:50: 4748/7

' 10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BQUANRIAL GUINEA

REGIME SAID ‘10 BE UNDERGOIW momma) DETERIORATION
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish No 513, 28 Sep 81 pp 62, 63
[Article by Gonzalo San Segundo: "Spain to the Rescue"]

[Text] Teodoro Obiang Nguema, president of Equatorial Guinea and cox-ander in chief
of the Armed Forces, has agreed to an aid program put forward by the Spanish Govern-
ment to ease its former colony out of the serious economic and political situation
in which it finds itself.

The plan, which will be spelled out later, is a three-step process. The first step
is to safeguard the security of Equatorial Guinea through increased cooperation be-
tween the two countries in the spheres of security and defense. When that phase is
concluded, a similar action will be undertaken in the economic sphere with the help
of Spanish advisers. The final step of the plan involves action in the political
sphere and envisages setting up a constitutional systa of state and government.

Meanwhile, Daniel Oyono, a former minister of the Macias Goveth now living in
exile, has told a CAMBIO 16 special correspondent in Paris that the only way to bring
democracy to his country was to set up a provisional government of national union
prior to holding free elections.

Spain does not want to lose its advantage, foothold and prominent role in Equatorial
Guinea. In recent weeks, and acting through its supporters in the Military Council,
the Sovet Union is reported to be trying to drive Teodoro Obiang into a corner and
force him to relegate Spain to a position of secondary iaportance.

But alerted by these schemes and animated by the spirit of representing the mother
country, the Madrid Governaent dispatched Jesus Martinez Pujalte, director of the
Office for Cooperation with Equatorial Guinea. to Malabo (the capital of that coun-
try) and on Monday, 12 Septeﬁer, he met with Colonel Gaiang, the president. Nine
days later, on 21 September, General Saens de Santa-aria, inspector of the
National Police, went to Malabo carrying in his briefcase a plan to organize the
security of the former Spanish colony. Meanwhile, Spanish Foreign Minister Jose
Pedro Perez-bores, met in Madrid with his comterpart, Florencio Mays.

The succession of visits to )hlabo by Spanish Government officials will reach its
peak when a group organized by the Ministry of Economy and headed by Undersecretary
of Comerce Agustin Hidalgo de Quintana, arrives there to attend the celebrations
to mark the date of 12 October, Hispanic Culture Day. A parliamentary mission is
also going to Malabo in the near future.

' 11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Meanwhile, the situation in Equatorial Guinea is rapidly deteriorating. Toward the
middle of this month, some 20 people were arrested on charges of "plotting against
the state." All of th- are considered to be pro-Soviet elements by the Equatorial
Guinean Government which has released them all with the exception of Luis Oyono,
Daniel's brother.

This developnent, which seens to be a reaction to the announcement nade by Daniel
Oyono on 18 September, in Paris, concerning the creation of a single political bloc
of the democratic Guinean forces inside the country, followed reports denouncing
an "economic coup d'etat" which President Obiang has used to reshuffle his govern-
ment bringing into it more pro-Soviet elmsmts.

Lt Carmelo Owono, an aeronautical engineer who is co-issioner of state for the
presidency, falls under that category. The same applies to Lt Isidoro Eyi, co-Iis-
sioner of state for information and tourism, and to Ricardo 810, technical secre-
tary in that sane department and former deputy chief of the Political Police under
Macias.

-A few days before that, President Obieng took what perhaps amounts to his most ser-
ious decision in the 2 years since he tool: over the leadership of his country by
banning Spanish newspapers from coming into the country and being read there. Later
on this ban was somewhat relaxed and only applied to three publications--CAHBIO l6,
DIARIO 16 and INTERVIU. Spanish diplomatic circles say that Obiang will lift the
ban on Hispanic Culture Day--a sort of preannounced smesty.

Day by day, Colonel Obiang Nguema—who has expressed the wish to meet the king of
Spain before the end of this year—finds himself increasingly isolated and under
growing pressure, to such a point that he is resorting to methods similar to those
used by his predecessor, such as the "economic coup d'etat." according to Daniel
Oyono, this was "an attempt to obscure the real situation in the country." It
coincides with a profound deterioration of the regime over which he presides.

On Hednesday, 2 Septeaber, Obiang threatened to "throw the disturbing elements into
the trash can" accusing them of being responsible for the disorder preVailing in the
country. Meanwhile, the colony of Spanish nationals, amounting to some 700 people,
does not hide its fears and the voices of exiled opposition leaders can be heard
again after several months of silence.

For instance, at a press conference held in Madrid on Saturday, 5 Septenber, Adolfo
Obiang, president of the FRELIGB [Liberation Front of Equatorial Guinea], said that
"God knows what Teodoro and his people have done wibh the money whihh they got
from the Spanish Government.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

8796
C80: 1.7108] 7

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comment. comm

SPANISH OFFICIAL DISCUSSBS SPANISH AID in mm:
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 80 513. 28 Sep 81 p 66

[Text] Jesus Hat-tine: Pujalte. director of the Office for Cooperation with Equa-
torial Guinea. told CAHBIO 16: "The USSR has already had its chance in Guinea.
Now, it in Spain's turn and we will not waste it." And he added: "Spain is not
going to engage in any kind of chancy and neocolonialist undertaking in its former
colony."

Acknowleding that in Guinea "there is no firmly established center of power,"
Martinez Pujalte thinks that recent developaents in that African comtry have
spurred the Spanish plan of assistance. ﬂhile it is true that the aid contributed
by Spain over the last 2 years (around 6 billion pesetas, half of which is on a
non-reimbursable basis and the rest in long-term loans) did not help to get the
country back on its feet, the Spanish Government does not want to miss this oppor-
tunity which any be its last.

"Spanish aid so far has not been very effective as a result of the huge donestic
problems facing the country," the director of the Office for Cooperation with
Equatorial Guinea admits. And nanong those probleas he aentioned the lack of an
administrative infrastructure, the lack of resolution when decisions need to be
taken and the lack of clear ideas regarding the role of the Spanish advisers.

Including doctors and teachers, there are 356 Spanish advisers in Equatorial Guinea
of which 32 are policenen, l9 cone under the Ministry of Transport, 18 under the
Hinistry of Defense and 12 under the Ministry of Labor.

The Spanish attitude seems to be firn. "The Spanish Government is prepared to get
Guinea back on its feet providing that it is given enough safeguards to effectively
carry out its undertaking," Martinez Pujalte pointed out. “He are not going to
tolerate any further harass-eat against Spain and Spanish citizens as happened with
Macias," he also said.

But not all aspects are negative ones. Since Macias was ousted, in August 1979,
death as a result of measles has almost disappeared although the country's health
standard is far lower than it used to be in 1968 when Guinea became independent.
Schooling is provided for 90 percent of the population and 500 million pesetas

worth of canned neat, milk, sugar, wheat and fish have been distributed anong the
population.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There was a need to control this economic aid and in May 1980 the emission for
Cooperation with Equatorial Guinea was created. Its purpose is to put to the best
possible use the 1.126 billion pesetas which the state budget has assigned this
year to the former Spanish colony on a non-reidmrsable basis.

"The money is spent here in Spain and we send to Guinea goods and services which
are allocated by the ministries." Martinez Pujalte explained. This sum of over
1 billion pesetas includes 300 million for medical aid, 120 million for education,
80 million for public works. 50 million for the television and a similar amount
for the Geographical Institute.

But there has been a drastic change in the criteria previously used by the Spanish
Governnent regarding the needs of Equatorial Guinea in the light of recent develop-
nents in its forner colony. It is the general opinion that the two fulcruns on
which Guinea hinges are security and defense on the one hand, and economic develop-
ment on the other.

This is why members of the Spanish police and military will be sent to Halabo to
act as advisers. About 100 Equatorial Guineans are currently attending courses at
military and police academies in Spain.

The imediate purpose of our talks is to have Equatorial Guineans, after being
trained in Spain, take over as President Obiang's personal guard under Spanish
commanders and officers to replace the Moroccan troops now entrusted with that
detail.

In the economic sphere, efforts will be directed toward three essential objectives:

to make the bikuele a peseta convertible currency, to bring order into the financial
and budget machinery of the Guinean state and to equip the country with the maximum

productive capacity.

President Obiang is preparing the ground. To start with, he has already announced
a sweeping ministerial reshuffle in the coming-Necks, a reshuffle which could
affect most of the departments.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Infornacion y Reviatas. S.A.

8796
C50: lo 748/?

lb

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABOR

BRIEFS

SUGGEST. BLUFF-How is he to face his deep feeling that he cannot count any
longer on the support of the French unitary forces in the case of a popular
revolt aimed at overthrowing hin? This is the question provoking the night-
mares of the Gabonese chief of state. One of his advisors has hit upon the
answer: when nokassa realized that Giecard was attempting to get rid of hin,
he thought of the stratagen of brandishing the threat of resorting to the
Soviet Union. Why not act in the same vein? The Gabonese president--fearing
that such a maneuver could precipitate the fall of his regime and realizing
full well that the USSR leaders would never fall into such an obvious trap—
asked his advisor and confidant for tile to think it over. This may be why he
launched a warning to France 2 weeks ago, accusing it of wishing to destabilize
his regime. "Bongo doubtlessly continues to think that the Giscardian regime,
which was able to "influence" a certain press, is still in power in Paris," an
influential sue-her of the French Socialist Party connented. "It is tine for
him to wake up...." [‘Iext] [Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 250, 12 Oct 81

p 28] COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique—Asie.

080: (0719/ 127

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!‘0FFKJAL.USE(NVLY

IVORY COAST

BRIEFS

COFFEE, COCOA CAMPAIcﬂs-0n 30 September the Ivorian council of ministers heard
an important announcement made by Denis Bra Kanon, minister of agriculture, in
relation to the 1980-1981 and 1981-1982 coffee and cocoa campaigns. For the
1980-1981 campaign. the minister noted a record production of 361,000 tons of
green coffee and the full operation of all of the 16 pulping machines. The can-
paign is ending with a stock of 210,000 tons of coffee. a quantity never equaled
before. As for cocoa, once again the harvest exceeds 400,000 tons, confirming
the Ivory Coast's first place in the world cocoa economy. However, the tun
main Ivorian products continue to face serious difficulties abroad because of
the low prices on the international market on the one hand, and of insufficient
export quotas for coffee on the other, despite the government’s efforts in this
respect. The council of ministers has set the first of October for the opening
of the 1981-1982 campaign, and a presidential decree has determined the prices
for producers at 150 francs CPA per kilo for coffee-berry (or 300 francs CPA for
green coffee) and at 300 francs CPA per kilo for cocoa. Buyers are forbidden
from purchasing below these prices. [Text] [Paris HARCBES TROPICAUX RT MEDI-
TERRANBENS in French No 1876, 9 Oct 81 p 2565] COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie
Paris 1981.

C80: 4719/127

16

FOR OWUWCJAI.US£10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DIOUF DISCUSSBS RECENT DEVEIDPMDITS IN POLITICAL SITUATION
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French “0 249, 28 Sep-ll Oct 81 pp 8-11

[Interview with Abdou Diouf, president of Senegal, by Ginette Got: date and place
not specified]

[Excerpts] The situation which has developed since 1 January
requires a new approach and concrete and credible proposals
and responses to the existing problems in the country, both
domestic and foreign. Ginette Cot, who met with the Senegalese
president, asked him all these questions.

The establishment of an unlinited, multi-party system is unquestionably one of the
most notable events of the last few months in Senegal. This is an event which was
watched with attention. if not an astonishment at times not far from disquiet, in
the other African capitals. By the end of August, or about 5 nonths after the
"democratic opening" had been put in concrete form by the revision of the constitu-
tion, 10 political parties (of which three claim to follow Harxism) were in the
Dakar political arena, and the list was certainly not closed. Didn‘t this run the
risk of the country's being swallowed up in a situation of anarchy and of para-
lyzing confusion, some people asked. Others asked themselves if Senegalese political
life was not giving the "staggers" to the observer who tried to find himself in his
this new labyrinth.

however, first of all one fact stands out: the majority of the six political move-
ments which have just acquired legal status, alongside the four parties previously
existing.1 in reality already had taken root, even if their activities were neces-
sarily on a reduced scale and their eventual growth was evidently limited by the
very fact of their semi-clandestine character. And if their emergence on the of-
ficial scene tends to overturn the assumptions of the political chess game to which
people were accustomed up to now, today it is practically the unanimous estimate

in Dakar that this explosion of political tendencies and sensitivitkw is a natural
phenomenon. In this view it is comparable to what you see when you lift the cover
from a boiling pot and constitutes an obligatory phase in the movement toward a
greater kind of political clarification. This is a clarification which the impact
of ideas, styles, and practices; a better and mutual acquaintanceship; and the con-
frontation with the daily realities and the imperious needs of the country should
inevitably be charged with bringing.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this shifting scene, where rightly or wrongly reorganisations, remodelings, and
even tactical or strategic-changes are generally expected, it would no doubt be
premature to foresee the possibility of the early establishment of a common action
front on the part of the progressive or radical opposition.

Certainly, no one rejects--quite to the contrary-the idea of a need for regrouping
and alliances around a specific progrann and certain problems may lead here and now
to the adOption of collective positions, as has been seen in the time of the mili-
tary intervention in Gambia. However, for the new parties, it is now time for the
tasks of restructuring, establishing themselves, deploying their forces, and expres-
sing their personality. This is also a matter of discovering what brings together
and what separates the diverse components of the new Senegalese political skein,

to determine their real objectives and concerns, both immediate and long term. ﬂow,
like it or not, it is necessary to recognize that the advent of the former prime
minister of Leopold Sedar Senghor to the position of chief of state and head of the
Socialist Party, as well as the innovations which the new president has unquestion-
ably introduced, has tended to reshuffle the old cards and modify the situation.

No doubt it is too early to measure the real extent of the changes which have been
made or planned and even to appreciate the degree of sincerity of the intentions
that have been proclaimed. No doubt also the argument of the opposition, which is
fundamentally unanimous in estimating that only profound and radical reforms in
the government's structures and methods are likely to bring the country out of the
economic, social, and cultural depression into which it has fallen, has not lost
all its weight. And neither is it possible to refuse to hear those who persist in
doubting the capacity of the party in power--now for more than 20 years-to reform
itself in depth and to make a change of direction likely to contribute to leading
the nation along the path of salvation.

Nonetheless, the fact remains that the situation which has developed since 1 January
requires a new approach, a deeper reflection on the situation and, more than ever,
concrete and credible proposals and responses to the problems which face the coun-
try. Lacking this, the democratic struggle which is developing on the foundations
of the economic crisis would risk being nothing more than a sterile debate which
would not take long to make the general public lose interest in it.

For the moment the new political edifice may still seem to be quite fragile. This
should not be surprising when we recall that democracy is a difficult and long-term
goal to achieve, if not a kind of apprenticeship without an end. Thus, one could
momentarily fear for the survival of the democratic process at the time the Gambian
affair occurred, where the violent dispute with the opposition seemed to show that
the party in power, or at least its spokesmen, were hardly prepared to hear or to
allow to be heard divergent points of view; In the same way one of the first ques-
tions which comes to mind is to know if the establishment of the multi-party system
should be considered as an irreversible achievement or whether, on the contrary, it
is a momentary experiment linked to the prospect of elections in 1983, a date after
which this system could be altered.

To this question, as to other questions which will be asked of him during the inter-
View which he has kindly agreed to give us-and all of which try to reflect cer-
tain concerns of Dakar political circles-President Abdou Diouf answers, as you will
see. without wandering off and without a shadow of complacency. Speaking like a

‘18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chief of state desirous of being "the president of all Senegalese," but also as a
party man determined to take up successfully the challenge posed to the political
party he leads, the successor to Senghor excused himself at times for the spon-
taneity and the passionate tone of his conversation. He moves from indignation to
an amused smile, having a perfect working knowledge of the Senegalese political
game and the concerns which underlie it.

[Answer] Hulti-party system? For us this is an irreversible phenomenon (he says
with conviction). Our determination is that the Senegalese people should be able

to express themselves, in the diversity of their sensitivities and of their opinions,
in the framework of parties legally established. That is the conclusion of a normal
process, which has appeared after a long period of a de facto single party, followed
by a constitutional system with three or four parties.

I also believe that it is possible for parties to group themselves around common

but healthy objectives. In effect it would be annoying for any kind of alliance at
all, an alliance against nature, to be established. By that I mean a group which
would be established on false and unhealthy bases for a purely electoral purpose,
with the single objective of defeating the Socialist Party. On the other hand I must
make clear that we are aware that the complete pluralism to which we have come, under
the specific conditions in Senegal, is our own particular experience. We do not,
therefore, intend in any way to pose as an example and still less to seek to drag
others along our path.

[Question] If the oppositionnparties henceforth have access to legal existence

on the same basis as the Socialist Party--on the sole condition that they conform
to the restrictions set out by the constitution, which prohibits, for legitimate
and quite understandable reasons, any identification with a race, a religion, an
ethnic group, a sex, a language, or a religion-it is noted, nevertheless, that
there is a disparity existing in terms of the means of expressing themselves and

of making themselves heard. we have-the impression that the state controlled

media (radio and television and the daily government newspaper) are not yet adapted
to the new situation. We have the impression, in addition, that the circular of
1977, regulating the use of state controlled media by legal political parties, is
above all applied to the opposition, which also complains of the censorship to which
its communiques are subject. wouldn't monopolisation of the media by the party in
power risk reducing considerably the democratic process which has begun?

[Answer] My wish is that the democratic process be carried on loyally at all
levels, including the level of state controlled media. However, at the same time
we should not confuse the state with the political parties. when the president or
cabinet ministers speak in the name of the state, it is not the voice of the
Socialist Party which is heard. On the other hand, there is a code of conduct to
be observed. 0n the occasion of statements, comauniques, or press conferences, you
can criticize as much as you want, but there is a matter of respecting the rules
of propriety and courtesy. In the Socialist Party we avoid giving insult and we
ask the others to behave in the same way. That being said, the use of the official
media is subject to the same regulations for all political parties, whatever they
are. Finally, let us note that each political group has the right to have its own
newspaper. However, there also it is a matter of avoiding certain defamatory
statements, which only pollute the political atmosphere of the country and con-
tribute nothing to the strengthening of democracy.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] The 1978 elections (presidential and legislative) were very broadly a
matter of controversy, and their results were challenged. In the same way, more-
over, looking to the next elections in 1983 the opposition is calling for a major
modification of the Electoral Code and, in an overall way, for guarantees with a
view to holding really free and democratic elections. Do you think you can join
with the opposition in the preparation of the new measures proposed?

[Answer] I do not consider that the 1978 elections were not free and democratic.
when the Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS) challenged the results, the Suprue
Court was charged with studying the matter and made its decision quite independently.

Having said that, I night add that one can always improve a system, and it is my
intention to propose an electoral code in the coming months. I do not reject, of
course, any contribution. The PDS has already had the occasion of giving me its
opinion on this subject, and if other parties wish to make their contribution, I
am entirely at their disposition. The new code will be discussed by the National
Assembly-where the ms is represented, as well, moreover, as the Democratic and
Popular Movement (MD?) has been for some time. It has a deputy2 in the National
Assembly, and the Assembly will decide on the matter in full use of its sovereign
powers.

[Question] You have announced your intention and spoken of the need to democracies
and cleanse the Socialist Party. Such an evolution cannot go on without colliding
with strongly established privileges. Do you consider that the balance of forces
within the Socialist Party is favorable to the success of this project?

[Answer] Every political party has its unwieldy aspects, its tendencies, its
factions. The Socialist Party, a use party, is not inune from this rule. My
predecessor always fought for progress in terms of the methods and procedures
within the PS. I have taken up the torch and I intend to continue this work of
improvemait, which. moreover, has become a necessity in the sense of a permanent
task. I will not allow myself to be stopped by any obstacle. Hy desire is to

make the PS the most "open" party, the cleanest, the most democratic party possible.
In the same way as I speak in favor of democracy within the country, I intend to
establish within the PS the kind of true. internal democracy which will permit the
free expression of the will of the numbers and respect for their choices at the
level of ideas and decisions.

[Question] The Socialist Party has succeeded the W8 [Senegalese Progressive Union]
under conditions which may seen to be rather informal. Further, it has been in
charge of the affairs of the country for more than 20 years. We know that, on

this basis alone, it risks having suffered some wear and tear to the credibility

of its power. Do you think that the reorganized Socialist Party will be in a posi-
tion to meet the challenge?

[Answer] For my part I am determined to meet the challenge. I will work in this
direct ion and I will watch in particular to ensure that the Socialist Party does
not fall into the sin of self-satisfaction. It is by aploying criticism and self-
criticism that we will avoid hardening of the arteries and that we will build a
healthy and vigorous party.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] In the sane way a law against illicit enricI-ent has been promulgated,
which seems to go in the direction of the proclaimed desire to carry on the strug-
gle against corruption and inequality. However, questions are asked about the
real importance of this neasure and about the possibility of implenenting it.

[Answer] Before the adoption of this law, everyone had said: the president will
never dare to approve it. lhen. on the eve of the debate on the law before the
deput ice in the National Assubly, people said: the National Assenbly will never
vote for such a aeasure. These two stages have been passed. Then people have
whispered that the establisluent of the special court charged with naking inquiries
and ruling on natters of illicit enricI-ent will be a long tine in coming. Today
the court has been established and the judges have been named. We are in a comtry
of law, and everyone will do his work in couplete indepmdence. I could not do
better to express ay political wishes.

Having said that, and although there is no reason to fold our arms—far froll it-
we might remark that Senegal is not among the countries nost affected by corruption
and injustices.

[Question] We note a cascade of price increases (on gasoline, sugar)-and the
people seem to live in fear of new increases. For a growing mnber of people
'hsking both ends aeet,“ as they say, is becoming an almost unsoluble problem.

Is it necessary to see in this deterioration in living conditions the consequences
of the policy of austerity advocated by the Di? and which would cone down to making
the mass of the people bear the heaviest burden of the crisis?

[Answer] What governnent is in a position to halt the increase in prices? Even
the most powerful goverrlsents do not achieve this. As we have been able to ob-
serve. the real proletariat in our country is the mass of farmers. And the first
social measures which were taken were in their favor, by wiping out the farnsrs'
debts and by reconsidering the prices paid to producers. That is to say that I
as deeply aware of the situation in which ny people live and that I will do every-
thing possible to ease their difficulties.

However, when the most developed countries do not succeed in halting inflation,

how will we do it in Senegal? I an not an expert in the exchange rate of the
dollar. And in order not to risk dragging the country into total bankruptcy, we
could not do otherwise than increase the price of gasoline. Regarding the increase
in the price of sugar-"of which part is produced donestically and the rest iaported--
the minister of comerce has explained the reason in detail.3 We could not continue
on the path of denagogic policy. There is a time when one is required to face up

to the situation. However, if we had not applied the policy of "price verity," we
would have seen sore increases, and these higher prices would have been much broad-
er. If we didn't go nore deeply into the process of price increases, it is be-
cause of the political process, based on a clear awareness of the situation of ay
people, that I have cos-itted myself to fight.

[Question] Regarding the events in Gambia, a certain nuﬂaer of questions remain.
For exanple, the quest ion is asked to what exterut the proclamation by the leaders
of the coup d'etat in Banjul of their adherence to Marxian was decisive in your
decision to intervene militarily in Gains.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY”

[Answer] The response stands by itself. I would never have permitted the legal
existence of several Marxist parties within ly country if I were a declared enesy
of Marxism as such. The nilitary intervention by Senegal in Gambia was decided on
at the request of the legal government in Banjul and in confornity with the
defense agreements siped between the two countries.

[Question] Despite the specific aspects of the Gatian problen, but taking into
account several precedents (including the sending of a Senegalese force to Zaire

at the tine of the Shaba war), aren't you afraid, after the intervention in Banjul,
that here and there, particularly in certain neighboring countries, Senegal night
be suspected of nourishing expansionist or interventionist tendencies?

[Answer] On this subject we can provide the most foraal assurances. Senegal mat
deal with enough difficulties not to load on itself, in addition, intervening in
the affairs of other states. And, above all, we have in this regard principles on
which we will not conpronise. It was to respond to the appeal of the international
coununity that we sent troops to Lebanon in the franework of the UN International
Force in Lebanon. And it is because we considered that there had been external
intervention in the affairs of a friendly comtry that we sent a nilitary contin-
gent to Sheba.

However, I can benefit from the opportunity you give no to provide full assurance,
through your publication, to all my neighbors with regard to the intuitions of
Senegal as far as they are concerned.

[Question] A draft constitution for a confederation of Ganbia and Senegal has been
announced. Is it possible to know now how this draft will be implemented, in con-
crete terns?

[Answer] We have agreed with I’resident Diawara on the need, in present circul-
stances--and it is the nininun which can be done-to establish a confederation of
the two countries. The draft is being studied by experts in the ministries of the
two countries. It will then be studied by the chiefs of state and subsequautly be
submitted to public opinion, either through the National Assenbly or directly by
means of a referendum. It is still too early to be nore precise.

[Question] At the sane tine as changes have been made in the donestic arms, one
has the impression of a beginning of change in the field of Senegalese foreign
policy. An outline of a rapprochement with Algeria has been noted. Can you tell
us what are the main orientations of Senegalese diplomacy today? And on the other
hand what is your position regarding the evolution of the problen of the Western
Sahara?

[Answer] From the beginning we reaffirmed our intention to strengthen our tradi-
tional friendships and to broaden the circle of our friends. We have no quarrels
with any country. With Algeria we intend to develop a policy of close cooperation.
We are in agreement on all the najor problem. Between the two capitals (Algiers
and Dakar) there is only one point on which our views differ. It concerns the
problem of the Hestern Sahara—a probles we put aside at the tine of our bilateral
meetings.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a general way Senegal follows a policy of the outstretched hand and of real non-
alignment, a policy concerned with contributing to safeguarding peace and security
in Africa. We are a beneficiary of all the efforts which work and fight to re-
store peace rapidly in Northwest Africa and wawelcomed with relief the speechf-of
the King of Morocco at the OAU su-it meeting in Nairobi. We have been comforted
by the results of the work of the Ad Hoe (Io-ittee of the OM), and we hope for a
rapid application of the measures agreed upon there, in order to bring back peace
in this region.

[Question] Anticipating our next question, President Abdou Diouf cut us off.

[Answer] As you have been able to note, we coed-med vigorously the latest armed
attacks launched by South Africa against Angola, whose existence as a state we
recognize. For nothing which involves an African country can leave us indifferent.

[Question] Can one expect that Senegal will take one step more and recognize the
government in Luanda?

[Answer] There is a problem of principle for us in that situation. As long as
Cuban troops are in Angola, we will have the feeling that there is a doubt as to
the real control of the Luanda government over Angolan territory. In our view
things would have been clearer if it had been possible to find a basis of agreement
with the other political forces. Otherwise, we have the impression that it is the
Cuban presence which maintains the Luanda government in power, keeping the other
forces at bay. It is true that there is a probla regarding the sequence of events.
At the time of the Nairobi summit meeting, I had a conversation with an Angolan
leader, the minister of interior, Alexandre Bodrigues. The latter gave me to under-
stand that it was South African and Zairian troops which were the first to begin
hostilities in 1975, when the HPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola]
was already in Luanda. Of course, the others, like UNITA [National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola], state the contrary view.-

[Question] However, UNITA is supported by South Africa. And South Africa is
guilty of aggression against Angola. In these circumstances, how could Cuban
troops be withdrawn? Isn't this a true vicious circle?

[Answer] That is true. I think that it is necessary to turn toward the future.
The Angolan problem is closely linked to the problem of Namibia. All parties should
mobilize themselves to impose a solution of the Namibian question. And we are sure
that, as from that moment, things will be clearer and that the problem of the
legitimacy of the Luanda government will lose much of its importance.

[Question] Since the change of government in France, how are relations between the
two countries?

[Answer] We place great hopes in President francois Hitterrand and his new team.
And we are sure that relations between the two countries, already excellent, are

going to develop even better. It is certain that there will be further develop-
ment of cooperation and a broadening and deepening of relations in all fields.

23

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WES

Of course these are the Socialist Party; the Senegalese Denocratic Party,
whose secretary gareral is Abdoulaye Wade; the African Party of Independence
(PAI), led by Hajhenout Map; and the Senegalese Republic lbvenent (HRS),
created by Bouhacar Gueye. The six parties which have recently been recog-
nized, after having deposited their by-lavs and received the acknowledgnent

of their legalization are: the Democratic National. Asseﬁly (RED), whose secre-
tary general is Sheikh Ants Map; the Popular Deaocratic Hove-eat (HDP), whose
national general coordinator is Hanadou Dis, forner prime minister; And-Jef,
the Revolutionary Hove-ant for the Na: Deaocracy (AJ - HRDR). led by Landing
Savane; the Union for the People's Deloeracy (UDP), led by Bernadine Racine
Guisse; the Independence and Labor Party (PIT), formerly the PAI [African
Independence Party] - Senegal, which Seydou Cissoho and Anath Dansokho lead
and which held its first constituent-congress lacAugust; the Democratic
League - Movement for the Horking Party (1.!) - m). of which Landing Savane is
one of the principal leaders. No other parties have deposited their by-lavs
but are waiting for their eventual acknowledgements: the Assembly for National
Salvation; and the Senegalese People's Party (PPS), the latter having held its
constituent congress last August before having received a response to its
request for legalization.

This refers to a deputy, Papa Darin Diallo, who had resigned from the PBS.

The retail price of sugar on 9 August wait fron 260 francs CPA to 325 francs
CPA per kilogram.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asle.

5170

C80:

6719/86

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00050R000400070030-7

[Article by Our Al-hnoody:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

um SAID TO BE MCKBD BY VAST WORM?

[Excerpts]

Todey. the effects of Nyerere's sociel-
iem ere beginning to he felt in the coun-
try. Attitudes hove chenged. So heve
lifeety_ lee. For exemple, it is now netion-
elly eccepted thet' it is morellywmn‘ for
eome people tolive in luxury whileothers
ere destitute. People ere no lower im-
pressed by limousines end skysaepere.
They ere fer more impreseed by the
development of social services like
schools. beelth centree. new suppliee.
electricity end trensport in the rurel
ereee where 90 percent of the lB-million
Tenaniene live. No longer doee the Ten-
unien peesent heve to welt more then
{our kilometree in seerch of hie weter.
dispensery or school. He no longer he: to
exheust himself to get hie produce to
merket. Villegee now own lorries end
buses. Todey the peeeent determinee
whet he went. endm whet he does not
went. He hee. to en extent. become e
decision maker. This he does through
viilege committees.

Seventy per cent ofschool-ece children
in Tenunie todey ettend pri
echoole. Forty per cent of the villegee
heve cleer running weter. Thirty-ave per
cent heve diepen-riee end over 74 per
cent heve their own ehope.

25

London NEH AFRICAN in English No 169.0ct 81 pp 22, 23

"Hyerere Still Believes 'Uje

Advec

Nevertheless, '.
lean. in pert. the
these ere due to
imencs. e for 1
tionel Monetery 1
Government ear
mulling US$404
zenie's belence
quently. omciel I
from the IMF end
hated to e 10 per:
Tenunien ehillin

Tensenie'e lib
eechenge control
effect. It malted i
in the country'e i
responding deficit
menu to the tune
In 1977.1‘eneenin
ments surplus of .

Lech efforeign
present under-u1
din-option of the ‘
shortage of cone
Breeltdowns in l
electricity end we
ciel indiscipline e
ieetione. ha m1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00860R000400070030-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070030-7

COPYRIGHT:

CSO :

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

standard of living for moat Tanzaniane.

To add to the country's problem. there
have been incidenta of corruption. rack-
eteering and proﬁteerina.

This, the people any. is a reflection on
human nature and the ways of the world.
not the eyetem. 80 anmon maintaina its
popularity as a way of life for the vast
majority of Tanzanian-O _

AFTER ALMOST 15 years mg
hard to hie people about the importance
to them all of hie brand of eocialiein
euooeeding in Tanzania. Juliua Nyerere
ie more conﬁdent than ever that Ujumno
ie the answer to the problem inherited
from colonialieni. .
Part of hie euoceae. perhape. in hit
honest approach to thoee he rulea He hae
never tried to cover up the problem faced
by Tanzania. Rather he hae preeented
thoee problem an a challenge. And hie
people have taken up the challenge.
Nobody. least ofall President Nyerere.

1981 10 Magazines Limited

4700/196

26

pr‘e‘t’ehdethat’l‘amani
eocialtetetete.3utthe

ltmwiththieinm
donomattoutorel
Initmenttoeociallan.
pleeay.iethevehicle
attaintheireocialmd
neede.

In 1981 Nyererehe
thathiepeoplewould
Tamaniathanthatdt
momma-y:

Nyererebelievedth
he prepared to work
knewthettheh-uiteol
beneﬁt their own co
“foreign" government

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 200710ﬁ09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070030-7
FOROI-‘FIC‘IALUSEONLY

2AM

WESTERN COUNTRIES CONTINUE SUPPOH: OPPOSITION LIQUIDATED
Brussels POURQIDI PAS? in French No 3278. 26 Sep 81 pp 29-31
[Article by Jacques Hiane]

[Text] For more than 10 years now we have been told hobutu‘s
regise was on the verge of foundering. All the sane. it is still
afloat. despite economic and financial insolvency. despite the
systematic exploitation of the national wealth by the president's
clique. despite the poverty of the people and the ruinous condi-
tion of the country. despite the rebellions and the opposition.

An unsinkable dictatorship? The incomparable skill of "Kinshasa's
great helnsnan" in avoiding the reefs? The durability of Mobutuisn
is basically underwritten by the Western countries who obligingly
cone to the rescue-«militarily and financially-whenever the regime
is threatened. And that support is not about to be reconsidered.
Hr. Nguza Karl I Bond found this out when he nade his recent trip
to the United States.

Before the House Foreign Affairs Sub-Comttee. the former Zairisn
prime minister nade terrible accusations against Hobutu, his fanily
and his entourage. He spoke of the corruption. the diversion

of funds. the violations of burns rights, the torture. But only

a few hours after he made his charges. the United States Governmnt
reaffirned its "full support" for the Zairian regime. Following
Paris and Brussels, therefore. Washington thus renewed Hobutu's
life insurance policy.

Chancelleriea. like religions. secrete doctrine. On the subject of Zaire. the United
States. along with the Belgian and French governments. clings to the following
analysis: Hobutu is the strong figure in Zaire. the only one capable of maintain-
ing national cohesion. It is in the interest of the West to provide his the eco-
nonic and military aid he denands. because the country occupies a strategic posi-
tion in the heart of the African continent and has fabulous mineral wealth (uranium.
cobalt, copper. diamonds. etc.) which is so necessary to Western industry. The

fact that the general-president and his entourage extract a heavy emission from
the nation's resources is a necessary evil. The choice is Hobutu o_r chaos.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtOFFKJAL.USE(H§LY

As a result of that doctrine, the Western camp has always come to Mobutu's rescue.
It has sent expeditionary forces there several different times to support the shaky
strongman. It has provided numerous financial transfusions to keep this ultra-
wealthy but ruined country alive. Since he fled Kinshasa. Hr. Nguza Karl I Bond
has been trying to show the West the "error in its calculations."

In Washington, before the House foreign affairs subcommittee. he repeated what he
had said many times in Europe:

"Far from being a factor for stability, the beutu regime is a destabilizing element.
Zaire and the Zairian people are getting poorer and poorer, while the fortunes of
the president and his entourage continue to swell. The patience of Zairians is

not unlimited, and the limits have been reached. Remember the so-called invincible
shah of Iran and the so-called docile people of Iran. If they want to avoid an
explosion--a Sheba III or a Kinshasa I--the Western powers must press Hobutu to

step down peacefully and support the establishment of a democracy.

A modern-day Cassandra. the former Zairian prime minister's words have been ignored.
Enigmatic

The "realpolitik" being carried out by the United States, French and Belgian admini-
strations is sustained by "bread and butter” considerations, not just fine senti-
ments. who stands outlined behind the democratic alternative proposed with such
fanfare by Nguza Karl I Bond? Zaire's former number two man is presented to us

as a savior, heaven sent. The man himself, however, remains an enigma. A nephew

of Noise Tshombe, a jurist educated at Louvain, a Dutch-speaker--which softens the
hearts of our northern neighbors-~he gets good press. His career in public life.
however, has not left an inperishabls trace on Zairians. Bis fame is confined to
what was formerly Katanga [province], where his image is not that of a charismatic
leader but an honest administrator. In Zaire and in foreign capitals people are
surprised that after having been condemned to die and then pardoned he agreed to
accpet the positions of foreign minister and prime minister. It is found still

more surprising that, after having been tortured in Kotakoli prison. he denied

the accusations made by Amnesty International and came to the defense of his tormen-
tors. 0n the other hand, he is indecisive in his political actions. prone to change
directions abruptly.

An example: On 16 April, he wrote in his letter of resignation to Mr. Hobutu:
"Hy most ardent desire is that my stay in Europe, which I hope will be as unevent-
ful as possible. shall not be exploited in any way for any kind of political adven-

turism."

Two months later, he announced his candidacy for the presidency of the republic
(1984). ’

He has also changed his attitude toward Zairian opposition figures in exile in
Belgium. Bis tactics for coming to supreme power have also varied.

"I want neither a declaration of war nor blood on my hands," he said in an inter-
view with a Belgian journalist. But in the African newspaper CONTINENT he announced:

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"If my words are the trigger. I will take full responsibility."

Finally. and this is not the least disquieting fact. behind Nguza Karl I Bond are
the movements of a not very teqting potpourri of people. Despite all these dark
spots. however, the alternative Ngusa offers to the Mobutu regime remains attrac-
tive. But is it credible? One democrat is not enough to create a democracy. Fran
what breeding-ground can more be drawn?

The Internal Opposition

At first glance. even within Zaire itself . there is no opposition to Mobutuisn.

And the regime tries to portray the Zairian people as spellbound and docile. In
reality, opposition novenents do becone active from time to time. and rebellions

and strikes break out. But these incidents do not easily escape the official cen-
sors. The revolt of the peasants of Idiofa--and the massacre which followed—

the guerrilla operations carried out in the 11:1 Baraka region by Laurent Kabila's
PRP [Peoples Revolution Party] and the strikes unleashed by the teachers and students
at the university, by the rank and file of unionists-wall this has been brought to
light by Znirian opponents in exile who have never hesitated to spread tall tales

or mix together truth and falsehood. Their claims thus lack credibility.

During the "Kinshasa spring." when the regime relaxed its grip as a result of
Western pressure. members of parliament and the political bureau of the MPR [Popular
Movement of the Revolution] (Zaire's sole political party) began to criticize the
regime, denand an accounting, set up emissions of inquiry. This alternate center
of power was nipped in the bud. Kasai's l3 deputies. and also representatives

of Kwilu and Sheba. were incarcerated and deprived of their civil rights. The
union leaders who dared criticize government institutions. who denounced the special
privileges of the oligarchy. were imrisoned. Dissident students were sent to

the fields and put into uniforn. 'l'he army--so often and so savagely purged—-has
lost the taste for plotting. Messianic rebellions--such as that of Nunbi Mpungum-
have been violently suppressed. nevertheless. if one can believe the Zaire Coalit-
tee, Mobutu's first is weakening. His authority is disputed. For exasple. a member
of the MFR political bureau, a former senator from Maniema dismissed by the supreme
guide, has reportedly been restored to his position by his peers.

The External Opposition

Finally. Zaire's dissidents can only express themselves by going into exile. It

is the only way they can draw attention to their thoughts and organize. In western
capitals. prarticularly in Brussels. movements opposed to the regime have pro-
liferated. United fronts have taken the place of disunited fronts. The Congo
Liberation Organization founded by Mbeka Mekosso. Zaire's former ambassador to

Iran. has been eclipsed by the Congo Liberation Council led by Mr. Mungul Disks.

one of Mobutu's eat-ministers. Alongside the MC [Congolese National Liberation
Front) which was responsible for rhe two Sheba offensives and was excessively Marxist
has appeared a moderate FLNC. In place of the Katangen gendarmes of Mbumbe operating
from Angola we have Major Mfunu's Katangsns based in Zambia. Zairian exiles and
dissidents come and go between the various political parties and liberation move-

ments. change camps, and wander aimlessly.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is a liquified opposition. one which in the last analysis poses little danger

to a regime enjoying the "full support" of the western countries. Because of this
reolpolitik under the equatorial sun, Zaire will thus rennin an ultreduealthy country
with an impoverished and starving people. But until for how long?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Pourquoi Pan?

9516
C50: I0719/73

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIA

AUSTRIAN DEVBIDPHENT PROJECT DESCRIBED AS SUCCESSFUL

London NEH AFRICAN in English No 169,0cc 81 pp 26, 27

[Article by Monika Brenner and Reinhardt Engel:

Back a Village its Valuea"l

{Text}

MWWE ie a little village in eeetem
Zambia. Several hundred fermera grow
their crepe on poor aoil. They aull‘er from
hunger. sickness and alcoholism. Young
men and women leave their village look-
ing for work in urban induetriee and in
the large copper mince. Reeeone for this
rural exodus are the relatively high
wages paid there. and a feeling of reeig-
nation in the village. the knowledge of
being left behind by the technical
development outaide Mtowe. The unity of
village life is increasingly falling apart.
The education of the young people
pleya its role too. Traditional culture ie
regarded as backward and primitive. The
agricultural policy of the Zambian gov-
ernment ooncentratee on ”modern farm.
"'3" swam" in agricultural echoole are
“In: hum how u uee fertilizera, me
u?" and N'VNM machines. A little
Village like Mtowe could notafl'ord anyof
theee resource;

Beatrice. achoola teach other eocial val-
uee: Inetead of cooperation within the
family etudente learn individualiem and
competition. Having acquired thie tech-

nical and eociel knowledge even thoee-

young people who intended to etey
become resigned and move into the more
developed ereae.

Thie wee the etarting point for an
Austrian development project. The lneti-
tute for international Cooperation. tllCI.
a catholic organieation. which educatea
and eendegevelopment eidea to countriee
a over c world, emit a A '
couple to Mtuwe. n uetrien

31

"Zambia: A Coaple Rho Cave

The teak of Johannea Ranch and hi;-

wife Gertrude wee to install an educa-

tionaleyum for the young girleand boye
of Mtowe to improve their lot by eimple

meane. .
"lothebeglnningtheyoun: ple
werediee 'tedwithuefea' mn-

naa Ranch. ‘l'hey had another picture of
Europeane. They thought a European
could eolve every problem. that he had
machinery and money. We did not even
have a ear.‘

gaining the conﬁdence of Mtowe'e young
inhabitants. The moat important teak
wee the improvement of the coil. They
dungtd the ﬁelde biologically; they har‘
neeeed the knowledge of old people:
which water holee could be need and
which were danger-our; which twee were
homes of harmful monkeye and which of
ueeliil birde.

Simple machinery

They built eimple machinery -
ploughe. harrowa. and other machine.
Everything wee drawn by oxen; a tractor

on expaneive fuel and central mainte
nanoe ehopa. The village people could
repair or even improve the tools -
eelvea

Gertrude Rauch taught the girle to
weave. ueing aelf-epun wool, and to eew
their own clothee. Becoming independent
from outeide wee the leading principle
here ae well. The etrict divieion of labour

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070080-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between male and female tealu remained
unchanged during the project.

The mecca of the programme was
convincing. The few dozen young people
who took part harvested more than a
thirdofthecropsalldieotherfarmenof
Mtowe did. In their carpentry shop they
built their own furniture too.

Shortly before the two Austrians left,
the young people of Mtowe started to
construct more daring projects. They
built a windmill to water a vegetable
ﬁeld and improved the supply of
vitamin-rich food to the village.

Equally important was the improve-
ment in self conﬁdence of the young
people in Mtowe. They now know that
they do not have to leave their eociel
surroundings and culture in order to live
rceeonahly well. They do not risk having
to live in the slums of the industrial
towns.

The educational system which the
Reucha had installed is continuing to
work without their help and is still
expending. Youn people from Mme
now teeeh their eo leagues in neighbour-
ing villages.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 10 Magazines Limited

cso: moo/194

_ 32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400070030-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

23 CROP POLITIMLY hBLPI-‘UL FOR RAW

IAFRICAN in English No 169,0ct 81 pp 27, 28

>y Guy Arnold: "Zimbabwe's Legacy for K.K."]

1981 HAS NOT. ao fenbeen an eoay year"

for Zombie. It began with atriltee on the

ltand-salmoat—amaioreon-
frontatlon between the powerful union
movement and the government. Thin
resulted from union oppoaition to a new
UNI? controlled ayatem of local govern-
ment. In February. President Kaunda
made the second reshuffle of two montha
when he replaced the number two and
three men in the atate hierarchy: Mainn
Chona. long cloae to Kaunda. gave way to
Humphrey Mulemba ae UNIP

Secretary-General (effectively deputy

In July; however. Pieaident Kaunda
went on a state viait to Zimbabwe. ’l'hia
was regarded as a medal tribute to the

part Kaunde and Zambia had played in
the Zimbabwe Who: struggle.
One of Saliehuly’a mein made we
renamedaﬂerZamhte’a '

babwe on atete viaite; the invitation to
Kauuda wee, therefore. aomewhat
belated. Nonetheleae he enloyed a
triumphal tour of Zimbabwe which
appeared to heal the wounds multinl
from the earlier oooIneaa. Speaking in
Bulawayo. Kaunde called upon Zimbab
weana to unite behind Huabe and aaitt

“You etand a teat from South Africa. If
you undivided the enemy will punctuate
your ranlte and one day South Africa will
be able to bring you to your kneee.” The
two eountriea concluded an Went
for preferential trade and increased co-
operation.

On hie return home. hovever. Kaunde
faced further conﬂict in the form of

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070030-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

renewed sinking on the Copperbelt. As
the mineworlters' leader. David Mwila.
said “These strikes are symptoms of the
people‘s growing disenchantment with
this government's economic policies.”

Part of the discontent stems from the
huge diIl’erentials between Zambian and
expatriate mint-workers for the same job.
But an Chiluba said: 'I admit the unions
are to the right ol‘ the party. We are
demanding that the government put an
end to socialiaation and spend its revenue
improving the lives of ordinary people.‘
Such a statementperhaps inevitably was
seen as a direct political challenge to the
government

A week later Chiluba and three other
top trade union otl'ncialswere detained by
Kaunda and the ZCTU met in emergency
session to consider what action to take.
The crisis on the Copperbelt was sum-
cientiy disturbing to persuade Kaunde to
cancel his plans to attend the Royal
wedding of Prince Charles in London.

In the event the unions baclted away
from a direct confrontation with the gov-
ernment— there had been suggestions 1!
a general strike - and appealed to work-
ers to remain calm. The ZC’I‘U did. how-
ever. call for a public commission of
inquiry with representatives of the OAU
and “.0 to investigate the strain which
has developed between the labour move-
ment and the government.

Political tool

In announcing the arrests of Chiluba
and hiscolleagues. Kaunda said they had
instigated strikes and planned to take
over the leadership of the country. This
was rejected in a statement by the ZC'I‘U
which said the workers were not being

economic and political |
the ZC'I'U as a scapego
Since independence
troubla have been as
UDI in Rhodesia andn
bis ons- sull’aud more
sanctions than did
whom they were I
exports. particularly o
copper. were severely
cutting otl‘ of the Host
the closing of the Ben:
ita imports of vital In
were likewise sevc
Kaunda to his credit. I

his people paid dearly
ness

Ironically.theendo
and the emergence (
Zimbabwe have in a
Zambia's problems.
appears to have a

Kaunds and a numbe
era about the directi
policies. And certainl
many of the most at
who have long since 4
ties into privatebusin
tiona; they are men
oountrydeariyneedsl
rather than some 0
haclts of the Central I
Kaunda. however.
most utute politiciat
no doubt weather 0'
survived many other
by what appears to l
- an estimated
which is the highest
the new agricuium
beginning to pay i“
the most difﬁcult a
lens - the inabilit;

used as a political tool by' the labour itself-willhavsbe
movement and twat on: "The Govem- thisysarandOl-Iul
ment must not shift the blame for itsown embattled Presiden'
COPYRIGHT: 1981 1:: Magazines Limited
080: 4700/1910 END
3“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007i02/09: CIA-RDP82-00050R000400070030-7