FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10619
29 JUNE 1982

South and East Asia Report

(FOUO W 82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of eadh item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SOUTH AND EAST ASIA REPORT
(£000 8/82)

CouTeu'rs

mom

Rrshed Pledges Return to Barracks After 'Politicel Clean-013'
(m Tm, 2 Jun 82) .000Goose.oooooooeeoboooOoOOOOOO

WORM

Information on PR3 and 88V Military Units ...................
LAKE

Information on Lao Military Units ...........................
PAKISTAN

Elections Iminemt; Time Said To Be Running Out
(John Fullerton; FAR EASTER macro mm, 11 Jun 82)

Jasete Island's Power, Policies Discussed
(John Fullerton; PAR EASTER}! mono mm, 1: Jun 82)

Nusrst Bhutto's Bitterness Described
(John Fullerton; FAB EASTER)! mam Md, 1: Jun 82)

Cotton and Textile Industry's Problems msoussed
(Mohamed Afteb; FAR EASTERN mono MIDI, 7 May 82)

-s- [III-ASIA-

l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ERSHAD PLEDGES RETURN 1'0 BARRACKS AFTER 'POLITICAL CLEAN-III"

P14021517 London ms TIMES in English 2 Jun 82 p 8

[Trevor Fishlock report on undated Dacca interview with Lt Gen Bussain Ershad,

chief martial law administrator of Bangladesh: "General's Pledge to Bangladeshis:
Back to Barracks After Political Clean-up"]

[Text] A wry smile crossed the face of Lieutenant-General Hussein Ershad.
"Unfortunately, yes, Bangladeshis are a very political people. They now
realize politics did not pay them much, that they were taken for a ride.
They never saw so much chaos. It was anarchy.

"The politicians were fossils, unable to lead. But politics will come back.
The question is: What sort of political system? I say, whatever people
decide. The government will be elected. We shall have new politics, nae
men, a new system," he said in an interview at his headquarters here.

The general 's promise keeps alive a potent ingredient in the power struggle
in Bangladesh.

The army took over four months after the presidential election because it
wanted a say in running the country. General Brshad responded to pressure
from officers who saw only indiscipline and corruption among bureaucrats and
businessmen, and were attracted by ideas of an Indonesian type of regime.

Hr Abdus Sattar, the president, stubbomly said the army's place was in
barracks. Considering the army's albitions, its view of its rights and

importance, and its contempt for politicians, the president's insistence
made a coup inevitable.

Now that the officers have what they want, the effect on them of talk about
elections can only be speculated on.

But General Ershad said his army is united as it goes about the task he calls

"a big clean-up, putting the house right." When stability and order had
been achieved, he said, "We will go back to our own job."

General Ershad's style is low-key and earnest. He talks of not having much
time for golf, his great passion, and for his minor hobby, writing poetry.

He insists he has no personal ambition, "for as army chief I already have
the highest honour. Hhat more c0u1d I want?"

1
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He could hardly expect to be popular, but many Bangladeshis say they are
impressed by his sincerity. His deneanour is of one convinced of the virtue
of an almst holy war as he sets his men to clean up the Augean stables.

He is enthusiastic about the regime's plans for devolving administration to
the clusters of villages known as thmas.

"Nine-tenths of our people live in villages and were previously left out of
things. Thanas will collect taxes, plan their own development, have all the
important services at their doorstep.

His regime works by agreement. He is careful to involve junior officers and
men, to give them jobs, and to hear their views, which are fed into the
13-member civilian and military advisory council.

The army is an institution that needs a good deal of attention, the general
said.

He has worked hard to mend the damaging bloody feud in the army between the
"freedom fighters" whd fought in the liberation war in Bangladesh and those
who. like himself, were interned in Pakistan and later repatriated. "The

unfortunate division between freedom fighters and repatriates is no nore."

The future, of course, is uncertain. The army extols its administrative
plans and its drive against corruption, appearing to believe that much else,
including the appalling economic problems of one of the world's poorest
countries, with one of the. fastest growing populations will be more easily
handled in "the new system."

Meanwhile, General Brshad, the respected chairman of s coterie of senior
officers, has to watch a number of pots to see they do not boil.

"Yes, there is uncertainty. There is fear. Mrtial law is very...but I
have not imposed harsh mrtial law. You don't see soldiers, do you? I have
not done so because the aim is different. And the people are cooperating
because our objective is noble."

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

C80: 4220/52

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INFORMATION ON PRK AND SRV MILITARY UNITS

[The following information has been extracted from Phnom Penh Domestic
Service at 1200 cm unless otherwise noted on the dates indicated, or from
Vietnamese materials as indicated. Unit signature and locations are as
given. The remarks include a brief emery of the information available
in the source.]

Unit Remarks
lath Battalion in Kampot Province Helped people in daily life.
(15 Jun 82)
"XOR" Brigade '3 24th Battalion Successful combat conducted against a
Oddar Heanchey Province group of Pol Pot remnants at (Prey Nam Tao)
(21 May 82)

31st Regt, B.79 Corps [Binh Doan] Serving in Kampuchea. A mobile unit.
Includes three battalions.
(QUAN n01 NHAN DAN 13 Hay 82 p 3)

H.89 Engineer Gp Serving Kampuchea. (QUAN D01 MAN DAN
13 May 82 p 3)

7th Battalion of Brigade "XOR" An outstanding unit growing up rapidly
through training and self-discipline.
(12 May 82)

5th Brigade, Sithor Kendal Article introducing Vietnamese cadre

District, Prey Vang Province (Nguyen Van Man) assigned an armed task

group conducting propaganda work among
people. (6 Kay 82)

13.1 Rest Serving in Kanpuchea. Subordinate units
include infantry companies. Dispersed
in small units. (QUAN DOI mm um
11. Apr 82 p 3)

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Photo of floating bridge constructed by
unit. (om n01 NEAR DAN 14 Apr 82 p 3)

Located at Taken, Kanpuchea. (QUAN 001
mm: mm 12 Apr 82 p 2)

Station correspondent describing his visit
to cadres and cowatants, noting progress
of training. success of sweep operations
and developnent of these units in training
as well as work performances. Also notes
close cooperation between Kamchean

soldiers and Vietnamese volunteer troops.
(12 Apr 82)

In March political course opened for
115 junior and Indian-rank cadres to expose
enesly's psychological tactics. (9 Apr 82)

Cited as model unit outstanding in use
agitation work in 1981. (7 Apr 82)

Successfully assisted people in production.
(6 Apr 82)

Crushed 19 enemy elements 27-28 May,
68 enay elmnts surrendered to authorities
in Srei Snan and Kralsnh districts.

(5 Apr 82)

Article describing outstanding feats nude
in mass persuasion work. (5 Apr 82)

Statenent to station correspondent by

(Chan Supheshtra). deputy cot-lander which
is-in'charge of defending northwestern
border. on his division's feats that enable
it to win Defense Ministry's nedals, people's
trust. rapid development of his unit, good
leadership, constant training, grasp of tasks
to defend country, care for subordinates.

(5 Apr 82 1230 GMT)

Helped people to harvest 15 ha of rice and
build 3 houses. (29 Mar 82)

Serving in Kanpuchea. «NAN D01 “HAN DAN
26 Mar 82 p 3)
Division [no designator]

20th Battalion of Sien Resp

Pursat Province's 37th Battalion

980th cp

Tra Khuc 6p

3.56 Gp

Trs Khuc Gp

Binh Tran M.79 aka ".79 Gp,
Transportation Department.
Rear Services General
Department

CSO: 4212/21

Comander: Senior Colonel Bhuysn m Qumg
[NGUYEN MINE QUANG} . Presently serving in
northwestern Kampuchea. Prior to early 1979
served in Tsy Ninh Province. (KHAN DA“

22 Mar 82 p 3)

Model story carried by revolutionary army
psper describing a clash between battalion
and a group of Pol Pot tenants which resulted
in 18 eneuy casualties and large arns haul.
(19 Hat 82)

Shines in training. (12 Mar 82)

Serving in Ksnpuchsa. Providing training
on antiaircraft guns to Kanpuchesn any.
(QUANDOINHANDANZHar 82p1)

Serving in northeastern Kanpuches. (QUAN D01
wow 22 Feb szpz)

Photo of unit patrol at Cheon Kean,
Preah Vihear Province, Kanpuchea.
(QUAN DOI “HAN DAN 23 Feb 82 p 2)

Located at Chep Village, Presh mm:
Province. Kanpuchea. (QUAN D01 MAN DAN
24 Feb 82 p 2)

Comnder: Lieutenant Colonel Buynh Cso
Son [HUYNHP CAO sown] . Located within
40 kilometers downriver from Phnon Penh
on the Mekong River. (QUAN D01 NEAR DAN
21. Feb 82 p 3)

5
son omcm. us: on“
Remarks

Effectively fulfilled task of maintaining
peace and public security while boosting
production early this year. (16 Jun 82)

Scored outstanding achievements in carrying
out tasks including rice farming, repairing
houses and vehicles, studying politics and
military subjects, and implementing army
regulations during past 2 months.

(16 Jun 82)

Opened specialized training course for
officers and men attached to battalion
between March and May. (16 Jun 82)

Held ceremony 7 June to present certificates
to graduates of basic technical course.
(15 Jun 82)

hulating to improve their units and repair
buildings. (19 May 82)

Repaired dozens of vehicles and built barracks
and other offices. (19 May 82)

Conbatants operating to defend fatherland.

Gives battalion comander Haj lamamphan's

report on battalion's past achievements, saying
combatants took part in 979 mjor or minor
attacks during which 312 enemy men Here

captured or forced to surrender, seized 372 guns
and large quantity of other equipment. Also
points to consolidation and building of
companies attached to this battalion. (25 Apr 82)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Army Battalion "A" in Vientiane

Army Logistics Training School

Air Transportation Battalion "3"

Regiment E in Southern Laos

Anti-Aircraft Battalion "P" in
Vientiane

Battalion "A of Northern Region
Military (Jo-and

Battalion "a" of Phom Saly
Province

' Major Battalion "c" of
Savannakhet Provincial Military
Comnd

Ant i-Aircraft Battalion "F"

Army Brigade "A" in Vientiane

Regional Armed Forces Battalion "P"

of Home Phan Province

Party committee held plenary meeting in
April to review past work and adopt new plan
for 1982. (19 Apr 82)

Cadres and combatants have, since early lurch.
competed in studying culture and specialized
subjects while carrying out activities to
maintain security to score achievements to
welcome Third Party Congress. (19 Apr 82)

Party conittee masters and combatants have
scored outstanding achievements in transport-
ing supplies and carrying passengers and in
boosting production. (19 Apr 82)

Leading connittee held meeting to publicize
success of conference of army party committees
and to launch emulation campaign to welcome
Third 1.?” Congress. (14 Apr 82)

Joined in expanding acreagea for sugar cane
plantation. (7 Apr 82)

Primary medical students began practical
training at command hospital on 3 March.

(5 Apr 82)

Has stepped up activities to consolidate
organization. (5 Apr 82)

On 28 March held meeting to hail success of
army party callittee conference. (4 Apr 82)

ﬁeld meeting on 31 mrch to hear report on
success of conference of party committees with-
in army, confer medals on outstanding cadres
and combatants for achievements in past

5 years and launch short-term elulation cam-
paign to welcome forthcoming Third LPRP
Congress. (3 Apr 82)

ﬁeld meeting of party cadres members to
hail army party comittee conference.
(1 Apr 82)

Organised political and military training
courses for cadres and combatants attached
to battalion between early January and

20 March. (31 Mar 82)

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Battalion "B" in Vientiane

Army Food Processing School

Army Battalion No 2 in Vientiane

Army Battalion No l in Vientiane

Army Battalion "B" in Vientiane

First Battalion of Army Brigade
"A" in Vientiane

Army Transport Boat Building
Factory

Battalion No 1 in Vientiane

Combined Military Training School
in Xieng Khousng Province

First Battalion in Vientiane

Armored Battalion B in Vientiane

N.92 Gp, POI. Department, Rear
Services General Department

CSO: 6206/55

Enthusiastieally performing task of consoli-
dating their units. Their achievements

in building living quarters cited.

(22 Mar 82)

Fulfilled plan for past 3 months. Achieve-
ments in transporting supplies. buildim
kitchens, growing vegetables and so

forth cited. (22 Her 82)

Harvested 10,300 kg of crops and raised
some animals during 1981 harvest season.
_(20 Her 82)

Harvested 11,890 kg of crops and 1,359 kg
of vegetables in 1981. (20 Her 82)

Scored excellent achievements in food
production and public service in late 1981.
(19 Her 82)

Attended politin study 15-20 February.
(18 Mar 82)

Fulfilled production plan by 87 percent
by late 1981. (18 Mar 82)

Company "B" has successfully fulfilled task
of maintaining peace and public order in
Hatsaifong District during past 2 months,
capturing four reactionary subordinates.
(17 Mar 82)

Women's union held celebration ceremony

10 March to mark international women's day.
Lt Col (Khamkhouang), deputy director of
school and member of provincial party
comittee, addressed rally. Unidentified
Soviet aperts working in this province also
attended ceremony. (16 Her 82)

Improves discipline and army procedures.
(13 Mar 82)

Held ceremony on lo March to confer ranks on
officers and men. Attending were Brig Gen
Ki Thoullnala, deputy chief of army general
political department. (6 Her 82)

Comander: Ha Rhac Thuan [m mmcs mum].
Serving in Laos. (cum no: mu m
21 Feb 82 p 3)

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PARIS!“

ELECTIONS mum: TIME SAID 10 BE WING 0UP
Hongxcng PAR EASTERN MIC mm in anglish 4 Jun 82 pp 23-26
[Article by John Fullerton]

[Text] Islamabad: July 5 will mark the fifth anniversery of the generals'
takeover in Pakistan which put President Zia-ul Bag in power. And informed
sources in both government and moderate opposition circles expect the anniver-
sary to produce the first step towards a return to a degree of civilian rule.
They forecast that the authorities will announce regulations governing nation-
al elections to be held within 18 months.

Zia could announce non-party elections, a policy to which most banned opposi-
tion leaders would be expected to object. But, in the final analysis, these
leaders would probably not boycott elections by preventing their respective
followers from standing as candidates. however, there are risks in this non-
party approachua last-minute boycott by the Pakistan People's Party (PPP)--
still the mainstay of the seven-party Hovensnt for the Restoration of W
racy (HBO) seeking an immediate end to martial lawnwould put the validity of
the exercise in doubt.

As some opposition spokesman of both the Left and Right have said, a hon-
party election would mean in effect 300 new political parties in the national
assembly. Parochial political interests would dominate the assembly and the
very consensus which zia seeks would be lacking. Alternatively, rules could
be drawn up governing the adoption of candidates for an election, barring those
who had held office in previous administrations and others lacking that the
fundamentalists would regard as suitable Islamic qualifications. This approach
seems to have the backing of conservative political groups such as the Jamaat-
i-Islemi Pakistan.

The elections would undoubtedly be held on the basis of proportional represen-
tation, which would help to ensure that no single opposition party obtained a
clear majority. Only political parties which agreed to register with the au-
thorities as required under a military regulation would be allowed to partic-
ipate and that could shut out the radicals. So far the PPP, the National
Democratic Party, the Pakistan National Party and the Pakistan Democratic
Party-«ll umbers of the Mam-have refused to submit the details of member-
ship and organisation required for registration.

9
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Would Zia succeed thereby in splitting the MED? Would he be able to tolerate
a consensus of conservative and centrist elements only too relieved to contest
an election without rivals from the socialist PPP and other smaller parties,
some of which champion the cause of provincial autonomy? Or would he face a
re-run of 1979 when the PPP's refusal to comply with government directives in
the run-up to a general election and the oppositim's charge that the election
process was being rigged led to an indefinite postponement of the voting?

Then, as now, it was a garble by both sides with the authorities believing
that the PPP could not afford, as a broadly-based movement, to continue its
semi-clandestine existence without losing support and the PPP believing that
zia could not survive a postponement of his plan for a return to representative
government. Bach underestimated the resolve of the other.

whatever the decision on the elections, the drawing up of a new Islamic con-
stitution or the amending of the presently suspended 1973 Constitution would
probably be deferred. zia is conscious of the fact that constitutions without
the consensus needed to make then work are merely short-lived pieces of paper.

This lack of a consensus has been Pakistan's weakness all along and it is one
reason why in 35 years the country's two general elections ended in the first
instance in civil strife-and the breaking away of the country's eastern wing,
now Bangladesh-and the second in a military coup. The nation's constitution-
al history has been characterised by the rise and fall of larger-than-life
leaders-men much loved and eventually much hated, whose colourful if brief
fortunes have seen the state lurching from one crisis of confidence to the
next.

Zia seeks a way out of the political log-jam, and a change in direction, from
the business of crisis management to long-term political management. Apolo—
gists for his five years of military rule insist that the man wants to extri-
cate himself from the political process, but that he is not willing to do so
as long as a return to the anarchy of 1977 which broght the military to power
seems inevitable.

They point out that the authorities have moved some of the way towards the
vision they have of a stable. democratic, but essentially Islanic state. The
Shariah (Islamic law) is now practised in the courts and it does have consider-
able popular support (as do military courts because of the expeditious manner
in which cases are handled).

The use of an Islamic banking system, following Islam's prohibition of usury
or interest, is proving a success and other Muslim nations watch the experiment
enviously. Zakat (the Islamic taxation systas which provides money for the
poor) is a national institution. Gambling and the consumption of alcohol have
been banned. national dress has been adopted by the civil service. And on
several occasions this year Zia has voiced his thoughts to the press on an
evolutionary return to democratic government.

Another move was the establishment of the Majlis-i-Shoora, a federal advisory
council (REVIEW, Jame). It may well consist of hand-picked people whom the

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
banned opposition condoms as opportunists and yes-men, but it functions with
all the trappings of parliamentary procedure and, despite the fury of at least
one senior minister, the flow of criticism directed at govemment policy has
gone unchecked. In an election its members are expedted to be encouraged to
stand as candidates and though many of them do in fact represent opinions far

to the left of zia’s supporters they will be expected to play a central role
in that badly needed consensus.

me same may be said of the local bodies or councils elected in 1919. That
exercise was an important lesson for zia, for the bodies were initially domin-
ated by the very people zia wanted to manoeuvre out of the political ring--
supporters of the PPP, still estimated today to be the most important single
force in opposition circles. But these and other elements viewed as undesir-
able were quickly disqualified under the local election rules. Hence the close
attention now being paid to regulations governing the selection of candidates
for a potential general election.

Recently, zia speculated publicly over the future role of the armed forces in
the country's political decision-making. He said he was considering the for-
mation of a higher comand council which would include the defence minister
and representatives of the three armed services, together with the president
and prime minister. Such an institution would ostensibly ensure the armed
forces a continued stake in the state and would help preclude the possibility
of a return to full military rule.

But his more outspoken critics view official and unofficial hints of a return
to civilian rule through elections as a Machiavellian campaign of psychologi-
cal warfare directed both at zia's domestic opponents and at his external
friends and critics. “zia is a soldier,“ said the acting president of the Teh-
rik-i-Istiqlal party, Mohammad Ali Kasuri. ”He knows the art of camouflage
and right now he is busy hoodwinking his enemy--the Pakistani people.” This
view is cons-on among social democrats and eocialists--in fact all politicians
left of centre. But the assumption that whatever 21a and his colleagues do is
designed to consolidate and legitimise the military's grip on the country could
lose the politicians their first opportunity in years to gain at least limited
power by going along with any electoral moves by zia. zia hopes the politi-
cians will cooperate. With this cooperation he could achieve what he calls
"positive results."

All public political activity is prohibited. Yet, on the surface at least, a
lively interest in political controversy remains. The press, still partially
muzzled by the authorities, refers in often detailed political comaentaries
to the "defunct" political opposition groups as a way of getting around the
regulations. Members of the middle classes will express their often extruse
opinions quite openly and observers can be forgiven for concluding that as far
as military dictatorships go, this one is remarkably liberal.

Politics remains very much a middle-class preserve. One reason for the rela-
tive inactivity of the PPP is that it is still led by a dozen wealthy people.
often landowners or successful merchants lacking the common touch of their
erstwhile leader:_ the charismatic, Oxford-educated Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, ess-
cuted in 1979.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Also, sporadic arrests of large numbers of opposition activists and the pros-
pect of lashes or lengthy terms of confinement have discouraged grassroots
political organisers from defying martial law. Political activity is a
shadowy, semi-clandestine affair and this has reduced the MRI) to a loose col-
lection of personalities rather than well-defined parties.

There is some truth in the cliche here that there are only two true political
parties in Pakistan: the PPP and the army. Por the opposition rests primarily
on an almost feudal social orar. a network of dynastic families which resist
mange. But society is nevertheless changingulargely under the impact of
migrant labour. Streams of people are moving from frontier and rural areas

to the major cities. Also hundreds of thousands of Pakistanis are now working
abroad, mainly in the Gulf, and are remitting big sums home.

The second constituency is the armed forces. zia sees himself as accountable
to the joint chiefs of staff, the three service chiefs, the army's general
staff and to a lesser extent the four provincial governors and the corps com-
manders. _ To that extent he is their man and represents the military's views.
There is no sign of significant dissatisfaction with his performance or the
threat of a sudden putsch by his military peers.

zia seems to recognise his mm limitations--that he lacks the easy informality
and personal appeal essential for a general looking for popular support. At
any rate, he has rejected appeals by some of his supporters to step down and
enter the political arena in his own right. He has also to consider the brutal
fact that the opposition is motivated by revenge for the execution of Bhutto.
He has his own safety to consider.

If he does step down, he will do so quietly and in favour of another general,
probably sesame who is thought to have sufficient charisma to attract popular
support as president. Several nases have been mentioned, but one possible
candidate who stands out is Lieut-Gen. Pasle ﬂag, currently governor of North
West Frontier Province, a difficult and key role.

ﬂag is articulate and has a fatherly image. He has a good political mind and
though some Punjabi officers would regard a Pathan as an outsider, his origins
could work in his favour. Lacking a natural power base in Punjab or Sindh
provinces, he would pose no threat to the military and would have to rely
heavily on his collequee. In short, he could be controlled. He also seems
to hold robust, pro-American views in keeping with the hawks in Zia's cabinet.

If the middle ground of the opposition seems soggy, there has been a percepti-
ble polarisation of politics. Zia must walk a tight-rope between the radicals
of the PPP on the one hand and the disciplined, Islamic reformers and their
armed student supporters on the other. As opposition leaders so often pro-
claim, without the holding of free and fair elections the country will inevit-
ably beoome radicalised.

One example is the Al-Zulfikar guerilla organisation operating out of Afghan-
istan and led by Bhutto‘s son hurtaza. Reliable sources said that an A1-
Zulfikar guerilla fired at the presidential aircraft carrying Zia from

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Islamabad to Lahore on February 7 with a Soviet anti-aircraft missile but
missed. 'No other squads of alleged assassins have been rounded up recent-
ly before they could put their plans into effect.

Zia is under pressure from his friends in the middle East, the United States
and Western Europe to stabilise Pakistan by a return to civilian rule. The
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 may have ended the international ostra-
cism of Zia’s regime which followed the execution of Bhutto, but the invasion
is no longer a blessing in disguise. The presence of 2.5 million Afghan refu-
gees in Pakistan and Kabul's efforts to revive latent separatism in border
areas threaten the country's territorial sovereignty. Despite hopes of re-
newed talks with New Delhi aimed at creating a no-war pact, the perception of
a short-term military threat fran superior Indian armed forces has not receded.

Zia cannot afford to underestimate the strength of his domestic opposition,
either. It is most remarkable that the “RD came into being at all and sur-
vived the trauma of the hijacking of a domestic airliner to Kabul by Al-Zulfi-
kar members early last year (REVIEW, Mar. 20. '81) . The hijacking helped zia
to attack the PPP as a subversive organisation because of the involvmnent of
Bhutto's son Murtaza. He used the hijacking as an excuse to round up PPP ac-
tivists, who were charged with grave offences.

There are reports that the MRD is planning to mount a general strike in urban
areas later this year after what is expected to be a tough budget which may
not meet the expectations of municipal and railway workers. teachers and bank
employees. to name but a few of the sectors elamouring for higher wages.

mpert foreign opinion on the future of Pakistan's econany can be sun-led up in
two words: cautious optimism.

The private sector is actively encouraged. but political uncertainty has meant
that the denationalistation of major enterprises has produced mixed results.
Although the worldwide economic slowdown has hit exports of textiles, raw and
processed cotton and rice in the past six months, many people are still wait-
ing to see whether the cutting of the links between the rupee and the US dollar
will have the desired effect (REVIEW, Feb. 5).

While the government devotes much attention to irrigation and rural develop-
ment, weather is a crucial factor in trying to establish a self-sufficient
agricultural base. The rains came late this year, but, despite this there is
a sugar surplus and the anticipated wheat shortfall is smaller than originally
feared, and can be made up from last year's bumper crop.

The forthcoming budget is expected to follow pragmatic lines. The temptation
to pump money into the economy will be resisted while the liberal policy to-
wards imports will continue. Wage demands will be met, partially at least,
through an improvement in allowances rather than direct increases in wages and
salaries. The growth rate of 5-6\ should continue through to 1983 at least
and, in political terms, that suits Zia in any attqnpt to change direction
towards democratic civilian rule.

Given all these factors, it is imperative for zia to be seen to be moving to-
wards elections, and soon. Time is running out for the generals and they ap-
pear to know it.

common-r: hongkong PAR EASTERN ECOWIC REVIEW 1982

. 13
cso. 4220/57 roe omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PAKISTAN

JAMM'B mum's rowan. macros ozscossso
Hong Kong m: was soonosrc mm in English 4 Jun 82 p 24
[Article by John Fullerton]

[Text] Lahore: Juaat-i-Islani Pakistan is the wild card in the country's
opposition pack. Proselytising, lavishly funded, disciplined and well-organ-
ised, its tiny membership belies the influence of its Islamic reformers who
seek to turn Pakistan into what they would regard as the world's first, truly
Islamic state. ‘

An ambassador representing a European government tried to explain its nature
in his reports hate by describing the Jamaat-i-Isleni as “an inverted, ortho-
dox communist party.“ ‘rhe Left here views it as a small group of fascist
bully-boys enjoying the partial protection of the country's military govern-
ment. One senior police officer said he thought the organisation was "getting
carried away' because it thought it had official sanction. It evokes both
fear and respect among its opponents, fear because its student wing has a
reputation for violence and respect because of its dedication and Weneity.

Mien Tufail Mohamed, the party leader, explained that the Jamaat-i-Islami
avoided confrontation with the military authorities because of the external
dangers--in the form of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the perceived
Indian threat. Nevertheless the party sought an innediate lifting of martial
law and the holding of elections under the suspended 1973 Constitution. Be
wanted safeguards too: candidates would have to qualify in terms of Islamic
principles and the elections would ahve to be based on proportional represen-
tation (thereby helping to ensure that no one party would emerge an outright
winner).

rufail puts the Janaat-i-Islani's membership at 4,000, but other sources say
it numbers 12-15,000. There is an associate membership system and a large
pool of active supporters. Cadres can be found in almost all sectors of so-
ciety, from the armed forces to the civil service. The Janaat-i-Islani's
power lies mainly in the universities, however, and among airline and railway
workers. The leader pointed out that in local, provincial or national elec-
tions the Jannat-i-Islani could and would put up candidates who were not mem-
bers but who were willing to pledge support for the party manifesto.

114
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
Participation in the seven-party alliance known as the Movement for the Res-
toration of Democracy would have made all the difference to the opposition's
ability to provide an alternative to President zia-ul Haq's policies. But
the Jamaat-i-Islani has studiously avoided collaboration with what it regards
as leftists-and leftists have been the party's No. l enemy. "Its power is
largely negative," said a rival political leader. "It has enormous power in
terns of disruption, but its popular following is negligible and hence its
contribution to forming an alternative system to the military is slight."

Until elections are held. the extent of the Janaat-i-Islni's backing will not
be known. It was founded in 1941 by the Sub-continent's leading Islamic phil-
osopher, Sayed Abdul Al Maududi, whose work in support of a resurgent Isla-
coincided with the energence of reformist Islamic societies such as Nursi in
Turkey and the Ikwhan, or brotherhood, in Egypt. Jamaat-i-Islani is very much
part of a worldwide phenanenon, far from isolated.

Its melabers are in constant, albeit informal, contact with similarly minded
Muslims throughout Asia and the Middle East. The organisation also plays a
vital role in foreign policy. It actively supports and funds sons of the Afghan
resistance groupsnnotably Hesb-i-Islani. Tufail believes that West European
countries and the United States should do far more to help the Afghan resist-
ance and despite his misgivings about the policies of both superpowers, he

was more favourable towards the US because of what he saw as its Christian
character. Like many Pakistanis he expressed bitterness and bewilderment at
what he saw as intransigence by the US in the face of Palestinian demands for
a homeland.

On April 23 bus loads of banner-waving Janaat-i-Islani students broke into
two Lahore newspaper offices. ransacked the premises, burned furniture and
nan-handled nubers of staff following local reports that one of their lead-
ers had boarded a Pakistan International Airlines aircraft with a pistol and
amunition in his possession. Has this attack in accordance with Islamic
principles? Tufail was unrepentant.

"We have been under constant attack fron leftist groups, sense of which are
instigated by the Soviet Union. Our people have been murdered. Now that we
are gaining control through elections the leftist parties are clanouring for
government restrictions to be placed on students. You must appreciate that
in the present crisis in Pakistan the Soviet Union is doing its utmst to
cause disruption. . . "

a left-leaning barrister active in the city's political circles was frank:
"The last thing I would want to have to do is to back down in the face of

Janast-i-Islami pressure or threats. But to be quite honest I'd rather not
cross their path at all...'rhey are trouble!"

mPYRIGllT: Honqkong PAR EASTERN WRONG REVIEW 1982

C80: 4220/57

15
Iron omcm. use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PAKISTAN

WSRA‘I‘ arm-10's arm-mess DESCRIBED
Hong. Kong?“ EASTERN ”MIC REVIEW in English 4 Jun 82 pp 26, 29
[Article by John Fullerton]

[Text] Karachi: Opposing the military rule of President zia-ul ﬂag can be
extremely costly as husrat Bhutto knows only too well. The tall. inaculate-
ly dressed widow, who gives a nisleading impression of fragility, naintains
an intense personal eminent to the Pakistan People's Party (PP?) which rep-
resents the strongest domestic challenge to Zia‘s government.

The BB? was founded by her late husband, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. who was toppled
in the 1977 coup which brought Zia to power and hanged in 1979. The Bhutto

home at the Clifton suburb here has my photographs. paintings and. other me-
nentoes of the late leader. And for his widow, now the 9?? leader, the fight

goes on.

But in personal terns the cost of her cosmitnent has been high. She has spent
about 42 months of the five years of military rule in detention. Her two sons,
Murtaze and Nawaz, who have opted for violent political change, abandoned
their studies in Laden and noved to Kabul to head the Al-Zulfikar guerilla
group. Hrs Bhutto says she has had no direct contact with them since they
went to Kabul.

Her fiery and politically formidable daughter, Benazir. is detained at the
family home at Lerkana near Karachi. Mrs Bhutto herself is under surveillance
and the authorities have registered a case in the courts charging the Bhutto
family with expropriation of secret government funds during the PPP adminis-
tration. '1 cannot give up the leadership,‘ she told the REVIEW. 'hy con-
science will not let me do so even if I wanted to. I cannot let our people
down--people who have languished in jail for years for their support of the
party."

She insists that the PPP has survived the waves of arrests which followed the
generals' takeover. She describes its progress as slow and steady but con-
ceded taht the prospect of indefinite terns of inpriscrment, lashes and tor-
ture deterred many people fro- activs political life in an environment where
all public politics and political parties themselves are banned.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hrs Bhutto maintains that zia has no intention of leaving politics and that
any moves by the authorities would simply be a step towards consolidating and
legitimising martial law. She rejected any form of what she calls farcical
democracy. For the PPP and other opposition groups, the only acceptable elec-

tions would have to be held under the 1973 Constitution , which is currently
suspended.

In such circumstances she could give an assurance that the PPP would not
threaten law and order. ”All I would need to do would be to address two polit-
ical meetings, one in the Punjab and one here in Sindh province and I could
promise a peaceful and orderly transfer of power. In fact I think I could
speak for the other opposition parties. too.“

She holds that the longer it takes to return the country to democratic, con-
stitutional life the more explosive the situation would become. We don't
look for chaos. We hope it would never happen. We are not trained for fight-
ing on the streets. We don't have guns and boobs. The PP? is trained to pre-
pare for elections. We are ready now.”

Party comittees had contacted groups of students, teachers, lawyers and work-
ers to study what the groups wanted, and what help the PPP could provide. On
the day the interview took place Mrs Bhutto had been meeting until the early
hours of the morning with about 200 grassroots supporters. She had asked them
for their response to zia's hints of elections based on proportional represen-
tation or on a non-party basis. The overwhelming reaction had been a resound-
ing no. "They said it would simply be another Hajlis-i-Shoora [the federal
advisory council set up by zia last Decemberl,‘ she said.

"Why would zia hold elections? For what he calls positive results. And what
do positive results mean? 'l'hey mean that he wants to get himself elected to

power."

In May it was Hrs Bhutto's turn to chair the Movement for the Restoration of
Democracy (MRD), the seven-member opposition group seeking an immediate and to
martial law. Why was it that the RED seemed unable to act, reluctant to acti-
vate popular opposition to the government? Hrs Bhutto pointed out that the
seven parties involved all had different political manifestos. They held in
conunon a desire for the inmdiate lifting of martial law and the holding of
elections under the 1973 Constitution. Bren some of the opposition groups which
which had remained outside the movement had indicated that they were willing

to cooperate with the MRD, at least unofficially.

Although Jamaat-i-Islmi Pakistan--the ultra-conservative Islamic grouping--
had not joined the MRD, it too wanted elections to be held now. And Mrs Bhut-
to had received a message from the Karachi branch of the Jamaat-i-Islami pled-
ging co-operation. She noted that the MRI) had only existed for a year and
said that its existence and survival was a remarkable achievement.

The PD? leader was clearly upset by reports she had received alleging that
people detained for political reasons had been tortured and maltreated.
"It's as if Zia is not satisfied with the blood of my husband--he sons to
want to crush us..."

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

She alleged that people had been burned with cigaxettes, and mentioned one
young man who she said could only crawl following his release because his
spine allegedly had been deluged by beatings. She accused the authorities
of arresting young people and accming then of links with the Al-Aulfikar
organisation of which the people detained knew nothing. She alleged: "In
sane instances the only way for smone to avoid being connected with terror-
ism was to have-his or her family pay a police officer a large sum of money.
when is justice in Pakistan now? “here do we go to find it? Zia seems to
tzeat people as the enemy. at we don't have tanks and anies. ﬂow can the
people support him in such a situation today?"

COPYRIGHT: Bongkatg PM W MIC REVIEW 1982

(250 2 4220/57

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
coma AND TEXTILE INDUSTRY'S P1081388 DISGJSSED

"auctions can EASTERN economc REVIEW in Bngliah 7 tray 82 pp 52, 54

[Article by ltohamed Aftab]

[Text]

talarnahad: The Pakistani Government.
the textile industry and pntatc eotton ea-l
porters are knotted in a yet mingly endless'
controversy. Accusations of mismanage-
tnent. losses to the state and pressures on
the industry to buy cotton at arbitrary pri-
ces are ﬂying.

The scedsol tlte controvc were sown
in the I973 nationalisation the cotton
trade as a result of the socialisatlon poli-
cies of Zullikar Ali Bhutto. The state»
owned Cotton Export Corp. (CBC) was
set up to buy all cotton trorn tarnters and
cotton ginners. lt alone sells lint cottott to
the domestic textiles industry and mono-
polises cotton etports thereby almost
completely eliminating the ate 'cotton
traders andesporters— w once hada
htcrative business.

The situation has hurt the textile indus-
tryand hastedtosignllicantlosseatothe
national cxchcquer because of the inca-
periertce and bureaucratic red- tape of the
CBC. which deals with a commodity lot
which split- -secortd deeisionsare needed to
trade internationally.

The situation has left my buyers oi

Pakistani lint cotton. textiles. cotton yarn
ind other when hosed products exasper-
ated. Anton; the bigger" bu era are those
ltorn Hortghoog. Japan anJOtina— the
latter being the biggest

The importance of raw cotton to the
Pakistan economy is evident lrorn the laet
that around 60?. ot all the country's ea-
ports are either at the raw commodity it-
oclt or at cotton-based products such as
textiles y.arrt garments and hostery The
textiles industry is the largeste otployerat
wellaslorntingthestnglehiggestgroupol
large scale tnanutactttring antts.

ECchairrnan Nusrat Htissain says the
corporation will purchase more than 4. l

19

'tnilhott bales cl cotton lrorn lanttcrs and

6nerstltis year So far. it has purchased
6million bales. of which 625“ (D0 hates
acre exporteduptoAprtllS.sh11teaverage
price of cotton already
shout SOUScentsa lh which the Clean
reasonably attractrve in view olpre
in; international prices. lollowtng the
world cotton

to install theCECaold l.9l million
bales ol cotton abroad tor US$216 tnil~
lion. according to the Ministry ct Corn-
tnerce. which oversees the corporation.
Of the 42 countries which boil it the
tnain ones were: Otina (at l million
hates). Japan .Honghong Bangladesh.
lndortesiaandlndia Thesaleaocttitta.
the CEC clairtts. was ”the single
deal in world cotton tradinghiatory
tustan has also tnanu to ea re new
marketssuchutraq untsia. igeria. Sri
Lantta Bulgaria. Romania. and some oi
the European Economic Community na-
ttons.

The CEC estimates overseas sales at
about L6 tnlllionhaleslnﬁscal 1982. or al
of the estimated «portable sutphn The
quantity has declined because at the cart
at 1m. carry-over stoehs hoot the pre
vious year were altnost exhausted.
Theetportahlesurpluslorlhcallmwill
rentaln :owemr thatt IOOI. despite a higher

cropin

CECelaitrtstohaveearnedaproﬁlol
$575 million in Inlhgainly due to a

ge carry-over stock the previom

r “:1: sale v'r‘as made at relatively:-
tract prices: says. But te
mm dispute this clairrt. country.
than t .isulleredlgge lamination;
Karachi Cotton AmartoamCA).whoae
membersusedtoexportalcononlaaddt-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT t

C50: 4220/64].

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lttlﬂ to aeling to the dented: natal in'
the pre-nationatiaatiortda . raakaa au-
thing mtmzltheﬁclm: CA "I;
t int-pit RM. 9"

C managed toe: l.9l rnilionbalea
ol cotton in Int tot US$121 tnillion—
and nut US$25.6ntillion. aselaitnedlry
the ministry. It says the average price
per It lob worksout at around 70.56cents.
lt contends that during the ante period.
monthly average ptiees in nor'tltetn Eu-
mpc wet: "never lessthanw ’2tvnts per
th. and the monthly atetape prices at the

Taking into account team-— '

aeticna of certain weeks on

the ltongleong and Japan cotton

narleeta. the m maintains:

“Cotton was nold cheaply, and

the benefit: of high pricaa
during the 1981 aeancrt was

not teanatexeed to grown in

Pakistan. "

There agantobemesubatanoeto
this The Chmbeenttpentngna
more lnisaee-laire manner that the. .
\t‘dol. Print to the l9?) nationalraation.
the KCAsanyheStleBanlotPakiataa
(tenlt'al hank) eaeteiaed an export pnee
check. Under this nl.otttyoot~
tun transactions will mot the pre‘
vailingNenYorlttutnruptieewete ap-
proved law. ' ' ' '- . '

ln l98l. Vott Mitten rentatned
altttve ltSJS cents a It. M in Angtlt
l9tlllandlanuaty l9" theqaoteatvent
ltt96ccm.onlwmthxu

lnnught the country a papetlouolnearly
llS$l0.lntillion.itarguee.- -

The KCAe sevetallooettlte
CECallegedlyauﬂetedbeeanaeotiutnn-
managementandlackoﬂoratght:

a Itsold63.33$baleaotcottonial981
atanaveranptieeotaboutnooenualb.
down lrota conservative ettintatee at 70
cents available at ailing rnarttetlevelt
—!oratoatol Araillion.

a ' .alarpeatoek. the CECde-

taulted in «mtg-0% several export con-

tracts‘ ‘ .tm hatee. It had to

my USsltiIton' irtairnrmsationandre-
tea.

a The CEC incurred an expenditure ot
US$6.85 rnlllion in I‘ll! on interest to
banks on overaalta. “unﬁt: cttttun and
insurunte became ot ‘a tit pit-apt
marketing.“

o The CEC carried over mum hates
ol cotton ltont I'Mstoeks. though it could
easily have been marketed at around 7"
cents a lb during lotto lot stzm ttttltinn.
and saved the storage eapensea

Bill

_tnen have repeat

The tetttletinﬁitrvmthewmt
selling cottoneheqtlyalttoad. but at quite
high prices to dotnenic use. This rneana'
Pakiatanilextilesqarnaartdothtt ﬁnished
proacta we hard to martet overseas lie-
eauae ol the added coat element belttrc
cottsolprodactionate taken irttoae.
count.

Theae iatuea ate a! behind the current
feud. Btntheheartolthernatreristhatthc
ptivale wetot challenges the continued
nationalisation oi the cotton trade at all

Site the I977“ oi mt. pet-
vate cotton dealer} and timer eaponeri
have httenﬁed their campaign to get the
nadedem. There isnodenitng
that the bareauaateturned-executives oi
the CEC ttill lad: the capertise ol interna-
uonaloottontnalers. In addition. lh-' alto

gattona til rod tnpe and mismanagement
ate diattabing.

The entteprenetna who handled the
cotton trade atom lltecotnrnodrty became
an ttent ot international commerce tit-re
able to respond rapidy to the weld
rnatket artuattun and channels math-
gond profits - earnings which the) want
ngain. The government and lht‘ printers
have oltea accused them ul gauging up
against the power: by not huying the cot-
ton quictly. theteby depressing prices.
But as soon as the crop came to private-
aeeror traders; prices would start rising.
hese traders would then tell cotton at

' ltprteet' totbetextile lndustrymtalt'
2.. good deal at prolit. - '03

etportets
talnlng abtoad part of tbeit foreign-ea-
earnings lrortt cotton exports.
Aaot allegationagainet tltern was telh
ingeottonolpoorqnalityornotatidingto
intetaational apeciftcations. When the
toolt o'ver the cotton trade in
973. the main arguraent was that it want-
edtohe thepoorlarnteranditnprove
qualitﬁ.‘ t the government. in the pm~
cen. .been making a healthy profit
eacbyearitsellnnddoeanotwantto
nith it. That is nth government tpo
ed’y ruled out tie-nation-
alisation.

The CEC-KCA leud appeat'ed to be
m' "raw 2’ m a:
t tene action '
araoeiation. It aerveda notice «Men

chiming USSIO million in genetal darn-
agestor“allegedly publishing baseleuand
t

latte intputationa ‘ he corpota-
lion.” and denta a published tetrac-
iron

The imputation: telerted toconeerned.
aniong other tltings.'the allegation that
Pakistan regrsteted ﬂtvisible loses 01
05828.2 million on lineal 1981‘s cotton
exports as a result at ittcllicient CEC mar-
keting. The to lion desaibed the al~
legationa an " atrtatnry." II

Far Eastern Boone-k: Review. Bongkonq 1982

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY