FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10462

15 April 1982

East Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fros foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and uterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT HHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MBRSRIP OF
MATERIALS RBPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT
POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

@0110 6/82)

Coureurs

POLAND

Cultural Figure Gives View: on Situation in Comtry
(Andrzej Zuleveld Interview; PARIS HATCH, 25 Dec 81) ...... 1

French Journalist Cements on Military Take-Over in Poland
(K0 so Kar013LEWOBSBHVATBUR, 6F°b 82) eeeeeeeoeee 5

French Journaliet's Interview With Internee Noted
(Paul Baudry Interview; LB NOUVRL OBSERVA‘I‘EUR, 6 Feb 82).. 8

- a - [III - EB - 63 F000]
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
CULTURAL FIGURE GIVES VIEWS ON SITUATION IN COUNTRY
PH301439 Paris PARIS HATCH in French 25 Dec 81 pp 25, 103

[Interview with Andrzej Zulawski, Polish poet, writer and movie director,
by Jean-Francois Chaigneau: "'Jaruzelski Hill Fire on the Crowd or Counit
Suicide'"-in Paris, date unspecified]

[Text] Andrzej Zulewski: This time, that's it, the two trains have set
off. and they are traveling in opposite directions....

PARIS HATCH: Which did you CLAB?

Andrzej Zulawski: You can't really take the Communist Party and Arsy
train: so I took Stlidarity's....

PARIS HATCH: Do you regret it?

Andrzej Zulawski: Yes indeed: Halesa's train has been derailed. It is
a monumental error to have reached this point. Primarily I blame his lack
of political sense. Everything should have been done to prevent this
direct confrontation fro. arising.

PARIS HATCH: Are you thinking of civil war?

Andrzej Zulawski: The fundamental question is whether the Polish people

are tired enough to capitulate or angry enough to continue. For my part

I am sure that they are too tired-that the women are too tired to make

war, too sick of seeing their children not have any silk...that physicians
have had enough of hospitals filled with 3- or 4-year-old children suffering
from malnutrition.... I hope that the population will think that the mili-
tary coup is after all an honorable outcome. proving that courage is not at
issue because the disproportion between the forces is too great.

PARIS HATCH: Do you want the Poles to capitulnte?

Andrzej Zulawski: Yes, at this stage, but only in order to resume the
struggle later, in the sphere of what seals possible to me.

PARIS HATCH: What is this sphere?

1
FINIlNﬂﬂCJAI.USE(MVLY
sea.- vases-mu... -_.. leai

Andrzej Zulawski: First let we define what is not feasible: A general
revolt by all the 0553's satellite countries? The revolts do not happen
sinulteneously (Budapest 1956, Prague 1968). The breakup of the Soviet
Union into 100 nationalist republics? It is possible but certainly not
tosorrow. World war? The cost is too high. So, what is there left?

well, the sphere of "what is feasible".... I have always thought that in
the history of Polish resistance the example was set by the Church. Since
19“, the Church has been chipping away slowly and patiently and nobody

can do anything to stop it. They could inrison Hyszynski and tear out

his f ingernails, or nistrest a priest who spoke freely in the pulpit...that
had no effect. The church continued to advance. He nust do the sane. This
was all the easier in 1980 since the econonic collapse of the Gierek regime
made it possible to introduce a new positive factor: the obvious fact that
there was no possible retreat. So that allowed an isprovenent in the eco-
nosic systen.

PARIS HATCH: In the inediate future will General Jaruzelski give orders
to fire on the Poles?

Andrzej Zulawski: Hy reply is cynical: To fire on the Poles "a bit," I
would say yes. "A lot"? I would say certainly not. All I know is that
Jaruzelski and people like hill have been trained in nurder and destruction.
He probably does not know hisself where the line between "a bit" and "a lot"
lies. In my opinion, he will soon be faced with a Draconian alternative:
either to give orders to fire on his own people or to blow his brains out.

PARIS HATCH: But he is a totally prwSoviet general, after all.

Andrzej Zulawski: Yes, but that is one of the paradoxes of Poland. This
conunist general, pro-Soviet and politicized in the extreme, is certainly
in the final analysis a Polish nationalist, as we all are. Anyway, just
before Saturday's events, he said this: "Poland is not dead as long as we
live." He thus used the double language to which every Pole is accustomed.
This simple phrase neans: If I, a Pole, do not do it myself, someone else
will. So I beg you, give in....

PARIS HATCH: And the Army?

Andrzej Zulawski: The Army is two-thirds composed of draftees. The renainder
constitutes a caste of professionals. They are recognizable. They are big
and fat and greasy-skinned. They have all the privileges offered by the
regine: apartment, food, car and clothes.... They are people educated
within the ayates; in defending it, they are defending the-selves. They

will obey and fire.

PARIS HATCH: For the Heat, Poland is the country which is causing trouble
for the Soviet bloc.

Andrzej Zulawski: Yes. Unfortunately that is perfectly in keeping with the
Polish spirit. For a long tila'now, especially since the 19th century,

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Poland has had a sort of messianic dream. The Poles see themselves as a
model, concentrated on their sufferings and misfortunes; and today they are
convinced that they will prompt the start of the fall of the Soviet empire.

PARIS HATCH: It is understandable that the Poles are sick of communism.

Andrzej Zulawski: They never wanted it. They are a people who are 98
percent Catholic and who were handed by the ﬂeet to the Soviet system. In
1945 Stalin drew the borders and that was that. Nothing paved the way for
it, yet merely at bayonet-point the country became communist. At the time,
90 percent of the population had neither an outlook nor a political educa-
tion leading to communism.... But everybody knows that. The problem was
rather how to manage communism differently from the others.

PARIS HATCH: So the country cannot become free?

Andrzej Zulawski: It cannot become a democracy, either bourgeois, capitalist,
liberal or anything else. It cannot change its regime. The country is a
land of passage, an enormous plain crossed by the railroad tracks taking
Soviet troops into East Germany. Ours is only a geopolitical role. Stalin
himself granted us this favor. In fact, Stalinism was never as oppressive

in our country as it was elsewhere.

PARIS HATCH: The explosion of Solidarity, is that the difference?

Andrzej Zulawski: It is more than that. It is quite simply the exaspera-
tion of a people who can no longer endure lies, poverty, lack of liberty
and inefficiency. So the country explodes and loses its head.

PARIS HATCH: The detonator?

Andrzej Zulawski: The Pope accounts for 90 percent and sausages for 10
percent.

PARIS “RICH: ....

Andrzej Zulawski: Before John Paul II's election, there were long periods

in Poland when the working class did nothing. Intellectuals and students
were regularly beaten up but the working class did not care. At the same
tine, food began to be frighteningly scarce under Gierek's team. And then
the Pop- came. You have to be Polish to understand what it meant to see

the Pope arrive, all in white, and get out of his white helicopter on his
visit to Krakow. the old royal capital. The country then rediscovered
language, and that was the real miracle: Somebody was speaking to it clearly.
Poland got drunk on words and phrases and Unless got nothing but promises.

PARIS HATCH: Yet Solidarity was legalized?

Andrzej Zulswski: Solidarity-what difference does that make if you can
not eat to satisfy your hunger? Halesa is very wrongheaded. I do not want

FOB ML USE ONLY
to add to his burdens at this difficult tine, but he is a nan who has been
puffed up by events though he is incapable of taking charge of them or
understanding then. He is too sinple.

PARIS MATCH: But he has held the powerful Communist Party in check.

Andree) Zulawaki: But look where we are now. A huge surge of hope has
ended up in military dictatorship. Since 1795 the country has experienced
continuous occupations and disuenberments. And World War II has never
ended for it. It is painful to say, but I think that in the country's
historical genes there is a skill in living under constraint, as well as

a tendency to misfortune. But I would not like to find today that there
is also a suicidal deter-inisn.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 per Cogedipresse S.A.

CSO: 3100/622

FOR‘OFIHC%%1.UGII(NVLY
FRENCH JOURNALIST COMMENTS ON MILITARY TAKE-OVER IN POLAND
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 6 Feb 82 p 34
[Article by K.s. Karol: "The General'a Ruse")

[Text] The argument is classic: "If you do not help me,
others, who will be tougher, will succeed me." But the trap
is too obvious.

"The month of February began badly in the streets of Gdansk," proclaims the of-
ficial agency PAP, which then goes on to report, in a few sentences, a "deplor-
able demonstration by young people," and then to list the reprisal measures
taken by the military regime against the region's population as a whole. If
one believes this incoherent version, there were only 3,000 young people demon-
strating in the streets of Gdansk last Saturday. Why, then, was it necessary
to extend the curfew by 3 hours in an urban center with a population of

750,000, cut off telephone communications again. and forbid all private vehicle
traffic?

The Warsaw officials claim that it was a matter of hitting hard on a preventive
basis, in order to discourage any protest movement against the price hikes (300
percent on the average) just coming into force. This explanation is doubly
fallacious: first of all because the Harsaw putschiats are constantly hitting
hard (the courts passed nearly 500 sentences during the last half of January).
and secondly, because the workers' reaction against the amputation of their
buying power could not, in Poland, be a l-day affair.

"Not One Step Backward"

It is difficult, nevertheless, to understand the dynamic of the Gdansk demon-
stration and of those that are also said to have taken place in Silesia, Lodz
and wroclaw, because the military in power have proved to be great experts in
the blocking of information. In principle, at the beginning of January, on the
eve of the meeting of the NATO foreign-affairs ministers in Brussels, they
abolished censorship for the Western press, believing that this gesture would
be sufficient to appease the chancelleries of the West. But in practice, the
situation of the journalists accredited to Warsaw has not changed. They do not
have the right to leave the capital or to telephone to their editorial desks,

5
roe omcm. use ONLY
I'UK UI‘IILIAI. use. URL!

and their accreditation is subject to renewal each month, which constitutes an
additional means of pressure on those who might try to inform themselves "too
much." The Western governments, even though there are reciprocity agreements
with Poland in the matter of the press, have not even deigned to raise a pro-
test against these restrictions.

Poland, of course, is too dependent on Western food aid to be able to isolate
itself totally. Those persons who go with the convoys of foodstuffs and medi-
cines--into the "closed" provinces too--necessarily meet people and bring back
news. Thus it emerges that Solidarity is now functioning clandestinely not on-
ly in Gdansk, Wroclaw and Katowice--its traditional strongholds--but also in
the peripheral centers and in the countryside. Despite the "state of war,"
samizdat leaflets and even pamphlets have a broad circulation. Thus it was
learned in Paris this week, with unusual speed, that the intellectuals interned
in a relatively comfortable camp in the northwest of the country have sent to
Lech Walesa a letter commending his tenacity and informing him that they will
neither let themselves be corrupted by their privileged treatment not separated
from their worker comrades, who are the worst-treated of the prisoners of Jaru-
zelski's gulag.

Then, on 26 January, Walesa was in his turn served with an internment order
dated 12 December, and managed to communicate his response: "Not one step back-
ward. This partner has never been honest and never will be." After this mes-
sage. the delegation of bishops, led by the primate of Poland, Jozef Glemp,
that has just visited the Vatican, is fully aware of the fact that the Church
cannot make the least concession as regards Solidarity without cutting itself
off from its popular base.

The putschists reply that there is no longer any Solidarity in Poland. As the
only people in charge, they are asking the Western governments for credits, and
in order to overcome their reticence, are trying to get them to believe that a
battle is in progress in the upper echelons in Warsaw: Jaruzelski and his po-
lice generals Hilewski and Kissczak are supposed to represent the "liberal"
wing of the regime, anxious to carry out reforms and behave as in the time of
“enlightened absolutism" (as it is put by the minister Ciosek). Pitted against
these despotic "good guys“ there is supposed to be a "tough" wing grouped
around Albin Siwak and the weekly of the Grunwald police association, “Real-
ity," supposedly determined to achieve loo-percent normalization of the coun-
try. In short, a Polish-style police war is supposed to be in progress, since
on both sides the principal protagonists are in the security forces.

It is probable that the minister of foreign affairs, Jozef Csyrek, came to

Claude Cheysson precisely to inform him of the "new development" in Polish po-
litics. But the ruse is too old to be credible. In the East, anyone who holds
power would like to have it believed that his possible successor would consti-
tute the worst of calamities for the world. It suffices to recall that Gustav
Husak too normalised his country while calling himself "liberal." But the case
of Jaruselski is even more serious than that of the Czechoslovak quisling.

In the interview granted to LB NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR last week, Chancellor Helmut
Schmidt explains that because of their guilt complex, the Germans need to have

6
INJI‘OITNCIAL lEHE(HWLY
with the Polish nation a relationship that is "morally clear, no matter what
person is in power in that country, whether it is Gomulka, Cierek or now an-
other communist, perhaps still another tomorrow, I don't know." I confess that
this way of viewing the communists as a race apart, immutable and self-con-
tained, leaves me perplexed; it flattens and emptics' of all its content the
real history both of Poland and of its CP. In fact, Gomulks and Gierek were
not only men with very different ideas and biographies; they also incarnated
two very distinct phases of the evolution of' 'real socialism. " The former was
the promoter of the policy of the 20th Congress of the CPSU, with its promises
of de-Stalinization. The latter represented the phase of Leonid Breshnev' s
"technological and scientific revolution" and believed, as did he, that he
could solve the problems by means of equipment imported from the West.

Sudden Changes of Pace

Jaruzelski, who arrives after the failure of these two attempts, is therefore
not simply' 'another comunist.‘ He incarnates a different phase, and it is not
by chance that he is the author of the first military coup d' etat in the his-
tory of the Soviet world. From Rome to Tokyo, the communists who know how to
think refuse to consider this putschist dictator one of their comrades. After
Enrico Berlinguer, the chairman of the Japanese CP, Kenji Hiyamoto, proclaimed
loug and clear that Jaruzelski struck his blow against the cause of socialism.
Why must the chancellor of the PRC recognize a certain "communist" dignity in
this Polish Pinochet, and why does our minister of external relations agree to
receive his representative at the Quai d'Orsay?

The answer probably lies entirely in Francois Hitterrand's little phrase about
"the delays of history." No one has any illusions about the nature of the Po-
lish regime. But everyone believes that he has to live with it, because a lot
of time is needed in order to change it or beat it. Maybe. But one should be
on guard: since World war II, there has been more than one sudden change of
pace in Polish history. Despite its limited sovereignty, this country is al-
ready in its sixth different regime, and the West would be making a serious
mistake if it closed its eyes to its extraordinary fragility: this time, it is
an entire people who, having found its political and social identity again, op-
poses the regime.

PHOTO CAPTION

General Jaruzelski receiving workers. Solidarity is now functioning clandes-
tinely

COPYRIGHT: Copyright 1982 "Le Nouvel Observateur"

11267
CSO: 3100/662

7
liliClﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
I‘vﬁ Vl‘l'shsna. we. VIILI

POLAND

FRENCH JOURNALIST'S INTERVIEW WIT“ INTERNBE NOTED
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 6 Feb 82 p 35

[Interview by Paul Baudry: "Three weeks in One of Jaruzelski's Prisons"; date
and place not given]

[Text] Few accounts have reached the Rest about what has
been happening in the Polish jails for the last 2 months.
Here, in an interview by Paul Bsudry, is the account by a
painter arrested on the same night as the coup d'etar,

13 December.

[Question] How were you arrested?

[Answer] The militiamen came to my studio on 13 December. at l a.m., and I found
myself in an ice-cold cell, alone, without knowing anything about the coup or

the reasons for my arrest. How could I have guessed them? I had indeed been
militant in the 1970's, and after 1976 took part in the activities of the KOR*,
but since 1980 I had been quite simply one of the 10 million members of Soli-
darity, without exercising any particular responsibilities. It was only on
Sunday evening, when I was given some cellmates, that I learned what had hap-

pened. Two days later, I was transferred to the prison of X..., where I re-
mained until I was freed.

[Question] Always in a cell?

[Answer] No. in a big room, where there were some 30 of us: most of then work-
ers, trade-union officials interned from the 13th. or militants arrested on the
occasion of the first strikes. There were also two peasants of the rural Soli-
darity, some engineers. some students and myself. a painter. During my

stay there. there was no right to have any walking exercise and no visiting
rights; the broadcasts of Radio Warsaw were the only link with the outside.

For the rest, we had relatively favored treatment: central heat, lighting.until
9 pm, and we were brought something to eat at 7 an, 2 pm and 5 pm. The mili-
tianen did roll call morning and evening, and whenever the door was opened one
could see their stony faces in the corridor. 0n the other hand, the prison

 

* Committee for the Defense of the Workers, founded in 1976.

8
FOR OFFICIAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
guards, who had counted on Solidarity to improve their miserable living condi-
tions, gave evidence of their sympathy for us and went to the trouble of pro-
curing for us, as much as they could, the things we asked them for.

[Question] How did you pass your time?

[Answer] We determined at the outset that in our prison there was neither any
informer to spy on us nor any microphone for listening to us, so that we there-
by evaded both the police system and the fear that it engenders. And a program
of presentations was established: each morning and each afternoon, one of us
would talk about his professional and political experience, and a debate fol-

lowed, often impassioned.

[Question] what divided you?

[Answer] While the social movement that Solidarity constitutes is unanimous in
contesting the dictatorship of the party, it is made up of different currents.
The majority, who recognize themselves in Lech Halesa, have to deal, on their
right, with the people of the KPN*, and on their left, with the former leaders
of the XOR. In the microcosm of our roomful of people. the KPN was represented
by a nucleus of five persons, with a few sympathizers sometimes rallying to
them, on the occasion of certain debates. The KOR was not represented as such,
since it was dissolved into Solidarity; but we divided on the ideas of Kuron,
for example--with the majority. incapable of imagining a communism that is not
totalitarian, reproaching nim for not having clearly broken with the Marxism of

his youth.

[Question] What makes you classify the members of the KPN as being on the
"right"?

[Answer] Their attachment to the past, to the country's military and insurrec-
tional traditions, their nationalism.

[Question] Nationalism--antisemitism perhaps?

[Question] Quite so; we questioned them about that, but they evaded the ques-
tion as if it were a taboo subject, one that gave them a bad conscience. The
Communist Party has at least rendered one service to Poland: it has cultivated
antisenitism so much on its own account that it has put it out of fashion.

[Question] In your debates, what pitted Solidarity against the KPN?

[Answer] The KPN reproached Solidarity with having been timorous and ineffec-
tive. with not having aimed at the government's Vitals, with having mobilized
the masses for combats lacking greatness. Solidarity explained that it had
chosen to change the people and the structures patiently, that it preferred
humble daily work to blows of heroic brilliance. It reproached the KPN with

 

* Confederation for an Independent Poland.

9
FOR(”HHCUU.USE(NVLY
[VI Ufl’lylnh VOA. Ul‘I-I

having furnished a pretext for the coup by revealing its long-term strategy, by
declaring war on the Party and on the USSR.

Furthermore, life in prison revealed two attitudes: while the KPH people were
pletting impossible escapes, the Solidarity officials, negotiating with the
prison administration day after day,wereimproving our living conditions, thus
expanding their influence.

[Question] Did you discuss the future also?

[Answer] We did nothing else! He talked, for example, about the oath of
allegiance that a great many Poles have to sign on penalty of losing their pro-
fession or their liberty. Some were resolved not to make any compromise, even
if they were to be sent to Siberia. The majority agreed that it was necessary
to show realism and use stratagems against force, that the first imperative was
to get work again, one's place, one's influence within society. At the time I
was freed, I myself signed a commitment not to undertake anything against the
so-called popular and Polish republic; but that doesn't bother me. But there
are some more compromising formulas, and I know people who are not forgiving
themselves for the disavowals extorted from them.

He also talked about the "passive resistance" spontaneously mounted by the pop-
ulation and consisting essentially in sabotaging its work. Some found it dif-
ficult to accept Solidarity's making a watchword of struggle out of this, and l
have since learned that the Church shares this point of view. Should the cost
of the downfall of the communist system be the total ruin of our country? Is
it by reaching the depths of poverty that the Poles will be delivered from
their tyrants?

[Question] Did you speak yourself about your profession of painter?

[Answer] Yes. I warned my companions against the temptation to engage artists
in the liberation struggles, to turn the methods of "socialist realism“ against
"real socialism." A painter does not address himself to the masses, he speaks
to persons. It is not by pitting some slogans against others that he has a
chance of being useful; on the contrary, he will be useful if he helps individ-
ual people to exorcise the demons interiorized in 35 years of dictatorship, to
kill the fanaticism inside them.

[Question] What weighed on you the most during your detention?

[Answer] Not knowing anything about the struggles in progress, not being able
to take part in them. On 17 December, when Radio Warsaw announced the death of
the Hujek miners, there was a moment of extreme tension. Since there was
fighting outside, it was insupportable not to be fighting:, we contem-
plated a revolt, a mass escape, at least a hunger strike. But a few Solidarity
officials kept their cool and fought hand to hand against these projects in-
spired by impotent rage.

[Question] What was most valuable to you in this trial?

10
Ft!!(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
[Answer] First of all the solidarity, really lived. I told you about our im-
passioned discussions; I remember especially that they were conducted with tol-
erance and respect for one another, without violence or aggressiveness. And
then the shared hope. It is only since I have been out of prison that I have
met pessimistic people. Every day, friends assure me that we have returned to
the Stalinist era, that we are in for it for 10 or 20 years. In Stalin's time
there were convinced communists, coldly determined to sacrifice everything to
their distant chiueras, but now we have only cynics, as preposterous as inquis-
itors who have lost the faith, short-sighted military men who have come out of
their tanks without having planned any political scenario.

But that's enough about then! People are too concerned here about what they
are doing; we were optimistic in prison because we always talked about what
/we/ were going to do. We have changed since August 1980: through the strug-
gles, the strikes, the liberty found again, we have woven new relationships
among ourselves, we have learned to speak to one another, to love one another.
That is mainly what makes me optimistic.

COPYRIGHT: Copyright 1982 "Le Nouvel Observateur"

11267
C802 3100/462 END

FtlICHHHCJEh.USE(MVLY