FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10180

11 December 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 45/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MT!

JPRS publications contain intornation primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. . Materials fron'foreign-language
sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, vith the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and Interial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforlation was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in psrentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion marl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. fines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, vieus or attitudes of the 11.3. Goverment.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS CWERNING WHERSHIP 0!"
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(POUO 45/81)

CONTENTS

AFGHANISTAN

Foreign Reporter Says 'Peaoe Is Not in Sight' in Near mture
(Anthony Ibnsn; THEMIIIB EAST, Nov 81) ...................

'ASAHI' Interviews NIPC Official in Tehran
(Taheri Interview; ASAHI 3311mm, 2!; Nov 81) ...............

Hojahedin Leader Interviewed on Various Issues
(“8 mm W, "0' 81) 00.000.00.000.00000000000000000...

IRAQ

Massive Development Problens in nation Cited
(mme W'MI, 2.8 at 81) OOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.00.00...

Tariq 'Aziz Discusses Relations with Rance, Future Prospects
(Tariq 'Aziz Interview; AbHA’I‘AN AL-‘ARABI, 28 Ans-3 Sop 81)

ISRAEL

Hebron Hayor Raps Increased Israeli Settlement
(PatI‘ICk Massey; mm, S “07 81) eoooeeooeoeoaeeeeoooe eoeo

SAUDI ARABIA

Saudis Reportedly Connitted to mplonatio Recognition of 088
(“9188 Graham; THE 088mm, 15 NOV 81) oeoeeooe eeee eases...

TUNISIA

Ahmed Hestiri's Personality, Career, Prospects Discussed
(80th Belhassen; JME mm, h “0' 81) oeoeoeooaeeeeoo

First Pluralistic Elections Evaluated
(Francois P011; JBWB 4mm, 11 Nov 81) eeeoeoeooeeoe 0 see.
POI OPTICAL USEONLY

YMMRBPUBLIC

Various Domestic, Foreign Relations Develop-eats Reviewed
(AL-“TAN ‘IP'MI, 9.15 wt 81) oeoeoeoooeoeooooeoooeeeoeo

‘AIr-HATAN AL-‘ARABI'in Sun'a, by Allied Bahia
Al-Sallel's Return
Interview inch Prise Minister

Briefs
1A8 Rebels Ceasefire

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
MICK m SAYS WM 15 M II 81631" I! mm mm

mm m moon: east 111 mu». an 81 no.9: pp 27-23

[Article by Anthony Hymn]

mm” mummy» “We...” .nm mum ”mammwmmu WmmmmmWﬂ

w “w .mMmm mmmwmm WWMW mwm mm «WWW
m w m« aw ﬁmwmwm u
«Mammww mmmmmw mmmw .m $ummmwmm

mm ”mm ﬂ mm“? 3 ME

mmm ﬁrm u. ”M mmmwmmmmmmmw

mmaw MM mmmumwmm aMmmmwmw mmmmWw

mm mm . m w. mmwmmwnm

mm mm ﬁg» “W memmmm

Wm” :mmm mm m wmmmmm Wmmmmmmm
M
333333;; 33 3333?; 3:"; 53%;; 333%

Egg: 1%: 5-513 23%;};
5:333 333 2335 3533?? g3“ 33 :3
Egg”; 32-:1 Egg;

Eggigsizgié EEEEEEE; étgé;
£33333: 3333:3333
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'ASAHI' INTERVINS NIPC OFFICIAL Ill TEHRAH
09280626 Tokyo ASARI SHIHBUN in Japanese 26 Nov 81 Horning Edition p 9
[Interview with NIPC President Taheri]

[Text] Tehran Bureau, 23 November-President (Taheri) of the Iranian National
Petrochenical Conpany (NPC) recently granted an interview to ASAEI SEMI!!!
Tehran Bureau on problems concerning the Iran-Japan Petrochenical Couples
Project (IJPC). During this interview, he hinted at the feasibility of the
recent Mitsubishi proposal for scaling down the scope of the project.

However, he declared that an investigation of the war damage to the project

is the first requisite. The following is a sI-ery of the interview!

[Question] what is your assessnent of the Tokyo negotiations?

[Answer] The Iranian Goveth position is that the Japanese side should cone
to Iran to search for the way which will enable the two sides to reach agree-alt
through a dialogue and conplete the project. On the basis of the previous
negotiations (in Tehran). the Japanese side asked us to subnit the results of
our survey on technical and economic problem. and we did admit that. But the
Japanese side demanded that the Iranian Government underwrite the whole cost

of the project on the grounds that the Japanese side was unable to nska any
further invest-ant. He countered by dannding that the Japanese side study the
results of the survey conducted by the Iranian side and. on that basis. visit
Iran to continue negotiations so that both sides can reach an agreement to carry
on the project. Our assesssent of the Tokyo negotiations will depend on what
nove Japan will make.

[Question] Judging that the project has already lost profitability. the Japanese
side has proposed a new formla under which "Iran will underwrite all costs
whereas Japan will only provide technical cooperation." what do you think?

[Answer] We want to protest to our partners by asking than on what basis they
are contending that the project is unprofitable. Since this problel was raised
during the previous talks. we proved this tires that as far as profitability

is concerned. there is nothing to worry about. Then the Japanese side brought

up the problm of damage caused by bombing. But without sending an investigation
team, how can they say the project has no profitability and will be difficult

to carry on? Don't you think it proper for then to first send an investigative
teen to deternine whether or not the project is profitable and whether or not it
is possible to carry on the project?

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the results of the investigation turn out good, the two sides should negotiate
on that basis and complete the project by all nsane. Should the Japanese side
ask for conpenaation on the basis of the investigation. the Iranian Govern-ant
will be ready to conply. At any rate, investigation cones first.

[Question] The Japanese aide is demanding a revision of the basic agree-eat
on the basis of the new formula. "hat is your opinion?

[Answer] The Iranian Governnent's position is that problems can be solved within
the framework of the eristing basic agreenent. The Japanese side presented

aone reasom for desiring to change the 50-50 ratio of investnmt sharing. but
these reasons are not reasonable at all in our eyes. They raised various
question about gas supply, war danage, water supply and housing. and we

have answered all these questions. Above all, we have assured the that Japan
will not be nade to share losses fron war damage. and we have also guaranteed
profits to than. lvle believe that problem can be solved under the existing
agreement.

[Question] What do you think of the large gap between Japan and Iran in their
estinates of the damage?

[Answer] This. too, stems from the fact that the Japanese side has not conducted
an on-the-spot investigation. 0n the other hand, the Iranian estimate does not
include the danage done by the sixth bombing (on 19 October). In order to work
out an estinate of the danage acceptable to both sides, it is necessary for than
to send a joint investigation teal. Dedicated to Islanic creed. the Iranian
Goverrsnent will do nothing which will cause its partner to incur a loss.

[Question] The Japanese side is thinking of reducing the scale of the project.
"hat is your consent?

[Answer] Re have never received any such proposal yet. That is a problen which
should be settled through negotiations according to our practice. If we find
this idea to be in the interest of the Islanic Republic, we will act accordingly.
What is important is that the petrochenical industry is Iran's key industry and
that we should couplets UPC with our Japanese partners and establish closer

relation between Iran and Japan.

[Question] Just before your departure fron Japan, you net with HITI officials
to ask for Japanese cooperation. Did you attend that nesting with possible
governnent-level negotiations in the future in mind?

[Answer] lil'l‘l officials said that Hitsui is a private business and the Japanese
Goverment camot meddle. But it is a fact that the m1 exercised its influence

in connection with Japan's exports to'the United States and its oil inports. I
asked the MRI to exercise sinilar influence over Hitsui.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] If its new formula proposal is not accepted, Hitaui is reportedly
deternined to go so far as to bring action in the international court in order
to suspend the project and withdraw from it.

[Answer] I have never heard of that. The Hiteui president said that his
company's financial condition does not pernit any further investment and he
does not want to sever Hitui's relations with us because of that. He feel
the same way. we hope that things will not cone to that and we believe
that problels can be solved through negotiations.

COPYRIGHI': Asahi Shin-bun Tokyo nonsha 1981

C80: 6106/27

5
FOR OFFICIAL use onur

_ In r «vunn rum-us I can gm- )011 no
nulnw - in wt Maybe ll WI“ h. pomhle tn
a lit“ uu-k-

C l~ dw Kurdistan lkuxn'ruzk i'urt)‘
of Dr (:ham-mlou a member?

;, \\'t- have a!“ as . ed tho Internal
autommy of Kurdistan within the
lama-wart: a! the national integritydlnn
The KDI’ ha: an autonomy
pm“: whnch It has sultmtttml to Pn-svdent
Barr. Rudy

'.'. Hau- ynu seen it and do you
approx-e of it?

Z We two alrvady taken the mam stepcf
appmnng the pnnciple uf ltuauukhtan
'auunu-my- and we have tame to me and
neat-mu- the dt-uuk

I In that “move. an you plan
ning a federal system for the Islamic
Dana-ratio Republic of Iran?

7 We an- mm tn a temporan mutton.
Tht- u-nmtuent assembly - which will he
vleﬂu‘l lhmuch ﬂee general electoom -
ml! (ltﬁdt Fm musclves. we belteve in a
dt-m-rratu remrm- uhtrh mm the
n:ht.~ n! all mummies and nattonalntn-s
;‘ If you cannot say who are the
number; at the Councﬂ. maybe you
can tell us who cannot he a manbee?
What about the Moms-china?

' Netther the Monarchics not‘hadeh can
accept our programme because they do not
helww in etther of our no main primiplea.
Indt'p-ndenoe and freedom.

I How can you say that the
Mona-thine no not believe in lnde
[u-ndence?

.. luck at the last 75 year! of marchy
m Iran When was mdewulma: then?
'..' “Mﬁmoouldbeamemhero!
the .N'ational Resistance Cot-toil?

.‘ All nattonal demo: mauve
{om-s all real Muslims

I Can you explain President Ban}
Sadr-'9 position and your mm role in
tho Council?

l‘rntdt-nl Rants-w: t~ holding the

temp-war} pn-s'tdt-nty of the sat». and din-s
not belong to any pol-Heal party I am
mm.- for the Cmnnl I am It:
~1-.k-.~mm. and Will tlms up tht- mam»
: 'n-ltl

2. H0" dtt you ”him your mule
Rabat We reﬁne?

; We have a stamp in thne SLIL‘I'SI
ﬁrst. aw had to lured: the atmaphcn' of

5%?
. g?
3.3%
ll?

g2
5%
E
a -.
E
9.3

3.
§

3n

.3
i-
5

:5
3‘31
3

E
E

sweat the ovum-y a he don (my
woblemiatoautaadltmaaticno‘m
understand thmatmtacmlty
0AM‘tyouaﬁ-udthataoutepeople
mhqmmmtmxm
Mtwmdan'm
solution“?
ommmwmum
mWenat-n Nx‘r‘monthantnlnnlf
theh ' epowet’toda.hm
unlltheykaepitmwtﬂw their
gumandtheirmtev?1'he3hahhadan
m’m*°““*m"mz
a M can
sterilitydonothavedupaoplenitlt
Pm OPPICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

MASSIVE DEVELOPED"? ROBLES IN M7101 CITED
Paris AL-"ATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 262 2-8 Oct 81 p 25
[Article: "On the First Anniversary of the War, Iraqi Projects Total 83 Billion"]

[Text] In September, Iraq celebrated the first anniversary of the outbreak of war
with Iran in a special way. while the battles on the front were going on in a
manner that had no precedent for a year, the Iraqi Ministry of Industry and other
departments were signing new contracts to continue carrying out development projects
in the country.

According to this ministry's statistics, Iraq, over the last 12 months, has signed
contracts to carry out a nuber of development projects costing about 1 billion
Iraqi diners (more than $3 billion).

A person studying these projects, and their circumstances and goals, will arrive
at a number of facts and conclusions, among them:

I. The rate of execution of these projects and their preparation and followup have
not declined as a result of the impositions made by the war mentality and ex-
penditures on various military areas. Indeed, they have risen in comparison with
the level of development and investment activity in the country prior to the out-
break of war. Referring to figures, it is clear that total investment spending

in the first half of the current year increased by 118 million Iraqi diners

(more than $350 million) over its level in the corresponding period of the previous
year.

2. These projects are enlarging the infrastructure and directly affect development
factors that have the effect of bolstering the production process in the country,
in the sense that these are not rapid consular projects but are aimed rather at
building a strong economy which can bear the elements of building itself by itself.
He can take many examples from the projects that are being carried out by themselves,
including consturction of a cement plant in the Karbala' area (100 kilometers
southwest of Baghdad) at a cost totalling about $134 million, with an annual pro-
ductive capacity of 1 million tons (which can be raised to 2 million tons);
construction of a plant for fired brick and eternite at a cost of $170 million;

and start of execution of the massive housing project in the north of the country,
whose final costs will come to $559 million and whose first stage costs will come
to $122.7 billion. This stage is under construction. Then there is a project to
build the Baghdad subway system, on which agreementl. been reached, another

8
you WPICIAL 083 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

project to lay out a system of long distance highways totalling about 1,000 kilometers
linking Iraq with Syria, Jordan and Kuwait, a third project to back up electric
capacity in the country, and a fourth to build three telephone centers in the
Outskirts of Baghdad.

3. These massive investment expenditures will make Iraq, after the Kingdom of

Saudi Arabia, the second highest country in 'the Middle East on the list of investment
activity expenditure, and as a consequence qualifies it to realize its aspirations
under the 5-year plan that is being carried out (1981-86) regarding a shift to

a country standing on solid ground within the group of developing countries. With
regard to the growth rate in the country, this plan aims at reaching about 35
percent, which is very ambitious. An index based on much evidence in this sphere
shows that the ration of investment spending to general state expenditure came to
about 70 percent last year, and that the amounts that went for development investment
came to $12 billion last year. The likes of these figures are scarcely seen in

what are categorized as developing countries--not to speak of countries that are
compelled to devote a large portion of their attention to war affairs.

to. Iraq appears, in spite of everything, to be able to sustain its development
plans at their current rate. Statistics show that the volune of its financial
reserves comes to $35 billion. This means that it has a clear ability to spend
for a period of at least 2 years in the worst possible and probable conditions
of production.

5. Returning to the thinking on spending itself, it appears, as a result of a
general theoretical analysis, that Iraq is striving toward activity that transcends
the rapid limits of spending in response to imadiate needs and is venturing into
activity aimed at building a firm productive base that will be sufficsnt by itself
to make the mechanism of the domestic economy run in sound, positive ways.

In the realm of comparison, Iraq appears to be trying to depart from a condition
that has plagued developing countries generally, and specifically oil producing
countries that show a high rate of spending in non-investment areas uhich are not
beneficial in the long run. Another conspicuous point is represented by the fact
that spending on military affairs has not harmed the desire for useful investment
spending.

6. Continuing with the same comparison, it seems, on the other side of the
battlefront, that Iran finds itself mired one way or another in intensified con-
sumption, consumption which for the most part goes to meet that country’s in-
creasing need for food and other basic comedities. This becomes plainly obvious
in reviewing the list of Iran's general expenditures, all at a time when work on
essential structural projects has stopped, or nearly stopped.

It is clear that the reason for that goes beyond the mere drop in Iran's revenues
resulting from the suspension of oil production, followed by its restsnption at a
low level over a long period, increased military expenditures, and continued civil
war, which have led to a paralysis of the sectors. The reason for this constaner
orientation, with no feasible spendim, is represented in particular by the absence
of what in the economic lexicon is known as a plan. The matter is particularly
related to the state of political instability, lack of security and an absence of
clarity in the country's economic future, which has caused it to neglect all long-
range planning.

9

FOR WFICIAL 1183 ONLY
Pm MICIAL USE ONLY

In brief, the Inc-Iran war. which has gone on for a year a of today, has paved
the way for a clearer reading of the resource. of this important oil region end

its potential for future progreu.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 A1 Hatan A1 Arabi

11887
C502 4406/71

10
Pm OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAQ

TARIQ 'AZIZ DISCUSSES RELATIONS HITll FRANCE, FUTURE PROSPECTS

Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic [lo 237, 28 Aug-3 Sep 81 pp 35-39

[Interview with Tariq 'Aziz. “ether of Iraq's Revolutionary Coal-and Council
and Deputy Prime Minister by Halid Abu Dhehr; in Paris: "'l'ari 'Azis Tells
AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI, 'Syrian Troops Must Get Out of Lebanon‘ "1

[Text] "The results of my talks with Hitterand have
been good; France will rebuild the nuclear reactor."
"The scandal of Israeli weapons to Iran proved that
the Arabs who took Iran's side were wrong."

"The Soviet position is better: Syrians are still as
biased as they were, and Libyans promised neutrality."
"Religious movements have a role to play, and they
have their special aspects, but they will fail in govern-
ment because they will divide the Arab nation."

"The Arab Nationalism Movement is stronger despite
setbacks and attacks from the religious right and the
Marxist left.“

Tariq 'Aziz is a member of Iraq's Revolutionary Comand Council and deputy
prime minister. He holds a prominent political, official and intellectual
position in the regime and in the party. In addition, he performed bril-
liantly in the missions he undertook outside Iraq. These missions had
sought to deal with and settle questions and problems of considerable impor-
tance in Iraq's bilateral relations or its national interest.

The talks which the senior Iraqi official held in Paris with President
Hitterand and with senior French officials were spotlighted last week in
the Arab world and throughout the world. MATH AL-‘ARABI took advantage
»of Mr ‘l‘ariq 'Aziz‘s visit to the French capital to conduct this comprehen-
sive interview with him. The interview covered Iraqi-French relations, espe-
cially with regard to nuclear cooperation. and it also covered topical
questions such as the dispute between Iraq and Iran and the Lebanese crisis.

The interview went beyond the traditional framework in which journalists
usually conduct such interviews with Arab officials to cover intellectual
questions as well as hypothetical political questions inasmuch as Inn;

11
FORMALUSEONLY
lﬂilioiiﬂClkL lEﬂECMULY

'Aziz's time allowed. He spoke about the present and the future of the
religious phenomenon in the Arab world and the attacks that the course of
Arab nationalism was being subjected to from the religious right and from
the Marxist left. He tried to respond accurately and candidly to questions
about sensitive and crucial issues, and he promised that the discussion
would be resumed soon in Baghdad.

This interview with Mr Tariq 'Asiz took place at the residence of the
Honorable Hr Nuri isma'il al-Ha'is, Iraq's ambassador in Paris. The inter-
view, which lasted almost 2 hours. took place after the member of the Revo-
lutionary Command Council and the deputy prime minister had concluded his
talks with President Hitterand; with his prime minister. Hr Pierre Mauroy;
and with a number of French ministers among whom were the ministers of
foreign affairs and the minister of defense.

i admit at the outset that the interview took place in a limited period of
time due to the tight schedule of the talks. However, the generosity of Mr
Tariq 'Aziz made it possible for us to expand the interview and to deal
with this large number of questions.

[Question] Hhat are your impressions now that you've visited France and
conducted talks with President Francois Hitterand and other French
officials?

[Answer] Ever since the French Socialist party and President Hitterand
came to power in France, President Saddam ﬂusayn and the leadership in
Iraq have wanted to become acquainted with President Hitterand and the
new leadership in France. This is because we appreciate the importance
of existing relations between the two countries in numerous essential
fields.

Our preference from the very beginning was that this meeting take place
after sufficient time had elapsed so that the new leadership in France
would have been able to find out the facts about France's relations with
other countries. among which are relations with Iraq.

it is normal for any new government and any new president who comes into
office to need some time before beginning to make contacts on the inter-
national scene. Even when the Zionist attack on the nuclear reactor took
place last 7 June. we did not find it necessary to contact France right
away. He preferred to contact France at a time that we thought would be
convenient and that the new French leadership as well found convenient.

On that basis we contacted the new French leaders late last July and told
them that President Saddam Husayn wished to send me to France to meet thin
and to explain to them directly our views of relations between iraq and
France as we saw them since they were established several years ago, and as
we see them at present and in the future. I would also discuss with the new
French leaders some of the new matters [pertaining to] cooperation between
the two countries.

12
FORIOFFKJAI.USI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The French lenders responded promptly to our wishes, and an agreement was
reached to set the date for the time in which the visit took place.

I met almost all the leading French officials during my visit to Paris.
Among those I met were President Hitterand; Prime Minister. Mr Pierre
Hauroy; and the ministers of foreign affairs. defense, planning, scientific
research and technology. foreign trade and education. I also met Mr Pierre
Joxe. president of the Socialist Parliamentary Group. He is one of the
leaders of the Socialist party.

My impression of the visit is that President Hitterand. the prime minister
and all the French officials I met were cordial. They showed that they had
a profound understanding of the nature of existing relations between Iraq
and France. and they understood the necessity of those relations to the
fundamental interests of the two countries. He concurred with them that
that relationship was also consistent with the aspirations of the Iraqi and
Arab people. on the one hand. and with the aspirations of the French
people. on the other. in strengthening the policy of independence.

I assured French officials that if we wanted to summarize the essential
nature of the pOIICy to which Iraq is inclined in building international
relations and in building long-term relations with France, we could do so
in one word: independence. Iraq is extremely intent on its independence.
and it advocates Arab independence most forcefully. Iraq believes that its
cooperation with France in all vital areas strengthens this independence
and also strengthens France's independent course. France's cooperation with
Iraq and with countries that are strongly bent on [maintaining] their
independent course enables France to strengthen its independent course.

I found that French leaders were in agreement with this understanding of
the relationship. and they assured me that they wished to continue rela-
tions with Iraq. I can say that the impression I have of this visit is that
it was a good visit and that it constitutes a new step in the continuing
close relations between us and France.

[Question] As far as the nuclear reactor in particular is concerned. has
an agreement to rebuild the reactor been reached? "111 nuclear cooperation
between the two countries also continue as it had been in the past?

[Answer] As I said. I dealt with relations between Iraq and France in my
talks with French officials. These relations include the field of nuclear
cooperation. French officials affirmed that they were prepared to resume
cooperation in all the fields in which we had been cooperating in the past.
including nuclear cooperation.

I dealt with these matters in a general framework. and I did not go into
the details because this is not the task which President Saddam uusayn
assigned to me. When we agree on the general framework and on the founda-
tions of future relations. our colleagues. the officials in Iraq and the
French officials in question can get together and resume the discussions.
But as far as discussions about a general framework and general principles
are concerned. the meetings and results were satisfactory.

13
lﬂ)!i0lﬂﬂ€1hl.ll§li(ﬂILY
FORIWFFKJAL.USEIONLN

An Agreement To Rebuild the Reactor

[Question] Can we say then that there was agreement to build the reac-
tor and to continue cooperation in the nuclear field?

[Answer] Yes. There was agreement about continued cooperation in the
nuclear field.

[Question] Has there French emphasis during the talks that if nuclear
cooperation between the two countries is resumed, iraq would have to pro-
vide guarantees [and meet] conditions that it would continue its nuclear
activities for peaceful purposes?

[Answer] The French leaders have affirmed that their cooperation with

lraq is not based on the notion of conditions. As an independent country.
we do not accept conditions for dealing with any other country in any field
whatsoever. But when two parties cooperate, each party shares with the
other what each needs and what it thinks is appropriate for the progress of
this cooperation.

when we discussed this subject, there was understanding on both sides.
We understand the French position well. and I discovered that the French
understand the lraqi position.

The way we see things from our perspective is that we cooperated with
France in the nuclear field, and the nature of that cooperation was peace-
ful. He signed several agreements in the past regulating this cooperation,
setting down and defining what the other party would call "guarantees"
it would need so that this program would be operated in a peaceful manner.

As far as i know, and i can affirm this absolutely and positively, ever
since cooperation between lraq and France began and ever since cooperation
between Iraq, other countries and the Commission on Nuclear Energy began,
Iraq has not been charged of a single violation of the agreements it signed
and is abiding by. The French leaders know this.

[Question] There was some talk, for example, about France's intention

to provide [lraq] with a kind of nuclear fuel known as "caramel" which
can only be used in peaceful activities.

[Answer] 1 did not hear this expression at all during my stay in Paris.
As I said. we agreed on the general framework and on the principles. The
technical people will begin their contacts at an appropriate time to look
into how the cooperation will be resumed. They will determine the details.
[Question] When will these technical talks take place?

[Answer] Soon.

[Question] Can you be specific?

FINICIHHCJAJ.USEGINLY
FKHIIJFINCIAI.IISEZ(MVLV

[Answer] We did not agree on a specific date, but this will take place
5000.

[Question] How much time will it take to build the nuclear reactor that
was destroyed?

[Answer] i personally do not know. I do not have a precise idea.

[Question] Are there still bombs which were dropped by the Israelis on
the nuclear establishments that have not exploded?

[Answer] Yes. There are still explosives in the old building or the old
location of the reactor.

[Question] One bomb?

[Answer] 1 don't know how many unexploded bombs there are. but I do know
that there are explosives there and that [the building] is not suitable
for operations.

[Question] [Is it true that] the second and the smaller of the reactors
was not hit?

[Answer] Both reactors are in the same location.

[Question] Does your satisfaction with the results of your talks in the
nuclear field extend to the results of your talks in the field of weapons
also?

[Answer] Yes, we agreed to continue [our] cooperation in the military
licld also.

[Question] Has an agreement reached on new and specific weapons contracts?

[Answer] No. I discussed general lines. Naturally, when there is an agree-
ment in principle on the part of any leadership to resume cooperation,

this means that the competent agencies can pursue this cooperation and sign
the contracts they wish to sign.

[Question] Did your talks deal with the matter of oil?

[Answer] when i met President Hitterand. I told him that France had under-
stood Iraq's wishes and its 1972 decision to nationalize its basic oil
resources. i told him that we greatly appreciated this position which

helped the nationalization process succeed. It was a major historical opera-
tion. I told him that it was from that time that the prospects for the new
relations between lraq and France, which I had described, had begun.

He would like relations between Iraq and France to be special. This entails
that we as well as the French make pledges to [this] friendship.

15
roe omen. us: on“
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢H§LY

l informed French leaders that since they had dealt with our needs with a
spirit of understanding and a positive manner, we would deal with their
needs in the field of oil and in other fields with the same view and spirit.

[Question] Iraqi oil production has declined because of the war. Is France
still receiving the high ratio of Iraqi oil it was receiving before the
war?

[Answer] Iraq is now producing less oil than it was producing before the
war. But in marketing its oil Iraq gives priority to the countries with
which Iraq has obligations. France is one of those countries. Naturally
Iraq is not France's only source of oil; it has other sources. I do not
know what is the difference between France's need [for oil] and what it
gets from Iraq. I do not have detailed figures about the volume of Iraqi
oil sales to France. but the oil that is exported to France is also premium
oil.

[Question] Did your talks deal with the subject of starting a dialogue
and setting up relations between the Arab Socialist Ba'th party and the
ruling Socialist party in France?

[Answer] The nature of the conversation I had with Mr Pierre Joxe was
political, intellectual and cultural. But naturally. our meeting was not
a lengthy one. I agreed with President Hitterand that relations between
the Arab Socialist Ba'th party and the French Socialist party were to be
developed. I expressed this wish. and he was enthusiastic about it.

[Question] Let us go back to the subject of rebuilding the nuclear reac-
tor. Saudi Arabia announced that it was prepared to finance the construc-
tion process. Does Iraq have a specific position regarding this Saudi wish?

[Answer] President Saddam Husayn responded to that at his recent press
conference. You may refer to the text of his statement. The essence of

what he said was that Iraq appreciates Saudi Arabi's wish. but that as

far as we are concerned we have no problem with financing.

[Question] Do you believe that the Saudi offer was an attempt to make
up for the fact that Israeli airplanes had infiltrated Saudi air space
despite the presence of the early warning and observation airplanes, the
AHACS airplanes?

[Answer] I prefer not to go into this subject. We are mindful of our fra-
ternal relations with our Arab brothers. and we do not want to talk about
anything in this area.

[Question] There is an American bid to declare the Middle East area an
area free of nuclear weapons. Egypt and Israel are now supporting this bid.
where does lraq stand on this matter?

[Answer] If the intent of this proposal is to destroy the nuclear weapons
which Israel has and to prevent Israel from producing nuclear weapons in

16
FOI‘OFF“!AI.U§I(NNLY
FORlOFFKJAl.USE(HVLY

the future. we have no objections to stopping the proliferation of nuclear
weapons in the area. Basically, we do not want nuclear weapons to proli-
ferate in the area. Therefore, we signed the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty. and we still believe in non-proliferation.

But if the intent is to cover up the Zionist military nuclear program and
prevent the Arab countries. including Iraq, from continuing their acqui-
sition of nuclear technology, we will resist this plan.

[Question] Israel is saying that it is prepared to accept the proposal pro-
vided that it achieves peace with the Arabs.

[Answer] This is a fallacy. It is Israel or the Zionist entity that is
attacking the Arabs. This is [Israel's] justification for the continuous
Zionist aggression on the Arab nation. An aggressor does not look for
guarantees; it is the attacked that is to look for guarantees.

we Are Asking That Syrian Troops Get Out of Lebanon

[Question] There is another point in the talks that attracts attention.
The joint communique indicated that there was an agreement in opinions
on the question of Lebanon. "hat is the substance of this agreement in
opinion between Iraq and France?

[Answer] We agreed in general on the unity of Lebanon's territory, on

the need for security in Lebanon to prevail and on the need for respect for
Lebanon's sovereignty and its constitutional authorities. We believe in
these points. and 1 found that the French were intent on them.

[Question] In your analysis of the serious events and developments in
Lebanon, what are your thoughts and your views on the future of this Arab
country?

[Answer] I talk about this matter with total candor. There are internal
factors in Lebanon that are causing the dispute. However, experience has
shown that these factors are not the most powerful reasons behind what
Lebanon is suffering from at present.

The strongest reason [behind Lebanon's present difficulties] is foreign
intervention. colonialist intervention. the superpowers. the continuing
Zionist aggressions against Lebanon and the abnormal Syrian presence there.
A situation may develop in which an Arab country may need the support of
another Arab country. even if the nature of that support had to do with
security. I do not refute such a need. and it must be met in the context of
national responsibility.

however. the Syrian presence in Lebanon has become abnormal. Syria's pre-
sence in Lebanon began and continued in an abnormal manner. Excluding,

of course. colonialist and Zionist influences, if the Syrian presence in
Lebanon is handled properly. many matters in Lebanon can be operated in

a better manner. I would think that if Syrian troops were to get out of

1?
IIIICHHHCJAI.USEIMVLY
l1)! GﬂHHCJAI.lEIE(H‘lN

Lebanon, a sound relationship between the Lebanese and the Palestinians can
be established. Such a relationship would be better than the one which
exists at present because the Syrian presence is complicating matters and
giving problems crisis proportions.

i am calling for the ouster of Syrian troops from Lebanon, and not just
because we have a quarrel with the Syrian regime. We had asked the Syrian
regime to get out of Lebanon when we were on good terms with it after the
Joint Arab Action Agreement was signed. He told the Syrian regime that
national interest required that the Syrian army leave Lebanon and that a
suitable solution for Lebanon's problem be looked into. He also told the
Syrian regime that the presence of Syrian troops in Lebanon spoiled these
troops. lt eroded their effectiveness and made them incapable of assuming
their combat responsibilities as an army which is supposed to oppose the
Zionist enemy.

The fact that scores of thousands of Syrians have gone into Lebanon under
the auspices of deterrent forces brings them back to Lebanon as policemen.
i personally overheard President Hafiz al-Asad himself saying, "Yes, our
soldiers in Lebanon have turned into policemen." Regardless of the nature
of its regime and of our differences with that regime, Syria is a confron-
tation state. and its army is supposed to be in the best state of mobili-
zation and readiness for a military confrontation. If members of this army
were to turn into policemen by the tlousands. that shift signifies that
this army has lost its combat ability.

It is then in Syria's interests, from a national perspective, and it is in
the interests of Lebanon and the Palestinian cause that the Syrian position
in Lebanon be rearranged in a manner that would allow Lebanon to be unified
and stable and have the ability to deal with the Palestinian presence [in
its territories] on a proper basis. There is to be a fraternal agreement
between the Palestinians and the Lebanese, and each party is to respect the
other. Such an agreement is to enable the Palestinians in Lebanon to con-
tinue their struggle for their cause.

[Question] With regard to the Iraqi-Iranian struggle, do you believe that
the fact that former Iranian president Abol hasan Bani-Sadr has stepped
down and the facc that the religious establishment is now directly in power
are making it easier or more difficult to reach an agreement between lraq
and Iran?

[Answer] The fact is that to be fair and precise, we would have to say
that the presence of Mr Bani Sadr as president of the Iranian Republic was
not an obstacle toward reaching a settlement in the dispute. Among the
leaders of lran he was the one most willing to look into the opportunities
for peace.

This does not mean that all his opinions and his positions were acceptable
and satisfactory as far as we are concerned. However, the truth must be
told to be fair to the man and to his positions. He was the one most wil-
ling to join the agencies that were looking for opportunities for peace:

FOI<0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

[these were] the delegation of the Islamic Conference, the delegation of
the non-aligned [countries] and Mr Olaf Palma the United Nations' envoy.

No one can say that existing conditions after his removal from office are
more favorable for peace. however. there is a general. logical judgment
that when the government in any country is united. that government is more
capable of producing peace or managing a war.

In an abstract sense this opinion is sound. but who can vouch for the appli-
cation of this opinion in Iran? Many things are happening there in an
illogical fashion. and no one knows the nature of things there now. Is

there a unified government in Iran. and is there a center for decision
making?

The world does not know about these matters, and we too do not know about
them. I would think. and this is speculation, of course. that if there
were a unified government in Iran and if there were anyone capable of ana-
lyzing the situation, of drawing conclusions and finding out the truth
about what is hanpening there and the truth about the military situation,
he would actually be looking now for opportunities for peace with us, not
only out of concern for Iran, but also because what Iraq is asking for

is basically not much.

All that Iraq is asking for is [recognition of] its sovereignty over Shatt
al-‘Arab. This is a historical right that was forcibly taken away from
Iraq in 1975 by the Shah. Iraq is also asking Iran to recognize its sove-
reignty over the territories that have been recognised as Iraqi in all
agreements about which there are no legal problems. however, the Iranians
have continued to occupy these lands. and they did not execute the
agreement.

Iraq also has a national demand. It is asking that the three islands in
the Gulf be restored to Arab sovereignty. These islands, as everybody
knows. were occupied by an armed force with the collusion of the colonian
list power.

If leadership such as that I described were available in Iran. those

leaders would have assumed a peace initiative as soon as possible. and they
would have responded to the attempts that the three aforementioned agencies
made to achieve a peaceful. just and honorable settlement [to the problem].

we have always been affirming that a settlement must be fair and honorable
for both parties because we believe that it is essential that a settlement
be fair and honorable. Iran is Iraq's neighbor. and we do not wish to
create a historical hostility between the two countries for the future.
They attacked us; they threatened our sovereignty and our nation; they
usurped our rights; and we had to respond. This is normal and essential.
But we do not want to have a future. long-term state of hostility between
Iraq and Iran.

On 28 September 1980 in his first speech after battles between the two

19
F0!‘0FFNJAI.USE(N‘lY
FOIIOFFRJAI.USE(NVLY

countries were expanded President Saddam Husayn said that we wanted to
establish good. neighborly and peaceful relations with Iran. These rela-
tions were to be built on mutual respect of both countries' legitimate
interests and on their mutual respect for each other's sovereignty. Presi-
dent Saddam Husayn affirmed that Iraq entertains no ambitions in Iran.

The Injustice of Close Friends

[Question] Some of the Arabs' close friends were unfair to Iraq when the
armed struggle with Iran began. But now after Iranian intentions were
revealed and after the fact that Israel provided arms to Iran was exposed.
have Iraq's close friends corrected their critical position of Iraq and
their support for Iran?

[Answer] Syria's position has not changed at all. Regarding Libya's posi-
tion, we told Mr 'Abd—al-Salam Jalud when he visited Baghdad recently that
normal relations between us and Libya could not be established if Libya
continues to ally itself with Iran against Iraq. The least we can ask for
is that Libya stay neutral in the dispute even though we cannot understand
that an Arab can remain neutral in a dispute between an Arab country and
another country. However, in the context of current Arab reality, we would
accept neutrality.

He sensed that Libyan leaders were inclined to favor this trend. 1 per-
sonally cannot say that the aid is continuing or that it has been suspen-
ded. The Libyans denied that they were giving [Iran] any aid. This is what
they said, and it is their business to confirm or deny this matter.

The other parties that assumed positions against Iraq in its dispute with
Iran have not admitted their error. not to our knowledge. Some of them
may have stopped or toned down their campaigns.

[Question] Are you referring to some of the Palestinian parties?

[Answer] Maybe. Palestinians and non-Palestinians. The scandal surfaced.
we were saying from the beginning that it was Iran that attacked Iraq and
that we were responding to the attack against us. Then we said that the
lranian attack on Iraq was a Zionist plot to undermine Iraq; it was a plot
that primarily benefited Zionism. [Its purpose was] to undermine Iraq and
to distract it away from its national missions. He said that there had to
be behind this aggression an alliance between the regime in Iran or some of
its factions and the Zionist entity. and material facts have confirmed
that. A few months after the war it was confirmed that the Zionist enemy
was supplying lran with weapons or that Iranians were buying weapons from
the Zionist entity.

This is not just information from the press. President Bani-Sadr. Iran's
former president and general commander of the armed forces stated 2 or
3 days ago that Iranians were actually buying weapons from Israel.

Then what are they saying now. those who wronged and accused Iraq? They

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
IVJR OlﬁﬂCJAl.USIZ(NﬂLY

cannot say anything to persuade anyone. The scandal that exposed Iranian-
Zionist cooperation is also their scandal. It signifies that there was
direct or indirect collusion with Zionism against an Arab state which is
supposed to be and is backing what they claim is their desire for libera-
tion and for resisting the Zionist entity.

If we were to assume that there was no collusion, [the cooperation that was
revealed] would be an indication of short-sightedness and of an error in
political thinking. It would mean that those people are actually not
suitable for making evaluations on major national issues and for deter-
mining the proper position on them.

This is the conclusion that one can derive from these positions. If those
who had stood beside Iran against Iraq had dune so on the basis of honest
principles and then discovered their error. the dictates of principle and
honor would have demanded that they criticise themselves and say, "He made
a mistake in analyzing and diagnosing the situation. We are now re-evalua-
ting matters and we are saying that Iraq was the victim of a foreign attack
in which Zionism played at least a part.

But they did not say that. and this means that their position was based
neither on principle nor on honor. The scandal touches those who supported
Iran at Iraq's expense.

[Question] How do you explain this agreement to treat Iraq as an enemy and
to support Iran?

[Answer] My explanation for that is the same as that which I told Presi-
dent Hitterand when I described the nature of relations between Iraq and
France: independence. when one is independent in this world, one has to
pay a very high price. The superpowers do not want to see an independent
and a strong Arab entity develop. It is the followers of the superpowers
who are carrying out the campaign of insults. accusations and conspiracies
on behalf of the superpowers or in conjunction with them.

They thought that Iranian aggression on lraq would weaken Iraq and its
independent policy and that this would force it to look for an interna-
tional cover here or there. The subordinates of the international front
which Iraq would join would then praise it. and Iraq would separate itself
from the subordinates of the other front. However. thank God. we did win
the campaigns and conspiracies [launched against us by] both parties.

[Question] Has the Soviet Union changed the position it assumed when the
armed struggle with Iran broke out?

[Answer] Relations are now better [than they were].

[Question] Does this improvement in relations include sending Soviet
weapons to Iraq?

[Answer] I will only say that relations are better. This means that in
general relations are better than they were in the past.

21
F0! 0i1ﬂ€1Al.USE1MVLY
FORIOFFKJAI.U8£(MULY

Arabism. Islam and the Religious Regime in Iran

[Question] Let us try to shift the discussion to some theoretical issues
since you are the man of thought in the Iraqi Revolution.,

Mr Tariq 'Aziz interrupted me.

[Answer] No, I am one of those who contribute in this area. The man of
thought in the Revolution is President Saddam Husayn.

[Question] Let us begin first with what we can call the religious phenome-
non. Hhat is your explanation of it? Do you believe that in light of what
happened in Iran there is a future for the religious expansion in the Arab
world?

[Answer] Iraq became aware of this phenomenon from the beginning. Presi-
dent Saddam Husayn wrote about it after the party was created in 1968 and
the need emerged to draw up a theory for action, as it is called, so as to
put the principles into practice. The president wrote a book entitled.
"Nazrah fi al-Din wa al-Turath [A View of Religion and Heritage], and the
book dealt with this problem. The president discussed this subject before
the Khomeyni phenomenon emerged in Iran.

We see no conflict between Arab nationalism and Islam. 0n the contrary
there is a special relationship between them. As we see it. the movement

of Arab Nationalism is closely related to Islam as a religion, as [a system
of] values, as a human message and as a message of justice.

[Question] And to Islam as a system of government?

[Answer] No. Let me explain that. This is the difference between our view
and the view held by religious parties and by some of the religious move-
ments such as those that took over power in Iran. These parties and move-
ments want to establish a political, social and judicial system on a purely
religious basis.

This is not how we ee things. We believe in establishing a society that is
national in the context of a single country and ethnic in the context of
the Arab homeland. This society would consider Islam to be its basic way of
life. but it would apply the principles of Islam in the context of the
present age and according to its needs and exigencies.

President Saddam Husayn explained this problem carefully in his book. We
believe that we succeeded in accomplishing this in Iraq: we've built a
national society. with an ethnic Arab identity that gives this status to
Islam.

But consider the Iranian experience, and you will find that it has in fact
failed. Those who took part in it are now saying that this course is not

the course that would realize for them what they believe the Islamic Revo-
lution could realize for them. Such statements are being made by Bani-Sadr,

22
FOI:0IFIC1Al.lEﬂE(ﬂILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by Mas'ud Rajavi. the leader of the Islamic Socialist Hajahedin-e-Khalq
organization, and by many others who took part in bringing about the change
in Iran. Khomeyni and the clergymen were not the only ones who brought
about the change in Iran. All these people took part in it.

In my judgment then the course that the present Iranian leadership is pur—
suing has no future in Iran or In any of the other Islamic countries.

[Question] And the Arab countries as well?

[Answer] Precisely in the Arab countries. For here basically there is

no conflict between Arabism and Islam. In Iran there was a blatant conflict
between the Shah's course and Islam. and there will be a conflict between
any ethnic Persian course and Islam. especially if that course is ethnic
and chauvinistic and not an open. humanitarian and nationalistic course.

An ethnic. chauvinistit. Persian course considers Islam an Arab religion
that was forced on Persian nationals and overthrew the old Persian civiliza-
tion. Islam, however, is the product of Arab culture and its genius. It is
also a divine message that was disseminated. interpreted and put into prac-
tice by Arab leaders. The Koran is [also] in Arabic. All these are factors
that create no conflict between Arabism and Islam. However. if this
delicate problem is not dealt with, it may create a conflict between Islam
and some ethnic tendencies that are racist and chauvinistic and can be
found in some of the Islamic countries.

Therefore. I do not believe that the religious movement in the Arab home-
land has a future in the sense that it can set up a model like the Iranian
model. However. movements that believe in Islam as a way of life can play
a positive role in resisting colonialism. social injustice and dictatorial
regimes. and they may play an effective and a prominent role in Arab,
Islamic society because they concentrate on the principles and teachings of
Islam.

But if these movements wanted to assume power and to impose their standards
on a temporary basis. they will fail in my judgment because they will have
to fall back into sectarianism, as President Saddam Husayn indicated when
he dealt with the problem of religion and heritage. When religious move-
ments fall back into sectarianism. they divide the people.

Thus these movements will not have a unifying nature as did the essential
nature of Islam. Islam unified the Arab nation and then unified a group of
nations that adopted Islam in the context of a single Islamic state with a
single faith.

Now if the way of life of religious parties and movements were to be put
into practice. a retreat into sectarianism will result. Accordingly, this
would lead to division and fragmentation and not to unification. And herein
lies the danger for the Arab homeland which needs someone to unify it;

it does not need someone to split it apart. The fragmentation and division
which the Arab nation is suffering from at the present time is a serious

23
F0!‘0FFNJA1.USE(HVUV
FORiOF1HCJAl.lEHE(MVLY

disease. and all sincere Arabs must struggle to unify [the people in each]
single country and then to unify the Arab nation.

[Question] Is the pitfall of sectarianism the only flaw or shortcoming

of religious movements, or are they suffering from something that is more
significant, namely. the inability to present Islam in a manner that is con-
sistent and congruent with the requirements and the needs of the age?

[Answer] I am not very well informed about all the theoretical works and
programs of religious movements in the Arab homeland in order to be fair.
if I were informed, I would have identified those that were closer to or

more remote from the spirit of the age.

There is also another reason: most of these movements are secret and their
programs are neither proclaimed nor made available in a democratic discus-
sion as the thought and program of the Ba'th party was discussed for many
years. The program of the Ba'th party was known to many people who were
able to discuss it and to determine their positions on it. But if we were
to consider the Iranian experience. we would find that it is very far away
from the spirit of the age.

The National Course ls Stronger despite Setbacks

[Question] The course of nationalism is being subjected to intense attacks
from two sides: from the religious right which is accusing it of conflic-
ting with lslam; and from the Marxist left which is stating that nationa-
lism as a stage has come to an end. what do you think of these attacks? Is
it true that nationalism was a stage that ended with the end of Nasirism.
for example. or rather with the death of Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir?

[Answer] The movement of Arab Nationalism did not in fact begin with
'Abd—al—Nasir; it began scores of years before him. However. under the
leadership of 'Abd-al-Nasir Arab nationalism gained additional power and
momentum. There are justifications for Arab nationalism in Arab history and
in Arab society. and these justifications did not disappear with the depar-
ture of 'Abd-al-Nasir. They are still the more dominant factors in Arab
reality.

what the communists in particular are saying or what those who claim to be
Marxists are saying-l do not wish to call them Harxists because they are
not exactly that-—proves [their] inability to understand the Arab reality
and to analyze it scientifically and correctly. Accordingly. it proves
ftheir] inability to offer the programs that would actually lead to the
realization of a revolution that is more mature and more complete in the
Arab homeland.

You can look at the Arab homeland and find that these movements are losing
their popular support and alienating themselves from the masses every day.
This is an indication of the fact that their logic and their view of Arab
nationalism are erroneous and far from the truth.

2h
ltﬂlCHﬁﬂCJA1.USE(M‘LY
FOR(NHHCJAL.USEi0NLY

The case is the same with religious movements. If they deal with Arab
nationalism in this manner, they will fail. If they deal with Arab nationa-
lism in the manner al-Ba'th party dealt with it. they will have the posi-
tive role that I referred to a little while ago. In other words. they are
not to place themselves in a position of conflict with the movement of Arab
nationalism. They can have their own character in the context of the
general national struggle for liberation. for unity and for the establish-
ment of social justice. I. this case they can play a positive role.

The movement of Arab nationalism has been hit by setbacks. but these set-
backs did not cause the movement to lose the revolutionary. progressive.
humanistic and socialist content of its justifications.

We believe that the experiment we are setting up in Iraq constitutes an
accomplishment irum which the Arab masses can benefit. This means that the
program of the Arab revolutionary movement, which has a humanistic. progres-
sive and socialist content is a program that can be put into practice.

it is a program that can survive. prosper and flourish. Thus what succeeds
in iraq on that level can succeed in other Arab countries.

it may be said that there are other regimes in the Arab homeland, and they
are existing. But there is a difference between an existing regime and

a regime whose program is successful. that is, a regime whose political,
social. economic, intellectual and cultural program is successful. progres-
sive and prospering. This kind of regime is a model that can be applied
elsewhere, but an existing regime that has not yet fallen is a model that
is not likely to live and. accordingly, not likely to be applied elsewhere.
Therefore. we are optimistic about the future of the movement of Arab
nationalism.

The purpose of the siege we are suffering now is to strangle this experi-
ment and to destroy these notions that the movement of Arab nationalism
entertains. However. the success of this experiment and Iraq's success in
resisting the Iranian aggression whose nature was very complex because it
tried to give its aggression an Islamic character, means that this program
succeeded and is therelore capable of being replicated.

He Practiced Self-Criticism in Iraq and in the Party

[Question] You referred to setbacks suffered by the movement of Arab
nationalism. Hhat is the responsibility of regimes and national movements
in bringing about these setbacks? For example. what was the responsibility
of the Ba'th party and the responsibility of Nasirism in that?

[Answer] In my judgment this is a subject that requires lengthy investiga-
tion. I am not trying to dodge the question here, but I will try to deal
with it briefly. I emphasize that brevity in such cases may not be consis-
tent with the accuracy that is required. However, I will give specific
indications, and we can later discuss this matter more exhaustively.

Analysts say that all setbacks suffered by revolutionary movements and

25
momaatussonu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regimes have two factors: a subjective factor and an objective factor.

the subjective factor refers to the responsibility that falls on the shoul-
ders of the party, if a party is being referred to. or the regime. if the
regime is being referred to. The objective factor includes many ingre-
dients: economic and social conditions. interventions by foreign powers,
colonialist conspiracies. and so on.

The subjective and objective factors [that played a part in] the setbacks
that befell the revolutionary movement and the movement of Arab nationalism
are indistinguishable. Anyone who blames imperialism, Zionism and reac-
tionaries only for the setbacks is quite mistaken. In fact, he would be
covering up the truth. Anyone who says that the reason for the setback is a
subjective factor would not be providing a comprehensive analysis.

However, in our experience in the Ba'th party we used to give the subjec-
tive factor greater importance than the objective factor. This was because
we assumed that colonialism. Zionism and reactionaries were the enemies

of the movement of Arab nationalism. Therefore, the forces of the revolu-
tion had to take precautions against such a conspiracy and they were not to
blame the enemies of the movement at the outset for failure.

We say quite frankly, for example, that the principal reason for the
failure of our 1963 experience was the subjective factor. we were respon-
sible for the failure. This does not mean that there was no conspiracy,
because there was a vigorous conspiracy. However. we are the ones to assume
responsibility [for the failure] because we failed to put our program into
practice in the manner that was called for.

What confirms this is the fact that we, the Ba'th party in Iraq. had
another revolutionary experiment 5 years later in the same country and
under the same objective circumstances. Colonialism, Zionism and reac-
tionary forces were hostile. and the Arab climate was less favorable than
it was in 1963. but we succeeded because the subjective factor was avai-
lable. That is. we had the maturity and the ability to deal with the objec-
tive circumstances wisely. deliberately and patiently. He had the histori-
cal leadership which we did not have in the previous period.

Bnieily. this is my view of matters, and what applies to us applies to
“the: experiences.

Copyright: 1981 AI-Hatan Al-‘Arebi

8392
C50: 6404/0

FORlOFFHJAl.USE(IVLY
FOR¢0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

ISRAEL

HEBRON MAYOR RAPS INCREASED ISRAELI SETTLEMENT
JN051730 London REUTER in English 1630 GMT 5 Nov Bl

[By Patrick Massey]

[Excerpts] Hebron, Heat Bank, 5 Nov (neuter)--The acting mayor of uebron today
accused Israeli occupation authorities of plotting to crests a corridor of Jewish
settlements through the heart of this teeming Arab city.

"They want to link up their settlement in the middle of Hebron with Qiryat Arba'
(the major Jewish settlement on the edge of the town) and drive out Arab families
in this part," said acting Mayor Hustafa 'Abd al-Nabi Natshah.

In an interview with Reuters, Hr al-Nstshah said the Arab population had been angered
by the recent advance of creeping Jewish settlement in Bsbron.

Last Saturday a Jewish settler was stabbed and slightly wounded in lebron's Casbeh
marketplace, an attack which brought vigorous Israeli reprisals.

After arresting two teenagers on suspicion of the attack, Israeli forces bundled
their families out of their homes and blew the houses up. An apartment belonging to
the family of a third youth suspected of complicity was sealed up with concrete.

"This has left about 35 people homeless just as the winter is setting in," Mr
al-Natshah said.

The latest step in the takeover of buildings in Hebron came when Israeli soldiers
moved into the Usama Ibn Hurhith school after the stabbing on Saturday and declared

it closed indefinitely.

"The 700 pupils now have to go to school three kilometers (two miles) away," Hr
al-Natshah said. "I protested to the military governor but was told the school was
needed so that Israeli soldiers could protect Jewish settlers passing by in the area.

"we are afraid that eventually the soldiers will leave and the school will be handed
over to Jewish civilians," he added.

"we believe the plan is to increase settlement along a path that takes in the tomb
of Abraham and extends to Qiryat Arba'," Hr al-Natshah said.

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some Arab houses close to the settlesents have been ordered closed for security
reasons. Mr al-Natshsh said. "All the time pressure on housing is growing worse
and we are not permitted to build fresh homes outside the city boundaries. He

fear that more and more people say be forced to leave Bebron.
"when I complained to the military governor be told se that ny complaints had only

stirred up anger asong Arab residents. He told he not to protest any more," the
acting mayor added.

CSO: 6400/57

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIDFFKJAl.USE(NNLY

SAUDI ARABIA

SAUDIS REPORTEDLY OMITTED 1‘0 DIWIC WNHION 0F USSR
PH150929 London TﬂE OBSERVER in English 15 Nov 81 p 10
[By Helga Graham]

[Text] Saudi Arabia has emitted itself to the diplomatic recognition of the
Soviet Union. say highly placed Arab sources.

An announcement may come about the time of the Arab emit conference, due to take
place in Morocco this month.

Saudi Arabia has had no diplomatic relations with Hoacow since the Soviet mission
was expelled in 1936. So far Kuwait is the only Arab state in the Gulf which has
relations with Russia.

The strategy being prepared calla for the reintegration of the Soviet Union in the
Middle East quest for a peace settlement, from which it was excluded when al-Sadat

vent to Jerusalem in November 1977.

The hoped-for advantage of such a formla would be to reconcile the radical Arab
states of the 'steadfastness front'--Iraq, Syria, Algeria. Libya and South Yemen-

to the eight-point Saudi peace project.

The Saudi initiative has found differing degrees of favour with the Europeans, the
moderate Arabs and the Americans and has been rejected by Isarel. The Arab radicals
have remained aloof and suspicious.

The assassination of President al-Sadat changed the situation. The circumstances

of his death made the moderates look uneasily at their own public opinion and seeming-
ly lent weight to the radicals' argunent that Arabs can never expect an acceptable
solution of the Palestinian question from the Americans.

The diplomatic breakthrough came finally when Yaair 'Arafat. the Palestinian leader,
and an Algerian delegation recently visited Jiddah.

'Arafat had just been to Moscow and the Algerian delegation'had passed through Iraq.
Syria and Libya. Prince Saud, the Saudi foreign minister, made a public statement

to the effect that it was nautral for the Russians to play a role in the Middle
Bast—-privately, the Saudi diplomatic recognition of the Soviet Union was agreed on.

COPYRIGHT: The Observer Ltd 1981

C80: 41.00/63

29
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

AHMED METIRI'S PERSONALITY. CAREER, MPBCTS DISCIBSBD
Paris JBINB AFRIQUE in French No 1087, s Nov 81 pp 35-36, 38

[Article by Souhayr Belhassen: "Ahmad heetiri, or the Apprenticeship of the
Opposition"]

[Text] In opposition to Bourguibe. but a nodsrate opposition
despite his “bravado" and controversial statements, a prins
candidate for the l Wer legislative elections. he is the
best known anong those who oppose the regi-a. It is a regine
which he knows particularly well since he was for a long tine
one of its most distinguished representatives. A lawyer, son
of the old Tunisian bourgeoisie which gave hill his sense of
discipline. nore given to solitude then singling in a crowd,
honest. rather quiet. suspicious, idealistic and asbitioue,
reserved and eodeat to the point of concealment. how has
Ahned Hestiri Isnaged to beoone a key figure to the public

of his country and the Maghreb? whatever the result of the
elections, whether Hestiri hilself is elected or he succeeds
only in having a half dozen of his people elected. as can be
expected, his participation distinguishes these first pluralist
Tunisian elections. and. perhaps, what will happen afterward.

The bar is a fine support for climbing the ladder to power. A lawyer by pro-
fession, Ahnsd Hestiri has taken advantage of it. But he is not alone in this.
Thus, we must look elsewhere for the unique factors in his political career,
perhaps the following: he has several tines been a Bourguibs sinister, several
tines massador; he has experienced a nuaber of lean periods on the outside
(the latest still continuing) and, in fact, has spent almst as my years in
power as in opposition.

His political comings and goings, his outbursts, his eloquent. or intended to
be eloquent. silences. his cool attitude. his large glasses. his frail and
slightly hollowed physique. his conservative clothes, and his massuning private
life are all well-known in Tunisia. But beyond that?

In particular, not everyone knows that this 56-year-old nan cones fro- a well-
to-do family, and that though he has been in the public eye for a very long tine,

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he hinself has been hearing discussion of Tunisian politics for even longer.
Uhile he was still in the cradle. his grandfather Ila-suds Hestiri was one of
the founders of the Destour Party, the first nationalist Tmisian party (which
becane the Neo-Destour Party. then the PSD, Destourian Socialist Party). Thus.
bourgeois grandfather ad father. and, like alnost all bourgeois. instilled
with solid convictions: a penny is a penny. hardship and discipline are the
priasry strength of arnies and young non of good fanilies. Travel by streetcar
if you wish. but always arrive on tin. And above all—above all—"nintain
your rank."

Faced with these imperatives. Ahmed did not disappoint. At least in the beginning.
An excellent student at the Rue Tribunal school in Tunis. where he began his
studies, and later at Sadiki college, still in Tunis. where he continued then.

One of his colleagues was Taieb Hehiri, who would also becone a ainister. The

two young nen found they had col-son interests. They went out on the town

together and had long earnest discussions in which they probably reshaped

Tunisia. the Hadlreb, and the world. A big friendship.

Scandal

Outbreak of world War II. By that tine. the old Destour Party had long ago -
brc'ten up, and Beurguiba had fomded in 1936 the Neo-Deatour Party. Eben the
(a. n troops, who had entered Tunisia after the Ansrican landing in Morocco

-: Algeria in 1942, left the country after a few nonths. and the Allies arrived
on their heels. hestiri and lbhiri were no longer wearing short trousers. The
Destour Party was a thing of the past. It was the Neo-Destour Party that
attracted then. A scandal in the two fanilies. which renained faithful to the
old party, and which regarded the new as one which, by dialectical transforna-
tion, had becone that of the "soufris" or hooligans. Scandalous. but a big
event for the two future politicians. For the first tine they were noticed.
Bourguiba hinself observed: "To have turned Hestiri into a Neo-Destourian—
that was something."

After Carnot. law studies in Paris. Despite the distance. Ahmad Nestiri closely
followed the activities of the suprene fighter. With other yomg Tmisians,

he prepared a bulletin on the evolution of the Neo-Destour Party. In 1969.
Bourguiba was able to leave Cairo, where he had been forced to seek exile be-
cause of the neasures of the French colonial authorities. and return to his
country. Hestiri finished his studies and returned to Tmis. where he joined
the bar and began activity for the powerful Tmis federation of the Neo-Destour
Party--the second inportant event which drew attention to hil.

It was at this tine that he first net Bourguiba, a neeting he would never forget.
Bourguiba conquered his by his approach to political action. his argunents,
his analytical ability. and the enthusiasa be conveyed.

During this sane period. there was another who fascinated Aimed Hestiri: the
great labor leader Parhat Ilached. self-tauﬂxt. and. said Hestiri. "capable of

writing articles in' first draft without alterations. excellent, and not needing
any re-editing." As we know, ﬂached was assassinated in 1952 by the Red land.
the terrorist organization of the French protectorate extremists.

31
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

At the time. Hestiri himself was also in the gunsights of the organization.
from which he received written threats. he was accused of "giving orders to
the 'fellaghs'.” and he was held "responsible for any assassination against

the French or pro-French Tunisians." Sought by the police, he was obliged for
the first time to change his appearance by changing his clothes. But more than
his raincoat or his soft cap. it was his taciturn nature, his secretive tendency.
and his innate suspicion which enabled him to elude traps. And while the re-
pression intensified; the activities of the Tunisian nationalists. and simul-
taneously of the French military operations. increased: and the prison camps
multiplied, Meatiri case and went, transnitted orders. and organised the group
of lawyers assigned to defend his arrested compatriots.

Promotion

In 1954 the first Tunisian government was finally formed which was responsible
for negotiating with France the agreements on internal autonomy. Tahsr Ben
Ammar, who headed the government, enlisted the cooperation of Ahmed Hestiri,
who thus made his official entry into political life. No longer a scandal.
His reputation grew, but his task was not easy, because he had to supervise in
effect the expenses of the Tunisian delegation in Paris, which Hestiri felt
were too high and didn't hesitate to say so. It was a surprise, therefore.
when in the year of independence. 1956. Bourguiba appointed his minister of
‘justice. The supreme fighter made the smiling remark: "I govern with the
people who like me least, not with my friends."

Actually, this fine promotion (Hestiri was only 31) could have been simply

the result of the head of state's desire to reassure the Tunisian bourgeoisie,
who were cautious about him, by assigning to one of their own the task of
applying the revolutionary measures which he himself had decided on concerning
justice. Indeed, Hestiri drew general attention by a two-fold and considerable
reform: elimination of the courts inherited from the French protectorate

(easy to do) and elimination of the Tunisian religious courts (much more diffi-
cult to achieve). Bourguiba also used his minister of justice to put through
his famous Code on the Personal S-atus of Women, which abolished repudiation,
banned polygamy. and instituted divorce. Finally. Bourguiba used hestiri as
intermediary when he delivered Tunisia from a crushing land system by eliminating
the "habous" property.

Diplomat

Because he was managing all these reforms, Hestiri caused some grinding of
teeth, even in his own family. But today he owes it to his family that his
name is associated with changes which mark the inauguration in history of
modern Tunisia.

 

(1)Any Tunisian landowner could convert his property to "habous" property by
declaring that at the conclusion of his line it wOuld pernsnently go to
religious causes designated by him. When such a "habous" did not have a
specific designation indicated by the deceased. the law provided that it
go to the poor and orphans. A "habous" property could. of course, not be
sold.

32
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the next few years, up to 1966, Hestiri experienced what one may call

a kind of desert crossing, despite the very important role he played during
the period. Being somwhat doctrinaire, impulsive, and lacking in flexibility,
while he was minister of finance after his term in justice. he had difficult
relations with Hedi Nouira, governor of the Central Bank (future prime minister).
and Bahi Ladgham, the prime minister. in effect, at the time (the title did
not yet exist). Alienated from the government. there happened to him what
happens in Tunisia (particularly) to a political figure whom you don't want to
get rid of completely but when you feel must be moved away: you make him a
diplomat. Ahmed Hestiri served as ambassador successively in Moscow. Cairo,
and Bl-Djazair, which were difficult embassies at the time. In particular.

it was not easy to be the first ambassador to Moscow of pro-American Tunisia
when Bourguiba decided, lo years after independence. to establish the first ties
with the East. The situation was no less delicate in Cairo and at Bl-Djasair,
where the supporters of Salah Ben Youssef. longtime opponent of the Tunisian
head of state, held sway. Even inside Tunisia, Bourguibists like Hohamed
Haemoudi criticized Bourguiba's "personal power": how should one proceed in
defending Bourguibism under these conditions? Hestiri did well. "Rithout
brilliance. but with dignity," one of his colleagues described it.

Exclusion

The period of the sixties, during which Ahmed Mtiri lived most of the time
in the East or the Maghreb. did not really shake his pro-Western views, but
did significantly modify his specifically Bourguibist attitudes. Certainly
today he attaches more importance to the neutralists. to Africa. and the Arab
countries ("our natural allies"). And he readily reaffirm that to him the 1‘
building of the Maghreb is a historical inevitability. One of his friends
consented as follows on these convictions: "Ahmed is not one of those people
who systematically search out the new. but every 10 years he arrives at a cer-
tainty which he will always hold."

In 1966, return to "business." Hestiri became minister of defense, gave the
Tunisian army status. brought young people into its ranks, established the
military academy, developed the concept of popular defense in Tunisia, and
earned the high esteem of the troops and officers. He is still esteemed today.
even by young soldiers who did not know him.

But again, conflict with Bourguibanthis time with Ben Salah in the middle.
Ahmed Ben Salah had comitted Tunisia to the collectivist experiment. hatiri
did not agree with this, at least in one respect. and he said so at the first
opportunity: the new Tunisian economic policy should have been preceded by a
genuinely democratic debate. he added that such a debate had not been possible
because the country's institutions were functioning poorly. Hestiri was not
against strong rule, but he set the condition that it should be freely accepted.
Thus, in January 1968 he resigned from the government and was expelled from the
party. "They demanded a letter of apologies." he revealed a few months later.
"I refused. It was a matter of dignity." Dignity: a key work in hatiri's
language. To him dignity was the motive for all participation. ”Politics,"

he said. "th not go to excess in the name of an ideology or a meesianism of
whatever variety, or it becomes demegogy."

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1970, 2 years after the furor of January 1968, Hestiri was seated again in
a ministerial chair, this time interior. But he had accepted it only on the
promise that there would be a program of liberalization of the state and party
structures. A year later this liberalization was still marking time. which was
obviously not to Hestiri's liking. Then, a new dissgreennt between Hestiri
and Prime Minister Nouirs about the appointment of a hid: official. Boorguiba
decides: they will do without Hestiri, definitely too hard to live with.
Dismissed from his duties. the former sinister and former massador goes over
to the opposition for good.

Movement

But it was several years before this opposition took the form of a genuine
movement and acquired its political label: EDS, Socialist Democratic Movement
(1976-1977). Mestiri. more than ever, knew what he wanted. He and 16 party
members put this in a declaration, which received considerable publicity. In
it, he did not stop with criticism of the single party. lie asserted that there
should be a general amesty for all political detainees, that the opposition
must be able to speak, that Destourian socialism should be given real content,
and that the nation's independence must be protected, a sincere choice be made
for Arabization, and the Arabic-Islamic personality of the country be preserved.
The movement's successes have been significant. ‘l‘unisians are indebted to it
for estalbiahing the League of lhnsn Rights in Tmisia, a Coincil of Public
Liberties. and the first opposition paper, All-RAY, published at the beginning

of 1978. In the spring of the same year, one year after its founding, the HDS
split in two. Hestiri kept the initials and presented on 13 June of that year
the statutes of a party which was not recognized. The other wing of the movement
kept the paper Ail-RAY, but from 1980 on Hestiri's 1413 has had its own paper
AL-HUS‘I‘AQBAL ("1118 mm"). Following the events of Cafes (end of January 1980)
and the change in head of governnnt. Heatiri supported the government initia-
tives to encourage the "overture" [opening] whid: Bourguiba mood on 10
April 1981 during the latest PSD congress.

Prudence

In regard to the socialist democrats, the mnisian Government snowed a relative
tolerance, thereby putting Hestiri in a delicate position, since he did not
want his movement to be used to help make possible the evolution of an authori-
tarian regime toward a restrained democracy. Liberty is not divisible, he felt.
The time spent away from government has not profoundly changed his. but he has
sharpened his caution. when will be his next bubshell?

In this ‘l‘misia where half-tones are preferred to the violence of harsh colors.
Hestiri's explosive statements cause surprise like a storm in a suer sky,

and anyone who does not know the man is likely to picture him as a loud person-
slity, a ”big mouth." rather than as he really is with the traits of reserve.
modesty, and almost withdrawal. His tastes drew his to solitude and reading.
his simplicity and honesty have become legendary. In this country where the
bourgeoisie is characterized by greed. he is a simple lodger in a home in the
Horse, or living in the fine residence of his in-lsws at Redes.

3!:

FOR nPPTl‘TAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One may wonder how this lawyer. whose practice is not the lost flourishing,

has become a kind of exemplary figure for a large proportion of the Tunisian
public. Doubtless because at a time when the entire political class of the
country was in submission, he was taking his risks. And because he knew how to
persevere. An idealist. Hestiri? Or ambitious? Those who know him believe
the qulaities are inseparable: he is without doubt both.

 

COPYRIGRT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

9920
C30: h519/b0

35
ms OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

men

FIRST PLURAIJSTIC ELECTIONS EVALUATED

Paris JEEUNE mum in french 1101088, 11 lcv 81 pp 29-31
[Article by Frencoie Poli: “me De-ocretic Hechinery']

['nert" 'Igsvethsnplurelien. Iopsnedﬂaedoortctheyeerzoootothee. My
cenno sew that they hsd to weit for the death of thet fescist, Who." ‘lhe
chief of etete ende this ststensnt in privete long before the results of the 1 lo-
venber parliamentary elections were mood (MIR imam Nos 1086 end 1087).

"The president," those close to his sey, ”sew neither Hr Heetiri [IDS (Bocielist
Democratic Hovenent)], hr Kernel [P02 (‘mnisien Goa-mist Peru!” nor Hr Del Hedi
m: [m n (Populer Unity Hovensnt 11)] on television. no use estisfied with
following the whole compels: on the redic. Be is encrnouslq concerned over ell
this."

mm the official results of this vote today, Mr mgnibs hes good reeson to
feel perfectly reassured, if he ever did worry shoot it: s totel victory for the
National Front (PSD [Deetourien Socialist Perty]-UG'I'I' mum General Mention
of Labor] coeliticn). Not s single opposition csndids wee elected. A success
that had long since been forecest - but not such s big one. W1

01‘ course, the ‘mnioien leeder'e personality end pest eccount for pert of it. Of
course, the Pan has for 25 yeere hed oceplete freedoe to line up the country. 01‘
course, the non cendidetes on the notions]. Front tickets induced s lot of people
to vote, pertimnerly in the fewer Dampeen sections of the cspitel where the PSI)
hes a very week foothold. Of course, the crest njcd'iw of Misiens ere feoing
many problem — including the elensntery one of swivel — end we cen nnderstend
why they more often then not hesitetsd to run the risk of giving their votes to
other men then those already in office end on when they depend st slnost e11 levels
in their locel districts or villages. ill the more so hecsuse these non m the
representetives of s governnent which —- end no one disputes the fect — hes
done a lot for the country.

National Front cendidetee did not deprive themselves of the opportunity to euphe-
size the fact throughout the entire election W. We don't hsve to neke
prooiees to you. Just look st whet hes been coco-pushed." For the 13 dews prior
to the vote they toured the country in ell directions, woundeted public end pri-
vate meetings at a truly setounding pecs. 'lhey telked, telked... telked, even in
the very depths of certain working districts where no one hsd ever expressed Iii-self
before they did.

36
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the head of the ticket in I‘Ionutir (Banguiba's birthplace), Prime Minister
Mohamed Hzali shows up as the recordholder in this mathon. on Friday, 30 October,
alone, he held three meetings, granted interviews and Mt“ two textile mills,
a tourist coupler, a yogurt factory, a toy factory, a school, a plastics factory,

at brichrard and a hatchery. He was seen stmding on a table, microphone in bud,
already haranguing the crowd, while at his feet ministers, advisers and aesbers

of his bodyguard, who everywhere had a hard tine keeping up with him, could hardly
catch their breath.

Is all this, which in fact led us to anticipate a big Isjority for the Natimal
Pront's red ballots, enough to explain such a collapse on the part of its opponents?
There can he no doubt as to the answer: no.

Aside from the different pressures on voters reported by the opposition and the
incidents that studded the election caspaioi (m imam: No 1037). it sen
difficult to admit that during the election everything went off in accordance with
the wishes expressed by Mr Hzali. In front of all the polling places I entered,
and even inside them, I could attest to the presence -— and host oft-i muscled at
that — of P80 aenbers.

But the accusations leveled by the opposition are both more precise and sore seriws.
"The electoral law and the law itself were violated. Polling place officials were
replaced by others after the voting Md alreaw begun, Polling booths were aisaing
here and there (in the Gates. district in particular). Sons voters were allowed to
vote several times. more were threats."

Soae 40 foreign newspapenen followed the course of the elections in Ennis. 01
Sunday, 1 November, election day, the three opposition parties (ems, PC! and WP 11)
invited then to a joint press conference to read to th. a letter full, as Mr
Hestiri specified, an official in charge of a polling place who had in essence
written the following:

"me delegate [subprei‘ect] from Jebel Jelloud, a suburb of tunic, got 150 polling—
place heads free his district together to advise men that, when the tins to count
votes arrived, PSI) members would create incidents which would pernit the official
in charge of the polling place, who mder the law is responsible for the policing
of the polling room, to have the room muted. his in order to be able to at
their leisure substitute red National Pmt ballots for opposition ballots."

Other grievances of opposition members: We were unable to actually seat car dele-
gateswhoareenpoweredbythe lawtocheokon thsvoting. mthedayoi‘thevote
they demanded of then an unexpected authorisation, not ded for by the Electoral
Code, one issued at the headquarters of the delegation subprefeotatre]. int docu-
mt was only issued, when it was, after a long wait. the northern and southern
suburbs of Me the polling places were in operation the whole naming without

any opposition representatives.“

For all thesereasons thaws, PCTandllJPIIasofnocnon1lloved>erdecidcdto
withdraw their observers 'in order to leave the gevemaent with mu responsibility
for the voting," A hasty decision, it would seen, which at am rate permitted
Ministry of Interior Dries Guiga to reply tint very day ﬂint “the Mt of
the field by the opposition seems very such like a ameuver ainsd at charging the
few votes it feared it would obtain to pretuded irregularities.“

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the foreign observer who has closely followed these elections, it tow appears
to be obvious that, while election campus: inoidmts have here and there hem
exaggerated by sons opposition members (in what country are election We coo-

seems partictuarlyhardtobelieve. 'Hhodo menu-rm- "'nteyerenﬂnz
m of us.” Tue sentences wshear today in Mic.

Before the National Pratt victory, were not these elections about which, after
apparent indifference at the outset, people finally succeeded in really getting
excited, first of all rather s victory for the reune'e tough policy, bots: {or its
hostility toward Hr Hzali's attempted democratization: experiment? his is the
question countless 'mnisians are asking themselves, Meier‘s who went to retain

the hope that the democratic whines-y will in spite of everything continue to
function.

COPYRIGHT: Jamie Afrlqus GRUPJIA 1981

11,466
080: 4519/ 43

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rm (3?!an USE ONLY

mm m REPUBLIC

mucus DQIBSTIC, roams" arm-nova nrvnmm mm
'AL-UA‘I'AN AL- 'msr' in San'a'
Paris AL-HA‘EAN AL-‘AMBI in Arabic No 2103 9-15 Oct 81 pp 45-46

[Article by Ahmed Habit: "Yemen Caught Between the Ila-er of Aden and the
Anvil of Gulf Cooperation"]

[Text] Parallel to the Gulf Cooperation Council, and facing the Libyan-BthiOpian-
Adeni alliance, North Yemen is looking for a foreign policy that is balanced and
open to the East and Heat both. AL-UA‘EAR AL-‘Ml's emissary to San'e' spent
several days trying to determine the course of Yemen's delicate, tentative moves
between the heme: of Aden and the anvil of Gulf cooperation. Ila brought back a
group of impressions and a conversation with the premier of Yemen.

"From Yemen come surprises"--and this time the surprise took place right at 0900
hours in the morning of 26 September, as the military reviewing grmnds in San'a'
were thronged with thousands of Yemenis who had cone to observe their armed forces
parading before the cot-lander general of the forces and president, Col 'Ali
'Abdallah Salih, and unusual movement appeared in the distance-military vehicles
advancing toward the main stand, surrounded by dozens of soldiers, from one of
which descended Lt Col Abu Bakr Yunus, who headed for the stand to take his place
close. to the president.

It was a surprise to many people.

This incident could be a key to understanding the events that are now taking place
in North Yemen. Col al-Qadhdhafi directed the nest vile accusations against the
current regime in San'a' during his latest visit to South Yeaen in the month of
August, and he did not hesitate to say, in al-Dali', a South Yemeni town lyim on
the North Yemeni border, that he was “responsible for all the acts of sabotage that
occur in the Yemen Arab Republic." In a few weeks'we then proceeded to send

'Ali ‘Abdallah Selih, the president of ﬂorth Yemen, a letter of apology for the
words that had escaped from him and stressed his readiness to attend the 26
September celebrations in San's'. In both cases the Yemeni officials kept their
calm about al-Qadhdhafi's initiatives, the aggressive and apologetic ones, and
told the colonel that he would be welcomed at any time. The Libyan president
decided not to attend and sent Abu Bakr Yunus, who, in turn, did not wish to
remain in San'a' for more than a night, during which he met President Salih and
repeated what his president has asserted in his letter, "apologising for the attack

on San'a'," pointing out that the Aden-Tripoli-Addis Ababa treaty was not aimed at
San'a'.

39
ron orncm. ass out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A high-level Yemeni official stressed to AL-HA‘l'AN AL-‘ARABI that the Yemeni leaders
received the Libyan official coolly and recited to him a description of the basic
outlines of North Yemeni policy at the present time, which is focused on "noninter-
ference in the affairs of others and a corresponding rejection of interference in
our domestic and foreign affairs." The Yemeni leadership expressed the hope to

the Libyan official that the Libyans would refrain from interfering on the affairs
of Yemen, north or south and would let the Yenenis resolve their problem themselves.
The relationship between San'a' and Men is of such a special nature that no one

but the two of them can fathom its complexities.

Every Yemeni official stresses these basic lines of the policy cf the current regime
in Yemen to every visitor to San'a', whoever he may be. The Yemeni leadership
considers that this policy is the sole solution to all the foreign or domestic
dangers surrounding Yemen and that North Yemen is the only country in the Arabian
Peninsula or the gulf that is not linked by treaties or regional blocs with any
other country. To its north and east are the six Gulf Cooperation Council
countries--Saudi Arabia, the Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain and the Sultanate
of Omar-and to its south is its twin sister, South Yemen, which becmae linked by
alliance with Libya and Ethiopia recently. Although the Gulf Cooperation Council
is the body closest to North Yemeni political orientations, and in spite of all
that has been said on the possibility that Yemen might join this cauncil. it

has been decided that San'e' is still far from belonging to it, out of its own
desire or because of a lack of enthusiasm on the part of the council members.

The Yemen Arab Republic is the only country in the Arabian Peninsula and the

Gulf that has more or less equal relations with East and West. In San'a' are
embassies of the Soviet Union, the United States, the Soviet Union, China and most
eastern and western countries. It receives aid from all these countries together;
wherever you go in the territory of Yemen, you will see a paved road graced with

a sign bearing the name of the country that built it--"a gift frcm its people to the
friendly people of Yemen." China has built a road, as have the Soviet Union, Nest
Germany, and so forth. There are many schools, hospitals and factories European
and Arab countries offered “as a gift to the friendly people of Yemen."

We can also sense this tendency in the policy of arming the Yemeni army. For a few
years the leaders there have been turning toward diversifying sources of arms,
whereas those used to be almost 100 percent Soviet. “this is a big development.
People who are in the know about Yemeni military affairs say that since the
revolution took place in 1962 and indeed before that, Yemen relied on the Soviet
Union for its arms, and now it has started to import arms from the United States
and France. In the latest military display, M16 and Sukhoi aircraft plied the skies
of San'a' alongside American F-S planes, while American tanks rolled behind Soviet
tanks and French-manufactured armored vehicles! Naturally such suns require
foreign trainers and experts, and they are actually there.

we see the same tendencies in the Arab context. The Yemeni leaders have managed so
far to establish balanced relatiOns with all Arab countriesuemcept Egypt, of
course. Relations with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia are now in their quietest state
(we would not say their best state), and the same is true vis-s-vis the Gulf
states. With regard to the "perseverance and steadfastness" countries relations
with them are normal. There remains the last neighbor, the fraternal one, in
words, deeds and history, South Yemen. Here we see that discussions on union are
going on "with the objective of realizing the dream of all Yemenis of attaining
union between the two segments of the single nation."

ho
roe MICIAL USE ONLY
FOR WFICIAL USE ONLY

What Domestically?

Domesticslly, it appears that the current Yemeni leadership has made important
strides in breaking down the symbols and signs of the local Yemeni social and
political situation. For hundreds of years Yemen was governed by the system of
tribes and clans, or the imamate, causing it to live in a medieval backwardness
through the first half of the 20th century. This had the effect of causing violent
social and political jolts when a change as great as the one of 26 September 1962
occurred. There then occurred the civil war, with foreign support, exploiting

the tribal and clan structure in order to inflame domestic disputes. Now the
current regime is trying to overcome these disputes by encouraging a climate of
political liberalization among the various influential political and social forces
ranging from the leaders of the tribes with their great influence to the new
growing social forces. that is, the politicized intellectuals. In the wake of the
revolution, with the expansion of education and fellowships, groups of educated
young people who political orientations range from far right to far left have

come into being. These new political forces managed to reach agreement on a
minimal alliance and in 1976 formed what is called ”the Democratic National Front."

Compromises Solutions

In another area, the current Yemeni leadership has had to face the issues of develop-
ment and progress and provide work for millions of citizens. Yemen, with a popula-
tion of 10 million according to the latest census, is one of the poorest Arab
countries in tenms of natural resources, which has driven many people to emigration,
of which Yemen's neighbor Saudi Arabia has the main share, with 1 million Yemeni
emigrants working and living in the kingdom. However, emigration has never been the
best solution for any people in the world. In San'a' they will tell you "Where
have we come now since the days of the imam?" They are proud that they have
electricity, sanitary water, paved streets, schools, hospitals, and modern means of
communifetion. true, but it is also true that development brings special problems
and issues with it. The people of Yemen, who were satisfied with the simplest
ingredients of life in the time of the imam, today have aspirations of varying
quality and quantity, now that 19 years have elapsed since the elimination of that
extremely backward regime. Thus the need arises of coping in a practical, effective
way with unlimited aspirations and limited resources. Perhaps these internal
realities can lead us to understand the keys or dimensions of the current leader-
ship's political orientations, which are aimed at avoiding domestic and foreign
threats, prompting them to choose compromise solutions in the domestic and foreign
contexts. hermetically, they are striving for "reconciliation" among the various
political and social forces. and the government is new active in discussin a
"charter" which the political forces are agreeing on as a practical political guide
to the future. Once agreement is given to the character, elections will be held

to choose the first parliament in the history of Yemen. This will take the place

of the advisory. or consultative, council that exists now. That is supposed to
happen in the next few months.

A number of questions remain:

will these "tension-easing" measures in the domestic context help solve the domestic
"Yemeni problem" and bring about a climate of political and social stability that
Yemen has not witnessed for a long time, both before and after the revolution?

bl
Pal orrrcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Or will the current political leadership, represented by the president, 'Ali
'Abdallah Salih, and his prime minister, 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, succeed in an
area where former leaders have not succeeded for 19 years since the revolution,
starting with Marshall ‘Abdsllah al-Sallal, Yemen's first president following the
successful revolution. passing through el-Qadi al-Iryani and al-namdi, and ending
with President al-chashmi, who was killed, like his predecessor al-aaadi, in obscure
circumstances?

Then, to what extent will the current Yemeni leadership be able to stick to non-
alignment between east and west? Hill the Soviet Union or the Americans let it
receive aid of every form and stripe without ultimately making it pay the price,
especially since Yemen enjoys an important strategic position at the entryway to the
Red Sea. is the neighbor of the oilwells in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, end
is truly considered to be the rear entrance to the Gulf? We might add: Is it
reasonable to assume that the concentrated Soviet presence in Yemen, represented

by a concentrated military and economic aid authority and experts in various fields
spread out among the vllages and towns of Yemen from north to scuth, is just a
coincidence, a gift whose only aim is the satisfaction of the friendly people of
Yemen?

What is said about the Soviet Union can be said about the American presence, the
Chinese presence and German activity, eastern and western alike, not to mention
insistent penetration by all the countries of western and Eastern Europe.

The question, or issue, imposes itself once again: Will the current leaders of
this Yemen, in this condition, be able to persist in their neutrality and benefit
from everyone's expertise without being presented a bill of accounts in the end?

These and other questions were put before the current prime minister of Yemen, Dr
'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani; he responded frankly and placed the dots on many letters.

Al-Sallal's Return
Paris AL-wArAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 263 9-15 Oct 81 p 46

[Text] After the la years he spent outside his country, mostly in Egypt, Marshal
'Abdnllah al-Sallal, the first president of the Yemen Arab Republic following the
successful 26 September Revolution which did away with the imamate regime in North
Yemen. has come back to San'a'. Al-Sallal’s return has come about in response to
an appeal made recently by the current president of Yemen, Col 'Ali 'Abdallsh

Salih. to the two former presidents of Yemen, al—Sellsl and sl-Qadi 'Ahd-al-Rshmsn
al-Iryani, who has been living in Syria since his dismissal from the government in
a move the army made, under the command of Lt Col Ibrahim Randi (the late president)
on 13 June, known as the June Corrective Movement. Yemeni sources have confirmed
to AL-HAIAN AL-‘ARABI that sl-Oadi el-Iryeni has responded to the Yemeni president's
appeal and that his return to San'a' is expected in the next few days.

This political step has raised many predictions among people who understand the
inside story of Yemeni political affairs. The two former Yemeni presidents are
considered historic in Yemen. 'Abdallah el-Sallal was the first president, from
26 September, that is, the successful revolution, to 5 November 1967, the day the
political current rose up against him under thectmmnnd of al-Qadi 'Abd-al-Rahman

al-Iryani and managed to remove him from pjrer, and he left San'a' for Cairo,
2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe Ol’l’ICIAI. US! ONLY

continuing to reside there until his recent return to Yemen. Al-Qadi, in his
turn, remained in power from that date until 13 June 1976; he is a personality
who has played an important role in the domestic political context of Yemen, its
northern and southern segments both.

The questions that are now being raised on the Yemeni state are: “by did

President Sslih choose this time specifically to offer the former two presidents

an invitation to return? Does this step mean a political relaxation in the context
of the numerous political powers nad currents that the Yemeni stage is teeming with,
especially since the Yemeni regime is preparing at this stage to choose the first
parliament in the modern history of Yemen?

On this subject Dr 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, the current prime minister, responded,
"The 26 September revolution truly appreciates everyone who played a part in it and
recognizes his good works in serving the people. Therefore President 'Ali 'Abdallsh
Salih's appeal has been a concrete step in this context. Our brothers al-Sallal

and al-Irysni are two Yemeni citizens who have the right to return to their country
at any time, and what applies to them applies to any Yemeni citizen living abroad
who wishes to return to his homeland. Yemen is open to its children."

In response to a question from AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI on the political significance

of this step, he said, "There is no specific political significance. If you mean
the 'political activity' of either of the two former presidents, we will welcome
any political effort they may have been making in the service of the people, but

I believe that both have grown old and would prefer to live the rest of their lives
in peace on the nation's territory."

Interview With Prime Minister
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 21.3, 9-15 Oct 81, p #7

[Text] Dr 'Abd-al-Ksrim al-Iryani, prime minister of the Yemen Arab Republic,

is a Yemeni personality well knwon for his Arab nationalist inclinations. Alongside
that, he is one of the most famous economists in Yemen. This interview with him
covered many questions related to Yemen's domestic and foreign situation in the
context of the international variables the Arabian Peninsula area is going through
at the current time.

I asked Dr al-Iryani,

"Many political observers differ ovar domestic and foreign Yemeni political orien-
tations at the current time. Foremost among them is the process of opening the
door wide to various forms of foreign a'.d, from East and Heat. Don't you consider
that this 'opening up' will have the effect of influencing Yemen's freedom of
national decisionmaking in the near future?"

[Answer] I do not think so at all. We are an independent sovereign country ruled
by a national regime arising from the heart of Yemeni soil and flowing into it.
Our opening up to various cOuntries does not mean that we are neglecting our
country's independence. We have not given any country that offers us aid any
concessions whatever on Our territory, military bases in our midst, or facilities.
Likewise we do not belong to any alliance or regional or international treaty.

In spite of that, let me assure you that our country is linked to everyone by firm
friendly relations based on a reciprocity of interests and benefits, especially
since the current Yemeni political leadership's thinking springs from Arab

1:3
roe orricmt. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nationalist and Islamic notions. Above and beyond that, our policies and our
relations with Arab countries are based on acceptance of the principle of a
multiplicity of ideas within the Arab world, even though we do not share some of
our brothers' ideas. Thus you can see that we have good relations with all Arab
countries. here I can give you an example: a short time ago a conference of
Arab ministers of justice was held in San'a' and not a single Arab minister failed
to attend and take part in it. Don't you agree with me that that is something
that occurs rarely now in various Arab conferences held on various levels?

[Question] But don't you consider that this concentrated foreign presence on
the territory of Yemen, in the form of various projects, is something that raises
questions?

[Answer] It is something, rather, that calls for appreciation and wonderment, and
thanks and gratitude to these countries which have come to Yemen, offering the

hand of aid and helping to save the country from its uncertain progress and back-
wardness. Yemen is a country poor in resources that needs to give help to everyone
in order to make up for the long centuries of backwardness it has gone through. In
order to develop and to make up for what we missed in the context of the imanate
rule. we have found that the best solution available is for us to open up political-
ly to everyone, while totally retaining the freedom to make political decisions in
our country. Therefore this approach-arises from a basic principle of Yemeni
policy, which is positive neutrality toward this opening up that we see everywhere
on the territory of Yemen.

[Question] "hat do you mean by that?

[Answer] To explain what I mean, let me give you examples in the form of projects
that have been varried out in Yemen via foreign aid:

The San'a' airport: the Soviets started to build it, and it was completed at the
hands of the west Germans. The Ta'izs-San'a' road was built by the Soviets, the
alvHafraq-Ta'izz road was started by the Americans and completed by the Kuwaiti
Development Fund, the al-Jadidah [sicl-Jiaan road was financed in full by the King-
dom of Saudi Arabia, and there are other projects. That will show you the size and
type of massive project in which many countries of the world have taken part.

Dr al-Iryani went on, laughing,

"I am not exaggeradng when I say that Yemen represents a United'Nations of develop-
ment, and I believe that Yemeni experience in this field is unique of its kind
for all developing countries."

Able To Defend

[Question] But don't you believe that the day will come when every country will
demand a price or something in exchange for the aid it has offered to Yemen?

[Answer] I do not believe that that will happen. The countries that have helped

us known that we are a poor country and need aid. Aid is recognized in all corners
of the world. In any eVent, let me stress once again that Yemen is able at all
times to defend its interests and its national soil against any foreign interference
in its affairs. hh

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] You are the only country in the Arabian hninsula that has not joined
the Gulf Cooperation Council or the Aden-EthiOpia-Libys alliance. "hat are the
reasons for this "Yemeni phenomenon?" Can the fact that you have not joined such
alliances be explained by specific goals?

[Answer] At the outset, we here in Yemen stress the Arab countries' right to work
within the context of the Arab League Charter. The Gulf Cooperation Council is an
experiment which is taking place among a number of Arab countries within this
framework. Therefore we have no opposition to it. The Arab League Charter stipu-
lates that any Arab country, whatever it may be, has the right to be incorporated
into another Arab country for the sake of achieving a federation or unity between
themselves. Because we adhere to this charter, we bless the establishment of any
union of any kind between two Arab countries. President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih was
the first Arab president to send a telegram of greetings to the Syrian and Libyan
presidents when unity between the two countries was declared.

[Question] But aren't you afraid of being in a kind of 'isolation' in facing
certain alliances?

[Answer] We do not believe that any regional alliance whatever in the area will
influence our platform of independence and neutrality.

[Question] It has been said that you have striven on more than one occasion to join
the Gulf Cooperation Council. However, these efforts did not meet with success.

[Answer] Everything that has been said in this regard is mere rumor that has been
spread around by the papers and has no basis of truth.

[Question] why don't you join the Gulf Cooperation Council?

[Answer] why should we join? Our relations with all the countries in the council
are good. The establishment of this council has not affected these relations in
any form whatever. They are very high level relations and we are totally satisfied
with them. "hat concerns us is the essence, not the form. I mean the form of the
relationship. whether it takes the guise of a federation, a council, or something
else.

Concerning Yemeni-Libyan Relations

[Question] Did Lt Col Abu Bakr Yunus' visit to San'a' and [his] attendance at the
26 September celebrations, help restore relations between Yemen and Libya to a
natural state?

[Answer] We did not start [matters] by attacking Libya or its president and
policies; Col al-Qadhdhsfi did. when he made his speech in al-Dali' attacking us,
creating a certain degree of confusion and ambivalence in our midst. However, I
can assert that with the contacts made between the two fraternal countries the
disputes haVe been eliminated and with the appearance of Abu Bakr Yunus we consider
the matter ended. we are not picking quarrels with any Arab or foreign country

whatever.

hS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] have you discussed the issue of financial aid to Yemen with the Libyan
emissary, or was some aid offered?

After laughing uproariously, the prime minister replied,
"Sir, if he was offering aid, he would not basically have come to San'a'!

[Question] Many questions are revolving about the anticipated union betwun the
two segments of the single nation of Yemen. Perhaps die most conspicuous of these
is, how can a union be established betwun two countries each of. which has a
political, social and economic system that radically differs from the other?

[Answer] That is an important question indeed. Hhile I understand the motives
behind this question, I must stress, or concentrate on, a very important point
in this regard, which is that what joins the northern segment of Yemen to its
southern segment is much greater than anything that separates the' two. We are a
single people and a single territory historically, geographically, and in terms
of civilization. Before these facts all other obstacles, whatever they might be,
dissolve and disappear. The motive force within our people toward the attaimsnt
of unity is more powerful than anything else in every Yemeni. from the north of
the country and the south. In spite of that, no political leadership that exists
in the north or the south of Yemen can ignore these deep Yemeni feelings and the
deep-rooted desire within the spirit of every Yemeni citizen.

where have the plans for union gone?
[Question] So why the delay in attaining this great objective?

[Answer] There is no delay. Agreement to union has been made in a broad manner

by the Yemeni leaders in the north and the south. All that remains is the fact that
we desire to establish a union 0n strong, firm foundations. Thus joint union
comittees, political, constitutional, economic and educational committees and so
on, have been formed by the two segments. These connittees are on the verge of
completing their final tauches on a constitution for the union state. It will hold
its last meeting next December.

He went on, "Meetings between the two segments of Yemen on various levels are almost
constant. There is an agreement which stipulates in principle that the two Yemeni
presidents should meet to review the issues of Yemeni unity. The last meeting

was in June 1980 and the meeting that took place recently between the two
presidents in San'a' was extremely important, since they agreed that the unity
comittees should complete their activities. A new cosmittee has been formed to
review what the various cosmittees have achieved, and it will prepare a report on
its activity which will be presented to the two presidents in November, that is,

on the occasion of the southern segment's independence day celebration.

[Question] What broad outlines of the constitution have been agreed on so far?

[Answer] The constitution of the state of union embraces the notion of Arabhood
and Islam, that is. national Arab policy and Islamic belief.

h6
son (11'1an use ONLY
Fa WFICIAL 083 ONLY

[Question] Do you believe that the Yemeni leaders in the south will give agreement
to this constitution?

[Answer] First, the constitutional comittee that approved these outlines in the
constitution includes the two ministers of justice ﬁrm the two ssgssnts, in addi-
tion to legal experts and consultants from the north and the south. Second, the
constitution will he presented to the whole Yeueni people and they will hove the
last word. The political leaders in the two sepents will have to comply with the
judgment of the people.

COPYRIGIlI; 1981 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

11887
CSO: 4404/71

14?
um 0":an us: out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

YAR REBELS CBASEPIRE--Aden, 26 Nov «my-m South Yeah-backed National Deno-
cratic Front (EDP), which has been waging a guerrilla war in lorth fem. has agreed
to a ceasefire starting on Thursday, 1'01? sources said here today. The agreement was
reached yesterday in Kuwait in talks between North Yeleni President 'Ali 'Abdalleh
Salih and theleader of the Aden-based rm. Sultan Ahnd 'Ihar, they aaid. Preaident
Salih also let his South Yeaeni counterpart, 'Ali llaair HM, under the auspices
of the enir of Kuwait. Sheykh Jabir al-Ahaad al-Sabah. during a one-day visit on their
way to tonorrow'a Arab sunnit in Morocco. Relatim between aoderate North Yen and
its Harriet neighbour have been attained by political and ideological differences.
The source aid the ceaaefire. effective at noon (0900 GMT) on 1hursday, was the
third this year. 'Ihe leftist guerrillas. seeking to overthrow the North Yemen Go-
vernaent, have been fighting the any in four central and southern provinces. The
two sides accused each other of violating a reconciliation agreeaent reached in Jan-
uary last year, which included a ceasefire and forution of a coalition government

to be followed by general elections. There was no consent free the North Yemen Go-
vernnent on the reported ceasefire. [Text] [M61839 London m in anglieh 1822
cm 21. Nov 81]

cso: MOO/67 “D

be
won OFFICIAL use ONLY