FOR Ol-‘l-‘IFIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/1.0206
22 Decembsr 1981

Translation

PROCEDURAL QUESTIONS OF SETTING HEALTH SAFETY STANDARDS

FOR ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATIONS

Ed. by

BM. Savin

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

\

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hoxds or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of due 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10206
22 December 1981

PROCEDURAL QUESTIONS OF SETTING HEALTH SAFETY STANDARDS
FOR ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATIONS

Moscow MBTODOLOGICBESKIYB VOPROSY GIGIYBNICBBShOGO NORHIROVBNIYA

ELBgTEgghGNITNYKB IZLUCBBNIY RADIOCHASTONOGO DIAPAZONA in Russian 1979
PP ‘

[Collected papers edited by 3.x. Savin, Order of the Red Banner of
Labor Scientific Research Institute for Labor Health Safety and Occu-

Egggonsl Diseases of the USSR Academy of Hedical Sciences, Moscow,

Couteurs

motattm eeeesee-eeeeeeesoeoeeeseeeeooeoseeooseoesees.aeeoeeoeeaeeeseoeoev 1

Foreword eeeaseeeeoeeeeseeeeessooeeeoeoeeseeoeaeeeeeeeeeoosseeeosooeeeeoosoe 1

The Problea of Setting Health Safety Standards for Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Radiationa at the Present Stage .......................... 7

The Health Safety Substantiation of Approaches to Setting Standards for

Radio “v3. eeeeeeeeooeeeseeOoeeeosseeeeeooeeeeooOeseeseaeoseseeseeesseeeo 25

Methods of Study and the Evaluation of Experiaental Data in Setting
Health Safety Standards for Radio Eldesione .............................. 35

Methods and Criteria for Evaluating the Results of Studies on Volunteers
in Resolving Questions of Setting Health Safety Standards ................ 63

The Tasks and Place of Clinical Research in Setting Health Safety
Standards for Electra-agnetic Radio Frequency Elissione .................. 50

Information on the Addresses to the Seainar ................................ 56

Methods of Study and Evaluation Criteria for the Biological Effect
of Electrical Fields at the Industrial Power Frequency ................... 68

- a - [I - USSR - C POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Text] Annotation

The collection is primarily intended for scientific workers (physicians. biologists,
biophysicists, engineers) engaged in research in the field of nonionizing radia-
tions, in particular. those involved with the development of health safety stand-
ards for radio frequency electromagnetic emdssions. Along with the history of
the field, also treated in the collection is the significance of the problem of
setting health safety standards at the present stage of the scientific and engin-
eering revolution; differences in approaches to the evaluation of biological
effects are analyzed and procedural approaches to setting health safety standards
for radio waves are also substantiated, where these approaches are based on con-
cepts of the threshold nature of the harmful impact of a factor. Considerable
attention is devoted to the treatment of experimental, clinical-physiological and

public health ("industrial") study data and arguments concerning their signif-
icance in substantiating health safety standards.

The materials contained in the collection encompass a bread group of procedural
issues and will undoubtedly be of definite interest to persons engaged in setting
standards for other unfavorable environmental factors, as well as for instructors

in health safety specialty departments and public health physicians and industrial
pathologists.

Editorial Staff: K.V.Hikonova and T.P.Gombarg

Foreword_

"hen solving any scientic problem, questions of methodology, as is well known,

are of primary importance. Just as a thoroughly thought out theory illuminates
the path of a scientific search. a refined procedure assures the success of any
experimental and theoretical investigation. In this regard. the problem of the

FIN!(IHﬂ(1AI.USE¢0NlY
ﬁOI!0l11C1AI.USI§CHVLY

biological effect of nonionizing electromagnetic radiations is no exception.

Moreover, by virtue of the complexity of the interpretation of various biological,
biophysical and physical laws, which govern the final result of an exposure, these
questions take on special importance within the framework of the indicated problem.

magnetic radiations (EH1) [EHR] at radio frequencies. Reports presented to the
All-Union Seminar on "Procedural Questions of Setting Health Safety Standards for
Nonionizing Radiations" (Moscow, 1977) were the basis for the collection.

At the present time, considerable phenomenological material has been accumulated

on the biological effect of radio waves. The organs, tissues, and systems which
are most sensitive to certain wavelengths have been ascertained. The clinical pic-
ture of disorders and lesions which occur in people systematically exposed to high
levels of microwave radiations has been described sufficiently completely. Nonthe-
less, it is impossible not to note that up until recently, research on the problem
was conducted primarily with an eye towards accumulating individual facts. The
theoretical and procedural aspects of the problem were inadequately developed.

It is specifically this which has to a considerable extent determined the occurrence
of two fundamentally differing approaches to setting standards for electromagnetic
radio frequency radiations, in particular. the substantiation of the ultimate
permissible levels of microwave irradiation.

In the majority of western European nations and the 0.8., health safety standards
are set by working from the concept of a purely thermal mechanism for the action
of microwaves, basing the work in this case on the thresholds of damage to so-
called critical organs - organs having the lowest level of vascularization and the
greatest sensitivity to a temperature elevation (the crystalline lens of the eye,
the cornea, testicles, etc.). The values of the ultimate permissible irradiation
levels are calculated on the basis of simple thermodynamic computations. It is

of absorbing in the form of radiative energy without a continuous rise in body
temperature. In extrapolating for the entire body surface, this amounts to from
0.1 to l K". Taking into acrount the indicated values, the maximum permissible
level of energy flux density is set equal to 10.000 uU/cm2 for any time interval
with a duration of six minutes or more.

In contrast to the majority of foreign countries, domestic public health safety
standards are based on concepts of the specific "nonthermal" effect of this kind
of radiation. Despite the fact that the starting concept for setting these stan-
dards is shared by the absolute majority of Soviet researchers, in the question of
which shifts in the status of physiological functions of an organism can be
treated as an indicator of the harmful effect threshold of radio radiations, the
opinions of the researchers diverge. Some authors feel that any reactions of the

FOI¢HHHIIAI.UEE(INLY
FOIiOFFMJAl.USE(ﬂVLY

organism which occur as a response to the action of radio emissions can serve as
such an indicator, while others suppose that only reactions of health safety
significance are the indicator for the harmful effect threshold of radiations.

A considerable portion of the health safety standards in force in the USSR at the
present time was developed more than twenty years ago, when the biological effect
of radio waves had just started to be studied. while the principles of setting
health safety standards for a factor were extremely poorly developed. The existing
standards are in need of substantial corrections and addenda. Undoubtedly. the
successful resolution of the problem of making existing standards more precise and
incorporating corrections in them is possible only on the basis of the development
of a unified procedural approach to the evaluation of the impact of a factor.

In recent years, especially in the field of labor health safety. serious research
has been done on the development of the theoretical principles of making the
environment a healthy one. One of the leading principles of the theory of the
maximum permissible levels for the action of various factors in the environment is
the concept of the effective threshold for the appropriate criteria of harmfulness.

As applied to problems of setting standards for radio frequency radiations, the
resolution of the issue concerning the evaluation of the importance of the data of
special laboratories. clinical physiology and so-called industrial studies is
likewise of substantial importance. Numerous public health specialists and indus-
trial pathologists are extremely critical of the possibility of setting the maxi-
mum permissible level for radio frequency, expecially microwave radiations, based
or the data obtained from studies performed on persons exposed to radiations under
industrial conditions, where there can be a successive exposure to various electro-
magnetic field intensities or even a combination of them with other factors.
Industrial studies do not usually allow for a sufficiently precise accounting for
the intensity, duration, conditions and other special features of the irradiation,
which are of greatest interest fro. the viewpoint of the problems to be solved.

In the literature, attention has already repeatly been devoted to the necessity of
an exceptionally careful approach to the utilisation of the results of these kinds
of studies. Moreover, it is impossible not to note that over the course of a num-
ber of years. there has been a trend towards exaggerating their significance. and
it is specifically this which has undoubtedly exerted a substantial influence on
the specific values of the maximum permissible level of radio frequency radiations.

A detailed treatment of all of the questions enumerated above is given in the first
paper of the collection "The Problem of Setting Health Safety Standards for
Electromagnetic Radio Frequency Radiations at the Present Stage" (B.H. Savin).

The inadequate state of development of procedural approaches to the health safety
evaluation of a factor and the principles of setting the aaximum permissible
levels is the reason not only for the extremely sharp differences in specific
values of the maximum permissible level adopted in various nations, but also for
the lack of a logical relationship between public health safety standards set in
the USSR for persons professionally exposed to a given factor. as well as the
population. It is specifically these questions which are treated in the second
paper "The Public Health Safety Substantiation of Approaches to Setting Radio
Emissions Standards" (K.V. Nikonova and 3.“. Savin). Approaches to establishing
the maximum permissible levels which standardize exposure parameters are also

- 3 -

FOIROIIICIAI.IEIBCHQLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.US€|NNLY

analyzed in it. as well as the requirements placed on health safety studies;
questions of the biological activity of exposures with various parameters are
also treated as well as the selection of health safety margin factors. the extra-
polation of experimental data as applied to man and approaches to setting maximum
permissible exposures for various irradiation categories.

By working from the acknowledgement of the leading role of experimental studies
in substantiating the maximum permissible levels. it is extremely important to
resolve the question of study methods and evaluation criteria for experimental
data. The paper of A.G. Subbota and B.A. Chukhlovin is devoted to just this
question, in which the considerable personal research experience of the authors
is generalized.

Since setting the harmful effect threshold is related to the determination of
those exposure parameters for which there is a trend towards a replacement of
purely adaptive processes by processes characterized by stress of compensatory
functions, the question of evaluation criteria for ascertained changes takes on
extremely great significance. The postulate advanced by the authors concerning
the ”imperfection" of the so-called analytical (the definition of the authors)
principle of comparing indicators before and after exposure is to a well-known
degree open to question. The latter, as is well known. is widely used in the
study of the most diverse environmental factors. It turns out that an important
role should also be set aside for this evaluation tecnique in the case of radio
frequency electromagnetic radiations. Along with this, considering the poorly
pronounced biological activity of a factor. it is impossible not to admit as
substantiated the recomendation of the authors as regards the use of functional
loads, which make it possible to more successfully ascertain hidden changes
which occur. Original approaches to the evaluation of the harmfulness of a fac-
tor are treated in the paper, which provides for the study of the impact of
electromagnetic radiations on animals which are conditioned beforehand to another
factor or which suffer from some kind of illness or artificial breakdown in
regulator mechanisms (the synthetic principle).

The paper by a group of authors (T.V. Xalyad, V.H. Nikitin and H.V. Shepelev) is
of undoubted interest from the viewpoint of substantiating the significance of
various research methods used in setting health safety standards for a factor;
the paper is devoted to an analysis of the requirements placed on the performance
of physiological studies under industrial conditions, as well as in the laboratory
on volunteers. A large set of methods was tested by the authors, at times
extremely complex ones, the most informative of which can be selected and recom-
mended for more wide scale application. As the main criterion in the evaluation
of the results of studies on people. it is proposed that the criterion of func-
tional accumulation be employed. Considering the importance of cumulative
processes. the use of the given indicator is enticing to be sure. Nontheleas,

if one works from the concepts developed by the authors in accordance with which
accumulation is understood to be any changes in the level of functioning of
physiological systems. then the indicated proposal raises a definite kind of
objection. It turns out that the rearrangement of a level of functioning in
general cannot be e1uated with accumulation. A rearrangement can be of an adapt-
ive nature and directed towards the equalization of external effects. since the
development of cumulative processes is evidence of the initial stage of disorders

- 4 -

ETHICNHWCIAI.USEGM‘LY
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

and that the organism is not coping with the load falling on it. From this point

of view, the possibility of using such an indicator as accumulation in studies on
volunteers is a cause for doubt.

The question of levels of functioning of the physiological systems of an organism
requires a special effort at greater precision. ﬂow is s new level of functioning
to be understood? Any changes in the indicators being studied or which have

definite attributes (quantitative or qualitative), which distinguish them from
the preceding ones?

Everything that has been said attests to the necessity of further developing the
question of evaluation criteria for the results of physiological studies performed
on people.

As has already been indicated above, clinical studies are of great importance for
more precisely specifying the maximum permissible irradiation level. The priority
as regards the detailed investigation of clinical manifestations of radio wave
exposures. predominantly in the microwave band, undoubtedly belongs to Soviet
authors. It is shown that the most frequent clinical forms of disorders are:
vegetative dystonia, and as a special case, neurocirculator dystonie with diverse
disorders of central and/or peripheral hemodynamics: neurasthenic and astheno-
neurotic syndromes; various degrees of the extent to which vegetative-vascular
paroxysns are pronounced, etc. However, more or less satisfactory data on the
exposure levels to which these manifestations are related have been lacking up

to the present time. Moreover, the majority of researchers in the 0.8. and a
number of western European nations deny the possibility of unfavorable conse-
quences from electromagnetic radiations in the case of exposure to nonthermal
intensities.

The paper of v.c. Artamonava and A.Ye. Vernel' is devoted to the problem of
clinical studies in the light of solving questions of setting health safety
standards. For the purpose of making the clinical manifestations of electro-
magnetic radiation phenomena more objective and studying the immediate and
remote consequences of exposure to EHR, it is expedient to perform studies in
accordance with specially developed programs. In this case. considerable atten-
tion should be devoted to the relationship between various changes in the health
status of man with irradiation levels. The results of epidemiological studies
are of special importance.

Research in subsequent years should lead to the attaining of a greater mutual
understanding among scientists working in the problem area and to the elimination
of substantial differences both in the treatment of the clinical changes and in
the irradiation levels permitted at the present time by the standards of various
countries.

In accordance with the wishes of the seminar participants, the remarks of its
participants in discussions of the reports, as well as in the overall concluding
discussion. have been reflected in the collection (the review paper by I.P.
Sokolova and Ye.K. Lebed'). It turns out that the interested reader will become
faniliar with the opinion of a number of leading specialists in the problem area
concerning the individual questions which were touched on.

- 5 -

FOI!0FFKJAI.USE(HNLY
FOR‘OFFICIAL.USII€IVLY

Also included in the collection in somewhat abbreviated form is a report devoted
to methods of study and evaluation criteria for the biological impact of elec-
trical fields at the industrial power frequency (B.H. Savin, H.G. Shandsla, K.V.
Nikonova and Yu.A. Horosov), presented to the Soviet-American symposium on ultra-
high voltage electrical power transmission (Tashkent, 1978). An attempt was made
in the report based on an analysis of existing data to reveal the reasons for the
contradictory nature of opinions of Soviet and foreign authors on the question of
the biological effect of a factor and procedural questions of performing experi-
mental studies on animals were discussed; the question of interpreting the results
obtained and approaches to setting standards for electrical fields at the indus-
trial power frequency for various categories of persons is also treated.

The authors hope that the papers contained in the collection will promote the
working out of a single concept of the setting of health safety standards for
radio frequency electromagnetic emissions and will gratefully accept all critical
remarks and proposals related to the questions under study. They will all be
taken into account in compiling the procedural handbook which is planned for
publication: "Procedural Recommendations for the Performance of Studies Hhich
Have the Goal of Substantiating the Maximum Permissible Level of Radio Frequency

Radiations".
Professor B. M. Savin

FGI(HHHK1AI.UBEIIVLY
roe ommt use ONLY

THE PROBLEM OF SETTING HEALTH SAFETY STARDARDS FOR RADIO FREQUENCY ELECTROMAGNETIC
RADIATIONS AT THE PRESENT STAGE

3.x. Savin

The problem of setting health safety standards for electromagnetic radio fre-
quency fields as a factor in an industrial setting and the residential environ-
ment has taken on special urgency in recent years.

The rapid development of radio communications, radar and television has led to
the fact that a significant portion of the globe's population has come to be
subjected to electromagnetic radio frequency radiations. At the present time, it
is difficult to find a sector of the economy or sphere of human activity in which
a systematic expansion of the area of application of electromagnetic energy
would not be observed to accomplish the most diverse operations, from heating,
welding. melting metals. the heat treatment of lumber and plastics to the
creation of a high temperature plasma and the use of microwave oscillators in
modern computers. The use of electromagnetic energy determines the possibility
for creating fundamentally new types of technologies and production processes.

It is specifically in this regard in line with the resolutions of the 25th CPSU
Congress that an important place has been set aside for the further development
of radio electronics and electrical power engineering in improving the technical
level of production and providing for qualitative shifts in the development of
all sectors of our nation's economy. This leads to an even wider dissemination
of radio engineering hardware and electronic instruments,_for which even higher
powers will be characteristic as well as new frequency bands and generation

modes.

To resolve the fuel and energy problem of the European area of the USSR and the
Urals, the 10th Five-Year Plan provided for placing long electric power trans-
mission lines at a voltage of up to 1,150 KV in service. This is responsible

for the special urgency of questions of studying the biological effect of elec-
trical fields at the industrial power frequency, both from the viewpoint of the
influence of a factor on the human organism. as well as on fauna, flora and the
ecosystem as a whole. There are all the reasons to assume that in the upcoming
10 to 15 years there will he a further expansion of the number of persons system-
atically exposed in the process of their work activity to the effect of radio
emission levels of health safety significance. Along with those persons profes-
sionally involved with sources of electromagnetic radiations, an increasingly
greater contigent of nonprofesaionals and the populace will be subjected to their
effects. In this case, the borderline between professional and nonprofessional
radiation levels will be erased to an ever greater extent. Even at the present
time. the irradiation levels for persons not involved in servicing radio engin-
eering hardware prove to frequently be higher than the irradiation levels of
professionals. The rise in the overall radio background will undoubtedly lead

to further leveling of the differences in irradiation levels not only for the
indicated two groups of workers, but also for the population. This is respons-
ible for the necessity of a joint developmental effort for questions of indus-

trial and public health safety.

ltﬂltlﬂﬂllnl.USIllNLY
liﬂl<ﬂﬂﬂCJA1.USE(NMLY

In the situation which has arisen, questions of preventing an unfavcrable effect
of radio wave emissions take on special significance. It is not accidental that
one of the tasks assigned by the 25th CPSU Congress in the field of health safety
is the development of new techniques and means of combatting exposures to elec-
trical and magnetic fields and radiations.

The major ways of preventing an unfavorable effect from a given factor are to be
considered the development of the maximum permissible level of radio frequency
radiations, as well as proteccive measures which provide for their strict
observance. It is specifically the health safety standards which are the basis
and the foundation for all preventive. sanitary and environmental protection
measures. It was towards this, in particular, that attention was turned at the
38th Session of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, devoted to questions of

the development of medical science and the practical introduction of its results
in the 10th Five-Year Plan in light of the resolutions of the 25th CPSU Congress.

Health safety standards can be treated as an indicator of the status of the
development of one public health safety problem or another. And if the specific
values of the maximum permissible level are determined, primarily, by the degree
of our knowledge of the effect of a particular factor and the level of health
standards theory, then the “set" of such standards is an indicator of the

extent to which the questions have been worked out from the standpoint of prac-
tical interests. In this regard. the history of how the standards adopted at the
present time came to be is of definite interest.

The first temporary standards for electromagnetic radiations in the radio fre-
quency band were adopted more than 20 years ago in our country. It must be noted
that during those years. the Soviet Union was the only nation in the world where
the level of permissible exposure to a factor was regulated in state policy. The

recommended standards encompassed a frequency range from 100 the to 300 MHz. In
1957, based on studies performed at the Institute of Occupational Diseases and
Labor health Safety of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences and the Military
Medical Academy imeni S.M. Kirov, standards were set for the centimeter wave-
length band (Table 1). In 1962, following a few additional investigations,

these standards were approximated for the band of decimeter and millimeter wave-
lengths. In 1964. the standards were made more precise for the 100 KB: to 300
MM: range and differential maximum permissible levels were established for the
following bands: medium and long waves, short waves as well as ultrashort waves.

The maximum permissible level was made more precise in 1971. It dealt with the
electrical component for the long and medium wavelength band (100 KB: to 3 Mus),
as well as the establishing of differential maximum permissible levels both with
respect to the electrical and magnetic components for the initial portion of the
VB? band (3250 MM:). Somewhat later, based on proposals of the Khar'kov Insti-
tute of Labor Health Safety and Occupational Diseases, the maximum permissible
levels were determined for the 60 to 100 KB: band.

The developmental course of the absolute maximum permissible levels for the VHF
band over the period from 1955 to 1979 is shown in Table 2.

IIIICIHHC1A1.1EHICIVLY
NI OFFICIAL USE CHIN

.0233 nous-3.3: .o 325: 233.350 .5 “0253 nag-«noon .o
35> .n «325 :26 .w 23>!» live: .n «.95: 93a .N
33:33:30 «33303 .25 H325! tuna—ov- osu ova-6.3000 an 2n "an:

@232. on» 23 3363.53 3.35 05 «332:: 05".— vzoa H3333: on» ”3395

0a.: .333?» < 3:32.03 0325!. on» «332.3 «a: gooﬁng cunt—50v <

3:23.53 33.5.3.3 2.“. 39335 on: v30. 2.» 39¢ on: H.332, v.53: :4
30¢ can ovuwucwuo o...» :32: you ouuouoavouu no own!— 05 3002:: 005.... 330. 2:. "vow: anon—lam

32-86338:- .3+§?§§§H . .. u
.5 iogmum I1 tong «Ix-Raﬁ. Inn-299838 $1.333

. lgﬂll . . . 0708.12 .58

. . I-l 2:86am.“ m8. cg.—
lllll'lnu' . a E :2
Illlnlllllu g 22
llllll' .._ as :2
. I'IJiul... nullllull a a. as
qu||+ Illl'l'l .. a? $2
lll.lllllll . a S: 9.2
" Iﬂﬂﬂll .. 32. a:

._ 3.383..» ”59.3022. 33:

llllj
. SS Ind-cgllN v

2.8 cum-sﬁwﬂxoomwuwmu) a 2.3 u 3 anon

< «out: 3 can

 

P. vﬁmbmonusuaﬁzs .3:
‘ gym. OuocﬁthvUUN 5H
. 38955.. 2.55
“ 58¢ .58 .En €25.58 a: £38 £x8_ 6: o« 22.8: 835.62»

 

a!!!
«mm: 05 .5 2.033008 380: 039.5005 0:0: «up

02.3— uou «cheep—3m 335 510: no «533 05 we 09:60 Hanna-5303a

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 2
Values of the Maximum Permissible Level of VHF Radiations in the

Period from 1955 through 1979

Years __
1955 196‘ 1972 1979
30--300 mix 30--300 nu; 30~50 HR: 30-50 Mil:
S--10 V/m 5 Wm 10 Wm; 10 V In;
0.3 A/m 0.3 A/m
50—300 KHz 50--300 NH:
5 Wm 5 Wm

It follows from the data in the table that over the indicated period (210 years)
practically no significant changes took place in the values of the established
maximum permissible levels.

The same thing secured with the standards set for microwave band radio emissions
(Table 3). Approved for the first time in 1957, they practically did not change
over this period of time. Only in later years were they made slightly more precise
with corrections which involved the use of the indicated standards for the per-
iodic irradiation of personnel from scanning antennas and the case of the combined
effect of microwaves and soft x-ray radiation and a high ambient temperature.

In 1976, all of the maximum permissible levels which had been worked out before-
hand were incorporated in COST 12.1.006-76: "SSBT, Electromagnetic Radio Frequency
Fields. General safety requirements", implemented beginning 1 January, 1977.

The establishing of regulations for the maximum permissible electromagnetic radia-

tions in the radio frequency band has played an important part in improving the
work health safety conditions for persons working with radio wave sources in var-

ious sectors of the economy. Their implementation promoted the elimination of
cases of occupational pathology related to exposure to a factor. limever, the
standards in force at the present time are in need of further refinement and need
to be asde more precise. The majority of the established maximum permissible
levels was reconnended during those years where the biological impact of m had
just started to be studied. because of which, the question of adequate models and
principles for extrapolating experimental data from animals to man was extremely
poorly worked out. Technical progress led to the introduction of new frequency
bands and new radiation modes into the national economy, for which the existing
standards were not designed.

The constancy of the health safety standards noted above could be due to one of
the following circumstances: either the fact that the proposed maximum permissible

levels were distinguished from the very start by a hish degree of precision, or by

-10..

morncutussom!
IIIRCNNHCJAI.USE1DNIN

     

.N5 3: oodﬂm .5 N now u: N new .2 N Mow ousuou Ian.
u-o\u; .3: can «no\:: co” Nau\3= cog «aa\:= cod ““4 Ana: a can
I an "anon: u: 0 now u: a new u: a now ouauoaxu aquux
.mxan - uga «nuxsa o4. ~a0\:= o” Nau\:: ca nu“: cougnaoo
.IuIIIIIIIIIIIIuIIIuIIIIIIuunIIuIaIIIInIIIuaIuInnI|IIIIIIIIIuiIIInunuuuunuunnnnuuununnuuu
ummmummummmmJnm u: ~ you n: a you .
“mau\u= .3: Nau\:: coo” Nao\:= oooH aqueouu<
OOONI a "onus: h: a now a: a new uauaaaom
.m\.a u usa Nauxs= cod Nau\:= cad noun oﬁuoauom
IlunuunlJuuuumalllll:nuu. . . I... I.-. I. -. . II-.. I:. :. ...:
coo” m1Muu. .

snow .33. hands»
I & “Nioxuniz
ooa ou Hanan
000v 9305qu
new 0:» a.“ an
.2. an on: as» a.“
use cums: .m\uo - can o~ won :«a cu you =«9 cu you :«a on “on a“: ow you
. una "odaauou au 3: coca so a: coo“ so a: coo” :0 3: coon so 3: oooH
N x N \ N x N x N \

 

 

 

 

 

 

23 60.3 233 u; N new .2 N new ..E N new .3 N now .2 N
3 30: 2.» N3} 2: N5; 2: N33 8.." N5; 03 you N5; 2:
.5 03.“... 0550.— n: a ham .3 » new n... a new us a new u: a
In» vanguagauom «go‘s: a" Nau\:= on Nau\=a ca Nau\:: a“ nou.~ao\:: ca
“no can--n.o "swoon..n.o u=ocom--n.c "soooa-.n.o u=ucoa..n.c "so on .. n .aoacguaoo
.: «ahoﬁ aha” “had NNQH ago” “maﬂ mmmmmmmmummm
lillllllllll me 9:56:

 

muuor

 

who." 9— 505—» smog IOHH veauom
05 a.“ 2.633ku 95395.“: no No.5.— ozunnaauom .3503: 05 no 332,

 

n manﬁw
FOR!0FFKJAI.USE(N‘LY

the fact that their further improvement did not receive the requisite attention,
or finally, by the fact that the possibility of successfully resolving the indi—
cated question was made sharply difficult by virtue of a number of factors of a
medical, biological and technical nature. Just the fact alone that unified maxi-
mum permissible levels were established for extremely wide frequency band, the
edge portions of which have pronounced differences in their biological effect,
places the rightfulness of the first of the propositions presented above in doubt.
For individual portions of a band, in particular, from 30 to 300 GHz, the stand-
‘ards were experimentally worked out to an insufficient degree and were essentially
extrapolated from the adjacent band. Horeover, while centimeter and especially
decimeter band radiations can reach vitally important organs in penetrating deep
into tissue, millimeter band emissions are practically completely absorbed in the
surface layers of the skin.

For the frequency bands from 1.5 to 30 His and from 50 to 300 MHz, the standards
for which should be set with respect to both the magnetic and the electrical com-
ponents, standards have been set only for the electrical component. Along with
this, it has been found in recent years that in the case of large dimensions of
a biological object, the energy contribution of the magnetic field component in
the HF and VHF bands can be significantly greater than the energy contribution
of the electrical component of the field [1]. The amount of energy absorbtion
by a body which is due to the H field increases in proportion to the square of
its linear dimensions. The latter leads to substantial differences in the
amounts of magnetic field energy absorbtion by the body of man and small animals.
Depending on the frequency band, other parameters of the external field being
the same, the differences in the energy absorbtion by biological objects of
different geometric dimensions can reach one, two and semetimes even higher
orders of magnitude. Thus, while in the microwave band (above 300 MHz) the
average and maximum specific absorbed power in a human body is usually 2 to.15
times less than in the bodies of small laboratory animals (rabbits, rats, mice),
in the region of lower frequencies (less than 100 lbs) the inverse relationships
are observed: a human body interacts with an external field some 5 to 30 times
more than the bodies of small animals [2]. Moreover, these differences in the
specific features of electromagnetic field energy absorbtion were not taken into
account when substantiating health safety standards, although a significant por-
tion of the maximum permissible level was established on the basis of experiments
performed specifically on small laboratory animals.

It must also be noted that with the exception of the microwave band, the maximum
permissible levels are not differentiated with respect to time, so that unjusti-
fied difficulties are frequently created in their realization under industrial
conditions. However, even for this band of frequencies, the established maximum
permissible levels are to a certain extent in contradiction with the general
biological laws governing the response of an organism to such exposure. It is
not difficult to convince oneself of this with a comparison of the permissible
standards for the energy relationships at various exposure intensities and dura-
tions. Thus, in the case of an eight-hour exposure to an electromagnetic field,
a value of 10 p'd/cm2 has been set as the maximum value of the energy flux density;
for a two-hour exposure it is 100 uH/cmz; and for 20 minutes it is 1000 uH/cmz.
It is not difficult to calculate that the amount of incident energy will be

- 12 -

F0!‘0PFKJAI.USE(N¢LY
FTHR13FIICtAL UGIICMVLN

4,800 uH-min/cm2 in the first case (10 uH/cm2 x 8 x 60 min); in the second case
1: is 12.000 uw-min/cmz (100 max-2 x 2 x so min), and in the third case, 20,000
uw-min/cmz (100 uH/cm2 x 20 min).

Thus, the permissible energy exposure levels are not equal for the various energy
flux densities. Moreover, simultaneously with the increase in the value of the
energy flux density (an increase in the intensity of the effective factor), the
standard norms permit an increase in the total amount of incident energy, and
consequently, also in the absorbed energy. The contradiction cited above is
especially clearly manifest in the "Public Health Horns and Rules when Working
with Sources of High, Ultrahigh and Superhigh Frequency Electromagnetic Fields",
No. 848-70, which permitted the sequential exposure of workers to two levels of
electromagnetic flux densities: 10 uH/cm2 and 100 uH/cmz and 10 uH/cm2 and 1000
uU/cmz. In the latter case, the total amount of incident microwave energy on a
man during the course of a working day could reach 2b,600 uH-min/cmz, which is
50 times greater than the amount of energy permitted in the case of exposure to
a field with an energy flux density of 10 uW/cmz. -

It must be noted that this same document sets the ultimate value of the energy
flux density for the populace at l uH/cmz. It is easy to compute that the
permitted amount of incident energy should not exceed 1,540 uH-min/cm2 in this
case over the course of a 24-hour day, and h80 Wain/cm2 over 8 hours, which

is more than 50 times lower than is permitted for persons working professionally
with the given factor. For none of the factors for which standards are set is
there such significant differences in the maximum permissible levels established
for workers and the population.

Although 608T 12.1.006-76 "SSBT. Electromagnetic Radio Frequency Fields. General
Safety Requirements" also does not provide for a variant of sequential exposure
of workers at different field intensities, nonetheless it is not free of substan-
tial contradictions as regards the quantities of permitted energy for various
worker exposure times in a microwave field.

Finally, it must be noted that some of the established maximum permissible levels
differ from foreign values by a factor of 1000 or more (Table 6). It is hardly
necessary to prove that with all of their atrictness in precluding the possibility
of damaging the health of man, the maximum permissible level should not be unjust-
ifiably stringent, since meeting them will entail unjustified economic expendi-
tures to implement protective measures and can be a break to further technical
progress.

The development of the international ties, which is accompanied by an ever wider
exchange of various equipment, including generators of electromagnetic radio
frequency emissions, is responsible for the special urgency of bringing the health
safety standards closer together. The effective utilization of such equipment is
possible only under the condition that there are maximum permissible levels of
electromagnetic radiations as well as methods of evaluating and measuring them
which are close in value. This kind of standardization becomes vitally essential,
primarily for states which are members of the CEHA.

-13-.

Fill¢JlIIClAI.llli(l‘LY
FINIGDFF‘CIAI.IINE¢NVLY

 

 

TABLE 6
Comparative Characteristics of Microwave Exposure Levels
Permitted in Various Countries
Frequency Band, Nature'ef the Maximum Permissible
Country Gﬂz Irradiation Level
USSR 0.3~—300 Continuous 10 uH/cm2 for 8 hours
GDR 100 uH/cnz for 2 hours
Bulgarian 1000 uH/cnz for 20 minutes
People's 2
Republic Intermittent 100 uH/cn for 8 hours
1000 W cm2 for 2 hours
Czecho— 0.3-300 Continuous 200 uH/an-hr
slovakian Pulsed 80 uH/cmzvbr
SSR
___________________________________________________________________________________
Polish o.3-300 Continuous 10 nw/an for an unlimited time
People's 200 ulul/cn2 for 8 hours
Republic from 200 uH/cmz to 10 nH/cmZ:
'r(hr)-32/(H/n2)2

Intermittent 100 uH/cm2 for an unlimited time
1000 nil/cm2 for 8 hours
from 1000 uH/cn2 to 10 nH/cmz:

“Ml-800101422

 

U.S. 0.0l--100 Any 10 mﬂ/cnz for an unlimited time
Holland o.3-300 for intensities above 10 and,
a dose equal to 1 mH/CIZ-hr every
. 0.1 hr

England o.3-300 Any 10 IH/cmz for an unlimited time
PRC

France

Canada _ 0.3--300 Any 10 nH/cn2 for an unlimited time

At intensities of from 10 ﬁlm2
to 100 nu/an:

Tgminl-Gooolgmﬂlcnzlz

What has been said fully applies not only to the hardware used in various sectors
of the economy, but also to various radio engineering facilities such as radio and
television stations, radar complexes, as well as high voltage power transnisaion
lines. If for our country with its enornoua territory, the question of the place-
nent of radio engineering facilities is already becoming quite acute, then it is
completely understandable how acute it is in those countries where the population
density is high while the territory is limited.

- 14 -

FOI‘OIFIIAI.UBE(HNLY
ficance of the theory

r nonionizing radiations. in particular.
questions of methodology. The latter has been reflected in the lack of unified

criteria for the estimation of biological effects of radio

receding one by an order of magnitude. Pro-

bted advantage, however,

from medical, biological and health safety atandpointe, it cannot be considered a

reasonable one. Apparently, a more substantiated claaei
of problems of setting health safety standards for elect

ng the interaction of

In particular, if one bases the
work on a purely power engineering approach to the evaluation of the influence of

enaiona consider-
, those with a wavelength commensurate
CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010004-1

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09:

FOI(NﬂﬂCLALIIIIONlY

 

 

 

  
   

 

 

 
 

Ii 3H 32 mu a2 a2: a: a; .533
Ila Hv Iao ch Ia Hv I I OH v II coHv Iﬂx Hv. ass nv Inseam v I: can A Input
oobqiouon
umuol kayo! naval Aunuozv
IHHHH: IHucoo IHuua uuozauuuHa uuonm ISHvo: uaoa uGOHuonsm oo>¢3
am: can an: on all coH oOHu
use can I «:2 con : I an: on A I all ocH A I nun H A "nu H v nauseoum
_m:>_ ~=o>bu ~uamm
nay coda—.05.. 35 93v 036 ocuucoavohh a no
uoHuuosuoum :wHauomam Iona :anauuHa aOHansvoum nun: Iaoavoum :04 30H uoaam v n
nouooaom HooH OHOHn
vac HuoHvox :« van: noHocoavaum oHv-x mo :oHuuouanouHu .o man<u
a H s OH I OOH 0:» :0H
as H I la H 30 H I Iv H av H I a H I s OH I a ooH I I: H as H I n Iu>¢3
uuuoa Honda .
nouoluHHH: nouuaHucoo noun-Hum: uuuo: Iwoon nauoom nuuoaoHHM mo>u3
sac m an: nu: an: m sax ooHu
use cannon use onnn Inn: con oonIon onIn Inzx can oonIOOH Icusvonm
NEE“ ~55“ ~25“ ~55“ . Nun“ ~mm ooHo
aoHucosvuum uoHocoauouh meucoakum amHoaoavoum QOHocosv Iaoavouh Away ooHu manna
nqu AHoauuuxm :anuonsm zuugauuHD stz auo> Ioum anz asHvu: Icoavouh 30H
naouuuH ox aaoHuaoHaaalou onaa
Ha30HuuahouaH cu uaHvuooo< aoHucoauoum oHvux mo :oHunoHannuHu dNIMNMﬂH

- 16 -

mmmonu'

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010004-1
ROI OFFICIAI.IHIECIULV

with the dimensions of a body or its individual parts. As applied to man, the
Corresponding frequency regions are: for the first, 5.30 “Ba, for the second,

3 10,000 HM: and for the third, 30 to 10,000 “Hz. Characteristic of the first
region is the fact that the energy absorption level, and consequently the specific
absorbed power falls off rapidly with a reduction in frequency, approximately
proportionally to the square of the frequenc~. A distinctive feature of the
second frequency range is the very rapid attenuation of electromagnetic radiation
energy when penetrating into tissue. In this frequency range, practically all

of the BER energy is absorbed in the surface layers of biological structures.

The specific absorbed energy in the skin does not depend on the shape or dimen-
sions of the irradiated object. For the third range, which is intermediate in
terms of the frequency, a characteristic feature is the existence of a number of
absorption maxima, where a body seems to draw a field into itself and absorb more
energy than arrives at its cross-section. In this case, interference phenomena
are sharply pronounced, which lead to a sharp dependence of both the overall
absorption and the distribution of the absorbed energy on the specific values of
the wavelenths, dimensions and anatomical structure of the organs and electrical
properties of-the tissues.

Unfortunately, up to the present time, the specific features of electromagnetic
field energy absorption and distribution considered above have not been reflected
to the requisite extent in the practice of setting health safety standards, in
particular. when extrapolating experimental research data from animals to man.
This is related to a considerable extent both to the inadequate amount of study
of the problem and to serious procedural difficulties in estimating electromag-
netic field energy absorption and distribution in biological objects.

In light of modern concepts of the possibility of the specific effect of electro-
magnetic radiations on an organism, it would apparently be incorrect to approach
the substantiation of the maximum permissible levels exclusively from power
engineering viewpoints, it must nonetheless be supposed that the considerations
treated above are to be taken into account when developing the appropriate health
safety standards.

In dealing with the question of evaluating the biological effects of radio fre-
quency exposures from the viewpoint of their health safety significance, it must
be underscored that considerable phenomenological material has been accumulated
at the present time, which attests to the great diversity of the responses of the
organism to radio wave exposures. The biological effects occurring in this case
can be manifest in the most diverse forms: from barely perceptible functional
shifts which fall within the range of the resolving power of existing methods of
investigation up to clearly pronounced morphological disturbances which attest
to the development of an explicit pathology. while as far as organic disturb—
ances are concerned there are no differences in their analysis, and they are
treated by all researchers as a manifestation of radio frequency insults, as
regards the evaluation of biological effects which are manifest in the form of
shifts in the functional status of particular systems. much yet continues to
remain debatable. Some authors consider it possible to view any reactions of

an organism in response to radio frequency exposures as an indicator of their
unfavorable effect and to treat them as being of health safety significance [3],

- 17 -

IIIICIHHCIAI.USE|I‘LY
FORIOFIWCIAI.USBIWVLY

while other consider it essential to differentiate the reactions occurring in this
case into two independent groups: those rrflecting manifestations of radio fre-
quency sensitivity and those characterizing the development of radio frequency

damage [4].

The specific features of the treatment of reactions considered above are deter-
mined not so much by differences in the mechanism of radio radiation action, as
such as they are by differences in the methodological approach to the evaluation

of the action of a factor. The latter have a fundamental influence on the contents
embodied in the concept "harmful action threshold", which. as is well known, is
the basis for the entire system of setting health safety standards (5].

Depending on the approach employed, the specific values of the maximum permissible
levels vary significantly, and the differences between them can reach several
orders of magnitude. It is specifically these questions which must be dealt with
in more detail, since they are specifically the ones of fundamental importance in
resolving questions of setting standards.

When evaluating the biological effects of radio frequency emissions, it is
essential to take into account both the specific features of a given factor and
the overall biological laws governing organism response to the action of various
stimuli.

As is well known, the basis for any biological reactions related to the action of
external stimuli is the property of everything living: irritability. This
property is manifest with the action of a particular factor in the occurrence,
amplification or attenuation of its activity, or in a structural change. The
extent to which these reactions are pronounced can vary in the widest possible
limits. It must be noted that the reactions themselves occur when the stimuli
reach definite intensities, which characterize the sensitivity threshold of~a par-
ticular biostructure. The sensitivity thresholds of various biostructures to
exposure to specific stimuli differ substantially. Their absolute value depends
not only on the biological features and functional status of the biostructures,
but also on the physical properties of the stimulus, the time that it acts and
the rate of rise. The threshold intensity as a function of the exposure tine to
a stimulus is characterized by a hyperbolic type curve and is expressed by the
empirical formula:
J - (alt) + b,

where: J is the threshold-intensity of the stimulus;

t is the time that its acts;

a is a constant determined by the properties of the tissues;

b is the threshold for the case of unlimited exposure to the stimulus.

The dependence of thresholds on the rate of rise of a stimulus is expressed by an
exponential curve, which reflects the development of the sccomodation processes.

At the present time, considerable experimental material has been accumulated which
attests to the fact that the extent to which biological reactions are pronounced
with the action of radio frequency emissions obeys the laws described above [6].
It is specifically this which provides a basis for treating many biological
effects of radio wave exposure as a manifestation of radio wave sensitivity.

- lg -

FOI‘OIIICIAI.IIII(HWLY
FOI‘DFFKJAI.U§E(HVLY

Treating the latter as a manifestation of irritability, it is necessary to study
in somewhat more detail the physiological evaluation of radio frequency radiations
as a stimulus. There is no doubt at all that the given irritant belongs among the
group of physical stimuli. A more complex issue is the resolution of the question
of its adequacy. If we work from the definition adopted in physiology, in accord-
ance with which all stimuli are included among the adequate ones which, first of
all, act on a given biological structure under natural conditions and secondly,
for the perception of which the structure is specially adapted, and thirdly, the
sensitivity to which is extremely high in the structure, then there are a number

of reasons for treating a rather wide spectral range of radio frequencies as an
adequate stimulus, or one c ose to it.

Under the usual conditions of their existence, the organisms of animals and man
are constantly subjected to radio frequency emissions of a rather wide frequency
range. It is known that a considerable portion of the so-called natural electro-
magnetic radiation spectrum, which is one of the constant factors in the environ-
ment, is composed of radio frequency emissions. They are comprised of the radio
emissions of terrestrial, solar and galactic origin. while the intensity of the
latter is low. the intensity of the radiations related to processes occurring in
the earth's atmosphere, especially during thunderstorm activity, is quite signif-
icant: it can reach hundreds of volts per meter, while the frequency character-
istics of these radiations fall in a range from 10 Hz to 10 MB: [7].

A rather wide range of electromagnetic emission frequencies is of solar origin.

The earth's atmosphere is a comparatively weak absorber of electromagnetic
radiations at a wavelength of from 1 cm to 30 - 35 m. The level of radio emissions
related to processes occurring on the sun can exceed the natural radio back-

ground level by tena, hundreds and even thousands of times. Thus, in the process
of evolutionary development, every living thing has constantly come up against

the action of these kinds of radiations.

At the present time, considerable experimental material has been accumulated which
argues in favor of the fact that the natural electromagnetic background has
exerted a definite influence on the development and vital activity of organisms,
and that organisms use natural electromagnetic radiations as a source of infor-
mation which provides for a continuous interaction with the changing conditions

in the environment.

Research results give evidence that the most diverse organisms, starting with
single cells and ending with man exhibit an exceptionally high sensitivity to
electrical and magnetic fields, the parameters of which are close to the natural
parameters of the fields of the biosphere [8].

Various reactions occur in an organism with the actions of electromagnetic fields
of hundreds of thousands and even millions of times weaker than would be antici-
pated if one worked from the concepts of a purely power engineering character for
the biological effects. The biological effects of weak electromagnetic fields
which are unexplanable from the standpoint of purely energy interactions with the
matter of living tissues can be understood from the viewpoint of their perception
by receptor systems, which in contrast to technical sensors, which transform
energy, react to a stimulus only as a starting mechanism.

- 19 -

“a lNJI‘OUIICIAl.IA§EI(HVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

The data of comparative anatomy and physiology attest to the fact that many organ-
isms have special systems (structures) adapted for the perception of electromag-
netic fields in the radio frequency range [9]. Their sensitivity to radio fre-
quency exposures is not inferior to the sensitivity of other perception systems
with respect to the action of adequate stimuli.

Many biological objects (fish, birds, insects) have well developed structural and
functional electromagnetic reception mechanisms, the sensitivity of which to
electromagnetic fields is exceptionally high. Thus, for example, the electrical
receptors of fish react to low frequency electromagnetic fields with an intensity
of 10‘6 V/n, and to high frequency fields with an intensity on the order of

z. . 10-1 Wm [10].

By working from the experimental data on the perception of electromagnetic fields
by animals, it can be supposed that they are represented to some extent in man
also. Evidence in favor of this. in particular, comes from the results of inves-
tigations related to working out the conditional reflexes with the action of
extremely weak magnetic fields and electromagnetic radiations [8]. as well as
data on the change in membrane permeability with exposure to an electromagnetic
field. As is well known. all receptor processes, regardless of which stimulus
(or factor) action determines them, are manifest as a change in the plasmatic
membrane permeability of the receptor. The absence of.subjective perception of
radio frequency emissions cannot serve as proof of the lack of reception. All
interoception is essentially undisputable.

However, it must be noted that biological structures experience the influence of
radio frequency electromagnetic fields not only from the environment, but also
those of "somatic" origin, i.e. not only those of an exogenic nature, but also
endogenic. In the life activity process in all cells, organs and tissues,
electromagnetic fields constantly arise, the frequency spectrum of which, accord-
ing to modern data. is rather wide and runs from fractions of a H: up to a
hundred kiloherta [11]. These fields are apparently completely adequate for
nerve structures. Thus, under natural conditions, biological structures constant-
ly experience the action of electromagnetic radiations, the frequency spectrum of-
which encompasses practically the entire range of radio wavelengths: from
extremely long to microwaves; an exception is only the El? frequencies - the
range of millimeter wavelengths.

If one agrees that radio frequency electromagnetic radiations cannot be treated
as a factor which by its nature is unusual for an organism. but are a stimulus
which is to a known extent even adequate (with the exception of their coherency).
then it must be admitted that it would be erroneous to treat any reactions of an
organism which occur as a response to exposure to this stimulus as a manifestion
of disturbances in organism activity.

The action of various environmental factors - light, sound, vibrations, acceler-
ations, high and low temperatures, changes in the gas mediun - result in extremely
diverse reactions of an organism. however, up to a definite stimuli intensity
level, these reactions are not treated as a manifestation of pathology. Thus.

a change in the position of the body relative to the gravitational field vector,

a drop in the partial pressure of oxygen when going up in altitude, a change in

- 20 -

FOR OFFKJA1.USE|M‘LY
FOI‘OCFKJAJ.USI¢NVLY

the temperature of the environment or atmospheric ion composition all lead to

the appearance of an entire set of reactions: a change in the rate and depth of
respiration, the hemodynamic or heat exchange status, etc. however, if the issue
is not one of a sharply pronounced oxygen deficit or significant changes in the
ambient temperature, then all of the indicated changes disappear comparatively
rapidly following the cessation of exposure to the factor, something which pro-
vides a basis for treating them as a purely physiological phenomenon of an adapt-
ive and compensatory nature.

The accumulated experimental materials make it possible to treat many biological
effects of radio wave exposure specifically as a manifestation of irritability,
and not as a consequence of the development of pathological processes. It must

be noted that a significant portion of effects of a physiotherapeutic nature is
due specifically to these kinds of reactions. Apparently, we would be making a
definite methodological error if we did not attempt to differentiate these reac-
tions from reactions which are characterized by the development of radio frequency
damage. Of course this can be done only with a solid scientific foundation for
the relevant criteria.

It is well known how considerable the differences are in the levels of light
energy which cause visual perception and which lead to damage to the retina.
Under the most favorable conditions for light perception (with maximum eye adap-
tation to darkness), the sensitivity of the eye is close to the physically
ultimate sensitivity and amounts to about 1 ' 10'10 - 1 ' 10'11 erg/sec. Damage
occurs to thg retina though when exposed to light having an energy on the order
of 6.18 - 10 erg/sec. Thus, the range of light intensities perceived by the
eye is on the order of 150 dB. The same governing laws are preserved as regards
the action of other stimuli. Thus, the difference in perception.thrssholda and
pain thresholds with the action of mechanical stimuli is about 160 dB. The
range of adaptive perception of sound stimuli is about 120 to 150 dB.

Thus. the ranges of various stimuli intensities which fall within the zone of
adaptive perception, fall well outside the limits of 100 dB.

The shifts in the functional status which occur in the range of intensities
indicated here, both within the bounds of the revelant afferent system and in
other systems of an organism are to be treated as a manifestation of organism
sensitivity to the given stimulus. A characteristic feature of the reactions
occurring in this case is their rapid normalisation following the cessation of
stimulus action, the lack of cumulative effects as well as the development of
accomodation phenomena in the corresponding receptor apparatus. It is specific-
ally these kinds of effects which we frequently come up against when dealing with
exposure to low level electromagnetic radiations.

The boundaries of the range of adaptive perception of radio wave radiations. just
as for other stimuli. are determined on one band by the radio frequency sensitiv-

ity threshold of the corresponding perception systems, and on the other, by the
damage thresholds of individual biological structures.

- 20 s

FIIIIDIIICIAI.IIIIII‘LY
II)I‘OIFICIAI.1EIE(HVLY

For some biological structures having a low sensitivity to a given type of
exposure, the radio frequency sensitivity and radio frequency damage thresholds
can coincide, as a result of which, there can be practically no region of adap~
tive perception of radio frequency emissions. Along with this, it can prove to
be quite considerable for structures which have an extremely low irritation
threshold.

Based on what has been presented, the entire spectrum of radio frequency emission
intensities can be broken down into three ranges: the subthreshold range, the
adaptive perception range and the damage range.

In turn. the adaptive perception range is to be subdivided into three regions:
the indifferent region,_the region of active adaptation and the region of extreme
exposures. The first of them borders the subthreshold range (their separation
boundary is the threshold of radio wave sensitivity), and the third borders the
damage.

Characteristic of the indifferent adaptive perception region is the occurrence of
minimal functional changes which do not go beyond the limits of physiological
norms and which take place rapidly both during the ﬂmmediate aftereffect period
and in the process of the exposure itself. Characteristic of the active adap-
tation region is the great extent to which the reactions are pronounced and the
fact that they are sustained both during the exposure and during the immediate
aftereffect period. A distinctive feature of the region of extreme exposures is
the diversity of reactions, the preservation of functional changes for and
extended time as well as the development of phenomena of a cumulative nature.

working from the principles of setting health safety standards for unfavorable
factors of the industrial environment which have been adopted in the USSR, in
accordance with which the primary importance is attributed to pronounced func-
tional changes in deteraing a harmful action, the threshold of harmful exposure
falls at the boundary separating the region of active adaptation and extreme
exposures. It can be characterized as that combination of standardized parameters
for which changes occur in an organism which are characterized by the presence of
one or a set of the following attributes: '

--A qualitative realignment of the course of vital processes;

--Any quantitative changes in the status of vital processes which go beyond the
limits of fluctuations in the physiological norm, corresponding to the
specific vital activity conditions, and cause a reduction in the capability
of an organism of realizing normal compensatory functions normal for its
volume to equalize the unfavorable effect of other environmental factors or
unusual psychophysiological states;

--The development of phenomena of summing the preceding exposure effects, which
have the nature of cumulative ones and which lead in the case of long term
exposure to the development of shifts in the status of vital processes which
go beyond the limits of their permissible quantitative changes.

If one agrees with the given definition for a harmful exposure threshold, then
it must be admitted that some of the established maximum permissible levels are

- 21 -

liliflﬂﬂCJAl.UBElﬂﬂlY
FOI1NHWCJAI.USE|MVLY

undoubtedly too low. Moreover, if overstating the maximum permissible level con-

ceals the danger of damage, then their unjustified stringency entails a completely
unsubstantiated expenditure of funds to implement protective measures in addition

to blunting the vigilance of medical workers.

The theoretical basis for setting health safety standards for radio frequency
electromagnetic radiations today should be the radiobiology of nonionizing
radiations, which at the present times is already an independent field of know-
ledge, formed at the interface of two scientific disciplines: biology and radio-
electronics. Its task includes establishing the laws governing the response of
living systems (at various levels of their organisation: cellular, systemic,
organismic) to the action of electromagnetic radiations - from quasistatic to
coherent optical band radiations. The following should be cited as independent
areas in it: the fields of bioradiometrology and biophysics. The first, the
bioradiometrological, has the goal of establishing the laws governing the inter-
action of electromagnetic radiations with a biological object, in particular,
establishing the quantitative relationship between the incident and absorbed
electromagnetic energies, ascertaining the nature of EH3 energy distribution at
various frequencies within a biological object in light of the specific features
of the physical properties of the tissues forming it, as well as depending on

its geonetric dimensions, shape, etc. The task of the biophysical area is esta-
blishing the laws governing the transformation of the biological substrate by
absorbed EHR energy to other kinds of energy as a function of the electromagnetic
radiation parameters, as well as ascertaining the specific features of the
occurrence of biophysical processes as a function of the amounts of absorbed
energy. The lack of data on the biophysics of the primary interaction of BER
energy with biostructures sharply limits the possibilities of constructing a
modern scientific theory for the mechanism of electromagnetic radiation action,
because of which, substantiating the health safety standards takes on an empirical
nature to a considerable extent. This in turns limits the possibilities of
scientific prediction. The lack of information on the specific features of energy
absorption and distribution in a biological object narrows the significance of the
experimental data obtained to the conditions of the specific experiment. It is quite
obvious that just as the lack of sufficiently complete data on the specific
sensitivity of an organism to the action of electromagnetic radio frequency
emissions, this creates exceptionally great difficulties in extrapolating the
data from animals to man.

In evaluating the status of the problem of setting health safety standards for
radio frequency electromagnetic radiations, it is essential to deal with the
state of affairs in metrology, if only briefly.

It is difficult to overestimate the role of standard setting documents, which
as has already been indicated above, can be treated as an indicator of the state
of development of the problem. However, the realisation of their requirements
depends in many respects on the monitoring capabilities. Unfortunately, the
equipment produced by our industry does not make it possible to implement appro-
priate monitoring of the level of electromagnetic radiations. At the present
time, essentially only one type of instrument (Pl-9, P2-l3) is series produced
for the microwave band for wavelengths of from 1 m to 8 mm. It must also be

- 22 -

FOI10FFKJA1.UBEGNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

noted that as applied to radiation conditions which exist in industry, as well as
the emissions generated by radio engineering facilities, the equipment which is
produced makes it possible to aeasure electromagnetic radiations with adequate
precision in approximately 10 to 20 percent of the cases. The equipment is not
designed for measuring the near field parameters of electromagnetic radiations,
i.e., at work positions for couple: fields. in the case of irradiation from
antennas with a moving direction pattern, etc. Moreover, it is specifically
these kinds of irradiation which are encountered extremely frequently in day to
day practice. Moreover, the equipment has a nmber of serious structural
drawbacks: the measurement precision is on the order of i 30 percent. it has
great size and weight, a small dynamic range and in a number of cases does not
provide for direct readout of the results, etc.

An important place in reducing unfavorable effects of nonionizing radiations in
the upcoming 10 to 15 years should be set aside for the development and design

of hardware for general and individual protection as well as effective systems

of protective measures for various groups of people.

It must be recognized as essential to improve public health law, as well as to
create a network of laboratories to monitor radiation levels in industrial and
public facilities for the purpose of providing for practical solutions to the
problem of protecting the environment against the unfavorable action of nonioniz-
ing radiations.

It must be noted that along with the necessity of providing protection against
exposure to nonionizing radiations, the question of the influence on man of
conditions characterized by a lack or reduction in the natural backgron have
taken on a well-known urgency at the present time. The answer to this question
should also be abtained in the upcoming years.

The successful solution of all of the problems enmerated here is possible only
based on widescale research with the participation of specialists in various
fields.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Lin G.C. , Guy AM. and Kraft LIL, "Microwave Selective Brain Heating",
J. MICROWAVE POWER, 197.1, 8, No 3/4, pp 275-288.

2. Shtemler V.H., Kolesnikov S.V. , "Elektricheahiye i magnitnyye svoystva
biologicheskikh tkaney" (“The Electrical and Magnetic Properties of Biological
Tissues"], in the book, "Fiziologiya cheloveka i zhivotnykh" ["Hullan and
Animal Physiology"], Vol. 22, ("Progress in Science and Engineering, All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of the
USSR Academy of Sciences"), Moscow, 1978, pp 12-67.

-23-

MOI-110A]. NEWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Gordon Z.V., "Voprosy gigiyeny truda i biologicheskoye deystviyc elektromgnit-
nykh poley sverkhhysokikh chastot" ["Problens in Occupational Hygiene and the
Biological Effect of Electromagnetic Microwave Fields"], Leningrad, "Meditsina"
Publishers, 1966.

lo. Savin B.M., Devyatkov N.D., Yernolayev Ye.A., et al., "Printsipy issledovaniy
biologicheskogo deystviya radi-avoln" ("Principles of Studying the Biological
Effect of Radio Haves"], "Metoiicheskoye posobiye" ["Procedural ﬂandbook"],
Leningrad, VMA [Military Medical Academy], 1974.

5. Imerov N.F., Sanotakiy I.V., "0 nekotorykh netodologicheskikh osnovalah gigiyen-
icheskogo normirovaniya fizicheskikh i khinicheskikh faktorov praizvodstvennoy
sredy" ["On Some Methodological Fundamentals of Setting Health Safety Standards
for Physical and Chauical Factors in an Industrial Environment"], in the collec-
tion, "Metodologicheskiye voprosy gigiyenicheskogo nornirovaniya proizvodstvennykh
faktorov" ("Methodological Questions of Setting Health Safety Standards for
Industrial Factors"], Moscow, Scientific Research Institute for Occupational

Diseases and Labor Hygiene of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences," 1976,
pp 5-17.

6. Savin V.M., Rubtsova N.B., "Vliyaniye radiovolnovykh isluchsniya na tsentral'nuyu
nervnuyu sistemy" ("The Impact of Radio Frequency Emissions on the Central Ner-
vous Systen"], in the book, "Fiziologiya cheloveka i shivotnykh" ["Husan and
Animal Physiology”, Vol 22, "Progress in Science and Engineering, All-:Onion
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of the 088R Academy-Dot Sciences”
Moscow, 1978, pp 68-111.

7. Freeman A.S., "Elektronagnitnyye polya i shivsya priroda" ["Electromagnetic
Fields and Living Naturc"], Moscow, "Hauka" Publishers, 1968.

8. Plekhanov G.F. , Vedyushina V.V., "Vyrahotka sosudistogo uslovnogo refleksa u
cheloveka na izmeneniye napryashenno'sti elektromagnitnogo polya vysokoy
chastoty" "me Output Response of the Conditioned Vascular Reflex in Man to
a Change in the Field Intensity of a High Frequency Electromagnetic Field" ,
ZHURNAL VND ineni PAVLOVA [JOURNAL OF HIGHER NERVOUS ACTIVITY imeni PAM],
1966, Vol. :5, Mo. 1. PP 36-37.

9. Bullock T.H., "Electromagnetic Sensing in Fish", in "Brain Interactions with
weak Electric and Magnetic Fields", 1977, pp 17-22.

10. Protasov V.R., "Bioelektricheskiye polya v zhizni ryb" ["Bioalectric Fields
in the Life of Fishes"], Moscow, Central Scientific Research Institute for
Fishing Industry Information and Technical Bcononic Research, 1972.

ll. Guddin 8., "Vremennaya organizataiya kletki" ["The Time Organization of a 0011"],
Moscow, Mir Publishers, 1966.

-21.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFIJAI.UBE¢INLY

THE HEALTR SAFETY SUBSTANTIATION 0P APPROACHES TO SETTING STAHDAKDS P08
RADIO HAVES

K.V. Nikonova and B.M. Savin

Setting health safety standards for electromagnetic radiations (EH1) [BUR] should
be based on precise knowledge of the physical parameters of a factor, the actual
conditions of human exposure to it as well as modern concepts of the mechanisms
of the biological action of radiations in various frequency bands.

Assuring the safety of personnel subjected to the action of radio frequency
electromagnetic fields (EMT). requires setting the maximum permissible irradiation
levels for the entire radio frequency spectrum. At the present time, when there
is still no sufficient quantity of data which reflects the laws governing the
manifestation of the biological action of a factor as a function of its physical
parameters, the basis for setting the maximum permissible levels can be materials
on the nature and expression of biological effects due to exposure to electromag-
netic radiations in a particular band or with a particular radiation mode.

The extrapolation of requirements placed, for example, on the microwave band to
others is not altogether rightful, all the more if they differ substantially in
frequency. Such an approach was used, in particular, in the 0.8. As is well
known, the American standard for irradiation in a frequency range of 10 MHz to
100 GB: is 10 mH/cmz. For lower frequencies, the maximum permissible levels were
obtained by calculations and were 200 V/m and 0.5 A/m. Such a conversion esta-
blishes only the physically equivalent quantities for the defined conditions
(specifically, plane wave conditions). Differences in the nature of electromag-
netic energy absorption and distribution as a function of radiation wavelength
(or oscillation frequency) are ignored in this case.

The computational method of determining the maximum permissible levels based on
the best studied band also cannot be considered a sufficiently correct one in
the case where differences in the frequency characteristics of the subbands are
formally taken into account. Accounting for the dependence of energy absorption
on the frequency of the acting field cannot guarantee equality of the biological
effects with equal absorption, since the specific features of the interaction

of the radiation energy with the biological object are not taken into account.

It is also completely obvious that by virtue of the differences in the mechanisms
of the action of high and low intensity electromagnetic fields, the maximum
permissible levels cannot be determined from computed data working from the
governing laws obtained by means of comparing the biological effects for various
frequency bands at high exposure levels (for example, based on the data from
determining the lethal effect thresholds). Calculations can be used only for a
rovgh preliminary prediction. The basis for setting the standard for each fre-
quency band at the present time should be experimental data on the harmful effect
threshold of radiations, taking into account the results of studies which charac-
terize the health status of persons exposed to a factor. The existing health

- 25 -
FOI!OIFIC1A1.IIIZ(INLM
All possible exposure parameters (intensity, duration, generation mode, condi-
tions and nature of the irradiation) should be maximally taken into account when
scientifically substantiating maximum permissible levels. However. standards have
been set for only the radiation intensity in the 60 KHz-300 Hﬂz bands. In the
300 HR: to 300 GHz band, the standards also take into account the duration of the
exposure along with the intensity. In this case, there is no functional relation-
ship between the parameters for which the standards are set. The lack of energy
agreement among the three levels for which standards have been set has been
repeatedly underscored in the literature. The traditional approach which has
grown up among us provides for utilizing the following as the standardized para-
meters of exposure intensity: the energy flux density (PPR), or the power density
(PM) in the 300 MHz--300 GR: band, and the field intensity of the electrical

(E) and magnetic (H) components of an electromagnetic field in a range of 60 KHz
to 300 MHz. Such an approach is based on the notion that the work positions at
Sh? sources (300 HHz--300 Che) are as a rule positioned in the radiation zone,
while in the HF (60 lair-300 MHz) and VHF (30 Mlle—300 1482) bands, they are in
the near field or the induction zone where there is no definite relationship
between the E and H field components. All of our work experience makes it-posai-
ble to state that these parameters are far from always suitable to us. In the
first case, when working with microwave sources under industrial conditions, it
is necessary extremely often to make measurements in the near or intermediate
fields (measurements in the direct vicinity of slots. leaky places in cabinets
and waveguide channels). Secondly, in the case of large radiating antennas. the
near field boundaries extend to a distant of 2a2/A (where a is the greatest
dimension of the radiating aperture and A is the radiation wavelength), which

in practice amounts to hundreds and thousands of meters. In practice though.
people are frequently subject to irradiation from high-powered sources located
close together, or at points where there is an arbitrary polarization and
multiple interference. In all of these cases. just as in the case of irradiation
from several sources, evaluating the exposure based on the energy flux density
(or the power density) is unsuitable. Thus. in particular, at close ranges from
sources, there can be strong electromagnetic fields with a low or nonexistent

mean power flux.

using an instrument with an isotropic sensor have demonstrated that in the

case of a measurement using the first method, significantly understated results
are obtained [1]. As researchers from the American Bureau of Standards point
out, "The accepted concepts and standards for the level of nonionizing electro-
magnetic fields are quite satisfactory under definite idealized conditions.
However, such conditions are rarely realized at work positions or even in exper-
iments on irradiation" [2].

As far as using the E and H component field intensities as the parameters for
which standards are set in the HF and VB? bands, than, without discussing the

- 26 -

FOI,0IIICIA1.IEH!(HULY
chanisn of the harmful action. Since the

the object, dosinetric

the realization of
to be possible at the present tine.

, l nA/cn2 for frequencies from 10 KB: to 10 MN: and

Other authors [6], believing that it
he biological effect of an exposure

It nust be noted that the proposals

contained in the indicated literature do not
exclude the necessity of neasurins t

he external field, and consequently, in a

of errors related to the measure-sat of the
energy flux density or the E and H component field intensity.

u; are the most suitable for
lescribing the potential danger of unperturbed fields. however. the authors
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

make the reservation that the indicated parameters are inadequate in estimating
reactive fields. According to the data of J. Lin, et al., the magnetic field,
especially in the HP band, can make a substantial contribution to electromagnetic
energy absorption by the human body. This makes it possible to speak of the
fundamental correctness of the approaches adopted in the USSR which provide for
estimating both components in the case of near fields.

Exposures to pulse modulated fields deserve special attention in the plan for
resolving questions of setting health safety standards.

ll.P. Schwan [7], in analyzing the reaction rates of systems to the effects of
forces generated by a field, came to the conclusion that a pulsed field cannot be
any more effective than a continuous one with the same average power. That is,
it is impossible to increase the probability of field-force effects by means of
pulses.

Along with this, some phenomena, such as electromagnetic hearing, for exaeple,
were related for a long time to the action of high peak powers [8]. However,
it was simultaneously shown that with a definite pulse width, the threshold for
the excitation of aural responses in man and cats is not governed by the peak
power, but rather by the quantity of energy going into each pulse [9].

In papers by Soviet authors [10, 11], based on the comparative evaluation of con-
tinuous and pulsed electromagnetic radiations with a pulse repetition rate of
hundreds of hertz, the great extent to which biological effects are pronounced
with exposure to pulsed radiation is noted from a number of indicators. however,
the differences were not so significant as to make it necessary to introduce
differentiated maximum permissible levels. Data were obtained by American
researchers [12]_which attest to the great biological activity of pulsed electro-
magnetic radiations as co ared to continuous radiations at comparatively low
power densities (200 phi/cm average; 2.1 lid/cm2 peak).

It turns out that at the present time when evaluating pulse modulated radiations,
it will be the most correct to assign the major significance to average field
levels. It is not excluded that at definite peak power values and pulse widths,
the maximum (peak) levels can make their own independent contribution to the
biological effects of radio frequency exposures. In these cases, it can prove
necessary to measure the average and the peak levels. Taking into account the
trends in the development of modern radio electronics, it is extremely important
to further improve the precision in the matter of the role in biological effects
of pulse width and amplitude, the ratios of the maximum and average field levels
at which the effects of the maximum levels exceed the effects of the average
level as well as the role of the pulse repetition rate. The clarification of
the indicated questions will make it possible to make the appropriate corrections
in the standards set with respect to the average level; as far as setting stand-
ards with respect to the maximum (peak) level, then it is'apparently expedient
to use it only in the case of one-time or infrequently repeating pulses.

As is well known, studies performed for the purpose of establishing safe
irradiation levels for man, as a rule, are complex and include the health safety

-23-

MWLUSEONLY
FOR‘OFFICIAI.IEIE(MVLY

evaluation of the conditions of exposure to a factor, the clinical physiological
examination of the health status of persons subjected to the irradiation and

the experimental study of the biological effects due to the influence of electro-
magnetic fields in various frequency bands. Without posing the problem of clar-
fying the role and place for various kinds of studies in establishing the maximum
permissible levels, we will only deal with the requirements placed on health
safety investigations.

It is specifically the health safety studies which determine the conditions .
necessitating the setting of standards. Clinical and health safety parallels are
drawn based on their results, the correctness of the conclusions of which depends
in many respects on the quality of the health safety data. The results of health
safety studies are incorporated in the parameters of the experiment.

Based on what has been said, it is apparent that health safety studies should pro-
vide the most complete possible characteristics of the industrial environment
being studied. Their results should contain data on the radio frequency band,

the irradiation mode, the nature of the irradiation, the intensity, the duration
of the exposure, on the presence and levels of other unfavorable factors (x-ray
radiation, unfavorable meteorological conditions. noise, chemical contaminants),
as well as on the conditions and level of intensity of the work.

Obtaining precise and detailed data necessary for resolving questions of setting'
health safety standards entails definite difficulties in a number of cases. Thus,
the environmental physiologist is not always able to evaluate all of the steps in
a production process or all of the ways the radiation acts on a person, not to
even mention the difficulties related to the unsatisfactory metrological support
for the studies which have the goal of determining particular parameters of radio
frequency exposures. Moreover, as the results of analyzing the materials of ‘
health safety and clinical physiological studies to substantiate health safety
standards for individual frequency bands of electromagnetic emissions over the
last 10 years, attention has been primarily devoted only to that factor which is
being studied and is considered the major one. All of the deviations ascertained
in the health status of workers are not always justifiedly linked to exposure

to that factor. ln-this case, the possible role of other factors in the produc-
tion environment is completely ignored. Such an approach can lead to serious
errors. This is all the more true since clinical manifestations related to
exposure to radio frequency electromagnetic radiations do not have any specific
attributes.

Because of the nonspecific nature of the functional changes which occur with the
influence of radio waves on man, and the difficulties of establishing the etiolo-
gical role of the various industrial and every-day factors in their origin when
working out the maximum permissible levels of electromagnetic radio frequency
emissions, a great role is assigned to experimental studies. In this case, the
question of extrapolating the data obtained in experiments on animals to man
becomes of exceptionally great importance. Differences in the reactions of
animal and human organisms to exposure to a factor can be due both to differences
in energy absorption and distribution and the specific features of the organiza-
tion and functioning of "critical" organs and systems. The biophysical studies

- 29 -
INDI‘OIIICIAI.IHIE(HULY
and calculations of electromagnetic energy absorption by models of different sizes
and shapes [13] which have been performed at the present time make it possible to
derive coefficients for definite conditions and using them, derive equivalent
exposure levels for man and animals in terms of energy absorption. As far as

the second factor is concerned which determines approaches to the extrapolation,
the species specific sensitivity, the question of its role in organism responses
to irradiation deserves considerably greater attention than has been devoted to
it up to the present time. There are only individual papers specially devoted to
the conparative evaluation of human and animal organism reactions to radio fre-
quency exposures. The purpose of the investigations of American authors [16] was
to search for an organism which could serve as a reference standard in studying
microwave exposures. The reactions of dogs, rabbits, rats and various small
organisms down to the simplest ones were studied in this case. An organism which
would possess definite and reproducible characteristics in the case of microwave
irradiation was not found. .A.G. Subbota and B.A. Chukhlovin [15], based on an
analysis of data in the literature as well as their own, came to the conclusion
that it is necessary to use predominantly large animals in experiments, where

body and the level of organization of the functional activity of the major sys-
tems. In the opinion of S.H. Hichaelson, an answer to the question of whether
it is better to use many objects or one to two (and which ones) to predict

human reactions has as yet not been obtained; a systematic study of several
types of animals is needed.

It goes without saying that special studies which make it possible to evaluate
changes in functions while taking energy absorption into account are needed to
resolve the question of the comparative sensitivity and vulnerability to damage
of animals and hunans. Only with sufficient knowledge of two factors - energy

harmful effect thresholds to maximum permissible levels, it is very important

to also solve the problem of the value of exposure margin of safety factors.

The purpose of introducing the latter. as is well known, is assuring the relia-
bility of health safety standards. As applied to various physical and chemical
factors in the industrial environment, the value of margin of safety coefficients
will fluctuate from a few units up to 100 or more.

No serious research of an experimental or theoretical nature has been done to
determine health margin of safety factors as applied to radio frequency expo-
sures. However, individuar proposals have been put forward on the given ques-
tion. Thus. in 1974, it was proposed for the entire nicrowave band, where
exposure intensity is estimated in power density units, that a health margin
of safety factor of 10 be used, as is most frequently employed in public health
safety practice. For lower frequency bands. where the intensity of electromag-
netic fields is estimated by the intensity of the E and H components, working
from the same factor of 10 and acknowledging that biological effects are due

to energy, a margin of safety factor of J55 I 3 was proposed. However, taking
into account the fact that workers may simultaneously be exposed to both elec-

- 3o -

FOI40FFHJAI.U§E(NNLY
FOI¢OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

trical and magnetic fields, the opinion was advanced that it is expedient to
increase this quantity by a factor of /5 times, 1.0., when setting the standard
for a factor with respect to the E or B field intensity, it was recommended that
a health margin of safety factor of 5 be established.

In the opinion of V.A. Zhuravlev‘, the cumulative level of radio frequency effects
in an organism should be adopted as the criterion for determining the value of
health margin of safety factors on analogy with other areas of setting health

safety standards. Experiments performed to compare the total energy of fractional
lethal doses and a one-time dose as well as an analysis of data in the literature
allowed the author to come to the conclusion that microwaves have a small cumula-
tive capacity, and to propose the following as the specific values of the margin
of safety factors for a single threshold dose for man: for professionally

exposed persons - 10; for nonprofessional exposure during production - from 20

to 50; and for the populace - 100.

we are inclined to believe that the health margin of safety coefficients should
be differentiated taking into account the exposure categories (professional, non-
professional, exposure of the population) and the biological effectiveness of the
exposure. The latter can be determined from the frequency characteristic of the
radiation, as well as the generation conditions or the conditions of irradiation
of an object.

There is doubt that it is correct to use a cumulative indicator as the main
danger criterion, since radio waves have a poor cumulative effect, because of
which it is difficult to anticipate substantial differences based on this test
with different exposure characteristics andvsince the governing laws obtained at
the lethal dose level hardly reflect the actual danger of a factor under indus-
trial conditions. It turns out that at the present time, the use of the chronic
effect threshold for systematic exposures and the acute effect threshold for
one-time exposures is the most justified at the present time as the main danger
criterion. The following should be taken into account as supplemental indicators:
the ratio of the acute action threshold to the chronic action threshold, which
characterizes the development of effects of a cumulative nature, as well as the
rate of rise of the curves which reflect the dependence of the biological effects
on the intensity and time of an exposure.

Exposures to continuous and pulsed (with a pulse repetition rate of more than

100 Hz) microwave radiations in a frequency range of 500 MHz to 10 GB: can be
considered to be the most well studied. The results of analysing experimental
data on the characteristics of biological effects of the indicated exposures
makes it possible to consider their use justified when the standard is set for

a health safety margin factor of 10 for professional groups. It is expedient

to estimate the danger and the selection of the health safety margin factors
when setting standards for microwave radiation in other frequency bands and expo-
sure modes based on the indicator of their relative biological efficiency (08A)
[R38]. The.latter should be expressed as the ratio of the harmful effect thresh-
hold for the exposure for which the standard is being set to the harmful effect
threshold of the most well studied microwave radiation. For’frequency bands and

*See Page 103 [62] of this collection.

- 31 -
FOR‘OFFHJA1.USEINULY
I!II(IHNC1AI.US£1UNLN

exposure modes characterized by a higher biological efficiency (833 > 1), it is
recommended that higher safety margin factors be employed, and vice-versa, for
lower efficiencies (EBB < 1), lower safety margins be used. It turns out in this
case that the differences in the biological efficiency of exposures is to be
considered substantial and requiring differentiation of the safety margins which
are introduced if the differences in the harmful effect threshold amount to a
factor of no nore than 3. Snaller differences are actually incorporated in the
possible experimental error. For the same reason, absolute values of the health
safety margin factors should not be less than 3.

The possibility of utilizing the given proposal when substantiating the maximum
permissible levels for electromagnetic radiations at a frequency of less than
300 MHz, or another approach which takes into account the specific features of

the parameters for which standards are being set, requires further theoretical
and experimental work.

The authors consider it expedient to use unified approached to setting standards
for radio frequency emissions for various categories of persons, and taking

into account the comparatively poor biological efficiency of a factor, consider
supplemental safety margin factors of 2 - 3 to be sufficient for nonprofessional
exposures and b - 5 sufficient for the population. “hat has been said in no
way precludes the possibilities of finding and using other procedural approaches.
The issue can involve, for example, modeling under experimental conditions the
particular features characterizing groups of personnel for which standards are
being set. However, the main methodological principle should be observed in all
cases which provides for the use of the appropriate harmfulness criteria in
setting the health safety standards. Health safety standards being set for
various categories of persons should not be a set of quantities which are not
related to one another, where these quantities reflect the specific features of
approaches to the substantiation of maximum permissible levels in institutions
for various specialties. They should follow from the overall laws governing the
interaction of radio frequency electromagnetic radiations with biological
objects.

It is obvious from what has been said that the process of experimentally substan-
tiating the maximum permissible levels is composed of the following steps:

-Evaluating the functional status of critical organs and systems under conditions
of acute and chronic exposure:

-Determining the harmful effect thresholds: the acute effect threshold and the
chronic effect threshold based on an analysis of the data obtained;

-The extrapolation of the data obtained on animals to men, i.e., the determina-
tion of the harmful effect thresholds for man;

--Substantiating the health safety margin factors;

--Proposals for the standard values, which follow from the results of the experi-
mental study.

- 32 -

FOIlolFHJA1.UBl¢I'lY
FOD‘DFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

For final recoumendation, it is necessary to rake corrections which follow from
an analysis of the data on the health s.atus of the irradiated contingents of
persons. It stands to reason that such data can be obtained by means of clinical
environmental physiological comparisons under conditions where it is possible to
make such comparisons and where the data being obtained meet the requirements
placed on the materials used for resolving issues of setting health safety stan-
dards.

It must be stated that as a result of scumulating the scientific data, in the
future we will be able to predict the biological effects of electromagnetic
radiations in new frequency bands and under new exposure conditions. To make
health safety standards predictable is an important goal, of special importance
in the age of the scientific and technical revolution. To achieve this goal, it
is essential to do fundamental research into the dependence of biological effects
on the parameters of exposure to a factor.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Klascius Al., "Microwave Radiation Hazard Around Large Microwave Antennas",
AMER. INDUSTR. HYG. ASSOC. 3., 1973, V01 34, N0 3, pp 97-101.

2. Hacker F., Bownan R., "Quantifying Hazardous Electromagnetic Fields: Scientific
Bases and Practical Considerations", 123! TRANS. M11, 1971, MTT-l9, No 2,
pp 178-187.

3. Schwan H.P., "Microwave Radiation: Biophysical Considerations and Standards
Criteria", lEEE TRANS. BIO. MED. ENG., 1972, BEE-19, 4, pp 306-312.

4. Benny J.c., Tancy M., "Studies of Biological Hazards fron High Power RF Band
Transmitters". in "Biological Effects and Health Implications of Microwave
Radiation, (Aynp. Proc.)", Richmond, Virginia, 1969, pp 66-69.

5. Rogers S.J., King R.S.. "Radio Hazards of the “FIR! Band", NONIONIZING RADIATION,
1970, 1, 178-179.

6. Lin J.C., Guy A."., Johnson 0.6., "Power Deposition in a Spherical Model of Man
Exposed to l - 20 MN: Electromagnetic Field", 1333 TRANS. m, 1973, arr-21,
pp 791-797.

7. Schwan H.P., “Interaction of Microwave and Radio Frequency Radiation with
Biological Systems", IEEE TRANS. MIT, (Special Issue on Biological Effects of
Microwaves), 1971, MTT-l9 (2), pp 166-152.

8. Frey A.N., Messenger R.J.. "Nu-an Perception of Illumination with Pulsed Ultra-
high Frequency Electromagnetic Energy". SCIENCE, 1973, Vol 181, pp 356-358.

9. Guy A.H., Taylor E.M., Ashlenan 3.. Lin J.C., "Microwave Interaction with the
Auditory Systems of Humans and Cats". in "Proc. of the IEEE G-MTT Microwave
Synp.", Boulder, Colorado, 1973, p 321.

- 33 -

FIIICNHNCIAI.IIHICHULY
1°.

11.

12.

13.

110.

15.’

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gordon Z.V., Tolgskaya 11.5.. ”Nekotoryye sravnitel'nyye naterialy o deystvii
otdel'nykh diapazonov radiovoln v reshinakh ispul'snoy nodulyatsii i
nepreryvnoy generataii" ["Sone Couparative Data on the Action of Individual
Radio Frequency Bands in Pulse Nodulation and CH Nodes"], in the book, "0
biologicheskou deystvii EHP radiochastot" [”On the Biological Effect of Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Pields"], Scientific Research Institute for Occupa-

tional Diseases and Industrial Rygience of the 0883 Academy of Medical Sciences.
1968, pp 167-170.

Lobanov Ye.A. , "Vliyaniye khronicheskogo vosdeystviys inpul'snykh i nepreryv-
nykh desyatisantinetrovykh voln na uslovnoreflektornuyu deyatel'nost' belykh
krys" ["‘I'he Impact of Chronic Exposure to Pulsed and CW Ten-Centimeter Have-
lengths on the Conditioned Reflex Activity of white Iats"], GIGIYBNA TRUDA I
PROPZABULEVANIYA [INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE AND OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES], 1966, 10,

pp 7-11.

Prey A.H., Peld S.R., Frey 3., "Neural Function and Behavior: Defining the
Relationship", ANNALS 0? NJ. ACAD. $01., 1975, Vol 267, pp 533-4039.

Shtenler vm. . Kolesnikov S.V., ”Osobennosti vzainodeystviya elektronagnitnykh
poley s bioob"yektani" ["Specific Features of the Interaction of Electronag-
netic Fields with Biological 0bjects"], in the book. "Piziologiya cheloveka i
zhivotnykh" ["Runan and Animal Physiology"], Vol. 22 (Progress in Science and
Engineering, All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Infomtion of
the USSR Academy of Sciences), Moscow, 1978, pp 12-67.

Michaelson 8.11.. "The Tri-Service Program - a'rribute to George H. Knauf",
IEBB TRANS. HICRWAVB THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, HIT-19p PP 131-166.

Subbota A.G. , Chukhlovin B.A., "Vybor netodov issledovaniy i printsipy otsenki
eksperinental'nykh dannykh pri nornirovanii radioizlucheniy" ("The Choice of
Research Nethods and Principles of Evaluating Experimental Data in Setting
Standards for Radio Radiations"], in the collection. 'Wtdologicheskiye
voprosy gigiyenicheskogo nornirovaniya neionisimyushchikh izlucheniy"
[“Procedural Questions in Setting Health Safety Standards for Nonionizing
deiations"], Moscow, Scientific Research Institute of Occupational Diseases
and Industrial Hygiene of the USSR Acadeny of Medical Sciences, 1977,

pp 28-31.

-34-

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FINICIﬁﬂCJAl.lEIE(NVLY

METHODS OF STUDY AND THE EVALUATION OE EXPERIHENTAL DATA IN SETTING HEALTH
SAFETY STANDARDS FOR RADIO EMISSIONS

A.G. Subbota and B.A. Chukhlovin

Experimental data which characterize the threshold levels of the unfavorable
action of a factor are of considerable importance in substantiating the health
safety standards for radio frequency electroesgnetic fields (EHP). It must be
noted that up to the present time, the question of the organs and systems which
are the most sensitive to exposure to a given factor cannot be considered finally
resolved, something which naturally makes it difficult to select adequate methods
of study. In the beginning of the 1960's, a number of American authors, working
from concepts of the thermal mechanism of damage, numbered the crystalline lens
of the eye among the most sensitive organs to exposure to electromagnetic fields,
in particular. in the microwave band. For this reason. they recommended opthal-
moscopy as well as the determination of ascorbic acid content and glutamine in
the crystalline lens as the most informative procedures [1].

In the opinion of the majority of Soviet authors, the greatest sensitivity to the
given kinds of radiations is exhibited by the central nervous and cardiovascular
system. The unfavorable effect of a factor has been estimated based on indicators
for a change in the functional status of specifically these systems [2].

It should also be pointed out that many authors have studied the status of a
number of other systens rather deeply (digestive, hematogenesis, endocrine, etc.)
as well as individual vital activity indicators for an organism. An analysis of
published literature provides a basis for thinking that among the research
methods being used, only a few are sufficiently informative for purposes of
setting standards. where some of them can be used only for limited species of
experimental animals. Thus, for example, to substantiate the maximum permissible
levels of electromagnetic microwave radiations, it is expedient to perform
experiments in the form of chronic trials with large animals. in particular using
dogs, for which the vital important organs are located at approximately the same
depth as in man [2). To evaluate the status of the higher nervous activity. the
use of I.P. Pavlov's method of conditional reflexes is justified (recording
symmetrical reactions). while for the cardiovascular system, it is necessary to
determine the arterial and venous pressures, as well as take electrocardiograms
and kinetocardiograms.

The methods of I.P. Pavlov and Heidenhain of studying the secretor function of
the stomach using ventricles. as well as the evacuator motor activity of the
stomach and the absorption of some substances in an isolated loop of intestine
are rather sensitive exposure to radio waves.

Gas exchange indicators studied using Douglas--Bolden's method can also be treated
as informative ones. as well as certain kinds of exchange: carbohydrate (based
on the blood sugar level and reactions to the sugar "load"), protein (based on
the content of overall protein or protein fractions in blood serumo, mineral
exchange (based on the K, Na, and Ca content in blood serum, Ca in tissues), etc.

- 35 -
ll!k¢ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.llﬂB(ﬂILY
F03¢NWIHAI.USE(HULY

Biochemical techniques directed towards the study of hot-ones primarily responsi-
ble for the mobilization of energy reserves and the adaptation of an organism to
exrreme exposures have become rather widespread in recent years. In the opinion
of a number of authors. hematogenesis status indicators (the overall clinical
analysis of the blood, the study of the osmotic resistance of erythrocytes)

and the biological immune protection system of an organism (phagocyte activity

of neutrophyls, blastotransformation of lymphocytes, the level of the immunolo-
gical response to an antigen stimulus) can also be informative [2]. To ascertain
the mutagenic action of radiations, special cytogenetic techniques using blood

cells, bone marrow, the epithelium of the cornea of the eye, etc. are finding
application.

To estimate the overall status of an organism. such indicators of vital activity
as the reproductive capability (fertilization, fetal development, fertility, and
the characteristics of progeny). a change in body weight, as well as the ability

of the irradiated organism to train to handle physical loads have also been
studied [3-5].

However, it must be emphasized that even correctly chosen methods still do not
fully guarantee the correctness of the scientific research to substantiate the
maximum permissible radiation levels. No less important really but an even more
complex issue is the question of selecting criteria for evaluating research
results. Because of the fact that when an organism is exposed to radio emissions,
as a rule, two to three types of reactions develop - physical and pathological -
the question of which of them is to be the governing factor in setting the health
safety standards for exposure takes on special significance. At the present time,
no one any longer has any doubt that adaptive reactions cannot be used for setting
standards for electromagnetic radiations, since they characterise only the radio
sensitivity and are more evidence really of the presence of the reserve capabili-
ties of maintaining homeostasis in the organism. It can be considered that the
basis for establishing standard levels should be those reactions which go out-
side the range of usual physiological fluctuations in the homeostasis process.

In this case, it is necessary to take into account the fact that with repeated
irradiations, the development of adaptation phenomena may be observed with
respect to the exposure, where this development is manifest in the gradual
attenuation of changes in step with the repetition of the electromagnetic expo-
sures.

As applied to the central nervous system, the main health safety indicator for
the unfavorable impact of a factor is to be considered a disturbance of higher
nervous activity. In this regard, the task of an investigator engaged is deter-
mining the threshold levels of the harmful effect of electromagnetic fields on
the central nervous system should be reduced to establishing the values of the
intensities and time parameters of the radiation exposures for which disturbances
occur in the conditioned reflex activity. In this case it is necessary to use

a rather wide assortment of stimuli, which are perceived by different analyser
systems.

It is significantly more difficult to determine the initial attributes of func-
tional disturbances in the blood circulation system, since up to the present time
there has been no clearcut experimental model for cardiovascular illnesses

-'36 -

FVIICHHWCIAI.USIIDNIJ'
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

TABLE 1 .

'l'he Disadaptlve Effect of Centimeter Wavelengths (X I 12.6 on;
"Luch - 58" Equipnent) from Data of a Study of Arterial Pressure
(AP) in Rabbits Adapted to IR Radiation with an Energy Flux Density

of 350 awe-2 .

 

Number
Conditions of the Trials of
Trials
Series 1
Starting data (3 days of 15
observation)
lst and 3rd IR Radiation
sessions with an energy
flux density of 350 mH/cnz.
Rectal temperature rise of
about 1.1" C 15
loth - 6th sessions of IR Rad-
iation exposure at the sane
parameters 15

8th-10th sessions of IR Rad-
iation with the sane para-
meters, for 1 day prior to
each of then, irradiation at
centimeter wavelengths (energy
flux density - 1 InH/cnz, A -
12.6 cm, 30 min. exposure)

Series 2

Starting data (lo days of
observation)

lat-lath sessions of IR Rad-
iation with the same parameters
5th - 8th sessions of IR Rad-
iation with the cane parameters
9th - 12th sessions of IR Rad-
iation. Each of them was pre-
ceded by microwave irradiation
with an Energy flux density of
50 law/cm
of 30 min.). Interval of one

(A - 12.6 on; exposure

15

28
28
28

24

Arterial Pres-

sure Drops
Over 2 Hours
llll Hg. 14 t u

‘09 t 0.5

15.3 t 1.8

(0.7 2 0.7

17.6 t 2.3

4.0 a 1.3
19.0 i 1.8
6.1 E 0.6

19.5 1 2.16

Signifi-
cance of
the Differ-
ences Hhen
Conparad to

Reurka

the Background
__L__ _._

< 0.01

.< 0.01

< 0.01

< 0.01

Adaptation to
IR Rays

' Disadaptat ion

Adaptation

Disadaptat ion

d_31'____.____________—___————-—

Notes: 1. The value of the arteria1 pressure gradients characterizes the peak to
peak value of the swings of the arterial pressure in the carotid artery

-37..

MWWONLY
INDI:(HﬂﬂCIAI.lﬂ§EI(HVLY

characteristic of man when he is exposed to radio emissions. Based on an analysis
of data in the literature, it can be thought that the most substantial in this
case are persistent electrocardiograa changes, which attest to the presence of
myocardial hypoxia, in conjunction with overall hemodynamic changes. Functional
changes which disappear rapidly are to treated as a manifestation of the radio
wave sensitivity of the organism.

The harmful effect indicators of radio frequency emissions on the digestive sys-
tem can be such changes as long-term depression of gastric juice liberation in
the nervous reflex phase, dissociated disturbances of the acidification and
digestive strength of the juice, as well as a reduction in the absorptive
capability of the intestine (based on the level of glucose absorption). These
kinds of changes can be treated as a manifestation of a singular gastric neurosis.

An objective indicator of the unfavorable influence of a factor on the biological
immune protection mechanisms of an organism is a persistent reduction in the
phagocyte activity of neutrophyles, a slowdown in the blastotransformation of
lymphocytes, depression of the organism's capability of antibody formation,

as well as a decrease in the bacteriocidal properties of the blood, etc.

Among the biochemical indicators, decisive significance should be assigned only
to those which confirm the corresponding clinical picture. In and of themselves
in isolation they cannot serve as a criterion for an unfavorable effect, taking
into account the pronounced variability of many of then in the vital activity
process of an organism [6].

Depression of gas exchange indicators, disturbance of endocrine regulation, etc.
should also be considered sufficiently informative for the determination of harm-
ful effect thresholds of electromagnetic radiations on an organism.

Thus, setting the threshold levels for harmful exposure to electromagnetic fields
should be based on the estimation of a set of indicators for the change in the
functional status of a number of systems of the organism. However, it must be
noted that the solution of this problem, which is based on the analytical prin-
ciple of comparing indicators obtained before and after an irradiation exposure,
cannot be treated as the optimal one. As drawback to the indicated approach

is the fact that in this case, the internal processes which take place in the
irradiated organism are not revealed. -

Experience with experimental work shows that more complete information on the
effect of electromagnetic fields can be obtained when using a different principle,
which can be designated the "synthetic" principle. The latter provides for the
study of the particular indicators against a background of exposure to extreme
factors, with the influence of which the system being evaluated is brought to
the upper limit of its functioning. Under natural conditions, such kinds of
changes occur in the thermal regulation system. when it is hot, this system is
loaded in one direction, and in a cold (in the winter), it is loaded in the
other. Against the background of substantial differences in the stress on this
system, an additional load on it because of exposure to an electromagnetic field
will be accompanied by unequal shifts in its functional status indicators, some-
thing which makes it possible to estiaate the degree of the unfavorable impact
of a factor.

- 3g -
FINIOIIKJAL.USE¢NVLY
F1Il¢lﬂﬂ€lAl.llﬂB(HﬂlY

where it is measured every 30 minutes for 2 hours. The radiation
exposure occurred in the interval between the first and subsequent
measurements.

2. H is the mean arithmetic value of the arterial pressure gradients and
m is the mean arithmetic error.

3. The Student-Fisher t criterion was used.

As is well known, the initial functional status of an organism depends not only
on seasonal temperature fluctuations in the environment, but also on previously
sustained illnesses, the degree of training for physical loads and the like. In
this regard, when setting the harmful effect thresholds for electromagnetic
fields, it is extremely important to correctly simulate the actual situation of
multiple factor exposures in the experiment.

The following two experimental schemes were used successfully in our research.

In the first case, an animal which was trained to any extreme factor (heat,
physical loads, etc.),-was subjected to a low intensity electromagnetic field,

and then again exposed to the extreme stimulus, to which the organism had been
previously adapted. In this case, it was established by how much the previously
acquired immunity of the organism to this stimulus was disrupted by the electro-
magnetic field and how long traces from the electromagnetic irradiation remained.
Trials on dogs demonstrated that when exposed to an electromagnetic field with

an intensity of one mil/cm2 , the disruption of the adaptation to a high temperature
environment can continue for up to three days.

Similar results were obtained in trials using rabbits, which were trained to high
temperatures by means of infrared rays. The results of these studies are cited
in Table 1. It can be seen from the table that the loss of adaptation effect as
regards arterial pressure is quite distinct. The data cited here are'indirect
evidence that microwaves actually have a nonthermal effect. If they were to cause
only a thermal effect, just as infrared rays, the elevated resistance to high
temperatures which was achieved should have been preserved (there would have been
a positive transfer of the adaptation to microwave heating). However, as follows
from the data given in the table, no such phenomena were observed. Similar
effects were detected in trials using rabbits, adapted to microwaves at a differ-
ent wavelength (Table 2). as well as with dogs. For the latter, electrocardio-
grams, respiration and rectal temperature were recorded in addition to the
arterial pressure [7].

The data of Table 2 show that the immunity developed to one wavelength is not
accompanied by increased immunity to another. 0n the other hand, when exposed
to decimeter wavelengths, a decrease in immunity is observed. Thus, radio
waves in this band disrupt adaptive responses developed for exposure-to centi-
meter wavelengths. The latter provides a basis for stating that the mechanism
for their action and the response of the counteraction differ for each of the
indicated wavelength bands.

A second variant of the experiments provided for conducting studies on animals
with an artificially disrupted activity of the regulator mechanisms or after
the animals had sustained some kind of illness. The results of these kinds

- 39 -

ﬁOI‘OIIIClAI.lEIB¢NILY
Nulber
of
Trials

Conditions of the
Trials

 

Initial data (4 days of

observation) 20

lat-4th sessions of cm
wavelengths (A - 12.6 cu;
energy flux density -

- 50 nH/cmz; 30 min ex-
posure). Rectal temperature
rise of 1.3° C

9th-11th sessions of cm
wavelengths with the same 15
parameters

20

12th - 15th sessions of ca
wavelengths with the same
paraneters. For one day
before each session. irrad-
iation with dn wavelengths
(A - 60 cm, energy flux
density . 1 mH/cn , 30 min
exposure)

20

16th - 19th sessions of ca
wavelengths of the sane
parameters, for 30 min
before the session, irrad-
iation with do wavelengths
(energy flux density -

1 nH/cmz)

let - 22nd sessions of ca
wavelengths with the same
parameters; prior to each of
them, irradiated by the sane 10
cm wavelengths with an nergy
flux density of 1 mH/cm .

20
INII‘OIIICIAI.IISEICHWLY

TABLE 3.

Specific Features of t e Impact of Microwave (1 - 10 cm; Energy
Flux Density - 5 mH/cm ; 30 Minute Exposure) on the Organism of
a Dog Which Has Sustained Radiation Sickness
After an X—ray Rad-
After iation Dose of 200 r

 

 

Indicators Backs Hicro- Peak of Significance
Being ground wave Ir- the Rad- 3 aonths Hicro- of the Differ-
Studied radiation ietion Later wave lr- encea "hen
Sickness radiation Compared
P

l 2 3 6 5 6 2-6 6-6
Conditioned '
motor reflexes:
a) Latent per- 2.8 3 65 7.2 56.2 0.01 0.5
iods in sec
b) Number of
hits on the 3.2 3.6 1.6 3.2 0.2 0.01 0.05
pedal
Conditioned
secretion
reflexes (quan-
tities in 16.6 18.2 5 16 6.6 0.01 0.5
drops)
Maximum arter-
ial pressure, 139 163 167 138 168 0.01 0.5
an Hg ' -
Number of 9,250 6,810 2,250 2.560 6,650
leukocytes
Trophic dis- Sores in
turbances the region

of the knee
and foot

joints

Note: Each figure in columns 2 - 6 is the average of five trials.

As has been shown in the studies of various authors. some of the symptoms of
previously sustained illnesses can reoccur in dogs with an artificially induced
myocardial infarct, uhich was achieved by means of tying off one of the coronary
arteries or by endocrine system insufficiency which was created by removal of
the hypophyais or the thyroid gland. It is obvious that the partial reoccur-
rence of a previously sustained illness (or function insufficiency) should

also be treated as an indicator of a damaging effect.

The question of the threshold levels for the unfavorable action of radio fre-
quency emissions is closely related to the estimation of the significance of
exposure parameters, and primarily, to the intensity (P) and duration (T) of

- 41 -

FOI‘OIIIJAI.USS(N‘LY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

the irradiation. As was shown in paper [8]. the same effect can be observed with
substantial differences in the intensity, but with different exposure durations.
Achieving different effects as a function of the exposure intensity and time
occurs when the following conditions are observed, defined by the formula:

T - H/kP

where T is the exposure time in minutes;
w is the incident energy density, ﬁg'ﬂin/CIZ;
P is the radiation intensity, mV/cm ;
k is an experimentally determined coefficient which shows how many times
the radio wave efficiency increases with an increase in the energy
flux density.

The circumstances treated here attest to the necessity of both standardizing

the conditions for the performance of experimental studies and working out
unified criteria for estimating biological effects, without which it is impossi-
ble to have a sufficiently rigorous substantiation of the threshold levels of
the unfavorable effecr of radio frequency electromagnetic radiations.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Carpenter 3.2., et al., "Biologic Effects of Microwave Radiation with Particular
Reference to the Eye". Proc. 3-d Int. Conf. Meet. Electron., London, Vol. 3,
p 601.

2. "Vliyaniye SVCh-izlucheniy na organism cheloveka i zhibotnykh" ["The Impact of
Microwave Radiations on Human and Animal 0rganisns"], edited by 8.1. Petrav,
Leningrad,"Meditsina". 1970.

3. Gorodetskaya S.F., "Punktsional'nyye i morfologicheskiye izmeneniya polovykh
organov samtsov belykh myshey pri vozdeystvii SVCh polya" ("Functional and
Morphological Changes in the Sex Organs of Male Hhite Mice Exposed to a Micro-
wave Field"], in the book,"cigiyena truda i biologicheskoye deystviye EM poley
radiochastot" ["Labor Hygiene and the Biological Effect of Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields"). Moscow, Scientific Research Institute of Labor Hygiene
and Occupational Diseases of the USSR Academy of Mecidal Sciences. 1963,
pp 25-26.

4. Gusarov D.V., "Vliyaniye SVCh-polya na fizicheskuyu trenir0vannost' eksperi
mentsl'nykh zhivotnykh" ["The Influence of a Microwave Field on the Physical
Training of Experimental Animala"], VMZh [MILITARX MEDICAL JOURNAL]. 1971.
3’ Pp 61-66 0

S. Lobanova Ye.A., "Vyzhivayemost i razvitiye zhivotnykh pri raznoy intensivnosti
i dlitel'nosti vozdeystviya SVCh" ["Animal Survival Rate and Development for
Microwave Exposures of Different Durationa and Intensity"), TEDDY MII GIGIYENY
TRDDA I PRDPZAVOLEVANIY AMN 8583 [PROCEEDINGS OF THE SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
INSTITUTE OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE AND OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES OF THE USSR ACADEMY
or MEDICAL scmucas], No 1, Moscow, 1960, pp 61-64.

- 42 -

FORIIHNCIAI.USE(NNLY
INDI‘OIINCJAI.IENE(NVLY

METHODS AND CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING THE RESULTS OF STUDIES ON VOLUNTEERS
IN RESOLVING QUESTIONS 0? SETTING HEALTH SAFETY STANDARDS

T.V. Kalyada, V.N. Nikitina and H.V. Shepeleva

Studies of the physiological laws governing the interaction of the organism of
man and electromagnetic radiations should occupy an important place in solving
the problem of the biological effect and substantiating the maximum permissible
levels of nonionizing radiations.

The study of these laws will make it possible to estimate the biological effects
of the action of a factor at the level of a quite complex, highly organized
biological systez, such as the human organism. Some authors believe that the
property of perceiving weak electromagnetic fields occurs only at the level of
complex, highly organized biological systems, and it is possible that this
property is fully manifest only in the human organism [11. The study of the
biological effect of electromagnetic fields on the human organism has the
advantage that its results in resolving questions of setting health safety
standards can be used directly without any corrections related to the extrapo-
lation to man of experimental data obtained with animals.

The experimental study of the biological effects of low intensity electromagnetic
fields makes it possible to ascertain the physiological systems most sensitive

to electromagnetic fields in various portions of the spectrum and establish

the threshold values of the radiation parameters for various reactions of an
organism.

Under conditions of long term exposures, which is possible only at low irrad-
iation intensities, it is possible to trace the development of shifts of an
adaptive and cumulative nature, which can be manifest, in particular, by a
change in the level of functioning of individual physiological systems. The
study of the genesis of functional changes in the human organism with the
action of electromagnetic radiation or in combination with other factors in
the industrial environment makes it possible to compare the concept of possible
paths for the development and the nature of formation of adaption reactions,
as well as clinical manisfestations related to the exposure to the factor.
This in turn serves as a good basis for the development and organization of
a system of prophylactic measures directed towards preventing the unfavorable
effect of electromagnetic radiations.

An extremely limited amount of research drawing on volunteers has been done at
the present time to study the biological effect of radio frequency electromag-
netic emissions.

Some of them are related to the determination of the threshold levels of micro-
wave radiations which cause a perception of heat in man. It has been determined

that with exposure to 10 cm wavelength waves, th s effect occurs at 10 mil/cm2
[2], and with exposure to 3 cm waves. at l mu] [3].

- 43 -

IIIICIHHCIAI.USE(NNLY
IIIICINNCJAI.USEiDNlN

Visual, aural, tactile and other effects caused by radiation have been des-
cribed [A]. “.1. Hatuzov, in studying the area of the projection of the

blind spot and adequate opgical chronaxy in the case of microwave irradiation
at an intensity of l mH/cm . noted an elevation in the irritability of the
visual analyzer [6]. S.P. Libikh later demonstrated that lower intensities
caused an expansion of the scotona while higher doses caused a contraction [5].

Sound perception with the action of microwaves has been described in detail by
a number of authors [6]. A similar effect has been observed with exposure to
lower frequency electromagnetic fields at 60 Hz to 15 KB: [7]. "hen msn have
been irradiated with a microwave field at an intensity of l to 3 mH/cm , a
disruption of coordination of movements has been noted [8]. When studying
reactions to a moving object (RDO), it been determined that microwave
irradiation with an intensity of l mH/cl increases the reaction precision.
something which can be viewed as a stimulating effect of weak microwave energy
doses. Extremely interesting is the fact that changes in the indicators for
response to a moving object show an onset only after four to five days of
exposure. The same thing has been observed when studying the hemodynamics of
volunteers with dosed exposure to microwaves [9]. In this case. irradiation at
an intensity of l mil/cm2 has led to an increase in almost all hemodynamic indi-
cators (with the exception of pulse pressure and sy tolic volume). The effect
of radiation with an energy flux density of 3 mH/cm caused a reduction in the
indicators being studied. In the case of coebined exposure to microwave and
VHF electromagnetic fields, no changes were detected after 5 exposures, but
after 10, the depressive action of the factor was noted. Also noted was a rise
in the extent to which biochemical changes were pronounced in step with the
increasing number of exposures [10].

In the authors' own research, in the case of exposure to electromagnetic fields
of low intensity, no substantial shifts in the reactions being studied were
noted in the first four to five days of irradiation. Only in subsequent days
was a realignment of functions at a new level of activity noted.

Some researchers in the case of inadequate repetition of the exposures have not
obtained reliable measurements, and in a number of cases have drawn the insuffi-
ciently substantiated conclusions that low intensities are biologically insig-
nificant.

The results of published research attest to the fact that different systems of
the organism respond to the action of a factor in different ways. Thus. a
study of functional shifts in the blood system of man in the case of microwave
irradiation (l mW/cmz) established that after the first exposure session,
phagocytosis intensity fell off. ”hen the number of exposure sessions was
increased up to 5 to 10, as well as during the aftereffect period, the studied
indicators for irradiated animals did not differ from the control values.

Studies of the gas exchange sta us of volunteers exposed to microwave irradia-
tion at an intensity of 3 m9] demonstrated that in the first days of expo-

sure, oxygen consumption increased among the test subjects. In step with the
repetition of the exposures (seven days), the response reactions smoothed out.

- 44 -

FIHIC”HHC1AI.U§BIMNLY
FIIICIWWCJAI.USE¢DNLV

This served as the basis for concluding that there was adaptation to the action
of the factor. however, after 9 to 10 sessions of irradiation, just the opposite
reaction was observed, i.e., a decrease in oxygen utilization [ll].

The results of many years of industrial experimental research, performed in the
Leningrad Institute of Occupational Diseases and Labor Hygiene have demonstrated
that the study of the interrelationships between the physiological functions of
man and a physical factor in the industrial environment can be accomplished both
under actual production conditions and in a laboratory experiment with simulated
production variations of the exposure or variations specified by the theoretical
studies. Physiological studies of man, in our opinion, should be based on para-
clinical research techniques which have become widespread in medicine. Even the
term "paraclinical" emphasised their integral relationship with conventional
clinical investigation techniques. The use of these techniques under conditions
of human labor activity has expanded the possibilities for evaluating the func-
tional status of an organism working under conditions of the unfavorable action
of factors in the production environment. In choosing the methods for func-
tional studies, one should work primarily from the clinical manifestations of
exposure to a factor and the nature of the pathology. The major feature of the
procedural approach in evaluating functional changes is the comprehensive

nature of the studies, which makes it possible to establish the presence. nature
and extent to which deviations in the functions being studies are pronounced.

In this case, the choice of the specific research methods is determined primar-
ily by the task posed by the research. Thus, for example, the frequent task of
estimating the reactions of any one system makes it possible to more deeply
investigate the choice of adequate methods which thoroughly reveal the functional
activity of this system. Tasks of a wider scope require the choice of methods
which make it possible to evaluate the functional status of the systems most
sensitive to the action of a factor, where these systems are functionally inter-
related.

Physiological investigations should be carried out in different variants, both
under conditions of relative quiet and under conditions where functional loads
are applied to more fully evaluate the system being studied. In this case, to
obtain comparable data, the studies should be performed under strictly identical,
standard conditions.

The analysis of accumulated material obtained as a result of evaluating the
functional status of an organism working under conditions of exposure to elec-
tromagnetic fields attests to the expediency of performing these kinds of
studies and makes it possible to note the major requirements placed on their
performance. For physiological studies in a production environment. it is
necessary to carefully select both the main and control groups of subjects.
The work conditions of the groups being compared should be identical in terms
of the nature of the work process, and the characteristics of the industrial
environment with the exception of the electromagnetic factor. The conformity
of the groups should be observed both with respect to such indicators as sex,
age. length of service, etc. The study should be performed on healthy persons,
and in the same seasons of the year if the work is carried out over a number
of years. The groups of study subjects should be segregated according to

- 45 -

FIII(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.lEIE(MVLY
FOI!0FFKJAL.USE(HVLY

various attributes, such as for example, frequency band, irradiation conditions
and intensity, the combination of exposures, etc.

On of the major trends in the study of the functional status in the organism of
workers is to be considered the statistical physiological assessment of the
various homeostatic systems of the organism, i.e., the evaluations of the levels
of their functional activity, which are produced during the process of environ-
mental exposure, including the exposure to the factor being studied.

The functional systems under study can be physiologically characterized by
means of determining their indicators recorded in various ways prior to the
start of the work process under conditions of relative quiet. For a deeper
assessment of the functional capabilities of the physiological systems being
studied, adequate functional loads should be employed.

when performing such research, sufficiently large contingents of workers under
conditions of exposure to electromagnetic fields and appropriate control groups
have been selected, something which has made it possible to comparatively eval-
uate the data obtained in different groups with various lengths of service and
to characterise the dynamics of the functional realignment of the systems of
the organism in the process of exposure to the factor being studied.

From standpoints of modern physiology, the transition of physiological systems
from one functional level to another can, on one hand, in the case of adaptation,
be accompanied by increased performance of the functional system, and on the
other, by a reduction in its performance as a result of fatigue and functional
exhaustion.

Physiological studies of workers can also be accomplished during the execution
of production operations during the course of a work day. It is well known that
the work process generates a definite dynamic stereotype, characteristic of
various professional groups. In those cases where the production activity is
realized under conditions of unfavorable exposure to a particular factor in the
production environment, one can anticipate disturbances of the developed stereo-
type or the one being developed.

A third extremely important trend in research is the study of biological rhythms.
As our research has shown, workers under conditions of irradiation are capable
of changing the diurnal periodicity of their physiological functions.

Experimental studies using low intensity electromagnetic fields on volunteers,
not previously exposed to radio waves, guarantee complete exposure safety, and
consequently, the permissibility of a detailed study of the factor.

Persons included in a laboratory experiment should be practically healthy. The
preliminary assessment of the physiological indicators of the functions under
study provides for a rather homogeneous selection of volunteers according to
typological features and adequacy of the reactions to the procedures being
employed and the experimental situation.

- 66 -

FOI‘OIIICIAI.IEI!(MNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

The first step in an experimental study consists in extinguishing the orienta-

tion reactions and the adaptation of the test subjects to the experimental con-
ditions. This period continues for no more than five days. The extinguishing
of the orientation reactions is determined by the relative stability of the
indicators being recorded. This step should be executed in precise time wise
accord with the experimental model. The next step in the investigations. being
a continuation of the first, should provide for the capability of a comparative
assessment of the parameters being studied with imaginary and real irradiation
of various test subjects.

Concurrently with the major experimental group, the research is performed on
persons not exposed to irradiation, i.e., only with imaginary exposure to the
factor. Such control is especially expedient during long term experiments and
has the goal of ascertaining the presence of cumulative effects. In this case.
the duration of the research with exposure to the factor being studied should
be no less than 20 days. Such a formulation of an experimental study makes it
possible to ascertain the threshold values of electromagnetic fields based on
the criterion of functional accumulation of a biological effect, which is of
great importance in substantiating standard values.

Each experimental study should be performed during definite hours, under
strictly monitored, fixed meteorological conditions, while maintaining the
specified irradiation parameters. Each experiment begins with a preliminary

20 to 30 minute adaptation of the test subject to the microclimatic conditions
in the laboratory should be optimal. Then, the physiological parameters of the
functions being studied are recorded in a definite sequence so as to avoid
possible functional loading by one method on the sequentially recorded indicators
for another function. Repeated recording of the indicators is accomplished in
a set sequence: isnediately after terminating the radiation and during the
recovery period. The daily exposure is determined in each specific case either
by the industrial.time wise models for the irradiation or by the theoretical
tasks of the research. Investigations of physiological systems can be carried
out during the irradiation process. In this case, to avoid artifacts when
recording indicators, it is necessary to preclude the possibility of contact
between the metal sensors and the human body during general irradiation or
with parts of the body exposed to local electromagnetic fields.

Based on an analysis of data in the literature and experience with their own
research. the authors consider it possible to recommend the following methods
for functional studies of volunteers:

-Electroencephalography;

-Hethods of evaluating various analyzer systems (visual, aural. temperature);
--Psycho-physiological tests;

-Hechanical cardiography;

--Rheop1ethysmography;

--0cclusion and simple plethysmography;

--Study of heat regulation, etc.

To assure the compatibility of work results, not only the procedural approaches
to the performance of industrial and experimental studies should be standard-
ized, but also the set of physiological instrumentation used in them.

- 47 -

F0. OFFICLAI.USEIDNLY
FOB‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY

Up to the present time, no unified principles have been developed for evaluating
the impact of an environment, including electormagnetic fields, on functional
systems of an organise. It is well known that the physiological substantiation
of the recommended maximum permissible level of industrial environmental fac-
tors should be based on definite physiological criteria. One of these criteria,
in our opinion, when evaluating the threshold effect of electromagnetic

fields in experimental studies on volunteers can be the cumulative biological
effect which is manifest in a change in the level of functioning of the systems
of the organism which are most sensitive to long term exposure.

When resolving questions of setting health safety standards, the results of
experimental research must be interpreted correctly, for which it is essential
to compare them with data in the case of imaginary exposure and with control
group data, as well as with the data obtained from practically healthy persons
during industrial observations, with the obligatory comparison to clinical
manifestations of exposure to the factor.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Presman A.S., "Elektromagnitnyye polya i zhivaya priroda" ["Electromagnetic
Fields and Living Nature"], Moscow, "Nauka" Publishers, 1968, pp 9-11.

2. Vendrik A., Vos J., "Comparison of the Stimulation of the ﬂarmth Sense Organ
by Microwave and Infrared", J. APPL. PHYSIOLOGY. 1958, 13, 635.

3. Hendler 5., Hardy, "Infrared and Microwave Effects on Skin Tasperature
Sensation", J. TRANS. IRE MED. ELECTEORICS, HB-7, 1960, V. 31, 1, p 43.

a. Matuzov N.I., "Izmeneniye vozbudimosti sritel'nogo analizatory u lyudey pri
vozdeystvii mikrovolnsmi“ ("Change in the Irritability of the Visual Analyzer
in Persons Exposed to Microwavea"], BYULLETEN' EKSPERIMENTAL'NOY BIOLOGII,
[BULLETINOFBXPERIHEN’IAL BIOMGY], 1959, Vol. 48, 7, p 27-31.

5. Libikh S.F., "Punktsional‘naya mobil'nost' setchatki glaza pri vozdeystvii
na cheloveka SVCh-polya" ["Punctional Mobility of the Retina with Human Exposure
to a Microwave Field"], in the collection, "Voprosy biologicheskogo deystviya
SVCh elektromagnitnogo polya" ["Questions of the Biological Effect of a Micro-
wave Electromagnetic Field"), Leningrad, 1962, pp 30-31.

6. Pray A., "Human Response ot Very Low Frequency Electromagnetic Energy", NAVAL
RES. REV.. 1963, 16, pp 1-6.

7. Hiske 6., "Human Sensivity to Electric Fields", "Biomedical Science.
Instrumentation", N.Y., Plenum Press, 1963, 1, 667.

8. Pivovarav M.A., "Vliyaniye SVCh-polya malykh intensivnostey na nekotoryye
analizatory cheloveka" ["The Influence of a Low Intensity Microwave Field on
Some Human Analyzers"). in the collection, "Voprosy biologicheskogo deystviya
SVCh elektromagnitnogo polya" ["Questions of the Biological Effect of a
Microwave Electromagnetic Field"]. Leningrad, 1962, pp 35-36.

- as -

FOI(HHNCDUL1EHBONLY
9.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pofsnov P.N., "0b izneneaiyakh genodinaniki u cheloveka pri vozdeystvii SVCh
elektronagnitnykh vole" ["0n Changes in the lemdynasics of Man with Exposure

to Microwave Electroeagnetic Havea"], in the collection, ”Gigiyena truda i
hiologicheskoye deystviye EMV radiochastot" ["Industrial Hygiene and the
Biological Effect of Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Haves"], Scientific Re-
search Institute for Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases of the USSR Acadely
of Medical Sciences, Moscow 1968, pp 161-162. '

Syngayevskays V.A.. Sinenko G.P., "Aninokislotnyy sostav krovi lyudey i rhivot-
nykh posle oblucheniya sverkhvyaokochastotnyni elektrostagnitnyni polyani"

["‘l'he Amino Acid Couposition of the Blood of Persons and Animals Following
Exposure to Microwave Electromagnetic Pielde"], in the collection. "Vliyaniye
SVCh izlucheniya an organism cheloveka i zhivotnykh" ["Inpact of Microwave
Radiation on Human and Animal Organisms”], Leningrad, 1966, pp 57-65.

Listova N.M.,"O roli shchitovidnoy :helesy v izneneniyakh gazoolmena pri vozdeya-
tvii EMV radiochastot" ["On the Role of the Thyroid Gland in Changes in Gas
Exchange with Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Haves"], Scientific
Research Institute for Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases of the USSR
Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, 1968, p 89.

-49-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIHICHNNCIAI.U3310NLN

TUB TASKS ARD PLACE OF CLINICAL RESEARCH IN SETTING HEALTH SAFETY STANDARDS
FOR ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIO FREQUENCY EMISSIONS

v.0. Artamonova and A.Ye. Vermel'

The impact of radio frequency electromagnetic fields on the human organism has
been studied for a long time, though changes in the functional status of organs
and systems in people exposed to a given factor nonetheless are frequently
treated far from the same way by various authors. The reason for this lies,

on one hand, in the inadequate knowledge of the mechanism for the action of
electromagnetic radiations, and on the other hand, in the absence of unity in
the interpretation of the reactions observed in this case.

As is well known, the basis for establishing the maximum permissible levels of
radio frequency exposures is the ascertaining of the harmful thresholds. In the
USSR, decisive importance is attributed in this case to functional changes, in
contrast to a number of foreign countries where the major role is assigned to
morphofunctional disturbances.

Noting on the whole the definitive achievements of domestic medicine in the
study of the clinical picture of radio frequency exposures, it is necessary to
note at the same time that a whole series of questions relating to the problem
continue to remain insufficiently worked out up until now.

In analyzing the literature devoted to the study of human organism reactions to
exposure to low-intensity electromagnetic fields. attention is drawn to the
extraordinarily large number of search investigations directed touards ascer-
taining both the clinical shifts and the changes in the individual laboratory
indicators. The estimated indicators also include those such as subjective
reactions to the irradiation, status indicators for the higher nervous activity
and cardiovascular system. digestive organs, kidneys, endocrine organs. as well
as the organs of vision and hearing. The influence of electromagnetic fields
on 336's and ERG's, gastric secretion, the morphological composition of the
blood, individual biochemical indicators, immunity status, reproductive function
and the overall morbidity has been described in detail [1-6].

It must be noted that the clinical significance of the data cited in various
papers is not of the same value. A significant number of the ascertained
shifts cannot be treated solely as a manifestation of pathology. Some of
them can be treated as responses to an external stimulus (the electromagnetic
field), i.e., belong among the indicators of radio sensitivity. or themselves
reflect the development of phenomena of an adaptive nature.

Undoubtedly, a characteristic feature of the development of radio damage is
the occurrence of functional disturbances in the central nervous system,
in particular, the hypothalamus_and in reticular formation. These disturbances

are manifest as clinical syndromes, which vary in frequency and the extent
to which they are pronounced, but are close to each other in essence and number

FOIIOFFKJAI.UBEINULY
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY

aaong neuroses with varying degrees of vegetative disorders [6]. This includes
vegetative dystonia (and as a special case. neurocirculator dyatonia with
various disorders of central and peripheral henodynamics), as well as neurss-
thenic or astheno-neurotic syndromes. differing degrees of vegetative-vascular
paroxysms and some others.

Despite the unanimous opinion of domestic clinical specialists and physiologists
concerning the functional nature of the disorders emanerated above, various
researchers do not give the same interpretation to the physiological reactions
and clinical syndromes which develop in persons exposed to radio waves. It must
be pointed out that even in the question of the rightfulness of the concept
"radio frequency illness“, there are various points of view. In essence. there

clear cut understanding of the timewiae pathology of the impact of an electro-
magnetic field on the human organism, and public health and safety conditions
as well as the influence of other factors in the industrial environment on the
health status of people working when exposed to electromagnetic fields are not
always correctly taken into account.

Everything that has been said causes well known difficulties in comparing data
obtained by different researchers, since there are no overall criteria for
estimating the observed clinical reactions, and reliable demonstrations of the
relationship of these reactions to the influence of the factor being studied
are frequently lacking. As an example of the not altogether successful treat-
ment of the detected clinical changes, one can refer to the review published
in 1977 devoted to the influence of microwave band electromagnetic fields on
the human cardiovascular system [7]. In this review, such phenomena as the
"muting of heart sounds, the shifting of its boundaries and systolic noise"
are cited as proof of the negative impact of an electromagnetic field on the
cardiovascular system. All of the enumerated attributes are not proof of
cardiac pathology. They are encountered with a very high frequency among
healthy people, and moreover, ascertaining then is of an extremely subjective
nature. The use of such criteria leads the author to an extremely free treat-
ment of the concept of myocardial dystrophy and to an arguable explanation of
the influence of electromagnetic fields on vascular tone. It is also no
accident that some foreign authors point out that the drawbacks to the work
of Soviet researchers are the "limited statistical analysis of the collected
data, the lack of adequate control and quantitative evaluation of the material"

[8].

It follows from what has been said that an important task of clinical research
at the present time is the creation of a standardized system of examining
people exposed to electromagnetic radiations. and the development of uniform
principles for evaluating the reactions of the human organism to the indicated
exposure.

Along with this, the successful resolution of numerous clinical problem proves
to be possible only given a combining of efforts by clinical specialists in
variOus institutions in our country, i.e., with the organization of widescale
clinical research within the framework of a unified comprehensive program.

This program should make it possible to resolve the questions posed above in

a comparatively short time, and in particular. to collect a maximum of informa-
tion and make the interpretation of the obtained data objective.

-51-
MOWIBEONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These kinds of clinical studies are widespread at the present time and assist
in the operationally timely solution of many complicated problems. It was
specifically because of the clearcut manner in which cooperative research was
set up in the U.S. that they were successful in their time in solving many
problems of berylliosis in a short period of time. Hide scale international
clinical studies are underway in our time. For example, the effectiveness of
various chemotherapy schemes for certain neoplasms as well as the epidemiology
of cardiovascular illnesses, etc. is being studied in the plan of the Soviet-
American medical program.

Since the creation of a standardized system of examining workers is of decisive
significance in the conduct of cooperative research, it is exceptionally import-
ant to establish the critical organs and systems which are the most sensitive
to electromagnetic radiation esposure, as well as to choose the main clinical
and laboratory indicators which objectively reflect human reactions to the
action of the factor being studied.

To assure the capability of comparing data obtained under different industrial
conditions. it is necessary to take into account the characteristics of radio
frequency emission as a whole with all other factors in the production environ-
ment. In this regard, the parameters of the electromagnetic exposure and
frequency range, nature of the radiation (continuous or pulsed), nature of the
exposure (constant, intermittent; overall, local), the intensity, duration as
well as the possible impact of other production factors (noise, x-ray radiation,
the temperature factor, labor intensity, etc.) and those of a nonproduction
nature (social and everyday living conditions, etc.) must be indicated in the
public health and environmental physiology characteristics which are obligatory
for any occupational pathology and clinical investigation.

As has already been noted, the interpretation of clinical shifts which take
place under the influence of low intensity electromagnetic fields poses
definite difficulties. The developing functional changes on the part of the
central nervous system, which are manifest in diverse neurotic syndromes, do
not have any kind of specificity, while their appearance is one of the most
frequent responses to the action of multifarious stimuli of an exogenic and
endogenic nature. As is well known, the development of a neurosis can be the
consequence of conflict situations in domestic life and in production, as well
as exhaustion. unfavorable meteorological conditions, intercurrent injections,
the result of exposure to diverse physical or chemical factors, etc.

Naturally, the lack of specific radio wave damage marker criteria among the
cited clinical reactions makes a precise etiological diagnosis of the observed
functional changes difficult. Along with this, it has been noted that these
changes, which are usually of the same type, occur only among workers who have
a long length of service and are exposed to electromagnetic radiations at
levels exceeding the maximum permissible levels.

The careful dynamic observation of the test contingent of persons and the choice

of the appropriate control groups of people working under similar conditions,
but not exposed to electromagnetic fields, are of great importance in understand-

-52-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIIICIWHCJALIJEEGNNLM

ing the role of radio frequency emissions in the development of particular
clinical reactions.

Taking into account the nature of the physiological reactions and the clinical
shifts which develop, it is necessary to select the most informative research
techniques when creating a standardised system of medical examination of persons
subjected to electromagnetic radiations. In this case, it is expedient to break
them down into obligatory and facultative. To be included among the first is
the detailed clinical examination (by a neuropathologist, therapist and oculist).
Working from the specific features of changes in the nervous system when exposed
to radio frequency electromagnetic fields, special attention must be devoted in
the clinical status to ascertaining the attributes of vegetative dysfunction.

In this regard the data on patient history should contain information on the
ability to endure unfavorable microclimatic exposures (cold, heat, a stuffy
room), accelerations (trips in a car, swing, hammock, boat), the extent to
which vegetative reactions are pronounced in the case of agitation (nasal vaso-
motor lability. hyperhydrosis and hypothermia of the hands, heartbeat), with

the precise time when these disturbances appeared (starting in youth or in later
years; the months).

Attention should be devoted to the presence or absence of vegetative shifts
during the neurological examination: in the dermal vascular response to
mechanical and chemical stimuli, sweating, and studied data on the orthoclino-
static reflex. To more precisely specify the status of the higher functions of
the central nervous system and make the neurotic and asthenic manifestations
objective, it is-expedient to conduct studies of the bioelectric activity of
the cerebrum (336) using functional loads as well as study the reaction thrash-
olds of a number of analyzer systems.

The extent to which vegetative vascular dystonia is spread among persons exposed
to electromagnetic fields determines the necessity of studying overall (central)
and regional (cerebral) hemodynamics. In developing programs, it is necessary
to precisely specify the specific methods recommended for investigating various
hemodynamic indicators (mechanical cardiography, isotope studies. dye tracing,
rheoencephalography, etc.). The measurement of arterial pressure in the
brachial arteries, the determination of the size of the vessels in the fundus

of the eye and EKG examination are to be numbered among the obligatory methods
of studying the cardiovascular system.

Besides those included among the obligatory methods, one should also include
the description of the status of the transparent media of the eyes, the study
of lipid exchange and the study of the morphological composition of the blood.

The set of facultative tests can be determined by the specific features of each
production environment, the scientific interests of the researcher and the
possibilities for using particular techniques. These can include the study of
a series of biochemical indicators, the evaluation of the hormonal status, the
status of the organism's nmmunological activity, etc. When selecting both

the obligatory and facultative tests, one must take into account the possibility
of using them during mass studies. The analysis of the data obtained requires
the observance of a strictly correct approach.

- 53 -
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USI(HNLY
FOI10FIICIALIJSE1DNLY

One of the important tasks of clinical research is the study of the remote
consequences of long term exposure to low intensity electromagnetic fields.

The high frequency of functional neurological disturbances, in combination with
vegetative dystonia in the form of disturbances in the regulation of vascular
tone and extracardial functional disturbances, makes it necessary to carefully
study the prognosticative significance of the indicated disturbances and their
role in the origin of certain general somatic illnesses: primarily hypertension
and chronic ischemic heart disease, as well as the impact of long term expo-
sure to electromagnetic radiation on the development of certain involutionsl
processes. including cataractogenesis. These questions. and in particulat, the
role of the physical factor being studied in the development of hypertension

and coronary pathology are discussed in our literature [9-10]. Bousver, the
conclusions of these papers are still to treated only as preliminary, since

they are based on a comparatively limited amount of clinical data. The clinical
study of the remote consequences of exposure to electromagnetic radiations is

of exceptionally great importance at the present stage, primarily for checking
the substantiation of existing health safety standards and the effectiveness

of the protective measures being taken.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. "Vliyaniye SVCh-izlucheniy na organism cheloveka i zhivotnykh" ["The Impact
of Microwave Radiations on Human and Animal 0rganisms"], edited by 3.1.
Petrov. Leningrad "Meditsina" Publishers, 1970.

2. Ginsburg D.A., Sadchikova M.N., "Electroencephalography Data from Long Term
Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields”, in the book, "0 biolo-
gicheskom deystvii EMP radiochastot" ["On the Biological Effect of Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Eielda"], Moscow, Scientific Research Institute
for Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases of the USSR Academy of Medical

Sciences, No. 3. 1968, pp 30-33.

3. Glotova K.V., Sadchikov M.N., Kochanova Ye.M., "Serdechno-sosudistaya sistema
pri vozdeystvii mikrovolnovogo oblucheniya" ["The Cardiovascular System with
Exposure to Microwave Radiation"), in the book, "Serdechno—sosudistaya sistema
pri deystvii professional'nykh faktorov" ["The Cardiovascular System in the
Case of Exposure to Industrial Factors"], Moscow, "Meditsina" Publishers,

1976. PP 129-152.

6. Drogichina E.A., Sadchikova M.M., "Klinicheskiye syndromy pri voadeystvii
razlichnykh diapazonov radiochastot" ("clinical Syndromes with Exposures to
Various Radio Frequency Bands"], in the book, "0 biologicheskom deystvii elek-
tromagnitnykh poley radiochastot" ["On the_Diological Effect of Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Eields"], Moscow, Scientific Research Institute for Labor Ey-
giene and Occupational Diseases of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, 1966,

pp 105-109.

5. Halyshev V.M., Kolesnik F.A., "Elektromsgnitnyye volny sverkhvysokoy chastoty
i ikh vozdeystviye na cheloveka" ["Superhigh Frequency Electromagnetic Haves
and Their Effect on Man"), Leningrad, "Meditsins" Publishers, 1968.

- 54 -

ltﬂlfﬂﬂﬂCIAl.USElm1lY
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

FOR‘OIIHCJAI.lEﬂE(MVLY

Tyagin N.V.. "Klinicheskiye aspekty oblucheniya SVCh diapazona" ["Clinical
Aspects of Microwave Band lrradiation"], Moscow, "Meditsina" Publishers,
1971.

Medvedev V.P., "Serdechno-sosudiataya sistema cheloveka pri vozdeystvii
elektromagnitnogo polya sverkhvysokikh chastot" ["Human Cardiovascular System
with Exposure to a Microwave Electromagnetic Field"), GIGIYERA TEDDA I PEOP-
ZABOLEVANIYA [INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE AND OCCUPAIIONAL DISEASES], 1977, 1, pp 18-22.

Michaelson S.M., "Biological Effects of Microwave Exposure", in "Biological
Implications of Microwave Radiation" (SyIp. Proc.), Richmond, Virginia, 1969,
pp 35-58.

Lysina 6.6., "Kliniko-fiziologicheskiye sdvigi pri radiataionnom i radiovolnovom
professional'nykh vozdeystviyakh" ["Clinical and Physiological Shifts with '
Occupations Radiation and Radio Have Exposures"], MBDITSIRSKAYA RADIOLOGIYA,
1975, 11, pp 50-54.

Medvedev V.P., "Serdechno-sosudistaya sistena u rabotnikov umstvennogo truda
pri khronicheskom vozdeystvii elektromagnitnogo polya SVCh" ["The Cardio-
vascular System of workers Doing Intellectual Labor in the Case of Chronic
Exposure to a Microwave Electromagnetic Field"), Doctoral Dissertation,
Leningrad, 1973.

- 55 -

FOR‘OFFHJAI.UBE(MVLY
I‘lltﬂﬂﬂClAl.lEli(l‘LY

INFORMATION ON THE ADDRESSES TO THE SEMINAR
I.P. Sokolova and Ye.K. Lebed'

Some 39 persons took part in the discussion of the issues raised at the
seminar concerning the methodology of setting health safety standards for
nonionizing radiations. It is appropriate to present the opinions of the
rather large group of scientists on the most urgent questions of the problem
under discussion.

The problems posed for environmental physiology science in light of the resolu-
tions of the 25th CPSU Congress and the 16th USSR Trade Union Congress were
reflected in the address of deputy chief public health physician of the USSR,
candidate of the medical sciences A.P. Zaichenko, in which the importance of

a more rigorous scientific substantiation of maximum permissible levels was
underscored in light of rapid scientific and technical progress. The author

of the paper especially emphasized the necessity of taking into account the

time factor when setting standards, the importance of bringing the viewpoint of
specialists in occupational and public health safety closer together for the
purpose of developing unified standards which take into account both occupational
and nonoccupationsl exposure. This sane question was reflected in the speech

by professor ".6. Shandala, in whose opinion "It is impossible to establish
regulations for nonoccupational exposure without knowing occupational conditions,
and vice versa". “.6. Shandala believes that all environmental factors can be
broken down into two groups: those inherent in nature and the fundamentally

new ones. In the case of the former, he considers it necessary to evaluate

not only excess exposure which leads to definite reactions of an organism, but
also underexposure, which is likewise fraught with various unfavorable conse-
quences. In evaluating such factors, it is proposed that three levels be
established: optinal, ultimate (or maximum) permissible and the ninimum neces-
sary. In speaking about the responses of an organism to exposure to electroeag-
netic factors, the author singles out four zones: the zone of primary (or evolu-
tionary) adaptation; the zone of compensator reactions or secondary adaptation;
the zone of reparative regeneration and the zone of pathology.

H.c. Shandala feels that the maxinum permissible levels for occupational expo-
sure should fall in the range of compensator reactions,-and for the irradiation

of the populace, it should fall within the range of primary adaptation.

In the opinion of professor 3.". Savin, such an approach is not a real one given
the hardware state of the art. The maximum permissible levels for the populace
should go beyond the range formed by the natural background, since otherwise we
will not in essence be able to do anything which adds to the natural exposures.
For this purpose, a more detailed study of the range which M.G. Shandala called
the zone of compensation is necessary. This range can be extremely great and
change depending on age, health status, etc. B.H. Savin also indicated the
necessity of a specific determination of the reactions, the threshold of which
will be the basis for setting the maximum permissible levels, once again under-

- 56 -

FOI1DFIKJA1.U$E(NVLY
FIHICNHHKJAI.IISI:(”VLY

scoring the fact that in this case, simply an action threshold or sensitivity
threshold cannot be used, since the latter completely depends on the sensitiv-
ity of the study methods employed.

Doctor of the medical sciences A.G. Subbota turned the attention of seminar
participants to the fact that nonionizing radiations encompass an enormous

range of the electromagnetic spectrum, and that only a few bands have been
studied sufficiently well at the present time out of this entire spectrum. This
is evidence of the necessity of organizing wide scale research in the radiobio-
logy of nonionizing radiations. The author of the paper noted fundamental diff-
erences between radio frequency electromagnetic emissions and other factors in
the environment:

--Limited penetration into tissues. which leads to the fact that all of the
shifts via the mechanism of chiasma of the afferent paths are directed towards
opposite portions of the central nervous system and are realized on the side
of the body opposite to the irradiated side; this is evidence of the necessity
of taking into account the worst case exposure variant in the physiological
plan along with the irradiation parameters when developing standards;

--The impossibility of using a number of physiological methods which require
contact between metallic elements (for example, electrodes) and the body
of man or animals, as well as the change in field distribution in the organs
as a function of the direction of irradiation;

-The impossibility of extrapolating data in a number of cases from animals to
man because of differences in the geometric dimensions of the bodies and the
species differences in physiological functions.

Professor Z.V. Gordon turned attention to the fact that the term "radiobiology"
as applied to nonionizing radiations is not a successful one, since it is
traditionally related to ionizing factors. She underscored the lack of health
safety standards in a nunber of nonionizing radiation bands and the necessity

of a more differentiated setting of standards for the radio frequency range.

In this case. Z.V. Gordon grants that the laws which have been sufficiently

well studied in one band (for example. the dose dependence of biological effects)
must be extrapolated to others. since the engineering cannot wait while we

"go throug " all the bands.

The address of v.s. Blumental was devoted to the question of the health safety
_evaluation of intermittent exposures. The author feels that breaking exposures
down into continuous and intermittent without indicating the pulse width and
repetition rate parameters does not make it possible to determine the true
degree of danger of the latter. Moreover, determining the type of irradiation
(continuous or intermittent) requires in a number of cases that special
oscillographic analyses be made of the field. A procedural approach to esti-
mating radar emissions, based on an accounting for the energy characteristics
of the field and organism reactions to the intermittent nature of the exposure.
The concept of effective intensity is introduced for this purpose:

Peff - Pavgy (K) s

where: P“g is the average value of the intensity of the intermittent irrad-
iat on;

- 57 -
FOI‘OIIICIAl.lEi3(ﬂﬁlY
IN)I1OFIWCJAI.IIHE(NULY

y(K) is a factor which takes into account the organism reaction to the
intermittent nature of the exposure, and which depends on the pulsation
coefficient K: K -a.b. , where a. is the magnitude of the periodic
responses of the organismvgn the steady-state mode when a pulsed field
acts on it; savg is the magnitude of the organism response when inter-
mittent radiation acts on it, the carrier frequency and average intensity
of which are similar to the corresponding parameters of the pulsed field.

The determination of the coefficient 7 requires the performance of special
medical and biological studies.

The following are essential for the instrumented determination of irradiation
levels using the proposed approach:

--The measurement of the average value (over the exposure period T) of the
intensity Pav ;

--Heasuring the level of the instrumentation response to the pulsed action of
the field, Pm;

--Sequentially determining: K - PI/Pavg’ 7(3) and Peff - P.vsy(x).

An intrument is needed for the measurement of Pa which has inertial properties
which are chosen from the condition eavg ng/o. where o is the permissible
value of output signal pulsation.

An instrument is needed for the measurement of P., the transfer function of
which is similar to the generalized transfer function of the organism.

In view of the fact that a number of the circuits of the instruments cited here
coincide. in particular, the RF, amplifier and readout circuitry, it is expe-
dient to design one all-purpose instrument, which correspondingly has two
operational modes.

An analysis of the dependence of the average and effective intensities on the
duty-cycle of the irradiation for different values of the relative pulse width
(1/0) shows that with a reduction in the pulse width, the values of Peff
approach the average intensity, and with an increase, they approach the peak
value.

To determine K and Peff. it is necessary to know the time constant of 9. Since
this parameter characterizes the dynamic properties of an organism, it should
be determined on the basis of the corresponding medical and biological data.

In the opinion of candidate of the physical and chemical sciences V.H. Chibrikin,
estimating the intensity of an electromagnetic field based on the energy density
could be used if a thermal mechanism were the basis for the biological effect.

It seems more correct to the author to speak of specific effects or resonance
ones. From the viewpoints of acknowledging the resonance mechanism of an
exposure, the utilization of a dosage approach in setting standards is the

subject of criticism, since not only the energy characteristics of an exposure
are important, but also its timewise distribution and the possibility of

matching the biological rhythms of an organism. In doubting the expediency of

- 53 -
F0!‘0!FK!AI.USE(H!LY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

estimating the total field energy ("tot.)v V.M. chibrikin devoted attention to
the differing sensitivity of biochemical reactions to B and H fields: biochem-
ical processes which are of an ionic nature respond to an electrical field,

and those of a radial nature, react to a magnetic field. In dealing with the
question of extrapolating experimental data, the author emphasized the nonuni-
formity of the comparison of exposures on animals of different kinds by virtue
of the differences in the depth of energy penetration.

Candidate of the biological sciences V.H. Shtemler turned the attention of
seminar participants to the fact that at the present day, the energy interaction
of electromagnetic fields with an organism are the most obvious. From this
viewpoint, it is rightful to speak of a uniform mechanism for the action of

E and H field components, since any alternating magnetic field, in accordance
with the law of electromagnetic induction, induces an electrical eddy field

in body tissues which should interact with tissues in accordance with the same
laws as an ordinary electrical field at the same frequency. Another matter is
that the magnetic component of an electromagnetic field can in principle cause
some specific effects which are due to the magnetic interactions themselves,
with which one must also deal. In particular, it has been demonstrated theoret-
ically and experimentally that it is possible for constant and low frequency
magnetic fields to influence the rate of free radical reactions in chemical
systems. However, the biological role of these kinds of interactions in the
radio frequency band remains unclear at the present time.

In evaluating the cyclical nature of exposures with respect to the circadian .
rhythms of the organism, V.H. Shtemler noted that it can be of importance if
any one system or any one reaction is analyzed. In practice though, the issue
is one of many systems and reactions. the rhythms of which do not coincide,
and for this reason, it is as if the response of the organism as a whole is
the resultant of the exposure of numerous systems.

V.H. Shtemler emphasized that the comparison of exposures to electromagnetic
fields for animals of different species is rightful if one works not from the
external field, but from the internal fields created in the biological object.
Based on the data of American researchers, the author of the paper calculated
the irradiation parameters in electromagnetic fields of different frequencies,
which provide equal average values of the internal electrical field, current
density and absorbed energy for man and animals of different kinds (see the
Table).

Candidate of the medical sciences V.A. Zhuravlev in his address noted the
existence of substantial differences in the set standard levels for radio
emissions adopted in different countries. These differences reach three to
four orders of magnitude. The author noted that the principles of determining
the duration of microwave irradiation based on integral values of the incident
energy (CSSR, Polish People's Republic), as well as setting norms for inter-
mittent exposure (Polish People's Republic) deserve attention. In the opinion
of V.A. Zhuravlev, pronounced but reversible functional changes should be

the basis for the development of maximum permissible levels. By assigning
great significance to health safety margin factors in setting the maximum

- 59 -

IKIICHﬂWC1A1.USEGJNLY
iibl‘OIFlCIAl.llsli(l§LV

TABLE
The Exposure Parameters Necessary to Provide for Equal Values of the
Internal Electrical Field, Current Density and Absorbed Energy Deneity
in the Body of Man and Certain Aninala

The Calculation for Equivalent Spheroidal Models of Man and Aninala

a) Energy Flux Densities for a Plane Electromagnetic Have, in nﬂ/cn2 *.
The Direction of the E Field In Parallel to the Long Axis of the Body

 

 

Average Dog, Rabbit, Rat, Mouse,

Frequency, , Man. 70 kg, 32 kg 3.0 kg 0.32 kg 0.02 kg
MHz 170 cm 90 cm ‘0 cm 20 cm 7 cm

20; Quaeistatic approx-
imation range 1.0 3.6 5.0 5.3 8.0
70; Maximum absorption
for nan 1.0 7.5 18.0 18.5 30.0
130; Maxi-um absorption
for a dog 1.0 0.53 2.0 2.7 6.7
300; Maximum absorption
for a rabbit 1.0 0.57 0.13 0.2a 0.67
600; Maxinun absorption
for a rat 1.0 0.85 0.26 0.06 0.23
1.700; Maximum absorption
for a mouse 1.0 1.0 0.4 0.12 0.02
10,000; Quasioptical
approximation range 1.0 0.9 0.65 0.17 0.06

* Calculation nade from the data of "Radiofrequency Radiation Dosimetry land-
book (Second Edition)" by 0.3. Durney, c.c. Johnson, PM. Barber, et el.,
1978, Departments of Electrical Engineering and Bioengineering, the Univers-
ity of Utah, Report SAM-TR-73-22.

-50-
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE{HNLY
FOICIﬂﬂCJAl.U§EIMULY

TABLE, continued
b) The "Isolated" B Field Intensities (VII) in the Quesietatic Approxination

Freguencz 5228‘ §< 20 "Hz:

 

Exposure Conditions Average Dog Rabbit Rat House
“On— __ _-—
Long axis of Free Space 1 2.27 2.38 2.16 2.71

nan and animal
parallel to Stbject on a
the B field conducting

plane ' 1 2.51 2.65 2.36 3.10
Long axis of Free Space 1 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95
man and aninal
perpendicular Subgect on a
to the E can ucting
field plane 1 0.89 0.88 0.90 0.85
Long axis of Free Space 1 11.6 11.6 11.6 11.6
:znzP:I:iie1 Subject on a
while animal conducting
perpendicular plane . 1 28.5 28.5 28.7 27.3
Long axis of Free Space 1 0.190 0.198 0.178 0.225
:anapeigegdi- Subject on a

conducting

:33 "2:21“ 91.... 1 0.078 0.083 0.073 0.097
_.L——____—_______

c) The Isolated H-Field Intensities (A/n) in the Quaaiatatic Approximation

Freguencg Range (.29 Eng}

Average
Eﬂﬁurg (Indium an Dog Rah“ Kg; Hgme
Identical orientation of the
long axis of Ian and aninal 1 1.06 2.3 5 12
in the B field
Long axis of Ian parallel to
B field, while animal 1 0.75 1.65 3.5 8.5

perpendicular

Long axis of nan perpendicular
to B field, while animal 1 1.5 3.25 7 17

parallel

- 61 -

FOI(IHHCIAI.UBE(IVLY
F0!‘0FFHJAI.USE¢NVBV

permissible levels. he believes that the level of cumulative radio frequency
effects in an organism should be taken as the criterion for determining the
values of the latter. His own research and analysis of the literary data in
this field showed that microwaves have a small cumulative capability. which
indicates the possibility of employing safety margin factors in a range of from
2 to 10.

In ascertaining three major exposure categories (occupational, nonoccupational
in the working zone and irradiation of the populace) and admitting the necessity
of setting microwave radiation standards based on a uniform threshold dose for
man. V.A. Zhuravlev proposes that the following health safety margin factors be
used: 10 for occupationally exposed persons; from 20 to 50 for nonoccupational
irradiation in industry; and 100 for the populace.

In entering the discussions on the report of A. G. Subbots and B.A. Chukhlovin,
"The Choice of Study Methods and Principles of Evaluating Experimental Data
when Setting Radio Emission Standards", professor H.I. Rudnev emphasized the
fact that when working out the maximum permissible levels of radio emissions,
changes of a functional nature are to be taken as the basis. where methods of
studying integral indicators, such as. for example, behavioral reactions and
the like should occupy first place in the set of experimental methods.

In giving a positive assessment of the proposals of the conferees, the author
of the paper considers it expedient to devote more attention to the study of
the status of hormonal functions. the cardiovascular system and remote conse-
quences. He also underscored the necessity of further work on questions of the
significance of various organism reactions and the quantitative evaluation of
the ascertained changes.

Professor A.A. Kasparov in his address emphasized the importance of standardizing
procedural questions when working out health safety norms. He devoted special
attention to evaluation criteria for the harmful effect of a factor. la recalled
that such criteria in toxicological practice are the extent to which the devia-
tions are pronounced, the stability of the changes and the presence of hidden
changes which are ascertained by means of functional loads. Professor A.A.
Kasparov emphasized that the most acceptable approach to nonionizing radiations
must be determined on the basis of analysing existing data, and also noted the
importance of creating a regulating document for working out the maximum permis-
sible levels.

Doctor of the medical sciences B.A. Chukhlovin supported the proposal of A.A.
Kasparov concerning the necessity of working out procedural recommendations.
This document can be written on the basis of existing procedural guidelines
using materials obtained in recent years. In the opinion of B.A. Chukhlovin,

a careful analysis of existing data will make it possible to make a substantial
contribution to the resolution of such questions as the selection of research
methods, precisely specifying the concept of "harmful action threshold" as
applied to exposure to radio radiations, setting a differentiated standard as
a function of the frequency characteristics of a band and exposure time as well
as extrapolating experimental data from animals to man.

- 62 -

liﬂltlﬂﬂClAl.USlt0NlN
F0!‘DFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

Professor “.6. Shandala, in emphasizing the body of research to be used in
ascertaining the threshold levels of a factor, noted that to establish the
adequacy of methods, the understanding of the mechanisms of a factor is of
great importance. Professor H.G. Shandala feels that the set of methods
recommended by the conferees is suitable only for special categories of persons.
However, when the issue involves the population, the regulating of radiation
for persons in various age groups and of different health status. then some
other criteria are needed to evaluate the harmful action of a factor. The
author believes that a special resolution of the question of using the setting
of communal health standards in practice for the health safety margin factors
is also needed.

Candidate of the medical sciences F.A. Kolodub underscored the fact that changes
in the exchange processes are the basis for the structural and functional
changes which are interpreted as signs of harmful exposure to electromagnetic
emissions; among these changes, a disturbance of the energy exchange is to be
put in first place. P.A. Kolodub considers it important to estimate the level
of macroergic [sic] compounds, and the intensity of oxidation and phosphoryla-
tion processes. As far as protein exchange is concerned. changes in it. as a
rule, are evidence of far advanced stages of disturbances. Preformed ammonia
can be used as an integral indicator in this case. The author of the paper
cited nucleic acid content, the overall level of enzymes. testosterones as well
as indicators which characterize the function of the vegetative nervous system
as important biochemical indicators.

I.P. Los' turned the attention of seminar conferces to the importance of devel-
oping predictive methods of studying nonionizing radiations, which requires the
gathering of rather precise information at the present stage, where this infor-
mation characterizes the biological impact of electromagnetic emissions. He
also noted that in research using low intensities, the duration of exposure to
a factor is of great importance. The author of the paper shared the results of
his own work which is directed towards finding integral parameters which charac-
terize the biological activity of radio frequency exposures. In this regard,
indicators for the rate of recuperative processes and the probability of
occurrence of deviations were treated based on the data from an analysis of

the variability of the individual functions which were studied.

v.0. Vatutin emphasized the necessity of standardizing not only the methods of
studying biological indicators, but also the methods of irradiating animals.
Working out the requirements placed on the technical hardware for eXperiments
should be accomplished taking into account the specific_features of specific
radio frequency bands. Such standardization is important from the viewpoint
of the possibility of comparing the results of studies by various authors.

In speaking on the report of T.V. Kalyada, V.N. Nikitina and H.V. Shepeleva,
"Methods and Criteria for Evaluating the Results of Studies on Volunzeers

when Resolving Questions of Setting Health Safety Standards". professor 3.".
Savin dealt with the issue of the site of observations of volunteers included
in other studies when substantiating maximum permissible levels. He does not
share the viewpoints of authors concerning the simultaneous conduct of experi-
mental rcsearch on animals and on volunteers. Such a formulation of the ques-

- 63 -
FOIiOFFKJA1.USE(MﬁLY
INDR 0511(1Al.lEﬂE(HULY

tion. in his opinion, is possible only in those cases where there is already

a sufficient amount of data which makes it possible to estimate the degree of
danger of one exposure or another. And an experiment on animals, in which
obtaining data on safe levels of a factor is assured, should precede studies
on volunteers. The goal of the latter should be to check the safety of the
values recommended as the maximum permissible levels and to ascertain the spe-
cific features of reactions to exposure of the human organism to a factor.

Professor 3.“. Savin then turned the attention of the conferees to the fact that
it is impossible to put an equal sign between the realignment of a functional
level in general and a cumulative effect. A realignment may even be expedient
which is directed towards equalizing external effects. Hhereas a cumulative
effect means that the organism is not coping with the load impinging on it,
that there is no recovery after periodic exposure to a factor, the accumulation
of various shifts with time is observed. The transition from adaptation to a
cumulative effect occurs where the realignment becomes extreme. There is doubt
as to the ability to study such shifts in man. This is evidence of the fact
that the question of criteria for evaluating results obtained in studies on
volunteers requires serious procedural preliminary work.

The seminar participants showed great interest in the clinical questions of
the problem. Candidate of the medical sciences ".8. Sadchikova in her report
characterized the dynamics of clinical manifestations of exposure to a factor.
She demonstrated that for persons working in the production shops of radio
electronics enterprises with intensities of up to several milliwatts per
square centimeter, there was no pathology in the initial years. Hypotension
and bradycardiya were noted in this case on the part of the cardiovascular
system. however, after 7 to 10 years. despite a fundamental improvement in
working conditions, illnesses began to manifest among these persons, where

the diseases are characterized predominantly by the sympathotonic direction of
the vegetative reactions. The vegetative vascular changes were retained among
the patients after the work was stopped, but as a rule, they were no longer
accompanied by paroxysmic manifestations. The author of the paper verified
the fact of the occurrence of ischemic heart disease among a number of workers
and in a few individual cases, myocardial infarct. However, it was not possible
to completely relate these cases to exposure to the factor. H.N. Sadchikova
feels that it is correct to speak of diagnosing an illness related to exposure
to radio frequency electromagnetic emissions as an independent nosological
unit "radio frequency disease".

Doctor of the medical sciences A.n. Vyalov shared his opinion that in occupa-
tional pathology, it is not expedient to use the term "neurosis", which modern
science understands to be of psychogenic origin and due to an unfavorable
social situation or neuro-emotional stresses, and that it is better to speak
of neurosis-like states. He also noted the inhomogeneity of the clinical data
from a symptomatological viewpoint, and the somewhat artificial distribution
of the symptomatology with respect to definite symptoms. A.H. Vyalov called
for a more careful analysis of the clinical symptomatology for the purpose of
defining a single syndrome characteristic of radio frequency exposures, some-
thing which will make it possible to more adequately assess the health status

- 65 -
FOI‘OFEKJAI.USI¢NVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of workers. He defined the presence of changes in the vegetative nervous system
as the most characteristic attribute of occupational pathology, where neurotic

reactions are in first place in the case of situational exposure.

Doctor of medical sciences A.Ye. Vermel' feels that the term "neurosis-like
state" proposed by A.H. Vyalov is not a successful one. since such a diagnosis
should be based only on knowledge that the patient worked under conditions of
exposure to electromagnetic radiations in a particular band, and since the
symptomatology related to exposure to the factor completely conforms to the
clinical picture of neuroses. The author of the report devoted to problems of
clinical studies in setting health safety standards for radio frequency electro-
magnetic emissions does not agree either with proposal of singling out an
illness related to electromagnetic radiation exposure as an independent
nosological form - "radio frequency disease" - since the issue involves known
illnesses of a polymorphous etiology, where the factor we are considering can
also be guilty in the occurrence of the disease along with others. He states
that an illness cannot be called an independent disease which does not have

an independent pathogenesis as well an independent clinical picture and specific
marker criteria.

In the opinion of candidate of the medical sciences K.V. Nikonova, the investi-
gation of the fate of hypertensive states in the clinical picture of radio
exposures is problem No. 1, on the solution of which the fate of our health
safety standards depends to a considerable extent. She turned the attention of
seminar participants to the fact that at high exposure levels for a factor. only
hypotension occurred. The the hypotensive reaction is also a characteristic
feature seen in the data of experilental studies, since hypertension has been
noted in experiments predominantly either with thermal electromagnetic radiation
intensities or as a short term transient phase. The observation that special
studies do not ascertain any definite dependence of frequency and extent of
hypertension cases among workers using microwave sources on the intensity of

the exposure. Considering the nonspecific nature and wide dissemination of the
changes under discussion, the clarification of the question of their relation-
ship to working conditions for various categories of specialists is an important
clinical problem.

Professor Ye.V. Cenmitskiy noted the importance of solving procedural questions
of setting health safety standards for radio emissions. Attributing great
importance to studies on volunteers, he supported the opinion put forward by
B.H. Savin concerning the procedure for the developmental work: first the
experimentation on animals to establish the harmful exposure thresholds and
only thereafter, the studies on man. Analyzing the situation which has arisen
with the recognition of the pathology related to exposure to the factor. in the
USSR and related to its denial abroad, Ye.V. Bewitskiy noted the existence of
significant procedural difficulties when studying the impact of electromagnetic
emissions on an organism. Is there radio wave disease or not? This question
is proving agonizingly difficult to solve for two reasons: 1.. There is no
specific symptomatology; 2. The pathological symptoms are not clearly drawn.
This question requires careful preparation and treatment in a special symposium.
The author of the paper does not support the term "radio frequency illness" and

-65-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USIJONIN

the singling out of all cases of illnesses as independent nosological unit; he
is a supporter of syndromological diagnosis. Ye.V. Gembitskiy emphasized that
despite the arguable nature of the terminology, the question of the possibility
of the occurrence in workers using microwave sources of disturbances of the
functions of the nervous, cardiovascular and other systems of the organism is
beyond doubt. He feels that in the report of v.6. Artamonova and A.Ye. Vermel'.
the following three directions for clinical studies are justified as the major
ones: ascertaining early premorbid forms; studying remote consequences; ascer-
taining the impact of a factor on the course of other illnesses (hypertension,
ischemic disease. stomach ulcers). He thinks that the scheme proposed in the
paper for the conduct of investigations can be taken as the basis. Ye.V
Gembitskiy also turned attention in his address to the fact that the use of

the concept "radio sensitivity" and "radio vulnerability", carried over from
the radiobiology of ionizing radiations does not have adequate bases in the
case of nonioniztng factors.

A number of foreign colleagues, cooperating with Soviet specialists in the
field of standardizing approaches to the environmental physiological evaluation
of nonionizing radiations via CEHA channels likewise became familiar with the
seminar materials. The GDR representative, national coordinator for the indi-
cated efforts, doctor Ju. Kupfer familiarized us with their opinion. He noted
that the materials of the seminar were accepted with approval. as underscored
the importance and timeliness of holding the seminar in connection with the
existence of fundamentally different approaches to the estimation of the

danger of the factor in various nations. Doctor Ju. Kupfer pointed out that
characterizing radio frequency exposures only in terms of the parameter of
intensity is inadequate and it is necessary to take into account the time and
conditions of the exposure as well. He noted that in setting standards for
numerous physical and chemical factors, a dosage approach has proved itself
well and that at the present time, there are all the reasons for discussing

tne possibility of utilizing it in setting standards both for microwaves and
for other lower frequency electromagnetic fields. Doctor Ju. Kupfer warmly
supported the idea of coming up with procedural recolmendations for the
performance of studies having the goal of substantiating maximum permissible
levels. He feels that the recommendations should include the requirements
placed on the conduct of both experimental and epidemiological investigations:
they should set the regulations for the conditions under which experiments are
conducted and the approaches to extrapolating experimental data to man as
applied to various frequency bands. as well as contain a program for processing
biomedical data by means of modern computer hardware. In conclusion, doctor
Ju. Kupfer expressed confidence that the seminar and the decisions it worked
out will promote an increase in the mutual understanding and a coming together
of the points of view of scientists of various nations concerning the question
of estimating the danger of both radio frequency and other bands of nonionizing
radiations.

The material presented in this paper attests to the fact that a number of
extremely important issues was raised at the seminar concerning the methodology
for setting health safety standards for radio frequency electromagnetic emis:

sions. Differing points of view exist at the present time concerning a number

_ 66 -
INNI.Clﬁ1(1Al.lISI:(MQLY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(HULY

of then. It appears that the exchange of views at the seminar will promote
greater closeness in the viewpoints of specialists working in the problem
area and the development of unified approaches to setting standards for the
factor.

- 67 -

FOI(HHWCUU.UBE(MVLY
FINICHWHCIAI.USE‘0NLN

METHODS OF STUDY AND EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR THE BIOLOGICAL EFFECT OF ELECTRICAL
FIELDS AT THE INDUSTRIAL POWER FREQUENCY

B.H. Savin, H.G. Shandala, K.V. Nikonova, and Yu.A. Morozov

The problem of the biological effect of industrial power frequency electrical
fields (2? p/ch) is taking on increasingly greater importance.

The rapid development of electrical power engineering and bringing larger ultra-
high voltage (SVN) power systems on line with lengths of tens of thousands of
kilometers provide the basis for treating the electrical fields they produce

as a factor which takes on ecological significance.

The existing data attest to the fact that industrial power frequency electrical
field can exert an unfavorable influence on the human organism and the environ-
ment. This governs the necessity of setting regulations for the exposure to

the factor. The inadequate degree of study of the biological impact of indus-
trial power frequency electrical fields and the lack of rigorously substantiated
health safety standards sharply increase the difficulty of planning ultrahigh
voltage lines and substations. The lack of scientifically substantiated

design standards in turn can lead to the creation of electrical power trans-
mission lines (LBP's) which are ecologically dangerous or to an unjustified
increase in their cost.

Assuring human and environmental safety from the unfavorable impact of industrial
power frequency electrical fields becomes an especially acute problem because

of the planned placing in service of the 1,150 RV and higher power lines. The
resolution of the question of the ecological safety of the power engineering
facilities of the immediate future depends to a significant extent on the results
of medical and biological research.

The problem of the biological impact of industrial power frequency electrical
fields has a number of independent areas which provide for the study of the
influence of the factor on the human organism as well as flora. fauna and
ecosystems.

Methods of studying and evaluation criteria for the biological impact of indus-
trial power frequency electrical fields are treated in this paper, where these
methods and criteria are employed in substantiating the maximum permissible
levels (PDU) for the action of a factor on the human organism.

In accordance with data from the literature, the intensity of industrial power

frequency electrical fields to which a human can be exposed is already reaching
30 KV/m at the present time. A further rise in the capacities of power systems
and the increasing working voltages may lead to an even greater increase in

the exposure levels. which if special protective measures are not implemented,

may reach 60 KV/m and more.

- 68 -
IMJI‘OIIICJAI.IIBII(I¢LY
IIII()FFICIA1.IISE:(HULY

The resolution of issues related to the study of the impact of industrial power
frequency electrical fields on man was started as early as the 1960's in USSR
because of the mastery of 500 XV electrical power transmission. During these
years, Soviet authors performed a number of investigations, the result of which
was the establishing of the first health safety standards in world practice
which set regulations for the exposure level to industrial power frequency
electrical field for workers [1-2].

mug.-
Health Safety Standards in Force in the USSR
Electrical Field Intensity, Permissible Exposure Time of Personnel
KV/m During a 26-Hour Day, in Minutes
Less than 5 Unlimited
From S to 10 No more than 180
From 10 to 15 No more than 90
From 15 to 20 No more than 10
From 20 to 25 No more than S

 

The maximum permissible levels for electrical fields which are in force in the

USSR, for fields generated by industrial power frequency currents at voltages
of 400 KV and higher, are given in Table 1.

For the remainder of a working day, the electrical field intensity should not
exceed 5 KV/m. At field intensities above 25 KV/m, a provision is made for the
use of special protective gear.

The research materials taken as the basis for the existing health safety stand-
ards have been repeatedly reported at international forums and have caused
great interest among foreign researchers [3]. Along with this, a number of
critical remarks have been put forward. In line with the tasks of this paper,
the indicated materials which have been supplemented with work in later years
will be analyzed in comparing the data of foreign authors for the purpose of
ascertaining the reasons for the contradiction in the opinions on the question
of the unfavorable impact of industrial power frequency electrical fields.

It is completely obvious that the studies performed in the 1960's cannot pre-
tend to a final and exhaustive resolution of the question, since their conclu-
sions were based on the use of a comparatively limited number of methods. They
were basically devoted to an evaluation of the health status and the status of
individual physical functions of the personnel servicing high voltage power
installations and subjected essentially to an aggregate of production factors.

In studies on people, the health status evaluation was made using the data of
a questionnaire and a medical clinic examination of workers using a number of
clinical and laboratory methods.

- 69 -
IIIICIWNCJAI.USE(3'LY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(MNLY

As a result of examining the health status of more than 300 persons, Soviet
authors determined that persons servicing ultrahigh voltage substations and
open wire lines (VL) complained about headaches, irritability, increased
fatigue, sleepiness, disturbance of the nemory and attention. pain in the
region of the heart, a reduction in sexual potency, etc. [6-5].

Various kinds of changes in the regulation of vascular tonus and heart activity
have been described [6]. A change in the content of hemoglobin, reticulocytes,
neutrophyls or tendency towards leucopenia with pathological graininess of the
neutrophyls, monocytosis, moderate thrombocytopenia as well as retardation of
the erythrocyte sedimentation rate have been noted in studies of the peripheral
blood [2, S, 6]. According to the data of V.D. Dyshlovoy and v.s. Kachura [4],
a reduction in the production of male sex hormones of both testicular and
adrenal origin was found in persons with a changed sex function.

Based on the results of a nedical clinic examination of a portion of those
persons involved in servicing ultrahigh voltage electrical facilities. changes
in the functional status of the central nervous and cardiovascular systems were
diagnosed, where these changes are manifest in the form of vegetative vascular
dystonias and more rarely as a neurasthenic syndrome. It was noted that for

the personnel of 500 KV substations, the indicated disturbances were encountered
more often than among workers at 330 KV substations.

It has been noted in a number of papers that the ascertained changes are pro-
nounced to a moderate extent and are of a reversible functional nature [6].

A clinical geneological examination performed on 200 families of 330 KV to

750 KV substation and line service workers did not reveal any changes which
could be related to the effect of the industrial power frequency electrical
fields based on such indicators as the ratio of sexes in the progeny. spontan-
eous abortions, stillbirths, or inherited diseases [6].

The physiological investigations performed by a number of authors in the course
of a working day using a set of methods which allow for the evaluation of the
functional status of the central nervous and cardiovascular systems. visual
analyzer. thermoregulation, etc., found changes among personnel of ultrahigh
voltage substations in the indicators which characterize nemory and attention,
an increase in the sensnmotor reaction time, an elevation of the olfactory sens-
itivity thresholds, a decrease in the frequency of heart contractions, a retard-
ation of intracardial conductivity and a change in vascular tonus [7-9].

Similar data attesting to the presence of functional disturbances among workers
exposed to industrial power frequency electrical fields were subsequently
obtained by Spanish author F. Pole [10], who noted among workers shifted over
to servicing a new 500 KV substation complaints of headaches, dizziness,
fatigsbility and nausea. A reduction in the frequency of heart contractions,
physical endurance and an increase in arterial pressure was found during an
objective investigation. However, the small population of the observed group
(8 to 9 people) raises justified doubts as to the representative nature of

the material obtained.

- 70 -

IMIICIHNCIA1.USE(N1LY
IND! OFFICIAL llﬂE(NVLV

Along with this, a whole series of authors from the 0.5. and western Europe in
studies on persons exposed to industrial power frequency electrical fields both
under industrial conditions and in everyday life did not obtain any data which
attest to the unfavorable effect of the factor.

“.3. Kouwenhoven, et al. [ll] published the results of examining the health
status of 11 linemen (a power line voltage of 365 KV) exposed to "high intens-
ity" electrical fields. 0f the 11 workers who were under observation for

62 months, a worked without protective gloves. The examination did not
reveal any changes in indicators characterizing the status-of the emotional
sphere, cardiovascular or motor systems, or the visual analyzer. Only among
2 men were deviations detected in the sperm characteristics. The lack of
pathological changes in the given contingent of persons was confirmed in later
years by H.L. Singewald, et al. [12].

E. Halboysson [13] made an examination of the health status of 86 workers of

138 KV - A00 KV transformer substations and 76 linemen. Besides the physician's
examination, the examination included a questionnaire, clinical and laboratory
studies (chest X-ray. electrocardiography, blood and urine analysis, the deter-
mination of sugar content in the blood, as well as cholesterol, triglycerides,
urea and uric acid), and analysis of the morbidity with the time lost as

unfit for work. As a result of a comparison with the data of a control group
(96 linemen on low voltage open wire power lines), a higher frequency of
deviations from the norm was found among the substation workers as regards the
digestive, motor and nervous systems. In the opinion of the author, the differ-
ences in the frequency of the changes in the motor sphere and digestion were
related to differences in age and diet. The question of the relationship of
high frequency of complaints of headache to working conditions requires further
clarification. Including that there is a lack of pathological changes among

the persons examined, the author emphasises that the time the examined per-
sonnel worked close to the 400 RV equipment was quite short (on the order of

15 minutes per work day).

K. Busby. et a1. [16] using a questionnaire did not find any unfavorable
influence of 76S KV open wire lines on people or large cattle on 18 nearby
flm. '

H.V. Strumza [15], in comparing two groups of the population (525 persons in
all). one of which lived at a-distance of 25 m from 200 to 500 KV power lines.
while the other lived at a distance of more than 125 n, did not find any
significant differences between the groups in the frequency of seeking medical
assistance or using medications.

An analysis of the papers cited here is evidence of the existence of the well
known contradictory nature of the data obtained by specialists in different
countries in evaluating the health status of persons exposed to industrial
power frequency electrical fields. However, it is difficult to compare the
results of these studies by virtue of the substantial differences in the
exposure levels as well as in the health status study methods and evaluation
criteria. The ultrahigh voltage substations in the USSR differ structurally

- 71 -

FOIIOFFRJAI.USE(MTLY
FIHICMNHCJAI.USB(IVLY

from similar substations in the U.S., Canada and a number of other countries.
The use of comparatively low supports holding high voltage equipment is
responsible for the higher electrical field intensities in the working zones.
In terms of the work conditions, servicing personnel are constantly on site
at substations. The changes in the health status noted in the papers of
Soviet authors concern primarily 500 IV substation personnel, where the elec-

trical field intensity at individual points in the working zone can reach 25
to 29 KV/m.

As far as the data of ".3. Kouwenhoven. et al., are concerned, they apply to
personnel servicing 3&5 KV power lines and using protective suits in this
case. The data of E. Halboysson were obtained on persons subjected to short
term exposure to the fields of electrical installations at voltages of 138 to
400 KV.

In dealing with the research methods, it must be noted that the possibility of
using the frequency of seeking medical assistance and consumption of medications
as the main indicators characterizing health status is extremely disputable.

The data of a questionnaire are an insufficiently objective indicator also.
Differences in the results of investigations can also be related to the use

of differing criteria for health status evaluation of the persons examined.
Thus, Soviet authors fix their attention on functional changes, while the
authors of other countries focus on pathological ones.

A definite drawback to work of a clinical and physiological nature is the lack

of satisfactory data on the environmental physiological characteristics of the
conditions of exposure to a factor, without which it is impossible to correctly
evaluate the material obtained. Usually, data only on the power facility
voltage or on the maximum possible field intensity in the work zone is cited

in the papers, which cannot be characteristics of the actual exposure to which

a person is subjected. In this case, the possibility of the influence of spark
discharges and capacitive currents, besides the electrical fields themselves,

is not analyzed. Even less attention is devoted to other factors in the environ-
ment (the microclimate, noise, toxic substances, atmosperic ionization, spe-
cific features of the production process), although the biological activity of
some of them can be higher than that of the industrial power frequency electrical
fields. The significance of some research is reduced because of the lack of

data on the health status of the contingent of persons being examined when they
arrive for work and on the dynamics of the ascertained changes, as well as
because of a lack of similar data for corresponding control groups.

what has been attests to the necessity of the further development of clinical
and physiological studies, refining their organization and improving the
methodological level. An important role in evaluating the biological impact

of industrial power frequency electrical fields belongs to research of this
kind, since it can provide information on the direct human long tern chronic
exposure to a factor at levels encountered in practice. However, to perform
this task, their conclusions should be based on the study data for a suffic-
iently large contingent of persons with a rigorous metering of the electrical
field exposure levels and the possible influence of other environmental factors.

- 72 -
FOI10FFIJA1.USI(IULY
III!(INWC1AI.IEIE(N‘IN

The obtained data should be compared with examination dam for corresponding
control groups and evaluated in the plan for determining the clinical signi-
ficance of the ascertained changes.

In working out the problem of the biological impact of industrial power fre-
quency electrical fields. experimental studies should occupy an important
place. This is governed by the possibility of studying the isolated influence
of industrial power frequency electrical fields under experimental conditions
for specified exposure parameters. It turns out that when studying a factor,
the clinical manifestations of which are so disputed at the present time, the
experimental approach to the solution of the problem is of especially great
importance. '

Ridescale experimental studies on the biological impact of indvstrial power
frequency electrical fields are just now expanding in the USSR. In this regard,
we shall consider the results of work which has been done up to the present
time.

T.Ye. Sazonova studied the influence of industrial frequency electrical fields
on the process of the formation of a complex motor stereotype and the performance
of automated work using 23 volunteers [16). The results of the study showed
that the exposure level characterised by an intensity of 16 KV/m and a duration
of 2 hours causes threshold changes in the precision of work performance. At
exposure intensities of 32 and 64 KV/m (a 20 minute exposure), along with a
reduction in the precision of work performance. a degradation of the overall
sense of well being of the test subjects, a change in the pulse rate, as well
as in the arterial pressure and peripheral blood were noted. The ascertained
shifts were of a functional nature. Rapid and total normalization of the
indicated functions began following the termination of the electrical field

exposure.

Yu.D. Dumanskiy, V.H. Popovich and I.P. Kozyarin made physiological studies of
34 volunteers under natural conditions with 330 KV and 750 IV open wire power
lines. The following were studied in this case: the functional status of the
central nervous system (Operational memory volume. capability of concentrating
the attention, electroencephalography), thermoregulation, work capability,
electrocardiograms. certain indicators characterizing the status of exchange
processes (blood glucose content, as well as urine and residual nitrogen) and
nonspecific immunity (lysosyme and complement titer. and bactericidal power

of the blood). As a result of the studies which were done, no statistically
significant changes were found in the functions which were studied witn expo-
sure to electrical fields with an intensity of 5 KV/m (2 hours each over a
period of 6 days) and 12 KV/m (for 30 minutes each 3 tines a day for a period
of 6 days). In the case of exposure to electrical fields with intensities of
15 to 16 KV/m (for a period of 6 days, 30 minutes each 3 times per day),
complaints of the test subjects of headaches, fatigue and irritability were
noted. Deviations were also recorded in the individual indicators being studied,
which did not go outside the range of physiological fluctuations and which
allow the authors to speak only of tendencies towards changes. In this case.
the possible influence of other environmental factors cannot be excluded.

- 73 -
IIII!OIWNCJAI.IIIB(HILV
IIIICIHHCIAI.UEIZ(HULY

The staff of the Kiev Institute of General and Public Hygiene imeni Herzeyev
also conducted a set of experimental studies on animals. The biological

impact of industrial power frequency electrical fields at intensities of 5,

3, 1, 0.5 and 0.1 KV/m with around-the-clock irradiation and 15, 7, 6, 2, and 1
KV/n in the case of daily exposures of 2 hours per day was studied using

rats and rabbits for a period of a to 4.5 months. A large set of experimental
methods was used in this case (weight dynamics, electrocardiography, electro-
encephalography, cholinesterase and sulfhydryl groups in the blood, the dynamics
of the absorption and secretion of 1131 by the thyroid, the thyroxine binding
power of blood serum, the residual nitrogen and urine in the blood, the 17-
ketosteroids, catecholamines, Na+ and K+ content in the urine, the phagocyte
activity of leucocytes, the lisocyme and complement titer and the bactericidal
power of the blood, the morphological picture of the organs and tissues, etc.).

For animals subjected to around-the—clock exposure to electrical fields with
intensities of 1, 2, and 5 KV/m, changes in the functional status of the cen-
tral nervous system were noted, which the authors concluded based on the dynam-
ics of a number of indirect indicators (a reduction in cholinesterase activity
and sulfhydryl group content in the blood) and the bioelectric activity of the
brain [18], as well as shifts in indicators characterizing the activity of
certain endocrine glands — the thyroid and adrenals [19].

After 6.5 months of around-the—clock exposure to an electrical field with an
intensity of 5 KV/n, disturbances of the reproductive power of rats were
observed, which were manifest in a change in the estral cycle among the females
and the sperm characteristics of the males, as well as poor fertility of the
progeny, and an increase in the number of weak individuals and those having
developmental anomalies among the progeny [20].

In the case of a 2-hour exposure to electrical fields, changes in the functional
status of the central nervous and endocrine systems, as well as in the indica-
tors characterizing exchange processes occurred at field intensities of 7 and

15 KV/m [21].

It should be noted that the data cited here, obtained under conditions of long
term chronic trials, deserves the most serious attention, although additional
improvements are needed. In particular, the procedure for the group radiation
of the animals (without the isolation of separate individuals) does not allow
for a precise evaluation of the actual electrical field levels to which each
animal was exposed. An analysis of the data obtained for individual groups of
animals attests to the necessity of further studies, taking into account spon-
taneous fluctuations in the indicators being investigated, as well as the
evaluation of the ascertained changes from the viewpoint of their significance,
etc.

A work which was a targeted study to ascertain the nature of changes in human
cells exposed to industrial power frequency electrical fields is generating
a great deal of interest [b]. In experiments using cultured human embryo
fibroblast-like cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes, the nature of the
growth in the cultures, the state of the chromatin of the interphase nuclei,

- 74 -
FOI'OIIHCIAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR|0FFKJAI.USEIIULY

the nucleus and cytoplasm ultrastructure, the mitotic activity of the cultures,
and the rate of DNA, RNA and protein synthesis were studied. The existence of
changes in a number of the studied indicators was established at electrical
field intensities of 50 to 200 KV/m.

In experiments on mice, the authors noted a depression of behavioral reactions
when the animals were located in a field with an intensity of 50 KV/m and
higher, as well as a drop in the fertilization rate and a decrease in the
birth rate. The characteristics of the progeny born from individuals exposed
to an electrical field with an intensity of 50 KV/m attested to the disruption
of embryogenesis processes, which was manifest in a change in the ratio of

the sexes. an increase in the frequency of stillbirth cases and developmental
monstrosities.

At the present time, the data cited here can be treated as preliminary. Hhen
continuing the research. it is necessary to observe stricter requirements on
the conditions for the performance of the experiments. The basis for such a
conclusion is the small number of observations, something which is especially
important when the tests employed by the authors are characterised by a pro-
nounced variability in the indicators. There can also be errors in evaluating
the field intensity levels when performing the work, which is related both to
the group method of irradiating animals and to difficulties in monitoring the
field when working with cell structures.

In recent years, the number of publications on questions of the biological
effect of industrial frequency electrical fields has increased in the 0.8.

and Western Europe. In analyzing this literature, attention is drawn to the
well known contradiction in results obtained by different authors. In individual
cases. a contradictory nature of the conclusions follows from studies by the
same authors. Table 2 lists the literature in which no biological effect of
industrial frequency electrical fields was found. The literature where the
authors observed changes in some of the particular human or animal functions
being studied is shown in Table 3. A comparative analysis of the indicated
materials, taking into account both the number of papers and the volume of
investigations reflected in each of the tables makes it possible to state with
a sufficient basis that industrial frequency electrical fields cause biological
effects for certain exposure parameters. Thus. the fact itself that there is

a biological effect of industrial power frequency electrical fields is beyond
doubt and follows from the work of both Soviet and foreign authors.

- 75 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.U§E(HNLY
F0!‘0FFIJA1.UBE¢MNLY

 

TABLE 2.
Literature in which No Influence of Industrial Power Frequency
Electrical Fields on the Indicators (or Functions) Being Studied
"as Pound '
Subject of the Study. Indicators (or Functions)
Author Experimental Conditions Being Evaluated Results
Kepnen, 1966 People, 50 Hz. 7.5, EKG No influence
12.5 and 27 KV/n; found
15-30 min.
Johanson, People, 60 Hz, Subjective percep- The sane*
et a1.. 1973 100 KV/n (the actually tions
effective field)*
Veyyesteynas. Rabbits**, 50 Hz, Cardiac overshoot. fre- The sane
Viola. et al.. 80 KV/n, fron several quency of heart contrac-
1975 win. up to 500 hours tions, arterial pressure
Shefer, Rats, cats. 50 3:, BBC, nuscle tonus No pronounced

Sil'ni, 1977 80 KV/m

Kantone, Rats, 50 Hz,
Kinwald, et al., 100 Kv/n. 30 nin.
1975 and 8 hours each
over a period of
68 days
Kruger, Chicks, 60 Hz,
Ciarola, 3.6 XVI-
1972
Hittke. et al.. Chicken eggs, indus-
1977 trial frequency,

1.5 and S KV/n

Bacteria, fungi;
50 Hz; 10, 50 and
200 KV/n

River, 1976

changes de-

tected***
Spernatogenesis, No influence
enbryogenesis detected
Height dynamics The sane
Bubryogenesis The sane
Culture growth and The sane

nunber of'nutations

_——___'—.—_————~——_—

Notes:

*The 100 KV/n intensity was given taking into account the field distor-
tion introduced by the biological subject.

Individual test subjects

noted unpleasant perceptions which the author related to weather

conditions.

**The studies were performed on anesthetized rabbits.

***The detection of EEG changes were related to vibration of the fur
cover; in the nuscle tonus - to being in confining teflon chambers.

- 75 -

INJI1OIIICIA1.IIBIICI€LY
IIIICIHNCJA1.USIIMUL¥

 

 

TABLE 3.
Literature in which Industrial Power Frequency Electrical Fields Here
Found to Influence the Indicators gor Functions! Being Studied
Subject of the Study; Indicators (or Functions)
Author Experimental Conditions Being Evaluated Results
1 2 3
ﬂauf R.. People; 50 Hz; Reaction tine; blood, Reduction in reaction
1976; 1-20 KV/n, up to BEG, EKG. frequencv of tine; increase in nun-
Bauf 6., 3 hours heart contractions, of leucocytes, reti-
l97b arterial pressure. culocytes; alight
Quick's teat. changes in EEG activ-
ity*
Weibel, People; 50 Ht; EKG, BEG Reduction of alpha
1975 6 KV/n for three rhythm frequency;
nin., 2 tines increase in the nun-
ber of beta waves
Kantr, People; 50 Hz; Thresholds of taste, Changes in the thresh-
1951 100 KV/m smell, hearing and olds of the analyzers
touch studied
Tsereteli, Dog. rabbits, rats; Cardiac overshoot. Dogs: increase in
Halaguti, 50 Hz; 100, 80 and frequency of heart frequency of heart
1976 25 KV/n, fron several contractions, arterial contractions when the
min. up to 500 hours pressure, blood norpho- electric field was
logy and biochemistry. turned on and off;
reproductive function. decrease in hemoglo-
bin and erythrocyte
content; tendency to
neutrophylysis;
Rabbita**: tendency
to elevate arterial
pressure;
Rats: tendency to
neutrophylyais; re-
duction in sexual
activity of females
during short tera
exposure.
Sil'ni. Cats. rats; 50 Hz; EEG, EKG, reapira- Increase in frequency
1976 60-80 KV/n for tion, skin and rectal of heart contractions,
6-16 hours temperature reduction in ampli-
tude and frequency of
EEG waves; change in
thernal regulation*
LeBar, Rabbits. rats; 50 Hz; Food consuaption, Rabbits: leucocytosis
Andre. SO KV/n 2b hours; growth, blood nor- with relative lympho-
1976 70 hours for 5 days; phology and biochen- penis (loo-day expo-

8 hours each for a
period of 30-100 days.

istry, reproductive
power

- 77 -

FINI¢HHNC1AI.USEINVLN

sure); increase in
urine content in
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 3, cont .

 

__1_ ______L______ ____3____ __ 4
blood (24 hour exp
sure); elevated CI
content and reduce
sugar content in t
blood (70 hour exp
sure);
Rats: increased u
content in the bit
(100 day exposure)
Neda, Rats, mice, guinea Blood, EEG, EKG Neutrophylysis, 13
197i: pigs; 50 Hz; phopenis. 1engthet
100 KV/‘III, 18 hours of the 941 intervz
per day and the QRS couplt
Strumzha, Rats; 50 ha; 17 Babryogenesis Reduction in veigi
1970 KV/n of progeny '
Shpitka, Eats; 50 Hz; Behavioral reaction Change in the reac
1969 50-70 KV/n tine }on tine
Fisher, Rate: 50 Hz; Frequency of heart Reduction in freq:
Heibel. 0.05 and 5.3 contractions of heart contract
Richter. KV/a; 15 min.;
1976 2, 10, 21 and
50 days
Knicker— Nice; 60 Hz; Enhryogeneais Reduction in acid
boker, 160 KV/m; of progeny
1967 1,500 hours

______________________.—————————
Notes: *Attention is drawn to the fact that the detected changes do not go

beyond the limits of physiological variations.
**‘l'he study was performed on anesthetized rabbits.

- 73 -

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next conclusion which can be drawn based on an analysis of the material
cited concerns the biological activity of the factor. A majority of the data
contained in the tables is evidence of the fact that at intensities of prac-
tical interest. an industrial power frequency electrical field has a weak
biological effect. This follows from the slight dependence of the biological
effects on the exposure intensity, as well as the lack of effects along a number
of studied subjects. even at high field intensities. In this regard, the ques-
tion of evaluating the significance of the observed effects takes on special
importance. It seems that the differences in the conditions under which the
experiments are performed and the‘differences in the treatment of the observation
results are the major reasons comprising the basis for the existing contradiction
in the opinions on the question of the unfavorable impact of the factor.

The question of the necessity of a more rigorous scientific substantiation of
health safety standards has been brought up at the present time in the USSR,
just as in a number of other nations in the world. Because of this, it is pro-
posed that extremely serious attention be devoted to procedural questions
related to the conduct of studies in subsequent experimental work. In particu-
lar, when irradiating experimental animals in the electrical field of a capa-
citor. it seems necessary to take into account such factors as electrical field

inhomogeneity in the edge region of the capacitor and mutual shielding of
objects which are close together.

Measurements of the current flowing through a biological object which were made
with an experimental test stand in the Scientific Research institute for Occu-
pational Diseases and Labor Hygiene of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences at
exposure levels of up to 300 KV/m and spacings between the capacitor electrodes
of up to 80 cm, sho ted that a substantial amplification of the effective elec-
trical field acting on an object can occur in those cases where the spacing
between the capacitor plates proves to be comparable to the vertical dimensions
of the object being irradiated. Thus, with a ratio of the indicated quantities
of 1.5, the current flowing through an animal increases by approximately 50 per-
cent as compared to conditions where the ratio of the spacing between the caps-
citor plates to the vertical dimension of the animal is greater than 3. A
further reduction in this ratio (less than 1.5) leads to a rapid exponential
rise in the current through the object where the value of the undistorted field
between the plates is kept constant. As far as the mutual shielding effect is
concerned, it has a substantial impact at spacings between animals on the order
of l to 1.5 of their effective diameter. In this case, there is a reduction in
the current through the object by 20 to 40 percent. Where direct contact
between the animals is possible, as in the case where they are placed in a
common container. the mutual shielding effect can prove to be even greater.

The next factor which must be taken into account is the orientation of the bio-
logical object relative to the B field vector. The possibility of placing
animals both parallel and perpendicular to the E vector while maintaining a
horizontal position of the body which is natural to them can be assured by using
capacitors. the electrodes of which are set up both horizontally and vertically.

Exceptionally important in the substantiation of health safety standards is the
questit'n of interpreting the results of experimental studies. There are two

- 79 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '

extreme points of view at the present time, with which it is impossible to
agree. Some authors do not at all differentiate tie effects which attest to
the physiological changes and which characterize the unfavorable effect of the
factor. In this case, any change is equated to an unfavorable one. Others
exhibit extreme caution and are inclined to judge the biological effect of
industrial power frequency electrical fields only on the basis of the presence
or absence of pronounced pathological changes.

It seems expedient to approach the evaluation of the biological effects related
to exposure to industrial frequency electric fields from the viewpoints adopted
at the present time in environmental physiology science and approved for the
study of other unfavorable environmental factors, including electromagnetic
radiations in other frequency bands.

Studies have been carried out in recent years in the USSR on the development

of the theoretical principles of making the environment a healthy one, including
setting health safety standards. One of the basic principles of the theory of
of maximum permissible levels (PDU) for exposure to various environmental fac-
tors is the concept of the threshold nature of an effect given the appropriate
criteria for harmfulness. In this case, indicators of any organism reactions to
the particular exposure cannot be employed as the latter. Such an approach
would place unsubstantiated requirements on protective measures. which are
difficult to carry out from an economic viewpoint and would complicate technical
progress.

In standing on the principles of environmental physiology science in the field
of setting standards for various unfavorable factors in the environment, it

must be remembered that at the present time, the harmful effect threshold of a
factor should be taken as the criterion of injury. The harmful effect threshold
is to be understand as that exposure level at which significant changes in the
physiological functions of various organs and systems occur in the organism,
where these changes have the danger of becoming pathological ones.

A more detailed interpretation of the harmful effect threshold is given in the
paper of 3.x. Savin [22].

In the experimental substatiation of health safety standards, questions of extra-
polating data obtained in experiments on animals to man are of great importance.
Differences in the reactions of animal and human organisms to exposure to indus-
trial power frequency electrical fields can be due to both differences in the
dimensions and shape of the body as well as the specific features of the organi-
zation and functioning of organs and systems. The resolution of the question

of the comparative sensitivity and vulnerability of animals and humans requires
special research. A necessary condition for the correct extrapolation of data
from animals to man is knowledge of the mechanisms of the interaction of indus-
trial power frequency electrical fields with biological objects. It must be
said, however, that this question has still been studied insufficiently.

In the literature. the effect of electrical fields on an organism is related on
one hand to displacement currents induced in a body by the external electrical

- go -
FOR‘OFINCIAI.UEIZ(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

field, and on the other hand. to the action of local field intensities on
cutaneous tissues. Depending on the significance of each of the indicated
mechanisms, the approaches to extrapolation can differ substantially. It the
decisive factor in the development of biological effects of industrial frequency
electrical fields is the current, then the extrapolation of data should be made
taking into account differences in the density of the current flowing in the
bodies of animals and man. The specific features of the body shape of man and
animals are responsible for the fact that with the same unperturbed field
intensity, a large current will be induced in a human body (a more elongated
shape) than in the bodies of many species of animals. Because of this, the

use of higher exposure levels in experimental studies on small animals than
those which may be of practical interest is altogether justified. It is appa-
rent that the approach which takes into account differences in the spatial dis-
tribution of the current in human and animal bodies is more precise and univer-
sal. However, praCtical realization of such an approach is difficult at the
present time because of the lack of the appropriate methods. If the biological
effects though are related to local field intensities, the extent to which they
are pronounced will depend substantially on the degree of difference in the
hair coat and the specific features of the development and functioning of the
receptor apparatus of the skin.

Species differences in the vital activity of the human and animal organisms also
have to be taken into account when extrapolating experimental data. When choos-
ing experimental models, attention must be devoted to the ecological features,
as well as the specific features of development, regulation and functioning of
individual systems which are inherent in a particular species of animal. The
medical and biological indicators being studied in an experiment can be deter-

_ mined from the principle of selecting either the most important organism function
or the systems which are the most sensitive to exposure to the factor. Such
systems can include the central nervous system, cardiovascular system and the
blood. There are also reasons for a more detailed study of the immunobiological
indicators and genetic effects. As far as the set of research methods employed
in an experiment, it is apparently not expedient to limit it to any specific
recommendations. It must be pointed out that while any of the most sensitive
methods can be used in the study of the effective mechanisms of a factor, the
methods used in substantiating the maximum permissible levels should provide for
obtaining information on the health safety significance of the exposure. In this
case, changes in such important vital activity indicators of an organism as the
lifespan, developmental and growth dynamics, normal volume of compensator capa-
bilities of an organism with respect to exposure to unfavorable environmental
factors as well as the normal volume of work capability and psychological func-
tions should be numbered among the manifestations of a harmful effect.

Along with questiomsof extrapolating experimental data in making the transition
from harmful effect thresholds to maximum permissible levels, an exceptionally
important question is the issue of the value of the health safety margin factors,
the purpose of the introduction of which is to assure reliability of the health
safety standards.

- 81 -

F0!‘0FFK]AI.USE(NVLY
FOR 0FF1C1AI.US£‘ONLN

Since an industrial power frequency electrical field has a low level of biolo-
gical activity, when stardards are set for it for professional groups, values of
the health safety margin factors on the order of 2 to 3 will be adequate.

The question of the necessity of also introducing additional coefficients for
other categories of persons (not occupationally exposed to industrial frequency
electrical fields as well as the population) can be resolved based on the results
of studies of the nature and extent to which biological effects are pronounced
for various intensities and durations of exposure to factor. In this case,

it must be kept in mind that persons of the most diverse age groups and diverse
health status can be exposed. We will note that there are data in the litera-
ture which attest to the differing sensitivity of healthy and sick organisms

to exposure to industrial power frequency electrical fields [23].

Research was done in the following major areas by USSR scientific institutions
during 1978-1980 for purposes of working out the maximum permissible levels of
exposure to industrial frequency electrical fields for various categories of
persons:

--Health safety evaluation of conditions of exposure to 50 Hz electrical fields
and power facilities for various contingents of persons;

--Studying the health status of workers when exposed to industrial frequency
electrical fields;

-uorking out the principles for simulating electrical field exposure under
experimental conditions;

-The experimental study of the biological effect of industrial frequency elec-
trical fields for the purpose of obtaining data on the characteristics of
biological effects at the level of various organs and systems; establishing
the dependence of biological effects on the geometric dimensions and species
specific features of an organism; substantiating the principles for extrapo-
lating data from animals to man; determining the harmful effect thresholds
for various exposure durations and substantiating the health safety margin
factors as applied to various contingents of persons and conditions of expo-
sure to a factor;

--Studying the primary mechanisms for the interaction of industrial frequency
electrical fields with biological objects.

It can be stated that as a result of conducting the indicated studies, new data
will be obtained on the biological impact of industrial power frequency electric-
al fields, which will allow for making a definite contribution to the resolution
of questions of setting health safety standards for a factor and protecting the
environment.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Asanova I.P.. Rakov A.N., Tscheglova A.V., "K voprosu o vliyanii elektricheskogo
polya vysokogo napryazheniya promyshlennoy chastoty na organism rabotayushchikh"
["On the Quesion of the Influence of a Power Frequency High Voltage Electrical
Field on the Organism of Horkers"], in the book, "Haterialy nauchnoy sessii,
posvyashchennoy itogam raboty Leningradskogo instituta gigiyeny truda i

- 32 -

FOR OFFIChthlJSEGJNLY
FOR‘0F11C1AL.USE4DNLN

i profzabolevnniy za 1961-62 gg" ["Haterisls of the Scientific Conference
Devoted to Progress in the work of the Leningrad Institute of Labor Hy-
giene and Occupational Diseases during l961-l962“], Leningrad, 1963,

Revnova N.V., Asano'a T.P., Semenovskaya H.A., Berner A.S.. "Vliyaniye

na organism elektricheskikh poley vysokoy napryazhennosti pronyahlennoy
chastoty" ["The Influence on the Organism of High Voltage Industrial Power
Frequency Electrical Fields"), in the collection, "Gigiyena truda i
biologicheskoye deystviye EHV radiochastot" ["Labor Hygiene and the Bio-
logical Effect of Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Haves"), Scientific
Research Institute for Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases of the USSR
Academy of Medical Sciences, 1968, pp 132-136.

Korobkova V.P., Morzuv Yu.A., Stolyarov M.D.. Yakub Yu.A., "Vliyaniye elek-
tricheskogo polya na podstantsiyakh 500 i 750 kV na brigady obsluzhivsniya
i sredstvs ikh zaehchity" ["The Influence of the Electric Field at 500 KV
and 750 KV Substations on the Servicing Crews and Their Protective Gear"],
SIGRE Report (International Conference on High Voltage Grids), No. 23-06,
1972.

Dyshlovoy V.D., Kachura V.S., "Vliyaniye elektronagnitnykh poley promyeh-
lennoy chastoty na organism cheloveka i biologicheskiye ob"yekty" ["The
Influence of Industrial Power Frequency Electromagnetic Fields on the Huean
Organism and Biological Objects"), Kiev, "2dorov'ye" Publishers, 1977.

Krivova T.I., Lukovkin V.V., Sazonova T.Ye., "Vliyaniye elektricheskogo
polya promyshlennoy chastoty i razryadov an organism chcloveka" ["The In-
fluence of an Industrial Power Frequency Field and Discharges on the Human
Organism"], in the collection. "Zashchity ot deystviye elektromagnitnykh
poley i elektricheskogo toka v pronyshlennosti" ["Protecting against the
Effect of Electromagnetic Fields and Electrical Current in Industry"],
Moscow. "Energiya" Publishers, 1973, pp 16-22.

Asanova T.P., Rakov A.N., "Sostoyaniye zdorov'ya rabotayushchikh v
elektricheskon pole otkrytykh raspredalitel'nykh ustroystv ‘00 - 500 kV"
["The Health Status of Persons Working in the Electrical Field of 400 KV
to 500 KV Outdoor Distribution Switchgear"], GIGIYENA TRUDA I PROFZABOLE-
VANIYA [INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE AND OCCUPAIIONAL DISEASES], Moscow. 1966, 5,
pp 50-51.

Concharova N.N.. Karanyshev V.B., Haksimenko N.V., et a1.. "Usloviya truda
i ikh vliyaniye na funktsional'noye sostoyaniye serdechno-sosudistoy sister
rabotayushchikh na vyaokovol'tnykh podstantsiyakh“ ("working Conditions

and Their Influence on the Functional Status of the Cardiovascular System
of workers at High Voltage Substations"), in the collection, "Gigiyens
truda i biologicheskoye deystviye EHV radiochastor" ["Labor Hygiene and the
Biological Effect of Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Wavea"], Moscow.
Scientific Research Institute for Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases
of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, 1972, pp 100—101.

_ 83 -

FOR OITWCLAL.USE1ONLY
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sazonova T.Ye., "Firiologo-gigiyenicheskaya otsenka ualoviy truda na OED-600 i
500 kV" ["Physiological Health Safety Evaluation of Working Conditions at

1.00 IN and 500 IN Outdoor Distribution Switchgear"], in the collection, "Trudy
institutov okhrany truda V'l‘sSPS" ["Procesdings of the Labor Protection Institutes
of the All-Union Central Trade Union Council"], No. 46 (2), Moscow, 1967,

pp 34-39

Savonova T.Ye. , Horozov Yu.A., "Pi:iologo-gigiyenicheskaya otaenks usloviy truda
na ORB-220, 330 i 500 KV" ["Physiological Health Safety Evaluation of Working
Conditions at 220, 330 and 500 xv Outdoor Distribution Switchgear”, ibid.,

No. 59, Moscow, 1969, pp 58-62.

Fole F.F., "Phaenonen 'Pat' in den elektrischen Dnterwerken" ["‘rhe 'Pat' Phenol:-

enon in Electrical Power Substations"], Second Coll. Int. Prev. Bisques. Prof.
a l'Electricite. Cologne, 30 Novenber - 1 December, 1972.

Kouwenhov an W.B., Languorthy 0.R., Singevald H.L., Knickerbocker 6.9., "Medical
Evaluation of Man Working in A.C. Electric Fields", IEEE TRANS., PAS 86-4, 1967,
p 506-511.

Singeuald H.L., Languorthy 0.1!. , Kouwenhoven W.D., "Medical Follow-Up Study of
RV Linenen Working in A.C. Electrical Fields", IEEE TRANS” PAS 92-6. 1973.
p 1307-1309.

Malboysson E. , "Medical Control of Men Working Within Electrocagnetic Fields",
RCE (Numero special), 1976, pp 75-80.

Busby K., Driscoll D. and Waehbon W.E., "A Field Survey of Farmer Experience
with 765 KV Transmission Lines", Abstracts issued by Agricultural Resources
Comission State Campus, Albany, 16.1., Hovenber 1974, pp 18-20.

Strunza H.V.. "Influence on Human Health of Close Electric Conductors at High
Tension", ARCH. DES HALADIES PROF. DE MEDICINE DU TRAVAIL ET DB 880. SOC.
(Paris), Vol 31, 6, 1970, 269-276.

Sazonova I‘.Ye.. "Vliyaniye sil'nogo elektricheskogo polya prouyshlennoy chastoty
na rabotosposobnost' cheloveka” ["‘l'he Influence of a Strong Industrial Power
Frequency Field on Human Performsnce"], in the collection "Ilamhnyye trudy
institutov okhrany truda VIaSPS" [“Scientific Proceedings of the Labor Protect-
ion Institutes of the AUCCTU"], No. 63, Moscow, 1970, pp 91-97.

Dumnskiy Yu.D., Popovich V.H. , Kozyarin I.P., "Vliyaniye elektronagnitnogo
polya nizkoy chastoty (50 G‘l‘z) na funktsional'noye sostoyaniye organism
cheloveka" ["‘l‘he Influence of a Low Frequency Field (50 Hz) on the Functional
Status of the Human Organisn"] , CIGIYENA I SAWIIARIYA [HYGIENE AND PUBLIC
HEALTH]. Moscow, 1977, 12, pp 32-35.

Dunanskiy Yu.D. , Popovich V.M. , Prokhvatilo Ye.v.. "Gigiyenicheaksya otsenka
elektronagnitnogo polya, sozdavayenogo vysokovol‘tnyni liniyaui" ["Heslth

Safety Evaluation of the Electromagnetic Field Produced by High Voltage Lines"),
CICIYENA I SANITARIYA, Moscow, 1976. 6. PP 19-23.

-31.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

19. Prokhvatilo Ye.v., "Reaktsiya endokrinnoy sistemy na vozdeystviye elektromag-
nituogo polya promyshlennoy chastoty (50 61s)" ["The Reaction of the Endo-
crine System to Exposure to an Industrial Power Frequency (50 Hz) Electro-
magnetic Field"], VRACHEBNOYE DELO [MEDICAL PRACTICE], Kiev, 1976. 11,
pp 135-139.

20. Andriyenko L.G., "Vliyaniye EHP promyshlennoy chastoty na generativnuyu
funktsiyu v eksperimente" ["The Influence of Industrial Frequency Electromag-
netic Fields on Generative Function in Experiments"], GIGIYEHA I SAHITARIYA.
1977s 6! PP 22-25.

21. Kozyarin I.P., Gabovich R.D., Popovich V.M., "Deystviye elektromagnitnogo polya
promyshlennoy chastoty na organizm pri kratkovremennom yezhednevnom ohluchenii",
["The Action of an Industrial Frequency Electromagnetic Field on the Organism
in the Case of Short Term Daily Exposure"), GIGIYEHA I SANITARIYA, 1977, 4,
pp 18-21.

22. Savin B.H., "Problems gigiyenicheskogo normirovaniya elektromagnitnykh
izlucheniy radiochastotnogo diapazona na sovremennom etape. Hetodologiches-
kiye voprosy gigiyenicheskogo normirovaniya neioniziruyushchikh izlucheniy"
("The Problem of Setting Health Safety Standards for Radio Frequency Electro-
magnetic Radistions at the Present Stage. Procedural Questions of Setting
Health Safety Standards for Nonionizing Radiations"], Scientific Research
Institute for Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases of the USSR Academy of
Medical Sciences of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, 1977, pp 16-23.

23. Berezyuk 6.8., "ﬂekotoryye ekaperimental'nyye dannyye o deystvii elektriches-
kogo polya promyshlennoy chastoty vysokoy napryazhennosti" ["Some Experimental
Data on the Effect of a High Intensity Industrial Frequency Electric Field"l,
in the collection, "Gigiyena truda i biologicheskoye deystviye EHV radio-
chsstot" ["Industrial Hygiene and the Biological Effect of Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Haves"], Scientific Research Institute for Labor Hygiene
and Occupational Diseases of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, 1968,

pp 15-16.

- END -
8225
cso: 8144/1611

- 35 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY