FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10338
19 February 1982

USSR Report

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
(P000 2/82)

CONTENTS
AEROSPACE 5 ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS
Radio Relay and Satellite Transmission Line Reliability............ 1
Electric Navigation Instruments.................................... 6
ANTENNAS G PROPAGATION

Abstracts From Collection 'NONCOHBRBNT SCATTERING 0? RADIO

"Am.................o..........oon.ooo...........oo....oooo.ooo 11

High Latitude Propagation of Decaneter Radio Haves................. 18

Short- and Ultrashort-wave Propagation............................. 23

Antenna Arrays: Trial Classification.............................. 27
BROADCASTING, CONSUMER ELECTRONICS

Semiconductor Converters in the Charge Systems of Reservoir
Capacitors....................................................... 37

Sensitivity of Solid-State Radio Receiving Devices................. 40

Unit for Rotating TV Camera Raster................................. 63
CIRCUITS & SYSTEMS

Linear Gating Device Unit.......................................... #7

Infralov-Prequency Triangular Current Pulse Generators............. 51

Counutator Controlled by Signal Frequency.......................... 57

- a - [III - USSR - 215 SET PC

FOR 0FFN]AL.USE¢)NLY
I'UK UI'I‘IIJAL UDI'. UNLI

Subnanosecond-Range High-Power Semiconductor Peakers..............

System for Controlling Closing of Spark Gaps by Field
Dintortion MechodCOOOO00.00000...O00.0.00.000IOOOOOOOCIOOOOOOOOO

High-Voltage Pulse Generator for LoubResiatance Load..............

Control Circuit for Seven-Segment Electroluminescent Indicators...

Frequency Dividers With Variable Division Pactor..................

Hideband Direct-Current Anplifier.................................

High-Speed Pulse Phase Discriminator..............................
COMMUNICATIONS

Laboratory Projects on Coununication Line Structures..............
COMPUTERS

Signal Processing Unit Based on 'Elektronika 53-18'
Microcalculator.................................................

Multifunction Generator...........................................

Computer-Assisted Radar Operator Trainers.........................

Tunable Function Generator Utilizing Microcircuits................
ELECTRON DEVICES

Analog Multiplexer in the CAMAC Standard..........................
INSTRUMENTATION & MEASUREMENTS

Millimeter and Subaillimeter Band Pulsed Spectrometer.............

High-Speed Tracking Frequency Meter...............................

Auger Electron Spectrometer.......................................

MICROWAVE THEORY & TECHNIQUES

Microwave Electronic Devices......................................

_ b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

61

65
v9
73
76
81
86

90

92
96
99
102

106

108

116

120

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PONER ENGINEERING

Statistical Processing of Operational Information in
Electric Power Systems..........................................

Air Circuit-Breakers for Power Transmission Applications..........
QUANTUM ELECTRONICS , ELECTRO-OPTICS
Gas Laser Discharge Current Stabilizer............................

Powerful Power Supply for Pulsed Lasers Elploying Vapors of

Metal-Boosooooooooooaoooooooo-coo-osonsooooooooooooooossoaoooosoo

SOLID STATE CIRCUITS
Calculation of Semiconductor Power Devices........................

Tests of Semiconductor Power Devices..............................

NEW ACTIVITIES, MISCELLANEOUS
Abstracts From Collection 'RADIO ENGINEERING'....................

Abstracts of Articles in Collection on Radio Engineering..........

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

130

140

154

1108

152

156

159

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AEROSPACE 8 ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS

UDC 621.396.96
RADIO RELAY AND SATELLITE TRANSMISSION LINE RELIABILITY

Moscow NADEZHNOST' RADIORELEYNYKH I SPUTNIKOVYKH LINIY PBREDACRI in Russian
1981 (signed to press 2 Jul 81) pp 2-3. 160

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Radio Relay and Satellite
Transmission Line Reliability", by Ariy lzrailevich Rakov. Izdatel'stvo
"Radio 1 svyaz'", 5800 copies, 160 pages]

[Text] The reliability of radio relay and satellite transmission lines (RR and
STL) is investigated: mathematical and physical models are analyzed. as are the
interdependence among reliability indicators and the laws for distribution of
failures and down-time duration. Ways to improve RR and STL reliability are
examined and recommendations are made for the sequence in which they should be
realized. taking technical efficiency into consideration. Methods are proposed
for optimization of RR and STL structure based on reliability and cost criteria.
Examples of calculations are given.

For engineering and technical workers specializing in radio relay and satellite
communications.

Reviewer: 6. V. Vodop'yanov
Foreword

The high reliability which is created in our country by the United Automated
Communications Network (YeASS) can be provided if the necessary level of reli-
ability is achieved in each of its individual links. The role of radio relay
and satellite transmission lines as the most important components of YeASS in-
creases annually. However, not all of the questions associated with providing
radio relay and satellite transmission line reliability have been adequately
covered in the literature. In the book offered to the reader, the theoretical
bases for studying radio relay and satellite transmission line reliability are
systematized, the experience of operating these lines is analyzed and recommenda-
tions for improving reliability are made. Methods have been developed for the
optimal synthesis of radio relay and satellite transmission lines and their
components which insure that the prescribed level of reliability is achieved at
minimal cost.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The numerical evaluations of reliability indicators which are presented in the
book are conditional and can be used only for instructional designing.

The author is deeply grateful to Prof. Dr. of Tech. Sci. S. V. Dorodich sad

Cand. of Tech. Sci. 6. V. Vodop'yanov for their valuable comments, which were
taken into consideration while working on the manuscript. The author is extremely
thankful to Prof. Dr. of Tech. Sci. D. R. Levin, docents Caad. of Econ. Sci.

Ye. D. Pankratov, Cand. Phys.-Hath. Sci. H. A. Pankratova and Caad. of Tech. Sci.
V. K. Ashirov for their discussion of certain of the book's positions, as well

as to engineer L. V. Borisova for help in preparing the manuscript for
publication.

CONTENTS
page
Foreword 3
Introduction 6
Chapter 1. Theoretical bases for studying radio relay and satellite
transmission line reliability 6
1.1 Mathematical models for reliability studies 6
1.2 Reliability indicators 21
1.3 Interdependence among reliability indicators 29
Chapter 2. Reliability of line-of-sight radio relay transmission
lines 36
2.1 Collection and initial processing of data on down time of
trunks and their components 36
2.2 Regularitics in the distribution of failures and down-
time duration for trunks 03
2.3 Changing reliability indicators for active radio relay
transmission line trunks 47
Chapter 3. Ways to improve reliability of line-of-sight radio relay
transmission lines 52
3.1 Improving station power supply system reliability 52
3.2 Improving stability of communications at intervals and
reliability of radio equipment 58
3.3 Improving technical operation 72
Chapter 6. Calculating the desired reliability of radio relay
transmission lines of a given structure 76
4.1 Improving the reliability of initial data for calculating
desired reliability 7a
4.2 Method for determining desired trunk reliability
indicators 79
4.3 Evaluation of the effect of trunk reliability on actual
carrying capacity 87
2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 5. Optimal design of line-of-sight radio relay transmission
lines
5.1 Variants for assigning reliability requirements
5.2 Structural diagram of a transmission line whereby a
prescribed reliability is provided
5.3 Optimal construction of radio relay transmission lines

Chapter 6. Providing reliability of tropospheric radio relay
transmission lines

Chapter 7. Reliability of satellite transmission lines
7.1 Peculiarities of satellite transmission line construction
7.2 Reliability indicators for a circular trunk
7.3 Reliability of the common and individual components of
circular trunks

Chapter 8. Ways of improving satellite transmission line
reliability
8.1 Trends in work to improve reliability of cannon and
individual components of circular trunks
8.2 Technical effectiveness of measures to improve reliability
of a circular trunk
8.3 Devices for automatic reserving of the equipment of

receiving earth stations
Chapter 9. Optimal design of satellite transmission line components
9.1 Structural diagram of a receiving earth station. whereby
a prescribed reliability is provided
9.2 Optimal structure of earth station components, whereby
a prescribed reliability is provided at minimal cost
Conclusion
Appendix. Algorithm III

List of Literature

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981

9194
C80: 1860/117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOR 0i?1t]Al-tﬂﬂ5(ﬂVLV

unc 629.3.002.72.002.5§(075.8)
ELECTRIC NAVIGATION INSTRUMENTS

Moscow ELEKTRONAVIGATSIONNYYE PRIBORY in Russian 1980 (signed to press 9 Dec 80)
pp 2-6, AAA-#47

[Annotation, foreword, introduction(excerpt)and table of contents from book "Elec-
tric Navigation Instruments", by Igor' Aleksandrovich Blinov, Aleksandr Vasil'yevich
Zherlakov, Vladimir Konstantinovich Perfil'yev, Yevgeniy Leonidovich Smirnov and
Andrey Andreyevich Yakushenkov, reviewed by Ye. F. Ludchenko, 6th edition, revised
and supplemented, Izdatel'stvo "Transport", 12,000 copies, 658 pages]

[Text] The fourth edition of this textbook is written in accordance with the new
program of the course "Technical Maritime Navigation Aids" for students of higher
marine engineering schools specializing in maritime navigation. It presents the
theory of modern gyroscopic and hydroacoustic instruments, logs and autopilots, and

examines the prospects of the development and practical uses of these instruments on
vessels of the marine fleet.

In preparing the new edition of this textbook, the material of the preceding edition
(1973) was revised considerably and supplemented with new data reflecting the im-
provement of electric navigation instruments in recent years, as well as sugges-
tions of instructors of maritime vuses, shipping lines land and aeagoing personnels.

This book can be used by students of higher maritime educational institutions spe-
cializing in radio engineering and hydrogrephy as a textbook for the appropriate
section of their program. It will certainly be useful for navigators of the mari-
time fleet, particularly in the part of the descriptions of new electric navigation
instruments which are being introduced on sesgoing vessels.

Figures -- 261, tables -- 6, bibliography -- 28 items.

Introduction

Resolutions of CPSU Congresses and five-year plans for the development of the na-
;.onal economy of the USSR envisaged further development of sea transportation and
replenishing of the fleet with faster large-capacity vessels of new types.

The most important role in achieving the highest economic effect in the operation
of each vessel and the fleet as a whole, as well as navigation safety, is played by
electric navigation instruments (EN?) which are used to determine the course and
speed of the vessel, the depth of the sea, and to control the vessel automatically.

FOR4HHHCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

For the convenience of studying, all electric navigation instruments are divided by
the principle of operation and by the value they measure.

By the principle of operation, electric navigation instruments are subdivided into
gyroscopic, hydroacoustic, hydrodynamic and electrodynamic (induction).

The following division is accepted with respect to measured values: meridian plane
indicators: azimuth indicators; horizon plane indicators; meters of angular veloci-
ties and acceleration of vessel movement; vessel steering angle meters; meters of
position coordinates; meters of linear speed and acceleration of the vessel; sea
depth meters.

Depending on their purposes, EN? have the following names:

hydroscopic compasses -- meridian plane indicators;

directional gyroscopes(azimuth gyroscopes) -- azimuth indicators;

gyro-magnetic compasses -- magnetic meridian plane indicators;

vertical gyroscopes (gyro horizons) -- horizon plane indicators;

gyrostabilirers -- commanded position indicators;

gyrotachometers (differentiating gyroscopes) -- meters of angular speed of mov-
ing objects;

gyrotachoaccelerometers -- meters of angular speed and angular acceleration of
the vessel;

accelerometers -- meters of linear accelerations of the vessels;

integrating gyroscopes -- steering angle meters;

inertial navigation systems -- meters of distance traveled;

hydrodynamic logs -- meters of relative speed of the vessel;

electrodynamic (induction logs -- meters of relative speed of the vessel;

hydroacoustic logs -- meters of absolute (in relation to ground) speed of the
vessel;

echo depth sounders -- sea depth meters.

Electric nagivation instruments can work in the indicator mode, when the information
obtained from them is used only for navigational orientation, and in the control
mode, when information is delivered to the automatic movement control systems of the
vessel.

Such automatic control systems using information of EN? are control systems of the
vessel's movement at a fixed course and along a prescribed trajectory and vessel
stabilisation systems used in rough seas.

This book consists of two parts. The first part presents the theory of electric
navigation instruments, and the second part describes their designs. The sequence
of chapters is determined by the interrelation among various instruments.

Much attention in the hook is given to the theory and the design principles of mo-
dern electric navigation instruments. Errors of instruments, causes of their ap-
pearance, and methods of their compensation are discussed in detail.

Considering the tendency in the development of electric navigation instruments of the

maritime fleet, considerable attention is given to new promising instruments and sys-
tems.

FOI¢0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
I'm Ul'flylﬂh we. Vl‘bl

Contents

Introduction

Part 1. Theory of Electric Navigation Instruments

Section 1.

Chapter I.
1.1.

Applied Theory of the Gyroscope

Properties of the Gyroscope and Equations of Motion
Definition of the Concept of "Gyroscope"
Suspensions Used in Gyroscopes
Main Properties of the Gyroscoper
Kinetic Moment Theorem
Applications of the Kinetic Moment Theorem
Gyroscopic Moment
Setting up Equations of Motion of Gyroscopes end Gyroscopic
Devices by Professor 8. I. Kudrevich's Method
Motion of the Gyroscope Under the Effect of a Steady Moment
of External Forces and Shocks
Processional Motion Equation of the Gyroscope

Chapter II. Free Gyroscope on the Earth. Methods of Converting a Free

1.13.
1.1“.

Section 2.

Gyroscope into a Gyrocompass and into a Vertical Gyroscope
Diurnal Rotation of the Earth
Apparent Motion of a Free Gyroscope in Relation to the
Meridian and Morison Planes
Rotation of the Horizontal System of Coordinates Due to
the Motion of the Vessel
Methods of Converting a Free Gyroscope into a Gyrocompass
Methods of Converting a Free Gyroscope into a Vertical

Gyroscope

Theory of Gyroscopic Compasses

Chapter III. Theory of a Two-Gyroscope Compass

2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.6.
2.5.
2.6.
2.7.

Sensitive Element of the Gyrocompass and Setting up
Equations of Its Motion

Sustained Oscillations of the Gyrosphere in the Azimuth and
Along the Height on a Motionless Vessel

Decaying Oscillations of the Gyrosphere in the Azimuth and
Along the Height on a Motionless Vessel

Effect of Vessel Movement at a Steady Speed and on a Fixed
Course on the Gyrocompass

Effect of the Maneuvering of the Vessel on the Indication
Accuracy of the Gyrocompass

Gyro-Horizon-Compass

Effect of Rocking on the Indication Accuracy of a Two-Gyro-
scope Compass

Chapter IV. Theory of Correctible Gyroscopic Compasses

2.8.
2.9.

Basic Diagram of a Gyrocompass with Indirect Control
Basic Diagram of Gyro-Azimuth-Compass "Vega"

F0! OFFHJMI.US£1MNLY
FOR OFHCIM. USE ONLY

2.10. Setting up Differential Equations of Motion of Gyro-
Azimuth-Compass "Vega"

2.11. Instrument Operation in the Gyrostabiliser Mode

2.12. Instrument Operation in the Mode of a Gyrocompass with
Indirect Control (without correction)

2.13. Instrument Operation in the Correctible Gyrocompass Mode

2.14. Operation of a Gyro-Azimuth-Compass in the Gyro-Azimuth
Mode

Section 3. Theory of Gyroscopic Devices of Stabilization Systems and
Vessel Movement Control Systems

Chapter V. Theory of Vertical Gyroscopes
3.1. Fundamentals of the Theory of Pendulous Vertical Gyroscopes
3.2. Fundamentals of the Theory of the Vertical Gyroscope with
Radial Correction
3.3. Fundamentals of the Theory of the Inertial Vertical Gyroscope

Chapter VI. Theory of Gyrotachometers
3.4. Operating Principle and Fundamentals of the Theory of the
Single-Gyroscope Gyrotachometer
3.5. Fundamentals of the Theory of the Two-Gyroscope Gyrotacho-
meter
3.6. Uses of Gyrotachometers in the Marine Fleet

Section 4. Automatic Systems of Vessel Movement Control

Chapter VII. Vessel as an Object of Automatic Control
4.1. Main Tasks of the Automation of Vessel Control
4.2. Setting up and Analyzing Equations of Vessel Movement

Chapter VIII. Operating Principle and Fundamentals of the Theory of
Autopilots
4.3. Automatic Control of Vessel Movement in Relation to the
Prescribed Course
4.4. Automatic Control of Vessel Movement in Relation to the
Prescribed Trajectory

Section 5. Applied Theory of Hydroacoustics and Hydroacoustic Instruments

Chapter IX. Sound Propagation in a Homogeneous Liquid
5.1. Physical Nature of Sound

Derivation of the Wave Equation

Plane Haves

Concept 6? Spherical Waves

Reflection and Refraction of Sound Haves

Interference of Sound Waves

Passage of Sound Through a Thin Partition

Diffraction of Sound Waves

Sound Propagation in a Moving Liquid

see.
sees

00
asaa

e

mummuuv-mu
.
omuoubuw

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'PILIAL 03!. ONLY

Chapter X. Sound Propagation in the Sea
5.10. Speed of Sound
5.11. Refraction of Sound Beams
5.12. Reverberation

Chapter XI. Sound Sources and Receivers
5.13. Oscillating Systems of Vibrators
5.16. Piezoelectric and Magnetostrictive Transducers
5.15. Directional Effect of Vibrators
5.16. Sound Radiation
5.17. Reception of Sound Oscillations

Chapter XII. Acoustic Method of Depth Measurements
5.18. Fundamentals of the Theory of Echo Depth Sounders
5.19. Block Diagram of an Echo Depth Sounder

Chapter XIII. Fundamentals of Hydrolocation
5.20. Substantiation of the Principles of hydrolocation Measurements

Section 6. Applied Theory of Logs

chapter XIV. Hydroacoustic Absolute Doppler Log
6.1. Fundamentals of the Doppler—Log Theory
6.2. Block Diagram of the Hydroacoustic Doppler Log

Chapter XV. Hydroacoustic Absolute Correlation Log
6.3. Fundamentals of the Correlation Log Theory
6.4. Block Diagram of the Hydroacoustic Correlation Log

Chapter XVI. Induction Log
6.5. Fundamentals of the Indiction Log Theory
6.6. Block Diagram of the Induction Log

Chapter XVII. Hydraulic Log
6.7. Fundamentals of the Hydraulic Log Theory
6.8. Block Diagram of the Hydraulic Log

Part 2. Designs of Electric Navigation Instruments
Section 7. Gyrocompasses and Autopilots
Chapter XVIII. Gyrocompass "Kurs-b"

7.1. Basic Specifications

7.2. Systems and Components of a Cyrocompsss with a Sensitive
Element Working on Alternating Current of 120V, 330 B:

7.3. Primary Instrument (Instrument 1H)

7.4. Auxiliary Systems and Instruments

7.5. Systems and Components of a Gyrocompass with a Sensitive
Element Working on Alternating Current of 127 V, 400 H:

7.6. Primary Instrument (Instrument 1K")

7.7. Speed Deviation Correction Unit

FOR OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter XIX. Aperiodic Gyrocompass "Kurs-S"
7.8. Basic Specifications
7.9. Systems and Components of the Gyrocompau
7.10. Primary Instrument (Instrument 1P)
7.11. Auxiliary Systems and Instruments

Chapter XX. Gyrocompass "Amur-Z"
7.12. Systems and Components of the Gyrocompass
7.13. Primary Instrument (Instrument 1A)
7.14. Instruments of the Supply Unit

Chapter XXI. Gyro-Asimuth-Compass "Vega"
7.15. Basic Specification of the Gyro-Azimuth-Compass
7.16. Systems and Components of the Gyro-Asimth-Compass
7.17. Primary Instrument (Instrument VG-lA)
7.18. Auxiliary Systems and Instruments

Chapter XXII. Autopilot AR
7.19. Block Diagram of the Vessel Course SAD [Automatic Control
System]
7.20. Components of Autopilots AR
7.21. Control Panel
7.22. Ordinary Control Panel
7.23. External Control Panel
7.26. Rudder Sensor and Rectifier Station
7.25. Amplidyne
7.26. Block Diagram of the Autopilot AR

Chapter XXIII. Autopilot: AIR and "Aist"

7.27. Basic Specifications of the Autopilot ATR

7.28. Components of the Autopilot ATR

7.29. Control Panel

7.30. Follow-Up Control Panel (PSU)

7.31. Hydraulic Amplifier

7.32. Pump

7.33. Actuator
7.310. Block Diagram of the Autopilot A'l'R
7.35. Basic Specifications of the Autopilot "Aist"
Section 8. Echo Depth Sounders and Logs

Chapter XXIV. Navigational Echo Depth Sounders
8.1. Echo Depth Sounder NEL-S
8.2. Echo Depth Sounder MEL-10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter XXV. Logs
8.3. Log MEL-25M
8.4. Log IBL-Z

Supplement. International Requirements for the Accuracy of Marine
Gyrocompasses

Bibliography
Subject Index
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Transport", 1980.

- 10,233
CSO: 1860/103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANTENNAS 6 PROPAGATION

ABSTRACTS FROM COLLECTION 'NONCOHERENT SCATTERING OF RADIO WAVBS'

Apatity NEKOGERENTNOYE RASSEYANIYE RADIOVOLN in Russian 1980
(signed to press 19 Dec 80) pp 2. 161-167

[Annotation and abstracts of articles in collection "Noncoherent Scattering

of Radio Waves". edited by B. Ye. Bryunelli, doctor of physical and mathematical
sciences, et a1., Kol'skiy filial AN SSSR. 400 conies, 167 oases]

[Text] Various aspects of the method of noncoherent scattering of radio
waves are discussed in the collection. a he! highly informative method
of studying the ionosphere. Theory of the method, questions of the
effect of collisions on the spectrum, the effect of continuous magnetic
and electrical fields. and possible occurrence of nonlinear effects

during measurements using the method of noncoherent scattering are dis-
cussed.

Methods and techniques of conducting experiments are examined, as are
questions of enhancing their informativeness. A brief description of
the Noncoherent Scattering Research Complex of Kharkov Polytechnical
Institute and the type of results obtained there are given. Information
resources of the method are analyzed in terms of literary sources.

UDC 533.9Sl+550.388

THE KINETIC THEORY OF RADIO WAVE SCATTERING IN A HBTBROGENBOUS PLASMA

[Abstract of article by v. V. Belyy, Yu. L. Klimontovich, V. A. Puchkov
and A. S. Sidorenko]

[Text] The theory of kinetic plasma fluctuations is presented as it
pertains to problems of noncoherent scattering of electromagnetic waves.
The effect of colliding particles on spectra of noncoherent scattering
is studied within model integrals of BGK collision. A discussion is

conducted based on parametric instabilities which may be generated by
the field of a powerful probe signal.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 533.932

FLUCTUATIONS OF CHARGED PARTICLE DENSITY 0P COLLISION PLASMA IN CROSSBD
ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELDS

[Abstract of article by v. D. Tereshchenko and Ye. D. Tereshchenko]

[Text] Based on kinetic theory, the spectrum of density fluctuations of
charged particles is calculated for a collision plasma located in an
external crossed electrical and magnetic fields. A model integral of
sex collisions is used for to describe the collision effects in an kine-
tic equiaton. It is shown that the colliding member of 36! can be used
to evaluate the effect of collision of electrons and ions on the spec-
trum of noncoherently scattered emission.

UDC 550.388.2
ELECTRON PORTIGI OP SPECTRUM 0F NONCOIIBRDITLY SCATTBRBD EIISSION
[Abstract of article by V. D. Tereshchenko and Ye. D. Tereshchenko]

[Text] The effect of a small addition of epithermal electrons on total
intensity of electron lines of the spectrum of noncoherently scattered
radio emission is studimd. The influence of collision on intensity of
scattering in plasma oscillations is analyzed. General results and
conclusions are applied to calculation of the altitude profile of the
total cross section of plasma line in the polar ionosphere. -

UDC 551.510.535
STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF NONCOHBRENTLY SCATTERBD SIGNAL
[Abstract of article by E. G. Mizer]

[Text] The statistical characteristics of ionic and electronic com-
ponents of the spectrum of noncoherently scattered signals in iono-
spheric plasma are considered. The process of formation of a scattered
signal is considered: distributive laws. space and time correlation
functions of the signal are derived. Physical processes of shaping of a
signal scattered on longitudinal plasma waves is examined. Methods are
recommended for receiving the signal of a plasma line permitting im-
provement of the signal-to-noise ratio with respect to power.

UDC 550.388.2

EFFECT OF MAGNETIC FIELD IN QUASIEOUILIBRIUM PLASMA ON IONIC PORTION OF
SPECTRUM OF A NONCOHERENTLY SCATTERED SIGNAL

[Abstract of article by A. D. Tereshchenko]

[Text] The effect of a magnetic field on the process of noncoherent
scattering of radio waves in a quasiequilibrium plasma is studied. The
spectrum of radio wave scattering in the meter range is determined by
longitudinal (with respect to magnetic field bearing) temperature com-
ponent and longitudinal component of electron directional velocity.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.510.535

ROLE OF NONLINEAR EFFECTS IN THE NONCOHERENT SCATTERING METHOD

[Abstract of article by v. A. Hisyura, s. I. Hartynenko and L. F. Chernogorl

[Text] For the case of the heating mechanism of nonlinear effects,
“engineering” formulas are derived which enable us to assess the minimum
effective output at which perturbation of the medium due to sensing
pulses becomes noticeable. Perturbations are calculated for two typical
meter and decimeter range facilities. It is shown that strong radio
pulses can increase electron temperature Te in the D—region by a factor
of ten. The change in Te in the E and P regions is small. Perturbation
of electron concentration may also be ignored. The principle of con-
struction of an approximate nonlinear theory of noncoherent scattering
(NR) of radio waves is described. It is shown that the use of increased
output installations expands the resources of the NR method.

UDC 621.371+550.388

SYNTHESIS OF HULTIPARANETRIC EVALUATION PROCESSOR STRUCTURE FOR NON-
COHBRENTLY SCATTERED SIGNALS

[Abstract of article by I. N. Presnyakov, A. N. Blinkov, S. s. Smol'yaninov,
M. I. Kochkin, Ye. A. Pis'michenko and V. A. But]

[Text] Questions of synthesis of structures of special digital pro-
cessors are considered for real-time processing signals of noncoherent
scattering (NR) are considered. Basic aspects of computer routines are ana-
lyzed; on this basis, requirements for processing system structure are
worked out. Basic circuits of a system for processing NR signals are
considered, including special processors oriented to compute correlation
function or energy spectrum; their basic merits and shortcomings are
analyzed. A programmable matrix-structured multiprocessor is proposed
as an all-purpose special processor. Principles of operation of such
processors are considered: it is shown to be highly efficient in pro-
cessing NR signals.

UDC 621.3.088

QUESTIONS OF PROCESSING NONCOHERENTLY SCATTBRED SIGNALS WHILE SENSING
DOUBLE RADIO PULSES

[Abstract of article by O. I. Tsilyurik]
[Text] Effect of distortion of signal shape in experiments on non-
coherent scattering with various receiving and processing equipment

parameters are considered. Methods of correcting the results are dis-
cussed.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Urn Lynn» van Uo‘ua

UDC 551.501.8

POSSIBLE USE OF OPTIMUM PROCESSORS FOR A SIGNAL REFLECTED ON A DISCRETE

OBJECT, T0 MEASURE THE POWER OF “IONIC" COMPONENT OF NONCONERENTLY SCAT-
TERED SIGNAL

[Abstract of article by G. N. Tkachev]

[Text] It is shown that current devices for processing echo-signal from
a point target. synthesized on basis of distribution of a signal by
modulation noise. may be used to measure the output of the "ionic'I com-
ponent of a noncoherently scattered (NR) signal. Correlation function
of the modulating coefficient is defined by autocorrelation function of
thermal fluctuations of electronic concentration of the ionosphere. the
law of intrapulse modulation of sensing pulses and the law of distribu-
tion of electrons with respect to range. Parameters of the device are

specified: the effectiveess of their use to measure power of NR signals
is evaluated.

UDC 551.501.8

POSSIBLE MEASURING OF THE "ELECTRONIC“ COHOPNENT OF A NONCONERENTLY
SCATTERED SIGNAL TO SENSE THE IONOSPHERE WITH BROAD-BAND PULSES

[Abstract of article by G. N. Tkachev and A. A. Martynov]

[Text] Expressions are derived and analyzed for signal-to-noise ratio
(in power) at the output of the linear part of a receiver matched with a
sensing pulse. It is revealed that while sensing the ionosphere with
pulses having linear frequency modulation (LPN) the signal-to-noise
ratio can be higher than in the case of sensing with a ‘smooth' pulse of
the same length by a factor of [5FT. where P is deviation of the LPN
pulse; T is pulse length. Resolution of LPH pulse in terms of range

deteriorates by a factor of [SET and is determined only by length of the
LFH pulse.

UDC 551.510
PHASE-MANIPULATED SIGNAL FOR NONCOHERENT SENSING OF THE IlleSPEERE

[Abstract of article by V. T. Sarychev]

[Text] The possible use of phase manipulated signals for noncoherent
sensing of the ionosphere is considered. Expressions are derived which
establish a link between signal parameters at the output of the re-
ceiving/processing installation for complex signals and the concentra-
tion and spectrum of fluctuations in electron concentration. Results of
calculation are cited in graphic form, illustrating expressions for
Barker. Longer codes and M-sequences. Analysis of results of calcula-

tion produces negative conclusions: enhancement of altitude resolution
for measurement of electron concentration is achieved at the cost of
loss of information about layer temperatures.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.371+550.388
MULTIPARAMETRIC EVALUATION OF SIGNALS 0P NONCOBBRBNT SCATTERING

[Abstract of article by I. N. Presnyakov, s. s. Smol'yaninov,
A. N. Blinkov and M. I. Kochkinl

[Text] Algorithms of multiparametric evaluation of the state of the
ionosphere obtained via maximization of the probability function of
noncoherently scattered (NR) signals are investigated. It is shown that for
a small signal-to-noise ratio, the procedure of seeking evaluations of
ionosphere parameters reduces to measurement of the correlation function
(energy spectrum) of NR signals and subsequent minimization of the quad-
ratic form of measured function and its model. An algorithm of matrix
filtration is derived which permits enhancement of the intormativeness

of measurements of parameters of a nonhomogeneous ionosphere. Results

of mathematical simulation are cited.

UDC 551.510:621.39
METER RANGE “ONCOHERENT SCATTERING RESEARCH COMPLEX
[Abstract of article by V. I. Golovin]

[Text] Basic parameters and structural diagram of a special noncoherent
scattering complex are cited. A description of its operation and quoted

research are explained as report summaries: in this connection refe-
rences are given to the literature which :ontains-more questions on this
report in terms of equipment and methods of measurement.

UDC 550.388.2
RESULTS OF STUDY OF TﬂE P2 REGION BY NONCOHBRENT SCATTERING
[Abstract of article by D. A. Dzyubanov]
[Text] Results of measurements of electron concentration. electronic
and ionic temperatures obtained in Kharkov Polytechnical Institute's

measurement complex for individual days in the winter and summer of 1975
are cited.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.371.165

SCATTERING OP ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES ON RANDOH BETEROGINBITIES IN TEE
IONOSPEERE

[Abstract of article by A. G. Tyshnenko, N. A. Khizhnyak and
G. K. Solodovnikov]

[Text] Assuming that heterogeneities of electron concentration in iono-
spheric please have a sharp ellipsoidal boundary, an exprsssion is ob-
tained for mean effective dielectric permeability of plaana with fluc-
rusting heterogeneities. By given formula is calculated the total cross
section of scattering of electron waves on random heterogeneities. It is
necessary to consider scattering on turbulent heterogeneities to in-
terpret vertical distributions of electron concentration obtained by the
method of noncoherent scattering of radio waves in the auroral zone.

UDC 621.371

EFFECT OF IONOSPNERIC dETEROGENIETIES ON OPERATION OF THE ANTENNA 0P
NONCOEERENT RADIO HAVE SCATTERING STATION

[Abstract of article by A. S. Shchennikovl

[Text] The function of three-diaensional coherence is found for spheri-
cal waves passing through a layer of anisotropic ionospheric hetero-
geneities. Change in mean beam pattern is analyzed with respect to the
output of the antenna of a noncoherent scattering station in the azi-
authal plane as a function of the characteristics of ionospheric hetero-
genities.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 550.388
STUDY OF IONOSPHBRE BY NONCOHERBNT SCATTERING OP RADIO WAVES (REVIEW)

[Abstract of article by a. Ye. Bryunelli]

[Text] A review of foreign publications. Basic attention is paid to
results obtained in recent years: construction of models of thermosphere
and thermospheric circulation. Hs-NR model, constructed on basis of
mass spectrometric measurements from satellites and data of noncoherent
scattering seems to be best method proposed. Subsequent research re-
fined nature of dependence of model parameters as a function of ac-
tivity. Observation of motion of air masses over NR stations esta-
blished the dominating harmonics of the wind system: its correspondance
to daily geomagnetic variation is shown. The wave nature of the vertical
distribution of winds determines wind shifts creating not only sporadic
layers. but also the intermediate layers in nighttime middle-latitude
ionosphere detected by the NR method. General tendency of development
of research by NR method is an even greater departure from traditional
ionospheric research of electron density distribution.

COPYRIGRT: Kol'skiy filial AN SSSR, 1980

8617
C80: 1860/37

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.u-s v.-----~ --- u“...-

UDC 550.388.2+621.396.24

HIGH LATITUDE PROPAGATION OP DBCAHETBR RADIO WAVES

Moscow RASPROSTRANENIYB DBKAHBTROVYKH RADIOMOLN V VYSOKIKB SBIROTIKB in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 27 Mar 81) pp 2-5, 179-180

(Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book 'Propagation
of Decameter Radio Waves in High Latitudes“ by Donat Vladimirovich Bla-
goveshchenskiy, Izdatel’stvo 'Nauka“, 750 copies, 180 pages]

[Text] Based on signal representation, the features of propagation of
decameter radio waves in high latitudes are considered in the book. The
results of comprehensive experiments on radio routes having various
orientations toward the aurora borealis zone are presented. Research is
based on all geophysical and radiophysical methods. In the first case,
the study object is the polar ionosphere, its fine structure: in the
second case, properties of signals after ionospheric reflection, as a
randomly nonhomogeneous medium. Patterns between the statistical char-
acteistics of signals in radio channels and parameters of the high lati-
tude ionosphere as a function of time of day, season, solar activity.
degree of ionospheric perturbation, etc. are cited. Considerable at-
tention is given to methods of rapid prognosis of abnormal states of the
ionosphere and radio channels according to signal transmittance monitor-
ing, radio noise levels, angular sensing data and ionospheric condi-
tions. Questions of simulation of radio wave propagation using com-
puterized trajectory parameter plotting are discussed. Problems of
enhancing the reliability of radio communications in the higher lati-
tudes are discussed. '

The book may prove useful to science workers and specialists in iono-
spheric studies, radio wave propagation and radio communications.

Fifteen tables; 56 figures; 377 references.

Introduction

The pattern of human activities in the Far North (and South) has given
impetus to new studies in the propagation of decameter radio waves in
these regions. Experimentally obtained data on the transmittance of
radio signals in high latitude ionospheric radio channels in response to
various geophysical influences is a major scientific interest: theo-
retical models of such channels are not always valid. 0n the other
hand, the problem of guaranteeing stable radio communications in the
high latitudes is very isportant. This also involves observing processs

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

identified as solar-terrestrial communications which occur in the atmo-
sphere and magnetosphere of the earth under the influence of the sun.
These processes have a direct effect on propagating radio waves in va-
rious ranges. 0n the other hand, the problem of guaranteeing stable
radio communications in the high latitudes is extremely important. As
we know, for the decameter range the transmission of signals largely
depends on the state of the medium of propagation. The latter, in turn,
is subject to various high latitude effects and phenomena. Thus to take
advantage of decameter waves in comparison to waves of other ranges,
their propagation should be thoroughly studied in high latitudes and
only then should radio communications be developed.

The complexity of the problem is that the space and time distribution of
basic parameters of the polar and subpolar ionosphere indicate a lack of
isotoropic conditions affecting propagation. Anisotropy is due to the
presence of zones of maximum auroral activity. subauroral red arcs, the
nonhomogeneous ionospheric structural band, the primary ionization gap,
etc. All of these phenomena are governed by the state of the geomag-
netic field. Estimating changes in the ionosphere due to geomagnetic
activity is difficult because we lack knowledge of the mechanics of
interaction between various geophysical phenomena. Consequently, a
study of the propagation of decameter radio waves in high latitudes
requires a comprehensive examination of the behavior of key parameters
of radio signals along various radio routes and their comparison with
geophysical concepts. Similar problems have been solved in both the
USSR and abroad. Research findings have been published in scientific
periodicals, as a rule as separate articles, reports, summaries, and
accounts. He should note that in most cases these studies have one main
direction. either considering the actual conditions of propagation with-
out the physics of the effect, or ionospheric processes which only have
an indirect effect on propagation. The comprehensive description is
comparatively small and few studies can be found which summarize scien-
tific advancements in this field.

In this respect, the present monograph attempts to partially fill in
this gap. It tries to explain the extent to which statistical charac-
teristics of radio signals depend on the range and bearing of the pro-
pagation route, operating frequencies, time of day, season, degree of
magnetic activity, etc. It is important to understand the essence and
meaning of mechanisms which affect signal propagation, considering ex-
ternal geophysical factors, so that these general patterns can be ex-
tended to similar radiolines in high latitudes. A comprehnsive study of
the problems (using radiophysical and geophysical methods) not only
clarifies the physical situation of conditions of radiowave propagation,
but may also serve as a starting point for predicting transmission of
frequencies and planning of radio communications. Material presented in
the book is mainly based on experiments conducted in northern Siberia
(Taymyr Peninsula).

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first chapter, primary attention is given to the structure of the
ionosphere and space-time variations: the main electron gap, sporadic
ionization in B and P regions of the ionosphere, perturbation in the D
region, altitude dependencies of the electron concentration. The char-
acteristica of the fine structure of the ionosphere are analyzed in
terms of test data in high latitude routes under various geophysical
conditions, specifically during subgales.

The second chapter is devoted to the properties of high latitude radio
channels. Indiators characterizing the non-steady state of channels are
first discussed (as illustrated by auroral routes during subgales). The
distributive functions of signal amplitudes for rapid and slow signal
fluctuations are considered from general positions. Statistics are
cited for parameters of this function in the routes. Experimental re-
search on the characteristics of the selective properties of channels
with respect to time, frequency and space are evaluated; at the same
time, several parameters for high latitudes, their comparison with theo-
retical values and their difference from middle-latitude values are
examined. In conclusion transmission functions of radio channels (as
linear systems) are analyzed for four groups of test energy spectra of
signal fluctuations.

In the third chapter are presented materials of experimental research on
the statistical characteristic of signals and radio noises in six high
latitude radio routes in Siberia. Primary attention is focused on di-
urnal and seasonal variations in parameters, the effect of subgales and
geomagnetic activity at the signal and noise level is analyzed in de-
tail. Trajectory characteristics of radio beams on a route situated in
a zone of auroral ionization to the north of the primary electron gap
are considered.

The fourth and last chapter is related to questions of radio communica-
tions. Methods of research of preCUrsors of ionospheric perturbation are
discussed for prediction of communication conditions. The current role
of angular sensing of the ionosphere for arranging radio comm:nications
is shown. Advantages of automated communication: systems in high lati-
tudes are analyzed based on the specifications of the propagation me-
dium. Notions about using antenna systems, method of separate reception
and conditions of transmission of radio frequencies in high latitude
radio routes.

in conclusion, the author expresses his indebtedness to N. M. Yerofeyev,
corresponding member of the Tadzhik 558 Academy of Sciences for his
continuous attention to the work, V. M. Driatskiy, editor of the book
and doctor of physico-mathematical sciences for his valuable comments
during preparation of the material and to G. A. Zherebtsov. candidate of
physico-mathematical sciences for collaboration in conducting the ex-
periments.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents

Introduction

Chapter I

High Latitude Ionouphere

1.1. Morphological features of the ionosphere

1.1.1. Zone division

1.1.2. Main electronic gap

1.1.3. Sporadic ionization in the F region of the
ionosphere

1.1.4. Sporadic layers of 88

1.1.5. D region perturbations

l 2. Nonhcmogeneous structure of the ionosphere

1 2 1. Altitude relationships of electron concentration
1.2.2. Ionospheric heterogeneities

l 2 3

1 2

. Characteristics of the fine structure
.4 Dynamics of key ionosphereic parameters during
auroral subgales

Chapter II
Description of shortwave radio channels

2 1. Indicators of nonsteady state channel properties
2 2. Signal amplitude distributions

2.2.1. Interference attenuation

2 2.2. Abnormal distributions

2 2 3. slow fluctuations in signal levels

0

. o

2 3. Selective attenuation

2 3 1. Time selectivity

2 3 1. Frequency selectivity
2.3.2. Spatial selectivity

2 3 4

2 3 S

a

. Polarization and reception angle selectivity
. Selective attenuation with respect to several
parameters

2.4. Representing the radio channel as a linear system

Chapter III

Aspects of radio wave propagation versus geophysical factors

3.1. Brief review of conditions of 8/" signal transmission

in high latitude radio lines

3.2. Daily and seasonal changes in statistical signal
parameters

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

39

42
46
47
54
65

69
72
76
87
90
92

99

106

107

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.3. Effect of subgales on propagation
3.3.1. Variations in signal parameters
3.3.2. Characteristics of S/w radio noises

3.4. Influence of geomagnetic activity

3.4.1. Analysis of signals in routes

3.4.2. Radio noise levels

3.4.3. Evaluation of several trajectory parameters of
beams

Chapter IV

Some questions of arranging 5/w communications in high
latitudes

4.1. Methods of short-term prediction of 5/" radio
communications

4.1.1. Analysis of geophysical phenomena
4.1.2. Probing the ionosphere

4.2. Arranging communications with aid of angular
ionospheric probing

4.2.1. Estimating enhanced reliability of s/w radio
lines by incorporating NZ equipment

4.2.2. Advantages of adaptive systems of N: type over
nonadaptive

4.2.3. Providing correspondents of automated
radio communications network with frequencies

4.2.4. Angular probing as means of interpretiing signals
in radio routes

4.2.5. Space-time variations in radio wave parameters in
routes

4.3. Features of method of 5/" communications improvement
in high latitudes

4.3.1. Communications media and conditions of radio
reception

4.3.2. Comments on choice of operating frequencies

References

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka'. 1981

8617
C50: 1860/49

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

118
118
121
124
125
127

129

131

131
131
137
141
141
144
146
150

155

161

161
163

167
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621 . 371

SHORT- AND ULTRASIIORT-WAVE PROPAGATION

Moscow RASPROSTRANENIYE KOROTKIKH I UL'TRAKOROTKIKH RADIOVOLN (HASSOVAYA
RADIOBIBLIOTEKA, WPUSK 1034) in Russian 1981 (signed to press 5 Jun 81)
pp 2-3, so

(Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Short- and Ultrashort-
Have Propagation", by Galina Petrovna Grudinskaya, Izdatel'stvo "Radio i
svyaz'", 50,000 copies, 80 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book presents basic information on shortwave and ultrashort wave
propagation. Problems involving long-distance reception of television
and amateur radio are examined. The second edition was published in 1960.
The present edition has been supplemented with information on radio wave
propagation in space and using satellites to relay radio waves.

The book is intended for trained radio amateurs. [The book was reviewed by
A.N. Shcherbitakiyl.

Foreword

Questions of the propagation of short and ultrashort waves have been
developed further since the publication of the last edition of this book.
Completely new areas have appeared in the science and practice of radio

wave propagation: propagation in space; utilization of earth satellites to
relay radio transmissions; and investigating the surface and atmosphere of

the earth and other planets using radio technical methods. Conceptions of the
propagation of radio waves in the shortwave band have been extended and
developed further.

These and other achievements in the area of radio wave propagation are of
major interest for a broad group of radio amateurs. Therefore, the third
revised and supplemented edition of the book devotes a significant amount of
space to new data on radio wave propagation, describes methods for experimental
ionospheric research in more detail, provides expanded material on super-long
range ultrashort wave propagation, and contains a chapter on radio wave pro-
pagation in space.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A great deal of theoretical and experimental research has been devoted to
the study of ultrashort wave propagation. The soviet scientists B.A.
Vvedenskiy, V.A. Pok and M.A. Kolosov have made a major contribution to

this matter; work in this area continues today. New types of ultrashort
wave applications are being sought out continually. Long-range ultrashort
wave radio communication utilizing scattering of radio waves on
heterogeneities in the troposphere and ionosphere, and using radio wave
reflection from meteor trails, has been developed. Satellite relay of radio
communications and television transmission has been accomplished. Soviet
scientists have been able, for the first time in the history of mankind, to
transmit images from the backside of the Noon to the Earth. significant
successes have been achieved in studying the surface and atmosphere of Venus
and Mars. This evidences the urgency of the problems of radio wave propagation,
especially ultrashort wave.

The book uses mainly the name for the radio wave bands which has been
established in the radio amateur literature -- short, ultrashort - and
indicates their name according to the new standard.

Radio amateurs were the pioneers in shortwave communications. Through their
efforts they promoted expansion of information on ultrashort wave propagation,
and their experiments in long—distance television reception are providing
valuable material for new scientific generalizations.

The present book, expanding the field of view of radio amateurs in the area
of radio wave propagation, will facilitate their further active work in
mastering new bands and conducting experiments in long and super-long range
television reception.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Basic information on radio waves and antennas a
Radio waves a
Radio waves in a medium 6
Antennas 8
Electrical properties of earth's surface and atmosphere lO
Earth's surface 10
Earth's atmosphere ll
Troposphere ll
Ionosphere 12
Radio-frequency interference l7
Man-made and atmospheric interference 17

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Cosmic interference

Shottwaves

Regular shortwave propagation
Features of shortwave propagation
Irregular phenomena during shortwave propagation

Ultraahort waves

Application and singularities of ultrashort wave propagation
Ultrashort wave propagation over distances far less than
line-of-sight

Ultrashort wave propagation over near line-of—sight distances
Influence of terrestrial irregularity

Influence of vegetation on ultrashort wave propagation
Ultrashort wave propagation over distances exceeding line-
of—sight

Absorption of ultrashort waves in troposphere

Long-range ultrashort wave troposcatter

Tropospheric waveguide
Radio wave scattering on heterogeneities in troposphere

lonospheric propagation of meter-band radio waves

Reflection from regular F2 layer

Reflection from sporadic Es layer

Scattering on heterogeneities in ionospheric layers
Reflection from meteor trails

Auroral propagation

Ultrashort wave radio links using artificial earth satellites

Satellites -— passive and active relays
“Holniya” communications satellites
"Inmarsat" marine Communications system

Ultrashort wave prepagation over space radio links

The interplanetary medium

The uplink

Radiophysical investigation of planetary surfaces and
atmospheres

Radiophysical properties of surfaces and atmospheres of
planets of interior Solar system

Near-planetary radio wave propagation
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000500030047-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusion

Appendix

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981.

6900
030: 1860/‘30

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000500030047-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.677.49
ANTENNA ARRAYS: TRIAL CLASSIFICATION

Moscow RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian Vol 36, No 10, Oct 81
(manuscript received after revision 16 Mar 81) pp 25-29

[Article by A.R. Vol'pert]

[Text] A classification is given for antenna arrays which is based
on the most characteristic features: geometrical. electrical
and functional. Further development of the classification
is possible as array theory and technology develops. The
classification is useful for drafting monographs on arrays
and in developing scientific programs; it is especially needed
in compiling terminological glossaries.

General considerations. Antenna arrays differ from all other antenna devices
in their relatively greater flexibility and multifaceted nature. Antenna
arrays can be defined as a combination of radiating (receiving) elements which
are arranged in some manner and excited by one source or a group of coherent
sourcesl.

As we know, the operating flexibility of antenna arrays results from the
capability of configuniug them in different ways. as a result of uhlch they

can be deployed on bodies with complex shapes. The required directivity pattern
can be achieved by appropriate phasing of the currents (or fields) in the
elements. Adjustable phasing makes it possible to change the patterns of arrays
rapidly, and in a special case makes electrical scanning possible.

Multi-element construction of arrays and element-by-element processing makes
possible more effective use of the information from the waves incident on the
array; the same sort of processing is possible during transmission, and various
adaptation and self-guidance methods result in multifunctional array utilization.
It is also possible to increment the radiated power by adding amplifiers to the
elementCifCUits; this use of amplifiers is also possible during reception. The
efficiency of the entire antenna can be increased in both cases. Methods are
also being developed for using arrays during reception to convert the incident
wave energy to dc.

The numerous varieties of arrays and their broad capabilities have long required
the establishment of an appropriate classification. However, the primary

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attention in available publications is devoted to geometric features [1], or
to features which poorly reflect the characteristic singularities of the arrays

[21.

The present article proposes a classification (cf. diagram) which is based on
three groups of features: geometrical, electrical and functional with no

loss of systematicity, no clear boundaries between them (especially between the
last two). However, these groups are arranged sequentially in the diagram

(and are set off there by circles).

The features within corresponding groups can be further developed (and refined)
through parallel development of the classification; this makes it possible to
introduce new features when necessary. thus expanding it (indicated in the diagram
by broken lines).

Geometric features. The simplest features are those which characterize the
general shape of the arrays and the arrangement of the elements. Therefore,
we sometimes see excessive efforts to enumerate the largest possible number
of different shapes.

Although array geometry affects their electrical properties to some extent,
it is still advisable to limit ourselves to typical configurations, since
various modifications of known shapes produce no qualitative changes in the
electrical picture. Therefore, the diagram uses as a basis arrays in which
the elements are arranged in a line or on the surface.

Volumetric arrays are presented only to complete the picture. In principle,
the third dimension in these arrays can be used to form a "reflecting screen
effect", making it possible to orient one-way radiation in any direction

[3, volume II, page 67. 4]. however, the difficulties in making up the
corresponding excitation circuits makes the construction of these arrays
extremely laborious (cf. Lﬁneberg lens below).

Geometric features also include the positioning of the elements. The
classification gives the best-known cases, and others can be added as
necessary.

Electrical features. The basic division of arrays here is into passive and
active (the latter means arrays which contain amplifying, oscillating or con-
verting devices). These devices may be contained in each radiating (receiving)
element. or in individual groups of elementsz.

The further features define the methods of exciting (feeding) the array elements.
There are two main excitation methods: feeder, in which the array elements are
excited by multi-port networks formed of coaxial feeder segments, waveguides or
other lines, and spatial, in which the elements are excited by an omnidirectional
source 80th as a horn, reflector, etc.3, Both of these methods can be combined.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1)

3'

~-——.---

 

é
.ﬁ
g
m
33

) \ I\ ‘ r " ~‘ - I\

r: r‘1 r‘u I“! P‘ F‘ "I {‘1
I I I n l I l s I I '0 I ' I
l- .ul I ' . l I l' U
I I II.' 1" II II :I
' i I H ' ' I I' II:
' I ll‘: ' g I ‘ II In
I' I' . In. I H I all
‘1’ tr: Lt. Lt: [It > I L,’ L,

0o 0-. N n ‘ In

Vv V V v v V v

 

following page]

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
00.
Al.
42.
b3.
44.
45.
66.
a7.
48.
69.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

controlling pattern position
single-pattern
multi-pattern
electromechanical scanning
electrical scanning
mechanical phase control
electrical phase control
Blass matrix

Butler matrix

by varying dispersion

by phase inverters

by phase inverters

time delay

frequency

dual frequency conversion
at i-f

single-processing arrays
adaptive
element-by-element processing
synthetic aperture
nonlinear processing
time-varying parameters
rectennas

self-focusing

re-radiating

optical

digital

multiplication
correlation

logical synthesis

length modulation

element switching
directivity pattern variation
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Functional features. The capabilities of antenna arrays result in a more
complicated picture when classifying them in terms of functional features.
Arrays are first divided in terms of transceiving functions. They are then
divided into arrays which:

-- form patterns with fixed position relative to the array aperture;
-- control the position of the pttterns, i.e., scan;
-- process the signals.

Arrays which produce fixed patterns include both single-pattern arrays which
were in use in the l920'a ("Telefunken"-type antennas [5, page 289]), as well
as modern multi-pattern structures for direction-finding tasks and for
parallel or switched spatial scanning in radar. single-pattern arrays may
differ in the configuration of the patterns and their positioning with
respect to the aperture. Hulti-pattern arrays differ mainly in the
arrangement of the pattern-formation circuits (the term "circuits" is under~
stood in the broadest sense, e.g., in the form of a Lﬁneberg lens with an
array of independent radiators [6, Figure 13-15))“. of the pattern-forming
circuits, we have shown serial ones (Blass matrix [6, Figure 14-131) and
parallel ones (Butler matrix [6, Figure 16-141). No division is given for
arrays which for- patterns in the same plane or in space.

Arrays with controllable pattern position are divided into electromechanically-
scanning arrays and electrically-scanning arrays. The classification does not
include so-called mechanical scanning done by turning or rotating the entire
array, since this is not associated with the arrangement of the array, but of
the facility within which it is used.

A variety of features resulting from different methods of controlling the
current (or field) phases in the array elements is characteristic for
electrically-scanning arrayss.

The classification includes the following:

-- electrically controlled phase inverters;

-- time delays for wideband scanning, when the phase shift occurs in real
time without "phase reset" [8, page 38];

-- frequency method, by changing the phase velocity of propagation in the
feed circuit;

-- dual frequency conversion using an auxiliary local oscillator I3, volume [[1,
page 306; 9, page 382];

-- intermediate-frequency phase control [10, page 303]. The number of methods
can be increased, and detailed further. Some of the electrical control methods

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

given in the classification can also be implemented with mechanical devices.

So-called signal-processing arrays hold an important place in terms of functional
features. He have in mind various special types of preliminary processing which
the signals undergo, mainly during reception, before they are combined in a
common channel. in contrast to simple direct addition of the signals from all

of the elementsé. The broken line which connects with the transmitting arrays
indicate that some types of processing can also be done during transmission.

In terms of processingmethods, arrays can be subdivided into:

-- adaptive;

-- arrays with element-by-element processing;

-- with synthetic aperture;

-- with nonlinear processing;

-- with time-varying parameters;

-- with element-by-element rectification of incident wave in receiving arrays.

Adaptive arrays are defined as antennas whose parameters are automatically
adjusted to meet assigned requirements when the transmission or reception
conditions change. In self-focusing arrays, automatic adjustment is provided
by phased addition of the signals from all of the elements with a complex
incident-wave phase front and different phase errors occurring within the
arrays themselves [3, volume III, page 383]. In transceiving-rsdiating arrays
(or Van Btt arrays), the received signals are re-radiated back in the direction
of the signal source [3, volume III, page 411].

The use of arrays with element-by-element processing makes it possible to

wake fuller use of the information contained in the incident wave. This is a
relatively new area in antenna enginnering; therefore, it will be refined and
expanded in the classification. The classification now contains coherent
optical and digital processing. In optical processing, like in the aforementioned
multi-pattern construction using matrix circuits, a group of patterns can be
formed simultaneously Ila; l2, page 60; 13, page 124]. The optical processing
of the signals coming from the array elements is analog, and allows large
amounts of information to be processed without scanning at extremely high
speeds. In digital processing, the signals coming from the array elements
first undergo analog-digital conversion, followed by processing according to
some algorithm.llb, 15].

Synthetic-aperture arrays [16], in contrast to those which simultaneously use
the information coming from all elements, include arrays which sample the
elements sequentially, then add the signals together through corresponding

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm urnLuu. var. mun

time-delay devices7. In this case, the processing can be done by various

methods, especially optical [18]. The classification of these arrays may
be detailed further in terms of the methods used to form the synthetic
aperture.

The use of strictly linear combinations of signals from the array elements
limits the shape of the patterns obtained. Array capabilities are expanded
with nonlinear signal processing, for which the following are typical:
multiplication of signals from individual elements, division of signals,
raising signals to a power, multiplication followed by averaging, i.e.,
correlation, etc. [19, page 306). The Hills cross is a simple example [17,
page 125]. Nonlinear processing also includes so—called logical synthesis,
in which the main controlling factor is usually the received signal,
depending upon the level of which the individual sections comprising the
array are activated or deactivated [19, page 301; 20, page 327].

Further expansion of array capabilities involves introducing time as an
additional controllable parameter. Arrays with time-variable parameters
belong to an area which is relatively undeveloped. At present, it is difficult
to provide a detailed classification of the varieties of such arrays; however,
we can point Out modulation of the effective array length in order to reduce
the side lobe level [3, volume 111, page 355; 10, page 349), as well as
sequential activation of elements [21] located along.some length8 (so-called
"Doppler arrays" [22, page 85]). In general, the overall pattern of an

array, and its phase pattern in particular, change over time due to variation
over time of the parameters which influence the field. If the phase pattern
depends upon the angular coordinates of the observation point, the
instantaneous frequency of the radiation field changes, thus becoming a
function of the angular coordinates. As a result of this, the radiation

field undergoes "frequency painting". Because of the mutuality principle, the
instantaneous frequency of the emf at the output of the receiving antenna
during reception, in turn, depends upon the position of the source of the

wave with respect to the antenna9. These circumstances can be used to solve
direction-finding problems.

Signal-processing arrays also include receiving arrays in which each
receiving element is loaded to a rectifier, so that "processing" consists of
both rectification and later addition of the dc energy caused by the incident
wave. These arrays have come to be called rectennas.[26-28].

FOOTNOTES
l. "Element" here is understood in the broad sense, in which it may be
implemented in a complex manner and, in particular, can itself be an
array.
33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the latter case, it is incorrect to characterize the array as
"semi-active".

Spatial excitation is sometimes called "optical". He do not feel
that this definition is correct.

A Lﬁneberg lens excited by a group of radiators can be considered as
an example of a volumetric array.

In contrast to the expression "electronic scanning" which is sometimes
used, the term "electrical scanning" [7] encompasses all cases in which

the phase state caused by scanning is changed by means of electrical
devices.

Although, of course, this addition is also a type of processing.

In radio astronomy, this type of synthesis is called "aperture synthesis"

[17].

The-pitture of the phenomena here is different from that occurring

during length synthesis (cf. above). However, the possible degree

of angular resolution during direction finding remains the same for
different array lengths [23; 25, page 117].

The mutuality principle is known for systems which have time-constant
parameters. However, [25] shows that this principle is retained when
time dispersion is present in the media.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Reznikov, 6.3. RADIOTEKHNIKA, Vol 31, No 3, 1976.

Kyun, R. "Hilrovolnovye antenny." [Hicrowave antennas]. Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo Sudostroyeniye, 1967.

"Skaniruyushchiye antennye sistemy SVCh." [Scanning microwave antennas].
Vol II-III. Translated from English, G.T. Markov and A.F. Chaplin,
editors. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Sovetskoye Radio, 1969-1971.

Herkulov, V.V.. Shishlov, A.V. RADIOTEKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, 1930,
Vol 25, No 6.

Dombrovskiy. I.A. "Evolyutsiya antennykh sistem. Ocherki istorii
radiotekhniki." [Evolution of antenna systems. Outline of history
of radio engineering]. Moscow, lzdatel'stvo AN SSSR, 1960.

31.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

l6.

l7.

l8.

19.

20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Markov, G.T., Sazonov, D.M. "Antenny." [Antennas]. Moscov, Izdatel'stvo
Bnergiya, 1975.

"Electrically-scanning antenna arrays." TIIER, Thematic edition. Vol 56,
No 11, 1968.

Vol'pert, A.R. In "Antenny" [Antennas], No 17, A.A. Piatol'kors, editor.
Moscow, Izdatel‘stvo Svyaz', 1973.

Skol'nik, M. "Vvedeniye v tekhniku radiolokataionnykh sisten"
[Introduction to radar system technology]. Moscow, Izdatel'atvo, Mir,
1965.

Fradin, A.Z. "Antenna-fidernye ustroystva" [Antenna feeder devices].
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Svyaz', 1977.

Lambert, Arm, Aymet. ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOBLEKTRONIKA, No 8, 1968.

Svet, V.D. "Opticheskiye netody obrabotki signalov" [Optical signal
processing method]. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Energiya, 1971.

"Antenny (sovremennoye sostoyaniye i problemy)" [Antennas (current status
and problema)[. L.D. Bakhrakh and D.I. Boskresenskiy, editors.
BIBLIOTBKA RADIOINZHENERA, No 16. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo, Sovetskoye
Radio, 1979.

Dadzhon. TIIER, V01 65, No 6, 1977.

Bogachev, A.S. RADIOTEKHNIKA, Vol 33, No 6, 1978.

Karavayev, V.V., Sazonov, V.V. "Osnovy teorii sintezirovannykh antenn"
[Fundamentals of theory of synthetic antennas]. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo
Sovetskoye Radio, 1974.

Yesepkina, N.A., Korol'kov, D.V., Pariyskiy, Yu.N. "Radioteleskopy i
radiometry“ [Radio telescopes and radiometera]. Moscow, Izdatel'atvo
Nauka, I973.

Kstron, Leyt, Porchello, Vivian. TIIER, Vol 54, No 8, I966.

"Antennye reshetki" [Antenna arrays]. L.S. Benenson, editor. Moscow,
Izdatel’stvo Sovetskoye Radio, 1966.

Kocherzhevskiy, G.N. "Antenna-fidernye ustroystva" [Antenna feeder
devices]. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Svyaz', 1972.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
21.

22.

23.

21s.

25.

26.

27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prokynin, L.H. RADIOTEKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 10, No 2. 1965.
Boldin, V.A. "Radiotechnical devices for air traffic control."

ITOGI NAUKI I TEKHNIKI, SBR. RADIOTBKHNIKA, Vol 10, Book 1. Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo VINITI, 1976.

Urkovits, Khatser. Koval'. TIRI, Vol 50. No 10, 1962.

Valunan, D.Ye. "Slozhnye signaly i printsip neopredelennosti v radio-
lokatsii" [Complex signals and principle of ambiguity in radar]. Moscow,
IzdaCel'scvo Sovetskoye Radio, 1965.

Kazyulin, A.F. RADIOTEKHNIKA I BLEKTRONIKA, Vol 10, No l, 1965.
Braun. ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELEKTRONIKA, No 8. 1970.

Cutmann, R.J., Borrego, J.H. Trans. IBEE, 1979, v. HIT-27, No 12.

Remizov, V.A.. Klassen, V.l., Shishlov, A.V. ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOBLEKTRONIKA,
No S, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: "Radiotekhnika", 1981

6900
C80: 8144/0686

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I‘ILIAL U85 Ul‘bl

BROADCASTING, CONSUMER ELECTRONICS

unc 621.314.632:621.376

SBM'ICONDIXITOR CONVBKIERS IN THE CHARGE SYSTEMS OF RESERVOIR CAPACITORS

Leningrad POLUPROVODNIKOVYYE PREOBRAZOVATBLI V Slim ZARYADA NAKOPITEL'W
KONDENSATOROV in Russian 1981 (signed to press 17 Feb 81) pp 2-5, 156

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from book “Semiconductor Converters in
the Charge Systems of Reservoir Capacitors", by Vladimir Aristarkhovich Knysh, re-
viewed by V. A. Galanov, Energoisdat, 6500 copies, 160 pages]

[Text] This book deals with the analysis, calculation and description of semicon-
ductor converting devices for charging reservoir capacitors in power supply systems
of pulsed electrical installations. It presents the theory of electromagnetic pro-
cesses in converters, examines circuit designs vhich are optimal vith respect to the
minimum weight criterion when supplied from independent sources; examples of compu-
tations are given.

This book is intended for use by engineers and technicians specialising in the area
of power and semiconductor engineering and can also be useful to senior students
studying industrial electronics.

Foreword

Electrical installations and devices using electric energy accumulated in electri-
cal fields of capacitors are being used more and more uidely in modern engineering.
Such installations and devices serve for pumping pulsed quantum oscillators, and for
creating the electrohydraulic effect, pulsed acceleration of plasma, and strong
short-term magnetic fields.

The development and improvement of installations and devices using energy accmu-.
lated in capacitors make it necessary to develop eharge systems for reservoir capa-
citors and to study the processes in these systems in order to raise the energy in-
dexes and to reduce their weight and dimensions. of particular interest are the
least developed methods of calculating converters ensuring the charge of reservoir
capacitors in the interval of time corresponding to a large number of voltage per-
iods of the source.

At the present time there are no boobavailable to broad sections of engineers and
technicians engaged in the designing in this area in order to familiarise themselves
with basic ideas and methods of constructing and designing converters in systems
of energy transmission to reservoir capacitors periodically discharged to pulsed
loads.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are published descriptions and studies on very different circuits of semicon-
ductor converters in charge systems of reservoir capacitors. However, in the major-
itycfthe works studies are limited to the determination of the time necessary for
charging the capacitor to the prescribed voltage. As a rule, energy indexes are not
examined or are determined on the basis of experimental data. The known studies on
capacitors are very scattered in nature and make it impossible to perform compara-
tive evaluation of various circuits by the energy indexes.

Rational selection of a circuit variant of a converter in the charging system of a
reservoir capacitor. as well as the determination of optimal parameters of the ele-
ments of the capacitor can be done only on the basis of theoretical studies. The
considerable gap between the theoretical principles of designing converters in the
above systems and the practice of their development often lead to decisions which
are far from optimal. An attempt was made in this book to fill this gap to some ex-
tent. Most of the results of studies and methods of calculations based on these re-
sults are being published for the first time.

The analysis of the electromagnetic processes in nonlinear circuits of converters
was done by computers, which made it possible, unlike the presently known works
dealing with converters of this class, to reveal the dependence of energy indexes on
the parameters of elements for a number of circuits. The quantitative results of
the analysis were obtained in a normalized form as graphs and make it possible to
determine optimal values of the parameters of the elements of converters in the pro-
cesses of designing by simple calculations. In order to facilitate the use of the
results of this work, examples are given for calculating the parameters of the basic
elements of the examined circuits of converters.

The first chapter of the book is an introductory chapter. It briefly examines the
areas of the applications of charging systems of reservoir capacitors, gives the
characteristics of individual sections of systems and charging methods, and surveys
circuits of converters in these systems and methods analysis of electromagnetic pro-
cesses.

The second and third chapters examine the processes in semiconductor converters with
current-limiting linear chokes and reactive quadripoles. The special characteristics
of the processes in these converters predetermine the expediency of their use when
they are fed from networks or from high-power sources. Here, the studies are based
on the maximum efficiency criterion. Installed capacities of the main elements of
converters are also determined.

The fourth chapter deals with studies of semiconductor converters in systems with
limited-power independent sources. The studies and calculations are based on the
criterion of maximum utilization of the installed capacity of the independent source.

The methods of designing substantiated and presented in this book make it possible
to calculate and select elements of converters working in the range of a medium pow-
er intake -- to several dozens of kilowatts; the overall results of the analysis of
electromagnetic processes in the devices of the class being examined are also appli-
cable for a broader power range.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Uta-stuns. var. v"..-

In order to reduce the size of the book, it does not include the methods of determin-
ing and reducing losses in semiconductor power devices operating in the switching
mode which are widely known from published literature.

The author is grateful to the reviewer, Candidate of Technical Sciences V. A. Gala-
nov, for many valuable comments which were taken into consideration in the final re-

vision of the manuscript.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Brief Information About Charging Systems of Reservoir Capacitors 6
1.1. Areas of Application 6
1.2. Methods of Charging and Main Sections of the System 8
l 3. Survey of Converter Circuits and Methods of Calculation 12
Chapter 2. Converters with Current-Limiting Linear Chokes 18
2.1. Converter with a Choke in an Alternating-Current Circuit when
Power Is Supplied from a Sinusoidal Voltage Source 18
2.2. Converter with a Choke in an Alternating-Current Circuit
when Power is Supplied from a Source of Periodic Voltage
of Rectangular Form 61
2.3. Converter with a Choke Connected in a Rectified Current
Circuit 52
Chapter 3. Converters with Reactive Quadripoles 55
3.1. Converter with an lC-Quadripole when Power Is Supplied from
a Source of Periodic Voltage of Rectangular Form 55
3.2. Converter with an IC-Quadripole when Power Is Supplied from
a Sinusoidal Voltage Source 73
3.3. Converter with an IC-Quadripole with Mutual Inductance 88
Chapter 4. Charging Systems when Power Is Supplied from Limited-Power
Sources 110
4.1. Principle of Converter Designing 110
4.2. Realization of the Charging Method of a Reservoir Capacitor
at Constant Power 119
b.3. Calculation of the Parameters of Main Elements of a Converter 127
6.4. Methods of Increasing the Source Utilization Effectiveness 1&3
Supplement 1. Physical Model of a System for Studying Processes in a
Converter 151
Supplement 2. Device for Increasing the Reliability of Starting a
Thyristor Inverter 153
Bibliography 156

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

10,233
CSO: 1860/119

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 621.396.62:621.382

SENSITIVITY OP SOLID-STATE RADIO RECEIVING DEVICES

Moscow CHUVSTVITEL'NOST' RADIOPRIYEHNYKH USTROYSTV NA POLUPROVODNIKOVYKH
PRIBORAKH in Russian 1981 (signed to press 5 Mar 81) pp 2-4, 165-166

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Sensitivity of Solid-

State Radio Receiving Devices", by Zinoviy Nikolayevich Muzyka, Izdatel'stvo
"Radio 1 svyaz'", 16,000 copies, 167 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book contains a systematic exposition of questions associated with estimat-
ing the sensitivity of radio receiving devices and analyzing the noise character-
istics of stages built with semiconductors (transistors and one-port networks
with negative resistance). The basic sources of internal noise in bipolar and
field-effect transistors, solid-state diodes and their equivalent noise circuits
are examined. The noise factor is examined as a function of frequency, feed-
back and operating state of stages, with examples of calculation given.

The book is intended for engineers involved in designing lowbnoise radio receiv-
ing devices.

Foreword

The sensitivity of modern radio receiving devices is determined primarily by

the inherent noise of the electronic components and passive elements in the
first stages. Therefore, besides the extensive use of high frequency bipolar
and field-effect transistors in the amplifier and converter stages of radio
receivers, low-noise amplifiers using one-port networks with negative resistance
have recently come into use. The implementation of lowbnoise amplifiers in
input Stages has opened up new prospects for constructing high sensitivity

radio receivers and for increasing the operating range of radio links.

The present book contains a systematic exposition of problems involved in estimat-
ing sensitivity and analyzing the noise factor of radio receiver stages using
transistors and one-port networks with negative feedback.

The basic sources of internal noise of semiconducting devices (diodes and transis-

tors) are examined on the basis of the physical concepts of their operation, and
methods of constructing equivalent noise circuits are given. Equivalent noise

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
for determining the noise factor of amplifier and converter stages using transis-
tors and one—port networks with negative feedback. The basic relationships
between the noise factor and frequency. feedback and operating node of the stages
are investigated. Recosmendations are given on the choice of circuit elements.
The equivalent noise circuits and the analytical apparatus of the theory of

The author is grateful to reviewer Candidaceaf Techrical Sciences A.K. Naryshkin
for his remarks, which helped to improve the content of the book, and to
Candidate of Technical Sciences V.Ye. Pustovarov for his help in preparing

the manuscript for publication.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Noise Characteristics of Radio Receiving Devices 5
1.1. General informatisn on sensitivity of radio receiving devices 5
1.2. Nominal power and nominal power gain 10
1.3. Equivalent noise circuits 15
1.6. Effective passband 19
1.5. Receive antenna noise 22
1.6. Noise factor 26
1.7. Relationship between receiver sensitivity and noise factor 31
1.8. Noise factor of system of cascaded two-ports 34
1.9. Noise factor of passive two-port 39
1.10. Measurement of noise factor 41

Chapter 2. Internal Noise and Equivalent Noise Circuits of Semi-
conductor Devices 66

2.1. Noise sources and equivalent noise circuit of semiconductor
diode b6

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Noise sources of bipolar transistors
Equivalent noise circuit of bipolar transistor with common emitter
Equivalent noise circuit of bipolar transistor with common base

0 o
o

NNNN
a

UI‘UN
0

Chapter 3. Noise Properties of Transistorized Resonant Amplifiers

3.1. Influence of internal feedback on parameters and performance of
stages

3.2. Analysis of expression for loop gain

3.3. Stable gain factor of Stage

3.4. Noise factor of transistorized resonant amplifier

3.5. Noise factor of stage with common-emitter bipolar transistor as

function of input matching
3.6. Noise factor of stage with common-emitter bipolar transistor as
function of frequency
3.7. Influence of transistor lead inductances on noise factor of stage
3.8. Influence of detuning of input tuned circuit on noise factor of
stage with bipolar transistor
. Noise factor of frequency converter with bipolar transistor
0. Noise factor of stage with field effect transistor

uw

.9
.1

Chapter 4. Noise Parameters of Amplifiers Using One-Port Networks
With Negative Feedback

4.1. Overall characteristic of amplifiers using one-port networks
with negative feedback

4.2. General remarks on solid-state parametric amplifiers
4.3. Noise factor of solid-state parametric amplifier

4.4. Noise sources and noise factor of tunnel-diode amplifier
Appendices

P.l. Static characteristics and mode-frequency relationships of

transistor Y-parameters
2. Reference data on parametric amplifier diodes
3. Reference data on tunnel diodes

P
P.
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". 1981

6900
C50: 1860/114

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

49
SS
61

. Noise sources and equivalent noise circuit of field effect transisu1'66

73

73
76
78
81

84

94
99

105
109
118

122

122

128
137

142

148
161
161

164
.‘U. V. O IQ-IRII Us!” VI \ul

UDC 621.397.3
UNIT FOR ROTATING TV CAMERA RASTER

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 6, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 26 Mar 80) pp 152-153

[Article by V.I. Shamis, I.S. Serbin, V.V. Korneychuk and 1.8. Zadorozhnyy]

[Text] A description is givan of a sweep voltage former for a television camera
employing an electrostatic vidicon. making it possible to rotate the broadcasting
standard scanning raster around its geometrical center by an arbitrary angle with
an angular velocity of 3 rad/s.

In the automatic recognition of objects, in observing rotating bodies and in tele-
vision endoscopy it is necessary to rotate the optical image relative to the tele-
vision scanning raster around its geometrical center (usually coinciding with the
optical axis of the camera). The methods of mechanically rotating the television
camera or special optical elements (Dove and Pekhan prisms) used in these cases
have an entire range of disadvantages. These include the complexity of manufactur-
ing high-precision electromechanical drives, the low reliability of rotating cur-
rent conductors, and large overall dimensions and heavy weight of the rotating
unit.

These disadvantages can be eliminated if electronic rotation of the scanning raster
in the transmitting tube's photoconductive layer is used. It is inapplicable in
cameras with magnetic deflection of the tube's beam because of the Complexity of
forming deflection current of the required form, associated with the substantial
influence of the inductance of deflection coils at the line scanning frequency.

In recent times in designing applied television apparatus preference has been given
to simpler miniature television cameras utilizing electrostatic vidicons. In cam-
eras of this type a rotating scanning raster with parameters conforming to the
broadcasting standard can be formed by relatively simple means.

Let us discuss the design of the raster rotation unit. Using the well-known re-
lationships between the coordinates of a point in two orthogonal systems of coordi-
nates with combined centers and axes forming a certain angle a , it is possible

to write the voltages. "a and U . which must be created in the deflection plates
of the vidicon for producing a raster rotated by angle a relative to the geometri—
cal axes of the deflection system:

43

FOI.OF11CLALIISE(NVLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"a(‘) - "scr(‘) sin a + "kadr(‘) cos a , (1)

Ub(t) - ustr“) cos a - ukadr“) sin a , (2)

where U (t) and U (t) are the sawtooth horizontal and vertical scanning
s kadr
voltages , respectively .

These voltages are formed in the following manner. The angle sine and cosine data
transmitter generates quasi-constant voltages proportional to these functions of
angle a of rotation of the transmitter's shaft relative to a certain zero posi-
tion. Line and frame integrators of these voltages, controlled by individual syn-
chronizing pulses (SI's) and having individual time constants, form sawtooth volt-
ages with perioda of the horizontal and vertical scanning and with amplitudes pro-
portional to the sine and cosine of the angle. These voltages are added according
to equations (1) and (2) by adders. Also added to the sum are the values of the
input voltage of the integrators, which makes it possible to produce in the adder'a
output sawtooth voltages without a direct component and eliminates displacement

of the raster's geometrical center when it rotates. The signals from the outputs

of the adders are amplified by paraphase amplifiers and are supplied to individual
pairs of deflecting plates of the vidicon.

The circuit diagram of one possible implementation of the scanning unit is presented
in fig 1.

Liz-€500”;- l.) [In/woman cu Ill)polm- cu W?’ ‘50
V ——_-_—-——————o ——————-—'--——-—-—.h ___________
v EtkT-EZu-lﬂr 221-," § _:§x 75-151—Md E
I —
- a H ~ .I 8
G I I I I I 6- I'II ' ' '4' ' 'm’
, I ”IV m ”x m
o - T
«I- P> : = F” "i "I p, . x
u: an A . ‘ '° .7 ‘ I i ,k’ . L J
— — :l I II I I 0: I l _
My» ”I ' I l I I I u; r' 3-
I 5,” ﬁg. -

 

   

m
—
- a
3
‘IJN ‘-
-
I
l
I
I
I
I
' 2
I a
I
I
I I
I N
I N
| t
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
f 20
I
I
l
I
I
'e
IH'
I‘
V
35'
r
‘0'
9.
el
L..- -..__.._.._

I2! _
- (In Im :01 I I I l" I?"
I” 2110, M u i S) yulgolur CH 1' ‘,
r- -------------- -O -------- 0 - ------------- - - - 1
N . Ilullf
0.7K I‘ﬁ
_ . I y
I? I

?igure 1. Circuit Diagram of Raster Rotation Unit: H to H4, H6--KllIOUD6,
H5, "Known; T to r3—ImoJL, Tr-Krshn. rs, T6--KT6023;
Dlnz 102A, Dz--281.)I3A
[Key on following page]

No

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI UI'I‘ILML UM Vl‘lol

Key:
1. Approximately 26 V, 600 Hz 5. 12 V
2. BSKT-ZZO-IP 6. l n?
3. Diode 7. Prams synchronizing pulses
a. Line synchronizing pulses 8. Output I

As an angle-data transmitter a BSKT-ZZO-IP sine-cosine transformer is used whose
excitation coil is supplied from a generator of sinusoidal voltage with an ampli-
tude of 26 V and frequency of 400 Hz. The transformer's sine winding is connected
to a phase detector assembled from operational amplifier H . The stage in H3 is

in the form of a voltage follower with a 1 l alternating-s gn transmission factor
set by a switch employing field-effect transistor T . The switch is controlled by
a square reference pulse shaper employing microcircuit H . The phase of pulses can
be corrected by a phase shifting stage employing H . Af er passing through a
multielement RC filter the constant voltage propor ional to the sine of the angle
of rotation of the transformer's shaft is supplied via follower H to line integra-
tor H . Voltage is supplied to frame integrator H via inverter “6, which makes it
possigle to change the sign of product Ukadr(t) sin a in keeping with equation
(2). The operation of the integrators is controlled via switches employing field-
effect transistors T and T by individual line and frame synchronizing pulses

whose length determines the length of the forward and reverse scanning strokes.

The addition of voltages is accomplished by an adder assembled from operational am-
plifier H8. The output paraphase amplifier is executed according to a balanced
circuit employing transistors TS and T6 with a current stabilizer employing trans-
istor T .

l.

The second channel, to whose input is supplied a voltage proportional to the cosine
of the angle of rotation of the transformer's shaft, is assembled according to a
similar circuit. The difference is that on account of external switching of the
terminals of operational amplifier “6 it is converted into a noninverting follower,
which makes possible the proper sign of the addends in the sum of (1).

In the phase detectors, followers and frame integrators 1600D6 operational ampli-
fiers are used, which have high input impedance and built-in correction. and
1500013 wider-band amplifiers are used in the line integrators and adders.

In the circuit presented for the data transmitter for the sine and cosine of the
angle of rotation the maximum rate of rotation of the raster which does not cause
noticeable geometrical distortion is approximately 3 rad/s without a limitation on
the angle. It is limited basically by the time constant of the filters of the
phase detectors, the reduction of which results in parasitic modulation of the
raster by fluctuations in the supply frequency of the sins-cosine transformer.

The rate of rotation can be increased to limits determined by the frame scanning
frequency and the vidicon's lag if a function potentiometer is used as the sine
and cosine data transmitter. With this the unit's circuit is simplified consider-
ably on account of the elimination of phase detectors, but the frictional torque
on the angle-data transmitter's shaft is increased.

$5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0810F11C1AL USEIDNLY

The scanning unit described was used in a television camera in conjunction with
LI-428 and LI—éSS electrostatic vidicons.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "Neuka", "Ptibory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8831
CSO: 1860/74

66

FOR 0FF1CJAI.UBEI(MVLY
"Uﬂ Ul‘flbll‘h 06‘ "I‘ll!

CIRCUITS 5 SYSTEMS

UDC 539.1.075

LINEAR GATING DEVICE UNIT

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4. Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 28 Feb 79) pp 122-126

[Article by 1.8. Marurov and Yu.G. Sibiryakl

[Text] A description is given of a linear gating device whose distinctive feature
is the absence of switched elements in the linear signal transmission section.

The unit operates with loads up to 5'10s pulses per second. The maximum input
signal is 7 V. Control signals are matched in terms of level with TTL [transistor-
transistor logic] signals. Temperature instability of the unit's transmission
factor is 0.02 percent per degree Celsius. The switch-on delay is 20 ns. The
length of the leading edge of the output pulse is 100 ns.

Linear gating devices (LPU's) are used extensively in spectrometric sections for
sampling input pulses wi;h reference to a control signal. The familiar LPU's,

both those in which stabilizing feedback is not applied to switching elements [1].
and LPU's in which a parallel switch switches the direct transmission channel of

an operational amplifier (OU) to which loo-percent negative feedback (003) is
applied [2], have the disadvantage that the switched element is included in the
linear signal transmission section. As a result the linearity of the transmission
section is worsened and a pedestal appears [3]. In [4] a method is suggested which
makes it possible to avoid the use of switched elements in the linear section and
to improve considerably the characteristics of the gating circuit.

The LP" described in this article is designed according to this principle and re-
presents an operational amplifier with two differential stages, H1 and M . A
structural diagram of the LPU which explains its operation is given in fig 1. The
transmission factor of a differential stage equals [5]:

Ks - (Mama/(mwi- (1)

It is obvious from this equation that with current Io - 0 , Kd - 0 .

The circuit operates in the following manner. If in the initial stage the switch is
in position 2 the LPU is closed. Current I passes through differential stage

M2. The transmission factor in this case from the input to the output is close to
zero and the circuit represents an operational amplifier consisting of circuits

H2 and M3 to which a great amount of negative feedback is applied which stabilizes

47

INSIGJFEKJAl.lEﬂE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the output zero level. After the arrival of the control signal the control circuit
flips the switch to position 1 and current I flows through differential stage

M . In this case the operational amplifier is formed from circuits H and M .

A; before, a great amount of negative feedback is applied to it, which makes pos-
sible transmission of the input signal to the output with a factor of K 1_l ,

as well as its good stability and linearity.

*5
ﬁx I
Bolted
l) '2)
am "'
0 f—

  
  

arms And yup.
ynpalnruun ‘—°

1.) 5)

Figure 1. Functional Diagram of Linear Gating Device: GT--current generator

Key:
1. Input 4. Control circuit
2. Output 5. Control input
3. Current generator

The circuit's sampling coefficient is determined by the ratio of the transmission
factors of differential stage M in the switched-on and switched-off states. since
the transmission factor of circuit M does not change. This ratio in turn is equal
to the ratio of currents passing through differential stage H in the switched-on
and switched-off states according to equation (1). For examp e, if in the cut-off
state a current of 1 uA flows through the differential stage (1 uA represents
current Iko of a KT315 transistor, with which it is possible to construct the
current generator), and a current of 2 mA in the switched-on state, then the sampl-
ing coefficient equals 2000.

A circuit diagram of the linear gating device is shown in fig 2. It consists of

a noninve:ting follower assembled from microcircuit H and transistor T , a direct—
current restorer (VPS) assembled from and M and T2 to T4 and the LP itself,
assembled from H to H6 and T to T . The direct-current restorer represents an
operational amplifier with log-percent direct-current feedback. Alternating—
current feedback is decoupled by means of capacitor C . The direct-current re-
storer's operation is based on discharging of capacirgr C in intervals between
input pulses by means of current proportional to the steady-level bias. During
the time T is recharged, at point A a potential of 1R originates
(where i is the capacitor recharging current and R :ikhigoghgugdtput impedance
of the preceding stage). This results in an increasevxn the integral nonlinearity
of the entire unit [6], since the signal in the output of the LPU equals the
difference kah(t1) - Uc(0) . where U kh(t ) is the amplitude of the pulse and
Uc(0) is the voltage across the capacigor a the moment of the arrival of the

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ave. use-won... v..- v-u-e

signal, which voltage is not a constant quantity. In order to lover U (0) it is
necessary to reduce R kh ; therefore, a follower with low output impesance is in-
stalled in the unit's input.

 

Figure 2. Circuit Diagram of LPU unit: M to H -—KlNT59lB, remainder-

KlLBSSS; T , T , T , T to T --KT315 . T , T , T , --
anosv;01}n2’1-nsisn.so3, pig-lose» 2 3 6 7
Key:
1. Input 3. Control
2. Diode 6. Output

All differential stages in the LPU unit are assembled from series 159 integrated
transistor assemblies. This made it possible to obtain good results with respect
to temperature stability without the preselection of elements. The generator for
current I is assembled from transistor T5. For the purpose of improving the
temperature stability of current I diode D“ is included in the base divider.
Switching of current I to differential stages utilizing microcircuits M4 and H
is accomplished by mean? of switches utilizing microcircuit H . The LPU is clos
if the left transistor of microcircuit H is closed and the right is open and the
entire current enters the differential pgir in microcircuit M from the current
generator. The zero level in the circuit‘s output is controlled by variable re-
sistor R . After arrival of the control signal the right transistor of microcir-
cuit H closes and the left opens and the entire current I enters the differ—
ential pair in microcircuit M . The LPU opens and the inpug signal travels to the
circuit's output. The zero 0 the "pedestal" in the output is controlled by means
of variable resistor R1. Circuit C3R3 eliminates generation in the circuit.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By means of switch 81 the direct-current restorer is connected to or disconnected
from the LPU's input. In the position in which switch 32 is shown in fig 2, the
LPU is normally closed and a positive control signal opens the LPU for the time of
the duration of this signal. If switch B is in the lower position. then the LPU
is normally open and the positive control signal arriving closes it.

The technical parameters of the unit are as follows: maximum input signal"? V;
transmission factor-0.98; direct passage of input signal to output in the closed
LPU is observed in the form of slight changes (less than 1 mV) in output level;
temperature instability of the transmission factor is 0.02 percent per degree
Celsius in the 20 to 55 ’6 range; integral nonlinearity with a pulsed input signal
is 0.02 percent; temperature instability of the zero level in the unit's output is
loO‘TJV/°C in the 20 to 55 'c temperature range; base level bias with a change in
the frequency of input pulses from 500 Hz to 50 kHz and with an input signal length
of 2 us is less than 5 W; the switch—on delay is 20 ns; and the length of the
leading edge of the output pulse is 100 ns. At the moment the LP“ is switched
noise is observed in the input in the form of a pulse with a height of 25 IN and
a length of 50 ns.

Bibliography

1. Koval'skiy, Ye. "Yademaya elektronika" [Nuclear Electronics], translated from
English, edited by I.V. Shtranikh, Moscow. Atomizdat, 1972, p 138.

2. Elad, B. and Rozen, S. NUCL. INSTR. AND METHODS, Vol 37, No 1, 1965, p 58.

3. Matalin, l..A., Chubarov, 5.1. and Timokhin, L.A. "Elektronnyye metody yadernoy
fiziki" [Electronic Methods of Nuclear Physics], Moscow, Atouizdat, 1973, p 156.

1,. Battista, A. NUCL. INSTRUM. AND METHODS, Vol 80, No 1, 1970, p 172.

5. Shilo, V.L. "Lineynyye integral'nyye skheuy" [Linear Integrated Circuits],
Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1974, p 66.

6. Baldin, S.A., Vartanov, N.A. and Yerykhaylov, Yu.V. “Prikladnaya spektro-
metriya s poluprovodnikovymi detektorami" [Applied Spectroscopy with Semicon-
ductor Detectors], Moscow, Atomizdat. 1976, p 106.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i rekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8831
C50: 1860/74

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'vn Va a evens. m vnua

UDC 621.316.1 : 621.59

INFRALOH-FREQUENCY TRIANGULAR CURRENT PULSE GENERATORS

Hoscow PRIBORY l TEKHNIKA BILSPERIHENTA in Russian No lo, Jul—Aug 81 (manuscript
received 19 Dec 79) pp 142-145

[Article by v.1. Danilov, A.A. Popov and v.s. Khsbarov, United Institute of Nuclear
Research. Dubna]

[Text] Two current generators are described: a triangular current pulse generator
for operation on a superconducting load with I 1 a - 0 to 2 A and a linear
current buildup (decline) time in the load of l L Y El 20 min . and an economical
current generator which is assembled according to a two-stage stabilization circuit
and can operate on an Rn - O to 3 9 with I - 0 to 10 A under conditions of
direct current in the load with a linear buildup (decline) of it to a prescribed
level in T - 5-10-2 to 1.1010'10~ s , as well as under conditions of triangular

current pulses with the same parameters.

For the purpose of studying superconducting materials, as well as in certain bio—
physics experiments [1, 21', infralow-frequency generators of triangular current
pulses with an amplitude of up to 10 A are needed. A specific feature of these
devices is that they must make possible a linear buildup (decline) of current in
the load to an assigned value over a time measured in minutes and hours. Another
problem originating in development is occasioned by the ranges of variation of the
load resistance and operating current and is associated with dissipated power in

active elements of the device.

In this paper a description is given of two current generators: a triangular cur-
rent pulse generator (GI‘I) and a universal current generator (1161‘). The GIT is
designed for operating on a superconducting load in which it forms triangular
current pulses with an amplitude of up to 2 A and a buildup and decline time in
the smooth regulation range of l to 20 min. The basic elements of the circuit
diagram of a 61'): are shown in fig 1. from which it is possible to see that it con—
sists of an output power amplifier (UK) and a triangular control voltage former
(m ). Both circuits are supplied from the electrical main through a transformer
and rectifier block (BTV). The power amplifier is constructed according to the
circuit of a series-type current stabilizer [3] with loo-percent feedback applied
from grounded shunt R1 and employing a lb'TIoOlA operational amplifier (M2) as the
mismatch signal comparison and amplification element. For the purpose of protect-
ing the superconducting load, to the output terminals of the generator via emitter

followers, 1‘1 , is connected an operational amplifier. H3 , in the comparator mode.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which, when auperconduction is impaired. sends through transistor T to FNTl a
signal which inhibits operation of the generator. The protection triggering
threshold is set by means of potentiometer R2 within the range of 1 to 20 mV.

 

'3
E
c
4)
trmo
6T0 6)

Figure 1. Key Elements of Circuit Diagram of GIT: M1--1L3553;H
M5--1UT501;M4--LN0042;M6. M7--K5545A2; T1 to T3 --K1N S91.
Ta-—KT808A; T5--KT807A; T6.T to T11——KT315; T7 --KT326B;

. --D818Ye, D to D --KDS 2; P --R£V18A, P2 --R£§§5A
Dl DZ 3 6 1
Key:
1. FNT1 [triangular control voltage 5. UN [power amplifier]
former] 6. BTV [transformer and rectifier

2. Start block]

3. Stop 7. Electrical main

4. Output

FNT1 determines the time and amplitude parameters of the output current pulses of
the generator. Time characteristics are set by integrator H“ with time setting
elements (R3.C1). Constant voltages of differing polarity are integrated, which
are set by potentiomctcrs R4 and R5 and are connected to the integrator' 3 input
by means of the cont:1cts of relay5 An LN0042 operational amplifier which can
be replaced by a domestic type lbOUﬁS. and a type PT—l charging capacitor (C1)
are used in the integrator's circuit. The integrator's output voltage, traveling

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ UI'I‘ILIAL uar. UI‘LI

through matching amplifier M , via emitter followers T2 and T enters comparators
of the lower (H ) and upper H6) levels of the former's outpue voltage. The com-
parators via flip-flop H1 and switching transistor T11 control the operation of
relay P . The triggering thresholds of the comparators are set by potentiometers
R6 and P7 and the difference between the threshold voltages of the upper and lower
levels sets the peak value of the FNTl's control voltage pulses and. consequently.
of the GIT's output current.

The signal for inhibiting the generator's operation enters from the power amplifier
(T8) into inhibit flip—flop M , which controls the operation of relay P2 and the
lamp display. The contacts 0 P shunt the integrator's time-setting capacitor,
C1. blocking its operation. In addition. it is possible to stop the generator's
operation by means of a "Stop" button and to start it by means of a "Start" button.
Both states are distinguished from a lamp display (L) on the unit's front panel.
Power of P 2.10 H is dissipated in output transistor T (fig 1) and it is placed
on a heat sink measuring 400 cm2 in area. The problem of enabling heat removal
arises in the development of a UCT, which must make possible output current in the
range of 0 to 10 A over a load resistance range of 0 to 3 9. Under the worst con-
ditions for the generator (R 1 0 and I - 10 A ) power. P . of approxi-
mately 600 H is dissipated 13 ihgaﬂéT's output pgwer stage (when using a linear
current stabilizer in it). Power of this sort is usually removed by means of a
fluid [4]. which is inconvenient when using the generator as a portable instrument.
Therefore, the UGT has been developed according to a two-stage stabilization cir-
cuit (fig 2). There is a linear current stabilizer (LST) in the generator's output
and an economical series-type pulsed voltage regulator [3. S] (IRN) automatically
maintains a minimum voltage drop, Uke , in its feed-through transistors.

The amplified signal of the output current transducer (R , M ) is compared in
operational amplifier "6 with the control voltage which enters from the switched
range divider (KPJ, R to R7). Amplifier M4 controls the output power follower
utilizing PZlOA transistors (T to T6). The voltage in the linear current stabili-
zer's load is compared with the pulse generator's output voltage in a differential
amplifier (T , T10) and the amplified error signal switches feed-through transistors
T13 to T1 0 the pulsed voltage regulator via a cascode switching stage (T11 and

T12) and a Schmitt circuit utilizing a thOlA operational amplifier (H10).

The linear current stabilizer's power transistors. T to T , operate in the linear
region of their characteristic with ”he i 1.2 V and the maximum switching
frequency of the pulsed voltage regulator a switching elements is approximately

6 kHz. In this circuit power of Pma g 40 W is dissipated in the power transis-
tors of both stabilizers of the UGT. xThe high-power semiconductor devices of
regulators are placed on heat sinks with a total area of 2000 cm2 and operate
reliably withOut forced cooling.

Protection circuits ensure reliable operation of the UGT. A signal for when the
load current exceeds the permissible is picked up from the output of amplifier

H and via transistors T 8 and T1 opens thyristor D1 . which blocks switching in
ERG pulsed regulator. which is ingicated by a lamp indicator (L1) on the unit's
front panel. When the feed—through transistors of the pulsed voltage regulator
fail, the voltage of the generator's rectifier enters the output transistors of
the linear current stabilizer, which results in their thermal breakdown. In order
to avoid this situation, in the collector of transistor T7 a signal is formed

53

FOR.OFFKJAI.USEloNLY
Key Elements of Circuit Diagram of UGT: M . H2
lUT531. M4, n . n n o--lUT401, M --LNooai, n
11 to r --P213A. i5, is, r 8~-MP26 , r, to r
r to 8--xr315, r to i
KigOBA;

--1Lnssa, n --

8, 39--Kssas32;

, T 9 to T 1,

11 13, r 2, r23--Kr6633, i 4 to ¥17“
--K5147. n --nz43, n to n 0, n to n 7--xn522. ”11'

012--K021 . 013--xu161, ”18”‘Kg133‘ 31-Ri61sa, $2

--R£S$SA
Key:

1. Electrical main 6. FNT2

2. Transformer and rectifier block 7. Start

1. Diodes 8. Stop

4. Pulsed voltage regulator 9

5. Output

. Linear current stabilizer

Tun units are use
Ige pulse sh
’NTZ block i

to 10‘I s, in this circuit are
we a set of time setting resiscors R to R 3. connected to dividers R to R1
y means of piano~kcy switches KP and 2, and potentiometets for smooth rcgulagion
l6 and R 7, within each range. I 3 output pulses at
I the UC+

s load drops to the
laper's operation.

FOEEOFFKJAI.USE!0NLY
PU“ UI‘I'ILIAL USE UNI-I

vnllduv. vln transistor T96 and flip-flop . blocks the operation of integrator
"6 by means of the contacts of relay P and simultaneously with this switches the
polarity of the integrator's input vol age. The next pulse begins to be formed
after the arrival of a signal from the linear current stabilizer's zero comparator
(M5. Ts). setting flip-flop M1 to a state inhibiting the integrator's operation.

The second unit controlling the UGT's operation, the digital-analog integrator [6],
is totally interchangeable with PNT and is constructed on the basis of a 12-bit
digital-analog converter with a reversible caunter and a digital comparison circuit.
It serves as a source of precise reference voltage with stepwise linear buildup

and decline times in the range of 30 s to 4 h and operates in the constant output
vultage mode. Single and periodic triangular pulse modes are also included in it.

Both generators have been developed as individual instruments powered from the elec-
trical main. The CIT has been designed as an insertion unit with a front panel
width of 120 X 160 mm). The UGT is assembled from four insertion units of the
following types: a power supply with front panel dimensions of 100 X 240 mm’.

a 65 x 260 mm, linear current stabilizer. a 45 X 240 nnz pulsed voltage regulator
and a 50 X 240 um“ control unit. At the present time the GIT is at work in testing
superconducting models and UGT's are being used in studies of the influence of
magnetic fields on biological subjects [1, 2].

In conclusion the authors wish to thank A.V. Karpukhin, V.Ye. Zhil'tsov and N.Ya.
Kalinkin for assembling and helping to tune the instruments.

Bibliography

1. Danilov. V.I. Collection "Fiziko-matematicheskiye i biologicheskiye prob-
lemy deystviya elektromagnitnykh poley i ionizatsii vozdukha. Materialy
Vsesoyuznogo nauchno—tekhnicheskogo simpoziuma" [Mathematical Physics and Bio-
logical Problems of the Influence of Electromagnetic Fields and Ionization
of Air: Materials of the All-Union Science and Engineering Symposium].
Moscow, Nauka. 1975. p 175.

2. Cerasimenko, V.N.. Govorun. R.A. and Danilov. V.I. Collection "Fiziko-mnte—
matlcheskiye i hiologicheskiyc problemy deystviya elektromagnitnykh poley i
ionizatsii vozdukha. Materialy Vsesoyuznogo nauchno-tekhnicheskogo simpoziuma,"
Moscow. Nauka. 1975. p 168.

3. Dudik, 8.0. and Cal'perin, Ye.I. "Istochniki elektropitaniya na poluprovod-
nikovykh priborakh" [Semiconductor Device Power Supplies], Moscow, Sovetskoye
Radio, 1969.

4. Bergel'son. I.G., Kamenetskiy. Yu.A. and Nikolayevskiy, i.F. "Tranzistory,

parametry. metody izmereniy i ispytaniy" (Transistors, Parameters, Measurement
and Testing Methods]. Moscow. Sovetskoye Radio. 1968.

55

FOR OFF]! 1“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Nakhratskty, V.M., Popov. ILA. and Khabarov, V.S. OIYaI [United Institute of
Nuclear Research] Preprint No 13-11795, Dubna, 1978.

6. Bychkov, N.S., Lachinov,V.H., Popov, A.A. and Khabarov. v.5. PTE. No lo, 1975,
p 166.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory 1 tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8831
C50: 1860/ 74

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COMMUTATOR CONTROLLED BY SIGNAL FREQUENCY

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERTHENTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 27 Nov 79) pp 116-118

[Article by A.Ye. Bozhko, Ye.A. Lichkatyy, 0.F. Polishchuk and V.I. Savchenko,
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Problems of Machine Building,
Khar'kov]

[Text] A description is given of a commutator controlled by the frequency of a
harmonic signal or a signal of the meander type. The circuit's operation is
based on comparison of the durations of the half-period of the control signal and
a reference pulse determining the switching frequency. The minimum amplitude of
the control signal is 0.02 V, the operating frequency range is 1 Hz to 1 MHz,

the maximum frequency change rate is 250 Hz/s and the switching error in terms of
frequency is less than or equal to 0.1 percent.

The representation of information in frequency form has found extensive application
in measuring and data processing systems. Here the need arises of switching informa-
tion channels, of changing operating modes and of monitoring the required parameters
as a function of the frequency of the control signal. One method of designing fre-
quency-dependent commutators is the employment of counting methods of measuring
frequency. Circuits implementing this method are complicated and are critical with
regard to rapid changes in the frequency of the control signal.

Another method is based on comparing the duration of the half—period of the control
signal with the duration of a reference square pulse [1]. However, a commutator

of this sort has a limited operating frequency range. For normal operation of the
commutator the inequality f < l/T must be fulfilled, where f is the frequency
of the control signal and T"l is tge duration of the reference palse. If f >
> l/T normal operation of ghe commutator is upset. The circuit presented 1% [1]
is usgd as a unit cell in constructing multichannel commutators. Each cell is tuned
to a specific commutation frequency. The limitations characteristic of this circuit
are thus extended also to a multichannel commutator. The maximum value of the fre-

quency of the control signal for a multichannel commutator equals double the value
of the lowest switching frequency.

In this article a description is given of a frequency-dependent commutator whose
stable operation is maintained in the range-of 1 Hz to 1 MHz with any value of the
commutation frequency [2]. A circuit diagram of the commutator is presented in

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fig 1. The unit contains an amplifier-limiter in :1. a matching circuit in trans-

istors T1 and T , a shape: in H _1 and M _2, 10 circuits, and flip—flops
l'he ampliﬁer-linger is necessary for controlling connota-

H _ , H _ and Q .
rich bysmgans at alharmonic signal.

 

Figure 1. Circuit Diagram of Commutator: M --lUTé02; Hz to Ha--1LBSS3;

Ms, M

6--1TK552; T1--NP42B. T2--HP 8

Key:
1. Input 3. Output
2. Reset

Let us discuss the circuit's operation. By means of the reset signal flip—flops

M _1 and "6- are set to the "1" state and flip-flop H _2 to the "0" state. A
sauarc pulse whose duration is equal to half the perioa of the control signal, U“,
from the output of the limiter through the AND gate. MZ'A' to whose second input

is supplied the signal of flip—flop "6-1’ by means of ts trailing edge triggers

the shaper consisting of H3_1 and H3_ . The shaper generates a pulse whose duration
determines the switching frequency. ¥he pulses of the control signal and shaper

are compared in terms of duration and the result or the comparison determines the
state of flip-flops M5_1 and M _2. If fu< 1/2T . the resulting pulses are present
in the output of H2_1 and if ? > l/ZTo in the output of "3-4' With the equality
in - l/2'I‘o a change of state tgkes place in flip-flops M5_1 and H5-2.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \l. I 0‘ .l‘h Us,“ “0‘...

For f “ l/To the Operatlon of the circuit is illustrated by the voltage diagram
In [lg“2. Slncc t ? 1/21“o . the first resulting pulse beginning at moments of
time to and t 8111 appear in the output of H3_“ and flip—tlops H _1 and “6—1
are set to the "6" state and flip-flop M5_ to the 1" state. In spiée of the
presence of pulses in the output of H _ the state of flip-flops "5-1 and H _2
remains stable since the signal from Ellp—flop M closes circuit H2_3. A§ter
termination of the shaper's pulse (output of H _27 the first pulse from the output
of M4_ . corresponding to the leading edge of ghe output pulse of the limiter, sets
flip-flop “6-1 to the initial state. circuits H2_3 and H are opened and the pro-
cess of the comparison of durations is repeated. Circui€~ﬁ _4 eliminates triggering
of the shaper before flip-flop MS 1 is set to the initial 3 ate and H eliminates

resetting of flip-flop “6 1 before termination of the process of campgrlson of the

durations of the pulses of the shaper and limiter.

Bernie! 1)

(6ch
2)

 

 

Flgure 2. Time Diagram of Voltages Existing in the Circuit

Key:
1. Output 2. Reset

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the frequency of the control signal becomes lower than the switching frequency.
the resulting pulses appear only in the output of H2_1. Flip-flop M5_1 is set to
the “1" state, changing the state of flip-flop H5_2 to the "0" state. Flip-flop
“6-1 remains in the "0" state permitting the passage of pulses through M2_ and

M _a. A discrete change in the commutation frequency is accomplished by changing
tﬁe capacitance of capacitor C and smooth change by changing R .

Thus. normal functioning of the circuit is maintained regardless of the value of
the commutation frequency. A multichannel commutator can be constructed by means
of a set of several of the circuits described, each of which is tuned to its
switching frequency. The commutator's specifications are as follows: The control
signal is harmonic or of square shape; the minimum peak value of the control signal
is 0.02 V: the operating frequency range is 1 Hz to 1 MHz; the maximum commutation
error in terms of frequency is 0.1 percent; and the maximum rate of change of the
frequency of the control signal is 250 Hz/s.

Bibliography

1. Yclisov, LN. and Sergeyev. N.P. PRIBORY I SISTEMY UPRAVLENIYA, No 10. 1976.
p 43.

2. Bozhko, A.Ye., Lichkatyy. Yc.A., Polishchuk. 0.F. and Savchenko. V.I. USSR
Patent No 712964, published in BYULLETEN' IZOBRETENIY. No 4, 1980. p 195.

COPYRIGHT: [zdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8831
CSO: 1860/74

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN OI'I'IL'IAL Ubl'. ONLY

UDC'621.373
SUBNANOSECOND-RANGE HIGH-POWER SEMICONDUCTOR PEAKERS

Moscow PRIBORI I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 3 Jan 80) pp 135-136

[Article by 1.V. Grekhov, A.P. Kardo-Sysoyev and S.V. Shenderey. USSR Academy
of Sciences Physicotechnical Institute, Leningrad]

[Text] A method is discussed of forming pulses with a height greater than 1 kV
with subnanosecond leading edges by means of a semiconductor diode peaker. A
description is given of a circuit making it possible to form leading edges with
a length less than 0.2 ns.

The basic method of producing pulses with subnanosecond leading edges is peaking
the leading edge of the original pulse by means of peakers included in breaks in
the transmission line. However, the use of peakers employing tunnel diodes or
diodes with charge storage is restricted by the low operating voltages (less than
1 and approximately 10 V, respectively). In this article a description is given
of the operation as peakers of semiconductor diodes with a breakdown delay effect.
first described in [1, 2], which make it possible to form voltage pulses with sub-
nanosecond leading edges and heights greater than 1 kV.

A study was made of diode peakers (00's) in the circuit shown in fig 1. A pulse
30 ns long formed by a thyratron was supplied via a 90—ns delay line to a diode
peaker connected in series with a load resistance of an - 50 Q , equal to the
wave impedance of the RK-SO-é-Zl cable lines used. The inclusion of L Cf networks
made it possible to change the rate of voltage buildup in the pulse's leading
edge. The signal for recording the current was picked up from a silver contact

in the form of a band inserted on type HOU-S resistor Rn at a distance of 1/8

of its length. The employment of an exponential shield made it possible to obtain
with a set of standard dividers a current time resolution better than 0.2 ns.
Voltage was tapped from the diode peaker at the end of the transmission line for
the purpose of registration through resistor Rd (TVO-0,5). The selection of the
position of R near the shield, as well as the use of a tubular coaxially posi-
tioned capacigor as the blocking capacitor asde possible voltage resolution of
better than 0.6 nm. The maximum operating frequency of the circuit was determined
by the mean power dissipated in the circuit's elements and equaled 1 kHz.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90R OFT1C1AL.USE¢NVLV

r urn-v unwell 1)

    

9) (quot-mun; on.

Figure 1. Circuit Diagram of Experimental Unit: L1--TGI-3/30

Key:
1. Pulse generator 6. Diode peaker
2. L6 7. Un
3. 9 ns 8. I
a. S p? 9. ngpigagloscilloscope
5. Synchronization

The diode peakers fabricated in keeping with [1, 2] were inzthe form of washers

7 mm in diameter and 0.3 mm thick soldered onto a tungsten plate 1.5 II thick

and were connected in the break coaxially in front of Rn. A constant bias voltage,
U m , was applied to the diode pesker in the cutoff direction. Oscillograms of
the incident wave, U , and of the voltage across the load, U , for various

Us are given in £12 2. It is obvious that after reaching tue maximum of the
voTtage, U , of the incident wave a rapid increase in current takes place to the
peak value. and the minimum current buildup time corresponds to the maximum value
of U8m . It has been established that the value of U with which the diode
peaker switching time is minimal must equal (0.7 to 0.8TU , where U t is the
breakdown voltage of the diode pecker with a slow increasesin voltage. s

"III-1)

  

Figure 2. Oscillograms of Transient Processes: 1—-incident wave; 2 to 5--

voltage across load with various U in V: 2--200. 3--600, 4--
700. s--1ooo 5'“

U ; 1N [load] 2. t . na

62

Key: 1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tux UrraLIAL use. one:

The rate of the increase In voltage U (dU Idt) is of great importance in the
diode peaker's operation. An increasenin dB Idt results in an increase in U“I
and. consequently, in an increase in the amplitude of the current. It has been
established experimentally that U“I and dun/dt are related as follows:

U... = U‘ + r‘dunldl, (1)
where t* - 1 to 2 ns and U* is close in magnitude to ust .
For the purpose of finding the value of dUn/dt with which peaking begins, the
dependence of UN - I on Um was plotted. This dependence is at first sharply

nonlinear and then it asymptotidally approaches a linear one. U . Um , which
corresponds to short-circuiting conditions of the diode peaker. The nonlinearity
is determined by the degree of modulation of the diode peaker's volume during its

switching. The nonlinear part of the dependence can be represented by the follow-
ing empirical formula:

0, fir—.110 0.44-1,
" (a ) (2)

where A - 200 V . Uniting (l) and (2), we get

what, Blc==—:.- [A In (—11% +1)—u-] .

Of great practical interest is the question of the stability of the diode peaker's
switching delay. As was already demonstrated in [1), the time instability was
less-than 50 ps and was determined only by the synchronization circuits and the
stability of the power supply. It is necessary to mention that during operation
the diode peaker must he isolated from the influence of external factors resulting
in the generation of excess carriers in the semiconductor (e.g., light). Oscillo-
grams of the current through a diode peaker recorded with different degrees of

illumination have demonstrated that illumination seriously worsens the transient
process of switching of a diode peaker.

in conclusion it must be said that the diode peakers described open up a unique

opportunity to form voltage pulses with a height greater than 1 kV and with
current of dozens of amperes during a time of less than 0.2 ns.

Bibliography

1. Grekhov, I.V. and Kardo—Sysoyev, A.P. PIS'MA V ZHTF, Vol 5. No 15, 1979.
p 950.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Grckhov, 1.V.. Kardo-Sysoycv, :\.F. and Kostlnn, L.S. PIS'HA V le'l’l",
Vol 5, No 16, 1979. p 961.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory 1 tekhnika eksperimenta", 198]

8831
C80: 1860/74

61.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Uﬂ Ufl‘lblnh URI. UNI-I

UDC 621.373.ﬁ3

SYSTEM FOR CONTROLLING CLOSING OF SPARK GAPS BY FIELD DISTORTION METHOD

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4. Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 30 Nov 79) pp 133-135

[Article by A.I. Gerasimov and Ye.c. Dubinov]

[Text] A spark gap - peaker filled with gas to l HPa is connected to breaks in

26 segments of cable charged to an identical potential difference of 15 to 30 kV
and each connected with its inner conductor to the control electrode of its own
spark gap. "hen all cables (2 ﬂ impedance) are short—circuited by means of a
joint commutator the length of the front. T - 40 to 70 ns , of the current wave
of their discharge is shortened by the peaker to 3.8 ns. The spread in moments of
breakdown of the peaker is less than or equal to 0.1 T . The breakdown is of a
multichannel nature with a gap of 1 to 2 mm between the peaker's electrodes and

when it is filled with nitrogen.

In spark gaps with distortion of distribution of the electric field it is necessary
to change rapidly the polarity of the potential of control electrodes [1]. In

the synchronous closing of a great number of spark gaps segments of coaxial cable
are used whose inner conductors unite the control electrodes of the spark gaps

and a commutator common to all the cables [2-4]. The accuracy of the mutual trig-
gering of spark gaps as well as the uniformity of the development of current
channels in them and of the distribution of current over these channels depends
substantially on the length of the front of the current wave for discharging of
the cables [2, 3]. If the number of cables connected in parallel to the short-
circuiting commutator equals a few dozen and their charge voltage, U . is equal
to or greater than 20 kV. then the length of the front of the curren through the
commutator usually is equal to or In greater than 10 ns.

In this article a description is given of a system of 26 segments of RK-SO-ll-l3
cable connected in parallel (total impedance of p - 2 ﬂ ). which makes it possible
to form a current wave for discharging of the cables with a front length of less
than or equal to 5 ns with U0 3 15 kV .

The circuit of a system for controlling the triggering of 26 spark gaps. P to
P76 , which switch capacitor tank C or individual tanks to load 2 is illusfrated
in fig 1. To each control electrode, 1, of the spark gap is connected the inner
conductor of a segment of RK-SO-ll-l3 cable 10 m long. High-voltage electrodes
2 and tank C are under a potential of U and electrodes 1 and the central con-

ductors of the cable under a potential of U0 of the name polarity; U0 usually

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equals (0.3 to 0.5)U. To breaks in the inner conductors of the cables is con-
nected a joint gas-filled spark gap - pecker, R0, similar to that described in
[S]. Leveling of the potentials of sections of the cables of the shaping (FL)
and peaking (0L) lines separated by the peaker's electrodes is accomplish-‘1 via
induction coil l. and resistor R z the 01. section can be connected to the charge
source in the same manner as the Pl. section. Switch K serves the purpose of short-
circuiting the cables. The parameters of the discharge current pulses of FL and
01. cable sections are measured through shunt resistors R and R consisting of

20 TVO-O,25 resistors connected in parallel and placed in the breaks of the

outer conductors, and the parameters of voltage pulses in electrode 3 and in con-
trol electrodes 1, by capacitive dividers l)1 (C1 C2) and D2 (C3, c4). respective-
ly. ’

a cul-
‘ A’ out.
9. ﬁle "M €:>"

J
1 L” on I _ z

 

Figure. 1. Circuit of System for Controlling the Triggering of 26 Spark
Caps Which Switch Tank C to the Load: C and C --10 units of

51 pi? each 1 3
Key:
1. To oscilloscope 3. Spark gap - peaker (R0)
2. Shaping line (FL) lo. Peaking line (0L)

After switch K operates. a discharge current wave is created in the Pl. cables;

it is reflected from spark gap R0 as from an open end with a change in the polar-
ity of the potential of electrode 3. Hith 21 >> 9 , where Z is the impedance
of series-connected R and R . the maximum pulse difference of potentials between
electrodes 3 and 1. equals U . fly selecting the distance. 6 . between elec-
trodes. the pressure, p . and the type of gas in the R0. with high overvoltage
across the gap it is possible to produce in the R0.a multichannel discharge which
peaks the leading edge of the discharge current pulse of the cables in the peaking
line. The current wave. reaching electrodes 1. has a front which is shorter than

the front in the shaping line. which stabilizes the operation of spark gaps P1 to

1’26.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
eves woo-y”... snug. _.-~.

The system was studied with U0 - 15 to 30 kV , spark gap - peaker R0 was filled
with N2. SF6 gas and mixtures of them [6], and as the commutator. K, an air-gap
discharger or a discharger with film insulation which can be broken down mechani-
cally was used. Studies were conducted in series consisting of one-time switching
on of the system followed by polishing of the electrodes before each next start.
Inspection of the surfaces of the electrodes of the spark gap - peaker showed that
the number of erosion spots on electrodes of a spark gap with a diameter of 135 mm
filled with N is greater than when filling with a mixture of SF6 + N2 and with
pure SF6 and is equal to or greater than three; one discharge channel, as a rule,
forms in SF . The registration of current pulses in two diametrically positioned
cables of the peaking line confirmed the multichannel nature of a discharge in N2:
the difference in the moments the wave reached resistors R did not exceed the
transit time at the speed of light for one sixth of the leagth of the circumference
of the ring electrodes of the R0. Uniformity of the distance between electrodes

3 and 4 over the entire length of the circumference (spread of less than or equal
to 0.05 mm) is important for normal operation of the spark gap. The calculated
time for propagation of the electromagnetic wave over half the length of the cir-
cumference of the electrodes equals approximately 0.7 as; this time difference

was observed to be 0.6 as in mixtures of gases and in SP . The difference in the
peaker's breakdown time. AT , in N is also less with the same gaps between the
electrodes of the R0. Taking these facts into account, the measurement results
presented below are given for filling the R0 with N2.

In fig 2 [photograph not reproduced] typical oscillograms are shown for the dis-
charge current pulse in cables of the shaping line (FL) and of the change, corre-
sponding to it. in voltage in electrodes 1 of spark gaps when using in switch K
solid insulation consisting of a Lavsan (Therylenel film. when the cables are
charged with a voltage of U - 23 kV . the gap measures 6 - 2 mm and the pres-
sure is p = 0.85 MPa N . t is obvious that with a length of the switching
current front of T 3 20 ns the voltage change time equals T2 3 5 as . when

6 is reduced to 1 mm time T2 is reduced to approximately 3.8 ns. With fixed

U and 6 an increase in pressure p shifts the moment of breakdown of the

R8 to the peak of the current pulse. but T2 is thereby changed but slightly.
The spread. T . in moments of breakdown of the R0 relative to the start of the
current pulse in the shaping line, measured with the application of 10 or more
signals (fig 2b). is less than or equal to A as in a series of 100 closings nr
switch K. Under the same conditions the spread in SP is approximately twofold
greater. Shortening of front T of the current pulse in the shaping line re-
duces the time spread, AT ; when an air-gap discharger is used. T increases to
70 ns and accordingly AT is increased to 7 as. The splitting of each table in
the peaking line near spark gaps P to P 6 into wires up to 2 m long matched with
respect to wave impedance (100 9) did nof worsen at their ends the speed of the
reversal of the polarity of potential. which makes it possible to control the
Operation of 52 spark gaps.

The spark gap — peaker operated reliably over the entire range of variation of
U . since a difference in potential is not created between electrodes 3 and 4
0? this spark gap with a static and pulsed charge for approximately 100 Us.

A similar system can be executed with a greater number of cables. The further

shortening of T2 can be achieved by the sequential breakdown of several peaking
gaps [7).

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Bibliography

Barnes, P..., Gruber, J.E. and James. T.E. J. SCIENT. INSTRUH., Vol 44,
No 8, 1967, p 599.

Bosamykin, V.S., Gerasimov. A.I., Zenkov, D.I. et 31. "Gas Discharge Devices"
in "Trudy konferentsii po elektronnoy tekhnike" [Proceedings of the Conference
on Electronic Engineering]. MOscov, TsNII “Elektronika”. No 2 (18), 1970,

pp 94, 9S.

Pavlovskiy, A.I., Gerasimov, A.I., Tananakin, V.A. et al. PTE, No 2, 1970,
p 122.

Pavlovskiy, A.I.. Cerasimov, A.I., Zenkov, D.I. et a1. ATOMNAYA ENERGIYA,
Vol 28, No 5, 1970, p 432.

Pavlovskiy, A.I., Kuleshov, 6.0., Geraeimov, A.I. et al. PTE, No 6, 1976.
p 136.

Gerasinov, A.I. and Saltykov, v.3. PIE, No a, 1979. p 265.
Vorob'yev, P.A. and Potalitsyn, Yu.P. Collection "Elektrofizicheskaya

apparatura i elektricheskaya izolyatsiya" [Electrophysical Apparatus and
Electrical Insulation], Moscow, Energiya, 1970, p 140.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory i tekhnika eksperinenta", 1981

8831

C50:

1860/74

68

INDR OFFTCJAL UBEICNVLY
I'UK UH'ILIAL Ubl‘. ONLY

UDC 621.374.22 : 621.373.32
HIGH-VOLTAGE PULSE GENERATOR FOR LON-RESISTANCE LOAD

Moscow PRIBORY I TBKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 14 Jan 80) pp 131—132

[Article by A.Yu. Ushakov. Leningrad Polytechnical Institute]

[Text] A description is given of a generator for producing square voltage pulses
with an amplitude of 102 to 40103 V with an approximately 2 9 load. The length
of the pulses is 0.25 us and regulation of length is not provided for. The pulse
repetition rate is l to 100 Hz.

The generation of pulses of microsecond length and kilovolt height with a low-re-
sistance load is complicated by the fact that it is difficult to implement high-
current generator circuits in the form of elements whose wave impedance would be
on the order of the load resistance. It is possible to solve this problem by
maximum reduction of the inductance of the generator's high-current circuit, pri-
marily by reducing its dimensions.

Of the generator circuits and their elements described in the literature most suited
to our purpose is a generator with a switch--a gas-filled spark gap--wnd with a
shaping circuit in the form of parallel-connected LC networks whose resonance fre-
quencies and wave impedance are in conformity with the Fourier spectrum of the
pulses generated [1]. A shaping circuit of this type differs advantageously from
the more widespread artificial long lines by the fact that it can be made consider-
ably more compact and with a smaller number or elements necessary for enabling a
specific form of the generated pulse close to square. The spark gap, operating

at a gas pressure on the order of atmospheric, can also be made miniature and its
speed of response and permissible current values conform to our objective.

The generator's circuit is presented in fig 1. The storage line is formed by four
series LC networks whose resonance frequencies, , and wave impedance, (lk ,
according to [l], are calculated by the following equations:

a). - uk/t. p. - spit/i.

where k a 2n — 1 ; n - l, 2, 3, 4. ... g and T is the length of the pulse
generated.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

 

“.p h n (bu anew”:
5) 50x 0.! ' Tm?” C? 5 62;»
+ﬁ0 -

Jung“

>9
Tpl

 

Figure 1. Circuit Diagram of Generator: C --Kbl-1a (0.067 HP, 6.3 kV);
C --KVI-3(3300 p?. 10 kV); C -- 1—3 (800 pF. 10 kV); C -
1-2 (100 pF, 10 kV); D1--D V, D -—K02021. D3--0816V.
KD202R (10 each); L --two turns. E --three turns, L --five turns.
La--12 turns (diame er of turns 12 mm, PEV-2-0.6 mm wire)

Key:
1. Diode b. Transformer
2. Choke 5. Start
3. Output 6. Synchronizing pulse

Taking into account the fact that for an oscillatory circuit 2 - llchk and
. the values of the inductances, Lk . and capacitances. Ck , of the line

- will equal

 

In the circuit two modes are provided for charging the shaping line. With low re—
petition rates of the generated pulses (up to 10 Hz) charging is performed through
resistor R1 from a source with a voltage of 0.3 to 8 10 V. A disadvantage of this
variant is its low efficiency. less than 50 percent. and with high frequencies the
charging resistor is heated intensely. In these cases it is feasible to use a
circuit with a charging choke and diode, which, of course, doubles the voltage in
in the line as compared with the supply voltage. The choke has a winding with 800

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'l‘ll'lAL UM. ONLY

turns of PEV-Z wire 0.4 mm in diameter and a core of transformer steel with a
steel cross-sectional area of 9 cmz. assembled with a lama air gap.

The spark gap (fig 2) with a regulated discharge gap is cemented together with
epoxy resin. Its electrodes are made of Duralumin and its case, with pulse re-
petition rates of less than or equal to 10 Hz. can be made of acrylic plastic and
with repetition rates of 10 to 100 Hz out of ceramic. The spark gap is filled with
a gas mixture-—air with 30-percent He. The addition of He facilitates firing of

the spark gap with low line supply voltages and reduces erosion of the electrodes.
The gas is supplied through a capillary tube in one of the screws fastening the
spark gap to the generator's case. under low overpressure--from a ball chamber.

The rate of flow of the gas is determined by the leakage between the case and anode.

 

Figure 2. Construction of Spark Cap: l—-lower electrode; 2--case; 3--
contact lid: 4--moving electrode: S--cable with firing electrode;
6--epoxy resin with quartz sand; 7--porcelain tube; 8--gas inlet

The durability of the spark gap is determined mainly by failure of the porcelain
insulator of the firing electrode. With a current of 1 RA it withstands 2'10‘

pulses. The interelectrode gap is set. depending on the supply voltage, within
a range of 0.5 to 8 mm. The diameter of the anode and cathode is selected to be

8 mm greater than the diameter of the discharge channel, which equals approximately
2 mm. The spark gap is fired by means of a high-voltage pulse supplied from the
step-up winding of transformer Tr2 (the line transformer of an “Elektronika VL—lOO"

television is used).

The generator's output voltage is measured by means of divider R6R and the current
by means of a Rogovskiy loop placed on the wire going to the outpu connector.

This loop's winding is made of wire with a diameter of 0.15 mm with a 0.5-mm
spacing on a dielectric ring with an outside diameter of 25 mm and a cross section

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of 5 X S mmz. Simultaneously with the output pulse the circuit containing Trh,

RS' R n and D forms a synchronizing pulse of fixed amplitude. The load resistance
is ma ched High the line's wave impedance and the output voltage is regulated by
means of resistors R and R4. For the purpose of lowering their inductance these

resistors are wound onto flat cores made of glass-cloth-base laminate 0.5 mm thick
with 0.6—mm—diameter Nichrome wire.

Shielding of the generator. which is necessary for suppressing noise originating
during its operation. is performed by means of an enclosure of copper 0.5 mm thick.
For the purpose of preventing infiltration of the noise signal, the contact between
the enclosure and the removable front wall to which the entire circuit is fastened
has been improved by using spring tabs on the lid. This sort of shielding made it

possible to use photodctectors with a sensitive amplifier in the direct vicinity
of the generator.

Bibliography

1. Krylov, N.N. "Impul'snaya tckhnika" [Pulse-Driven Equipment], ﬁoscow.
Svyaz'izdat. 1950. p 71.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8831
C50: 1860/74

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ufl‘ll IAL USE. UNL'

UDC 621.374.32

CONTROL CIRCUIT FOR SEVEN-SEGMENT ELECTROLUMINESCENT INDICATORS

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHBNTA in Russian No A, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 4 Feb 80) pp 109-110

[Article by Ya.L. Gesin and G.A. Korotkevich]

[Text] A description is given of a control circuit. operating in the dynamic mode,
for KSlleZ 7-segment indicators. Utilization of switching of the cathodes of
indicators as opposed to switching of the grids made it possible to simplify the
code converter circuit.

Certain circuits for controlling vacuum tube luminescent 7-segtent indicators in
the dynamic node call for supplying an enabling potential to the indicator's grid.
However, with this method of switching indicators it is necessary to use a great
number of mounted elements and an additional disabling voltage source [1]. Chang-
inc from switching the grids of vacuum tube luminescent indicators to switching the
cathodes makes it possible to use a considerably simpler circuit for controlling

a multidigit digital indicator. as well as to make fuller use of the capabilities
of integrated microcircuits with a medium degree of integration as compared with

[l].

The advantages of this method of constructing a code converter are obvious in the
example of the boplace digital display unit whose circuit diaaram is presented in
fig 1.

A 2-bit code with an information replacement frequency of approximately 400 Hz for
enabling a dynamic display mode enters the address lines of a KlSSIDl binary-
decimal decoder and two doubled KlSSKPZ multiplexers. The individual outputs of
counters in direct code are led to the information inputs of the multiplexers.

The combination of multiplexers transfers the direct code from one of the counters
to the input of a code converter depending on the current address. The code con-
verter consists of a unit for decoding the binary-decimal code into the code of
K154IDZ 7-segment light-emitting diode indicators and of seven high-voltage switches
employing two K1NT661 microcircuits for controlling the anodes of the digital indi»
cators .

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F!ﬂ(]Al.USlE(NNLY

 

Figure l. H1-—K155IYe2; M and M3--K155KP2; M‘--KISSID1; M5--KSlbIDZ;
"6 and M7--K1NT 61

athodes of the indicators with
from one another, the power
he incandescent filaments.

. of course. is compensated by the

[or its realization. Only two nominal sup
iliwn digital indication with a great numbe

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Three-stage logical isolation of the counters from the high-potential circuits
makes possible exceptionally high noise imlmnity of the circuit.

Bibliography
1. Bahanin. V.B., Husonov, v.1. and Chizhikov, V.A. PTE, No 1, 1977, p 103.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory i tekhnika eksperiuenta". 1981

8831
C50: 1860/ 714

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.376.32 : 621.374.44

FREQUENCY DIVIDERS WITH VARIABLE DIVISION FACTOR

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 16 May 80) pp 115-116

[Article by V.V. Krochakevich, Riga Polytechnical Institute]

[Text] A description is given of pulse frequency dividers with a variable division
factor (from 1 to 10 and from 1 to 256) in which the pulse counter is preset by

a certain number with the subsequent continued counting of pulses to complete
filling of the counter. These dividers are constructed with series 166 microcir-
cuits and have a speed of response of 1 MHz.

Frequency dividers with a variable division factor (DPKD's) containing a pulse
counter, decoder and gated setting unit [1] have the disadvantage that they require
the use of a multiposition switch capable of reliably switching current in the nano-
ampere range. Designing a DPKD on the basis of a parallel-series or series circuit
[2] has proven to be disadvantageous from the viewpoint of minimizing the number of
integrated microcircuit cases.

in figs la and 2 circuits are given for DPKD's for which the division factor, K .
can take on values of

K - N - n ,
(1)

where N is the total capacity of the pulse counter. n is the presetting number
assigned from without by a coding switch, set of switches. analog-digital converter
and the like. Both DPKD's are designed on the basis of the integrated microcircuit
of a 5-bit pulse counter. the K1641Ye2, which has terminals for asynchronous pre-
setting of the first four bits and operates in the binary-decimal or binary mode
depending on the potential in the counting control terminal. The overall synchroni-
zation system of the DPKD provides for gated presetting of counters by a number, n ,
assigned from without. upon termination of the cycle for the filling of the counter
(counters) with pulses up to its total capacity, N , in each operating cycle of the
DPKD. Competition phenomena among signals in the synchronization circuit are elimi-
nated. since the counters and synchronization unit are clocked through a single

line. but here the counter is switched by the trailing edge and the synchronization
unit by the lending edge of the clock pulse. In addition, pulses of all operations

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I \I‘ "O I I‘ URI: Villa "I‘.l.

of the synchronization circuit are strictly separated over time and have flat
peaks at the maximum clock rate of 1 MHz.

 

Figure 1. Clock and Frequency Divider with Variable Division Factor (from
1 to 10) (a) and Time Diagram of Divider'a Synchronization Cycle
(b): H --K164LP1, M2-—K164IYe2; M3--Kl65PUI: H“--K166TH2;
P1--PP1 -HV; Rn--1H9

Key:
1 . NH: 3. Output
2. Power supply 6. Timing

In fig 1a is shown the circuit of a clock and DPKD with a division factor of K -
from 1 to 10 . The binary—decimal operating mode of counter is set by a low
potential in counting control terminal 1. The decimal carry a gnal is picked up
from terminal 15, which is the output or a built-in element (ZNAND) for bringing
together signals from the outputs of the first and fourth bits of the counter. At
the leading edge of the next (after the carry signal) clock pulse the synchroniza—
tion (H4) and gated presetting (M ) circuit is included. A time diagram of the
synchronization cycle is presented in fig lb. Counter is reset to zero by means
of a signal from the output of f1ip~flop M 2 and the signal at the output of flip-
flop H _1 is the presetting gate. The di der's output signal, produced from the
initia clock pulse put into the presetting gate, is picked up from output 13

77

FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of integrnlml microclnzuit M]. The diagram in fig 1b reflects the operation of
the synchronization unit of a DPKD operating with any division factor, K . not
equal to one. With K =- l the signal in the decimal carry output of counter
M2 has a constantly low potential and the signal in the output of flip-flop M44
a high potential, and inverted clock pulses from its input are present in the
output of the divider.

 

Figure 2. Frequency Divider with Variable Division Factor (from 1 to 256):

M1. .‘ia--K1641Ye2; M2, lis--Ki6loi’lil; M3--K16AL11: M6—-K164'n12
Key:
1. Input 3. Power supply
2. Timing 6. Output

The division factor for the (t-lmk pulse frequencv is set L; presetting number n
in tr‘rminnis lo to 7 of counter .‘i in the form of a binary code. The code for con-
trolling :he division factor so: from without through lines A to Al. is inverted

In roans of element .‘i . iherefore, the code supplied tc thesd lines must he repre-
s-t-mui .1s rim inverted code of binary number n .

ii tin Mii‘ for controlling the dixision humor of the DPKDP is set in lines A in
A, bv :11 :ms oi .1 set of suitchr-s or a coding switch (a. g..l’ in fig la) then the
mmm wire for t. no «ct of switches or coding switch is connected to one terminal
M i! -r power supply and Hats A to A! are connected via resistors R to the other
It-rsainai of the power supply. +he value of each resistor R“ is dctct‘mincd hy the
minimum unrent for reliahlo switching of the switch chosen (or coding switch)

".‘lu- 'ircnil of the gated presetting unit and for forming the output signal (H3 in
fir. la) is organized on the basis of n K16loPUl level. converter integrated

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I' HFIAI. ”St. UNIJ

microcircuit containing five inverters with two—way current switches in the output
of each inverter. Internal coupling of the output current switches with the cannon
conversion level line makes it possible to use this line (terminal 1 of H3) for
gating for the output of all five inverters.

Circuit R Ca in fig la is intended to exclude a possible combination of switching
of the flip-flops of the synchronization unit and pulse counter to a random state
during the supplying of power from which the DPKD circuit cannot automatically
leave. Setting inputs of flip-flops “4-1 and H _ of the synchronization unit can
be used for controlling the operation of the DP . for example. with a high poten-
tial in the line connecting terminal 8 of H4 and terminal 4 of H," pulses are
absent in the output of the DPKD. 0n the other hand. with a high pogential in
terminal 10 of H!" , the frequency of pulses in the output of the DPKD equals the
frequency of clock pulses and the picture of the initial cycle is inverted. When
the operating mode of the DPKD is controlled through the setting inputs of the flip-
flops of the synchronization unit the initial state of these flip-flops is deter-
mined by the control signals and loop R Cl. is eliminated from the circuit. For the
purpose of interrupting the operation 0 the DPKD it is convenient to use one of
the terminals of the built-in ZAND gate in the clock input of pulse counter M2.

0n the basis of the Kl6loIYc2 integrated microcircuit of the counter it is possible
to set up the circuit of a binary-code-controlled DPiCD with any division factor.
If the circuit of the DPKD in fig la is supplemented with a multi-input “AND gate
in the circuit for coupling the counter with the synchronization unit, then in
formation of the counter's overflow signal, by bringing together through the loNAND
gate the first four bits of the counter the division factor of the DPKD can be

set from 1 to 16 (whereby the operation of the counter itself. M , in the binary
mode is set by the high potential in counting control terminal 1;. If the outputs
of all five hits of the counter are brought together for synchronization through
a S-input NAND gate. then with the same control of the DPKD division by 2, lo, 6,

.. 32 is carried out. A further increase inithe division factor is achieved by
increasing the number of bits of the pulse counter and the number of elements of
the presetting unit. As an illustration. in fig 2 is given the circuit of a DPKD
with a division factor of K - l, 2, 3, ..., 255, 256. Division factor K is set
in keeping with (1) through lines A to A in the form of the inverted code of
number n . In the circuit in fig } the first four bits of both counters. H and
M . are brought together through an 8-input NAND gate into the synchronization unit
through integrated microcircuit M (a Kl6loLI1) containing a 9-input AND gate and
one inverter. The unused ninth input of. the AND gate can be connected to the posi-
Live terminal of the power supply or. as shown in fig 2, it can be connected to
any input used for the circuit. The operation of the synchronization unit (H 1
and ”6-2) of the DPKD in fig 2 is similar to the operation of the same unit (ﬁ;_1
and H44) in the circuit in fig la with any division factor different from one
(cf. the synchronization clock period time diagram in fig lb). The difference
between the circuit diagrams of the synchronization units of these dividers is that
to the setting input (terminal 4) of flip-flop M in fig 2 is connected a logic
circuit which eliminates self-locking of the DPKD'in any possible combination of
inclusion of the flip-flop structures of the entire circuit of the divider when
supply voltage is supplied. For the purpose of controlling (similarly to the DPKD
in fig 1) the operation of the DPKD in fig 2 it is possible to use the setting inputs
of flip-flop "6-1 and the logic in the clock input of counter M1.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘I-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

in further development of DPKDk based on the circuit in fig 2 it is necessary to
take into account the fact that with an increase in the divider's word length the
load capacity' of its output decreases. This is explained by the specifics of the
use of Kl64PUl level converterintegrated microcircuits as gates for the presetting
unit of a DKPD, namely: The sum of the output currents of all gates is equal at
the limit to the current of the comon conversion level line (terminal 1 of the
KléhPUl), connected in theselWKD circuits to the output of the first flip-flop

of the synchronization unit. Thus. whereas in the circuit in fig 2 the load capa—
city of the output of flip-flop M (KIGATMZ) equals 100. then the load capacity
of the output of the DPKD equals with total connection capacitance of approxi-
mately less than 100 pF. DPKD's according to the circuits in figs la and 2 were
tested in the ambient temperauwe range of -20 to +60 ’C with a supply voltage of
6 to 9 V with timing by means of pulses with a frequency of 1 MHz from the clock
shown in fig la. With a supply voltage of S V a frequency of 0.5 MHz has been de-
termined as the maximum spcalof response for the circuits tested.

51

Bibliography
1. Helen. R. and Garland. 0. "Integral'nyye mikroskhemy s KMOP strukturami"
[Integrated Hicrocircuitsuith CMDS Structures]. translated from English.
edited by V..‘I. Bogachev and 3.". Smnl'skiy. Moscow, Energiya. 1979, p 115.
2. Kostyukov. v.1. and Reger. I’.O. PTE, No 5. 1977, p 89.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "Nauka". I'l’ribory i tekhnika eksperimenta". 1981

883].
C50: 1860/74

80

FOR OFFICIAL liSE ONLY
I‘UK UEHLIAL U31: UNLV

UDC 621.375.024

VIDEBAND DIRECT-CURRENT AMPLIFIER

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 2 Dec 79) PP 124—125 '

[Article by Dzh.K. Parsamyan and H.c. Tokhmakhyan, Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences
Institute of Radio Physics and Electronics, Ashtarak]

[Text] A description is given of a wideband direct-current amplifier with a drift
compensation channel constructed according to a modulation-demodulation structure.
The amplifier's gain is 60 dB, its transmission band is 0 to 100 kHz and its
voltage temperature drift is 0.5 uV/°C.

A major disadvantage of the familiar Structures for wideband amplifiers with a
parallel amplification channel is the complexity of ensuring uniform amplitude-
frequency response (AChKh) in the region of the corner frequency [1]. In the am-
plifier which has been developed. whose circuit is shown in fig 1, the modulation-
demodulation channel, H1. H and M , is designed to compensate the drift of the
direct-current amplifier (UQT), H2. M“ and H . With this structure the amplifier's
amplitude-frequency response is determined by the parameters of the d.c. amplifier
channel [1].

The direct-current amplifier is assembled from three operational amplifiers (00's).
M . M4 and H6 (140UD8A [2]) with a gain of 20 dB for each stage. Since with this
séructure the current component of the drift is not compensated, for the purpose
of reducing it. in the first stage of the direct-current amplifier an operational
amplifier with field-effect transistors in its input is employed. The MD" [modula-
tion-demodulation] channel with a total gain of 100 dB contains a modulator, de-
modulator, generator, M (140UD13 [3]). and two amplification stages. M and H5
\.40UD83). The output voltage of the direct-current amplifier, via div der R5 to
R with an attenuation factor of K - KUP; . and the input voltage enter the
dgiferential input of H . In the output 0 the MD" channel voltage is produced
which is proportional :5 the drift presented to the input of the direct-current
amplifier. An integrating RC network (R9C ) with a time constant of 10 a is used
as the low-frequency filter. The compensagion voltage isolated in the filter
enters the noninverting input of Mg, which makes it possible to maintain both a

high transmission factor and a hig time constant.

The balancing outputs of operational amplifiers M7 and M2 are used for coupling
the MDM channel with the direct-Current amplifier. The compensation voltage is

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

added to the input of the second stage of operational amplifier M2 (terminal 6)
from the output of the first stage of operational amplifier H7 (terminal 6).
Filters R , R , and R3, R4. C prevent the penetration of commutation noise
into the inpuf oflu and the output of the amplifier. Diodes 01 and D2 prevent
H6 from going out of order from input overloads.

 

Figure 1. Circuit Diagram of Amplifier: M
léOUD8B; M2, "4’ M6-—140UD8A; D

--K140UD13: M3, Ms, M --

1 p --2D503 7

1’ 2
Key:
1. Input 2. Output

The voltage temperature drift of the direct-current amplifier is determined by

the drift of M . Uniformity of the amplitude—frequency response is determined

by the identity of filters R . R2. C and R3. R4. C2. From the results of labora-
tory tests the amplifier possesses the following parameters: gain of 60 dB;
transmission hand of 0 to 100 kHz; voltage temperature drift of ?'5 uV/°C;

noise e.m.f. at a frequency of 1 kHz not greater than 400 nV/ilzl 2 The amplifier's
operating temperature range is determined by the temperature range of the KlbOUDll
operational amplifier.

The amplifier is assembled on a printed circuit board measuring 95 X 190 mmz.

Bibliography

1. Polonnikov. D.Ye. "Reshayushchiye usiliteli" [Operational Amplifiers].
Mosrow. Energiya. 1973.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UPI-It IAL USP. ONLY

2. Bluuberg. H.R., Meyer, V.V., Nesterov. V.I.. Ryucel'. A.R. and Scrizh. A.A.
ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST', No lo, 1978, p 7.

3. Lyakhovich, V.V., Hoskalenko, N.I.. Ozhogin, M.A. and Stepanenko, I.P.
ELEKTRONNAYA PRCMYSHLENNOST', No 5. 1979. p 26.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Na-‘53", "Pribory 1 tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8831
C80: 1860/ 7!;

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.376.55

HIGH-SPEED PULSE PHASE DISCRTHINAIOR

Moscow PRIBORX I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4. Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 16 Feb 79) pp 119-122

[Article by Ye.P. Vetlugin, A.I. Lavrushev and T.P. Yartsun, Kiev Polytechnical
Institute Zhi tomir Branch]

[Text] A pulse phase discriminator is described which is designed from series 500
microcircuits. The discriminator's operation is based on the formation of a time-
base voltage of asymmetric trapezoidal form, which makes it possible to create an
intermediate storage, to improve noise immunity and to reduce the aperture error.
With a comparison frequency of 2 NB: the discriminator makes it possible to suppress
noise 20 dB greater than with time-base voltage of asyusetric triangular form.

Pulse phase discriminators (IFD's) are widely used in crystal frequency band con-
trol systems. IFD's of the "accessing-storage" type, executed according to the
time-base balancing method, have high speed of response but noise of high amplitude
at the comparison frequency is present in their outputs [1]. It is possible to
reduce the amplitude of this noise by changing the form of time-base voltage. In
[2] it is demonstrated that if asymmetric triangular voltage is employed instead of
sawtooth then it is possible to reduce voltage overshoots at the moment scanning

is begun.

In the iFD's described. for the purpose of further reducing noise in the discriminaw
tnr's output sweep voltage nr asymmetric trapezoidal form is used.

A structural diagram cf the iFD is shown in fig la and a time diagram of its opera-
tion in Fig lb. The phase difference discrimination unit (UVRF), to whose informa-
tion inputs are supplied the reference (f ) signal and the signal being studied

(f ), generates pulses (diagram in fig lb?puhose length is proportional to the
dinereuee between the phases of f and f . A control unit consisting of
flip-flops Tgl. Tg2 and an OR gate 3? the leading edge of this signal turns on and
at its trailing edge cuts off the scanning unit (RU). The integrating capacitor.
C. having had in the initial state a charge corresponding to the initial level,

U . is charged to a level. U . proportional to the length of the pulse in the
output of the UVRF and remaing in this state until the discharging unit (UR) is

turned on (b in fig lb).

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul'fﬂ IAI. US". UNIJ

Simultaneously with cutting off of the RU. from flip-flop Tg2 a signal is supplied
to the switching unit (KlU). which opens for period of time At (b in fig lb),
equal to the delay time of delay line LZl. and the storage unit (20) is connected
via input buffer stage BK to integrating capacitor C. and storage 0! potential

U takes place in the storage unit. During time At2 , equal to the delay of delay

line L2 . the switching unit is closed (d in fig lb) and storage of the signal
takes place in the storage unit until the next "accessing" (e in fig lb).

r__

IDS!

l cl
2) I I
a a l :
o _ . .
can .~ .
I‘ g I '

 

  
 

b)____—-'_'_'“"""'__'_'_—'__—"'

an at,a¢

u.-|

    
 

 

 

Figure 1. a--Structura1 Diagram of Unit: UVRF--phase difference discrimination
unit. RU~-scanning unit, UR--discharging unit. Tgl and TgZ--flip-
flops. H--0R gate, L21 to L2 --delay lines, K1U--switching unit,

BK and BK --source followerg. ZU--storage unit; b--Time Diagram
of Unit's aperation

Key:
1' 69“ [reference] 3' :11? flop 2
n s g '-
3. RU 10. Delay line 1
4. UR 11. Output
5. h) 12. Buffer stage 2
6. c) 13. Storage unit
7. d) 14. Switching unit

85

FOR 0FT1CJAI.USEGDNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During time At . after KlU is closed. equal to the delay in L23, the discharging
unit is cut in and integrating capacitor C is discharged relatively slowly through
resistor R1 (b in fig lb). Thus. the integrating capacitor of the scanning unit

in this circuit emerges in the role of an intermediate storage. Besides. charging
of the capacitance of the storage unit (20) takes place when transient processes
associated with charging of the integrating capacitor, c, of the scanning unit have
already been completed and transient processes associated with its charge have not
yet begun, since the switching unit (K10) connecting the storage unit to capacitor
C is open after the charge and closes before the beginning of the discharging of
capacitor C. In other words. the scanning unit (RU) accomplishes accessing and
storage of the sweep voltage for the period of copying into the storage capacitance
of the storage unit. which stores the information until new accessing. The storage
time in the scanning unit's integrating capacitor does not depend on the value of

the phase difference and is constant. since it is determined by the total delay of
the three delay lines (Lz's).

The length of the pulse opening the switching unit (KlU) (c and d in fig lb) is
determined by the time constant of the storage unit's charge, i.e.. by the product
of the capacitance of the 2U and the resistance of an open switch of the KlU. In
this circuit this length is also constant. which creates favorable conditions for
operation of the K1U Switch.

Time At is a variable quantity. It varies in inverse proportion to the length
of the tzase difference. Ab. pulse from 0 to (1/2)f , but for the purpose of
protecting the sweep voltage at the initial moment ffom overshoots of the transient
process associated with discharging of integrating capacitor C, the minimum value of
At is limited by the condition: AtS min 3_At . where At is the time of the
trznsient process of the discharging of capacitgr c. Under Ehese conditions the
scanning unit will begin to operate after termination of all transient processes of
the preceding cycle. i.e., each start of the operation of the scanning unit is pre-
ceded by quiescent conditions. when URU - UO for period of time Ats .

The entire circuit of the discriminator. with the exception of source followers BK1
and BK and the switching unit (K10). is executed with series 500 digital integrated
microc rcuits. The circuit diagram of the pulse phase discriminator is shown in fig
2. The UVRF is executed with XOR gates (M . N2. H to H7 and H9). This unit repre-
sents a phase discriminator which generate; two puises for the period of i ,
conparing signals f and f . The first time, comparison takes place dafing the
time of the durationogf the pulse. and the second time, during the time of the dura-
tion of the pause. The operating principle and characteristics of the phase dis-
criminator are given in [1]. The scanning unit is executed with two NOR gates.

M1 and HLJ' integrating capacitor C and resistors R and R . and the discharging
nnYt with one gate of the same kind. 4, and resistof R5. he control unit is
constructed with flip-flops Tgl and lg} and NOR gate H8. Flip-flop Tgl controls

the scanning unit (RU) and flip-flop T32 the switching unit (KlU) and RU.

Delay lines L2 to L2 are constructed with differential receivers from the line.
DPl to DPB‘ which per arm the function of comparison circuits [4], and three NOR

gates. M11. M12 and M 5. forming together with capacitor C and resistors R and R
(fig 2) a sawtooth voItagc generator (GPN). Flip-flop Tgé and NOR gate ”16 contro

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l‘"l \II I'I‘ Il“; .‘I’.'- 0"...

the KlU and flip—flop Tg3 together with circuit DP‘ serve the purpose of returning
the entire circuit to the initial state.

 

o —

Figure 2. Circuit Diagram of Pulse Phase Discriminator: H} to H9 and "16'-
1/3 KSOOLHlOSK; M 0 to H 5--l/2 KSOOLYelln; Tgl o Tg4—-
1/2 Ksoomnm; oil to DPr—l/B K500LP116H

Key:
1. f 6. DP [differential receiver]
2. Sggnning unit 7. Buffer stage
3. Left half (L1) 8. Switching unit
4. Tgl [flip-flop] 9. Storage unit

5. Discharging unit

of definite interest is the execution of scanning unit and sawtooth voltage generator
circuits with NOR gates. The circuit diagram of a scanning unit containing two

NOR gates is shown in fig 2. Each gate consists of the logic section itself and
three output transistors with open emitters and a cannon collector output. It is
obvious from fig 2 that the scanning unit is in the form of a current switch. one
arm of which is loaded onto capacitor C and the other onto resistor R . In the
initial state the left half (L ) an: transistors Tl to I are closed-—gapacitor C1

is charged to potential U --an5 the right half is open. when the scanning unit is
out in the loft half of t e switch is opened and the right half is closed--capacitor

Cl is charged to potential U ny means of the current generator (R - 2 k9 and
E - -12 V ). when the scanning unit is cut off capacitor C remains charged until
the discharging unit is cut in. which occurs by means of a signal from the output
of element DP a period of time of At3 after closing of switch K1U (cf. fig 1).
Upon this signal transistors T7 to T open, connecting in parallel capacitor 61 of

the scanning unit 80L resistor R5 of the discharging unit. thus making possible
87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

smooth discharging of the integrating capacitor (cf. diagram b in fig lb). In the
circuit discussed integrating capacitor 61 is charged according to a law close to
linear. and not an exponential one, since charging of the capacitor is produced by
the current generator.

The delay line sawtooth voltage generator is constructed similarly. but its output
voltages have an asymmetric triangular for: since its integrating capacitor is not
fixed in the charged state, i.e., after charging discharging ensues at once. The
sawtooth voltage generator is controlled by flip-flop Tg2.

The formation of time intervals by delay lines L21 to L23 is accomplished as the
result of the operation of DP to 0P3 in comparing the output voltage of the
sawtooth voltage generator with reference voltages U to U3 . Circuit DPA
operates similarly with respect to reference voltage 104 .

Buffer stages BK and BK? are in the form of source followers with dynamic loading
and reduced input capacitance. assembled from KP303V field-effect transistors and
KT363B bipolar transistors performing the role of an output stage designed as a
balanced circuit. This circuit has a transmission factor of 0.98, input impedance
of 1 HQ, output impedance of 50 to 100 Q and input capacitance of less than 1 pr.

The switching unit is executed as a series-parallel circuit employing KPJOSZh MOS
field-effect transistors having low open-channel impedance. The switch consists of
three stages and makes possible attenuation of a signal in a pause of 120 dB (at
frequencies up to 30 MHz). For the purpose .6 matching the control input of the
switching unit with ECL logic element levels and for producing the required voltages
for effectively controlling field-effect transistors, a control circuit is used
consisting of two differential stages with direct coupling. The first of these is
executed with KT3ZSB silicon transistors with reverse conductance, and the second
with KT363B silicon transistors with forward conductance. This circuit for the
switching unit control unit has high stability and the use in it of high-frequency
transistors makes it possible to produce a short leading edge for the control signal
(less than 30 ns) and to reduce the time for turning the switch on and off.

The use of an asymmetric trapezoidal form of sweep voltage makes it possible to re-
duce considerably the amplitude of voltage overshoots and the time for the establish-
ment of transient processes of the scanning unit. especially when the scanning mode
is replaced by the discharging mode. In addition, the use of sweep voltage of this
form makes it possible to reduce the unit's aperture error. which is especially
important when using the discriminator in measuring equipment systems.

The pulse phase discriminator was studied at a frequency of f I 2 MM: . Sup-
pression of voltage with the comparison frequency was producedogo an extent of 118
as, which is 20 dB greater than with a pulse phase discriminator with an asymmetric
triangular form of sweep voltage. The phase shift measuring range equals i t.

Within the range of measuring the phase shift the phase pulse discriminator's charac-
teristic is a straight line passing through the origin [1] and nonlinearity equals

a 3 0.07 . Structurally the pulse phase discriminator is executed in a sectional
shielded case. Power supply voltages equal -2, -5.2 and -12 V.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a-.. ~...~.-.~ u-.. v.-~-

Bibliography

1. Galin, A.S. "Diapazonno-kvarcsevaya stabilizatsiya SVCh" [Microwave Crystal
Band Stabilization]. Moscow, Svyaz'. 1976, p 72.

2. Gelozhe. Yu.A. and Kibirev, A.A. USSR Patent No 486636, published in
BYULLETEN' IZOBRETENIY', No 34. 1975, p 140.

3. Maahbits, L.H. WIOTEIO‘INIKA. Vol 28, No 9, 1973. p 1.
4. Veclugin. Ye.P.. Lavrushev, A.I., Povidayko, PM. et a1. PTE, No 1. 1979, p 82.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", "Pribory 1 tekhnika eksperlmenta". 1981

8831
C50: 1860/76

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFFKJALTHEIONLY

COMMUNICATIONS

UDc 621.391 (075.8)
LABORATORY PROJECTS on COMMUNICATION LINE STRUCTURES

Moscow LABORATORNYYE RABOTY PO LINEYNYH SOORUZHBNIYAM SVYAZI in Russian 1981
(signed to press 6 Mar 81) pp 2-3, 153

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Laboratory Projects

on Communication Line Structures", by Aleksandr Vasil'yevich Obukhov, reviewed
by G. N. Azarenkov and H. Ye. Smolyanskiy, Isdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 12,000
copies, 153 pages]

[Text] This laboratory manual describes laboratory projects based on the curricu-
lum, The necessary theoretical material is presented for each project; instructions
on the methods, work schemes, graphs and tables are given, as well as a short de-
scription of the instruments to be used and the rules for using them. At the end

of each project, a list of questions for programmed testing is given.

This manual is intended for use by students of communication tekhnikums specializing
in the following: “Automatic and Multichannel Electrical Communication" and "Tele-
graph Communication and Data Transmission".

Foreword

Under present conditions, practical training of students of specialized secondary
educational institution is an integral part of the educational process as a result
of which students acquire professional skills, and in technical fields of special-
ization, they also acquire qualifications for a practical profession. Practical
laboratory work is one of the forms of practical training.

The teaching aid on the subject "Line Structures" contains laboratory projects com-
piled in accordance with the program of the course. The engineering of line struc-
tures of communication lines has changed substantially. There appeared new types
of communication cables, cabling technology has been improved. new instruments have
been created for work on communication lines, new instruments and equipment were
created, and normative technical documentation was developed and approved. This is
reflected in this manual. It contains the necessary theoretical material for each
project, instructions on methods, work schemes, graphs and tables, descriptions of
the instruments to be u5ed and rules for using them. At the end of each project,

a list of questions is given for a programmed test covering the material of the pro-
ject. This manual is intended for use by students of tekhnikums in the areas of
specialization "Automatic Electrical Communication", "Multichannel Electrical

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0' WIKIAI. USI- UNI—l

Communication" and "Telegraph Couuunication and Data Transmission". The programmed
tests for each project will also make it possible for the teacher to use the class
time more rationally.

The author is grateful to the reviewers H. Ye. Smolyanskiy and G. N. Asarenkov for
their useful comments and advice which contributed to the improvement of the con-
tent of this book.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Instruction on Methods for Carrying Out Laboratory Projects a
Safety Measures in Carrying Out Laboratory Projects 6
Instructions for Programmed Tests 7

Laboratory Project No 1. Structural Elements of Cables and Cable

Materials 8
Laboratory Project No 2. Structure of Intercity Communication

Cables and Their Marking 22
Laboratory Project No 3. Structure of Cables of City and Rural

Telephone Networks and Their Harking 31
Laboratory Project No a. Cabling of GT5 [City Telephone Networks] 40
Laboratory Project No 5. Cabling of Intercity Networks 56
Laboratory Project No 6. Installation of Intercity Cable Distribution

Heads 68
Laboratory Project No 7. Installation of Distribution Boxes and Heads

of CTS 73
Laboratory Project No 8. Line Materials, Fittings, and Erecting Tools

Used in VLS [Aerial Communication Lines] of Intercity Networks 81
Laboratory Project No 9. Line Materials, Fittings, and Erecting Tools

Used in VLS of City Telephone Networks 98
Laboratory Project No 10. Balancing of Communication Cables 105
Laboratory Project No 11. Measuring the Potential on the Cable

Sheathing, Protective Devices and Cathode Stations 127
Supplement 140
Bibliographv 153

COPYRIGHT: Izdaiol'stvu "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981.

10,233
CSO: 1860/110

91

FOR 0F51CJAI.UEIE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COMPUTERS

UDC 621.317.772

SIGNAL PROCESSING UNIT BASED ON 'ELEKTRONIKA 33-18' NICROCALCULATOR

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4. Jul—Aug 81 (manuscript
received 28 Apr 80) pp 107-108

[Article by S.V. Klevtsov, Ye.A. Putsyato, Yu.P. Firstov and N.P. Chistyakov,
Moscow Engineering Physics Institute]

[Text] A dascription is given of an accessory for the "Elektronika 83-18“ micro-
calculator making it possible to process signals according to an assigned routine,
in particular to compute the phase shift angle, ¢ , between two signals. U and

U . according to the routine $ - arccos U /U . Angles are measured in fhe range
0? 0 to 90' (i 65') with an accuracy of 0.0} p rcent with a maximum input voltage of
10 V. It is possible to change the computation routine. as well as the sequence

for performing operations.

In conducting a physics experiment it is convenient to use a standard microcalculator
for automatic processing of its results. In combination with an accessory which
converts analog signals into digital form and inputs this information, a microcal-
culator processes these signals according to an assigned algorithm and displays the

result obtained.

In this article a description is given of an accessory making it possible in com-
hination with a "Elcktronikn 33-18" microculculator to measure the phase shift be-

tween two signals.

in measuring the phase shift. W . between two signals. U and U , it is necessary
to perform an operation of the type t - arccos U /U . These opgrations are per-
formed hy means of thc computer-processor whose s ructural diagram is illustrated

in fig 1. The unit operates in the following manner. When pulse Gate 1 is supplied
signals from the output of voltage—to-frequency converter PNCh I begin to enter
through commutator K the input of counter line SCh 1 (five decades) and at the
trailing edge of pulse Gate 1 the numerical equivalent of quantity U entered in
SCh 1 during the time of this pulse's action is copied into register R . Similar-
ly. when pulse Gate 2 is supplied the numerical equivalent of quantity Ul is
entered into register R1 .

Execution of the computation routine begins with the arrival of pulse Gate 3. Clock
pulses enter SCh 2. which controls multiplexer MP. in whose output is formed the code
or the operation to he executed at this step. The operation code then enters the

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1“)“ \II'fO‘. IAL U6!“- UI‘LD

decoder. Dsh. which controls the actuating unit, 10, which replaces the microcal-
culator's keyboard input. Registers R and R‘ are connected to inputs 1 to 5
and 7 to ll (outputs 4 to 8 and l. 2. 29 to 23) of the multiplexer. HP. In this
variant of the computer code 1011 (I) is supplied to input 6 (output 3) of the
multiplexer by connecting the corresponding output to the common line or to the

power line. Codes are assigned similarly for inputs 12 to 15 (outputs 17 to 20).
whereby a "wired-in program" is made possible.

 

Figure 1. Structural Diagram of Phase Shift Meter

Key:
1. Gate 1 6. Registers
2. Input 1 7. Multiplexer
3. Clock pulses 8. Decoder
4. Commutator 9. Actuatlng unit
5. Counter No 1 10. 83-18

The circuit diagram of voltage-to-frcquency converters PNCh l and PNCh 2 is shown
in fig 2. The operation of this unit is described in detail in [1]; therefore.

let us indicate only that the clock frequency for the voltage-to-[requency converters

equals 20 kHz. An output frequency of 10 kHz corresponds to an input voltage of
10 V, conversion nonlinearity is not worse than 0.01 percent and instability is net
greater than 0.02 percent in the 0 to 35 °c temperature range.

 

Figure 2. Circuit Diagram of Voltage-to-Frequency Converter: GTl-—clock;

M1 and H2 --140UD7, H -—5218A3. M4 --155TM2, H5 -159NT1A;

D1 to D3 --0223, D4 -- $1966
[Key on following page]

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Input 4. 20 kHz clock
2. Diode No l 5. Output frequency

3. Operating frequency

The circuit diagram of the phase shift meter processor is presented in fig 3. The
processor is constructed with series 136 and 155 uicrocircuits and consists of an
input commutator, H1 . counters; "S to H9 . an auxiliary counter, H 0 , register

R0 --H to M15, register R --M16 to H2 . a multiplexer. H 1 to H14, and a decoder,
H25. ‘l'I‘ie actuating unit is Implemented thh RES-663 (354563.745) ﬁermeucany
sealed reed relays with an operating current of approximately 3 mA connected in
parallel with the control keys of the microcnlculator.

 

5". 1“”
r (I
I." 21:)
al' :12)
ll
5" a“?
[I
III 5(0)
m)
7“)
on) m
! J7 t
3"” m; s
r
5" :9 my) 6)
all m) ”(5}
4" Mb)
III
II IUF)
an)
ﬁ-l
n
Figure 3. Circuit Diagram of Meter: H1--155LR1. M2 and H3--13éKhLl, H4--
155L84. MS to M --lSSlYe2. H --155IYeS, M11 to Hzo--155TM8,
M21 to NZa--1552P1. H25--155I83
[Key on following page]
94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I on VI 0 0“". WI- “I‘M.

Key:
1. Reset 6. Clock pulses
2. Input 1 S. Frau H22
3. Gate 1 6. To actuating unit

The key technical characteristics of the phase shift meter are as follows: range
of angles measured--0 to 90° Q: 45'); maximum relative error—-0.03 percent; input

signal range-~10 V; meaSurinz time—-l a; clock frequency-—lo kHz: floating-point
result presented on 8—decade display.

This signal processing unit constructed on the basis of a microcalculator, with

small overall dimensions and simplicity in debugging. has high precision charac-

teristics and makes it possible to alter flexibly the computation routine and se-
quence of operations.

Bibliography

1. Sheyngold, D.H.. editor. "Spravochnik po nelineynym skhemam" [Nonlinear Circuit
Handbooxl. translated from English. Mir, 1977. p 92.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta". 1981

8831
C80: 1860/74

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.376.53 + 621.317.6

HULTIFUNCTION GENERATOR

Moscow PRIBORX I TERHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No a, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 29 Apr 80) pp 110-111

[Article by I.K. Gerasin. Moscow Institute of Electronic Engineering]

[Text] A description is given of an analog converter constructed with series K140,
K198 and K159 circuits. The basis of the converter is a KléOHAl balanced modulator.
The converter multiplies and measures ratios and can be used for extracting the
square root and for amplitude and phase detection in phase-locked loops. The maxi-
mum input voltage is t 10 V, the dynamic range is 50 dB. nonlinearity is less than
or equal to two percent and the input bandwidth is 2 MHz.

Multiplication-division and root extraction devices are necessary for reproducing
trigonometric functions. computing vector quantities and a root-mean-square value
and other computing and measuring operations. The operating accuracy of these
devices depends on the methods and element base employed for their design [1-3].
Here the added problem arises of coordinating various function generators in a
single measuring complex. A unified element base partly solves this problem.

Differential stages have received extensive application in the design of function
generators. Multiplication devices have been implemented most simply by their
means [1]. The integrated circuits of 526PSl. SZSPSl and KlbOHAl balanced modula-
tors can serve as an example [A]. The last one of these was used as the basis for
constructing a multifunction generator which can be used for extracting the square
root. squaring. finding ratios and multiplying voltages.

The generator whose circuit is shown in fig 1 is implemented with series K140, K198
and K159 integrated circuits. when the device is used in the multiplication
(squaring) mode the signals to be multiplied are supplied to inputs X and Y of
the voltage-current converter. H . and a nmltiplication stage, M . respectively.

M and the differential transistors, M . loading it, uith the diodes included, re-
present a logarithmic amplifier with mutually inverse outputs by means of which
multiplication stage is linearized for input X [S]. The output current of “8’
proportional to the product of the input signals, is supplied to current reflector
M7 and current-to-voltage converter M . The generator current in transistor 2.

passing through transistor 1 of the current reflector and the current-to-voltage
converter makes it possible to shift the level of the multiplication stage.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
——o+/5

 

Figure 1. Circuit Diagram of Multifunction Generator: H , "10' --K140HA1;
H2--K1NT591V; H3, M7--K1RT986A; HS, M6--KPSlOlo ; H9--K 40UDlO;
T --KT3102V; D . D --KDSO3A
l 1 2
Key:
1. Diodes 2. Output

In the division mode input Y of circuit )1 is connected to a source of reference
voltage whose value determines the function generator's transmission factor in this
mode. The voltage of the dividend is supplied to input x and of the divisor to
input 2 of individual voltage-to-code converters H and "I.“ The latter via
current reflector M controls the transconductance of diodes H . Control can be
accomplished by volgage of both polarities supplied to the corresponding input of

N1. whereby the other input is connected to ground.

For the purpose of reducing the influence of the input current of :8 on the trans-
conductance of diodes Hi. its input is connected to the output of 6 via source
followers with dynamic oading of Mg and . For the purpose of compensating the
emitter-base difference voltage of the di es of K , resulting in biasing of the
function generator's zero level, to the drains of Ehe field-effect transistors re-
sistors are connected. by selecting which it is possible to reduce this voltage.
in terms of the input of H8. to zero.

The voltage drop in the diodes o! H is proportional to the logarithm of the
dividend and inversely proportional to the transconductance of the diodes and
accordingly to the voltage at input 2 . Thus. the voltage at the output of H9

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

will be equal to the ratio of voltages at inputs X and Z . When the output of
M9 (taking into account the polarity of the output voltage) is connected to input
2 of circuit M the output voltage of the function generator will be proportional
to the square root of the voltage supplied at input X . Matching of integrated
circuits M . H and H in terms of potential levels is made possible by transistor
Tl and dioées 81 and 2.

The function generator has the following characteristics: maximum input voltage-—

1 10 V. dynamic range--50 d8. nonlinesrity less than or equal to two percent.
input bandwidth-4 MHz .
COMPUTER-ASSISTED RADAR OPERATOR TRAINERS

Moscow TRENAZHERY DLYA PODGOTOVKI OPERATOROV RLS S POHOSHCH'YU BVH in Russian
1980 (signed to press 5 Dec 79) pp 2-4. 125-256

[Annotation. introduction and table of contents from book "Computer-Assisted

Radar Operator Trainers" by Anatoliy Nikolayevich Romanov. Voyenizdat. 6000 copies.
127 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book examines the basic technical design principles of computer-based trainers.
and presents the requirements for trainers. Methods of modeling targets and noise
on the display screen using computers are explained, as are principles of simulat-
ing signals in trainers.

Some questions of the psychological training of operators are explained, and the
methodology for teaching operators using trainers and methods of evaluating their
level of training are given.

The book is intended for military specialists involved in developing and operating
trainers.

Introduction

Units and subunits of radio technical troops are equipped with the most modern combat
technology, incorporating the latest achievements of Soviet science. This increases
the requirements for the level of training of the personnel which service it.

When operators are working at a high professional level, they are able to master
modern radar technology and automated control systems, and to exploit their conbat
capabilities with confidence.

Life has made it necessary to find ways to train radar operators more rapidly.
Reducing the time required to train specialists is only part of the problem.

Another part is to increase operator performance using combat equipment. In
organizing and conducting combat training. commanders. political workers and

staff officers use as their basis the fact that continuously increasing power

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAI. USE ONLY

and complexity of military technology are amplifying the relationship between the
degree to which it is mastered by personnel and the effectiveness of its battle ap-
plication.

The level of training of radio technical subunit crews has a direct influence on the
accuracy with which ground-to—air missile troops and fighter aviation execute their
tasks. Therefore, one of the most important requirements for crew training should
be the detection of targets at maximum ranges, providing radar information with
maximum accuracy, and full utilization of the capabilities of battle technology

in determining the composition of aerial targets.

The progress in science and technology in recent years has led to the extensive
utilization of complex technical systems. The decisive role of the human operator
in such systems, the complexity of analyzing the data and implementing control
functions have put forth the problem of improving the quality of training and
teaching of operators. This problem is particularly urgent in radar, where
operator training using real targets involves major expenses and significant
consumption of materials.

Regardless of the rather widespread utilization of simulators and trainers as
technical devices for teaching the operators proper habits for controlling targets
of various types, their application has not been sufficiently effective until
recently. Analysis of trainer devalopment has shown that their creators originally
tried to simulate serial situations using simplified models which provided training
only in a limited number of modes. The requirements for the quality and methodolo-
gical capabilities of trainers were increased, and led to the necessary for in-
crcasing the completeness and accuracy of utilization of dynamic and information
models, which demanded that computers be included as part of trainers.

The advantages of computer-based simulators and trainers include the capability of
simulating any aerial situation, to complicate it or simplify it, to change the
parameters of the target trajectories in real time, to repeat the information
models of the aerial situation and to study them one part at a time, and to
automatically obtain an objective evaluation of the level of training of the
operator and to monitor the progress of their training.

These advantages of trainers based on computers promote more efficiency training,

improve its quality and reduce the amount of time required. The results of opera-
tor training can provide the basis for evaluating their suitability for controlling
a specific system and for comparing operators in order to sake operator selections.

Table of Contents

Introduction 3
The operator in a radar informaticn processing system S
Operator selection

Features of operator activity
Operator actions in solving typical problems 1

I-‘N

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a use so. a an”... vua— vs a...

Radar information processing systems
Semiautomatic information processing
Peychophysiologicai characteristics of operator
Operator recognition of radar signals
Radar operator trainers
Computer situation modeling
Principles of computer situation modeling
Construction of simulated target trajectory model
Modeling of appearance of simulated target echos, location errors
and noise
Modeling sequence of instant of entry of targets to radar scan zone
Modeling algorithm for forming sequence of target echos
Example of air attack model
Simulation of situation on radar indicator screens
Makeup of target and noise simulation equipment
Formation of P-sweep on indicator screen
Measurement of target coordinates in digital code
Target display on indicator screens
Simulation of active and passive noise
Computer-based trainers
Trainers for teaching operators of circular scanning radars
Trainers for teaching guidance and manual target tracking operators
Methodology for teaching operators on trainers
Methodology for step by step formation of actions and concepts
Features of teaching using trainers
Principles of evaluation level of operator training
Mathematical methods of evaluating operator training level
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1980

6900
C30: 1860/126
FOR OFFICIAL USEGDNLN

UDC 681.586-181.4
TUNABLE FUNCTION GENERATOR UTILIZING MICRQCIRCUITS

Moscow PRIBORX I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 6, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 2 Jul 79) pp 112-113

[Article by Yu.A. Klyuyev, V.Yu. Pavlenko and N.S. Tanyanskaya]

[Text] A description is given of a function generator whose transfer characteristic

:gdtugable owe; a range bounded by the dependences vakh [output] - ’ﬁvkh [input]

vykh - vkh ’

K286PU1 microcircuits connected in an "ideal diode“ circuit are used in the function
generator. The basic percentage error is approximately one percent of a 1 V output
signal in the input signal variation range of 10 to 1000 mV. The complementary
error is less than or equal to 0.5 percent at 10 'C in the -10 to +50 ’0 temperature
range.

This function generator is designed to linearize the transfer characteristic of a
gas analyzer for $02. The method of piecewise linear approximation with direct
simulation of an assigned function is used for linearization [1]. With this design
method the output voltage of the function generator is determined by the equation

Usur=Uo+ KOUII + Kg'galar—ana).

where U0 is the value of the output voltage with a minimum input signal. U -
215 mV with ka I 10 mV ; U is the reference voltage of the ideal dioge;

K0 is the transmIssion factor astermining the slope of the initial section of the
function generator's characteristic; K is the transmission factor of an ideal
diode; and n is the number of ideal dIodes.

The coefficients and reference volta es of the ideal diodes were calculated for a
conversion function of U Ih - vkh with an approximation error of one percent
of U

of the maximum output sngX kh - l V . These calculations are presented
in table 1.

102

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
I'W Vl'l'lbll‘lv var. Ul‘I-l

Table l.
Transnission factors -
K1 K2 K3 Kb
4.9 -2.4 -l.1 —0.5 -0.25
Reference voltagesI mV
Uop l uop 2 uop 3 uop 6
18 62 70 160

The circuit diagram of the function converter is presented in fig 1. The circuit
consists of four ideal diodes ( to H‘). an inverting analog summer, H . and an
inverting amplifier. K . The vo tages determining the enabling levels for the ideal
diodes are gotten from resistive dividers R3 to R and are supplied at the inputs

of the ideal diodes. The transmission factor for each ideal diode is

K. - “Roe/3'.

where R is the feedback resistance of an individual ideal diode (R , ...);

R' - 10 £5 for this type of microcircuit; a is the part of the total output
voltage of the ideal diode supplied at the summer's input and determined by the
output resistive dividers of the ideal diode. Retuning of the conversion function
is accomplished by means of the output resistive dividers of the ideal diodes.

Inverting analog sumner H adds signals: the input voltage, U , and the output
voltages of all ideal diodes and the voltage gotten from the res stive divider,

R 4 to R , which compensates the internal bias voltage of H5. The transmission
factor 0 the sumer for signal kah equals

Ks " Ray/(Rt + 3,).

The transmission factors of the summer for signals arriving from the ideal diodes
are chosen to be constant and equal one. Thereby their mutual influence on one
another in the tuning process is eliminated. Inverting amplifier H is designed

to reduce the output signal to unified form, U - l V . The tragsfer character-
istic of the function generator consists of fixzkiinear sections each having its
own slope (transmission factor).

The function generator is tuned to the conversion function:

Uws=m-

103

FOR OFTHCJAI.IEHE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Circuit Diagram of Function Generator: H1 to H6--K286Pul

Key:

Thereby the individual values of the reference voltages of the ideal diodes are
set. When it is necessary to retune the function generator it is possible to use.

only adjustments of the transmission factors of the ideal diodes, Ks , and of the
transmission factor of the answer, K0 .

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I V“ V. . own-.- you so. u...

Bibliography

1. Smolov, v.3. "Diodnyye funktaional'nyye preohuzovaceli" [Diode Function
Generators], Leningrad, Energiya. 1967, p S.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperinenta". 1981

8831
CSO: 1860/74

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRON DEVICES

UDC 621.385.832.810

ANALCG MILTIPLEXER IN THE CAMAC STANDARD

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNTKA EKSPBRIm-ZNTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 3 Jan 80) pp 258-259

[Article by A.(;. Kuchinskiy, v.11. Savchenko and A.l(. Yakushevl

[Text] This module is designed for the parallel connection of four out of 120
inputs to four individual outputs in keeping with instructions arising from a
crate line. The module can be used in designing multichannel measuring systems and

other electronic apparatus making possible the multichannel processing of analog
information. The circuit of the common section and of the analog signal comutator
for one of the four outputs of the multiplexer is given in‘fig 1; an external view

of the module is shown in fig 2 [photograph not reproduced].

The module contains the following functional units: an analog signal comutator
executed with 20 16901011 microcircuits (16 microcircuits are connotation switches
and lo microcircuits are level restoration switches (KVU's)) and one KISSLAB micro-
circuit; a 3-bit binary address register; a 4-bit binary control register; a crate
line instruction decoder and an interrogation processing circuit, 1.. The contents
of the address and control registers, as well as the state of interrogation, L , are
indicated on the module's face panel.

Analog signals enter via connectors located on the module's face panel into indi-
vidual inputs (1 to 30) X 10 of the analog commutator. Upon an instruction arriving
from the crate line into the instruction decoder D h' the simultaneous switching
of four analog signals takes place to the individualh outputs of the multiplexer
(outputs 1 to 4) by means of the address register, Run, and the control register,
RgU. The codes of the switched channels are written in the address register and
the codes of the individual groups of channels in the control register. Interro-
gation L is formed in the interrogation processing circuit, $020.), 1.5 us after
the arrival of an instruction from the crate line and inform the control unit of
the completion of the switching of input signals.

The multiplexer has the following specifications: open-channel ilpedance less than
or equal to 200 Q; leakage current in input less than or equal to 500 nA; switching
time-~l '..s; switched current—-lO mA; switched voltage-mi S V; duration of overshoots
less than or equal to 1 us; amplitude of switching overshootsnloo to 250 mV.

The protection of inputs from voltage overloads is provided for maintenance con-
venience.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI VI'I'ILIAI. nor. on.”

5 I xi.“
) w u.

I 33, EIIIIIL ..
- EIIIIL.

     

    

  

Figure 1. Circuit of Common Section and of Analog Signal Commutator for One
of Four Outputs of the Multiplexer

Key:
1. Crate line 4. Control register
2. Decoder, SOZ(L) 5. Control of outputs 2, 3, h
3. Address register 6. Control of level restoration

switches 2, 3, a

The following instruction operations are used for the purpose of controlling the
multiplexer: NP(26)A(0)Sl--enabling signal L ; NP(24)A(0)Sl--inhibiting the
signal; NP(8)A(O)-L interrogation check; N?(Z7)A(0)--analysis of state of in-
terrogation flip-flop; NF(1)A(0)-reading nodule state word (81 to R11);
NP(17)[A(1) to A(4)]-—writing address of switched channels into switching register
(W1 to W3); NP(ll)A(0)SZ--clearing address and control registers; NP(25)A(0)Sl--
switching channels selected; (2 + C)82-preparation for operation.

Signal X is generated and used according to standard. The unit is designed as a
CAHAC module of double width. The power requirement is + 6 V, 0.8 A; - 15 V, 0.3 A.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8831
C50: 1860/74

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INSTRUMENTATION & MEASUREMENTS

UDC 535.853; 621.3.029.65
HILLIHETER AND SUBNILLIHETER BAND PULSED SPECTROMETBR

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIMENTA in Russian No 6, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 2 Jan 80) pp 159-162

[Article by V.H. Naumenko, V.V. Yeremenko and A.V. Klochko, Ukrainian SSR Academy
of Sciences Physicotechnical Institute of Low Temperatures. Khar'kov]

[Text] A description is given of a resonatorless spectrometer of the transmission
type with a direct amplification receiver for making studies in the 0.3 to 6 mm
wavelength region in a pulsed magnetic field of up to 300 kOe with the temperature
of the specimen determined by the liquid coolant (He, H , N ). A quasi-optical
system for irradiating the specimen is used in the specgromgter. A description is
given of a method of fastening the specimen with fine adjustment of its position

in the solenoid channel with an accuracy of 0.5'. Automatic recording of the zero
and loo-percent resonance absorption levels and of the zero level of the magnetic
field is employed in the instrument, which makes it possible to determine the para-
meters of resonance lines with high precision.

Modern physical studies of the magnetic properties of materials are carried out
over a wide range of frequencies and magnetic fields. Oscillators of the backward
wave tube type [1] and high-sensitivity receivers [2] are often used in wideband
spectrometers.

In [3] a description is given of a spectrometer operating in the 0.2 to 2 mm wave-
length band, in which the retunablc Pabry-Perot resonator with the specimen lies

in the channel of a superconducting solenoid with a maximum magnetic field strength
of 40 kOe. However. when operating at longer wavelengths it is necessary to in-
crease the inside diameter of the solenoid. which considerably complicates the pro-
duction of high-strength magnetic fields. Besides. magnetic fields with strength
of up to 300 k0e are usually produced by the pulse method and furthermore it is not

permissible to place the massive metal parts of the resonator inside the solenoid
channel.

In this article a description is given of a pulsed resonatorless spectrometer of
the transmission type for a wide range of wavelengths and magnetic fields and for
low temperature of the specimen. In the spectrometer there is a circuit for pro-
ducing a signal proportional to the differential magnetic susceptibility of the
specimen studied, as well as a unit for precisely adjusting its position in the
solenoid channel during an experiment. The spectrum is turned by means of the
magnetic field with a fixed frequency of the microwave oscillator.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A block diagram of the spectrometer is presented in fig 1 and the measuring cell
with the cryostat (downward cross—sectional View) in fig 2. The microwave radiation
source, 1 (fig 1), is connected to a transmission line which consists of a horn
antenna, a system of matching lenses, 2, and a 20-mm-diameter hollow dielectric
light guide with a number of additional devices, such as polarization plane rotators
(VPP's), 3 and 4, a beam splitter (DL). 5, and an absorption wave meter, 6. The
transmission line based on a hollow dielectric light guide and the quasi-optical
devices were fabricated at the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences Institute of

Radio Physics and Electronics and operate in the 0.3 to 21mm band. An optoacoustic
receiver, 7, is connected to one of the arms of the beam splitter for the purpose of
registering the signal reflected from the absorption wave meter. Standard wave
meters of the transmission type, e.g., Vll84-A and Ch2-26, are connected between the
microwave source and horn antenna when operating in the 2 to 6 mm band.

 

Figure 1. Block Diagram of Spectrometer: 1-microwave oscillator with horn;
2, 8--confoca1 lens light guides; 3, b--polarization plane rotator;
S--beam splitter; 6--absorption wave meter; 7--optoocoustic re-
ceiver; 9--cryostat with solenoid and specimen; lO--integrator;
ll--solenoid power supply; 12--mechanical modulator; 13--automatic
calibration unit; 14--delay unit; lS--n-ln$b detector; 16, 17--
preamplifier and final amplifier; l8--monitoring oscillograph

Then the radiation is channeled by means of a confocal lens light guide, 8, with a
distance between lenses of 120 mm. Microwave power losses in the lens light guide
with X Z 2 mm are caused basically by diffraction [4]. These losses are minimal
for a TEN 0 wave and the TEMOO wave is practically established in the tranmission
line afte? five to seven lenses. In a hollow dielectric light guide in the 0.3 to
2 mm band a wave of the EH type is propagated, which is rather close in structure
to a TEM wave. which makes it possible easily to match the dielectric light

guide H199 a confocal lens light guide. Losses of microwave power in a 20-m-dia-

meter hollow dielectric light guide in the 0.5 to 2 mm wavelength range are within
the range of l to 7 dB/m.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICJAI.USE10NLY

 

Figure 2. Cross Section of Specimen Cryostat: l-windows made of Therylene
(Lavsan) film; 2--specimen; 3--Teflon cones; 4--holders: 5--
moving frame; 6--Therylene bushing; 7, 8--coils for measuring
dH/dt and dM/dH , respectively; 9--steel band of solenoid; 10--
fabric-base laminate insert

Between the last two lenses of the light guide, 8 (fig 1), is installed a cryostat.
9, with film windows, 1 (fig 2). inside of which a measuring cell with the specimen
to be studied is placed. Special attention has been paid to the method of irradia-
ting the specimen. After testing several variants a quasi-optical system consisting
of two conical lenses, 3 (fig 2), converting into waveguides proved to be optimum.
The lenses are made of fluoroplastic and have a 16-mm aperture. The use of these
lenses makes it possible to irradiate a specimen with an area of 3.5 X 3.5 mm2 and

(with a solenoid aperture diameter of 6 mm). In order to eliminate stray passing
of the wave past the specimen. the side surface of the cones is coated with con-
ducting pain . There are 2.5-mm-diameter axial openings in the conical lenses for
the purpose of improving transmission in the 0.3 to 0.5 mm region.

The holders are installed on a frame. 5, which can be turned around two mutually
perpendicular axes (perpendicular also to the axis of the solenoid) at angles of
FOR UI'HLIAL U3£ URL!

1 3° with an accuracy of 0.5'. The turning knobs are on top of the cryostat. One
of the holders with a conical lens is installed fixed to the frame and the other
can be moved in the axial direction and is spring mounted, which makes it possible
to choose the optimum pressure on the specimen with which it does not crack in
strong magnetic fields, resonance lines are not distorted and the shortening of the
conical lenses when they are cooled to 4.2 °K is compensated. Bushing 6 (made of
Lavsan). onto which the measuring coils are wound. prevents the waveguide sections
of the conical lenses from shifting to the sides.

A signal propertional to the rate of change of the strength of the magnetic field.
dH/dt , is picked up from coil 7 (fig 2) and is supplied to the input of integrator
10 (fig 1) and then to the oscillograph. From the other two coils, 8 (fig 2), a
signal is supplied to the two inputs of the differential amplifier of an 58-2 double—
beam storage-type oscillograph on whose screen is recorded the amplified difference
signal proportional to the differential magnetic susceptibility. dH/dﬂ .

The solenoid with the quasi-optics and turning unit together (65 X 65 mmz. height
of 105 mm) is fastened to a rod and is inserted into the cryostat from above. which
makes it possible easily to change specimens without disturbing the vacuum in the
cryostat. The pulse: solenoid coils are wound onto a tube made of German silver

25 mm long with an opening 6 mm in diameter. For the purpose of increasing their
mechanical strength the windings are impregnated with an epoxy compound and are

put into a band of stainless steel. 9. Two solenoids were used in the study: The
first contains 80 turns of a copper line with a cross section of 1.08 x 2.44 mm2
and the other 356 turns of PELSh0-0,72 wire. The field pulse rise time for the
first solenoid during the dischargirg of a 7—mF capacitor bank equals 0.9 ms, and
for the second 2.5 ms (with a 3.5-mF capacitor bank). A cylindrical fabric-base
laminate insert, 10 (fig 2), was used in the last solenoid for the purpose of
improving homogeneity of the magnetic field. An ignitron is used as the discharger.
In the solenoid's power supply there is a capacitor bank charge level stabilizer
which charges the bank after a few seconds to the assigned voltage and maintains

it with an accuracy of one percent. The solenoid's magnetic field is calibrated

to the EPR [electron paramagnetic resonance] line of O-diphenyl-B-picryl hydrazyl
(DFPC) contained in a preform of molded polyethylene placed alongside the specimen.
A signal proportional to dM/dH is also used for calibration if the fields of
magnetic phase transitions in the specimens being studied are known.

in recent times much attentic1 has been paid to the precise measurement of the
intensity and width of resonance lines in radio spectroscopy. We used a method
making it possible to increase the accuracy of these measurements and to a certain
extent to automate them. The microwave radiation is modulated by means of a
mechanical interrupter. 12 (fig 1), with a frequency somewhat lower than (1/2)T,
where t is the duration of the magnetic field. During startup, the automatic
calibration unit. 13. (operating in the one—time startup mode) in phase with modula-
Llon of the radiation generates successively three control pulses. The first two
pulses correspond to the moments of opening and shutoff of the microwave beam by

the interrupter's segment and produce a successive two—time startup of the storage-
type oscillograph's sweep action. The zero and loo-percent absorption levels and
the zero level of the field (or dH/dH ). respectively. are entered on its screen.
At the moment of the next opening of the microwave beam by the interrupter's segment
the automatic calibration unit forms a third pulse which enters the power supply of
the solenoid. 11, and the capacitor bank is discharged onto the solenoid. At the

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

same time this pulse is fed to the delay unit, 14, and after this to the storage-
type oscillograph for starting its sweep action a third time. The absorption
spectrum and the field magnitude (or dM/dH ) signal are recorded on the scale
selected.

The presence of zero and loo-percent levels on the oscillograph'e screen along
with recordings of the spectrum make it possible to improve substantially the
accuracy of determining the parameters of resonance lines. Since the duration of
the entire cycle is less than 10 ms. during this period the amplitude of the micro-
wave oscillator. the position of the oscillograph's zero lines and the gain of the
receiving and recording system practically do not change during this time. This
technique is especially helpful when working with a backward wave tube, which as

a rule has a strongly divided amplitude characteristic. The use of calibration
marks. taking into account the nonlinearity of the 88-2 oscillograph's measuring
channels, the presence of a beam biasing circuit (as in [5]) as well as the auto-
matic recording of the zero level of the magnetic field make it possible to bring
the accuracy of measuring the magnetic field up to one percent.

An n-InSb chip placed in a separate cryostat and cooled to 4.2 °K is used as the
microwave radiation receiver, 15.* The receiver's signal enters preamplifier l6
and then final amplifier 17. each of which has a gain of 100. The transmission
band of the receiving and amplifying channel equals 5 MHz at a level of 0.7. In-
duction into the receiving and amplifying channel during operation of the pulsed
solenoid is at the noise level because of galvanic decoupling between the cryostat
of the receiver and specimen. Taking into account the fact that the transmission
band of the receiving and amplifying section equals 5 MHz and the short-term in-
stability of the backward wave tube's frequency is approximately 10 “, the reso-
lution of the spectrometer is determined by the homogeneity of the magnetic field
in the bulk of the specimen and equals approximately 500 for a specimen 1 mm thick
with an area of 3.5 X 3.5 mmz, which is completely adequate for the majority of
resonance investigations of solids. The homogeneity of the nagnetic field in the

solenoid was determined from the width of the EPR line of DFPG contained in pre-
forms of molded polyethylene of different thicknesses.

As an illustration of the Operation of the spectrometer, in fig 3 [photograph not
reproduced] a photograph is presented. of the oscillograph's screen in studying

the interaction of antiferromagnetic resonance with impurity resonance in Col?2 +
+ Mn .

In conclusion we wish to thank V.V. Pishko and V.V. Tsapenko for assistance in
tests and in making individual units.

Bibliography

1. Colant, H.B., Vilenskaya, R.L.. Zyumina, Ye.A. et al. PTE. No 4, 1965, p 136;

 

*Let us use this opportunity to express our heartfelt thanks to F.F. Kharakhorin
for offering high-quality low-noise chips.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ UI'I'ILIAI. USE URL!

Golanc. M.B., Alekseyenko, Z.T., Korotkova, 2.5. at al. PIE, No 3. 1969,
p 231.

2. Aganbekyan, K.A., Vystavkin, A.N.. Listvin, V.N. and Shtykov. V.D. RADIO-
TEKHNIKA I ELBKTRONIKA, Vol 11. 1966. p 1252.

3. Petutin, A.I., Zvyagin. A.I.. Dyubko. S.P. et 31. PTE, No 6. 1970, p 163.

4. Valttov, R.A.. Dyubko, S.P., Katyshan. V.V. et al. "Tekhnika submillimetrovykh
voln" [Submillineter Have Equipment]. Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio, 1969.

5. Gurevlch, A.G., Golovenchits, Ye.I., Voronkov, V.D. and Gromzin, D.Ye.
PTE. No 4, 1967, p 121.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Pribory 1 cekhnika eksperimenta", 1981

8831
cso: 1860/76

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(HﬂﬂC1ALlﬁﬂ30NLY

UDC 621.317.761

RICH-SPEED TRACKING FREQUENCY METER

Moscow 931808! I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIMENTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 26 Dec 79) pp lbs-1&8

[Article by 6.6. Vorob'yev]

[Text] A description is given of a tracking frequency meter constructed from a
reversible counter. a reference frequency generator. a direct-counting counter and

a multiplication logic circuit installed in a feedback loop between counters. The
number entered into the reversible counter directly expresses the value of the
measured frequency. f 2“ . With a generator frequency of l Hﬂz the upper value of
£12 - 100 kHz and the lower value is not limited. whereby the measuring accuracy
is Tdentical over the entire range and is determined by the stability of the genera—
tor. An "acceleration" circuit assembled from logic elements is used for the purpose

of reducing the time of the transient process.

Digital frequency meters of two types [1] have gained extensive application in
frequency measuring practice. The first type is based on measuring the period of
the input frequency while employing the operation of finding the inverse value of
the period measured. These frequency meters are used for measuring relatively low
frequencies. To the other type belong frequency meters whose operation is based on
counting the number of periods of the measured frequency over a reference time in-
terval. These frequency meters make it possible to obtain a direct digital reading
of the measuring result and they are convenient to use for measuring high frequen—

cies.

One more type of frequency meter is known-—a tracking frequency meter [2] having

a reference frequency block. frequency analyzers. frequency mixers. shift registers
and a set of electronic switches. however, in view of the high complexity of these
frequency meters they have not found a practical application.

The frequency meter described below [3], whose block diagram is shown in fig 1, is
without this disadvantage and the use in it of an added "acceleration" circuit has
made it possible to increase considerably its speed of response. The frequency
meter consists of a reference generator (26). decade frequency dividers (by a factor
of 10), a measurement range selector switch (P), a direct-counting counter (PS).

a multiplication circuit (X), a reversible counter (Rs), an anticoincidence circuit
(SAS). digital indicators (Tsl's) and an acceleration element. The latter has a

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul'l‘ll IAL UM URL!

shaper (P), one-shot multivibrators 0V1 and 0V2. flip—flops Tgl and Tg2, AND gates

11 and 12 and an OR gate.

     

'18 m 20)

h - — J lamb ”mm um

Figure 1. Block Diagram of Tracking Yrequency Meter

Key:
1. Shaper 11. AND gate
2. Reference generator 12. Start acceleration
3. Measurement range selector switch 13. Addition
4. One-shot multivibrator No 1 14. Subtraction
5. Feedback frequency 15. OR gate
6. Reference generator frequency 16. Digital indicator
7. "1" setting 17. Reversible counter
8. Flip-flop No 1 18. Direct-counting counter
9. Acceleration unit - 19. Anticoincidence circuit
10. Measuring frequency 20. Measuring circuit decade

The operation of the frequency meter in the tracking mode is described by the
equations

I... = KI... K-Sum-Ism.

where fon is the feedback frequency and K is the number obtained in the rever-
sible counter. With the advent of the equality of frequencies in the input of the

reversible counter, f - f , we get f Kf . If it is assumed that f
= 10n . where n is gsnatufgf number, theazft is Egt difficult to see that K EC

directly reflects the value of the measured frequency.
An added acceleration circuit was used for the purpose of reducing the time of the
transient process originating at the beginning of measuring. Its operating prin—

ciple consists in the fact that with the start of measurement an acceleration fre-
quency (in this case ‘36 ) is supplied to the addition input of the reversible

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

counter simultaneously with f 2“ . When the necessary readings are reached (K).
when £12m becomes equal to £0 , the acceleration frequency is cut off and then
the frequency meter operates in the ordinary tracking mode. Diagrams of the volt-
ages of the acceleration unit at points a to g are presented in fig 2. The
acceleration frequency cutoff moment is determined from the appearance of the first
"superfluous" pulse of frequency f (the right half of the diagrams in fig 2)

by means of a trigger circuit execuggd with elements 0V , 0V , Tgl, Tg2, I1 and 12.
In this case the time for the initial setting of readin s is reduced.

 

Figure 2. Diagrams of Acceleration Unit Voltages

The circuit diagram of the frequency meter is presented in fig 3. The digital
display unit is not shown; for the purpose of implementing it it is necessary to
connect to the outputs of microcircuits M4 via decoders (a KlSSIDl microcircuit)
IN-lZB digital gas-discharge indicators.

Let us discuss the operation of the frequency meter's measuring decade. Changes in
voltages in specific outputs of microcircuits H to of counter PS (diagrams Q1
to Q4 in fig 4) are differentiated by means of ghe RC networks of microcircuit

M . From the ?E§3t1ve_29}“e° obtained after differentiation a frequency spectrum
1; created (dQ to an ) with a dynamic code of 4-4-2-1. In the zeroed state of
the decade of Ehe reversible counter (microcircuit H ), in the output of the in-
verters installed in the bit output of microcircuit a "1" potential is

present (+4.5 V), which cuts off the diodes of microc rcuit M . Pulses do not
enter the common line of the diodes (the input of ahaper P). When a "1" is en-
tered in mic: circuit M4 the diode of microcircuit H is rendered conducting. ad-
mitting dQé pulses to the output (cf. diagram 1 in fig a). Operation of the
reversible counter takes place in 1-2-4-8 code, which is convenient for controll-
ing the digital display. For eliminating failures in the operation of the rever-
sible counter an anticoincidence circuit is used which eliminates the entry of
pulses coinciding in time into its input. The operation of this circuit is ex-
plained by diagrams of the voltages (fig 5) in various points of it. With a suf-
ficient distance of addition and subtraction pulses from one another (time t

and t2 in fig 5) they pass to the input of the reversible counter. And if he
addition and subtraction pulses lie in "dangerous" proximity to one another then
coincidence of the pulses of the input stretchers (the right half of diagrams

a' and b' in fig 5) will take place. The inhibit pulse multivibrator operates
(diagram h in fig 5). The input of the reversible counter will be closed.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Ul‘a'enu‘l. vat. Unhl

1

l'

a
V
——-—

I

3) ' , ______________ J L ________________ Z
“P“l'l ﬂuada autumn/mu; {rum 12)

 

Figure 3. Circuit Diagram of Tracking Frequency Meter: to H3-K1551Ye1,
M -K1551Ye6, H -—K2NK061, H to H9--K155TK1; a 1 inverters-
d551,”; rulerﬁm D--GDSO7R

1. 1 MHz 7. One-shot nultivibrator No 1
2. Reference generator 8. Flip-flop No 1

3. Reset 9. AND gate

6. Start acceleration 10. OR gate

5. Shaper 11. 510 p?

6. f 12. Measuring circuit decade

izn [measuring]

117

FOR 0FT1CL\L.USEGDNLY
I")! OFFTCJAI.USEZ(MVLY

1M nuuunuuuuu/
0: ll:=:=:= II:===II

, . =l=ll=l- '
a . I==lll=- '
’ ll. i=—
4}; IIIEIII -
n I: ==r -

0 =II===I

, -====III

a“ IIIIIII

awlpllllll,'
«(lam-Ill-
«a: IIIIII

,. III].-

“ IIIIIII

o l

u laminae j ,

Figure a. Diagrams of Measuring Decade Voltages

Key:

1' fEc [reference generator]

 

Figure 5. Diagrams of Anticoincidence Circuit Voltages

If an oscillator with quartz stabilization at 1 MHz is used as a reference frequency
generator (fig 3). then the upper value of the measured frequency equals 100 kHz.
This value is determined by the maximum value of the feedback frequency. In this

case it equals fos - f I10 , where 10 is the division factor of the smoothing
divider (microeircuit HE installed in the feedback loop. The smoothing divider
reduces nonuniformity of the feedback frequency and at the same time eliminates

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \u'a aysnu you V”...

the drift in readings of the digital indicator's lower-order bit. The lower value
of the measured frequency is theoretically not limited but it must be remembered
that then the time of the transient process increases.

The number of measuring circuit decades and the number of scale dividers in the
output of the reference generator is determined by the required measurement

accuracy, which is identical both for high and for low frequencies and is determined
by the stability of the reference generator. A multichannel tracking frequency
meter can be designed on the basis of this frequency meter [6].

Bibliography

1. Yermolov, R.S. "Tsifrovyye chastotomery" [Digital Frequency Meters].
Leningrad, Energiya. 1973.

2. Shlyandin, V.M. and Lomtev, Ye.A. USSR Patent No 250308, published in 3.1.
[BYULLETBN' IZOBRETENIY], No 26, 1969. p 64.

3. Vorob'yev, 6.0. USSR Patent No 565259. published in 8.1., No 26, 1977, p 96.
4. Vorob'yev. 6.6. USSR Patent No 393693. published in 8.1., No 33, 1973, p 182.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Nauka", "Pribory i tekhnika eksperimenta". 1981

8831
C50: 1860/74

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use can

UDC 621.3810

AUGER ELECTRON SPECTROMETH

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No In, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 30 Apr 80) p 257

[Article by A.V. Kozhevnikov. A.H.-S. L1 and V.A. Pirogov]

[Text] This instrument makes it possible to make an elemental analysis of the
surface of solids in studying processes of adsorption, desorption and diffusion
on a surface under conditions of an ultrahigh vacuum. Atonization of the surface
by means of an ion beam makes it possible to study the distribution of elements
over the specimen's depth.

A beam of primary electrons from an electron gun induces the exiting of secondary
electrons from the studied section of the surface of the specimen. The energy
distribution of secondary electrons is registered by means of an analyzer of the
cylindrical mirror type. The spectrum of secondary electrons is recorded on an
N306 XY-recorder. It is possible to observe spectra on an oscillograph, which
makes possible on-line monitoring of the state of the specimen's surface. The mode
of electronic differentiation of the spectrum of secondary electrons is provided
for increasing the sensitivity of the instrument.

The surfaces of specimens are cleaned by bombarding them with an Ar+ ion beam and
by heating them under a superhigh vacuum. The holder with the specimens is in a
cryostat cooled by liquid nitrogen. The specimens are heated to a temperature of
1800 °C by means of an electronic heater. The holder with the specimens is re-
placed through a lock chamber. which makes it possible to maintain steadily a high
vacuum in the spectrometer's working chamber. The specimen holder is equipped
with a precision manipulator. Visual monitoring of the replacement and placement
of specimens in the analyzer is possible. The evacuation system is oilless.

Key Specifications of Instrument

Energy range of Auger peaks which can be registered—~0 to 2500 eV; energy resolu-
tion of analyzer less than or equal to 1 percent; energy of primary electrons--

0 to lo keV; diameter of beam of primary electrons less than or equal to 200 microns;
working vacuum not worse than 10 7 Pa; time for replacement of holder with speci-
mens--1ess than or equal to 50 min; dimensions--l350 X 650 X 500 mm ; weight--180 kg.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nsuka". "Pribory i tekhnika cksperimenta". 1981

8831

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F‘llCHﬂﬂCJAI.lRﬂI(NVLY

MICROWAVE THEORX 8 TECHNIQUES

UDC 62l;386.6(076,5)

MICROWAVE ELECTRONIC DEVICES

Saratov ELBKTRDNNYYE PRIBORY SVERKHVYSOKIKH CHASTOT in Russian 1980
(signed to press 5 Hay 80) pp 2-5, 611-416

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from textbook "Microwave
Electronic Devices", second edition, revised and supplemented, edited by

by V. N. Shevchik (deceased) and H. A. Grigor'yev, lzdatel'stvo Saratovskogo univer-
siteta, 6500 copies, 416 pages]

{Text} This book deals with studies in electronics and characteristics of modern
devices intended for the amplification and generation of electromagnetic microwave
oscillations (reflex klystron; traveling-wave tube; backward-wave tube; multireson-
stor magnetron; voltage-tunable magnetron; avalanche-and-transit-time diode oscil-
lator; Gunn diode oscillator) and combines a textbook in a theoretical course with

a laboratory manual. The book is divided into parts treating various types of in-
teraction of electrons with electromagnetic fields in a vacuum or in a solid body.
Each part contains theoretical chapters and the related experimental problems for
practical laboratory work on microwave electronics. Primary emphasis is placed on
systematic presentation of the fundamental theoretical information on the electronics
of the devices being studied. Typical circuits of laboratory devices and the neces-
sary methods of microwave measurements are also described. For each concrete pro-
blem, recommendations are given for the order of studies and instructions for practi-
cal studying standsrd microwave devices, and test question are formulated. This
textbook was written on the basis of many years of experience in teaching microwave
electronics at the Saratov University.

Foreword

This hook is based on a laboratory manual on microwave electronics published in 1965*.
That first edition was an attempt to giVe the students a sufficiently complete guide
for practical laboratory work which, on the one hand, would free them from the neces-
sity of working through a large amount of special and often scattered literature,

and, on the other, would be a basis for a more profound study of physical phenomena
in microwave electronic devices with the use of highly specialised literature. It
was also intended for coordinating the preparation of students for practical work
with the methodology and program of the course of lectures on the fundamentals of

._.____._.___..___.___.._.________
*"Elektronnyys pribory sverkhvysokikh chastot" [Microwave Electronic Devices],
edited by V. N. Shevchik, Irdatel'stvo Saratovskogo universiteta, 196“.

121

FOR OIIICJAI.USE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

microwave electronics offered at SGU [Saratov State University]. The first part of
these considerations remained the sane in the preparation of this, second, edition.

During the fifteen years since the first edition, the theory and practice of electro-
vacuum microwave devices have developed further and, which is most important, solid-
state devices are rapidly penetrating microwave electronics. In the final analysis,
all this determined the considerations by which the authors were guided in preparing
the second revised and supplemented edition of this book. The absence of such teach-
ing aids made it expedient to prepare a textbook which would be useful not only for
the students of the Saratov State University, but also for other vuses of the coun-
try which have radio physics and radio engineering departments and fields of spe-
cialisation.

when revising this book, the authors removed the sections treating oscillators with
decelerating fields and electron wave oscillators, since these devices did not find
extensive applications in practice. Sections on the reflex klystron, multiresonator
magnetron and noise in LBV [traveling-wave tubes] were rewritten and expanded. The
remaining parts of the book were also changed substantially and supplemented. For
example, in presenting the theory of LBV, considerably more attention was given to
the mechanism of the interaction of electrons with traveling waves, electrodynamics
of decelerating system and the treatment of the canoe t of coupling resistance. In
the section on the theory of LOV [backward-wave tubesﬁ, more attention was given to
the operation of the tube, decelerating systems and space harmonics, as well as the
results of the nonlinear theory. The following are among the microwave electronic
devices which are included in the new book but were not treated in the first edition:
the voltage-tunable magnetron as well as the most important solid-state devices --
avalanche-and-transit-time diode oscillator and Gunn diode.

The entire material of the book was systematired by the criteria of the types of
interaction of electrons with high-frequency fields (0 or H) and types of oscillat-
ing systems (resonators or decelerating systems). A separate part of the book
treats solid-state microwave devices. Theoretical introductions to various experi-
mental problems (projects) pertaining to the same or related devices were combined
into independent chapters. This made it necessary to combine problems which are
similar with respect to the basic characteristics of interaction into appropriate
experimental chapters which serve as a practical supplement to theoretical chapters.
Although this does not change substantially the form of the book, the unified number-
ing of the problems was retained, which is convenient under laboratory conditions.
The contents of the experimental sections (problems) is given in the new book in a

a generalized form, which makes it possible to use it in university laboratories
having different microwave devices and measuring instruments. For this purpose,
only basic block diagrams of experimental devices are given without reference to
concrete types of devices, and the recommended measuring methods are described in
general terms. The assignments for each problem are formulated as recommendations
for conducting studies whose concrete list may vary at the discretion of the instruc-
tor. The numerical values of the usually specified parameters and ranges of changes
of the physical values used are to be determined by the student on the basis of the
manufacturer's certificate and the geometric data of the device being studied, as
well as from preliminary theoretical calculations. For each experimental problem,
instructions are given on the use of standard microwave electronic devices as the
objects of study.

122

FOR OFTNCJAI.USEGNVLY
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USE‘0NLN

Although the initial purpose of the book as a laboratory manual on microwave elec-
tronicssns preserved, but, with respect to the volume of theoretical information,
which occupies its major part, it is far beyond the scope of the ordinary teaching
aids for laboratory studies. In essence, the book became a textbook for a theore-
tical course in the fundamentals of microwave electronics accompanied by an aid to
practical work coordinated with it. On the basis of many years of experience of the
operation of the teaching laboratory for microwave el.ctronics at the Saratov Uni-
Versity, we believe that this is a necessary quality of the book which expands the
possibilities for the instructor who, depending on concrete conditions, can estab-
lish one or another theoretical minimum sufficient for admitting the student to per-
ﬁorming practical exercises. Of course, this book can also be used as a teaching
aid for a theoretical course, because it presents in detail the material correspond-
ing to modern programs in the fundamentals of microwave electronics.

The authors of this book are: V. S. Andrushkevich (Chapters I, II), N. P. Budnikova
(Chapter II), Ye. P. Bocharov (Chapter VIII), H. A. Crigor‘yev (Chapters II, IV-XIII),
Yu. D. Zharkov (Chapters I, II), N. I. Sinitsyn (Chapters IV, V, VII), 6. L. Sobolev
(Chapters VI, VII), D. I. Truhetskov (Chapters VIII, X), V. L. Fisher (Chapter VI),
and B. G. Tsikin (Chapters III, V).

V. V. Kolosov participated in writing section XIII.2 (Problem No 10). Overall pro-
cessing of the material was done by A. V. Tolstikov. In the prOCers of the prepara-
tion of this book for publication, its contents were discussed in dntail at the me-
thods seminar of the electronics department of $60.

The following participated in preparing the manuscript for the press: L. I. lvanova,
V. G. Kravtsova, V. A. Nazarov, V. V. Kolosov, N. V. Belousov, and S. P. Gudkov.

The authors are sincerely grateful to all members of the microwave radio physics

department of M00 [Moscow State University] and its chairman, Professor V. H. Lopu-
khin, for their thorough review of the preliminary wording of the book and useful
comments and suggestions, as well as to Professor A. H. Kata of SPI [Saratov Poly-

technical Institute] for reading the manuscript and a number of valuable camments
in reviewing it.

V. N. Shevchik (deceased), H. A. Grigor'yev

Contents Page
Foreword 3
List of Basic Notations 6

Part One. Interaction of an Electron Stream with Electromagnetic Fields

of Resonance Microwave Oscillating Systems (O-type interaction) 15
Introduction 17
Chapter I. Reflex Klystron Theory 20

1.1. Brief Description of Reflex Klystron Operation 20
1.2. Excitation Zones of the Reflex Klystron 27
123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.3.

1.6.

FOI‘OFFICIAI.UBEHDNLY

Electronic Conductivity and the Steady-State Operation
Mode of the Reflex Klystron

1.3.1. Basic Relations of Steady-State Oscillations
1.3.2. Electronic Conductivity
1.3.3. Alloving for the Interaction of Steady Component

of Electronic Current with a Variable Field in the
Cap

1.3.6. Startup Mode

1.3.5. Equation of Steady-State Amplitudes. Stability in
the Operating Mode

1.3.6. Boundaries of Excitation Zones

1.3.7. Elec'ronic Efficiency

1.3.8. Power Under Load

1.3.9. Optimal Load

Electronic Frequency Retuning

1.6.1. Connection Between the Frequency and the Deviation

of the Transit Angle from the Optimal Value

1.6.2. Electronic Retuning Range

1.6.3. Steepness of Electronic Frequency Retuning

Refining of Excitation Zones

Discussion of Adopted Assumptions

1.6.1. Space Charge Field

1.6.2. Nonuniformity of the Reflection Field

1.6.3. Deposition of Electrons on the Walls of a Resonator;
Secondary Emission of Electrons from the Grid

1.6.6. Multiple Transit of a nigh-Frequency Gap by Electrons

Chapter 11. Experimental Study of the Reflex Klystron

11.1. Problem No 1. Experimental Study of the Main Characteristics
of the Reflex Klystron
11.1.1. Experimental Setup
11.1.2. Recommended Order of Studies
11.1.3. Instructions for Studying Typical Reflex Klystrons
11.1.6. Test Questions
11.2. Problem No 2. Experimental Study of the Electronic Conduc-
tivity of the Reflex Klystron ‘
11.2.1. Justification of the Method of Measuring Electronic
Conductivity
11.2.2. Experimental Setup and Measuring Methods
11.2.3. Recommended Order of Studies
11.2.6. Instruccions for Studying Typical Reflex Klystrons
11.2.5. Test Questions
Part Two. Interaction of a Straight-Line Electron Stream with Electro-
magnetic Fields of Decelerating Systems (O-type interaction)
Introduction

Chapter 111. Theory of the Traveling-Wave Tube

111.1

Schematic Arrangement and Operating Principle of LBV [Traveling-
Wave Tube]

126

FOR OFFICIAI.IHHB(HVLY

30
30
32

37
61

63

65
67
69
51

51
52
S3
57

57
58

58
S9

61
61

61
62

65
66
69
72
76
76
77
79
82

82
rust “fulﬁl. M Ul‘hl

III.2. Linear Theory of LEV
III.2.l. Derivation of the Equation for a Current Grouped in
a Given Field
III.2.2. Derivation of the Equation of the Excitation of a
Decelerating System by an Electron Stream
111.3. Electrodynamics of a Spiral Deceieration System
111.6. Compatibility Equation and Its Solution
III.k.l. Variance Equation
111.4.2. Initial Conditions and Amplification
111.“.3. Effects of Distributed Losses in a Decelerating
System and Changes in the Electron Velocity
III.b.4. Effect of a Local Absorber
111.5. Nonlinear Effects in LEV

Chapter IV. Theory of the Backvard-Have Tube
1V. 1. Physical Picture of the Phenomena in LUV
IV.l.l. Basic circuit Diagram of W
IV.l.2. Decelerating Systems and Space Harmonics
IV.1.3. Discrete Nature of Interaction and the
VarianceEquation of a Decelsrating System of
"Opposite Pins"
IV.l.b. Feedback in l£N'and Electronic Retuning
IV. 2. Elements of the Linear Theory of LOV
IV.2.1. Introduction
IV.2.2. Analysis of Starting Conditions
IV.3. Sane Results of the Nonlinear Theory of LOV
IV.4. Structural Elements of the Backvard-Have Tube
IV.4.l. Decelereting System
IV.4.2. Electron Gun and Focusing System

IV.4.3. Energy Extraction and the Absorber

Chapter V. Experimental Study of Tubes with Protracted Interaction
of the O-Type

v.1. Problem 30 3. :Aﬂcslmpﬁtal Study of 137
V.l.l. Method of Experimental Studies of LEV
V.1.2. Recommended Order of Studies
v.1.3. Recommendations for Studying Standard LBV
V.l.6. Test Questions

v.2. Problem No. b. Experimental Study of 10V
v.2.1. Method of Experimental Studies of LOV
V.2.2. Recommended Order of Studies
V.2.3. Recommendations for Studying Standard LOV
V.2.b. Test Questions

Part Three. Interaction of Electrons with Electromagnetic Fields of
- Resonance Oscillating Systems in Crossed Electrical and
Magnetic Fields (H-Type Interaction)

Introduction

125

FOI‘OFIICIALIJSEGNHLV
Chapter VI.
V1.1.
V1.2.

V1.3.

V1.4.

V1.5.

V1.6.

INDR OIWNCJAI.IEIE(MVLY

Elements of the Magnetron Theory

Designs and Applications of Magnetrons

Oscillating Systems of Magnetrons

V1.2.l. Types of Oscillating Systems with Axial Symmetry

V1.2.2. Types of Oscillations of a System whose Axial
Symmetry is Disturbed by the Introduction of a
Coupling Element

V1.2.3. Stability of Oscillations in a Multiresonator
Magnetron

V1.2.b. Oscillating System of the Voltage-Tunable Magnetron

V1.2.5. Field Distribution of the Zero Space harmonic in
the Interaction Space

Basic Information About the Operation of the Multiresonator

Magnetron

V1.3.1. Analysis of Electron Trajectories

V1.3.2. Interaction Power and Efficiency of the Magnetron

Fundamentals of Multiresonator Magnetron Calculations

v1.4.1. Static Mode of a Cylindrical Magnetron. Critical
Mode Parabola

v1.4.2. Dynamic Mode of the Magnetron. Threshold Voltage

Performance Characteristics of the Multiresonator Magnetron

V1.5.1. Current-Voltage Characteristics of the Magnetron

V1.5.2. Output Power of the Magnetron

V1.5.3. Electronic Frequency Displacement

Voltage-Tunable Magnetron

V1.6.l. Electron Beam Injection

v1.6.2. Qualitative Description of Electronic Processes
in the Voltage-Tunable Magnetron

Chapter VII. Experimental Study of Magnetrons

V11.l.

V11.2.

Part Four.

Problem No. 5. Studies of the Multiresonator Magnetron
VII.1.l. Description of the Experimental Setup
V11.1.2. Order of Switching the Experimental Unit and
Work Procedures
V11.l.3. Recamnended Order of Studies
V11.1.4. Recommendations for Studying Standard Multi-
resonator Magnetrons
V11.1.5. Test Questions
Problem No 6. Experimental Study of the Voltage-Tunable
Magnetron
VII.2.l. Description of the Experimental Setup
VII.2.2. Order of Switching and Work Procedures
V11.2.3. Recommended Order of Studies
VII.2.h. Recommendations for Studying Standard Voltage-

Tunable Magnetrons
V11.2.5. Test Questions

Some Special Characteristics of Microwave Electronic Devices

Introduction

126

ETHICMWNCJAI.USBGINLY
Pm WIN-IA]. 08l- mus

Chapter VIII. Elements of the LEV Noise Theory
VIII.l. Introduction
VIII.2. Basic Information on the Appearance of Noise in Microwave
Beam Devices
VIII.3. Calculation of the Noise Factor of LDV of the O-Type
VIII.3.1. General Remarks
VIII.3.2. Analysis of the Propagation of Noise Fluctuations
in an Electron Stream
VIII.3.3. Noise Factor Calculation
VIII.3.b. Minimum Noise Factor Calculation

Chapter IX. Elements of the Theory of Load Characteristics of the
Reflex Klystron

IX.1. Introduction

IX.2. Ideal Load Characteristics of the Reflex Rlystron
IX.2.l. Original Equations
IX.2.2. Ideal Load Diagram at a Constant Transit Angle
IX.2.3. Load Diagram at a Constant Potential of the

Reflector

IX.3. Real Load Characteristics
IX.3.1. Effect of Energy Extraction Without Losses
IX.3.2. Effect of Losses in Energy Extraction
Ix.3.3. Long Line Effect
IX.3.4. Effect of Resistance Jumps in the Output Device

Chapter X. Experimental Study of Special Characteristics of Microwave
Electronic Devices
X.l. Problem No 7. Study of Noise in LEV
. Method of Measuring the Noise Factor
1 2. Block Diagram of the Device
1.3. Electrical Circuit of the Device
l 4. Measuring the Amplification Factor with the Aid of
a Noise Generator
.l.S. Recommended Order of Studies and Practical Instructions
.l.6. Recommendations for Studying Noise Properties of
Industrial LEV
7. Test Questions
8. Supplement. Roots of a Characteristic LEV Equation
X.2. Pro lem No 8. Studying Load Characteristics of the Reflex
Klystron
x.2.1. General Remarks on the Methods of Experimental
Studies of Load Characteristics

X.2.2. Description of the Experimental Setup

X.2.3. Selection of the Reference Plane

X.2.5. Recommended Order of Measurements and Some Practical
Suggestions

X.2.5. Recommendations for Studying Load Characteristics of

Standard Reflex Klystron Oscillators
X.2.6. Test Questions

127

FOI1DFFKJAI.USE|MVLY
Part Five.

FOR OFTTC1A1.USEIDNLY

Solid-State Microwave Devices

Introduction

Chapter XI.

XI.1.
XI.2.

x103.

XI.4.

XI.5.

XI.6.

Elements of the Linear Theory of the Avalanche-and-Transit-
Time Diode (LPD)
Introduction
Physical Picture of LPD Operation
XI.2.1. Inpact Ionization and Avalanche Breakdown
XI.2.2. LPD as a Diode with Field Emission
XI.2.3. Avalanche-and-Transit-Time Mechanism with Trapped
Plasma
Movement of Carriers in a Crystal and Impact Ionization
XI.3.1. Drift Speed Saturation
XI.3.2. Impact Ionization
Original Equations for the Analysis of Nonsteady-State Processes
in LPD
XI.k.l. Basic Assumptions
XI.h.2. Original Equations
XI.4.3. Approximation of a "Thin Multiplication Layer"
Dynamic Mode of LPD
XI.S.1. Multiplication Layer Impedance
XI.5.2. Impedance of Transit Sections
XI.S.3. Impedance of p-n Junction of LPD and Its Equivalent
Circuit
XI.5.6. Nonlinear Effects in LPD
Design and Special Operation Characteristics of the LPD
Oscillator

Chapter XII. Cunn Effect and Elements of Its Phenomenological Theory

XII.1.
XII.2.

XII.3.

X11.b.

XII.5.

Discovery of the Cunn Effect
Qualitative Explanation of the Cunn Effect on the Basis of
the Mechanism of Intervalley Transit of Electrons
Phenomenological Theory of the Gunn Diode
XII.3.1. Introduction
XII.3.2. Linear Theory of the Gunn Diode
XII.3.3. Elements of Nonlinear Theory of Stable Domain
XII.3.6. Small-Signal Impedance of a Sample vith a Strong
Field Domain
Conditions of Domain Existence
XII.b.l. Internal Conditions
XII.6.2. External Circuit Effect
Operating Conditions of the Gunn Diode
XII.5.l. Domainless Mode of Stable Amplification
XII.5.2. Three Domain Modes
XII.5.3. Mode of Limitation of Space Charge Accumulation
(ONOZ)

Chapter XIII. Experimental Study of Solid-State Microwave Devices

XIII.1.

Problem No 9. Study of the Avalanche-and-Trsnsit-Time
Diode Oscillator

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

291

293

295
295
296
296
300

303
308
308
312

312
313
315
317
322
322
324

326
328

330

33k
334

336
3&1
341
3&3
352

361
368
368
371
372
373
374

376
382
382
XIII.1.I.
XIII.1.2.

XIII.1.3.
XIII.1.b.

XIII.I.5.

IV“ V. o .yana. uua- v: I».

Experimental Setup

Method of Measuring Effective Resistance Character-
izing the Interaction of Carriers with a High-Pre-
quency Field

Recommended Order of Studies

Instructions for Studying Standard Avalanche-and-
Transit-Time Diodes

Test Questions

XIII.2. Problem No. 10. Study of the Gunn Diode and Oscillators
Based on It

XIII.2.1.

XIII.2.2
XIII.2.3
XIII.2.4
XIII.2.5.
XIII.2.6.

Bibliography

Table of Contents

Design of the Gunn Diode and an Oscillator Based
on It

Description of Experimental Setup

Measuring Method

Recommended Order of Studies

Instructions for Studying Standard Gunn Diodes
Test Questions

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Saratovskogo universiteta, 1980

10,233
CSO: 1860/122

129

FOR 0FF1C1AI.lEﬂE(NVLY
FUR (II-'l-‘K’MI. USE ONLY

POWER ENGINEERING

UDC 621.311:519.2h
STATISTICAL PROCESSING OF OPERATIONAL INFORMATION IN ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMS

Irkutsk STATISTICHESKAYA OBRABOTKA OPERATIVNOY INPORHATSII V ELEKTROENERGETICHESKIKH
SISTEHAKH in Russian 1979 (signed to press 12 Dec 78) pp 2-6, 256-260

[Annotation, table of contents and 25 abstracts from book "Statistical Processing
of Operational Information in Electric Power Systems", edited by A.Z. Canm,
candidate of technical sciences, Sibirskiy energeticheskiy institut SO AN

SSSR (831), 500 copies,260 pages]

[Text] Annotation

Theoretical problems of rough error detection, filtering, and prediction in
statistical data proeessing in automated electric power system dispatcher
control systems are considered. Adaptive models of-random processes

are proposed for solving filtering and prediction problems. Data are presented
on corresponding groups of programs and individual programs, and the practical
testing and implementation of developments of power systems are discussed.

This collection has been published using materials from a conference conducted

at the Siberian Power Institute of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy

of Sciences for workers at a number of scientific-research institutes. institutions
of higher learning, and planning and operating organizations involved with

problems of improving the quality and reliability of source information for
dispatcher control.

Table of Contents

Foreword 5

Krumm, L.A. Work on developing a theory and methods for controlling the
functioning of large power systems 8

Bogdanov, V.A. Calculated trajectory method for determining quality

of measurements and accuracy of estimates of steady-state power
system mode 26

damn, A.Z. Nlowance for nonlinear electric power system properties
In analyzing observahllity 39

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H”! OFFICIAL USE. UNIJ

Gorakiy, S.K., Shirma. R.c., Shchur, Ye.V. Statistical method of
factor analysis in problems of estimating status, optimization and
planning of electric power system modes

Borozdin, 0.P., Danilenko, Ye.L. Operational mathematical-statistical
testing of random processes

Gamm, A.Z., Kurbstskiy, v.6. Investigation of decomposition of
random processes in electric power systems into characteristic
components (using example of Bratsk-Ust'-Ilimskiy Center)

Guseynov, F.G., Rakhmanov, N.R. Utilization of data on fluctuations
in power system mode for mathematical description of its basic objects

Bushuyev, V.V., Novikov, N.L.. Knrostyshevskiy, Ye.A. Estimation of
state and mode parameters of combined power systems as objects of
control by frequency and active power

Gerasimov, L.N. Real-time estimation of nonstationary process
with unknown characteristics

Rakhimov. 6.6. Linear filtering algorithm with minimum number of
measured electric power system parameters

dogdanov, V.A., Chernya, G.A. Utilization of pulsed electronic
counters for remote measurement of electrical energy and improving
accuracy of power estimation

Dorofeyev, V.V., Popov, V.V. Evaluation of application of analog
data input systems for information—control complexes in automatic
power system dispatcher control system

Abdullayev. D.A., Hakarov, G.N., Arifdzhanov, A.l., Umarov, N.N.,
Begmatova, H.T. Processing telemetry data using adaptive model
of channel of telemetry system interfaced with H—6000 ASVT-H UVK
[expansion unknown]

ldel'chik. V.l., Novikov, A.S., Palamarchuk, 8.1. Errors in assign-
ing parameters of equivalent circuits in analyzing power syscem
modes

idel'chik. V.i., Neyman, V.V.. Novikov, A.S., Palamarchuk, 8.1.
Errors in measuring parameters of power system mode

Babayev. 0.5., Plotnikov, I.L.. chelpanov, A.V. Set of programs for
operational analysis and planning of power system modes for "-222
computer

nabayev. 6.8., Camm. A.Z., Ceraslmov. L.N., Grishin, Yu.A..

Grunina, R.l.. Golub. i.l., Kolosok, I.N., Plotnikov, I.L.. Chelpanov,
A.V. "lRlS" system for processing operational information regarding
power syscem mode

‘9‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kolosok, I.N. Problem of detecting bad data and solution algorithm 192

Grishin, Yu.A. Yes-1010 program for real time estimation of electric
power system status 201

Liseyev, H.S., Unger, A.P. CaICulation algorithm for test measurement
processing program 215

Bogdanov, V.A.. Liseyev, M.S. Experience in using computer programs

for processing power system test measurements and prospects for

further development 223
Shakhanov, V.S.. Kamynin, S.M. Problems of estimating electric power

system status in automatic uispatcher control system operational-

information system and ARChM [expansion unknown] digital system 229

Pershikov, S.F., Yurovskiy. A.c. Operational estimation of power
system mode 236

Kizhner, 5.1., Sukhov. A.I. Accounting for errors in controlling
current distribution in nonuniform network 239

Golub, [.1. "Rasstanovka TM-I" system for selecting complement
of electric power system measurements 244

ABSTRACTS
UDC 621.311:681.162

WORK ON DEVELOPING A THEORY AND METHODS FOR CONTROLLING THE FUNCTIONING 0?
LARGE POWER SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by Krumm. L.A.]
[Text] The basic methodological conception of integrated optimization and control
of large power systems is examined using the example of electric power systems;

research of the Siberian Power Institute which is being conducted in cooperation
with various organizations is also considered.

UDC 621.31:519.24

CALCULATED TRAJECTORY METHOD FOR DETERMINING QUALITY OF MEASUREMENTS AND ACCURACY
OF ESTIMATES OF STEADY-STATE POHER SYSTEM MODE

[Abstract of article by Bogdanov, V.A.]

[Text] An approach is proposed based on combined utilization of direct and

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r\ll\ \Il'a a\ Il‘l- an“. \n‘ha

interactive calculation methods which allows the mode of a power system to be
determined for an arbitrary composition and arrangement of measurements at nodes
and branches. when the number, composition and arrangement of measurements

cannot be used to determine the mode of the system as a whole, it is still possible
to calculate all of those fragments where the necessary measurements are available.
in doing this, the problem of estimating the sufficiency of measurements is solved,
with each redundant measurement isolated and topologically connected.

UDC 621.311

ALLOWANCE FOR NONLINEAR ELECTRIC POHER SYSTEM PROPERTIES IN ANALYZING
OBSERVABILITY

[Abstract of article by Gamm, n.2,]

[Text] It is shown that nonlinear properties of objects lead to modification of
observability conditions. The concept of observability regions is introduced,

and it is proved that the introduction of measurement redundancy ensures nonlinear
observability. Nonlinear properties of an electric power system are analyzed, and
it is proved that there exists a system of nonredundant measurements which ensures
full nonlinear observability. It is also asserted that with this system of
measurements there is a unique solution to the state estimation problem. Consider-
ation of nonlinear properties when incomplete information is available, especially
when telemetry is insufficient, is examined.

UDC 621.3ll:519.311

STATISTICAL METHOD OF FACTOR ANALYSIS IN PROBLEMS OF ESTIMATING STATUS, OPTIMIZA-
TItN AND PLANNING 0P ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEM mDES

[Abstract of article by Gurskiy, S.K., Shirma, R.c., Shchur, Ye.V.]

[Text] A modified dynamic approach to state estimation is proposed which is based
on avoiding a multidimensional random process describing the mode of electric
power systems with correlated components and uncorrelated variables, which makes
it possible to reduce the problem to several independent problems of analyzing
unidimensional random processes. The mathematical apparatus is based on using
factor analysis methods, exponential smoothing and the technique of analyzing
cycles in time series.

UDC 658.57.519
OPERATIONAL MATHEMATICAL-STATISTICAL TESTING OF RANDOM PROCESSES
[Abstract of article by Borozdin, 0.P., Danilenko, Ye.L.]
[Text] A class of so-called robust (noise tolerant) methods for statistical test-
ing of random processes is described. These methods are less sensitive to changes

in conditions than are a priori, which makes it possible to obtain more reliable
statistical estimates of the parameters tested;

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.311

INVESTIGATION OF DECOMPOSITION 0F RANDOM PROCESSES IN ELECTRIC PWER SYSTD‘S INTO
OiARACTERISTIC COMPONENTS (USING EXAMPLE OF BRATSK-UST'-ILINSKIY CENTER)

[Abstract of article by Gain, A.Z., Kurbatskiy. v.c.)

[Text] Application of the Karhunen-Lowe method for obtaining models of random
processes in a power system is described, and the possibility of using this
approach in processing information in emergency automation systems is analyzed.
Experimental findings from analyzing random processes are presented.

UDC 621. 311

UTILIZATION OF DATA ON FLUCTUATIONS IN POWER SYSTDi MODE FOR MATHEMATICAL DESCRIP-
TION OF ITS BASIC OBJECTS

[Abstract of article by Cuseynuv, F.G., Rakhmanov, N.R.)

[Text] Fluctuations of mode parameters in the region of the frequency spectrum of
electromechanical oscillations are examined at the input of typical objects ~-
load centers and synchronous generators; a device is described for recording these
oscillations and ways are indicated for using the data obtained to identify dynamic
characteristics of the object. Experimental findings are presented, which show
that the characteristics obtained have the same trends as the theoretical
characteristics.

UDC 621.311:519.2lo

ESTIMATION OF STATE AND MODE PARAMETERS OF COMBINED POWER SYSTEMS AS OBJECTS OF
CONTROL BY FREQUENCY AND ACTIVE POUER

[Abstract of article by Bushuyev, V.V.. Novikov. NJ... Korostyshevskiy, Ye.A.]
[Text] Results of analyzing irregular oscillations of mode parameters of a unified
power system using full-scale experiments conducted at various power associations
in the country are presented. The statistical characteristics of irregular oscil-
lations obtained made it possible to solve a number of problems of filtering,
extrapolation and prediction for frequency and active power regulation systems.
The mathematical apparatus is based on the use of a Kalman—Busey filter.

UDC 621.311:519.26
REALeTiHE ESTIMATION OF NDNSTATIONARY PROCESS HIT" UNKNOWN CHARACTERISTICS

[Abstract oi article by Ccraslmov. L.N.]

{Text} The requirements imposed on estimation algorithms operating in automatic
Control systems are analyzed. Based on the analysis. a linear model is proposed

1314

FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY
mu (DH-u Ml. UM. um.»

which approximates a nonstationary process, for the identification of which adap~
tation apparatus which "forgets" past data is used. Experimental findings are
presented which confirm the methodological assumptions. The high speed of the
programs allows them to be used in real time.

UDC 621.311:519.24

LINEAR FILTERING ALGORITHM WITH MINIMUM NUMBER OF MEASURED ELECTRIC PWER
SYSTBi PARAMETERS

[Abstract of article by Rakhimov, 6.6.]

[Text] It is shown that the observability of s linear model of electric power
system elements can be ensured using a minimum number of measurements. Hays

are proposed for improving the convergence of the estimation process with minimum
measurements.

UDC 621. 398

UTILIMTION OF PULSED ELECTRONIC COUNTERS FOR REMOTE MEASUREMENT OF ELECTRICAL
ENERGY AND IMPROVING ACCURACY OF POWER ESTIMATION

[Abstract of article by Bogdanov, V.A.. Chernya, G.A.]

[Text] It is proposed that the readings of pulsed electronic electric energy
counters be used to obtain information about power, which makes it possible to
increase telemetry accuracy. Estimates are given of the technical requirements
for remote power and energy measurements, and ways are indicated to achieve the
required accuracy.

UDC 621.311:681.326.3

EVALUATION OF APPLICATION OF ANALOG DATA INPUT SYSTEMS FOR INFORMATION-CONTROL
COMPLEXES IN AUTOMATIC POWER SYSTEM DISPA‘I‘CHER CONTROL SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by Dorofeyev, V.V., Popov, V.V.]
[Text] Computer data input using existing analog data transmission channels and

analog-digital converters is analyzed. Results of experimental investigation of
channel noise are presented.

UDC 53.089.68

PROCESSING TELI'HETRY DATA USING ADAPTIVE MODEL OF CHANNEL 0!" TELEMETRY SYSTEM
INTERFACED WITH 14-6000 ASVT-M UVK

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘l-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

[Abstract of article by Abdullayev, D.A., Hakarov. G.N.. Arifdzhanov, A.I., Umarov,
N.N., Bcgmatova, M.T.]

[Text] A list of the methodological materials making up the set of metrological
support programs for telemetry in power engineering is given. Justification is
given for the requirement of processing telemetry data by an adaptive model of
the telemetry system channel.

UDC 621.3.05

ERRORS IN ASSIGNING PARAMETERS OF EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS IN ANALYZING POWER SYSTEM
MODES

[Abstract of article by Idel'chik, V.I., Novikov, A.S., Palamarchuk, 5.1.]

[Text] The influence of weather, mode and construction factors on the accuracy of
assigning parameters of equivalent circuits of overhead power transmission lines,
transformers and autotransformers is evaluated.

The values of characteristic errors in assigning longitudinal and transverse para-
meters of the equivalent circuits of these network elements are given. It is
shown that most factors can be considered by appropriate functional relationships
in creating standard mathematical models of power system modes or by introducing
averaged corrections in preparing the source data.

UDC 621.317.3

ERRORS IN MEASURING PARAMETERS OF POUER SYSTEM MODE

[Abstract of article by ldel'chik, V.I., Neyman, V.V., Novikov. A.S.. Palamarchuk,
8.1.

[Text] The intervals of variation are obtained for errors in measuring voltage,
active and reactive load power which characterize the accuracy with which these
parameters are assigned in controlling the modes of power systems. A method for
determining the resultant error in measuring mode parameters is shown in detail;
the values and causes of occurrence of systematic and random components of the

resultant error in measuring voltages, active and reactive loads at power system
nodes are presented.

UDC 621.311.007.2: 681.3.06

SET OF PROGRAMS FOR OPERATIONAL ANALYSIS AND PLANNING OF POWER SYSTEM MODES FOR
M-222 COMPUTER

[Abstract of article by Babeyev, 6.8., Plotnikov, I.L., Chelpanov, A.V.]

[Text] The first phase of a group of programs for obtaining and processing source

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

data on the mode of an electric power system is described. and the design prin—
ciples and initial experience in working with this group are given.

UDC 62l.311.007.2:681.3.06

"IRIS” SYSTEM FOR PROCESSING OPERATIONAL INFORMATION REGARDING POWER SYSTEM MODE

[Abstract of article by Babayev, 6.3., Call, A.Z., Gerasimov, L.N., Grishin, Yu.A.,
Grunina, R.I., Golub, I.I., Kolosok, I.N., Plotnikov, I.L., Chelpanov, A.V.

[Text] A description is given for the IRIS information system, which is intended
to improve the quality and reliability of operational dispatcher data by using
mathematical methods. The initial data sources are dispatcher sheets. test
measurements, remote measurements and remote signals. The system has been imple-
mented on Yes-1010, Yes-1022 and H—222 computers and is being introduced in the
Irkutsk power system.

UDC 621.311:519.24
PROBLEM OF DETECTING BAD DATA AND SOLUTION ALGORITHM

[Abstract of article by Kolosok, I.N;]

[Text] A brief description is given of methods for finding bad data and for cal-
culating the algorithm for a program used to detect bad data using the tapological
analysis method; the characteristics of this program and analysis of results are

given.

UDC 621.311.001.57

Yes-1010 PROGRAM FOR REAL TIME ESTIMATION OF ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEM STATUS

[Abstract of article by Grishin. Yu.A.)

[Texr] One possible approach to implementing the evaluation of electric power
system status on a small computer is examined. It is shown that the scanning
method is most convenient for this purpose, considering interfacing with the
equipment in the SOT 4R-0 telemechanical data display system. Numerical
results are cited which confirm the possibility of monitoring electric power
system mode (for up to 50 nodes) using 30 remote measurements in a five—second
cycle, and 150 measurements in a one-minute cycle. Approaches for reducing
counting time are indicated.

UDC 621.311.681.3.06

GLCULATION ALGORITHM FOR TEST MEASUREMENT PROCESSING PROGRAM

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IJSl-Z ONLV

[Abstract of article by Liseyev, H.S.. Unger, A.P.]

[TeXt] A calculation algorithm is described for a program used to process test
measurements on the basis of generalized normal estimation and filtering of
erroneous data. A characterization is given of the program and its flowchart,
and the calculation results are analyzed.

UDC 621.311:681.3.06

EXPERIENCE IN USING COMPUTER PROGRAMS FOR PROCESSING POWER SYSTEM TEST MEASUREMENTS
AND PROSPECTS FOR FURTHER DEVELOPMENT

[Abstract of article by Bogdanov, V.A.. Liseyev, M.S.]

[Text] A brief characterization is given for two programs for processing test
measurements developed at the Central Dispatcher Directorate of the Unified Power
System of the USSR and the Moscow Power Institute; the findings are analyzed and
prospects for further developments are noted.

UDC 621.311.681.3.06

PROBLEMS OF ESTIMATING ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEM STATUS IN AUTOMATIC DISPATCHER CONTROL
SYSTEM OPERATIONAL-INFORMATION SYSTEM AND ARChM [expansion unknown] DIGITAL SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by Shakhanov, V.S., Kamynin. S.M.]
[Text] Ways of constructing information models of electric power systems based on
telemetry data are given, as is the possible structure of a group of algorithms
for estimating electric power system status. Qualitative estimates of numerical
methods are given which must be used to solve the estimation problem.

UDC 621.311:001.57
OPERATIONAL ESTIMATION OF POWER SYSTEM MODE
[Abstract of article by Pershikov, S.F., Yurovskiy, A.G.]
[Text] A group of programs is proposed for operational estimation of power system
mode which has been developed at the All-Union Scientific-Research Institute of
Power Engineering and the Computer Center of the GTU [expansion unknown]. The

problem is solved in a two-machine operational-information computer system con-
sisting of a Yes-1010 and Yes-1033.

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK (”'l‘l‘ IAI. ”hf. \II‘LI

UDC 621.31:Sl9.21o
ACCOUNTING FOR ERRORS IN CONTROLLING CURRENT DISTRIBUTION IN NONUNIFORM NETWORK
[Abstract of article by Kizhner, S.I., Sukhov, A.I.]
[Text] It is proposed that a systematic error filter be used to increase measure-
ment accuracy, and an approach is examined which allows power system modes to be
controlled with a minimum amount of information. The source information in the
algorithm consists of the branch loads, and the independent variables are the
equalizing loop currents.

UDC 621. 311:519. 21.

"RASSTANOVKA I'M-I" SYSTEM FOR SELECTING CONPLEHENT 0F ELECTRIC POWER SYSTDi
MEASUREMENTS

[Abstract of article by Golub, 1.1.]

[Text] The "Rasstanovka TH-I" set of programs is described, which is intended for
selecting the optimal group of measurements in terms of the electric power system
observability quality criterion. The progress are written in FORTRAN for Yes-
series machines; the set of programs has been sent to the Moscow Department of the
Enerboset'proyekt automatic control system.

COPYRIGHT: Sibirskiy energeticheskiy institut 80 AN SSSR (SEI), 1979

6900
cso: 1860/72

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.316.542.066.241
AIR CIRCUIT-BREAKERS FOR POWER TRANSMISSION APPLICATIONS

Leningrad VOZDUSHNYYE VYKLYUCHAIELI in Russian 1981 (signed to press 29 Jan 81)
pp 2-6, 380-381

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents of book "Air Circuit-Breakers",
by Vasiliy Vladimirovich Afanas'yev and Yuriy Iosifovich Vishnevskiy,
Energoizdat. Leningradskoye otdeleniye, 10,000 copies. 382 pages]

[Text] Aspects of theory and design are examined in the book, and designs for
high-voltage s.c. air circuit-breakers are described.

The book is intended for engineering and technical personnel engaged in the
development, research, installation and operation of high-voltage circuit-
breaker devices. It may be extremely useful for teachers and students special-
izing in high-voltage equipment building.

Reviewer: 0. B. Bron
FOREWORD

The practical use of compressed air to suppress the electric arc in high-

voltage circuit-breakers was begun in the 1920s. The first examples of air
circuit-breakers rated at 10-20 kw, in which suppression of the electric art

was provided by compressed air at a pressure of 10x105 Pa (10 kga/cmz), appeared
in experimental operation in 1929. The primary insulation in the circuit-breakers
was made from ceramic materials. The design of the first air circuit-breakers
was imperfect in many ways. This came about because the pecularities of electric
arc suppression in compressed air were still inadequately studied. A certain

time was required for designers to overcome these shortcomings and to make air
circuit-breakers which could compete with oil breakers.

Particularly intensive developments in air circuit-breakers began in the Soviet
Union in 1945, when research and design work was initiated in order to create a
series of substation circuit-breakers rated at 35-220 kw. F. F. Baburskiy and

Ye. M. Tseyrov, VEI (All-Union Order of Lenin and Order of the October Revolution
Electrical Engineering Institute imeni V. I. Lenin) and L. K. Greyner (plant
"Elektroapparat") were the initiators and leaders of this work.

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F08 (WI-ll Ml. “SI-I ()Nl.\

A new trend in the design of air circuit-breakers was set in 1947 by the proposal
0! P. F. Baburskiy to place the arc suppressing apparatus in a metallic container
filled with compressed air (cf. [3, p. 82]). This permitted the efficiency of
the compressed air effect on the electrical arc to be improved significantly.
This idea was used somewhat later by a number of foreign equipment building
companies in their elaborations of air circuit-breakers.

Air circuit-breakers currently enjoy an extremely wide application, and have
replaced oil breakers in many instances. Air circuit-breakers permitted the
jump to voltage classes of 750 and 1150 kw; the shift to higher voltage classes
is possible, as well as to cut-off currents of 63-80 kAmp at voltages of 110-
750 kw and 160-240 kAmp at voltages of 20-30 kw.

The development of air circuit-breakers was to a great extent the basis for
creation of other types of gas circuit-breakers, e.g. with sulfur hexafuloride
(elegaz) as the insulation medium. although, in perspective, as will be demonstrated
in more detail in the first chapter, each of these types will retain a fully
determined area of application.

Materials on the design and engineering of air circuit-breakers are assembled
and systematized in this book. Moreover, many sections of the book may also
concern switches filled with sulfur hexafluoride.

The book being offered consists of 9 chapters. Examples of designs are presented
in the appropriate chapters for better mastery of the design methodology for
one or another component of pneumatic switches.

The second, seventh and eighth chapters were written by V. V. Afsnas'yev,
the first. third, fourth, sixth and ninth by Yu. I. Vishnevskiy and the fifth
by S. M. Krizhanskiy.

The authors express their deep gratitude to Dr. of Technical Sciences 0. B. Bron
who reviewed the manuscript and made a number of valuable suggestions.

The authors are grateful to N. M. Adon'yev and R. B. Dobrokhotov, who rendered
great assistance in preparation of the present work.

Comments on the book, notes and desires should be directed to the following
address: 191041, Leningrad, Marsovo Pole, 1, Leningrad Branch of Energoizdat.

CONTENTS

page
Foreword 3

Chapter 1. Designation, operating conditions and classification of
air 5
1.1 Area of application of air circuit-breakers -
1.2 Classification of air circuit-breakers -

1.3 Basic characteristics of modern air circuit-breakers and
requirements for them 7

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL “SI“. ONLY

Chapter 2. Basic information on gas dynamics

Physical properties of air

Fundamental properties in gases

Propagation of elastic perturbations (sound) in a gas
Basic types of gas movement

Basic laws of gas movement

Resistance of air lines

Evacuation and filling of reservoirs

Filling and evacuation of cylindrical pipes

NNNNNNNN
o
mNOU‘bUNH

Chapter 3. Electric strength of compressed air

3.1 Brief survey of physical phenomena upon discharge in a gas
3.2 Paschen's law

3.3 Deviations from Paschen's Law in intervals with
compressed air

3.4 Effect of the state of the surface. the electrode
material and dirtiness of the air on breakdown strength
[probivnaya prochnost'] of gaps with compressed air

3.5 Electric strength of various gaps in compressed air
based on experimental data

3.6 Electric strength of moving compressed air
3.7

Dependence of electric strength of compressed air on
humidity

Design of gaps in compressed air

to
o
m

Chapter 4. Heat transfer in compressed air

4.1 Posing the problem

4.2 Heat transfer by thermal conductivity and free convection
through layers filled with a compressed gas

4.3 Formulae for calculation of heat transfer, taking
convection into consideration, for layers of diverse
form in a compressed gas

4.4 Compressed air as a heat transfering medium in comparison
with other gases and liquids

4.5 Thermal radiation

4 6 Resulting equations of stationary heat exchange in layers

Chapter 5. Electric arc processes in air (gas) circuit-breakers
5.1 General characteristics of arcing processes in arc
suppression chambers of gas circuit-breakers

5.2 Determination of parameters of a gas flow in an ASC
(arc suppression chamber) with transverse gas blast
[prodol'noye gazovoye dut'ye]

5.3 Theoretical description of arcing process for a.c. in
transverse gas flows

Chapter 6. Shunting resistances

6.1 Designation and general characteristics of shunting
resistances
6.2
6.3
6.4

6.5

6.6
6.7
6.8

Chapter 7.

e

NNVVN
m o
UéwNH

Chapter 8.
8.1

8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6

Chapter 9.

000
UNI-I

000
o o .
QM“

Appendix

H.“ ("ti-IQ I“ l'hf UN! \

Effect of shunting resistances on voltage recovery at the
contacts when a short circuit near the switch is
disconnected

Effect of shunting resistance on voltage recovery at the
contacts when a short circuit on the line (nearby short
circuit) is disconnected

Use of shunting resistances to limit commutation over—
voltages when disconnecting unloaded transformers and
small inductive currents

Use of shunting resistances to limit commutation over-
voltages when switching unloaded lines

Basic thermal stability requirements and features of
shunting resistance design

Shunting resistance circuit diagrams

Shunting resistance design for air circuit-breakers

Air circuit-breaker components
Compressed air reservoirs
Preventing moisture condensation inside hollow insulator
Pneumatic valves
Choke devices
Valve control

Air circuit-breaker control systems
Classification of control systems and principles of
their design
Control systems with mechanical transfer
Control systems with pneumatic transfer
Control systems with pneumatic-mechanical transfer
Control systems with pneumatic-hydraulic transfer
Control systems with pneumatic-light beam transfer

Designs for air circuit-breakers and their are
suppression devices
Basic principles of modern air circuit-breaker design
Breakers from the "Elektroapparat" Association
Breakers from the "Uralelektrotyazhmash" (Ural Heavy
Electrical Machinery) Association
Breakers from the BBC Company (Switzerland)
Breakers from the Dell Company (France)
Certain design features of breakers from foreign
companies

List of Literature

COPYRIGHT:

9194

Bnergoizdat, 1981

C30: 1860/121
FOR 0F11C1AL.USE1MNLY

QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, ELECTRO-OPTICS

UDC 621.316.721.1 : 621.378.33
GAS LASER DISCHARGE CURRENT STABILIZER

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIMBNTA in Russian No A, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received 7 Apr 80) pp 167-168

[Article by v.6. Gudelev, V.H. Kuznetsov and V.H. Yasinskiy, Belorussian SSR
Academy of Sciences Institute of Physics. Minsk]

[Text] A description is given of s gas discharge current stabilizer making
possible the effective suppression of current fluctuations in the frequency

band of approximately 200 R“: with an operating current of 2 to 15 mA. The
dynamic outpu: impedance of the circuit is approximately 400 no and the tempera-
ture coefficient of current variation is less than or equal to 10 “ 'K '.

For the reliable operation of measuring systems based on gas lasers--gyroscopes
and interferometers stabilized at the frequency of lasers--it is necessary to
ensure instability of the discharge current of the laser's active element of less
than 10 3, i.e.. the power supply must have high dynamic output impedance in a
frequency band of maximum width beginning with direct current. Most often used

in these systems are He + Ne and Co lasers whose operating currents usually equal
2 to 15 mA with a voltage of 0.5 to 8 kV.

In [1] for the purpose of producing high dynamic impedance of the laser's power
supply a current stabilizer is used which utilizes a high-voltage electronic

triode with a transistor stage as the cathode load. This circuit solution makes
possible the suppression of high-frequency current fluctuations, but because of
thermal changes in_5he current of the transistor's base the instability of output
current reaches 10 . The influence of temperature on the discharge Current can be
reduced considerably by eliminating current coupling between the control and dis-
charge circuits and by using the compensation principle of stabilization. In fig 1
is shown the circuit diagram of a current stabilizer consisting of a low-voltage
precision current generator of the compensation type utilizing operational ampli-
fier H1 with a regulating element in transistors T and T [2] and of a high-voltage
voltage amplifier in electronic tube L . 61-73, Gl-llB, £8500 and 61-30 tubes and
KléOUDBA and KlUTﬁOlB operational amplifiers were tested in the stabilizer. The
maximum frequency band for the effective suppression of fluctuations in discharge
current (approximately 200 kHz) was obtained when using a KlUTéOlB microcircuit,
and the maximum dynamic output impedance (approximately 400 HR) when using a

6850b triode and 61—30 double tetrode in a triode connection with parallel connec-
tion of the anodes and unification of the control and screen grids. The corre-
sponding anode—grid characteristic of a 61-30 tube is shown in fig 2. The gain

164

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
MM 0"“ Int. use. sun.-

for the tube's voltage with this connection is approximately 350. A 6550b

tube has a considerably higher cutoff voltage than a 61-30 tube, which places
strict requirements on the parameters of the regulating unit. The use of a
6850b tube is preferable in miniature laser systems for supplying active elements
with a combustion voltage of less than 1.5 kV.

 

Figure 1. Circuit Diagram of Stabilizer: H1-—K1UT4013; T1--KP3033, T2--
KT608B; D1-0818Ye; L1--GI-30. L2--1aser gas discharge tube

Key:
1. Diode b. L
2. Modulation voltage 5. High voltage
3. Test

The use of field-effect transistor T1 made it possible to eliminate the influence
of the thermal drift of the current of the base of transistor T on the discharge
current on account of the equality of the input and output currgnt of the regulat-
ing unit utilizing transistors T1 and T . The stabilizer's output current is de—

termined by the reference voltage, UOP ? of stabilitron D1 and by the total resist-

ance of resistors R1 and R2:

1 2 Use/(Rn + 1'2).
Resistor R2 serves the purpose of limiting the maximum current of the stabilizer.

Thermal changes in current are caused by drift of the reference voltage of stabili-
tron D by the change in resistance of current-setting resistors R and R2 and by

the drift of the bias voltage, U , and input current, I kh , of the operational
amplifier: sm v

1‘5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR “FHHAL "SI-Z ONLY

   

L"

%r‘,

Figure 2. Anode-Grid Characteristic of 61-30 Tube in a Triode Connection

Key:
1. Anode voltage. 2.2 kV 2. Grid voltage. V

Here IuI §_lO-5 K-1 is the temperature coefficient of voltage of stabilitron D1
and 8 is the temperature coefficient of resistance of the current-setting re-
sistor; the value of the third and fourth terms of the right half is approximately
10 5 K 1. If an operational amplifier with field-effect transistors in its input
is used in the stabilizer, then the discharge current circuit will be practically
totally decoupled with respect to current from the control circuits and the influ-
ence of the last term will be eliminated. Consequently, the temperature stability
of the discharge current is caused primarily b the temperature coefficient of
resistance of the current-setting resistor (IBT < 10 3 K ' for SP-l variable re-
sistors and ISI < 10" K-' for PTHN-l fixed wiEeuound resistors). For the purpose
of producing current instability of less than 10 “ K ' it is necessary to control
the temperature of current-setting elements (Dl' R1, R2) and the operational ampli-
fier.

In the current stabilizer the ability is provided of modulating the discharge cur-
rent by supplying a control voltage to the noninverting input of H1 through capaci-
tor C .

l
The optimum supply voltage for the stabilizer is chosen from the measured combustion
voltage for discharging of the active element taking into account the anode-grid
characteristic of tube L1 and the voltage drop in ballast resistor R . For stable
operation in the region of low current the active element must be connected to the
stabilizer by means of wires of minimum length and capacitance. For the same rea-
son it is undesirable to connect the high-voltage source between the anode of the
tube and the cathode of the active element. Resistor R3 must be connected

166

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USll(NﬂLY
tun urn-u un- v-u "no u

directly to the cathode of the active element or between its anode and the posi-
tive terminal of the high-voltage power supply.

The current stabilizer was used to supply the active elements of an He + Ne laser
with a discharge combustion voltage of up to 2.5 kV and of an LG-23 C02 laser and
made possible stable operation in the current range of 2 to 15 nA.

Bibliography
1. Poaakoni, H.Dzh. PRIBORY DLYA NAUCHNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY, No 2, 1972, p 90.

2. Rutkovski. Dzh. "Integrsl'nyye operatsionnyye usiliteli" [Integrated Opera-
tional Amplifiers]. translated from English. edited by H.V. Gal'perin, Moscow.

Mir. 1978, p 301.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory i tekhnika eksperinenta". 1981

8831
C50: 1860/7h

147

FOIIOF1NC1AL.USE(MVLY
ma OFFICIAL I'SI" UNI \

UDC 621.378.325
POWERFUL POWER SUPPLY FOR PULSE!) LASERS EMPLOYING VAPORS 0P METALS

Moscow PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 (manuscript
received ll; Mar 80) pp 165-166

[Article by A.Ye. Kirilov, A.N. Soldatov and V.P. Fedorov, USSR Academy of. Sciences
Siberian Division "Optics" Special Design Bureau for Scientific Instrument Making,
Tomsk]

[Text] A description is given of an apparatus for studying the energy character-
istic.- of lasers utilizing vapors of metals. The power supply makes it possible
to form current pulses with a height of up to l kA, a voltage up to 15 kV and a
length of 100 to 500 ns with a pulse repetition rate of up to 30 kHz.

One method of increasing the mean power of gas-discharge recurrent-pulse lasers
utilizing vapors of metals is increasing the volume of the active medium and the
power of pumping sources [1-3]. In this paper a description is given of a unit
for forming pulses with a current amplitude of up to l kA and a voltage of up to
15 W with a pulse length of 100 to 500 ns and a repetition rate of up to 30 kHz.

Twelve TGIl-lOOO/ZS hydrogen thyrstrons are used as switching elements in the power
supply, which make it possible with simultaneous operation to switch power of up to
25 to 30 k". The circuit diagram of the unit is shown in fig 1.

A ferroresonancc voltage regulator (RN) and rectifier, V. executed with TRl—6,S/20
thyratrons, make possible smooth regulation of voltage to 15 kV with a current of
5 A. The resonance charging of working capacitors is accomplished via inductance
1.1 (0.5 H) and a block of charging kenotrons, L1 to L36 (VI-0,15,55's). Low-in—
duction capacitors (KVl-J's), C 1 to C 12 , are used as working capacitors. The
capacitors are installed directly at the anode terminals oi: the TGIl-lOOOI25 thyra-
trons and are cooled by fans. The charging inductance in the high—voltage version
is composed of sections. each of which is wound on a core with 0.7- to 0.8—mm—
diameter wire with an air gap between turns. For stable functioning of the thyra—
trons when they are connected in parallel, the working capacitors are charged
through individual kenotrons (three kenotrons for each thyratron). which makes
possible reliable anode decoupling. Bach three kenotrons have their own winding

in a filament transformer designed with an air gap. The primary winding of the
filament transformer is shielded.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'(’K "It“ IAI. var. UNIJ

 

Figure 1. Circuit Diagram of lZ-Chsnnel Power Supply: L1 to L 6--V1-0. 15/55;
to I.“ , -TGI1-1000/25. L‘9--gas discharge tu e; D1--
KTs106G; ﬁ 1--R9V-5- 10 HR; ,R --MLT-2--selected as a function
of type of1 instrument; R3. 16’ 1 —KEV-S- 100 an; RV
mT-z—ioo k9; R --convention 1 representation of induction-
free compensated8 volfage divider;R -TVO- 5- 10 k9; C --

I
xvx- 2- 20 pP-30 kV, cz—xvx- -3- 3300 :ﬁlmkﬁlzc 1. cm, Cor 3:02--
KVI-3-220 to 4700 131’, c 1, C12 --o. 01 1117-3 k6
Key:
1. + 2 kV, 500 mA 5. Transformer
2. Kenotrons 6. Delay line
3. kV 7. Rogovskiy loop
6. Working capacitor 8. To 37-8 oscillograph

The thyratrons are triggered by a 12-channel modulator whose output stage is exe-
cuted with thyratron L (TGII— 1000/25). The trigger pulses are formed during
discharging of capacitggc2 through the primary winding of air-core transformer
Trl. Capacitors C to C2 and resistors R to R8 are included for the purpose
of producing automatic bias2 voltage in the g? glds of ‘EEe thyrstrons. The thyratrons
are triggered by means of a signal from a pulse transformer through cable delay
lines L2 to L2 2. Automatic biasing makes possible continuous operation of the
thyratrohs with a pulse repetition rate of greater than 5 kHz. With a lower rate
negative voltage regulated from 0 to 500 V is supplied to the grids of the thyra-
trons via decoupling induction coils (0.05 H) of the bias source.

With the parallel operation of several thyratrons it is necessary to control their
triggering. This is accomplished by means of dividers,R Ra to R1“, R15, the
signal from which is supplied via switch P to a pointer instrument or to an oscillo-
graph. The filament supply of the hydrogen thyratrons is stabilized.

For the purpose of optimizing the opersting conditions of a self-heated laser it is
necessary to select-to-fit the working capacitors,C to C r+ﬁ’ the peaking capaci-

tors, C to C , shunting inductor L2 and other elements. ese elements are
usually 0replaced with the laser shut off; however. during the shutoff period

149

IW3R OFFWC1A1.US510NL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

uncontrollable changes take place in the gas discharge tube. Low-induction
high-voltage vacuum relays, vv-zo's (R1, R2 [in Cyrillicl), are used for the
on-line switching and fitting of elements with the laser operating. With the
simultaneous use of three to six relays it is possible to compare with one

turn-on operation the laser's operating conditions with various peaking and working
capacitors and shunting inductors. Curves for generation pulses, 1. 1', 2, 2'.

and voltage pulses, 3, 3'. of a laser employing copper vapors are presented in

fig 2. Curves 1 to 3 were plotted with the peaking capacitor disconnected and

1' to 3' with a "peaker" connected, when cr/co - 2 : 1 .

 

Figure 2. Experimental Curves for Generation Pulses (1. 1'), Current Pulses

(2. 2') and Voltage Pulses (3, 3') in a Gas Discharge Tube:
1 to 3--without peaking capacitor; 1' to 3'—-with pesker connected

Key:
1. T , as

The unit described makes it possible to supply two-section gas discharge tubes
(fig 3) with slight modification. With this power circuit it is possible to pro-
duce higher voltages per unit length and shorter lengths of current pulses. which
results in an increase in the pulsed generation power.

 

Figure 3. Circuit Diagram for Connection of a Two-Section Gas Discharge
Tube. L49

Key: 1. L49

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUN UrrILIAL use. VI“..-

The measurement of pulses of current through the gas discharge tube and of the
voltage across electrodes is performed by means of Rogovskiy loops PR1 and PR
(fig 1) and by means of induction-free compensated voltage divider “18’ R 9, Ehe
signals from which are supplied to an 57—8 two-channel storage-type oscillograph.
The oscillograph is triggered by a signal from one of the Rogovskiy loops. Lasing
pulses are measured by means of an EEK-02 coaxial photoelectric cell.

An automatic coaxial switch controlled from the oscillograph is used for the simul-
taneous observation of four signals on the oscillograph's screen.

In conclusion let us mention that this unit made it possible to produce a recurrent-
pulse discharge with a frequency of 15 kHz in a mixture of neon and copper vapors

in an active volume of 3.5 liters. The amplitude of the current and voltage through
the 55-mm—diameter gas discharge tube equaled 1 kA and 15 kV, respectively. The
maximum lasing power in a laser employing copper vapors equaled 40 H and was pro-
duced in an active volume of 1.25 liters with a power supply power of 8 k".

Bibliography

1. [sayev, A.A. and Limmerman. C.Yu. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 4, No 7, 1977,
p 1413.

2. Kirilov, A.Ye., Polunin, Yu.P., Soldatov, A.N. and Pedorov, V.P. Collection
“Izmeritel'nyye pribory dlya issledovaniya parametrov prizemnykh sloyev atmo-
sfery" [Measuring Instruments for Studying the Parameters of Layers of the
Atmosphere Near the Earth]. edited by I.V. Samokhvalov, Tomsk, USSR Academy of
Sciences Siberian Division Institute of Atmospheric Optics, 1977, p 60.

.

3. Smilanski, 1., Erez. 6.. Kerman, A. and Levin, L.A. OPT. COMMUN., Vol 30.
No 1. 1979, p 70.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pribory i tekhnika ekspcriments", 1981

8831
C50: 1860/74

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US? ONLY

SOLID STATE CIRCUITS

UDC 621.382.2/3.001.24
CALCULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR POWER DEVICES

Moscow RASCHET SILOVYKH POLUPROVODNTKOVYKH PRIBOROV in Russian 1980 (signed to press
160u.n)pp24,lM-w5

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Calculation of Semiconductor
Power Devices", by Panteley Georgiyevich Dermenzhi, Vadim Arkad'yevich Kuz'min,

Nadezhda Nikolayevna Kryukova, Valentin Ivanovich Mamonov and Valentin Yakovlevich
Pavlik, edited by V. A. Kuz'min, Izdatel'stvo "Energiya", 11,500 copies, 185 pages]

[Text] The authors examine the connection between the electrical characteristics
and parameters of semiconductor power devices -- diodes and thyristors -- and the
physical structure of the device and analyse the interconnection of the basic param-
eters. They give the methods and formulas which make it possible to calculate power
devices and give examples of calculations.

This book is intended for engineers and technicians specializing in the calculation
and development of semiconductor devices, and also can be used in designing systems
with semiconductor power devices.

Foreword

At the present time, semiconductor power devices, among which silicon diodes and thy-
tistors of various purposes are very important, are used widely in a great variety of
areas of electrical engineering and electronics.

Properties and characteristics of thyristors are described in periodicals, as well as
in the books by F. Dzhentri et al "Silicon Controlled Rectifiers", V. A. Kuz'min "Law
and Medium Power Thyristors", and V. Ye. Chelnokov and Yu. A. Yevseyev ”Physical Prin-
ciples of the Operation of Semiconductor Power Devices". These books discuss in de-
tail principal theoretical propositions and physical processes in thyristors. However,
these books are partially outdated. Moreover, in recent years, theoretical and ex-
perimental studies have been carried out, making it possible in a number of cases to
have a new approach to the calculation of thyristors and to establish more accurate
quantitative relations between the electrical characteristics of modern power thyris-
tors and physical and geometrical parameters of multilayer structures. The use of
quantitative methods of calculation, including those with the use of electroaic com-
puters, makes it possible to reduce the volume of experimental studies in developing
new devices, to shorten the time of designing, and to improve the quality of the

power devices being developed.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "PM! IAI. NM UNI.‘

In spite of the fact that this book treats the calculation of power thyristors, it
can be used also for designing power diodes.

Calculations of breakdown voltage of the p-n junction (Chapter 2) and direct voltage
drop (Chapter a) can be used directly for determining the breakdown voltage and

direct voltage drop in power diodes.

For this reason, as well as in connection with the fact that the diode is a consider-
ably simpler device in comparison with the thyristor, the book does not contain a
special section treating power diodes.

Much attention in the book is given to presentation of problems connected with the
calculation of the effect of the density of shunting the cathode junction to the
static characteristic and transient processes. The authors analyzed the special
characteristics of thyristors with current regeneration which are used very widely
at the present time.

Transient connection processes are examined in application to powerful high-voltage
thyristors, whose connection has substantial peculiarities in comparison to low-
power instruments. In calculating transient processes of connecting and disconnect-
ing, as well as processes of heating under the effect of current pulses and shock
currents, special characteristics of designs and specifics of the modes of measure-

ments of dynamic parameters of thyristors were taken into consideration.

Chapters 1 and 6 were written by P. G. Dermenzhi, Chapter 2 -- by N. N. Kryukova,
Chapters 4 and 8 -- by V. A. Kuz'min, Chapter 5 -- by V. Ya. Pavlik, Chapter 7 --
by V. I. Hamonov, and Chapter 3 -- by P. G. Dermenzhi, N. N. Kryukova and V. Ya.

Pavlik.

Contents Page

Foreword 3

Chapter 1. Designs, Parameters and Technology of Power Thyristors.

Properties of Silicon Used for Their Manufacturing 5
1.1. Designs of Power Thyristors S
1.2. Basic Parameters of Power Thyristors 10
1.3. Technology of Power Thyristors 16
l.b. Properties of Silicon Used for Creating Power Thyristors 21
Chapter 2. Calculation of p-n Junctions 25

2.1. Reverse Branch of the Volt-Ampere Characteristic of the p-n
Junction 25

Width of the Layer ofthe Volume Charge. Capacitance of the
p-n Junction 25
Calculation of the Fundamental Components of Reverse Current 28
2.2. Breakdown of the p-n Junction 29
Calculation of Breakdown Voltage 29

Volt-Ampere Characteristic of the p-n Junction in the Section
of Avalanche Breakdown 3a
Dependence of Breakdown Voltage on the Area of the p-n Junction 39
153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
chapter 3.

3.1.

“UL-I
coo
$9,”
can

FOR 0FFK1AI.USE(MVLY

Methods of Eliminating Surface Breakdown
Thermal Breakdown

Calculation of the Static Chatacteristic of a Thyristor

in the Cut-Off State
Volt-Ampere Characteristic of a Thyristor in the Cut-Off State.
Mechanisms of the Dependence of the Transmission Coefficient
on the Current and Voltage
Technological Shunting of a Cathode Emitter Junction
Calculation of Switching Voltage and Its Temperature Dependence
Protection of the Surface of a p-n-p-n Structure Against
Breakdown

Chapter 4. Calculation of the Static Characteristic of a Thyristor

6.1.
4.2.
4.3.

in the Cut-In State
Boundary Conditions for the Concentration of Holes and Electrons
Calculation of Holding Current
Calculation of the Volt-Ampere Characteristic

Chapter 5. Calculation of the Transient Switching-On process of Thyristors

5.1.

5.2.

5.3.

5.4.

Unidimensional Model of the p-n-p-n Structure. Density of

the Critical Switching-0n Charge

Transient Process of the Switching-On of a Thyristor

Calculation of the Delay Stage

Stage of Regenerative Build-Up of Anode Current

Switching-On Process at a High Injection Level in Both Base
Layers

Nonunidimensional Model of the p-n-p-n Structure. Area of

Initial Switching-0n and the Process of Propagation of the

Switched-0n State

Switching-0n Process of a Thyristor with a Current-Regener-

ative Control Electrode

Chapter 6. Calculation of du/dt-Stability and Switching-Off Time

6.1.
6.2.

du/dt Effect in Thyristors

Calculation of du/dt-Stahility

Transient Switching-Off Process

Calculation of Switching-Off Time

Special Characteristics of the du/dt Effect and the
Switching-Off Process in Real Thyristors

Chapter 7. Calculation of Permissible Modes

7.1.

7.2.

7.3.

Heat Removal from a Semiconductor Structure. Structure

Temperature

Thermal Resistance

Calculation of Structure Temperature

Calculation of Maximum Currents

Calculation of Maximum Low-Frequency Currents

Calculation of Maximum High-Frequency Currents

Calculation of Emergency Overload Currents

Calculation of Temperature Under the Effect of a Pulse of
Large-Amplitude Current

154

POI 0F1NC1AI.US£1MMLY
Calculation of the Emergency-Overload Current Determined
by Parametric Failure
Dependence of the Emergency-Overload Current on Pulse
Duration. Protective Index
Chapter 8. Example of the Calculation of a Power Thyristor
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Energiyn", 1980

10,233
cso: 1860/108
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USEZONLN

UDC 621.382.2/3.001.4l

TESTS OF SEMICONDUCTOR POHER DEVICES

Moscow ISPYTANIYA SILOVYKH POLUPROVODNIKOVYKH PRIBOROV in Russian 1981 (signed tor
press 25 Mar 81) pp 2-6, 201

(Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Tests of Semiconductor Power
Devices", by Oleg Georgiyevich Chebovskiy and Lev Gennad'yevich Moiseyev, reviewed
by V. A. Labuntsov, Energiozdat, 10,000 copies, 201 pages]

[Text] The book presents methods of testing semiconductor power devices (diodes,
thyristors, symmetrical thyristors, photothyristors, voltage limiters, and others).

Requirements for semiconductor power devices established by the State Standards and

other normative documents are examined; functional diagrams of systems, requirements
for the elements of the circuits of these systems are given, as well as the charac-

teristics of methods of testing for reliability and reliability estimation.

This bo a is intended for use by engineers and technicians engaged in the develop-
ment, manufacturing and testing semiconductor power devices and conversion units.

Foreword

In connection with the rapid development of conversion devices and their introduc-
tion into nearly all sectors of the national economy, designers and operators of con-
version devices impose new, often specific, requirements for the volume and quality
of information on electrical, thermal, mechanical and other parameters and character-
istics of semiconductor power devices (PPS).

The available infonnational materials do not always meet the needs of the consumers,
and manufacturing enterprises are not always able to meet these needs.

Moreover, in order to improve the quality of their products, many enterprises have
their own PPS quality control for eliminating the defects which are not controlled
at the manufacturing enterprises of PPS, or for the purpose of selecting PPS accord-

ing to some parameters.

This book describes testing equipment used at the present time at the manufacturing
enterprises of PPS, defines the requirements imposed on such equipment ensuring the
performance of the necessary measurements and studies of the dependence of the PPS
parameters on various conditions.

156

IND! OFFICJAI.lEﬂE(NﬂLY
rust Uri-“115s. van. was».

The book consists of four chapters.

The first chapter examines the system of parameters of semiconductor power devices
and dependence of these parameters on the conditions of measurements and operation.

The second chapter gives the description of measurement methods, requirements im-
posed on measurements, and units used both for studies and for measuring the param-
eters of devices. The operation of individual assemblies and units is illustrated
by figures and time diagrams; structural data and specifications of the elements of
circuits of some devices are also given.

The third chapter contains the description of circuits of semiautomatic testing
complexes for controlling the main parameters of thyristors and simistors.

The fourth chapter examines requirements for conducting mechanical and climatic
tests whose entire complex can be done on series-produced stands (therefore, the
authors do not consider it necessary to describe these stands).

The authors do not claim that all Problems connected with the testing of semicon-
ductor power devices are presented in full, since other circuit designs can be used
for testing equipment.

The authors are deeply grateful to engineer v. N. Yunovich for his help in the pre-
paration of the drawings of electrical circuits.

The authors will be grateful to the readers who will send their comments and sugges-
tions to the following address: 113114, Moscow, M-llh, Shlyurovaya naberezhnaya,
Building 10, Bnergoisdat.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Notations Used 5
Chapter 1. System of Parameters of Semiconductor Power Devices 8
1.1. Characteristics of Semiconductor Power Devices 9
1.2. Maximum Permissible Values 31
Chapter 2. Testing Methods. Equipment for Measuring the Parameters
of Semiconductor Power Devices 41
2.1. Measuring the Parameters of Volt-Ampere Characteristics and
the Control Electrode 42
2.2. Measuring Time Parameters 67
2.3. Measuring the Characteristics of the Loading and Overloading
Capacity of PPS 83
2.4. Measuring the Critical Build-Up Rate of Voltage and Current 123
Chapter 3. Highly Productive Equipment for Measuring and Monitoring
the Parameters of Semiconductor Power Devices 136
157

FOR10FFMJA1.USE(NNLY
3.1. Semiautomatic Testing Complex for Measuring and Checking
the Electrical Parameters of Thyristors (Diodes)

3.2. Semiautomatic Testing Complex for Measuring and Checking
the Electrical Parameters of Simiatora

Chapter 4. Resistance of Semiconductor Power Devices to Climatic
and Mechanical Effects
6.1. Mechanical Tests
5.2. Climatic Tests

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdst. 1981

10,233
C80: 1860/109
FUR Ul-‘l’lt‘lAl. PSI: ONLY

NEH ACTIVITIES, MISCELLANEOUS

ABSTRACTS FROM COLLECTION 'RADIO ENGINEERING'

Khar'kov RESPUBLIKANSKIY MEZHVEDOMSTVENNYY NAUCHNO-TEKH-
NICHESKIY SBORNIK: RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 56,1981 (signed to
press 24 Feb 8!) pp 2. 132-136

[Anitotution and 20 abstracts from "Republican lnteragency Scientific and
Technical Collection: Radio Engineering" edited by A. I. Tereshchenko et al..
lzdatcl'skoye ob"yedineniye "Vyshcha shkola". 1000 copies. 136 pages]

[Text] The results of theoretical and experimental studies of electronic and
semiconductor SHF devices are presented in the collection. Questions of
calculation and construction of SHF measuring devices. components and sub-
assemblies of SllF equipment are considered.

For science workers and specialists.

List of references at end of articles.

UDC 621.372.82

CALCULATION OF WAVE RESISTANCE OF SOME TYPES OF STRIP LINES
[Abstract of article by V. M. Sedykh, N. V. Lyapunov and S. A. Pogarskiyl

[Text] A comprehensive approach to the question of calculating waveguide
resistance of some types of strip lines is proposed. Wave resistance is com-
puted for screened symmetry and symmetrical strip lines. The accessibility
of limiting transitions to other types of strip lines is shOWn. Theoretical
graphs are presented and a comparison is given with results of other authors
known from the literature.

UDC 621.372
THEORY OF COUPLED OSCILLATIONS lN RESONATORS
[Abstract of article by A. V. Gritsunovl

[Text] The link between oscillation types in a volumetric resonator is con-
sidered. An equation is derived for excitation for oscillations coupled by a
nonhomogeneous electronic space charge. The equation is solved for the case
of two oscillations. Coupling coefficients are computed for degenerate oscil-
lations ll” in a cylindrical resonator.

159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘UII I)l-'l-‘l('ll\|. USE ONLY

UDC 621.376.332

SIIF OSCILLATOR AFC SYSTEM FOR RESONANT FREQUENCY OF A CON-
TINUOUS RESONATOR WITH surramseo CARRIER

[Abstract of article by V. D. Bobryshev, V. M. Dmitriyev and N. N. Prents-
lau]

[Text] The use of a limiting resonator with suppressed carrier developed by
the authors in an SHF oscillator AFC circuit increases the parameters of the
AFC system. The limiting resonator used in the AFC system is described. .

UDC 621.372.413

STUDY OF QUASIOPTICAL OPEN RESONATOR WITH ONE OR MORE CON-
DUCTIVF. PLATES BETWEEN MIRRORS

[Abstract of article by B. M. Bulgakov. V. N. Skresanov. A. l. Fisun and A.
M. Fursov]

[Text] Results of an experimental study of an open resonator containing
extensive nonuniformities in the form of metal plates are cited. Relatively
high resonator Q is maintained for specific selection of geometric plate
dimensions and arrangement within the resonance chamber. Perturbation of
the field in the resonator is comparatively small. Range properties of a
perturbed resonator are explained. Distributions of fields within the re-
sonator chamber near the plate surface and far from it are studied. A
considerable field intensity gradient is present in the immediate vicinity of
the plate surface.

UDC 621.372.413

EFFECT OF JUX'I‘APOSITION AND MUTUAL ORIENTATION OF COMMUNI-
CATING SLI'I‘S ON 'I‘IlI-Z PROPERTIES OF AN OPEN RESONATOR

[Abstract of article by Yu. l. Leonov and A. M. l-‘ursovl

[Test] An experinentnl study was conducted on the effect of the spectrum
of a hellspherical open resonator in which the inlet and outlet of electro-
magnetic energy is situated on the surface of a flat mirror. and on the
juxtaposition and mutual orientation of communicating slits. Questions per-
taining to polarization splitting of azimuthal types of oscillations excited in
this resonator are considered. Recommendations are made on the optimum
selection of mutual orientation of communicating slits for smooth alternation
of the communicating coefficient of the. open resonator with Slll-‘ channel
and production of signals at the resonator output having the necessary fre-
quency and polarization.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL t st; (mm
UDC 621.372

CALCULATION OF AMPLITUDE-FREQUENCY RESPONSE OF ELECTRICAL-
LY TUNABLE FILTER BASED ON WAVEGUIDE-DIELECTRIC RESONANCE
OF FERRITE INSERT lN TRANSLIMITING WAVEGUIDE

[Abstract of article by V. Ya. Dvadnenko and V. A. Korobkin]

[Text] Calculation of the amplitude-frequency characteristics of an elec-
trically tunable filter based on waveguide-dielectric resonance of a ferrite
parallelepiped in a translimiting rectangular waveguide is investigated by the
generalized scattering matrix method. Expressions are found for determining
the coefficient of transmisison of the primary wave. Permissible approxima-
tions are considered for calculation of matrix elements and recommendations
are made on the choice of matrix size. Results of calculation and experi-
ment are compared.

UDC 621.372

lI-I’I.ANAR CONVOLUTED WAVEGUIDE BRANCHBOX AS DNIDER AND
OUTPUT SELECTOR

[Abstract of article by S. V. Butakova]

[Text] Based on improvement of series convergence. formulas are derived

for refined computer computation of scattering matrices of waveguide de-
vices with ll-waves. Electrical characteristics of convoluted waveguide branch-
boxes are computed and analyzed. Under certain conditions the branchbox '
may serve as an electrical equivalent of a current device: an H-planar bridge
or Y-eoupling of waveguides.

UDC 621.372.852.l

ltEJECTION-TYl’l-Z SIIF FILTER BASED ON WAVEGUIDE-DIELECTRIC RB-
SON/\TOll

[Abstract of article by L. l. Babarika. V. l. Grutsyak and V. A. Korobkinl

[Text] The properties of a waveguide-dielectric resonator excited by sym-
metrical and asymmetrical graduated notches made directly on a dielectric
insert are considered. Based on this resonator. a waveguide band-eliminating
filter is created. Methods of thermal stabilization are indicated.

UDC 538.574.6

STUDY OF STAR'I‘UP CHARACTERISTICS OF REFLECTIVE DIFFRACTION
EMISSION GENERATOR

[Abstract of article by l. Vi. Balaklitskiy. f‘.- S. Vorobyev, A. l. 'l‘svyk and L.
l. Tsvyk]

['l'extl Analytical relations are derived to study startup characteristics of a
reflective diffraction emission generator bsed on linear theory. Numerical
analysis of startup currents and frequencies of oscillation based on the angle
of electron escape in the reflector field are cited. Fields of reflector vol-
tage change are indicated for minimum values of startup current. Results of
theory agree well with experiments conducted in the millimeter wavelengths.

161
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’OR Ol’l-‘R‘IAI. USE ONLY

UDC 621.317.029.64

RECORDING THE DISTRIBUTION PROFILE OF INTENSIVE ELECTROMAG-
NETIC FIELDS OF SIIF OSCILLATIONS. REPORT 1. STUDY OF ORGANIC

LUMINOPHOR SENSORS

lAbstract of article by A. B. Kononov, A. l. Tereshehenko. L. Ya. Malkes et
01.]

[Text] A method for obtaining visible images of the high intensity electro-

magnetic field distribution within volumetric resonators using lumionophors is
considered; quantitative and qualitative estimates of the degree of hetero-

geneity of the electromagnetic field in the cooking chamber of a home mie-
rowave oven are given.

UDC 621.317.029.64

RECORDING 'l‘llli IllS'I'RIIiL'TION PROFILE OF INTENSIVE ELECTROMAG-
NETIC FIELDS Ol’ SIIF OSCILLATIONS. REPORT 2. STUDY OF LC 'I‘IIER-
MODISI’I.AY SENSORS

[Abstract of article by V. l.. Mironenko. A. l. Tereshehenko. S. P. 'l‘ur ct ul.]

[Text] A method for obtaining visible images of high intensity electromag-
netic field profile within a volumetric. resonator using liquid crystal thermo-
displays is considered; quantitative and qualitative estimates of the degree of
heterogeneity of the electromagnetic field in the cooking chamber of a home

microwave oven are given.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.317.784

PULSED TRANSIENT OUTPUT HATTHETER FOR UNBALANCED SH? WAVEGUIDE TRANS-
MISSION LINES '

[Abstract of article by V. N. zhendubayev, Ye. K. Bogomolov and A. Yu.
Simovskiy]

[Text] A device is described for measuring pulsed transient SH? output,
base on the principle of multiplication of signals proportional to mean
transient output and on-off time ratio of a pulsed radio signal. Device
error and basic test responses in pulsed operation of a transmitter are
analyzed. The vattmeter can be used to monitor waveguide transmission
lines for pulsed SHP signals.

UDC 621.382.2

OPERATING CONDITIONS OF GANN DIODES IN OSCILLATOR HAVING OUASIOPTICAL
RESONANCE SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by V. V. Smorodin]

(Text! Based on the study of conditions of oscillation, amplification
and synchronization of Gann diodes in a solid-state oscillator having a
quasioptical resonance system, it is shown that the very high SH? fields
required for efficient operation of oscillator diodes can be attained in
an open resonator having a transparent diffraction grid. The results
show that favorable conditions exist in the oscillator for sunning up
the outputs of many semiconductor diodes.

UDC 621.385.6

STUDY OF FREQUENCY FLUCTUATIONS OP SHF SIGNAL OF DIPPRACTION EMISSION
GENERATOR

[Abstract of article by I. M. Balaklitskiy, Yu. V. Haystrenko.
A. I. Tsvyk and L. l. Tsvykl

[Text] Theoretical and experimental studies on the effect of If noises
of electron flux on frequency fluctuation of SR? signals of a diffrac-
tion emission oscillator are discussed. In quasistatic approximation
are obtained relationships for analysis, in the Doppler range of fre-
quencies (l to 500 kHz), of the extent of effect of power supply noise,
focusing magnetic field (electromagnet) and flicker effects, shot noise
and other phenomena occurring in electron flux, on the spectrum of the
oscillator signal. The results of theory are compared with tests run in
the millimeter wavelengths on 601 devices and resonant LOVO. Calcula-
tions and measurements are graphically illustrated.

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.375.001.24

IDENTIFICATION OF PARAMETERS OF EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS OF SH? TRANSISTORS

[Abstract of article by V.M. Shokalov, A. I. Luchaninov. V. K. Royal'-
chuk et al.]

[Text] Methods are developed for identifying the parameters of equi-
valent circuits of SHE transistors. A goal function is proposed which
can be used to greatly reduce solution time of optimization problems and
to define equivalent circuit parameters which guarantee coincidence of
theoretical and measured responses within the limits of energy dis-
sipation and impedance variables of transistor production lots. Results
of identification of equivalent circuit parameters of KT9198 transistors
are discussed.

UDC 621.375.001.24

METHOD OF CALCULATING OPTIMUM CONDITIONS AND LOAD RESPONSES 0? SH? TRAN-
SISTOR POWER BOOSTERS

[Abstract of article by V. M. shokalov, v. K. Koval'chuk, A. I. Lucha-
ninov and P. L. Tokarskiy]

[Text] An approximate method for calculating optimum parameters of
potentially unstable transistors is proposed for all input and output
admittances. Questions of designing load repsonses of power transistors
are discussed for complex fields of load impedances, within and at the
boundary of which are guaranteed at least nominal energy parameters of
the booster.

UDC 621.396.67.012.12
SYNTHESIS OF DISCRETE ANTENNAS. REPORT 1.
[Abstract of article by V. A. Pavlyuk and A. M. Rybalko]
[Text] Optimum current distribution is found in a rms approximation
ofthe problem of synthesis of antenna arrays with side lobe suppression

in a discrete number of directions, based on the presence of errors in
antenna parameters.

UDC 621.396.67.012.l2
SYNTHESIS OF DISCRETE ANTENNAS. REPORT 2.
[Abstract of a ticle by V. A. Pavlyuk and A. M. Rybalkol
[Text] For antenna arrays with passive elements, the optimum current
distribution in problems of antenna synthesis with side lobe suppression

is found. An algorithm is proposed for finding optimum reactive loads
to synthesize antennas in terms of reactive loading.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.67

SYNTHESIS 0? ARC ANTENNA ARRAYS WITN DEEP BLANK SPOTS IN HIGHLY DIREC-
TIONAL AND DIFFERENTIAL BEAM PATTERNS

[Abstract of article by L. G. Korniyenko and A. A. Bychkov]

[Text] The prpoblen of maximizing the directivity factor of a summary
antenna array. or the transconductance of the differential beam pattern
of another antenna array with simultaneous formation of deep blank spots
and zeroes at specific angular bearings is considered. The effect of
random field fluctuations in the antenna aperture on the depth of blank
spot formation in bean pattern is analyzed; the properties of optimum
amplitude-phase response are studied. Results of conputer simulation
for are arrays having various periods are cited.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'skoye ob'yedineniye 'Vyshcha shkola'. 1981

8617
C50: 1860/38

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ABSTRACTS OF ARTICLES IN COLLECTION 0N RADIO ENGINEERING
Khar'kov RESPUBLIKANSKIY MEZHVEDOMS'I‘VENNYY NAUCHNO—‘l‘EKHNICl-IISSKIY
SBORNIK: RADIO’I‘EKIINIKA in Russian No 53. 1980 (signed to press 17 Oct 80)
pp 2, 119-121
[Annotation and abstracts from collection "Republic lnterageney Scientific
and Technical Collection: Radio Engineering". edited by A. I. Tereshehenko.
V. D. Kukush et al.. Izdatel'skoye ob"yedineniye "Vyshcha shkola", 1000 e0pies.
121 pages]
[Text] The results of theoretical and experimental studies of electronic
and semiconductor SIIF devices are presented in the collection. Questions
01' design and construction of 8111‘ measuring devices. components and subassemblies
of SIIF equipment are examined.
l-‘or science workers and specialists in radio engineering.
Bibliography at the end of each article.
UDC 621.372.413

STUDY OF POLARIZA'I'ION EFFECTS IN OPEN MILLIME‘I‘ER WAVELENGTH
RESONATORS

[Abstract of article by II. M. liulgukov, Y. 1. Leonov and A. H. Fursov]

[Text] The causes which trigger the splitting of higher oscillation types of
an Open resonator are investigated. 3 figures; 10 references.

UDC 588.574.15

STUDY OF ENERGY PROPERTIES OF RESONANCE SYSTEMS Wl'l‘ll WAVEGUIDE
TERMINAL

[Abstract of article by A. 'l'. Uolovin. 0. A. ’I‘ret'yukov and A. A. Shmat'kol

l'l‘ext] An analytical expression: is derived for the field amplitude in a waveguide
terminal. 3 figures; 9 references.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USI'Z ONLY

UDC 62l.382.2:621.396.662
SHF OUTPUT LEVEL DISCRIMINATOR
[Abstract of article by N. N. l’rentslau, V. M. Dmitriyev and V. D. Bobryshev]

[Text] The generation of if oscillations by Si mulitiplier diodes in response
to SllF output is described. 8 figures; 3 references.

UDC 621.372.413

CALCULATION OI" Till-2 FREQUENCY SPECTRUM 01" N-OSCILLATIONS
OF A COAMAL Ill-ZSONATUR WITI‘I DISKS

[Abstract of article by U. U. Kanarikl

[Text] A characteristics equation is written to study N-types of oscillation
in a coaxial resonator with capacitive disks. 3 figures; 3 references.

UDC 621.376.332:621.385.6
REFLECTIVE KLYSTRON FREQUENCY S'l‘ABILIZING SYSTEM
[Abstract of article by N. N. Prentslau and V. D. Bobryshev]
l'i‘ext) A system is described in which an active thermostabilized resonator

is used as a frequency standard in an automatic frequency conversion system.
1 figure; 4 references.

UDC 621.372.413
STUDY OI" CONICAL RESONATORS
[Abstract of article by V. L. Mironenko]

[Text] A conical resonator with one short-circuiting baffle is investigated.
2 tables; 2 figures; 4 rerferences.

UDC 621.318.0

ROUND MAUNI-Z'I'ODIELHUI‘RRI WITH STEPWISE CHANGE 01" EXCITING
I’ll-2M)

[Abstract of article by V. l. Antyufcyev. V. N. Krusnikov and V. V. 0vcharenkol
l'l'exl] The process 01 changing the electromagnetic field in internal and

external regions of an infinite cylindrical round magnetodielectric will: stepwise
change of the exciting field is considered. 2 figures; 3 references.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Olt OI-‘l-‘IthAL USI-Z ONLY
UDC 621.372.8215
APPLICATION OI‘ 'I‘IIIE METHOD OF DIFI-‘IEKI'ZN'I‘IAL EQUATIONS TO

THE PROBLEM OI" WAVE DIFFRACTION IN A TRANSMISSION LINE WI’I'II
LONGI'I‘UDINALLY NONHOMOUENEOUS DIELECTRIC MEDIUM

[Abstract of article by V. l. Grutsyak and V. A. Korobkinl
[Text] The method of differential equations is considered as it applies
to the problem of scattering of electromagnetic waves by a nonhomogeneous
dielectric inclusion in a rectangular waveguide. 3 figures; 6 references.

UDC 621.372.854
ELECTRICALLY ADJUSTABLE FILTER BASED ON WAVEGUIDE DIELECTRIC
RESONANCE 01- A l-‘l-thltl'l'li I’ARALLELEPIPED IN A SUPl-ZIIIJMI'I‘INU
WAVEGUIDE
[Abstract of article by V. A. Korobkin and V. Ya. Dvadnenkc]
[Text] The design. operating principles and calculation of an electrically-adjustable
filter based on Waveguide dielectric resonance of a ferrite parallelepiped
in a superlimiting rectangular Waveguide is considered. 2 figura; 4 references.

UDC 621.496.677.4

OPTIMIZATION OI’ 'I‘IIE INTEGRAL CIIARACI‘I'IRIS'I'ICS OI-' ANTENNA
ARRAYS

[Abstract ol article by V. A. I’avlyuk and A. M. Rybalko]

l'l‘ext] An el'lective method is preposed for finding the amplitude and phase
distribution of antenna arrays based on the presence of amplitude and phase
error. 2 figures; 10 references.

UI)C 621.396.667.3

CALCULATING 'l'IlI-J RADIO ENGINEERING CHARAC'I‘I-ZIIIS'I'ICS OI" WIIII'I
AN'I'I-ZNNAS

[Abstract of article by V. l. 'l‘kachenko, A. Ii. 'l‘arnsov and V. A. Pavlyuk]

[Text] The possibility of eliminating problems in calculation utilizing the
method of integral equations is indicated. 2 figures; 8 rcl‘ercncw.

U DC 62 I .396.li7

'I'III-Z I-ZI’I-‘l-IU'I‘ OI- A I)II°ZLI-LL."I'RIC DIAPHRAGM ON ELI-ZUI‘IIOIWNAMIC IN'I'I'JICAU'I'ION

Ul-' MET/ll. (:0Ml’0Nl-ZN'I'S OF A Ml-Z'I‘AI. l-‘IIAMl-J AN'l‘liNNA SHIELD
lAhstract of article by 0. l. SukhareVskiyl
I'l'c-xt] Several systems at integral cauntions ol‘ the 2nd order are constructed

and applied with respect to the density of surface current on metal cylinders
and the field in a diaphragm. 2 figures; 2 references.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'tnt urt-HJIH. uor. umn
UIIC 621.396.677.494
PHASE SYNTHESIS 01" SECTORAL ANTENNA ARRAY BEAM PATTERNS
[Abstract of article by L. G. Korniyenko and V. I. Loktin]

[Text] Problems of phase optimiution for the conventional maximum beam
pattern coefficient and maximum concentration coefficient of emission output
of antenna arrays are considered. 1 table; 3 figures; 5 references.

UDC 621.396.67

APPROXIMATE ML’I HOD OI- CALCULATING 'I‘IIE EFI 201‘ OF ELLIPTICAL
RODS ON THL EMISSION FIELD OF AN ANTENNA

[Abstract of article by A. Ye. Kushchl

[Text] Methods are presented for approximate solution of the problem
of scattering of an antenna emission field on elliptical rods situated in front
of its aperture. 2 figures; 3 references.

UDC 621.396.67

CALCULATING 'I'IIIS EFI’IKI‘I' 01’ A SYS'I'I-ZM OI“ ROUND METAL RODS
SI'I‘UA'I'ISD IN FRONT OI" AN ANTENNA APER'I‘URE ON ITS EMISSION
PERFORMANCE

[Abstract of article by A. Ye. Kushch and 0. l. Sukharevskiyl

[Text] The method of integral equations is used to solve the problem

of calculating the effect of a system of round metal rods on the performance
of emission for the case where their transverse dimensions are commensurate
with the wave length. 2 figures; 6 references.

UDC 62l.385.001.6

INITIAL STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT OF OSCILLATIONS IN DIFFRACTION
EMISSION GENERATORS

[Abstract of article by l). M. Vuvriv. O. A. Tret'yakov and A. A. Shmut'koI

[Text] The initial stage of interaction of an electron beam with the field
of u high-Q resonator with delaying structure is investigated. l table; 3
figures; 3 references.

UDC 62l.385.642.3

CALCULATION OF NONSYNCIIRONOUS INTERACTIONS DURING EMISSION
OF A CYLINDIIICAL MAUNE'I'RON

[Abstract of article by I. V. ltuzhcntscvl

[Text] Results of numerical computer calculation of the effect 0! nonsynchronous
three-dimensional harmonics of the hf field of a delaying system on the formation
of an electron cloud in a cylindrical magnetron are cited. 2 figures; 8

references.

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.385

EFI-‘I-ZC'I‘ 01" COMPUTER ERROR ON RESULTS OI" ANALYSIS OF PROCESSES
IN AN M-TYPE AMPLIFIER WITH DISTRIBUTED EMISSION

[Abstract of article by G. l. Churyumov]
[Text] The effect of computer error is examined based on analysis of trajectories
of electron travel in an M-type amplifier with distributed emission. 1 table;
3 figures; 3 references.

UDC 621.385.6
INVESTIGATION OF OSCILLATION SPECTRUM 0F MAGNETRON OSCILLATOR
[Abstract of article by S. A. Volin]

[Text] A device for studying the oscillation spectrum of a magnetron oscillator
is described. 1 table: 3 figures; 5 references.

UDC 621385.64
PROBLEM OF MAGNETRON ELECTROSTATICS
[Abstract ol article by A. ‘. 'l‘ertyshnyy. A. G. Shein and l.. l. Shklyurov]
[Text] The application of the structural method is presented in solving
the problem of calculating the electrostatic field in u magnetron. 2 figures;
5 references.

UDC 621.372.8514

SUUllllLLlMli'l‘l-ilt RAMON/WE SEMICONDUCTOR GATE
[Abstract of article by V. K. Kononenko and Ye. M. Ruleshov]
lText] Possible use of the minimum magnetoplasma reflection
effect in a semiconductor is considered for creation of a submillimetcr WtIVC gate.
1 table; I figure; 4 references.

UDC 621.3.029

SYNTHESIS AND APPLICATION Ol‘ A DYNAMIC MODEL OI" A p-i-n DIODE
‘l‘Yl'l-Z Slll“ A'I'I'I-INL'A'I'UR

[Abstract of article by V. 'l‘. ’l‘sarenkol
[Text] The problem of creating a linear mathematical model of a quasi-distributed

type is solved in which the variable lag time is considered. 1 figure; 5
references.

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'Ult Ul‘rtvlnh uor. Una.”

UDC 621.373.029
CALCULATION OF PARAMETERS OF A TRANSISTORIZED PHASE INVERTER
[Abstract of article by V. M. Kichak]

[Text] Methods are proposed for analyzing the parameters of a transistorized
phase inverter using scattering parameters. 2 figures; 3 references.

UDC 621.3822

IMPEDANCE CHARACTERISTICS OF CATHODE STATIC DOMAIN TYPE
OSCILLATORS

iAbstract of article by E. l). Prokhorov and S. N. Skorobogntova]

l'l‘ext] It is shown that short (10-20 micron) Cann diodes with cathode static
domain have negative impedance at many superhigh frequencies (25-100 gHz)
in evolved impact ionization conditions and can be used as active camponents
for oscillators in this range. 2 figures; 3 references.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'skoye ob"yedineniye "Vyshcha shkola". 1980

8617
C80: 1860/39 - END -

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY