FOR OFFICIAL USE” ONLY

JPRS L/10358

2 March 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
NOTE

ms publications contain information priurily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each- item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itmas are as
given by source.

line contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of. the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING (”“888an OF
MATERIALq REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHDIATION
0? THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(2000 4/82)

Coursms

INDIB'I'RIAL TECHNOIDGY

Antanated space Factory Planned for Arielle Launches
(Pierre Kohler; SCIENCE 8v VIE, Dec 81) .......................

SCIENCE POLICY

United Kingdom: Current Trends in nan Reviewed
(LE moans samznqus, May-Aug 81) ........................

-a- un-w‘z-lsls
monmn. uszomv '
AUTOMAIED SPACE FACTORY PLANNED FOR ARIANE LAUNCHES
Paris SCIENCE 6 VIE in French Dec 81 pp 67-50
[Article by Pierre Kohler: "SOLARIS. the Space Robot")

[Text] At the very moment when development of the Arlene
rocket. of which the fourth and last qualification firing

is to take place about 12 December, SOLARIS may be the next
great European space achievement: an ambitious and original
project and. what is more, one that has great scientific,
industrial. and strategic interest.

Soon. Soviets and Americans are going to occupy space permanently: the former
during the next year. thanks to a continuously operating orbiting complex *3 the
latter starting in 1986, thanks to a nodular station assembled by the space shut-
tle. In this competitive situation. the SOLARIS project may be a way for Europe
to confirm its space vocation and asserts its presence upon the sixth continent:
the cosmos.

At present. SOLARIS (acronym for "Station Orbitale et Laboratoire Automatique de
Render-vans et d'Interveationa Spatiales" [orbiting station and automated laboratory
for rendezvous and space operational) is only a project of the engineers at the
National Center for Space Studies (CNBS). But it is a project sufficiently
advanced to have been presented to the 32nd International Astronautics Congress.
which was held in Rome last 6 to 12 September. This project, even though conceived
in France, can only be carried out at the European level, since its magnitude
requires financial resources which exceed our capabilities (the preliminary esti-
mate is close to 10 billion francs). In return, because of the originality of the
chosen operating sphere and the diversity of the facilities exploited. it can be the
opportunity for the Europeans to lanifest their own scientific individuality by
entering technological domains from which they are still absent: space rendezvous,
transfer operation in orbit, remotely controlled manipulation. atmospheric
reentries, capsule recoveries. and so forth.

A kind of small orbiting factory whose operation is completely automated. SOLARIs,
if it sees the light of day. will be a perfect example of space robotics. At
present. the scope of its mission remains to be defined, but the prospects, and
developments. are many.

 

* See SCIENCE 6 VIE, do 768, p 9b.

FOR10FFKJAL.UB£(NVLY -
In the first place. SOLARIS will make it possible to perfect the techniques of
construction and operation of a space station without human presence. Although
_the incorporated automation makes the complex equipment intended for the protection
of astronauts and for their activities unnecessary. it does. on the other hand.
require greater precision and complete reliability of its equipment.

Horeover. SOLARIS will provide new markets for the Ariane rocket in the form of
supply missions. CUES. which is seeking to exploit its launcher in parallel
utilizations. will find there a large market capable of extending over 15 years.

As the space station launches its capsules. Ariana will deliver new ones to it.

and these will be put in place by remote nmnipulation and will serve in experiments
of different types: industrial. biological. astronautical. and so forth.

The industrial domain will have the top priority. Special alloys, difficult to
obtain upon Barth because of gravity. can be fabricated abroad SOLARIS. For example.
the combination of aluminum and tungsten cannot be realized down here because of

the extremely great difference in the densities of the two metals; but under weight-
less conditions, the two mix perfectly and yield a homogeneous alloy which combines
the mechanical properties of tungsten with the thermal properties of aluminum.

Another example: crystals. Under weightless conditions. they grow more easily
and can attain sizes unknown on the surface of the globe. In addition. they are
of greater purity. Now the fabrication of certain crystals. or of crystals of
certain quality. is vital to the development of the electronics industry. Thus:
mercuric iodide. used in gamma-ray detectors. does not have a regular crystalline
lattice when it grows in a gravity field; in space. that problem is resolved.

Observation of the Earth will also be one of the tasks assigned to SOLARIS. But.
unlike specialized satellites of the SPOT class. the orbiting station is not

limited to optical observation; as a matter of fact. the plan is to equip it with

a high-performance radar which could be used for civil purposes (relief cartography.
wave height) as well as for military ends (detection of aircraft. ships. or

various installations).

Lastly, astronomical observation platforms. laboratories for biological experiments.
or experimental telecommunications relays could, either in succession or simul-
taneously. be "grafted" to the orbiting station.

Even though it is still only in the project stage. the general characteristics of
SOLARIS right now are well defined. Thus. it is known that the station will weigh
between 4.6 and 5.4 tons, depending on the orbit chosen: elliptical. between 200
and 800 kilometers. or circular at 800 kiloaeters. In any case. this orbit will be
heliosynchronous; that is. the station will always be illuminated in the same

manner and will pass over a given point on Earth at the same local time every day.
SOLARIS. by the way. will be equipped with two panels of solar cells. 230 square
meters in area. which will provide 10 kilowatts of power. Transmission of scien-
tific data will be accomplished by radio with a rate that can attain 400 megabauds——
that is, 600 million bits (information elements) per second.

2
FOR‘OFFKJAJ.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first launch could take place toward the middle of the year 1990. aided by
an Ariane IV rocket. As we have said, the service life of SOLARIS will be 15
years. A fuel reserve and an attitude-correction system will enable the station
to stabilize itself perfectly about its three axes to such an extent that the

microgravity on board will not exceed g/100.000--an essential condition for the
success of metallurgical experiments.

Periodically coming to the station. and mooring to it, will be "transport modules"
launched at the rate of two per year (or a total of 30). These modules will also
be propelled by Ariana IV rockets. and their coupling to the station will be
accomplished automatically (the differential velocity at contact will be lower
than 1 centimeter per second. which is very close to the pace of a snail!). Once
the coupling has been effected. a remotely controlled manipulator fixed abroad
SOLARIS will take hold of the payloads and install them in their operating posit
tions. Three types of transport module are planned: one large one. 3 meters high
and 3.2 meters in diameter. weighing 3.600 kilograms; and two small ones of dif-
ferent shapes, weighing 700 kilograms and launched in groups of four.

When the experiments have ended. the payloads will be brought back to the docking
point by the remotely controlled manipulator and will then follow a return sequence
which is completely conventional: 'unmooring of the module. orientation by means of
small attitude rockets, ignition of the retrorocket. separation of the reentry
vehicle. properly speaking. opening of four parachutes. and landing in the sea off
the coast of French Guiana. The area in which it falls will be an ellipse of 12
kilometers by 20-hence small enough to make recovery easy.

The first of these recovery operations is planned for the end of 1991 or the
beginning of 1992. Certainly that will be a memorable data in the history of

Europe. for it will denote full and total accession by the Old Continent to the
mastery of space.

1) aun-mauSﬁV-
2) 3)-
l 2

In the course of successive launches, the nose of the Ariane IV rocket could be
occupied by various elements of SOLARIS: the main platform, which weighs 5 tone (1);
groups of four small nodules. each weighing 700 kilograms (2); and a single large
module of 3.b tons (3).

  

l. Ariane IV nosecones
2. SOLARIS station

3. Pour small modules
a. Large module

3
FOR OFF1CJAl.lﬂﬂE(NHLY
I‘UII urn-gum. UGI'. UNLI

THREE EXAMPLES OF ACTIVITIES ON BOARD

 

Among the different'applications of the SOLARIS station. some. such as observation

of the Earth by means of a field synthesis radar (1) proceed in autonomous fashion,
whereas other.

Key:
1. remotely controlled
manipulator arm

 

such as the metallurgical experiments. require the intervention of remotely con-
trolled manipulator arms: here is seen the introduction of an experimental component
into the appropriate compartment (2). Others necessitate still more elaborate con-

atruction before they can operate. Such is the case with radio observation of
stars with small angular separation:

I Key:
2) 2:3".nn 2. astronomical interferometer

3. remotely controlled manipulator arm

h. automated assembly of an astronomical
interferometer

5. SOLARIS station

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR<0FWKJAI.USB(NVLY

the astronomical interferometer (3) which fulfilll this function consists. in
effect, of three receiving antennae uhich must be ease-bled in advance and deployed
in place autonetically by remotely controlled mipulator am (6).

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Science et Vie"

11706
080: 3102/92

5
FOR‘OFF"JAI.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE POLICY

UNIT- KmeH: CURRENT TRENDS IN 36!) mm
Paris LE-PRDGKBS SCIBITIPIQUE in French Hay-Aug 81 pp 51-65

(Article: "Current Trends in Technological Research and Development in the
United Kingdom," prepared by the scientific service of the French hbassy
in London, May 1981]

[Excerpts] In the United Kingdom. as elsewhere, research is often recognised
as a way to relieve or resolve current economic difficulties. For many '
countries (USA, Japan, FRO) the primary concern remains energy supply, followed
closely by the necessity to innovate in order to preserve technological
supremacy—a supremacy which is being more keenly contested daily by countries
in process of industrialization.

The United Kingdom is a special case. It is the only large industrial country
which has been independent in energy for several decades, and thus is not
impelled to make any special effort in this area. For a nﬂer of years
British industry had a huge protected market, which dispensed with the need to
pursue innovation in order to prevail in economic competition. The energy
liaitation is less important in the United Kingdom than elsewhere; the stimulus
for innvation is also more recent. In regard to scientific programs. this
situation translates into excellent basic research but less well developed
finalized research than in other countries, though compensated by a fine
coordination between university and industry, no doubt better than in France.

The budget for the current fiscal year which began on 1 April 1981 has just
been published. Table 1 shows the breakdown; it reveals significant increases
for agriculture (+33.9 percent) and industry (+3l.8 percent). The energy
budget only increases by 16.5 percent, hardly compensating for losses due to
inflation. The average increase is 23.7 percent for civilian research and
12.8 percent for military. The United Kingdom will thus spend 3.3 million
pounds in 1981 for public R 8 D.

6
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
=33
__

.- awo-
Q

 

 

850 £803

+|l
”QC“ '-

33355'323 " 6'

so
82

|I|l+

 

§E°§' ”3" i "
- a a gg-gs "ma '

-88

g i! §§3§8§§§9§§§ 5 ﬁﬁﬁﬁgﬁasﬂliﬂ i ‘58

+ I ++++++++++ +

“ a gsaégsmssaw-Eoe

 

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
<4 \A...» I

. 9.. «a ape-a... vue- .. u-e

National Research and Development Policy

Under the present organization. product of the Rothschild reform which ained
at administering relations between scientists and the technical ministries.

Parliament votes the budget for basic research. which is presented by the
Depart-ant of Rducation and Science (science vote). The funds are then

divided up anong five of the research councils: Science Research Council (sec),
uedical Research Council (like). Agricultural Research Council (ARC). Natural
navironee'nt Research Council (NERO), end Social Science Research Council

(SSRC) . The Advisory Board for Research Councils (ABRC) proposes the

criteria for allocation of the funds.

Table II shows the current-year allocations to the -£ive research councils as
well as the expenditures of. each research council by budget category, i.e.: '

Universities‘ ovn laboratories and other associated units and support to
universities through: contracts; placing at their disposal heavy equip-ant in
the council 'o on laboratories; participation in international programs;
snintenance grants for training of researchers.

YMLEAU ll

(1) mamamwmlusauu1msm
2 ensue—emu-

sac MIC WISH: “To”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Comma do We 23 10.5 , 7.2 “A 8‘ 18.1
W st unites do We 23.5 215 M 57.0 0.5 132.2
Baa-sea do fownsoon » 0.3 ‘5 3.4 34.1 as 41.8
Midterm aux miles W 1.5 43.1 as
m - Divers 31 4.2 u 0.3 1.8 10.5
m . as m m was . m was
Key:

1. Expenditures of the research councils by type of activity in 1979-1980

2. In nillions of pounds sterling

3. Research contracts

4. Laboratories and research units

5. Training grants

6. Participation in international programs

7. Administrationuvarious

8. Totals

Applied research is managed by the technical ministries (there is no inter-
ninisterial budget). These ministries are considered as clients undertaking
research projects to seat their own objectives through laboratories, selected
in principle by that. and treated as "contractors." This system has apparently

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

worked well for some ministries (agriculture) but had to be dropped recently
by others (health). The technical ministries have their own laboratories
(Industrial Research Establishment) but delegate a large proportion of their
ante basic projects to the research councils. At the highest level,” a
conittee, the Advisory Council for Applied Research (ACARD). plays a role
similar to that of the ABRC.

The research is carried out either in the universities or the research councils'
own laboratories.

Financing for the universities is handled by a special body, the University
Grant Cos-titres: the allocated sun is intended to meet teaching and research
expenses. It is up to the university to see to the maintenance and operation
of the laboratories, and to undertake with its own funds research of a quality
that will persuade the research councils to award it contracts; this is the ’
"dual system," an arrangement which works well when there are sufficient
resources on both sides. However, that is currently not the case, since the
present government wants to significantly reduce the budget of the universities
and decrease the masher of students. It is likely that the b_ig universities
(Oxford, Casbridge, London, Edinburgl) which have their own funds, will not be
much affected by these financial cutbacks; but the recently established small
miversities which only have government subsidies will have difficulty surviving.

Biomedical Engineering

Biomedical engineering deals essentially with medical instruments (analyzers,

detectors, microscopes, etc.), products relating to biology, and internal and
external prostheses.

Private Sec tor

Since medicine is nationalized in the United Kingdom, the National Health
Service is the principal customer for this equipent, which is produced almost
entirely by the private sector. Last year, the N118 spent about 1 million
pounds for purchases in this sector, which is a very favorable one for the UK.
In 1978, exports (200 million pounds) succeeded imports (150 million pounds).
Production in 1979 totaled 90 million pounds. of which two-thirds was exported.
The R 8 D in this sector is estimated at about 3 million pounds, or an average
of 6 percent turnover. Table IV portrays the situation in the other sectors
(biomechanical, mecanotherapy, sterilization and opthalmology equipment).

Table III
1979 Degree of . Percentage
Production Penetration Exported
million unds) ercent Position 1979
Medical imagery 58 66 Excellent ' 87
Hedical electronics 31 58 Excellent 60
Pacennkars — 100 Very poor 0
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I908 Uri-[LN USI'. ONLY

Table IV
In millions of pounds sterling
Other sectors rts rts
Biomechanical equipment 18.8 11.5
hchsnotherapy equipment 7.6 10.8
Sterilization equipment 1.5 . 2.2
Opthalmology (glasses, lenses) 1.5 5

In the bionedical sector, we should note the remarkable technical success
(which earned a Nobel prize) of the m Scanners (600 tologrsphs sold for
export in 1979). Seventy scanners are in use in the UK, or 1.3 per million
inhabitants (the corresponding figure for the United States is 6.7 nillion).
Following financial difficulties, Thorn ml recently turned over its medical
activities to CF. (11.8.). On the other hand, a recently established British

cospany, Medical Engineering. is planning to comtcislly produce scanners
at a very low cost price.

British activity in the biomaterials sector has thus far been very slight.

Public Sector

Activity is" divided amng the Medical Research Council. the Science Research
Council, and the Departmmt of Health and Social Security, but it is difficult
to establish precisely how much is being spent for these purposes;

The NRC does not spend more than 1 percent of its budget on this field, most
of its resources going to the clinical Research Center, which has two com-
puterized services, one for market infatuation on instrments and materials,
and the other for published material;

The SEC has identified three priorities (but spends little on these areas):
materials used in dentistry. internal prostheses (polymers, ceramics, heart
valves), external prostheses (henodialysis, oxygenators, contract lenses, etc.).
Jointly with the HRC, the SRC tries to pro-ore development of magnetic nuclear
resonance equipent. In 1979—1980, the SRC and NRC spent about 400,000 pounds
on the area of internal prostheses.

’l'he DHSS is the most involved in this area: it spend 2.7 million pounds in.
1980, of which 540,000 pounds for the research on prostheses and rehabilita-
tion of handicapped people. For example, the following projects are underway:
medical imagery by magnetic nuclear resonance; s Coulson biological analyser;
a cyclotron for neutrotherapy; a device to make kidney grafts possible; a
photorefrsction technique for early detection of sight problems in children;
production of synthetic tissue from carbon fiber, and flexible contact lenses.

Biotechnology

An ad hoc working group presented a report to the governnmt in August 1980
concluding that the UK had done very little in the area of biotechnological
innovation and that investments in this field were too small compared to other

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

countries. The working group recomended increased financing of public research
in this field, developing scientific capability by training more researchers,
and establishing a company in the public sector to benefit from research
potential. The government's reply, recently published as a white paper, was

a strong disappointment to the scientific comunity: no additional funds were
allocated for research or aid to small enterprises, other than a suggestion

to better coordinate the efforts of the National Research Development Corpora-
tion (NRDC) and the National Enterprise Board (NED). The responsibility for
converting discoveries of useful products and services of possible comercial
value is left to industry. However, the Center for Applied Microbiology and

Research at Porton is to be available to industry and serve as an exchange
center.

The regulations on security control of experiments involving genetic recombina-
tion have been eased for experiments with lowest danger potential classified

in physical confinement category I, or experiments involving a reliable
microbiological practice; this applies in fact to 99 percent of experiments.

It is no longer necessary to notify the Genetic Manipulation Advisory Group
and the Health and Safety Executive on a case-by-case basis. The decision

as to whether experiments fall into these categories will be up to the local
security committees.

Public Sector

It is estimated that the research councils spend about 3 million pounds for
biotechnology, to which should be added a few contracts originated by the
technical ministries and financing of research by the Public Health Laboratory
Service in the Center for Applied Microbiology and Research.

There are a number of leading teams scattered in various centers, institutes,
and universities (Cambridge, London, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Bristol, Warwick,
Norwich and Cranfield Institute of Technology).

The SRC, which for a decade has been financing basic research in restriction
enzymes--particularly at Edinburgh University (Professor Murray)--plans to
increase its involvement in the coming lo years and establish two "bio-centers“
(teams located in universities) whose purpose will be to cooperate with
industry in biological engineering.

At the NRC, basic research on the cell at the molecular level has reached the
stage of possible usefulness to clinical medicine: work on molecular
sequences, genetic manipulation, and production of monoclonal antibodies
(research being conducted particularly at the Cambridge Laboratory of Molecular
Biology). The NRC is also financing work on plasmids which are resistant to
medicines, studies which could lead to synthesis of antibodies and research

to develop techniques for prenatal diagnosis of congenital problems (for
example, Thalassemia). In 1978, the research capability was estimated at about
380 persons, of whom 56 were in the “RC.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1978 the ARC began a program of research into genetic manipulation applied
to food agriculture. The target of 50 researchers set at that time has been
achieved; the teams have gone to various institutes appropriate to the scope

of their projects, and the programs have been laid out for the ANC as a whole.
The objectives of the research are improvement of vegetable varieties (develop-
ment of somatic hybrids), combat of certain animal diseases (production of
antigenic proteins using bacteria in which a viral plasmid has been cloned),
processing of microorganisms of value to food agriculture (bacteria, yeasts).

The NDRC, ANVAR's counterpart, has invested about 3.5 million pounds. It is
currently financing 22 projects: 8 in genetic engineering, 6 in antibiotics,
6 in potential industrial applications using microorganisms and enzymes. and
2 for vaccines. The NRDC has little cooperation with the pharmaceutical
industry, which conducts its own R a D. In the next few years, investments
are to be directed to the food industry.

The Center for Applied Microbiology and Research (CAHR) at Porton, which is
financed by the Public Health Laboratory Service (ms) and which was recently
reorganized, is particularly well-equipped for physical isolation of dangerous
pathogens (category A, such as Lassa virus, measles...), culture of micro-
organism in large quantities, and fermentation. It will be assigned an
increasingly important role in biotechnology and obtaining contracts with
industry. The biotechnical projects include production of human growth hormone
for Kabi-Vitrum. development of vaccines by genetic engineering, study of hosts
other than E. coli (yeasts--thernophile bacteria) and biodegradation of
effluents by bacterian enzymes.

Hain Developments

Interferon: preparation of a monoclonal antibody against human interferon;
marketing by Celltech; cloning of interferon genes O( and B ; Professor Burke's
team has succeeded in cloning interferon {zones ed and ﬂ in a plasmid of

E. coli (cloned genes are not yet capable of expression).

Human growth hormone: production on a large scale at CAMP. of human growth
hormone for Kabi-Vitrum using E. coli containing genes of the hormone.

Vaccines: developmt of vaccines by genetic engineering at CAHR (work in
progress, with Professor Hurray of Edinburgh, on vaccine against viral
hepatitis—-vaccine against smallpox).

Taline: at Kent University (Professor Stacey), research to produce an E. coli
(or other bacteria) capable of synthesizing a protein, Taline. which is found
in fruits of tropical plants and is 3,000 times sweeter than cane sugar
(cooperation with Tate & Lyle).

Cooperation in biotechnology between the University of Compiegne and the
Cranfield Institute of Technology: establishment of a joint unit at Cranfield
working on biotechnology. The research will be done under contract for public

12
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
services and industries. It will involve development of the methods and

requirement for exploiting industrial and agricultural lay-products and biomass
(obtaining unconventional proteins, fuel and food-agriculture engineering).

Improvement of plant species: use of gene cloning in bacteria or yeasts for
various projects to improve plant specie. including: somatic hybridization
of two varieties of petunia; plant regeneration through modified protoplasms
for the species of primary agricultural interest (potatoes. grains, grasses);
modification of the properties of grain proteins; increase in plant resistance
to viral diseases and sensitivity to antibiotics.

Center of Biotechnology at the Imperial College of Science and Technology (under
the direction of Professor 3. Hartley): the center coordinates the activities

of various Imperial College departments, particularly the biochemistry depart—
ment, and also outside branches (for example, the Center for Applied Microbiology
and Research and the biotechnology unit on plant cells at Sheffield). There

are numerous contracts with industry (in 1981 their value totaled 100,000 pounds)
but most of them are confidential.

The research focuses on the following topics, among others: large-scale industrial
fermentation processes (interpretation of laboratory results in fermentation
viable in the 25-1,000 cubic meter range).

a contract has been reached with Biogen for large-scale (3,000 liters) produc—
tion of leucocyte human interferon from recombined E. coli.

Also underway are projects on the following: use of continuous culture for
selection of clone in presence of a mutagene; large-scale production of
metabolites (isolation of intra—cellular enzymes); simultaneous isolation of
several enzymes (large-scale production: 70 kg) using thermophile bacteria
more stable than stearothsrmophiles; cloning of genes and expression in yeasts
(facilitating expression of foreign genes in organisms); genetic manipulation
of thermophile bacteria to produce solvents and chemical products in large
quantities; biological control of plant diseases by replacing chemical products
as control agents with microorganism or their products (experiment on an '
agronomical scale).

Private Sector

According to the "chief scientist“ of the ministry of Industry, expenditures

by industry are probably about the same as those of the public sector. Bio-
technology is not a new development in the UK, particularly in certain chaical,
pharmaceutical, and food-agriculture industries. For example: Glaxo and
Beecham, producing penicillin and semi-synthetic penicillins; Hellcome
Foundation Ltd., which is preparing interferon from lymphoblasts; Imperial
chemical Industries (ICI): production of protein from methanol for animl feed.

The yield of "Pruteen" has been improved through the introduction into the
bacteria, methylophylus methyltropus. of a coding gene for an enzyme which will
catalyze the reaction more effectively. Experiments are underway to produce

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USII‘. ONLY

PHD (polyhydroxbutyrate) which resembles synthetic polyesters used for plastics
employing a process similar to that for production of Pruteen but with new
strains of bacteria. In fact, the PUB synthetized is too fragile, but the

161 team is trying to modify either the polymer itself or the bacteria used

(alcaligenes entrophus) through genetic engineering to obtain a polymer which
will be less fragile and sore flexible.

Tate and Lyle: conwersion of hydrates of carbon and alcohol using micro-
organisms; Rank Hovis McDougall has received the Agriculture Ministry's
authorization to proceed with development of a mycoprotein obtained from grain
and intended for human consumption; Searle (United States) in the UK:
production of interferon from fibroblasts in a pilot plant constructed in the
UK and flu vaccine (at High "ycoﬂie, first phase of cloning a gene of the flu
virus in a bacteria).

Establishment of Celltech (1980)

The new British company has a capital of 12 million pounds financed by “EB

(46 percent) and the remainder by four companies of the city. It has its own
laboratory at Slough and is to serve as an interface between research and
industry. Celltech has signed an agreement with NRC giving it access to
research of its laboratories, particularly in the field of hybridomes and
genetic recombinations by ADN. The royalties NRC receives will be used to
finance research, in addition to that funded by its own budget, and will
become the “Calltech Fund.“ controlled by a subcommittee composed of council
members. Marketing of Calltech's first product has been announced. It is a
monoclonal antibody against interferon developed by Dr Sacher at the Cambridge
Laboratory of'hblecular Biology in cooperation with Professor Burke at Warwick.

Scientific and Technical Information (Data Banks)

Scientific and technical information is disseminated in the UK by two main
services:

The British Library Research and Development Department (BLRDD), which is
the equivalent, in part, to our National Library. The British Library

is a public institution under the authority of the Ministry of Education and
Science.

The Technology Reports Center (TRC) is a technical information center under
the Ministry of Industry.

While the TRC's activities are exclusively technological, the BLRDD's field
of operation is far broader with resources to match. Thus, in 1979 the BLRDD
spent 1.3 million pounds both on activities by its own staff of 32 people and
on contracts with the universities. It is estimated that the TRC has only
about one-tenth of those resources.

lb

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he BLRDD's primary objectives are set by an interministry comittee on
scientific and technical information, the ICC-3T1 (Interdepartmsnt and
Coordinating Conittee for Scientific and Technical Information), with the
31.30!) providing the secretarial support. These objectives have been
elaborated into priority research projects, specifically biblionetric
research, computer indexing, processing of cheaical data, and nethods for

evaluating index systeu. Those priorities led to conclusion of contracts
for 1979 as follows:

Basic research (180,000 pounds); example: methods of data
compression (University of Sheffield).

Advanced techniques (53,500 pounds): example: integration of bibliographic
material into the British videotex systse masm. (Lsngton Information
Systen).

Theaatic research (23,600 pounds); maple: comparative evaluation of
toxicological infatuation sources (Royal Postgraduate medical School).

-User research (250,000 pounds); example: evaluation of the teaching "package"
in information science. (Newcastle Polytechnic).

Two other priorities obtaining a significant budget allocation are the program
to improve manage-ant of scientific or nonscientific libraries (378,000 pounds)

and the program for developnent of research and informtion in public libraries
(128,000 pounds).

Finally, what is the UK's position in relation to its main competitors in
regard to R 8 D of data banks? Ihe following Iain institutions are in the
best position:

Development of data bank software: universities: Aberdeen, East Anglia,
Edinburgh, Sheffield, Strathclyde, London School of Economics; industry:
13!! (Peterlee Center), Honeywell, ICL.

Developmalt of data bank hardware: this is done almost exclusively in the
industrial context: IBM, Honeywell (IDS Systan), and finally ICL, which has
been able to develop its hardware in two directions, one being mass storage,
with its CAPE (Content Addressable Pile Store), applicable also to the
electronic annual, and the other relating to architecture with its IPA
(Infornat ion Processing Architecture).

If you use the number of publications selected at international conferences
as a criterion for international ranking, the UK does.not rank high since
only one British paper has been accepted during the three latest inter-
national conferences on data banks (the Ins-m congress in Venice, the
Rio de aneiro conference, and the Paris conference in 1980). However,

if you believe that the best measure of development effort in this area is
ultimately the actual number of data banks established in the 0!, then you

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR WIKJAI. 051'. ONLY

should consider the picture presented by the following list of British data
banks, east of which are accessible to Sumner/DIANE: Aqualine (water);
BERA Fluid kgineering; Bil? Metals Abstracts (nonferroua metals); CAB
Abstracts (agrimlture); Conference Proceedings Index; PSTA (food science
and technology); Geoarchive (geology); Inspec (electronics, cosputers.
physics); IRL Life Sciences collection; LISA (library and information
science); Postdoc (pesticides); PIRA (paper and printing); RAPRA Abstracts
(rubber and plastics); Ringdoc (pharmaceuticals); Surface Coating Abstracts;
UKC Hm; "eldasearch; world Teitilea; RPI (patents).

This leads us to conclude that co-puter information technology in the UK
is at least as advanced as that in trance. .

Finally, it is important to note that the T110 is a computerized center for
technological information catering to conpaniee. The center depends on
existing data banks, British (e.g. INSPEC), American (e.g. M18), or even

European (e.g. BSA banks), and itself produces a technical inforlation data
bank It 6 D Abstract.

Telecoununicat ions

In many respects, telecommunications development in the UK is comparable to
what can be done in France. Two major elements contribute to this development,
one, public, is the Post Office, the other, private, is the whole group of
major telecommications companies, cm, Pleasey, STC. The viability of the
one and the prosperity of the others are closely linked.

R 6 D Resources

The following table breaks down the Post Office R G D budget for 1980. The
approximate breakdown is given for ujor objectives, then for the najor technical
options.

Table A
Post Office R S 1) Fund Co-Iitnents
Breakdown by Objectives

in millions of pounds sterling

 

Improvement of present techniques 13.7
Developnent of new systems 56.3
Long-tern research, basic research 17.3
Advice. consultance, studies 98.3

' 5.6

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF-“TIM. [USE ONLY

Table 8
Post Office R 6 D Fund Connitnents
Breakdown by Technical Options

- in millions of munds sterling

Substitution 54.
Transfer 18.
Customer equipment 10
Components, materials 6
Technical advice 2.
Studies, consultance 3
S

The first conclusion we can draw is that the Post Office' a R & D effort is

conparable in volume to that of its French counterpart, Poet and Teleconunica-
tions.

In the UK private sector, CBC, Plessey, and src share the telecomnications
market, with sales of 2.5 billion, 6108 million, and 636 nillion pounds
respectively. Their activities. are closely tied to the public nrksta. It is
obviously very difficult to find out what resources these conpaniee devote to
R G D.- However, it appears that British companies spent $25 million pounds
in 1978 on components and commications.* We can conclude that British

cospaniss spend at least 100 million pounds on their teleco-sunicationa R a D
effort.

Main Lines of Developnent

It appears that the main lines of development are the same in nature to those
of France.

Projects already in the industrial phase:

Piber optics--a 4504a network is under construction and should be operational
by 1982; radiotelephonsua project to expand from 30,000 to 1.5 million users;
telephone exchanges-with development of srsmx X time switches; telecoI-unica-
tiona satellites—development of the Hadley station at a cost of 7.5 nillion
pounds: telecomputsr--development of the PRESTEL videotex system, already in
operation with 6,000 subscribers, tele-conferences. tale-slams, etc.

Projects in R 6 D phase:

Optic transmission: rapid data transmission $65 million bits/sec; facsimile
transmission; microelectronics—"design" of specialised LSI circuits (e.g.
CODBC); nicroprocessor-equipped local switchboarde.

The Post Office's R & D effort in telecomications has increased significantly
in the last few years (55 million pounds in 1975, 96 million in 1980). Despite

* Business Monitor-m 14--“lndustrial Research 1978."

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It’ll UI‘I'ILIAI. USE. WVLI

pessimistic predictions for this industry (cf. "Electronic Telecommunications
in the UK to 1985" Bureau Carsen Sweeny). the UK nevertheless finds itself
in a good position, particularly with respect to France. He should point out

that the British telecomputer program has reached a state of edvencenent which
is also-very competitive.

Automobile Research

'ﬂle international symposium on automotive technology (ISATA 80) held in Turin
in 1980 heard 16 British and 6 French papers. The British companies represented
were: Ford, Shell (UK), 6. Cussons, Luces, Leyland Vehicles, British Leyland,
Gut (UK), snac Engineering, and BP. The universities and research centers

represented were: University of Southampton. London (Queen Mary College) and
UKAEA.

The disproportionate representation of the British cornered to the French is
not i-ediately explainable. We do know that companies in the best position are
not always eager to talk about their operations at international congresses
after the point when the industrial stakes become important. However. this
illustration does give an idea of the more iaportant British companies in
automobile development. In 1978. the companies spent 128 million pounds
sterling for auto development: the most striking result was the unveiling

in 1980 of BL's mini-metro, whose fuel consumption figures are very close

to those of our RS.

It is clear that auto vehicle development (gasoline engines) is carried out
almost exclusively by the private sector. Of the 128 million pounds spent in
1968, 5.5 million pounds were pnovided by the British Government.

British research is evidently oriented to parallel that of its principal
competitors:

Auto electronics: Example 1: Lucas is developing specialized pressure detectors
as well as air loss detectors; Example 2: Shell Research is developing electronic

lighting.

New materials/substitute materials: Example 1: Lotus is using composite
materials in its racing models; Example 2: Pord and Fiber Glass have jointly
developed a new polyester intake manifold for cars.

Testing/security: Example 1: BP is developing computerized test benches for
engines; Example 2: The MIRA (Motor Industry Research Association) is working
on vehicle security.*

Materials and aerodynamic engineering: Example I: The UKAEA is analyzing the
engineering limitations of materials (with application to vehicle chassis):
Example 2: The MIRA is developing new aerodynamic shapes.

 

* The Research Associations are equivalent to our technical centers. The MIRA
spends more than 3 million pounds per year on automobile development.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, we should mention one more important element, electric vehicles:
the Departmnt of Industry is providing 3 million pounds sterling to
assist a development program for electric vehicles. This research seems
to have made more progress in the university context. The following table
shows the major university teams involved in these projects.

Universities Projects (applied to
electric vehicles)
Manchester, Nottingham, Sussex, Warwick Linear motors, synchronous motors
Bristol, Cranfield, Manchester,
Nottingham, Deeds, Newcastle Electric motors

Cranfield, Imperial College, Manchester,
Newcastle. Nottingham, Leeds, Sussex,

UMIST Reliability
Bristol, UHIST, Manchester, Nottingham/
Leeds, Warwick Energy storage
Leeds, UHIST Batteries, chemical conversion,

economy , marketing

He should add to these teams all the manufacturers who are involved mainly with
chemical transformers, for example: Chloride, partner of Chrysler, and Lucas,
partner of Bedford, are developing electric vehicles. These manufacturers
generally form partnerships with a vehicle producer.

The position of the-British automobile industry is hardly bright: 98 percent of
production is divided among four groups: one British group (British Leyland) and
four American (Pord, Vauxhall, (cu), Chrysler), but in fact 50 percent of Fords
sold in the UK are assesbled in Spain, the PRC, Belgium and Ireland. British
Leyland is. therefore, fighting for the survival of the British automobile
industry.

By comparison with this bad situation, the automobile equipment sector is in
an excellent position; the major manufacturers in this sector long ago realized
that they had to cross frontiers; they are established in Europe and the
United States, and have undertaken a profitable diversification into the
aeronautical field.

Pine Chenistry

Chemistry in the UK is a prime sector. whether in scientific planning or
manufacturing .

Three organizations are involved: the Science Research Council, the National
Research Development Corporation, and the Department of Industry.

The SRC has defined the priority sectors, and polymers leads the list. The
830's policy is twofold: it assists in acquiring expensive and sophisticated
equipnent, and funds specific research projects. For example, it has financed

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“W Ol'l'lt'lAl. USO; ONLY

the purchase of high-isolation mm spectrometers for the universities of
Edinburgh, Sheffield and Norwich, and Queen Mary College in London; Raman
spectrometers and lasers for Cartridge, Oxford, Nottingham, Bristol, and
Bouthhazspton; and high-resolution liquid chrolmtographs to develop methods .
for producing antibiotics and vitamins. It is actively supporting work at '
Oxford on synthetis and biosynthesis of lactary antibiotics, and in general
all the activities of the "Oxford Enzyme-Group."

As for the “BBC, it is trying to convert laboratory project achievements to
the industrial level, and specifically is siding the team at Leeds, Surrey,
Berriot Watt, and Newcastle in their work on lactamel. Also, it is promoting
work on "Charcoal Cloth" and on phosphorus monocrystels or gallium arsenide.

The Ministry of Industry is devoting special attention to catalyzers, providing
grants specifically to the Harwell center (500,000 pounds) which is studying
in detail the role of catalyaers (surface state, purity of materials, and
geometric effects, etc.).

Industrial Sector

The industrial sector is dominated by the major companies (ICI, Shell,
Gourtaud, etc.) but 101 is the real leader and also the example and the
authority. The British chenicsl sector deserves close attention.

101, which is involved in all areas (dyes, pigments, pharnaceutics, catalyzers,
and um plastics), is one of the shining lights of British industry (6.5 million
pounds of products sold in 1980). It is second in Europe behind the FRO. It
invests from 10 to 12 percent of its turnover (5 percent in France). Between
1971 and 1975 its turnover increased by 80 percent, and it succeeded in placing
"key men" in s amber of important strategic posts (chief scientist of the
Departnent of Industry, the Department of Energy, chairman of the SRC, etc.).
ICI is a world which it is difficult to penetrate; it is also a model for
university-industry relations.

Other, smaller companies are more specialized in pharmaceutics; Beecham and
Glaxo had a turnover of 1 million pounds in 1980 and Hilson and Fisons are
also involved in pharmaceutics and dyes.

Overall, the private sector spends 500,000 pounds for R & D, of which one-third
is for pharmaceutics, which is an excellent sector for the UK, with a higher
productivity than the 0.8. counterpart.

Overall, fine chemical products for pharmaceutics are in a state of stagnation:
237 million pounds in 1977, 247 million pounds in 1980. Pine plastics totaled
615 million pounds, and dyes about 230 million pounds (3.1 pounds per kilogram).
Briefly, the main research targets are as follows:

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ICI: replace-en: of petroleun products by products derived fros coal or gas,
fer-entation. bioengineering;

Shell: theraoplastics, resins. elastosera. colloidal chenistry;
Courtaud: chemical textiles, carbon fibers.

The chunical sector in the UK is at a crossroads. Kore than any other sector.
it has pushed invest-ant, at the risk of having overproduction in sone areas.
Should it continue to invest in order to maintain its lead over its European
rivals, onshould it stop its expansion. thereby-risking being overtaken

when the North Sea oil. price becomes the same as that of Middle East oil? One
of its largest handicaps currently is the high price of its raw materials

(and secondarily its relatively modest productivity).

The British Space Progra-

A space progran has two elements: production and ass of launchers, and production
and use of satellites in orbit.

Launchers

The UK has deliberately bypassed the launcher phase in order to concentrate on
satellites. After giving up development of an independent strike force, the

UK stopped work on developing the "Blue Streak" missile and induced the European
countries in 1961 to join the "European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO)
to develop a heavy launcher (1 ton in orbit), thereby seeking to profit in a
European context from the work it had done in the military field. At the end
of 1968, for financial reasons, the UK left EDO, stopping its contributions
and taking Italy with it. In 1972, ELDO and 38110 (European Space Research
Organization) were dissolved. ‘

Satellites

The UK has played an active role in this area within Bsno; it also plays an
active role in the European Space Agency (ESA).

It has very good scientific and technical capabilities in the satellite field.
From 1962 to 1979, it launched 13 satellites, lo military using Thor Delta
rockets (of these 2 failed). and 9 scientific. 0f the 13 satellites. 4 were
bought from the United States and the others were produced in the UK.

The tvo big industrial cospanies involved in producing satellites are British
Aerospace and CEO Marconi. They are both members of the three European
consortium STAR, NEST and 008108. '

Under current progress. ARIEL 6, a satellite launched recently for scientific
purposes, will be the last all-British space capsule. There has been a change

l-‘Oll OFFIGM. USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILML USE ONLY

recently in the British attitude on satellites. Until recently, they showed
little enthusiasm for the European altitions. A study by the "Central Policy
Review Staff" apparently convinced the British Goveth that it could no
longer stay aloof from the progress of this technology. Since that time
(autun 1980), the British Covert-eat has shown nav interest in the European
satellite program; regretting that they were not involved in the French-
German direct TV program, the British organised within BSA the LSAT project

by enlisting those European countries not associated with the Trench-German
program.

They are slowing lively interest in the Arabaat issue, and relations between
British Aerospace (BA) and Hatra are excellent, though clouded by the

Anglo-American discussions on replace-ant of Skynet (geostationary military
satellite).

The British satellite industry intensively researches the international narkets.
BA has been the principal subcontractor for Hugues Aircrafts [as published]
'for 12 Intelsat satellites, and has played the same role for ’0 Count
satellites; it has been the principal contractor for cms and was heavily
involved in 008B. It is also the principal contractor for 01‘s (Orbit Test
Satellite) as the forerunner for BCS (European Co-unication Satellite)

to be launched by Ariana in 1982.. Also. two Harec satellites which the UK
regards as very important are being built by the European HBSB consortiua
under the leadership of British Aerospace. As for Spacelab. whose cospletion
has been put in doubt by the United States, British Aerospace is to construct
discs and platform assentlies. BA is also working on an order worth

13 million pounds from BSA as the European participation in the telescOpe

to be carried by NASA, and production of a very high sensitivity photonic
detector. lbre recently, the BA-Hatra consortium was granted a contract to
build a teleco-unications satellite.

In regard to scientific research devoted mainly to astronomy and ionosphere
projects. the British national effort has been decreasing steadily in favor
of cooperative programs. Nuclear physics is one of the area in which the UK

has decided, due to limited financial means. to work only through international
cooperation. ‘

In conclusion, the British space program is undergoing a reappraisal, since
the UK does not want to be left out of the European achievements, particularly
the French-German.

Bilateral Scientific and Technical Cooperation Between the UK and France

This cooperation is not easy to encompass, since it has many aspects: sons
the subject of formal and official agreement between similar (or quasi-similar)
organizations, others having developed at the level of research organizations
and independent of any control. About 200 French scientists live in the UK
for periods varying fron l to 6 months. In 1981, there were approximately

80 researchers working under the following cooperative agreements: CUES/Royal

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Society (30); Foreign Affairs (young engineers 19); cuss/sssc (8); IRRIA (6):
1’3sz (3); CNRS/MRC (2); (BM/British Council (2): various others (5).

0f the total 29 were from the engineering field, 15 biomedical, 13 mathematics-

physics-chesistry, 10 social sciences, 6 computers. and the rest (6) from
various sectors.

The average stay of Preach or British researchers in the UK or France is

5 to 6 months. For every two French researchers who come to the UK, one
British researcher goes to France.

The British come to France to study the following: human sciences (51 percent);
life sciences (22 percent); mathelatics and physics (10 percent) ; chemistry
(5 percent); L08 (land, ocean, space) (5 percent); other (7 percent).

The French cone to the UK to study: lumen sciences (31 percent); chanistry

(23 percent); life sciences (17 percent); engineering (12 percent);
mathematics and physics (9 percent); DOS (3 percent); others (5 percent).

COPYRIGHT: DGRST, Paris, 1981

9920
(:80: 3102/ 109 END

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY