FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10434
2 April 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 13/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGULATIOXS GOVERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(rouo 13/82)

Coureurs

POLITI CAI.

{KER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Cmoept of Maghreb Parliament Supported
(Hebib Bouleree; JEINE AFRIQUE, 10 Feb 82)..................

IRAN

8 tie is
New Office
mmition Supply

LEBANW

Se'ib Salem Interviewed on Election:
(Sa'ib Salem Interview: mm AL-‘ARABI,
22-28 Jm 82)....I....I"OI......O....'..OOUOCOUCQOUCUOUCOOO

Syria Seeks To Extend Serkie' Term
(All-“ATM ““MI, 29 Jan" Rb 82)..-oeeeeee'ooceoepeoooo

SYRIA

Publication Gives Details of hunt Coup Plot
(AL‘HATM All-'MI' 12-18 hb 82)....ceooeoeoooeeeceoooooo-

Diplomat Blamed for Magazine Bowing
(AL-"AT” AL-'ARABI. 22-25 J81 82)....-oeooooeoeooooo...nooo

Briefs
Attempt To Guggle Am toiled
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

C(NCEPT 0!" M01833 PARLIAMENT SUPPORTED
Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1101, 10 Feb 82 p 21
[Commentary by JEUNE AFRIQUB adviser ﬂabib Boulares: "For a Maghreb Parliament"]

[Text] "The source of everyone's pain is also the subject of everyone'

attack." This verse of Corneille can certainly constitute a basis for Colonel
Qadhdhafi's meditation. King ﬂasssn with a rare vigor accused Colonel Qadhdhafi
of every sin. The Algerians have received him, from 18 to 23 January, with a
discreetness that bordered on indifference. The Tunisians treated him as a
tourist of a certain notoriety (J.A. No 1100). His idea of a union with Algeria
did not create any enthusiasm in President Chsdli Bendjedid'a entourage. How-
ever, to know what happened in Algiers we can only rely on what was made public
by the Libyan sources.

We must admit that Tunisia has reasons to fear the intensive training in Libya
of approximately 10,000 of its nationals. Algeria discovered to its surprise
that Algerians are also being trained in Libyan camps. This has created, for
the time being, nothing but a shrug. However, this was not the case a few
months ago when Libyan soldiers positioned themselves to the south beyond their
borders in Algerian territory. They were requested sharply to go camp else-
where.

Union by force has no greater chance of succeeding than the direct occupation
of the land. The attempt at persuasion through dialogue does not seem to have
borne more fruit in Algiers than in Jerba. Furthermore, there is something
confusing about this ”Guide of the revolution" who has proposed a union at
times to Bourguiba and at times to Bendjedid, while at the same time asserting
to the public that union along Arabs can be accomplished only through the
people and by bypassing the leaders and governments.

No! Following Qadhdhafi's visit to Algeria and his passage thru Tunisia, the
idea of Pan-Arab union, or that of a Greater Maghreb, has not evolved.

However, we have to admit that Qadhdhafi is not the only cause. Surely, with-
out Libya, as Hassan 11 stated, the Saharan war could not have lasted that
long. Algeria certainly gives the impression that it is trying to find a way
out of the conflict. Nevertheless the Polisario is today a political and
military force that intends to use all its potential to prevent it from being
sacrificed during a referendum or a multilateral negotiation.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mauritania distrusts Morocco and the tine has passed when an understanding
between Rabat and Nouakchott could have paved the way to a peaceful solution.
The Saharan question is at an impasse, and the latest declarations of the King
of Morocco have not been encouraging.

Who can in these circumstances endorse and advance the concept of a Maghreb
union? Qadhdhafi speaks action of the masses. and his target is a Pan-Arab
union. The Tunisian jurist Mohamed Charfi, who animates the "Maghreb En—
counters." considers the separate actions of the rulers and the people to be
insufficient, and advocates their union. This is the path of wisdoe. Never-

theless, this concept can only take shape if an organisation is willing to
endorse it.

However. until now there is a fralework that has not been used, i.e., parlia-
mentary action. Why not actively support a North African parlinent, a Maghreb
assembly, where the parliaments of Mauritania, Morocco. Algeria, Tunisia and
Libya can send their representatives? Why can't this parliament, based on the
example of the European Parliament, be established in a central city, which is
not a capital of a state, e.g., Constantine, this Cirta of ancient Nuaidia which
had its moment of glory during the tins of Massinissa and Jugurtha’.’

Parliaments constitute, despite their linited freedom of action, ideal fora
for open debates that would permit the clarification of the rulers' actions.
It is in such a forum that the supporters and the adversaries of a united,
federated or confederated~ Maghreb can confront each other without such a
confrontation turning into a war. It is here that the peoples' actxon through
their representatives, and the rulers through their parties, can combine their
efforts to spread an idea that all the crises were unable to bury because
everyone continued to believe in it.

C(PYRIGIT: June Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

(30: 4519/18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

BRIEFS

NEH OFFICEnThere is a new office for Iranian eabassies, that for "Mose-ina-
tion and Explanation of the principles of the Islamic Revolution." The
directors of these new services are carefully chosen by the High Council

of the Guardians of the Revolution. The first post so provided is London.
Paris and loan vill follow. [Text] [Paris L'EXPRESS in French 5-11 Her 82
p 85] (WRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groups Express]

AMMUNITION SUPPLY—A nuaber of lbouyni's generals telephone their centeri-
parts in Israel regularly to specify their needs of ammunition and spare
parts and ask advice from their former instructors. These messages go
through Rome and are received in a few minutes. [Text] [Paris L'EXPRBSS
in French 12-18 Mar 82 p 89] {Gunman I982 s.a. Groppe Express]

680: 4619/73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SA'IB SALAM INTERVIEHBD ON ELECTIONS
Paris AanATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic lo 258, 22-28 Jan 82 pp 32-33

[Interview with Ss'ib Salas in beirut by AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI; date not
specified]

[Text] Sa'ib Salem, former prime minister and a leader of the Islamic Coali-
tion, is one of Lebanon's most courageous and hardline Muslim leaders. Mr
Salem, a supporter of Prime Minister Shafiq al-Haasan, is known for his out-
spokenness and a disposition to call a spade a spade, often to the ire or
embarrassment of others.

Our first question centered on the American and Soviet positions on the
Lebanese crisis as gleaned from the visits of the two countries' envoys [to
Lebanon] last year. Mr Salem had this to say:

"Competition between the two superpowers in all parts of the world continues.
It is becoming more acute in the Middle East. The new American republican
administration says its first priority is to stop the extension of Soviet in-
fluence in the Arab world and the Middle East. But all American actions are
so absolutely stupid that they are producing the opposite effect: opening the
door wide to the growth of Soviet influence. Foremost among these actions is
Washington's insistence on continuing the policy of blind support for Israel
which that country has enjoyed since its birth.

'Tecausel met with Philip Habib, I know more about his mission than that of
the Russian envoy. we discussed all topics, but his foremost concern, as I
discovered, was to strengthen the ceasefire.

'1? interpretation of his preoccupation with the ceasefire is that the u.s.
wants to maintain the present situation, that is, one that, while not
exactly calm, is free of major eruptions until next April, the deadline for
settling the Sinai issue.

'Tnbrief, here is what I told ﬂabib: 'Go to America and look for a solution
there. You will not find one here? The solution is not here, but there. By
this I mean that a solution can be found only if America changes its policy
and frees itself from Israeli domination. This is the way to safeguard
America's interests in the region and in the Arab world.

4

roe omcw. use ONLY
"The Soviet envoy came to regibter his presence; his main concern, apparently,
was to exploit America's mistakes for some new [Soviet] purpose."

[Question] It is rumored that in addition to his concentration on [strengthen-
ing] the. ceasefire, Philip Habib wanted to explore the possibility of a Syrian
pullout from greater Beirut. Do you support such a move?

[Answer] The only thing I know about this is what I read in the newspapers.

I talked with Mabib for over 2 hours. He discussed all issues and all aspects
of each issue. From what I could see, Babib's only obsession was to strengthen
the ceasefire. He did not even mention the Syrian missiles in Lebanon-and
neither did I. The way I see it, America is confused, and its confusion is due
to the tension in Israel and much of the Arab world. America is worried that
this tension might lead to an explosion that could threaten next April's
[Sinai] deal.

"he Represents the Muslims?

[Question] In the western tone [of Beirut] the problem of security is tangled
in politics. People are clamoring for representation. Is the Islamic Coali-
tion the only representative of the Muslim community?

[Answer] There is not only one representative for the Mali: comnunity.

when the conflict in Lebanon reached the stage of violence, and when foreign
propaganda, abetted by the Zionists, portrayed the situation as a confronta-
tion between the Christian Right and the Mann Left, we wen. deeply hurt.
The majority of Muslims did not rush to arms just to enter into a violent
confrontation, but rather because there was no choice. Prom the outset we
nade our position clear: violence was net the answer to the Lebanese problem.
Several long years of destruction and a great toll of human life have yet to
solve our problem, just as we had predicted. We were also dismayed to have
the Muslims portrayed as Leftist. Not only are the Muslims not Leftist—in
the sense of being terror-bent comaunists directed from outside the country,
as the term is understood here--but they are anti-Left. That is why we
established our coalition and why we named it the Islamic Coalition: to de-
prive the real Leftists of the right to speak in our nmae. Re have succeeded
to some extent in undermining the synonymity of the terms Leftist and Muslim
in the minds of the people and to discredit those who claim to speak for us.
Now, when a Leftist or a commist representative attemts to speak in the
name of the Muslims he is ridiculed in and outside Lebanon. (As a further
measure of our success, Leftist and comsunist announcements are now made in the
name of the National Forces rather than the Muslims.)

While the Islamic Coalition does not pretend to speak for the Muslim community,
its actions over the past 6 years have always been a note accurate expression
of the will and aspirations of that cosmunity. In this respect. anyone who
expresses the will and the aspirations of the Muslims can be termed a repre-
sentative of the Muslin comsunity.

I agree with your description of the security situation in the western zone
[Rest Beirut]. Those who seek control of the area are divided. They collide

5
FOR bmcut us: on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inside and outside the area; the victims, unfortunately, are the residents of
the area. while the various factions claim to be concerned with security in
the area, they, thaselves, are the cause of lawlessness. They are responsi-
ble for the explosions. assassinations and uncomtab‘le breaches of security.
This is not my view alone. The prevailing view is that the head of the so-
called National Movement is responsible for chaos in the western zone.

[Question] You say the army is the vital element in the search for a compromise
solution. Can the army, with its current composition, bring security to all
parts of the country?

[Answer] Let us look at the question from a different perspective. I have
indicated earlier that the Lebanese people, Christians and Muslims, are
anxious to get together in an effort to save their country. This is the
objective of the "national compromise" movement. Many say "compromise before
security." but those who advocate this course are misguided and simplistic. or
they are misguiders who want to maintain the troubled situation. Every
rational person knows that one cannot have compromise unless there is a legal
authority that can provide security, and the only way for the legal authority
to provide security is through the army. Here is where the problem begins.
The goverment has not been able to convince the groups opposed to the army
to let the army carry out its security duties. The opposition is completely
internal; some of the Opposition is directed fromoutside [the country].

The roads from east Beirut to west Beirut are closed because certain factions
do not want the Muslims and the Christians to get together. I am convinced
that if the Christians and Muslims were left alone, many would suffocate

in the rush to embrace. They all want peace. That is why I support the
army and want to see it strengthened. There were times of small or signifi-
cant disagreements with the army, nevertheless I have always continued to
work for the creation ofa strong army. Those who oppose the army use any pre-
text to reject it. The truth is that they do not want an army in the first
place. Many would criticize the army for being "unbalanced," a term they
invited to misguide people. When most people rejected this depiction of the
army. the opposition admitted that they have misused the "unbalanced"
adjective.

It is essential that we have a strong army based on a national foundation.

I invite my Maronite brethren to discourage the idea of "Maronizing" the
army. He must have s Lebanese Army, and it must remain Lebanese if it is to
succeed in extending the legal authority [of the government] to all parts of
Lebanon. In view of the collapse of civil and sewrity [police] authority.
the army is the only arm of the state that can restore legal authority.

I Support Sarkis

[Question] You were among the first to "open fire" on the goverment and to
accuse it of poor performance. Suddenly and unexpectedly you are opening a
new leaf with him [President Sarkis]. what are your real reasons?

[Answer] I am surprised at your use of the terms “suddenly" and "open fire."
I have always had some disagreements with the goverment, but my position has

I-‘Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
always been made clear and in an open manner. Everything I say openly I have
said to the president in face-to-face meetings. I have always insisted that
the president take the initiative, particularly after things worsened in the
wake of the Riyadh Conference. That conference involved things that exceeded
the president's constitutional powers, but we overlooked that because we wanted
to save the country by any means. We supported the president and I was the
first to do so. You refer to my criticism of the president but forget that

I was the first to support him when he assisted the presidency. He requested
the president to move on behalf of Lebanon. We asked him to go to Washing-
ton, to Moscow and to the UN. Even when Lebanon itself became the problem,

lem and continue to do so today as much as the Palestinians themselves. Now ‘
Lebanon has a problem and we must concentrate on it. Yasir 'Arafat constantly
moves from capital to capital in search of a solution to his problaa. King
Hussayn [of Jordan] does the same thing. That was the point of my criticism.
The moment the president began to move, however-by taking part in the First
Tunis Conference, the Te'if Islmaic Conference, and the Second Tunis Confer-
ence, followed by his decision to reactivate the Arab Follow-up Conittee—it
became my duty to support him. when he explained Lebanon's position at the

the Lebanon crisis, I found it my duty to support him. I was pleased to note
that for the first time the president and the prime minister were working co-
operatively, something I had repeatedly called for in the past.

Not once during the 4 years of [former] Prime Minister Salim al-lloss' tenure
did I withhold my support. On the contrary, my support was unqualified. I
also supported Prime Minister al-Harzan. I even defended Prime Minister al-Hoss,
and, if I may say so, repeatedly. I did not, however, always take his side in
his counterproductive, nonstop dispute with the president. I as a positivist
by nature and temperament and favor a positivistic approach to work. When I
noted that the president and Prime Minister al-Uassan were working coopera-
tively, I gave them my support. It is wrong to say that the prime minister

is not his own man because he cooperateswith the president, who in turn is a
tool of the Phalange Party, which in turn is a tool of Israel. By this
"logic," al-Hassan is an Israeli tool. This is the logic of those who do not
wish Lebanon well.

This is why I have supported President Sarkis' moves on behalf of Lebanon. It
is my duty to support him against his assailants of ill will.

[Question] Prime Minister al-Wassan is the target of a campaign to remove him
from office. Do you favor that his government remain in power till the end of
its term?

[Answer] In my opinion, Prime Minister al-Uasaan is doing his best. The prime
minister's job is difficult under the best of circumstances, and is much more
so now. Not only do I oppose a change of government now, but I support Prime
Minister sl-Wazzan's government. Those who want to replace al-Wauan want to
destroy rather than rebuild Lebanon.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEt0NLY

I Oppose attending President's Term

[Question] The presidential election campaign has already begun. You are a
very close friend of General Raymond Iddih. what are his chances of becoming
the next president?

[Answer] It is known that I have in the past supported General Iddih for the
presidency. I did not support him on the basis of his friendship alone-~a
friendship of which I an proud-but because of his patriotism. He is a capable
man, one who can shoulder the burden of the presidency. Should I support his
bid again, it would be for the same reasons. Be is patriotic, capable and
inspires confidence: and these attributes qualify him for the presidency.
Nevertheless, there are others who have these attributes and who are equally
qualified. There is a saying in Lebanon that "every Maronite is a candidate
for the presidency," but there will be easy changes before election time. A
group of people has of late been calling for amending the constitution and
holding the elections now. I have opposed this group and succeeded in silenc-
ing it. Why? Because the situation in Lebanon and in the region at large is
not clear and will remain so until next April,pending the resolution of the
Sinai problem. The situation will become clear then in Lebanon and the region.
No one knows whether the Sinai will be returned [to Egypt] or not. If the
Israelis do not withdraw, the situation will change. If they withdraw, we
will still face a new situation. Furthermore, why should we advance the elec-
tions when the constitution stipulates that elections take place 2 months
before the president's term ends? That is not till next July. Let us wait
till after the Sinai return to see how things develop and what effect they
will have on Lebanon.

[Question] The possibility of extending his term of office has been raised
with Mr Sarkis. Do you support such a move?

[Answer] I am against the idea and.believe Hr Sarkia himself is also opposed
to it.

[Question] It is rumored that Mr Philip Habib has proposed the idea. Is that
true?

[Answer] I read that in the papers, but I have not heard it from any reliable
source. All this. however, must await Israeli withdrawal from Sinai.

[Question] In the wake of the Fez Conference, what do you foresee for southern
Lebanon?

[Answer] Many like to portray the Fez Conference to the outside world as a
great tragedy. I do not agree with this portrayal and believe it harms the
Arab cause. I simply say the conference did not succeed and its failure was
expected. While I had expected the conference to fail, the objectives of
the conference remain valid. These objectives are yet to be fulfilled.

Hhile saying farewell to Mr Sa'ib Salem, he asked ac to convey his greetings
to Professor Valid and to inforn hﬂn thathelHr Salem] had read Hr Halid's
interview with President Saddam Hussayn [of Iraq] and was very impressed with
it.

comment: 1981 AL-HAIAN AL-‘ARABI
9063 8

CSO= “04/256 ms OFFICIAL use ONLY
SYRIA SEEKS 1'0 EXTEND SARKIS' TERM
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 259, 29 Jan-b Feb 82 pp 36-37
[Articlez "Barter Transaction Between Sarkis and Damascus“]

[Text] After the session of the Aria Follow-Up Conittee was postponed until
the first part of next March, talk began about a Sarkis-Syrian "deal" in con-
nection with the presidential election campaign. which can be smarized as
establishing "special and privileged relations" between Lebanon and Syria, in
exchange for Syrian support for Sarkis either to extend his term or to deter-
mine any alternative as president. Hhst about the new deal? Postponing the
meeting of the Arab Follow-Up Committee until Hatch night be the start of
abandoning the co-ittee, and consequently cancelling its meetings, unless
positive developments suddenly appear on the Lebanese scene. leading to a
move to convene, and an adjustment in the climate leading to implementation
of the resolutions previously issued by the committee.

Ministerial sources say in this regard that, since the last meeting held by

the committee, Lebanon has lost hope for the possibility of achieving any
progress tovard solving the crisis at this stage, since many problems.

including the "Syrian problem" have prevented any progress to speak of. Con-

sequently, the member nations in the comaittee (Saudi Arabia and Kuwait) have
been forced to be tantamount to "false witnesses," because these states know
the Syrian positions and reasons that are blocking Lebanese accord. Neverthe-
less, they have been forced to disregard the reasons which are too ntnerous to
mention.

The sources add that if Syria carries a share of the responsibility for the
failure of the Arab solution, other parties in Lebanon. such as the Lebanese
Front, the National Movement and the Palestinian Resistance also carry a
portion of the responsibility, for selfish or personal reasons.

These sources say that the highest authorities told some of the leadership a
few days before the date to convene the Follow-Up Committee that it was the
Arab parties' intention, especially Lebanon. to postpone the date for the
comittee's meeting. When the Kuwaiti foreign minister. Sheykh Sabah
al-Ahmad, excused himself from attending, along with Prince Sa'ud al-Paysal.
Lebanon was sure that the meeting had become passe. When the Saudi position

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
was sounded out, the reply came back that the Riyadh government preferred

to postpone the Follow-Up Couittee's meeting, because none of its resolu-
tions could be achieved on the spot. Lebanon's position was similar. When
Syrian Foreign Minister 'Abd al-Balim Khaddam came on a sudden visit to
Beirut, carrying a message from President Hafiz al-Asad to Lebanese President
Ilyas Sarkia on 17 December, the picture became very clear. He was con-
veying the other Arab positions. They had no objections to the postponement.

Postponement or Abolishment?

Ministerial sources say that Lebanon preferred not to go on record as being
for a meeting without results. The meeting, if held even with the attendance
of the foreign ministers, was not capable of producing new and decisive
decisions, especially since the existing decisions are still just in]: on
paper. Therefore, how could it be productive if held with the attendance of
other ministers, representing the foreign ministers, who would not be con-
versant with the developments and nuances of the Lebanese situation.

These sources disclosed that Saudi Arabia and Kuwait had told Lebmon, about
a week before the date of the Follow-Up Col-ittee meeting, that they would not
participate in the committee meeting. at the foreign minister level, unless
the two previous decisions issued by the comittee were implemented. They
are:

1. To open the traffic lanes in the Sodeco area.

2. To form a Lebanese security force, under the remand of the minister of
the interior, Prime Minister Shariq al-Hazzan, to take charge of maintaining
security on both sides of the confrontation line from the Sodeco area down
to the al-Harafa' quarter.

These two measures are considered sufficient to cool off the security situa-
tion, which would encourage the Lebanese government and the Arab parties
participating in the Follow-Up Committee, through their representatives in
Beirut, to prepare for the dialogue, and then the national accord.

These sources think that postponing the meeting of the Follow-Up Committee
until March may be the start of finally abolishing the committee's role,
especially since there is no evidence on the horizon to indicate the possi-
bility of achieving any progress toward implementing its previous decisions.
This means the failure of the Arab solution, by virtue of the fact that the
Follow-Up Comittee represents locally, Arab-wise and internationally the
only way to deal with the Lebanese crisis. Lebanon was betting on the Arab
solution, for fear that it would get involved in other solutions, especially
international solutions.

Lebanon believes, as President Sarkis told the members of the Follow-Up
Comittee at their last meeting, that the aspirations and hopes that were
pinned on the committee have been lowered a great deal from what they once
were right after its formation at the Tunis emit. The reason, according
to President Sarkis, is that the committee has shifted from dealing with the

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fateful issue as a whole, since it was charged with dealing with the Lebanese
situation in its entirety, with its Arab and Palestinian ramifications, to
dealing with trivialitiee, such as opening the roads and removing the barri-
cades, while not coming close to the nub of the Lebanese problem. Official
Lebanon has tried to shift the consensus of the comittee to a more effective
and colprshensive level. through a working paper which it submitted and which
proposed solutions for various political and security issues, including the
national dialogue leading to accord. However. the cmittee preferred not to
plunge into the details of the Lebanese working paper, because that would
require specific positions from the various parties influencing the Lebanese
scene (Syria. the Palestinian Resistance, the UN forces and the local par-
ties). This could have reached specific political sensitivities between
these parties and the Arab neuter states on the Follow-Up Coanittee.

Privileged Relations

At this time. inforned sources told AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI that Syrian Foreign
Minister 'Abd al-Halin Khaddan arrived to discuss with President Ilyas Sarkis
how to ”normalize" special relations on the official level between Syria and
Lebanon. lle perceived from the Lebanese president a desire to coaply with
this request (2). Re is the one who, so far. has rejected even a discussion
of subjects like this. being anxious about the factors of Lebanese sov-
ereignty, or what is left of it.

Those in the know say that President Sarkis, who is nearing the end of his
tern, is trying to ensure Damascus' support for hinself, his methods and his
progress. At the sane tine. he is trying to exchange "special relations"
for the withdrawal of Syria fron Beirut and certain suburbs. which would
permit peaceful presidential elections. The president night go as far as
exchanging security information with the Syrians, in addition to better
econoaic coordination and coordination of political positions on the interna-
tional scene. for the purpose of ensuring this withdrawal.

In the context of the presidential campaign, which is preoccupying the
Lebanese more than at any time, those who are striving to bring the points
of view of Damascus and Raymond Iddah closer together note that Syrian-

Phalangist relations are not as bad as some inagine. As evidence of that,
Huhaa-ad Ghanim. director of Syrian Intelligence says in his private neetings

that Syria has not yet lost hope for the return of the Phalangists to "the
husband's house." However, this return would have to be deferred. if Israel
continues in its intransigence with regard to the Golan annexation or if it

intends to launch a new attack against South Lebanon.

The statuents that have been attributed to Phelangist officials recently
bear out the belief that there is a tacit Syrian-Phalsngist understanding to
extend President Sarkis' tern, with specific security arrangements. such as
deploying the arny in the eastern area and handing over security in the
Western area to the internal security forces. while awaiting propitious
international circumstances to strengthen the Syrian-Phalengist solidarity on
the level of conprehensive solutions.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arab Reservations

In this context. observers have noted that the routine extension of the Arab
Deterrent Force in Lebanon has not net with any Phalangiat opposition this
time. Perhaps this Phalangist "silence" played a part in facilitating the
mission of Phillip Babib, the Anerican envoy. who returned to the area to
ensure the continuation of the Israeli-Palestinian cease-fire, and to ensure
the legal formalities of the presidential elections. or the extension of the
present president. However, there are those who talk about the "contradic-
tion" between the Phalangist position and the position of the Haronite
Patriarchy in this regard, since the patriarch says that Haronites in Lebanon
must not consent to any measure which would amend the written constitution.
such as an extension for President Sarkis, for example.

Phillip Habib has in fact returned for three political purposes:

-Follow-up the coordination between the Syrians and the Phalangists.

--To cool off Syrian-Israeli relations, after the "scenario" of Israeli
orbiting over the Biqa' and the rumors about Syrian "SAH" missiles being fired
at the Israeli aircraft...without hitting then, of course.

-Preparation for the election campaign, in light of President Sarkis' posi-
tion regarding the extension.

Perhaps the Syrian and Lebanese presidents will both find it necessary to
meet at this stage (in the second half of February in all probability) before
the reconvening of the Arab Follow-Up Committee. to review the situation in
the region as a whole and the role of the deterrent forces in the future
stage. which will follow the Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL HATAN AL 'ARABI

7005
C50: 460A/323

12

FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
PUBLICATION crvss perms or encam- oour mm
Paris AL-wAIAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 261. 12-18 Feb 32 pp 22-23

(Article: "Names of Officers Arrested in Coup Attempt; Entire Mic Squadron
Tasked With Bombing Defense Company Bases and the Republican Palace")

[Text] "as American Intelligence the one that uncovered the recent coup
attempt in Syria, as comensation to the Syrian regime for the American
position in the Golan case? This is the information that was leaked at least
by Western diplomats. in a letter that AL-UAIAN AL-'ARABI received from
Washington, which also included previously unpublished information about the

officers who carried out the attempt. their names and their military respon-
sibilities.

When the Syrian authorities confirned that they do not expect an Israeli

attack on the Syrian army in Lebanon. what was the justification for these
assurances? The evidence is the information which was leaked by sources

well-connected to the American State Department to the effect that none
other than American intelligence gave the Syrian regime the details of the
recent coup attempt, and provided it with the nnes of the of.icsrs and
civilians who had prepared it, for the purpose of "saving face" for the
Golan case, after the recent American veto in the United Nations.

It can be said that American-Syrian relations are not as bad as some may think.
and that Washington has not yet lost hope in the Syrian card in the coming
negotiations that will follow the withdrawal from Sinai.

In light of this fact, washington is still covering the Syrian role in Lebanon.
It is a role which is in direct agreement with the logic of "red lines." by

which the Syrians and Israelis deal with the Lebanese crisis and for which,
sometimes, the Lebanese and Palestinians pay a price.

Liquidations

American diplomatic circles are talking about the American "Vatchfulness" in
Damascus. which presupposes that there is a Soviet eye in the area. These
circles confirm the information that the number of Syrian officers, who

were arrested after the coup attempt, ranged between 180 and 220 of various
branches of service and ranks, including about 30 officers of the rank of najor

13
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
general. hrigadier general and colonel. There was also a ntmber of retired
officers and about 50 civilians.

The arrests included most of the important corps and units of the Syrian
army, but were concentrated largely nong pilots of the Air force. the naval
forces, armored divisions, co-aand officers in the Syrian Chief of Staff
office, the engineering corps, some officers of the ailitary survey unit and

a small umber of officers of the defense companies, whose noes are not
known.

The infatuation indicates that Brig Gen Huh-ad al-Khuli. the director of
air force intelligence and an adviser to President Hafiz al-Aaad. personally
supervised the arrests with the assistance of military intelligence. headed
by Brig Gen 'Ali Duba. It was learned from some informed sources and from
those who had a connection with the investigation, conducted in strict
secrecy by the Syrian authorities, that some of the arrested officers were
required to talk by telephone with their wives and families and pretend that
they had suddenly been sent on special military matters to Lebanon with the
deterrent forces. in order to give the authorities more opportunity to
arrest those whose noes had been provided by the officers who were con-
nected with the coup attempt.

The noes of sons of the arrested officers have been leaked. A number of
them were liquidated by firing squad after their interrogation. The fol-
lowing were known to be among them:

Haj Gen Harwan al-Juqdar from Damascus, who held the post of assistant chief
of staff and director of training in the Syrian army.

Brig Gen Ahmad 'Abd al-Nebi, from the Third Armored Division Cal-sand.

Brig Gen Ibrahim sl-Malki. who was described as director of operations for
the Fifth Division.

Brig Gen Salih Ballawah. one of the senior officers of the First Armored
Division.

The me of Brig Gen Ibrahim el-Safi was repeatedly mentioned among those
arrested; he is an 'Alawite. previously known to be a swporter of Sallah
Jadid. however, President al-Asad appointed him as counnder of the First
Armored Division. and he was leading this division on 22 Novaber 1980, the
day the Syrians mobilised forces on the Jordanian border. his division was
one of the main divisions concentrated on the border.

The Plan

The information confirms that 60 officers from the Air Force were arrested,
including five high-ranking officers. It has been confirmed that at least
four of them were brigadier generals. They also included some 25 pilots,
and known to be among them, Lt Col 'Assaf 'Assef. The commander of one of
the MiG-l7 squadrons was also arrested. along with most of his pilots.
There was also a nusber of air base conanders. including the commander of

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
one of the helicopter bases and the commanders of one of the other air
wings close to Damascus. The name of Lt Col Enytham, one of Brig Gen
Muhammad al-xhuli's aides, was also bruited about by those arrested. The
arrest of Brig Gen Taysir Lutfi al-Hamawi has been confirmed, and it was
said that he was executed a week after his arrest. He held the post of
army operations in Office of the Chief of Staff.

Damascus' information states that some Christian Ba'thist officers were also
arrested or discharged from service. A small number of 'Alawite officers.
from the First and Third Armored Divisions, were also arrested, as well as
some from the Seventh Armored Division. However, it is so far apparent

that most of the officers confirmed to be either arrested or executed were
from Damascus, Hamah. Dayr al-Zewr, Aleppo and Roms.

Reports have been gathering to the effect that these officers were preparing
a major coup attempt, beginning with air bombardment of the defense com-
panies’ headquarters and main camps, followed by bombing the Republican
Palace, the party's national headquarters, the Central Committee and the
headquarters of the Air Force and Intelligence. Then some armored units,
based close to Damascus at al-Kiswah and el-erun camps, would move on the
capital to occupy the vital centers there and take control of the government.

Discharges

It has been confirmed that scores of senior Syrian army officers were
discharged before the start of the recent arrests. These were officers who
were cleared of any connection with the coup attempt. These dismissals in-
cluded a large number of officers of the Air Defense Corps and the naval
forces in Latakia and Tartus, as wall as several senior officers from the
Supreme Military College, including 10 officers of the rank of major general,
about 20 brigadiers, and some other ranks such as colonel. lieutenant colonel
and major. Those identified include Brig Gen Lutfi Mikha'il Haddad, Brig
Gen 'Izmi 'Adi, both from the naval forces in Latakia, Maj Gen Ghazi al-Jabi
and Brig Gen 'Abdullah Nummar, both from the Suprene Academy for Military
Science, and some officers from some of the infantry brigades, the nissile
and artillery forces and the air force, including Brig Gen (pilot) Hu'taz
Barbuh and Lt Col (Infantry) Salim al-Hushaysh.

The tree Ba'thist Officers

Another aspect of the attempt was contained in the information given to
AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI to the effect that the investigation revealed a new aili-
tary organization within the Syrian army, bearing the name of the "Free
Ba'thist Officers." The leader of this organization committed suicide. as

soon as he was discovered, while Maj Gen Neji Jamil was being interrogated
and as soon as President al-Ased postponed his execution.

The discovery of the organization came about in stages, starting, to be
precise, on the afternoon of 5 January, when the commander of President

Hafiz al-Asad's special security guard granted permission by telephone to
one of his officers to take leave because of illness.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
However, the special military intelligence organization urgently reported

to the president that evening that a surveillance force, subordinate to it,
reported that one of the president's security guard officers, i.e., the
"sick" officer, had been seen in a meeting on the outskirts of Damascus with
Staff Col Barb al-Saalaan. who for more than 3 months had been under intense
surveillance. because of his suspicious movements within the armored corps
to which he belonged. In addition. he had werm friendships with some of the
youthful air corps pilots.

At dawn the next day, forces from the defense companies raided the home of
the guard officer. During the meticulous search, a large quantity of

pamphlets were seized, which attacked the regime and called for its over-
throw. They bore the signature of the "Free Ba'thist Officers."

The special guard officer was interrogated for 3 days, during which he was
subjected to severe torture. lie finally confesss" the ages of seven fellow
masters of the "Tree Ba'thist Officers," including Col al-Saaman, who was
described as the leader of the organization.

All those whose names were given by the guard officer were arrested. except
for al-Sarman who remained free under intense surveillance, so that he could
be the trap for other officers who night contact him.

Periods of Torture

The investigation. which was accompanied by periods of torture for 5 full
days. was only able to obtain from those six arrested officers the males of
18 other officers from various army corps who were members of that organiza-
tion. The shock that jolted the regime was that three of those arrested
held leadership posts in the defense companies and that 11 of them were
'Alwites. All of then held party membership. In addition. one of that
during interrogation mentioned the name of Maj Gen llaji Jamil. who was men-
tioned in some of the meetings as being an outside supporter.

Naji Jamil was arrested and interrogated at the defense caapmies' head-
quarters. He was later transferred to the Reprblican Palace, where President
el-Asad personally interrogated him. Naji Jamil denied knowing anything
about this organisation or having contacts with it. however, he did confess
that he had heard, as others had heard. more about hostile movements in
the armed forces, although he had paid them no attention, and therefore.

he saw no reason to tell the authorities. since they were merely rumors.

Rife't el-Asad believed that because of what Naji Jamil had candidly con-
fessed. he deserved to be emscuted. However, President al-Aaad, who consid-
ered Naji Jamil to be guilty, refused to execute him on the gromds that
that would shed light on the rebellion within the armed forces against the
regime, which could lead to serious coaplicatione.

Intense surveillance of Col al-Sanan produced no results. It was obvious
that al-Smmaan had detected the surveillance, and had suspended his activ-
ities and had cut off all contact with the officers and his friends and
companions.

16 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ~
On 18 January. the order was issued to arrest Col al-Samaan. When the
defense companies' force raided his home, he drew his pistol against the
calmander of the force. The orders carried by this officer required his to
arrest al-Sanan alive, no aatter what the coat. The force renained in its
positions, unable to move against Col al-Sannan, for acre than 3 hours.
during which time the district in which the house was located was hlockadaa.

Suddenly Col al-S-Inan raised the pistol to his head and said: ”You will
not take me, and you will not learn anything. If we have failed this tine.

there will be another time, and we will succeed!" Be fired a bullet into
his head and fell to the ground.

A secret and swift military trial was held, after which a sentence of execu-
tion was issued against 19 of the arrested officers, while six others were
sentenced to dismissal froa the service and prison terms ranging between

10 and 15 years. The sentences were in fact carried out on the sure day
that Maj Gen Naji Janil was seen on television, in an indirect attenpt to
refute the reports, circulating within the arned forces and political cir-
cles in the Syrian connunity. about the discovery of a revolutionary organi-
zation of army officers working to overthrow the regime. and about the con-
nection of Maj Gen Naji Jamil with them.

however, the regime is still doing all it can to carry out a canpaign of
arrests and widespread purges within the any and the defense companies.
and to discover the answer to the question that is haunting it: What is
the organization of "Free Ba'thist Officers."

Other Details

Regarding other details about the abortive attempt, the disturbances that
occurred in Syria last month. and which still continue, caused the Syrian
president to cancel his trip to Arab North Africa. Foreign correspondents
who had gone to Syria reported that there were severe battles between units
of Haj Gen 'Ali Aslan, one of the advisers to the Syrian army chief of staff .
and special forces. subordinate to Rifa't al-Asad, near the town of Duns.

and that Aslan's forces had shelled Rifa't al-Asad's headquarters in that
town.

Information was also reported that the Syrian authorities had banned foreign
correspondents and photographers froa covering sone of the locations of
these incidents. They took away their documents and cameras upon arrival

in Damascus, at the seas time that some Syrian civilians were watching a
large migration to the mountains. out of fear of renewed disturbances. An
armored unit has been pernanently deployed around the Republican Palace

in Damascus, while President al-Asad has sent his children to his village

of al-Qardahah, his birthplace. in Jabal al-'Alewiin.

At the same time, a group of Syrian special forces was withdrawn froa
Lebanon in two batches: the first time, 8,000 troops were withdrawn. and the
second time, 2,000 troops were sent to Damascus.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In any event, the size of the "conspiracy" is clear evidence that the
Syrian opposition is not confined to Ba'thiet circles. nor to the Muslim
Brotherhood, not to any specific sect or quarter. There is evidence that
those who carried it out belong to various sects. They are active Iilitary
and retired, as well as civilians. who form the active national foundation
for the popular opposition. The Syrian authorities today can of course be
forgiven if they feel less than reassured about the loyalty of the military
establish-ant, whether in Syria or in Lebanon.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL "ATARI AI. 'ARABI

7005
C80: 6606/ 323

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DIPLOMAI BLAHED FOR MAGAZINE BONDING
Paris AL-UATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 258, 22-28 Jan 82 p 16

[Text] AL-HATAN—AL-‘ARABI has learned from a diplomatic source here that the
French Foreign Ministry has forwarded to the French ambassador in Damascus, a
complete file on the Syrian diplomat Mikha'il (nicknamed Michel), Kasuha, who
is believed to be responsible for the unsuccessful attempt to bomb the offices
of AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI. The file reportedly contains documents and evidential
materials linking the Syrian diplomat to the crime. It has been confirmed
that the French ambassador to .amascus last week turned over the file to offi-
cials of the Syrian Foreign Ministry in Damascus. ALPHATAN AL-‘ARABI features
the first artist's sketch of the accused diplomat on this issue's front cover.
It is known that Mikha'il Kasuha, born in Home in 1948, first entered France
in October 1980 as a cultural adviser to the Syrian Embassy in France. He did
not serve in this capacity, however, but concentrated instead on his other
mission, the one having nothing to do with cultural affairs. AL-HATAN AL-
‘ARABI was the first to disclose his real mission following the assassination
of Salah al-Bitar and Bansn al-‘Attar. The question now is why the French
authorities failed to expel him imnediately as a persons non grata. The
answer lies in diplomatic conventions which bar expulsion except when a diplo-
mat is caught in the act, which was not the case in the Kasuha incident. In
such situations, the authorities where the crime takes place merely inform the
other country's authorities of all legal evidence linking the diplomat to the
crime, in the hope that the offender would be withdrawn by his own country.
When such action is delayed, the host country orders the diplomat to leave.

It is expected that the Kasuha case will soon be resolved, particularly in
view of many indications that the French Government has decided to crack down
on terrorist activities following the assassination last Monday in Paris of
the American diplomat Charles Ray. The Elysee Palace has issued direct orders
to French Security agencies to take all necessary measures to stem the wave of
terrorism in France. A total of 13 assassinations and assassination attempts
on foreign diplomats have taken place in France in the past 5-1/2 years, cul—
minating in the assassination last November of the American diplomat Christian

Chapman.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WAIAN AL-‘ARABI

9063
C80: 4&04/256

19

IND! 0F11CJAI.UGII(NWLY
Hr Rif'at al-Asad (brother of President al-Asad nearly precipitated a diploma-
tic crisis between France and Syria. "hen French security authorities learned
that Mr al-Asad, accompanied by a group of armed bodyguards-some with sub-
machineguns-was leading a motorcade from Geneva [Switzerland] to France, they
sent a police delegation to meet him at the Swiss-French border. when French
police insisted on searching the Syrians, the latter revealed their identities
and produced diplomatic passports which give then immunity against police
searches. At that, the officer in charge demanded that the Syrians surrender
their weapons or return to Switzerland. After much debate and several tele-
phone calls to the highest governmental authorities, the Syrian bodyguards re-
turned to Switzerland, while Rif'at al-Asad, accompanied by only two of his
bodyguards, was allowed to continue his trip to Paris. Three hours later, and
to the surprise of French airport police, the Syrians, still armed, landed at
Orly Airport. Informed of strict instructions to bar entry to any of them
while armed, the "diplonats" finally surrendered their weaons and were per-
mitted to enter France. The incident nearly precipitated a diplomatic crisis
between the two countries. The French Foreign Ministry, acting through diplo-
matic channels. communicated its displeasure to the Syrian Government and
warned against repetition of similar incidents. It also made clear to the
Syrians that responsibility for protecting foreign visitors to France was the
business of French police. A similar incident reportedly took place last year,
causing widespread anger in French police circles. [Text] [Paris AL-UIIAR
AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 258. 22-28 Jan 82 p 17] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-'
ARABI] 9063

C80: 4404/256 END

20

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY