FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10373

8 March 1982

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE
(FOUO 4/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPES publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OP THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

Aemcuuuna
9000 4/82)

Coursurs
LIVES'IOCK FEED mam

Strengthening, Modernising Livutock Food Production
(mpmzmmm’ J“ 82) I0....CO...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOG

Lms'mcx

Accent-“ion of Rates of I“ Production cmed For
(v. mm; mmm’ Dec 81) OOIOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOO0.

AGRO-ROIIQIICS AID ORGAIIZAI'IOI

Development of Food Program Within APE Syutu Discussed
(Yul-1y Innovich Bystrakov. Mikhail Anilinovich Polyukov;
mmsy- ’.M81)U0.00000...OIOIICQOOOOOQO‘COOO.....

- a - [111' - ussn - 7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
During the 1976-1980 period, the develop-eat of the country's feed base ves cerried
out by leans of. inprovusente in the structure of forage crop plentings, by an

Year Plan. Beaver, on the whole the growth in teed production did not satiety the
increasing requirements of animal husbandry. either Iron the etandpoint of quantity
or quality. The ratee of growth in the cropping power of the principel forage crops
did not correspond to those sssigned in the teska and a subetentiel increase was

cOneidersble increase during the Bleventh Five-Year Plan in the production of
coarse and succulent feeds and ieprovenents in their quality. In carrying out this
teak, priority importance will he ettsched to taking ﬂexin- use of ell evailahle

intra-farn specialization in feed production. creating teed production subunits at
the kolkhoees end sovkhozes, with land srees, equip-eat end personnel essigned to
epecielized feed production deperteents, eections and brigedes end further
ieprovenents must be carried out in the control stmture. The work of creating
epccislized far-e snd inter-tern sseociations for the production of nerketeble

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Officiﬂo USE ONLY

raising the culture of branch manage-ant and sharply increasing the cropping power
of forage crops on arable land and the productivity of the natural haying and
pasture lands.

The principal trend with regard to increasing the production of feed on arable
lands continues to be that of improving the structure of the areas assigned for
forage crops. Special attention nuat be concentrated on expanding the plantings of
perennial leguinoua grasses -- alfalfa, clover and others and increasing their
proportion in the structure of nown perennial grass areas. By 1985, with a
negligible increase in the overall perennial grass area. the aowings of alfalfa
nust be expanded to 9 nillion hectares, clover and sainfoin ~- to 10.5 aillion
hectares. The work associated with reducing the sowing areas for annual cereal
grasses should be continued. Taking into account the soil-climatic conditions of
the olbaste, kraya and republics. grass nixtures of pulse and annual cereal grasses
should ideally be used nainly as internsdiate and occupied fallow crops and also
within the green conveyer systea.

Under the conditions imposed by concentration and specialisation of agricultural
production, great inportance is attached to introducing specialised feed crop
rotation plans into operations, with consideration being given to the particular
animal husbandry trend at a fern. With the nastering of these plans, feed
production on arable land can becone the foundation for feed production and its
further intensification.

Silage crops, which annually occupy 18-19 nillion hectares, warrant special
attention. An industrial technology nuat be introduced on a wide scale into
kolkhoz and sovkho: practice for growing corn for silage. with ears of nilky-waxy
ripeness and involving the use of highly effective herbicides and early ripening
and mid-season ripening corn varieties and hybrids.

During the current five-year plan,l a sharp increase nust be realised in the
effectiveness of use of reclaimed land in behalf of forage crops, so as to ensure
that these lands serve as a guaranteed source for obtaining feed.

lnprovenents in the structure of the areas under crops, through an expansion of the
plantings of perennial leguninous grasses (with irrigation to 76 percent and on
drained lands to 68 percent). corn, food roots. the application of optima:
fertiliser norns and observance of the irrigation regions will nake it possible to
double, by 1985, the gross yield of feed obtained iron reclained lands, conpared to
the average annual level achieved during the Tenth Five-Year Plan.

Expansion of the sewing areas using new and highly productive varieties of forage
crops and grasses offers great opportunities for obtaining additional feed.
Compared to 1980. the areas to be used for early ripening hybrids and varieties of
corn during the current five-year plan nust be increased by a factor of 2.5.

Technologies will be introduced into production operations on a nore extensive
scale which will neka it possible to obtain 2-3 forage crop yields annually on
irrigated lands and in the cone of adequate noisture. The plans call for the
area of intermediate sowings of forage crops under irrigation to be increased by
twofold prior to 1985. The sowings of early ripening nustard fanily crops
(rape, oil-producing radiahes, white nustard and others) must be expanded.

2
10!! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The creation of a strong feed base is unthinkable in the absence of an
intensification of the pasture-meadow econon and the extensive use of natural feed
lands for agricultural purposes. The kolkhoses and sovkhozes are carrying out a
grandiose long-term program for mastering these lands and raising their

productivity based upon the increasing potential of land reclamation, mechanization
and the use of chemical processes.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, the plans call for a large voluse of work to be
carried out aimed at radically improving the natural feed lands, creating irrigated
haying and pasture lands, flooding pastures and developing catchwork irrigation.

In addition to carrying out further work associated with improving haying and
pasture lands, the attention of workers attached to kolkhoses, sovkhoses and
agricultural organs must also be concentrated on their effective utilisation. A
radical change must take place in the attitude towards the use of improved natural
-feed lands, the area of which will increase to in excess of? 31 million hectares by
1985. The timely carrying out of a complex of measures for the tending and

rational use of these lands will make it possible to increase the fodder yield by a
factor of 2-3.

A great amount of work must be carried out during the current five-year plan aimed
at introducing a technology for the multiple-cutting use of grass stands. This
technology will be based upon applications of complete fertiliser norms and
harvesting of the grasses during the early phases of development. The use of this
technology in regions of adequate moisture will make it possible to carry out 3-4

cuttings of the grasses and, in the process, to raise the quality of the feed
considerably .

Forage crop areas located on flood plain lands require strict attention. Even with
low expenditures for developing them in many regions of the country, they can
become a reliable source for obtaining coarse and succulent feeds.

In addition to the further watering of pastures in the arid zone, more intense work
must be carried out in connection with improving their ability to produce feed. In
addition to taking advantage of existing scientific and practical experience, it
will also be necessary to expand the work volunes associated with introducing
pasture rotations with two seasons of use and alternation of the spring and sunset
pastures. This will make it possible to raise their productivity by 20 percent,
increase the areas to be used for planting pasture-protective sexaul strips and for

the additional sowing of grasses and to intensify the campaign being waged against
the degradation of pastures.

One of the chief problems in feed production continues to be that of improving the
quality of the feed and reducing losses during their procurement and storage.
Considerable feed losses and a reduction in their quality are being tolerated as a
result of the untimely harvesting of the forage crops. A month or longer is being
spent in harvesting the sown and natural grasses at kolkhoses and sovkhozes and
only 30-40 percent of their areas are being cut down during the optimum periods.
And indeed just one day's delay results in a 2 percent loss in feed units. When
corn is cut down during earlier phases (prior to omencament of milky-waxy
ripeness of the grain), each hectare produces 25 fewer quintals of feed units. The

yield of dry substance is especially low in the case of late ripening varieties and
hybrids.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The untimely harvesting of forage crops is the result mainly of failure to observe
technological discipline, the absence of operational control over the course of
feed procurement Operations, weak organization of labor and unsatisfactory
preparation and use of the feed harvesting equipment. The kolkhoses and sovkhozes
are confronted by the task of achieving complete and efficient use of the entire
pool of machines and raising their productivity prior to the end of the five-year
plan. Taking into account the deliveries of highly productive equipment, this will
make it possible to reduce the schedules for harvesting grasses for hay to 12
working days, for haylsge -- to 8 and for silage -- to 9 days, or more than twofold.

An important reserve for increasing production and raising the quality of feed is
that of introducing progressive technologies for the procurement and storage of
feed. During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, the overall volume of hay procurements,
pressed and prepared using the method of forced ventilation, will increase to 55
percent instead of 25 percent as was the case in 1980. A technology for the
chemical preservation of green plants holds great prospects for the future. This
technology is presently being employed for preparing 7-8 million tons of silage.
In 1985, assuming deliveries by the chemical industry to agriculture of chemical
preservatives in the planned volumes. it will be possible to preserve 60 million
tons of fodder.

The kolkhoses end sovkhozes are sustaining considerable losses in feed nutrients
owing to a lack of feed storehouaes. In 1980, 40 percent of the silage, 80 percent
of the haylege, 10 percent of the root crops and 8 percent of the hay were placed
in storage in capital facilities. Despite a great volue of feed storehouse
construction to be carried out during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, the requirements
of the farms for such facilities will still not be met. Thus the construction
volumes for the 1981-1985 period must be viewed as minimal and use must be made of
all available potential and reserves for completing the construction of feed
storehouses at each kolkhos end sovkhos.

A great amount of attention must be given to organising the rational and efficient
use of forage grain in animal husbandry. In 1980, only “4.1 percent of the-forage
grain was processed into mixed feed. The remaining portion was used in an inefficient
manner -- in simple feed mixtures or in crushed form.

Special importance is being attached at the present time to organizing the
production of animal husbandry products with minimal expenditures of concentrates.
Every attempt must be made to ensure that all grain allocated for feed purposes is
used in the form of mixed feed or full-value feed mixtures. In addition, maximum
effort must be directed towards reducing the proportion of grain in the mixed feeds
by increasing the proportions in them of high quality grass meal and valuable waste
products from the food industry and agriculture. Experience has shown thst the
proportion of non-grain components in mixed feeds can be raised to 60-50 percent,
with no harm being caused to the productivity of the animals. In the process.
rather than simply mixing various types of components, they should be selected in a
manner so as to ensure the production of rich mixed feeds which will be balanced in
terms of the required nutrients.

The non-grain feed resources which our country has at its disposal, assuming their
complete use, could also make it possible to reduce the proportion of grain in
mixed feeds. For example, when organising the drying of best pulp residue, malt
residue, brewing waste and potato pulp, it is possible to obtain on an annual basis

h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
no less than 6 million tons of valuable raw materials used in the production of
mixed feeds. However. drying is being carried out presently only in the case of
best pulp residue, and only on a limited scale.

Bach year the animals are being fed large quantities of skim milk. whey and
buttermilk. Uhen these products become readily available during the summer months.
when no protein deficit is being experienced, they are expended in an irrational

' manner. The organization of the drying of these products will make it possible to
obtain 1-1.5 million additional tons of rich raw materials.

An increase is required in the production of feed additives of animal origin. At
the present time. slightly more than 50 kilograms of meat-and-bone meal are being
produced per ton of meat, although this indicator could be considerably higher.
Measures should be undertaken aimed at processing into feed meal all waste products

obtained from the meat industry and making complete utilization of all slaughtered
animals.

In order to achieve rhythmic Operations by the inter-farm, kolkhoa and sovkhoa

mixed feed enterprises and departnents and unconditional fulfillment of the
production plans for mixed feeds and feed mixtures, the USSR Ministry of Procurements
must undertake additional measures to ensure that the tasks for supplying
agriculture with proteindvitamin additives are fully carried out. Specigl
importance is attached to ensuring that 0883 Gosplan, 0883 Minkhimprom [Ministry of
the Chemical Industrxl, USSR Minudobreniy (Ministry of Mineral_l'ertiliser
Production]. USSR Minmedprom [Ministry of the Medical Industry] and Glavmikrobioprom
achieve fulfillment of all plans and are able to supply agriculture with additional

quantities of mineral additives. microelements, vitamins and other biologically
active substances.

It is presently impossible to solve the growing ta ks in feed production in the
absence of active scientific participation and in uence.

The task of scientists consists of intensifying studies of a research nature,
expanding scientific work of an applied character end sharply increasing the volumes
of completed scientific studies being introduced into operations. All possible
measures must be undertaken aimed at raising the operational effectiveness of
scientific institutes 'in the area of feed production and strengthening their
contacts with kolkhoses and aovkhoses.

The placing in operation of all available reserves for feed production, the use of
modern methods and technologies for preparing feed and the rational use of feed are
making it possible to raise the productivity of animal husbandry and to ensure the
successful fulfillment of the animal husbandry production volumes planned for the
Eleventh Five-Year Plan.

COPYRIGIH: Isdatel'stvo ”Moles", "Kormproisvodstvo", 1982

7026
050: 1824/1716

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ACCELERATION OP RATES OF EGG neonates CALLED FOR
lbacow I’TITSMSTVO in Russian 30 12, Dec 81 pp 2-5

[Article by V. Annenkov, first deputy chief of USSR Ptitsepron: "Accelerating the
Rates of Intensification of ng Production"]

[Text] mu. implementing the party's agrarian policy. our country's poultry work-
ers have done an iuense anomt of work in the past three decades for concentration
and intensification of production in the branch.

Before the changeover of public poultry raising to an industrial basis it was sein-
ly small kolkhos end aovkhoz ferns that engaged in egg production, and extensive
methods were used in the branch. The average production of eggs per hen on ferns

of the public sector anountedto only 117 per laying hen. 80 percent of the eggs
were obtained during the spring end our period, and they were produced at a loss
on the majority of the terns. In 1961: the gross yield of eggs wanted to 26.7 bil-
lion. including only 7 billion or 26 percent tron the public sector. The par capi-
ta egg production was 126.

The radical rescructuring of the branch began in keeping with the decisions of the
March (1965} Plenun of the CPSU central Col-litres and the decree of the CPSU Central
Co-Iittee and the USSR Council of Ministers, "0n Organizing the Production of Eggs
and. Poultry Meat on an Industrial Basis,” of 3 Septseber 1964. During the ties that
has passed since then a specialized aysten of poultry raising ferns has been creat-
ed (0853 Ptitsepron). Reconstruction of existing enterprises. and the construction
of large new poultry ferns. breeding plants and other reproduction facilities were
carried out systenatically and consistently. During 1965-1980 13.5 billion rubles'
worth of capital investments were nsde in the developnent of a production base for
the branch. amounting to a total of 15.6 billion rubles. A total of 1037 poultry
farms for egg production were constructed or expanded, as were 75 breeding ferns.
Aleost all of the specialised enterprises underwent technical rear-aunt. New ca-
pecities to ecconodete 110 nillion laying hens were put into operation. Large
poultry fares for 300,000-600,000 and 1.0-1.5 aillion head of industrial stock were
created.

The rapid technical progress in the branch, the consolidation of enterprises and
the inprovezsent of the volune and planning decisions led to a change in the stand-
ard designs of poultry ferns. Reinforced concrete structures with plant readiness.
asbestos cenent, and panels faced with sheets of aluninun began to be used nore

6 .
roe 0mm use my
FOI(HWNCLALI£ﬂiONLY

extensively. All this made it possible to use industrial methods to construct spe-
cialized enterprises and to sharply reduce the time periods for putting them into
operation.

The development and mass production of highly productive equipment and machines for
various purposes contributed to the technical rearmament of poultry raising. and
this considerably raised the level of mechanization and automation of all technolo-
gical processes without exception.

During the years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan they began series production of such
highly efficient modern coop equipment as the K3392 two-layer battery for group
maintenance of hens that breed other hens for egg laying, and a three-layer battery
of the cascade type for raising poultry to replenish the flock and maintaining lay-
ing hens of the industrial flock (sun-3 end BKN-3). Their utilization makes it
possible not only to considerably increase the density of the poultry per one square
meter of floor of the chicken coop, to reduce labor expenditures and to increase la-
bor productivity by 16-67 percent. but also to provide for operating the equipment
automatically and to create optimal conditions for keeping the poultry.

As of 1 January 1981 on egg farms of the USSR Ptiteeprom more than 98 percent of
the laying hens of the industrial flock. almost 99 percent of the young poultry for
replenishing the flock and about 70 percent of the reproduction flock were kept in
mechanized batteries. IKP-90 incubators are being produced for raising large
batches of young poultry. The poultry farms are now receiving BSK-ZS exterior bun-
kers for storing mixed feeds and ASP-25 special feed carriers.

In order to change poultry raising over to an industrial basis, it was necessary to
develop a principally new technology and effective methods of feeding and maintain--
ing poultry, as well as to improve the forms of organisation of the branch and ad-
ministration of the poultry raising business. On the basis of a study of the prac-
tice of poultry raising throughout the world and generalization of the advanced
practice of the best farms of our country, Soviet scientists. in a relatively short
period of time, developed and introduced into production a comprehensive system for
running the branch on an industrial basis. This system includes methods of selec-
tion, norm setting for feeding poultry. programs for controlling productivity (pa-
rameters of the microclimate, lighting conditions, purposive raising of young for
replacement. artificial melting of laying hens. and so forth), technology for main-
taining poultry in batteries of cages, effective measures of fighting against the
most dangerous infectious diseases of poultry, and many other things.

Improvement of breeding work and the creation of domestic lines and crosses of
highly productive poultry for eggs played a special role.

At the rims of the creation of the USSR Ptitseprom system in our country there were
no sufficiently highly productive lines and crosses for obtaining hybrids. In or-
der to accelerate the creation of a breeding base, the All-Union Trust of Breeding
Poultry Farms was organized. It included 20 of the best breeding farms.

In order to replace the less productive poultry. more than 200,000 head of young
foreign crossbreeds were imported. This poultry was propagated and improved in
scientific institutions and at breeding plants. _

7
FOItOFIﬂCIAl.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As poultry raising became more intensive, selection workers were faced with more
and more complicated tasks. Scientists and specialists of scientific institutions
and leading breeding plants, on the basis of domestic and imported genetic material,
created and introduced into production a whole series of highly productive egg lay-
ing crossbreeds. The most widespread on the specialized farms were the following
crossbreeds: Yantar'-l (38 percent of the poultry that was utilised). Belarus'-9

' (31 percent), Zarya-l? (12.7 percent). and Volzhskiy-3 (10 percent).

Many farms that used the Zsrya-17 cross achieved high indicators of the productivity
of the hens in 1980. Thus the Giryale poultry sovkhoz in the Lithuanian SSR gather-
ed an annual average of 271 eggs per laying hen, the Veviskaya poultry farm in the
Lithuanian 88R and the Zabrodenskoye association in Voronezhskaye (blast—267, and
the Gur'yevskaya poultry farm in Kaliningradskaya onion—266 eggs.

At the present time there is fully developed system of breeding farms in operation
in egg production, which makes it possible to utilize only hybrid laying hens at all
conercial enterprises withOut exception, which allows us to hope for a significant
increase in the productivity of the hens in the near future. This pertains also to
kolkhoz and sovkho: farms and farmstead plots belonging to the population.

At the same time, under the Eleventh Five-Year Plan selection workers will be faced
with the task of creating producing crosses of poultry which produce 255-260 eggs
per laying hen with feed expenditures of no more than 1.6-1.5 kilogrmss per ten

A large amount of work has been done to deepen the specializations of the farm,
concentrate production and improve administration of the branch'on the basis of
agro-industrial integration and the creation of various interfarm associations and
complexes. As a result, the average size of the farms in the USSR Ptitseprom sys-
tem has increased from “.000 head of mature poultry in 1965 to 150,000 head in
1980, that is, more than 3-fold. While in 1975 there were 60 production associa-
tions in the USSR Ptitseprom system, as of 1 January 1981 there were more than 100.
These associations now include 600 farms «28 percent of the overall number of
farms in the USSR Ptitseprom system. The work experience of the Minsk, Kiev, Tomi-
lino, Kustsnay, Vitebsk. Glebov and many other associations clearly shows this form
of organization of the branch contributes to improving technology and introducing
comprehensive mechanization and automation; it also provides for more efficient uti-
lization of fixed capital and a reduction of the expenditure of labor and money per
unit of output with a sharp increase in its gross volume.

eggs, and compensated for the shortage-of them in other categories of farms, thus
contributing to successful fulfillment of the five-year plan which envisioned in-
creasing the average annual egg production on all categories of farms to 58-61
billion. It actually amounted to 63 billion eggs.

The overwhelming majority of poultry farms and kolkhoz and sovkhoz farms have suc-
cessfully fulfilled the assignments for the past five years. There was also a con-
siderable improvement in the quality of egg products, and expenditures of labor and

roe omcuu. use ONLY
non 051WC1AI.USE.O”§LY

feeds per unit of output decreased. Labor productivity, profitability and produc-
tion efficiency also increased.

One cannot but take note of the large amount of work that has been done for a sig-
nificant expansion of the processing base on farms of the USSR Ptitseprom. During
the past five years the capacities of slaughter shops increased fro: 1,800 to 3,500
tons of slaughtered poultry per shift. Enterprises of the Russian Federation and
the Belorussian SSR have organised the production of powdered eggs, whose output
amounted to 3,700 tons in 1980. All this made it possible to considerably improve
the quality of the products and reduce losses of then.

I should like especially to discuss an important economic indicator of the develop-
ment of the branch and the efficiency of the operation of its enterprises as labor
productivity. During the past fifteen years it has increased 6-fold on the farms of
the USSR Ptitiseprom system, including by 41.8 percent during the years of the

Tenth Five-Year Plan. The highest rates of increase in 1.oor productivity were
achieved on specialized farms of Belorussia, Lithuania and the Russian Federation.
Under the Tenth Five-Year Plan, 80percent of the increase in gross output was a-
chieved as a result of increased labor productivity. It is typical that the rates
of increase in labor productivity exceeded the increase in earnings 2.5-fold. This
is a most important indicator of production efficiency.

While in 1975 6.2 man-hours were expended for 1.000 eggs, in 1980 this figure was
3.0 man-hours. During the Tenth Five-Year Plan the number of head of poultry at-
tended by one worker on the farms of the USSR Ptitseprom system increased 1.5-fold.

The 26th CPSU Congress earmarked increasing the average annual volume of egg'produc-
tion on all categories of farms to no less than 72 billion during the current five-
year period. In order to achieve this it will be necessary for all categories of

farms to obtain no less than 75 billion eggs in 1985, including 52-53 billion eggs
in the public sector.

In order to carry out this task it will be necessary to evaluate critically all the
work that has been done and to concentrate attention on unsolved problems. when
analyzing the indicators of the operation of specialized farms, one cannot fail to
note the significant differences in then. In each oblast and republic there are
farms that achieve a sharp increase in egg production from year to year and in-
crease zootechnical and economic indicators, and there are enterprises operating
under the same conditions with a considerably lower level of operation.

One of the main reasons why the farms of a number of oblasts and republics fail to
fulfill the plans for~egg production is inadequate attention to such a reserve as
increasing the egg bearing of the hens. Frequently the explanation for their low
productivity is the poor quality of mixed feeds that are sent to the ferns. But
still many enterprises with the same conditions achieve quite a different result.
Increased productivity of the hens is the result of a persistent, purposeful strug-
gle for the further intensification of the branch. A good deal is being done in
this area in a whole number of union republics. For example, in 1980 the special-
ized farms of the Lithuanian SSR obtained an average of 269 eggs per laying hen,
which is an annual increase in productivity of six eggs; and enterprises of the
Estonian SSR and the Belorussian SSR gathered 266 eggs per hen, with the increase

9
FOI‘OFFK]A1.USE(NULY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in productivity per head being four eggs and one egg, respectively, as compared to
1979.

And yet on the farms of the Ptitis prom of the Tajik 85!! the productivity of the
hens decreased by 13 eggmtne Kirg t SSR-hy 8 eggs , 'the Latvian SSR--by 10 eggs,
the Azerbaijan SSR—by 5 eggs, and‘the Ukrainian 881! and the Kaeakh SSR—by 2 eggs.

The immediate task of managers and specialists of the branch consists in extensive-
ly developing the struggle for increasing the productivity of the hens. As a re-
sult of this alone , with the same capacities, it is possible to significantly in-
crease the production and procurement of eggs.

This task is closely related to another, no less important one-«canonical expendi-
ture of feeds. For the greater the productivity of the poultry. the less feed is
expanded per unit of output. 0n the Vevisskaya poultry farm in the Lithuanian SSR,
which obtained 267 eggs per laying hen in 1980, feed expenditures per 10 eggs a-
mounted to 1.5 kilograms. at the borovskaya poultry in ‘ryumenakaya 0b1ast-258 eggs
and 1.5 kilograms, respectively, and the Minsk production association—256 eggs
and 1.7 kilogram, respectively.

In the Tonilino production association in Moscow Oblast the egg production of the
laying hens increased from 221 to 241 eggs during the past five years. And this is
with a large number of head of poultry. In 1980 the ‘romilino association produced
650 million eggs, and feed expenditures per 10 eggs decreased from 1.88 kilograms
in 1975 to 1.77 kilograms in 1980. In the Glebov production association in Moscow
Oblast the productivity of the hens increased by 8 eggs during this same period
and reached 260 eggs per laying hen. Feed expenditures decreased appreciably here
too. All ‘of these' farms and associations strictly observe technology and strive to
enrich the feed mixtures. '

One met not forget for a ninute about efficient expenditure of feed resources. It
is known that the cost of nixed feeds comprises 65-70 percent of all the expendi-
tures on egg production. Therefore the primary duty of workers of the branch con-
sists in struggling for economy of feeds each day and closing off all channels
through which they are lost. An inspection of the work of a number of farms showed
that from 2.5 to 5 percent of the feeds are lost when they are shipped in railroad
cars or open trucks, and 1-2 percent are lost while processing is being completed
on the farms. Rodents eat 1.5-2 percent of them. And losses from all these fac-
tors reach 5-10 percent. But the greatest losses come from filling the feeders too
full—the scattering of the feeds accounts for frat 10-15 percent of the losses.
And every gram that is lost means products that are not produced and labor that is
expended in vain. A thrifty attitude toward feed should become an indispensable
law at each enterprise and farm.

An important reserve in egg production is to reduce the percentage of rejection of
laying hens during the productive period. Many farms reject up to 1.0 percent of
the poultry during this time. As a result, during the course of the year produc-
tion capacities are actually not utilized for about two months.

The extensive production experiments conducted at the Borovskaya poultry farm
showed the possibility of keeping laying hens from the time they are 150 days old

we OFFICIAL use 01m?
FINICNﬂﬂCIAI.lEﬂi(NILV

until the end of the productive period without rejecting them, with the exception
of removing dead poultry and those with symptoms of diseases. The results of the
experiments were utilized in the practical work of the enterprise. This made it
possible to reduce the culling of laying hens from 33 percent of the initial number
in 1975 to 18 percent in subsequent years, that is, to keep an additional 120,000
hens, which produced 30 million more eggs.

Further increase in labor productivity also requires unwavering attention. The
differences in this most important indicator among individual union republics are
still extremely great. while on farms of the Estonian §SR 1.8 man-hours are ex-
pended per 1,000 eggs, in the Turkmen SSR they expend 7.5 man-hours or four times
more. At specialized enterprises of the Georgian 858 this indicator is 6.7 and in

the Azerbaijan SSR--8.9 man-hours, that is, almost three times more than the aver-
age for the USSR Ptitseprom.

Labor productivity is a comprehensive indicator which reflects the farms level of
operation and determines its efficiency. Only constant and persistent study and
introduction of advanced practice and improvement of the organization of labor as
well as all other aspects of production activity will make it possible to achieve
an improvement in this indicator, and, consequently, successful fulfillment of the
tasks facing the farm.

Despite the significant increase in the production and procurement of eggs in past
years, the demand for this valuable food product is still far from being fully set-
isfied. The per-capita egg production in the republics of Central Asia, Transcau-
casia and a number of regions of Eastern Siberia and the Far East still fall signi-
ficantly below the scientifically substantiated norms. Therefore it is necessary
to ship a large quantity of eggs there.

In these regions it is necessary to considerably increase production capacities by

reconstructing existing farms and constructing large new poultry farms and mechan-
ized commercial farms.

But in many oblasts, krays and republics the per-capita egg production has reached
300 and more, that is, it has approached the scientifically substantiated norms for
consumption. In these regions the problem of providing eggs for the population has
practically been so] ed. Consequently we should discuss utilizing production ca-
pacities more fully and increasing all qualitative indicators of production as well
as its efficiency.

One cannot but take into account the role of farmstead plots either. They are an
important source for augmenting food resources. Their annual egg production a-
mounts to 20-22 billion eggs. Therefore it is necessary to fully satisfy the needs
of the owners of these farms for highly productive young poultry. In 1980 570 mil-
lion head of young poultry were sold to the population--allost ZDOnﬂllion more than
in 1975. But this must be regarded as only the beginning of effective measures for
rendering assistance in the development of farmstead poultry raising.

The first year of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan is drawing to a close. Labor col-
lectives of poultry enterprises and farms, implementing the decisions of the 26th

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Party Congress, are striving to fulfill end overfulfill annual plane and socialist
counitnante for the production and sale to the Itete of products of the branch, and
to lay a firm basis for early completion of the assignments of the five-year plan.
The utilization of the extremely rich reserve of industrial poultry raising will
unite it possible to unite a worthy contribution to the improve-eat of the supply of
highly valuable food products for the population of our country.

ICOPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "xo1os","Pt1tscvodstvo". 1981

11772
050: 18210 I156

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AGRO-ECWWICS AND ORGANIZATIGI

DEVELOPMENT OF FOOD W WITHIN APK srsm DISCUSSED
Hoscow VOPROSY mm in Russia No 12, Dec 81 pp 103-113

[rticle by Yuriy Ivsnovich Bystrakov. doctor of econonic sciences. deputy chair-
nnn of the Co-ussion on Scientific Principles of Agriculture under the Presidium
of the USSR Acadew of Sciences, and Mikhail Anisinovich Polyakov. candidate of

economic sciences. senior scientific worker at the Institute of. acononics of the

USSR Academy of Sciences: "Agroiudustrial Complex and Developnent of the Food
Program '7 '

,kcerp_t_7 The party and the government pay constant attention to the development
of integration relations of agriculture with industry and service spheres. At the
Novewer (1979) Plenum of the CPSU Central Cormrlttee L. I. Brezhnev stressed the
following: "In the final analysis the consuner judges both the quality and quan-
tity of agricultural output by ulhat he sees and can buy in a store. That is why
it is necessary to strive for a smooth and coordinated operation of all the links
of the chain that connects the field or the fern with the consumer. Everything is
equally important hereuthe transport and production of containers. storage and
processing of products and. finally, trade." The link that connects the field and '
the farm with the consular is a figurative expression of the agroindustrial com-
plex (APR).

The agroindustrial coqlex of the USSR as a structural unit of the system of the
national econoey is the totality of technologically and economically interconnected
sectors subordinate, to a course ulti-te end-full satisfaction of the needs of
socialist society for food products and other consumer goods produced froe agri-
cultural rav materials. The agroindustrial complex received an official status in
the national economic plan. The following is stated in "Basic Directions in the
Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period Until
1990": "The country's reliable provision with foodstuffs and agricultural raw ma-
terials is the basic task of the agroindustrial cowlex.”

The agroindustrial couple: occupies a position exceptional in its scale in the sys-
tem of the national economy. For exalple. nore than 600 nillion hectares of agri-
cultural 1end. including lore than.220 million hectares of arable land, are used
in agroindustrial production and over 60 nillion average annual workers are em-
ployed in it. During thallth Five-Year Plan more than one-third of all the capi-
tal investments are allocated for the developeent of the agroindustrial couples:
(including nonproduction construction). The proportion: of the agroindustrial com-
plex in the formtion of the final product coeprises more than 50 percent. ‘lhe
share of foodstuffs in retail trade turnover cowrises approxi-tely 55 percent
and of all the goods with the use of agricultural raw uterials (foodstuffs. feb-
rics, clothing. knitted articles. footwear and so forth). about 80 percent.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The structure of the agroindustrial coupler is determined by technological and e-
conomic relations and connections among sectors directly participating not only in
the production process, but in the delivery of the final product to the consumer
as well. The correlation of sectors performing production functions at every stage
of integrated agroindustrial production for” the sectorial structure of the agro-
industrial cowlex.

Agriculture and food and light industry sectors are the basic complex forming sec-
tors of the agroindustrial complex. The proportion of all these sectors in the
production of the final product comprises about 65 percent.

lhe following belong to the sectors of the agroindustrial complex: tractor and
agricultural machine building; eachine building for light and food industry; machine
building for aniul husbandry and fodder production; production of mineral fertil-
izers and plant protection agents; mixed feed and hulling and milling industry;
microbiological industry; repair of tractors and agricultural mhines; material
and technical supply (in the part made up for by the enterprises and organizations
of the State Conittee for Supply of Production Equipment for Agriculture); land
reclaumtion; rural construction; road construction (in the part of intrafarm work);
housing and cultural-general construction; personnel training; farming sectors;
animal husbandry sectors; food industry (including net and dairy industries);
light industry; procurements; trade and consumer cooperatives; specialised transport.

In the physical and mterisl component food products and agricultural raw mterials
for 'their production, which in their totality form the food aubcoaplex, constitute
the predominant part (about three-fourths) of the final product of the agroindus-
trial cowlex.

The level of development of the food aubcomplex in our country mkes it possible
to ensure the population's nutrition in terms of the total caloric value at the
level of scientifically substantiated norms. From 1965 through 1979 the per-capi-
ta consumption of basic food products increased at the following rates: of mt.
by 1.1 percent. of milk. by 27 percent. of eggs, by 88 percent. of fruits and ber-
ries. by 36 percent and of vegetables, by 32 percent. During the seas period the
total caloric value 'of food products increasedby 10 percent. amounting to approx-
imately 3,000 kcal. which corresponds to the average physiological norm determined
by the FAO (Food and Agriculture Commission of the United Nations).

Balanced nutrition in term of the total caloric value should not be a calming
factor. because the needs for proteins and fate of aniul origin are compensated
at the expense of carbohydrates. At present the consuwtion of milk, dairy prod-
ucts. eggs, meat. vegetables and fruits lags behind rational norms.

The partially unsolved problem of the population's provision with food products
generated the need for the development of a special food program. Speaking at the
October (1980) Plenum of the CPS!) Central Co-ittee. L. I. Brezhnev said the fol-
lowing: "Among the problems on which the living standard of the Soviet people de-
pends improvement in food supply occupies the first place... The Politburo of the
CPS!) Central Committee adopted a decision on the preparation of the food program.
It is a question of a program designed to link together problems connected with
the development of agriculture. of the industrial sectors servicing it and of the
procurement. storage, transportation and processing of agricultural products and

ll: _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
problems connected with the development of the food industry and of trade in food-
stuffs... lhis agroindustrial food couples: should be planned, financed and Inn-
aged as a single whole, ensuring high end results. The food prograa chauld be pre-
pared so that it becomes an organic component of the llth Five-Year Plan."

The difficulties in its development are connectedvith the intricate social and econ-
omic structure of the food subcomlu. as well as of the entire agroindustrial com-
plex. whose development is determined by the natural and climtic factors of the
country and regions. Products are produced at state and Itolkhoz-cooperative enter-
prises snd on private subsidiary farms. lhe system of manage-mt and planning has
a significant effect on the stability and efficiency of production.

productive capital and an outstripping growth of the capital of agricultural pro-
duction as compared with the capital of sectors of sphere III of the agroindustrial
complex. The reasons for the noted shortcomings are the low level of utilization

planning and management. At the Novelist (1981) Plenum of the CPSU Central Com-
mittee L. I. Brezhnev stressed that "during the preparation of the program it is
necessary to carefully work out the structure of the agroindustrial complex and to
eliminate the discrepancies existing in it. In the presented plan slightly more

problems concerning the development of agriculture and of servicing and process-
ing sectors of the agroindustrial complex. Therefore, the concept of a steady and
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stable development of agroindustrial production becomes basic in the establishment
of the country's food program for the forthcoming five-year plan and for the period
until 1990. 'me objectives and tasks of the very near future and of a long-term
period and large-scale measures and steps aimed at the solution of the food prog-
ram are developed from this point of view.

‘me fulfillment of the indicated conditions of development of the agroindustrial

colplea of the USSR in the specific proposals for an improvement in the structure
and mechanism of its functioning is connected with the effectiveness of the basic
principles of socialist unagement, in particular democratic csntralism and so on.

In the system of measures directed toward the attainment of stable rates of devel-
opment of agroindustrial production retional’isatiai of the structure of the agro-
industrial food cowlex and improvement in the economic mechanism of management are
put in the forefront. At the same time. the economic mechanism itself is a means
of rationalisationof the structure of the sgroindustrial comlennprovision of op-
timisation of the functional structure of the agroinduetrial complex and its em-
bodiment in the sectoriel stmcmre.

no object food program is aimed at ensuring the basic conditions of functioning
of the agroindustrial complex—e balance of the production stages of this couple:
in the volumes of production and resources and orientation of the sectors of the
agroindustrial complex toward a cos-Ion ultimate end. In other words. the program
envisages not only rationalization of the structure of the agroindustrial couples.
but also the elimination of the existing separation of its sectors by the motiva-
tional mechanism of stimlation of economic activity for the attainment of high
end results. ‘nlis will create favorable opportunities for the fullest utilisation
of production, biological and nterial resources at all the stages of agroindus-
trial production.

The many-sided nature of solution of problems connected vith the development of

the agroinduatrial complex requires a single management. of both the elaboration
and the realization of the food program. This should be based on a systematic
transition from the existing territorial-ssctorial magement to a primarily over-
all territoriel-intersectorial management of the egroindustrial complex with a sep-
aration of regional and. specialized subcomluas. The system of management of the
agroindustrial cowlex should organically codaine the overall (system-program)
planning of all the stages of agroindustrial production, the economic mechanism and
the organisation of management ensuring a rational codination of centralism and
democratic principles in the area of decision making and realization. Directing
agroindustrial production toward the maxim output of the final product (food)
rational in its strucmre per unit of integral production resmrces, not toward
sectorial (intermediate) results. is the most isportant condition for its effec-
tive functioning.

-1:he creation of cmditions for the transition from sectorial to intersectorial
program-object planning and anagamsnt should become the most important task in
the area of improvement in production planning. In this connection the develop-
ment and utilization of progressive norms as the principles of planning in the
system of the agroindustrial complex. as well as control over the observance of
planning discipline. takes on special isportancs. At the same time. it is neces-
sary to strictly observe the provision of planned assignments with resources in
accordance with standard requirements.

16
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Only the types of products needed for the formtion of all-Union food stocks. as
well as export and reserve resources. should be envisaged in the state plan for
purchases of agricultural products. which fully regulates the production structure.

‘lhe realisation of the principles of program-object planning and management of the
agroindustrial cowlex is connected with the elimination of bottlenecks hampering
the development of production and causing losses and with the liquidation of inter-
mediary links in the sectorial and functional structure of agroindustrial produc-
tion. ‘lhe rationalization of placement and specialization of the sectors of the
agroindustrial complex serve this task. During the forthcoming years it is espe-
cially important to begin the ilplementation of measures for the fullest utiliza—
tion of the country's natural and climatic potential with due regard for the real—
ization of large-scale plans in the future. ‘lhey include primrily the formation
of specialized production zones and an interregional exchange of the output of the
agroindustrial complex.

The stability of production in the system of the agroindustrial complex should also
be understood as the attainment of a regional structure of the egroindustrial food

complex that ensures the mximm utilization of all the resources available in its
sectors.

'lhe development and mastering of advanced systems of agricultural nnagenent. ac-
celerated realization of the achievements of scientific and technical progress in
the sectors of the agroindustrial complex (selection and seed growing, breeding of
highly productive livestock and poultry, increase in the reliability and productiv-
ity of machinery and equipment. development of land reclamation and so on) and the
solution of social tasks of rural develoth take on especially great importance.

Measures for changing the regional structure of agroindustrial production should
be inplamented simultaneously with an improvement in the sectorial and functional
structures of the agroindustrial complex. For this it is necessary to change the
relations among the complex forming sectors of the agroindustrial cmla. giving
consumer sectors greater opportunities of influencing supplier sectors. ‘lhe com-
bination of planning levers with the development of direct contractual relations
and the elimination of intermediary organizatims could be the most acceptable so-
lution of this problem. lhis involves. when approving the production and sale
plan of the capital producing sectors of the agroindusrial complex. enabling agri-
culture itself to form the orders for equipment on the basis of economic contracts.
At the same time. it is also fundamentally important to create economic incentives
for an improvement in the quality of the delivered fixed productive capital. min
can be attained. for example. if, along with other conditions. contracts provide
for the fulfillment of all the operations for couples repairs and care of equip-
ment by the forces of the industrial enterprises producing them.

In the area of price formation it is necessary to establish a stricter state con-
trol, not permitting a rise in the price of a unit of useful effect of means of
production in the sphere of their production consumption. In order to ensure a
price balance in the system of the agroinduatrial complex. prices of products in

all its sectors should ensure the same conditions of accumulation per unit of the
integral indicator of production resources, including land resources. in a mone-
tary evaluation.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An inortant role in the system of assures aimed at improving the economic moha-
nism of mnagement of the agroindustrial cowleat is assigned to legal support. It
is necessary to significantly raise the level of legal regulation of economic rela-
tions, in particular following the eagle of industry.

‘lhe concept of stability should not be identified with the demand for production
stabilization. Conversely. an effective development of positive tendencies and
flexibility (observance of the principle of elasticity) of rational decision taking
under changing conditions (foreign political situation. natural and climatic fac-
tors, social and economic development and so forth) are needed. At the same time.
stabilization and even a certain local reduction in the production of intermediate
products of the sectors of the agroindustrial complex are an inevitable measure of
the period of transitim to a more productive and. therefore. economically advis-
able stage in the development of agroindustrial production. his concerns prod-
ucts the production capacities for the processing of which in the localities do not
correspond to the attained volumes of production and their transportation to the
country's other regions or eeport presently is not possible or advisable. there-
fore. stabilisation of the production of some raw uterials of agricultural origin
is a necessary meamre for the prevention of losses and an efficient utilisation
of the potential of the entire agroindustrial complex.

A certain reduction in the areas sown with some low-yielding crops greatly depend-
ing on weather conditions. as veil as in the population of unproductive livestock.
in a nusber of farms. rayons and large regions is necessary for the attainment of
an improved regional structure of the agroindustrial couple: on the basis of for-
mation of specialised zones of production of basic cousodity products of the sec-
tors of the agroindustrial complex and development of intrarayon specialization
and interregional exchange. The cosbined nterial and technical potential of the
agroindustrial food complex released in the process should be directed to the pro-
duction collectives, sectors and regions in which the most rapid and steadily pro-
gressive effect of the increase in food production throughout the country (region)
can be obtained.

The most rapid elimination of losses in all the links and at all the stages of ag-
roindustrial production plays an exceptional role in the solution of the food
problem. Speaking at the Novesber (1978) Plenum of the CPSU Central Comittee, L.
I. Brezhnev. discussing losses. especially stressed the exceptional importance of
a radical solution of this problem: "Today we say with good reason that the prob-
lem of grain. vegetable, fruit and cotton losses is not only an econcnic probles.
It is also a big political problem."

‘lhe set of measures for the fight against losses should be based on the realiza-
tion of the above-mentioned steps for an improvement in the sectorial and function-
al structure of the sgroindustrial eagle: and on the elimination of bottlenecks
in the sectors of processing and infrastructure during the storage. processing and
transportation of raw mterials and products. For the purpose of increasing the
balance of the structure and volumes of production in all the sectors of the agro-
industrial couples. for the llth Five-Year Plan provision is ads for measures

for an outstripping development of the concluding stages of production of the fi-
nal product of the sgroindustrial coqlex and its delivery to the consumer. For
examle, plans are made to increase capital investments for the establishment of
storage facilities 1.6-fold and for the construction of intrsfarm hard-surface

18
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roads 1.6-fold. 'lhese measures mat be codined with rationalization of the place-
ment and specialization of production. bringing processing closer to the zones of
specialised production of agricultural products and developing an interregional
exchange.

An elimination of losses is. at the same time. a fight for an inrovement in the
quality and efficiency of utilization of production resources. It is necessary to
concentrate efforts on the development and use of advanced technologies (primrily
resource saving technologies) and agricultural mnagement system and on the over-
all nature of deliveries of uchine systemainstead of deliveries of separate units
and so forth. Principal attention in the area of agriculture should be given to
an iaprovement of qualitative indicators. An increase in the volunea of production
(with due regard for the internal balance of the agroinduatrial cowlex) should be
ensured primarily through an increase in the yield of crops and in the productivity
of livestock. refinement of the structure of plant groving and anisal husbandry
sectors and iaprovement in the qualitative characteristics of output. The follow-
ing are necessary for this: an objective evaluation of quality. enhancement of the
role of standards and their observance and consideration in prices through the val-
ue of useful effect of means of production and iaplementation of measures for the
stimulation of the quality of output of the sectors of the agroinduatrial complex.

In the solution of the food problem considerable attention should be paid to mess-
ures for the introduction of nontraditional technologies of protein and food pro-
duction. As investigations and experiments under production conditions have shown,
these measures can be realized without substantial capital investments and ensure
the production of high-quality food products with the fullest utilization of ini-
tial raw mterials.

The stability of development of the agroindustrial couple: is connected with the
formation of a stable and reliable system of organisation and management of the
establishment of the country's food program. "It is important to determine the
stages and order of the solved problems in the program," 1.. I. Bredmev noted at
the October (1980) Plenum of the CPSII Central Couittee. "And. of course. it is
necessary to have a system of program management clearly establishing personal res-
sponsibility for every section of work and giving the necessary rights. Without
all this the program is not a program, but a sum of good wishes." As noted at the
26th CPSU Congress, work on the food progran should constantly be in the center of
attention of the activity of party. Soviet and economic bodies.

The development and realization of the program is one of the basic tasks of the
current 5-year and long-term period. This is not a one-time task. Conversely.
this is large-volume work requiring constant efforts on the part of workers of
may ministries, departments. scientific research institutions and organizations.
the personnel training system and so forth. "The program should represent a sub-
stantiated plan of measures directed toward the end result and toward a complete
solution of one problem or another. a plan based on accurate calculations." said
L. I. Brezhnev at the October (1980) Plenun of the CPSU Central Comittee.

The food program should encompass all the conponents of the agroindustriel com-
plex in their organic interconnection. unity and development. The process of de—
velopment of this program should be continuous and iterative. ensuring the reali-
nation of the principle of democratic centralism,and adaptive,cresting conditions
for a systematic refinement and increase in its efficiency.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Discussing the food program, K. Chernenko. mesher of the Politburo of the CPS!) Con-
tral Conittee. said at the festive meeting in Hoscov devoted to the lllth anniver-
sery of V. I. Lenin's birth that "this is an ieportant and large-scale task. Peo-
ple's needs are growing constantly. Furthermore. not everything is obtained right
away. In any work something must be corrected and completed. It is quite obvious
that the fulfillment of the food program requires special attention. persistence
and purposefulneas. It requires a more rapid elimination of any manifestations of
irresponsibility, laxity. lack of departmental coordination and mismanagement and
a bolder search for new unbeaten paths." Therefore, when developing the food prog-
rem. it is important to take into consideration the principles of unity of the proc-
ess of its elaboration and realization. Ever newer circumstances requiring correc-
tions of previously developed individual parameters will inevitably appear in the
course of study of program outlines. Owing to the organic interconnection of the
technological stages in agroindustrial production, this will lead to the need for
refinement of the proportions anong sectors, volumes of resources and so forth.

In accordance with "Basic Methodological Principles of Development of Overall Na-
tional Economic maject Programs" approved by the USSR Gosplan it is advisable to
work out the program in three stages. An analysis of the food situation in the
country is made at the first stage. ‘Ihen the initial assignment for the program
is developed and approved. the preparation and approval of the draft program rep-
resent the concluding stage.

The basic task of the first stage in the elaboration of this program lies in the
formlation of problems connected with the development of the agroindustrial food
couples, which bring about an aggravation of the food situation. For this it is
necessary to investigate the patterns in the formation and development of the ag-
roindustrial complex beginning with the establishment of the basic values and
goals of this social and economic system and of the structure of its organization and
mechanism of functioning. It is necessary to comers the real system character-
ized by the actual values of parameters with its ideal representation in the form
of a standard model described by specific standards (for example. norms of per—
capita consumption of food). As a result. the following should be developed: con-
cept of the solution of the food problem; consolidated structure of the program's
goals and the tentative values of the most important object standards; functional.
sectorial and regional structures of the food couples; list of priority proposals,
which can be included in the plan at this stage; consolidated structure of the
program (list of basic subprograms). ‘lhs tentative periods and evaluations of the
expenditures on the program should also be detersined.

ﬁne food program, owing to its emceptional inortance for the solution of social
and economic problems, should be an object program and receive priority among oth-
er national economic programs in the allocation of various types of resources for
its development and realization. ‘lhe order of the technical and economic calcula-
tions and drafts of this program should correspond to the movement from the ulti-
mte end of the agroindustrial coeplex through a system of measures to all the
types of resources necessary for the attainment of intermediate goals at every
stage of agroindustrial production.

Preliminary investigations show that the attainment of the basic goals of the ag-
roindustrial food couples is connected with the development and realization of the
following subprograms:

20
roe omcuu. US}: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. lhe subprogram "general concept and methodology": elaboration of the general
concept of development of the agroindustrial food complex of the USSR; investiga-
tion and development of the functional. sectorial and regional structure of the ag-
roindustrial coqlex; substantiation of the system of goals for the development of
the agroindustrial’ couples; elaboration of basic directions in the solution of the

food problem; creation of the methodological scheme of the food program and substan-
tiation of the ways of its realisation.

2. The subprogram "food production and the granting of services"; overall anal-
ysis of the state and tendencies of and prospects for the development of function-
al-sectorial and production~technological links in the systems of agricultural man-
agement (farming, plant grovin fodder production and animl husbandry) and prod-
uct subcomplexes (grain. meat- egg7-dairy. fruit-and-vegetable. potato and fat-and-
oil subcompleues; subcomplex for anger production; sea-fishdproduct subcomlex;
subcoqlex for the production of salt. preservatives and food additives, of non-
traditional types of foodstuffs and so forth); evaluation of supply and demand;
evaluation of the possible volumes of production and expenditures of resources;
analysis of problens and solution alternatives.

3. The subprogram "production and technology": investigation and analysis of the
aectorial and territorial-sectoral structure and placement of production; devel-
opment of concepts of improvesent in the sectorial and territorial-sectorial struc-
tures of farming and animal husbandry on the basis of fomtion of specialised
zones; evaluation of the variants 'of placement of production with due regard for
the expenditure on the development of production and social infrastructures; ele-
boration of system of economic management in the sectors of the agroindustrial
complex and of resource saving technologies.

4. the subprogram "natural resources and the environment": overall evaluation of
natural resources (land. vater and forest) and of natural and climatic conditions
of production; development of methods of rational utilization of land resources
and of measures for their conservation and reproduction; elaboration of problem
of preservation of the ecological balance; rationalization of waste utilisation.

5. lbs subprogram "mterial and technical resources": overall analysis of the
state and structure of the Interial and technical base of the agroindustrial com-
plex; development of ways. methods and periods of elimination of the lag of the
material and technical base of the processing industry and sphere of circulation;
evaluation of the volumes and rational structure of capital investments; develop-
ment of alternative variants of the structure of nterial and technical resources
with due regard for the possibilities for their interchangeability.

6. line subprogram “labor": investigation and development of the occupational-
skill and age structures of labor resources; development of demographic forecast;
investigation of problems of migration and development of methods of its regula-
tion; analysis of labor productivity and elaboration of proposals for increasing
it, lowering personnel turnover and strengthening labor discipline; analysis of
the system of training of mass trade personnel; elaboration of proposals for an
iaprovemsnt in the Interial conditions of work and employment in a rural area.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. The subprogram "infrastructure": Investigation and elaboratim of problems of
inrovement in production infrastructure (procurements. storage facilities. mate-
rial and teclmical supply and technological production support. transport. power
facilities, repair base and types of services—ag'rochemical. veterinary. land or—
ganization. informtion-cosputer and so forth); elaboration of problem connected
with the development of nonproduction infrastructure, including the system of pub-
lic health, elemtary education, municipal and everyday services and housing and
road construction.

8. the subprogram "ecmomic mechanism and management": analysis of production
efficiency in the system of the agroindustrial complex; formlstion of proposals
for an improvement in intersectorial relations directing all the links of the ag- .
roindustrial complex tomard the ultimate and; development of a system of economic
incentives operating at all the levels of the agroindustrial complex; elaboration
of proposals for an improvement in the system of collective wages and economic in-
centives; determination of the fares and methods of 'cosbination of the plan and
direct contracts; provision of conditions for an enhancement of the role of con-
tracts in the regulation of economic relations; development of economic and legal
principles of contractual relations and of theatrengthsning of contractual dis-
cipline; elaboration of proposals for an ismrovesent in economic legislation; de-
velopment of the concepts and fort-tion of the system of organizational management
of the sgroindustrial coqlex of the USSR; determination of the principles of ob-
ject program planning and meagemant in combination with sectorial and territorial—
sectoriel management; development of proposals for the establishment of a long-
term scheme of management of the agroindustrial couples.

9. The subprogram "foreign economic relations": elaboration of the general con-
cept of utilization of the foreign nrkst for purposes of an efficient development
of the sgroindustrial concept; investigationof the structure of import and ela-
boration of proposals for its improvement; evaluation of the opportunities of en-
port trade and of the ways of their realisation; investigations of the possibili-
ties of international division of labor and integration of cm meniaers in the so-
lution of the food problem; elaboration of proposals for the organization of out-
put of the sectors of the agroindustrial complex on a cowensation basis.

10. The subprogram "scientific and technical progress": development and substan-
tiation of the basic directionsin scientific and technical progress in the sec-
tors of the agroindustrial coupler; elaboration of an overall program for scien-
tific investigations of problems-connected with the development of the agroindus-
trial complex of the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the period until 1990.

11. The subprogram "efficiency and quality": development of the criteria and
measurers of efficiency and quality; analysis of losses and unutil'iaed opportuni-
ties with an indication of the reasons for their occurrence in all the techno-
logical production links of the agroindustrial comlex; development of a program
of urgent measures for an elimination of losses and realisation of unutilized
opportunities with an evaluation of the expenditures necessary for this; elabora-
tion of proposals for an improvement in the standards of the assortment and qual-
ity of services.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. he subprogram "social development": elaboration of the concept of social
development of rural areas with the determination of imdiate and long-term tasks:
investigation of social factors in the economic developmt of the agroindustrial
coupler; evaluation of economic efficiency of social transformations in the system
of the agroindustrial comlex; substantiation of sources of material resources for
the solutim of social problems.

13. me subprogram "experiment": develop-ant of proposals for an organization of
an experimental check and performnce of social and economic experiments for the
solution of various problems connected with food supply for the population and in-

crease in the social and economic efficiency of the agroindustrial complex of the
USSR.

The developed operational (program) goals. system models and problems should be in-
tercoordinated. Such a corbination of all the program tasks ensures a unity of

approaches to the solution of the food problem and consistency of results. At the
same time. it becomes possible to correctly coordinate the organizations developing
individual subprograms in the process of program development. This equally applies
to the determination of priorities and concepts. including for the periods of solu-

tion of the food problem, as well as to the comparison of the evaluations of prog-
ram expenditures and results (effect of the program).

The food program is one of the min components of the economic policy of the party
for the 11th Five-Year Plan and for a long-term period. At the Noveuber (1981)

Plenum of the CPSU Central Conittee L. I. Brezhnev noted that the "preparation of
such a program is a highly creative and-there is nothing to hide—coupler matter.
It should conbine efforts in agriculture itself, in the sectors of industry nerv-
icing it and in the systems of procurement. storage. processing and transportation

of and trade in agricultural products. What is especially ilportant, it should
subordinate the work of all. the indicated sectors to the com ultimate end-~meet-
ing the country's needs for foodstuffs."

The utilization of the uncovered reserves. increase in the effectiveness of capi-
tal investments and rational utilization of means of production and labor and nat-
ural resources will make it possible to give the country more grain. potatoes, veg-
etables, meat, milk and other necessary products. A skillful and efficient utili-
zation of the advantages of planned socialist management, of the production and
scientific and technical potential and of the initiative and creative work of mil-
lions of workers will contribute to a successful solution of the tasks envisaged
by the program and to the attainment of new advances in commnist construction.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy Ekonomiki", 1981

11 .439
C50: 1826/1610 END

23

MWUSEONLY