FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10037
8 October 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 51/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the W.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FORGJFFNJAI.USEIONLY

JPRS L/lOOE

8 October ]

REST EUROPE REPORT
(8000 51/81)

Cou'reu'rs

THEATER FORCES
FRANCE
ss-zo Seen as Modernization; Pershing 2 Seen as Escalation

(Francois Schlosaer; LE NOUVEL OBSERVATIDR.
29 Mg'a Sep 81) nososoossoosssssssnurse‘s-s-anaooaasaoooso

Divided, Neutrolist Views Said To Prevent Realistic Defense Policy
(Jacques Julliard; 1: uorvzn OBSERVATBUR, 29 Aug-a Sep 81).

ECONOMIC
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Trends in One Hundred Largest Enterprises
(CAPITAL, Aug 81) .........................................

ITALY

Finance Minister Intervieved on Taxation
(Franco Reviglio Interview; IL HDNDO, 28 Aug 81) ..........

Need To Revise Law on Flight of Currency Sean
(Vittorio Bsrattieri Interview; IL HONDO. 28 Aug 81) ......

UNITED KINGDOM

'TIHES' Voices Concern Over UK Honetary Policy
(Editorial; THE TIMES, 25 Sep 81) .........................

-s- [III-WB-ISOPN

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HRLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Polls Favor Good Relationship "ith United States
(”As WIT“, Aug 81) 00......O......OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOO.

FRANCE

Effects of Conventional, Nuclear Strength, Detento on Defense
(Pierre Lellouche; WARE. Suns: 81) ......mm...

Social Democrats Publish Draft Constitution
(Julian Haviland; m IDES. 23 Sep 81) .

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOHIOFFKJA1.USEGDNLY

THEATER FORCES FRANCE

58-20 SEEN AS MODERNIZATION; PERSHING 2 SEEN AS ESCALATION
Paris LE noun-:1. oassnvaraun in French 29 Aug-a Sep 81 pp 37-39
[Article by Francois Schlosser. chief foreign editor: "Will Europe Burn?"]

[Text] Hill Pershing 2 missiles be deployed in NATO countries to
counterbalance the Soviet SS-ZO missile threat? Francois Schlosser
explains why he believes moving a major piece on the chessboard of
nuclear terror would have very serious consequences.

"You blow up my gasoline dumps; I atomize your marshaling yards in response.' You then
burn six of my weapons manufacturing plants; so I destroy two of your headquarters

and four airports. You blast three of my missile sites, I vitrify two of your naval
bases..." Deterrence has failed. War has broken out in Europe. Soviets and
Americans continue to escalate in tit for tat fashion. It's a question of who will
lose their nerve first and hesitate to raise the level of violence another step

closer to the apocalypse. Both superpowers are now exchanging "Eurostrategic"

blows: SS-20 missiles launched from the USSR against European targets; Pershing 2,
Polaris, Poseidon. and cruise missiles fired in Europe against targets in the Soviet
Union. After a few days of such exchanges, Europe is burnt, radioactive, and fatally
wounded. The USSR has already suffered heavy damage. The United States is unscathed.
What will happen? Will the two superpowers give up or resort to their intercontinental
weapons?

As Europeans, however. we are no longer interested in what happens next. Consequently,
let us come back in time to the present when it is still possible to ask ourselves:
What is happening today? Soviets and Americans are both arming themselves with new
highly accurate weapons enabling them to fight a limited nuclear war in Europe.

To cope with a qualitative leap forward made by the Soviets with the 58-20 missile,
NATO has decided to make its own new qualitative and quantitative leap forward by
deploying in Europe, beginning in 1983, American Pershing and cruise missiles capable
of striking Soviet territory. This was a momentous decision.

Throughout Europe, all those persons who question the wisdom or quite simply the
rationality of this NATO decision find themselves in a ticklish position. They are
suspected of pacifism. anti-Americanism or neutralism. It is astonishing that a
debate of such urgency and gravity, because it directly involves Europe's future and

IN)I10FIﬂC1Al.Il§li(M¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

survival. should have so grossly dodged and confused the issue and degenerated into
invective. A clear explanation for the benefit of public opinion ought to be
possible. But there has been no such explanation. Yet there are highly qualified
men, including experts and top-level military officials. who consider this rearmanent
unnecessary or the method chosen--deploying land-based missiles on European soil-
unjustified. Chancellor Schmidt himself has expressed some personal reservations
about the nature of the weapons chosen. Nevertheless, officials have been rushing
implementation of this decision with almost frantic doggedness, openly fearing that
negotiations with the USSR might delay it.

This is a truly disquieting situation. First of all, because of the way only one
weapon was chosen and isolated-—the Soviet SS-20--and portrayed as a sort of mythical.
diabolical missile. The 88-20 missile is actually derived from an older version,

and admittedly its accuracy and the miniaturization of its warhead have been greatly
improved. It is not a very mobile system--if highly mobile, it would be invulnerable-
but a semimobile weapon requiring large concrete emplacements built in advance, and
hence located by satellite and easily targeted by existing Western missiles. It is
calculated that there are currently some 30 of these launch sites west of the Urals,
all of them ideal and highly visible targets for a small number of NATO missiles.

The Pershing 2 missile the Americans want to introduce in Europe is 10 times more
accurate and its warhead is 10 times more miniaturized than the 88-20.

Nevertheless, some well-meaning individuals are doing their utmost to convince
mmmmsmthsMthyneﬁduannuththgﬂntouwthm

The petty details of the intrigues that led to NATO's decision to rearm are most
enlightening in this regard. In the beginning, nobody had taken any notice of the
55-20 missile. the latest addition to the Soviet arsenal. detected for the first
time about 1975. It is now already more than 20 years ago that the Soviets deployed
some 700 medium-range 85-5 and 88-5 missiles in the USSR, all aimed at Europe.

They had virtually been forgotten. They became old, and the Red Army, fully occupied
in more urgent tasks--closing its ICE)! gap with the United States--let these 700
l-megaton dinosaurs rust in their silos. Each one resembles a sort of factory;

they burn only liquid fuel and handling them is an extremely time-consuming and
difficult task. The International Institute for Strategic Studies in London reports
that scarcely 100 of the approximately 400 SS-a's and SS-S's still operational are
likely to reach their target. The others would explode in their silos at the moment
of ignition or vanish into thin air.

In the meantime, NATO countries have assembled, over the years, an altogether
respectable medium-range (Eurostrategic) nuclear arsenal. one capable, in any event,
of blasting European Russia back into the Stone Age. This array of weapons exists
precisely to counterbalance the Soviet SS-b's, SS-S's. and medium-range bombers
menacing Europe. Moreover, NATO did not refrain from continuously upgrading these
weapons consistent with the latest state of the art. This arsenal consists mainly

of bombers capable of carrying nuclear weapons and stationed on American forward
bases in Great Britain and aboard aircraft carriers in the Mediterranean, as well as
several hundred nuclear warheads on submarine-launched HIRVed missiles. To which the

Soviets add-to depict the magnitude of the Burostrategic threat from their point of
view-the nuclear forces of Great Britain and France.

But of all the NATO Eurostrategic forces, the Kremlin views the American forward
bases as the most acute threat. In fact, the Soviets see them as an extension of the
American strategic and intercontinental arsenal, and capable, therefore, of tipping
the overall balance in favor of the United States. This is why they have constantly

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFK]AL.USE¢3NLY

insisted, from the very start of the SALT negotiations. that these weapons be taken
into account. Indeed. on several occasions they have proposed talks on the limitation
of atomic weapons in Europe. For a long time. the Americans ignored such proposals
until finally they agreed to discuss these Burostrategic weapons in the future SALT 3
negotiations. But everyone knows what happened to SALT and to arms control in
general: Reagan pigeonholed them.

Gamble on a Bluff

The Kremlin began modernizing its Eurostrategic arsenal to strengthen it. of course.
but also to have something with which to bargain when the inevitable negotiations

on medium-range weapons in Europe opened. For the Soviet SS-a's were falling to

pieces and had really ceased being a serious threat. Modernization meant incorporating
the last word in technology. The West which has not kept a single missile as

obsolete as the 55-h in its arsenal, knows a thing or two about modernization.

Thus the 55-20 was born. and now there are some 160 of these missiles targeted at
Western Europe, gradually replacing older missiles. “hat is the actual scope of the
threat they present?

In the flood of false data and doctored statistics that constitute the essence of
NATO's case in favor of its own weapons modernization program. there is one

argument that is worth serious examination, the argument of "controlling escalation."
Being able to "control escalation" means having the capability of matching the enemy
blow for blow, but with weapons of the same caliber or same level. If the Red Army
begins to use its 85-20 Eurostrategic missiles and if the President of the United
States has no equivalent response, he is unable to control escalation. Because there
is a gap in his overall defense capability. he is compelled either to stand aside

or skip several rungs in the ladder of escalation and use his ICBH's. In so doing,
however. he will inevitably draw nuclear fire on American cities. To avoid being
faced with such an agonizing choice, the Americans will be obliged. even in peacetime,
to be prudent and very flexible in the event of a serious crisis. In other words.
the USSR has a military advantage it can exploit politically.

Another "iffy" scenario that would confirm this conclusion: the USSR, thanks to the
accuracy of its SS-ZO's. eliminates one or more NATO armies by destroying all
important military objectives in a surprise attack. Having no weapons equivalent to
the SS-20's, the Americans. in this case too. could only resort to their ICBH's.
thereby triggering a global holocaust for the sake of a Europe that is already lost.
Such an American response is not credible enough to deter the enemy. Conclusion:

in both of the above cases. the USSR stands a good chance of winning a nuclear war in
Europe. Consequently, in peacetime. it can hold over the West the threat of a
victorious nuclear war against Europe and use this threat to derive political
advantages therefrom.

This highly sophistical argument ought to convince the moat skeptical minds. One has
to assume. of course. that the Soviet leaders, who only Just recently commemorated the
ﬁOth anniversary of Hitler's aggression-~which cost 20 million Russians their lives--
are prepared to gamble the survival or almost total destruction of the USSR and its
people on a bluff. Admittedly Europe is. of course, a very nice prize.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yet how could the Soviets possibly carry out such a bluff without NATO countries
having responded with all of their weapons by launching retaliatory strikes against
Soviet territory? of what use then would be all those bombers on American forward
bases and aboard carriers in the Mediterranean, and especially all those invulnerable
American and British submarine-launched missiles assigned to the defense of Europe?
Have not all of these aircraft and missiles been deployed specifically to preclude
Americans from having to use their intercontinental arsenal in the event of a

Soviet attack, even one on a large scale but limited to Europe?

Unless they were collectively stricken with a fit of madness, Soviet leaders cannot
take that risk nor delude themselves into thinking such an attack would go unpunished.
Therein lies the crux of the problem. On the one hand, the USSR is credited with a
disarming first strike capability it really does not have because it cannot cripple
all of NATO's available Eurostrategic forces by surprise attack; on the other hand,
speculation about totally irrational behavior by the Kremlin is used as the basis

of an argument which has all the appearances of exceptionally rational sophistication,
namely the threat of a victorious nuclear war by the USSR against Europe.

In reality, this argument was elaborated ex post facto to justify deployment of the
new U.S. missiles in Europe. when in 1977, Helmut Schmidt first called NATO and 0.8.
officials' attention to the modernization of European—oriented Soviet nuclear weaponry.
it was in the hope of getting the two superpowers to negotiate about all of the
so-called Eurostrategic weapons. The German chancellor, noting how the Soviets were
modernizing their arsenal with SS-ZO's, believed European inferiority had to be

offset by new means. but only if (future) negotiations failed.

The Americans were initially reluctant. But Schmidt's remarks had not fallen on deaf
ears among the "defense community's" prolific multitude. That community encompasses
all those persons who are directly or indirectly engaged in military matters, whether
it be in industry, laboratories, universities, research institutes, financial
institutions, or government departments and agencies. For this particular military-
industrial-university microcosm, Schmidt's misgivings opened unexpected prospects.
"Hade-to-order“ doctrines were very quickly prepared to rationalize the idea of
deploying American ground-launched cruise and Pershing 2 missiles in Europe, missiles
that were already in a very advanced stage of development.

Battlefield a la Carte

Nhen Helmut Schmidt learned that they were going to foist on him something Konrad
Adenauer had always managed to avoid, namely basing in Germany nuclear delivery
vehicles aimed at the Soviet Union's territory, he rued his earlier remarks and tried
to convince the Americans to drop their plan. He preferred a naval solution, arguing
that they could very well increase the capabilities of the submarine-launched missiles
assigned to the defense of Europe, or else build new missiles to be based at sea in
submarines or on surface ships. It was too late, however. The Americans now wanted
ground-launched missiles to be based in Germany.

At this point, some readers might interject: "Quite so! the case presented by those
defending resumption of the arms race by deploying American Pershing and cruise missiles
may not be clear; it has too many gaps, too many obvious falsifications, too many
cleverly disguised weaknesses. But why make such a fuss when there are already so

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

many nuclear weapons in Europe. on both sides? Why fiddle-faddle over the few
hundred additional weapons the Americans want to store here? It can only make the

Soviets reflect a bit more if, by misfortune, they are ever tempted to use the
'unthinkable' bluff."

Unfortunately these few new missiles do change everything, nor is this fact explained
to European public Opinion. They constitute a critical change of direction, the

start of a new technical-military race, a specific option on a certain kind of future
for Europe. First, it was not by chance that the Americans, initially reluctant and
subsequently interested. suddenly became adamant on the issue of basing these miSBiles
in Europe. The fact is that America greatly changed in the space of a few monthé.

The new administration adopted an idea that had slowly matured under the two

preceding administrations, that of a limited nuclear war that can be won. For Reagan,
Neinberger, the Pentagon's boss, and Haig, the secretary of state, whose course of

action is one of confrontation with the USSR, everywhere and in all fields, war ih
Europe has become one hypothesis among others.

In the view of this administration which is preparing to spend 1.5 trillion dollars on
defense in 5 years, and whose thinly disguised objective is to reestablish America's
military and strategic superiority over the USSR, deployment of Pershing 2 missiles in
Europe has become more than a test. It is a highly attractive venture, and

unexpected short cut to bringing the USSR to its senses. This weapon system‘s
capabilities, accuracy, and speed are such that the USSR has no means of countering

it and not even any warning of its launch. It can strike at targets in the heart

of European Russia within 5 or 6 minutes. And this time, the roles are reversed.

To respond to these missiles launched from Europe, the USSR is the one that would

have to decide whether or not to strike at America, and thereby take it upon itself

to bring about the apocalypse. As for the Pershing 2, its extreme accuracy and
miniaturized warhead actually enable it to follow a "surgical strike" strategy.

What Europeans can fear is that the United States-~after having added this European-
based "wonder weapon" to all the other means it already has of containing the USSR--
may also be tempted, if not to use it, at least to threaten to do so, even in
situations arising from conflicts outside Europe. This is not a baseless fear.

One need only listen to top-level U.S. officials as they explain their new doctrine
of military rivalry with the Kremlin: America will not permit others to dictate the
battlefield; if the USSR attempts to intervene in a region of the globe where the
United States finds itself in an unfavorable military position, it will retaliate in
other theaters of operation in which it holds an advantage. For American strategists,
the Pershing 2 will be but one of a series of options. Hence by the force of
circumstances, its function will be much broader than simply defending Europe.

Choosing this weapon system primarily means, therefore, choosing a definitive
transfer of Europe's control over the vital issue of security. For Europeans, it
also means the guarantee of greater insecurity. And all this in the name of a
concept no one has sought to clarify, the concept of "Eurostrategic balance." This
is a notion that emerged as if by magic in the vocabulary of the experts. Is
superimposing European-Soviet parity upon American-Soviet parity a conceivable
approach? How can the Soviets be prevented from including in the global strategic
balance all American weapons, even if they are deployed in Europe, when those
weapons are capable of striking the USSR? And if, for their part, Europeans truly
want a balance, shouldn't they include in their calculations all of the Soviet

5
F03 OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USEZONLY

weapons capable of striking Europe as well as the United States? In that case.
what would the implications of a "Burostrategic balance" be? Eurostrategists
haughtily neglect to answer these basic questions?

Is there any good reason for Europe to rush into a new arms race without first
trying to clarify the issues, an arms race which guarantees it, at best, increased

dependence on America and. at worst. nuclear suicide, the date and hour of which
it even will not have been able to choose?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "1e Nouvel Observateur"

8041
CSO: 3100/965

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER FORCES FRANCE

DIVIDED. NEUTRALIST VIEWS SAID TO PREVENT REALISTIC DEFENSE POLICY

Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 29 Aug-6 Sep 81 pp 60~61
[Article by Jacques Julliard: "The Blind Supporters of Detente"]

[Text] We must put an end. as Cornelius Castoriadis does in his latest book, to the
idea that the Soviets are defending themselves somehow or other against a hostile
world that is encircling them. The truth is that the Soviet Union is on the offensive
everywhere. And the time has come to draw the appropriate conclusions from such
Soviet action.

The great debate of the 1980's will initially be militant and then economic.
Identification of the authoritarian regimes of the East with socialism. that great
hoax of the past half century, is completely fading. So much the better for socialism.
So much the better especially for the countries of the East that up to now have not
even been entitled to acknowledge their misfortune and are now at the dawn of a great
revolutionary period. Like it or not, Eastern Europe is where the storm belt is

now located; and also where the future of the workers "self-management" movement lies.
led by men who have risen from their own ranks, Polish workers have thrown off the
yoke. Supported by a Catholic Church that has never stopped fighting Stalinism, an
entire people began marching forward. thereby recording the most glorious date in

the history of the proletariat since the Commune of Paris: Gdansk, August 1981.

The band of tyrannical old men ruling over Moscow knows that its system of domination
is doomed in the somewhat long run. It fears the contagion of the Polish workers
movement and is hesitant about the best way of suppressing it. Therein lies one of
the main reasons for its present militarism and expansionist tendencies. A threatened
regime reacts by taking the offensive to evade that threat, and also by taking the
offensive outside its borders. That is why the period which opened with the invasion
of Afghanistan and the continuous threat the USSR holds over Poland's internal
independence is the most dangerous to the peace we have known since Horld Var II.

'Hardware'

There is absolutely no doubt that since the American defeat in Vietnam, the USSR has
taken the offensive in most regions of the world. Carter's idealistic pacifism--
somewhat reminiscent of the aging Roosevelt's version. but within a context much less
favorable to the United States-did the rest. Taking advantage of the American
retreat, the USSR consolidated its gains (in Africa and Asia) and built up its

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOB.OFFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY

military strength (in Europe). From that time onwards, American public opinion was
critical of Carter's policy despite its definite successes in Latin America.

And today Brezhnev is in a very poor position to denounce Washington's "cannibalistic"
(sic!) tendencies. Indeed he, Brezhnev, together with Ayatollah Khomeyni, was
Reagan's leading and most effective political campaigner. Reagan is now taking up

the Soviet challenge. and the world has entered a new cold war phase.

The foregoing considerations will help to better understand the subject and import of
Cornelius Castoriadis' latest book "Devant la guerre" [In the Face of war] (published
by Fayard). Be careful, "devant" definitely does not mean "avant" [before]!

This is somewhat reassuring. Nevertheless. Castoriadis' numerical assessment implies
that in the final analysis the ratio of forces overrides all other considerations in
East-West relations once again. Not that the economic war has lost its importance
nor that the North-South confrontation between rich and poor countries is losing its
position as a topic of current interest. It is a fact, however, that in the world

of 1981, the detailed breakdown of military strength, of "hardware," or “dead forces"
as Casroriadis also calls it. dominates the diplomatic scene.

After a detailed analysis supported by recent data compiled by the International
Institute of Strategic Studies in London, the author concludes that there is a '
growing imbalance in the ratio of forces in favor of the Soviet Union. Like all data
related to classified military information, the data used by the author may be
contestable. I believe, however. that its general thrust itself is incontestable,
namely that the USSR is steadily gaining ground. Although in the area of strategic
nuclear weapons-ICBM% covered by the SALT discussions between the two superpowers--
American inferiority in tonnage is temporarily offset by a superiority in number

of warheads, the same is not true for medium-range missiles that have an annoying
propensity for deployment in the European theater, hence their designation as
Euromissiles. The gradual replacement of obsolescent Soviet equipment--SS-4's and
SS-S's--by multiple-warhead SS-ZO missiles creates a serious military imbalance in
Europe, one that Francois Mitterrand had the courage to denounce strongly before and
after his election as president. Hence Moscow's bitter remarks about him and
accusations that he is an extreme Rightist. If unquestioning trust in the Kremlin's
peaceful intentions is the criterion of a person's position on the Left-Right axis,
then the President of the Republic is indeed on the far Right. Brezhnev's moratorium
proposal made at the 26th CPSU Congress would render negotiations thoroughly uneQual.
Under the terms of the moratorium, Soviet 88-20 missiles would be allowed to remain
deployed but NATO would be prohibited from responding by basing Pershing 2 and

cruise missiles in Germany, Great Britain, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Brezhnev's
proposal must be taken for what it really is, a propaganda gesture.

The Soviets do, of course, point out that while improving the quality of their
missiles, the current modernization program does not increase their number.

They pretend to forget that at the time of the SS-é's and SS-S's, NATO had, as a
counterbalancing force, Thor and Jupiter missiles based in Great Britain, Italy, and
Turkey, and has withdrawn them since then in favor of missile-launching submarines.
But above all, the Soviets "forget" that back then their superiority in Euromissiles
was for the purpose of offsetting their inferiority in ICBM's. Lacking the capability
of striking the U.S. homeland, the Soviets were taking Europe as hostage. Now that
the ICBM gap has been filled and the USSR can strike directly at its main adversary,
Soviet predominance in the European theater can be interpreted in no other way than

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

offensive and a threat to us. Likewise, we doubt that the 50,000 tanks the Soviets
have accumulated are designed for a landing on the New Jersey coast.

Refusal to be Informed

The neoneutralism now spreading on a foundation of antinuclear pacifism throughout

the FRO, Great Britain and the Netherlands--and which the PCP and CGT are trying to
establish in France—-obviously would deadlock any change in the ratio of forces on
European territory, a ratio that is currently in favor of the Soviet Union. The 1950
Stockholm Appeal was a propaganda-inspired hoax. American supremacy limited its effects,
however. It miﬂlt even be argued that the appeal contributed to restraining possible
American preventive war temptations. Today, however, neoneutralism, far from serving

as a counterbalance, actually increases the imbalance. Under these circumstances, we
may rightly conjecture about the reasons this neoneutralism evokes such an echo in
neighboring countries.

First. the desire not to be informed. European public opinion in its legitimate

desire for peace has become so accustomed to viewing detente as a permanently
established fact that any adverse information is automatically ignored or underestimated.
This would not be the first time that blind pacifism has become militarisn's

unwitting auxiliary. Hho today would venture to state that the USSR wants war?

No one, and rightly so. As Castoriadis explains, the USSR does not want war but
victory.

The fact is that USSR's postulate of pacifism is the last refuge of progressivism in
dissaray. It should be clearly understood that the USSR is not a proletarian state
but a police state. Privilege reigns there, not socialism. The "gulag" is not a
mistake made by the system, it is one of the system's foundations. Pacifists tell
you: "That is inmaterial, Soviet leaders, pressured by their public opinioni"

(no jokingi), "do want peace." Indeed, it is this morbid obsession with peace and
security that explains a few rare incursions made by these oversensitive leaders

into Hungary, Czechoslovakia. Afghanistan, and tomorrow perhaps into Poland. For what
purpose? This large country, one of the world's two most powerful. is also, my word
of honor. the globe's most timorous country. It trembles at the mere rustling of
leaves. Hence its morbid fear of encirclement, which unfortunately the roundness of
the earth continues to foster. Alas, we just have to accept and deal with the fact
that as long as they have neighbors, these unfortunate people will not sleep in peace.

Alain's Mistake

Lastly, the ambivalence of European-American relations adds to this climate of
resignation disguised as optimism. As concerns Atlantic relations. we have entered an
era of suspicion. Europeans accuse Americans of cynicism. Americans suspect
Europeans of appeasement, another Munich. To sum up the situation, we could say that
when Americans look as if they are going to "decouple" their defense from Europe's
defense, they are accused of abandoning Europe; when. on the contrary, they couple

the two defenses, they are accused of taking Europe for a battlefield. This shows
that Atlanticism and neutralism are not two opposing attitudes but the two
complementary sides of Europe's one and the same powerlessness.

9
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FKMICNﬂHCJAl.USElDNLN

The truth-~and on this point Mitterrand's views are akin to De Gaulle's--is that
only renegotiation of the Atlantic Alliance on the basis of equality of duties and
responsibilities would enable us to get out of an impasse that the cold war has
made extremely dangerous. But this presupposes-let us not be afraid to admit it--
a common European political will which hardly exists.

In short, I view as well-founded the diagnosis which is the very heart of Castoriadis'
book. The USSR is and will increasingly be a stratocracy, that is to say a military
government that deliberately sacrifices civilian objectives for an indefinite build-up
of its military forces with the aim of increasing their offensive capabilities.

The author offers a few impressive illustrations of this trend. All examples have

to do with the creation of a veritable military society whose efforts are totally
directed to arms production, a society entirely separate from the "civil" society.
Everything in this military society is different: working conditions, wages,
productivity, and the quality of its products.

It is not always wise to presume an adversary has the same type of rationality as
oneself. Yet this was the postulate which Alain, for example, was not afraid to
apply to Hitler himself on the eve of World War II, in order to justify his own
pacifism. (There is no assurance, as Castoriadis notes. that the term "unacceptable
damage“ means the same thing to Westerners and to Soviet leaders). Granted the
present situation is not the same as in 1938. Nevertheless, the past does contain
a lesson that is still valid, namely that optimism, when it claims to replace
rigorous analysis of the facts, is the primary form of acquiescence to misfortune.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "1e Nouvel Observateur"

8041
C50: 3100/965

10
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

TRENDS IN ONE HUNDRED LARGEST ENTERPRISES

Hamburg CAPITAL in German Aug 81 pp 26-27

[Text] The weakened economy is not reflected in the
1980 sales figures of large German enterprises. Almost
all of them showed increases over 1979. The rates of
increase, however, are deceptive with respect to the
earnings picture of most companies: In general, profits
declined.

In the middle of May 1981, when Dr Gerhard Prinz, head of Daimler-Benz, and
Edzard Reuter, his chief financial officer, presented to the economic press
the 1980 annual report, the journalists registered more or less casually that
the Stuttgart automobile plant had--once again-oincreased its-sales. Since at
that time only a few financial statements of German corporations had been
published, the actual quality of the Untertuerkheim final balance remained
hidden. Anyway. Daimler-Benz is one of the few companies that was able to
increase its earnings over 1979.

Only later it became evident: The majority of the companies had to be satisfied
with profits that were lower than last year's. A few of them even registered
substantial losses. Among the biggest losers were firms which. like Daimler-Benz,
are building automobiles. The list of losers is headed by the Cologne Ford Works.
which experienced a decline in earnings of DH946 million when Compared to 1979.
The next highest loser, which followed at a considerable distance although losses
were also high, was the second v.5. automobile enterprise: The Adam Open AG

in Ruesselsheim recorded earnings that were DH66A million lower than last year's
figure. Even the profits of the Volkswagen Work in Holfsburg were down by

DM346 million when compared to last year-~as a result of sluggish sales but also
because of extremely poor business in Brazil, in the United States and for the
office-machine subsidiary of Triumph-Adler. The decline in automobile sales

did not affect the Bavarian Motor works in Munich. although they were out-
distanced by Daimler-Benz.

Among the few companies that increased their earnings in 1980 also are the
German Gold and Silver Separation Installation, the Metal Company and the
PREUSSAG Mining and Metallurgical Corporation. Apparently these companies

were particularly adept at profiting from the ups and downs of metal prices.
In addition, they benefited from the strength of the American dollar and the

English pound, which increased their earnings considerably compared to 1979.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The remaining German enterprises--apart from a few individual cases—had to present
their stockholders or parent companies with glaciated profit accounts for 1980.
Some even had to report losses. The industrialists were quick in locating a
scapegoat for this negative development: steep price increases for primary and
secondary energy, of course. The Association of Chemical Industries, for

instance, is complaining about a "price jump of between 25 and 30 percent" for

the most important raw materials (primarily crude oil) and energy.

Friedrich Karl Flick, who manages a wide variety of industries and services
(Feldmuehle, Dynamit Nobel, Buderus, Krausa-Haffei, Cerling Insurance and others),
cites a figure that sounds ominous, but it represents the energy consumption
necessary for production: "In spite of all conservation efforts," energy costs
in his empire rose by approximately 16 percent. At any rate, it represents an
increase of DH7S million marks over 1979, which had to be paid by Flick's
Feldmuehle and the other concern companies in l980-while the annual profit
amounted to slightly more than M77 million. Rolf Samet, manager of the
Hoechst AG, is concerned about the rapidly increasing energy prices, wondering
seriously whether in the long run the PEG could be the right location for
chemical industries.

As is the case with respect to increased sales figures for l980--which frequently
even reach 2—digit growth rates-~sa1es prognoses or estimates for the current

year are clouding the earnings picture of the German industry. Because almost

all enterprises are expecting higher or at least unchanged sales. Continuing
increases in costs, frequently paired with price concessions, however, leave
little hope for improvement with respect to earnings. The steep decline in
profits continues. Concern Manager Flick describes the situation in the following
verdict: "Compared to 1979, 1980 was unsatisfactory; compared to 1981, it was
still acceptable."

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
  
 

 

 
 
     

 
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
  

  

   

   

       
 

  

  
 

'.l-! ML-.- :1 iss'I.'§'.',§_hs'-_.__- "’5' mil “W - _‘=_ ' IE:_ _I.‘ '7. W” ' ’
iriIVJhiat—l :u A... '_)_J_!ll'otl mono I 'I'MM9ﬁ1dm _ ml ou'now I
_)__G_§I§!t_ls_m__1l9 Ekiuo JIM mm . II um)m m m» I
”4: gm Ian-In lie-14 MIIo_____ 1m“ 0|! [DID] I ” 5(l ' III! W ‘
I I “9' 1 cu... mm Inﬂux]. I WE’RE:-
"9| Lglgg‘i—t‘ﬂ M“ __ 3'” ,lﬁ-m 9 A! “Him.%mm '9
_I _I_: yysl____‘ (REL__ :II_:6 %Imm I ’7 [DUI-57m % £9“ *_
magi... _. m« .. “1me "m °
-1 L0 listlesf'ﬂﬂu‘ 312w! ._ ' 3:2” mm - in $%% ‘
_IDI _I_\_-_IIIIQI__ m... 1mg mm M w w . Inum— . -
._” . —————w—* “a, $.33] , 6| n mug not no m 0
:1-33: “u mam _ I: MI mo :m gm +_
amt:- _u "m III-{III 101 mo 1012?.-
um . u Sun-lump Suu 61 mo 9 II. 20511 _.-
.. t ._ .L:..I’L|_°_°‘.' "
_l1_ I I1" II'IIJ 'IzIIIIIfIT' 9,1 _ __ __I_I'o_io I :_IL um I
_ll _K1an‘l|¢_)w_.2_u_ _R_o_bt_¢u‘IMuc__h_ ”JED I! 80149! I
IV 19 hm "ouch 1,)5uhl_ If?“ I
I I‘lw‘EALmI ( __________ __ w
.2ph'2M __ ........ u. {ﬂat-1....-. mm m r
.-'r1‘.Q".‘e-!'--..__UI’ “lea-19$“ ' ' --*'
”He'ksﬂ'sm "2.4%.. ml% 9
l-II_I._I_I._ _y. qug«_.n.__ 9m [ID] 9
‘.‘II 3.11903! st Ann I____l__9_."_2‘ mm '6
2 Ilkumhdnu *- Hum-ml ' 9026 9321 min -
41W! IIIIIII_III_III_I'I'_"_JL {£979.}; I ma II: [BRIE
27 I” Muir-KN Militia” ' .1".
.5I_ _';»'I'Ir.sI;_a'u_T._;I:_ —— $121222! [2:
3.3. mlrmL" mm -: E
"baa-2.....u (mu-- [2- mm:-
* Q . g Imm-
mm»
.-__ I17] I
"sz RxgmuLmo mum! I g
" ”-1"- - ~ grim ° I- ”“0 —'T_
I: ......I am . 53 II mm“
.w I.‘Lhii.izseu«_n2m %% I um I: mun-mu «m_ +
.‘7. 7 N'henﬂs‘m H - I: P I WEE-[m Im. -
.‘! -“‘?.""!Pr5"'¥!!. .3:- Emu-mung» “...... m... mm m. -
1.! 'L'LN'“ '-'. HIP-I'm}! - ' l7 [n "W much. an all ma L
€9.15 . autumn umvzc. I may!“ ”a. .
,3 l WWII» _._I_ mailman o DIWW mama!) IoosI -
1| mm - 90 ~'" . - M0 9
.‘T'EA' WL-rLWEAE | 2.52 mm - II [a non . . . $%lﬂﬂl Iozo_o -
fld’ﬁuhg‘wdc ”I: ”151% + n o u. M mm :-
- -- wS"-‘-""l— 1! "‘"""'°‘ "’° "' ’ "I” the mmm -—
lit-AI-ELG- 7 M. mm + u r mmmm +_
“91. 7 I“um-«m Inn-2m] + I: H mm.“ mm um I -
Usa'm.-12_ VIII-"— __ Inn-1m) . _ , __
‘BIQISLIIIILIIQ - Ina—IIIIIII_ [1mm I mm run. run. , , $ .25 .uo I
KMMIIIIIII- (I )Ma—Mn‘ 9 3.1 m - ’7 I'll W _m - 5|' N24 '-
.'~"I"9¢ﬂ_ _____ ”mm W I ' :a o
lk-Iukllobcut umIqu-I. our ¢IJJ mu + ”[m A I I . m am new I
we no . ' -ll I1!” I

 

1 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.

18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23C
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
%.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

Rank

Firm

Branch

Sales in million marks
Change in sales

Employees in 1980

United Electricity and Mining
Corporation

Baden Aniline and Soda Factory
German 3?
Rhine-Hestphalian Electricity
Works, Inc.

German Shell

Ruhr Coal

Metal Company

PREUSSAG Mining and Metallurgical
Corporation

German Texaco

Ford works

German Gold and Silver
Separation Installation
German Unilever
Augsburg-Nuernberg Machine
Factory. Inc.

IBM Germany

Krupp Steel

Huels Group

Kloeckner works

Saar Mines

Thyssen Industry

German Babcock
Energy/Oil/Chemicals
Automobiles

Electric products
Automobiles

Chemicals

Chemicals

Chemicals

Steel

Petroleum

chemicals

Energy

Petroleum

Petroleum

Mining

Machinery

Electric products

[Key continued on following page]
{Key continued]

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
106.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.
132.
133.
134.
135.

COPYRIGHT:

8991
C50:

Carl-Zeiss Foundation

Rutgers Works
Enka Glossy Fibers
Photography
Electric products
Pipes

Cigarettes

Energy

Electric products
Power plant
Electric products
Petroleum
Air/Space travel
Pharmaceuticals
Tires

Steel

Paper

Food

Aluminum
Chemicals
Machinery
Pharmaceuticals
Machinery

Food

Chemicals

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

136.
137.
138.
139.
140.
161.

Refrigeration Technology/Equipment

Cigarettes
Electric products
Steel

Steel
Construction
Nonferrous metals
Energy
Construction
Electric products
Energy

Records

Petrochemicals
Gears

Nonferrous metals
Optics/Photography
Tar Chemicals
Milling facilities
Vehicles

Mining

Synthet 1c f ibe rs
Construction

3103/422

1981 Cruner + Jahr AC 6 Co.

15
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060014-8

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102I09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060014-6
FINANCE MINISTER INTERVIEWED ON TAXATION

Milan IL MONDO in Italian 28 Aug Bl pp 14-16

[Interview with Finance Minister Franco Reviglio by Antonio Ramenghi: "Victims United";
date and place of interview not given]

[Text] The fury of 35 million Italians who are dutiful taxpayers

will win the war against the tax-privileged. The latter are, however,
still strong.

bC [Christian Democratic Party] Secretary Flaminio Piccoli accused Franco Reviglio of
animosity in his confrontation with innkeepers; over the telephone, Piccoli had urged
him not to meet with this powerful group of taxpayers. Reviglio answered with a
threat to resign: if Piccoli had something to say, let him say it in public and

face the consequences. Thus the long-contested tax receipt became mandatory with

the consensus of millions of citizens. This is only one hitherto unpublished episode
among many that have studded the ministry of Franco Reviglio. In 2 years at Finance,
Reviglio has been the most loved and hated of ministers. Many have hoped that he
might actually achieve fiscal justice, but they have been opposed, as he has, by
critics who have accused him of being too much of an alarmist and creating an anti-
tax climate in many categories of taxpayers. And even when Giovanni Spadolini's
government replaced him with its most faithful party man, Socialist Rino Formica,

not a few jumped for joy; but very many expressed their appreciation for a job well
done, so much so that even today Reviglio still receives dozens of letters a day.

After relinquishing the reins of the small and ephemeral group of technical ministers,
Reviglio accepted IL MONDO's invitation to review his work at Finance and tell what
remains to be done to bring Italy up to European levels of tax justice. As Reviglio
says very clearly in his interview, this goal is very far away.

[Question] How much tax evasion is still going on in Italy?

[Answer] That is very hard to say. I think that between tax evasion and erosion
there is still a margin of at least 7-8 points in the national income. Yes, I think
we are still at those levels.

[Question] That comes to about 28 billion lire, which is a lot of money. How do we
compare to other countries?

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVA va'raslnl. var. UI‘LI

[Answer] With respect to those with a higher standard, take Holland for example,
our tax evasion is 3-4 times greater.

[Question] And this despite the large gains made in the last 2 years: receipts
grew from $2 billion in 1978 to 92 billion in 1981. What did the ministry find
that was bad about this situation?

[Answer] You have to look at two different trends: the level of receipts with
respect to national income and public expenditures, and the efficiency with which
taxes are collected. Hell, I found a deficit that was still excessive relative to
the demands of public finances. Hence the first objective was to help shrink the
deficit by increasing collections in proportion to the GDP [Gross Domestic Product].
0n the other hand, the efficiency ratio did and still does leave much to be desired.
But I would like to emphasize that the efficiency with which I had tax collections
carried out in Italy in 1976. that is, since the last change in rates implemented

by Minister Bruno Visentini, that efficiency has diminished because of a long period
of double-digit inflation. In such a period, given our system of progressive taxation,
a noticeable increase in tax pressure is brought to bear on categories of people who
cannot escape income taxes, especially wage earners.

[Question] Because of the tax-rate structure then, inflation makes those pay more
who are already paying taxes.

[Answer] Certainly. Inflation is an evil that must be fought; it produces many
negative effects. But it was produced by something positive: the creation in this
country of an invincible social bloc against tax evasion and injustice. This bloc
would no longer admit that a dichotomy could exist between the taxvridden and the
tax evaders; it was a dichotomy that had grown to enormous proportions. A mechanism

of institutional and political consensus was created that led to the real fiscal
crisis in Italy. It is a crisis that we share with countries that are nonetheless

different from ours.

[Question] In northern European countries, for example, taxes are lower because
there are fewer public and more private services. But in those countries, the level
of public spending for public services is already very high. This is certainly not
the case in Italy.

[Answer] Actually, for us the fiscal crisis is not so much a generalized one as it

is the reaction of some categories of taxpayers who are the most numerous and who

have formed a social bloc. Their consensus has made it possible to launch a social
project: legitimizing the institution of taxation (and more generally legitimizing

the state) by reducing the area of tax evasion and legal loopholes. It has been done
gradually, a step at a time. It has put into practice the slogan that we have repeated
many times: if everybody pays taxes, taxes may go down. Inflation and the consequent
tax revolt by millions of taxpayers have favored this action. This is the mechanisn
we have sought to put into effect: no corporate interest, no privilege can resist

the mass of 35 million Italians who are wage earners, pensioners or their dependents.
Individual privileges must gradually give way to this pressure. It is this political
mechanism that has enabled us to do many things. It's like a battle: you have to have
three waves of troops and a strategy.

17
FORIOFTTCIAI.USEIDNLY
[Question] Yet there have been and still are very strong forces on the other side.
These are the groups that enjoy broad privileges and others who are able to engage
in outright and complete tax evasion. What are these categories?

[Answer] Describing the privileges would take as much space as the Encyclopedia
Britannica. There are thousands upon thousands of tax exemptions. The biggest are
in the agricultural sector, where the conventional base rate, for example. is 1/20
of income. And there are real, well-defined reasons of political economy why agri-
culture ought to get special treatment. It's beyond me how the farmer in Pianura
Padana can earn 50 million lire a year and pay taxes on only 2.5 million. And real
estate incomes are 3 times taxable income. Interest and dividends are either exempt
as in the case of government bonds or, if they are taxed, are taxed at a flat rate,
not progressively. These are the three sectors of major privilege as concerns tax
payments in the narrow sense of the word. if you look at social contributions, which
account for 40 percent of tax payments, you will see that there are exceptional pri—
vileges there, too, for agriculture, commerce, artisans. etc.

[Question] Where are the tax evaders?

[Answer] Just read our publications. Tax evasion takes place in all categories,

all that have income not subject to withholding. The amount of tax evasion varies

by sector and individual. And, of course, there is business income. In 1977, busi-
ness declared 13 billion lire in losses and only 6 billion in profits. This is
incriminating data; it cannot be attributed solely to a business slump. But I think
the sector where the most tax evasion takes place is that of the VAT [Value-Added Tax].
This is where I was thinking of concentrating our audits. The latter have so far been
quantitatively and qualitatively rather inferior to those allotted to IRPEF [family
income tax]. Audits in some offices have already shown, and very quickly, how much
can be recovered in that sector.

[Question] Who are the most powerful allies of the privileged and the evaders?

[Answer] I don't want to name any parties. But they are the parties that have
mounted campaigns against any innovation of ours; but at the last moment they didn't

go through with them because they couldn't risk alienating millions of wage earners.
Then there are organized groups that are very powerful both economically and politi-
tally. The problem is that we have a political struggle between parties that cut
across economic classes and have trouble countering these arguments. They all recog-
nize that wage earners' taxes must be reduced, but this possibility is defeated. They
say instead, let's reduce the wage earners' taxes and also reduce or at least not raise
the others. This is a political move and a contradiction in the system.

[Question] But how are these interests organized? What is their strategy?

[Answer] Nowadays nobody can come out explicitly against the fight against tax evasion.
Auditing is more subtle and sophisticated precisely because we saw a massive consensus
for it. You don't say no to the cash register; you say "yes, but..." and there is a
series of conditions. The same thing happened for putting handcuffs on tax evaders;

yes to handcuffs for evaders, but....

[Question] How have these positions taken concrete form since then?

18
FOR 0FFK]“1USEl)NLY
c b.‘ ~.-.-a.-~ v~~ sv-u-n

[Answer] You would have to make a study of how parliament functions. In the last

30 years, sectional interests in Italy have succeeded in passing many, many laws in
favor of sectional interests and very few for the common interest. This is the problem
of how the democratic system functions in Italy. Democracy means finding compromises
between the various conflicting interests. But when sectional interests are always
put first, then the mechanism becomes corrupt. The issue that made me aware of the
difficulties to be overcome was that of collective parliamentary options. And it's
not because parliament doesn't work but because the decisioncmaking mechanism is not
adequate to the times and the modern democracy of an industrialized country. Here,
everything is done by law, and the enormous demand for change requires an equal capa-
city to pass bills. However, they are not passed with thorough reasoning of political
considerations, regulations and practice.

[Question] This is the context in which you began your activity and carried it out
for the most part. The fiscal crisis has favored your work. Where did you begin?

[Answer] We began by working on a machine that had had almost nothing done to it.
Besides, of course, collecting taxes, this machine is also supposed to accomplish

the essential tasks of checking and investigating and to carry out the legal actions
resulting from investigations. The work is enormous: every year there are 22 million
lRPEF returns and 3.5 million VAT returns. About a hundred million returns have to
be examined, because action can be taken on returns filed in the last 5 years.

[Question] And what is the capacity of the machine? What are its means and methods?

[Answer] Auditing capacity is now at about 300,000 returns a year. But when I took
over, capacity was only a quarter as much. We introduced cross-checking for the first
time, and it was essential. Another important fact: the introduction of auditing in
fiscally dangerous categories and the elimination of discretionality, which allows
distortions and even corruption, not to mention escape from societal control. The
system of selective auditing gives the taxpayer the feeling that no impunity exists,
because anybody can be selected for audit, and the selection criteria change from
year to year. Before leaving the ministry, we managed to put out the bulletin on
the selective auditing of taxable organizations. in this area the machinery is now
running, and things are going very well, especially.since collections are exceeding
fiscal drag. In part, the increase in collections has been caused by psychological
pressure: publishing tax returns. the red books. We have made enormous strides,
although there is much left to be done.

[Question] Some people have accused you of being too unconcerned with administration.

[Answer] 1 think that is one of the most unfair things they could say. Our other
great work has been to find a large area of consensus on administrative reform and
to send bills to parliament. Hitherto, fiscal administration resembled an automobile
plant producing motors for 5,000 cars and gears for 100. In the end, it managed to
produce only a hundred cars. The whole production effort has to be redesigned.

And here we have made studies, plans and proposals, always in concert with union
organizations. Meanwhile, I pulled all the strings I could, with full attention to
the official functions. Thus l blocked all transfers from the North to the South.
Then 1 brought in a few thousand new workers, mostly in the North. Then we planned
the Rome and Milan service centers, which will start up at year's end and be fully
operational in 1982. They will achieve an extraordinary reform in administration.
Some 13 other centers will follow those of Milan and Rome in the next few years.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] The thorn in the side of your ministry seems to have been the Finance
Guards. How did they or did they not meet your expectations?

[Answer] The finance guards are very efficient and well trained. They are the envy
of other countries. They have no problems with strikes or working hours. I found
them to be even more efficient than I expected. Naturally I did not expect corruption.

[Question] Which reached the highest levels.

[Answer] Yes, the last events, from the oil scandal on,did unfortunately touch high
level administrators and left obvious blot. on the service. But it was only a small
minority who did not do their duty, and many of them have been demoted or fired. The
majority are clean and well trained. Rivalry must be avoided between groups within
the Finance Guards. I also think we should reduce excess discretion, which is the
root cause of corruption. The finance administration should be interested in this
deveIOpment, which should proceed gradually and limit personal intervention by increa-
sing automation.

[Question] How, for example?

[Answer] One of the greatest forms of monetary fraud and corruption is found in
international exchange, which in this country comes to large proportions: 150 trillion
lire a year. If there is an information system, for example, that can tell us in real
time the average value of merchandise passing through customs and what changes are
reflected in the accompanying documents, then we can check abnormal cases and take
action immediately. If the employee knows this checking can be done, he won't take
any risks. But aside from the cases of corruption, I must say that administrative
work was done in an atmosphere of cooperation. A service I thought was in disarray
found its motivation.

[Question] Overall, then, it is a positive report. What are the results and, espe-
cially, the prospects for the future?

[Answer] Tax receipts relative to the GDP increased 1.8 points in 1980 and 1.8—2.0
points in 1981 for a total of more than 3.5 points, bringing tax pressure up to about
36 percent of the GDP. A large part of the increase (in 1981 lire, 3.5 points of the
60? comes to about l3 trillion lire),a1most half the increase,has been obtained by
reducing the area of tax evasion. For the future, as I have said, there is a lot to
he recovered in the VAT area, but the real net is in public spending. The consensus
in the tax office has had the result of causing the citizens in tax revolt to pay
increased attention to public spending, i.e. to where their tax money goes. The
problem of justifying public spending is an explosive one. In the 1970’s a mechanism
was created whereby public spending increased every year as a fraction of the GDP;

tax receipts did not increase proportionately, so the deficit grew. People thought
some kind of magic rule had been discovered, because nobody was paying for the increase:
public spending. Actually, when a deficit of huge dimensions takes on structural pro-
portions, it produces very weighty negative consequences in some economic categories:
unemployment, low job creation and slowed growth. I think the political issue of the
next 5 years will be this matter of public spending. The citizenry must be told what
public spending is; many people think it is a gyp and a waste.

COPYRIGHT: ll. MONDO 1981

8782
C50: 3104/365

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC ITALY

NEED TO REVISE LAW 0" FLIGHT OF CURRENCY SEEN

Milan IL MONDO in Italian 28 Aug 8] pp 64-67

[interview with Vittorio Barattieri, general director of production in the ministry
of lndustry;by Giancarlo Bussetti: "I Admit It, It Should Be Changed"; date and place
of interview not given]

[Text] Vittorio Barattieri, one of the coauthors of the currency
penal law, holds a long conversation with IL MONDO in which he gives
an unprejudiced report on 5 years of struggle against the flight of
capital. He makes some proposals.

The last fannus person to feel the full rigor of the law was industrialist Giovanni
Fabbri, who had to spend a couple of weeks in jail for an alleged attempt to export
art objects and antiques. A few days before,the lightning of law 159 struck Roberto
Calvi, president of the Ambrosian Bank; he was sentenced to 4 years for currency
infractions. Between that time and the time when the law took effect in 1976, many
representatives of the economic world were ground up in the law's gears: industrialist
Piero Barilla; speculator Franco Ambrosio; Roman contractor Mario Genghini; Enzo Ba-
dioli, president of ICCREA [expansion unknown] (charged on successive occasions);
Alberto Ortelli, a Milanese professional, who had established a most efficient organi-
zation for exporting capital to Switzerland; Vicento industrialist Tullio Campagnolo;
and Italian-Panamanian businessman Jose Alberto Missri, who became a fugitive after
exporting more than 50 billion lire to Switzerland.

But is this law really effective? it has caused more than 16,000 people to be denounced
and a thousand Italian citizens to be arrested (see table); it has caused a little less
than 2.5 trillion lire to be recovered in 5 years. Have the technical means provided
for by law 159 really been suitable to stop the flow of money that has been going to
cooperative foreign banks and financiers at an average rate of 8 million lire a day
since 1975? Many doubt it today.

Law 159 is also being threatened to be cut off by an appeal of the Bolzano court to
the court of justice in Luxemburg to ascertain at the highest EEC judiciary level
whether the disposition of Italian currency is compatible with the free circulation
of capital sanctioned by Community rules. Serious doubts about the compatibility of
ltalian legislation with EEC regulations are advanced, in fact, by ilportant scholars
such as Alfredo Gaito. professor of criminal justice at the University of Rome, and
Giovanni Mangione, a professor of finance law at the state University of Milan and a
member of the council of state.

21
FOR40FFKJAL.USEIDNLY
’ﬂ—_—___

      
  
  

(I) Quanta brad. In ﬂamenco doll.

(manna-am
Wm WM)

  
   
      

 

(2) VW ocean-Io 2.593 1.900 2.061 me 2.062 16.561
(3) Forum. dorm-ale 1.666 2.669 2.166 5.“: 1646 ‘6162

Palm mutate 96 166 156 2‘0 2” 1006
(a) Wmavama

     
    
    
      
     

(s) O ‘I‘UI 6| C‘”‘°
(6) (in “I.“ 6 Ir.) I2.7 8.. 6.2 9.‘ “.6 5‘]
ml" “WW

0: caonau areamo

(nmliamdlitel 225 62.7 — -— - 300,3
Anon-mo

elm moon-

(n «Into a he) 397.6 216.5 — 710.1 699.1 2065.5

(7)

(I) What the Yellow Flame [Finance Guards] Burns (service of the Finance Guards for
the prevention and repression of currency violations)

(2) violations noted

(3) persons denounced

(4) persons arrested

(5) confiscation of currency and credit (in billions of lire)

(6) ascertained transfer of capital abroad (in billions of lire)

(7) other violations (in billions of lire)

A chorus of criticism has fallen on law 159 in recent months, especially from business—
men and banks. This criticism has been met by the government's attempt to draft a bill,
which is being examined by the justice commission of the Chamber of Deputies. But is
this enough to dispel all the doubts of interpretation, the contradictions and proce-
dural trappings surrounding law 159? For example, Gustavo Visentini, a professor of
finance at the University of Perugia, says, "The real danger is that this bill, which
only partly modifies the preceding rule, gives a stable foundation and unfair recog-
nition to a criminal law that needs rather preventive redrafting under civil adminis-
trative legislation." Giuseppe Mariani, in Rome, is one of the most important currency
consultants; he reflects the mood of economic operators: "It would be a lot better not
to do things hastily, to redo the entire currency law by reorganizing it in legally
clear and acceptable terms." But Pietro Nuvolone favors the modifications introduced
in the government's bill. He is one of the foremost Italian experts in currency matters.
Nuvolone told IL MONDO, "Besides, it is to be hoped that the terms will be reexamined
under which capital illegally held abroad is declared and nationalized; they should
allow the interested parties all the time they need to normalize their position with-

out penalty."

In sum. law 159 should be thoroughly revised. A few days ago, Guido Carli, a former
governor of the Bank of Italy. touched things off by emphasizing the urgency of refor-
ming currency regulations. But how? What should be changed immediately? Should the
goal be a single piece of currency legislation? Is it the right time to allow a new
normalization? IL MONDO asked these questions to Vittorio Barattieri, who has been
general director of production in the ministry of Industry since January l980. Barat—
tieri. who is 38, is one who is thoroughly familiar with law 159, as he has been
working since 1976 with the minister of foreign trade, Rinaldo Ossola, on restructuring

the currency penal law.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Italian Investment Abroad

  

lagoon-non“ Italian-l
all odor.
"' Total net investment in billions of lire
roanhnn-umnnuu-nuual
I“ N
on K“
In N
I»——————————-—————_,_____
a H
0 R
-aee N . .
The year 1976 is the only one in which total
400 \ net Italian investment abroad is negative.
_.~ ~UM This is due to the fact that in that year
' ' ' " the concessions encouraged by law 159, which
'9“ had just taken effect, jumped to $00.4 bil-
” ‘"”*°'M°”’aiilulbdqﬂ lion lire; the next year 53.9 billion lire
mesa-mom! mm was or mum '
“900 maﬁa mo 9 :Mmgu folio a: were iDPOI‘ted .
I! Mama '0 mm
5.33.: a W'FW . Source: Bank of Italy

 

[Question] Five years after law 159 took effect, the chorus of criticism is swelling
against many of the currency rules in that law. Do you share in this criticism?
Should the law be radically changed?

[Answer] The currency penal law is certainly marked by visible defects. They are
due to the haste in which the law was drafted, under extremely serious circumstances.
Yet a revision is necessary, as Guido Carli rightly maintained recently. and revision
was urged by former minister Ossola at the end of September 1978.

[Question] Yes, but Ossola and you, too, had great responsibility in drauing up
this law.

[Answer] Everybody had his own responsibilities. Indeed, people continue mistakenly
to make Ossola out to be the father of law 159; actually it was launched when he was
still general director of the Bank of Italy, being a parliamentary initiative from
the socialist group. When Ossola became minister of foreign trade, he redirected
things rather to regularizing currency illicit before 6 March 1976; the original
version would have allowed only small change to be brought back in.

[Question] One of the objectives that law 159 seems to have missed is, indeed, the
return of capital exported abroad. So much so that some people say the law should
be abolished completely. Do you agree?

23
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USEIJNLN

[Answer] These defects do not justify purely and simply throwing out law 159”

In fact, the defense of today's national economy, which is beset by destabilizing
internal and external factors, requires the maintenance of exchange controls and,
therefore, of the means of dissuading people who want to violate them. Otherwise
the preferences of domestic investors would go to foreign financial markets, and
precious resources would be diverted from domestic projects. The system of adminis-
trative sanctions that took effect in March 1976 has proven to be wholly inadequate
to the task, but the currency penal law has done its thankless job rather well.

[Question] Even though the host form of dissuasion would be reliance on a rich and
vital domestic economy.

[Answer] Of course. But as we wait for better times, we have to be realistic,
even if it goes against our personal convictions.

[Question] Do you favor a new normalization that would affect, for example,
so-called foreign investment activities (capital located in Italy and held by

foreign dummy corporations (editor's note)) and the capital that a resident ille-
gully holds abroad?

[Answer] Having seen first-hand the earlier experience with normalization, I have
to emphasize the great difficulties that might strike such a provision, which would
raise serious ethical and therefore political problems. I think that in any case a
fresh normalization could make it possible to repatriate a vast amount of capital
invested abroad, because the location of this capital will give investigative agencie
especially interesting traces leading to related illicit funds. Holders of this capi
tal are aware of this state of affairs, and they would certainly welcome the oppor-
tunity to normalize their situation.

[Question] As happened. at least in partg'with the first normalization.

[Answer] In 1976 the most significant effects of the normalization affected this
category of capital. For reasons easy to understand, though. I seriously doubt
that a new normalization would be capable of bringing back to Italy capital that
has completely abandoned our economy and been invested in foreign markets.

[Question] Among the strongest critics of law 159 are many businessmen who think
these currency rules are harmful to Italy because they seriously restrict foreign
trade. Do you agree?

[Answer] I don't think law 159 is in itself a serious obstacle to foreign economic
relations, at least for those who are used to obeying the law. You have to remember
that the currency penal law did not impose new restrictions but limited itself to
penalizing with jail sentences the most serious violations of preexisting currency
regulations. To see whether the continued and pressing complaints of economic opera-
tors are well founded, you must ask rather whether all the restrictions set by the
currency law are really necessary and timely.

[Question] What do you think about the restrictions that are still not supported
by economic operators?

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK urn-tum. USI'. ONLY

[Answer] During my service in the ministry of foreign trade, I came to the conclu-
sion that, even as we keep the present law and not hurt currency reserves, it is
possible to simplify procedures directly by broadly decentralizing functions so that
the agent banks can use their own initiative in many operations now subjected to the
preventive control of high-level services in the Italian currency system. That way,
residents would have more freedom in their foreign activities, and administration
would be improved over its present slowness and inefficiency due to the enormous
amount of paperwork it faces.

[Question] Indeed, many operators complain that ministerial authorizations arrive
months, chn years late, which makes big productive and commercial opportunities go
up in smoke. Many experts also criticize the vagueness of rules that have caused

a huge, clumsy casuistry to emerge. They point to downright contradictory rules
like article l-a in the integrated text of penal laws on currency infractions, which
punishes with 3 years in prison any resident who assigns to a foreign dummy corpora-
tion any capital located in Italy, even when the individual wants to bring back to
Italy capital he owns abroad.

[Answer] Article l-a is an aberration to the extent that it punishes bringing capital
into the country. If it is necessary now to penalize those who export or form capital
abroad, I don't understand why people should be punished for doing things that help
our balance of payments. The best thing to do would be to abolish the rule.

[Question] In France, for example, foreign investment activity is taxed at a higher
rate.

[Answer] If this rule is intended to discourage the use of foreign dummy corporations,
then tax policy could be used, but not in a form that jurists consider practically
incomprehensible for its purpose.

[Question] The recent legal proceedings against the president of the Ambrosian Bank,
Roberto Calvi, for illegal formation of financial reserves abroad, have brought to
light complex questions of commercial and business law. The most direct method,
which is of course adapted to settling quickly the case of the tourist caught with
his bankhook in his pocket, is this method also apt to shed light on complex cases
such as that of the president of the Ambrosian bank?

[Answer] It is really absurd to use the simplest procedure for crimes that very
often require extremely complex evidence. In such cases I think that the requirements
of judicial procedure should make formal indictment mandatory.

[Question] The government bill intended to modify law 159 has been in the Chamber of
Deputies judicial commission since last April; it introduces new elements, but it
does not solve any big problems. Ossola has called it "if not a monster, at least

a monsterette." For example, it sets 15 million lire as the cut-off between misde-
meanor and felony. Is this fair?

[Answer] The lS-million lire limit will make it possible to remove from the area of
criminal justice the huge number of infractions connected with the tourist trade.
These are minor violations that only distract the judiciary from much more important
tasks and that can be dealt with sufficiently through administrative channels.

25
roa OFFICIAL use ONLY
in the bill to reform the currency penal law there is a very timely provision for

a definition of abbreviated currency infractions subject to administrative procedure
up to 5 million lire, so that the defendant can settle his case immediately with a
payment of 25 percent of the value of the infraction. and the state can collect the
fine immediately rather than after many years and a lot of complex procedure.

[Question] But all this is made partly irrelevant by the fact that it is possible
to add up the infractions committed in 365 days.

[Answer] The reference to the 501*? year has been eliminated from the final text
of the bill to reform law 159.

[Question] This bill has a rule to favor workers normally living in Italy who work
abroad. 00 you agree with this?

[Answer] 1he bill to change law 159 broadens the category of workers considered
non-residents for monetary purposes. If this proposal becomes law, we can be sure
that, for example, resident professionals' pay received for work done abroad would
no longer go towards increasing Italian currency reserves but would presumably be
invested quite legitimately in foreign real estate or securities. We would have to
recognize that the rule in question is based on a presupposed mistake and makes less
clear the idea of what a resident is for purposes of currency exchange. We should
then drop the rule and rather make administrative exceptions for fair monetary advan-
tage in the cases of temporary workers and those living on the borders. Other emi-
grated workers already qualify under the law as non-residents for currency purposes
and their income earned abroad is already exempt; it is useless to repeat all that.

[Question] Among those who have called most insistently in recent years for thorough
changes in the law are administrators and bank workers, who are responsible for
verifying the accuracy of the prices of goods imported and exported. Are these
requests justified? Does the reform bill include them?

[Answer] It is a pure illusion that bank administrators and employees can verify
the accuracy of prices in all foreign transactions under their jurisdiction, because
nobody can know everything. But I think the government has made a sensible proposal
to limit the penal consequences due to a lack of verification in the case only of
financial operators in foreign trade. To puncture an out-of-date commonplace, I
want to emphasize that since the currency penal law has gone into effect, agent
banks have generally operated correctly and unfortunately have often shown an excess
of bureaucratic zeal out of fear of law 159. Their present trustworthiness is
another reason not to worry about letting them take over many tasks presently done
by the central monetary authority.

[Question] Why does the government's bill limit the Finance Guard's authority
to audit hanks? ls the intention to entrust bank audits only to Bank of Italy
inspectors or to those of the UlC [expansion unknown]?

[Answer] The government hill allows the Finance Guard access to the banks even
without the preventive authorization of judicial authority. However, unlike what
happens today, no general audits can be made, i.e. those extending throughout the
bank, nor can exploratory audits be made, i.e. audits not justified by well-founded
suspicion of specific currency infractions. Besides, general audits are already

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

under the jurisdiction of the Bank of Italy, which does them very well, but the
protection of privacy, which is a part of the bank-client relationship in Italy,
can be justly set aside only when there is real suspicion that a major sum of
interest to the state is affected.

[Question] The ministerial decree of last 12 March, which contains rules on cur-
rency and financial relations with foreign countries, misled operators, who saw
themselves again being hampered by a mess of procedures.

[Answer] The decree of 12 March l981, which went into effect the following September
and gathers together part of the administrative regulations on currency hitherto
scattered in many different places, is limited to a partial reordering of currency
discipline but does not help streamline currency procedures significantly. If this
decree is a starting point to reach higher objectives, then we will finally see
implemented those fine proposals to lighten the load on currency exchange, proposals
that were put forth by the recent ministers of foreign trade. Otherwise you will
have to watch out, because the currency bureaucracy is jealous of its prerogatives
and will have succeeded in imposing its own conservative opinions.

COPYRIGHT: IL MONDO 1981

8782
C50: 3|04/365

27
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC UNITED KINGDOM

'TIMES' VOICES CONCERN OVER UK MONETARY POLICY
PM251343 London THE TIMES in English 25 Sep 81 p 15

[Editorialz "Something To worry About"]

[Text] Washington has exported an epithet for the people who have been unloading
shares on the stock markets with such abandon in London yesterday. President
Reagan's treasury secretary Donald Regan calls them “worrywarts.” The trouble

is that though the London Stock Market may prove to be too pessimistic, as it

frequently has in the past, there is something for the.'%orrywarts" to worry
about in both countries.

Technical and political factors go some way to explain the mood. The persistence
of high United States interest rates far longer than originally expected had
already undermined American and Far Eastern markets and was beginning to have
repercussions here before last week's deliberate hoist in British rates acted

as a final trigger. That move pointed to a further delay in economic recovery.
as costs rise and demand is further restrained. It also increased the return

on fi\nd interest stocks-—ncw. unlike during most of postwar history, a signi-
ficant real return-to well beyond that on equities. Until that yield gap is
narrowed, share prices will not make a sustained recovery. Even more worrying

to the markets is the suspicion that interest rates have still not reached their

peak, here or in America; money market rates in London are already looking to
a further rise.

But underlying these factors is a broader anxiety for the United States as well
as for Britain. It is that the counter-inflation policies being pursued by our
respective governments--policies which the business and financial communities

initially welcomed with unguarded enthusiasm--are going to be at least a little
late in delivering their miracles.

There has been a qualitative change for the worse here. Until very recently

the central debate was whether output could be stimulated without damaging the
priority of reducing inflation. With the pound's fall, the question has now
become whether it is possible to prevent inflation reigniting without deepening
the recession. Sterling's decline this year. on the formula used by the treasury
and the Bank of England, will add more than 3 per cent to consumer prices.

The rise in interest rates to stabilise the pound indicates that the government
now has an ﬂmplicit exchange rate policy.

28
INJR'0F11C1A1.IJSEZ(MQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There could hardly be less propitious circumstances in which to mark the approach-
ing mid-term of Mrs Thatcher's ministry. Prices are today still rising faster
than when her govarnment took office. Unemployment is within a whisker of three
million (up 1.7 million since May 1979). National output is 7 3/6 per cent below
its peak in the early summer of 1979. Manufacturing industry alone is producing
16 per cent less.

There has been some improvement in productivity and recovery of corporate profits
so vital for investment, but no government for half a century has presided over
such a fearsome economic deterioration. Neither can these developments all be
blamed on the world recession. It has been steep but Britain's performance has
been worse than that of any other major industrial country.

It is not difficult, though depressing to describe the government's plight and
dilemmas. It is less easy now to prescribe solutions: one would not, as they say,
be starting from this place. If there had previously been an exchange rate policy,
the peak could have been taken off the unmerited rise, accumulating reserves and
limiting the damage to British manufacturing. Now whatever is said by the
monetarist theoreticians. a decline in the pound will add to inflationary pressures,
but a further sharp rise in interest rates will subject the nation to still higher
levels of unemployment which in turn adds to social security expenditure and so
pushes the PSBR further beyond target.

Clearly the broad thrust of this administration, reinforced by the most recent
ministerial changes. will be to put its head down and try to see through the
existing policy, with a few missed targets and doctrinal compromises, hoping for

a fall of American interest rates and for exports to rise. That course might
succeed politically, despite all the problems and failures described and predicted
above. Governments do recover, even from the electoral and opinion poll depths
recently plumbed by Mrs Thatcher. At the end of 1976 the labor government was
flat on its political back, under medication from the IMP--but within 21 months

Hr Callaghan had the option, in October 1978, to fight in election which many
believe he would have won. Hrs Thatcher has more time than that to recover.
However, there are differences: the world economic climate is now less benevolent
than then to economic recovery and the monetarist medicine now being applied has
already been applied for two years and so far the patient has not responded too
well. It does look as if something more may be needed to assist the government
politically and the nation economically.

Reality is well as expediency may require some give in the announced PSBR target.
A substantial proportion of that deficit is made up of unemployment payments and

debt interest; it hardly makes sense to maintain puritanical ambitions when world
interest rates and Britain's jobless are rising.

A case can also be made for allowing the exchange rate to slip even further,
especially against the European currencies of our main export markets. This would,
if accompanied by lower interest rates and an early cut in employers' national
insurance contributions, encourage industry to expand and invest and would create
jobs. Along that path might lie the "virtuous spiral" of increasing tax revenues,

29
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

declining social security payments, a falling PSBR and consequently further
reductions in interest rates, etc. It might be a mirage. Even if a real
prospect, it could only succeed if the inflationary pressures generated by
sterling depreciation were contained by some kind of incomes policy.

The government already, of course, has an incomes policy of 4 percent in the
public service sector. This is shrewd and fair and promises to be successful
within its limited ambitions. The question is whether more is needed, possibly
through attempting to apply 4 percent to workers throughout all the economy,

or even to aim for a total freeze. The problem with resorting to such a
comprehensive policy is that the risks of failure are increased, as the government
confronts groups with great bargaining power, whereas the gains would be marginal,
since large sections of private industry are anyway constrained by market forces.
The public utilities are a different matter and whether or not the government
extends its present incomes policy it must have support in reining in these greedy
monOpolies.

A total freeze, covering six months or a year, has the greater attractions of
simplicity of concept and equality of burden in the crisis. However, its
execution would be far from shmple. It would impose a massive reduction on real
incomes at a time when some corporate profits are rising and when the trade union
movement is massively hostile to the government. Without the cooperation of the
unions it would require an enormous imposition of Mrs Thatcher's political will,
and it is not clear that her present level of popularity and credibility would
ensure that. In collision with the unions she would provide opportunities for
Mr Benn and his like to exploit the populist rhetoric. To some extent the

prune minister's own rhetoric has made this option less viable. And she will
surely set her face against another option being canvassed, that of exchange
control. The sooner this is publicly ruled out the better.

The present crisis seems to be having one salutary effect. It may be forcing the
recognition that no lasting solution is possible which is conceived within the
boundaries of this island alone. The chancellor and the governor of the Bank of
England have implicitly acknowledged as much in speeches this week, directed to
the United States Government. Perhaps the call for the Americans to cut their
public spending and lower their interest rates is somewhat impertinent in view of
early criticisms of United States monetary laxity and our own failure to cut
public expenditure, but the governor. in particular, must be supported in his
criticism of the floating rate system and encouraged in his recognition of

the need for the collective management of collective problems.

it is crucial to have international action towards more stable currencies. The
chancellor should take on his worrywarts at the treasury and insist on Britain
uttering the European monetary system. That is only a first step to end what

Lord Lever calls, in the business today, the manifest bankruptcy of the present
unilateralism. That is a dirty word in defence-~in our judgment-and it should be
just as dirty a word in economics. Arguably America might be able to solve its
problems by itself. Britain certainly cannot, even with the bravest of first
lords of the treasury.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, l9§l

C80: 3120/2

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

POLLS FAVOR GOOD RELATIORSHIP HIT“ UNITED STNTES
Hamburg DAS CAPITAL in German Aug 81 pp 90-96
[Text] Marginal Phenomenon

The loud agitations by leftist groups are suggesting that
today's danger of war does not originate in the East but
in the United States. Does that mean that the concept

of the "ugly American" is prevalent among the Germans?
Not at all. Elisabeth Noelle-Neunann found out: More
FRG citizens favor a good relationship with the United
States today than was the case 25 years ago.

if one asks the German population: "In your opinion. what foreign policy would
be preferable--should we continue our military alliance with the Americans or
should we try to be totally neutral?"--the majority of the population would
prefer the alliance with the United States (55 percent compared to 31 percent
favoring neutrality). Nevertheless, differences between the young generation
and the rest of the population are significant: whereas those belonging to the
medium-age group--particular1y the older ones-prefer the alliance with the
United States by a two to one margin, the majority of the below-30 age group
favors neutrality: 45 percent express the opinion: "Prefer alliance with the
United States," compared to 40 percent who do not.

Apparently the growing sentiment of anti-Anericanism is again a self-perpetuating
combination of media reporting and the critical assessment of the United States
among the young generation. particularly the "Greens" who are'attracting public
attention. Otherwise, when looking only at the data of an opinion poll represent-
ing the trends since the 1970's, there is no evidence of a growing anti-Americanism
among the PRC population.

Between 1973 and 1981 there have been five opinion polls containing the following
questions on German foreign policy: "Should we in the future cooperate equally
closely with the United States and the USSR or should we cooperate more closely
with the USSR or more closely with the United Statea-what is your opinion?” The
answers have never been as much in favor of the United States as was the case in

spring 1981: 56 percent voted for closer cooperation with the United States,
in May 1973 it was only 36 percent.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even when the question is formulated differently during every other interview,
reading: "If we had to make a decision for either one of these two possibilites-
what is more important for the future of the German people--a good relationship
with the United States or a good relationship with the USSR?" The result is the
same: No indication of growing anti-Americanism.

The latter version has been used in the Allensbsch opinion polls since 1956. At
that time 62 percent stated that a good relationship with the United States is
more important, 10 percmt favored a good relationship with theUSSR. In 1975
the fraction in favor of the United States had declined to 52 percent and 12 per-
cent felt that a good relationship with the USSR was more important. Now. in

1981, 65 percent-—in other words. a higher percentage than in 1954--are in favor
of a good relationship with the United States.

An atmospheric anti-Americanism which might perhaps be detected. was expressed in
a more distant relationship when it comes to being absolute followers of the
United States as a leading power. Already in May 1980. when the question concern-
ing loyalty to the Alliance was posed for the first time. many people were shocked
by the interpretation of the German role in the Alliance as seen by the Germans.
The question. which was again asked in May 1981, read as follows: "Considering
the present situation in foreign policy, should the Federal Government lend total
support to the United States or should it treat each case according to its own
merit when it comes to deciding whether to support the United States or go its

own way?“ Already in 1980, 56 percent felt that "each case should be treated
according to its own merit," a year later this opinion spread further; at the
present time it is representative of 65 percent.

A year ago. 30 percent were solid supporters of the Atlantic Alliance, right now
the figure stands at 28 percent. The tendencies are even more pronounced when
the questions are phrased differently. emphasizing the character of obligation
and reciprocal loyalty within the Alliance.

Germany Between the Big Powers

Question: 'm very general question concerning German foreign policy: Should

we in the future cooperate equally closely with the United States and the USSR.
or should we cooperate more closely with the USSR or more closely with the United
States--what is your opinion?"

 

 

Oct Sep Jan Phy
Choices 1977 1978 1980 1981
More closely with the United States 69 51 49 56
More closely with the USSR 2 1 2 1
Equally closely with the United States
and the USSR 38 36 41 32
Undecided ll 12 8 ll
32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Firm Support of America

Question: 'Two people are discussing the relationship between the United States
and us. Which of the two statements reflects your own thoughts more accurately?"

 

 

Total Age groups by years
Choices result 16-29 30-44 45-59 above 60
'%b must continue to lend firm
support to the United States." 48 38 50 56 49
"It is no longer compatible with
the new role of Germany that we
submit ourselves in all areas to
the American leadership." 35 63 38 33 26
Undecided 17 19 12 11 25

Foreign Policy--Each Case on Its Own Merit

Question: "A question concerning foreign policy. Should the Federal Government
lend total support to the United States or should it treat each case according to

its own merit when it comes to deciding whether to support the United States or
go its own way?"

May May
Choices 1980 1981
Total support of Unites States 30 28
Treat each case on its own merit S6 - 65
Undecided 14 7

All data in percentages.

Reacting spontaneously, is the feeling toward the United States one of likability
or one of unlikability? The vocabulary test was designed in such a manner that
rational arguments are ignored and feelings are displayed spontaneously, demon-
strating Germany's feeling of likability for the United States.

When they see the word United States, 65 percent express likability, 17 percent
unlikability. Over 60 percent of the supporters of the CDU/CSU, SPD and FD? say:
"United Statea-likable." But the "Greens" deviate like a signal-~apparent1y

a different world and. to be sure. it is anti-American: 25 percent of the "Greens"

say that the United States is likable compared to 46 percent who consider the
United States "unlikable."

The 'treens" and the rest of the population do not differ a great deal with respect
to their critical assessment of the United States. Sixty percent (among the
"Greens": 81 percent) of the population agree with the view: 'ﬁhe Americans

are a frightening example for the rest of the world because they are a consumption-
oriented and throw—away society." Only 23 percent disagree with this View.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Almost every other person among the adult population (A7 percent, among the
"Greens" it is 70 percent) think: 'The United States is not sparing any means
to strengthen its position as a world power. In the process they are even
supporting fascist unjust regimes in Central and South America.

The thing that separates the majority of the population from the "Greene“ is the
fact that they do not only see the bad sides in the United States, but they see
the bad and the good sides. It opposes, for instance, the view: 'The United
States is again headed toward the cold war and, consequently, making the world
unsafe." 'That is not true," 52 percent of the population (26 percent of the
'treens") are saying. Only 25 percent of the population are subscribing to the
cold-war thesis: "Agree." On this point the majority of the "Greens" are of

a different opinion: 56 percent agree.

0n the other hand, almost 50 percent of the population again sees the United States
in the role as defender of democracy. 'Today the United States," one of the

theses presented during the interview read, "finally is once again a reliable
leading power of the West, which from a position of strength provides security
against the £ast"--That is true, 47 percent of the population (15 percent of

the "Greens") say compared to 26 percent who are opposing the statement.

The essential political reason for Germany's likability of the United States

becomes evident in the sentence: "No other country defends democracy again and
again or is as strong a bulwark against communist dictatorships as is the

United States." Fifty seven percent of the Germans are saying, 'That is my opinion."
Only 21 percent disagree.

The reason why the likability is not easily tarnished is that experiences from the
time following the collapse of 1965 are a factor. In May 1981, one of the

questions read: "During the first few years following Horld war II it was important
to establish a new democracy. In your opinion, did the Americans play a major

or a minor role in achieving this goal." Fifty percent of the people said, "a
major role." and an additional 29 percent said, "a fairly large role.“

Nevertheless. strange signs are written on the wall: With respect to the future,
the climate of opinions in the United States and the PRC differs in a remarkable
way. In 1978 the American Gallup Institute came up with the idea of asking

about what should be strengthened with respect to people's life styles and
attitudes. In May 1981 we put the same question to the citizens of the PRC.

In some areas Germans and Americans expressed the same aspirations: To place
greater emphasis on the family, also on personal deve1opment and less importance
on money. But in those instances where the population is preparing for the future
and strong technical and economic development, the opinions of Germans and

Americans are far apart.

3b
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
United States/PRC:

Question:

in our society.

Deviations

"This list contains several items which could change in the future

such a development?"

Item

 

If in the future there will again be
more respect for authority

If in the future more emphasis is
placed on technical progress

lf in the future work is taken less

seriously

If in the future sexual freedom is
accepted as a matter of course

United States/PRC:

Question:

Item

 

If in the future more importance were

placed on

If in the
placed on

it in the
placed on

All data in percentages.

in life

Concurrences

Choice

I welcome it
I reject it
Undecided

I welcome it
I reject it
Undecided

I welcome it
I reject it
Undecided

I welcome it
I reject it
Undecided

 

United States

89
6
5

75
12
13

25
69
6

29
62
9

Could you tell me item by item whether you welcome or reject

Germany

53
30
17

68
26
26

38
52

20

28
45
27

'tould you tell me on each item whether you would welcome or reject
such a development."

family ties

future more emphasis is
personal development

future less emphasis is

money

Falling Tendency

Choice

I welcome it
I reject it
Undecided

I welcome it
I reject it
Undecided

I welcome it
I reject it
Undecided

 

United States

91

5
l.

75
15
10

70
21
9

The SPD--media representation and demoscopic data come
up with the same picture--has reached a low point; a

consequence of its own internal strife.
however, in the eyes of the citizens respect for Chancellor

Helmut Schmidt has remained untouched.

In spite of it,

Elisabeth Noelle-

Neumann shows how the opposition is profiting from this

fact, as is demonstrated by the question inquiring about the
present intention of voting.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Germany

$38 099% meg
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in May 1981 the spectrum of party politics was restored to the position that
existed between 1976 and 1978. Approximately 50 percent of the population
indicated that they were CDU/CSU supporters.

Nevertheless, there has been a total shift in the make-up of party politics since
the fall of 1980 and the Bundestag election; as a matter of fact, something has
happened that has not been observed in the FRG for 3 decades, a unique demoscopic
combination: The SPD is experiencing one of its worst slumps since the estab-
lishment of the PRC, and in early spring only 34 percent of the people indicated
that they would vote for the SPD when asked the "Sunday question"--"If the
Bundestag election were held next Sunday..." It appears that the SPD is almost
returning to its former situation: It can get one-third of the votes, but no
more--a situation it believed to have overcome.

The chancellor, however, is not affected by it. There is no evidence of past
phenomena when the popularity of the party and its representative chancellor
were linked together, well-known from the time of the Adenauer years as well as
the times of Chancellor Ludwig Erhard and Chancellor Hilly Brandt.

Of course, Helmut Schmidt's unshakable position is also an indication why the
number of supporters of the SPD is declining. Impressions of what the SPD wants
and what it represents--the image of this party-changed dramatically between

June 1980 and May 1981. In the eyes of the voters, internal fights with the left
wing of the party increased the detrimental traits of the party: "is experiencing
internal strife"--“makes many promises that cannot be kapt"-—"has a few politicians
whom I definitely dislike"-"in its speeches frequently ignores the real concerns
and wishes of the population."

The fact that the SPD loses supporters not only when specific questions are involved,
is evident from changes in opinion. For instance: 'The SPD has extremely capable
politicians"--was answered in the affirmative by only 41 percent. Earlier it was

56 percent. Or the question: “Has politicians who can be trusted"-received only

34 percent yes-votes compared to an earlier 65 percent. It is not_necessary to ask
who the politicians are, because it is sufficiently clear from a statement which

had not yet been incorporated in the test of summer 1980. This statement: "The

SPD is too soft toward the East," was answered affirmatively by 48 percent.

The CDU/CSU has therefore good opportunities in this area. It is accused of such
softness by only 5 percent of the population. The CDU/CSU has now lost the
odium of internal strife, which affected the party between 1979 and 1980--in the

opinion of the voters it is almost the worst thing that can happen to a party.
Thus, 34 percent of the population--twice as many as voted for the SPD--indicated
that the opposition party is emitting optimism and confidence. Nevertheless,
if one looks at the details of the image which is projected by the CDUICSU to the
population, one will recognize that in many areas only insignificant changes have

occurred during the last 12 months.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if Elections Here Held Next Sunday

Question: "If Bundestag elections were held next Smday--for which party would

you vote?"

log Union SPD FOP "Greens" Others
198] opinion p011 50.7 34.0 9.2 5.7 0.4
1980 Bundestag election 44.6 42.9 10.6 1.5 0.4

Party Crit ic ism

when ascribing certain characteristics to the SPD and to the CDU/CSU, the
individuals contacted during the poll decided as follows:

Em M. .5&
Has extremely capable politicians 51 41
"as politicians who can be trusted 45 34
Conducts a middle-of-the-road policy 37 21
units optimism, confidence 34 16
Offers a guarantee that one will be well-off for a

long time 23 12
llas a few politicians whom I definitely dislike 49 48
Makes many promises that cannot be kept 37 59
Is experiencing internal strife 18 55
In its speeches it frequently ignores the real concerns

and wishes of the population 28 42
Favors its party-friends 22 36

Schmidt in Front

Question: "Presuming that a new decision had to be made as to who is to be
chancellor, whom would you prefer—Kohl or Schmidt?"

 

 

Total Supporters of
11.33 result Union §§2 FDP _ "Greens"
l-‘or Kohl 30 61 2 9 7
For Schmidt ‘35 14 84 54 45

All data in percentages.

COPYRIGHT:

8991
C80: 3103/422

1981 Cruner + Jahr AG 8 Co.

3?
ma OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR 0FFN]A1.USE(NVLY

POLI TICAL FRANCE

EFFECTS OF CONVENTIONAL, NUCLEAR STRENGTH. 0mm ON DEFENSE
Paris COMMENTAIRE in French Summer 81 pp 188-196
[Article by Pierre Lellouche]

[Text] Although most Europeans--including their governments--would prefer to ignore
the fact, it is becoming increasingly clear that the defense of Europe in the 1980's
will be determined by three new realities.

New Facts in European Security

First of all. the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979. by precipitating

a major crisis between the superpowers. has led to a deterioration in overall East-
Heat relations. Although the Europeans have done their best to reverse that trend.
the very existence of detente-—the key condition for security in Europe since the end
of the l960's--has been jeopardized. Beginning in the summer of 1980. the chances
for saving detente were to become even slimmer due to the Polish crisis and the re-
sulting threat of new Soviet military intervention in the center of Europe.

PoIitically. therefore. the security of Europe in the 1980's will have to be main-
tained in a new and probably long-lasting phase of confrontation between the super-
powers. Armed with its rediscovered moral convictions and reviving nationalism, the
United States during the coming decade will seek above all to reestablish its posi-
tion as a world power and to contain Soviet expansion in the Third World. For its
part, the Soviet Union. now assured of its global military power but uneasy because
of its internal weaknesses. will continue to be preoccupied with the consolidation
and expansion of its empire rather than with the demands for a genuine relationship
of detente with the United States. Whether the Europeans like it or not, this situa-
tion will have a direct impact on overall East-West relations and on Soviet-European
relations in particular.

in the second place. the basic conditions for Europe's security on the military and
strategic IeVel have also undergone some fundamental changes.

From the strictly military standpoint. the balance of power in Europe will continue
to work in the USSR's favor throughout the 1980's. Considering the now-established
parity between the central nuclear arsenals of the superpowers. the growing Soviet
superiority in Europe--as regards both conventional forces and Theater Nuclear Forces
(TNP)--wi11 further reduce the credibility of NATO's ”flexible response" strategy.

38
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In fact, the Europeans will find themselves increasingly caught in the following
strategic ”pincers':

1. Their persistent and worsening inferiority in conventional weapons will increase
their vulnerability to a surprise attack by Soviet conventional forces, and for that
reason, the Europeans will be more dependent on a first nuclear strike by NATO--one
that will have to be made almost immediately after the start of hostilities.

2. But at the same time, the Soviet Union's recently acquired superiority in theater
nuclear weapons, coupled with parity at the central strategic level, will have the
effect of neutralizing in practice any attempt by NATO to bring the conflict up to
the nuclear threshold.

It will be late in this decade before the new defense programs being launched or ac-
celerated by the United States have any impact on certain components of the balance
of military power--especially at the central strategic level. And the imbalances be-
tween conventional and Theater Nuclear Forces in Europe will be only partially re-
duced beginning in the l980's--thanks to NATO's modernization programs (the moderni-
zation of TN? and the LTDP [Long-Term Defense Plan])--provided, of course, that those
programs are completed.

lastly, on a more global geostrategic level, the invasion of Afghanistan, following
as it did the extension of Soviet influence into Ethiopia and Yemen, has radically
changed the strategic map of the Persian Gulf region-~a region that provides Europe
with some 60 percent of its oil imports. Soviet penetration of that zone and the
resulting strengthening of the Western naval presence (basically American and French)
in that region have in fact widened the "front" of East-West confrontation beyond the
traditional central zone--Europe--into a zone which itself is extremely volatile and
unstable. The situation in this new theater is far from favorable to the West: geo-
graphic proximity works in the USSR's favor, and the local powers are afraid of see-
ing the Gulf region turned into a new arena of East-West competition. To quote
Raymond Aron, "The Middle East is a vacuum, but a vacuum that refuses to be filled."

Americans and Europeans have reacted very differently to the transformation of the
strategic environment in Europe and the Third World. While the events in the Gulf
have caused an American "awakening" and the emergence of a new foreign policy that

is much more "militant” and voluntaristic. the Europeans have tended to react with
the greatest caution. Their attitude has only increased American irritation at what
is perceived--at best--as new proof of Europe's traditional selfishness and, more and
more frequently. as the sign of a slide by the Europeans into a sort of ”self-
ncutralization" or “Finlandization.” The fact is that neither the Europeans nor the
Americans have thus far succeeded in working out a coherent strategy aimed at resolv-
ing the new strategic equation of the 1980's. On the contrary, the general reaction
on both sides of the Atlantic has been to fall back on the solutions of the past.

The Americans, increasingly exasperated by their allies, are trying to revive the
old "Atlantic" system of the 1950's and doing their utmost to return to the blessed
days of 0.5. nuclear superiority and absolute "leadership'' of the Alliance. That
explains the temptation in some American circles--close to the new administration--
to take a tough line toward Europe and, if necessary, to abandon it to its fate.

And for their part, the Europeans are for the most part dreaming of a miraculous re-
turn to the happy days of "perfect detente” that prevailed in the 1970's, a detente

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that allowed them to enjoy American protection within the Alliance while also cash-
ing in on the dividends of European detente with their neighbors to the east. Other
Europeans—~a minority-~are still dreaming of a ”European Defense Community" that
would give a united Europe the means of insuring its own defense and assuming a new
role in world affairs. In fact, neither the ”Atlantic" concept nor the notion of a
“Europe of defense" corresponds to today's political realities. And neither of those
notions can provide the framework for realistic options for the future.

Alteration of Atlantic Alliance

what has changed structurally--so to speak--in the Atlantic Alliance is the confirma-
tion rather than the appearance (which occurred in the 1960's) of two major and in-
escapable historical trends, moving in opposite directions but reinforcing each other.
First of all. there has been a relative decline in American power, both in the balance
of power with the USSR and with respect to West European allies. But there has also
appeared the pole of German power in a Europe that has in general turned ”semi-
Gaullist."2

That double transformation has been visible for some time now in the economic area:
the quarrels in the 1970's over economic policy (the issue of the ”locomotive”),
the establishment of the European Monetary System, and the controversy over nuclear
energy and nonproliferation reflect a new balance of power within the Alliance it-
self. As a result of the change, Europe has become as rich and competitive as the
United States and is now capable of asserting and defending its own interests (in
connection with monetary policy or nuclear energy, for example) against the wishes
of the United States.

A parallel development, although more complex and less visible, has also occurred in
the field of security. Here the essential transformation has occurred in the field
of East—west relations, or, more precisely, in the increasingly obvious differences
that have arisen between the development of U.S.-Soviet relations on the one hand
and of relations between Europeans and Soviets on the other. The core of the prob-
lem concerns the basic difference between the European and the American couudtment
to and dependence on detente.

For the United States, detente turns out to have been merely a temporary phase in
that country's history--a phase that had more to do with the constraints of the in-
ternal situation (Watergate and Vietnam) than with a clear vision of the USSR. As
was pinpointed by Robert Tucker,3 detente enabled the United States to solve the
problem of its relations with Moscow almost "for free“ compared to the expensive
policy of "containment" pursued in the past. At one point, in fact, detente came to
justify the de facto renunciation by the 0.5. Congress of the use of force in foreign
policy (the War Powers Resolution). It also permitted a sizable reduction in the
military budget following Vietnam (an average annual drop of 1.21 percent between
1070 and 1977) and a stabilization of the u.s. strategic arsenal at its 1968-1969
level. And lastly, it justified the theory of Mutual Assured Destruction (HAD)--that
is, the renunciation by the United States of its strategic superiority, which was the
American foundation for the SALT negotiations.

As a result, Soviet—American detente rested almost exclusively on its-military con-
tent (and especially on arms control), while the economic or human elements remained
negligible. And consequently, as soon as the Americans realized how far the balance

ho
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of power had evolved to their disadvantage, and once they were convinced that the
value of the arms control process to their own security was, after all, limited,
they began to turn their backs on detente and to return to a more traditional form
of power policy with respect to Moscow.

For the Europeans, however, and for the Germans in particular, the experience with
detente could not evolve as it did for the United states. From the start, detente
had an entirely different meaning in Europe, expressed in terms of almost daily human
and economic interaction. On this side of the Atlantic, detente means stabilization
of the postwar territorial status quo and the guaranteed security of Berlin. Eco-
nomically, it represents access by European industrialists to new markets and to
sources of the raw materials that they urgently need. Detente also permits a stabi-
lization of budget efforts for defense at modest levels (from 2 to 3 percent of the
GNP at the very most in most European nations). And on a wider political level, de-
tente has also allowed the Europeans to assert their own identity in full safety in
the face of the American leader of the Alliance.

"Gains of Detente" or New Vulnerability? The German Case

Such a situation poses three sets of problems, however: first of all, in the field
of politics: when the "gains” become too sizable, they are transformed imperceptibly
into equally sizable vulnerabilities. Thus, there arrives a moment when the idea of
renouncing a ”gain" becomes politically (or economically) too expensive, even if the
other party openly violates the rules of the game. In the case of Afghanistan, for
example, the Europeans have refused to pay the price of giving up their ”dividends“
from detente, even though that has meant accepting in practice the Soviet definition
of that same detente's divisibility. The question then becomes: how far can the So-
viets go before they go too far? For example, is Poland worth giving up detente for?
But since nothing has been done in the case of a nonaligned country that is the vic-
tim of open Soviet aggression, why would things be any different in the case of a
country that everyone recognizes as being part of the Soviet empire?

The second problem arises from the fact that the Western democracies tend too much to
be blinded by the short-term benefits of detente and to forget that it can only be
based on a stable and balanced relationship of power. Military imbalance can only
produce an equally unbalanced political relationship. By forgetting that basic truth,
the Europeans have gradually come to see in detente--and in its military corollary,
arms control--a convenient substitute for continuous defense efforts on their part.
In fact, as their dependence on detente has increased over the past decade, the Euro-
peans have gradually lost their awareness of the fundamental importance of the bal-
ance of power, and their will to assume the costs of that balance has declined apace.
The danger is therefore obvious: while detente has occupied an ever-larger place in
the political life of the European nations, that political life has come to be based
on a balance of power that is tilting increasingly in favor of the USSR. The danger
is all the greater in that Europe's security depends on American protection. This is
where the gap between the respective American and European conndtments to detente
creates the most severe problems. Because the time will come when Europe's depend-

ence on detente will have a head-on collision with its dependence on the Alliance.
That is an extremely fragile knot of vulnerability that the Soviets--not at all

surprisingly--exploit continually with a view to "decoupling“ Europe from the United
States.

bl
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of all the European states, Germany is certainly the one which--because it is di-
vided and because of its geographical location as the I'first line" facing the Soviet
empire--is most committed to and the most dependent on detente. Germany is also the
country that has benefited most from what has now come to be called the “dividends"
or "gains” of detente. Its 0stpolitik has given Germany the political dimension it
previously lacked by endowing it with international recognition and making the FRG
the center of gravity of East-Best relations in Europe. A new decisionmaking pole
was therefore created within the Alliance, and the United States lost its monopoly
and in some respects its initiative as far as political relations.with the East are
concerned. For their part, the Soviets found a valuable "advocate” within the Al-
liance and a way of working for a possible "political decoupling" thanks to the sys-
tem of "double detente" thus established: a detente between superpowers with the
United States, but also a European detente with Bonn (especially) and Paris.4 For
the Germans, the dividends of detente could also be measured in human terms (the re-
turn of 200,000 Germans to the ERG) and in terms of economic benefits (the PRC alone
accounts for between 40 and 50 percent of all Western trade with the East). Lastly.
detente also provided the PRC with more scope for diplomatic maneuvering, and this
has enabled it to assert and defend its own interests.

But as was noted above, such a commitment to detente is unavoidably accompanied by
tremendous vulnerabilities. The latter appeared plainly just after the Afghan af-
fair. when Bonn refused to follow Washington's example in applying economic sanctions
to Moscow. There is even reason to wonder whether the PEG would be willing to en-
force such sanctions on a long-term basis in case of Soviet military intervention in
Poland. Such vulnerabilities have also turned up on the political level. Just after
the Afghan affair, the PRC, caught between pressure from Washington, which was asking
it to prOVe its solidarity with the Alliance. and pressure from Moscow, which told it
to save detente on penalty of jeopardizing its own security, managed to make no deci-
sion at all. To save their Ostpolitik without breaking with Washington, the German
leaders had to go along with the boycott of the Moscow Olympic Games by their Ameri-
can protector, but made up for that gesture by attending the Moscow summit meetfhg

in June 1980.

But it is in the area of security-~where Germany is most shaky--that those vulnera—
bilities have appeared most clearly. This is the area where Germany is in a position
of extreme dependence, both with respect to the potential aggressor--the USSR-~and
its ultimate protector--the United States. Two recent events--the issue of the neu-
tron bomb and the long and painful process of negotiation within the Alliance that
ended in NATO's December 1979 decision to deploy 572 new medium-range nuclear mis—
siles in Europe--illustrate the PRG's basic dilemma in the age of detente.

Europe in Extended Order

The weakening of the Atlantic system that we have just discussed does not mean, how-
ever, that political evolution in Europe has reached a stage in history where the
European states are already in a position to take charge of their own security and
thus replace the Atlantic institution with the “third way“ that certain Europeans
have dreamed of since the abortive attempt to set up the EDC (European Defense Oom-
munity) in the 1950's. 0n the contrary-~and this is the essential difference with
respect to the "great debate" in the late 1950's and early l960‘s—-the Europeans are
no longer reacting in the same way to the decline (real or presumed) of the American
nuclear guarantee. Twenty years ago, the "normal" European reaction was to acquire

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its own “bomb" (as France did) or to try to start European cooperation in defense
matters (as was the cage with the French-German negotiations of 1958-1963 or the
Fouchet Plan of 1962). Today, on the contrary--and this is precisely what is most
disturbing in the present context-~each of the governments concerned has reacted
separately in an attempt to preserve the status quo in the face of growing Soviet
pressures and the rebirth of a strong pacifist and neutralist current. while some
governments, particularly among the smaller members of the Alliance, decided purely
and simply to reduce their military efforts, the others clutched desperately at arms
control in the hope that those negotiations would miraculously succeed in restoring
the balance of power while also justifying on the domestic political level the mini—
mum military effort necessary for staying in the Alliance.

In such a context, European cooperation efforts in the area of defense have pro-
gressed scarcely at all. although the idea of a Europe of defense was mentioned sev-
eral times during the 1970's by European leaders. Great Britain, for example, which
had to decide whether to replace its deterrent force, has in fact never seriously
:onsidered the "French option." British leaders interested themselves exclusively
in the American Trident system, feeling that the French M-4 missile was less satis-
factory from the standpoint of requirements and performance. as well as more expen-
sive and, above all, more of a political risk, since Anglo-American relations were
at stake. And Chancellor Schmidt's FRG, whose attachment to the French-German
"coupling” is nevertheless well known, stated very clearly its opposition to any
idea of nuclear cooperation with France after that idea was mentioned from the French
side by Buis and Sanguinetti. More than ever, the FRG is hanging on to its status
as a nonnuclear state, which underlies a part of its relations of detente with the

East, and, as in the past, Germany wants above all to avoid having to choose between
France and the United States.

Paradoxically, the most positive development in the direction of a possible European
option in defense matters has taken place in France. which nevertheless remains for-
mally attached to the policy of independence set by General De Gaulle. We will not
linger here over the details of doctrinal developments in French strategy since
President Giscard d'Estaing's election in 1974, the main element of which was the
concept of "enlarged deterrence" proposed in 1976. The fact remains that those de-
velopments have been considerable as regards both the terms employed and the thinking
of French leaders. It is true that they refused to publicly support the TNF moderni-
zation plan, although such support would no doubt have played a decisive role in
1978-1979 during the political debate in Germany and would have greatly facilitated
Chancellor Schmidt's task in dealing with opponents within his own party. It is true
that the French leaders, so far at least, have carefully striven to keep their re-
marks deliberately vague concerning France's possible role in the security of Europe
and particularly with respect to that of their German neighbor. It is obvious. how-
ever, that considerable progress has been made in that direction, as witness the

many official statements on the tie-in between France's security and that of its
neighbors and the decision to modernize its strike force--involving in particular
decisions aimed at making the tactical weapons more flexible (with, in particular,

the addition of enhanced-radiation weapons to the French arsenal). Clearly, the
accepted French strategic model of only 8 or 10 years ago--limiting deterrence to

French territory alone--has given way to a broader concept which, although still
very vague, explicitly takes into account the security of our European partners and
especially of the PRC. And it is interesting to note that the evolution of French
strategic thinking has corresponded more to the new awareness of the problem of

1:3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-DR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

German security than to a perception in France of a change in the balance of strate-
gic power between the superpowers. For a very long time, French leaders had in es-

nuclear model or by seeking a form of separate accclucdation with the USSR. Quite
' Germany, unified or not,

. Considering current political realities both
in the Alliance and in Europe, it is obvious that neither a return to the old "Atlan-

system nor the establishment of a theoretical "European Defense Ckmmmnity" is a
realistic option for preserving security in Europe during the 1980's. Without po~
litical will on the part of the countries concerned, the European option represented
by an “80C“ is doomed to remain in the planning stage for a very long time to come.
Its attainment, which is possible in the long term, is in any case too far away to
be of real help in solving the security problems facing Europe today.

At the other extremity, the purely Atlantic option scarcely seems attainable. The
reason is that the golden age of the Atlantic system has passed; it is hard to see
how the United States could turn back the tide of history by reestabliehing both an

lab
ron omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

particular), was to feel that Europe could exist only if it provided its own means
of security outside NATO. In fact‘ that perfectly logical line of reasoning also
scrvad as a convenient justification for the inertia that has characterized European
cooperation in security matters since 1954.

Our objective today should be to reconcile the Alliance with a determined effort to
achieve European cooperation in defense. The gradual establishment of such European
cooperation, carried out in parallel with NATO, would make it possible to:

1. Encourage a greater contribution by the Europeans to the defense of their conti-
nent.

2. Compensate for the decline in the credibility of the American guarantee.

3. Release the American military resources necessary for protecting vital Western in-
terests in areas outside the NATO zone, while also clearing the way for a European
military role in those areas.

The attainment of those objectives would in no way require the establishment of new
institutions or even the renegotiation of the 1949 NATO Treaty-~a task, incidentally.
that would be nearly impossible and in any case risky. Neither would it entail the
establishment of a new inter-European regional entity--and even less a supranational
one. In this case, it would be sufficient simply to build on what already exists--
that is, on cooperation in foreign policy and on the de facto complementarity that
already exists among the armies and defense policies of the three principal European
states. At the overall western level, it would be a matter of consolidating the com-
plementarity between European potentials and the American potential that is already
a part of the Ottawa Declaration of 1974.

Those initiatives must be aimed at loosening the previously described Soviet stra-
tegic pincers through double-pronged action:

1. Raising the nuclear threshold--and this would mean a considerable strengthening
of the conventional potential.

2. The implementation of means and of a doctrine capable of restoring credibility to
the first use of nuclear weapons.

That double-pronged action would be based on the idea of strengthening the operational
and strategic complementarity of the forces maintained by the three principal European
states (France, the P86, and the United Kingdom), with that complementarity to be
achieved in parallel with NATO. Here we will simply mention in outline the measures
necessary as far as conventional armament is concerned and lay more stress on the ob-
jectives of possible nuclear cooperation.

As far as conventional forces are concerned, the Europeans will have to deal with an
increasingly difficult situation that will be characterized by two unfavorable trends:

1. Growing Soviet capability for launching a surprise attack on Europe, taking into
account the balance of power existing before mobilization or the sending of reinforce-
ments.

16
FOR OFHCIAI. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. An American trend-~and it will grow—~toward moving troops and equipment currently
stationed in Europe to other theaters when necessary (the Persian Gulf in particular).

what this will mean in the future is that the Europeans will have to do a lot more

in the very area in which they have been least efficient (with the possible exception
of the PRC and its Bundeswehr) and least willing to act in the past for all kinds of
political, economic, and social reasons.

Obviously, it is not a question here of defining a program for modernizing conven-
tional forces on a European scale. But we will make some general remarks. From the
start, taking action to rebuild conventional forces will involve a certain number of
financial--and therefore political--choices. It is clear that in view of the consid-
erable inflation in the cost of armaments, such a buildup will require a sizable in-
crease in European defense budgets beyond the current 3 or 4 percent of GNP--meaning
a gradual rationalization of defense efforts which so far have been made separately
by each of the states in question. Considering the sizable political, economic. and
social constraints in Europe, it seems unrealistic to expect a sudden jump in defense
budgets. Relatively speaking, catching up with the financial resources allocated to
defense by the USSR (from 11 to 13 percent of the Soviet GNP) would mean tripling
European defenses. Catching up with the United States would mean doubling them. The
most one can argue for in Europe is an increase of 1 percent of the GNP--and that in
itself would be regarded as an optimistic objective by any French, British, or German
military planner.

This first budgetary constraint means that we will have to make better use of what we
have. And that is the area where a lot can be done on a European scale.

First of all, a lot can be done in the joint design and manufacture of armaments.
In this area, there have been many experiments in Europe, and some of them (chiefly
between France and Germany) have been very positive--the HOT Roland systems, Alpha
Jet, and so on--but others (more international in nature, such as the Tornado) have
turned out less satisfactorily, mainly from the financial standpoint.

Second. the problems of coproduction, which are very complex (because they go beyond
the military sphere to affect the economy, technological innovation, and employment),
can nevertheless be solved provided that the political will to cooperate exists. The
case of French-German cooperation is significant in this respect. So there is reason
to think that a rationalization of production programs in France, Germany, and Great
Britain will make it possible in the future to improve the quality of the systems
while also permitting longer production runs and thus ending the current dispersion
of resources and the redundancy of competing systems produced separately by each of
those states.

But beyond the coproduction of armaments, the main effort at rationalization will
have to be concerned with the overall concept of defense forces in the three coun-
tries. In this respect, greater operational complementarity and even a specializa-
tion of duties among European armies seem inevitable. Incidentally, that specializa-
tion already exists: the Bundeswehr is currently west Europe's strongest conventional
army, while France and Great Britain are in fact nuclear powers to a greater extent
than they are conventional ones (with France retaining a second specialization: ex-
ternal intervention). In the future, it will be a question of strengthening that
specialization both operationally and financially. It is clear that France and Great

136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Britain will find it increasingly difficult to finance the modernization of their
nuclear arsenals and their conventional potential simultaneously. (And in France's
case. we would have to add the cost of outfitting the external intervention forces.)
Rather than scattering valuable resources in that way, London and Paris should inten-
sify their nuclear specialization and be content with a main body that is smaller but
better equipped than Great Britain's current BAOR [British Army of the Rhine) and
France's First Army. For France, such a plan would have the advantage of permitting
a rapid and needed modernization of its army and navy while releasing more credits
for more numerous and more mobile intervention forces.

As far as nuclear weapons are concerned, it is clear that the French and British
forces will be called on in the future to play an increasingly important role in the
reorganization--which we consider inevitable--of the Alliance's nuclear posture in
Europe. The reason is that as American credibility declines, the importance of
French and British European forces increases almost proportionately--whether Paris

or London likes it or not. incidentally. It is an almost natural development and

one that could be compared to the interaction between communicating vessels. As long
as the American guarantee was clearly protecting nonnuclear Europe, the two European
nuclear powers could confine themselves--to their own great benefit--to a posture of
minimal deterrence covering only their own territories. But as soon as that American
protection weakens, those same French and British nuclear forces find themselves be-
ing hurled, as it were, into a European role. We should note, by the way, that their
role-~already recognized implicitly in the Ottawa Declaration--is being strengthened
in fact by the quantitative and qualitative increase in the French and British arse-
nals, which are capable now and will become increasingly capable of covering more
than just the national territory (this is true of the French forces, which will have
MIRVed rockets beginning in 1985, and of the British potential. which will include
Trident missiles armed with MRV warheads). In practice, it will therefore be impor-
tant to confirm that 'evolution“--which, let us repeat, is already underway-~by as-
signing to those forces the trigger role in escalation to the nuclear phase. a role
that is no longer performed credibly by the American systems alone. Because while it
is possible that the Soviets may have reason to doubt whether the United States would
defend the continent by engaging in a first strike with the nuclear weapons it has
deployed in Europe, such a doubt would no longer be possible if the Europeans them-
selves declared themselves willing and were able to make that first strike in the de—
fense of their continent. Such an expansion of French and British deterrence to in-
clude the FRG and West Europe would therefore have the advantage of offsetting the
decline in American credibility while not eliminating (but, on the contrary, strength-
ening) the link with the use of the American central systems.

Conclusion

It would be illusory for the Europeans to believe that they can with impunity become
a "big Switzerland" protected from external upheavals. Because if Switzerland--or
Finland--exists today. it is precisely because other Europeans have so far manifested
the will to exist as independent nations determined to defend themselves. And al-
though such expressions are fashionable today, there will be no “Pinlandization' or
”Euroneutralism" in Europe, because there is no third way between defense and enslave-

ment.

1;?
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

. The program for modernizing theater weapons and that for conventional forces (the
Long—Term Defense Plan) have been analyzed by C. D. Blacker and P. ﬂussain respec—
tively, as well as by Richard Burt in “European Security in the 1980's."

. See Fritz Stern, "Germany in a Semi-Gaullist Europe," FOREIGN AFFAIRS, Spring
1980.

. See Robert w. Tucker, "America in Decline: the Foreign Policy of Maturity,"
FOREIGN AFFAIRS, "America and the world, 1979.“

. Incidentally, Moscow did not fail to play on that double detente just after the
Afghanistan affair. The Soviet press noted after the summit meetings in Warsaw
and Moscow that "the U.S. partners are continuing to cultivate the field of de-
tente, while the United States continues to underline it" (TEMPS NOUVBAUX, quoted
in LB HONOR, 1 July 1980). PRAVDA went so far as to marvel at “the peacemaking
role" (I) of the French-German connection (quoted in LB HONOR, 11 July 1980).

For his part, Brezhnev warned Chancellor Schmidt during the Moscow emit meeting
that the "United States couldn't care less about Europe's fate; if there is a nu-
clear war, it will be on the other side of the ocean" (PRAVDA, quoted in INT,

8 July 1980).

. See Wilfrid Dohl, "French Nuclear Diplomacy,‘ Princeton, Princeton University
Press, 1971, chs 2, 7.

. 0n the central front, the ratio is currently 1 to 2 (27 NATO divisions to 46 Warsaw
Pact divisions, or, in terms of battle tanks, 7,000 to the Warsaw Pact's 19,500).
See 1188, "Military Balance," 1979-1980, pp 110-115.

OPYRIGNT: 1981 s.n. Commentaire

1798
SO: 3100/954

118
Iron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL UN ITH) KINGDOM

SOCIAL DWCRATS PUBLISH DRAFI CONSTITUTION
m231507 London nu: nuts in English 23 Sep 81 pp 1, a
[Report by Julian Haviland: “Policy Voice for Every Social Democrat"]

[Text] Leaders of the Social Democratic Party yesterday published a draft
constitution designed to give every party member a voice in formulating policy
and in choosing the party's representatives at almost every level.

Every member would have the right to choose by postal ballot candidates for
election to Westminister, to the European Parliament and if they wish, to
local'authorities. The significant exception is that it would be open to the
party's HPs to choose the parliamentary leader (who would be prime minister

if the party held office) provided only that they were of one mind. That
hitherto undisclosed provision, which, like everything else in the constitution
is subject to ratification by the entire mewership, seems likely to extend the
controversy over choosing the leader, on which the four; founder members are
already divided.

There is to be a dual leadership. A president, who as leader outside Parliament
would be the second most powerful figure, would be chosen by the whole membership.

The constitution incorporates the expertise of many constitutional lawyers and
seeks to avoid the divisions notably over the manifesto and the rights of HPs.
which rack the Labor Party. It provides for:

A council for social democracy—described as ”the parliament of the party"—with
about 600 members, elected every two years, and meeting at least three times a
year. The council will debate and adopt policy.

A national committee, meeting monthly to run the party 's affairs outside Parliament.
It will include HPs, regional representatives and some members elected by a national
ballot of all—party members.

There will be no corporate membership—"no block votes," Mr Ray Jenkins said
yesterday. "Representative democracy has to work," Mr Jenkins said, "on the basis
of a certain degree of trust—of independence and of people who democratically
elected have the opportunity to make up their minds."

1:9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Special provision is made at all levels for women representatives. Short-lists
of parliamentary candidates must have a proportion of women and of men.

The national panel of candidates will include "a reasonable balance between both

sexes and different age-groups, and include representatives of different social
and economic groups and not ethnic minorities."

0n the rights of HPs and their relationship with the party outside Parliament,

the Social Democrats' constitution is explicit. "It is hereby declared that

the parliamentary committee must have full regard to the election programme and
all the statements of policy adopted by the council. But SDP members of Parliament
shall not be mandated nor subject to direction or control by an organ of the SDP."

The president is to chair both the council and the national committee. But his

position is carefully circumscribed, to limit the possibility of rivalry with the
leader--the putative or actual prime minister.

The leader is to be chairman of the national committee's policy sub-cmmmittee,
of which half the members will be MP3. The connuttee will formulate policy,
"after wide consultation," for the council to ratify.

The constitution reads: "An election programme shall be based upon statements of
policy adopted by the council, but if no statement of policy has been adopted on
some issue which in the view of the policy sub-comittee needs to be referred to,
the sub-committee shall have power to pronounce a policy on that issue for
inclusion in the programme."

Mr Jenkins said yesterday that the method of electing the leader would not cause
great upheaval. The constitution provides that the HTS should first choose the
leader from among their ranks. Each candidate would have to be nominated by

15 per cent of HPs, and the winner would have to be endorsed by the council.

IE endorsement was withheld, the choice would go to the whole membership.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited. 1981

C50: 3120/2 END

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY