POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10201
18 December 1981

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 19/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY

JPRB L/10202
18 Dace-be:
HORLWIDE REPORT
Teucomumcanous POLICY, RESEARCH AND Devewmm
(3000 19/81)
Commas
ASIA
JAPAN
Activities of Major Optical Fiber Manufacturers Reported
("IKKAN KmYo sum“, 29 mt 81) .OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOO.
0388
Time and Frequency Service Using Cuban National Television
Channels
(Yu. A. Pedorov, J. Gonzales; Imm'mn 13mm, Jul 81)
WEST EUROPE
SWEDEN

New Technology Seen Overwhelning Telecouunicatione Agency
(Carl-Olof J0hard, mm mm, 12 NOV 81) 00000000000000

-l- {III-W-I4OPOUO

MWWOMY
ACTIVXTIES OF MAJOR OPTICAL FIBER MANUFACTURERS REPORTED
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 29 Oct 81 p 15

[Text] Optoelectronics entered the practical stage only because low-loss fiber and
the long-life seniconductor laser becaae practical items, and the contribution of
high-quality fiber is especially large.

About the tine the Corning Coapany succeeded in the epochnsking develonnent of
glass fiber with the extreaely low loss of 20 decibels per kilo-eter and the bell
Laboratory announced its aethod of manufacturing new optical fiber base asterial
in the latter half of the 1965 decade, Japan's efforts in the optical fiber area
were being accelerated. Up to that tine. there had been scattered research on the
part of cable conpanies and con-unication asters focused Iainly on Iultiple con-
ponent low-loss glass. but since 1975 the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public
Corporation and three electrical cable aster coapaniea (Sunitoao Blectric Indus-
tries, Furukawa Electric, and Pujikura Cable) initiated joint research in this
area. In 1979 these parties succeeded in developing optical fiber with a loss of
0.2 decibels per kilo-eter. which made it the best in the world in this respect.
and Japan has been enjoying top position in the area of fiber technology since
then.

At the present tine. the optical fiber nakers. centered on the electrical cable
nakers, are developing their independent technology and hanging on to their own
products as they are responding to the expanding and diversifying needs of the
narket.

Furukswa Electric has doubled its optical fiber production capability over that
of 1980 to 4,000 kiloneters. This past January. this conpany together with
Fujitsu jointly received an order for 6,000 kilometers of optical con-unication

network fro. the Hong Kong Telephone Company. thereby greatly enhancing its posi-
tion in the field.

It was about 1970 that this coapsny took up the subject of optical fibers seri-
ously, end a joint agreeaent for coordinated research was reached between three
coapanies--Por:ing Glass, Fujitsu, and this conpany-in 1973. as a result of which
there was a sudden acceleration in developnent. Then. the highest level four-core
optical cable was developed in 1975. and a line was set up at its Chiba plant.

This cable is still operating today without nishap, ably demonstrating the high
quality of optical fiber cables. Since 1975 this coapany has been engaged in joint
research with the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation. and in 1978

1

ROI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it entered into an agreement with the Corning Company. This company presently is
producing top-quality fiber both by the CVO method and the VAD method.

Looking at the orders this company has been receiving over the past few years,
there was the order from Nippen Steel in 1977. from Tokyo Electric in 1978, from
the Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute and the Agency of Industrial Science
and Technology in 1980. the order from Bong Kong in January of 1981, and from
Northern Telecom by way of Corning in August 1981.

This company is not satisfied to limit its efforts only to quartz system fibers.
but is pointing toward high-quality optical fiber development and wider use of
image guides and is enhancing its ability to handle orders for systems.

Sumitomo Electric initiated basic research on optical fibers in about 1965 and
entered into earnest research on low-loss quartz optical fiber development along
about 1970. Since it initiated joint research with the Nippon Telegraph and Tele-
phone Public Corporation. this company has been looking toward mass production.

and it also initiated joint research with the electric power companies on power
control. it has been participating in second-phase and third-phase joint research
programs with the Public Corporation. Both domestic and foreign orders began to
increase starting about 1978; it has received orders from Nippon Steel for informa-
tion transmission at its Yawata Steel Plant, for subways, for an ITV system for a
high-speed railroad. from Disney World. and from the Brazil Telephone Public Corpo-
ration. of special note is the joint order received with Nippon Electric last year
from Argentina for expanding that country's communication system over a 5-year plan
involving 3.020 kilometers of installations requiring a total of 8,000 kilometers
of optical fiber.

The method of manufacturing optical fiber parent material is the VAD method (axis
attached method), which is a strictly Japanese method developed in joint research
with the Public Corporation. Since the van method is adaptable to mass production.
it has good capability of responding to sharply increasing demand.

This company estimates that this year's total sales in the optical communications
area will total more than 5 billion yen. including sales in industrial use image
fiber. optical fiber voltmeters and photo components (split wave devices, switch-
es). compound semiconductor production projects. and all optical fiber related
technology. it anticipates that sales this year will total 5 billion yen.

Fujikura Cable entered the field of optical fiber development early in the game
and is a member of the top group in Japan in this area. One of its past achieve-
meats which can be cited here is its success in commercializing the silicon-clad
optical fiber in 1973. This was the first commercial product for signal transmis-
sion. In 1976. it came out jointly with the Public Corporation with the success-
ful development of an extremely low-loss optical fiber. This is a 1.2 micron fiber
with the very low loss of 0.47 decibels per kilometer. and this may be said to be
indicative of the high technological level of this company. During the past year
it has been engaged in developing optical fibers without the peak which appears

in the loss level and has established the position of optical fibers as replace-
ment for copper cables in communication transmission.

5
‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL PSI". ONLY

Because this company has fairly little interplay with communications equipment
makers. it has suffered considerably in the international market. but in July it
received an order from the mainstay of optical fibers, the Bell Laboratory of the
United States. for 65 kilometers of optical fiber for use in submarine cables.
and this company appears about to make expansions in this area.

While sales in the public comnication area to the Public Corporation account for
the major share of this company's production, recently it has been developing sales
in the private sector. such as the recent sales for ITV systems used in subways
such as the Kyoto subway and for control systems of high-speed highways. Because
it does not have any specific partner in this area. it has the advantage of teaming
up with any maker, and it is reinforcing the production capability of its Sakura
plant, dedicated solely to optical fiber production, to 3,000 kilometers per mcnth.

Showa Electric Wire and Cable Company is the top maker in the area of multicom-
ponent glass optical fiber. To be sure. this company is developing and producing
quartz optical fiber just as any other company. This company is pushing develop-
ment of high-quality quartz fiber for long-distance transmission use and the multi-
component glass fiber which can be produced in mass quantity at low cost for medium
and short distance communication.

The features of multicomponent glass fiber include the free selection of the open-
ing number of light impulses which can be accummodated by the cable, the large size
of core which can be used. and the good coupling with the light source. Its low
melting point also enables ready splicing. “hen the distance of transmission is
small and the volume of communication is not too large. the comparatively large
loss rate (7-8 decibels per kilometer) compared to quartz fiber is not too much of
a problem. That is why this company is pushing expans on in use of this fiber in
the area of intraplant communications, computer data bus, CATV, and observational
control transmission type applic :ions.

Various multicomponent systems and quartz systems are being produced at its Sagami-
gahara plant, where the monthly production is about 1,000 kilometers. Series link-
ing of peripheral equipment with optical fiber such as data link is also under de-
velopment.

Since last year, Hitachi Cable has been operating its headquarters dtmarket devel-
opment and service. laboratory oproduct making, plant Omanufacturing system de-
velopment centered on its optical system development headquarters to promote devel-
opment and production of optical fibers and associated equipment. Joint research
was initiated on optical fibers with Hitachi Limited from about 1971, and the re-
sults are appearing in the form of unique development not seen in other companies.

Joint research on practical technology related to systems control was initiated by
Tokyo Electric and Kwansai Electric in 1976. in 1980, success was achieved in
setting up n Z-kilometer HF analog transmission system through joint research with
NHK by which wide area television (large number of scanning lines with good image)
transmission systems were made possible. At the same time, there has been a large
increase in orders for items such as the data Fourier system for the Kimiru steel-
making plant of Nippon Steel and the ITV observation system for the high-speed
highway, and sales totaling more than 1.5 billion yen are anticipated for this
year.

3
FOR 0F11(1A1.US£1NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The elliptical jacket type polarized waved plane retention fiber which this com-
pany announced in July of this year maintains the vibrational plane (polarized
plane) of light in a fixed direction as light is transmitted, and this factor
coupled with its low loss are expected to find wide application for this fiber in
optical communications, gyroscopes. and magnetic flux gauges.

in addition, this company has developed blood pressure measurement devices using
optical fiber which are expected to find many uses in diagnosing and treating
cardiac patients. blood pressure measurements during the postsurgery stage, and
general observation use.

Dainichi-Nippon Cables' quartz optical fiber is a product of joint research with
Mitsubishi Metals and is a solely developed HRT (modified rod in tube) method tech-
nology. The features of optical fiber produced by the HRT method include the sep-
arate melt-forming of the core and cladding such that-the dimensions can be adjust-
ed at will.

it is possible to produce fibers ranging from small diameter (6 microns) for com-
munications use to large diameter fibers (1.000 microns) for power transmission
which are very readily adapted to medical and sensor applications. This company
exploited the features of this MRT type fiber to market an image guide. In the
past, image guides were used for stomach cameras, but the large transmission loss
limited its length to 2-3 meters; the development of quartz fibers has made pos-
sible transmission of clear images over more than 100 meters, which has made opti-
cal fibers useful in nuclear power, blast furnace, and metal flaw detection uses
as well as many other uses.

[his company is also working toward serializing data links according to need. The
spliccr developed by this company (mel: joining device) uses butane gas, does not
require an electric power supply, and is low in cost, which makes it a highly eval-
uated product.

Dates of Optical Electronics Development and Practical Introduction
{€25 Event

1953 invention of glass fiber by Ban-hiru [phonetic]

1960 Invention of laser

1970 Corning Company: invention of low-loss glass fiber (20 decibels/kilometer)
Bell Laboratory: invention of semiconductor laser

1974 Bell Laboratory: announcement of low-loss optical fiber by the HCVD method
(1.1 decibels/kilometer)

1975 Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation. Purukawa Electric,
Sumitomo Electric, Fujikura Cable initiate joint research

1978 Haiobisu [phonetic] initiated at Eastern Items

1979 Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation joint research group:
development of low-loss optical fiber by the Van method with 0.2 decibels/
kilometer loss

1980 Husashino Laboratory of the Public Corporation. Fujitsu. and Nippon Elec-
tric joint research: development of semiconductor laser with life greater
than 100,000 hours.

 

\

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981

2267
C50: 8129/0249 h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOF'ICIAI.DSE¢0NIJ

USSR

"06 529.70l:621.397.6
TIME AND FREQUENCY SERVICE USING CUBA" NATIONAL TELEVISION CHANNELS
Moscow IZHERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA in Russian No 7. Jul 81 pp 39-51

[Article by Yu. A. Fedorov and J. Gonzales: "Transmission of Time and Frequency
Units via the Channels of Cuban National Television")

[Text] The NTSC color television standard has been adopted for television broad-
casting in the Republic of Cuba. Balanced quadrature modulation of one chromi-
nance subcarrier frequency is employed in this system for the transmission of the
color difference signals. The nominal value of this frequency should meet the
conditions for compatibility of color and black-and-white television and should
have no impact on the quality of black-and-white and color images. For this
reason. the chrominance subcarrier in the NTSC system was chosen at 3.5795‘5...
MHz. while the repetition rate of the horizontal lines and fields of the composite
TV signals are 15,73h.266... and 59.9b... Hz respectively [1].

With these frequency values for the sync pulses, both passive and active techni-
ques can be used to reference time scales to each other [2]. The passive method
requires the simultaneous recording at two points of the same frame sync pulses
with the subsequent exchange of data from the measurement results, while the act-
ive method provides for the transmission of special code groups incorporated in
the TV signals. where these groups carry information on the time position of the
frame sync pulses relative to the reference standard time scale.

The practical implesentation of these techniques involves the organization of an
additional communications channel in one case, and in the other, the utilisation
of complicated and expensive transmitting and receiving-recording equipment of
limited precision. which is governed by the discrete nature of the transmitted
data and its reproduction based on the second time signals.

Experience in the USSR with the design of synchronization systems for time scales
using television channels shows that time signals with different repetition rates
and a high degree of precision in their matching to the scale of the state time
and frequency reference standard can be continuously transmitted as part of the
television signals [3]. In this case, the transmitting and receiving-recording
equipaent is substantially simplified and high precision, reliability and a high
confidence level in linking the tine scales of spatially separated facilities
without supplemental information exchange are assured [h - 6].

FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(HNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USIZCHVLV

it follows from an analysis of the techniques of generating high and low frequency
sync pulse components in the NTSC system that for a definite relationship between
the time signal repetition period and the frame sync pulses, the time signals can
be transmitted continuously as a part of the television signals just as in the
SECAH system, adopted for TV broadcasting in the USSR. In this case, the time
position of the frame sync pulses and the time signals will remain unchanged for
the duration of an entire transmission.

To assure that the time signals coincide with the frame sync pulse once per second,
this relationship is determined from the expression:

Tnp. - N/ff (1)
where T,.p, is the repetition period of the time signals; ff is the frequency of
the TV signal fields. equal to 59.96... Rs; N is the number of TV signal fields.
equal to 60.

To obtain the precise value of the time signal repetition period, it is necessary

to use coefficients whith relate the value of the chrominance subcsrrier frequency
in the sync signal scanning frequencies. In this case. the relationship between the
reference standard frequency signals of the master oscillator of the television
center, having a nominal value of 5 MHz, and the chrominance subcarrier f0, is
established from the expression f0 - k-S MHz, where k a 63/88 [7]. 0n the other
hand, the frequency of the TV signal fields is related to the number of horizontal
lines in the television raster. z - 525, and twice the horizontal line frequency,
Zfz. by the function:

If . 2ft]: (2)

. I
I thi .-. , __:_., 3
n s cast 2h 4 +1 ( )

where (2n + 1) - 455 is a coefficient chosen in step with the degree of percepti-
bility of the lntcrference.from the chrominance signals [1].

The simultaneous solution of (l) - (3) yields:

 

_, 0.
Tr.p. . a» '0' (b)

All of the quantities in (6) are finite numbers. and for this reason. the precise
value of the llmesluuals repetition period, which continuously coincide with the
arse nlqndard TV signals. is equal to 1.001 sec and is a multiple of 1 mass.

The iunetlonai configuration of the reference standard time and frequency signal
(HSChV) transmission system using the channels of Cuban national television, which
is shown in Figure l. was developed in accordance with (a); the equipment complex

was hreadboarded from transmission, monitor and control equipment. as well as re—
' eeiving and recording equipment. Experimental studies of the constructed system
were conducted in June of 1979 in the Havana television center.

FIIIGJFIICIAI.IIBIIIHVLV
FOITOFFKJAI.lEIECNULV

 

Figure 1.

Key: ESChV - Reference standard tins and frequency signals;
SV - Tine signals.

The 5 MHz signals fros naster oscillator 13 of television center II, for which a
Chl—69 rubidius time and frequency standard is employed, are fed sinultsneously
through the Erase sync pulse equalizer 11 and the tins signal equalizer 16 to the
chrosinance subcarrier frequency synthesizer 6 and tine signal generator 15. The
time signals take the form of a train of pulses with a repetition period of l nose
and a width of 2 usec. To resolve the ashiguity in the second intervals. pulse
width nodulation is used for the tine signal pulses with a repetition period of
100 and 1 Hz with widths of S and 15 ueec respectively.

In accordance with (a), the tine signals with a repetition period of l nsec coincide
once per second with the interval authorized for the transnission of the second

half of the 10th line of the frase blanking pulse. In this case, the frsse pulse
watches each tine with the next tine signal having a repetition period of l ssec.
Thus, all signals with a repetition period of l nsec will be transaitted sequent-
ially during the specified tine. This neans that the signals sodulated by the
pulses with a repetition rate of 100 Hz will be transnitted once every 10 seconds
and those with a repetition period of 1 Hz, once every 1.000 seconds.

Then the tine signals generated by the method indicated above are fed simultaneously
with the harmonics of the 1 MM: frequency from the other output of the rubidiu-
Chl-69 standard to block 12 for generating the tine and frequency reference standard
signals. Block 12 is coupled to the television progran source 8. the sync signals
to which are fed fron the output of sync generator 7. operating in an external
synchronization node from the reference standard signals of the chroninance sub-
carrier frequency. which are fed fron the output of synthesizer 6.

A 1A9A test signal generator made by the Tektronix conpany. having a special input
for external signals, was used as the device for feeding the reference standard

tine and frequency signals into the TV signals during the experinentsl transnissions.
The reference standard tile and frequency signals. in the forn of sinusoidal packets
at a frequency of l "he. positioned in the first part of the 10th line with a width
of 15 usec, and the tine signals positioned in the second portion of this line. are
fed fron the output of test generator 9 to the television transaitter 10 of the

INII‘OIIICIAI.IIBII(IELY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Havana television center and to the input of a radio relay link which transmits
the central television programs throughout the entire territory of Cuba.

The instant of time signal output from the TV transmitter antenna according to the
time scale of the working reference standard 1, located in the time and frequency
laboratory of lNIHET. is determined remotely via a telephone line, 5. which ties
the monitor and control center i to the transmitting television center 11. For
this purpose. the time signals from the output of the type RTV-Ch receiving and
recording unit [8). 3. are fed to the "stop" input of time interval meter 2. where
theseconds signals from the output of the working reference standard 1 are fed to
the "start" input of this interval meter. Based on the results of these measure-
ments. taking into account the travel time of the signals from the TV transmitter
antenna to the monitor station. the instant of time signal output is varied until
the signals match the scale of the working reference standard by means of the
signal controller. a. which generates special voice frequency pulse trains which
are led via the telephone line to the input of the time signal correction unit 16.
in this case. an additional correction is made in the time position of the frame
sync pulses by means of changing the phase of the 5 MHz signals fed to synthesizer
b so as to place the time signals in the interval of the 10th line authorized for
their transmission. where this change is accomplished only during the frame blank-
ing period to attenuate the influence of the phasing on the color video quality.

The time signals are segregated from the composite television signal at the station
for tying the time scales together, III. by means of the type RTV-Ch receiving and
recording unit. l6. and the tine signals are fed to the "stop" input of time inter-
val meter 17. where the seconds signals of the local clocks 18 are fed to the
"start" input of this meter. Based on the results of these measurements. taking
into account the time of signal travel from the point of their transmission to

the reception point. the deviation of the instant of the local clock seconds sig-
nal from the time scale of the INIHET working reference standard is determined.

 

I! 00 to u no ﬂaunt;
' t, sec

Figure 2.

An example of the results of recording the time signals at the monitor and control
center is shown in Figure 2. not taking into account the systematic shift in the
time scales of the transmitting television center and the INIHET working standard.
The instant of signal reception was recorded by means of a Ch3-36 time interval
meter with a resolution of 10 naec and was recorded on paper tape with a numeric
printer concurrently with the data on the current time values from the output of
the electronic clocks.

An analysis of these results indicates the high phase stability of the television
transmission and reception channels. which is on the order of tens of nanoseconds.

F0. OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
INWIiOFIICJAL UEIZCNVLV

however. in the period when the experimental studies were performed on the
transmission system, it was also determined, for example, that changing the
alignment of the TV receiver leads to a change in its delay of up to 0.2 to 0.6
microseconds. depending on the reception conditions, frequency band and type of
TV receiver.

The experimental data obtained make it possible to corclude that with minimal
material outlays and simple transmitting and receiving-recording equipment, there
is possibility of synchronizing the time scales of spatially separated facilities
with an error on the order of (1 - S)°10'11 over 1.000 seconds with respect to
frequency and 0.3 to 0.5 microseconds with respect to time over practically the
entire territory of the Republic of Cuba.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Novakovskiy S.V.. "Standartnyye sistemy tsvetnogo televideniya" ("Standard
Color Television Systems"). Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers. 1976.

2. Jcsperscn 0.. 0t ni.. PROC. IEEE. 1972. No 5, Vol 60.

3. Fedorov Yu.A.. ct 81., IZNERITEL'NAYA TBKNNIKA [INSTRUMENTATION ENGINEERING],
1977, No 4.

4. Fedorov Yu.A.. Nusldze N.A.. USSR Patent No. 582586. BYUL. IZOBRET. [BULLETIN
OF INVENTIONS]. 1977. No 60.

5. Fodorov Yu.A.. USSR Patent No. 640652. BYUL. IZOBRET., 1978, No 08.

6. Fodorov Yu.A.. Nasidze N.A.. USSR Patent No. 520722, BYCL. IZOBRET., 1976,
No 25.

7. Davis 0.0., ELECTRONICS. May 10. 1971, Vol 46.

8. Fedorov Yu.A.. nnl'shakov V.Ya.. PRIBORY I TEKNNTKA EKSPERIHENTA [EXPERIMENTA-
TlON INSTRUMENTS AND ENGINEERING], 1979. No 3.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatvl'stvo standartov, 1981.

8225
C80: 5500/l002

FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE|IVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OlLY

NW TECHNOLOGY SEEN OVEMEL‘HNG TELECOMMICAI‘IWS WC?
Stockholm VECKANS AFFARER in Swedish 12 Nov 81 pp 52-57
[Article by Carl-Olaf Johard]

[Text] Recently the Telecommunications Service noted record profits of

2.5 billion kronor. Behind these outstanding figures, houever, is a monster
that, while not on feet of clay, is overwhelmed by the new technology in

the field of telecommunications. This has created new fields in which to do
husiness--which has set the agency on a collision course with other companies.
The need for investments is enormous, to say the least. and the Telecommuni-
cations Service has been forced to cut back in this area. At the same time,
the scope of the agency's activities that was determined by parliament as
recently as 1 year ago was soon exceeded. Director general Tony ﬁagstrom
dismisses the critics by saying, "Re are not striving for a monopoly and

we ourselves have proposed narrower limits."

when Tony Hagstron assumed the leadership of the Telecommunications Service's
orange-colored troops in 1977, succeeding the previous director general

Bert il Bjurel, an active chapter was begun in the history of the Teleco-uni-
cations Service.

The transition from electromechanics to electronics meant not only a costly
and demanding reorganization. but it also opened new and extremely lucrative
markets for the Telecomunications Service. Previously these markets had
been enjoyed only by private industry.

of course, the feverish expansion was accompanied by sharp disagreuaents
uit‘ -he already established industry, resulting in attention from the mass
sedia, piles of antitrust complaints. and questions in parliament.

In recent years. the accusations of "monopolistic tendencies" have been many,
to say the least. Quite simply. the electronic revolution has developed so
rapidly that our parliamentary system has not managed to keep up. Legisla-
tion and limitations on monopolies have become rapidly Outdated.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The proposal of December last year that limited the monopoly of the Tale-
communications Service had hardly been approved before voices were raised
in parliament and in the business world against the antiquated law.

"Of course, the proposal presented by the cosnunications minister at that
time, Ulf Adelsohn. was a step in the right direction, but subsequent events
have shown that it is insufficient. We must clarify as soon as possible how

this proposal is to be implemented." member of parliament Anders Bjorck,
Conservative Party, said.

The present government is also considering this matter.
Legislators Cannot Keep Up

"With the rapid development in this field, legislation soon becomes vague,"
current cousunicat ions minister Claes Elmstedt said.

According to the December parliamentary resolution, the Telecomunications
Service's monopoly is now limited to include only equipment for voice
comunicat ions over the public network, as well as certain modems (trans-
mission equipment that transmits signals into the telephone network).

The Comvik case is an example of the difficulty in having one law that covers
such an expansive sector as the teleconunicationa market. The department
simply forgot about mobile telephones, which has now given rise to the
notorious conflict between Comvik and the Teleco-unications Service.

Comvik with its 2,000 customers presently accounts for 10 percent of the
mobile telephone market, while the Telecouunications Service is responsible
for the rest. As long as the Telecossuunications Service's mobile telephone
exchanges were completely electromechanical the division of responsibility
between Comvik, or Foretagstelefon as it was called at that time, and the
Telecommunications Service was clearly defined.

For [5 years Comvik has been permitted (by contract according to Convik, by
dispensation according to the Telecommunications Service) to operate its
private mobile telephone network, where previously all calls made via Comvik‘s
exchange were transferred manually.

The transition to electronic or digital technology, however, means that calls
go out directly over the public telephone network. According to the
Telecomunicstions Service, this is a threat to the agency's right and duty

to manage the public telecommunications network. If Comvik is allowed direct
access to the line, a precedent will have been established and the Telecossmni-
cations Service's responsibility for the system will have been eroded.

For its part, Comvik hel ieves that since the company is already part of the
network, no new precedent is established and the action of the Telecossnunica-
tions Service is nothing but an attempt to eliminate an unwanted competitor

11
FOR OFFIClAl USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY

from the market .

"Through its actions and its monopolistic claims, the agency is exceeding

its authority. If the Telecoslmnications Service wants to extend its mono-
poly by declaring the private networks part of the public teleco-unications
network, it must not do this surreptitiously through selective type approvals,
but by open resolutions by the board of directors so that these resolutions
can then be submitted to the government for consideration," Convik director
Anders Runer said.

The comissioner for freedom of couerce, who handled the case, is in complete
agreement with Convilt and believes that the Teleconunicationa Service's
sudden awakening was somewhu unusual. ‘l'he Teleconunications Service should
increase competition gradually, according to the co-issioner, who said that
this case raises the concern that the Telecosmunications Service is proceeding
in the opposite direction.

"In our opinion it is not entirely clear that the Telecomunications Service
should have a monopoly on mobile telephones and since Comvik is already in
the market, we believe that Comvik should rmin, even with the new
technology. The matter has been turned over to the goverment and it is the
government and parliament that must make the final decision in this matter,”
Sven Sahlstron, department head of the Freedom of Co-erce Office said.

Comunications Minister Claes Elnstedt said:

"We are now examining the matter and will make a thorough study based on the
I980 parliamentary resolution."

Tclefax Companies Had 2 Years to Cease Activities

Text comaunication, i. e. telex, telefax, and teletex, is another area that
has caused legislative problems and where the Teleconunications Service
has been sharply criticized for its "nonopolistic tendencies."

The Telecommunications Service's share of the telefax market-a device that
is connected to the telephone network to tranuit print, drawings, etc.--is
just over 50 percent and the number of customers is currently 2,200. Telefax
was introduced in the spring of 1979 amidst great protests when the Tele-
communications Service maintained that it had a monopoly on telefax services
and gave companies in the field 26 nonths to cease operations.

The commissioner for freedom of couerce soon received stacks of letters
from the Swedish Data Processing Association, the Federation of Swedish
Wholesalers and Importers, the Federation of Swedish Industries, and others.
As the matter dragged on longer and longer, the attitude of the Telecmni-
cations Service became less harsh and after the action by the co-issioner
the agency itself took the initiative in drafting the new proposal for sore

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE OR?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

clearly defined groundrules on the monopoly.

This has not silenced the competitors, however. In the telefax market, the
Telecoumunicstions Service is now being accused of price cutting.

"The price policy of the Telecoumsunications Service is subject to criticin.
Its prices on telefax equipment are almost 50 percent below those of its
competitors. This is not sound business practice. Are telecomnications
customers paying for this?" asked Bo Hedberg, head of the Office and Data

Processing Equipment Trade Association (mm) of the Federation of Swedish
Wholesalers and Importers.

The comissioner for freedom of cosnerce recently dealt with a complaint
concerning price cutting involving telephone answering devices, since the
Telecommunications Service did not pay sales tax, which its competitors must
do. Similar complaints have also been sent to the Internal Revenue Service.

"It is perfectly clear that the Telecommunications Service must also pay

sales tax and this situation must be corrected." said Sven Sablstrom.
commissioner for freedom of couuerce.

Competitors in the new teletex field also believe that the Teleconunicationa
Service is attempting to circumvent the resolutions of parliament by making
the business activities of private competitors more difficult in various
ways. According to the plans of the Teleco-unications Service teletex,
which originally was an advanced developent of telex but 30 times faster

and with services related to office automation, will be introduced in
November 198! with service beginning in 1982.

At the same time the Telecomunications Service is beginning an expensive

marketing camps ign, it is also announcing that its competitors will be
connected to the teletex network only 18 months later.

The Telecommunications Service says it needs this time to test its unique
new combined service equipment. the so-called screen, through which the
sctvicc's private competitors must be connected to the data network. This
means that companies choosing the Telecouunications Service's own teletex
can coumnunicste with teletex equipment throughout the world from the very
beginning. In other words, the Telecomunueat ions Service will have a

1.5 year head start on its competitors.

"This is an unusual action that finds no support in the law. The Telecommuni-
cations Service has no monopoly on teletex services, since teletex is a
service that has been designated for competition." said 80 Hedberg of LKD.

Dntn communicnt ion is another disputed field. This is one of the most
expansive areas within the Telecomunications Service. During the 1980/81
fiscal year sales amounted to 263 million kronor, a 30 percent increase in

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE Olly

fixed prices over the previous year. According to the Teleco-unications
Service's own predictions the nunber of computer terninals will increase
iron the present figure of 30.000 to 86,000 in 1987, i. e. an anmnal increase
of 20 percent.

Controversial Parlianentary Resolution at "Five Before Midnight"

Along with the other Nordic teleco-Inications agencies, the Teleco-unica-
tions Service is establishing a special data tran-ission network, the
general data network. which will rationalize and increase data services and
also provide protection against unauthorized access.

The first stage includes equipnent for connecting 6,000 custoners. It is
estimated that by the laid-1980's 16.000 custoners will be connected to the

general data network. a capacity that experts in the field believe to be
far below deaand.

Apart from the monopoly question, debate on the fluid boundary between the
business and agency sides of the Teleco-mications Service has cone note
and more to the fore.

The fact that the Teleconunications Service in its capacity as an agency
tests the equipment of its competitors before such egiipnent is allowed

into the network was the subject of heated debate. even when parlianent and
the Couaunicat ions Couittee dealt with the new proposal last year. In order
not to make too radical a change in the present system. parliaaent decided
to instruct the Tclecossunicstions Service to create an independent testing
unit within the agency--independent even of the director general. It was
suggested that a special appeals board be appointed with two nenbers fron
the Telecommunications Service and three outsiders. The board was to be
financed by the Teleconunications Service. This, however. was inmfficient,
according to opponents.

"th should the Teleconunications Service not be subject to the sane
objective testing as other companies. According to the law on test sites.
testing should occur conpletely independent of the Telecomnications
Service. The agency that sets the regulations cannot be the testing site,
as well. I an a saber of the agency that designates testing sites and

we have proposed the National Institute for Materials Testing for the
telecosuunicat ions equipment," said saber of parliusnt Sture Palm, Social
beam-rat, who also believes that the proposal was written nuch too hastily

and then approved by parliament the last night in Decaber at "five before
midnight."

The comissioner for freedon of couerce agrees totally with Sture Paln:

“He believe that the tests should be conducted by an independent agency
outside the Telecoanunicationa Service. The double role of the Telecouuni-
cations Service as an authority and a business is lost unfortunate," Wen
Sahlstron said.

12;
FOR OFFICIAL (SE ONLY
It‘R (‘FFICXM US} «‘51\

f Antaleu 2*
,. .lelefpnapparatenr

 

Sweden now has 772 telephones per 1.000 inhabitants. Only the United States
has a greater percentage.

Key: Number of telephones per 1,000 inhabitants.

;. Anhhu..he
7 telexanslutningarl'

 

There are now 15,946 telex,terninels, s 6.6 percent increase over the previous
year.

Key: Number of telcx terminals (thousands).

15
ran omcm. usr om.»
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

It is estimated that the number of computer terminal: will increase by
20 percent per year to 86,000 in 1987.

Key: Number of computer terminals.

 
 

_ Anmlegtelefau,
.- -«”-:‘anslutningan»

    

It is expected that telefax, which was introduced in 1981, will increase by
30 to 50 percent annually during the 1980's.

Key: Number of tclefax terminals (tbuundl).

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Director general Henric Bildt of the National Institute for Materials
Testing said that the testing could be transferred easily from the Tele-
communications Service to the Natioml Institute for Materials Testing.

"It is dangerous to maintain. as the Teleco-unications Service does, that

state agencies need not operate on the sane principles that must be accepted
by private business. He have not yet taken a position on this question, but
we believe that if the Telecommunications Service would simply deter-ins the

requireaents. we are competent to take over the actual testing," leuuric
Bildt said.

This matter is also on the desk of the coununications sinister.

"He are following the matter continually and the critici- against the
present systqa is totally understandable. I believe there is reason to
intervene in this matter," Claes Blmstedt said.

On the background of this fluid boundary. the agency is also being accused
at making large prof its from its teleco-uunications subscribers and then
transferring the profits to the business side of the agency to be used in
the price war in competitive sectors. It is maintained that in this way
maintenance and expansion of the network are suffering.

"He have written to the Telecommunications Service and pointed out that the
network is overburdened. There is strong suspicion that the Telecomnications
Service has neglected to expand the network at the required rate," said

Nils Luundqviat, chairman of the Telecomunications Cousittee of Private
Industry and Commerce, a kind of lobbying group for customers led by

large companies such as Asea, SAS. Volvo, and Electrolux.

The fact that reliability, service. and maintenance are subject to critici-
was indicated recently by a survey taken by the Stockholm Chamber of Conerce

among its numbers. All the responses expressed strong discontent with the
Telecouununications Service's treatment of its customers.

Dissatisfied Customers Arrange Hearing with Telecommunications Service

"(Mr members are disturbed by how the service is working. This concerns
services such as price quotations, installation, delivery time, and material
purchases. In addition, several of the companies are quite large with
subsidiaries abroad and thus have an opportunity to compare the service with
service in other countries." said Martin Carlstein. head of the section on
public economic policy at the Stockholm Chanber of Conerce.

'i‘luu' Cit-umber of Commerce. which has conducted siailar surveys on other state

ngenc ies such as the post office, the Swedish State Railway, the Quatoas

Office, and the National Civil Aviation Administration, indicates that previously
it has not encountered such widespread and massive discontent. In order to
soothe these customers' indignant feelings somewhat, the Chamber of Conerce

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?

plans to arrange s hearing with the TelecoI-Inications Service in late
Nova-bet. The Chamber of Co-erce also intends to approach the goverI-ent
on this natter at s later date.

The Teleconunicstions Service has chosen to blue the poor service and long
waiting periods, prinarily in and around Stockholn. on delayed shipeents.
which has greatly angered LN Ericsson. which says that this is a domright
lie end that the blane lies entirely with the Teleco-unications Service.

One concession by parliaaent to the dnandnnade even by the Teleco-inica-
tions Service-for a clear delineation within the Telecmnicetions Service
between the business sect ion and the agency was the creation of Teleinvest,
the holding company that presently conducts the business endeavors of the
Telecomnications Service. Several conpetitive activities are still within
the scope of the agency. however, including data, teletex, and teleiax.

"If no clear lines are drawn between the agency and the business aspects,
the nonopolists nust be prepared for constant battles in parlianent. The
discontent is so widespread that each individual question involving the
Telecomunications Service will be the abject of debate," Anders Bjorck
said.

Relations with custoner, supplier, and developnent partner DI Ericsson have
not yet been seriously disturbed, however.

"But the situation can change. of course. if the Telecommunications Service
continues to expand its activities," said director Bjorn Svedberg of
LH Ericsson.

Interview with Tony Hsgstrou

The Teleco-Iunicat ions Service has becone eonewhat of a continuing story at
the Freedom of Concrce Office. What aonopolistic tendencies does the
Telecouaunicat ions Service have?

"we have no monopolistic tendencies whatsoever. The state has sinply given
us the task of nsintsining the overall responsibility for Swedish tele-
comnications and this is what we are att-pting to do--end it is a simple
fact that Sweden is the world's bargain basaent when it cones to telephones.‘

tht are the linits on the Telecouaunicationa Service's nonopoly? The law
is quite vague on this point.

"No. it is not vague at sll. our nonopoly includes two area-two-way voice
consunication and certain nodus. These lines are based on the requir-snts
of our responsibility for the systu. so tint we can assuae the full
responsibility. I would also naintain that we at the Swedish Teleco-unica-
tions Service are unique in that we ourselves reco-ended to the state

18

POI! OFFICIAL WE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

authorities a clearer and narrower delineation of the monopoly. I believe
that no other telecommunications authority in the world has done that."

Are mobile telephones within the scope of the monopoly?

“He believe that the resolution of parli-emt is umbiguous, although I
admit that this is not explicitly stated in the proposal. Of course. if we

had had any idea that a debate would arise on this point we would have
requested a clarification."

Now the government must take a stand on this issue. If the government says
that mobile telephones are open to caspetition, then I believe that this would

he a departure from the proposal and parliament must then correct its
dec ision."

Then competition must apply only to manual exchanges?

"No. these manual exchanges are also included in the monopoly, but for many
years Comvik has been granted dispensation. With the new digital exchanges.
mobile telephones will became like any other telephone. Comvik's mobile
telephones will be connected automatically to the telephone network and we
are not prepared to allow this."

Are you afraid of setting a precedent if Comvik is included in the telephone
network? -

"it would be a curious situation if Comvik were given the exclusive right

to connect automatic exchanges to our network. This would mean that Comvik
had a monopoly on competing with the Teleco-unicat ions Service as far as

the network is concerned. The alternative is to open the network to everyone
and in that case I believe there would be no difference whatsoever between
exchanges and then we would have to formulate a totally different tele-
communications policy for this country."

no you want to eliminate Comvik from the market through competition?

"No. If we hnd wanted to eliminate Comvik we simply would have demanded that
Foretagstelefon. as the company was called previously, pay off its debts to
us. in that case, the company would have gone bankrupt."

"instead. we haw: written off some of the debts. He devised payment plans
for them precisely to prevent the company from going bankrupt and so that
its customers would not be inconvenienced in the process. we chose that
course of action because we believed that Foretagstelefon complanented our
activity in the market and because we were living in peaceful coexistence."

The Telecomunications Service, with its so-called screen, will keep its

competitors out of the new teletex field for 18 months until October 1983.
Is: this not interference with free competition?

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY

"when this accusation was presented to the Freedom of Co-erce Off ice
several years ago. the office turned thumbs dosn on the industry's
accusations. The actual situation is that the so-called screen promotes
conpetition instead of inpeding it."

"First of all. it will be a kind of "Checkpoint Charlie" with respect to
traffic into and out of the teletex network. He can limit our control to
the actual network. In this way. we can avoid regulations and terminal
inspections, which we have to make otherwise.”

"Secondly, we muld relinquish our telex monopoly in practice, since in the
long run tcletex will take over the functions of telex. 3y asking it possible
for both teletex and other text processing equipment to co-unicate with
tclex. we are also preparing for total competition in this aarket. It is
obvious, then, that the manufacturers are protesting—what nenufacturar does
not want to tie his customers down to his om systa."

Can a single monopoly meet the expected high demand for services within the
general data network?

"Yes, we are studying developments and making predictions for Sweden on the
basis of European information. He will have no probl-s whatsoever matching
expansion with increasing demand."

The Teleco‘nunicat ions Service recently placed a large teletex order with
Philips. Why do you not buy Swedish products to a greater extent?

"With regard to this natter. we accepted a large number of bids for teletex
terminals, resulting in an order with Philips worth 85 aillion kronor and

LN Ericsson received an order worth 65 million kronor. but the Teleco-uni-
cations Service and w Ericsson were to conduct development work jointly

in certain important areas. LH Ericsson subsequently purchased a najority
interest in Datasaab and a new situation has arisen. Discussions are presently
underway with Ui Bricsson on how the agrauent should be adjusted with

regard to the new situation."

Teleinvest's purchase of the Norwegian electronics company Nerion. a
competitor of LH Ericssonuwas this an isolated event or may we expect
similar purchases by the newly started 'l'eleinvest?

"Expansion is not an end in itself. Any purchase must fit into the overall
picture of the Teleconnun [cations Service. The purchase of Nerion case about
as an interesting opportunity for us to complement our own expertise. we
hope to achieve sone synergistic effects."

Some people suspect that the Teleco-unications Service, instead of properly
maintaining the network, transfers large portions of the income for the
telephone service to sectors that must conpete with other companies. Are you
neglecting the network?

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

‘.- male! mobilielefon
ansluiningarlNMn

 

According to director general Tony Hsgstrom, the number of mobile telephc1cs
(NHT) will reach 30,000 in 1985 or 1986.

Key: Number of mobile telephones (NUT)

"No, that is completely false. Let me state first that we invest about

4 billion kronor annually in the network. which may be compared to

45 million kronor required for telefax tenminals over several years and

l30 million kronor for teletex terminals over several years. The network

is of high international quality. We have a failure rate that is 50 percent
below most other countries.“

“Despite this, criticism has arisen because we have had and continue to have
some problems in Stockholm. Availability is poor for calla made to Stockholm
and this is due primarily to delayed deliveries of some modern equipment for
the data network. For this reason, the telecommunications network has been
under greater stress than previously anticipated."

"Another explanation is that we had a loss of personnel from the older
stations in Stockholm. resulting in numerous vacancies. At the same time,

I must admit openly that we should have reacted more quickly when we saw that
the problem began to arise. There is reason to criticize us for not being
alert and we at the Telecommunications Service are aware of this. It is
about like suddenly making an own-goal at a soccer match."

lhny people have accused you of undercutting your competitors and you did not
pay sales tax on your telephone answering devices. Why?

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"First of all, we have not undercut our conpetitors and, secondly, we will
pay sales tax on our telephone answering devices. There was some uncertainty
in this matter previously. The new guidelines transferred telephone
answering devices from the nonopoly sector to the competitive sector. He

do not pay sales tax on our nonopoly products end there hes been a certain
lag on this point. but it is clear that we will pay sales tax."

why can equipment that is to be connected to the telecouunicatious network
not be tested by an independent agency. for example the National Institute
for Materials Testing? Hhat do you gain by conducting the tests within your
agency?

"If we at the Teleconnunications Service were to view this from a purely
business standpoint, we would gladly be rid of the testing. Re have been
criticized for this repeatedly. We have been col-issioned by the state,
however. to be responsible for the telecommunications network systen in this
country and we have a network that is not homogeneous."

"The old network often fails us and, for this reason. we lust discover
various innovations to nske the old technology work together with the new.
The overall responsibility for making all this work rests on us."

You see no conflict of interest in the fact that you as an authority test
your conpetitors' equipment?

"No. we went through this carefully in connection with the proposal. A
telecommunications connection board is now being crested that will exanine
complaints from custoners with regard to testing. we hope this will
guarantee that everything is done properly. Let us now see how this new
system works."

Teleinvest Approaches Billions

Since its beginning in January this year, Telelnwest has grown rapidly to a
stable and very inportant part of the Telecosmunicetions Service. Teleinvest
is now one of the agency's lost expansive sections. Sales during the fiscal
year 1980/81 amounted to l82 nillion kronor and net profits were 9 nillion
kronor.

Teleinvest was created by parliament to bring those sectors within the
Telecommunications Service that sust conpete with other companies lore in
line with the market and to help the service keep up with its competitors on
a purcly commercial basis.

So far the new holding company has only one employee--managing director
Sven-Roland Letzen, who is also economic director for the entire Telecommuni-

cations Service. The chairman of the board is director general Tony Hegetrom,
who is well compensated for this (20.000 kronor per month). for which he has
been criticised severely in the ease media.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

 

 
 

El Tefefnvesrﬁgﬂ

  

Key:
1. Telecommunications Service

2. Volume: 60 million kronor
Number of employees: I75

3. Recently established

6. Volume: 55 million kronor
Number of employees: 400

5. Volume: 70 million kronor
Number of employees: 570

6. Volume: 20 million kronor
Number of employees: 45

7. Volume: 1 billion kronor
Number of employees: 2.300

8. Alarm Division
Volume: ll7 million kronor
(to assume corporate form by 1 July [982)

9. Volume: 970 million kronor
Numher of employers: 1.500
(to assume corporate form by 1985. probably u soon on 1982/83

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In ad lition to holding stock, the company also manages property. The
£01.10ng companies are included in Teleinvest at present:

Swedtel (Swedish Telecoms International AB), which does conmlting work in
telecosmunicat ions, primarily in developing countries. The consultants come
nostlv from the Telecomunications Service. Swedtel -ploys 175 persons and
has a business volume of about 60 million kronor.

Swedcon (Swedish Telecoms Contracting AB) is brand new and will do contracting
work in developing countries for planning, installing, operating, and Iain-
taining telecommunications equipment. In addition, the company sells the
Tclemmunications Service's own equipment and products.

Nerion MS is a Norwegian company recently acquired by Teleinvest. Nerion
compel es to a marginal degree with LN Ericsson and sells microprocessor-based
tclecunmunicat ions systese under the name GARZX. The systas can he adapted
for traffic controllers at airports, as well as police, fire, and shore

radio stations. Nerion has 65 uployees and a volume of 20 million kronor.

Teleindustrier, together with its subsidiaries Telefsbrikation in Skelleftea
and Tclefshrikation in Kristinehamn, has a business volume of 70 million
kronor and anploys 570 workers. Teleindustrier manufactures equipment and
components for the Telecommunications Service.

SOSAB performs .1 number of basic services for municipalities and county
councils such as emergency services, fire and mbulance alarms, and also
handles comerc ial alarm services for industries and security companies.

SOSAB, 50 percent of which is owned by Teleinvest. 25 percent by the
Association of County Councils, and 25 percent by the Assocciation of Local
Governments, has a volume of 55 million kronor and msployees #00 workers.

Teleinvest now owns 9.5 percent of Datasaah, since the Teleco-sunications
Service took over the state's interest. and LH Ericsson owns 90.5 percent.

According to a resolution by parliament, the Alarm Division will assume a
corporate form under Teleinvest by 1 July 1982. The Alarm Division has a
volume of [17 aillion kronor and has achieved considerable shares of the
market in the fields of intercoms. fire alarms, and burglar alarms.

According to a parliamentary resolution, Teli, the industrial division of
the Telecomunicat ions Service, will assume corporate form under Teleinvest
by 1 July 1985. There are indications that this will occur already during
the fiscal year 1982/83. ‘l'eli manufacturers primarily telephone exchanges,
private branch exchanges, and telephones, but also alarms, data processing
equipment, and air traffic equ ipent. In addition, some renovation work is
also done. The company has a volume of 970 million kronor and ntt profits
of 3') million kronor and the division employs 3,500 workers.

2!.
ion OFFICIAL use our
l-OR OFFICIAL ”SE ONLY

Investments Down Despite Record Profits

From an economic standpoint, the Telecommunications Service is our best run
state agency. The 1980/8] fiscal year showed record profits of 2.5 billion
kronor--a 29 percent increase, even adjusted to the Telecommunications
Service's new bookkeeping system. Profitability during the sane period
amounted to 12.5 percent.

0f the total volume of 9.3 billion kronor. the telephone sector was responsible
for 85 percent. while activities such as data and text communications were

well under 5 percent each. In addition. 50 percent of the telephone revenues
result from charges for calls.

The favorable results are due primarily to increased volume in the telephone
sector, which rose by 4 to 5 percent during the 1980/8] fiscal year and sales
by 16.6 percent expressed in fixed prices-—the greatest increase throughout
the 1970's.

The higher profits mean that the Telecommunications Service has now doubled
its reserves to 600 million kronor which, in turn, means that new rate
increases will not occur for a long time to come.

The Telecommunications Service will need this capital when it introduces its
electronic AXE stations, which will require annual investments for many years
of 4 billion kronor at today's monetary value.

To manage these heavy investments. the agency has repeatedly requested
permission to form its own financing company, Telefinans. in order to go

out into the open market and borrow under somewhat more favorable terms.
Parliament refused to allow this and instead gave the Telecommunications
Service a flexible credit of 800 million kronor with the National Debt Office.
The Telecommunications Service has not given up the idea of Telafinans
total-y, but will make a new application in the near future. While awaiting
a response and in order to cope with investments the Telecommunications
Service chose instead to reduce the rate of investments, which means that the
big cities receive priority, while small towns must wait for the new AXE
exchanges.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Olv‘saﬁnznq for
‘ Televerket: '

 

Demand for the agency's services continues to grow. During the 1980/81
fiscal year volume reached 9.3 billion, a 17 percent increase during the

year.

Key: Volume of Telecommunications Service (million kronor)

Rmelscrmulmt
(after. avskrivningar-

 

Since economist Tony Hagstron became director general, the Teleconnunicntionn
Scrvice's profits have increased from 631 million to 2.554 billion kronor.

Key: Net profits (million kronor)

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UlthlAL van URL!

- Avkastnmg pa
. ‘ '5 maﬁgapmw

 

Like profits. returns on total working capital during the past 5 years
have increased from 6.l to 12.5 percent.

Key: Returns on total capital (percent)

COPYRIGHT: Ahlen « Akorlunds try-:kerier. Stockholm I981

913h
650: 5500/2047 END

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY