FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10045
9 October 1981

West Europe Report

SC'ENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 11/81)

Fans FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
BIOTECHNOLOGY

'Biotechnologies' Task Force Created at DCRST
(LE PROGRESS SCIENTIFIQUE. Mar-Apr 81) ............

ENERGY

PRC, Poland Found Joint Coal Conversion Research Center
(STAHL UND EISEN, 27 Jul 81) ......................

New Cssification Method Processes All Types of Coal
(STAHL UND EISBN, 27 Jul 81) ......................

wind Power Plant Connected to National Grid
(IL SOLE-2a ORE, 25 Jul 81) .......................

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

Italian Experts Work on Robots With Tactile Capability
(Carlo Arcsri; EUROPEO, 13 Jul 81) ................

TRANSPORTATION

Three Main Participants Meet To Discuss New Airbus A 320
(AIR 5 cosmos, 29 Aug 81) .........................

First A 310 Nears Completion. A 300 Sales Reach 150
(AIR‘cosms' 29 M8 81) ICICCOIOIOOIIIOOOOOOOOIIO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIOTECHNOLOGY

'BIOTECHNOLOCIES' TASK FORCE CREATED AT DCRST

Paris LE PROGRES SCIENTIFIQUE in French Mar-Apr 81 pp 3-5

[Text] The idea of exploiting the power of synthesis of the living cell, a true
chemical plant whose programming proves to be modifiable at will, is responsible for
the rapid progress of hiotechnologies with industrial aims.

The government wants our country to methodically develop the study, research, and
applications of biotechnologies in all relevant national activity sectors.

To this end, the state secretary for research has asked DCRST (General Delegation
for Scientific and Technical Research) to form a Biotechnologies Task Force capable
of making all necessary efforts to develop appropriate research in the public
sector, and to bolster the scientific competence of industrial laboratories.

The intensified basic research and its achievements must thus go hand in hand with
the transfer of knowledge and know-how from fundamental research to industry, whom
the authorities are in fact encouraging to resolutely step on a road which will lead
to a bio-industrial revolution.

Organization of the Biotechnolopies Task Force

The Biotechnologies Task Force is a group which gathers the four DGRST sectors
concerned with upstream research on living cells and with transfer of this research
for industrial exploitation. Each sector has an interface with at least two
adjacent sectors and is open to the outside, with the goal of dealing with the
various occurrences of hiotechnologies in associatiOn with such interested organs as

CNRS (Rational Center for Scientific Research), INSERM (National Institute for
Health and Medical Research), lNRA (National Institute for Agronomic Research),
universities, and industry.

in addition. for all natters concerning relations with the industry in the areas of
chemistry. pharmaceuticals, agronomy. and agricultural food products. this structure
ls widely open to the Orientation Committee for the Development of Strategic
Industries (CODIS) and the National Agency for Research Valorification (ANVAR).

This strategic aspect is essential to the extent to which the Biotechnologies Task

Force of DGRST is upstream of development and intends to compete in industrial
innovation.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Ull Ul‘flvlnu U020 Ul‘bl

(kgonhnusdbllchonﬂn
O
(B) mowers as use
Iﬁaobbknh
Biologic moldwlain oi colluil'n
Gedegonnhuo
(B) 2 ma. mission: (C)
Connnuun: ‘. Phnbpokouﬁukv .
Quanta anuﬂuuhruuwuul Slaulayonann

4
MEDICAMENT RECHERCHES DE TRANSF ERT

. 2Wdomiuion: Zcharoadomillon: *
'"‘"“"!’ {I Morita-nuniFhuny GﬂhutOunnd Indundm
”Wu“ Annie Wolf mane. nob-n Minimums

Syntm
hunkynuwns

(D) CHHUE 'lll

Chuvﬁdounhdon:'

MW mun. ,
aﬁmhfkn ‘.' “Inﬂnmcbhlu
om mun-tho. blows-o
lnduaﬂoldumians

'huuWuanaMu-nmmm

(A) Pierre Douzou, counselor for biologic and medical research
(8) Research organs

BASIC BIOLOGY

Microbiology

Holecuiar and cellular biology

Genetic engineering

Two task-force leaders: Philippe Kourilsky

France Plessier-Normand

(C) Agronomy sector

TRANSFER RESEARCH

Agricultural food industries

Two task-force leaders: Gilbert Durand

Maurice Robert
(D) CHEMISTRY
Task-force leader*: Michel Soustelle
Fine chemistry
Enzymatic engineering
Biomass hasic materials
Chemical industries
* A second leader will be named for this sector in the near future
(E) Cellular components
PHARMACEUTICALS
Pharmaceutical industries
Synthesis and semi-synthesis
Two task—force leaders: Maurice-Bernard Pleury
Annie Wolf

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
These actions are thus conducted jointly with the Ministry of Industry (notably
ANVAR) and the State Secretariat for Agricultural and Food Industries, and are
deliberately open to the industrial sector.

Tasks: Personnel Training

Through a voluntary policy of training scholarships;

Through the organization of courses and training study programs in laboratories that
are already specialized;

Through encouragement to reconvert the methods and study topics of tenured
researchers and teams in research organizations and universities.

This policy is carried out in concert with interested research organs and
universities.

Basic Biology (Concerted Actions)

Increased effort in advanced molecular and cellular biology. as well as in genetic
engineering;

Development of research in basic microbiology;

Transfer of knowledge acquired with micro-organisms, to animal and vegetal cells;

Directed actions on essential components of cells, with a View to making them
available for all suitable utilizations (oligonucleotides. hybridomes, interferon,
enzymatic systems, and so on).

Transfer and Finalized Research

Primarily concerned with overseeing the development of such "centers of excellence"
as the Institut Pasteur and the laboratories of the universities of Compiegne,
Strasbourg, and Toulouse, as well as the installation of a center at Grignon.

The finalized research concerns mainly the area of fermentationa, and finds its .

application in agricultural food product problems. Biomass is also considered as
interfaced with chemistry.

Chemistry

Obtain basic materials: this means an exploitation of the biomass in its chemical
context, rather than exclusively with its energetic potential.

Fine chemistry: as a priority, the use of enzymatic engineering to innovate basic
chemical products. as well as products of therapeutic interest, some of which are of
a cellular nature.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run unfunny uuo umu.

Pharmaceuticals

In this domain, the Biotechnologies Task Force devotes itself to exploiting the
implications of basic biology and chemistry.

Its policy consists of remaining in constant contact with the companies interested
in this question, of supplying infatuation. and issuing bilateral contracts.

Logistics
Creation and development of cell banks and their components. Voluntary policy for
production. stocking, and distribution of aonoclonal antibodies and nucleic

components.

These actions will he conducted in coordination uith interested organs.

COPYRIGHT: D.G.R.S.T., Paris, 1981

11.023
CSO: 3102/415

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY

FRG. POLAND FOUND JOINT COAL CONVERSION RESEARCH CENTER
Duesseldorf STAHL UND EISEN in German 27 Jul 81

[Text] A joint research center for coal refining has been established by the Alfried
Krupp von Bohlen and Halbach Foundation, Essen. and the Ministry for Science. Univer-
sity Curricula and Engineering of the VRP.

The agreement was signed in Essen on May 13. 1981. by Berthold Beitz, chairman of
the Board of Curators and member of the Board of Business Management. of the Alfried
Krupp von Bohlen and Halback Foundation and by Dr. Habil. Janus: Gorski. Minister
of Science. University Curricula and Engineering of the VRP. The Krupp foundation
is participating with DM 15 million and the Polish Ministry of Sciencewith 250 mil-
lion zloty.

The agreement runs until 1990. It controls the joint scientific and scientific-
engineering effort in the field of coal refining. The research center will be set
up as an independent unit at the Silesian Technical University where good prerequi—
sites already exist for undertaking the research work. The direction of the re-

search is determined by an 8-member council composed of equal numbers of leading
scientists and experts from both countries. The research results will be fully avail-

able to both the Polish Ministry of Science and the Krupp Foundation.

The initial research work will be focused primarily on the development of a special
coal gasification process for producing various gases which will be used for heating
huenergy production and as a raw material in the chemical industry.

A broad base will be laid for the joint effort through conferences and synposia in-
volving scientists and experts from the two countries. Further, an attempt will
be made to exchange researchers between the research facilities of the respective
host countries.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Verlag Stahlcisen nbN. Duesseldorf .

9160
C50: 3102/607

5
ms OFFIClAI. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY

NEH GASIFICATION METHOD PROCESSES ALL TYPES OF COAL
Duesseldorf STAHL UND EISEN in German 27 Jul 81 p 32
(Article: "High-Grade Gas From all Types of Coal")

[Text] At KHD Humboldt Hedag A6 a new coal gasification process is presently being
developed to operational maturity. It exhibits special advantages and the facility
is relatively simple to build. with this process. which is based on the process
known as autotherm coal gasification in an iron bath. a high-grade gas is produced
which contains in general only carbon monoxide and hydrogen and is almost free of
sulfur components and carbon dioxide. Thus. in many cases it can be used directly
without additional washing.

Based on extensive research and development work, a facility will be built for large-
scale tests of the Humboldt coal gasification process. It will gasify 10 t of coal
per hour at a pressure of 10 bar and a temperature of 1.350 to 1.6000 deg C; this
amounts to a volume of about 20.000 m (i.N.)/h. From the operation of this installa-
tion. whose start up is planned for the end of 1982. the data and experience required
for large-scale application of the process will be acquired. The development pro-
ject will be completed in 1984 at the latest.

The Humboldt coal gasification process is based on the dissolution of carbon in mol—
ten iron with subsequent reaction of the carbon with the gasifying medium. The
gasification reactor is a refractory-lined container with a molten-iron bath. Finely
powdered coal with a transport gas and lime with oxygen are injected into the iron
bath through cooled. complex jets. Yet other gasifying media such as air. steam

and carbon dioxide can be introduced at the same time through the complex jets. The
gasification process runs on the injected coal, lime and gasifying medium; however,
the iron isnot consumed in the process. The raw gas is largely freed from dust in

a hot-gas particle separator; and the nongasable constituents are continuously ex-
.racted from the reactor as carbon-free molten slag which is crushed after cooling.

The Humboldt coal gasification process has several distinct advantages compared to
many other processes. All types of coal can be used irrespective of their properties
such as cokeability. volatile constituents, ash and sulfur. Since the coal is
completely converted in the gasifying process at high temperatures. there are no

byproducts.

Because of its favorable composition, the gas is exceptionally well suited as a start-
ing material for various chemical-synthesis processes.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition, the raw gas is practically free from oxidizing components such as carbon
dioxide, steam and sulfur con-pounds and can therefore be used for example in direct
reduction installations without having to be washed as an intermediate step. Due

to the extraordinarily low sulfur content (below 20 ppm), the gas is well suited

for use in combined gas-steam turbines for generating electricity.

With over 98 percent carbon conversion. the process exhibits a high specific effi-
ciency in gas production. According to the present s§ate of knowledge. a reactor
can generate a gas-volume rate of more than 200.000 m (i.N.)/h.

Additional information can be obtained from Kim Humboldt Hedag Ac, Postfach 9101057,
0-5000 Cologne 91. FRG

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Stahleison mbﬂ. Duesseldorf

9160
(250: 3102/1007

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3!: SR“; T

WIND POUER PLANT CONNECTED TO NATIONAL GRID
Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 25 Jul 81 p 6

lArticle: "The Cagliari Wind Power Plant Inaugurated--The First Sardinia Hind Goes
into the ENEL (National Electric Power Agency) Network"!

[Text] Cagliari--For the first time in Italy, the energy produced by a wind genera-
tor has been put into the national electric-power network. It is the first step in
the ENEL project called “wind-sails for electricity." a vast research program that

has involved experimentation and practical application in Sardinia at Santa Cateri-
na, a locality in the commune of San Giovanni Suergiu, close to the southwest coast.

In presenting the wind-power generator, the president of ENEL, Francesco Corbellini,
said that the experimental plant represents the first phase in the electric-power
company's wind-power strategy and marks an exceptionally important occasion. The
program's aim is to arrive, in successive stages, at the building, in Sardinia, of a
SOD-kilowatt wind power plant composed of 10 FIAT-ENEL windmills of $0 kilowatts
each, and subsequently to develop large-size machines (rotor diameter of about 100
meters, power of 4,000 kilowatts).

"Before the end of 1982," Corbellini said, "ENEL will put the 10 windmills into op-
eration in the power plant built in the high Nurra, in the Sassari region."

The "wind-sails" project is the logical outcome of the results achieved through
technical-economic studies that demonstrated that at suitable sites. wind power is
the most competitive of the renewable energy sources. With regard to costs, the
president of ENEL stressed that a kilowatt produced by the use of wind presently
costs 100 lire as against 70 lire for gas-oil and 25 lire for nuclear power. Among
the renewable sources, the exploitation of wind, even if technical difficulties re-
main to be overcome as regards the big windmills, is very advantageous--certainly
more advantageous than exploitation of color energy.

"With the photovoltaic system to which BNEL is devoting a lot of attention," Corbel-
lini said. "it would not be possible to get below 250 lire per kilowatthour. The
anemological map of Italy shows that Sardinia is in an especially favorable posi-
tion, having a wind regime particularly well-adapted to exploitation."

COPYRIGHT: 1980 Editrice Il Sole-24 Ore s.r.l.

11267
650: 3102/382

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISII'. ONLY

INDUSTRIAL TECIBEOLOGY

ITALIAN EXPERTS k'ORK 0N ROBOTS WITH TACTILE CAPABILITY
Milan EUROPEO in Italian 13 Jul 81 p 66

[Article by Carlo Arcari: ”Hey. Robot. Let's Shake Hands--Three Italian Experts Are
Inventing New Automata, with a Very Human‘Sense"]

[Text] The "electronic hand" will be covered with a special plastic material full
of sensors. This will enable it to recognize objects, and the robots will thus have

the sense of touch. Science fiction? No, simply the latest frontier in research on
robots.

"The idea came to me while I was watching the workers of Olivetti," says engineer
Pier Carlo Pinotti, a specialist in automation and robotics," who for 8 hours at a
stretch pick and put together typewriter parts of various kinds, which are all mixed
up in the boxes under the cutters. It is work that the workers now do without even
looking at the pieces. using touch only.“

By touch, we can perceive the state of an object without seeing it: with the hand.
we recognize whether an object is hot or cold, hard or soft, of metal or plastic,
and we identifyshapes. "hen we touch it, its image appears clearly on our private
monitor (the brain), together with all the memories that relate to it.

But touch is all a question of skin: and to widen the sensorial sphere of robots, it
is necessary to recreate this sensitivity with an artificial material, combining ro-
botics and bioengineering. This is what, alongside Pinotti, two researchers of the
Piaggio Center of the University of Pisa-Danilo De Rossi and Paolo Dario, bioengin-
eers who have been working for some time on "sensors" for biomedical applications--
are trying to do.

To achieve the "electronic hand," the three specialists will exploit the properties
of PVFZ (polyvinylidene fluoride), a thin film of transparent plastic which, sub-
jected to pressure, can emit an electrical field. This characteristic of PVFZ has
already been used in making a catheter which, inserted to reach the aorta, measures
flow pressure and cardiac sounds.

A thin covering of PVFZ full of sensors will constitute the palm of the robot's

hand. The sensors are electrodes of aluminum or chrOme and gold, stamped onto the
plastic by a special process, and differ in type depending on the datum to be per-
ceived (pressure, ultrasonic waves, temperature variations, etc). “It is important
to emphasize," Pinotti further states, "that these sensitive plastics will make it

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possible to recognize objects in far shorter times than with the optical systems
with television cameras."

The robots that "see" represent the second generation of the automate and are about
to take the place of the "stupid" ones that work in factories today. With their
television eyes. these robots can analyze the scene in which they are working and
can decide what to do when confronted with occasionally differing situations. But
sight is a complicated sense. and the analysis work obtained thourgh a television
camera by an artificial intelligence is long and laborious and takes up too much of
the computer's time.

The piezoelectric polymers (the sensitive plastics) will not be used only as sensors

"that is. as "skin." Some researchers are already thinking of producing real mus-
cle masses with these materials. How? "By working with polyacrylamide ‘gel' ." re-

plies engineer De Rossi--"a collapsible plastic material that can contract or relax
on command."

The idea is to produce with this material capillaries which, once filled with a sa-
line solution and subjected to a field of electrical voltage, can "collapse" (that
is, lose pressure) in a controlled manner. "The thinner the capillary is," De Rossi
explains, "the faster the contraction is. the values of which can be made similar to
those of human muscles."

Today the Pisa biocngineers are working along with the University of Genoa research
group that has made an optical system for robots which is very similar to the human
one (EUROPEO, No lol, 1980). Thus, with eyes from Genova and skin and muscles from
Pisa, will the Cipputi of Duemila be born?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Rizzoli Editore

[1267
C50: 3102/3582

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

THREE MAIN PARTICIPANTS MEET TO DISCUSS NEW AIRBUS A 320
Paris AIR a COSMOS in French 29 Aug 81 p 8

[Text] The French minister of transport, Mr Charles Fiterman, met with the
British secretary of state for industry, Mr Normal Tebbit, and the West German
secretary of state for aeronautics cooperation, Mr. Martin Gruner, in London on
17 July. The purpose of this meeting was to discuss the Airbus program.

The A 320 program was officially brought up for the first time. Althou h the
French authorities had had the matter referred to them by AEROSPATIALE National
Industrial Aerospace Company], neither the British authorities not the German
authorities had been approached regarding it by British Aerospace and HBB [Messen-
schmitt-Baldow-Blohm] respectively. Following the 17 July meeting, the govern-
ments requested the industrialists to submit their proposals. The ministers will
meet again before the end of this year specifically to examine customer reactions
to the A 320 project, which has already signed up Air France (25 planes on
conditioned order, 25 on option).

British Aerospace may already have submitted its A 320 report to the British
authorities by the time this article appears in print. It is known that the Brit-
ish company would like to develop the front end of the plane but would also want
to take over its assembly at its Filton plant. However, to take 30 percent of the
work involved in the program, British Aerospace must invest over 250 million
pounds in the project in the near future. Furthermore, from the standpoint of
efficiency, it would seem preferable to maintain the present areas of specializa-
tion within the Airbus Industrie group, that is, assetmly operations at Toulouse
and the fabrication of the flying surfaces in Great Britain.

Essentially, the current talks on the A 320 revolve about the availability of the
engines and the payload-to-total weight ratio. Exchanges of views are continuing
between Airbus Industrie and the airlines. The carriers, however, are manifesting
a certain reserve attributable to current difficulties in the air transport
situation.

Mr Fiterman's visit to London was discussed at the 30 July meeting of the Council
of Ministers. The communique issued at the conclusion of that meeting states that

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mr Fiterman "is gratified to report that the joint intent of developing European
cooperation in the field of aeronautics was confirmed and the importance of the
150-passenger A 320 construction project, to which he attaches great interest, vac
noted. The industrialists concerned will be invited to submit without delay the

necessary detailed proposals in this matter."

COPYRIGHT: A. I. C. 1980

9399
C30: 3102/420

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATIOR

FIRST A 310 NEARS COMPLETION, A 300 SALES BEACH 150
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 29 Aug 81 p 20

[Article by J.M.]

[Text] The roll-out of the B 167 in Seattle (see preceding pages), which will be
in the air in a few weeks, prompts an examination of the status of its competitor,
Airbus Industrie's A 310.

The final assembly of the first A 310 is now in progress at Toulouse (the ABRO-
SPATIALE PLANT at Saint-Martin). The first sections of the fuselage, as we know,
arrived at Toulouse, fully equipped as a "Super Guppy," on 9 May (forward section
13-14 from VFW [Vereinigte Plugtechnische Herkej), on 15 Hay (center section 15-21
fabricated by use [Hesserschmitt—Baldow-Blohm] and ABRCBPATIALE [National Indus—
trial Aerospace Company] at Saint-Nazaire and Nantes), and on 29 June (rear sec-
tion from HEB). Their assambly with sections ll (cockpit) and 12, fabricated at
Toulouse and Nantes, commenced immediately. By the beginning of July, the fuse-
iage of the first A 310 had neared completion at Saint-Martin. The horizontal
tail unit has just been put into place. The flying surfaces, the first set of
spars for which left British Aerospace's Chester plant on 17 May for VTw‘s Bremen
plant to be equipped there with its moving elements (fabricated in Germany, Bel-
gium, France and the Low Countries), has been shipped to Toulouse in the last few
days and will be joined to the fuselage during September. The vertical stabilizer
and the landing gear (delivered by Messier-Hispano-Bugatti) will be put in place
in October, and the plane will then be visible as a whole, while its final equip-
ment and test instrumentation array is being installed. After checking out all
its systems, it will be ready for roll-out (end of October), its first flight
still being scheduled for the end of March or the very beginning of April. Prior
vibration tests will have begun around mid-December.

The fabrication of the following planes is also well advanced: the second proto-
type goes into its final assembly stage at the end of this month, that of the
joining of the various fuselage sections, the last of which is to be delivered

in October. The flying surface spars for this plane left Chester for Bremen on

22 July and the complete wing is to arrive in Toulouse on 1 November. is second
A 310 will fly by the end of April 1982, thus some weeks after the first A 310;
the third A 310 is to fly by the end of July.

1
FOR OFFICIABL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first operational tests of the flight controls and of the landing gear will
be made on the general test bench at Toulouse, which has already been used for the
A 300 and which will be used subsequently for the A 300-600.

In view of the decision announced by Kuwait Airways in July to modify its previous
order for 11 A 310's with Pratt and whitney engines by "transforming“ three of
these A 310's in as many A 300 c4-600 (convertible version), Airbus Industrie,

on 31 July, reported the sale of 153 A 310's (79 firm orders and 74 options) to
11 companies. Three of these companies (Air France, Lufthansa and Kuwait Airways)
have ordered A 300's as well as A 310's.

Middle East Airlines, whose orders have remained entirely in suspense, could not
be included in the official list of orders published by Airbus Industrie, since,
although the decision in principle was made to purchase 19 A 310's (5 + 14), the
signature of the contracts has been delayed until the end of September; which,
however, did not keep Pratt and Whitney from announcing on 1 August an order from
MBA for the engines necessary to equip these planes.... Potentially, therefore,
the A 310 has been chosen by 12 carriers, totaling 172 A 310 orders (8‘ + 88).
Pratt and Whitney has been chosen by six of these carriers, representing a total
of 65 planes (32 + 33) to be so equipped. All the rest will be equipped with
General Electric CPS-80A engines.

As regards the A 300, two planes were delivered on 2‘ July: one on 24 July to
Malaysian Airline System (fourth A 300 80-200), the other on 29 July [as pub-
1ished] to Olympic Airways (sixth A 300 84-100). As of 31 July 146 A 300's (100
type 84's, 46 type 32's) had been delivered to 28 airline companies.

The 150th Airbus will be delivered in the very near future.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1980

9399
cso: 3102/420 END

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY