FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10057
19 October 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 743

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

zhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATICN BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10057

19 October 1981

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

2000140. 743

CONTENTS

INTER-AFN CAN AFFAIRS

Got Reaffins France's 'Privileged Relations' With Africa

(HARCBES TROPICAUX ET MEDIERBANBENS, 21 Aug 81)................ l
ANGOLA
General Mobilization Against Vashington, Pretoria Advocated
(Editorial, Sinon Halley; MRIQtB-ASIB, llo Sep Bl).............. I.
Western Support Seen Increasing in Southern Africa Events
(Bdltorialh 81m mlhy; WOW-$13, 28 50]) 81)eeooeooeeeeee 6
0.5. Accused of Hiahing To Revive PNLA:
(AmQUB'ASIB. 28 sep 81)....0..00.00IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOCOO0...... 9
South African-Captured Materiel leportedly Goes to INI'IA
(APRIQUB-“IB, 28 sep 81)....0.0000000.000.0000....0.0.00.0...0. 10
CAPE VERIE
Agrmian Reform Canpaign Hatred by Incidents
(AmQIJE-“IE. 1‘ sap 81)....0..00....COOOOOOOOOOOIOCIOOOOOIt... 12
Brief:
Political Incidents in Netherlands 13
(28111“. AFRICAN REPIBLIC
French Government Said To Be Facing Difficult Pootcoup Situation
(mall-:5 TROPICAUX ET mmmmuus, 6 Sep 81)................ 14
General Kolingba Said To Be Pro-herican
(Francois Soudnn; Jam: AFRIQUB, 9 Sep 81) 17
-a- [III-NBSA-IZOFOOOI

me (WA! USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs
Military Promotions
French Military Materiel

EQUAIORIAL GUINEA

Government Reported 'lb Nave Failed 1b Restore Boone-y, mmcracy
(Claude Hauthier; JENB "MQUE, 9 sap ans-assessoos-ooooososoos

(mm

Drillings Near Msyoudaa, Dope: Reveal Oil
(mums TROPICAUX B'l' mmmmmns, lo Sop 8D..................

Briefs
Bongo's lbported mnial

(BAN).

Briefs
Cultural Agreement With USSR Urged

Delegation to DPM
PRC 'lhreatens Hithdrawal
GUINEA

Nigerian Fishing, Cultural Cooperation, Mining (boperation
(mamas TMPICAUX B'r IBDI‘BBBANEBNS, 4 Sep 81)..................

Briefs
Australian Dis-0nd Participation

GUINEA-BISSAU

Briefs
French Agricult urel Aid

mm IQUE

Needs, Expansion of Beira Port Detailed
(HARCNES TROPICAUX B'r EDIERRANBBNS, 28 Aug 81)................

Briefs
Hachel May Visit Paris

NIGER

Briefs
Uranium Sales Policy
Japanese Urmiul Exploration Agreement

unb-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

20

23

24

25
25

26

27

28

29

31

BB
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NICERIA
Briefs

Petroleum Prices
New 011 Discoveries

DOA}! DA

Briefs
I! Accmea Covenant

ZAIRB
Brie to

Canadian hinge Aid
Mine Investments

MIA

Next Few baths Seen as Critical for leadership
(AFRIQUE-ASIE, 31 Aug-13 83p 81)oaoeoeooooooooooooooooaacotouooc

Ethmol Project Seen as Energy Saving, chonically Helpful
(APIIQUE-ASIB, 31 W13 SOP 81)..0000aoooovvevoeo000.000.000.00

mu MN“. "St ONLY
FIHI(MWWCJAI.USE(NVLY

INTER—AFRICAN AFFAIRS

COT REAFFIRHS FRARCE'S 'PRIVILEGED RELATIONS' RITE AFRICA
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in french No 1867. 21 Aug 81. p 2161

[Text] France's interest in Africa has not ceased with the ascendancy of the new
president of the Republic. His personal advisers and the ministers in charge of
foreign affairs for development and cooperation have stepped up their visits to
Africa--Hr Claude Cheysson has gone to Maghreb. while Mr Jean-Pierre Cot has visited
South Saharan Africa. Having just returned from a 15-day trip to Cameroon. Senegal
and Ghana. he is leaving again for Nigeria. For its part. Paris has received the
heads of state from the Ivory Coast. Gabon. Niger. the Congo. the vice president of
Kenya. the prime ministers of “ \egal and the Central African Republic, as well as
the secretary-general of the 9-. [Organization of African Unity]. The new leaders
have had just as many opportunities to establish or braoden their contacts with the
African leaders. for whom personal relationships have always had a particular
importance. to become familiar with their records and. from their contacts with
concrete situations. to study the difficult path of reconciling the preservation

of principles with the dictates of reality.

hr Jean-Pierre Cot's statements. and his replies at a press conference of 18 August.
as well as those of Mr Claude Cheysson on the respect France has for all the commit-
ments made by her previous governments. and her extremely clear position regarding
the Republic of South Africa and the Namibian problem. shed light on the great
choices that will inspire Prance's policy on Africa. and help dispel the anxieties
which may have been aroused by certain documents of the Socialist Party.

Above all, the primacy of Africa among France's preoccupations has been reaffirmed.
It will have a privileged place in France's relations with the developing countries.
This includes all of Africa-~the French-speaking. of course. but also the English-
speaking and the Portuguese-speaking. Hr Jean-Pierre Cot stated that he was
impressed by the aspirations he observed among his interlocutors in Ghana. even
more so than among the Franch-apesking Africans. toward a common destiny. asking
them so sensitive to everything concerning Namibia's independence and the fate of
their black brothers in South Africa. and which led them in Lagos to set the ground-
work for an economic conmunity from a self-contained and internsldevelopmentwhose
first priority was agriculture. Ghana. the country of Nkrumah. was the first
non-French-speaking African state to receive the French minister for cooperation
and development-~a symbolic and significant choice. It was to affirm this recog-
nition of Africa's aspirations toward unity that Mr Jean-Pierre Cot recalled that
for each of his visits to a French-speaking African state. he intended to go to an
English-speaking or Portuguese-speaking state. and that France will not only clearly

I

INII‘OﬁIWCIAL USIZCMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

respect the decisions of the African governments. but will actively support. by
every means possible. the solutions adopted by the organizations which unit them.
especially the DAB. In the more limited area of financial aid, France's tradi-
tional friends can rest assured. France will continue to concentrate her efforts
on them for. as Mr Jean-Pierre Cot stated on a realistic note. before he left

Dakar for Paris. "she does not have the means of assuring political and meaningful
aid to all of Africa."

Finally. France has traditionally maintained government-to-government relations.
no matter what type of political regime either may have. This principle will be
upheld. and display a preference for a socialist or capitalist system of social
organization will entail neither privilege nor rejection on the part of France.
The only ones to find themselves isolated would be those governments that do not
assure the basic human rights to their citirems. Their conduct will be judged on
the basis of criteria that are presently being thought out.

Facing imediate problems. especially in Chad and the Central African Republic.

the new government is defining its position in light of those principles. In Chad.
where Hr Campredon was sent to make contact with Chadian leaders. all factions,
with the exception of Mr Hissene Habre's. showed a willingness to maintain their
country's territorial integrity. to restore the national army. and to regain their

sovereignty. A mission of French experts recently travelled to Nadjamena to oval-
uate methods for re-establishing acceptable living conditions by restoring water.
electricity. and communications systems. etc. France's primary objective is to
restore Chad's capital. and she is ready to she part in that by permitting its
residents who fled during the battles to come back there and settle again. In line
with this. France is pursuing diplomatic actions aimed at facilitating the applica—
tion of the OAU and Lagos resolutions and reconciling the conditions which would
allow the Chadian authorities later on to demand the repatriation of the Libyan
troops. On the other hand. if the resumption of French aid may be studied. it

In the Central African Republic. the situation remains uncertain. The appeasement
tactics taken recently by President Decks in lifting the ban on certain opposition
parties seem reasonable. The French government is continuing to carry out the
cooperation agreements. including that of military cooperation. uniting it with the
Central African Republic. as it does with all the other African states which have
signed similar agreements with France. These. moreover. are nothing other than the
legal framework within which French cooperation is expressed. in such a way that.
if something must be changed. it will not be the framework but the spirit in which
the cooperation was conceived. Despite certain statements made at Bangui by the
Central African head of state. after the prime minister's recent official visit to
Paris. he did not ask that cooperation agreements with France be revised. Just
lately. the minister for cooperation only received a request to modify some of

the clauses governing military cooperation. but not concerning the matter of
Frenchtrooppresence in Central Africa.

In Senegal.Franceshowed her traditional solidarity by granting emergency aid which
was justified by its difficult economic situation. A group of French experts.
under the director for development of the Ministry of Cooperation. is presently

2

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE<0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

working with the Senegalese authorities. and in cooperation with a mission of the
IMF [International Monetary Fund] to define the country's needs and the possible
means for aiding the success of the courageous plan of reparation begun by the Dakar
government. This would be a type of valuable assistance for France's African
partners in preparing their records for submission to international institutions
such as the IHV.

Thus. on his first trip to Africa, the new minister for cooperation and development
could ascertain the difficulty. as he himself put it. "of passing from rhetoric

to politics." and of comprehending the true dimension of Africa's problems: the
legitimate desire for true independence and. at the same time, the need for foreign
aid in resolving the more immediate problems of everyday life for as long as the
complex problems surrounding the establishment of a new economic order. sought by
the developing countries. have not been satisfactorily solved. Africa in particu-
lar expects France to explain its requests to the industrialized countries. The
sinister for cooperation and development knows how to respond to the hope of

Africa and the Third world and to give France "the ambition. within the framework
of Euro-African cooperation. to be the dynanic and animating force for the European
side."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie. Paris l98L

9475
680: 6719

FOI:OIWWCJAI.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

GENERAL McBILIZAIION AGAINST WASHINGVON, PRETORIA ADVOCAIBD
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 268, 16 Sep 81 pp 8-9
[Editorial by Simon Halley: "Angola: Aggression Should Be Stopped!"]

[Excerpts] South Africa's strategy in opposing the genuine independence of
Namibia, in launching its fascist hordes and puppet mercenaries of the UNITA
against Angolan national territory, in violating its sovereignty. in causing
death and destruction, could not be any clearer. First of all, public opinion
should be conditioned to come to believe that it is on the verge of facing

a military confrontation with Cuba and the Soviet Union, that the latter has
already drawn up the plans aimed at conquering the entire region of Southern
Africa--including South Africa itself--and that the only way to save Uestern
civilization, which it claims to represent on the African continent, is to be
given a free hand and to be granted carte blanche to strike wherever it wishes,
attack whomever it wants, invade wherever it deems it necessary. And even if
the quasi—unanimity of the UN members were not taken in and condemned it, as was
recently proved by the debates of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
is not the support granted South Africa by the Reagan administration sufficient
proof? Has not this administration saved it from the danger impiicit in the
council's resolution vetoed by the United States?

But this is not all. Once these results have been achieved, isn‘t Pretoria
attempting to impose the second part of its strategy? In other words, isn't it
attempting to create a kind of Lebanese situation in the southern part of Angola,
with Jonas Savinbi playing the role of the Christian militias and South Africa
that of Israel? By creating a buffer zone in that area, the racist Pretoria
regime could install there the puppet Savimbi, who would then appeal for the
recognition and support of the imperialist powers and their allies. Hashington
and Pretoria would thus repeat with Angola and Savimbi the Noise Tshombe in
Katanga. and the Ojukwu in Biafra, experience, two disastrous events, the
consequences of which are atill-unfortunately-~felt by African people, and
especially the Zairians and Nigerians. Do the apprentice sorcerers of Pretoria
and Hashington have such short neuories? have they forgotten so quickly the
extent of the repercussions of these tragedies, the indignation and anger
pervading African opinion at the time these colonial adventures were launched in
the sixties, adventures that were nevertheless defeated, but not without the loss

PORiOFlﬂClAl.lHﬂE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of thousands of innocent victims? Hill the African peoples continue to tolerate
that their continent remain a field for imperialist and racist experimentation,
for experiments of domination and exploitation?

This challenge by Washington and Pretoria must be picked up. It would be criminal
to let it go unanswered. Otherwise, who could prevent Pretoria's racists from
being used tomrrow by U.S. policy makers in order to claim that other countries
such as Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia, Nigeria, the Congo-and many others-«must
be the target of their aggression because their regimes are threatening the
security of Southern Africa, of which they consider themselves the principal
policeman? Thanks to its nuclear weapons—negotiated, moreover, during the talks
in Hashington between Secretary of State Alenander Haig and P11: Botha—will not
Pretoria be assigned the mission of bringing "recalcitrant" African regimes

into line, in the name of the United States?

Already, thanks to the Angolan president 's appeal, thanks to the Serurity Council's
meetings, to the debates of the General Assembly, to the honest reports of numerous
neutral Western diplomats and observers, the psychological war launched by Pretoria
did not succeed. Following many days of hesitation and circumspection in regard

to Luanda 's affirmations, international public opinion sided with the victims of
South African aggression.

If the Western press itaeuf believes that a break between washington and Africa

is inevitable, if Pretoria's schanes would come to be applied, why and how could
African peoples resign themselves to and remain passive vis-a-vis this monstrous
conspiracy which is taking shape in Southern Africa? To cross one'a arms, to
limit oneself to the UN, 0A1! or other interventions in the international arena
while crimes are being perpetrated, while the freedom and independence of African
peoples acquired at such great cost are flouted, while new Katangas and Biafras
are in the process of developing, would be to insult the conscience of each
African, the dignity of each patriot, the honor of each militant. If the Security
Council was proved powerless, in the face of the U.S. veto, to take forceful action
against South Africa, the UN charter and a nudaer of resolutions voted during the
fifties and sixties (notably the one called "United for Peace") confer to the
General Assembly the right to step in when the council is blocked by a veto and
invoke Chapter VII (referring to sanctions) against any aggressor. And doesn't
Africa, the principal reservoir of the mineral resources vital to the Heat,

have the necessary means to halt the aggressor of the whole of Africa, the aggressor
and its principal instigator, Hashington? And this Arab world, whose sacred cause
had mobilized African peoples when they decided to break off relations with Israel,
does it not feel a sense of duty via-a-vis this-.violsted, martyred Africa, the
victim—just like itself—of the heguonic, imperialistic policy of the United
States and its privileged ally, Pretoria? Must one cite the names of those Arab
countries that are feeding the South African war machine through their oil and
their dollars?

For South African invasion to stop forever, for the schemes aimed at balkanizing
the countries of Southern Africa to be buried once and for all, collective action
by all those who are targets of the danger represented by South African imperialism
is imperative, today more than ever before. At the United Nations, at the OAU,

at the non-aligned movement and in the socialist camp, a general mobilization must
be decreed against Hashington's, Pretoria's and their accomplices' economic and
strategic interests. The rest is nothing but idle talk...

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie
C80: 4719/32

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

HESTERN SUPPORT SEEN INCREASING IN SOUTHERN AFRICA EVENTS
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 269, 28 Sep 81 pp 12-16
[Editorial by Simon halley: "Pretoria-Hashington Isolated"!

[Excerpts] It was in Lagos on ll September. The Frontline States were meeting
for a summit conference under the chairmanship of the Nigerian chief of state,
Shehu Shagari, to review the situation created by the occupation of the province
of Cunene in the People's Republic of Angola and adopt the measures required to
respond to the challenge launched by the Pretoria-Washington axis against all of
Africa.

Hhen President Shagari asked, how could the Frontline States' solidarity be trans-
lated into concrete decisions, President Samora Machel did not hesitate one
moment: "Nothing could better convince the aggressors and their ".8. accomplices
than the feeling that they are not only facing the Angolan people. but all of
Africa. Our fighters are ready to join their comrades in Angola if the Angolan
Government requests it. To be sure, there are other African countries, more
powerful and with more sophisticated means, which could play an important role

in supporting our Angolan coerades..."

Actually, the participation-be it only symbolic—~of the African forces on the

side of the PAPLA would no doubt have considerable impact on world public opinion,
even though it is obvious that what Angola needs the most is sophisticated

weaponry, of which Pretoria has an abundant supply thanks to the assistance of

the western nations, notably the United States. These sophisticated weapons, as
well as the cadres able to use them, are available in a number of African countries,
be it Libya, Algeria, Nigeria. thiopia, etc. ﬂhy, then, shouldn't one resort to
them?

Have decisions been made on this subject? Hill they be applied? Will they produce
positive results? If the decisions adopted have, naturally, remained a secret,

the hope felt by the Prontline States meeting in Lagos is, nevertheless. great.
Isn't it, moreover. the reason why the final resolution addressed a solemn appeal
to all the OAU members to provide assistance-~cspecially military assistance-to
the People's Republic of Angola in order to grant this country concrete support

in resisting and defeating the South African invaders and occupiers? Isn't it

also the reason why the GAO secretary general, Noureddin Djoudi, was sent to
Luanda to find out what the OAU role could be? However, let us not get ahead of
the facts and let us not put our trust in speculations and premature optimise.

6

FOR‘0FFNJAI.USIZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless, we can note a factor which, in our view, is essential. By first
addressing themselves to the OAU members to fulfill their obligations and fully
assume their responsibilities, the Frontline States and Nigeria wished to face

the two-pronged goal pursued by U.S. imperialism and its allies: first, to inter-
nationaliae the conflict in Southern Africa and attempt to transform it into an
East-West confrontation, and then to try to prove that Luanda's policy is deter-
mined by the Soviet Union and the socialist countries.

 

Lagos' answer was clear and unambiguous: it is important to africanize the war
of resistance against South Africa and its allies, to oppose a common diplomatic
front (already established, of course), but also a vaster military front to the
hegemonic objectives of Pretoria and to abort the projects aimed at constituting,
in the very midst of the independent and sovereign countries of Southern Africa,
a number of puppet "buffer states," which would serve as permanent bases for
aggression against them. Hhat has just taken place in Laogs should be a lesson
for the imperialist, Zionist and racist forces. And if this lesson is not
rapidly understood, if, as we are convined, the United States is studying, in
conjunction with Zaire, South Africa and Gabon, the formation of a "special
military force" targeted against the independence of the progressive and revo-
lutionary countries of Southern Africa--as the socialist Portuguese newspaper
PORTUGAL HOJB affirms--the Reagan administration would do well to desist. Threats
of intervention, of colonial expeditions, destabilization campaigns...will never
defeat this will to resist the schemes of aggressors which is increasingly
affirming itself among the peoples and governments of Africa.

Africa, and especially its revolutionary progressive regimes. is not and will
not remain alone, isolated, cut off from its friends and allies or subjected to
the diktat of Pretoria and Uashington. First of all, it has its natural allies
in the socialist camp which, no matter what international constraints exist at
this time, cannot afford to abandon it to the vultures and the grave-diggers of
its dearly acquired independence. Additionally, after the rise of the left in
France, the increasingly hard line adopted by U.S. policy, the resort by the
Reagan administration to the strong methods that became notorious at the time
of the cold war, the political climate in Europe is changing and many foreign
ministries are beginning to keep their distance.

Thus it is that Luanda's diplomacy is beginning to bear fruit in Western Europe.
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos who started it is determined to break off the
isolation in which the Reagan administration has attempted to maintain Angola.

He first appealed to the UN secretary general, to the Security Council, the extra-
ordinary general assembly and tens of chiefs of state in the East and in the Rest.
Special presidential emissaries want to many capitals. In Paris, Bonn, London,
Rome and New York, the Angolan foreign minister, Paulo Jorge and the Angolan
ambassador in Paris, Luis de Almeida, achieved remarkable successes. Hhile

French Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson was affirming that his talks with Paulo
Jorge took place in a particularly warm climate, that the French Government

firmly supported Resolution 435 of the Security Council and that he saw no connec-
tion between the settlement of the Namibian question andthepresence of Cuban
troops in the country, West Germany warmly welcomed the Angolan minister. As

for Lord Carrington in Britain, did he not affirm to Luis de Almeida that his
government would not change its position on Resolution 435 and that despite the

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

abstention of the British delegation at the Security Council on the South African
aggression, London had been the first Vestern nation to denounce and stigmtizs
the invasion of Angola by South African troops and densnd that they inediately
withdraw?

If the clinate surrounding the explosive crisis still reigning in Southern Africa
seems, for the moment. to be favorable to the Prontline States and Angola, if the
international press is continuing to severely criticise washington's and Pretoria's
policy, we are still far, very far fron the desired objectives, because nothing,
absolutely nothing has changed in the strategy adopted by Heshington and in
Pretoria's ains. But when French President Francois Mitten-and will officially
receive President dos Santos on 15 October, he will no doubt wech hill while
taking into account three particularly leaningful realities for France, Angola
and the African countries: President dos Santos will be the first chief of state
in Southern Africa to visit him. France will be the first Western nation visited
by an Angolan chief of state and finally, the reason why France was first chosen
by President dos Santos is because of the victory of the Preach democratic forces
at the 10 Hay elections and the assuwtion of power by the leader of the Socialist
Party, which filled with hope the peoples of the Third World and in particularly
those in Africa, who have suffered so each t 1 a result of the arbitrary, personal
and corrupt policy of the Giscardian regine.

Should not cannon sense, sutusl interests, the sense of international responsibility
inspiring both chiefs of state impose that the success of this meeting be equal to
the hopes that socialist France is awakening among the peoples of Southern Africa?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

CSO: [4719/77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

U.S. ACCUSED 0F WISHING T0 RBVIVE MA

Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French No 269, 28 Sep 81 p 29

[Text] The departure "in exile” of many former leaders of Roberto Holden's FNLA
for the United States, recently announced to the press by President Hobutu. is

s patently false attempt aimed at deceiving public opinion. In reality, Holden
deputy Hendrick Vaal Neto, who is among the puppets of the MA enjoying v.5.
"political asylum," revealed to his confidantes: "Our Amricsn friends informed
us that they wanted to reactivate the run so that we can reorganize ourselves
and continue our struggle for national liberation."

Thus. the Reagan's administration plot against the People's Republic of Angola
is taking shape and affirming itself. Following its decision to support Jonas
Savinbi's UNITA, it is now embarked in an operation ained at training, arming
and equipping the second Angolan puppet organisation. Since this latter is
supposed to operate in the northern part of Angola, the question now is to know
to what an extent the assurances and promises repeatedly made by the bloody
dictator in Kinshasa to Angolan officials in relation to his desire to cut off
any assistance to Angolan counter-revolutionaries can be believed. African
diplomats fron progressive countries stationed in Kinshasa say that "here, no
one believes him. He is an inveterate liar, and his words of honor, his oaths
to Presidents Neto and dos Santos are worth nothing..."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie .

CSO: 4719/77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFICLAL.USE¢DNLY

ANGOLA

SOUTH AFhICAN—CAPTURED HAIERIEL REPORIMILY GOES To UNITA
Paris APRIQUBPASIE in French No 249. 28 Sep 81 p 17

[Text] As could have easily been inagined, the UNITA, which was able to escape
in extremis from the province of Cuando Cubengo--where it was almost decisively
defeated by the FAPLA a little before the South African invasion of the province
of Cunene-can be found today in the occupied zone of the border province, in
order to "capitalize" on the results of the aggression, as the chief of staff of
the racist forces, Gen Geldenhuys, affirmed.

No military role has been attributed to the UNITA, and the South Africans could
not leave this province without running the risk of having the PAPLA defeat the
puppets without further ado.

In Cahama, the Angolan army was intercepting radio messages from the racist army,
whose command post is less than 70 kms from the city of Xangongo. Even though
succinct, these messages provided confirmation of the fact that the only task
South Africa-fully conscious of UNITA'I limitations-can attribute to it is to
undertake reprisals and repression against the civilian population.

Consequently, the URITA is performing "parallel activities" while the army of
occupation is, at this time, "recovering" all the civilian and military vehicles,
including the agricultural ones, in the occupied province. According to witnesses
who were able to escape the area, it is also destroying all the documentation of
the Angolan administration, it is lorting stores, both state and private, as well
as the residences of local authorities or of mere members of the HPLA-Labor Party.
As in 1975, herds are also driven beyond the border, into Nanibia.

"The racists are not only genuine nasis and assassins," Commandant Farrusco, in
charge of Cahama. said with some irony, "but they are also true thieves, who loot
everything they can get their hands on. A large portion of this materiel, and
especially whatever can serve as transportation means, will then be handed over
to the UNITA." Thus the collection of "recovered materiel" that Jonas Savimbi
and his follower N'zau Puna will be able to show to the Western press in their
bases in Namibia is getting richer. It is even reported that the tractors and
bulldozers "recovered" by the invaders are actually sold to white Namibian
farmers by the UNITA.

At the beginning of the invasion, it was the South African army itself that took
care of the "enemy" and the HPLA militants who had stayed in the city. Jorge

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mussua Hichinichi, hospitalized in Ondjiva until the morning of the 28th. that is,
a few hours before the total occupation of the city by the South African troops,
escaped the shooting by hiding in the hospital's water tank. Iron there, he heard
the South Africans threaten the women in the hospital to find out where the non
were hiding.

Suspecting that all the young people in the hospital were FAPLA were, the South
Africans would then shoot the sen in their wards. Hichinichi took advantage of
the confusion and the screens to leave his hiding place and escape through a
service corridor.

officer Alfonso Maria, in charge of the Ondjiva units, told us that there were
indeed some Angolan soldiers among the most seriously wounded who were hospitalized
in Ondjiva, but that most of the patients were peasants wounded during the course
of the severe bombing attacks.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie.

C50: 4719/77

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPE VERDE

AGRARIAN REFORM CAHPAIGN MARRIED BY INCIDMS
Paris AFRIQJB-ASIE in French No 2158, 14 Sep 81 p 66

[Text] The bill on agrarian reforn abolishing the metaysge systu and uniting
the relations of production more democratic in the rural areas of the Cape Verde
Islands—which still presented some feudal aspects—was recently subjected to
popular debate throughout the country's 10 islands.

In those islands and regions where the peasant nassee have become conscious of
the social injustices suffered through the centuries of colonial and class
domination. discussions were passionate and constructive. But in Santo Antao
groups of individuals, known to have belonged in the past to pro-colonialist
and revolutionary organizations attempted to undermine the initiative of the
Cape Verdian Government. Taking advantage of the contradictions that feudal
relations fixed in the mentality of a ntmber of peasants, and threatening those
who wanted to participate in the discussions on a these that is close to their
hearts, these elenents succeeded in upsetting the debates.

Houthing reactionary slogans to Cape Verdian organizations abroad—closely tied
to international, and notably Portuguese, fascist groups—they fought local
authorities and attempted to disarm a polich who had arrested some of the
agitators.

During the course of these incidents, one of the denonstrators was killed and two
others wounded. Authorities arrested all those responsible for the clashes.
However, these incidents did not prevent the enlightenment canpaign on the

fundamental principles of the agrarian reforn to be conducted throughout the
island.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie .

CSO: (0719/32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPEVERI!

BRIEFS

POLITICAL INCIDENTS IN NETHERLANDS—The chauffeur of the Cape Verde consulate
in Rotterdam was wounded by gunfire on 9 Septedaer following an altercation
with opponents of the Cape Verde Government. Simultaneously. in The Hague.
police prevented 1 group of about 20 Cape Verdun citizens from occupying

the country's absssy. The demonstrators vented to protest against the "non-
denocretic" Cape Verdun regime. [Tat] [Paris muss TROPICAIIX ET

HEDI‘I'ERWBBIS in French No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2380]

C80: 6719/32

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

mum mvemeeru' SAID to BB FACING mmcmn' Posrmup SITUA‘nm
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANEENS in French N0 1869 ‘ Sep 81 p 2232
[Article: “Ben Andre Kolingoa Becomes liead of Statef/

[1'er 0n l Septenber, the Central African army forced the Central African
president. David Dacko, to hand over power to it.

The general chief of staff of the Central African any, Army Gen Andre Kalingba,
has since then assured the duties of head of state. The Constitution has been
suspended and any activity by political parties has been forbidden.

General Kolingia indicated in a broadcast speech that he had “asked for and
obtained“ the resignation of President Dacko because of the president's health
and ”taking into account the political tension that has reigned in our country
for the last 6 months."

The leadership of the country is now being taken care of by a Military Comittee of
National Recovery, composed exclusively of the armed forces and placed under the
authority of General Kolingba.

The change in power was effected without any bloodshed and without violence. The
international airport at Bangui was not closed at any time and no curfew was set
up. Only telephone and telex comunications were interrupted. The following day.
2 September, everything was absolutely normal in Bangui and the people seemed
rather satisfied. General Kolingba's radio speech seems to have been well
received by the people, who seem to be pleased at the arrival of a stmng man as
the head of state.

The French troops remained confined to their barracks and did not intervene at any
point. The minister of defense, Charles Hernu. stated in Le Havre, where he was
presiding over the ceremony of the launching of the nuclear submarine "SAPHIR' at
the time of the events in Bangui, that the only mission of the French military
would have been to assure the protection of the life and property of any French
people if they had been threatened.

The forced resignation of President Dacko, although it seals to have caught the
French government unawares--the new French dressador to Bangui had presented his

credentials the day beforenis not a real surprise. The circumstances of his
return to power accompanied by French forces from the Barracuda operation prevented

14

ml? "W‘N‘YA' "Q7 an
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

him from imposing his authority with regard to political adversaries. thus puttin
his legitimacy in doubt. His first action was to me tablish

s the conditions for
operating a demcracy by authorizing the establishment of political parties. The

gh. The ruined state of publi
finances and of the economy left by the dethroned emperor had made their presence

necessary in the eyes of Paris. which had been asked to contribute financially

to the country's recovery. Since the-return to Bangui . it has been for all
practical purposes France which has as

government employees
and the daily life of the Central African Republ c. This F

, Henri Maidou.
and Francois Pehoua, and suspending Ange Patasse's party. President Dacko

decided upon the arrest of these heads of the opposition. In fact, only Ange
taken refuge abroad. Three weeks later.
in a desire for appeasement, which. it i ‘

regard to him, seems to have let himself be convinced without difficulty to cede
power to General Kalingba. Should we i

n fact credit him with the intention of
havmg made the first move and having p

‘ rican Republic, nevertheless finds itself faced with a difficul

t is obvious that its position in the days to come will b
oth within Africa and elsewhere.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The penetration by the Libyan armed forces into Chad and the occupation which

has followed has led those African nations linked to France by cooperation and
defense agreemnts, along with their neimhors. to question the efficacy of the
protection that Paris could assure the. and to look for other possible “protectors".
President Reagan's doctrine. clearly stated. of opposing the Soviet inﬂuence

in Africa and elsewhere nay encourage some nations to get closer to the United
States. especially since Colonel Qadidiefi'e Libya. which has become the warehouse
for sophisticated Soviet weapons on the African continent and which has just
strengthened its ties with the Soviet Union. may be suspected of trying to

expand its inﬂuence in the Central African Republic. The French government cannot
remain insensitive to such a threat to ruin its positions in Africa and it will
have to find a way of reconciling the defense of these positions with still
maintaining respect for Central African sovereignty.

COPYRXGHT: Rene Moneux et Cie Paris l98l.

"550
050: 4719

16

me OWYPTA'I. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

GENERAL KOLINGBA SAID TO BE PROHAQEIICAN

Paris JEINE APRIQUE in French No 1079. 9 Sep 81 pp 28, 29

[Article by Francois Soudan: "In Dad Health, Weakensd, President mcko blinquishes
Pmer 1b the Army. As In 1965 : ‘lhe Coup d'Btat ‘lhst Has Expected”

[Text] Nobody, or almost nobody, hnew it, but_ General Andre _Kolingba, chief of staffs!
the Central African arsy and simply chief of state since 1 September, is a recid-
ivist. That Tuesday morning when, before dawn, he entered the residence of David
Dacko on the banks of the Ubangui, there is no doubt that the president resesbered

a conversation that he had had, 1 south before, with the one who. he had just ap-
pointed general of the army: "The time has come, Mr President,“ lolingba had said

to him, "to put a stop to political disorder; resign. or else the army will no

doubt have to interfere."

In bad health-he suffers from high blood pressure which causes frequent fainting
spells-to such an extent that he had decided to cone to Paris in mid-September
for treatment, looking older than his 52 years, David Decks had nevertheless held
out. In Bangui you do not let go of power just like that. especially when you
have experienced a coup d'etat once before (that of 31 December, 1965, which over-
threw backs and brought Dokassa to the presidency).

And anyhow, it now seems clear, David Dacko had already chosen his heir apparent.
("in 8 or 10 months, after the legislative elections,” he confided), and it was
not Kolingba, but Hsgr Ndayen, the archbishop of Bangui, chief of the powerful

. Catholic church of Central Africa and brother of the er—commander of the gen-
darnery, who had been resoved froa his position 3 weeks previously at the explicit
request of Kolingba.

Following the failure of his first attempt, Andre Kolingba, formerly of the French
Military School of Frejus, who was ambassador to Canada and Rest Germany under
Bokassa, therefore returned to the charge. Hith far less restraint (but without
bloodshed), since he brought out of its barracks the small Central African army
(2,000 men). of which he is alsost undisputedly the chief, and proclaimed, in
keeping with a classic process, the dissolution of parties and the repeal of the
constitution.

Did France have an "in" in this, did it give its blessing to the putsch? At first
glance. this seems possible, even probable, since France maintains 1,160 men in

17

INDR OFTWCJAL UGEZCNNLY
FOR<0F11C1AI.lEﬂE(NULY

Central Africa, even right anong President Dacko‘s closest associates. In actual
fact, however, this is quite uncertain: the Barracudas had been very strictly
confined since last 14 July. It had been necessary to sake a telephone call from
Paris at 9 o'clock Tuesday aorning. i.e. several hours after the "coup," for the
annassador to find out that Dacko had been overthrown. It is obvious that, since
the election of the socialist, Francois Hitterrand, inforlation "flows badly," as
the saying goes, between certain Preach information aervices-especislly the aili-
tary--and the Elysee. Last of all, it is hard to see why Paris would want to
burden itself with the dilenns that is taking shape: keeping the Barracuda con-
tingent in a country with a "hard” nilitary regine (which, to say the least, would
be contrary to its principles), and thereby risk losing its influence of the na-
tionals in the country.

Support

So then. is it likely that Andre Kolingba acted alone? No, because he will cer-
tainly, in the near future, have to pay the civil servants. This general, very
close to the for-er prine sinister. Bernard Ayandho (a personal friend of Presi-

dent Bongo and outspokenly pro-American). undoubtedly did not "nake a aove" with-
out nets. The question is: who put then in place?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRDPJIA 1981.

9698
080: 6719/388

18

FOR 0511C1Al.lﬁﬂ£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

MILITARY PRONTIONSuGen Andre Kolingba. chief of general staff of the Central
African awed forces, who took power yesterday in Bangui. had been promoted to any
general. the highest rank in the Central African amy, on 30 July. President
Dacko made this decision when the arm was invested with complete authority in
the area of law and order following the attenpt of 14 July. which resulted in
three dead and 32 wounded in a Bangui cinema. Appointed acininistrator of the
state of siege declaned on l9 July. General Kolingba had issued a warning to
those "who are looting, raising barricades, or harming freedon to work. The amy
will severely reprimand all agitators.“ proclained General Kolingba. At the sane
time as General Kolingba, several other officers of the any were prorated to a
higher rank. These promotions, observers considered at the time, were Justified
by the "loyalty" shown by _t_he grated forces during the events that followed the

attempt of l4 July. Text [Paris HARCHES TROPIGAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French
No 1869 4 Sep 81 p 2 82 (mum: Rene Morena et Ole Paris 1981] 11550

FRENCH MILITARY MATERIEL—Haj“ deliveries of French Iilitsry Interiel to the
Central African Republic before the putscb of 1 September: six liaison and recon-
naissance vehicles as well as 20 jeeps have just been sent to Bangui. For the
month of July alone France's military assistance to the CAR slomts to 150 mil-
lion CPA francs. [Text] [Paris JBUNB AFRIQUE in French No 107$9 Sep 81 p 69]
[COPYRIGHT: Jenne Afrique GRIIPJIA 1981] 9698

C80: 6719/388

l9
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EQMTORIAI. mu

mvsmmm REPORTED '1!) “VB FAILED 11) 3881038 3mm, MC!
Paris mum AFRIQIE in French llo 1079, 9 Sep 81 pp 50-51

[Article by Claude Hsuthier: ”No Years After the Pall of the "Tiger" Ool. Teodoro
(hiang Nguen use Failed To lsestahlish unocracy, and has Not Restored the Economy:
Rope mm to Disappointnnt")

[‘rextl Nothing is going any better in Equatorial Guinea. or so few things: the
great hope that sprang up following the fall in August 1979 of Francisco Macias
Ngueu, called the ”Tiger,” has dwindled in fact of the inability of the new
regine to get the economy of a bloodless country back on its feet. to say nothing
of its refusal to re-establish even so Inch as the appearance of democratic free-
don. Admittedly the time of hasty mentions and atrocious tortures is past, but
dreary apathy has come to replace the passing glsdnese which 2 years ago had
greeted the sasmtion of power by the new strong-an of the country, Colonel
Teodoro Obiang lguens.

Stage-setting

The strange trial in July of the meters of the unsuccessful plot of April 1981,
following which nearly 200 people had been arrested, did little but add to the
legitimate suspicion surrounding the new regime. Actually the court condoned
only the "underlings": one soldier to death. about 10 nonco-issioned officers
and civil servants to long prison terns. Some 30 officers got off lightly with
6 months of imrisonment, while about 30 other accused people. including two of
hacies' former ministers. were released. As for the one who could have been the
guiding light of the plot, Moises H'Ba, accused of nisappropriation of funds and
attenpting to destabilize the state. sentenced in his absence to 20 years of
prison, he mnsged to leave the country with entire inunity shortly before the
month of April.

The route taken by this politician, and subsequently a wealthy businessman, now
taking refuge in Spain, was indeed a curious one. At the time of the Spanish

colonization, Hoisea‘ﬂ'ba was one of the leaders of the pro-Franco party, Hunge
(National Unity Movement of Spanish Guinu) and a representative in the Cortes.

Upon the approach of independence, proclaimed in 1968, he became the head of a
dissenting group of the Hunge to support the candidacy of Hacias in the presi-
dentisl election. As a result of his "flair" he was awarded the presidency of
the Council of State (senate). but in 1972 he deeud it sore advisable to go to
Geneva and get back into the ranks of the principal opposition party in exile,
the ANRD, (National Alliance for Demcratic Re-establisl-ent), and he became the
resident of its central comittee. Four years later he was excluded from the

20
“MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANRD, and went to set himself up in Spain. Only a few months before the discovery
of the plot had he returned to Equatorial Guinea to create there an import-export
business firm in which Colonel Obiang is said to have held some of the shares.

In Halabo it is not considered entirely impossible that Noises H'Ba could have
been the pawn of a set-up designed to get potential rivals of the chief of state
out of the way, one which may have involved some dirty doings relating to big
money. As a matter of fact, in Madrid the businessman has just stated that the
chief of state likely demanded, for the benefit of his 13-year-old son, Theodorin,
a capital increase of 30 percent of the firm, which likely brought on their fall-
ing-out and his departure.

In any case. for the time being power seems to remain in the hands of the clan of
Mango-o, the village of Macias, who was the uncle of Colonel Teodoro Obiang. The
number two man in the regime, Haye Ela, first vice-president and minister of for-
eign affairs is also a nephew of the fallen dictator. Both of them are members of
the supreme military council which was an outgrowth of the coup d'etat of 1979.
Hongomo is in the east in the continental part of the country, near the border of
Gabon, in the land of the Esanguis. a group constituting the ethnic majority of
the Fangs.

Bit-players .

The Essnguis represent only about 1.5 percent of the total population of the coun-
try, but most of the ministers, the military chiefs and the ambassadors belong to
the clan of Hongomo. The Bubis from the island of Bioko (formerly Fernando Po)
are represented in the government by the second vice-president. Bulogio Oyo
Riqueza, the minister of agriculture, Emiliano Baule, Borico. and the minister

of health. Cristino Seriche Bioko: it is believed that they are hardly anything
more than bit-players.

However that may be, the political parties have not been able to resume any sort
of activity, in spite of the resolution to this effect adopted in March 1981 in
Geneva by the UN's human Rights Commdttee. But in November 1980 at the time of
his official visit to Paris did not Colonel Teodoro Obiang declare that it was

possible "both to rebuild the country and restore democracy"?

Lethargy

0n the other hand, the chief of state integrated into the army the members of the
sadly famous "Youth in Pace with Macias" who had caused a reign of terror during
the former regime. Symbolic of the very few changes that have come about during
the past 2 years, the Equatorial Guinean “wall of shame," bristling with barbed

wire, erected by Macias around the sumptuous presidential palace in Halabo, is
still standing.

Coloncl Obiang has not restored the economy any more than he has re—established
democracy. According to the report of a technician of the PAO (Food and Agricul-

ture Organisation of the United nations), in January 1981 two-thirds of the popu—
lation had not eaten any meat for at least a month, malnutrition and underfeeding
were widespread. The production of cacao (£0,000 tons before independence) today

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sits somewhere around 8,000 tons, as during the final years of the Macias regine.
The government has returned the confiscated plantations to their former Spanish
owners, but the latter hardly dare risk taking then in hand again and investing
the major sums required for putting then back into good condition. Further-ore
negotiations with Lagos to bring back the 60,000 Nigerian workers who had fled
from Equatorial Guinea under Macias have produced no results.

Money is flowing in, however, from Spain as well as from the European Economic
Conunity and from other Western countries. Madrid has sent off to its former
colony nearly 600 technical advisers. But neither this windfall nor the Spanish
technicians have been able to put back on its feet the economic machinery de-
stroyed by the bloody dictatorship of the "Tiger." A whole pack of businessmen

of shady character has pounced upon the country, whose administration is an inex-
perienced as it is corrupt, according to the testinony of a Nest German technician
recently published in the FRAMKPURTER ALLOWINE ZEITUNG. Everything transpires,
in fact, as if the country were stricken with a kind of lethargy while waiting

for a miracle to happen: the discovery, of course. of a petroleum deposit, which.
anong other things, would enable Equatorial Guinea. whose monetary unit, the
ekuele, is not convertible, to belong to the Custom and Economic Union of Central
Africa (UDEAC), so far noncomittal, and to end its isolation.

All of the neighboring countries, Cameroon, Gabon and Congo. have struck black
gold, and two laws have just been passed regulating petroleum prospecting, an
undertaking in which Western companies are actively engaged. The West has, in
fact, been the principal beneficiary of the fall of the former regime which was
aligned with the USSR. The two countries which have gained the most are Spain,
which currently supplies 80 percent of the imports. and Morocco, which, after
sending a detachment of Moroccan troops following the 1979 coup d'etat, succeeded
in obtaining the cancellation of recognition by ext-President Macias of the Sa-
haran Democratic Arab Republic.

Exiles

Of all of the movements in exile of opposition to Macias, only ANRD, whose general
secretary is a university nan, professor Eya Chan-a, still raisins to demand that
changes he made at last in a country which has regained only a semblance of free—
don. The 200,000 Equatorial Guineana who had fled from the former regime have,
for the most part, felt up to now that it is preferable not to return.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9698
(250: 4719/1588

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

DEILLINGS NEAR MAYOIMBA, IDPEZ REVEAL 011.
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French 4 Sep 81 pp 2282-2283

[Text] During exploratory and evaluative projects. Elf Gabon has just drilled two

promising wells. indicated a stateeent released by the nationalized conany Elf
Aquitaine on 26 August.

The first. the Moubenga Marine exploratory well. located 70 kilo-eters south of
Mayoumba, passed through sandstone permeated with hydrocarbons at around 2960 meters
in the Dentale forution. A test conducted at the wellhead yeilded an oil flow
of 43S n3/day. Additional study will be required to clarify the value of this dis.

covery. The well is located in the Paka Marine license area which is 100 percent
held by Elf Gabon.

The second, the Konzi Marine Mo 3 test well. located 65 kilo-eters from the Lopez
cap, has confirmed that the structure is of interest by passing through about thirty
meters of sandstone permeated with oil between 1080 and 1160 aeters. Tests will

be conducted at the wellhead. This drilling location is in the Pongara Marine

license area for which there is an exploration and shared production contract between
the Gabonese governaent on the one hand. and the nationalised coapany Elf Aquitaine
(70 percent) and Elf Gabon (30 percent) on the other.

The last discovery aade by Elf Gabon was at the beginning of August (MARCHES TROPI-

CAUX ET MEDITERRAMEENS 7 Aug 81 p 2058). Elf Gabon was operating for the Elf Gabon
(50 percent) / Mitsubishi Petroleum Developnent Comany (50 percent) partnership.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cia 1981.

9693
CSI: 6719/398

23

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

BONGO'S REPORTED DMAb—Preaident Bongo made it a point to deny to the French
Government that he is atte-pting to achieve a rapprochement with the United

States, according to the information published by AFRIQUB-ASIE. He affirmed to

the French Enbassy in Libreville that "these are ramblings of a nagaaine that
hates ne..." But the Gabonese president forgot to mention to his French colleagues
that he had invited two high officials fron the CIA to cone to Libreville for
"consultation." "If I no longer have Col Robert here (the former French aabaaaador
in Libreville, previously a lee-her of the SD30! [Internal Intelligence and Counter-
espionage Service], accredited by Giscard and recalled by Hitterrsnd) and if the
SAC [Civil Action Service] is abandoning ne. I lust, of course, look elsewhere,"
he reportedly confided to his friends. And what vould be better, Mr President,
than Reagan's secret agents? [Text] [Paris AnIQUE-ASIB in French No 249, 28

Sep 81 p 28] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afriqne-Aeie]

CSO: 4719/77

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

to the govern-eat once again at the end of Auguat to sign a cultural agreement with
the Soviet governmnt. The appeal vaa Iade by the aeaociation'e aecretary general,
It. Opare Abahio, before the departure of 28 atudenta for the Soviet Union. K. Opare
Ahabio noted that the agreeaent on the baeia of which the atudente had obtained
study grants for the Soviet Union waa not an official one. we laat agreement at a
governmental level datea froa Nkruaah tiaea and haa been abrogated, without ever
having been renewed, after the 1969 military coup d'etat. [Text] [Paria news
1110le ET Murmurs in French No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2386]

DELEGATION ro DPRKnA lo-oenber Ghanaian delegation headed by Joaeph Rilfrid Boateng.
deputy niniater of agriculture, left at the and of Auguat for Pyongyang in North
Korea to participate fro. 26 to 31 September in a amoeiu- on food and agricultural
production in developing countriea. [Excerpt] [Paria mucus TROPICAUX 31' -lm-
MNBENS in French No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2386]

PRC menus "mum-ﬁne“ techniciana engaged in the Afife irrigation project
threatened at the beginning of Septednr to withdraw froa the project if the local
traditional chiefa continued to encourage pilfering and depradation on the aite of
the project. A author of peraona have already been arreated and the project itaelf
has been put under police aurveillance. [Text] [Paria HARCBBS TROPICAUX B‘l‘ MEDITER-
RANEENS in French No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2386]

cso: 4719/66

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI,USE(HVLY

GUINEA

NIGERIAN FISHING. CULTURAL COOPERAIION. MINING COOPERATION
Paris NARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBENS in French 4 Sep 81 p 2276

[Text] On 28 August. at the completion of the constitutive session of the Guinea-
Nigeria commission, Guinea and Nigeria signed two agreements to cooperate in the
areas of culture and of fishing. These agreements were signed by Mr. Ismael Toure.
Guinean minister of mines and geology. and by Hrs. Adenike Bbun Oyagbola, Nigerian
federal minister of the Plan.

The two delegations also examined the possibilities for cooperation in the areas
of mining, animal husbandry and agriculture. as well as the possibility of Nigeria
supplying crude oil and petroleum products to Guinea.

Nigeria. which is building a huge steelmaking complex (to be operational in 1983
with a production goal of 3.5 million metric tons of steel) is already associated
with Guinea and with other partners in the Guinea Hifergui-Nimba project in which
it has a 13.5 percent interest. or the largest share except for the State of Guinea's

50 percent interest. Hr. Ismael Toure has announced that Nigeria's participation
in this project will be increased on 16 September.

The Hifergui-Nimba project. which should be launched this year. involves the mining
of a high content iron deposit at Mount Nimba (southeast Guinea) whose reserves

are estinated at 2 billion metric tons. The first exports of iron are through the
Liberian mineral port at Buchanan are planned for 1986.

The Nigerian government is also involved in the Guinea Uranium project, which should
be underway on 1 November, and holds 25 percent of one of the two companies formed
for this purpose.

Finally. Nigeria has a 10 percent share of capital in the Ayekoye project. This

project involves the mining of a 500 million metric ton bauxite deposit in northwest
Guinea and the onsite processing of the bauxite into aluminum at first (1 million

metric tons per year to start). and then the production of l50.000 metric tons of
aluminum per year. The project also includes construction of two hydroelectric

dams on the Konkoure River.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9693
680: 6719/398

26

INJR‘OFIICIAI.lEﬂ£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

BRIEFS

AUSTRALIAN DIM!) PARTICIPATION-~11» Australian comany Bridge Oil Limited. which

is involved in petroleum and mine prospecting. has just secured a 45 percent share

of the 8 10.91 million in an alluvial diamond mining project in Guinea. The Austral-
ian treasurer indicated on 21. August that the partners in the Australian company,
based in Sydney. would be the government of Guinea which will have a 50 percent
interest, and two foreign companies. Simonius Vischer of Switzerland and the Industrial
Diamond Company Limited with headquarters in London. each with 2.5 percent. According
to the Bridge Oil Germany. the alluvial deposit contains diamonds (gems) and gold.
Production should begin at the end of 1983 and should reach 500.000 carats per year

in 1985. Under the terms of the agreement. 8 55 million will be invested in machines
and equipment. [Text] [Paris HARCllES TROPIGAUX B‘l‘ animus in French 6 Sep

Bl p 22710] I [mmm‘n Dene Karen: at Gie Paris 1981] 9693

can: (019/398

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINFA-BISSA

sum

FRENCH AGRICULTURAL AID—France has granted Guinea-Bissau the amount of S l11110n
French francs for agricultural projects in the Bafata and Calm areas in the
eastern part of the country. The agreuent was signed in Bissau on 8 September
between Mr Robbin, French charge d'affaires and Avito Jose da Silva, minister of

rural development of Guinea-Bissau. [Text] [Paria means TROPICAUX Er
mnmmnzns in French No 1871. 18 Sep 81 p 2380]

C80: l0719/32

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICHWNCJA1.USE<DNLY

MOZAMBIQUE

NEEDS, EXPANSION 0F BEIRA POkT DETAILED
Baris HARCEES TROPICAUX IT MEDITERRANBBNS in French 28 Aug 81 p 2235

[Text] The port of Beira. constructed in a difficult area at the center of Mozam-
bique's coast. quickly proved itself the country's second port. and the first port
for the southern region's interior. It serves. in fact. four central Mozambique
provinces-~Sofa1a. Hanica. Tete and Zambezia--and five other African countries--

Malawi. Zimbabwe. Zaire. Botswana and Zaabia-which is the reason for its importance
to the economy of the country and of the entire region.

The construction of the port of Beira was closely linked to the colonization process
in the English-speaking countries of the southern region. For the colonies of South-
ern Rhodesia. Northern Rhodesia. and for Nyasaland (now Malawi). beira constituted

the quickest access to the ocean and. consequently. the most profitable from the

point of view of transportation charges for products intended for export. The advant-

age remains the same today for these countries which are now independent;ﬁstresees
APP.

Given the port's privileged location. Mozambique authorities feel its development
is essential. The channel entrances must be dredged and excavated to attain suffi-
cient depth for large tonnage ships. The existing channels will not accommodate
25.000 HI ships loaded to full capacity. 0n the other hand. work is in progress
to improve current conditions and to develop the port‘s capacity. In fact. the
future of independent Zimbabwe allows reconsideration of the port of Beira's true
international role.

Thus, a dock which will accommodate large tonnage ships and petroleum tankers. which
should put into port at beira for 18-day periods. is nearing completion. Next to

this dock, which will have multiple uses. there will be a container storage area
-and covered storage amounting to almost 3.000 square meters.

Construction of a fishing pier and a repair dock is also in progress and almost
completed. Eventually. a cannery. a fish meal plant. a refrigerated warehouse for
processing shrimp. as well as a fish oil plant will be built and the infrastructure
required for production, equipment. handling and administration will be established.

Plants for processing coal and a pipeline for neighboring Zimbabwe complete the
panorama of installations with which the port of Beira is equipped. For 1982, an

increase in port traffic of 138 percent over 1972 is expected; the best year the
port will have had to date. In 1992. this percentage would increase to 260 percent.

29

FIN!(NWH(JAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this purpose. a Dutch consulting company. Nedeco. is currently studying the
possibility of dredging and excavating the channels. They feel that at first. over
the short tern. 40,000 HT ships loaded to full capacity will be able to enter the

port-of Beira. and that. over the medium tern. 75.000 HT ships will be able to put
into port there.

According to the port director. Mr. Rui Ponseca, the investments which must be made

for port equipment. and particularly for widening the berthing areas. should corre-

spond, over the medium term. to the requirements of international traffic and to
modern standards.

From these statements it may be deduced that. like the port of Maputo (HARCBES TROPICAUX
ET HEDITBRRANEBNS No 1867 21 Aug 81 0 2179), the port of Beira must actively prepare

itself to retain its traditional users and to attract nev ones. particularly in
the young neighboring republic of Zimbabwe.

Quarters close to the port sector are optimistic and go so far as to consider Beira

as the best port in the country. taking into account the level of organization and
productivity attained over the past few years.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9693
050: 6719/398

30

FOR‘OFFKIAI.USE(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

momma:

BRIEFS

HACHBL HAY VISIT PARIS-An ilportant econonic egreeunt between Maputo and Paris
is being negotiated and could be signed within the next few days. Moreover, it
is possible that President Senora Hachel will visit President Hitterrand before
the end of the year. It is known that, following President Aristides Pereira,
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos will nest with President Mitterrand in Paris
on 15 October. The Elysee attributes particular inportance to the visit by
President dos Santos because of the continued occupation of Angolan territory
by South African troops and also because of its concern to find a solution for
the iwasse reached by the "contact group" on the Ila-ibisn issue. As is known.
the Iain reason for this iqaeee is the support granted by the white House to
the racist South African Government. [Text] [Paris AnIQUE-ASIB in French No
2109, 28 Sep 81 p 28] [mmmah 1981 Afrique-Asie]

CSO: 4719/77

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

all sales of uranium decided on during the first 6 nonths of 1981, the authorities
confirmed their resolution to snke consonplace trade in a highly strategic product.
Deliveries to Libya increased six tines (1,212 tone as coIpar-d with 200 in 1980)
and an initial purchase by Iraq (100 tone) was recorded. whereas these two countries
have been blacklisted, in particular by the United States which, invoking nonprolif-
eration, would like to prohibit the third world states free access to nuclear energy,
even to the atoe bomb. The position of President Seyni Kountche is clear: "Ne are
selling to any custoner who, while accepting our prices, satisfies the purchase
conditions set by the international emission in Vienna." The loading of blue
barrels full of ore is carried out in broad daylight at the airports of Nianey end
Agadez or in the port of Cotonou (Benin). lbreover, the quantities which will be
sold to each of the custoners is known in advance, by decree. Thus for exports
which will be delivered this year: France will purchase 2,293 tone (as conpared
with 1.364 in 1980 or 67 percent of total sales); Libya. 1,212 tons (25 percent);
Japan, 816 tone (1? percent); Spain, 300 tone (6 percent); the PRC, 125 tone

(3 percent) and Iraq 100 tone (2 percent). In total: (0,846 tons for 1980. In
fact, to boycott some purchaser or other according to the whine of western diplonacy
would be tantamount for the Nigerien Government to losing control of the receipts
of foreign exchange vital for the pursuit of economic developnent [Text] [Paris
JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1080, 16 Sep 81 p 31] [comzm-r, ng “rig“. cgupJn
1981)

JAPANESE URANIUM EXPLORATION WuA Japanese coupeny, the Power Reactor and
Nuclear Fuel Developeent Corporation [PNC]. signed on 9 Septeebsr in Niansy a draft
agreenent with the Nigerian Office of Mineral Resources [mm] for the exploration
and exploitation of a new uraniu- deposit. The mam-m association is to start
soon its exploration in Agades Departnent (northern Sahara). on the In Adrar site.
The draft agreenent was signed for the Nigerian side by the sinister of lines.

Annou Hahanane, the director of 01mm, Bani Router-bi, and by the director of the
PRC, Hikio Isetani. It stipulates that the Japanese coepany will finance the '
exploration and installations at the rate of 600 eillion CPA francs for the next

2 years and an additional 600 eillion CPA francs for the fourth year. Japan is
already active in Niger in the exploration and exploitation of uraniu in particular
through the Overseas Uranit- Resources Develop-ant [0031)], which holds 25 percent

of the capital of the Akouta Mining Comany [W]. one of the two large Nigerian
uranium exploitation enterprises. with the Air Region lining Coepany [MIR].

Japan has purchased in Niger 816.6 tons of uraniun since the beginning of the year.
[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET norms in French No 1871. 18 Sep 81

p 2383] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Noreux at Cie Paris 1981]

080: 6719/29 32

muséonu
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

931110an PRICES-obespite the official denials of widespread infatuation in the
Heat concerning unofficial proposals of a reduction on the order of 3 dollars per
barrel made by Nigeria, it appears that this information is correct. It has been
announced, indeed, at the saritise exchange of London that shipping orders issued
to tankers transporting Nigerian crude increased at the beginning of the week of
10 to 16 August. This increase coincided, the brokers esphasited, with the infor-
mation according to which Nigeria had reduced its sale price. During the past
weeks, the loading of crude fron Nigeria had become rare. The Anericsn Colpany
Amoco, of whoa: it was thought that it had stopped buying oil from Nigeria, was
mom those issuing new shipping orders and proceeded on 11 August to transport
59,000 tons to the United States. On the other hand, during a press conference
dedicated to Nigeria's econoaic situation, professor mneul adozien, president
Shagari's econoaic advisor, declared that "the standardization of crude oil prices
will remedy the glut on the world crude oil sarket." This indirectly approved the
proposal for the standardization of prices node by Saudi Arabia. Professor Bdosien
also inplied that Nigeria could be led to accept a decrease in its sale price,
adding that officials did not think it possible to return to the level of produc-
tion that existed before the glut, in other words, about 2 million barrels per
day, nor to the prices, and consequently, to the revenues following fros then.
[Text] [Paris HANGERS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1867, 21 Aug 81

p 2167] [COPYRIGHR Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 9670

NE" OIL DISCOVBRIBSm-‘mo oil companies, Nobil (U.S.A.) and A61? (Italy) recently
discovered in the Delta region of the Niger, in the eastern part of Nigeria, two
important fields of hydrocarbon, amounted Hr Lawrence Also, new director of the
NNPC [Nigerian National Petroleun Co.?]. Hr Aau, who was addressing the partici-
pants at the 5th international synposiu of the Society of Petroleun Engineers at
Harri, oil town in the State of East Bendel, specified, according to the Nigerian
press agency NAN (official) that the Mobil field presumably contains 1 billion re-
coverable barrels. Hr Anu did not give any details about Agip's field which he
qualified as sizable. [Text] [Paris MARCEBS 1110le ET HEDITERRANBENS in
French No 1867, 21 Aug 81 p 2167] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981]
9670

C80: 4719/1005

33

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UGANDA

BRIEFS

DP ACCUSES covmemnrhe Democratic Party in opposition (DP) accused the govern-
nent and nilitary officials on 29 August of taking advantage of "isolated" attacks
against governantal installations to cause damage to the Ugandan people. "Thess
isolated acts of violence. sometimes carried out even by aployees of the govern-
ment or the armed forces, serve as a pretext for the bad treatment against the
Ugandan people," said the HUNNANZI, the opposition's English language newspaper.
The government's reprisals against some guerrillas are forcing nany Ugandans to
"live like nonads" to escape these reprisals, the newspaper adds, and goes on to
say that these actions "caused the death of thousands of Ugandan civilians and the
destruction of their property. [Tat] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX er HEDITERRANEENS
in French No 1869, lo Sep 81 p 2285] [COPYRIGll'h Rene Horeux et Cie 1981] 9670

CSO: 4719/1005

3!.

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

BRIEFS

CANADIAN REFUGEE AID—The Canadian government has decided to grant $500,000 in aid
to the refugees settled on the Zairian territory. This aid, drawn from the funds
of the Canadian Program for amnitarian Aid, is part of a total grant of 22.10
million dollars that Canada has pledged to the African relief program. This aid
will be allocated mainly to the areas of housing, food distribution and health.
According to sources close to the UN High Comission for Refugees (BCR), Zaire

has given asylm to nearly 600,000 Ugandan. Angolan. Rwandan. Burundian, and Zambian
refugees. [Text] [Paris “ARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITWS in French No 1869. lo
Sep 81 p 2283] [COPYRIClﬂ'z Rene horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 9670

MINE INVESTMENTSnAccording to Zaire's General Comission of Planning, the total
cost of the public investment program in the mine sector for the 1981-1983 period
comes to 2,365.7 million zaires. of which 1,869.6 million zaires in foreign currency.
The self-financed portion of the program amounts to 518.5 nillion zairea, of which
76.2 million is in foreign currency. hternal sources should provide 1,787 million
zaires in foreign currency. Some mining companies, like the General Quarry and Ore
Company (Cecaminea), the Bahranga Mining Company (Ribs), the Kivu Mining Company
(Soninki), Kilo-Hoto (gold). and the Zairetain Company [pewter] will benefit from
new financial contributions provided for by the program. The coat of Gecamine's
3-year program. in this particular from“. comes to 1.956 million zaires. of
which 1,566 million zsirea is for the "£620" program and 390 million is for the
"P.470." [Text] [Paris HARCBBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1869, la
Sep 81 p 2283] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 9670

650: 4719/1005

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

NEXT FE" MONTHS SEEN AS CRITICAL FOR LEADERSHIP
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 267, 31 Aug-13 Sep 81 pp 18, 19

[Text] The government, say the union members, must not place
the responsibility for its economic and political problem on
the ZCTU [Zambia Congress of Trade Unions].

In Lusaka on this Monday morning in late July at 7 o'clock. the Zambians did not
get their news bulletin as usual. In fact, President Kaunda used this prime time
to broadcast a 30-minute speech. Though most Zambians were still in bed listening
to the morning news that cold morning. they were forced to get up and listen very
attentively, for the president was announcing the arrest of some of the moat eni-
nent and controversial officials in the country—high-ranking authorities of the
Zambia Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU). The arrested officials are the president,
Frederick Chiluba; his general secretary, Newstaad limbs; the assistant general
secretary, Chitalu Sampa, and the president-deputy of the Miners' Union of Zambia,
Timothy "alamba.

The reason for the arrests, he explained to his shocked and still sleepy-eyed
compatriots, was having incited the workers to break social peace and ultimately
overthrow the government. This decision is made to insure social peace and her-
mony in the country. President Kaunds accused the leaders of having urged the
workers to carry out wildcat strikes which have practically paralyzed the mining
sector in Zambia during these past 6 months.

Torn Flag

Up to now 205,681 working days have been lost in wildcat strikes. and these ille-
gal work standstills have been disastrous for this sector of the already ailing
economy. In 1979 there were 46 illegal strikes involving 10,866 workers, and this
year the number of strikes has doubled and these have involved 21,921 workers.

These past 6 months have seen the materializing of no less than 86 illegal strikes
involving 46,399 workers.

The seeming purpose of all of these strikes was the improvement of work conditions
and salary increases. President Kaunda accused the leadership of the workers'
movement of trading, for personal purposes, upon the economic problems which Zam-
bia is experiencing. he explained that instead of informing the workers of the

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

real reasons for the situation and encouraging them to follow the correct proce-
dure for making their demands, the leaders chose to slander the leading party,
the UNIP and its leadership. "They consider that the solution to this problem is
to change the political leadership and the political and economic ideology. It
is for that reason that they are prodding the innocent workers. It is for that
reason that they have not condemed the strikes, which have taken place without
any real motive," the broadcast message said.

To put a stop to the vandalism which has characterized moat of the strikes, the
president has ordered the police to intervene quickly and to see to it, whenever
necessary, that law and order are respected. He was particularly disappointed by
the daring and the lack of patriotism of the striking miners in the city of Kitwe,
who recently damaged the official Hercedes Benz of the Minister of Labor, Basil
Kabwe, who had rushed off to the Copperbelt to persuade the workers to return to
the mine. The miners jeered at the minister and insulted him, and tore up the
national flag—a symbol of the nation's unity-which was installed on his car.

President Kaunda questioned whether or not the improvement of work conditions and
salary increases were the reasons why the union leaders had asked the workers to
strike, saying that in fact their objectives were political and that they were
trying to use the workers to attain them.

The four arrested leaders are a part of the group of 17 leaders who were expelled
from the UNI? last January for having objected to the new system of local govern-
ment. None has returned to the party, even though the central comittee of the
UNIP invited then to do so last March.

The other leaders did not remain inactive following the government‘s decision.

The ZCTU held an emergency meeting of general council shortly after the announce-
ment of the arrests, and decided to require the unconditional release of their
colleagues. They launched an appeal for an international committee to investigate
the causes of the strikes and the faulty understanding which permanently exists
between the workers' movement and the government.

The ZCTU stated that the independent investigating comittee should include repre-
sentatives from the International Labor Organization (11.0) and the Organization
for African Unity (OAU) and other agencies of the United Nations.

The worker leaders considered the arrest of their comrades "a betrayal" because
they had been thinking that the two sides were at that time coming close to a
meeting of the minds. The government, they say, must not take the ZCTU as a
scapegoat to explain its economic and political problems, and they warned it that
if the four leaders were not released, they could set off a general strike through-

out the national territory.

While the two parties were engaged in discussion. the mining companies, Nchanga
Consolidated Copper Mines and Roan Copper Mines, which until they had kept quiet,
were making an arbitrary decision which, at the last minute, gave the signal for
a final confrontation. The two firm, which had lost about $35 million during
the last strike, which lasted 7 days, announced the dismissal of S90 miners.
Before being laid off, 825 miners received one last warning. A spokesman for the

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

two companies let it be known that the dislisaed workers were laid off not only
because of their participation in the last strike, but also because they had long
since accumulated marks against themselves in terms of disciplinary action.

"Struggle to the End"

This aggravation can only further erasperate the union leaders who were not con-
sulted before the dismissals, and arouse the anger of the workers.

It being clear that the government will not allow a committee to investigate the
strikes, the die is cast for a total showdown. The latest reports tron Copperbelt
indicated that the miners were waiting for their end-of-thedmonth pay to go on
strike again as a sign of their solidarity with the arrested persons.

The dismissal of their comrades gives then an even stronger reason for not working.
The next strike action, if and when it gets under way, is likely to be long. It
is said that the miners have sent their wives and children back to the villages,
and that they are staying to "struggle to the end."

The evolvement of the disturbing goverunent-worker relationships having reached a
linit and Zambie's unity is seriously threatened. Other workers. teachers and
railroad employees also have already threatened to go on strike immediately to
stand behind their demands for housing and other advantages.

On a continent where changes in government are generally not constitutional, espe-
cially in the case of single-party systems, the coming months are going to be very
hard and crucial for the Zambian leaders. The last-minute cancellation of the

trip which President Kaunda was supposed to make to London for the marriage of
Prince Charles and Lady Diana shows that the situation is serious.

The four worker leaders were arrested by security officers at dawn on this Monday,
27 July, practically the day planned for the president's departure for London.

COPYRIGﬂT: 1981 Afrique-Asie.

9498
C50: 4719/383

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

ETHANOL PROJECT SEEN AS ENERGY SAVING, mommy mmn
Paris APRIQUE-ASIE in French No 267, 31 Aug-l3 Sep 81 p 19

[Text] Zambia, which is totally dependent on imported petroleum for meeting its
fuel needs. has a choice between different means of reducing its bill for importing
hydrocarbon, which at present amounts to nearly $200 million a year. It can take
very strict measures for saving fuel, as neighboring Horambique has done, look for
other sources of cheaper energy, or. better yet, do both things at the same time.

In neighboring countries, in fact, it is forbidden to drive on Sunday, and gasoline
is sold there only on certain days at specific times. The amount of fuel sold to
consumers is likewise limited.

where gasoline rationing is concerned, Zambia has known what to expect since the
days of the unilateral declaration of independence from neighboring Rhodesia
(today Zimbabwe) and the decision to take punitive action against that country
in terms of petroleum.

The Zambian government now envisages the possibility of producing ethanol on the
basis of raw materials from the biomass which would be added to gasoline to reduce

import costs.

The implementation of the first "alcohol" project has been entrusted to Indeco
Ltd., one of the entirely state-owned affiliates of the gigantic Zambia Industrial
and Mining Corporation (Zimco).

During these past few years Indeco has devoted itself to setting up a series of
new industries designed to contribute to the national policy of rapid industriali-
zation and import substitution.

The feasibility study on ethanol production which will result in the national
project was entrusted to Jager Associates of Zimbabwe. This choice among six in-
ternational companies which had submitted bids was approved by the Zambian govern-
ment and the Horld Bank which is to finance the study. Jager has a broad experi-
ence in central Africa, especially in Zimbabwe and Mali. where it has undertaken
to carry out ethanol production projects. Zimbabwe is already mixing ethanol
with its gasoline.

The production of ethanol from raw materials of the biomass. like molasses, sugar
cane and cassava, for energy purposes is already a going thing in a number of
countries, especially Brazil.

39

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Now Zasbia has enough agricultural potential to produce alcohol on a large scale,
especially fro- nolasses (about 60,000 tons a year), which up to now has been used
principally for food reserves and. in part. exported to neighboring countries.

The purpose of the Jager study will be to determine which of these two uses of
nolasses is the more profitable.

It is thought that it will be are advantageous for the country to devote nolasaes
to the production of ethanol than to use it as at present. The nixture of ethanol
with gasoline will cause Zambia to achieve substantial savings on its bill for in-
porting petroleun.

In this country the anomt of ethanol aimed with gasoline will probably be between
12 and 20 percent, which will produce savings in the sane percentage on the bill

for inorts .

It is believed that the study will be finished in 2 nonths, following which finan-
cial arrangements and an ilplenentation plan will be worked out. The conpletion
of the project could cone about 2 years after the signing of an agree-eat on equip-
nent and machinery.

The International Finance Corporation and the World Bank have already shown an
interest in asking a financial contribution to this project.

Besides savings in foreign exchange, the new technology will undoubtedly create
new job opportunities. and perhaps will unite possible, at a later date, the expan-
sion of the sugar cane fields.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie .

9498
cso: 4719/383 sun

‘0

0-“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY