FOR OFI-ICIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10469

20 Apr" 1982

Sub4Schoron Africa Report

FOUO No. 769

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms publications contain inforsmtion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, 'but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPBS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. there no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ution was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itans are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the {1.8. Goverment.

GOPYRICBT LAVS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WSHIP 0P
IWIERIALS “PRODUCED BEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMENATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

P000 N0. 769

CONTENTS
INTER-APRICAN AFFAIRS

Jean-Baptiste Douaeng Explains Plan for Feeding Africa
(Jean-Baptiste DouIeng Interview; APRIQUB-ASIB, 15-28 Pev 82

CHAD

Cookouni Explains Opposition to DA!) Resolution During Press
Conference _ _
(Goukoulli meddei; AFRIQUE'ASIE’ 15-28 “It 82) o o o s s e s s e s s s o

Clarification of 0A!) Role Possibly Attained
(Antonia Blis; AFRIQUB-ASIB, 15-28 Feb 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -

Departure of Libyans, Arrival of 0M! Force Described
(Tanguy Loyaance; AFRIQUE-ASIB, 15-28 Feb 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

NAMIBIA

Negotiations on Namibia 'Close To Breakdovn‘
(Denis Herbatein; THE GUARDIAR, 26 Mar 82) .. .. . . . ... ... . .. .

ZAIRE

Economic. Pinancial Situation at End of 1981 Analyzed
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEERS, various dates) .......

ZAMBIA

Briefs
Dispute with South-Africa Regarding Pontoon-Bridge
JEAN-BAPTISTB some mums mm FOR panama AFRICA
Paris marque-15min French 15-28 Feb 82 pp 17-20

[Interview with Jean-Baptiste Douaeng by Henri Delahaie: "Bow Africa Can
Feed and Develop Itself")

[Text] He is a farmer, a Frenchman who, as he himself says,
"never went to school"--s footnote of history. He is a

man who for half a century has been a camunist without .
any break in continuity, who has "seen everything," who from
the time he was an adolescent decided to be a nan who "was
ﬁornerly poor," and in fact became the nan when his de-
tractors call “the Red Billionaire," which aromas one's
curiosity.

But when you become aware that this Frenchan from Toulouse,
who has set up one of the world's leading cooperative socie-‘b
ties, Interagra, is fascinated by Africa and its problns,
you are in contact with history, history which is capable
of changing the direction of History with a capital 8.

You are not surprised by anything in this man's remarks:

"Crow as much corn in Africa as in the United States"--
"Hake 100 billion dollars available 50: use in African
development.” The sphere of his activities on the African
continent covers Nigeria, Congo, Madagascar, Angola. and
Benin, but it also covers Algeria, Libya, Ethiopia, Hom-
bique, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Bin-midi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda,
Gabon, etc. 1»

He is a man who "targets" capitalist coupanies all over

the world. But he is also a visionary who intends to con-
tribute to-if not actually pronote-the structural changes
necessary for development and self-sufficiency in Africa.
Henri Delahaie net with him.

[Question] "How can Atrics feed itself?" It is no secret to anyone that
that question interests you, and that through your various con'panies you
play a role on that continent which is not insignificant, a role which does

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not in any way pertain to the "assistance" proposed--even if not actually
granted-—by several more or less official bodies. But is it possible, in your
opinion, to respond to that crucial question without considering structural
answers rather than answers limited to isolated objectives? '

[Answer] The issues you sention elicit two counts. First, Africa has
been subjected to colonial exploitation, which means exploitation concen-
trated in coastal areas where merchants were concerned with bringing in
goods, carrying them off to somewhere else. and the slave trade. But you
know about this. Second, there is the industrial boom caused by oil which
has taken place in the countries which have sons, the oil being ninly off-
shore in the whole western gulf area. The result has been an incredible rural
exodus, whether in Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Angola, or Congo, with cities of
300,000 now having a million or more. And, moreover, the people living in
these cities have neither food-sand the vitamins which food contains and
which are essential for life-nor housing.

In terms of the African nsrket's viability, there are three kinds of vital ..
nutriments for these population groups: bread, fish, and poultry—and
sometimes rice, but it is three times more expensive than bread.

Therefore, my first reaction has been to build silos, mills, bakeries for
large cities, poultry farms, and refrigerated warehouses. and to organise
fishing—besides, this fits in with the market-finding vocation of my

European cooperatives. I feel that this was the only way to act quickly.

[Question] With the agreenent of the countries concerned.

[Answer] Of course I only engage in these activities when governments
correspond to what I believe to be the true reality as far as Africa is con-
cerned and when those governments are in agreement with my doing so. And

I always do it in association with than, never with a setup of a capitalist
or neocolonialist nature.

But these installations have to be "managed." Most countries do not have
the means for that. Then financing these installations is a major initia-
tive: they are all expensive items, and with a few exceptions the colonial-
izing process never concerned itself with tha. That is the first activity
to get under way.

of course, people often make the argunent that this activity risks wiping
out the food crops of African rural populations. That is wrong. We do
not have it in mind to act in such a way as to bring that about. We are
trying to do the opposite in the countries involved in order to grow what

is lacking and supply what cannot be grown in then. Unfortunately, these
countries cannot grow wheat. But they can grow rice-dike in Madagascar--
and corn--that is the nsin item of consumption in Rigeria, Osngo, and Angola.
They can grow many things; and when local conditions do not stand in the way
and when the state permits, we try to organize groups of producers along
cooperative lines and to pronote the steady expansion of food crops and, to
the extent possible, to encourage supply via local production.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

All of this is a matter of great agency for these countries. I would add
that if we were not doing this, it would be detensined solely by importing
activity—class-oriented importirguimporting which in the and would feed
only expatriates in the industrial and oil-producing areas who have much
greater supplies of available financial assets than do the country‘s other
residents. This is part of "colonization by papered children." For
staple, in Gabon there is an "Elf city" which is completely cut off fras
the rest of the country, and nobody objects.

All right, that is the first idea. We are trying to set that up. But tine
is needed, and a lot of money. And we feel that to the atent contractors
and goverments are allowed a free hand, and whatever their good faith,
whenever they are going to have to secure financing, with credit insurance
covered by foreign trade insurance companies like Barnes for Germany and
OOl-‘ACB [French Insurance Company for Foreign Trade] for trance, or with
American credits, or with the European Omission, then they will often be
led to choose priorities other than those which I have mentioned. This is
because they will need housing and buildings for goverment offices. This
is because they will want to build a dam to check the flow of water which
there is no certainty of using due to the lack of upriver and downriver
irrigation systass. Therefore, these are expenditures which risk ending 11)
jmt in the erection of useless cathedrals, which unfortunately is sunetimes

the case.

Finally, these who determine what these large road and railway investments
are directed toward use than first to move the industrial proaucts of these
countries to credit-worthy countries.

[Question] Neocolonialist aid, in point of fact.

[Answer] I think aid is always potentially neocolonialist, especially since
food aid in most cases is a bunch of words and slogans. It gets lost, it

is misappropriated, it is sometimes not made good use of, and at other

tines it is resold through lines of distribution which are always multi-
national. That is the arrangement. And there is where I strongly note our
desire to rectify history, even though I am aware that human actions are
only infiniteainal in that rectification of history.

[mestion] In view of what you have just described, what do you propose?

[Answer] Here is my plan. My plan is to help African countries create an
African Development Fund. But who-'is able to do that? A country of 700,000
like Gabon, which extracts oil at a l3-million-ton rate, is economically
well off and is a relatively developed country. It would not take nuch to
bring it out of the clutches of neocolonialism and help it enter into some
activities of a more progressive nature. That is what I discussed with
President Bongo during a meeting with him.

What would have to be done? The oil companies are omitted to investing
the equivalent of around $10 per atracted barrel in the economy of the

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIA

country where they attract it--above and beyond the taxes they pay to that
country-but they do it on their own responsibility. Which acute to
saying that the companies charge $10 for that which costs than S, or else

they undertake investments which only correspond to their desire to develop
further.

Of course sale scraps come back to the country and its economy. Besides,
in the case of Gabon it is more than scraps—it is real developentn-but

it is for the cities. That is became in Gabon, as in many of Africa's
comtries. nobody is farmirg any more. Agriculture has in effect been pre-
cluded. And yet it is not true that Gahonese land is barren. I will
demonstrate that, if the coxmtry's authorities give me the chance. For my
part, I went there mainly because Gabon has 800 In of coastline not being
used for fishing. I said to myself: there is fishim in Equatorial Guinea,
in Congo, ani“ in Angola. Why not make use of that coastline area? Fishing
is an asset. there are 800 in, and since the ZOO-mile statute I have signed
an agreenent mm the Goverment of Gabon in that connection.

[Question] Thu. is getting us away from your plan.

[Answer] What I. want is for $2 per barrel of oil to be frozen for ear-
marking into a fund which can be called the Pan-African Development Fund-- .
$2 out of the $13 which the companies have to invest, anyway, and which
would be "borrowed" from them and repaid without interest 20 years later.

Let us take the case of Gabon. Thirteen million tons, let us say roughly,10,
multiplied by 7* makes $160 million at $2 a barrel. That is for Gabon alone!
That would be, according to even the most pessimistic asstnption, :a ninimum
of $1.5 billion applied to all of Africa.

That is $1.5 billion for the sole purpose of paying for loans and credits
needed in Africa's development. With that $1.5 billion you will be able to
borrow $100 billion based on the dollar at 15 percent.

The Polish debt being talked about so such is, for example, only $25 billion.
Without considering. South Africa, we are talking about $100 billion for 20
years bought in financial markets without any help from any government and
"managed" via an agreement with the governments or associations that want to
do it--in Europe, or France in particular--do you see?

[Question] But are you alone in associating yourself with these ideas?

[Answer] The representatives of the agricultural cooperatives in Italy,
Spain. France, Portugal, Greece, and Yugoslavia met in Rome 28-29 January
on the initiative of the Economic Bureau of the Agricultural Conittee of
the International Cooperative Alliance, with the participation of CEA
[European Agriculture Confederation], [IPA [International Agricultural

* There are 7 barrels in a ton.

l.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Products Federation], and OOGBCA [the European Economic Co-Iunity's General
Comittee for Agricultural Cooperation]. Along the state-eats they nade,
they approved, along the sane lines as lay thinking, "the idea of an African
Developnent Fund and the comitnsnt to 'aanage' the technical econonic
problems which light be entrusted" to then.

This means that European resources with nobilisat ion capability, agricultural
product ion capability, and a long cooperative tradition, aloof fro- any
corrupt practices of a mltinational nature, would be able to respond to an
invitation of that kind. '

[Question] An invitation mde by whole?

[Answer] Hhat I can tell you for the tiae being is that the Gabones'e
President has agreed to the idea and has publicly declared that he would
seek the agreement of the other African countries. It cannot be nerely a
Gabonese affair. But if it can cone into being, we will co-it all our
capabilities to it.

[Question] But it also involves the connitnent of European capabilities.

[Answer] I have informed the higher authorities of lay country, France, of
these plans. They agree in principle with this general direction since,

like me, they believe that it is a good thing for the purpose of contribut-
ing to African developeent independent of any neocolonialien.

[Question] Do you think that the oil companies will be in agreuent?

[Answer] Let us be frank. The oil coepanies have many things to reproach
themselves for, in Gabon, in Africa, and elsewhere. And I can put several
questions to than to which they would have great difficulty responding.

For their sake, I hope they will not dare to actively oppose us on this ear-
marking. If they were to do so, they had better not forget that they would
be hearing from us concerning their behavior in those countries! besides
which, building this fund would not "stick" them for one cent. .The fund
would prevent the companies froa cheating the countries. It would give the
companies security, after a fashion. As if nothing had happened, we would be
purifying those who are continuing to rob developing countries by coepelling
those parties to pay for developeent assistance. '

[Question] Have you been in contact with other heads of state on this sub-
ject, and what have been their reactions?

[Answer] No. Not yet. Since it is a question of pan-African developnmt,
and the President of Gabon has agreed to it in principle, I did not want
to do that. This natter is between Africans.

[Question] When you speak of Africa, are you talking only about black
Africa or all of Africa?

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I an thinking about all of Africa. It seems to me that North
Africa overall has less need of the fund. But it would be open to everyone.

book at what the ow is. It is a force which I respect; it should fit

its efforts into this dialectical process, because if it wants to go beyond
the politin discussion stage, it can support this project-and the
materialization of this project will be visible and will be African.

[Question] what type of management do you foresee for this fund?

[Answer] It is very simple. It is not a question of Iaking this fund into
a kind of World Bank managed by the Americans. An exaaple of that is
Ghana's needing $10 billion and not being able to borrow it because nobody
in those circles trusts Ghana. The fund I would like to see set up would
be able to borrow that $10 billion itself, from America for maple, and
thus Ghana would be able to borrow it.

[Question] So, in any case this would be a fund with a mltinational calling.

[Answer] of course. Broadly speaking, if you like, along African Third and
Fourth World countries. For the time being, there is no question of seeing
Africa flying to the assistance of South America or Asia. but the fund can
help the Malagasy President do without the IMF and the Mozadaicen President
keep from falling in the hands of that sane IMP. There are the real issues
that present themselves.

[Question] But would this fund be more a' world Bank-type fund or an m-
type fund?

[Answer] It is not for me to give an answer, other than that it is not a
matter of starting up a new Di? going around explaining to countries how
to manage an economy. That would be direct interference in a government's
affairs. That would not be able to work.

But the IMF turns up only when countries are unable to pay. That would not
be the fund's mission. There is a need today in Madagascar to build a road
from Antananarivo to Tamatave because it is a natter of urgency, or to build
a port, or to dredge a harbor in order to get the coffee out-«whatever the
IMP's opinion might be and whatever conditions it night set, financing by the
fund I an talking about would be provided.

[Question] What would the financial conditions be?

[Answer] There would be none. The fund would pay the interest and would
give the money unconditionally. There could be risks of nonpayment, but it
is up to the fund to take those risks if it appears that that is needed to
save the country. but that is a decision which will be node by the fund's
board of directors, which will be required to be made up of representatives
of the various countries that subscribe to the fund. It is of paramount
importance that the fund bring together all African countries-«progressive or
not-with the exception of course of South Africa.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] You do not anticipate that other comtries, non-African countries,
night participate in this fund?

[Answer] If they ask to. Of course, that is the visionary aspect of this
plan, especially with regard to the OPEC countries. "has Saudi Arabia de-
clares that it wants to tasks Sudan its breadhasket, what is that other than
another forts of colonialism, even if it is unintentional? It is not a latter
of covering those countries with these. But this way, Saudi Arabia could

find other 'neans.
[Question] And managing the fund?

[Answer] We--Europe--are the only ones with the capacity for "managing"
this fund, especially in France's case with Hitterrand's favorable Third
World policy, along the lines of an original French-style socialist concep-
tion. That is the only way to prevent the Aaericans or other powers from

occupying African territory.

[Question] But even so, there do exist African funds, an African Development
Bank.

[Answer] Yes, indeed, but where do its funds cone from, and to when is it
useful?

[Question] So there are two dimensions to this plan: a financial dinmion
which is undoubtedly original, but also privileged relationships with certain
countries or certain bodies. -

[Answer] There is no question in Iy view that France sinuld play a rain role
in it. If France can be given the trust to "manage" the fund....

[Question] At the present time you are talking about socialist France. It
might be felt objectively that Africa can in fact gain that confidmce little
by little, what with the new political intentions of the group in power vis-
a-vis the Third World and Africa. But let us imagine that unforeseen cir-
cumstances of history make it such that there is a new dbange of goverment
in France, and that suddenly France, one of the leading spirits of the fund's
management, finds itself with an "old regine"-type of govermsent again.

[Answer] First of all. the cooperatives which I have set up have lived
through all forms of government in France. Besides, I an hoping that the
socialist government in power today will succeed in mining a 35-hour work-
week and 5 weeks of paid vacation the general rule. If a change in govern-
ment occurs, do you think that they will go back on that 35 hours and 5

weeks of paid vacation? What will he done will he done.

[Question] For benefits gained an the domestic plane, certainly. But is
it not riskier in the area of foreign policy?

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Listen. I cannot judge history that is yet to cone. I an fitting
myself into that history in order for gains not to be reversed. I would have
proposed this plan to France. whatever its governnent.

[Question] Is this plan not substantially akin to President Batsiraha'e
proposal at the Nonaligned Conference in Havana advocating South-South
cooperation? And does it not echo the declaration of Cape Verde's President
Pereira at the last conference on the Sahel in Praia, asserting that "aid
cannot ensure Africa's food independence"?

[Answer] Ofrcourse. It is Rstsiraka, and Castro, and Pereira. what I an
seeking is to put what responsible politicians think into concrete fore in
the actual practice of my profession and in my niche of ‘ectivity. But
politics is something that gets discarded in history. Reality, on the other
hand, is a "contraption" which is fashioned step by step. I am a novice in
regard to radar. But that is of interest to every country. Spending $100
billion a year in Africa! -

[Question] That is also a means of hsVing'Africa escape the clutches of
American imperialism.

[Answer] All of Africa, whatever its ferns of government, met be mobilized
by helping it to provide for its complete development, and by steering it
clear of extra burdens of a military nature and steering it clear of a wor-
sening of neocolonization. The fund would not, at any rate, be used to pay
for weapons. Nigeria needs a great deal of money for certain things. Why
should it not make use of this fund? A great idea‘, for example, would be
to grow as much corn in Zimbabwe, Hombique, and Ethiopia as in the United
States. And to feed Nigeria with its own agriculture. Angola, as well. In
Nigeria there will be 150 million people in the year 2000. And in Angola,
an effort of this kind used for development would make it possible to "turn
the corner" on all the problus they are faced with there today and which
have been destabilizing the country for a number of years. Thht would also
force the South Africans to think twice before loosing their bonbs. And as
for Namibia and its genuine independencs--you are dealing with countries
which clain to be arranging a settlement for that independence and which,
objectively speaking, are South African allies. There is an issue.

[Question] But is it out of the question for this fund to call for the
financial participation of the developed countries?

[Answer] "by not call on than if they want to participate? And that does
not in any way change the role of those who want to help in other ways.-

To put it simply, there is the opportunity for arbitrage. And when the Afri-
can countries are told that COPACB is raising its interest rates by one
point, the African credit rates associated with the fund I an talking about
will not be raised. The African countries will be given money for nothing]
Honey taken to be used as a tool hecones a genuine tool, not an instrunent of
exploitation. With this money, the African econonies will be developed in 20

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

years, and the-conditions for real security for Africa will have been estab-
lished. With its own production capacity, Africa will have set itself up

as an enormous credit-worthy market for Europe. For Europe that is an
absolute necessity, since within 20 years Europe will no longer be able to
sell anything to the socialist countries. because the latter will be competi-
tive and will be selling most of the goods they are buying from us today.

And a great number of other countries-«side fros a few emirates.- perhaps-
will not be far from socialise.

L.. -
How are we to fit ourselves into this inescapable evolution of the world?
Day to day, or with a broad and long-term perspective?

Africa is s rich area, close to services offered by Europe, in which there is
little that needs to be done with respect to ports. roads, and railroads.
There is no need for Africans to go fetch the Americans. But if we wait too
long, there will be a different kind of confrontation in 20 years. Whereas
today, the cooperatives for which I provide the impetus and Africa's agricul-
tural arrangements have convergent interests. I believe all this because

I an snti-Halthusian, and because I think it is politically just to nove
toward peace by preventing Africa from being m scene of s pernsnent safari.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

9631
CSO: 4719/612

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GOUKOUNI EXPLAINS OPPOSITION T0 OAU RESOLUTION DURING PRESS CONFERENCE

Paris APRIQUE-ASIE in French No 261, 15-28 Mar 82_pp 12-11.,15
[Goukouni Oueddei's Press Conference; 16 February in Ndjamena]

[Excerpts] The resolution published last 10 February in Nairobi
in the name of a self-styled OAU standing committee on

Chad, and which goes counter to all the decisions made by the
pan-African organization since the last sumit meeting of the
African heads of state last June in the Kenyan capital, has been
perceived in Ndjamena as a veritable declaration of war. It has
startled the country and aroused its fighting spirit to such

an extent that the Chadian leaders themselves have been surprised.

In fact, the injunctions of the standing connittee which, in a
way. were putting pressure on the GUNT [Transitional National
Union Government] to submit its resignation have been perceived
as a blatant interference in the internal affairs of this country,
as an insult to its dignity, its sovereignty, its independence

as well as to those of its goverment who had never appeared

as close to its people as during these days of new trials.

Demonstrations supporting the GUNT and protesting against the
decisions of the OAU standing committee have taken place in
Ndjamena and in provincial towns. Following a meeting organized
in the Chadian capital by the FROLINAT on 16 February, which
turned out to be a highpoint in the mobilization of the people,
the president of the COM held a press conference, large excerpts
of which will be found below. On this occasion, Goukouni Oueddei
answered numerous, sometimes probing, questions from newsmen--
most of whom were Chadian, although some foreigners were also
present; he recalled the genesis of the present conflict, con-
firmed and explained what had happened in Nairobi as well as the
reasons why the GUM asked for the- withdrawal of..th‘e Libyan troops.

As will be seen, Coukouni Oueddei's statements are a good reflection
of the fighting spirit which is now prevailing in Ndjamena and

of the determination it has shown to spare no efforts to master the
situation and, once and for all, be done with Hissein Rabre who

has shown he would destroy his own country, and bring to it war and
suffering.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, the GUNT president's statements will also help in drawing
a profile of this man who in every respect-especially rectitude,
abnegation and the will to struggle for his people-contrasts with
his political opponent.

"As I am talking with you, millions of Chadians are watching us. Therefore, you
have the great honor of being our interpreters with the people, this people who
have suffered so much and been subjected to so much deprivation and injustice,
who have stood by our side during the bitter war years, who were and are still
anxiously waiting for an end to their long tale of suffering and to know what
they can expect in the future. To answer their concerns, the government of which
I am president has adopted an open door policy. This is why, three times in a
single year, the GUN! has accepted to meet with other African states in Nairobi

o

in order to discuss what is an internal problem of Chad."

“Thus, peace was finally restored to all of our national territory. But the Oh“,
manipulated as it was by hidden forces, felt that the neo-colonial order in Africa
was being threatened by the presence of those [these are, of course, the Libyan
troops] who, at our request, had come to help us put down the rebellion. It sub-
jected us and our friends to intolerable pressures. In order not to place our
Libyan friends in a bad position, we asked them to put an end to their presence
here. But before that, we had suggested that other African countries should re-
place the Libyan troops and fill the vacuum created by their withdrawal since our
army was not yet fully integrated. And while the OAU was dodging the issue, the
rebels, who were receiving subsidies and weapons from pro-imperialist states, have
gained ground."

"Rather than taking measures to remedy this situation. the DAB took pretext of
logistic difficulties and decided to convene a summit meeting to discuss these
questions. The outcome was the November 1981 meeting in Nairobi where the Chadian
government and the OAU signed documents concerning the Inter-African Peace Force

in Chad. In agreement with the general secretary of the GAO, we had terminated'
the activities of said standing committee on Chad, the existence of which was not
supported by any legal text of the pan-African organization; therefore, in all good
faith, we assumed that we had definitely ended what had been a legal aberration.
However, before the last meeting-~that of 9 Pebruary-we had expressed reservations
which we hoped had been understood and, subsequently, we went to the Kenyan capital
to meet there with representatives of the countries who were actually contributing
to the pan-African force and of those who had accepted to send observers to Chad.
We were therefore very much surprised to notice the presence, in the conference
room, of representatives of countries which did not belong to either of the two
categories!"

“we then refused to discuss under these conditions. No OAU document provided for

a standing committee on Chad; therefore, that committee had no power to discuss

our problems. The communique published in Nairobi by our delegation is very explicit
in this respect. "

"Despite our protests, this self-styled standing committee has made extremely serious
decisions, which amount to imposing its diktat on us. As far as we are concerned

therefore, these decisions are null and void and not binding on us. however, they
demonstrate the irresponsible attitude of the DA“ or, at least, some of its members

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iv e-

roward the true problems of Chad. Those states which have assumed the heavy res-
ponsibility of creating war conditions in.Chad must know that my country is not an
OAU protectorate. Chad is a founding member of the OAU and it will not submit to
injunctions from any part whatsoever."

"Chad is not the only African country to have internal problems. If the GAO were
to confirm the decisions of this self-styled standing committee, another country
could be subjected to the same interference tomorrow. A dangerous precedent would
have been created. In Africa and throughout the world. Chad has friends who are
ready to help it. Nevertheless. we ask that the OAU changes it mind and analyzes
dispassionately the Chadian problem so as to help us bring the war to an end."

"I would like to take advantage of this opportunity to thank the Chadian people
for demonstrating massively. both in the capital and in the provinces, against the
irresponsible actions of some African heads of state. I am asking the people to
remain calm should serious events occur."

"As for the GUNT, it has a moral obligation to adopt a patriotic policy and to do'
everything possible to spare our country the infernal cycle of war.”

[Question] Why did you not take measures to anticipate foreseeable maneuvers, for
instance by sending missions abroad?

[Answer] We are both a founding and a full-fledged member of the OAU. We took
part in the 18th summit meeting of the CAD. in Nairobi, when all members of the
pan-African organization pledged their support to the CONT. We could not know that
a few months later these very same countries would betray our government.

Before leaving for Nairobi to attend the latest meeting (on 9 February), we sent

a telex to the present president of the GAO, asking for detailed information on

the agenda of the meeting and on the instrument which would be entrusted with the
task of solving our problems. We received no answer. In view of this silence,

and after a Cabinet deliberation, we decided not to leave full latitude to our
enemies and not to allow manipulators to take advantage of our refusal to accept
the invitation of the GAO. We therefore decided to go to Nairobi with an important
delegation which, besides myself, included five GUNT ministers. This is to show
how important this meeting was to us. I...]

[Question] Now that the GUNT has rejected the Nairobi resolution. will not Chad
find itself isolated from the African community? Can the GUNT, which derives its
legitimacy from the OAU, settle the Chadian conflict without that organization?

[Answer] First, you must understand that the GUNT derives its legitimacy from the
Chadian people. not from a group of pro-imperialist countries. Until now, the GAO
has recognized Chad and the GUNT. If a self-styled standing committee adopts an
irresponsible position, it does not ensue that its position is that of the OAU.

We do not exist because a group of countries allow us to exist. but because we
have the support of our people.

[Question] The "0A0 cease-fire" will end on 28 February. and the GUNT considers
the Nairobi resolution to be null and void. What is, in fact, going to happen?

f2
ros current use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] There is no reason to ask this question. You have read the communique
published by our delegation in Nairobi, which has been approved at.a meeting of
the Cabinet in Ndjamena. The position we expressed has been further strengthened
by public demonstrations. All this means that the measures adopted by the self-
styled 0A1] standing committee are in fact null and void.

Therefore, there can be no question of a cease-fire between us and the rebels. Be-
sides. it is hard to see on what basis such a cease-fire could be concluded. How
could we observe a unilateral cease-fire when we are attacked by rebels who are
armed and supported by imperialism?

You will recall, among other things, that at the time of the withdrawal of the
Libyan troops, these very same rebels had stated in the press that they would
observe a truce. But what did in fact happen? Bissein Habre is known for never
observing the commitments he makes; it is known he has never observed the cease-
fire, whether signed in Ndjamena, Lome or elsewhere. [...]

[Question] The GUNT is still refusing to negotiate with Hissein Habre. The go-
vernment is relying on the determination of the people. But do we have true friends
who are decided to help us logistically as well as financially in the struggle which
we must pursue?

[Answer] First, I would urge the masses to strengthen their determination. For

I have experience in long struggles pursued under difficult conditions. In the
past, without any means, we have militated, struggled, fought to change things in
this country. Therefore, how could the GUNT, which is now supported and backed by
the masses, not manage to overcome the obstacles which imperialism and its valets
are placing on its way? Finally, to the determination of the people, you must add
the assistance which brother countries will not fail to provide to the GUNT. Our
brother countries will not stand and watch as imperialism attempts to neutralize
the Chadian people.

[Question] Does not the Nairobi resolution express a certain irritation on the
part of African countries, who are tired of the war in Chad?

[Answer] We have never closed the door to national reconciliation, reconciliation
with all the Chadians exiled into neighboring and other countries. Today as always,
we are ready to look for a solution with all those who are willing to negotiate
with us, under the general amnesty decreed by the GUNT.

[Question] Under the amnesty, therefore. But the Hissein Habre problem still
remains...

[Answer] The crimes committed by Hissein Habre since 12 February 1979 are known

to everybody. You know that he has been publicly sentenced to death for his crimes.
How would we new date deal with a criminal? How would the people react if we were
to accept negotiating with Hissein Habre? Then,_the GUNT would become criminal,

for it would have given legitimacy to a criminal. This is why we shall never

agree to negotiations with Hissein Hahre. I...)

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Don't you think that what happened recently in Nairobi is also the
result from a lack of determination of the GUNT?

[Answer] I both agree and disagree with your remark. "by? First, the GUNT is
blamed for not being a homogenous government and its military arm for not being
able to master the situation. This is how the outside world analyzes our
situation.

In fact, it is true that there was a time when we did not show enough determination
to crush the FAN [Northern Armed Forces]. He first wanted to test the capabilities
of the OAU, to see what this pan-African organization could achieve through its
military forces sent to Chad to help us resolve the crisis. I...]

The truth is that, first, the CAD does not have the means to support forces in Chad
and, second, it is manipulated or-more accurately-some OAU countries are manipula-
ted by imperialism which wants to impose on us a solution entirely different from
that we are contemplating. This is why these countries. whether manipulated or
misled, wish to resolve the Chadian problem their way, and to do so before the next
OAU summit which is to take place in Tripoli. For they know very well that if the
Chadian problem is not resolved as they want before that meeting, they will no
longer have any opportunity to try and impose their diktat on us once Qadhdhafi

has assumed the presidency of the OAU. This is why they have tried to reach hasty
decisions in order to corner us.

But we are saying no. He can and we shall resist the diktat of these countries.
Besides, the decisions arrived at in Nairobi have finally boosted up our courage.
Why? Because we have been able to measure the determination of our people. We
did not know before-~but we do know now--that our people are determined to support
us until death. And through the insult hurled at us by the can, our people has
become more fully aware of what is at stake in this struggle. Thanks to their
determination and their awareness, we shall master the situation, we shall get
organized so as to defeat Hissein Habre on the one hand and, on the other hand,

to agree on a political solution to our problems.

Finally, we have been able to judge the work of these countries which, at first, we
thoughzwere brother countries, friends, and therefore allies which would help us
out of our present situation...

(Question) Some say that Chad would not find itself in its present situation if
the GUNT had not requested the withdrawal of the Libyan troops. Would you agree
with that?

[Answer] I never regret a decision once taken. We asked for the withdrawal of
the Libyan troops from Chad after completing a serious analysis of the situation.
Their departure has enlightened us in several respects. We have been able to
take an exact measure of the capabilities, determination and will of the OAU.

We have been.able to see who were our friends and who our enemies. we have been
able to measure the determination of our people and to become aware of the means

and forces at our disposal to ensure the security of our country. These are
highly valid tests. I...)

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Goukouni Oueddei then recalls the treasons which led the GUNT to call on Libyan
troops; he then goes on: "The presence of those valiant Libyan soldiers was con-
trary to the neo-colonial order; it spread panick among the reactionary regimes of
Africa and was a cause of concern for imperialism. Pressures of all kinds were
exerted both on us and on our Libyan brothers. This conspiracy was led by a few
states who had also offered to serve as a bridgehead for an attack against Libya.
using its presence in Chad as a pretext. We discovered the maneuver and put an end
to it. We are of course very much concerned with the security of Chad. And it is
known that the security of Libya and that of Chad are closely related. But under
no circumstances can we give imperialism and its agents in Africa an opportunity

to use the Libyan presence in chad to strike at the Libyan Jamahiriya. This is why
we have asked our brothers to withdraw. But allow me a digression: never, I re-
peat. never have we repudiated our friendship for Libya. He shall always be grate-
ful to it and we shall remain its closest allies, just as we are the natural allies
of all countries who love peace and justice [...]."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

929k
CSO: 4719/757

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CLARIPICATION 0F OAU ROLE POSSIBLY RETAINED
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in beach no 259, 15-28 Feb 82 p 30
[Article by Antonia Elie: "The 0A0 With Its Back to the Hall")

[Text] It is the eve of the Nairobi su-Iitm-a limited sumit tasked with
discussing on 10 and 11 February the situation in Chad 3 nontha after the
Libyan military withdrawal, and the operational problqls facing the Inter-
African Peace Force deployed in that country-«and the possibility of an
inprovanent in the ratio of military forces in favor of the GUM“ (Trans-
itional National Union Government] is not ruled out.

As is well known in the field, Hiasein habre's Northern Arned Forces (FAN)
went over to the offensive, encouraged by their allies in the region. and
taking advantage of the vacuum-created by the departure of the Libyan
troops; and in a few weeks they successively took the prefectural seats.-of
Biltine and Ouaddai in the eastern part of the country and then a portion
of the Batah region in the central part before extending their control to
Faye-Largeau, chief town of BET (Borkou-Bnnedi-Tibesti) in Chad's far-
northern area.

The latest nave is accounts of infiltration of PAN units into Kane-I, in the
western part of the country. And while the reports according to which Bissein
Habre's men have penetrated to Salal and Houssouro on the rain 'rosd between
Pays-Largeau and Ndjanena were initially denied by the InterbAfrican Force's
comander in chief, the PAN's intention-~to converge on the capital in order
to attempt to overthrow the COM or to force it into shan negotiations-dues
no secret to anyone.

In the face of this threat, and unless the GAO wants to risk losing all
credibility and risk being covered with ridicule in the first operation to
defend an African state it has been charged with carrying out, it is obvious
that the 0M! cannot continue to play ostrich and equivocate by pretending
not to know what the role of its nilitary should be or who the eneay is that
is threatening Chad's stability and peace.

It is along these lines that some progress has just been nede. During a
press conference in Ndjanena on 22 January held jointly by the OLD secre-
tary general'e special representative in Chad. Gebre Bgri'sher Dawit

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(fihtiopia), and the Inter-African Force's wander in chief, Gen Geoffrey
E3 iga (Nigeria), they in fact gave specifics which show that a sounder
interpretation of the comituents nade by the 0M! regarding the cm is in
the process of prevailing within the OAU.

Thus, Egriaber Dawit, whose statement claimed to be a clarification "once and
for all" of the role of the Inter-African Force deployed in chad, affirmed
that, in accordance with its sandsto, this force would give assistance and
support to Goukouni Heddeye's legal government in order to "enable bin to
recover the areas under ensuy control." Dawit declared that he was con-
vinced that this stand was well understood by everyone, and furthermore he
mentioned that the OM! force-was to help train the Integrated Nstionsl Any.
He added that the foras this collaboration with the Chadian authorities are
to take are under consideration.

For his part. Gen Geoffrey Ejiga announced that the neutral force "would wipe
out" the FAN's advance units if they tried to advance toward Ati and Kongo.
He further asserted that the areas where that force is deployed would be
defended in an ”appropriate" runner, and that any attempt at destabilization
by FAN elasents will produce a "legitimate defense" reaction from the Inter-
African contingents.

With a view to frustrating the mm plan to advance to lidjanena, units of
the Inter-African Force in the field have been positioned to the north of
the capital in Houssouro, Mao, and 301. Thus, the OAU's "blue helmets"
[UN-style peacekeeping troops] are deployed all around Ndjanena within a
radius of 100 to 400 km. This arrange-ant should in principle permit than
to ensure surveillance of the two Iain tracks leading into the capital fros
the northern and eastern regions.

If the secretary general of the OM! hinself--Bdsn Kodjo, who carried out a
"consultation mission" in Chad before the Nairobi nesting—is to be believed
the "misunderstanding" which esisted between the OM! and the Transitional

National Union Government of Chad was "cleared up" at President Goukouni
Ueddeye' 8 level.

If this evolution in the direction of a clarification of the 0M! force's
role is confirmed, it is not an illusion to think that other African states
night he encouraged to give direct support. The Inter-African Force (5.000

soldiers in all) only has means at its disposal which are clearly insuf-
ficient in the areas of both troop strength and material and logistical struc-
ture, in the face of the troops raised by Bissein Kabre in the course of his
advance; according to certain sources, [Hissein Babre' s] troops number none

8, 000.

It is thue problens which, logically speaking, should be holding the attai-
tion of the participants in the Nairobi linited aux-sit. It would be naive,
however. to suppose that Ilissein Habre suddenly has no sore supporters
within the OM). The pressuru of all kinds which are exerted on the GUM to
have it believed that the only solution to the Chadian problem consists of

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

negotiating with the head of the PM (whose only native, as 13 well known,
is to one day become the grand motor of Ndjanena, vhntever it costs his

country) show this only too well.
COI’YRIGHT: 1982 Afriquc-Asle
9631

cso: 4719/618

18
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DEPARTURE 0F LIBYANS, ARRIVAL 01’ 0A0 FORCE DESCRIBED
Paris AFRDQUB-ASIB in French No 259. 15-28 Feb 82 pp 31-33
[Article by Tanguy onzance: "When the Libyans Left")

[Text] 'ranguy onzance, who knows Chad well because of
having often sojourned there, lived through the initial
weeks which followed the departure of the Libyan troops.
He arrived in Ndjanena on the eve of the tension arising
from the completely fabricated news concerning the spur-
ious coup d'etat of Acyl Ahnat, end in his coverage of a
story which took bin even into the eastern area of Chad,
he attests here to the void created by the departure of
Chad's Libyan ally and to the uneasiness aroused among
the ranks of the GUNT [Transitional National Union Govern—
ment] by the change in the situation.

The Chadian-Libyan Bank had been rebuilt and repainted white and green. 0n
the min wall behind the cashier, who was somewhat drowsy in his chair, was

a portrait of Qadhafi next to the one of President Goukouni. In February
1981 I was leaving Chad jvith that final image. The Cheri, the river that
separates Chad fron Caseroon, we: rundown at lowest water then and carry-
ing along the bones and skulls from the mass grave discovered 100 asters tron
Bissein Habre's residence after the liberation of Ndjanena in Decoder 1980.

Sone 8 months later, the city had hardly changed. A whole area of hoses
destroyed or three-quarters in ruins, with sections of walls riddled with
thousands of bullet impacts, still bore witness to the tine when every day
people were dying between the houses, their bodies often remaining on the
ground until evening.

But life took up its course again. Three-quarters of the refugees case back.
even though supporters of Hiasein labre remain in the Kousseri coup in
Caneroon, where sons are recruited to go swell the ranks of the Northern

Armed Forces (FAN) in the eastern part of Chad, after having followed the ‘
now-standard channel that leads the free Kano in Nigeria to Khartoum in Sudan.

when I arrived in Ndjanena at the end of October. everything was peaceful.
The city smiled at the bogus coup that the Gm's minister of state for

' 19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
foreign affairs, Asyl Ahmat, was said to have considered. President Goulcouni
Heddeye was getting ready to leave for Paris, accompanied by Acyl Must, to
attend the Franco-African conference.

A small display of Libyan forces had been observed in the Chadian capital
on the occasion of the visit of Com-ander Jallud, Tripoli's number two.
Since the Ndjanenois gendarnes had not been interned, a certain tension had
resulted from that. Some alaraist telegrams sent via the trench diplomatic
transmitter installed in Kousseri, and some slightly hurried accounts of

observers newly arrived in the Chadian capital, had added further to the con-
fusion.

The atnosphere was nevertheless calm on that 3 November nursing at the
Chadian-Libyan Bank, where the assistant director received ms to talk about
his establishment's activities. But a telephone call from Libyan head-
quarters, mre precisely from 001 Radwan Salah Radwan, cos-under of Libyan
forces in Ndjanena, informed us that his troops had received orders to with-
draw from Chad as rapidly as possible. Starting at 1600, an airlift be-
tween the Chadian capital and the Sehba oasis (in Libya) was set up, and the
sound of Ilyushin helicopter flights was to be continuous for 10 days.

In paris no one believed it, as was attested by correspondents who could be
contacted by telephone. The Chadian Government had of course asked for the
withdrawal of the Libyan troops; in Tripolia that decision was learned of
via the radio. And Acyl Alnat vainly tried to delay that departure, since he
considered there had to he a guarantee beﬁorehand that the Libyan Amy would
be replaced by other forces effectively guaranteeing surveillance of the
eastern borders. "The request for withdrawal of the Libyan troops is pre-
mature," he told us--Christian Eoche fraa L'BXPRESS and myself-when we net
with his in his Psi-chat hone. "There does not etist in Chad today an army
capable of guaranteeing border defense." Acyl Must also felt that before
the Libyan troops departed, assurance had to be obtained that the Sudanese
and Egyptian goverments would cease giving assistance to Hissein Habre.

At Libyan headquarters, Colonel Radwan seemed a little bitter. "Yes, we have
restored peace and guaranteed security in Chad," he told us. "But we were
also meant to contribute to the creation of the Chadian National Any. and
we have not yet had time to accomplish that task." "as he disappointed by
the decision of the Chadian Goverment? "I was not disappointed," he re-
torted. "I an a military man and I obey orders. But everything leads one to
predict that fighting will soon take place in the eastern part of Chad. And
nowadays it is not very easy to see what other nation night agree to spill
its blood for the Chadian people.“

Subsequently, Colonel Qadhafi himself was to announce that 300 Libyans had
died in Chad in order to help keep peace there.

The frequency of the Ilyushin helicopter ﬂights increased. and they were
taking away everything, including htge Massey-Ferguson tractors which, as
Colonel Radwan's assistant explained, had been "intended for the production
of new crops and the creation of fame."

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

The rapidity of the Libyan departure suddenly created a void, and a certain
feeling of insecurity hmg over Ndjaaena, where the Inter-African Torce was
then being awaited and was supposed to be operational in a few days instead
of taking as long as several weeks.

On Friday 13 Novaber I was to witness a fairly mcmon sight. The last
Libyan platoons in bulletproof vests, helmets, and full battledress, with
Kalashnikovs in bundles, were getting ready to take off. At the same lament,
the first of Hobutu's paratroopers in "Bigeard" caps and leopard dress were
disenbarkim from an Air Zaire DC-8. About 100 Chadians who had gathered at
the airport were observing this traffic, and one had the feeling then that
this was no longer a matter of only a civil war but was an interplay of in-
fluence at the level of several continents.

The Libyans had not yet completely cleared out when messages originating

from the eastern zone were already caning in. On 11 Novasbar, Adre, a aaall
town in the eastern part of Chad, was attacked by the Northern Armed Forces.
"Take a look at Lebanon," stressed Colonel Radwan. "There is an Inter-African
Force over there. What is it doing? In Chad it will be the sane thing. If
Hissein Habre comes back into the country, he will be allowed to do what he
wants without there being any resolution to the problem. And so that African
Force will be of no use."

So the fighting resuned in Chad. And the 260 Zairians who arrived in Ndjasena
on 13 Noveaber were waiting for the other elaents of the neutral African
force before being distributed over the country. Conseqtnntly, there was no
longer anybody to defend the eastern towns except Acyl Almat's troops who,
seconded by elenents of the Integrated National Army, had had to ﬁace the
PAN's attack operations without respite ever since the end of the 1980 war.

Since April 1980 no journalist had been able to go to Ati in Batha or to
Abeche, Chad's former capital. One morning I finally received authorization
to take off with reinforceaents that were being sent to the "front." It
took us 5 days to get to Om-hadjer (670 km fras Ndjamena), where we arrived
19 November toward noon. We then learned that Abeche had been invested that
same morning by aissein Habre's forces, and that the goverment forces had
now taken up position at Katoro-Fallata, 60 km fra Om-Badjer.

Some Sudanese Bleaents

The town's subprefect had two sheep killed to welcome us, but of course it
was no longer the right time for a celebration. Among the people who had

arrived that sane norning fral Abeche (soldiers and officials), there were
a great nuaber who had left their wives and children or else all their pos-
sessions in that town. For the fate which Biasein Habre most often has in

store for Chadian Arabs is well known. That was the case in Abeche in 1980 at
the time of the sheep fair, when 150 Arabs had their throats cm by llissein
Habre's men.

News traveled fast. It was learned that the FAN had held_a meeting in
Abeche's main square to annomce that their policy had charged, that there

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1;. -
i

would be no abusive danands, and that their stnggle ahed only at "defend-
ing Chad's own identity vis-a-vis Libya and its little green book." Several
days later there were other reports of systelatic looting 0'3 the goods of
military officials and of rapes.

Before I was able to try to get to the front, I was to rennin nearly 3 weeks
in 0un-liadjer--a gorgeous little town cut in two by the Bethe River, which
was dried up at that time of year—where reinforcements headitg toward
Katoro-Fallata passed thrmgh at night.

Abeche had fallen as of 19 Novaaber, and Katoro-Pallate was attacked by the
PM on to Decanber. That scans to report the pattern observed in Ndjmena
during the 1980 war. The goverment counteroffensive was not yet finally
ready, althoxgh it had been announced a long time before, and the PAR took
advantage of that to take the initiative and thereby benefit from the effect
of surprise.

0n 5 Dccenber, having managed to get 20 km fraa Katoro-Pallata, I was forced
to turn and go back. But it was there that we were to see the first wounded
evacmted from the front. There were to be about 120 of tha, in serious
condition. That same day, fierce battles took place in Katoro-Fallata,
where the GUNT forces were noving to the attack. The GUNT ﬁorces—eade up
for the most part of soldiers frun the former CDll [Revolutionary Duocratic
Council] of Acyl Ahnat, of ANI [Integrated Rational Any] units, of more than
160 soldiers of the People's Armed Forces couanded by Mousse Sougui, and

of some elements of lhhamat Abe's first army—added up to 2,200 nen spread
over a 5-10: front, equipped with bevy weaponry, and placed under the comand
of Rakhis Hanani, first deputy to the A111 chief of staff. The PM were the
driven back, leaving some hundred dead on the field.

Althmgh the situation is serious. Acyl Ahab-who received us in his Ati
hone (in Baths). which he got back to after the fall of Abeche--had not

lost faith. 0n the other hand, the trip to Sudan which a cum delegation

is getting ready to make leaves him perplexed. “To me, this kind of fairy-
tale does not signify anything good," he told us. "What is certain and is not
a product of the realm of illusion is that sale Sudanese elements participa-
ted in the capture of Abeche."

How did the GUNT minister of foreign affairs assess the proaises of aid made
by France before the Libyans' departure? "I continue to think that the
French authorities have a poor understanding of the Chadian situation," he
said to us. On the subject of the Inter-African Force, Acyl Al's-at pointed
out: "The contingents of the Inter-African Force are expected very shortly
in Ari. But their mission is not to fight. Nevertheless, their role mght
to consist of helping the GUNT forces to hold fast in their positions mtil
the integrated army is operational. If the Inter-African Force cones only

to retain confined to qmrters in the chief towns of the departments, it is
incomprehensible how that force could ensure Chad's security."

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the followitg day, Tuesday 8 Decaaher, the first Nigerian contingents of
the Inter-African Force landed in Ati, where they were greeted by Lieutenant
Colonel Allafi, ANI chief of staff. That made it aactly 1 month frm when
the Libysns had left and 3 weeks fraa when Abeche had been taken by the PAN,
who today control Ouaddai and Biltine.

After having visited the front and after having held lengthy discmsions with
the variom officials. the GUNT vice president, Colonel Morgue, who had
wanted to assess the situation in the field for himself, reported his
anxieties. "The situation is serious," he told us on his return to Ndjaaena,
"and it should be time for each and every one so take responsibility. It is
also time that Chadians know the whole truth concerning the sitmtion in

the eastern part of the country."

In fact, it was not to be 1013 before events started to move faster. On

22 Decenber the town of Om-Hadjer was evacuated by government forces after
fierce battles in which the PAN sealed to have camaitted the bulk of their
forces and considerable heavy equipment (nine 106-Im guns, several 12.7's,
four AML's). And on the morning of 23 Decuber, Acyl Ahat took off

again to reorganize the "front" a few kilometers fran Om-Hadjer on the road
to Ati, where the neutral Inter-African Force was setting itself up.

The question being posed today is to figure out to what extent the PAN's
advance is the responsibility of the Inter-African Force, since from the
time of its arrival Hisaein habre's troops have been threatening several .
sizable towns, including Ati and Mango, the last key positions on the road
to the capital.

Acyl Ahnat was already saying to us on 6 December, "If Hissein Habre occupies
Abeche and we are not in a pesition to drive him back, who will be able to
prevent him from imposing his will in any possible negotiations? The answer
is obvious. And there is no dodat that this whole scenario has been prepared
by the powers which insisted so strongly on the Libyans leaving the field
without any prior guarantee having been provided."

While the GUNT's position on that point has always been very clear—in
Ndjanena it is repeatedly said that "there is no question of negotiating
with someone who has been sentenced to death by the State Security Court"—
certain Inter-African Force officials make no secret of their assertion
that, in their opinion, it is a certainty that the Transitional National
Union Governnent will sooner or later have to negotiate with the PAR.

On 214 Deceaber, however, the Ndjmnena Council of Ministers was deciding on
setting up a National Defense and Security Council as well as the immediate
integration of all of Chad's armed forces into the AM. It was a matter
of gettirg a force into operation that would be able to thwart the Fan's
advance and to refashion or consolidate political mity around the GUNT.
Therefore, not everything has yet come into play in Chad.

(DPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

9631
080: 4719/618

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEGOTIATIONS 0N NAMIBIA 'CLOSE TO BW'
”(2101529 London TEE GUARDIAN 1n Elglish 210 Mar 82 p 6
[Denis Herbstein report: "Double Vote Could Help Pretoria Line in Namibia"]

[Excerpt] Negotiations on Namibian independence are close to breakdown be-
cause of Western proposals for a voting system which would favour pro-South
African political groups, officials of “APO, the country's main liberation
movement, clained in London yesterday.

Details of the Western proposals nude available to 1113 GUARDIAN seem to support
the contention of SWAPO and of the African "front line" states, that the dual-
voting system the West and South Africa want is too cowlex for African peasant
farmers. It would probably give more weight in a constituent asseliﬂy to
non-SHAPO groups than they would receive in more conventional elections.

So serious is the impasse that a leading SHAPO official warned yesterday that
negotiations were facing breakdown.

Last week, as if to underline the lack of progress, a South African military
force invaded Angola where it claimed to have killed more than 200 members of
SHAPO. Last Friday, after nesting at Lancaster House, senior officials from
the Western countries among them the 0.8. under-secretary of state for Africa,
Chester Croker issued a communique reporting "little progress."

Hidepo Hanutenya, SWAPO's information spokesman said: "If the West and South
Africa refuse to budge on the voting system, we night have to report back to
the Security Council that their efforts have failed."

In 1977, the council allowed the group (Britain, the United States, Canada,
France, [lest Germany) to seek an agreement in the 30-year»old dispute. This
week SHAPO called for direct negotiations with Pretoria, but there is little
chance of that at present.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited [1982]

CSO: 4700/1024

21.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC, FINANCIAL SITUATION AT END OF 1981 ANALYZBD
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANRENS in French Nos 1893-1896. 19, 26 Feb 82
[No 1893, 19 Feb 82 pp 569-571]

[Text] 0n the international level; the beginning of 1981 experienced two impor-
tant events that could affect efforts made by Zaire to bring about its indis-
pensable economic recovery: President Reagan's inauguration in the United
States and the replacement of Valery Giscard d'Estaing as president of France

by Francois Hitterrand. In both cases. relations previously favorable to the
policy of President Eobutu were threatened by a "cooling off" that could only
hurt Zaire.

As has often been the case since June 1960, the visits made by the Zairian
chief of state to Paris and Washington in November resulted in the unexpected:
Both ended in what the press has not hesitated to label as "victories" for
President Hobutu. Even before he went to the United States, he managed to
make the new French officials understand that it was not in France's interest
to make a lBO—degree shift in the policy developed by the preceding president.

Received in Paris on the occasion of the French—African summit meeting (from
which he had nearly been excluded) as a privileged guest, the Zairian chief
of state will remain a key element of the African policy of France, which
considers him to be the surest guarantee of stability in the country and all
of Black Africa. In exchange for such spectacular support, did Hitterrand
obtain solid commitments from President Mobutu regarding a profound change
in the management of the Zairian Government in a perilous situation? Only
the future can say.

In Washington, where he went on the invitation of President Reagan, the “en-
lightened guide" undeniably marked up points and brought off an-inportant dip-
lomatic success. Some have persisted in viewing it as nothing more than the
manifestation of a sunmary anticommunisn within the framework of which the
United States believes that Zaire has a prime role to play in the heart of
Black Africa. It should be noted that part of the American press has noted
the disastrous economic situation of Zaire, however. and castigated a presi-
dential policy lacking in effectiveness and probity. In the joint communique
published at the close of the visit, one phrase is typical: "...There exists
mutual understanding of the need to strengthen the economic institutions and

25
FOR10IFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOI(NHHCJAI.USE(NNLV

the Armed Forces of Zaire." This was expressed concretely in a promise of new
aid amounting to $45.5 million in 1982 and promises of more aid in 1983.

In conclusion, it should be noted that, feeling more strongly backed by the
United States and France once again, President Hobutu showed his teeth in
Belgium, as is almost traditional. It was a domestic scene that was quickly
quieted and that nevertheless reminded the former colonial power that for
Zaire and Hobutu, Belgium is no longer the only country on Kinshasa's horizon!

Monetary and Financial Situation

1982 budget: First State Couisaioner H'Singa Udjuo presented the proposed
1982 budget to Parliament. It provides for receipts totaling 7,834,200,000
zaires (some 50 billion Belgian francs) and spending amounting to 8,836,200,000
zaires (about 60 billion Belgian francs). The budgetary deficit is therefore
some 1 billion zaires (10 billion Belgian francs). This budget represents an
increase of 2,217,800,000 zaires (about 42 percent) for receipts and 2,717,1
2,717,100,000 (about 63 percent) for spending compared with fiscal year 1981
(for more details, see HARCHES TBDPICAUX of 1 January 1982, p 36).

Currency: Since the devaluation of 19 June 1981 making the value of the zaire
.1575 sun, the average official price of the zsire remains relatively stable
on the Brussels Exchange. The black market price, which was a Belgian francs
on 30 June (compared with an official price of 7.0707 7 Belgian francs on

23 June), has experienced variations in the opposite direction, with the

range being from 3.10 to 4.30 Belgian francs. At the end of December, the
zaire brought about 6 Belgian francs. In business circles, there is talk of
the possibility of another devaluation, whose extent and date cannot yet be
predicted.

Foreign trade, balance of payments: No valid statistics are available for
1981. Based on the recent edition (December 1981) of the report of the
Office of the State Commissioner for Economy, Industry and Commerce of Zaire,
a summary of which was published in the 15 January 1982 issue of MABCHBS TRO-

PICAUX (No 1888, pp 1951-1952), we have been able to give information for 1980.

Financial situation: It should be noted that: 1) the meeting of the Club of
London, which was to be held in London in September, has not yet taken place,

which would seem to indicate that the private banks working with Zaire are not
yet ready to grant it total confidence; and 2) President Hobutu said, on

14 September 1981 before the Central Committee of the “PR, that the country
should pay the members of the Club of Paris some $370 million by 31 December
1981, plus the amount of the unconsolidated debts of the private banks (Club
of London). The total would be some $500 million, which would heavily mortgage
the country's economic recovery.

Economic Production
(General remark: It is difficult, if not impossible, with a few rare excep-

tions, to find reliable statistics for the various types of production. A
substantial effort will be made to obtain precise data for 1981 as soon as

possible.)

26
INDIIOFIICLAI.IISII(IVLY
In July 1981, the Executive Council decided to carry out an integrated medium-
term socioeconomic plan, beginning in 1983. which would replace the Hobutu Plan.
The chemical industry, energy, agricultural equipment, the agroindustry and
building materials would be among the prime sectors.

In August 1981, the IMP stated that execution of the 3-year recovery program
(1981-1983) had gotten off to a good start. Difficulties that could not be
foreseen at the time the program was drawn up (drop in the prices 'of copper,
cobalt and coffee) would still cause the country major difficulties, in its
opinion. Zaire had already withdrawn 100 million of the 912 million SDR in

"expanded facilities" granted in June 1981.

In October, the Executive Council granted a second installment of $20 million
to economic operators for the importation, in accordance with a schedule of
distribution decided upon by it, of articles indispensable for their activi-
ties. They will be made in keeping with the same regulations and same strict-
ness applied to the first installment of $50 million. Since fraud was dis-
covered. the number of companies benefiting from the privilege was cut from
192 (in July) to 24 (in September 1981).

Development agreements: During its 4 December 1981 meeting, the Executive
Council examined the matter of expanding development agreements to all enter-
prises that might produce rau materials locally. Legislation on this operation
has already been drafted and passed by the Situational Committee; promulgation
needs only the approval and signature of the chief of state.

Private ownership: At the beginning of November 1981, the Executive Council
gave authorization to the Office of Government Investment Holdings to draw up
a complete inventory of national enterprises that should be shifted to private
management. 0n 4 December, the Executive Council examined criteria considered
for the reversion or buying back of such enterprises. It chose the criteria

according to which an individual or company could be approved in an enter-
prise set up from a dissolved enterprise. It expressed the desire to have the

list requested on 6 November as soon as possible. (That has now been done.
See page 568.)

Agriculture

During its meetings of 20 and 28 November, the Executive Council made a thor-
ough examination of efforts made and to be made in order to intensify the
agricultural season and improve the country's food situation.

In particular, the Council studied the problem of maintaining roads, indispen-
sable to the rapid and reliable shipping of production. Out of the 145,000
kilometers of roads making up the Zairian system. 45,000 will be taken on by
the Road Office. As for the remaining 100,000 kilometers, their maintenance
will be the task of roadmen under the territorial adminsitration and of com-
panies with interests in the region and that would enter into agreements with
the government. An interdepartmental committee has been set up to draw up
criteria governing the choice of such companies. The necessary funds will be
"regionalized."

27
FOI‘OIIICIAI.lEﬂI(ﬂNLY‘
FOR‘DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

Concerning fuel, the Energy Commission Office has been instructed to find solu-
tions leading to an improvement in the supply to production regions in the es

east e

The principle of the establishment of an agricultural loan bank has been
definitively adopted. The headquarters of the organization will be in Kinshasa

and branch offices will be opened in all regions of the country.

Agricultural schools will be opened again. All graduates of these institutions
will be surveyed in order to organize farmers.

aegional governors will carry out a census of peasants and farmers and will
determine as accurately as possible what areas will be cultivated and how much
will be harvested. In this connection, the agricultural statistics office

in the Office of State Commissioner for Agriculture believes that the number
of farm families in Zaire went from 2. 42 million in 1970 to 2.95 million .in
1980, which corresponds to a population of 15. 3 million.

In his speech of 14 September, President Mobutu announced that 148 million

zaires would soon be allocated for the market garden season. Means of trans-
portation in Kinshasa were to be assigned to farmers in the interior. Other

actions aimed at supporting farm action (seed supply, fertiliser, implements
and tools, and so on) were underway or about to be undertaken. He have no
information about whether such promises have been kept. Nor do we have any
statistics at all on food production.

Agroindustry: No.figures are available for 1981. According to information '
gathered locally, the situation of the export companies has reportedly improved

thanks to a better supply of foreign exchange.

Coffee and coffee exports in particular, although strictly regulated, continue
to be the source of scandalous manipulations and also to management errors on

the part of OZACAF [Zairian Coffee Office].

The palm oil sector seems to be improving slightly because exports for the first
nine months of the year amount to 11,887 tons (they-were nonexistent only a

short time ago). If we extrapolate for 12 months, we could have exports of
16,000 tons, the mark of definite progress.

Manufacturing industries: The system of allocating foreign exchange, which is
favorable to the export companies, is ruinous for those working with the
domestic market, for they must buy fuel, raw materials and apart parts by
financing their purchases from production which is generally sold at imposed
prices. There are naturally special appropriations that have helped some to
make ends meet, but we are still far from a normal situation.

Lumbering: Total exploitation of Zaire's forest resources could, in 20 or 30

years, bring in more money than ores, according to FAO experts now making stu-
dies aimed at finding ways and means of achieving optimum use of Zairian forest

resources a

28
INJI‘OIIICIAI.lEiI(HNLY
Early estimates indicate that such operations would require financial invest-
ments of over $80 million. Zaire's forests make up 50 percent of all the
forests in Africa. Actually, Zairian forests cover an area of 122 million
hectares, including 100 million in the central basin, 240,000 hectares economi-
cally well-situated in Lower Zaire and 20,000 hectares of clear forest in
Sheba.

Zaire and Canada signed a technical assistance agreement on 22 October 1981

in the SPIAF (Permanent Department of Forestry Inventory and Development). The
agreement covers 5 years and financing is divided up as follows: CAI $9.2 mil-
lion and 34,854,000 zaires. The mandate given to SPIAP concerns a survey of
the country's forest resources and the establishment of standards for their
rational development and use.

5. .l.‘

Mining Production

Copper: Since copper production was always the backbone of the Zairian economy,
we deemed it fitting to go into more detail about the production of GBCAHINBS

[General Quarries and Mines Company]: The 3-year program for the renewal of
the latter will alone absorb 1,956,000,000 zaires, including 1,556,000,000
for the program P 420 and 390 million for P 670.1

In September 1981, the EEC granted Zaire an overall package of 60 million ecua
[monetary units] to go to SYSHIN [expansion unknown] for the improvement and
modernization of the company's facilities. The BBC criticized the Zairian
Government for not lightening the tax system applied to GBCAMINES.

During the second half of_1981, the evolution in world copper prices, which

has considerable influence on the Zairian budget, experienced wide fluctuations.
Prices were given in Sterling pounds per ton on the London market and copper-
prices seesawed. Starting in July with a price slightly over the 850-pound
mark, it then shot up to 1,250 pounds in August and September before falling
under 850 at the end of Sovamber. A slight improvement at the end of the year

brought it close to 890 pounds, but this rise was again followed by a drop to
under 850 pounds.

Since the Lobito line could still not be used to ship out copper from Sheba,

1981 production shipped out of the country went through the following ports
(net weight in tons): Hatedi, 242,856; Dar-es-Salasm, 21,636; Durban,
88,770; and East London, 97,179. Total: 650,461.

(Concerning reparation of the future Lobito line, see further under "rail
transport.")

No figures are available for SODIHIZA [Industrial Development and Mining
Company of Zaire].

 

1 The general cost of the mining recovery progran for 1981-1983 amounts to

2,365,700,000 zaires, including 1,869,600,000 zaires in foreign exchange
(or 34.45 percent of the total). Foreign sources should supply 1,787,000,000
zaires in foreign exchange.

29
90310FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For Tenke Pungurume (see MARCHBS TROPICAUX, 6 November 1981, p 2805), at the
end of the first half of 1981, we wrote the following: "Development of the
deposit will depend on completion of the high-tension line that will carry
electricity from lugs to Sheba." This line was finished in August 1981

(see below under ”Electricity") and new studies are underway. Perhaps 1982
will finally see the continuation of the work that was undertaken, then aban-
doned, by the international firm set up for completion of the project.

Cobalt (see MARCHBS TROPICAUX, 6 November 1981, p 2805): Little official in-
formation is available on the subject of this-product, which, at the time of
the boom in prices paid on international markets, made Zaire'a fortune. Ac-
cording to Zairian sources, GBCAMIMBS exports reportedly total some 9,500 tons
for 1981, nearly all of which (according to estimates) would have been taken
out by ship (7,000 tons) through Durban, with the rest going by air.

Concerning prices, the only Zairian quotations are given by SOZACOM [Zairian

Company for the Marketing of Ores] in Brussels. During the first two months
of the six-month period, it quoted $20 a pound, than 1,555 Belgian francs a
kilogram.

At the beginning of the month of December, at the opening session of the Cobalt-
Metallurgy and Uses Congress, the chairman of the board of SOZACOM announced

the decision of cobalt producers to set up a Cobalt Development Institute. In
addition to producers, refiners, distributors, users and consumers are also
asked to participate in the association. It should be operational by 1 Janu-
ary 1982 (provisional address: Cobalt Development Institute, 3 rue Raven-
stein, 1000 Brussels).

Cassiterite: The price of tin in London (in pounds sterling per ton) exper-

ienced an extraordinary evolution in 1981. Falling below the 6,000-pound
level at the end of April, it rose steadily from May to December and ended

the year, after soae minimal fluctuations, at about 8,500 pounds. Although
Zairisn production is not very large, this evolution nevertheless deserves

the attention of observers.

As was previously the case, the only statistics available are those from
SOMINKI [Mining and Industrial Company of Kivu] (from 1 July to 31 December
1981): cassiterite, 1,170.75 tons; wolframite, 73.5 tons; coaltar, 21 tons;
monazite, 32.6 tons. Total: 1,297.65 tons. Shipments were mainly made
through Matadi and Dar-es-Salaam.

Diamonds: The activity of MIBA (Bakwanga Mining Coapany) was as follows:'

1981 1980
Production (carats) 5,753,568 8,001,076
Volume of gravel grocessed (m3) 1,698,883 1,191,785
Content (carats/m ) 3.86 6.71
Shipments (carats) 5,961,531 8,101,525

The volumes of are treated rose. However, because of the substantial drop in
diamond content, production dropped also. Replacement and modernisation of

30
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢N‘LY
processing facilities continued in 1981 in order to develop the working of
deposits of kinberlite. HIBA also ordered a scoop dredger in 1981 that will
enable it to work the bed of the Mbujimayi River and adjacent alluvial shores

Illegal mining is spreading alarmingly. An order from the state coniasioner
for mining on 20 August 1981 gave SOZACOM a monopoly over the establishment

of purchasinglcounters for diamonds from small-scale operations in the Republic
of Zaire. These counters will be set up in areas declared as cottage mining

areas by the state comissioner for mining, particularly Tshipkapa. Luebo,
Demba and Insambo.

Gold: In order to fight fraud (see moans TBDPICAUX, 6 November 1981), the
secretary of state for mining announced in August 1981 the establishment of
purchasing counters by the Holuka and Hadini firms.

It is estimated that production of the Kilo-Hoto Gold Mining Office (ornao)
(1,805 kilograms in 1978, 1,729 kilogram in 1979 and 660 kilograms in 1980)
might total 1,500 kilograms in 1981. The biggest problem to be solved remains
the construction of a new processing plant with advanced technology, to replace
the existing plant, which is totally outdated. Indispensable to the survival
of the enterprise, this new plant would cost $6 million. Company officials
believe that they could finance the project without outside help, if the
currency allocation is adequate. Otlm's future depends on an increase in

resources granted to it, the establishment of a development policy and the
fight against fraud and the illegal mining of gold.

For its part, SOMINKI exported 221.5 kilograms of gold through Matadi during
the second half of the year.

Oil: Crude oil production in Zaire's offshore ares totaled 1,666,131 barrels
during the second quarter of 1981, compared with 1,798,837 barrels during
the first quarter. The level of production in mid August was nearly 21,000

barrels a day. It remained at that level in September.' The encouraging signs
detected in a structure close to the coast by one exploratory well and’ one
evaluation well have not been confirmed. A new well drilled 20 kilometers
offshore at a site where the depth of the water is over 30 meters was planned
for December 1981. It should go to 6,600 meters, which would require a new
type of platform. It has been delayed by the unavailability of such a platform.

Since 15 August, ZAIRBP [expansion unknown] has been engaged in surveying the
extent and characteristics of the asphaltic sands of Mayumbe in Lower Zaire.
The operation, which will last from three to four months, represents an invest-
ment of $9 million. The purpose of the undertaking is long-term working of

the asphaltic sands as a source of crude oil. In 1980, the deposits worked

by ZAIREP'produced some 20,000 tons of oil.

Finally, it should be recalled that the Zairian Government and the Zaire Gulf
Oil Company have signed a new protocol (the fifth since the initial convention
of 9 August 1969) dividing up company receipts as follows: Zaire, 76 percent;
Gulf, 2!. percent.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY

Investments

Following a study done by research workers at the University of Syracuse (Unit
(United States), Zaire will remain among the countries presenting the highest
risk for business in 1982. It already had a very poor classification in 1981
(see HARClU-ZS TROPICAUX of 6 November 1981, p 2807). The Zairian Government
seems aware of this and appears to be determined to give the private sector the
necessary encouragement and to restore complete confidence by practicing eco-
nomic liberalization, restoring the infrastructures needed to develop the
country and especially, permitting enterprises to have the currency they need
to import essential equipment.

A 3-year plan for 1981-1983 provided for 225 projects extending the 1979—1980
Plan, which could be carried out only to the extent of 40 percent of the total

value of the initial projects. Its cost would amount to 6,867,000,000 saires
(constant value 1980) and would be distributed as follows: agriculture, 13.7

percent; mining, 34.5 percent; infrastructures generating foreign exchange
savings, 40.7 percent; and miscellaneous, 11.10 percent.

While there is no plethora of private investments, one must nevertheless note -
certain initiatives tending to prove that the Zairian position is not desperate.

On 13 June 1981, the facilities of the National Breweries (BRANA) were offi-
ially opened in Kinshasa. At full capacity, annual production of the new brev-
eries could go as high as 200,000 hectoliters of beer and 50,000 hectoliters

of sweet beverages.

The Charleroi Electrical Engineering Shops (ACBC) have decided to set up an
electric transformer manufacturing plant in Kinshasa, which would supply urban

and suburban systems and enterprises. This new plant will be an extension of
the already existing ACBC-Zaire. It should be able to begin production in 1982.

In August, the Executive Council approved a mining convention concerning the
development of the North-Kivu pyrochlore deposit. The Kivu Mining Company
(SOMIKIVU) plans to invest some $50 million in order to equip the Lueshe mine,
which in the final phase will have a capacity of 1,500 tons a day.

The signing of the agreement governing the international consortium that will
carry out the ALULAIRB aluminum plant project took place on 23 November in
Kinshasa. The initial capacity of 150,000 tons will rise to a final 600,000
tons. Inga will provide the electricity. The investment was estimated at
over $1 billion, to be shared by the Zairian Government, ALUSUISSB [Swiss
Aluminum], project foreman, and specialized organizations fra the Federal
Republic of Germany, Italy, Yugoslavia, Norway, Japan and the Netherlands. The
plant would be set up on the Kinlao Plateau, on the Atlantic Coast, and would
have three sections: an electrolysis plant, a foundryand an anode factory.
Some 100 expatriates and 1,900 nationals would work in the complex.

The Hatadi Flour Mills (Kim-314A), subsidiary of the American Continental Hill-
ing Corporation (New York), has just approved a new investment on the order of

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
some $2.1 million in order to increase its capacity from the current production
of #50 tons to 600 tons of wheat flour a day. The mill's new capacity could
be ready by the beginning of March 1982.

[No 1896, 26 Feb 82 pp 628-630]

[Text] The following is the second part of the article on
Zaire's economic situation at the end of 1981. The first
part of the article (monetary and financial situation,
agricultural and mining production, investments) was pub-
lished in our 19 February issue, pp 569-571. This second
installment is essentially devoted to transport, energy and
water and social questions.

SOFIDB [Finance Company for Development]: Once again, the operations financed
by SOPIDB, which have been detailed in these columns, give precious indications
on investments made in the country in the field of the PH! [small and medium-
size businesses] in general. For the second half of 1981, total credits
granted by SOPIDB total 38,703,000 zaires. All details on its operations have
been published at the proper time in our columns. The majority of the credits

granted are investment credits. The rest cover credits for the importation of
raw materials and spare parts. '

Inga Free Zone (ZOFI): At the end of September 1981, the Zairian Government
officially initiated a series of promotional confervncen in Brussels on the
Inga Free Zone. He shall not reprint the details of the report given by
Professor Kinzonri, adviser to the Office of the President of Zaire. ZOPI
will mainly be, in the area defined, a special investment system enjoying fis-
cal and customs advantages, exemptions from import duties on equipment for
industries, a special system for the 'ransfer of capital and special prices
for electric power supplied by Inga. The speaker emphasized the advantages

to European businessmen of this system, which should enable Zaire to design a
broad agricultural 'and industrial program that should serve rural development,

the main concern of the Hobutu government.

Transport

we have already stated, but can never repeat it often enough, that transporta-
tion, in all its forms, is of cardinal importance in a vast country such as
Zaire. He shall therefore devote an important part of this article to it.

The interest in the question of all Zaire' s neighbors is enough to support
this point of view.

Air transportation: In 1981, the rebuilding of the Kolwezi airport was under-

taken. Extension of the existing runway will be completed.- Improvements at
the Bunia, Njili, Lubumbashi and Kavumu airports have been planned. 0n 1 Novem-

ber 1981, the first Kisanganiénuts flight took place.

On 9 November 1981, Air-Zaire and Sabena concluded a series of commercial
agreements concerning rationalization of Zaire-Belgium connections, their

33
IIHI(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(HNLY
IKIICNWNCJA1.U5810NL¥

profitability, quality of service to the public and development of tourist
traffic to eastern Zaire. Other agreements are aimed at technical cooperation,
including the organization of services, personnel training and the exchange

of various types of information.

Road transport: 0n 1 October, a 35oton ferry, financed by the Federal Republic
of Germany, was officially put into service at CHANIHETAL [expansion unknown].
It will be used on the Kasai River at Ilebo. Another 12-ton ferry was offi-
cially put into service on 27 October on the Haindoabe River, some 100 kilo-
meters from Kinshasa. Its operation makes it possible to reopen the road
linking Kinshasa to western Bandundu by Kwanouth. As part of its ferry reha-
bilitation plan for l981~l986, the Road Office plans to replace 91 units, 80

of which will be designed and built by the Office's shipyards.

The Road Office has announced that reparation of the Bukavu-Uvira read (128
kilometers), planned for several years, will be carried out in 1982. The

necessary equipment was purchased through financing from the Reconstruction
Credit Bank (Kfﬂ) (PRO). It is now on the site (end of 1981).

Rail transport: The 5-year plan of the SNCZ (1980-1984) will receive a credit
of $106 million. This sum represents the total aid fros various countries

(see MARCHES TROPICAUK, 13 March 1981, p 655).

Benguela Railroad (Lobito-Shaba—Zanbia): During a conference held in Kinshasa
on 30-31 July, the rehabilitation of this line was discussed by the ministers

of transport of Angola, Zaire and Zambia. The estimated cost of repair work
would be $80 million. The three countries involved have received a first
installment of aid amounting to 8.6 million 803 granted by the BBC and the
UNDPs ‘

On 8 Novenber 1981, the UNDP granted Zaire $780,000. This sun is to be used
for a joint Angola-Zaire project. A similar agreement was signed with the
Angolan Government. The two countries have decided to put together $595,000
to complete the financing. The project, which should take 2 years, is aimed
at enabling the two countries to recruit experts, upper-level personnel,
technicians and workers in the different areas of specialization in order to
perform advisory and operational duties and ensure the training of relief
personnel from the two countries. Zambia, which is also interested in opera-

tion of the Benguela Railroad, is not now in any agreement with the UNDP.

Container transport: The SNCZ (northern section, main office in Isiro) plans
to develop container traffic on the Kisangani-Ubundu-Kindu-Kalemia line. It

will install three 20-ton cranes at the Kisangani (left bank), Ubundu and
Kindu ports. On their return, the containers will be loaded at Kieangani with
rice from Haniena.

Ilebo equipment (port): 0n 5 November 1981, the sucz-put into service an
electric gantry crane for containers, with a lifting capacity of 60 tone, at
the Ilebo port. It will accelerate loading and unloading operations at that

transit part, where the SNCZ daily handles 1,500 tons of goods. Unfortunately,
it still has the worst congestion in the SNCZ system.

34
IIIIGDFIWCIAI.IENB(HNLY
FII!(Iﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂ£(MVLY

e

ONATRA "

Development program for 1980-1986: ONATRA (National Transportation Office)
plans to undertake projects within the framework of this program, costing

$86 million 023'percent of the total). (See HARCBES TROPICAUX of 28 August
and 6 November 1981, pp 2228 and 2806.) Nearly $60 million will be allocated

for rail and river equipment purchases. 0n 6 October 1981, the IDA [Interna-
tional Development Association] granted $26 million to the Office. More

financing will be provided by the PIG ($8 million, with ONATRA contributing
$28 million itself). The largest initial expenditures will involve river
transportation equipment ($27.5 million).

Port Traffic (Nine Months of 1981; in tons)

 

Import Export Total
Matadi 685,656 366,528 839.1861
Boma 14.047 65,761 59,8082

1 For monthly traffic, 109.63 percent compared with the nine—month average in
1980 and 56.08 percent compared with the average for nine months in 1959.

2 0r 97.36 percent compared with the nine-month average for 1980 and 61.61
percent compared with the average for nine months in 1959.

It is still too early to derive any valid conclusions concerning the evolution
of the Zairian economy from these partial statistics.

River transport: we believe that it is interesting to give the tonnages trans-
ported during the first nine months of 1981 for river routes (Kinshasa-Kirangani
and Kinshasa-Ilebo), plus a number of comments: a) upstream: miscellaneous
merchandise, 186,627 tons; inflammablas, 61,886 tons; local, 175 tons; total,
226,688 tons. b) downstream: mining products, 195,105 tons; palm oil,

61,651 tons; miscellaneous, 128,655 tons; local, 268 tons; total, 365,269 tons.
Overall total: 591,757 tons. (Note: For October, upstream transport totaled
20,660 tons and downstream 67,079 tons. Total: 67,519 tons.)

For the first nine months of 1981, the average is 101.91 percent compared with
the 1980 average for the same period. It is 69.16 percent compared with the
1959 average. September tonnages (63,697 tons total) are down 3.6 percent
compared with August. October tonnages (67,519) are nearly identical to those
of August.

Expansion of Kinshasa and Hatsdi ports: A delegation from the Horld Bank
visited Zaire from 6 to 7 October to make a preliminary evaluation of the
project to expand the Kinshasa and Hatadi ports. Total cost of the project is
an estimated $120 million. IDA participation of $60 million is-anticipated.

A total of $1 million will be advanced for preliminary studies.

Banana port: Backers interested in-the project met in Brussels on 30 Septem-
ber and 28 October 1981. To date, Arab backers do not appear to be interested

35
FOIIOIFKJAI.USltl‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this project. The financing of complementary studies for the project as a
whole, estimated to cost 4 million ecus (some 160 million Belgian francs), was
examined. Italy and France will finance port and urban development studies,
the PRC those for waterworks, and Belgium those for the Inga-Banana electric
line. All studies will be done under the supervision of the Office of General
Comissioner for Planning, aided by the Bans-Kinshasa Equipment Organisation
(033K), for which Belgian and Trench consulting firms are working.

Mandi-Banana railroad: The provisional support cables for the bridge making
it possible to install the suspended elements for the bridge over the Zaire at
Hatsdi were put up on 21 July. The project is midway through the final stage.

The railroad will be built in two phases. The first will include construction
of the Hatsdi-Boma section, with a junction onto the Hayumbe railroad (Taela-

Boma), which will be rebuilt. In the second phase, the Mandi-Banana railroad
will start from Bonn and run to the ocean. .

Electrification of the Mandi-Kinshasa line: Detailed technical studies for
the project were entrusted to the Belgian Transurb Consult Company. The pro-
ject is included in the Public Investment Program (PIP) presented by the Zairian
Zairian Government at the recent Paris meeting of the advisory group On Zaire
The project of the CM (Mandi-Kinshasa Railroad) is therefore among the
priorities, but according to World Bank officials, the final decision on
electrification must also depend on the effect of all financing on Zaire's
balance of payments. This means that financing must be accomplished on the
basis of concessionary means. It must be organized based on gifts and credits
between governments, with the gift factor being high. No final decision had
yet been made by the end of 1981. -

Shipyards: Financing of 13,997,000 zaires is planned for a project to repair
facilities, which should be carried out in 1982. It involves the Ndolo (Kin-
shasa), Boma (bower Zaire), Yuki and Boyera (Equator) shipyards. On 17 October
1981, at the Ndolo shipyards, the last seven roadstead tugs were officially

put into service (out of a series of nine purchased within the framework of
aid from the PKG; six will be in service in Kinshasa and one at each of the
ports of Ilebo, Kisangani and Hhandaka).

National transport: Considerable efforts are being made to repair and improve
operation of the national transport (Belgium is particularly active in this
area). Technical, material and financial assistance is mainly aimed at the
SNCZ (rail), the River Lines Administration (INF), ONATRA and the Shiplines
Administration (RVM). The RV? will in particular have a training boat used to
instruct individuals wishing to specialize in buoyage and hydrography. The
RVM has five senior helnsnen and has sent trainees abroad.

It should be recalled that the national transportation system is an ensemble

of domestic lines in Zaire linking the Atlantic (cu.'.‘ently the ports of Boma
and Matadi) to Shaba via Kinshasa and Ilebo; to Buka'm and Kalemia via Kin-
shasa, Ilebo and Kanina; to Kindu via Kisangani; and to hangbere via Aketi.

36
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Telecommunications

Development plan: The master plan for the proposed telecommunications project
in Zaire has now been completed. The plan includes a long-term (about 20 years)
development plan and another short-term (about 5 years) plan. One of the imme-
diate objectives of the project is strengthening the planning division of the
Zairian National Posts and Telecommunications Office (ONPTZ) by the foreign
training of upper-level Zairian personnel. In the long run, the project is
aimed at covering all of Zaire with a hypersequence transmitting system and
telephone centrals in all the major population centers of the country, with
access to the automatic interurban service.

African telecommunications system: At the 15th subregional conference of the
Pan African Telecommunications Union (UPAT) held in Gaborone (Botswana) in
September, the meeting of experts designated Zaire and Zambia to serve as inter-
connection points for the telecommunications system between Central and Heat
Africa. This decision implies construction of the Kinshasa-Lusaka telecommuni-
cations axis. Zaire and Zambia manifested a desire to make the efforts needed

to carry out the project. The conference also decided to set up the Advanced
Multinational Telecommunications Institute in Nairobi.

0n 5 December 1981, Zaire and Burundi signed an agreement to make telephone and
telegraph connections between the capitals of the two countries possible.

Energy and Water

Inga-Sheba line: According to a spokesman for the CIS (Inga-Sheba Engineers),
the high-tension continuous electricity line between Inge and Sheba should go
into service during the first quarter of 1982. The last pylon was put in on
22 August 1981 in Kolwezi (1,748 kilometers from Inga). However, energy is not
yet being carried.

Zaire-Italy agreement: On 14 September in Kinshasa, Zaire and Italy concluded
a technical cooperation concerning electric power. For three years, Italy will
provide technical assistance to the National Electric Company (SNBL). It will
cover the completion of studies, the drafting of projects and the startup and
operation of existing or future facilities.

Nepoko hydroelectric operations: SNBL has ordered a study of the possibilities
of utilizing electric energy that-could be produced by the three waterfalls on

the Nepoko River in the Henba area (Upper Uele). According to the study, some
6,000 kilowatts could be obtained, particularly in order to supply industrial

and agricultural companies in the region and the city of Isiro, which would be
linked to the powerplant by a 90-kilometer-1ong line.

Mbandaka: In November, following a study done by the PRC, it was decided to
build a new thermic powerplant at Hbandaka. Financing would be handled jointly
by Zaire and the PRC.

Natural gas: During the visit which President Hobutu Sese Seko made to Kigali
on 25 August, during which he met with the Rwandan president, the two chiefs of

37
FOR‘OFIWCIAI.U§E¢NNLY
FOR10FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

state emphasized the priority of the methane gas from Kivu Lake project because
of their countries' urgent energy needs and the possibilities which the by-
products of that gas offer, particularly for agricultural development. They
stressed their interest in the rapid completion of studies planned within the
framework of the project in order to embark upon its practical execution. In
this connection, they agreed to speed up the establishment of the Zairian—
Rwandan joint company for the working, transport and marketing of methane gas

from Kivu Lake, in keeping with the agreement signed between the two countries
on 3 Hay 1975. '

Distribution of water: Details of the 10-year program of REGIDESO [Water and
Power Distribution Administration] have already been published. One of the main

points is supplying 164 cities and towns in the country not presently served
(estimated cost: $232 million). Some 70 pe.cent of the population should be

supplied with drinking water by 1985 and 85 percent by 1990. The number of
centers, as planned by the program, is as follows: Lower Zaire, 6; Equator,
19; Kivu, 21; Bandundu, 24; Upper Zaire, 31. The capital is the subject of a
special program.

Social Questions

Wages: On 30 June 1981, President Hobutu decreed an increase in salaries of
government employees amounting to 15 percent, in addition to an initial identi-
cal increase (15 percent) granted on 1 January 1981. It becomes effective on

20 July 1981. The state commissioner for labor and social security announced on
8 July that workers in the private and parastate sectors would also receive the
lS-percent increase in salaries.

National Labor Council: The National Labor Council held a special meeting from

17 to 21 September. -It approved, with some modifications, the proposal of the
state commissioner for labor and social security concerning the increase in
minimum interprofessional wages and minimum family allocations. This proposal
must next be submitted to the Situational Committee and then to the Executive

Council.

Prices: Evolution of Indexes During the First Eleven Months of 1981

Kinshasa Markets1 Kinshasa Stores2

January 12,360 44,956
June 14,210 52,674
July 14,720 56,701
August 15,100 ' 58,276
September 15,350 59,276
October 16,003 62,160
Novembrr 16,963 65,525

1 Base October-December 1964 - 100
2 Base June 1960 - 100

38
ﬁDR¢NﬂﬂCJALIﬂ§E¢MVLY
Although checked somewhat compared with previous years, the increases are still
tangible: 6 percent on the markets from October to November 1981 and 5.6 per-
cent during the same period in stores in the capital. The impact of these in-
creases particularly hurts the purchasing power of workers, whose wages are low.

Purchasing power: The year 1981, declared the year of social benefits, ended
worse than it began. Inflation, which exceeded 100 percent in 1979, had been
reduced to 50 percent in 1980.

In May 1981, the IRES [Institute of Economic and Social Research) said that the
general price increase had fallen nearly to 0. The latest devaluation, imposed
by the IMP, had disastrous consequences. The price index in Kinshasa resumed
its increase, going from 2.6 percent in June to 4.6 percent in July and 7.5
percent in August, wiping out the 15-percent wage increase granted on 1 July

in less than 3 months. Zairian experts accuse the IMF of having miscalculated
on the measures and have strong fears about the purchasing power of the working
people.

Transfer of remuneration and social benefits of expatriates: Precise documen-
tation on the subject is difficult to obtain. Nevertheless, it should be noted
that with respect to transfers of remunerations, the situation is very different
in the two major types of enterprises:

1 -- Export enterprises (which can deduct at the source, without complicated
administrative maneuvers, from 15 to 20 percent of the currency from their
sales) have a satisfactory situation.

2 —- Nonexport companies (which depend, for their transfers, on currency avail-
able from the approved banks) are clearly at a disadvantage and delays of vary-

ing lengths hit technical personnel indispensable to the companies hard. Fur-
thermore, the administrative formalities are more complicated for them.

Conclusion

Thanks to his undeniable political and diplomatic shrewdness, President Hobutu
has succeeded in lending credit to the image of a Zaire progressing slowly but
surely down the path of economic recovery promised in November 1965. The ob-
jective was nearly attained at the beginning of the 1970's, but the march for-
ward was halted in 197‘ by a series of errors of all kinds, including poor ad-
ministrative and financial management and corruption, known but left unpunished.
Consequently, by the end of the decade, Zaire was shot through with a malady
that threatened its very existence.

Spurred on by international organizations and friendly countries trying to
stave off the irreparable, President Hobutu tried in 1978, in a desperate ef-
fort, to get things back on the right track. After the execution of the plan
bearing his name and which.conc1uded at the and of 1980 with a good record,
Zaire received expanded privileges from the IMS in 1981 and enjoyed the under-
standing of the members of the Club of Paris. Only the private banks joined
together in the Club of London have remained distrustful. More realistic and

39
FIII‘IIIICIAIIIEHECMWLV
FOI:0FI1C1AI.IEHE(HVLY

perhaps better informed about the situation inside the country in particular,
they have taken the position of a significant inertia.

At the end of 1981, the Zairian problem took on a political tone that had always
been present but that gradually became more and more important until it finally
predominated. Aware of the trend, President Mobutu exploited it very adroitly
in order to conceal the real situation in his country, which he managed to pre-
sent to the world as much better than it actually it.

Through the long modification of political structures, the apparent democratiza-
tion of the regime has led to the concentration in its hands of a practically
unquestionable and unquestioned discretionary power. Opposition movements
abroad are inoperative and ineffective and their following in Zaire is nonexis-‘
tent.

While the masses support, despite their poverty, a "guide" who presents himself
as irreplaceable and who manages to give credit to the image, the danger of de-
stabilization could come, we repeat, from an army which absolutely does not
share that confidence in the chief of state. Furthermore, since all interest
is directed at the Lower Zaire-Sheba axis, the people in the north, northeast
and Kivu feel frustrated and might react.

Nor must all of this make one forget that, according to international standards,
the majority of the Zairian people are undernourished and that inflation, once

contained, condemns many of them to be content with a barely tolerable minimum.
Some observers fear that the very severe anti-inflation measures applied under
the influence of the IMP may one day lead to social disturbances if the "barons"
of the regime were tempted to make up for their losses at the expense of the
masses.

And yet, seasoned observers think that the political future of President Hobutu
is linked to the success of the IMP plan and they are unanimous in declaring
that there is no other alternative for him if he wishes to continue to govern

his potentially rich country.

We believe that it would be a mistake to underestimate President Mobutu and to
judge his conduct on the basis of our European criteria alone. "African prob-

lems must not," he recently said in an interview granted to the press in Libre-
ville, "be considered on the basis of pro-established cliches. The center, the
left, the right or even the center right and center left have no meaning in our
political concepts."

While we would willingly follow him on this path, we must nevertheless not close
our eyes to inadmissible violations of international morals. He must accept
this point of view if he wishes true integration of the north's technology with
the potential wealth of the south, of which his country is one of the major
pawns in Black Africa.

The revival of economic production has not come about as Zaire and the IMF
wished. That is undoubtedly the most serious aspect about Zaire's current and

long-term situation. In order to get out of the rut, the country has to produce

00
FOR!0FFKJAI.USB(IVLY
more and it ithhe realization of this objective that will determine, on the

part of wealthy nations, continuous aid without which increased production-of
better quality is practically impossible. This also means a considerable ef-
fort to train nationals capable of efficiently using modern techniques and in

the final analysis, real rural development without which any far-reaching pro-
gress is quite~aimply impossible.

As the Zairian chief of state recently stated, with praiseworthy frankness:

"Our country has not yet come out of the tunnel." Some foreign and Zairian
experts have gone even further in asking: "Is Zaire still capable of getting

out of the rut?" Another question: Is the policy imposed on Zaire by the IMF
not too systematic, too rigid, too ill-adapted to Zaire's very particular
contingencies to be able to succeed?

No one seems anxious or capable of answering these agonizing questions.

According to President Mobutu, 1982 will be the "year of consolidation." He

added that he would continue his cooperation with the IMF and the ﬂorld Bank,
that the rural development program would be pushed, that economic recovery

would have his complete support and that his state commissioner for finance
would be his privileged adviser. As we know, 1982 will also be the year of

legislative elections: Hill they bring a change, an improvement? Only the
future will tell.

a 1

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
CSO: a719/707

41
FOIIHﬂﬂClkllﬂﬂEONlN
BRIEFS

DISPUTE ma SOUTH-AFRICA REGARDING mamas-mm” it cease to interfering
with countries it does not approve of , the Pretoria regine will shrink fron no form
of aggression. Lately, the Zambian inhabitants of the Seshekeand Senanga regions,
located on either side of the Zambezi River, at the Namibian border. have been
deprived by South-African troops of their only means of crossing the river: a
pontoon-bridge which the rising waters, which are especially roughat this time of
the year, had displaced. As a :eault, the inhabitants now cross the river on make-
shift canoes, running daily the risk of being overturned by hippopotani, eaten by
crocodiles or drowned in the eddies of the swelling river. The South-Africans
wish to negotiate the return of the pontoon-bridge with Zubezian authorities who,
for their part, refuse such negotiations, and rightfully so since they do no: main-
tain diplomatic relations with the racist South-African state, on the one hand,

and since the pontoon-bridge belongs to then, on the other hand. They demand that
the pontoon-bridge be returned unconditionally. Let us recall that. in the past.
South-African troops have actually occupied lesbian territory in both districts.
The population was then displaced. the schools closed. and the area used to launch
attacks aginst SWO guerillas. [Text] [Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in Pranch No 261.

15-28 last 82 p 15 COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asiel 9294

CSO:lo7l9/757 END

62
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY