FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10715

5 August 1982

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(Fouo' 8/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language scurces
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLIMIll-I REPORT
NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(I'OUO 8/82)

Cou'reurs

ASIA '
JAPAN

ABC's lO-Iear Nuclear Power Malay—mt Plan
(m mm M, 2 Jul 82) O...IOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

norms REPUBLIC OF CHINA

Enﬂmaim for nuclear Plants Reportedly Cooled
(man Chanda; PAR EASTER some KEVIN, h-1o Jun 82). '

LATIN mu
ARGENTINA
Briers
Madam Hunts ‘l‘o Fulfill Program
Ranks on Nuclear Subs Scored
ma EAST All!) NORTH AFRICA
IRAQ

Chronology of Developments in Iraqi Nuclear Industry
(JAKE-BUG“ m WM, J“ 82) 00.000000000000000
mamamomv

SUB-SAHARA)! AFRICA
HIGH! '

Nation Said To Be m won-1d Producer of Uranium
(Mon Alpha Barry; M ”$1003, 19 m 82)....00000.
azc's 104mm man rowan M 9m
ouosnas Tokyo ASA!!! ammo ms in hglieh 2 Jul 82 p 3

{Text} Jepen'e Atoeic Energy Co-ieeion [no] hee decided on e lO—yeer nucleer power
developaent progree oiled et developing feet breeder reectore for precticel uee eround
2010. The ac. heeded by Ichiro hekegeve. cebinet linieter end chief of the Science

and Technology Agency. hee cowiled the eixth long-ter- project otter reviewing the preeent
plan worked out in l970. Officiele eeid wedneedey the not: won. wee eepped out in view
of infleted expectetione for etebi1ited eupply of nucleer power.

The nev long-ter- plen. budgeted et SJOO billion yen (et 1982 pricee). eetieetee

nucleer power ie fiecel 1990 et ‘6 Iillion kilovett-houre (M). rising to 90 million

M in fiecel 2000. It reco-ende thet the next-generetion feet breeder reector be
brought into co-erciel operetion by eround 2010. end thet 3.000 svu (Seperetive work
Unit) tone of enriched ureniu be produced donuticelly ennuelly by eroend the yeer 2000.
The Ace eleo propoeed full utiliee'tion of plutoniu through the edvenced therIel converter
reector end the light-voter reector by 1990.

It looked iorverd to privete induetry'e poeitive colleboretion in building end running
theee plente. end euggeeted thet the tile hee cone for Jepen to ooneider exportim nucleer

power technology end releted equip-out. with theee proepecte in eind. the All: e-pheeized
the need for the notion to pro-ote e nucleer nonproliferation policy.

mPYRIGiT: Aeehi Evening News 1982
cso: 5100/2213

1
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PEOPLE'S munuc OF CHINA

ENTHUSIASI FOR NUCLEAR PLANTS WTEDLY coonm

mw937 Bong Kong PAR EASTERN aomomc ”VIN in English 6-10 Jul 82 pp 12.
13

[Article by Nayan (beside. Hong Kong]

[Excerpt] According to unconfined reporte, French Poreign Hinieter Claude
Cheyeeon ie echeduled to vieit China in July. but Jobert'e count, if it
is truly reflective of the French Govern-ent'e policy, would tend to caet
doubt on euch a vieit. however. ainoe Jobert'e unhappy trip to Chin laet
year there have been exchangee of military delegations. Laet eonth’ China
eiped an agreemnt with a French company to buy PR 275 #11101: (ussas ail-
lion) worth of coal nining equipnent—the noet iaportant deal eince the eu-
ner of 1930. but Jobert eeid that nothing hae cone out of the (hineee agree-
aent in principle—announced by former President Valery Giecard d'Betaing

in October 198) during hie vieit to amine—to buy two nuclear power etationa
worth R8 billion.

(mina'e enthuaiaen for nuclear plante haa apparently been cooled by lack of
money. The noet likely one to go dread ie Guangdong Province. which would
eell power to Bong Kong'e China Light and Power. Sourcea in Bong Kong euggeet
Prance'e Pranatone. which nenufacturee a preaeurieed water reactor under a
licence from Heatinghouae of the United States, ie the front moor for the
nuclear engineering pert of the Ouangdong-hong Kong project. However. there
is etill eone way to go before thie is finalized, eo France ie anxioue to find
alternative eerkete if the mangdong deal doee not work out.

The French buoineae cot-unity hae ahown dieenchantnent at the low level of
business with China deepite good bilateral relatione eince 1966. French exb
ports to China roee by only 15 percent laat year from 198), while exporta to
Taiwan shot up by 68.8 percent. France ha a favorable trade balance with

Taiwan while the oppoeite ia the case with Gaine.

Jobert reflected acne of thie fruetration when aeked about the developmt of
French trade with Taiwan. Since French policy for many yeara hae been to have
good political ties with China, Paria haa taken care to do nothing to hurt
China'e feelinge in ite dealing with Taiwan, in fact "a little too ouch" in
Jobert'e View. He eaid that if China did not buy the nuclear power etetiom
from France the latter could "eell than eleewhere." implying Taiwan. Informed
eourcee told the REVIEW that Taiwan hae shown great lntereet in buying French-
built nuclear power etationa if France were to grant. along other thinge.

POIOF'FIGMJJSEONLY
”OFFICIALUSIONLV

landing ditto in Porn for tdvu'o flu-carrier China Airman. Asked if
Frau bod coutdorod tho poutbmty of rolling or- to Taiwan. Jobort at
ﬂat and: "lo do not have a precise policy." But htor ho corrected hin-
oolf uying: "Ho or. not upociany concorud with this proopoct.”

680: 5100/2197

LUSEONLY
MADE!!!) WANTS TO FULFILL “DOW-nuance Aim, 7 Jul (IMO-4t has been
officially reported that Vice Ad- Carlos Castro Hadero, president of the
National Atoaic Energy Cos-ission (018A), today proposed to President
Reynaldo Bignone the adoption of sons econonic neasuree for continuing

the national nuclear plan without any problem. Today Castro hadero talked
with Bignone for more that 30 minutes at (‘ove'rnnent House, explaining to
the chief of state the problens confronting the CNEA in fulfilling the

c rrent nuclear lan because of e diffic t f ici l bud t ituation.
The projects mdgr construction‘slr‘Mch nsyube delayed due E: s ortage of

funds are the nuclear plants of asbalse Rio 'l'ercero in Cordoba. Atuchs 11
in Buenos Aires and the Arroyito heavy water plant in Neuquen Province. a_
plant which is vital for Argentina to cowlete the nuclear fuel preparation
cycle. [Excerpt] (“081237 Buanos Aires m in Spanish 1619 or! 7 Jul 82]

REMARKS 0N NUQEAR SUBS SOORBD—duenos Aires, 5 Jul (mm—Mferring to the
possibility that the National Atoaic Energy Con-lesion [OIBA] could build

a nuclear subnarine. for-user (:NBA technological manager Jorge Sabato stated
that it would be "the most outrageous shaaalessness" of the military to
"decide for theneelves and by themelves the investment of sore my in
armaments." Sabato made these renarks to DYN. referring to rensrks made by
(NEA (hair-an Carlos Castro Hadero, who does not discard the possibility that
Argentina could build a nuclesrpowered stbnrine in the near future. since
we have the technical elenents to begin the task. Sabato said he had "no
objection to the accomplish-ant of feasibility studies for the construction
of a nuclear-powered subnarine and that it be done by the ORA, which ho
great technical coqetence." but added that "the final decision nust be
adopter: by a constitutional government." He also expressed his "profound
concern over the subject itself. because it would seen that Argentina is
withdrawing fron its traditional line in antters of nuclear energy. which
so far has been used exclusively for peaceful purposes. A nuclear subnsrine
could be the first step toward the developnent of nuclear weapons," he
stated. As a "final thought" Sabato stated that "the comtry has nuch sore
important priorities than nuclear stbsarines." he cited along other things
education and homing, and added. that there are "other priorities in the very
field of nuclear energy." [Text] [PYONMS Busnos Aires mm in Spanish

1135 GHT 5 Jul 82]

C50: 5100/2216

1;
MWLLSEWLY
MWALWONLY

IRAQ

WOPDMOPWSINMIWMSM
Duesseldorf JAERBUCB DER AW in Como Jan 1982 Vol 13. pp 176~l76
[Text] lo April: IABO inspections in Iran. Iraq and Pakistsn

According to a report of the president of the International Aconic Energy 0r-
ganization to the IABO governors council, the IAEO carried out routine inspec-
tions in the Iraqi nuclear research center in 1981 as wall as in Iran and in
Pakistan in October 1980, in each of which "satisfactory proofs” of the entire
anount of nuclear laterial were given.

Israeli Air Attack at Osirak

On Sunday. 7 June 1981, Israeli fighter jets (eight Y-l6's fro- the USA with
six P-lS'c as fighter cover) boobed the Osirak research reactor of the Iraqi
nuclear research center in Ten: near ‘rawaitha, apprai-ately 20 In Southwest
of Baghdad, which had been built by the trench and was ready to be used. The
reactor was heavily danaged, perhaps conpletely destroyed. Since the core had
not been charged yet. no radioactivity escaped.

The planes, which obviously flaw along the Jordanian-Saudi Arabian border. were
neither detected by Iraq nor by the Saudi Arabia-stationed AHACS plane which
patrols the Persian Gulf. and returned without any losses. Jordanian stations
that detected the {oration were aisled by Arabic radio traffic.

Lasting news accounts stating the attack had been on a nuclear power plant are
false. There are no nuclear power plants in Iraq, neither in use nor in the
process of being built or planned. According to infor-ation tron the 1AM, all
reactor aitea in Iraq are located in the research center at Tame. Here there
are l) the small research reactor at 2000, a wining-pool type reactor which
was delivered by the Soviet Union and has been in use since 1967. working with
uranium that has been enriched to 10 percent, 36 percent and 80 percent re-
spectively; 2) the nearly cowleted large Osirak research reactor called Talus-l.
a tank-ewi-ing pool reactor under construction by the French since 1977 and
which. according to IABO. has a capacity of £0 with and should start working
this year. and, belonging to Tame-l, a critical set-up. talus-2. with a 500
kWth capacity‘. Both plants should be fed uranit- that has been enriched with
0235 to 93 percent. In addition to this. there are the respective fuel depots
in Tau: as well as a laboratory with hot cells. delivered by the Italians.

5
mmuaowu
INJI‘OFV1CJAI.IISEZCMNLV

Osirak resembles the Osiris reactor which is being operated in the trench nu-
clear research center at Saclay with a capacity of 70 Hﬂth. According to the
present inforaation. the building at Osirak and the inner walling were heavily
damaged; however. no damages were reported froa Tamua-Z nor froa the depot

of irradiated nuclear fuel. '

After the announcement of the action which came only after a report on Jordanian
radio on 8 June 1981. the action was justified by the Israeli prime minister

H. Begin by saying that Iraq intended to produce atomic bombs with the help of
the Osirsk facility which would be a life-threatening menace for Israel. This
statement was instantly rejected. The IABO pointed out that Iraq had signed
the non-proliferation treaty in 1970 and had accepted supervision of all its
nuclear-technical work by the IAIO (both of which are not the case for Israel.
The supervision was carried out satisfactorily with the last inspection having
taken place in January 1981. In spite of using fuel elements containing highly
enriched uranium, which actually is appropriate for the production of nuclear
weapons. a swimming-pool reactor would be of little use in the production of
nuclear material, since the visual supervision of the nucleus of the reactor

is very easy. Besides that, the plutoniua could hardly be concealed because in
the fuel eleaents, only very saall aaounts of plutoniua are produced and a
nantle of breeding elements would be instantly detectable. In addition, the
presence of many technicians of the delivering country would provide additional
safety against any misuse of the fissionable material. francs points out that
Osirsk is supposed to have 10 annual working periods of 20 days each, during
which the aininum aaount of Pu necessary for a bomb could not be produced.
France has also irradiated the first fuel elements before delivery. which

would definitely make misuse of the eleaents auch aore probleaatic.

While according to IAEO information, during the inspection the fuel for the
Taauz reactors had been found. the french point out that the fuel elements that
had originally been delivered for the critical set-up had been returned to
trance after the first air attack on the research center which was flown on

30 Septeaber 1980 by unidentified aircraft. not causing any najor damage. and
that the delivery of the eleaents for Tamuz-l which was planned for this fall,
had not been coapleted yet.

The Israeli action has been unanimously condo-nod worldwide. The Security
Council of the UN passed an appropriate resolution which, however. does not
contain any sanctions against Israel. 0.8. President R. Reagan ordered an
export ban on four fighter jets that stood ready for delivery to Israel. IAIO
chief secretary s. Eklund called the Israeli action an attack on the control
system of the IAED. However. the IAEO does not have the power to take any
steps in case of detection of any violations of its safety controls. On

12 June 1981 the IAEO governors council passed a resulution which calls on the
IAED general-conference of next Septenber to consider all the consequences of
the action. including a teaporary suspension of Israel's rights as an IAEO
aember and to help Iraq overcome the effects of the attack (of the 34 aembers
of the governors council, Canada and the United States voted against the resolu-
tion and Australia, Sweden and Switzerland abstained).

IIIIGJIIICIAI.|IBI:II‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

In France as well as from the Israeli opposition. the action of Begin is being
criticized even under consideration of the fact that Israel feels threatened.
nainly because not all diplomatic possibilities for neasures against this threat
had been taken. Rspecially since the election of P. Hitterrand as president,
who holds a critical view of the delivery of the Osirak facility, Preach
neasures are to be taken into consideration. This includes the question of
delivery of fuel elenents with low enrichmt. Such ele-enta had already been
developed under consideration of the lion-Proliferation treaty by the french
62A under the nane CARMEL with less then 10 percent enrith and had been
tested in Osiris. However. they had been rejected by Iraq under reference to
the specifications of the treaty and their still-lacking experience and certain
difficulties with the use of the eluents.

The worldwide response is even intensified by the fact that this is the first
nilitary attack on a nuclear facility in the world. The consideration of the
safety aspects of such plants took for granted that. since every country has
such plants, and therefore. lust expect an appropriate countarattack, such
actions could be considered as highly ilprobable. However. when Begin gave
the reasons for the date of the (obviously long-planned but delayed) attack.
he especially pointed out that the attack had to be carried out before the
plant started working so that no radioactivity could leak out.

1 August: Osirak still unavailable

On 18 June 1981, earlier than expected. the mac sent supervisors to the Iraqi
nuclear research center at ‘ra-ut where the research reactor Tame-l (Osirak)
had been heavily den-aged during the Israeli air attack on 7 June 1981. also
during which the French engineer D. Chaussepied iron the fire Air Liquids lost
his life. Since the supervisors were not able to follow the conditions of the
Iraqi authorities who demanded that a bond be signed which freed the Iraqi
Goveth of any responsibilities for the personal safety of the supervisors.
they were not able, ”due to suspicion of unexploded boobs and the extent of the
damage, to get close to the daaaged site and to inspect the fuel of the Ten:
reactors.“ as non president 8. mund explained on 6 July 1981 before the nso
governors council. however, the supervisors inspected the reactor 13‘! 2000
which had not been danged and the depot of natural and enriched uraniue, where
no changes since the last inspection could be notice. 0n 2 July 1981. the um
president laid off the 0.8. 1m supervisor, R. Richters, without notice on the
grounds of serious violations in connection with the security of secret infom-
tion that had been obtained by the nether countries. Richters, who belonged to
the IAEO since February 1978 and who had been appointed to the section South
and Southeast since 16 March 1979, but had not been deployed in Iraq itself.
offered his resignation to the IASO from the United States on 18 June 1981,
effective iron 16 June 1981. On 19 June 1981 he appeared before a co-ittee
of the American Congress and criticized the effectiveness of the IAEO control-
function, especially with respect to Osirak. Already earlier he had written

a secret docueent about the safety controls available to the 0.8. enbassy in
Vienna.

Saudi Arabia announced it was ready to finance the re-establishaent of the re-
search center and confined officially that King Kahled had told the French

“WALUSIONLY
”OWN-08101913

president 1'. hitterrend hed pointed out thet lrence wee beeicelly willing to
provide e new reecter, but only it e11 guerenteee euinet nieuee for nilitery
purpoeee were kept. here the queetien of delivery of low-enriched fuel will
probebly eleo be of inortence. ln Frence it ie nheeiud thet ell theee
queetione will be coneidered only eiter Ireq hee nede the eppropriete requeet.

1 October: 0eirek ie to be rebuilt

Ae ennounced eiter telke with the deputy prine ninieter of tree. '1. Arie, in
aid-Met in l’erie with Preeident 1. liitterrend end eeverel einietere. hence
is willing to orgenize the reconstruction of the reeeerch reector Tenn-l
(Oeirek) of the Ireqi reeeerch center which hed been deetroyed during the
Iereeli eir etteck of 7 June 1981.

however, Prence denende nore inr-reeching guerenteee for the excluOively peece-
tul one of the plent then hed been incorporeted into the originel contrect.
negotietione ebout deteile will euppoeedly be tehen up in the neer future.

The ace of low-enriched fuel end en even etroneer augment of the um
control function ie teken into connideretion ee well ee the presume of

French epecieliete in the lreqi center for e longer period of tine then the
plenned 10 yeere. smdi Arebie hee declered ite willingneee to tinence the

reconetruction.
b Decenber: um eupervieore inepect 'ruweithe

he the um ennounced. two of its eupervieore cerried out eefety inepectione
tron 15-17 hovenber 1981 in the lreqi nuclear reeeerch center at ‘ruweithe neer
Beghded eiter the Ireqi covert-eat hed ennounced on 9 Jenuery 1981 thet the
buildinge oi the Tenn. reectore could be vieited min efter diepoeel oi bonhe
end pertielly deneged eourcee of redietion. Accordin; to the report, no nine
of eny violetion epinet the eefety control treety between Ireq end the IA!)
were found. lhe eeteriel wee in egre-ent with eerlier inepectione on 28 end
29 June 1980 end on 18 end 19 Jenuery 1981 (eiter the firet eir etteck on

30 Septenber 1980). of the 39 highly enriched fuel eluente. one wee loceted
in the hell of the reactor, the other 38 were irredietins in the hue of the
enell Tense-2 reector which hed not been deneaed during the eir etteck on

7 June 1981. The directly edjeccnt building of the big reeeerch reector
‘l'e-uz-l (Oeireh), howenr, ie heevily danced. Alec the reeeerch reector

m 2000 end the depot for neturel end enriched ureniu were unchensed. ‘l'he
eupervieore were eleo eehed by the lreqi euthoritiee to erenine the supplier
of Yellow Cehe, the delivery of which hed been pointed out to the IABO by lreq
end the delivering countriee. They will be put under um control before being
need. e4. chenicelly cleened.

2 lurch: Duel cycle. Portugueee urenim delivery to Ireq

In 1980 epproxinetely 100 t 03 with e velue of ebout an 20 eillion (epproxi-
netely $8 eillion) were deliver iron Yortugel to lreq. The delivered count
corresponds approxinately to one year's production. In 1986 hovever. a new
uraniun factory will be started in Alta Alentejo which will increase the annual
production to 270 t "308- The delivery of uraniun was compensation for the
delivery of oil fro- Iraq which covers 40 percent of the Portugese (la-and.

3 May: International treaties

Belgium-Iraqi nuclear treaty.

0n the occasion of a visit of the Belgian secretary for foreign trade in
Baghdad. a treaty betveen Belgiua and Iraq was signed concerning cooperation
in the field of nuclear energy. It runs for one year and can be renewed. One
of the projects is the production of uranim from the phosphates of [Ll-Kain.

comrcn'r: 1982 by Handelshlatt GmbH, Dnesaeldorf.

9280
CSO: 8120/1422

9
POIOI‘FICIALNEONLY
we OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RICH

RATIO“ SAID 10 33 um mam PRODUCE 0P URANIUM
Parie mm AFRIQUB in French No 111$. 19 Hay 82 pp $7.50
[Article by Hamdou Alpha Berry: '”In the Beginning There Wee Uraniun"

[Text] Parie' attention to Niger ie not dieintereeted. Niger, indeed, ie the
fifth ranking world producer of a etrategic product: uraniun. Although ae far
as overall trade ia concerned Niger renka only 66th no a world eupplier of
France and 10th of Africa and ranks 63rd ae France'e cuetoner and 13th ea
Africa's, it ie the no 1 foreign eupplier of uraniue (coming before Gabon and
Cenada)-nore epecifically, in nerketable concentratee of about 70 percent
uranium.

Purchases of thie ore by the French 000m [General Conpany of Nuclear Mater-
ials] roee fron 930 tone in 1977 to 1,690 tone in 1981. To thie met be added.
aleo for 1981. the purchaee of 600 tone by the CEA [Atonic Energy Col-ieeion],
or a total of 7,000 tone for the period under coneideration. Thie repreeente
a total of 172 billion CPA france. Niger euppliee an equivalent of nore than
30 percent of French neede in thie ore.

It ie to be noted that since 1979. Pranco-lligerien trade has evolved in favor
of Niger. prinarily becauee of French purchaeee of ureniun. Rigor, along with
Gabon. ie the only country in the franc zone whoee trade balance with trance
shows a eurplue. In 1981, the enall increaee in the value of Nigerien exporte
to France reflected the drop in the price of ureniun. The diecovery in 1966
of nineable uraniun-bearing depoeite at the foot of Air mountain near the
city of Arlit, 950 kilo-etere northeaet of Money, wee a veritable godeend

for Niger. Vaet but epareely populated (four inhabitante per equate kilo-
neter). ravaged by drought and, to top it off. located in the heart of the
continent. nore than 1.000 kilonetere fro- eny outlet to the eea. thie country
in laying e.‘.l ite hopee on uranium

scum [Air Region Mining Omani]. with capital mounting to 5.3 billion CIA
france. was for-ed in 1968. France, through comm. clained the njority of
its eharee. when the nine becene operational in 1971. ﬂiger received a pitiful
1 billion CPA france as a dividend. Once in power in April 1976. the OB
[Supra-e Military Council] tried to break France'e nonopoly. The new govern-
nent obtained a eubetantial increeee in ite ehare, rieing fron 17 to 33 percent.
It also eubecribed to 31 percent of the capital (3.5 billion on france) of

10
”MMONIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOHINAK lAkouta Mining Conpeny] which, in 1978, began lining a deposit located
10 kiloneters from that of Arlit. In 1976. the nilitary regine also set up
ONARDi [National Office of Mineral Resources]. which took over the state's in-
terests in both conpsnies.

Uranium production increased rapidly: fro. 610 tons in 1971. it rose to

2,249 tons in 1978 once smx becane operational. The following year, Niger
went up to fifth ranking in the world with production of 3,500 tons. caning
after the United States. Canada, South Africa and Ila-ibis but ahead of Trance.
(It is to he noted that this ranking does not include the 0833, East Europe or
China, where production levels are unknown.) It is estinated that Niger will
supply 4,860 tons of mania in 1982.

A precious ore, therefore. that has becone the prinary foreign currency re-
source of the country. Besides its share dividends and the sale of stock a1-
loted to cm, the state draws royalties fron production, custom duties on
exports and a tax on profits. Result: revenues derived frol uraniul repre-
sent 30 to 1.0 percent of the Nigerian budget. fixed st 93.3 billion CPA francs
for 1982. This result is largely due to the rapid rise in the price of uran-
iun following the energy crisis of 1973: 5.000 CPA francs a kilogram in 1971,
14,000 CPA francs in 1976 and 26,500 CPA francs in 1980. Eighty percent of ex-
port revenues cones fron the sale of this product. However, the petroleu-
crisis had positive effects not only on uraniu. The drop in scononic activ-
ity in the industrialized countries and ecological duonstrations against all
nuclear plants resulted in a revision of electro-nuclear program. This re-
sulted in a sharp drop in the world price of this strategic ore, which fell
to 16,500 CPA francs a kilogra- in 1981. It was only after negotiations
between Nigerien and French officials and representatives of other partners
that Niger obtained preferential rates: 20,000 CPA francs a kilogram in 1981
and 24,000 CPA francs in 1982. Nevertheless, it is to be noted that these
prices rennin lower than the prices 2 years ago. As a result. there was a
cut of 8 billion CPA francs free the 1981 budget and a 9 billion shortage to
be nade up conpared with revenue estimates for 1982. On the other bend, the
record of 5m [Tassa-N'Taghalgue Mining Coupany] for the nining of a third
uranium deposit in the vicinity of Arlit could benefit through more preferential
treatment by the Prench Government. This conpany was for-ed in 1979. Its
capital of 10.5 billion CPA francs is divided three ways, i.e.. anong 01mm.
com and a Kuveiti fin.

with proven reserves of 160,000 tons, Niger could. by 1990, be the no 1
African producer and the fourth world producer. with 8,000 to 11,000 tons of
uranium concentrates. However, given the uncertainty over prices, it is at the
very least risky to project that Niger could derive sufficient revenue fron
ureniu- to bring about a genuine econonic take-off.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982.

5671
CSO: 5100/5685 3ND

11
M OFFICIAL us: ONLY