FOR ommu. USE ONLY

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 11/82)

DREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATIC

MWWMY
JPIS publications contain inforntion pri-rily fro. foreign
nevspapers, periodicals and books, but: also iron news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. hterinls fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those tron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and uterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPBS. Processing indicators such as [Test]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation as
processed. lliere no processing indicator is given, the inﬂor-
ntion was sumrized or extracted.

Unﬁniliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or ones preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. files within itm are as
given by source.

to contents of this publication in no my represent the poli-
cies, vim or attitudes of the 0.8. Covert-ant.

COPYRIm HHS AND [NATION cavmmc man 0?
tumms REPRODUCED HEREIN REQIIRE mt DISSEHIRATIGI
OF HIS WEICATIOU IE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
mmmmcouu

JPRS
14 He

Willi REPORT
Temcomxcanous POLICY, RESEARCH AND ﬁevewm

(moo 11/32)
Commas

ASIA
JAPAII

Satellite Press Transmission To Be ‘rested
(thm, 7Apr 82) .......

Satellite Ptess Trustissiou 'l'est Successful
(ASAIII zvmnc mm. 15 Apr 82) ...
9381‘ more
1811!”th AFFAIRS

Briefs
French-Swedish Renate Sensing

macs

Govern-eat Tries To nefocus "otld Radio Station
(Abdelssis Dsh-ani; m ”noun. 3 Na: 82) ...........

Satellite Inge Distribution Coqsny To Have 13 Stockholders
(Pierre Langereux; Al"! 81' 606108. 27 ﬂat 82) ...........

Briefs
New Gena Ingery Satellite

UNITED um

Satellite TV Plsns Announced
(1113 mes, 21 m 82)
sarmrr: mass mmssmw to as man
woum'rokyomz mamas manna: 7Apr82p 3

[Text] The first test to tune-it naspaper pages via a co-unication
satellite with a digital electric trans-lesion syst- will be held between
April 12 and 23, the Poets and Teleco-nucatiom ministry announced Monday.

The test will he conducted with the cooperation of the Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Public Corporation, the Japan Mspaper Publishers an‘a Editors
Association and the National Space Develop-ant Agency, using ASA!!! sensors
conputerized digital electrical trans-lesion systel.

Similar tests using the alalog nethod were held last February.

Fourteen newspapers, including the ASAEI, the HAM! and the YMURI,
are sending pages between their offices in the tests.

If the tests are successful. they will open a path toward sending large
amount of intonation very rapidly to neny destinations.

The experinent is divided into two different tests. The run test is to he
held between April 12 and 15: a tram-itting station will he set up at the
ASA!!! snneun's Tokyo head office in Teuhiji to send and receive the news-
paper's pages via the satellite fselmre."

The PS! test will he held between April 19 and 23. A traneeitting station
will also he set up at ASA!!! salmon. The pages will be modulated and sent
to the electric wave research center in lashi- via the satellite to he
a-plified and again sent back to the transnitting station via the
satellite. In this test, the infomtion will also be electrically trans-
titted to a station set up at the ASA!!! SEMUII's Osaka office.

oomma‘r: Aaahi Evening new 1982

050: 5500/2221

mmmonu
SATELITE PRES W810! m SWESSFUI.
M70200 Tokyo ASABI mm; IBIS in English 15 Apr 82 p 3

[Text] The aperi-ental wireless transnieeion of newspaper pages using the
experi-ental co-Inications satellite, Saturn, was successfully carried
out by the Posts and Teleoo-nnications Hinistry Tuesday (13 April] at the
ASMII saneuu's head office in Tsukiji, Tokyo. the very clear negative
file received is shown in the photograph.

The wireless tram-union of the test pattern, which was canister-edited by
the ASAEI, was reputed. and the test results were very good. The test
started out with an output of 100 watts end output was gradually lowered

to 10 watts. There were no errors.

The tests were carried out by the einietty with the cooperation of the
llippon Telegraph ad Telephone [m] Public Corporation, and others.

A vehicle-nomad relay station of the m perked in the ASABI's parking
area was used to send the trasniasion free the nayspaper's page trans-
eission device to Sakura. the signals received bad: fro- the satellite

were relayed by the station to the ASABI'e receiving device to produce
the negative file.

Sinilnr tests were to be carried out Wednesday [16 April] using the pages

of 13 newspapers, including the lumen! sans”, WI SHMUNJ'OUO
sauna: and III)! IBIZA! sansus.

comma: Asdai Evening love 1982

(30 5500/2221

mammouu
rum-mm: M sesame-4h. CIR [(Prench) Iationll Conn: for Space
Studies] and the sec [Swedish Space Ooryoration] are putting the matching

(Sweden) to receive images fro the mrican Landsat 0 and trench 8901' satellites.

and for the creation of two new mania to larket the data Ira these satel-
lites. Then coqanies vill be capitalized at 2l aillicn Swedish kroner. 10 per-
cent of which will be financed by France. lie recall that Swedish may already
participates in the construction or the swr catcnitt. for which mm [Icelan-

ics. Aviation and Traction many is prise contractor. Text] [Paris an 31'
cases in punch 21 pct: 02 p 39] mm: A. s c. 1932 9399

080: 5500/2154

mmmmv
W mm 10 was now: lADIO 81A?!“
Paris Jamie unique in trench lo 110‘. 3 her 82 p 50
[Article by Abdelasiz Dal-Alli! "the World within Voice Range']

[Text] During the last presidential awaign. Valery Giscard d'Bstaing spoke

of “the grandeur of France.‘ and Francois llitterrand or 'the good fortune of the
French.“ But very quickly. Prancoia Hitterrand proved to he nore Gaulle-ian than
his predecessors in the breadth of his views on the prohless of the planet.

And so the French govern-ant has decided to ”he its voice heard virtually every-
where throughout the world by means of radio. It has an instrunent available to
it for this purpose: non [mm-m mum]. But the upset of this
station is linited owing to technical and financial reasons.

Further-ore, this 'Voice of Prance' is essentially oriented towards Prench speak-
ing Arrica south or the Sahara (Southern Service) and. to a lesser estent towards
East Europe (Eastern Service). The User Bast. the Persian Gulf. Latin Aeerica.
Scutheast Asia and even the very near naghreb are so-ehow heing neglected. It is
not surprising that these have hecone the favorite targets of other radio broad-
cast networks. such as VOA (VOXCB 0? men), the British BBC, the m
we and RADIO meow.

Francois hitterrand's France now wants to sake up for lost tine, even at the risk
of being labeled expansionist. The 'new world intorntion order' indeed provides
for reducing the stranglehold or the big powers. their press agencies and their
radio broadcast services on intonation. This new order has as its sponsor
UNESCO. One of its staunchest defenders has been nerve Bourges. while he was

the spokes-an of that organization. This nedia specialist has a profoimd know-
ledge of the probles. having written a book titled ’Deooloniser l'inforsation [De-
colonising InfornationJ.' Now. since January 1902. ﬂerve Bourges is the head of
8-H. Andit ieheuponwhonithasdevolvedtosuhnittothel’renchgoverneent
an ambitious plan for developing the activities or 3-?! over the next 5 years.

R-Pl ranks 28th anong the world's radio stations according to the HANDBOOK-1982

classification. It broadcasts 125 hours per week versus 119 hours for the sec.
804 hours for the um um. Moreover. 11-?! programs are broadcast in only

mammal!“
five languages (mropean), versus 30 for the BBC and 33 for the m um.
It; budget was 10 aillion francs in 1981. versus 510 aillion for the VOA. £10 ail-
1ion for the sac 'overseas service.’ and 700 aillion for the German network...

The “Bourges Plan' provides for expanding the 20 transaitters located in France.
building a relay station in Guyane (for Latin Aaerica), a transmitting center on
neunion Island (for Southeast Asia). and increasing the power of the suns
[expansion unknown] transaitter on Wprus (for all Arabic countries).

In 1985. according to the plan, there will he 500 hours of broadcasting: 126 to
Black Africa: 1.26 to East mrope; 141 to Latin America: 66 to Southeast Asia: 14
to the llaghreb: 1‘ to the Ilear East. and 1 to Geraany.

To Black Africa. beginning in 1983. 3-?! will introduce prograaing in Swahili,
Amharic and Hausa. It will broadcast to Angola and ”antique. Broadcasts to the
naghreb and to the Riddle East will he in trench and Arabic. But its Iain effort
will be directed toward Central Aaerica and South Alerica, a sane that has becoae
of the hiﬁnest priority to French interests.

1» counterbalance this offensive. a—n will provide more cooperation to the
various national radio broadcast networks, no longer requiring then to broadcast
certain pr’ogra-s as is presently being done. 'no enjoy greater independence. 3-?!
will also create its own written press agency. It will pool its own intonation
with telex and press releases by the mai d'Orsay (Preach minis of roreign
Affairs) and the dispatches of the m [m m 08 passes The clients
of this service will be essentially the African and llaghrebian newspapers.

in return, this agency will furnish intonation to the French press. especially
the regional press. 0n the developing cuntries. 'liis greatest quality consists
of pairing his sensitivenesa together with the hopes of the Third World and his
love for his own country, his opemess to others with being true to hinelf.‘
said Anadou-lahtar u'now, director general of omen, of nerve Bourges upon the
latter's departure fro- Place Pontenoy for the 3-”. And those who have long
known his have added: 'lle will not betray that quality... ."

mm: 1982 Jeane Afrique ma.

9399
60: 5500/2154

"WISE“?
SATELLITE nuns otsmama comm 10 HAVE 13 mm

Paris AIR 31' cosnos in trench 2,7 liar 82 p 39
[Article by Pierre Langereus: 'Ispending Creation of am m which will Dis-
tribute spar mgu']

[text] The interninisterial neeting of 2s larch authorised the cues National
Center for Space Studies] and the tan [National Geographic Institute to parti-
cipate ﬁnancially in the capitalization of the future '90! Inage' many which
will ngrket the data iron the trench remote-sensing 8m [Barth (beervation Probe
SystenJ satellites. A decree will be published shortly confining this decision,
which will then enable the creation of the coqany. 31m Inage will thus prob-
ably be for-ed between lid-April and laid-Hay 1982. -

Initially, SPOT Inge will have 13 stockholders. four of who. will be public
entities (cues. Ian. 11'? [French Fetroleun Institute]. on bureau of Geological
and Mining Exploration}. faur banks (Credit Lyonnais, all? lational Bank of
Paris], Paribas and Societe Generale). two industrial aer enterprises
(Mm hecha'nics. Aviation and Traction Coupany] and 83? Buropean Propellant
Comany . and one IRDI [Regional Institute for Industrial Develop-ant}¢he IRDI-
hidi-Pyrenees [mm-Southern France-Pyrenees]. In addition to these French
stockholders. there will also be two foreign stockholders: The Swedish space
agency (Swedish Space Corporation) and a Belgian entity that has yet to be naned.
Share ownership will be as follows: CBS 34 percent: 16!, In and one: each l0
percent: and the SP0: prise contractors mm and 831’ each 7.5 percent. The
Swedish Space Corporation will own 6 percent. and the Belgian entity e percent.
The banks and the IRDI-nidi-Pyremes will each own 1.2 percent. This leaves

5 percent still to he assigned (probably to an agricultural public establish-ant)
but teqzorarily held by are cars. the capital will be 25 nillion francs.

The 8901' Inge cowany will be headed by llr Gerard Brachet of the was as presi-
dent; its general nanager will be Mr Andre Pontanel of the In. em Inage will
have its head office at ‘Doulouse and begin operations this year with a staff of

7 persons that is expected to grow to sons so persons by 198‘. Its staff will
consist Iainly of technicians and narketing cadres. By l982.a subsidiary will be
established in the United States, where a substantial part of the narket for GM
inages is located.

“WISEONLY
SPOT image will operate the French SPOT satellites equipped with high-resolution,
stereoscopic, visible- and near-intrared-spectrus caseras. The first such satel-
lite. SPOT 1, is scheduled to be launched in early July 1984. The second.

070'! 2. identical to the first. could be launched by June or July 1985 should it
be necessary; otherwise. it will not be launched until souetine during the second
half or 1986. Both satellites will be put into low orbit at an altitude of 800
km (heliosynchronous) by Ariane rockets. Pour satellites will be needed to pro-
vide service for at least 10 years. The actualisation of the satellites that are
to follow SPOT 3 and SPOT 4 will be the object of a proposal to be sub-itted by
the ompany to its stockholders and oversight authorities in 1903.

The cowany will be responsible for Iarketing the SPOT [real-tine or delayed-
transnission] data received by the two central stations of the network, installed
at Toulouse (France) and Kiruna (Sweden). The French station will receive an
average of 5 orbits per day: the Swedish one, in Lapland. will receive up to 10
orbits per day. SPOT Image will also earket the data received (directly) by the
roreign stations equipped to pick up SPOT signals. SPO! stations are already
being planned for Ouagadougou (Africa) and Bangladesh, in addition to Sweden.
Negotiations are also under way with Australia. Canada and Brazil to equip these
countries with SPOT stations, and a feasibility study has been made by the cam
on the installation of such a station in Kenya. Other interested countries
include Japan. Argentina, India... .

trance per raw inage tor the data received by foreign stations. and at 5.000
francs per processed and guaranteed (tree of cloudage) image for those received
by the central statio . In the latter case, the user will be assured a fully
exploitable image (tiled, preprocessed and recorded on Iagnetic tape to facili-
tate specific subsequent utilization).

COPYMGBT: A. 6 C. 1982

9399
C80: 5500/ 2193

FOIOFIICIALISEONLY
new sauna Inncznr sasznhrrsiarhe curs [national Center for Space Studies] has
undertaken the actualization of a trench scientific satellite to be orbited by
the end of 1985 (October 0: Decedwer) with the first denomtration flight of the
new European launcher Ariane d at [curcu (see All! 81' mos no 893). this gem
iugery satellite, baptized Sig-a. will be injected into a very elliptic orbit
having a 3,000 I:- perigee and a 200,000 In: apogee. ‘lhe satellite. which will
weigh around 1.5 tone, will be equipped essentially with a telescope and ga-a
ray detectors weighing arm 500 kg. sigla'e nieeion will be to detect and
localize. with a precision of a few minutes of arc. the meet: of gene rays in
outer epace. The Sign draft-project phaee ie to be concluded in June 1902. We
recall that the future Ariane d rocket. the building of which has just been
decided by the nether countries of the an [auropean Space Agency]. will be capa-
ble 0! putting 4.3 tons into geostationary tranaier orbit (zoo-36.000 kn).

[Text] [Paris AIR er cosmos in Prench 21 Feb 92 p 39] [cowxnicars A. a c. 1992]
9399

“0: 5500/2154

mammal“
SATELLITE TV PLANS mamas
PHlelolol London 1118 runs in English 21 Apr 82 p 10

[Unattributed report of 20 April UK House of (lo-om Session: "Satellite
Channels by 1986”]

[Excerpt] The BBC will operate the first two direct broadcasting by
satellite channels likely to be available by 1986 but three further channels
should be made effective and when there was the demand, Mr William Hhitelaw,
the hone secretary, said in opening a debate on satellite and cable
broadcasting.

The government believed it vital, he went on, that industry should be in a
position to reap the benefits of new technology on which the future econonic
health of the country depended in part. For that reason there was need to
press ahead with proposals as quickly as possible so as not to miss the
opportunity. .

It would be possible with the right equipment to receive foreign services,
and there was concern throughout Europe on the effect this night have on
the arrangements of individual countries. Discussions were in progress
within the Council of Europe and the government was represented on a working
group examining the scope for international agreement on programs standards
and advertising.

Programing costs could be between 10- pounds a year for a channel reliant
on existing naterial to 100- pounds for one conparable in contmt to 3301
or ITV. The BBC believed its subscription service could be entirely self-
financing within about four years after which it would make a profit which
would eventually benefit the licence fee payer. Cash might have to be
borrowed to cover startup coats.

Various services such as teleshopping and telebanking became possible once
the cable was there.

No one had yet suggested that it would be possible to reach anything like

the 99 per cent of the population who could now receive television. lie
believed they had a duty to the najority of people in the country who could

MWWONLY
continue to rely on BBC and m services for the foreseeable future. 'lhey
were entitled to expect that the range and quality of those services should
not be dininiehed by cable service. eyphondng off the bee!- eport. beet
film and bent enterreir-ent.

"1th the 386's satellite amecription service he was confident the gneral
interests of the licence fee payer vauld tannin paramount. With cable,
there were as yet no natural safesmrda and no natural nechanione of
accountability, and the goverment would need to consider in the light of
the amt inquiry'o report what safeguards and lechaniene of auperviaion
and accountability there should he.

comm: Tine Newtopapere Linited 1982

($0 : 5500/ 2221 m

10
"WIRONLY