FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10542

26 May 1982

East Europe Report

ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPIS publications contain information primarily from foreign
nevspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation Has summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the bciy of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND KEGULAIIONs GOVBORINC OHNBRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS
26 Ma
EAST EUROPE REPORT
Ecouontc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(P000 4/82)
ConTENTs
HUNGARY
Italian Paper cites Ramadan Sources on lconoaty
(Franc Barbieri; LA STAHPA. 25 Apr 82) . . .............. .
POLAND
Polish Bank Official on Rescheduling Debt
(David Buchsn, Christopher Bobinski; FINANCIAL
Tms. 12m: 82) 00.01.000.000... OOOOOOOOOOOOO OCOOOOOI.
Polish Official Predicts Shift in Trading Pattern
(Roger Bayes; m TIMES. 5 Ha: 82)...

- a - [III - an - 64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BWGARY

ITALIAN PAPER CITES HINGARIAN SOURCES 0N BMOHY
”129104., Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 25 Apr 82 p 5
[Dispatch from Frane Barbieri: "limgary's Polish Gains"]

[Text] Budapest--Paradoxically, the best interpretation of Kadarism that
I have heard was from a Catholic prelate. I visited the primate'. seat

at Eszetergom. where Canon Bartl was authorized to convey Archbishop Lekai's
thoughts to me. When I observed that the Hungarian church is accused of
excessive cowliance toward the government--a criticism eta-sing primarily
from warsawwthe priest replied: ”Yes, our position is often criticized
by the Poles. But the archbishops always says: Hungary is different from
the other people‘s democracies. We are criticized for not confronting the
state, but the ar:hbishop says: Since in our comtry social problems are
resolved to such an extent that all citizens are protected, the people

are satisfied and the church is not forced to attempt a battle, as it is
in Poland, where people are hmgry and suffering as a result of serious
problems. in our country. as the archbishop says, we prefer the policy of
small steps."

Next he talked about Vader: "Radar himself. who is respected by everyone,
represents national interests. It is a divine mercy to have him. There-
for: the church does not have the impression that it has to represent the
nation's interests with respect to anyone else." Is it possible that
"culag" socialism has led a "Gulag" religion too? No. Father Bartl said;
everything is not ideal as far as religious matters are concerned, but that
prosperity creates a relaxed atmosphere in which, by meme of continuous
negotiations and "without any banging of fists on the table," it is possible
to move toward the church‘s objectives. He said: "If we asked for every-
thing in advance, we would have ruled out the paths of cospromise."

Be issued a curious verdict on Hojtyla: Hhen he was elected it was feared
that he wOuld impose the Polish line but then, by retaining Caseroli, the
pope showed that he appreciates the policy of small steps. Monsignor Poggi
apparently also confirmed this on his visit to Budapest a few days ago.

lhe ecclesiastical interpretation of the ﬂmgarim miracle basically
coincides with the Marxist theories on Kadarism; prosperity gradually leads
to freedom and democracy. The Polish idea, the one held by the church and
Solidarity, was reversed: Freedom to achieve prosperity. A hasty appraisal

FOIOFHGALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

would be that the Hungarians are entirely right. However, not even the
miraculous ngarian idyll provides sufficient evidence that material
prosperity leads automatically to democratic fredoms. ‘Ihe almost ingenious
reformism in the economic field has not‘in the least affected the political
and social sphere. It is Kadar's pragmatic style (with a touch of skeptical
detachment) that gives the system the element of tolerance-certainly not
the ideocratic institutions.

This being so, it remains to be seen whether prosperity will always remain
at the level needed to allay political and social thmts and whether it is
conceivable for demands for an adequate political structure. not to emerge
in the presence of an efficient economic machine.

The idea of an all-embracing economic approach is encountering difficulties
in view of this uncertainty. This was revealed .0 me by [Director of the
Research Institute of World Economy of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences
Jozsef] academician Bognar, a leading economist: "Now the need is emerging
to transfer the state economy to society. I do not trust the systems
without contradictions inherent in the utopiam ideals of the last century.
The contradicti-ms must be highlighted because the state is based on the
nation. Economists do not like the nation. however; they like the state.
But let us not forget that not all states have a nation and not all nations
have a state. The vast majority of people are aware that our situation

is better than our neighbors', but new demands are emerging, especially
among yomg people who lack the mentality and the memory of the old. ‘lbis
emphasizes the need to move toward greater freedom. In a strictly disciplined
society this is impossible."

Engrosaed in turning the rubic cube of the economy this way and that, the
government definitely seems behind in considering political reform. Some
menbers believe that it is enough to impart a Christian democratic substance
to existing structures, others that new forms of democracy must be made

to emerge from the peogle‘s unrest. This is what [Hungarian Socialist
Workers Party] Central Connitee member [Peter] Renyi said: "It may be a
heretical idea, but I believe that a crisis could even be positive. because
it would destroy the dogmatic way of thinking."

Indeed. many people have a feeling that there will be an imminent crisis.
Not so much as a result of the Polish epidemic as because of the mlikeli-
hood of maintaining high living standards. The government is planning a
halt at the present level, with a symbolic growth of 1 percent, but current
prices do not confirm these forecasts. How will it be possible to manage
the conflicts and anticipate the unrest? There is a fear of excessive
order but also a fear of excessive disorder.

Officially there is no dissidence among young people and intellectuals.

The argument "let us not create difficulties for Kadar" has always prevailed
over attempts at opposition. In exchange the limits of tolerance of

artistic eatpressionnin literary journals, in the theater and above all in
films (the protest movies of the Rakosi period are significmt)--are extended.
In research and the sciences. however, economics has dominated sociology

and philosophy. Paradoxically, Stalinist former Prime Minister Hegedus

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

has remained virtually isolated in his ivory tower of lukacs-style critique.
In this connection there is no evidence of either a Hungarian workers
defense committee or a resurgence of the Petofy clubs. the intellectual
catalyst of the 1956 uprising. Indceed, the intelligentisa submits to the
party verdict, according to which tne clws were "dens of comterrevolu-
tionary revisionism."

While among intellectuals there is no rebirth of old Marxist ideas-«the ideas
of human alienation. the obsession with the young Marx as originator of new-
left dissidence--early Christian protest is emerging within the Catholic
ranks. The bishops are grappling with oppositionist priests. There are
about 100 of them, centered on Father Bulanyi. 111ey demand "the return to
prayer" and criticize the bishops for having been: integrated into the
establishment. The "hardliners" (there are apparently some 100,000 supporters)
are, in the opinion of priest and. deputy [and director of Actio Catholics
Imre] Varkonyi, "subversives opposed to the episcopate and to socialism,"
and moreover "false pacifists." Lekai has already warned the clergy against
following Bulanyi, invoking Kadcr more than papal encyclicals.

Then there are the trade unions. I asked Secretary of the National Trade
Union Council [Ferenc] Solyom what lesson has been learned from events in
Poland. He replied: "They show us that decisions cannot be taken over
the workers' heads. without the workers." For ngary too "there is a need
for a new trade union movement." It will emerge, however, within the
existing official trade union, not from a spontaneous workers initiative
(condemned back in the verdict passed on the 1956 uprising).

Some measures have been adopted in this direction: For instance, the trade
mion has the right to veto all decisions by the factory management regarding
pay and working conditions; the trade mion chief belongs to the "quadrum-
virate" that determines enterprise policy and includes the manager and the
party. columnist youth and trade mion secretaries; last, every year the
trade union gives the ministry its opinion of the wager, an opinion that
can. but need not, influence the renewal of his mandate. But has the

nub of the conflict between Halesa and Jaruselskiunamely who should appoint
the director--been tackled in Hungary? In practice, no, inasmuch as
Jaruzelski's rule applies: The state owns the enterprise and therefore
appoints the managers.

In a book by trade union president and Politburo member Gaspar I read,
however, that in the future factories will tend to become workers coopera-
tives, like the farm, not vice versa. Solyom explained to me: "In fact
the policy is to socialize enterprises primarily in their management,
leaving only the general development guidelines to the state."

[Question] So does the manager represent the state or the workforce?
[Answer] For the time being the valuation is mixed. Where participation

is more limited, he is regarded as a man of the state, but there are already
examples where the manager is regarded as a representative of the workforce.

3
[0| OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (”LY

We have placed the problem of appointments on the agenda, and the trade
union's opinion is already the first step.

[Question] What about self-managemt? Is that another Polish obstacle?

[Answer] We do not say self-management. though in practice it will exist.
[Answer ends]

They do not use this term for curious reasons: In the 1956 uprising self-
management was the slogan of the rebels in the big factories, who are now
proclaimed to be comterrevolutionaries inspired by the Yugoslav revisionists
and by Western imperialists (as stated in the party history published on

the 25th anniversary of the uprising). Moreover, the Soviets are allergic

to the world self-management because of both Yugoslavia and Poland.

In Budapest's major work sites I tried to establish to what extent this new
nechanism works in practice. The enterprise is autonomous to the extent

of the one-third of the profits that remain available to it after the state
has deducted two-thirds. The manager considers himself an interlocutor on
a par with the minister. Mist about the trade unionist with respect to
the manager? I asked him: Have you ever used the veto? He replied:

"No, but the fact that we are able to use it is in itself a function."

[Question] Have you ever gone on strike?

[Answer] No, the right to strike exists but we do not consider it too
beneficial for socialism.

[Question] Have you expressed your opinion of the manager?
[Answer] Yes, for the fourth time.
[Question] Has it favorable?

[Answer] Yes: There are more problems where it would have to he unfavorable.
In those cases it is often not expressed.

[Question] Do you think about self-management?

[Answer] In our country the task of management has been clarified, there
is no sharing or confusion of tasks. This does not mean that the trade
union must not be consulted on the plan and on the distribution of profits.
We have a duty to stimulate the production forces, because to demand pay
without producing enough is illogical. [Answer ends]

In other words. a trade union that could be envied by other Eastern bloc
workers, but even more by Western industrialists.

ﬁts most intensive social dialectic still seems to be between Ujpest and

Ferencvarosi [soccer clubs] supporters, partly because Kadar has had the
wisdom not to disclose his own preferences with regard to soccer. Basically,

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of all the single-party and monolithic institutions of Kadarisn, the most
democratic, open-minded and tolerant is still Radar hinself--"a real divine
miracle," according to the priest-deputy Varkonyi. According to party
ideologue Rsnyi. he is "the am who did not invent but who intuitively
grasped this line that has extricated us from terrible confusion. A nan of
resolute will and strong nerves, determined in politics and with s untality
of gradualisn, of small steps foward."

The only threat to Kadarisn is that events can sonetius proceed by larger
steps. This fear was expressed to as by s political analyst on a relaxed
free Saturday granted by Radar, while a free Saturday denied by Jamslski
is causing Poland's collapse.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Bditrice LA STAHPA S.p.A.

C80: 3105/203

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

POLISH BANK OFFICIAL on RESCHEDULIN DEBT
”(1211429 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 12 Her 82 p 1, 40

[Dispatch by David Buchan and Christopher Bobinski: "Poland Cuts Arrears
on 1981 western Bank Debt"]

[Text] Harsawb-Poland has reduced the interest arrears on its 1981 debt to
Hestern banks to "almost sero"--$lOH-$20H and is confident of finally signing
a formal rescheduling of its 1981 debt of $2.63n by the end of this month.
Hr Marian Hinkiewicz, president of Bank ﬂandlowy, Poland's foreign trade
bank, said yesterday.

In an interview. Mr Hinkiewicz and Mr Jan Holossyn. his deputy. who handles
the complex negotiations with more than 500 Western banks. made clear that
rescheduling a similar amount of western bank debt falling due this year
could be more difficult without a sarhed improvement in Poland's hard cur-
rency trade balance.

Hr Hinkiewic: said it would probably be impossible if Western governments
did not agree to reschedule the $2.23n which they have guaranteed and which
also falls due this year.

Mr Holoszyn admitted that in its talks with western banks, Poland was trying
to bring pressure to bear on their governments to reschedule. Host Hestern
governments have refused to reschedule their debt until General Hojciech
Jaruzelski. Poland's military leader, ends or significantly relaxes martial
law.

The leaders of Handlowy Bank, which handles all Poland's foreign exchange
dealings. stressed that it was in Hestern bankers' interest to grant Poland
speedy short-term trade credits. This would help improve export earnings
and aid Poland's ability to repay.

"He have had indications that some commercially-minded banks might do this.
including one major West German bank." although only after Poland had met
all its obligations on 1981 debt. said Mr Hinkiewicz.

The Soviet Union has not given Poland any further hard currency loans so far
this year. Last year Moscow lent Poland 8665“ and rescheduled about $999M
of earlier loans in convertible currencies.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁr Hinkiewicz said, partly as a result of General Jsruzelski's successful
trip to Moscow early this south, the Soviet Union had speeded up deliveries.
largely on credit, of raw naterials such as cotton, iron ore and netals.

Parliamentary deputies in Rarssw have been told that the Soviet Union has
undertaken to deliver between 25 and 60 percent of its total planned 1982
shipnents to Poland by the end of this nonth.

"Up to now we have given equal treatnent to all banks and governnents," said
Mr Hinkiewicz. But if none countries refuse to reschedule and other govern-
ments are ready to, “we would differentiate in our attitude to then." Austria
in particular is "interested in naintaining its energy imports like coal
from us. and its exports to Poland," Hr Holosyn claimed.

The bankers explained their aritluetic on Poland's parlous financial situa-
tion this year. Total debt obligations falling due this year anounted to
SlOBn, of which $7Bn was principal and $3Bn interest, they said. Of the
$7Bn, $2.23n was owed to Hestern governlents, $2.!an to western banks, and
most of the rest to COHECW countries.

The Polish officials expect hard currency exports to reach about $6-7Bn this
year. But since imports had been drastically squeezed for lack of credit,
hard currency trade night be $0.53n-l.03n in the black. They declined to
cow-lent on the possibility that, without a fresh currency injection from
Moscow, Poland night not have enough to pay the interest on evenarescheduled
1982 western bank debt.

Hr Hinkiewicz said Poland was still interested in nenbership of the Inter-
national Honetary Fund and denied it was dragging its heels with the DIP,
which sent a team back to Harsaw this week.

The Polish Government was not counting on any IMP loan this year in its
calculations. But the Bank handlowy cemented that many of General
Jaruzelski's governnent's recent neasures, such as the February price
increases, would be just what the IMP "doctor" would order, if and when
Poland entered the IMF and drew a loan.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1982

C50: 2020/37

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

POLISH OFFICIAL PREDICTS SHIFT IN TRADING PAW

M61309 London THE IDES in English 6 Hot 82 p 6

[Roger Boyes dispatch: "Poles To Reduce Trade Links with the Rest")

[Excerpt] Warsaw, 3 Har--Poland is preparing a radical shift in its trading
pattern to minimize its econo-ic dependence on the Heat. according to an
official who accompanied General Hojciech Jaruzslski. the Polish leader. to

Moscow.

The off icial, who wanted to remain anonylous, said three levels of econolic
aid had been discussed in Moscow. First. there was Soviet assistance to
relieve the inediate effects of the Heat's limited sanctions against Harsaw.
Second. there would be COHBCON assistance to increase the use of industrial
capacity in Poland and ease unelploynent there. Finally, long-tern plans for
coepletely changing the focus of Poland's trade with the world were discussed
in the talks with President Brezhnev and other Soviet leaders.

This last point. the official said. represented "a turning point", indicating
that it meant a much deeper relationship with the Eastern bloc. Meanwhile.

the Soviet Union was giving assistance in hard currency to help Poland "through
these troubled tines."

The official, an officer in the Polish Any. emphasized parts of the final
communique that acknowledged Poland's right to settle its own problems without
foreign interference‘ and recognized that Poland's borders were just and inter-
nationally guaranteed.

Although these consents were intended to demonstrate that the United States
has no right to interfere in Polish affairs. a long-standing couplaint since
aartial law. they are also significant when nade in the context of a trip to
Moscow. underlining the Soviet willingness to allow Poland tine to find its
own way out of the crisis without direct intervention.

COPYRIGHT: 'l'iees Newspapers Limited. 1982

(ISO: 2020/“1 END

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY