FOR ()I-‘FII‘IAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10638
7 July 1982

USSR Report

LIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPIS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNBRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
LIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL ANO BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(rouo 4/92)

CONTENTS

ARTIFICIAL Immune:

Object Deecription end Recognition in Artificial
Intmisme sma.eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

BIOCHEMIS‘R‘I

Van der weele Porcee of Interaction Between Spherical Aerosol
Perticlee end Cylindricel tiber ee Perticlee Approech

t1“ Fibertt0.0.0000000000000000000C...UOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOIOOOD

BIONICS

“001109.! Infomtion chum.eoeeeeeeeoeeeoneeeeeeeooeeeeeeeeo

Introductm to Bl.ctro°¢°1°”eeooeee...eeeeoeeeeeoeeeoeeooeoooe

Structure of Alger-it!- for Beti-ting Stimli in
Imunmu. PacthOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOO0.000000001000000...

BIOTECHNOLOGY

Dietribntion. llonology end Cloning of Cryptic Plenide of
“€111“. mrmien31.eooeeoeeveeeoeooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Mobilization of Chrouoeonel Genee of Vibrio Choleree by
P1...“ ”‘t‘m ct.62000.00000000'OCOOOIO0.0000000000000000...

Rediophyeicel Method 1 or Ononetreting Taperetnre
Ammliti“ in an“ Intle m‘meeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee-eoeen

Cloning and Identification of the Gene 0! III-en Leukocytic
Interferon Being Synthetic Oligonncleotidee ee Priner

‘nd "cheeeeeeoeoeeeeeoeeeeeeoeoeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeoe

- e - [III - USSR - 21a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16

19

29

38

‘2

S"! P
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MEDICINE

Ptorduf. .n Antinwplutic “at...sssssaeesosaossasssossssesso
Intensive Processing of Medicinel Rev Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Scientific Lebor Orgsnizstion in Pharmaceutical Production. .. . ..

PHYSIOLOGY

Physiology end Hygiene of Personel Protection Ageinst Cold

for Men.......................................................

Review of Book on Sleep end Motor Activity......................

Review of Book on botionsl Menory sud Its Mecheni-s...........
RADIATION BIOLOGY

Industrial Hygiene and Prevention of Occupstionsl Pathology
R.1.t.d to Working With n.0r.sssssaoooeososssessasseoesooeoes

Reaction of Proliferative end Resting Tunor Cells to Periodic
Puud mtr‘ml.‘ “whtcnait’ met mutton. s s o s s e s a e s o a 0

HUMAN FACTORS
Use of Digitsl Computers for Evolution of Operstor Output......
Use of Physiological Infomtion in Msnv-Mschine Syn-sun”...
PSYCHOLOGY
Psychological Science in Socislist Countries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
General Principles of Psychology................................
Psychosonstic Correlations in Chronic ﬁctional 8tress..........

Source and Genesis of Mental Inge (Cnosiological Analysis)..."

MOMMONLY

67
69
53

57
62
67

72

76

80
85

108
111
115
121
o

ARTIIICIAL INTIILIGINC!

UDC: 621.391.19
OBJECT DESCRIPTION AND RECOGNITION IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS

Moscow OPISANIYB I RASPOZNAVANIYB OB"YEKTOV V SISTEHAKB ISKUSSTVBNNOGO
INTELLEKTA in Russian 1980 (signed to press 30 Jun 80) pp 2-4, 136

(Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Description and
Recognition of Objects in Artificial Intelligence Systems", edited by

V. S. Gurfinkel', doctor of medical sciences. and V. S. Fayn, candidate of
engineering sciences, Institute of Information Transmitting Problems,
USSR Academy of Sciences, Isdatsl'stvo "Nauka", 2300 copies, 137 pages]

[Text] This collection consists of articles dealing with the following three
problems: mathematical modeling of variability of objects that are of
practical interest (speech process, some types of images, etc.), use of
mathematical methods in medicine and some aspects of voice control of
computers in man-machine systems. It is intended for specialists in the
field of artificial intelligence. pattern recognition and allied fields.

Foreword

Time has made appreciable corrections in interpretation of the problem of
image recognition, understanding of its substance and place in modern
scientific engineering knowledge.

One of the main manifestations of this development is the increasingly clear
realization that the problem of recognition proper is. in a certain sense,
secondary to another problem. that of demonstrating and describing the
essence of variability of the object to be identified. In all three cases
where the essence of variability is veil-studied, organization on its basis
of an identification process is now a rather well-studied matter. Construc-
tion of a description of variability is also of value independent of
recognition, since it opens the may for solving another problem in the

field of artificial intelligence, that of artificial generation of changes
in an object (design, verbal synthesis. automatic multiplication, etc.). All
this has resulted in publication of many uorks in recent years that deal
with mathematical modeling of the patterns upon which a certain variable
phenomenon or object is based. This tendency has also been manifested in
this collection: the articles by Ye. F. Yurkov and V. S. Nagornov, A. S.
Omel'chenko and V. S. Payn, Ye. P. Ponomarev and Yu. N. Prokhorov, V. N.

FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
m “WINS! IIBI‘ (\va

Sorokin. A. P. Vaynshtok deal with the search for descriptions of the patterns
characterizing object variability in diverse problems of practical importance.

Uniortunatley. demonstration of the essence of variability or its relation to
externally observed characteristics of an object is a very difficult problem,
and to this day it is not always solvable. A classical example is referable

to the problem of seismic forecasting or zoning. Medical diagnostic problems,
which are also extremely difficult, are just as important. However. the urgent
need to solve them is a powerful stimulus for constantly applying more and
more efforts. In this collection, the articles of A. M. Alekaeyevskays and

V. S. Pereverzev-Orlov, P. Ye. Kunin and V. P. Karp, Yu. 3. Pogel'sOn deal with
these problems.

Another problem of artificial intelligence touched upon in this collection is
referable to organization of dialogue in a man-machine system. Making the
machine capable of understanding vocal commands is one of the means of
satisfying the requirement of maximum convenience and naturalnesa of man's
function in such a system. Research, which has been pursued in this direction
for several years. is the topic of articles by S. N. Krinov, V. P. Savel'yev.
c. l. Tsemel', as well as A. V. Vasil'yev, S. S. Raksheyev and V. M. Chithkov,
and S. M. Shevenko.

No doubt specialists in the field of pattern recognition and forecasting will
be interested in the originality of the proposed methods and timeliness of
topics discussed.

Contents Page
Foreword 3
Determination of Empirical Relationship Using One-Dimensional

Functions (Ye. P. Yurkov, V. S. Nagornov) 5
Method of Transforming Plat Curves Based on Sliding Datum Method

(A. S. Omel'chenko, V. S. Fayn) 15
Local Evaluation of lnformativeness of Flat Curve (A. S. Omel'chenko) 27
Adaptive Linear Filtration of Verbal Signals (Ye. P. Ponomarev,

Yu. N. Prokhorov) 32
Mechanics of Tongue Movements (V. N. Sorokin) 62
Evaluation of Imperviousness to Interference of Rejector Analysis of

Speech (A. P. Vaynshtok) 72
The 'Two Physician' Problem in Pattern Recognition, .

(M. A. Alekseyevskaya, V. s. Pereverzev-Orlov) 75
Method of Retrospeccive Randomization for Comparing Efficacy of

Treatment Alternatives (P. Ye. Kunin. V. P. Karp) 85
Reduction of Sorting in Construction of Distinguishing Tags

(Yu. 3. Pogel'son) 89
Significance of Changes in Fundamental Tone Frequence to Automatic

Speech Recognition (S. N. Krinov, V. P. Savel'yev. G. I. Tsemel') 92
Grouping of Words According to Peaturee of Basic [Accentedf] Sounds

and Sound Combinations (S. N. Krinov) 100
Autonomous Determination of Bord Tags (A. V. Vasil'yev,

S. S. Rakaheyev, V. M. Chiahkov) 107

Computer 'Comprehension' of Tests in Natural Languages (8. M. Shevchenko)ll3
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “hanks", 1980

10,657
C50: 1840/161

FOR¢OIIICIAI.IE”E(MMLY
BIOCHEMISTRY

UDC: 539.612

VAN DER "AALS FORCES OF INTERACTION BETWEEN SPRERICAL AEROSOL PARTICLES ARM
CYLINDRICAL FIBER AS PARTICLES APPROACR TEE FIBER

Moscow DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 260. No 5, Oct 81
(manuscript received 8 May 81) pp 1189-1191

[Article by l. Tashpolotov, B. P. Ssdovskiy and 2h. T. Tekenov. Physicochemical
Scientific Research Institute imeni L. Ya. Ksrpov, Moscow]

[Text] It was demonstrated in a paper [1] dealing with aerosol filtration
theory that Van der Heals forces may play a considerable part in deposition

of aerosols on filter fibers. 0n the other hand. it is necessary to know

the force of interaction of aerosol particles with cylindrical fibers in order
to run processes of rageneration of various fibrous filters. The forces of in-
teraction of these solids are discussed in (l, 2], withOut consideration of
electromagnetic lag. However, in the course of deposition of aerosol particles
on the surfaces of filter fibers, interaction forces also play an appreciable
role at distances in excess of 0.1 um. In this case. the hypothesis advanced
by London. to the effect that each atom instantly reacts to the fluctuating
electric field of another atom, cannot be considered, strictly speaking,
correct. as was demonstrated by Casimir and Folder [3]. According to [3],

at distances in excess of 0.1 gm, interaction energy is determined by

the law of l/r’. Interaction of molecular forces between a spherical particle
and a cylindrical fiber had not been previously examined with consideration

of the lag effect.

According to the results in [3), the energyof interaction between two con-
densed bodies (sphere and cylinder) can be expressed as the integral of
attraction energy:

5 ' -£ { mama. (1)
I .

where V1 and V; are the full volumes of the sphere and cylinder; n; and n' are
the number of atoms per cu’ of these bodies; Kid is London's constant; r s the
distance between centers of dV1 and dV3. The adequacy of such an approach

was discussed in [4, 5].

Let us transform integral (1) into the following form:

FOI‘OFFHJAI.USEGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

8
E . -'-, I I a
'. '- V: ’ (2)
where 8 I s’ 2 80m)“.
' I

1. Let us consider integral (2). By integrating respectively in the cylindri-
cal and spherical systens of coordinates for elementary volumes 6Nx and ‘1sz
with consideration of the integration limits (see Figure l), we shall obtain:

. 43 00!. non, 3 - l—_I 2 I’ I l‘
Lm__ .. R, .. -R’ (5--- L. )
IDJ.R.II{R, kl. (D ”7 3?”st (3)
R’ +r’ - R]
x —
stcoos ZRr der,
where s- «701'.

Integral (3) is not integrated in elementary functions. Calculation thereof
is node by numerical lethods.

however, if 1 + °,, after making simple calculations, from (3) we shall obtain
the value of energy of interaction between the sphere and an infinitely long
cylinder. with consideration of the molecular force lag effect:

_ lose; ski --4-D‘ -7DR. -33]
ISD nun—(omml' ’
. Noam-4k}. IR§-4D’+1DR._-3Ri (A)
an: In: -(o+n.)'l‘ I: In: 4040'!"-

_ atom-«é; ‘._D_lnD'-(R.OR,)'
"3 I“ -(D-R.)‘I '68: 0’ 431-32). .

2. In order to assess the obtained equations, let us assume that at and R; >1!
(Figure 1). Then formula (6) can be approximated for energy of interaction
between the bodies in question as follows:

 

8 Rm, 8R.
£-—. or£-—.ifR-o-,
«m R. m, 4511' ’
where R. - R¢ is the radius of the sphere. (5)
b

momcutusrontv
F ' 2tRJIlI), (7)

where 30!) is the energy of interaction

 

c 81 between two infinite plates per cm’.
This energy according to Lifahits [7]
is determined by the formula:
Figure l.
Diagram of interaction between sphe- E . h_¢‘ _"_ Co -| (8)
rical aerosol particle and cylindrical 311’ 240 g. + 1 ”ML

fiber

where h and e have the usual meaning. to is the electron mtic dielectric
constant and 90:.) is a function whose value is determined fron a graph.

From (7) and (8) with known physical parameters of a quart: lens (6. - 3.6; ac -
26 ca [6]), for the force of interaction between the lens and a flat surface
we can obtain:

F m 7.:9 . 30-". rt, (9)

From fornula (6), taking the value of constant B for quartz from [6], we get:

r e 337 - acuity". (1°)

Thus. the force of interaction between a sphere and flat surface calculated
with formula (6) is about one-half the force as determined with fornula (7).
In order to obtain a more precise value we must take into consideration the
other terns contained in (b).

3. According to [l], the condition for coaplete deposition of particles from
the zone of molecular attraction has the following appearance:

 

pF

ll < MR.” , (n)

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US!. ONLY

where u is the velOcity of the particle in the zone of attraction, p is the
length of filtering surface along current line and n is gas viscosity.

Let us consider the following instance: the radius of a gold particle R1 -

10"~ cm, the radius of glass fibers R; - 10'b cn. p . 5010‘: ca, 3 - 2.3010"’
erg°cn. H - 10" cm, then we shall have, from condition (11), u<5.7 m/s. having
found P from formula (6) ..

If u is velocity of air (gas) in the boundary layer formed around cylindrical
fibers, knowing the structure of the laminary boundary layer [8] we can
calculate for our case the velocity of free-stream [incident] flow u. using
the following formula:

 

a

”I ’ (1‘)

where v is kinematic viscosity of gas and a is the angle measured from the
frontal critical point of the cylinder to the point where the particle settles.

The velocity of incident flow a» for an angle a - l/6, calculated using formula
(12), has the following value: u.518.5 n/e.

Thus. with filtration of aerosol particles at the rate of uuﬂl8.5 m/s,

there is deposition of particles upon nonbunping collision at a distance of

1 an fron the surface of the fiber due to Van der Heals forces. To determine
conditions for deposition of non-spherical particles. one inst take into con.
sideration the coefficient of sphericity.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Tunitskiy. N. N. and Petryanov, I. V, ZhFKh, Vol 17, 1963. p 608.

2. Rosenfeld. J. l. and "seen, D. 1., J. COLL. INTERFACE 861., Vol 67, 1976,
p 2 .
3. Casi-1r. H. B. C. and Polder, 0., PHYS. 33V.; Vol 73. 1948, p 360.
4. Kaplan. I. G. and Rodimova, 0. 3., UFN, Vol 126, 1978, p 503.
5. Hinterton, R., Ibid, Vol 105, 1971, p 307.
6. Deryagin, B. V. and Abrikoeove, I. 1., ZhPKh, Vol 32. 1958, p 642.
7. Lifehita, Ye. H.. ZhETP. Vol 29. 1955. p 9b.
8. Sedov, L. 1.. "Mechanics of a Solid Medium." Moscow, third ed.. Vol 2, 1976.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'atvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

10,657
cso: 18a0/167

FIIICHﬂﬂCJA1.USI2(MVLY
310N108

UDC: 621.391
NONLINEAR lNFORHATIOllCHANNELS

Moscow DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 262, No 3, Jan 82
(manuscript received 25 Jun 81) pp 556-555

[Article by N. R. Yevtikhiyev, corresponding member of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, and H. A. Savchenko, Moscow Institute of Radio Engineering, Elec-
tronics and Automation]

Text] Theory of nonlinear information channels with scintillation [flicker]
was expounded in [l]. The main idea of this theory was that when the channel
operates at a high noise level there is very marked increase in fluctuation
of parameters of transmitted signal, such as smplinude and frequency. Then
the signal can be described as effective temperature T. and noise level as
the corresponding temperature In. With T. . In. the channel's capacity

will be zero, which means that signal amplitude at the output in the receiver
equals zero.

This situation can be interpreted as a phase transition. But then, the operat-
ing mode of the nonlinear channel in the temperature range of T.>Tn should

be described by a parameter of order, S. (in this case, this is signal
amplitude at the output) just as is done in phase transition theory [1]. When
T3>Tn, the parameter of order-will be So - 0 and with T.<Tn S. i 0. He can
then write down the free energy of the system in the temperature range of
Tn>T3. In phase transition theory such a state is called paramagnetic.

Thus, the expression for free energy can be written as follows:
P - 81s; + r(r)sz + A(r)s: + ..., (1)

where r - 1 - T‘IT, F(T), A(T) are slowly changing positively defined functions
of noise temperature. From the minimum thermodynamic potential ar/as. - 0,

we can calculate function s.(T) in the vicinity of the phase transition
points and then, using temperature derivatives, the entropy and heat capacity
of the signal, which enables us to determine the channel'scapacity.

As we mentioned above, there is increase in fluctuations of parameter of

order in the vicinity of the phase transition point, as well as in their
typical dimension

5 ” 1-” (v>0).

7

FOR‘0FFK]AI.USE(NULY
5 son omcw. use ONLY

i.c., with I e 0, g + n. Then F is a function of variable a (in the simplest
case, x: -in I) and satisfies the nonlinear differential equation of Lie:

-I" - 1(1‘), (2)
where '0‘) is called a (Hell-Hann-Low) function
m“) -Ar'+ar’+cr" + ..., (3)
A, B and c are coefficients of expansion.

If the system is not characterized by one parameter of order. but several-
Sgt, ..., Sok, ... Sop--a set of values Pi appears with fourth-order terms.
Consequently, a system of nonlinear differential equations appears, i.e.,
the problem of phase transition amounts to a problem of theory of nonlinear
fluctuations. Solving the equations enables us to determine the nature of
phase transition in the system. It can be either continuous (second class,
i.e., parameter of order 8} is not continuous at the phase transition point)
or in steps (first class).

If an electromagnetic information channel is being considered. S is the
amplitude of electric and magnetic field in the wave,si - B: + B 3 if it
is a biopolymer channel, 83 is the amplitude of the elastic wave.

Biophysical communication channel: If a biopolymer co-unication
channel is being considered, there can be interferences in it due to the
effects of high-frequency electromagnetic radiation. Tuning out the noise
involves an increase in signal energy, i.e., its input amplitude. If there

is a stepped phase transition in the system, it is related to softening of the
coherent phonon mode of the polymer chain [2, 3]. But then we are in the
region of the spectrum,-in which linked phonon states-solitons-can arise.
i.e., tuning out from the interference leads to a change in channel operating
mode with insignificant change in input power. Now the signal can be trans-
mitted in the form of solitons [4].whichare resistant to the effects of a high-
frequency electromagnetic field. Ihus, we are able to change the nonlinear
channel to a different, more stable operating mode.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Yevtikhiyev, N. N. and Sevchenko, H. A., DAN, Vol 254, No b, 1980, p 82b.
2. Kiseleu, Ye.S., Higley, H. P., Moskalenko. 8. A. and Khodzhi, P. 1.,
”Tea. X Vsesoyuzn. konf. po kogerentnoy i nelineynoy optike" [Summaries of

Papers Delivered at 10th All-Union Conference on Coherent and Nonlinear
Optics], Kiev, 1980.

3. Devyatkov, u. 1)., uur, Vol 110, 1973, p 453.
a. Yevtikhiyev, u. n., Jr., momma. I sum. 1712., Vol 45, 1930, p 142.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR", 1982

10,657
cso: 1840/212

F!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.USE(NVLY
INTRODUCTIO“ T0 ELECTRDBCOLOGY

Moscow VVEDENIYE V ELEKTROEKOLOGIYU in Russian 1982 (signed to press 7 Jan 82)
pp 2-7, 335-336

[Annotation, foreword by Academician V. Ye. Sokolov, introduction and table

of contents from book “Introduction to Electroecology" by Vladimir
Rustamovich Protasov, Anatoliy Ignat'yevich Bondarchuk and Vladimir Hendelevich
Ol'shanskiy, Institute of Evolutionary Morphology and Ecology of Animals

ineni A. N. Severtsov, USSR Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka",

1800 copies, 336 pages]

[Text] This monograph outlines the range of problems in a new direction,
electroecology--the science dealing with electric correlations in living
nature-~on the example of fish, which are animals with high electric sensi-
bility and capacity to generate electric fields. The following are discussed
in this work: history of the question, status of the problem, analytical
methods of evaluating electric fields of biological objects, questions of build-
ing the physicomathematical apparatus adequate for problems of electroecology,
and it also evaluates the effects and aftereffects of natural and artificial
electric fields on ichthyofauna. The book is intended for a wide range of
specialists-ecologists, ichthyologists, cyberneticists, bionic engineers and
workers in the field of environmental protection.

Foreword

The book, ”Introduction Into Electroecology," is an original piece of research.
The authors did not limit themselves to a description of the existing situation
in this young branch of ecology, rather, they devoted much attention to develop-
ment of adequate physicobiological approaches to the problem. Although the
entire study is referable to ichthyology and was conducted on the class of

fish, the interaction models proposed by the authors could extend to other
classes of animals with further development of ecology.

Not only is there discussion of electric interactions between fish and
between fish and the geophysical environment, but emphasis is laid on questions
of possible effects on fish of electromagnetic sources of anthropogenic origin.

Of course. not all of the issues are presented equally well, and this is in
part attributable to the existing situation in the scientific literature. At

FOI1DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the same time, the significant asount of physicomsthematical lay-outs appears
logical for this branch of ecology in view of the complex nature of the problem.

This book will be of definite interest to a wide circle of biologists and
technical specialists concerned with problems of environmental protection.

Introduction

Among the intensively developing branches of biology, in addition to genetics
and molecular biology, we can mention ecology, the science dealing with the
way of life of plants, animals and man. In our days, this discipline is
undergoing a sort of rebirth. This is related, on the one hand, to technolo-
gical progress, with which different forms of human endeavdr become ecological
factors; on the other hand, it is related to appearance of new methods of
studying intrapopulation relations as a result of development of allied branches
of science. For this reason, the newly arising problems and approaches to
their solution form a new branch of ecology. The appearance of chemical
ecology (see book by H. Barbier, "Introduction to Chemical Ecology," Mir,
1978) is attributable to expressly these circumstances.

It became possible for new branches of ecology to appear only as the

result of interaction between ecologists and specialists in allied disciplines.
Electroecology, an introduction to which is discussed in this monograph.

is no exception to the foregoing. Electroecology is a young and very important
branch of ecology. Electricity as an ecological factor is of interest, not
only because of the enormous quantity of electric fields of anthropogenic
origin, but their involvement in orientation and communication of some fish.
The uniqueness of electric perception inherent in these fish has inspired
scientists in different specialties to learn all about it.

When one speaks of electroperception, one occasionally uses the words, "they
see": "fish see the world by means of a new sense" (see, for example, T. E.
Bullock, 1973, 1976). And, although electric perception of fish is closer,
let us say, to acoustic perception than it is to visual perception with

regard to a number of features (morphology of receptors, distribution of
receptors, frequency range, informativeness, etc.), use of the word, "see,“
appears to be quite natural. At the same time, we cannot fail to note that
there is a substantial difference in ability of researchers to study vision
and to study electric perception, a difference that refers not so much to the
fact that the principles of construction of these receptor systems are differ-
ent (Bullock, 1973). as to the fact that the researcher (man) does not have
personal experience in electroperception and cannot directly (i.e., without
the help of instruments) monitor a spontaneous or experimental situation. No
matter how great the differences between hunan and animal vision, in most
cases we are able to see the signs that have appreciable ecological significance
to animals, for exanple, geographic and time-related distinctions of the
background, coloration and changes (mating, seasonal) in coloration of animals
and plants, bioluminescence, etc. Qualitative comparisons of human and

animal visual skills (sharp-sighted eagle, blind mole, night vision of the
horned owl) were made long before determination of the physical nature of light,
bef°r8 studies of physiology of vision, long before development of special
instruments.

10

IIII(Iﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NVLY
But when we try to assess the ecological significance of low-frequency electric
systems of fish, we have not experienced such direct perception and we are
compelled to proceed solely from accumulated theoretical conceptions and ex-
perimental data, and conducting experiments usually requires rather complex
equipment.

With such a situation. we need not be surprised at the abundance of physico-
mathematical calculations and physical models. or the profusion of technical
terms inherent in the literature on the topic of "Investigation of the Role of
Electric Fields in the Life of Fish." A number of technical ideas were dis-
cussed in biological literature much earlier than in technical literature proper.
For example, the idea of active electrolocstion and physical model corresponding
to this idea were published in the JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY in 1958
(Lissman, Hachin), whereas one of the first patents for electric location was
issued in the United States to (V. Shvan) only in 1971, with priority as

of 23 January 1967 (0.8. Patent No 3562633 class 324-1), i.e., almost 10 years
later.

The book, "Introduction Into Electroecology," was written with reference to
fish. which are animals with exceptionally high electric sensibility that
use their bioelectric fields in ecology.

However, the scientific importance of the results of studying electroecologicai
relations, which were pursued on fish, is not limited to this class of animals.
In recent times, there has been increasingly frequent discussion in the scien-
tific literature of the possibility that various animals use electromagnetic
fields in ecology (see, for example, the book by A. S. Pressman, "Electro-
magnetic Pields and Living Nature,” Nauka, 1964; Yu. A. Kholodov, "Man in

the Magnetic Heb," Znaniye, 1975). On the basis of the hypotheses of these
authors which, unfortunately have as yet had little experimental validation,
one can consider electroecology in a broader aspect, as a branch of biology
concerned with various types of electromagnetic correlations. In this case,
there is validity to consideration of electromagnetic interactions between

" .erent animals and plants, in the first place; in the second place, it
becomes necessary to study the effects of the electromagnetic background of

the environment on ontogenesis and, in the third place, to study some physio-
logical functions with the use of electromagnetic fields (EH?) on the cellular,
organismic or population levels. In this respect, the mathematical approaches
developed for fish can also be used for other classes of animals.

At the same time, electroecology is faced with ichthyological problems.
Perhaps electric ecology will be one of the keys that will enable us to
comprehend such complex problems as homing, interspecific and intraspecific
coordination of fish.

This book is only an introduction to the problem, but aside from the broad
spectrum of examples of electric interaction of fish, it devotes much atten-
tion to attempts at quantitative analysis, engineering estimates of electric
fields, interaction between specimens via this communication channel.

The engineering estimates, construction of models and quantitative estimates
conform to the modern requirements of science and enable us to understand

11

ll”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(MVLY
3 son omcun. use ONLY
i
l

the principles involved in the fucntion of some ecological systems. Thus, the
problem of electric ecology is discussed from different points of view in
this book. For this reason, it addresses itself to a wide circle of special-
ists-—ecologists, ichthyologists, cyberneticists and bionic engineers-who
will find here the history of the question and can assess the status of the
problem, as well as extract the mathematics involved in evaluating the
adjacent zones of electric fields and consider the influence of electric
fields of surrounding background on the ichthyofauna.

This monograph was written by a team of authors: Introduction, chapter 1 (History
of the Problem) and Chapter 2 (Status of the Problem) by V. R. Protasov, doctor
of biological sciences; Chapter 3 (Construction and Methods of Estimating the
Mathematical System [Software?] Consistent With the Tasks of Electroecology) by
A. I. Bondarchuk, candidate of engineering sciences; Chapter 6 (Bionic Assess-
ment of Electrocommunication Systems of Fish) by V. H. Ol'shanskiy, junior
scientist, and Chapter 5 (Assessment of Effects on Ichthyofauna of Electric
Fields of Abiotic Origin) by V. R. Protasov and V. H. Ol'ahanskiy.

Contents Page

Foreword 3
Introduction (V. R. Protasov) a
Chapter 1. History of the Problem (V. R. Protasov) 8
Chapter 2. Status of the Problem (V. R. Protasov) 22
l. Informational (signal) relations in the fish class 22
2. Electricity in the life of fish 33
3. Structure and function of electric organs 34
4. Electric fields in schools 53
S. Perception of electric current by fish 57
6. Electric fields as communication signals 77
7. Electric fields as orientation signals 86
8. Evolution of electric systems 91
Conclusion 96

Chapter 3. Evaluation of Electric Fields of Biological Objects on
the Basis of Theory of Linear Parametric Field of

Potentials (L. I. Bondarchuk) 98
1. Introduction
2. Formulation of problem 101
3. Analysis and formulation of linear parametric field of
potentials 105
4. Metric relations on potential field 130
5. Generalized coefficients of interaction of media with
electromagnetic field 142
6. Examples of calculating electric field of soft sources 153
7. Synthesis of complex potential transfer functions (PT?) 176
8. Electric models and calculation of fish field 182
Conclusion 202
Chapter 4. Bionic Assessment of Electrocommunication System of
Fish (V. H. 01'shanskiy) 203
1. Static dipole 204
12

FOI!0FFKJAI.UBEINNLY
2. Dynsnic dipole
3. Energetics of electrocoumunicstion in dipole approximation
Conclusion
Chapter 5. Assessment of Effects on lchthyofeuns of Blectro-egnetic
Fields of Abiotic Origin
1. Ambient electromagnetic field. Correlation between elenento
of background in aster and air (V. M. 01'shenskiy)
2. Effect of natural electric fields of oceans on behsvior and
distribution of fish (v. R. Protesov)
3. Effects of electric fields of anthropogenic origin
(V. R. Protesov)
a. Possible sftereffects of permanent week electric fields on
hydrofsuns (V. R. Protseov)
Conclusion
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'etvo "Hanks". 1982

10,657
C50: 1840/20?

13

FOI‘OFFKJAI.U§B(IVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI. ONLY

wa~ ~..—

. ...

i use: 62-501.7:57lo.6

STRUCTURE OF ALGORITHM FOR ESTIMATING STIMULI IN INSTANTANEOUS PERCEPTION

Moscow AVTOHATIKA l TELEHEKHANIKA in Russian No 4, Apr 82 (manuscript received
20 Jan 81) pp 50-53

[Article by L. H. Shcherbanskiy (Kurgan)!

[Text] Two variants of units are discussed, which reproduce

an algorithm for estimating the number of stimuli perceived
instantaneously. These devices have sensors, a set of random
delays and multi-input 0R logic circuit. Determination is

made of probabilistic characteristics of reliability of estimat-
ing the number of delivered stimuli, and operating speed of the
units is evaluated. It is maintained that the algorithm run

in these units has features that are similar to the main
characteristics of biological sensory systems.

The study of sensory systems raises the question of simulating instantaneous
perception. It is known that man can estimate with high reliability a small
number of elements of images (for example. points or spots) presented for

a short period of time [1].

As the number of stimuli is increased (over 6-7) reliability of estimation
diminishes. Analogous properties have been demonstrated in the cutaneous
analyser. auditory analyzer and others. It can be assumed that the proper-
ties of the same algorithm are the basis for similarity of properties of
these analysers. Simulation of this algorithm is of interest to both
physiologists and engineers.

Analysis of the process of instantaneous perception enables us to advance the
following hypotheses concerning the properties of the algorithm for estimating
the number of stimuli.

In the first place, this algorithm is unrelated to scanning of outputs of all
fibers of an afferent nerve. At least 10’ s would be required to scan an
entire nerve for estimating the number of delivered stimuli, the interroga-
tion time constituting on the order of lO"sperfiber and there being on the
order of 1010‘ fibers in the optic nerve. The visual analyser estimates the
number of delivered stimuli in tenths of a second. consequently. most of the
processing of information about number of stimuli occurs simultaneously

(in parallel).

16

ltlltlﬂﬂCJAl.UBE(lNLY
In the second place, the algorithm in question is stochastic, since in estimat-
ing the number of stimuli (for example, white [light] dots) the analyzer gives
an undetermined answer, and with increase in number of stimuli the probability
of correct estimation diminishes.

Let us consider two types of units that run the algoritlm that can serve as a
model of an unknown algorithm that exists in biological analyzers. Both units
are based on the use of a principle known in engineering of transforming a

set of simultaneously (in parallel) delivered signals into a sequence of
signals. Figure 1 illustrates the flowchart of such a unit.

The analyzed complex signal. which contains several stimuli, is fed to the sensor
field. Each sensor 5 simulates in this case the functions of a receptive field
[2, 3]. The general require-ant is that the sensor must react to different
values of the stimulus in a binary code. For this, the sensor must contain a
specialized input converter and threshold element. The specialized input
converter transforms the stimulus into an analogue. In simulating, for example,
the visual analyzer, photoelectric pickups (photoresistors, photodiodes) can
serve as such a converter.

 

d! I! t
Figure 2.

 

It is further assumed that each stimulus activates only one sensor. The case
where each stimulus (for example. a light spot) activates a group of receptive
fields can be examined within the limits of the proposed algorithm, but is not
discussed in this article. Sensors S that form the sensor field are connected
to delay components 0. The outputs of all delay components are connected to
the inputs of the OR circuit. A recording counterRCfor the nudaer of signals
is connected to the output of the OR circuit. Nerve fibers can be considered
an analogue of delay components, whereas the functions of the on circuit and
recording counter are presumably performed on higher levels of the nervous
system.

in analyzing the first variant of the unit, we shall consider that lag time T.
provided by each component is a discrete random value. Let us assume that

the values of all delays are in the [11, 12] range and that in this range there
are k possible discrete values—~gredations of lag time.

Let us examine the operating cycle of this unit. A limited number of stimuli
is delivered to the sensor field within a short time (exposure time). Since

15

FIHIIIFFiCIAI.I£SI:(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the stimuli are distributed at random over the sensor field and the values of
delay cbmponents connected to the sensors are chosen at random, there will be
separation of the signals in time.

A sequence of pulses will appear at the output of the OR logic circuit, and
their number is recorded by means of a small capacity recording counter.

There is a probability that is other than zero that all signals formed by the
activated sensors will be delayed for different time intervals and that the
number of inputted stimuli will be recorded in the counter. This probability

is related to the number of gradations of time leg, as well as number of
stimuli.

-§

0.!
0.! h” h!”
0.1
' M
0.5

 

2 U 6 In
Figure 3. Figure ’0.

The probability that all signals will have diff.rent delays, in the case of
total number k of gradations of lag time and m number of inputted signals,
can be determined using the following formula (see Appendix):

P.-T,:"'m(-:-)". (1)

Figure 2 illustrates a family of curves plotted for several values of m as a
function of k number of gradations. Figure 3 illustrates the probability of
correct estimation Pm as a function of number of inputted stimuli, with k " 50
and k - 100.

Analysis of these functions shows that with a small number of atimli ("Ks-10)
and large number of gradations (k - 100) the probability Pm of proper estima-
tion of number of stimuli remains rather high (Pm>0.5), but then, with increase
in m, it diminishes rapidly. Such change in Pm is similar to the corresponding
functions demonstrated in biological sensory systems [1].

However, the time of estimating the number of stimuli is a more important
characteristic. The time in which the operating cycle is effected is determined

by t2. The main restrictions are imposed on r; by the resolution of the R0. The
counter's resolution is determined with the following formula:

16

MOMCIALUSEONLY
n-t. > 1,. ' (2)

k

where k is the number of gradations, T? is the resolution of the recording
counter (minimal time between two signals that the counter can still perceive
separately).

In view of the fact that 11>0 and k>0, this inequality can be converted into
Tz>kTp. According to this inequality, the duration of the measuring cycle of
the unit in question is determined essentially by the number of gradations

and resolution of the RC (i.e., it does not depend on the number of sensors).

let us dwell in greater detail on this property of the algorithm under dis-
cussion. If we take 10" s as the resolution of the RC (i.e.. commensurable
with the response time of a single neuron), with 100 gradations one can esti-
mate the unit's response time at 10" s, which is commensurable, for example.
with the speed of action of the visual analyzer, as determined in tachistoscopic
experiments. Thus, analysis of this algorithm shows that its most important
features resemble those of sensory systems.

From the standpoint of a physiologist, the assumption that the lag time is
discrete is a very gross error. To eliminate it. let us discuss an analogue
unit, in which the time lag for each component can assume any value in the

range of [11. 12]. Let us assume that time lag is a continuous random value
that is uniformly distributed over [1,. 12]. In this case, restrictions on

the interval between delayed signals are also imposed by the resolution of the
recording counter. We shall give the resolution as a share of interval [11, 1;]:

— -‘ (a)

1"“! (13-11) a

where 0<Y< l .

As in the first variant of the unit, it can be considered that the stimuli
are distributed at random over the sensor field and that each of the formed
signals is delayed for a random period of time. If at least two signals
are inputted in the 0R circuit, which are less than t? apart, the 80 will
record them as one signal and there will be erroneous estimation of the
number of stimuli.

when there are two stimuli on the sensor field, a problem arises that is
called "encounter problem" in probability theory [6]. For m stimuli, one
can formulate a multidimensional "encounter problem." In the unit under
discussion. the "encounter" of two or more signals leads to an error in
estimating the number of stimuli going to the sensor field. Figure 4 illus-
trates the probability Pm of correct estimation as a function of delivered
stimuli with two values for parameter 7. This function was obtained as a
result of simulating the multidimensional "encounter problem" on a computer.
Analysis of the obtained functions confirms the conclusion that the algorithm
in question has characteristics that are similar to the main characteristics
of biological sensory systems.

17

FOI.0I11CLAI.IEIE(HVLY
IND! OF1ICJAI.US£(JNLY

; APPENDIX
E
Derivation of Formulas [i]

Let there be N sensors, to each of which is connected a delay component. There
are k gradations of time lag. Then the number of delay components for each
gradation is determined by the equation, n; - N/k, where (i - 19k). One must
determine probability Pm of an event, which consists of the fact that with
random choice of m delay components in a set of N elements all m elements

will have different lag times.

Let us designate as Ai an event consisting of the fact that the selected
delay is referable to the ith gradation. The probability of event A; is
determined by the equation:

p(,4,)-.1-.‘_.,_

N b (A.l)

Then the probability of one variant of choice m for different delays is
determined by the equation:

P -Im.n- - ( 71-) .. (A.2)

The total number N of such variants is determined by:

kl

l-C.'ml - (k-ll). .

(A.3)

 

Ultimately, we see that the probability of choice of m different delays is
determined using formula (1).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Miller, G. A., ”The Magic Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two. Some Limits
to Our Ability to Process Information," in "Inzhenernaya psikhologiya"
[Engineering Psychology], Moscow, Progress, 1964, pp 192-225.

2. Agababyan, K. 6., "Algebra of Neuronal Matrices," DOKL. AN SSSR (SBR.
HATEHATIKA, FIZIKA), Vol 199, No 5, 1971, pp 991-993.

3. "Physiology of Sensory Systems," Leningrad, Heditsina, 1976.
6. Gnedenko, B. V., "Course in Probability Theory," Moscow, Nauka, 1965.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauks", "Avtomatika i telenekhanika", 1982
10,657

C50: 1840/211
18

Ptﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂ!(NNLY
3W

UDC: 575.1:576.851.5

DISTRIBUTION. BMOLOGY AND CLONIM 0P CRYPTIC ms 0? MCILLUS
THURINGIENSIS

Hoscow own-m in Russian Vol 18. No 2, tab 82 (manuscript received 6 Oct 81)
pp 181-189

[Article by V. A. Sakanyan,‘ 6. ll. Selivanova. N. 0. Buksnov, M. A. Krupenko
and S. I. Alikhanyen. All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Genetics
and Breeding of Industrial Hicroorganisms. lioscow]

[Text] At least seven cryptic plasmids (pBTGl-pl‘rm) with
molecular lengths of 8.5-1.5.7 .kb [kilobase] were identified

in Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. galleriae 69-6. According to
the results of hybridisation and heterodupler analysis. the
plasmids of this strain have extensive regions of homology to
one another. homology was also dmsonstrsted between B.
thuringiensis subsp. galleriae 69-6 plasmids and cryptic
plasmids in 10 out of 1‘ tested ex'r'aiaeﬁt- other 3. thurin-
giensis serotypes. These data indicate that some plasmid

genes are conserved in I. thuringiensis. All Ilindlll. Ben!!!
and acoRI fragments of cryptic plasmid mu iron 3. thuringiensis
subsp. galleries 69-6 were cloned on vector ”I325 in Escherichia
coli cells.

The sporulating soil bacterium. B. thuringiensis, produces insecticidal toxins.
The most pathogenic one is crystalline G-endotoxin, which is used as a biological
agent for protecting plants against harmful insects [1]. There are still no
data whatsoever concerning the genetic organisation and regulation of toxin
production by B. thuringiensis.

The discovery of cryptic plasmids in strains of several 3. _thuringiensia
serotypes [2-5] and study of plasmid cmoaithn of crystallff'erous and animal-
lifﬂ‘” strains made it possible to expound the hypothesis of plasmid deter-
mination of toxin production [2. 6]. However, there are data that fail to
confirm the involvement of plasmids in synthesis of G-endotoxin [5, 7. 8].
It was recently possible to demonstrate that plasmids of B. thuringiensis
subsp. galleriae 69-6 (eerotype V) code the synthesis of crystalline G-endo-
toxin [9]. This prompted further studies of cryptic plasmids of B. thurin-
giensis.

.-.—

19

l-‘OIOI‘FICIALUSIONLY
F03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Material and Methods

The bacterial strains used in this study are listed in Table l. B.
thuringiensia aubsp. galleriae 69-6 is used in industry. while the other
strains of B. thuringiensis were obtained fros the culture collection of the
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Genetics. DNA was cloned in
Escherichia coli “101 r's" cells on vector 1238325. which detersines resis-

tance to tetracycline. aspicillin and chloramphenicol [10].

iensia

Table 1. Strains of B. thuring

   
 

  

lash
imam m.» sleeve! .
momma 1mm maniacal vm - xv»

Hedia: we used Bottinger broth end 1.5: Bettinger agar. in acne cases. we
also used I. broth and solid nedius prepared on the basis of this broth by
adding 15 g agar (Difco, United States) per liter sodium.

Isolation of DNA: He used the ssthod described in [ll] for preparative
isolation of plassid one from E. coli cells, with the exception of the fact
that cells were submitted to lysis using a solution containing 0.2% Triton X-
100, 50 d4 tris-ml. pH 8.0, and 62.5 ii me. He used the sethod described
by Gonzalez and Carlton [5] to screen plasmid one in strains of different
serotypes of b. thuringiensia. the ease technique, with nodifications, was
used to isolate plasnid DNA free 3. thuringiensis aubsp. galleries 69-6.
Cells cultivated in l i broth at 35": with intensive rocking to the late
logarithmic phase were collected by centrifuging under refrigeration and
washed twice in cold TEN buffer (0.05 h trio-“Cl, pl! 8.0, 0.005 ll ETA-Rap
0.05 1! NaCl). The cells were frozen for about 2 h at 40°C and resuspended
in 1001-1 TE“ buffer containing 251 sscchsrose. Five sin later, we added to
the resuspanded culture 10 at freshly prepared lyaosyse solution (16 sglmi),
and the nixture was incubated for 90 sin at are with gentle stirring. ihe

cells were lyzed by addition of 100 st. 51 sodium dodecylsulfate (Sips. United

States) in TEN-buffer followed by incubation with gentle stirring at 690 for
up to 15 min. To the lysate we added 50 m1. 5 ll llsCl solution and continued
incubation for another 5 sin at 65.0. The lysate was kept overnight at a‘c
and centrifuged for up to 50 sin at 17.000 rlmin to precipitate chromosossl
DNA. To the cleared lysate. we added dry polyethyleneglycol with relative
molecular sass of 6000 (Serve. "6) to an and concentration of 101. and the

mixture was stored overnight at a‘c. Polyethyleneglycol-bOund one was pro:

cipitated by slow (3000 risin) "centrifuging", aid-the precipitate a? dissolved—
(l glut), the

in TEN buffer. To the suspension we added dry cesius chloride
solution was centrifuged and the floating "protein film" was renewed. we
added to the solution ethidiul broside (Serve, rum to an end concentration of
300 Lg/mi and brought the solution refraction index up to 1.392. Equiponderant
ultracentrifuging was performed at 610,000 r/min for up to 66 h on an lr-b)
centrifuge (Beckmsn, United States). Plasmid DNA was carefully collected from
the gadient with a syringe, and to remove ethidium bromide we performed 2-3-
fold extraction with isopropyl alcohol saturated with cesium chloride. To

the solution we added one-third volume of 3 N sodium acetate and double volume
of cold 96: ethyl alcohol. The DNA was precipitated at ~20'C overnight with
subsequent centrifuging. The precipitated DNA was dissolved in TE: buffer

(10 d1 tris-NCl, pll 8.0, 1 it ETA-Nag). In the experiments for cloning.
plasmid DNA of B. thuringiensis and pBR325 vector were purified twice in a
gradient of cesium chloride. He used the method described in [12] to analyze
recombinant clones for demonstration of plasmid DNA.

Changing supercoiled closed circular molecules (CCC form) into
open circular molecules of DNA (oc form); He transferred 2-6 pg
plasmid DNA in 100 ui. TE buffer, which contained 50 ug/mz ethidium bromide,

into a quartz covette and exposed it to UV' [ultraviolet] light at 1000 erg/mm2 s
(SW-120A lamp). He took samples at specific intervals and analyzed them

by electrophoresis in 0.5! agarose gel.

Isolation of individual plasmids from sgarose gel: Ne used several
methods [13-15]. The best results were obtained with the method of Ledeboer
et al. [13]. Hydroxylapatite-bound DNA was eluted by chromatography through
a column with Sephadex G-50 medium (Pbarmacia, Sweden) by means of 0.25 M
EDTA solution, pH 8.0. Separated DNA was precipitated with 962 ethyl alcohol
for >4 h at -20'C and on a microcentrifuge (Bechen. United States). The
supernatant was carefully removed with a sterile Pasteur pipette: to the
precipitate we added 701 ethyl alcohol and repeatedly centrifuged. The re-
maining fluid wns evaporated in a water bath at 65’C and the pilih‘éntm
dissolved in 10 .20 at TE buffer.

Electrophores...s was performed in a horizontal unit, in 0.5: agarose gel,
15x18xo.3 cm in size at a voltage of 20-200 V for 2-68 h. We used a buffer
of the following composition: mm M tris-base, pH 7.8, 0.02 M sodium acetate
and 0.002 M EDTA. The gels were stained Lathe same buffer containing 1 using,
ethidium bromide and photographed under UV light through an 08-12 orange
light filter.

He used 0. 7% agarose gel for preparative electrophoresis. Ne applied ~l0-20 pg

plasmid DNA into each depression (pore. pit] 30Xl. 5 an in size. Electrophoresis
was pursued for 18 h at 30 V and PC.

Restriction and ligation of DNA: DNA was cleaved for 1-2 h at 37°C

in buffers of the following composition: 20 ii tris-NCL, pli 7.0, 100 rd! NaCl,
7 d4 chlz for BamNI enzyme; 20 m4 tris-NCl, pH 7. 5, 60 d! NaCl, 7 Iii NgClz
for Hindu! and 100 IN trio-NC, pH 7. 2. 50 all NaCl, 5 it 14301, for EcoRI.

The reaction was stopped by heating the reaction mixture at 65'C for 10 min.
followed by rapid cooling in an ice bath. He added one-fifth the volume of a
5-fold solution containing 501 glycerin, 0.51 sodium dodecylsulfate and 0.251
bromphenol blue to the reaction mixture. and samples were analyzed by means of
electrophoresis.

l-‘OIOI-‘FICIALUSEONLY
l-‘UK ol-‘I-IL‘IAI. use unu

For cloning, the restricted DNA specimens were precipitated with 962 ethyl
alcohol as described above. then we mixed cloned and vector DNA in a ratio of
3:1 and spliced with polynucleotide ligase of 1'4 phage with an end DNA con-
centration of 70 ug/mi. The reaction was run in 100 u}. solution containing

70 if tris-hCl, pl! 7.6, l mu BDTA. 10 if ch12, 1 it ATP (Sigma, United States),
10 In dithiothreitol and ligase excess (20 units) at llo'c for 12 h. The
reaction medium was heated at 65'c for up to 10 min and, after cooling. was
used to transform competent E. coli 8.3101 calla.

Transformation of plasmid DNA was done by the method of Mandel and Digs
[16] in the modification of Dagert and Ehrlich [17] by breeding anpicillin-
resistant (100 ug/mi) colonies.

Transfer of DNA from agarose gel to nitrocellulose filters (type
3M5, pore size 0.65 um, Schleicher 6 Schuell. m) was performed by the
method of Southern [18]. Ne transferred high-molecular DNA after‘lpartisl
depurinisation [l9]. ‘lhe filters with transferred DNA were kept in'vacITum '
at 80’C for up to 3 h.

Transfer of colonies to Hhatman 5&1 paper was performed by the aethod
described in (20].

Preparation of "P-labeled DNA: DNA was denatured by boiling at lOO'C
for up to 5 min followed by rapid cooling in an ice bath. then labeled by

the nick translation method [21. 22]. Radioactive DNA was separated by
chromatography on a column with fine Sephedex'G—SO (Pharmacia. Sweden), using
for elution a buffer containing 100 Iii tria-BCl. pl 8.0, 50 Iii NaCl, 5 ii
BDTA. The specific activity of the radioactive samples constituted 0.5-2-10'
counts/un/ug DNA. He used [a-“Pl-ATP (350 Gi/ﬂl; 1 Ci - 3.7010" becquerel
(Amersham, England) and DNA polymerase I of 3. coli (Bethesda Research Labora-
tories, United States).

Hybridization was performed in 502 deionized formamide solution containing
0.02% each of bovine serum albumin. ficoll and polyvinylpyrrolidone [23], 5-
fold SSC (1-fold SSC contains 0.15 H Neel, 0.015 M sodium citrate, pH 7.0) and
200 ug/ml low-molecular denatured DNA from chick erythrocytes. The reaction
lasted up to 30-190 h at 37‘C. After hybridisation, the filters and Hhatman
paper 541 were eluted in a solution of 2-fold 880 containing 0.51 sodium
dodecylaulfate (4 changes) and 2-5 times in a solution of 2-fold 880 for at
least 5 h. Autoradiography was performed using “11 oswo x-ray film in
cassettes ["boses"] with an Ell-V2 amplifying screen at -70'C.

Electron microscopy was performed as previously described [26).
Experimental Section

Identification of cryptic plasmids of B. thuringiensis subsp.
galleries 69-6: kamination of B. thuringieneie subsp. galleries strains
was indicative of the presence of plasmids [2, 25]. In order to determine

the true number and identify the plasnids in B. thuringienais subsp. galleriae
69-6, we conducted electrophoretic and electron microscopic analysis of

22

MONIQALUSEONLY
plasmid DNA of this strain. As can be seen on the electrophoregram (Figure 1
(no photos reproduced], the fraction of extrachromeomal DNA of B. thuringiensis
subsp. galleriae 69-6 contains several bands, which implies the existence of
several plasmids with different relative molecular mass. Since the same plasmid
DNA exists in the cell in the form of structural configurations with different
electrophoretic mobility. we transferred the CCC forms into 00 forms of DNA.

For this purpose, total plasmid DNA was exposed to UV in the presence of ethidium
bromide and then analyzed in agarose gel. Figure 2 shows that exposure to UV
leads to disappearance of several bands (ccc forms) and intensification of
others (0c forms). In the case of prolonged irradiation, linear forms also
appear, due to substantial damage to DNA.

As a resultof these experiments, we identified six cryptic plasmids in B.
thuringienais subsp. galleriae 69-6. A comparison of electrophoretic mobility
of 0c forms of plasmid DNA to that of plasmids with known relative molecular
mass yielded the relative molecular masses of the demonstrated plasmids.

These data were confirmed by electron microscopy of the plasmid DNA fraction.
Measurement of contour lengths of >500 OC molecules of DNA enabled us to
determine more exactly the relative mol. masses of the plasmids and discover
yet another plasmid with relative mol. mass of 16.2 kb (Table 2). The cryptic
plasmids of B. thuringiensis subsp. galleries 69-6 were desimted as pBTGl,
”1132, etc., in accordance with the increase in their relative mol. mess.

Table 2. Cryptic plasmids of B. thuringiensis subsp. galleriae_69-6 _

 

pBTGl “so so am i 1 to
"mus amiig" 39.1.2: :éﬁ'iz 23’
v - p a

pm 1mm; ’

*The number of 0c forms of DNA measured under an electron microscope is
given in parentheses.

Thus, there is wide representation in a. thuringiensis subsp. gelleriae 69-6
of cryptic plasmids with relative mol. mess of 8.4 to 15.7 kb. He do not
rule out the possibility that there are also higher molecular plasmids in
this strain. since preparative electrophoresis in gel showed slowly migrating
bands (see Figure l), which were absent when we analyzed small amounts of DNA.

Ne succeeded in isolating individual cryptic plasmids of B. thuringiensis
subsp. galleriae 69-6 only with regard to the pB‘l'GZ plasmid. In all other
cases, the specimens contained an admixture of plasmid DNA with similar rela-
tive mol. masses.

Homology of cryptic plasmids of B. thuringiensis: It was previously
found that there are homology regions in plasmids of the same strain of B.
thuringiensis I26, 27]. Our experiments described here are also indicative of

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

homology between the cryptic plasmids of D. thuringiensis subsp. galleriae 69-6.
Figure 3 shows that "P-labeled m of plasmid pB'l'GZ is hybridized at least with
DNA of plea-ids pB‘l‘Gl and plum. According to intensity of hybridized bands,

as compared to hybridization between labeled and unlabeled DNA of plasmid pB‘mZ,
it can be assumed that there is a high level of homology between DNA of

plasmid pBIGZ and plasmids pB‘l‘Gl and pb‘l'cb. Indeed, heteroduplex analysis
enabled us to detect extended regions of homology in DNA of plasmids ”1'61 and
pB'I'GZ (Figure 6). In all, up to 602 of the genome of these plasmids consists

of homologous sequences.

It was interesting to determine whether there is homology between plasmids of
strains of different serotypes of D. thuringiensis. First of all, we examined
the plaenid composition of ll» strains. Figure 54 shows that 12 of the strains
examined contain plasmid DNA, and many of them have several plssnids. At
least one of the cryptic plasmids of most strains (with the exception of two
representing the subspecies toumanoffi and morriaoni) are hybridized with "P-
labeled DNA of plasmid pB’I‘GZ (see l’igure 56). There was particularly inten-
sive hybridization of a plasmid with relative nol. mass of ~5 MD in B. thurin-
giensis subsp. kurstaki. Moreover. there were several plasmids that hybridized
with plasmid pB'i’GZ in this strain, as well as in the subspecies subtoxicus and
tolworthi.

when a mixture of plasmids pB‘l‘Gl, pB‘rGZ. pb’l‘GJ and pm (this DNA fraction
was obtained fron agarose gel in the course of isolating individual plasmids)
was used as the uP-labeled DNA, we identified additional hybridizing bands
of plasmid DNA in lysates o_f_so_m_e__subspeciee of B. thuringiensis. This shows
that one (some) of the pB'rGl, pb'fGS and 93704 plasmids also has different
areas of homology with DNA of cryptic plasmids of other serotypes of b.
thuringiensis strains. as compared to plasmid pB‘NZ.

Cloning plasmid DNA of B. thuringiensis subsp. galleries 69-6 in
E. coli cells: Representation of the set of plasmids with similar relative
moi. masses in B. thuringiensis subsp. galleries 69-6 limits the possibility
of physical analysis of individual plasmids. Nevertheless, restriction with
total plasmid DNA reveals that some plasmids have at least one cleavage site
for one of the enzymes, Banal, HindIII or EcoRI (Figure 6).

Total DNA of cryptic plasmids treated with one of the restrictases, Bale,
Hindlll or EcoRI -waa spliced with ligaseto vector pBRJZS also treated with
one of the restrictases. Ne selected ampicillin-resistant transformants
from E. coli 33101 cells, which were tested by means of colony hybridization
for acquisition of fragments of cryptic plasmid DNA of D. thuringiensis
(Figure 7). As a result, we selected lb, 30 and 8 recombinant clones that
acquired Bemﬂl, Hindlll and Book! fragments, respectively. of B. thuringiensis
cryptic plasmid DNA. It should be_ggtsd that cloning in the appropriate
restriction site did not lead to inactivation of antibiotic resistance in
all of the recombinant clones. For example, 12 clones that acquired the
NindlII fragments of B. thuringiensis cryptic plasmids retained resistance

to tetracycline .

26

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Screening of recombith clones revealed that they all acquired plasmid DNA
with greater rel. mol. mass than that of initial vector pBR325. Preliminary
restriction analysis of recombinant plasmids warrants the assumption that we
succeeded in cloning virtually all fragments of cryptic plasmid DNA of the
strain 3. thuringiensis subsp. galleries 69-6 generated by the Banal, HindIII
and EcoRI enzymes.

Discussion

Many strains of B. thuringiensis contain utrachromosomal DNA. ‘me plasmid
genes of D. thuringiensis subsp. galleries 69-6 code synthesis of insecticidal
toxin [9]. Thus far no other function has been determined for B. thuringiensis
plasmids. The presence of extended regions of homology between cryptic plasaids
of B. thuringiensis subsp. galleriae 69-6 warrants the assumption that the

same genes are copied on independent replicons in the host strain. Noreover,
homology between cryptic plasmids of different serotypes could be the result

of the fact that certain plasmid DNA sequences are conserved in B. thuringiensis.

Another cause of homology of cryptic plasmids of B. thuringiensis could be
related to the presence in them of mobile structures of the transposon type and
insertion sequences. Debabov et al. [27], using electron microscopy, identified
a transposon-like structure in one of the B. thuringiensis plasmids.

The transduction method of transmission of genetic material in B. thuringiensis
cells under in vitro conditions has been described [28, 29]. Recently, trans-
formation transfer of heterologous plasmid DNA in polyethyleneglycol-treated

B. thuringiensis cells was also performed [30, 31]. Homology between plasmids
of different representatives of B. thuringiensis suggests that, under natural
conditions, bacteria of the genus B. thuringiensis have effective routes for
exchange of genetic information.

Still unclear is the cause of broad representation of extrschremosomel DNA in
B. thuringiensis cells. With reference to D. megaterius, which contains nine
plasmids, the hypothesis has been expounded that extrachromoeomal DNA of this
strain consists of circular fragments of chromosomal DNA [32]. In order to
determine the validity of this hypothesis for D. thuringiensis plasmids,
experiments are currently in progress to determine the possibility of homology
between extrachromosomal and chromosomal DNA. -'

\‘....

It should be noted that the cryptic plasmids of B. thuringiensis subsp.
galleriae are notable for several parameters. For exasple, plasmids pBTGl,
pBT63 and, perhaps, pants are isolated from cells chiefly in 06 forms of DNA
(see Figure 2). Sensitivity to the relaxing effect of sodium dodecylsulfate
(used for cell lysis) may be related to the biological distinctions of these
plasmids. Moreover, judging by the intensity of tee and 0C forms of DNA, it
may be considered that plasmids ph‘ml, pm3 and pms are present in the
cell in considerably fewer copies than, for example, plasmid pBTGZ. The
small number of copies, as well as similar rel. mol. masses of several plasmids,
were the reason why there are quite limited possibilities for studying indi-
vidual B. thuringiensis plasmils at" the present time.

25

FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Apparently, B. thuringiensis plasmids participate not only in synthesis of
insecticidal G-endotoxin [9], but other cellular processes. Plasmid DNA
cloning in cells of a suitable recipient is the most acceptable approach to
solving this and other problems. As we demonstrated previously [33], E. coli
could serve as such a recipient, since we should expect expression of many

B. thuringienais genes in the cells of this Gran-negative bacterium.

In the course of preparing this article for publication, the article of
Schnepf and Hhitelay appeared [3b]. which dealt with successful cloning of
plea-id genes of the crystal protein of B. thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki in
B. coli cells.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. “02:15, J, 3., "Sporetores as Insecticides,” J. APPL. BACTERIOL., Vol 33,
1970, p 192.

2. Debabov, V. 6., Azizbekyan, R. 8., Khlebalina, 0. 1., D'yechenko, V. V.,
Galushka, P. P. and Belykh, R. A., "Isolation and Prelilinary Description
of Extrachronosonal DNA Elements of Bacillus thuringiensis," GBNBTIKA,
Vol 13, No 3, 1977, p ‘96.

3. Stahly, D. P., Dingman, D. 9., Irgens, R. L., Field, 0.0., Feiss, H. G.
and Smith, G. L., 'Bhnltiple thrachroeosomal Deoxyribonucleic Acid
Molecules in Bacillus thuringiensis," FEMS HICROBIOL. LBITBRS, Vol 3,
1978, p 139.

a. Faust, R. H., Spizieen, J., Gage, V. and Travers, B. 8., "Extrachromosomal
DNA in Bacillus thuringiensis Var. kurstaki, Var. finitimus, Var. sotto and
in Bacillus papillae,” J. INVERTBBRATB PAIHOL., Vol 33, 1979, p 233.

s. Gonzalez, J. u.. Jr. and Carlton, a. c., "Patterns of Plasmid m in
Crystalliferous and Acrystalliferous Strains of Bacillus thuringiensis,"
PLASHID, Vol 3, 1980, p 92.

6. Stshly, D. P., Dingsan, n. U., Bulls, L. A.,Jr. and Aronson, A. 1.,
"Possible Origin and Function of the Parasporal Crystals in Bacillus
thuringiensis," BIOCHEH. BIOPHYS. RES. CDHHUNS., Vol 84, 1978, p 581.

7. Hiteva, V. 1., "Characteristics of Three Plasmids of Bacillus thuringiensis
Var. thuringiensis B. I Serotype," C. R. ACAD. SCI. (Bulgaria), Vol 31.

8. Debabov, V. G., Lideean, L. B., Khlebalina, 0. I. and Kotova. T. 8..
"Use of Combined Transcription—-Translation System to Determine the
Role of Cryptic Plasmids of Bacillus thuringiensis," HOL. BIOL., Vol 13,
1979, p 1230.

9. Alikhanyan, S. 1., "Gene Engineering Experiments with Bacillus thurin-
giensis," "IV dvustoronniy sispoziun sssn-rnc 'Strukturs i transkriptsiye
genoes': Teeisy dokladov" [Summaries of Papers Delivered at 4th Bilateral
USSR-PRC Symposium on Structure and Transcription of Genome], Yerevan,
1981, p 9.

26
ltlltﬂﬂﬂ(1hl.lﬂli(lVlY
10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Bolivar, 11., "Construction and Characterization of New Cloning Vehicles.
111:. Derivatives of Plaenid p38322 Carrying Unique Dcokl Sites for
Selection of Book! Generated Decodinant DNA Iblecules,” cm, Vol lo,
1978, p 121.

Dauphreye, c. 0., Hillehav, 6. A. and Anderson, 3. 8., ”A Sinle liethod
for the Preparation of Large Quantities of Pure Plea-id DEA," 31003111.
DIOPIYB. ACTA, V01 282, 1973. p 657.

Dirnhoin, 11. c. and Doly, J., "A lapid Alkaline Extraction Procedure for
Screening Remnant Plea-1d NA," 111101.. ACIDS 338., V01 7, 1979, p 1513.

hedeboer, A. 11., Hills, J. and Schiperoort, l. A., "An Easy and Efficient
Procedure for the Isolation of Pure DEA Restriction PragIente Fran Agarose
Gel," 310611111. DIOPBYS. acre, Vol 520, 1978, p 698.

Chonikh, J., Volovitch, H. and Got, P., "A Siqle and Fast Blectrophorstic
Method for mution of llucleic Acid Pro- Gels," 1101.. 3101.. REPORTS, Vol 5,
1979, p 237.

Thuring, R. H. J., Sanders, J. P. 11. and Iorgt, P., "A Freeze-Squeeze
Hethod for Recovering Long DNA Pros Agarose Gels," ANALYT. 310mm.
Vol 66, 1975, p 213.

Handel, 11. and Riga, A., 'Calciul-Dependent Bacteriophage DNA Infection,"
J. ”01.. DIOl.., V01 53, 1970, p 159.

Dagert, H. and Ehrlich, S. D., "Prolonged Incubation in Calciue Improves
the Coqetence of Escherichia coli Cells," cm, Vol 6, 1979, p 23.

Southern, 8. 11., "Detection of Specific Sequences bong DNA Pregnants
Separated by Gel Electrophoresis,” J. 101... 3101... Vol 98, 1975, p 503.

Hehl, G. 11., Stern, 11. and Stark, G. 2., "Efficient Transfer of Large
DNA Fragments Prom Agarose Gels to Diasobenayloxynethyl Paper and
Rapid Hybridization by Using Dextran Sulfate," PROC. NAT. ACAD. SCI. USA,

Vol 76, 1979, p 3683.

Grunstein, H. and Bognsss, D. 8., ”Colony Hybridisation: a Method for the
Isolation of Cloned DNA's That Contain a specific Gene," Ibid, Vol 72,
1975, p 3961.

Heniatia, 1., Jeffrey, A. and (laid, D. 6., "Nucleotide Sequence of the
Rightvard Operator of Phage A," lbid, Vol 72, 1975, p 1186.

Rigby, P. 11. J., Diechen, 11., Rhodes, c. and Berg, P., ”labelling
Deeoxyribonucleic Acid to high Specific Activity in Vitro by Nick-
Translation Hith DNA Polymerase I," J. 1101.. 3101... Vol 113, 1977, p 237.

Denhardt, D. A., "A Kahuna-Filter Technique for the Detection of
Cowleaentary DNA," 31m. atoms. RES. towns” V01 23, 1966, p 6101.

27

mammormr
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

FOR OFT-1C1“. USE ONLY

Sakanyan, V. a., Yakubov, L. 2., Alikhanyan, 8. l. and Stepanov, A. 1.,
"Genetic and Heteroduplex Analysis of Deletion Mutants of Plea-id pass,”
CW1“, Vol 15, No 5, 1978, p 853.

Galushka, 1'. P. and Arizhekyan, B. 1., "Study of Plasaids of Different
Variants of Bacillus thuringiensis Strains," m. All 8333, Vol 236,
No S, 1977, p 1233.

Hiteva, V. 1., ”Study of Plea-id of Bacillus thuringiensis," author
abstract of dissertation in defense of scientific degree of candidate
of biological sciences, Sofiya, Institute of Hicrobiology, Bulgarian
Academy of Sciences, 1979, 28 pages.

Dehabov, V. 6., Khlehalina, 0. 1., Calushka, F. P. and Slsdkon, l. A.,
"Plasnida of Bacillus thuringisnsie Var. galleriae Strain 612," HOB.
3101... Vol 14, 1980, p 1039.

DeBarjec, I!” "Transduction in Bacillus thuringiensia," C. R. ACAD. 801.,
Vol 270, 1970, p 2227.

Thorns, s. B., "Transduction in Bacillus thuringiensis," APPL. “V130“.
“10103101“, V01 35, 1978, p 1109.

Byabchenko, N. P., Buhanov, N. 0., Saksnyan, V. A. and Alikhanyan, S. 1., ‘

"Transforntion o! Protoplasta o! Bacillus thringinsis Var. lleriae ‘
69-6 by Plea-id pBCl6," non. Al SSSR, Vol 233, lo 3, 1980, p' 29.

Martin, P. A. H., Bohr, J. B. and Dean, 11. 3., "l‘ranstorlstion of
Bacillus thuringiensis Protoplssts by Plenid Decayrihonucleic Acid,"
J. W01", V01 1‘5, 1981, p 980.

Benneherry, R. C. and Carlton, B. C., “Characterisation of Polydisperse
Closed Circular Deoxyrihonucleic Acid'ﬂolecules of Bacillus legateriul,"
lhid, Vol 116, 1973, p 625.

Tsoy, 'r. V., Sskanyan, V. A., Lebedev, A. R. and Alikhanyan, 8. 1.,
"Cloning and Expression of Pronotor Regions of Bacillus thuringiensie
DNA in Escherichia coli Cells," swarm, Vol 17, No 12, 1981, p 2100.

Schnepf, a. B. and ﬂhitaley, Ii. 3., "Cloning and Expression of the
Bacillus thuringisnsis Crystal Protein Gene in Escherichia coli,"
PBDC. NAT. ACAD. SCI. USA, Vol 78, 1981, p 2893.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'etvo "Ranks", ”Censtika", 1982

10,657
C80: 1860/213

28

MWMONLY
UDC: 576.312.3102
MOBILIZATIW 01’ 6330105”!— ems OF VIBRIO CHOW BY rum 326mm cts62

Moscow (:me in Russian Vol 18, No 2. Feb 82 (nsnuscript received ll 8ep 80.
tinal version received 12 Jan 81) pp 227-236

[Article by A. G. Skavronskaya, G. I. AleehLin, I. G. Tiganova and I. A.
Shaginyan, Scientific Research Institute of Bpideniology and Microbiology
ineni N. P. Canaleya, 0888 Acadeny of Medical Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] Studies were ends of the possibility of nobilieation

of chronosonal genes of Vibrio cholerae with plenid ”6::

Nu cts62. This plasmid was constructed in E. coli cells and then
transferred to donor strains of Vibrio cholerae. It was shown
that plasnid RPM: cts62 nobilises chronosonsl genes of
Vibrio cholerae through conjugative transmission. There is
considerable increase in frequency of nobilieation when crosses
are produced at the senipernissive tenperature for heat-
inducible phage nu cts62.. his pattern is observed only with
use of donors carrying plea-id ”41m: cts62. but not donors
with plasnid RM. The incidence of transnission of chronosonsl
narkers by plasnid RP :znu cts62 per transnitted plasnid is
considerably higher than the incidences characterising the
nobilizing activity of the 8 factor of Vibrio cholerae. 30
markers of plasnid are and phage nu cts62 are denonstrable in
transconjugsnts receiving planidwnohilised chronosonal genes,
which could he an advantage in using the obtained reconbinants
in studies dealing with genetic analysis of Vibrio cholerae.
The causes of absence of plasdd I” and phage nu cts62 where
in reconbinsnts are discussed.

In recent years, there has been considerable intensification of genetic studies
of Vibrio cholerae. and this is reflected in the published surveys [1. 2]. Use
of systene of genetic hybridization of V. cholerae. in which vibrions with the
P factor serve as a donor, established that there are three groups of linkages
on the basis of napping 17 genes of V. cholerae [3].

while there are obviOus advances in the area of genetic studies of V. cholerae,
it is just as obvious that analysis of crosses between P" and P“ cells is

far tron perfect. This circunstance has led researchers to work on new

routes of genetic exchange in V. cholerae. Bone progress has already been made

29

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this direction. In particular, so-cslled Tfr strains (from the English.
"transposon facilitated recombination" [4, 5]) have been obtained by insertion
of transposons that provide for homology in the chromosome and P factor.

The studies described here deal with development of a new system of genetic
exchange in V. cholerae. To create such a system, plasmid RN. which contains
the cts mutant of phage Mu (”mm cts62). was constructed and transmitted
to V. cholerae. The capacity not only of its own transsisaion in crosses
between V. cholerae. but to mobilise chromosomal genes of V. choleraa, was
found to be inherent in this plasmid. It was demonstrated that mobilisation
of chromosomal genes by plasmid ”lush: cts62 occurs much more efficiently
than with plasnid RN, and the temperature is a contributing factor.

Material and Methods

Table 1 lists the strains used in this study. Phage Mu and its mutant ﬂu cts62
were obtained fron H. Howe (United States). This mutant of phage Mu has a t
mutation in gene c which determines beat induction of prophage (62°C) [6].

In this work. we used complete Lennox medium of the Difco Company (United
States) and minimum medium A [7]. Amino acids were added to mining medium in
a concentration of 200 ug/mt, glucose in a concentration of 0.62. as well as
antibiotics (in Lug/ml): tetracycline 10. ampicillin 20, hanamycin 20 and
streptomycin 100. Lysogenization of cells with bacteriophage ﬂu and ﬂu cts62,
as well as head induction of phage nu cts62, was performed by the techniques
described by Rowe [6]. Conjugation transfer of plasmid I” by 3. coli cells
was performed by the standard method [7].

Table 1. Bacterial strains used in this study

_

 

 
  
   
  

 

Strain Genotype Plasmids Source
Realize/mo . up .. ___.__._.___--._____.._.
wauo thy m lisction of s. P. Moro: (Moscow)
cum "put-.1. org B’sir RN naction or G. a. Smirnov (Moscow)
Amos hm .3hﬂh - . Howard-Flanders (United States)
4mm leu an - "" ‘ _- ‘-
”h. a.”

xsum pm Mum - . 8. Il'ina (noscow)

GAS‘IO lea his thr 3' RH: :ll ls
”mm 0 c 62 This laboratory

Vcholmo: 5090 Prototroph - WW'
Iwm nv his us an tor - c; Parker (United States)
mum
V1510: Protouoph “1".sz 03 “It. .my
30

MWWONLY
Bxperinental Section

He know that plaseid ”6 can be transaitted to bacteria of different systenatic
groups. This plasmid can nobilise chromeonel genes. However. the frequency
of transfer of chronosoaal narkers with this plasmid is not high [8]. At the
sane tine. we know that frapents of a bacterial chronosone can be incor-
porated in a plasmid if phage ﬂu is inserted in it. which carries the cts
mutation. or else a chronosoesl fragaent. In the presence of senipereisaive'
temperature for such a phase, there is partial induction of prophage. This
increases the frequency of formation of a unique structure: a segeent of s
chronosone that is flanked by the genoae of phage liu is contained in the plea-
eid [9, 10].

In order to obtain such a systee of nobilisation of chronosonal genes in V.
cholerae. we constructed plea-id ”sum cts62. For this purpose, E. coli

strain GAlZO was lysogenired by phage ﬂu cts62. 'l'he lysogenic clone was

used in crosses with E. coli strain Chill (”(0),"Vh16h served as the donor.

we selected tetracycline-resistant (Tc) transcipients. Cross-selection of

the donor was nade on the basis of growth require-ante (absence of arginine and
adenine in the nediun). The frequency of ‘l'c clone fornation constituted
10'2-10'” scaled to donor cells. All of the tested clones were In Ap 'l'c.

i.e.. they had all the aarkers of plasaid ”lo. he‘sﬁ‘s‘ensitivity imparted by

phage ﬂu cts62 and carried the recipient's genetic earker (tryptophan dependence).

In other words, we obtained clones containing both plasmid RN and phage Mu
cts62. One of these clones was used as a donor in a crossing to produce an
RN plasnid containing a chroeosonal fragnent flanked by the genome of
phage Mu.

It is known [9] that one must use Recs strains to deaonstrste bacteria with
such plasaids. This is attributable to the fact that chroeosonal taco-bina-
tiona do not occur in Roch strains. and the chronosonal trait appears
because of a gene contained in the plasmid.

In view of the foregoing, we used strain “2663' race as a recipient, after
submitting it to lysogenisation by phage "u of the wild type. Lysogenitation
of the recipient was done in order to prevent zygotic induction of phage Mu
cts62 which is transaitted as part of the plasaid. We selected the erg narker
to obtain plea-id ”6 containing bacterial gene and phage Mu. gonsequantly.
Arg" transcipients werc subnitted toe—election. Cross-breeding of the donor
was nade by adding streptonycin to the nediun.

we codified slightly the method of Paelen and Toussaint in our experiments,
and conducted then as follows. Just prior to hybridization. the donor culture
in the log phase of growth was incubated for #5 min at 37‘C (smiperniasive
tenperature for phage Mu cts62). Hybridisation was perforned at the sane
tenperature for 3 h. when we checked the nonselective narkers in the
recovered Arg" trenscipiants. we found that the absolute nsjority (16 out of
17) carried all the narkers of plasaid R26.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICMNWCJAI,USElMVLY

Lysogenicity of the recipient.prevent0heet induction of phage ﬂu cts62. Con-
sequently, special experiments were conducted to prove its presence in plasnid
RPA. For this purpose, one of the obtained Arg+Kn Ap Tc transcipients, desig-
nated as strain 6A570, was used as donor for conjugative transfer of this
plasmid to E. coli K31661 mutant. This mutant, which was kindly provided by
T. S. Il'ina (Moscow) is resistant to phage Mu. This property of the nutant
makes it possible for phage Mu to enter only as pert of plea-id era and pre-
cludes lysogeniration by free phage spontaneously induced in donor cells.

He submitted In clones to selection in the GA570xKSlb61 cross. Beat sensiti-
vity of the selected clones was analysed as a nonselective market. All of the
checked In clones were found to be heat sensitive. resistant to tetracycline.

kanamycin end ampicillin, and they retained the amino acid markers of the
recipient.

Two such clones were tested for heat induction of phage. The phage titer
in cultures exposed to heat (AZ'C) constituted 107 (Table 2).

Table 2. Beat induction of bacteriophage Mu cts62 in E. coli and V. cholerae

 

 

 

cells
Phage p:iti lea per -
Strain a:
are «re
Alma n cm) 1.540 8.040.
cm tzun M) new new
All (“qu on”) new mm
was «tan oust 3.040 2.010.
nVJl (“Patna clso ) 3.040 1,010

This warranted the belief that strain GA570, which was used as donor, carries
plasmid RPA, which contains phage Mu cts62. Strain GA570 was used as a donor
in crosses with V. cholerae. In these experiments. V. cholerae strain 5693
served as recipient.

The crosses were made on filters. Bacteria cultivated in Lennox broth to the
stationary phase of growth (18 h) were applied on the filter in a 1:1 donor-
recipient ratio. The filter was placed on Lennox agar and incubated for 24 h
at 30'c. The conjugation mixture was then washed off the filter, and cultures
were nade on selective asdiun. which consisted of nininua agar with glucose
and tetracycline.

The cultures on selective nedia were incubated at 30°C for 2-3 days. The fre-
quency of plasmid transfer constituted lO"-lO“. The selected Tc transcipi-
ents had all the markers of plaanid are. The heat sensitivity transferred by
phage no to transciplents formed on the basis of strain 5693 could not be
demonstrated. since heat sensitivity was found to be inherent in this strain
(no growth at 62°C). However, the presence of phage Mu cts62 who demonstrated
by reproduction of heat induction. As can be seen in Table 2, heat induction
of phage did occur. although with less efficiency than in E. coli. This was
indicative of preservation of phage ﬂu in the ark plan-id transferred to V.
cholerae.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3. Frequency of transfer of plea-id and chroeoeoeal urhere with

 

      
 

   

32.313 2:2: 3:32: . .5: ms:
V7510! IWSi - ' = 3:3:

V1310: -t

 

0h the two top lines, frequency of narkar transfer is scaled to donor
cells and in the two botton lines to traneferred plaenid.

One of the clones of strain 369! carrying the narkere of plauid are. which is
sensitive to heat induction of pbge. was deeignated an strain VTSlOl. The

”I. plasnid wee trananitted to the sane strain of V. cholerae (5693). This .
transfer was affected by the sane technique as transfer of plaenid name:

cte62. One of the obtained clones. which contained the IN plaenid. was -—4
deeignated an "5102.

Acquisition by V. cholerae of both the are and ”’6th: cte62 plaaeide was not
associated with change in their eerological characteristics.

V. cholerae strains "5101 and VTSlOZ were used as donors in hybridisation of

V. cholerae. In theee experinente, nultiply-Iarked mtant strain Will of V.
cholerae was used as a recipient. Hybridisation wee perforned on filters using
the above-described nethod. The filters were incubatedat 37‘C. In eone of

the experiments. we conducted concurrent taste, in which filters with conjugating
bacteria were incubated at 30°C (i.e., we did not use the senipernieaive tenpe-
rature for phage m cts62). He selected recoﬁinante for all of the chronosonal
narkere of strain “31 (Agr‘, nv+Bis+ recoebinante). Concurrently. we selected
KI reconbinants (8P1. earhar). The ieoleted recoebinant clonea were eubnitted

to 2-fold purification on the one selective nedie, after which we analysed
noneelective aarkers. The results of theee enperieente are listed in Table 3.

He see that transfer of Rl’lnmu cte62 and IN. plea-ids to cholera vibrione
occurs at a frequency of 10" and 10". This conforne to the difference in
frequency of transfer of these plea-ids in the atperinente with E. coli (Tabla
lo). The frequency of transfer of plea-id ”lo was coneiderehly higher in the
experinents with recipients that were not lyeogenic for phage Hu (E. coli

and V. cholerae) than the frequency of transfer of plasmid ”hum cte62 (see
Tables 3 and 6). 91th use of 8. coli lyeoganic for phage Mu ea recipient,

the frequency of transfer of ”633m cte62 rose aleoet to the level inherent
in the RIM plasnid. Lyeogenization of the recipient does not effect transfer
of plasaid ”I. (see Table 6). V. cholerae is not eenaitive to phase ﬂu Ell].
For thie reason, we did not eucceed in lysogenisation and conducting analogous
expert-ante with V. cholerae.

33

FOIOIIICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘rable b. Prequency of tranafer of pleenid end chromaonel nerkere in
hybridization of _§.__coli attain?" _

 

6A1” ("Mule M2) Am
A8115?

mm u. out:
man (mu) AM '

 

*Incubation temperature 31 “C.

The frequency of tranefer of chronoaonal narkera liated in Table 3 was calcu-
lated in relation to donor calla and tranaferred plea-ids. Aa can be aeen
in the top part of thie table. in the experinente with both plaanida there
van a low incidence of reeonbinante for chronoeonal narkera when calculated

:3
m In «a: 5.5-
1.0-
5.0

8.010"1.0-10" 10" ~10”
“Ho- 0.0'

' 13-10" 3.040" ”'10"

55-10" 1.040" 10‘“ 8.040“

~10" 14340" ”-10" £1.10"

in relation to donor calla. If, however. the frequency is calculated in

relation to tranaferred plaeIide (bottom part of the table), a conaiderably

higher frequency of reconbinenta ia obeerved in the teata with the ”6::

cta62 plea-id. Changing the tenerature (37'C) doee not affect frequency of

tranafer of chronoeonal genee by plea-id ”I. (eee Table 3). The findinga

were different in the experinenta with ”bulb cta62: in thie cue, the fre-, "
quency of fornetion of reconbinante according to chronoeonel genea increaeed
eignificantly when hybridization wee perforned at the a-ipernieeive teqera-
ture (37°C) for phage Nu cta62 (eee Table 3).

Thus, there is an increaae in frequency of trenefer of chroneeoael when
under the influence of teqerature only in the cue of the donor with RPIozmu
cte62. but not with the one that tranafere the 826 plea-id. rhie ahowe that
the node of tranafer of chronoeonal genee deecribed for E. coli by Paelen

and ‘rouaeaint alao occure in V. cholerae.

Hith reduction of V. cholerae, tranefar of chronoeonal narltera by neana of
”lame cte62 (with direct aelection of appropriate recoebinante) occurred
at about the am frequency aa in the experinente with E. coli (see Tables 3

and“.

At the eane tine, there wee acne distinction to the V. cholerae reconbinante.
Thun,‘ we failed to denonetrate either narkere of ”6 plea-rid or heat eenai-

tivity inparted by phage Mu cta62 in recodainanta of V. cholerae eelected

according to chronoaonal narkera (Table 5).

The aane table ehowa that

tranacipienta eelected for chronoaonal narhare. which were obtained in

experinente with a donor carrying 3P6. did not have pleaeid nerkera in only
a certain nunber of men. However, in the experinenta with E. coli. re-

tention of plaanid nerkera and the trait tranaferred by phage liu cta62

depended on the recipient'a genotype. lime. in the experinnta with race
recipiente, 1001 of the trenecipienta selected for chromeoeal aarkere pre-
tented heat eeneitivity and antibiotic reeietance inherent in the RM plaanid.

34

”MUSE“?
In the experieente with an recA“ recipient. however, only part of the tune-
cipiente carried plea-id nerkere (aee Table 5).

'l'eble 5. Conjugetive cotrenafer of ”lo and phase llu cte62 narkere in
hybridization of trenecipiente according to chronoeonal nerkera

 

    
 

501”? Inner cptrenefer,‘
t1?-

 
 

CMI) ”‘3'! w XABIWI mt W 25 S 35
GM!) muzzle our new: tea-(Ila out) Ill-9 too gen :00
m0 m m m
V7101 (”can “63)on MM give: 3 3 3
mm ‘mxavs: nee. ' II” 81.5 - -
mm ( ':Ilu comment: no» (In one) Ill-9 3 - -

1hua. while only aoee the tranecipiente loet earhera of. the tranaterred
”loath: cte62 pleenid in the expuinnnte with rece" E. coli, in thoee
with V. cholerae auch loae wee inherent in all of the tented tranecipiente.

Diecueeion

The submitted data indicete that plea-id mum cta62 can be trananitted to

V. choleree. Thie plaaeid ia retained in V. cholerae cello. and the cte eutent
of phage no contained in it ie aubject to heat induction. there in a wider-
ebly lower yield of phage particlea with heat induction than with heat induc-
tion of the cane plea-id in E. coli cella. Thie ehowe that eventa that are
involved in heat induction of phage nu cta62 in V. cholerae are leea efficient
than in E. coli. Still unclear are the procaaaee involved in but induction
(encieion or reproduction of phage), to which these eventa ere reletedh

In hybridization of V. choleree. the ”In: cta62-pleanid mobilizes chrono-
eonal senee. Iranafer of chrmeonel nerkera wee eatebliehed on the basin of
direct eelection of Arg", llv", Ilia" clonee (see Table 3). Such clonee could
be formed by bacteria with the appropriate genee in the plan-id, i.e., con-
taining the etructuree described by Peelen end roueeeint [9]. which constitute
the R24 pleaeid with chronoaonel {res-onto flanked by phage In. At the cane
tine, the Arg", Inf“ and 313+ clonea could appeer aa a reeult of race-binn-
tion between the ineerted plaanid end chrouaoee. i.e., theae clonee could be
represented by chronoeoeel recoebinente.

In the former ceae. we ahould obaerve a colbinatien of acquired chroeoaoeel and
plaenid nerhere, aa well an the nerker of phage Mu. 'l‘he reeulta of analyaia

of clones obtained in the experinente with E. coli are en illuatretion of

ouch e pattern. loot denonatrative are the data characterizing the tranacipi-
ente foreed on the baeia of en recA recipient (eee “reble lo). lheee tranecipi-
onto. which were selected for chroeoaoeal eerkere. terry the nerkera of the
are plaeeid in 100: of the ceeea and they ere heat-aenaitive (phage nu cta 62
nnrker).

35

MWNONIX
FOI10FHKJAI.USE(NVLY

However, both the RPé aarkers and heat sensitivity imparted by phage Mu cts62
are wanting in trsnscipients obtained from hybridization of V. cholerae
selected for chromosomal markers (see Table 5).

Consequently, the ark plasmids with phage ﬂu and fragments of the bacterial
chromosome transferred to V. cholerae spparentlyseparate,amd this is associated
with formation of chromosomal recombinants. Evidently, this is associated
with elimination of components of R94 and phage nu cts62. The breakdown of

the complex plasmid could precede formation of recombinants, but perhaps it
could be the consequence of recombination events. According to the date listed
in Table 5, when E. coli is hybridized with the use of an recA+ recipient.

some of the selected clones, which acquired chromosomal traits, also present
loss of era and ﬂu cts62 markers. This indicates that, in the presence of
recombination activity in the recipient, formation of chromosomal recombinants
could also lead to dissociation of the plasmid in B. coli.

In spite of the absence of ark and Mn cts62 markers in recombinants for
chromosomal genes, the origin of these recombinants is definitely related to
transfer of chromosomal fragments by the EPA Hm cts62 plasmid. This is indi-
cated by the considerable increase in frequency of formation of such recombin-
ants at a temperature of 37°C, which elicits partial induction of phage Mu
(see Table 3).

The absence of plasmid and phage ﬂu markers in recombinant clones obtained in
this manner should favor their use in studies dealing with genetic analysis
of V. cholerae.

The system of hybridizations, in which donor capacity is provided by the Brazzlu
cts62 plasmid is quite efficient for V. cholerae. Transfer of this plasmid
occurs at a lower frequency than transfer of the P factor, which occurs at a
frequency of up to 90: [12]. At the seas time, the frequency of mobilisation
of chromosomal genes by ara::uu cts62 (scaled to transferred plasmid) is quite

high.

As can be seen in Table 3, this frequency constitutes 7.h-l.9-lO" for differ-
ent markers with heat induction. Recalculstion of the data of Bheskaren and
Sinha [12] for transferred P plasmids yields figures on the order of 5.0-10”.

He could expect better efficiency of the 394::uu cts62 system if conditions

are developed to provide lysogenisstion of V. cholerae (recipients) by phage Mu.
In E. coli. such lysogenisstion raises the frequency of transfer of BPézz

cts62 (see Table 3), which could be attributable to prevention of zygotic
induction of phage Mu cts62 transferred with the plasmid.

Refinement of the systes. in the direction of stabilising plasmids carrying
chromosomal fragmentu and phage Nu cts62 should make it possible to transfer
V. cholerae genes to the plasmid.

In this regard, it is of particular interest to clone and analyse genes of

toxigenicity and other genetic determinants, the products of which are
important to the pathogenic effect of V. cholerae.

36

FOI40FFKJAI.UBE(HVLY
me authors wish to thank r. S. Il'ina, A. P. home, 6. B. Snirnov (Moecov),
H. Howe, P. Houard-Plandere and ‘1. Parker (United States) for furniahing
bacterial and phage atraine.

BIBLINRAPHY

1. Bhaekaran, K., "Genetic Hybridization in Vibrio cholerae," GRATION.
INDIAN J. MED. 338., Vol 62, 1974, p 807.

2. Skavronakaya. A. 0., ”Genetic Study of Vibrio cholerae," 1110803101... Vol 0.
1980. p 3.

3. Parker, Ch., Gauthier, 1)., Tate, A., Richantaon, K. and Ronig, H. 3.,
"Expanded Linkage ﬂap of Vibrio cholerae," GENETICS, Vol 91, 1979, p 191.

10. Johnson, S. R. and Romig, 9. B... "Tranapoaon-Faciliteted Recombination
in Vibrio cholerae," 1101.. GEN. 6.131., Vol 170, 1979, p 93.

S. Idea, "Vibrio cholerae Hybrid Sex Factor That Contains Awicillin
Transpoeon Tnl," J. “8138101... Vol 137, 1979, p 531.

6. Hove, H. H., "Prophage Deletion Mapping of Bacteriophage Hu-l,"
VIROLOGY, Vol 510, 1973, p 93.

7. Miller, 6., "Experiments in Molecular Genetics," Hoecov, Mir, 1976, p 252.

8. Holloway. B. 9., ”Plasmids That Mobilize Bacterial anomaone," PLASHID,
Vol 2, 1979, p 1.

9. Fae1en, H. and Iouaaaint, A., "Bacteriophage Knl, a Tool to Transpoee
and to localize Bacterial Genee,” J. 1101.. 3101... Vol 1M, 1976, p 523.

10. Faelen, 14., 'rouaaaint, A., Vanlbntagu, 11.. Van den Bleacher, S.,
angler. G. and Shell, J ., "In Vivo Genetic Engineering: Mu Mediated
Transpositon of Chromeonal DNA onto Trenanieaible Plannida,” in
"Insertion Sequences, Plasmids and Epieonea" (eda. A. J. Bukhavi, J.
Shapiro, Adhya). New York, Cold Spring Harbor Press, 1977, p 521.

11. Howe, H. H. and Bade, B. G., "Molecular Biology of Bacteriophage Mu,"
SCIENCE, Vol 19. 1975, p 624.

12. Bhaakaran, K. and Sinha, V. 3., "‘rrananieaible Plasmid Pactora and
Fertility Inhibition in Vibrio cholerae," J. GEN. 11101108101", Vol 69,
1971, p 89.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'etvo "Nam", "Genetika", 1982

10,657
CSO: 1860/213

37

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
UDC: 535.216.4z6l$.671:616-073.6$

RADIOPHYSICAL m F09. DWNSTRAIING tmmmz ABNORMALHIZS IN
HUMAN INTERNAL OMS

Hoscow DOKLADY mam NA!!! 888?. in Russisn Vol 260, No 5, Oct 81
(unuscript received 28 Apr 81) pp 1108-1110

[Article by G. S. Hieeshnikov, A. G. Sel'skiy and V. B. Shteynshleyaer
(presented by Acsdenician Yu. 3. lobearev on 15 Apr 81)]

[text] Studies were begun in recent years to deteaine the fusibility of
using intrinsic heat elission of the human body in the rsdio range for
nedicsl dissnosis of idles-story processes and oncoloeicel diseases [1].
Use in nsde of the fact that these diseases are essocieted with locsl eleva-
tion of tenpereture in the involved region (she-sly) by e few degrees.

One must use rsdioneters operating in the radiowsve tense with sstistsctory
penetrstin; capacity. for example in the decinetsr tense. for detection of
abnorsal taspersture change deep in the hulsn body. however. use of such
relatively long rediowsves worsens the spstisl locslisins cspebility of the
I.tmds

we describe here s method end redioeetric device [2] for detection of tempera-
ture anomalies deep in the lama body. which overcome the shows contradiction.

For this purpose, e dielectric lens with dielectric constant of 5d that equsls
penetrshility 81- of Men internal tissues is used es the sntenns of the
radiometer, which is focused on the area under study deep in the body. The
lens is in contsct with the part of the body under study. which is the her-
sion medium for this lens. (Let us note that en sntenns in the tors of e
waveguide filled with dielectric is s specisl instance of a lens with
focusing to infinity.)

The width oi the focal diffraction spot (for level of 0.5 of satin- intensity)
of the dielectric lens is [3]:

o,sx
A .- .
x Jane (1)

 

where A is wsvelensth in air end 29 is the sperture angle of deperture.

38

MWWONLY
According to formula (l). when the aperture angle is large enough the width
A

2’5:
Figure 1 illustrates the results of experiments using a dielectric lens, which
were conducted at a wavelength of A . 18 cm. He used water, the dielectric
constant of which, Ed: is close to permeability of most internal tissues with
high fluid content [6], as dielectric lens and tissue equivalent (in the future,
it is planned to use a solid dielectric with ainimal loss and Ed equaling

er of the internal human tissue under study). The measured value of szin the

a plane is Axi- 1.4 cm (Figure la). which is close to the estimated value.
whereas in the 8 plane it is somewhat higher.

 

oi the focal spot is ~ regardless of depth of the area under study.

  

I n 315s

Figure 1. Distribution of field intensity in focal plane (a) and along
optical axis of dielectric lens (b); a - a - 10 cm; b - A -
18 cm; 20 3 90°; e - 80; extinction in water ~ 0.7 dB/cm;
reading from apex of lens

Localisation is less accurate along the optical axis than in the focal plane.
The accuracy can apparently be improved by examining the area in question
from several directions and processing measurements on a computer.

when examining internal tissues, the superficial fatty layer, which is charac-
terized by relatively low 6 and minimal losses [4], causes reflection of waves
from its boundaries, as well as aberration by widening the focal spot. The
experiment revealed that with typical thickness (~l cm) the equivalent of a
flat adipose layer leads to insignificant widening of the focal spot, and it
diminishes if the layer is spherical.

Reflections from the fatty layer have a more appreciable effect on measurement
of visceral temperature. since these reflections lead to uncontrollable change
in antenna temperature of the radiometer, when the antenna moves over the
body, as a result of differences in thickness of the fatty layer in different
parts of the body. Indeed, when using a dielectric focusing lens, antenna
temperature T8 of the radiometer is determined by the following equation (for
a model of the body in the form of flat layers):

T.=IT.+AT(I -m)m*.lll -|l'l’)+TndJl‘l’. (2)

39

FOI'OFFKJA1.USB(NVLY
lﬂnl0FFKJALlAn20NLX

where I; is body temperature; or is local elevation of body temperature in
abnormal region; n; and n: are power transmission coefficients for an
anomalous layer with thickness Al and for a layer of tissue with thickness 1,
respectively, which separates the abnormal region free the fat layer at

the place of contact between the lens and body; keel is the coefficient of
filling of focal spot cross section by anomaly; f is the coefficient of
reflection from the fatty layer; Trgd is the temperature characterising in-
tensity of radioneter noises emitted by its antenna.

Thus, antenna temperature depends not only on body temperature, but on the
unknown F.

(ﬂ

‘1'

40/

    

M 1! 1a id at
Ann

Figure 2. Increment of antenna temperature as a function of operating
wavelength. In our estimates, ve took Ed - £7 - 50; 20 - 90‘

1) AZ - 3 cm, I - 5 cm, tan 6 - 0.15 3) Al - 2 cm, 1 - 3 cm, tan 6 - 0.3
2) AZ - 3 cm, 1 - 5 cu, tan 6 - 0.3 6) AZ - 2 cm, 1 - 5 cm, tan 6 - 0.3

Measurement error related to reflection from the fatty layer can be reduced
if noise is fed into the antenna through the ferrite circulator at the
input of the radiometer, the intensity of uhich, Trad. is set (by means of
a special automatic regulating system [5])at the intensity of the recorded
heat emission of the body.

Comparing temperature readings in symmetrical points of the body is an addi-
tional means of compensation for the effects of reflections.

Uith elimination of the above error, the unit's (radiothermograph's) capacity
to detect slight temperature abnormalities is determined by its sensitivity
to fluctuations, which is rather high in modern radiometers and constitutes
hundredths of a degree. when the reflection effects are conpensated by neans
of an impedance transformer in the SH? circuit of the radiometer, increment

60

IN)! OI!W€1A1.I£§I§(M‘lY
613 of antenna temperature caused by local elevation A1 of temperature in the
region of the anomaly is determined by the dimensions of the anomaly. absorp-

tion in the layer separating it from the surface of the body and, according
to equation (2), it constitutes:

5r, - am - n,)'n,k,. (3)

Calculations, using equation (3), of some typical values of parameters Al, 1
and tangent of angle of loss in body tissues. tan 6 lead to the optimum
operating wavelength Aopt - 20—30 cm (Figure 2); with A<A° t9 the value of GI.
diminishes due to increased absorption in tissues and, wit A>Aopt, due to
increase in size of the focal spot.

Evidently, one can improve the diagnostic capability of the instrument by using
SH! hyperthermis, since this heats the tumor to higher temperatures than
healthy tissue [6]. It is particularly convenient to use hyperthermia in
the described instrument: due to concentration of energy in the lenticular fo-
cus (Figure I), there will be less heating of surrounding tissues with hyper-
thermia than without the lens.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Barrett. A., Myers, P. and Sadowsky, H., RADIO 861., Vol 12. No 68, 1977.
p 1678.

2. Hisezhnikov, G. 8., Hukhina, H. H.. Shteynshleyger, V. B. and Yanovich,‘A.V.,
"Device for Detection of Abnormal Temperatures in the Human Body," Author
Certificate for Invention No 799726, for application Ho 2656217 registered
on 18 Aug 1978.

3. Born, H. and Vol'f, 3., "Fundamentals of Optics," Hanks, 1970.

6. Johnson, C. and Guy, A., P800. 1323, Vol 60, 1972, p 692.

S. Ludeke, K., Schiek, B. and Kohler. J., ELECTRON. LBTT., V01 16, 1978,
p 194.

6. Isksnder, H. and Durney, C., PROC. 1238, Vol 68, 1980. p 126.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hauka", "Doklady Akademii nauk 888R", 1981

10,657
CSO: 1840/16?

41

INJI1OF1HC1AI.IISEI(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N0

UDC: 567.963.32

CLONIM AND IDENTIFICATION OF THE cm 0? ms WOWTIC MW
usmc SYNTHETIC OLIGOMUCLEOTIDBS AS PRIMER AND PROBE

Moscow DOKLADY maul “AUX $833 in Russian Vol 262, No 3, Jan 82
(Manuscript received 16 Dec 81) PP 725-728

[Article by Academician Yu. A. Ovchinnihov. Ye. D. Sverdlov, S. A. Tsarev,
Ye. M. Khodkova, G. S. Monastyraksya, V. A. Yefimov, 0. G. Chahhmakhcheva,
V. D. Solov'yev, active menber of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences.

V. P. Kuznetsov and V. M. Kavaan. Institute of Bioorganic Chesistry imsni

M. M. Shemyakin, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow; Institute of Epidemiology
and Microbiology imeni M. F. Gemaleya, USSR Academy of Medical Sciences,
Moscow; and Institute of Molecular biology and Genetics, Ukrainian Academy
of Sciences, Kiev]

[Text] One of the most important problems of modern biotechnology is Iicro-
biological synthesis of human interferons with the use of producer strains
obtained by gene engineering methods. Recently, the structures of several
genes of leukocytic interferona ll, 2] and gene of fibroblast interferon [3]
have been published. Producer strains, which synthesize up to 10' units of
interferon per liter bacterial medium, have also been described.[b]. In all
these cases. the pan 322 plasnid was used. which was split with restriction
endonuclease PstI with subsequent build-up of poly—d6 and poly-dc ends on the
plasmid and insert, respectively.

He cloned one of the genes of human leukocytic interferon in the MindIII
segment of pBR 322 DNA. The cDMA, which was rich in interferon sequences. was
synthesized with the use of synthetic oligonucleotide primer for reverse
transcription. Selection of recombinant clones was nede using another syn-
thetic oligonucleotide as a probe.

Total mnMA was obtained free human blood leukocytes induced with Newcastle
virus by the guanidine chloride-guanidine thiocyanste method [5]. we ob-
tained the poly-A fraction of nRMA by two-fold purification on oligo-dt cellu-
lose (P. L. type 7). In a typical experiment, we obtained 400 ug poly-A+ of
IRMA out of 10 ‘ leukocyte cells. which was then used as template for reverse
transcription without further purification. Such IRMA had an average
specific activity determined according to translation in oocytes of 1000-2000
units of activity per ug RMA.*

*Decerminstion of IRMA activity was made in the laboratories of K. T. Gararyan
(Departsent of Enbryology, Moscow State University imeni M. V. Lomonosov) and

T. G. Orlova (Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology imeni M. F. Gamaleya,
USSR Academy of Medical Sciences).

42
F0. OWIICIAI.UBE1ONIN
He synthesised cDNA in the following manner. He primed [or neutralized] in
200 pt 0.6 M KCl, by means of gradual cooling from 65 to azic. 100 ug sans

and 120 pH synthetic oligonucleotide dGAGTTTATTCCTTCCT, with a '2P-labeled
S'-end element. the 3'-end part of which is complementary to most interferon
genes described in the region of termination of translation (575-560). Syc-
thesia was performed in a buffer containing 50 m! tris-ﬂcl, pH 8.3. 6 an HgClz,
5 an DTT, 80 m“ KCl, a mixture of four deoxynecleoside triphoaphates-0,5 an
of each, 500 units of activity of AHV reverse transcriptese for l h at 62'C.
Upon termination of synthesis, the mixture was treated with 0.3 H alkali at 70'C
for 20 min and the obtained single-strand DNA was separated by electrophoresis
in denaturing 7.5% PAAG [expansion unknown]. using pBR 322 DNA. split with
AluI restriction endonuclease as reference points. A fraction of DNA 650 to
900 nucleotides in length was eluted and used to synthesize the second

chain using a fragment of Klenov DNA polymerase I. The synthesized double-
chain cDNA was split with DspI restriction endonuclease to remove the terminal
single-chain "pin" and separated in 7.51 PAAG. The region corresponding to
650-600 9.0. [oligonucleotide sequences?] was eluted.

As a result of these operations, we ob-

”"ﬂn FNun Hndﬂl tained 2 ug cDNA, to which we connected

ﬂindIII linkers by the method in [6] and
""’ quﬂ inserted plasmid p88 322. split by HindIII
Scum“ endonuclease and treated with phosphatase

55100 200 ID 500 [6]. The mixture obtained after linkage
Figure 1. was used to transform E. coli K802.- After

plating on nitrocellulose filters by the
method in [7], we obtained 30,000 AprTc'
transformants.

Diagram for determining sequences of
cloned gene of human leukocytic
interferon. Arrows show length
established with each given segre-
gation of sequence. Numbering of
nucleotides is the same as in [2].

The colonies containing plasmids with
inserted cDNA, which was obtained as a
result of elongation of the primer used,
were identified by means of hybridization
on filters with the sale primer labeled with "P [8]. or the 30,000 colonies
we analyzed, we selected #0 that gave a positive response. The plasmids

from clones thus selected were submitted to further analysis by means of
splitting with PvuII restriction endonuclesse. He know from published data
[2] that virtually all interferon genes contain a highly conservative

site for splitting this endonuclease. The pBR 322 plasmid vector also con-
tains one site for PvuII splitting. As a result, recombinant plasmids con-
taining interferon genes should have two loci for PvuII segregation, and they
can be readily identified by the electrophoretic mobility of fragments that
are formed when they undergo hydrolysis. -

As a result of such analysis, we selected six clones containing plasmids with
two Pvull sites. Provided that the inserted fragment contains the complete
structural gene for mature interferon, its length should be at least 500 p.o.
we determined the length of the inserts in the selected plasmids by means of
separation thereof with ﬂindIII restriction endonuclesse and comparison of
electrophoretic mobility of the formed fragments to s set of reference material
with known length. As a result, we selected three clones that met the above
requirements.

63

IIIICIHWC1A1.1EHE(EVLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m x u

“-IOS mmmmescmatmmmsammhmmm
(“WWW
” U

nos-m mattmmacltsmmm s
mnmwmm“ ‘0 W

so

on
m-za mutmmmncccc
W a huummauwmwmmw

N '0

121-26 utmmmmwwmm
m. ' mmmmmmmssuumw

00 N
28,-)“ mmsnmtssu
mmmmummmmummmm
M * HO

3074“ mmucttsweettetmeumasmasmmmmommm
WMWVW-Wm

m 1”

modes museum":tnmmmmmmmmmmmmmu
W'WWWWW

I” no

m-sza mummmmmdmwmmmummmmmm
WHEN-JD..-

IN I"

527675 mmtummmwwmmmmmummt
“WIWWWWW

Figure 2. nucleotide sequence of clone gene for husan leukocytic inter-
feron and its amino acid sequence. The sequence is given for
coaplenentary DNA chain adequate to the anus sequence. The

amino acid sequence of nature interferon is given inupper case letters, and the

part corresponding to the precursor is shown in lower case. Numbering

of nucleotides and amino acids is that adopted in [2]. C*-5-aethylcytidine

residues

For asking the final choice, as well as simplification of analysis of the
representative group of clones (about 40,000)* obtained by this tine by other
methods, we synthesized a second lh-link oligonucleotide dTCTCATGATTTCTcCT.

the structure of which corresponds to a segaent with the same sequence in all
known interferon genes (520-505). Hybridization of the above-described three
clones with this oligonucleotide, whose sum link was mom with ”r. enabled
us to identify one clone, from which we isolated a recoabinant plea-id. The
prinary structure of the inserted fragment vas identified by our nodification

[9] of the Hanan and Gilbert nethod [10].

*These clones were obtained by reverse transcription of name with oligo-(dT)
as primer and insertion of the obtained cDNA in the Pet! site of pBR 322 by

the poly-dG-poly-dc nethod [ll]. The structures of genes found in this
case and their differences fro. those described in [2] will be published

separately.

6‘

I‘lltnﬂﬂCIAl.USE(NNLY
Figure l illustrates the diagran for determining sequences. A particular sequence
is illustrated in Figure 2. A comparison of this sequence to known structures

[2] enables us to conclude that we cloned the gene for human leukocytic inter-
feron F. The cloned gene contains 15 nucleotides from the precursor region

and differs from the native gene described in [2] with regard to structure

of the terninating codon (TGA in the described structure and TAA in ours) and
four nucleotides following the terainator (AACC in the described structure and
ACTC in the one given here). ,These differences are attributable to a structural
difference in the primer used and inserted in cDRA through reverse transcrip-
tion, as coapared to the same region of the native gene.

In addition, we demonstrated four deviations from the described structure in
the internal region of the gene. In the published structure. A is in position
190 and according to our data C is located there. In all other described
interferon genes, G is also found in this position, which enables us to con-
clude that this nucleotide is highly conservative. He do not know why there
is a difference between the structure of the interferon 1' gene in [2] and
other genes, but in our case the structure of this region was deter-ined
over two complementary chains. Guanosins is demonstrable in the site in
question of the chain corresponding in sequence to nRNA, whereas S-nethyl
cytidine is found in the complementary chain, which is usually encountered

in ccch sequences and deterainetion of which often leads to errors. Inter-
estingly enough, the next discrepancies are also in the CC} 06 sequences. He

refer to position 356, where we found n’c, whereas A was found in [2]. In
most other interferon genes, c is in this position, as we also found it to
be. In addition, this refers to positions 622 and 690, where T is contained
in the published structure and use was found in our study. It is only in
the second of all four cases (position 356) that the discrepancy in nucleo-
tide sequence leads to a substitution of amino acid. In the structure of
interferon F, the authors of [2] found methionine in position 96, whereas
according to our data leucine is found. as in all other interferons. The
accuracy of the structure described here is based on deter-ination of the_
sequence of this region over two coaplensntary chains.

The authors express their profound gratitude to Prof V. G. Debabov. Yu. I.

Kozlov, B. A. Rebentish (All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Genetics

and Breeding of Industrial Microorganism) for their constant great assistance

in our work and to A. I. Petrenko (Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics.

Ukrainian Acadeny of Sciences) who participated in recovery of cDNA.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Hantei, N., Schwarzstein, H. et al., GENE, Vol 10, 1980, p l.

2. Goeddel, D. V., Iaeung. D. H. et ai., NATURE. Vol 290, 1981, p 20.

3. Taniguchi, T., Ohno. S. et al., cm. Vol 10. 1980, p 11.

lo. Goeddel, D. V., Yelverton, 3. at al., NATURE, Vol 287, 1981, p 611.

‘5

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Olirgvin, J. 11., Przybylo. A. E. at. a]... 810611941811“, Vol 18, 1979. p 5296.

Good-an, ll. H. and HacDonald, R. J., in ”Methods in Enzynology," Vol 68,
1979, p 75.

Hmhan, D. and Messiaen, 11., cm, Vol 10. 1980, p 63.

Hallace, R. 3., Johnson, K. J. et a]... NUCL. ACIDS 828., Vol 9, 1981, p 617.
0veh1nn1kov, Yu. A., Guryev, S. 0. cc :1... can. Vol. 6, 1979, p 235.

Mam. A. and Gilbert, 14., PROC. NAT. ACAD. SCI. USA, V01 75, 1977, p 560.
Giana, A. C. Y., NATURE, V01 275, 1978, p 617.

Oil-0:1, IL, Ionian, J. and m, A. 11., NUCL. ACIDS 1128.. Vol 5, 1978,
p 1679.

COPYRIGHT: Izdacel'uvo “Noah", "Dohlady maeu1 nauk SSSR", 1982

10,657
CSO: 1840/212

‘6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIDICIIB

UDC: 615.277.3
FTORAFUR, AN ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENT

Moscow PROTIVOOPUKHOLEVYY PRBPAIAT ffORAFUR in Russian 1981 (signed to press
16 Oct 80) PP 2-4, 136

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "The Antitumor
Agent, Ftorafur", by Raderhda Germanovna Blokhina, Bagrat Tiranovich
Garibdahanyan. horgeris Yur'yevich lidak and Anatoliy lorisovich Syrkin.
USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, ledatel'stvo "Haditsina", 1381 copies,
136 pages, illustrated]

[Text] This monograph deals with one of the active sntineoplastic agents,
ftorafur [1-(2-tetrahydrofuryl)-S-f1uorouracil], which was synthesized in

1967 by Prof S. A. Giller, Academician of the Latvian Academy of Sciences.

et al. This agent is an original chemical coepound with heterocyclic struc-
ture, and it has a marked sntineoplastic effect with moderate toxicity. Experi-
mental studies of ftorafnrrevealed that the spectrum of its antituaor action

is similar to that of 5-fluorouracil, but it has less marked side-effects.
Ftorafur has no persistent deleterious.affect on normal tissues of different
-organs and systems, and it has no cumulative toxic effect. Its capacity to
penetrate the blood-brain barrier is one of the distinctive properties of
ftorsfur. Clinical studies revealed that ftorafur has marked antitumor
activity in the treatment of tuners of the gastrointestinal tract, breast and
brain. Use of ftorafur in accordance with the refined method of treatment
elicits a good sntineoplastic effect with minimal side-effects. At the present
time, ftorafur is used extensively in oncological practice, both in the Soviet
Union and abroad. This monograph is intended for clinical and experimental
oncologists. It has 13 figures, 26 tables and 101 references.

Introduction

The authors dedicate their work to the bright memory
of Solomon Aronovich Giller, acedemician of the Latvian
Academy of Sciences.

Slightly over 10 years have passed since a new antitumor agent, ftorefur, was
synthesized at the Institute of Organic Synthesis, Latvian Academy of Sciences,

under the guidance of S. A. Giller, academician of the Latvian Academy of
Sciences.

47'

IND! OII1C1A1.1158!DBHUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This ugcnt drew the attention of chemotherapists and clinical oncologists as a
new compound with original pharmacological properties and high antineoplastic
activity. Ftorafur was submitted to conprehensive investigation. By now,

many works have been published that deal with experimental and clinical studies
of this agent.

Ptorafur is allowed for medical purposes and it is used in the treatment of
a number of malignant tumors in the USSR, hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia.
Yugoslavia, Japan and a number of other countries.

However, many aspects of the mechanism of action of ftorafui, as well as its
capabilities as an antineoplastic agent, have not yet been definitively
determined. Studies of this agent are growing.

In view of the foregoing, it was deemed desirable to sum up the preliminary
results of studying ftorafur, in order to point out the inadequacies of some
aspects of investigation of this product and determine the moat premising
directions of future research.

In this monograph, attention is focused chiefly on the results of clinical use
of ftorafur. In addition, the principal information is given about the
chemistry, metabolism, pharmacokinetics and toxieology of ftorafur. The
results of studying its biochemical action and effects on animal tumors are
submitted. Reference was made primarily to experimental data that could be of
interest and considered in clinical studies.

The authors will be grateful to specialists who will read this book, for
all comments and suggestions on future studies of the promising Soviet
antineoplaatic agent, ftorafur.

Contents Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Chemistry of Ftorafur 5
Chapter 2. Metabolism 10
Chapter 3. Pharmacokinetics 19
Chapter 4. Biochemical Effects 33
Chapter 5. Effect of Ftorafur on Animal Tumors 47
Chapter 6. Toxicology 65
Chapter 7. Use of Ftorafur in Treatment of Certain Malignant Tumors 81
Conclusion 123
Bibliography 129

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'stvo "Heditsina". Hoskva. 1981.

10,657
C80: 1840/176

68

FOIiofFKJAI.UGE20NlN
FOIOFHCIALUSIONLY

INTENSIVE moussmc 0? )BDICINAL RAH MATERIALS

Hoscov IWSIVIIAYA 0mm mono SYR'YA in Russian 1981
(signed to press 17 Aug 81) pp 24. 206-205

[Annotatiom forevord and table of contents free book "Intensive Processing

of Hedicinal Rev haterial". by Gennadiy Ivanovich Holchanov. ledatel'stvo
"Keditsina". 2104 copies. 206 pages]

[Tut] Annotation

The present book provides the first systenatised infonation on nodern
physical nethods for intensifying technological processes in industrial
and pharnacy-scale nsnufacture of nedicinalsx frequency (subsonic) vibra-
tions. pulsed and superhigh frequency effects. electrical and magnetic
fields. The possibilities are considered for utilising physical netth
to intensify heat and ease exchange in drying. dialysis. dispersion,
filtration. sterilisation and extraction of biologically-active substances
and in other operations used in contenponry nedicinal technology.

General intonation is provided on nee electrophyeical nethods for process.
ing nedicinal res naterial. internediates of plant. ani-l and nineral
origin; brief informtion is given on energy generators and certain eco'nonic
bases for individual processing aethoda.

Considerable attention is devoted to the dependence of the physical properties
of nedicinal rav saterial upon external factors; infonation is presented on
the change in teqerature and hydrodynanics of the nediun during extraction.
the theoretical foundations of various technological processes are provided,
their instrunentation described. and so on. The methods examined for inten-
sive processing of raw eaterial are highly progressive and vorthvhile for

the production not only of nedicines but also of nany other products used in
the national econoey. Use is nade both of intonation publist in the

Soviet and foreign literature and of data experimentally obtained by the
author.

The book is intended for engineers and technologists. builders of chenico-
pharnaceutical factories and vorkers at pharnaceutical scientific research

institutes and universities concerned with questions of nedicinsl production
and investigation. ’

69

lnoaomcmwrouur
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The book contains 68 illustrations and a bibliography of 159 titles.

Reviewed by G. s. Bashura. doctor of pharmaceutical sciences, professor
and department head at the Khar'kov Scientific Research Institute of
chaicopharmaceuticsls.

Foreword

In the reports of the 26th @311 Congress it is stated that the efficiency of
modern manufacture is closely tied to the accelerated introduction of new
technological processes pernitting the rational utilisation of reprocessable
raw material. The expansion of finishedng production in the llth five-
Year Plan requires comprehensive theoretical and applied study to create new
technology for the extraction. separation, adsorption, dispersion and fine
purification of various systems on the basis of the utilisation of new physi-
cal and electrophysicsl methods.

The present monograph is the first Soviet work to describe the contaporary
state and prospects for the utilisation in pharnacy of nontraditional
methods of nedicinal raw material processing: broad-range frequency vibra-
tions (from subsonic to superhish). electrical and magnetic fields, pulse
methods. raw material extraction with liquefied gases for selective removal
of substances. and so on.

Each of these methods is used to some extent both in chenicopharmaceutical
manufacture and in other realms of the national economy. The effectiveness
of certain of the methods has as yet been established only under laboratory
conditions.

Since many traditional methods and technological processes widely used in
pharmacy have reached their natural limit and afford no possibility of in--
creasing the rate of mechanical and hydrodynamic processing of raw material
and enhancing thermoconductivity. mass transfer. etc.. it has naturally be-
come necessary to search for new. more intensive methods of processing
medicinal raw material.

However. certain gaps are still apparent both in the theory of development

of new teclmological raw material processing methods and in their practical
utilization in production. This is to some extent due to the fact than an
inexcusahly mall place in medicinal technology textbooks is given to new
physical methods for intensifying technological processes. while curricula
lack a specially designated course studying the foundations of the theory and
practice of these methods.

In light of the foregoing. the present hook att-pts to generalize the
scattered information about the utilization of new physical methods for in-

tensifying technological processes in phat-cy. The term intensify is under-
stood to mean not only the acceleration of any particular stage or process.
but also the rationality or effectiveness of application of any type of
treatment with the aim of directed conduct of the process.

50

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The contents of the present book are a logical extension of an earlier
publication“. which adequately described the theory. practice and potential
application of ultrasound in pharmacy. This nethed of intensifying technologi-
cal processes is therefore not canined in the present book.

Unfortunately. certain of the physical methods described in the book are not
utilized in pharmacy. But the advantages of these netbods are obvious.

This is evidenced by the results of our investigations conducted with nodern
electrophysical equipment in laboratories at various institutions and uni-
versities in the country.

The author considers it his duty to express deep gratitude for valuable
advice and assistance rendered during the preparation of the nanuscript by
Corresponding-Men USSR Acade of Pedagogical Sciences.

Professor Ye. M. Korhevnikov. Corresponding-Huber. Ukrainian SSR Acaduy
of Sciences. Professor 1. L. Povkh and Doctor of Technical Sciences.
Professor A. I. Rogov. The author is also grateful to Doctors of Sciences.
Professors G. A. Altsel'rud. H. G. Granovskiy, G. A. Gulon. I. S. strov,
V. I. Klassen and I. A. Hurav'yev and to Candidates of Sciences.

Docents L. G. Aleksandrov, A. V. Pekhov. A. D. Holchanov, Yu. G. Pshukov.
V. H. Varagov and engineer V. I. Saprykin for affording the author the
possibility of faailiarizing himself with work in their departments and
institutions. of utilizing certain of the materials in the present book,
and. also. for technical assistance rendered in the book's preparation.

The author will be grateful for all comnenta and suggestions that the reader
of this book my feel able to comlunicate to hill.

Table of Contents

Porevord 3
Chapter 1. Extraction with liquefied gases 5
Liquefied gas as an extracting agent 5
Kinetics of uses transfer in liquefied-gas extraction 15
Influence of separate factors' on liquefied-gas
extraction ‘ 21
Pulveriration of raw saterial with liquefied gas 25
Process instrunentstion 38
References lob
Chapter 2. bow-frequency processing of medicinal raw naterial 67
Particle vibration in a motionless or noving liquid
stream 50
Fluid pulsation in a suspended rav-naterial layer 60
Fluid pulsation through a rev-material layer 70
References 77

*G. I. HolcEnov, "Ul'trarvuk v Parnatsii" [Ultrasound in Pharmacy], Moscow.
Meditaina. 1980.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 3.

Chapter It.

Chspter 5.

WPYRIGHT:

9962

NI OFF-1"“. "SR ONLY

Pulsed processing of Isdicinsl rev sstsrisl

Hechsnisu of production of electropulse dischsrge

Process instrumtstion '

Dispersion of oedicinsl rev uterisl in solid phase

Accelerstion of crystalliution and dissolution

Change in the viscoelostic properties of syetens

Accelrstion of extraction

Acceleration of sizing sod hosogenirstion

lsctericidsl sud chenicsl action of electropulse
discharge

References

High frequency 0!?) end Superhigh frequency (SKY)
processing of nedicinsl rsv uteriel

Useful rsnge of electrcusgnstic mes

Essential festures of polsrizstion in dielectrics

I! end S!!! generstors snd inetsllstions

Dielectric and structural psrsleters of sedicinsl
rsv nsterisl

a! sad m heating of sedicinsl rev Interiel

I! snd SR! drying of sedicinsl rsv ssterisl

a? and SR? sterilisation snd pesteurizstion of
ssdicines end nsdicinsl rev asterisl

Activetion of enzyme prepsrstions

References

Blectricsl processing of udicinsl rsv material
Electropls-olysis

Electrodislysis

halsion electrodispsrsion

References

Irdstel'stvo "Meditsins" Moshe. 1981

080: 1860/ 172
MOMUSEONLY

UDC 661.12:658.387
scmrnnc LABOR ORGANIZATIOR IR WWW PRODUCT!“

Moscow NAUCENAYA WHTSIYA TIDDA V Pmrsxmmsrw PROIZVODS'NB
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 22 Jul 81) pp 2-6. 226

[Annotation. introduction and table of contents fro- book "Scientific
Organisation of Labor in Pharsaceutical Production". by Lev Viktorovich Berg.
Yuriy Vasil'yevich Btischanko and Hikheil an'yevich Bfinchenko. lsdatel'etvo
"Heditsina". 2827 copies, 225 pages]

[Text] Annotation

The nonograph describes the basic principles, tasks and directions in the
scientific organisation of labor (DOT). methodological foundations are pro-
vided for analysing the state and quantitative evaluation of level of NOT in
pharasceuticsl enterprises. The results are presented of e cospleted analy-
sis (including division and coordination of labor. dnonstration of rational
labor techniques and sethods. labor conditions. organisation and servicing
of work sites. labor non-setting, organisation of socialist cospetition,
determination of the level of labor organisation attained in an enterprise
as a whole. advanced experience of work on the improv-ent of labor
organization) .

The greater part of the neterial presented is the result of the authors'
original theoretical and experisental investigations; the nonogrsph is
illustrated by specific axe-plea and is provided with practical reco-enda—
tions. It is intended for specialists in pharsaceutical and chuicophernaceutiv-
cal enterprises, pharnaceutical adsinistrations. and. also, in analytical
control laboratories involved in the organization of production and labor in
pharaaceutical production.

Introduction

At the present tine. attain-eat of the basic objectives of the Party's
econolaic strategy. tomlated by the 26th CPS“ Congress. is closely tied to
the acceleration of scientific and technological progress. an increase in

the role of intensive factors of econoaic development and iaproved regulation
of the national econosy.

53

mammomx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Decree of 12 July 1979 of the CPS!) Central Conittee "Purther Improvmaent
of the Economic Mechanism and Tasks of Party and Government Organs" and the
Decree of 12 July 1979 of the CPS!) Central Committee and USSR Council of
Ministers "Inprovenent of Planning and lntensification of the Inpact of the
Economic Mechanism upon Increasing the Production Efficiency and Work
Quality" pointed out specific neans to achieve reserves of increase in produc-
tion efficiency.

One such means is to continuously improve the organization of labor and to
achieve on this basis a rise in labor productivity and an improvement in
other economic parameters of the activity of the enterprises.

The conunity of principles, directions and factors in the scientific organi-
zation of labor (ROG) predetermines the identical nature of work methods in
this area at enterprises in different branches of the national economy. In
other words the principles. directions and factors of N01“ are of an inter-
branch character. At the same time, features of technology. production
organisation and enterprise specialisation that are peculiar to a branch make
for large differences in the methods and aeans of approaching identical
problems associated with the inrovement of labor organization. This situation
is entirely pertinent to pharmaceutical enterprises (factories and plants)
included in the system of the Main Pharmaceutical Administration of the 0883
Ministry of Health.

At the present time nest drugs are produced at the chenicopharnsceutical
factories of the aedical industry. Pharmaceutical enterprises of pharma-
ceutical adninistrations operate parallel to ch-icopharmaceutical factories
but do not duplicate their activity; rather, they have been designed for
reprocessing local vegetative and other raw material. packaging certain
types of products supplied by factories of the Ministry of the Medical
Industry and other ministries and preparing drugs from prescriptions fre-
quently recurring in pharmacies. Thus. pharmaceutical enterprises were
created for the animal utilisation of local raw naterial. the elimination
of redundant transport of raw material and prepared products and the liquids-
tion of unsuitable transport of drugs in packaged form for long distances.
These enterprises must release their products in volumes that generally
match the consumption of a single oblast (kray).

As of 1 January 1980, there were 88 active pharmaceutical enterprises in the
pharmaceutical administrative system of the Union Republic health ministries.
These enterprises annually provide the nation's pharmaceutical netvork and
therapeutic and prophylactic institutions with products worth nore than

110 million rubles. prepare aore than 2b,000 tons of galenic products and
about 800 million units of prepared drugs [37].

The regionality and specificity of the tasks of pharmaceutical enterprises
predetermine their low rate of product release (most frequently from 0.5 to
2 million rubles per year) and high diversity of released products (about
200 items). With respect to product volume. pharmaceutical enterprises
belong to the smell category with insignificant engineering and technical
staffs. in which in practice it is difficult to find even one epecialist in
the nor field.

56

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
The diversity and seal]. volue of released products predator-ins a unall-
scale type of production. which necessitates frequent equip-ant readjustaent
(for ens-pie. in nechsnited product packaging). At the sons tins. certain
jobs (preparation of cardboard packaging. sanual drug packaging, washing of
glass containers) are characterised by a high degree of labor nonotony [lb].

Many pharnsceutical enterprises were constructed according to plans that do
not nest nodern require-eats and were not fully provided with eodern equip-
ment and technological and organisational sccouternents. In order to rectify
this situation. 22 new factories have been built and 20 active enterprises
reconstructed during the last 10 years. Also. the features of phsruceuticsl
enterprises and the conditions of their activity necessitate great syste-
natic efforts to isprove the organisation of labor and production in order to
enhance the functional efficiency of the respective enterprises.

work in the field of labor organisation has seen continued develop-ant in
pharmaceutical enterprises in recent years. According to prelininsry calcu-
lations the introduction of N0? neasuros accounted for a lean annual growth
in labor productivity of 0.7-0.82. The content of the work conducted has
also been enriched: probless in the isproveaent of labor organization are
nore frequently resolved on the scale of a section. shop and whole enterprise.

With each year increasing attention is given to the organization of labor.
This is shown by the publication of a book 136] and separate articles [18.
20, 37] devoted to the activity of pharnacoutical enterprises and institu-
tions in the field of labor organization. The present book describes the
results of investigations using inforntion freephonecouticsl factories

in the RSPSR. the Ukraine and Kazakhstan relating to an analysis of the state
of labor organization and a generalization of advanced acct-tasted experience.
Special attention in the book is given to nethodologicel questions in the
study. analysis planning and introduction of 301.. Material in the book was
divided along the authors in the following tanner. L. V. Borg: first
section in Chapter 1. second section in Chapter 2. second section in

Chapter 3. third section in Chapter 5. second. third and fifth sections in
Chapter 7. second section in Chapter 9. first section in Chapter 10

(Jointly with Yu. V. lfischonko) and the second and third sections in
Chapter 10; in. V. Bfinchenko: introduction. third section in Chapter 2.
first. second. fourth and fifth sections in Chapter 5. first section in
Chapter 7, first section in Chapter 9 and first section in Chapter 10
(jointly with L. V. Berg): H. Yu. Bfinchonko: second section in Chapter 1.
first. fourth and fifth sections in 'Chapter 2. first section in Chapters 3.

lo and 6 and fourth section in Chapter 7.

Table of contents

I ntroduc t ion 3

Chapter 1. Essential nature and basic principles. tasks and

directions in the scientific organization of
labor (NOT) 6

$5

MWWONLY
Chapter 2.
Chapter 3.
Chapter ’0.
Chapter 5.
Chapter 6.
Chapter 7.

Chapter 8.

Chapter 9.

Inprove-ent of division and coordination of labor
Improvement of labor technique and nethode
I-provenent of labor conditions

Inprovenent of labor non-netting

Organization and eervicing of work sites
Organization of aocialiet competition

Quantitative evaluation of the degree of labor
organization

Scientific organization and quality of labor

Chapter 10. Advanced experience in work organization by NOT

Appendixea
Referencea
comm:
991.2

for enterpriaea

Izdatel'atvo ”ueditaina" Moakvn. 1981

CSO: 1860/175
PHYSIOLOGY

UDC 612.592.]3‘613J66J
PHYSIOLOGY AND HYGIENE OF PERSONAL PRUI'BCTION AGAINST COLD FOR HAN

lbscow PIZIOIDGIYA I 6161!!!“ INDIVIDUAL'NOY W?! m 01‘ move in
mssian 1981 (signed to press 12 Aug 81) pp 2-6, 288

(Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book “Physiology and aygiene
of Personal Protection Against Gold for Man" by Viktor suenovich Koshcheyev,
Izdatel'stvo 'lbditsina", 5,000 copies. 280 pages]

[wextl his book acquaints the reader with the basic aspects of affording protec-
tion to man in low temeratures. It generalizes the experience acquired by the

author and his colleagues over a period of my years in physiological and hygienic
research on heat exchange in response to general and local cooling of varying in-
tensity and duration, as well as in response to the codained action of cold and
other factors.

The data acquired by the author's collective is used as abaeie for an attemt to
substantiate the tactics of individual protection for teen in a cold environ-ant and

in water, and to develop the principles of creating and operating different forms
of personal protective equipment, to include resources «playing nannads systems
for heat regulation.

The book presents the latest achievements in designing winter gear here in our
country and abroad, and it recomends literature that may be used as a guide for
developing, making and operating personal protective resources.

This sonograph is intended for biological scientists, physicians, physiologists.
hygienists, engineers. designers and so on, and specialists of the national econony
dealing with the problem of developing regions of our country with a severe climate.
me book contains 95 figures and 60 tables.

The bibliography contains 288 titles.

Reviewer: ISSR heads”! of Medical Sciences Academician V. P. Xarnacheyev.

57

MOFFICIALUSEONLY
l-‘OR OfﬂClAl. USE ONLY

Contents Page
Introduction................................. 3

Part I. Physiological Features of neat Exchange in Response to Chilling 1

Chapter 1. The Organism's 'mernoregulatory Inactions to Whole-Body Chilling . 12
1.1 HeatProductionandBeat‘rransfer .. .. .. .. . .. . ... 12

Features of neat Exchange in msponse to Subnormal I‘emeratures . . . 3O
Featuresofﬂeatsxchangeinlbderatecold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

PeaturesofﬂeathchangeinSevereOold...............S3
Features of Heat Exchange in msponse to the Codained Inﬂuence

of mldm'md I O O O O D O O O 0 O O O O I O O t O O C O O O O I 0 62
1.6 PeaturesofﬂeathchangeataighAltitude.............. 76
1.7 Peaturesofﬂeatnchangeinwater. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . 79

Chapter 2. me Organism's hermoregulatory Reaction to local Oold . . . . . . 93

Chapter 3. (autism and Permissible 'l‘hermal State of an Individual working
in mld O O O O O O O l O I O O I O O O O O O O O I O O O 0 O O O O O O O I 97

3.1 Informativeness of Physiological Parameters and Selection of
TheirHinieunSet forEvaluating Ooldnoad. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97

3.2 The Criterion of (ptinm neural State and Permissible (milling . . . 109
Chapter 4. Physiological Limits of Chilling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111

Onapter 5. Some nethods of Emergency Normalization of an Individual's
'mermalstatehfterclilling .......................1l7

HHHH
macaw

Part II. radical and technical. Problems of Individual Protection Against Gold 139

Chapter 6. Principles of Creating and Operating Winter Daily Wear . . . . . . 140

Chapter 7. Principles of Creating and Operating Insulating Personal
Protective Resources in now Wrature Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . 182

Chapter 8. Some Technical Problems of Protecting the Pace and Breathing
Organswhenﬂorkingincold........................200

Chapter 9. Principles of Creating and Cperating Personal Protective
Resources annoying Hanmade System for Beat mgulation in Severe Cold . . 207

Chapterlo. ProtectiveGsarforHorkinOold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .257

Bibliography.................................271

Introduction

The working conditions encomtered in various industrial sectors. in aviation and
coauonautics, anddevelopnent of Arctic and sub-Arctic regions. in exploration of
the Antarctic and the World Ocean and so on are such that nan may experience
stresses from tslperature factors. the comlex of natural and production factors
influencing the body's heat exchange with the surrounding environment is rather
large. They include teaperature, huidity, wind, ineolation and so on. Separately
or in different codinations, each of these factors often causes excessive accumula-
tion of heat. or its intense loss.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Among climatic factors, cold has an especially unfavorable influence won the body.
we can get used to anything, experienced polar explorers assure us. except to cold.
in the course of ma-alian evolution, stable adaptation to low environmental tamer-
ature developed not along the lines of increasing the body's heat production, but
rather alteration of the mechanisms responsible for physical heat regulation with
the purpose of reducing heat transfer (development of a hairy integusnt or a sine-
able layer of fat on terrestrial and aquatic inhabitants of the earth's cold regions,
and so on). As we know, in evolutionary respects man is a subtropical animal, and
he does not possess sufficiently effective resources by which to adapt to cold. As

a rule he maintains thermal equilibriua by means of individual and collective pro-
tective resources.

In view of the geographic position of our comtry, about two-thirds of its population
is in perpetual contact with a broad range of cold—from moderate to very intense.

In a certain period of the year the labor and health of people in a hudnr of

regions are essentially fully dependent on the level of technical development, the
type of personal protective gear available and shelter.

Host explorers of the Arctic. sue-Arctic and Antarctic note that the success of

their expeditions has been dependent not so much on the degree to which people
acclimate themselves as on the material and technical gear provided to them—primar-

ily resources offering protection against cold (161,162,211).

Use of personal protective resources (8123' has become one of the invariable teami-
cal measures of preventing overcooling of the body and ensuring safe working condi-
tions. The need for such resources is acutely sensed both on and off the job; in
the Arctic and Antarctic. moreover, this need is almost constant, while in sub-
Arctic regions, which contain all of Siberia and the comtry's northeast (including
Kamchatka) , this need persists for a siseable part of the year..

Personal protective gear acquires special inortance in emergency situations,
particularly when an individual is i-ersed in water, when the possibility that the

whole body would be objected to vitally hazardous chilling is very large, and in
cases where disaster survivors are coapelled to remain for a long period of time
in boats or on rafts, exposed to the influences of cold water and wind. Such er-
trene situations also include emergency abandottmsnt of aircraft at high altitude,
when low teaperature codained with the high rate of air flow about the parachute

jumper may lead to general and local overchilling cowled with significant freezing
of the face, hank or other portions of the body.

Each year the gear is becoming increasingly more complex, since it has now become

multipurpose--that is, it is intended to provide reliable protection in various
environmental conditions. Modern industry needs personal resources that could
combine protection against cold with protection against harmful production factors;
caustic and toxic substances in chemical industry, radioactive substances in atomic
industry and so on.

‘Abbreviations ccuuonly accepted in applied physiology are used here and subsequently:

KPD-wfficiency, S'm‘umean body temperature, Tensncantral nervous system, 885»
cardiovascular systes. VND--higher nervous activity, SV'r—mean-weighted teaperature,

and so on (editor's note).

59

l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me problem of creating such gear is made more complex as a rule by the need for
satisfying a large ntwer of requirements. sometimes highly contradictory. Por
example the winter protective clothing used by workers in chemical industry must

be low in weight. its capacity for providing protection against heat must be great,
its permeability to air must be low while being highly per-sable to moisture, it
sust keep caustic cosponents from coming in contact with the skin while concurrently
not providing an obstacle to removal of moisture free the body surface. it must

protect agath overcooling at rest and not elicit overheating during work. and
so on.

As protective articles become more and sore coupler, an increasingly larger nulber
of collectives are being asked to work on this problem. which is no longer within

the means of the designers alone. This is why physiologists, hygienists, design
engineers. materials scientists. PhYsicists, chemists, mathematicians and other
specialists are now participating in the development of protective resources. ibday.
the institutions working on personal protective gear are entire scientific-produc-
tion coqalexes in which the scientific research is well organised. They possess

a modern experimental base making it possible to siIulate man's presence in different

extreme environments, and specialised design subdivisions with a good experimental
industrial base.

It should be remastered that no design concept is perfect if it is not fomded on
a knowledge of hush hygiene and normal and pathological physiology.

"Physiological-hygienic research conducted in the course of developing and evaluating
personal protective resources in the laboratory and under production conditions
mikes it possible to create thermal contort for man in a broad range of teqeratures

and thus maintain labor productivity at a high level and regulate the ties and
nature of work in personal protective resources on a scientific basis. when a
person is allowed to work intensively to exhaustion and then resme such work after
an amount of rest determined by the worker only on the basis of his own subjective
opinion of his state, the functional possibilities of his body will in time exhaust
themselves; this is why it is extremely inortant to develop physiological criteria
for regulating the time of work and rest in personal protective resources. Using
such criteria, we can find and maintain an optima relationship between the func-
tional stress experienced by the body and its perfor-ance in coldnthat is. we can
help to solve the problem of optimising man's work in personal protective gear.

Interpreting personal protective resources as an artificial environment separating
man from the external conditions. we cannot fail to accomt for the influence these

resources have on the body. the degree of this influence depending on the form of
protective gear. When Ian wears protective personal resources, he limits the
volume of his so-called 'stbgarment space,“ as a result of which it becomes diffi-
cult to maintain an optimum microclimate and gas cowosition within this space.
The parameters of this microclimate are determined by the products of the body's
vital activities (setsbolic heat. moisture, anthropotoxins) and by certain foreign
substances which may be contributed by the materials from which the personal pro-
tective resources are made.

A significant nmer of works devoted to the influence of low environmental
tenperatures on the human body have now been punished in the Soviet and foreign

literature (9, 35.66.97.107,110,150.211. 303. 308,332, 341, 371, 384 etc. ).

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mfortmatsly the problem of Ian's individual protection agath cold was not
reflected in these works. In reality. a Innograph devoted to this probles and
publist sore than 20 years ago by the Qnadian physiologists A. aarton and

0. Bdkholn (25) is still the principal reference used by specialists working on
the theoretical and practical problems of creating individual protection against
cold. as present work should be viewed as an attemt to continue and develop
these and other stmlies aimed at providing the physiological and hygienic grounds
for personal protective resources.

Ibnographs published in recent times (13.99.103.144 etc.) are devoted only to
particular problems: the planning of clothing for personal use. predicting the

thermal statm of the body during work in such clothes in different climatic sense
of the country and so on. .

'lhere can be no doubt that protection against cold requires more than just clothing.
his problen is nuch broader. We need dependable protection of the breathing

organs. the face. the lilbs (especially when perfonaing delicate manual operations
in cold) and so on. When we refer to personal protective resources. we isply

special clothing. special footwear. isolating overalls. resources protecting the

breathing organs. the head. face. eyes and hearing. and individually ewloyed
safety devices.

Because the conditions under which man is subjected to cold and the specific

features of each concrete production operation or production situation are so di-
verse. we cannot provide any all-elbracing recs-endations. But the basic physio-

logical and hygienic requiressnts imosed on personal protective resources and
on their design. from a udical and a technical standpoint. remain ocean. and

therefore they last be used as the foundation for planning. making and operating
such resources in different sectors of industry.

The available scientific literature of Soviet and foreign authors and our own exper-
isental data. acquired with the assistance of modern research methods and resources.

permitted us to generalize the results of the work of a large collective of
scientists who have conducted research for any years on personal resources against
cold for man.

We are convinced that by using physiological and hygienic research as the basis
for creating new personal protective resources. we could realistically count on
successfully solving any concrete problem connected with maintaining nan's thermal
homeostasis in extreme conditions.

Probless associated with freezing. hypother-ia and adaptation in nan are not
illuminated in this work.

The author extends his deep gratefulness to S._ G. 8a1ivon. A. A. Stikharev.

V. 1. mkarov. v. A. Ivanov. Yu. H. Isvashov. N. r. Gribanova and H. Ya. menko
for making it possible to present the results of their research in this work.

Naturally the author will be grateful to all specialists who send their responses
and resarks on the content of this book to the publishing house or directly to him.

COPYluGrr: Izdstel'stvo "Heditsina", noekva. 1981

11004
cso: ism/156 61

MOFIICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 019.961d'612.82+612.821.8
REVIBH 0! 300K on SLEEP AND MOTOR ACTIVITY

ﬂoscow ZHUBNAL WSSBEY NERVNOY DRAM'NOSTI INF-NI I. P. PAVLOVA in Russian
Vol 31. No 6. Nov-Dec Bl pp 1318-1321

[kgviev by A. A. Volohhov (deceased) of book "Son 1 dvigstel'naya aktivnost'" -

[Sleep and Motor Activity] by I. A. Vakhraseyeva. Izdstel'stvo "hanks",
Leningrad. 1980. 181 pages]

[Text] Thanks to accumulation of new experimental and clinical data on hypno-
genic processes, our knowledge about the nature of sleep and its role in
adaptive hunan and aninsl activity has been considerably enriched and
basically altered in the last two decades. The wide use of electroencephalo-
graphy, neurophysiological and biochenical methods, as well as accurate and
continuous recording of notor reactions, has made it possible to single out
several of the Iain stages of sleep and provide couprehensive descriptions
thereof. As a result of a multidisciplinary investigation of the waking-
sleep cycle, there has been confirlation of the conception of sleep as an
active conplexly organized process, in which various special structures of
subcortical and cortical regions of the brain are involved. This has been
supported by advancement of the conception of aotor control directed at
active restriction of nuscla tone and nobility in certain sleep phases. The
conception of supraspinal control sssunes the eeistence of specific nechanisns
in the higher notor structures of the brain. which are capable of blocking
the output of efferent inpulsation to effectors. which could lead to preven-
tion of superfluous notor activity at tines of absence of consciousness.

However, since the aein theses referable to notor control in the sleep pro-
cess were validated neatly by experinents on animals and only partially

by clinical and physiological observations of nan, their applicability to nan
is still unclear in my respects. This requires further research with the
use of adequate new nethodological approaches, one of which could be the
study of fornetion of sleep stages according to electroencephalographic and
rotor conponents, with analysis of underlying neurophysiological nechanises
in ontogeneeie of nan.

In recent tines. such studies of infants were described in works by a nunber
of foreign and Soviet authors. However, with all the conprehensiveness and
depth of investigation of the distinctions of different sleep phases in
these studies, there was no detailed consideration of the question of initial

62

MWUSIONLY
organization of the mechanisms of inhibitory control at the active stages of
sleep. For this reason, it should be deemed quite timely and important

that the monograph of I. A. Vakhrameyeva has been published, as it deals with
investigation of the stages of ontogenetic evolution of supraspinal motor
control during the sleep cycle of infants.

This book consists of three chapters. The first one deals with a wide range

of issues related to investigation of the distinctions and mechanisms of

muscle tone and movements at different sleep stages, as well as their electro-
graphic expression in adults. Physiological studies with the use of polygraphic
recording of the EEG and distribution of tonus and motor reactions in the
sleep-waking cycle led to distinction of five main stages of sleep, among

which the stages described with particular detail include the stage of high-
amplitude slow sleep (88) with spindles, deep sleep with many high-amplitude
slow waves on the E26 ($8), the RE! or paradoxical sleep stage (PS), also refer-
red to as rapid, active deaynchronized sleep, with low-voltage activity on the
EEG and paroxysmal rapid eye movements. Data are submitted on separation of
motor manifestations during sleep into two groups: constantly observed and
relatively seldom encountered (chiefly in pathology) motor phenomena, each of
which, in turn, is subdivided into different types of tonic and phasic motor
reactions, as well as on analysis of EEG patterns in motor structures of the
brain, which are based on the hypothesis of summation of postsynaptic somato-
dendritic potentials in cortical pyramidal neurons.

In this chapter, there is a very interesting critical discussion of data

that validate the well-known conception of Pompeano concerning the mechanisms
of organization of depression of spinal motor centers during paradoxical sleep.
The submitted data on the behavior of monosynaptic and polysynaptic spinal
reflexes (tendon, h reflex and others) indicate that suppression of these
reflexes during development of sleep is not attributable to elimination of
alleviating influences on spinal centers, but specific inhibitory influences
from the reticular formation of the brain stem and vestibular complex trans-
mitted over vestibulospinal and reticalospinal pathways. As the sleep stages
change, there is redistribution of correlation between excitatory and inhibi-
tory influences on various levels of the reflex system of the spinal cord.
During 88, when the flow of excitatory impulsation to motoneurons is drastically
reduced, there is virtually no activation of'the‘system of inhibitory influ-
ences, whereas onset of PS, conversely, is related to activation of both
excitatory and inhibitory systems of motor control.

Analysis of the conception of inhibitory motor control in the light of current
views of the genesis of SS indicates that a special role in its genesis
belongs to strucrures of the region of the doraolateral part of the tegmentum
of the pans (Jouvet et al.). Subsequent neurophysiological analysis made by
Pompeano et al., Robson and McCarley et al. led to the conception of a

pontine PS generator as a cyclic system, the main element of which is made up
of a group of cholinergic and cholinoreactive cells situated in the region

of the giant-cell field of the tegmentum (FIG). These cellular structures
are capable not only of excitation by exogenous acetylcholine, but self-exci-
tation. However, activation of FTC neurons does not produce direct inhibitory
motor control, rather it is mediated by the inhibitory bulbospinal system and
vestibular nuclei. At the same time. according to the conception of Pompeano,

63

FOR‘0F11CLAL.UBE¢DNIN
I'UK UI‘PILIAI. UM URL!

the pontine generator is under the inhibitory influence of monoaminergic mech-
anisms represented by the norepinephrine-containing neurons of the Locus
coeruleus complex and serotonin-containing neurons of the nuclei of the

raphe system (pans and mesencephalon).

In general, this chapter is not only a necessary and important introduction
to the next chapters that deal with ontogenetic aspects of sleep, but has
great independent significance; there, the author sheds light with great es-
pertise on many important fundamentals of neurophysiology of sleep that have
not been covered in the Soviet literature.

The second chapter sums up the literature and results of the author's own
studies of patterns of muscle tone and motor activity of neonates during
sleep. In the general description of early motor activity of the newborn, we
were impressed by the increased tone of the flexor muscle system and highly
generalized motor activity, which subsequently undergo changes that coin-
cide with specific states of the infant during the waking--sleeping cycle.
With reference to segmental and supraspinal mechanisms of organizing postural-
tonie and motor activity of infants, it is indicated that a conception is
formed on the basis of new experimental data on neuronal organization of the
segmental system and hierarchic organisation of the system for control of
movements. according to which the function of controlling motor activity

is effected by using spinal systems of interaction of neuronal elements,
which are formed on underlying levels. In neonates, the system of supra-
spinal regulation of the segmental system is organised differently from
adults: in early ontogenesis, one can readily elicit numerous spinal reflexes
in infants, which are already reduced or have disappeared in adults. Dka
obtained by the author using electromyographic methods, in particular the
H-reflex method, as well as information in the literature concerning morpho-
logical development of spinal cord cellular elements, are indicative of the
relative functional maturity of the spinal cord reflex system in neonates.
Neurophysiological analysis of supraspinal influences in these infants
suggests that it is possible for movement to be triggered by the mechanism
of autorhythmic activity, in addition to reflex stimulation of sensory systems
on the spinal and even higher center levels. However, the last statement
should apparently be considered too categorical, since no convincing evidence
is offered to validate it, while the isolated case observed by the author of
appearance of rhythmic bursts of activity on the EEG of the brachial muscle
of an infant (page 58) cannot be given serious attention.

 

In the next sections of this chapter, there is discussion of the distinctions
of onset of sleep processes on the EEG, and according to autonomic and motor
parameters. Data are given concernng the substantial differences between
sleep stages in adults and infants, in particular, concerning the separation of
sleep of neonates into two main stages--"active sleep" (AS) and "calm sleep"
(CS), as opposed to slow sleep (SS) and paradoxical sleep (P8) in adults.

AS is characterized by low-amplitude, often irregular 338 activity, with

rapid eye movements, diminished tone of some muscles, irregular breathing

and palpitations, high level of general motor activity, while cs corresponds
to high-amplitude slow waves on the BIG, slow irregular breathing and heart
beat, accentuated tone of the same muscles, absence of rapid eye movements and

66

FORIOFFHJAL.USE(HNLY
low general aotor activity. With reference to inception of the different
sleep stages of neonate, premature and mature infants, an effort is made to
trace the ontogenetic evolution of the main stages of sleep (AS and CS). It
is found that differentiation of these stages with respect to characteristics
of respiratory excursions of the chest, BEG patterns and general motor acti-
vity begins several weeks prior to normal birth time and by that time there
is distinct separation of these two stages. True, we cannot fail to note
that the data concerning formation of these processes at different stages
have not been sufficiently systematized, and they are fragmentary.

The third chapter is concerned with the solution to the problem raised in

the introduction of development of mechanisms of organization of depression

of spinal motor centers in human ontogenesis. Using the method of monosyn-
aptic testing of reflex excitability of spinal motoneurons (B-reflex method).
in a large series of studies, the author demonstrated age-related distinctions
in excitatory and inhibitory supraspinal influences on motor centers of

infants (starting in the 28th week of the gestation period up to birth, as

well -s the first 2-3 months after birth) at different stages of sleep and
waking states. To identify the as and CS phases of sleep, which is particularly
important in infants up to the age of 2-3 months, determination was made of the
dynamics of various quantitative functional parameters (general and spectral
EEG, index of counterphases of respiratory excursions, Hoffmann reflex and
others), which permit determination of onset and development of tonic and
phasic depression in children differing in physiological maturity. It was
demonstrated that the dynamics of B-reflex amplitude in healthy neonates
demonstrate a relationship to sleep stage: the H response reaches a maximum
during CS, whereas general depression of the H reflex is observed in AS,

but such a pattern is not yet seen in premature infants.

As a result of these studies, it was established that there are three stages
of ontogenetic development of supraspinal inhibitory mechanisms during sleep
at the abovedaentioned early stage of ontogenesis. which are formed in the
following order: 1) phasic (presynaptic) inhibition; 2) tonic (postsynaptic)
y-inhibition; 3) tonic (postsynaptic) a-inhibition; 4) activation of inter-
neuronal inhibitory system. The presence in neonates of phasic and tonic
depression of spinal reflexes during development of AS and enhancement
thereof during CS are consistent with one of the important theses in the
conception of Pompeano.

While we rate highly the description of ontogenetic stages of development of
correlation between sleep processes and motor activity in man, it is regret-
table that it pertains to a relatively short prenatal and postnatal period
of ontogenesis. Yet it is known that the stage principle of formation of
motor functions is also valid in subsequent periods of postnatal life, in
particular, the "critical" times of organisation of movements observed at
an early preschool age, at (us age of 7-8 to 11-12 years (period of second
childhood) and puberty (16-15 years). Investigation thereof in the aspect
of development of stages of depression of supraapinal mechanisms during the
sleep cycle is felt to be quite promising to solving the problem of adult
sleep.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

The data furnished in this book concerning the stages of ontogenetic develop-
meat of mechanisms of depression of spinal motor centers during sleep at the
early stage of human life go beyond the mere establishment of age-related
distinctions in formation of these mechanisms, and they have broader impli-
cations to disclosure of evolutionary patterns of development of inhibitory
processes in general. The author validly discusses this matter in her conclu-
sion, assessing her data in the light of the evolutionary conceptions of L. A.
Orbeli about development of inhibitory functions.

0n the vhole, this monograph, which summarizes the author's data and those in
the literature concerning the important problem of correlation between sleep
processes and motor functions in ontogenesis of man and sheds light on this
problem from the standpoint of evolution, is a valuable scientific work, both
theoretically and practically. This book will undoubtedly attract the atten-
tion of specialists-biologists, physiologists and micropediatricians.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Zhurnal vysshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti", 1981

10.657
CSO: 1840/136

FOI‘OFHKJA1.USE(NVLY
REVIEH OF BOOK ON EMOTIONAL HEHO!Y AND ITS MECHANISMS

Moscow ZHURNAL VYSSHEY NERVNOY DBYATEL'NOSTI IHENI I. P. PAVLOVA in Russian
Vol 31, No 6, Nov-Dec 81 pp 1322-1325

[Review by R. I. Kruglikov of book "Emotsional'naya pamyat' i yeye mekhanizmy"
[Emotional Hemory and Its Hechanisms] by Ye. A. Gromova, Isdatsl'stvo "Nauka",
Moscow, 1980, 181 pages]

[Text] Investigation of learning and memory mechanisms has become one of the
basic directions of neurobiology in recent years. The advances and achieve-
ments in this field are not only of obvious independent importance, but an
aid in elucidating the functional patterns of CNS [central nervous system]
activity and create realistic conditions for effectively controlling this
activity.

The recently published monograph by Ye. A. Gromova, "Emotional Memory and Its
Mechanisms," can serve as convincing evidence of the foregoing. This mono-
graph, which summarizes many years of research conducted by the author and
the team she heads, deals with the most complex and pressing aspects of the
memory problem. The main distinction of the monograph is that the general
patterns and mechanisms of learning and memory processes are discussed on
the example of one of the forms of mnestic activity, emotional memory. At
the same time, it should be stressed that the results of the comprehensive
and purposeful investigation of emotional memory and its mechanisms, which
are submitted in this monograph, fill the perceptible gap that had existed
in the literature on this subject.

The monograph consists of six chapters, which systematically deal with differ-
ent aspects of emotional memory. Since current conceptions of the essence of
learning and memory processes serve as the theoretical premise for investiga-
tion of neurophysiological and neurochemical mechanisms of emotional memory,
the author justifiably begins the monograph with a description of current
conceptions referable to structural and functional organization of memory. The
relevant material submitted in Chapter 1 touches upon all of the main direc-
tions of research in this field and it is of unquestionable independent
significance, constituting an essay of the current status of the memory problem‘
In this section, the classifications given by the author of different forms

of memory and current conceptions of biochemical bases for fixing and retain-
ing information in the CNS merit special attention. Although several major
surveys and summaries have been published in recent years on the biochemistry

67

POI OI!1C1A1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ul lcnrulng and memory, because of the good systematization and consistent
presentation of her point of view, the material in the first chapter of the
monograph dealing with these matters is interesting to read and generally
enlarges appreciably theoretical and survey literature. The author quite
validly stresses that, with all the profusion of facts about invo'vement of
RNA and proteins in learning and memory processes, no conclusive data have
yet been obtained on the coding of individual experience in macromolecules.
She advances an original conception of neurotrophic mechanisms of memory on
the basis of analysis of the distinctions of neuronal metabolism, and it
consists of the following. Upon perception of various stimuli, appropriate
electric signals travel to neurons over specific sets of synapses. By virtue
of genetically fixed mechanisms, synaptic activation through the system of
cyclic nucleotides leads to derepression of specific genes and synthesis of
specific proteins. The function of these de novo synthesised proteins is

to implement reception of corresponding neuromedietor factors. As a result,
a given neuron is involved in a system of interrelated neurons. In the light
of the conception that the author develops, long-term memory is based on
functional interneuronal connections, the nature of which on the level of
individual neurons is coded in DNA Inlecules. In our opinion, this concep-
tion merits further development and definition and, in particular, there must
be determination of the role of reinforcements and their relationships,
primarily time relationships to signaling factors.

The author concludes the essay on the current status of the memory problem
by emphasizing very validly that the main task of research on the biochemical
bases of memory is to investigate the mechanisms of effects of neuromediators
on activity of the neuronal genetic system and processes of intracellular
metabolism.

Chapter 2 of the monograph deals with neurophysiological and neurochemical
bases of emotions. while analyzing neurophysiologicsl mechanisms of emotions,
the author calls attention to the need to answer two basic questions, namely:
Is there validity to reduce the entire diversity of emotions to emotionally
positive and emotionally negative states, and is it possible for there to be
relatively independent mechanisms for each of these states? In the author's
opinion, both questions as a whole can be answered in the affirmative. And,
since organization of adaptive behavior requires prompt evaluation of the
usefulness or harm of a situation, the mechanisms of such evaluation must be
inborn. These mechanisms, as they interact with physiological systems of
perception of stimuli, impart the appropriate emotional coloration to the
perceived situation. The neurochemical basis of emotional reactions is
given a large place in the conceptions that the author develops about the
nature of these reactions. After comprehensive analysis of an extensive
literature, the author concludes that biogenous monoamines are actively in-
volved in organizing emotional behavior. At the same time, the author calls
attention to the contradiction of published data, which is indicative of

the need for continued special investigation of the differential role of
biogenous monoamines in organization of positive and negative emotional
reactions.

The role of attention in memory mechanisms is the topic of Chapter 3. Along
with data from the literature, it discusses the results of the research

68

I‘lltnﬂﬂCIAL.USE(MVLY
pursued by the author and her coworkers. Proceeding from the general thesis
that the state of attention is expressed by changes in evoked potentials,

the author investigated the modulating influences of different parts of the
hypothalamus on primary responses (PR) of the visual cortex of unsnesthetised
rabbits. It was found that stimulation of structures of the anterior and
posterior hypothalamus affected PR differently. This finding served as the
grounds for studying the chemical nature of modulating hypothalamo-cortical
influences. The results of these studies led the author to the conclusion that
modulating influences of the hypothalamus on perception of sensory stimuli

are implemented by monoaminergic systems. This thesis was confirmed in
studies using the method of microionophoresia. Taking into consideration data
about involvement of monoamines in organization of emotional reactions. these
facts enabled the author to advance an interesting conception of participation
of monoamines in formation of directed attention which enhances perception

by increasing neuronal capacity to isolate a signal from noise.

Chapters 6 and S occupy a central place in the monograph, and they deal with
the functional link between emotion and memory, and the role of monoaminergic
systems of the brain in effecting this link. In a study of memory as a func-
tion of level of emotional tension, the author and her colleagues obtained some
extremely interesting material, and this was considerably aided by the use of
original methods and fortunate choice of subjects (athletes). As shown by the
studies, a general (to a specific limit) increase in emotional tension is
associated with improvement of short-term memory; conversely, absence of
emotional tension worsens short-term memory. The conception ensuing from

data of optimum level of emotional tension for mnestic activity was also
confirmed in special experiments on humans with the use of a modified

method of perceptual conflict. In experiments on animals, the author demon-
strated the involvement of different emotiogenic structures of the brain
(hypothalamus) in learning and memory processes, and the role of these struc-
tures in consolidation processes. Their purposeful and systematic study of
the role of monoaminergic systems of the brain in learning and memory pro-
cesses led the author and her colleagues to the conclusion that activation of
serotoninergic mechanisms of the brain improves the learning process with

use of emotionally positive (food) reinforcement and worsens learning with

the use of emotionally negative (electric, nociceptive) reinforcement. Con-
versely, activation of catecholaminergic brain mechanisms improves learning
with emotionally negative reinforcement and has no appreciable influence on
learning with food reinforcement. 0n the other hand, a decline in functional
activity of serotoninergic and catecholaminergic systems also has different
effects on development of conditioned food and defense re- rexes. In su-ariz-
ing these data, the author arrives at the basic conclusion that serotoninergic
and noradrenergic systems of the brain participate actively in learning pro-
cesses, and this involvement is effected via the emotional sphere. Accord-
ing to the author's data, the serotoninergic system plays the leading part

in organizing emotionally positive behavior, whereas the noradrenergic system
of the brain plays such a role in organization of emotionally negative
behavior. These conclusions, which are of a basic nature, would gain even
more conviction, in our opinion, if a broader set of behavioral tests had

been used to substantiate them. The fact of the matter is that the consequences

69

INJR!DFIWCJA1.I£§EZ€MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of interventions in brain activity, including function of neuromediatory sys-
tems, are determined not only by the nature of interventions, but distinctions
of tests used to demonstrate the consequences of these interventions. In
particular, much depends not only on the nature but features of the condi-
tioned reflexes used. He know, for example, that a serotonin deficiency in
the brain has different effects on conditioned active and passive avoidance
reflexes, although both reflexes are of the same defensive nature. It is
also well-known that a shortage of norepinephrine in the brain has different
effects on various conditioned food reflexes (for example, running through
mazes and depressing a lever).

He cannot fail to agree with the author when she stresses that moderate changes
in the physiological range are the most adequate for demonstration of the role
of monoaminergic systems of the brain in learning and memory processes. indeed.
rather large doses of monoamine precursors or inhibitors of synthesis thereof
are used in many studies. But the use of relatively intensive factors must

be viewed as a necessary stage of development of appropriate studies. one of
the future objectives of which is to determine the dose functions. In-depth
analysis of correlations of monoaminergic systems of the brain according to
various functional parameters thereof led the author to conclude that these
correlations are reciprocal. This conclusion is one of the major general con-
clusions in the monograph being reviewed; it not only deepens the conception

of the role of monoaminergicneuromediatorysystems in brain function, but
predetermines to a great extent the direction of future research in this field.

He should like to make special mention of the significance of the final sec-
tion of the fifth chapter of this monograph, which discusses the prospects of
pharmacological influence on memory through metabolism of biogenous monoamines.
The author substantiates quite convincingly the possibility of therapeutic

use of agents that normalize monoamine metabolism on the basis of the results
of in-depth examination and treatment of mentally retarded children who
present disturbances in metabolism of biogenous monoamines. The author's
indication of the feasibility of predicting the therapeutic effect according
to parameters of functional balance of monoaminergic systems also merits much
attention.

The final, sixth chapter of the monograph is concerned with comprehensive
description of emotional memory proper, principles and methods of producing
models thereof. It also discusses in detail the role of the brain's mono-
aminergic systems in the mechanisms of emotional memory. Among the interest-
ing ideas advanced by the author in this chapter, the explanation she offers
for the speed of formation of emotional memory is impressive. Involvement of
monoaminergic systems of the brain. which have extensive connections with
other parts of the CNS, in mnestic processes provides for immediate inter-
action of incoming sensory information with inborn forms of emotional behavior.
Such interaction is instrumental in faster and lasting fixation of information.

As the author indicates in the "Conclusion," the purpose of this monograph was
to call the attention of physiologists, psychologists, clinicians, pharmacolo-

gists and specialists in other fields to the need for deeper studies of emo-
tional memory, objective investigation of which is only at its first stage.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
There is every reason to maintain that the monograph of Ya. A. Gromova vil1
not only drau the attention of researchers to the problem of emotional memory,
but will serve as an important milestone in experimental and theoretical

work on this pressing problem. At the same time. the monograph of Ye. A.
Gromova makes a substantial contribution to the study of general neurophysiolo-
gical and neurochemical mechanisms of learning and memory, and it is of con—
sidarable and unquestionable interest to specialists working in this area of
higher nervous activity.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", "Zhurnal vysshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti", 1981

10,657
080: 1860/136

71

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RADIATION BIOLOGY

UDC: 613.6b7:621.375.826

INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE AND PREVENTION OF OCCUPATIONAL PATHOLOGY RELATED TO
HORKING WITH LASERS

Moscow GIGIYENA TRUDA I PROFILAKTIKA PROFPAIOLOGII PR1 RABOTE s LAZBRAHI
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 10 Sep 80) pp 2-5, 208

(Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Industrial
Hygiene and Prevention of Occupational Pathology Related to working With
Lasers", by Vladimir Pavlovich Zbokhov, Angelina Antonovna Komarova, Larisa
Ivanovna Haksimova, Vitol'd Rostialavovich Hurstov, Yuriy Petrovich Pal'tsev
and Anatoliy Ivanovich Semenov, Isdatel'stvo "Heditaina", 991 copies,

208 pages. illustrated]

[Text] This monograph was written by a team of authors working in various
scientific institutions. It describes in detail the characteristics of

laser radiation fields and measuring methods, gives inforlation about existing
measuring equipment; a summary is made of data fro. the literature concerning
the biological effects of laser radiation on animals and man as related to
different field characteristics; analysis is made of the possible mechanisms
of interaction between radiation and living tissues. Special attention is
given to the effects of laser radiation on the eye, as well as integument.
Clinical and physiological data are submitted concerning the health status of
specialists working with lasers; existing standards are given in the area of
evaluating field intensity of laser radiation, which require more definition.
This monograph is intended for hygienists, occupational pathologists and
specialists concerned with the problem of biological effects of laser radia-
tion and work on protective and preventive measures. There are 17 figures
and 6 tables.

Introduction

The constant refinement of technology is a mandatory prerequisite for develop-
ment of all types of industry. Technological progress alleviates human

labor, permits considerable intensification and acceleration of industrial
processes; radio-electronics, semiconductors and ultrasound are becoming
increasingly prominent in industrial technology. Laser technology is also
being developed and refined.

The wide use of lasers in science. technology, medicine and other sectors of
the national econosy is associated with a considerable increase in number of

72
ltllCﬂﬂﬂClAl.lh§E1MNLY
pvnplo who might be exposed to laser radiation, which is a new factor in the
industrial environment. Already in the early years of making practical use
of lasers it was established that their radiation could present a hazard to
man in some cases. All this makes it necessary to elaborate scientifically
validated standards for laser radiation, as well as to implement protective

and preventive measures that would rule out the adverse effects of laser
radiation on man.

Many works have been published to date, both in the Soviet and foreign litera-
ture, that are concerned with different aspects of this problem. Analysis of
the literature shows that most studies were conducted in order to determine the
therapeutic properties of laser radiation and they are purely qualitative

in nature, which is not always acceptable when dealing with hygienic problems,
which require determination of the quantitative relationship between intensity
of laser radiation and its effects. This is largely attributable to the
specifics of the work of clinical physicians, the fact that most modern laser
units used for clinical purposes are not equipped to take quantitative

neasurements, as well as inadequate theoretical basis for metrology of laser
radiation.

The first experiments on the effects of laser radiation on living tissue already
revealed that it has high biological activity. and many researchers attributed
this to the specific properties of laser radiation. particularly its coherence.
Yet it is known that there is no one-to-one relationship between coherence of

a radiation source and coherence of the radiation field in the place where

the irradiated object is located. It is also known that the photometric
methods of measuring intensity of electromagnetic radiation fields that are
familiar to hygienists and occupational pathologists are not generally suitable
for measurement of the characteristics of coherent radiation. All this makes
it imperative to undertake theoretical elaboration of the fundamentals of
methods for quantitative measurement of intensity of laser radiation, with
consideration of its coherence, as well as to determine the range of applica-
tion of the photometric approach to this problem.

The next tasks are to define the characteristics of the field of laser radia-
tion, which determine to a large extent the biological effect of this field,
to refine methods of measuring these characteristics, as well as make the
choice of necessary measuring equipment. When this is done, it will be
possible, on the one hand, to make quantitative measurements of intensity of
laser radiation fields as related to each specific situation and to compare
this intensity to the maximum permissible levels (HPL), thereby implementing
sanitary and hygienic control. On the other hand, proper formulation and
solution of the above problems are mandatory conditions for obtaining

scientifically substantiated material to set HPL according to experimental
data.

The practical use of lasers makes it imperative to classify known lasers,
those under development and laser units according to the nature of effects of
their radiation on man, to classify the possible types of illumination from
laser radiation, as well as to systematize data on the expected levels of
laser field intensity in industry. scientific laboratories, clinical practice,
etc.

73

FOI‘OI1WC1AI.UEIICHVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

An entire set of problems must be solved in order to gain the proper idea
about the hazard of laser radiation to man. One of these problems is to
determine the nature of changes that occur in individuals exposed to laser
radiation, as related to characteristics of the laser field, in order to

work out appropriate criteria for setting hygienic standards. Since there
are substantial legal and ethical restrictions on obtaining such information
on man, animal experimentation is the main source of factual material. This
generates the specific problem of interspecific extrapolation, which has not
yet been definitively resolved.

Unqestionably, there is a difference between the consequences of exposure
to laser radiation by chance of man and the long-term exposure that occurs
when working with laser installations. Hence the need for a differentiated
approach to the choice of factors that have an adverse effect on man, as
well as to setting the “PL.

At the present time, standards have been developed and are in wide use, which
regulate the HPL of laser radiation, which do not conform, to some extent, to
the constantly increasing volume of information about the effects of lasers

on the organism. This raises the problem of refining [defining] the standards,
as well as widening the range of characteristics of the laser field, for

which standards should be set.

it is of great practical interest to consider the ways and means of protec-
tion against laser radiation, as well as development of the necessary pre-
ventive and therapeutic measures.

This monograph, which is the first attempt in the Soviet literature to summarise
material accumulated on this subject, deals expressly with all these questions.

Contents Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Main Characteristics of Lasers and Areas of Application 6
Arrangement, operating principle and main characteristics of lasers 6
Areas of practical application of lasers 10
Chapter 2. Laser Radiation Field 17

Theoretical bases of methods for quantitative description of
laser radiation field 18
Characteristics of laser radiation field 23
Measurement of characteristics of laser radiation field 26
Laser measuring equipment 36
Chapter 3. Mechanism of Biological Effects of Laser Radiation #6
Chapter 4. Effects of Laser Radiation on the Eye 62
Brief anatomical and physiological description of the organ of sight 62
Mechanisms of eye damage by laser radiation 66
Damage to eye tissues by laser radiation 75
Types of eye exposure to laser radiation 86
Chapter 5. Effects of Laser Radiation on the Skin 96

Chapter 6. Clinical and Physiological Data on Health Status of
Specialists Working With Lasers 103

76

FOB OFIHC1A1.1EHE(HVLY
Chapter 7. Setting Standards for Laser Radiation 127

Interspecific extrapolations 130
Statistical processing of experinental data 133
Current hygienic standards in the area of safety practices when
using lasers 136
Chapter 8. Industrial Hygiene When working Hith Lasers 166
Exposure of eye to direct laser beam 167
Exposure of aye to reflected laser has. 156
rrotective and preventive measures to assure good working conditions
with lasers 168
Medical supervision of health status of individuals working with
lasers 179
Conclusion 186
Appendix - 199
Bibliography 202

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Heditsina" Hoskva 1980

10,657
CSO: 1860/173

75

IND! 0"WCLAI.USIZCHVLY
we omens use ONLY

000: 577.3

REACTION OF PROLIFBRATIVE AND RESTING TUMOR CELLS TO PERIODIC PULSED
ULTRAVIOLET LOU-INTENSITY LASER RADIATIOR

Moscow DOKLADY AKADEMII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 262, No 6, Feb 82
(manuscript received 29 Sep 81) pp 1598-1501

[Article by T. I. Karu, G. S. Kalendo. V. S. Letokhav and V. V. Lobko,
Scientific Research Center for Technological Lasers, USSR Academy of
Sciences; Institute of Spectroscopy. USSR Academy of Sciences, Troitsk,
Moscow Oblast; and Oncological Research Center of the USSR Academy of Medical
Sciences. Moscow (submitted by Academician A. H. Prokhorov on 1 Sep 8l)]

[Text] It was previously demonstrated that powerful pulsed laser radiation

of picosecond duration (A - 266 am) can have a selective effect on nucleic
acids of tumor cells [1]. It was found that, by varying the radiation para-
meters (number of pulses and their intensity), one can alter the rate of
nucleic acid synthesis, accelerating it or slowing it down. It is of great
theoretical and practical interest to find out how the same cells would

react to UV [ultraviolet] laser radiation at the same wavelength and in the
same dosage, but delivered insdifferent form. As such a source, we chose

a source of UV radiation that is new to photobiology, which is based on
transformation in the UV range of radiation from pulsed period lasers on

Cu dysds [2]. Such a laser emits pulses lasting 18 us at wavelengths of

510.5 nm and 578.2 nm at a frequency of 10 kHz and mean power of several
watts. when these two waves are summated in a nonlinear crystal, one can obtain
UV radiation pulses at A - 271 um and frequency of 10 kHz, with mean power of
up to 10" R and peak energy of up to 10 w. Unlike the continuous sources of
UV radiation that are generally used in photobiology, the effect is pulsed,
periodically recurrent in nature. At the same time, the peak energy of the
pulses is not sufficient for occurrence of any nonlinear effects in biolo-
gical molecules of the type observed in [1], so that our first task was to
study the photobiological effects of periodic pulsed UV laser radiation and

to compare them to the effects of continuous UV radiation from the usual
source with the same dosage of radiation. i.e.. to check the law of reci-
procity.

This study was conducted on a culture of HeLa tumor cells at the logarithmic
stage of growth (proliferative cells) or stationary stage of growth (resting
cells). Such models were chosen because there are always sose cells in

the populations (including those of real tumor tissues) that do not partici-
pate in proliferation, along with proliferative cells [2]. These so-called
resting cells may fail to multiply for an indefinite time and retain their

76

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
viability entirely. From this state,
the cells can return into the cycle

 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
    

3-?“ under the influence of an adequate
o stimulus. It is believed that resting
he"
‘3 cells are much nore resistant to
5‘ 3:: deleterious factors that proliferative
g o“ ones. which is related to the specifics
'3 u 0 of this physiological state of cells
8 3“ [3]. Bearing this in nind, it is
3 :3 also interesting to conpare the be-
'3 .40 havior of resting and proliferative
1- 5‘ cells after exposure to lasers. This
< 0 was the second objective of our study.
3 .5 e' s a' s s q -
3' 3/” The culture was irradiated 72 h after
Figure l. plating, when there were 6-5-10s cells
Change in DNA synthesis (neasured in (proliferative cells) per vial or
decays/sin, with results nornalized after 10 days (resting cells) when
to the control) after exposure to there were 10‘ cells per vial. The
periodic pulsed laser at A - 271 nn irradiation technique was described
in resting (l) and proliferative (2) in [l]. Radionetry was used to
cells study the intensity of incorporation

of labeled precursors of DNA and
RNA synthesis (’B-thynidine and l‘C-uridine, respectively), perneability of
cell nenbranee for these precursors under nornal conditions and after exposure
to lasers, adhering to the methods described in [6].

He used a DUE-15 mercury lamp as noncoherent source of UV light (A - 254 nm),
which was focused with a quartz lens at a focal distance of 12 cm. The dose
rate constituted 0.06 Iii/mla in the plane of the botton of the vial with
cells. A shutter [obturator] was used (10- and loo-fold attenuation) to
reduce the nean energy of radiation to the required level.

We tested the effects of the second harmonic of the copper laser (A - 271 nu)
on Hebe cells with change in radiation dosage fros'SolOf‘ to 2-10": chsz.
Both DNA synthesis and permeability‘of the cell nenhrane to the ’N-thynidine
precursor of DNA synthesis were found to be sensitive to this type of radia-
tion (Figures 1 and 2). He found that there were opposite reactions by
proliferating and resting cells. In the case of proliferative cells, DNA
synthesis (Figure l) was depressed over the entire range of doses we tested,
i.e., the larger the dose. the greater the depression of DNA synthesis. There
was an analogous reduction in permeability of the cell nemhrsne to ’ll-thymidine
(Figure 1). In the case of resting cells, we observed an increase in DNA
synthesis with the sane range of doses (Figure l), and it reached s maxim
with a dosage of 5'10.“ J/cmz. Hith further increase in dosage, the rate of
DNA synthesis decreased to the control level. There was concurrent increase
in perneability of the cell menbrane (Figure 2), with a neximn at approxi-
merely the sane dosage (5010“ J/cm’). -

RNA synthesis turned out to he a process with little sensitivity to radiation
by the second harmonic of the copper laser at A I 271 all, although there is
RNA absorption. like DNA, at this wavelength. Incorporation of H(z-ur‘idine

77

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
b0“ UN'IL'IAI. USO. ONLY

0‘3.”
~§~

  
  
   
   

««
0 e.

    
 

   

h
N

\

2 G

‘\ A
“_ .--‘
. ..

\

~
‘

  

-
-

  

Cell radioactivity(normalized to control;
it

Figure 2.
Change in membrane permeability for
’H-thymidine after exposure to periodic
pulsed laser at A - 271 nm (l-resting
cells; 2—-proliferating cells) and
after exposure to continuous UV light
at A - 254 nm (3-resting cells, 4-

proliferating cells)

  
    

a.
N

    

S

  
  
 

‘3
a

DNA radioactivity
(normalized to control)
e 2 e

a
e
..
e
a

Figure 3.
Change in DNA synthesis after exposure
to continuous UV light at A - 254 nm
(l--resting cells, 2--proliferating)

remained at the control level over the
entire range of doses (from SolO“ to
2.10'2 J/cm‘) in both proliferating and
resting cells.

To compare the photobiological effects
of periodic pulsed UV radiation to UV
radiation from a continuous source.

we conducted experiments under exactly
the same conditions using low-intensity
continuous light (BUB-15 UV lamp). Un-
fortunately, its maximum radiation

(A - 254 nm) does not coincide exactly
with the wavelength of the second
harmonic of the copper laser (A -

271 nm), but this wavelength is still
in the range of nucleic acid absorp-
tion. As can be seen in Figure 3, the
changes in ORA synthesis in prolifera-
tive and resting cells under the in-
fluence of noncoherent UV light were
essentially the same: it remains at
the control level with low doses and
is depressed with increase in dosage.
No stimulation phase is observed.
Permeability of the cell membrane for
’U-thymidine diminishes monotonically
with increase in radiation dose in

the case of proliferating cells.
whereas in resting cells. it presents
mild (within the range of the error
factor) tendency toward increase with
low doses, which changes to depression
when the dosage is increased

(Figure 3).

As we see, the reaction of prolifer-
ating cells to radiation is similar
for both periodic pulsed and con-
tinuous UV light: with increase in
dose, DNA synthesis and permeability
of the cell membrane to ’H-thymidine
decrease. the findings are quite
different in the case of resting
cells: noticeable dependence of both
processes on stimulation dosage with
exposure to periodic pulsed source
and no stimulation with exposure to
UV lamp. Thus, it can be concluded
that, aside from the different reac-
tions of resting and proliferative

cells to radiation from a periodic pulsed source, resting cells have a specific

78

FOR OIIWC1A1.USEJDNIN
response to this type of radiation: DNA synthesis is stilulated and there is
Increase in membrane permeability to aH-thymidine.

Unlike the data Submitted above, it was possible to stimulate DNA synthesis in
proliferating cells by exposing them to powerful ultrashort picosecond puleel
[l]. A comparison of the data given here to the results in [1] leads to the
conclusion that pulsed radiation in the same dosage but different form (inten-
sity, pulse duration, recurrence frequency) can elicit different responses in
cells. Apparently, this is attributable to the fact that in one case [1]
there is a two-quantum excitation process and in the other (Cu laser) a
single quantum process. This conclusion is also confirmed by the results we
obtained here when proliferating cells were exposed to UV light: a decrease

in DNA synthesis also dependent on dosage, without stipulation phase. We have
yet to determine the mechanism of stimulation of DNA synthesis in resting cells
in this light. We can only assume that it is a specific response of resting
cells to periodic pulsed irradiatidn.

Thus, there are three conclusions:

1. Exposure to periodic pulsed lasers at A _- 271 nm elicits a change in DNA
synthesis and permeability of cell membranes to ’N-thymidine, the precursor
of DNA synthesis, in both proliferating and resting cells. There is a

qualitative difference between reactions of resting and proliferating cells.

2. Periodic pulsed laser radiation induces dose-dependent depression of DNA
synthesis in proliferating cells. Continuous UV light has an analogous effect
on proliferating cells.

3. Periodic pulsed laser radiation induces a dose-dependent stimulation of
DNA synthesis and increase in permeability of the cell membrane for ’H-
thymidine in resting cells, whereas exposure to the same doses of continuous
UV light do not elicit stimulation. Evidently, stimulation of DNA synthesis
and increase in permeability of the cell membrane are related to the periodic
pulsed nature of radiation.

The authors are grateful to A. N. Zherikhin and V. l. Hishin for their assistance
in the work with the Cu laser, as well as to V. A. Semchishen and Ye. V.
Yudakhina for help in conducting the experiments.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Karu, '1‘. 1., Kalendo, G. 8., Letokhov, V. S. et al., KVAN‘DOVAYA
BLEKTRONIKA, Vol 8, No 12, 1981.

2. Gavosto, P. and Pileri, A., in "Cell Cycle and Cancer," New York, 1971,
pp 99-128.

3. Yepifanova, O. 1., TSITOLOGIYA, Vol 21, 1979, p 1379.

lo. Aleksandrova, Ye. V., Kalendo, G. 8., Semenyalr, 0. Yu. and Serebryakov,
P. 0., TSlTOLOGIYA, Vol 22, No 7, 1980, p 869.

COP-RIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR", 1982

10, 65 7
(ISO: 1840/1910 79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HUMAN FACTORS

UDC: 658.512.011.56
USE OF DIGITAL CWUTBRS FOR EVALUATION OF OPERATOR OUTPUT

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTM UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 8-9

[Article by N. F. Bsshenov, candidate of engineering sciences, V. V. Kuz'mich
and P. A. Tonkonogov, engineers: "Use of Digital Computers to Evaluate
Operator Throughput"]

[Text] One of the main elements of autosated control systems for technological
processes (A08 1'?) is the operator. A mandatory prerequisite for improving
the efficiency of the entire system is to organize effective interaction be-
tween the technical part of the system and [human] operator. The important
factors in organizing interaction include conformity of throughput of ACS
equipment to that of the operator.

The increase in the system's throughput by means of the operator is always
minimal. The steps to increase the system's throughput amount to selection
of people who are the most capable, training and instruction thereof. To
screen operators, one should make an objective experimental evaluation of
their output capacity. Output of the operator in ACS refers to the
throughput of the sensory input of the operator and speed of information
processing. Operator throughput is the reciprocal of the steepness of
reaction time to an incoming signal (tag) as a function of amount of informa-
tion in the communication received: A - I/Tn, where I is the mean amount of
information per tag [sign] of received conunication, in bits, and Tn is
reaction time in seconds.

The operator's reaction is an action that is perfon by means of man's
"output devices“ (speech, movement) and the operator's motor field, which
consists of a set of buttons, keys, etc. [1]. Mainly movenents are used

to transmit commands. Experimental studies of a number of psychologists
determined that reaction time In is a linear function of quantity of infome-
tion that is average for a received tag [sign], which is a stimulus for the
operator to respond [2]. This function is expressed as follows:

'l;-,-t.+kl (1)

where t. is simple reaction time (lag of operator's motor response to a
signal that is known in advance but that appears suddenly), I: is the steep-
ness of the line characterizing increment of reaction time Tn when the
amount of information in a cormunication is increased.

FOIOFHCIMUSEONLY
ll Is hollovvd that the value of the information received will not have an
appreciable influence on equation (1). Each individual operator has his "own"
inherent values for steepness [gradient7] k and time t.. They are minimal for
the more skillful operators, and can be reduced (within certain limits) by
instruction and training. Thus, in the course of instruction, there must be

a source of communications that permits immediate [operational] change in
amount of information in the communication, in order to check the operator's
throughput. It is expedient to use a discrete alphabet of symbols, ai(i - I, m).
as such a source, each of which is selected for an operator at random with

a certain probability P(a£). Every symbol in the alphabet delivers an
average amount of information, which is determined by the well-known equation
for source entropy:

H (In-I (ﬁ)-—2 P (m log.» («0.
III

If the alphabet symbols (for example, numerals) have different lava (series)
of distribution in each experiment, the mean amount of information carried
with each symbol will differ, in particular, it will be maximal with a
uniform law of distribution. The more the distribution differs from being
uniform, the less information is given by the source to the operator. If
symbols a1; of the alphabet are chosen for an operator N times, the time of
his reaction to the message is calculated using the formula:

Th - ZAtilﬂ

where ZAti is overall reaction time to all symbols presented to the operator
in a given test.

The Consul printer, which is the unit of outputting information from the Mir-2
digital computer, is the source_of symbols with different laws of distribution
that are presented to the operator. Discrete [digital] messages from the
source are numerals, 0, l, 2, ..., 7, printed on paper at random times.
Appropriate programs for the Mir-2 computer are used to generate pseudorandom
numbers that form an entire group of events.

Four experiments with the computer are run to determine function Tn - f(I).
The series of distribution of pseudorandom numbers are approximated by the
laws of Rayleigh, normal, exponential and uniform distribution. The distribu-
tion series and .corresponding amounts of information per symbol are listed

in Table l.

The operator's reaction time is found by measuring the interval between his
response [action] and time of delivery of a stimulus (printed digit). The
responsive (controlling) action of the operator is to depress a key on the
control console, the number of which corresponds to the digit printed by the
Consul. The time interval is measured by electronic computation. The times
at which the computer prints out the digital symbol and the appropriate

81

FOI‘HHWCIAL.USE(NWLY
FOR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

button is depressed determine the leading edge [front] and cut-off [decay] of
the gate [strobe] pulse. the duration of which, TstrO equals the measured
interval At. This time is measured by counting the pulses with fixed recur-
rence frequency PC that fill the interval. If the recurrence frequency of
counting [calculating7] pulses equals PC (recurrence period Tc) there will

be c - At/Tc . Ath within the measured interval At.

Table l.

Approximating
law of
distribution

Rayleigh 0.0: 0.1: 0.01 0.210 0.00; 0.0» 0.03 0.00 m

 

 
 
   
   

"om; 0.010 us 0." 0.10 0.250 0.11 0.0a 0.0:: 1.3:
Exponential m: 0.10 0.10 on: 0.00 0.00 0.070 0.01: 0:00
Uniform 0.1: 0.: 0.!!! 0.15 mm 0.103 was 0.1: 0

Thus, the measured interval will be found
in the following manner: At - C/Pc s.

The number C of counting pulses that fill
the gate pulse is read by the pulse
counter, and the frequency meter is used
in the summation mode for this purpose.

 

The experimental equipment for operator
Table 3. training consists of the following
(Figure 1): source of communications,
interval timer, Operator's console with

oparato I. I
control unit. The Ch3-38 frequency meter
1 m0n on" (in summation mode). combined with a
g &:2 :3: 65-15 counting pulse generator, is used

 

 

to measure the time intervals. The

generator delivers counting pulses at a
fixed recurrence frequency to the input of the frequency meter. The unit that
controls the interval timer causes formation of gate pulses and controls delivery
of counting pulses to the frequency mater.

The control unit consists of a set of triggers. OR and AND circuits (Figure 2).
The triggers are actuated by computer signals that control digital printout.
The triggers are returned to their initial (zero) state by the operator, by
depressing a button on the working console that corresponds to the digital
symbol printed on paper. The gate pulses thus formed pass from the trigger
outputs through the on circuit to the input of the AND circuit, thus causing
delivery of counting pulses to the frequency meter input. -If the wrong
button is depressed in error, one that does not correspond to the printed
symbol, the cut-off of the gate pulse is not formed and the frequency meter
continues to measure the time interval. Steepness k of inclination [see
formula (1)] and the operator's simple reaction time t. are determined by

82

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(M‘LY
processing experimental data with the least squares nethod. This provides for
best confornity of experinentally obtained results with the individual capa-
cities of operators.

Operator's control console

     

 

Source of
Fur-2
emu“ r Tiler control Tiler
information
Figure l.

The experimental values of paraneters ‘rm; and 111» found by the method of least

squares are substituted in the analytical expression of the sought function (1);
This yields the following aysten of
arbitrary linear equations [3]:

(0+.Il—Tll I":
l.+U:—Tn-0:
lu+u8_rI!-o;
‘.+”g—T.0-o.

This systen is reduced to normal equations
of the following appearance:

 

AA! ' Al'k— arm—o,
' [41111.34 Ill-[b.l'lo. I (2)
frcn work console
Figure 2. where A; - l is the coefficient with

‘1“ to.

[AA], [AI], .... [11‘ ] are found from the experinental data in the following
manner:

AA -A A +A :i- A :
1' 'r‘ﬁ'%‘+#r‘.:"§+~"2 r
IpLI.I.#I'.'I.+LI.+I 2:“ ' "'
I sI-IITII+Irraa+’I “+1.7”.

83

F0! OFT-10M. USE ONLY
HM Dbl-IQ IAI. USP. UNIX

The values of parameters k and t. for each Operator are found by solving system
of equations (2).

In an experimental test of this method, laboratory technicians and computer
laboratory engineers, who had experience in working at the consoles of various
digital computers, participated as operators. There were more than 15 tested
operators in all. The results of the experiment (reaction time Tn in seconds)
were different for each participant. Table 2 lists data obtained for three
operators.

After substituting the values of parameters I and TH in (2) and solving the
system of equations on a digital computer, we found the values for time to in
seconds and steepness k in a/bits (Table 3).

These values could also be found by graphic plotting (approximately). Experi-
mental determination of time Tn and calculation of time to and steepness k
make it possible to assess the individual capacities of an operator (the lower
the values of parameters t. and k, the greater his throughput capacity).

Throughput of the above-mentioned operators constituted 8.55, 7.81 and 9.71 bit/s,
respectively. For other operators who participated in the experiment, there

was a 1-1.5 bit/s difference from the above figures.for their throughput.

This is consistent with the already known results of other experiments, which
confirm that man is capable of receiving and processing 0.1-10 bits of in-
formation per second [h-G]. Each subject should first become familiar with

the experimental operator console to improve the reliability of results.

Thus, use of a digital computer as the source of random symbols delivered to
an operator and electronic timing of his reaction to symbols permits immediate
["operationa1"] evaluation of operators' throughput. This method could be
used for screening operators for AC8 TP.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Polyakova, L. V. and Leyn, V. H., “Display of Measurement Information,"
Leningrad, Energiya, 1978.

2. Haydel'man, I. N., Revenko, V. N. and Sarkisyan, B. 6., "Information
Display in Automated Control Systems," Moscow,Sov.radio, 1972.

3. Vostroknutov, N. G. and Yevtikhiyev, N. N., "Information and Measurement
Technology," Hoscow, Vysshaya shkola, 1977.

4. Temnikov, F. Ye., Afonin, V. A. and Dmitriyev, V. 1., "Theoretical
Bases of Information Technology," Moscow, Energiya, 1979.
5. Trostnikov, V. N., "Han and Information," Moscow, Nauka, 1970.

6. Kostyuk, V. I. and Khodakov, V. Ye., "Information Display Systems and
Engineering Psychology," Kiev, Vysshaya shkola, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Hashinostroyeniye", "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya",
1982

10,657

cso: 1860/77 so

FIHICIHNCLAL UBIICHVLY
USE OF PHYSIOLOGICAL INFORHAIION IN HAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

Moscow AVTOHATIKA I TBLEHEKHANIKA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 (manuscript received
16 Dec 80) pp 151-166

[Article by a. A. Desova (Moscow)]

[Text] Use of physiological information about the state

and qualities of an operator is discussed in the areas of
design, study and operation of man-machine systems. Groups
of specialized criteria referable to engineering psychology,
which characterize practical tasks, are singled out. The
main phases of the methodological approach to construction of
formalized assessments of physiological information are
developed and described. An approach is offered to construc-
tion of a quantitative evaluation of an operator's functional
state, which is developed on the example of formation of the
scale of Operating [working] tension.

In recent times, increasing attention has been devoted to use of physiological
information (PI) characterizing a human operator (0) in the design, study and
operation of man-machine (m) systems. Such information is based on measure-
ment of different physiological parameters (PP), such as electrical activity
of the brain, cardiac activity, galvanic skin response, respiration. blood and
urine biochemistry. and many others.

From the standpoint of problems of engineering psychology. PI can be useful as
a gauge of two main factors: current functional state of the operator. for
example, degree of fatigue, emotional and working tension. stress, level of
wakefulness. etc.; individual psychological traits and potential capacities

of the operator.

Evaluation of these factors is very important to many practical tasks where
the results can be used for different purposes (Chart). Thus, evaluation of
an operator's current functional state is necessary primarily for tasks
involved in assuring reliability and efficiency of m systems, in designing
operator work places and problems of industrial hygiene. Evaluation of
individual psychological human traits is used in the areas of vocational
screening and operator training.

85

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Physiological paraneters

Gauge of operator's current
functional state

   
  
 

 

Gauge of individual psycho-
logical properties and
potential capacities

 

of operator

 

i
Checking Industrial Applicant Operator
operator hygiene screening training

reliability

 

The main stages in solving the problem of practical use of PI in HM systems
are: elaboration of an engineering psychological criterion (for example, pro-
bability of operator error, probability of worsening of health, degree of
change in functional state, etc.) characterizing the practical problem to be
solved, which is a function of the neasured physiological parameters; deter-
nination of the most informative set of PP; development of a formalized
nethod for evaluating the selected criterion in the function of measured PP.

Our objective here was to discuss a range of questions related with the first
and third of the above stages. We intend to provide a systenatized survey

of practical tasks, for the performance of which PI are used, determine the
main criteria specific to these tasks, shed light on approaches to develop-
ment of fornaliaed methods of using PI in current use, as well as to show

the way to further refine these methods.

We shall not discuss here questions related to investigation of the informa-
tiveness of different PP. This is a problem of great independent importance
and requires special consideration. One can find the nest complete biblio-
graphy on this subject in [7, 9, 60, 73, 78, 80].

1. Areas of Use of P1 in Han-Machine Systens

At the present tine, the task of developing reliable and refined nethoda of
using PI for practical purposes is at its first stage. However, there have
been very nany studies directed at developnent of such nethods. Analysis of
this research enables us to single out the main pronising areas and aspects
of using PI.
Problems of this class are referable, first of all, to systems, in which emer-
gency situations are possible due to partial or total loss of operator work
capacity. These tasks are inherent in, for example, such sectors as cosmo-
nautics, aviation, railroad and motor vehicle transport.

Several works have dealt with general formulation of the problem of using P1 to
evaluate reliability and efficiency of operator performance [10, 18, 32. 50. S9,
98, 68, 81. 105]. There, stress is placed on demonstration of relationships
between changes in PP and decreased operator work capacity [50, 68], determina-
tion of permissible range of changes in parameters of physiological systems [10.
18], feasibility of forecasting operator states [59, 10, 96] and several other
problems.

One usually makes a distinction in the problem of enhancing operator reliability
between such tasks as preliminary checking of operator readiness [qualifica-
tions?) for a given job [65, 85], ongoing monitoring of the operator's functional
state, which changes under the influence of working and ambient conditions, in-
cluding extreme factors [66, 75, 78, 115]; implementation of prognostic checks

of operator work capacity so that preventive and protective steps can be
promptly instituted [10. 01, 71, 89].

Among the most constructive steps referable to monitoring operator reliability,
we can list differentiation between active waking and drowsy states according
to electroencephalograph (EEG) parameters [2, 25) and galvanic skin response
(GSR) [46, 113], assessment of degree of fatigue according to a set of para-
meters, including the EEG, EH6 (electromyogram) and GSRI821.assessment of
fatigue according to statistical characteristics of cardiac rhythm [13, 53. 77],
forecasting a comatose state according to changes in shape of pulse wave [Sh],
differentiation between rest and activity according to cardiac rhythm [8] and

a number of others.

2. Evaluation of Professional Aptitude of Operators

Problems of this type are most often solved as they apply to screening special-
ists in such important occupations as pilots, railroad engineers, operators

of complex technological systems, etc. Paychophysiological studies are pur-
sued in order to screen applicants that meet specific requirements for a given
type of work [3, 12, 33, 65]. Use of physiological information in such tasks
is validated. first of all, by the fact that there is a correlation between PP
and a number of human psychological traits that are significant from the
standpoint of professional aptitude [suitability]. Thus, we can mention such
experimental data as presence of correlation between level of intelligence

and frequency range of evoked potentials [101], between level of vestibular
stability and parameters of base tonus of the autonomic nervous system [6],
between EH6 changes during performance of perceptual tasks dealing with dis-
crimination and psychological ratings on the Eysenck scale [106], between
degree of depressiOn of alpha rhythm with a load and level of capacities [102],
etc. The existence of such correlations makes it possible to use PP in
classifying subjects into groups according to type of nervous system and type
of physiological reactions [6, 15, 52, 76, 90, 92, 116, 122], as well as

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f‘M \II'I'0\ 0A0. not, Ul‘lol

for assessment of the following: subjects' resistance to extreme factors, for
example, vibration, accelerations, orthostatic load, exercise [6, 56, 79],
level of mental [101, 102, 103, 119] and operating [93, 106] capacities,
suggestibility [69], degree of conditioning [11, 99], etc.

In addition to the above aspects of using physiological information in the
area of professional aptitude, w- can mention another special area of applica-
tion [37]. It is known that test study procedures are used extensively in
problems of professional screening, which are aimed at demonstrating traits
that are professionally important, such as stability and ability to switch
attention, operative memory, senaorimotor coordination and a number of others.
Measurement of PP which are, in turn, a reflection of an operator's functional
state, could be aimed at refining testing methods. Information about such
aspects of functional state as degree of operating and emotional tension,
degree of fatigue, could be useful in conducting tests in the aspects described
below.

The existing methods of assessing testing results (usually problem solving
time and number of errors) are rather poor. Information about the subject's
state, particularly about his operating tension, could serve as an additional
assessment of quality of performance of a given test and, consequently, as an
additional evaluation of the tested psychophysiological property. As a result,
there is better reliability of testing as a whole, and it also becomes
possible to have a more differentiated gradation of the evaluation.

The ratings used in testing are related not only to the tested psychophysiolo—
gical property but, to some degree, the subject's functional state (emotional
excitement, fatigue). Information about this state can be used to either
control the testing process (control of testing may consist of taking steps

to diminish emotional excitement, stopping the test if there is an inadmissible
degree of fatigue, etc.) or to correct testing grades.

The above aspects of using information about the functional state of operators
require, in most cases, both qualitative and quantitative evaluation of such
states.

3. Operator Training

At the present time, physiological information is used relatively little in
tasks of this type. However, it is stressed in a number of works that use

of such information is important [22, 65, S9, 63, 70, 72, 84, 96]. Mention
is made of such purposes for its use as investigation of the learning process
and development of its bases [59, 72, 70, 84], forecasting quality of
training [22, 63], development of training equipment [59], etc.

This aspect of using PP is based on the relationship between degree of operator
training and degree of his tension, which emerges as a sort of "physiological
payment" for the work results achieved. Many studies [70, 100, 110, 121] are
aimed at studying the relationships between PP and difficulty of an assignment.
Work difficulq isdetermined by either objective indicators of difficulty of

an assignment [57, 121] or duration of training to perform a given job [70].

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The results of such studies can be used directly in operator training, both
to work out criteria of training and to refine training systems.

In addition, in training problems, information about the operator's functional
state can emerge as one of the criteria of causes of nonachievement in the
learning process. Excitement, stress, fatigue, weak activity, etc., may be
such causes. Depending on the demonstrated cause, one can add some stimulat-
ing factors to the training system (incentives, assurance, etc.) in the form
of appropriate instructions to the trainee. It is believed that the use of
physiological information is particularly promising in development of
automated teaching systems.

6. Industrial Hygiene

Problems of this type are aimed at assessing the psychophysiological expendi-
tures of workers in different occupations for=the-perpose of scientific organi-
zation of labor and providing conditions that conform to public health
requirements [43, 51].

Studies aimed at solving this problem are pursued during actual work and

deal most often with such specialists as pilots [39, 00, 68, 123], air traffic
controllers [115, 116], railroad dispatchers [6h], computer center workers
[17, 77], motor vehicle drivers [16], mine workers [13], etc. Most often,
the objective of these studies is to assess man's physiological reactions

in the presence of neuroemotional tension [39, #0], stress occurring in
emergency situations [#8, 115], physical loads [11, 35, 95] and fatigue [13,
16, 77, 82]. Several studies have been made of the effects of such working
conditions as monotony [82], holding a strained position for a long time [49],
and studies are also made of the dynamics of the state in the course of a
work day and week [17]. Many works deal with assessment of the effects of
extreme environmental factors, particularly spaceflight factors, on changes

in operator PP [9, 18, 78, 89]. The results of the above-mentioned studies
can be used directly to form criteria characterising the effects of work
factors on operators' health status.

5. Designing the Operator's Work Place

The problem of using physiological information in problems of operator work
place design was raised in several works [5, 21, 36, 67, 72, 118, 126].

In such problems, measurement of physiological parameters permits determina-
tion of the relationship between quality of equipment and psychophysiological
input required to perform a given job. He can nention a number of studies
dealing with consideration of PI in elaborating criteria of quality of
information display systems [1, 38, 67], selecting optimum configuration of
operator chairs [126], evaluating difficulty in driving motor vehicles

with different types of transaissions [118], etc.

There are two main aspects to the practical use of PI in designing problems.
In the first place, this information permits direct assessment of designed
systems from the standpoint of meeting industrial hygiene requirements and,
in the second place, it can serve as an indirect indicator of reliability of
operator performance. Both factors determine to a substantial degree the
quality of the proposed operator work place.

89

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE10NLY
ms OPNCIAL USO. ONLY

Evaluation of a proposed system according to the criterion of reliability of
"purntor performance is based on the correlation between psychophysiologicsl
Input oi the operator and difficulty of his work. By estimating the operator's
psychophyeiological input [expenditure] (on the basis of measurement of PP).
one can predict the probability of errors and thereby assess the proposed
system. There are several works [57, 70] that deal with evaluation of PP

as a function of difficulty of an assignment. These results can be used
directly to form criteria characterizing the quality of a proposed system.

By virtue of the prognostic nature of this information, use of P1 in this
aspect is particularly promising with respect to reducing the time of field
[on the job} trials of newly designed systems.

11. Methods of Formalizing PI Evaluations

At the present time, most studies in the area of using P1 are chiefly pursued
to gain knowledge, and they are directed at demonstration of various physiolo-
gical parameters as functions (G0 of some objective indicators or other,

which emerge as engineering psychological criteria (H) specific to a given
study. This is a so-called "direct" problem whose purpose is to find the
functions:

0.-F.(W). 1—1. 2,. . .. n. ' u)

where n is the number of physiological parameters.

The results of solving this type of problem are reflected in many works [26,
60, 73, 80. 82, 66].

However, to make practical use of PI, one must solve the "opposite" problem,
whose purpose is to construct a solving rule that permits evaluation of the
adopted criterion H as a function of a set of measured PP:

W-‘P (0.. 0.. . . . . 0.). - (2)

The solutions of these "direct“ and "opposite" problems do not ensue directly
from one another, due to the heterogeneity of changes in each PP individually
as a function of the given criteria and influence of many factors on the nature
of these functions. Although most current works deal with investigation of

the "direct" problem, it is still far from having been completely solved.

There are appreciably fewer studies dealing with the "opposite" problem, and
its solution is still far from complete. In this part of our work, our
purpose was to discuss the existing approaches to solving the "opposite"
problem.

Hethodologically, construction of function (2) anounts to proceeding through
the following main stages: elaboration of criterion H in terms of the
meaningful substance of the practical task to be performed; determination of
the aggregate of informative physiological parameters; choice of software that
would permit construction of the solving rule to assess the adopted criterion
as a function of measured PP.

90

IN)! OFFICIALIJSIICH‘LY
ﬁnl1ﬂFFICIAI.lﬂil(N‘LY

Let us consider the specifics of these stages in greater detail.

The above survey of practical problems, for the solution of which PI is used.
enables us to single out the following main groups of specialised criteria:
criteria characterizing operator work capacity in a specified type of work
expressed in terms of results of such work. Use of these criteria is made
primarily in the area of improving reliability and efficiency of ROI systems
and design thereof; criteria characterizing the concrete psychological

traits of the operator (for example, type of nervous system, intelligence,
suggestibility, etc.) expressed in terms of the corresponding psychological
properties. Such criteria are used in professional screening and training;
criteria that characterize the effects of working and ambient conditions on
health. These criteria are used in problems of industrial hygiene,

designing HM systems, as well as problems of improving reliability of HM systems.

Apparently, within each of these groups there can be quite a few narrowly
specialized criteria determined by the specifics of a concrete practical task.
In order to obtain maximum accuracy in solving this problem, it is desirable to
form as many specialized criteria as possible. However, such an "individual"
approach is justified only for particularly important practical tasks. To

make broader use of PI, it is desirable to form a perhaps less accurate but

more general criterion, which could be used in various practical problems. The
functional state of the operator could serve as such a criterion, for example.
degree of fatigue, emotional or operating tension, activation, etc. However,
the absence of a strict, formal definition of the concept of "functional state,"
for which reason it is necessary to select several objective indicators, in

the terms of which this concept can be expressed. is a considerable difficulty in
the path of forming such a criterion.

Let us consider the existing approaches to methods of specifying the functional
state of an operator, which are used in experimental research. here, we can
single out two main directions. The first one involves specification of
functional state by means of organizing the experiment. Thus, most often the
subject's functional state is given by such procedures as use of emotiogenic
stimuli [16, 20, 62, 86, 87, 111], presenting tasks eliciting mental or
operating tension [6, 19, 30, 58, 73, 100, 106, 116, 120), use of interference
while performing a specified job [57], giving physical loads [11, 91], etc.

In such experiments, the functional state is controlled, for example, by
changing the difficulty of problems or operations, changing the noise level,
setting time limits, etc. Occasionally, such artificial methods as dramatic

["actor"] simulation [73], hypnosis [31, 73] and pharmacological agents [88] are
used to produce the appropriate functional state.

The above methods of producing a functional state are referable to model ex-
periments. In addition, experiments are performed rather frequently under
real working conditions [16, 64, 115, 107, 117]. In this case, the nature
and level of functional state are determined by such factors as work time,
presence of emotional factors (passing tests, complicated situation) and a
number of others.

with the second approach to means of setting the functional state, indicators
of results of performance are used as a criterion thereof [29, 53, 68, 93, 100].
During the experiment. the subject performs a certain work (for example,

91

IKIRIHWHCIAI.U8£1MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

working at a bench, solving test problems, etc.). the results of which are evalu-
ated by several objective indicators (number of errors. solving time, etc.).
Determination is made of the measured PP as a function of objective indicators

of achievement. The latter emerge as a criterion of the subject's functional
state.

As for the choice of a set of informative tags, the physiological signs known
to date can be divided into the following groups: parametric signs, for example.
pulse rate as a correlate of mental tension [73, 60, 20], amplitude of EKG
waves as a correlate of mental work [19], arterial pressure as a correlate of
operating tension [57, 72], etc.; signs determined by the degree of correlation
either between different derivations of physiological signals, for example,
change in degree of correlation between bioelectric potentials of different
parts of the cerebral cortex during mental work [58], or between different types
of physiological signals such as, for example, change in correlations between
EKG parameters, pressure and pulse in the presence of fatigue [16]; signs that
are determined by the statistical parameters of physiological processes, such
as change in spectral and correlation characteristics of R-R intervals of the
EKG in the presence of fatigue [13, 10, 53, 77], change in mean asymmetry of
duration of phases of alpha rhythm in the presence of a mental load, fatigue
and sleepiness [2, 25], etc.

The choice of basic set of signs to construct function (2) is usually made

on the basis of prevailing conceptions of informativeness of certain PP 1r
other. as well as the researcher's available technical resources. There is
often the problem of minimizing the sign space on the basis of using correlation
or factor analysis. The effectiveness of these methods in reducing the number
of seasured signs is reflected in a nulber of works [3, 97, 109, 112, 67]. For
exasple, data are furnished that were obtained on the basis of the method of
main components to reduce the number of informative tags (BEG parameters)
characterizing different types of rest, ranging from several tens to several
units [97, 112]. Factor analysis on the basis of examining the time series of
R-R intervals of the EKG revealed one informative tag that characterizes pilot
tension during flights [67].

The next stage following the choice of the initial set of informative tags

is to construct the solving rule to assess the adopted criterion as a func-
tion of measured PP. For this purpose, two mathematical approaches are being
used: pattern recognition method and regression analysis method. The main
distinction of these methods is that the use of recognition actually solves

the problem of qualitative evaluation of the criterion under strdy (most

often, determination of its alternate class, for example, sleep-~wakefu1ness,
cxcitement--rest, etc.), whereas with the regression model a quantitative
evaluation of this criterion is made on a continuous scale, calibrated in terms
of the corresponding objective parameters.

In the area under discussion, the pattern recognition method has the most
application, and this is due primarily to the fact that it is less difficult to
construct a classification algorithm. As a rule. the recognition method is
used to assess the current state of an operator [26, 28, 36, 55, 61, 83, 112]
and in professional screening [23, 2b, 69, 79]. In most cases, recognition

92

FOI‘OFHKJAI.USE(NNLY
involves two alternatives. to the first of the above tasks, distinction is
made between such states as rest and activity [83], normal and comatose state
[54], wakefulness and sleepiness [26], rest [calm] and emotional excitement
[20, 61]. In the area of applicant screening, a distinction is made between
"good" and "bad" operators [24], those with and without aptitude for learning
[23], resistant and nonresistant to suggestion [69], etc. In a number of
works, a more difficult problem is solved, namely, recognition involving
multiple alternatives [112, 28]. For example, there is examination of the
possibility of distinguishing between such states as activity, operative
rest, drowsiness, sleep [28]. As a rule, the classification algorithm is
constructed by the method of learning with a "teacher." Here, the following
two methods of presenting the teaching sample are used. With the first one,
the teaching sample is formed by means of obvious specification of identified
classes, for example, specifying such states as sleep, drowsiness, rest, or
certain types of subjects. Not infrequently, ancillary criteria are also
used, which characterize the relevant classes.

with the second method, there is indirect presentation of the teaching sample,
which is based on the method of setting up the experiment. Thus, various types
of mental activity [26], various types of emotionally significant factors [61],
various psychological tests [83], etc., are given by means of experimental
conditions. In this case, the specific difficulty of the studies is that the
teaching sample is not precisely specified. For example, giving emotionally
significant factors cannot always unequivocally determine the subject's
emotional reaction. This makes it necessary to increase substantially the

size of the teaching sample to assure statistically reliable results.

When constructing the solving rule for recognition of psychophysiological
states and operator traits, the basis is quite often referable to experimental
data on the properties of the used tags. Most often, one uses the procedure
of successive analysis of probabilities that a given tag belongs to a given
class [24, 26-28, 69]. This classification method is the most suitable in
cases where the recognition process implies the use of additional tag analysis
as the diagnostic solution is obtained. This usually occurs in problems of
professional screening or identification of developing states, such as sleepi-
ness, fatigue, etc. For example, successive analysis is used [26] to make

a distinction between waking and sleepy states on the basis of the parameter
that is defined by the mean asymmetry of duration of phases of EEG alpha
rhythm. Elsewhere [24], determination was made of whether operators belong

to a known good or bad class on the basis of results of psychological tests
and physiological reactions. In [69], specialists were screened, who must
make important decisions, according to suggestibilitytntthe basis of measurement
of a set of EKG parameters.

In several other works [20, 76, 83], a linear discriminant function, the

value of which characterizes the degree to which an object with given value of
tags belongs to the relevant class, is used for classification of states under
study. For example, this method was used to distinguish between rest and
emotional tension due to anticipation of an impact load, on the basis of a

set of signs such as pulse rate and arterial pressure [20]. A classification
algorithm was constructed [83] for the states of calm wakefulness and tensiOu
due to performance of test assignemnts, on the basis of measuring the spectral
characteristics of the EKG.

93

FORIMHWCLALllﬂEONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

llnis method 01 clalsslllcut ion is the most effectiVe when there is normal
distribution of the tags used.

Use of multiple regression analysis is another approach to formalised evalua-
tion of engineering psychological criteria as a function of measured PP [6,
108. 22, 52, 62, 65, 79, 89, 118]. As we have already mentioned, unlike
recognition methods. in this case it is a problem of quantitative, rather than
qualitative, evaluation. This makes it necessary to use appropriate metrics
("scales") characterizing the adopted criterion in given units of measurement.
The appropriate scales are usually formed with consideration of the specific
function of the practical task. For example, we can mention studies dealing
with evaluation of vestibular Stability of subjects [6, 79], forecasting
operative work capacity [52], evaluation of quality of flight training [22,
62], etc. In all cases, the problem of forming the appropriate scale amounts
to experimental determination of the set of measured PP as a function (2) of
the adopted H criterion. For example, flight achievement expressed as a
grade [22], quality of performance in units of precision and time character-
istics [52], etc., are used as H criteria.

The method of forming function (2) consists of two successive stages: choice

of structure of equation accurate to a certain number of unknown coefficients
and estimation of these coefficients on the basis of available experimental
data. Selection of the structure of a regression equation,ia generally limited
to construction of linear models of both the unknown coefficients and measured
parameters Oi. Calculation of the sought criterion is made in the following
form:

W-6.+i5.'ib.+r.o.+ . . . +s,o.'._ ' (3)

where b., bi (i = l, ..., n) are estimates of coefficients of the regression
equation. These coefficients are determined at the stage of "teaching" the
model, in the course of which the values of criterion H- are given (or
measured) and the corresponding values of 0i are measurid. It is assumed that
these values are related in equations of the following type:

W,—b,+ 25.0“”, i—i.2....,N. (a)

where jSs the value of the criterion in the jth experiment; Oi’d is the

value of the ith parameter in the jth experiment; ¢' is a random centered func-
tion which is independent of "J and determined by t e influence of unknown
factors on the measurement process; N is the number of equations.

Estimation of unknown coefficients bi is made by means of the least squares
method. The influence of interference is suppressed due to redundancy of
the system of experimental cases ["observations"] (N>n).

The effectiveness of using regression models depends largely on the adequacy of
conditions of the "teaching" experiment to actual conditions, for which the

96

FOI4DFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
scale is being formed. Consequently, the task of providing cantor-it, vs
"teaching" and "examination" [test] conditions is of first and foremost im-
portance. Although there are few works dealing with construction of regression
models, it is evident that this direction is promising from the positive re-
sults of a number of studies [22. 52].

III. Means of Further Developnent of Hethods for Porsuliaed Use of
Physiological Information

There are mainly two reasons for the difficulty in using Pl to solve practical
problems. The first is attributable to the complexity of physiological signals
notable for such properties as time variability, similarity of reactions to
different factors, poor differentiation with regard to different states of the
body and very marked individuality. The second reason that sakes it quite
difficult for practical use of PI is the wide diversity of engineering psycho-
logical criteria (EPC), that are specific to each concrete form of activity.
Since it is inexpedient to elaborate formalised methods of using PI

separately for each type of activity, it is necessary to form a rather

general [universal] EPc that is suitable for solving many practical problems.

In this part of our work, we shall discuss one of the possible approaches
to solving such problems.

As we have already stated, the most general EPC is evaluation of the operator's
functional state. However, the absence of a formal definition of this concept
makes it necessary to choose certain objective parameters, in the terms of
which it can be measured. In a rather general case, one can select the
indicators of operator achievement as such objective parameters. However,

the difficulty then arises that the parameters of performance are just as
diverse as the types of activity themselves. For this reason, such parameters
must be selected in a rather abstract form.

In view of the foregoing, we propose the following approach to creation of a
quantitative evaluation ("scale") of functional state on the example of
developing the scale of operating tension.

1. A certain set of "standard" problems is selected, each of which is charac-
terized by the specificity of psychophysiological input to solve them. These
may be problems that are related. for exaaple, to intellectual or sensorimotor
activity, etc. Each of these standard problems is used to form the scale of
tension inherent in the corresponding type of activity (intellectual, sensori-
motor, etc.).

One nust take into cunsideration the following requirements in selecting a
standard problem [or task].

The standard problem must have objective parameters of results of solving
it. This may be either parameters of solution quality (number of errors,

solving time, etc.) or objective indicators of difficulty of solution (level
of interference, limited time, etc.).

95

FOR'OFFNJAI.USE(M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Variation of conditions of presentation of the standard problem (for example,
variation of pace or duration of presentation, interference level, etc.)

should lead to a change in difficulty of solving it, which causes a change in
tension.

2. A certain set of physiological parameters is selected, which emerge as
informative signs of operating tension. The scale of functional states is
formed as physiological parameters as a statistical function of quantitative
indicators of results of solving the standard problem.

3. Evaluation of an operator's functional state under real conditions, which
is done by measuring his physiological parameters, is made in terms of
indicators of achievement in solving the relevant standard problem. For

each concrete, real activity a set of standard problems is chosen which
corresponds the closest to the job with regard to nature of psychophysiological
input required.

The method of constructing a functional state scale consists of the following.
A standard problem and method of varying operating tension during solution
thereof are selected. For example, tension can be varied by introducing
different levels of interference, time limits, modifying the standard problem,
etc. This method of varying operating tension is based on the assumption that
an operator can sustain the quality of standard problem solving on a constant
and rather high level with change in objective difficulty of this problem due
to a corresponding increase in tension.

The statistical relationship between the measured PP and objective indicators
of difficulty of solving the problem, which are set by the experimental
conditions, is determined experimentally for a rather large group of subjects
in the course of solving the standard problem. The difficulty of the assignment
for each subject is varied in the range of minimum difficulty to a certain
critical difficulty, with which accuracy of performance exceeds the permissible
range. The objective indicator of problem difficulty corresponding to the
critical value is taken as 1001 tension, while the corresponding values of
physiological parameters expressed in relative amounts of background values

are taken as the cut-off values on the formed scale. Thus, as a result of
experimenting with each subject, we obtain his physiological parameters as

a function of problem difficulty, which is expressed as a percentage of
critical difficulty.

This experiment is conducted on a rather large group of subjects, and the
individual results are appropriately averaged for the entire group.

The function obtained by the above method is used as the scale of operating
tension for a given type of activity. It should be noted that the resolution
of this scale depends on the degree of certainty of the obtained function.
Degree of certainty refers to the correlation between the full range of

changes in the measured parameters caused by change in problem difficulty and
random (including those determined by individual distinctions) variations of
the same parameters, that are unrelated to the work load. In some cases, it is
expedient to construct the scale and use it on a rather homogeneous group of
operators to increase its conclusiveness l"definiteness"].

96

FOI‘OFENJAI.USE(MVLY
1.

2‘

3.

(Ga

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

Adrianova, V. Ye., "Man's Performance in Control Systems," Leningrad,
lad. ICU [Leningrad State University], 1976.

Artem'yeva, Ye. Yu. and Khomskays, Ye. D., "Changes in Asymmetry of EEG
Haves in Different Functional States Under Normal Conditions," VOPROSY
PSIKHOLOGII, No 3, 1966, pp 75-84.

Akhutin, V. M., "Bionic Aspects of Synthesis of Bioengineering Systems.
Informational Material." KIDBRNBTIKA, Moscow, Sovetekoye radio, 4(92),

Akhutin, V. M., Zingerman, A. M., Kislitsyn, M. M. and Menitskiy. D. N.,
"Conbined Evaluation of Operator's functional State in Control Systems,"
in “Problemy kosaicheekoy biologii" [Problems of Space Biology}. Moscow.
Nauka, Vol 34. 1977. pp 234-265.

Ageykin. D. I., Galaktionov, A. I. and Fatkin, L. V., "Main Directions

of Research in Engineering Psychology," PRIBORY I SYSTEMY UPRAVLENIIA.
No 10, 1967, pp 58-61.

Bayevskiy, R. M., Kudryavtssva, V. 1., Nikulina, G. A., Polyakov, B. 1..
Senenova, T. D., Tazegdinov, I. 6., Puntova, I. 1., Sokolov, Ye. 1.,
Savvin, A. 3., Pyatakovich, F. A. and Tarko, A. M., "Experimental Study
of Possibility of Predicting Human Reactions to Some Extreme Pactors and
Functional Loads," in "Vaprosy kibernetiki" [Problems of Cybernetics],
Moscow, Izd. Nauch. soveta po komplekanoy problems "Kibernetika" AN
SSSR [Published by the Scientific Council for the Complex Problem of
Cybernetics, USSR Academy of Sciences], Vyp 22, 1976, pp 38-53.

Bayevskiy, R. M., "Physiological Methods in Cosmonautics," Moscow, Nauka,
1965.

Bayevskiy, R. M. and Kalantar, V . A., "System for Automatic Processing
of Csrdiological Information Based on MIX-1 Hybrid Computer Conplex,"
Ibid, pp 19-37.

Dayevskiy, R. M., "Physiological Measurements in Space and the Problem
of Automation Thereof." Moscow, Nauka, 1970.

Idem, "Problen of Forecasting Man's Condition During Long-Term Space
F1ights," PIZIOLOGICHBSKIY ZHURNAL SSSR 1M. 1. H. SBCHENOVA, No 6,
1972, pp 20-28.

Beletskiy, lu. V.. “Cybernetic Methods for Analysis of Information in
Evaluating Man's Circulation During Exercise," in "Voprosy kibernetiki,"

Moscow, Izd. Nauch. soveta po kompleksnoy problems "Kibernetika" AN SSSR,
Vyp 22, 1976, pp 56-66.

97

FOI<0FF1CJAl.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bodrov, V. A. and Marishchuk, V. L.. "Psychophysiological Screening and
Operator Specialist Training," in "Problemy inshenernoy paikhologii"
[Problems of Engineering Psychology], Leningrad, Izd. Nauch. soveta po
kompleksnoy prohleme "libernetika" AN SSSR, Vyp 1, Pt 2, 1968, pp 312-320.

Brocyagin, N. A., "Spectral Analysis of Heart Rhythm in Evaluation of
Effects of Dork Load on Some Categories of Mine workers," in "Voprosy
kibernetiki," Moscow, de. Nauch. soveta po kompleksnoy problame
"Kibernetika" AN SSSR, Vyp 22, 1976. pp 80-83.

Vasil'yev. I. A., "Indicators of Emotional States," in "Psikhologicheskiye
issledovaniya" [Psychological Research], Moscow, 12d. MGU [Moscow State
University], Vyp lo. 1973, pp 35-40.

Vssilevskiy, N. N., "Electroencephalographic Testing of Operators,"
in "Problemy koamicheskoy biologii," Moscow. Nauka, Vol 36, 1977,
pp 224-236.

Vaysman, A. I. and Breydo, M. D., "Distinctions in Regulation of
Physiological Functions in the Presence of Fatigue," in "Biologicheskaya

i meditainskaya kibernetiks" [Biological and Medical Cybernetics], Moscow-
Leningrad, Izd. Nauch. soveta po kompleksnoy problems "Kibernetika" AN
SSSR, Pt 2, 1974, pp 27-28.

Volkovs, I. M., "Effect of Mental Tension on Function of Central Nervous
and Cardiovascular Systems," in"Fisiologiya truds" [Industrial Physiology],
Moscow, lzd. NII gigiyeny truda i profsabolevaniy [Publishing House of
Scientific Research Institute of Industrial Bygiene and Occupational
Diseases], 1973. pp 7b-76.

Volkov, A. A.. ZaV'yalov, Ye. S. and Kuznetaov, V. 6., "The Question of
Operator Reliability in Control Systems During Exposure to Some
Spaceflight Factors," in “Problemy inzhenernoy psikhologii," Moscow, Itd.
Nauch. soveta po kompleksnoy problems "Kibernetika" AN SSSR, Vyp 1, Pt 2,
1968. pp 272-276.

Volkov, A. M., "Primary Systemic Reaction to Physical and Mental Hork
in Experimental Studies," in "Fiaiologiya truda," Izd. NII gigiyeny truda
i profzabolevaniy, Moscow, 1973, pp 73-7‘.

Voskresenskiy, A. 0., Elivanov, V. A. and Andriyako. L. Ya., "Assessment
of Emotional Tension According to Set of Parameters of the Cardiovascular
System," in "Problemy inahenernoy psikhologii i ergonomiki" [Problems of
Engineering Psychology and Ergonomics], Yaroslavl', Izd. Yaroslavsk. gos.
un-ta [Yaroslavl' State Universityl.Vyp 3, 197k, pp 65-67.

Galaktionov, A. I.. "Fundaaentals of Engineering Psychological Design of
Automated Control Systems for Technological Processes," Moscow. Energiya,
1978.

Gerber, Ye. I. and Krasnitskiy. V. 8., "Use of Multidimensional Regression
Analysis for Predicting Quality of Flight Training," in "Vychislitsl'naya
iekhnika v fiziologii i meditaine" [Computer Technology in Physiology and
Medicine], Moscow. Nauks, 1968. pp 172-176.

98
FOI‘OFFNJALIEHEONLY
23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

3b.

Gerber, Ye. I. and Krasnitakiy, V. 8.. "Use of Oouputers for Deter-ination
of Professional Aptitude," in "Avtonatisatsiya. organizatsiya. diagnostika“

[Auto-ation, Organization and Diagnostics], Moscow, Nauka. Pt 2, 1971,
pp 719-722.

Genkin, A. A. and Bodrov. V. A., "Use of One Statistical Algorithn of
Separation of Input Situations Into Classes for Determination of
Professional Aptitude," VOPROSY PSIKHDIDGII, No 1, 1967. pp 92-105.

Genkin, A. A. and Zarakovekiy, G. K" "Autoaation of Diagnosing Functional
States According to no Date." in "Prone-y inshenernoy paikhologii,”
Leningrad, Izd. LOU. Vyp b, 1968, pp 190-206.

Genkin, A. A. and Hedvedev, V. 1., "Forecasting Psychophysiological
States," Leningrad, Nauka, 1973.

Genkin. A. A. and Gubler. Ye. ~V., "Application of Successive' Statistical
Analysis for Diagnostic Purposes and Use of This liethod.” in "Priseneniye
aatesaticheskikh netodov v biologii" [Application of Mathematical Methods
in Biology], Leningrad. Isd. LGU, Vyp 3. 1966, pp 1710-185.

Genes. V. 8.. "One Approach to Combined Evaluation of Electroencephalograas
and electrocardiograas," in "Statisticheskaya elektrofisiologiya"
[Statistical Electrophysiology], Vilnius, Ird. Vil'nyussk. gos. un-ta
[Vilnius State University], Pt 2, 1968, pp 110-125.

Gordon. A. V. and Reutova. A. It. "Evaluation of Intensity of Operator

Work in a Tracking System According to Parameters Characterizing Him

as an Element in the Control System." in "Probleay inxhenernoy psikhologii."
ﬂoscov, Ird. Nsuch. soveta po konpleksnoy problue "Kibernetika" AN SSSR,
Vyp 1, Pt 2, 1968. pp 328-368.

Gorbunov, V. V.. Sirotskiy, V. V. and Hakareako, N. V.. "Changes in the
Km of Man During Brief Mental Bork," 2E1. VYSSIIBY NERVNOY DBYATEL'NOSTI m.
“mow, Vol 28. No 1, 1978. pp 41-47.

Grink. L. P., "Simlation of Human States in Hypnosis," Moscow, Nauka. 1978.

Gurovekiy. N. IL, editor. "Essays on Psychophysiology of Cos-onaut Hark,"
Moscow. Neditsina. 1967.

Gurevich, K. H. and Hatveyev. V. P., "Professional Aptitude of Operators
and Methods of Detersination Thereof ." in "Voprosy professional'noy
prigodnosti operatornogo personals energosisten" [Problems of
Professional Aptitude of Operator Personnel of Power Systena]. Moscow,
Proaveshcheniye, 1966, pp 3-96.

Gushchin, Yu. F., Dubrovekiy, V. Ya. and Shchedrovitskiy, L. P.. "Problem
of Considering Huaan Factors in Design," in "Psikhologicheskiye
iasledovaniya, Moscow, Izd. nan, Vyp 2, 1970, pp 13-25.

99

FOR .OFFICIAI. USE ONLY
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

100.

41.

42.

’03.

Mo.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gumener. P. N., Sukharev, A. 6., Osipovs, M. S. and Daybikova, L. 8.,
"Methodological Aspects of Individual Evaluation of Regulation of
Respiratory Function During Different Intensities of Exercise," in
"Metody biokiberneticbeskogo analiza funktsional'.nogo sostoyaniya
sportsmenov-podrostkov" [Methods of Biocybernetic Analysis of Functional
State of Adolescent Athletes], Moscow, Izd. In-ts gigiyeny detey i
podrostkov [Institute of Child and Adolescent Hygiene], 1977. pp 87-96.

Dadashev. ll. S. and Murashov, Ye. 11., "Feasibility of Solving Problems
of Diagnosing the Functional State of Man with Comuters," in "Siste-s
'chelovek--avtomat'” [Man-Machine Systems], Moscow, Nauka, 1965.

pp 94-111.

Desova, A. A., "Use of Physiological Information in Problems of

Evaluating Professional Aptitude of Operators," in "Voprosy kibernetiki.
Avtonatizatsiya protsessov issledovaniya i proyektirovaniya
cheloveko-mashinnykh sisten" [Problem of Cybernetics. Automation of
Processes of Studying and Designing Man-Machine Systems], Moscow, Izd.
Nauch. soveta po konpleksnoy probleme "Kibernetika" AN SSSR, 1980, pp 69-76.

Idem, "Use of Physiological Parameters to Assess Quality of Information
Displaying Systems," in "Matody i sredstva issledovaniya ch'eloveko-
mashinnykh sisten" [Hays and Means of Studying Man-Machine Systems],
Moscow, Isd. Institute problem upravleniya [Institute of Control
Problems]. No 21, 1980, pp 25-30.

Derevyanko. Ye. A. and Zavalova. h. D., "Psychophysiological Characteristics of
Pilot Perfornance in Instrument Flying." in "Aviatsionnays i kosmicheskaya
meditsina" [Aviation and Space Medicine], Moscow. Isd. AM'M SSSR [USSR

Academy of Medical Sciences]. 1963, pp 157-158.

Yerokhin. V. P. and Ostrovskiy, V. P.. "Nature of Changes in lleart Rate
as Related to Different Levels of Inflight Nervous and Emotional Tension."

in"?1;plogiya truda," Moscow, 12d. NII gigiyeny truda i profzabolevsniy.
1973. pp 122-123.

Zagryadskiy, V. P. and Sulino-Samuylo, 2. K., "Investigative Methods in
Industrial Physiology." Leningrad. Nauka, 1976.

Zil'berman, P. 8., "Notional Stability of Operators." in "Ocherki
psikhologii truda operators" [Essays on Psychology of Operator Work],
Moscow. Mauka, 1976. pp 138-172.

Zinchenko, V.P.. Munipov, V. M. and Smolysn, G. I... "Ergonomic Bases
of Organization of Labor," Moscow, Bkonomika, 1974.

Isakov, P. K., "Evaluation of Reliability of Operator Performance by
Simulating Extreme Situations," in "Piziologiya truda," Moscow, 12d.
NII gigiyeny truds 5. profzabolevaniy, 1973. pp 155-156.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘5.

46.

67.

108.

(09.

51.

52.

53.

56.

55.

Ioeeliani, X. K., “Clinical and Psychological Studiee in ﬂedical
Certification of Pilots," author abetrect of dieeertation for ecientific

degree of doctor of aedical aciencee, Hoacov, Inetitute of Biomedical
Probleme, 1975.

Kandror, l. S. and Denim, 1). lb, "Principlea and Criteria for Phyeiolo-
gical C1eeeificatio.. of Bork According to Difficulty and lntenaity,"

.nzrowcm. cumru, Vol 4.. No 1, 1978, pp 136-148.

Kielitayn, H. H., "Studiea of Functional State of Pilote During
Plight Work by the Hethod of Kultidimeneional Statiatice," in "Voproey
kibernetiki,” Hoecov, Ird. Ranch. eovate po komplekenoy probleme
"Kibernetika" All 8883, Vyp 51. 1978, pp 161-168.

Kitayev-Smyk, L. A., Neumyvakin, I. P. and Ponomarenko, V. A., 'Methode
of Aaeeeeing the Paychophyaiological State of Pilote in Might Emergency
Situations," in ”Problemy inahenernoy peikhologii," Leningrad, lad.
Leningradak. done nauch.-tekhn. propagandy [Leningrad Center for
Diaae‘mination of Scientific and Technical Information], 1966, pp 61-62.

Koaeronko, 0. P.,'bynanica of Functional State of Operatora Maintaining
Strained Poaition for Long Perioda of Time," in "Prohleny inahenernoy
paikhologii," Hoacov, led. Ranch. eoveta po komplekanoy problem -
"Kibernatika" AN SSSR, Vyp 1. Pt 2, 1968, pp 277-283.

Kotik, H. I... "Self-Regulation and Reliability of Operatore," Tallin,
Valgue, 1974.

Koeilov, S. A., "Baeaye on Induetrial Physiology," Hoacow, Mediteina, 1965.

Krylov, Yu. V., Krylova, N. V. and mnachatur'yante, L. 5., "Generalized
Evolution of Performance Pith Simulation of Spaceflight Conditions,"
in "Brgaticheakiye eiatemy upravleniye" [Ergodic Control Syeteme], Kiev,
Naultova dumka, 1976, pp 28-33.

Kudryavtaeva, V. 1., "Poaeibility of Evaluating Operator work Capacity
According to Statietical Characteristica of Cardiac Rhythn," in
"Statieticheekaya elektrofiriologiya," Vilniua, 1rd. Vil'nyueek. goo.
un-ta. Pt 2. 1968. Pp 267-2“.

Kukuahkin. Ya. A., ”Measurement of Sphygnoarteriogra- Parametera in
Probleme of Automatic Recognition of Baaardoue Statea," in "Fiaicheekiye
metody i voproey metrologii biomeditainakikh imreniy. ﬂat. IV Veea.
seminars" [Phyaical Methode and Metrology of Biomedical ﬂeaeuremente.
Proceedings of loth All-Union Seminar], lioacou, led. Veee. nauch.-iaaled.
in-ta fiziko-tekhnicheekikh i radiotekhnicheakikh'ianereniy [All-Union

Scientific Research lnetitute of Phyeicotechnical and Radiotechnical
Heaaurenenta], 1976, pp 176-176.

Idem, "Evaluation of Spectral Compoaition of Sphygmographic Signele," ‘
Ibid, 2d All-Union Conference, 1972, pp 95-98.

101

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

66.

65.

FOI*OITWC1AL USEQDNLY

Levando, V. A., "Some Problems of Examination of Athletes' Vestibular
Systen From the Standpoint of Automatic Regulation Theory," in "Hetody
biokiberneticheskogo analiza funktsional'nogo sostoyaniys sportsnenov-
podrostkov." Moscow, 12d. Institute gigiyeny detey i podrostokov, 1977,
pp 97-118.

Leont'yev, A. N., Bangal'ter. R. 1.. Gordon. A. V., Leonova. 1. Ya.,
Nayenko, N. I., 0vchinnikova, 0. V. and Rautova. V. P., "Study of Operator
Tension During Tracking Hark," in "Problemy inzhenernoy psikhologii,”
Moscow, Izd. Nauch. aoveta po kompleksnoy problems "Kibernetika" AN SSSR,
Vyp 1. Pt 2, 1968, pp 306-311.

Livanov, H. N.. Gavrilova, N. A. and Aslanov, A. 5., "Reciprocal Correla-
tions Between Different Parts of the Human Brain During Mental Work.”

2H. VYSSHEY NBRVNOY DEYATEL'NOSTI IH. PAVLOVA, Vol 19, No 2. 196‘,

pp 185-194.

Lonov, B. P. and Prokhorov, A.I., "The Question of Monitoring the State
of Operators," Moscow, Nauka. 1965.

Luk'yanov, A. N. and Prolov, H. V., "Signals of Operator's State."
Moscow, Nauka. 1969.

Luk'yanov, A. N., Simonov, P. V., Temnikov, P. Ye. and Prolov, H. V.,
"Reliabilitycf Control and Physiology of Emotions," in "Voprosy bioniki"
[Problens of Bionics], Moscow, Nauka, 1967. pp 277-280.

Luk'yanova, N. F. and Voskresenskiy. A. 0.. "Correlation Between Pilot
Personality Traits and Different Levels of Professional Training," in
"Voprosy diagnostiki psikhicheshogo rszvitiya" [Problems of Determining
Mental Development], Tallin. lzd. Nauch. issl. in-ta pedagogihi
Estonskoy SSR [Scientific Research Institute of Pedagogics, Estonian $58].
1974, pp 104-105.

Luk'yanova, N. P. and Nalkin. V. 8., "Cambined (Electroencephalographic
and Individual Psychological, Personality) Evaluation of Aptitude for
Flight Training." in "Hetodika i apparatura dlya issledovaniya .
psikhofiziologicheskikh kharakteristik cheloveka-operatora" .[lethods and
Equipnent for Examining Psychophysiological Characteristics of Operators],
Moscow. Nauka, 1977, pp 50-56.

Natyushkov. V. F.. "Psychophysiologicsl Description of Tension in
Railroad Dispatchers." in "Problemy inzhenernoy paikhologii i ergononiki."
Yaroslsvl', 12d. Yaroslsvsk.goa.un-ta. Vyp 3, 1974, pp 85-88.

Heyeraon, A. M., 950me Possibilities of Optinizing the Results of Multi-
dimensional Correlation Anslysis in Psychological Studies," in

"Psikhologiys i mstematika" [Psychology and Mathematics], Moscow. Nauha.
1976, pp 172-189.

102

PIIICHﬂﬂCIAI.U8EZ(lVLY
66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

7b.

75.

76.

Medvedev. V. 1.. "Functional State of Operators." in "Brgononika
(printsipy i rekomendatsii)" [Ergonomics (Principles and Reconnendationsn,
Moscow, ltd. Vaes. nauch.-isa1. in-ta tekhnicheskoy estetiki [All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Esthetic Design in Engineerinsl. Vol 1,
1970, pp 127-160.

Dobrolenskiy, Yu. P., editor, ”Methods of Engineering Psychological
Studies in Aviation." Moscow, Meshinostroyeniye. 1975.

Mileryan, Ye. I... "Emotional and Cooative Elements of Operator Reliability,"

in "Ocherki psikhologii truda operatora," Moscow, Nauka. 1974. pp 5-82.

Mordvinov, Ye. P., "Forecasting Suggestibility in Making State," in
“Avtomatisatsiya. organisatsiya, diagnostika", Moscou, Nauka, Pt 2. 1971,
pp 562-565.

Myasnikov, V. I. and Mordovskaya. L. 6., "Formation of Sensoriaotor
Skills of Control and Checking Their Stability as a Factor in Improving
Operator Reliability in a Systems Engineering Complex," in "Problemy
kosmicheskoy biologii," Moscow, Ranks, Vol 34, 1977, pp 136-150.

Myasnikov, V. 1. and uekrasov, V. P.. "Use of Method of 'Standardised
Parameters' in Evaluation and Forecasting of Operator Work Capacity as
Related to Spaceflight Conditions," in "1x Simposium po kosmicheakoy
hiologii i meditsine" [9th Symposium on Space Biology and Medicine],
Budapest, Intercosmos. 1976, pp 71-72.

Nayenko. N. I. and Ovchinnikova, O.V., "Differentiation Between States of
Mental Tension," in "Psikhologicheskiye issledovaniya." Moscow, 1rd. MGU,
Vyp 2, 1970. pp 60-66.

Mayenko, N. 1., "Mental Tension," Moscow, lrd. M80, 1976.

Neroslavskiy, l. A., lotelov. 1.. V. and Naumkin, A. M.. "Use of Linear
Discriminant Analysis to Assess the State of Operators Exposed to

an Extreme Factor." in "Probleay sordaniya apparatury dlya meditsinskikh
laboratornykh issledovaniy" (Problems of Developing Equipment for
Medical Laboratory Tests], Leningrad, ltd. Leningradslt. filiala Vses.
nauch.-issl. in-ta meditainskogo priborostroyeniya [Leningrad Branch of
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Medical Instrument Making].
Pt 3, 1975, pp 107-108.

Nikulina, G. A., "Mathematical and Statistical characteristics of
Cardiac Rhythm With Exposure to Spaceflight Factors." in ”Voprosy
kibernetiki," Moscow. 13d. Ranch. soveta po koapleltsnoy probleme
"Kibernetika" AN SSSR, Vyp 22, 1976, pp 167-176.

Ovchinnikova, 0. V. and Pung. B. Yu., "Experimental Studies of Emotional
Tension in Examination Situation." in "Psikhologicheekiye issledovaniya,"
Moscow, Izd. mu, Vyp lo. 1973, pp 69-56.

103

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
77.

78.

79.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

FOR OI'MCIAI. USE ONLY

Opnlovskaya, G. M., "Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Cardiac
Rhythm in Computer Center Employees," in "Voprosy kibernetiki," Moscow,
12d. Nauch. soveta po konpleksnoy probleme "Kibernetika" AN SSSR, Vyp 22,
1976, pp 126-131.

Garenko, 0. G. (USSR) and Calvin, M. (United States), editors, "Funda-
mentals of Space Biology and Medicine," Moscow, Nauka, Vol 2, 8k 2, 1975.

Polyakov, 8. I. and Petrenko, 8. Ye., "Cardiovascular Reactions to
Orthostatic Tests and Runan Resistance to Vestibular Stimuli," KDSMICHESRAYI
BIOLOGIYA I AVIATSIONNAYA MBDITSINA, Vol 11, No 3, 1977, pp 58-53.

PunumJ”"meﬁPMudnuuPumuuameauuL"m
"Experimental Psychology" (translated from French), Moscow, Progress,
Vyp 3, 1970, pp 9-93.

Petrov, B. N., Ulanov, C. M., Ul'yanov, S. V. and Kharen, B. M., "Problems
of Information and Semantics in Processes of Control and Organization,"
Moscow, Nauka, 1977.

Rozhdestvenskaya, V. 1., Golubeva. E. A., Yernolayeva-To:dna, L. 3.,
Vasilenko, T. K., Aleksandrova, N. 1. and Shibarovskaya, c. A., “Experi-
mental Study of Mental Fatigue,“ in "Tipologicheskiye osobennosti
vysshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti" [Typological Distinctions of Higher
Nervous Activity], Moscow, Prosveshcheniye, Vol 4, 1965, pp 186-202.

Roshchektayeva, S. A. and Sytinakaya. T. V., "Use of Cluster Analysis

of Spectral Characteristics of Human zxsoc [2] in Studies of Operative
Memory," in "Kiberneticheskiy podkhod k biologicheskim sistemam"
[Cybernetic Approach to Biological Systems], Moscow-Leningrad, 12d.

Nauch. soveta po kompleksnoy probleme "Kibernetika" AN SSSR, 1976, pp 84-88

Sergeyev, G. A., Prokhorov, A. I. and Yevgrafov, V. 6., “Principles of
Construction of Systems for Monitoring Man's State During Learning on
Training Equipment," in "Nadezhnost' konpleksnykh sistem
'chelovek-tekhnika'“ [Reliability of Complex Man-Machine Systems],
Leningrad, 12d. Leningradsk. doma nauch.-tekhn. propagandy, Pt.1, 1969,
pp 76-77.

Strogin, G. L. and Govorushenko, V. V., "Problems of Organizing a
System of Automated Preflight Medical Monitoring in the Civil Aviation,"
in "Voprosy kibernetiki," Moscow, Izd. Nauch. soveta po Rompleksnoy
problems "Kibernetika" AN SSSR, Vyp 51, 1978, pp 139-161.

Suvorova, V. V., "Blectroencephalographic Correlates of Individual
Distinctions of Human Behavior Under Stress,” VOPROSY PSIKNDLOGII, No 2,
1965, pp 35-49.

Tomashevskaya, L. 1., "Reactions of Cardiovascular and Sympathoadrenal

Systems to Mental Work Hith Emotional Tension," in "Ocherki psikhologii
truda operators," Moscow, Nauka, 1976, pp 276-290.

106

F!NR()FIICIAI.IIBE:(NULY
88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

96.

95‘

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

Frankenkhoyzer, 11., "Sone Aspects of Research in Physiological I’Nycltohmy,”
in "Ebotsional‘nyy stress" [notional Stress], Leningrad, Heditsiua, 1970,
pp 2“37e

muchatur'yants, 1.. 8., Grisak, L. P. and Khrunov, Ye. 9., "Experimental
Psychophysiology in Space Research," Moscow, Nauka, 1976.

Shauov, P. 6., "The Question of Assessing Psychophysiological Capacities
of Operators in Han-Machine Systems," in "Problems inzhenernoy psikhologii,"
Leningrad, Isd. mu, 1966, pp 171-186.

Adey, U. R., Kado, R. '1'. and "alter, D. 0., "Result of Electroencephalo-
graphic Examinations Under the Inﬂuence of Vibration and Centrifuging in
the matey," no em. mmrars101.., Suppl, Vol 25, 1967, pp 245-277.

Aguilar, P. Falco and Llnch, B. Alnirall, "Bxperinental Study of Introversiono
Extraveraion Personality Factor Using Autonomic Manifestations Recorded
by the Polygraph Hethod," AND PSICOL., No 16, 1976, pp 35-52.

Dante, D., Prick, K., Scheuler, H. and Zeller, 8., "Psychophyoiological
Studies of Electrical Activity of the Raking Brain During Specific
Vigilance Requirements. I Mitt, dZ—Attention and Load Test, and

BBC Content," 2. sec-mo, Vol 7, No lo, 1976, pp 163-170.

Berry, C. A., "Sui-nary of ﬂedical Experience in the Apollo 7 Through 11
Spaceflights," AEROSPACE “30., Vol 61, No 5, 1970, pp 500-519.

Brodan, V. and Kuhn, 2., "Odpovqi. tepove frekvence na nahodne :neny
zatizeni pri praci na ergonotru," PR. 1.3., Vol 28, No 6, 1976, pp 179-182.

Carriero, Nicholas John and Pite, John Jr., "Cardiac Deceleration as an
Indicator of Correct Performance," PnCBPT. AND 101‘. SKILLS, Vol 64, No l,
1977, pp 275-282.

Chavance, H. and Samson-Dollfus, Doainigue, "A Contribution by Multidi-
nensional Methods to Choosing Descriptive Data for BBC by Spectral
Analysis," “2111. INFORH. HBD., Vol 15, No lo, 1976, pp 229-236.

Chapanis, A., "Relevance of Physiological and Psychological Criteria to
Han-Machine Systens: the Present State of the Art," snoonomcs, Vol 13,
No 3, 1970, pp 337-366.

Craveri, A., Andreuzzi, P., Querenghi, A., Segu, R. and Lodi, P...
"Electrocardiographic 1'91th in the Study of Cardiac Function in
Athletes Specializing in Different Fields," MINERVA CARDIOANCIOL.,
Vol 25, No 9, 1977, pp 693-705.

Duncan-Johnson, Connie, C. and Coles, Hicheel G. 11., "heart Rate and
Disjunctive Reaction Tine: the Effects of Discrimination Requirements,"
J. EXP. PSYCHOL., Vol 103, No 6, 1976, pp 1160-1168.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

116.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Flinn, Jane, H., Kirsch, Arthur D. and Flinn, Edward A., "Correlations
Between Intelligence and the Frequency Content of the Visual Evoked
Potential," PHYSIOL. PSYCHOL., Vol 5, No 1, 1977, pp 11-15.

Fuller, Peter H., "Computer Estimated Alpha Attenuation During Problem
Solving in Children With Learning Disabilities," BEG CLIN. NEUROPHYSIOL.,
Vol 62, No 2, 1977, pp 149-156.

Galbraith, Gary C., "Computer Analysis of the Blectroencephalogrsn and
Sensory Evoked Responses," in "Brain Punct. and Mslnutrit., Neuropsychol.
Heth. Assess-eat," New York, 1975, pp 161-168.

O'ﬂanlon, James F., and Beatty, Jackson. "Catecholanine Correlates of
Radar Monitoring Performance," BIOL. PSYCHOL., Vol 6, No 4, 1976,
pp 293-304.

Kenning, F. 0., "Aircraft Accidents and Human Factors," AEROSPACE HBD.,
Vol 46, No 6, 1973, pp 682-686.

Hinton, John and Craske, Brian, "A Relationship Between Eysenck's P
Scale and Change in Muscle Action Potentials With Attention to
Perceptual Tasks," BRIT. J. PSYCHOL., Vol 67, No 6, 1975, pp 461-466.

Jones, H. J., "Should Colonel Glenn Try Again?" as. SCIENTIST, Vol 13,
No 273, 1962, pp 304-306.

lshii, Nsohiro, Iwata, Akita Suzunura lobuo and Suginoto,uideyuki,
"Denki Iauyein Chakkay Ronbunsi," TRANS. INST. ELECTRON AND COMMON.
ENG. J”.. Vol 61. No 12, 1978, PP 901-9080

Kobayashi, Toshinori, Yonezawa, Isuneyoshi and Okuno, Haruo, ”Kochaku
in Daychaku Kenkyu Khokoku," RES. REPTS. EDGAKUIH UNIV., Vol 62, 1977,
pp 92-101.

Kornfeld, Charles H. and Beatty, Jackson, "EEG Spectra During a Long-
Tern Conpensatory Tracking Task," BULL. PSYCBONOH. 800., Vol 10, No 1,
1977, pp 66-48.

Lazarus, R. 5., Speisnan, J. C. and Hordkoff, A. H., "The Relationship
Between Autonoaic Indicators of Psychological Stress: Heart Rate and
Skin Conductance," PSYCHOSOH. HBD., Vol 25, 1963, pp 19-30.

Levrat, Bernard, Renault, Bernard and Pinndji, Francois, "Classifica-
tion of Waking BBC," ”REV. ELECTROBNCBPBALOGR. ET NEUROPHYSIOL., V01 6,
No 2, 1976, pp 298-301.

Levy, 5. 2., "The Use of Skin Resistance to Monitor States of
Consciousness," AEROSPACE HBD., Vol 32, 1961, pp 60-66.

Hontangonery, George K., "Effect of Performance Evaluation and Anxiety
on Cardiac Response in Anticipation of Difficult Problen Solving,"
PSYCHOPKYSIOLOGY, V01 16, No 3, 1977, pp 251-257.

106

FOI‘OIFKJAI.U§E(NVLY
115.

116 .

117 .

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124 .

Melton, C. 3., Snith, R. C., McKenzie, J. H., Roffnann, S. H. and
Snldivsr, J. T., "Stress in Air Traffic Controllers: Effects of ARTS-
111," ANIAT. SPACE AND ENVIRON. usn., Vol 67, No 9, 1976, pp 925-930.

Raycheva, V., Antwa, H. and Tokarev, D., 'Tsychophysiological
Constellations Alleviating Occupational Adaptation of Dispatchers,"
"Nauchni trudove po transportna neditsina," Sofia, Neditsina i
fizkul'tura, Vol 2, 1976, pp 97-104.

Rodahl, K. and Vokac, 2., "Work Stress in Norwegian Trawler Fisherman,"
ERGONOHICS, V01 20, No 6, 1977, pp 633-662.

Tellini, H. and Angeletti, P., "Studies of Effects of Driving Hotor
Vehicles With and Hithout Automatic Transmission on Some Physiological
Parameters," QUAD. SCIAVO. DIAGN. CLIN. 8 LAD” Vol 11, No lo, 1975,

pp 747-769.

Sturgis, Randy, Lenke, Elmer A. and Johnson, James J., "A Validity Study
of the Neural Efficiency Analyzer in Relation to Selected Measures of
Intelligence," PBRCEPT. AND m. SKILLS, Vol 65, No 2, 1977, pp 475-478.

Schreinicke, Gert, Scheuch, Klaus and Huber, Bernhard, "Physiological
and mdurance Parameters of Compensatory Tracking in Sons Aspects,"
EUR. J. APPL. PHYSIOL. AND OCCUP. ””8101... Vol 37, No 2, 1977, pp 137-151.

Halter, Gary P. and Porges, Stephen 11., ”heart Rate and Respiratory
Responses as a Function of Task Difficulty: the Use of Discrininant
Analysis in the Selection of Psychologically Sensitive Physiological
Responses," PSYCBOPNYSIOLOGY, V01 13, No 6, 1976, pp 563-571.

Halter, D. 0., Redo, R. T., Rhodes, J. H. and Adey, H. 3., "Klectro-
encephalographic Baselines in Astronaut Candidates Estimated by -
Conputstion and Pattern Recognition Techniques," AEROSPACE NED” Vol 33,
1967, pp 371-379.

Vasileva, H., Ninkova, N. and Venkov, A., "Cardiac and Circulatory
Reactions in Pilots," VIEW. 0ND 63332633., V01 24, No 7, 1977,
pp 251-256.

Voge, Victoria 11., "Psychophysiological Assessnent of Acceleration-
lnduced Changes in Various Seat Configurations," AVIAT. SPACE AND
ENVIRON. 1130., Vol 68, No 6,1977, pp 527-538.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatei'stvo "Nauka", "Avtonatika i telemekhaniks", 1982

10 , 657
C80: 1840/ 168

107

FOR OFﬂCIAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYGIOWY

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE IN SOCIALIST COUNTRIES

macaw PSIKHOIDGIGIESKAYA NAM V SOTSIALIS‘HGIEKIDI 5mm in Russian 1981
(sinned to press 2 Apr 81) pp 2-4, 224

(Annotation, foreword and table or contents from book 'Psychological Science in

Socialist Countries,“ edited by [5811 Academy of Sciences Corresponding Kosher
3. P. Innov, Institute of Psychology, man heads-y of Sciences, Isdatsl'stvo

”Nauka“, 4,300 copies, 224 pages]

[Put] This collection reflects the status and develop-ental trends of psychologi-
cal science in socialist countries. It provides a theoretical analysis or psycho-
logical information accumulated as of today; it cruises the basic directions of

the development and application of psychological knowledge in the social practices
of socialist countries.

The book is intended for a broad range of psychologists.

Contents Page

Formrdeeeseeeeesseooeseeqeeoesssoeesshoes 3

Savva Ganovskiy, “Present Status and Prospects for Development of
PsychologicalScienceinBulgaria". . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Perents Pataki, 'Pressing Problem of Psychological Science in Hungary” . . . 21
Fan Min Khak, Do mug, ”Developmnt o! Psychological Science in vieman' . . . 38
A. Kossakovskiy. ”Developnental Trends and Prospects of Psychology in the GDP." 48
Khose A. Bustanante, ”Development of Psychology in Cuba“ . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Ya. Reykovskiy, "Polish Psychology: Directions tor Develop-ant” . . . . . . . 78

a. noshke, x. Voyku, ”Status and Prospects of Psychological Scientific
munchinmnania'............................ 119

B. P. muov, ”status and Prospects ﬁor Development of Psychological
Scienceinthelssn"............................ 129

Y. ungart. D. mach, M. m, '1‘. Pardel, “Psychology in Czechoslovakia' . . 159

1%

POI Oil-10“. USE ONLY
v. l". Vonda. "cooperation of Socialist comtries in Human Factors Analysis" . . 181

K. A. Abul'khanova-Slavskaya. E. A. raraponova, "me First Conference of
Psychologists of the Socialist Oomtries' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192

Btbllography.......s..o.........o..........o.211

Reminder.................................. 218

Developed socialist society is witnessing signifith growth in the role played by
sciences studying the influence of the human factor in all spheres of life--in

solving the problems associated with building the material-technical base of com-
nisn. with accelerating scientific-tedmical progress and increasing the effective-

ness of production, with ilproving social relations and with shaping the new Ian.
Among these sciences. psychology occmies an important place. The social practices
of all socialist countries «sand intensive development of psychological science.

One of the prerequisites of successfully solving the pressing theoretical and practi-
cal psychological prcblen is to achieve collaboration among psychologists of social-

ist countries. this collaboration presupposes cooperative effort in solving this
probles and a certain degree of division of labor.

The scientific ties between psychologists of socialist comtries have been developing
intensively in recent years: Bilateral and multilateral agree-ents are being signed
to permit joint solution of a nunber of problems in different branches of psychologi-
cal science, exchange of information in different form and discussion of pressing
problems at conferences and smsims. New forms of collaboration among psycholo-
gists of socialist countries have arisen-~the Pirst Conference of Psychologists

of socialist countries was held in Potsda- (GDR) in 1978. A decision was made to
hold such conferences systematically in different countries. he first conference

of directors of psychological institutions in socialist countries was held in Mscow
in 1976. In 1979 a conference of the directors of psychological institutes was held

in Poland. The status, tasks and prospects for developnent of psychological science
.n socialist countries were discussed at the ibscow conference. hecoanendations

to publish the proceedings of this conference were approved. The book offered here
for the reader's inspection consists of articles prepared basically from reports
given at the conference by executives free psychological institutions, prominent
scientists and the leaders of the psychological societies of Bulgaria, Hungary,
Vietnas, the con, tuba, Poland, Romania, the USSR and Czechoslovakia.

'lhe development of psychological science in socialist countries shows that this
process is following certain cot-son laws. Marxist-uninist theory is the couch
foundation for the study of psychology in different socialist countries.

The unique features behind the sociohistoric development of socialist countries
and the internal logic of the development of psychological science in these coun-

tries went a long way to predeter-ine the level of developnent of this science,
its directions and the problems it studies in different countries. no rain trends

in the development of psychology include a convergence of the leading psychological
schools and directions in terms of their approaches, principles, methods, state-
sents of goals and choice of the leans of attaining then. mess general

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

methodological principles are: develop-ant of consciousness on a sociohistoric

basis, determinism, unity of consciousness and activity. the principle of reflection
and the systems approach.

ﬁne book distinguishes two basic directions in psychological science-«development of
the fundanental problem, and development of applied studies having direct practical
significance. In the opinion of the book's authors, success in these two directions
require that we study the basic methodological and theoretical praises of Innis!!-

Ieninisu, and that we successively criticise and deeply analyse various directions
of bourgeois psychological science.

In their practical aspects, psychological studies are oriented on the following
problem: particular features of the socialist way of life, for-ation and develop-
ment of the personality. psychological problem associated with raising the effect-
iveness of ideological indoctrination and inroving social control, the psychological

aspects of raising labor productivity. and particular features in human activity and
behavior in the face of scientific-technical progress.

COPYRIGi‘l': Izdatel'stvo "Ranks”, 1981

11004
(:0: imp/160

110

FOIOW‘ICIALUSEONLY
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF PSYCBOLOGY

Ibscow GSHCHAYA PSInIOIDGIYA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 16 Jan 81) pp 2.
382-383

[Annotation and table of contents tron hook "General Psychology'. edited by

v. v. Bogoslovskiy, A. G. lovelev and A. A. Stepanov, 3d edition. revised and
supplemented. approved by the 088R ministry o! Mutation as a textbook for students
at pedagogical institutes. Indatel'stvo 'Prosveshcheniye". 279,000 copies. 384 pages)

[least] Ihis textbook was prepared by the collective of the department of psycho-
logy of the Leningrad Order of the Red Labor Banner State Pedagogical Institute
ineni A. I. Gertsen. Department chainsaw-Pro: A. I. Shcherbakov.

The following participated in the writing of this textbook:

v..v. Bogoslovskiy—chapter 6 "Personality and Collective“, dupter 7 I'Psychology
of Oouunication and Interpersonal Elationships" (51 jointly with A. A. Stepanov) .
Chapter 15 ”Imagination and Creativity“ (except for 54), mapter 17 I'Wlition and
Volitional Properties of the Personality”, A. D. Vinogradova—auapter ll 'Peroeption
and Powers of (beervstion', 51 and 3, chapter 16 'anotions. Sentiunta and notional
Properties of the Personality“: A. G. mnlew-Chapter 4 ”Personality and Its
Structure", mapter 5 'Personality Orientation“. Chapter 18 "hnperansnt'.

Chapter 19 “unractet'. Chapter 20 "Capabilities“; 1.. P. nikhaylova—dnapter 3
“Development and Present status of Psychology As a Science“ (jointly with A. A.
Stepanov); A. I. Rayev-wanapter l "the wject of. Psychology" (jointly with A. I.
Shc'hsrbakov): chapter 2 'Msthods of Psychology“ (jointly with 1.. A. Asgush:
(mapter 13 "thinking and Intellectual natures of the Personality“ (jointly with

1.. A. mgush); I.. A. asgusho-ciapter 2 “Methods of Psychology“ (jointly with A. I.
Rayev) , Chapter 13 "minking and Intellectual Peatures of the Personality'I (jointly
with A. I. Rayev): A. A. Stepanow-dzapter 3 "Developasnt and Present status or
Psychology n a Science“ (jointly with 1.. P. Hikhaylovn). Chapter 7 ”Psychology

of Commication and Interpersonal nationships" (51 jointly with V. v. Bogoslov-
skiy). Chapter 8 "Psychology of Activity“, drapter 9 "Attention and Attentiveness“.
Chapter 10 ”Sensation and Sensory Organisation of the Personality', Chapter 12
'Msnory, Ideation and men-chic Properties of the Personality”. Olapter 14 'sPeech
and Speech Properties of the Personality“. 54 drapter 15 “Imagination and Creativ-
ity”: S. N. shabalinnchapter 16, 92 and 4: A. I. sherbakow-Orapter 1 "its (Inject
of Psychology" (jointly with A. I. Rayev).

111

”WWW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COM-nuts

Pan: I .

Olapter l. The Object of Psychology

Psychology as a Science

vesseeseeeeee

51.1heConceptoftherjectotPsychology. . . . . . . . .

52. Development of the Animal Hind

§4.Bunan(bnsciousnesa.................

55. Principles, Structures and Tasks of Soviet Psychology

mapter 2. lbthods of Psydiology

Sl. Organizational Principles of Psychological nesearch .

52. Pact Gathering Methods

seesseeeeeeeeee

S3. mthods of Processing heseerch Interials .. . . . . .

Chapter 3.

e

e

eseeeeeeeeeee

53. Arisal and Historical Developnnt of amen Consciousness

9

sets

Develop-ant end Present States of Psychology as a Science
91. Pomtion of the Suic Psychological Concepts and ibsearch liethods

eoeevv

eeee

52.lbdernoirectionsofnourgeoisPsychology.......... ...
53. Development 0! Russian and Soviet Psychology . . . . . . . . . .

Part II.
Oupter 4.

mlationship

Personality and Activity

PersonslityandItsStructure................
51. m Concepts Han, Personality and Individuality, and Their

52. Social Sssence of the Personality . . . . . . . . . .

53. Psychological Structure of the Personality
N. 'ihe Personality as a Self-Controllable System

Chapter 5. Personality Orientation

52emueseeoeseeeee

eeeeee

51. The Concept of Personality Orientation

53.1nterests................

54. Philosophy and Ideals o: the Personality

Chapter 6. Personality and the Collective .

51. The Concept of Groups and Collectives
52. Levels of Development or a Collective

see

53. Personality and Collective
diapter 7.

51. 'me Concept of Co-znication and Relationships

52. Porns o: Conunicaticn

e
e
e
s
e

sense

0
e
e
e

eeeee

sees

e

e

secs

0

eesee

e
e
s
e

e

e
e
e
e

e

eeeee

eeoe

Psychology of mication and Interpersonal Relationships

eseeeeeeseessosseeeeeeeeee

sees.

seesaeese

esseeeseeeeeeeeeeese

53. Interpersonal Mutual lblationshipe in Groups and Collectives
54. Psychological Cowatibility, Conflicts and Interpersonal

e

Elationships.........................

55. Mass Psychosocial Phenomena and ‘[heir Rule in Comicaticn and

in Interpersonal Relationships

Chapter 8. Psychology of Activity . .
51. The Concept of Activity . . . . .
52. mledqe. Abilities and aabite .
53. Ports of Activity . . . . . . . .

”MUSEONLY

eeoe
see.

112

eese

e

e

s

a

eseeseoeeeeeeeee

eeee

s

eeessseeesese

tees

seees

seeee

sseeeseee 0

case

sees

Page

14

18
23

30

34
42

49

56
60

66
70
73

80

81
85
88

94

100
102

109

114
119

123

126
1 30
137
146
chapter 9. Attention and Attentivenoss .
51. me concept of Attention . . . . . . .
52. Pbrnsothttention . . . . . . . . . .

53. Properties of Attention . . . . .
5e. Attentiveness as a Personality Property

o o o e s
o e o o e
o o o o o
e s 0 o o
o o o o e
o o o o e
o o o o o
o e o s e
o o o o e
o o o o o
o o s o e

Part III. Mental Processes and Personality Properties

Chapter 10. Sensations andSensory Organisation of the Personality .
:l.‘i‘he00nceptof$ensation ..............

52.Pornso£Sensations..............
53.1heLavsotSensations ............
54. Sensory Organization of the Personality . . .

chapter ll. Perception and Powers of (beervstion . . . . . . . .
51. 'meOonceptotPerception.................
52.Propertieso!Perception.......... . .
53. Ports of Perception Depending on the (bject or Reflection .

o o

e
o e s a e
e s o o e
o s s o o
e o o e o

o
o o o
o s o s o
s s o

54. (beervationandPowersofwservation . . . . . . . . . .
55. Individual utterences in Perception and (beervation . .

Chapter 12. Henry, Ideation and menonic Properties of the Personality
sl.De£initionostnory.....................
52. Characteristics of Henry Processes and Their Laws . . . . . .
53.menonic Properties otthePersonality .. . . . . . .. . . .
54.Ideation ...........................

Chapter 13. winking and Intellectual Features of the Personality
slommaptofminkugseoooeoooeseooe
52. Content and Operations as Comments of Thinking . .
53. The Process of Solving a Mental Probleo . . . . . . .

o o e o o s
o o e o e o
o o o e o e

eeooo
oeon

54.?orlsof'ihinking.................
55. Intellectual Features of the Personality . . . . .

Chapter 14. Speech and Speech Properties 02 the Personality
51.5peechandnanguage.................
52.?0ruofSpeech...................

53. Speech Properties of the Personality . . . . . . . .

duapter lS. Imagination and Creativity . . . . . . . . . .
§l.’l‘heOoncopto£Inagination......... .........
52.?0rnsand‘1‘sctmiquesotlnagination ......... ....

53. mat‘vity I O O o I O O O O O O l O O O O O O O O O O O 9 O 0
54. Imagination and'lhePersonality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

mapter l6. Emotions, Sentiments and notional Properties of the Personality
51. meccnceptofmotionsanGSentinsnts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

52. Pom 0: $.an . O O O 0 O O O O O O O O O O C O O O O O O O O O
53. mtim‘l Sat. 0 O O O 0 I O O O O O 0 O O O O C O O O O O O O I O O

54. Sectional Features and Properties of the Personality . . . . . . . .

daepter l7. Volition and Volitional Properties of the Personality . . . . .

51.1.‘heconceptofVolition........................
52. AnalysisofaCleexVolitionalAction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

53. Volitional Properties otthe Personality . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

oooooeoooe
eooooeeoo
ooooseeese
oooeoeooee
eeeooeeoese
oeooeeeeeo
O 00....
oeeee

e o e e e
o
e e e o e

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. 153

156
162
166

169
175
183
190

195
201
207

213
217

219
221

229
232

238
241

247
250

254
258
263
268
271

278

281
289

293

300
306

- 311

315
320
327
(mapter 19.

chapter 20.

51.
52.
53.
5‘.
SS.

56.

com: RIG”:

11004
50:

Part IV.
Chapter 18.

Properties

I‘m Ufl‘lLIAI. 03!. UNIV

Individual-upological Features of the Personality

‘lbnperaunt................
51. The Concept of unperament

eoeoeesee

eeesseeeaee'eeeeeeeeeseea

The mncept of Capabilities . . . .

The Conception o: Capabilities . . .

Innate Properties and Capd>ilities

Pedagogical Capability and Its Structure
Mutual blationship Between Capabilities and other Personality

Properties

1840/159

Izdatel'stvo "Prosveshcheniye',
Izdatel'stvo 'Prosveshcheniye', 1981, s isneneniyani.

one.

as...

ooseoeaeeseeeeaesee

Develop-ant and Porntion of Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . .

11‘

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1973

Onaracter

mrlctcro...o...........o...co.

51. The Concept 0: Character
52. The Structure of diaracter

53. That Which is Individual and That mich
Capabilities

eeeeeeseeeeeoeeeee

eeeeeeaasseeeeeee

is typical in

e
a
e
e

e

aeeeaeeeeeeeeeeessse

. 52. mes of Higher Nervous Activityntbe Natural Basis of Mermnt

53. We of Wranent and mu Psychological Description
54. textual mlationship Between 13:90th and Other Personality

C C C O

eeeoe

a Case

eees

cease

333

334
336

341
3“

347
355

361

- 363

367
370

372
377
PSYCHOSOMATIC CORRELATIONS I]! CHRONIC MICK“. STRESS

Novosibirsk PSIKBOSGM‘IIGBSKIYB VMWSWA PRI MICBSW
MISIONAL'M WRYAZHENII in Russian 1981 (signed to press 31 Aug 81)
pp 2-8, 178

[Annotation. introduction and table of contents fro. book "Psychosomatic
Correlations in the Presence of Chronic Emotional '.enaion", by Lev
Yevgen‘yevich Panin and Vladinir Petrovich Sokolov, Clinical Research
Center of the Siberian Branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences and Institute
of Clinical and Experimental Hedicine, Siberian Branch of the USSR Academy
of Medical Sciences, Irdetel'etvo "Nauka". 3100 copies. 179 pages]

[Text] This monograph deals with one of the pressing problems of modern
biology end medicine-«investigation of correlation between mental and emo-
tionsl aspects of man, on the one hand. end function of autonomic and visceral
systems of the body, on the other. The authors analysed the nature of changes
in these relations in the presence of chronic emotional stress [or tension].
The syndrome of peychosmotional stress was singled out. Its clinical, psycho-
logical, endocrinological and setabolic features are described. This problem
is particularly important in view of intensive scientific and technological
progress and effect of intonation stress on man. The link betveen emotional
tension and development of cardiovascular pathology (atherosclerosis, ischsmic
heart disease, arterial hypertension) is discussed as it relates to the
conditions of the Extreme north. This book is intended for physicians. biolo-
gists, biochemists. psychiatrists and psychologists. Tables 65, figures 20.
references 225.

Introduction

The term. adaptation, refers to the complex process of the body's adjustment
to adverse environmental conditions. It is expedient to make a distinction
between two aspects of this phenomenon, dynamic and static. Adaptation of
separate individuals, regardless of their position on the evolutionary ladder,
corresponds to brief changes in the enviroment, lasting much less tine than
the life span of an individual. In this case. the term, adaptation, serves
to designate the structural and functional alteration of the organism. and it
is used as a dynamic concept. In the case of prolonged exposure to extreme
stimuli. the organism changes to s new functional level as the result of
function of adaptive mechanisms. In this case. adaptation .is used to desig-
nate the state of the organism, i.e.. as a static concept.

115

MWUSIONLY
FOI‘OFI1CIAL USEZCNULY

In the evolutionary aspect. adaptation is viewed from the standpoint of con-
(urmlty of phenotypic and genotypic traits of an organism with the habitat.
Hence the conception of ecological niche, in which this conformity is the
fullest and most adequate. In this sense, adaptation is one of the main
contents of the evolutionary process and is viewed as a static concept.
when there are stable and prolonged changes in the environment, lasting sub-
stantially longer than the life span of a single individual, adaptation is
discrete, and it is related to variability, heredity and natural selection,
i.e.. it is viewed as a directed [guided] process (dynamic concept). In
this case, the concepts of "evolution" and "adaptogenesis" are identical.

Not only individuals, but populations (species) are formed as a result of
natural selection. Physiological (individual) and population (species)
mechanisms of adaptation work together as a single, purposeful biological
mechanism.

Adaptation mechanisms gradually became more complex in the course of evolution
of the animal kingdom. Their hierarchy was an organic blend of the principle
of autonomy on the level of the cell, different functional systems with the
principle of subordination and integration on the whole organism level

' (Vasilevskiy, 1978). In essence there are four stages of development and
complication of adaptive mechanisms that correspond to the most important
stages of evolution (formation of the most elementary forms of life, appear-
ance of unicellular and primitive multicellulsr animals; complication of
multicellular organisms and formation of the internal environment of the
organism; appearance of the nervous system; formation of the second signal
system and mind).

At the first stage of evolution, there were simple, stabilising adaptation
systems. They were based primarily on allosteric and isosteric mechanisms

of regulation of enzyme activity, the action of close and distant feedback in
metabolic pathways, presence of competitive correlations. The internal

medium became the barrier that separated the organism from direct contact

with the external environment, the characteristics of which change signifi-
cantly depending on the time of day, season, etc. Unlike the external environ-
ment, the internal one (blood, lymph, tissue fluid) retains relative stability.
Contact between each cell of a living organism with the endogenous environment,
which retains relatively stable physicochemical characteristics, creates op-
timum conditions for all of its vital functions. "Constancy of the internal
environment is the condition for free and independent life.... Stability

of the environment implies such perfection of the organism that exogenous
changes are immediately compensated and balanced" (Bernard, 1937, p 96).

It is expressly with the endogenous environment that many homeostatic systems,
upon which is based the organism's adaptive behavior, are connected.

However, the constancy of the internal environment is not absolute, it is
relative. when the organism is exposed to extreme stimuli, it actively forms
the internal environment that permits optimisation of physiological processes
under new living conditions. This is done by means of purposeful mechanisms,
fixed through evolution, that determine the operation of homeostatic functional
systems. The endogenous environment changes constantly in order to compensate

116

FIMRGDFIICJAl.lﬂ§E:(HVLY
lnr the effects on the organism of altered living conditions, to assure survival
In a new, unusual situation. Somatic changes are reflected primarily by
change in the organism's internal environment.

when the existing organic world became more complex, it led to refinement of
self-regulating systems. The need for a fine differentiated response, a

more adequate and rapid one, to diverse effects of environmental factors led to
formation of the nervous system. This meant a change to a basically different
level of organization of adaptive processes, with directed transmission of

flow of information, which became more economical and more accurate than

before (Lyapunov, 1962; Kasnscheyev, 1973). Further complication of regulatory
mechanisms led to formation of the central nervous system (brain) and appearance
of such complex attributes of adaptive behavior as instinct, memory, emotions,
etc. "The higher ... the sensory organization through which an animal is
oriented in time and space, the broader the range of possible life encounters,
the more diverse the environment that affects the organism and means of
possible adaptations" (Sechenov, 1952, p 63).

Nervous mechanisms of regulation were not a simple addition to humeral ones;
rather, they constituted a functional adjustment that qualitatively altered

the operation of the latter. The idea that the nervous system plays a

part in controlling adaptive acts was first advanced by I. H. Sechenov. He
believed that the biological meaning of reflexes consists of being a means

of communication between the organism and the world around it, living conditions
and, which is the main point, of being a regulator of these communications,
literally "the manager of actions consistent with these conditions (i.e.,
purposeful and adaptive actions)" (Sachenov, 1957. P 416). Subsequently, these
ideas were developed by I. P. Pavlov in his doctrine of nervism.

with the appearance of man, new forms and mechanisms of adaptive behavior
appeared, which were related to development of the second signal system,
further development and refinement of the mind. They implied already elements
of cognition of the environment: storage and transmission of information,
learning. existence of interpersonal relations, participation in socially
useful labor, capacity for creativity. Man's capacity for apperception

and even forecasting development of future events and changes in the environ-
ment, what P. K. Anokhin (1975) called the pricniple of anticipatory reflec-
tion, is very important.

with the appearance of mental (psychophysiological) adaptation, the range of
man's adaptive capabilities broadened considerably. This is related. first
of all, to better understanding of the essence of processes occurring in
nature and society. with the appearance of human society, numerous social
forms of adaptive behavior appeared, among which man's transforming activity
began to play a dominant role. Man not only retains adaptive functions in-
herent in him as a biological being, he also refines them by developing
training systems, conditioning, engaging in physical culture and sports.
However, man does not so much adapt to the environment as he transforms it
in accordance with his needs and requirements. he develops protective
equipment, creates an artificial microclimate and refines the system of
social relations.

117

ROI OWIHCIA1.UBE1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development of social consciousness in the form of various social Institutions,
intensive scientific and technological progress of modern society opened up
new opportunities to improve the relations between man and society, man and
industry, man and the environment. The concept of "adaptive-adapting system"
began to apply to human society (Petlenko, Tsaregorodtsev, Sakhmo, 1976); it
reflects the basic difference between human and animal adaptation mechanisms.
The idea was advanced that. unlike other living beings who adapt to their
habitat only biologically, by means of phenotypic and genotypic changes in
the course of adaptogenesis controlled by natural selection, man, who remains
unchanged in the genotypic. species-related respect. adapts socially to the
environment by changing it (Frolov, 1975, quoted by Korolenko, 1978).

The mind is the most sophisticated and vulnerable system of man's adaptation to
the social and ecological environment. "hen the body is exposed to extreme
stimuli in the presence of acute and particularly chronic stress, this form

of adaptation may be the first to be impaired. As a result of existence of
psychosomatic relations, this leads to changes on lower levels of structural
and functional organization, primarily of vegetoviaceral systems (Kurtsin.
1973) and could lead to development of a systemic pathological process. Sub-
sequently. its influence is rejected by the distinctions of the pathogenesis,
which reflects the established, stable correlations in development of
disturbances and lend a syndromal nature to the pathological process.

The nervous system has a direct influence, through nervous mediators and hor-
mones, on the functional state of organs, cells and intracellular metabolism.
Somatic changes are immediately reflected by a change in the body's internal
environment. These changes may be brief and could be eliminated by the func-
tion of homeostatic mechanisms. or else they may be lengthy, when the organism
changes to a new level of homeostasis. Thus. we were the first to show

that at high latitudes, man develops a polar metabolic type under the influ-
ence of subextreme and extreme factors (Panin, 1979). The typical distinction
of this type is a change in energy metabolism, from the carbohydrate to the
lipid type (Panin, 1978). The influence of neural mechanisms on the endogenous
environment is very complex on the level of higher nervous activity. Thus.
the endogenous environment is an excellent indicator of the state of psycho-
somatic relations. Analysis of these relations is of enormous interest, not
only to gain understanding of the entire complexity of man's adaptive behavior
mechanisms, but to determine the pathogenesis of diseases that are usually
classified as psychosomatic pathology: arterial hypertension, ischemic heart
disease, peptic ulcer, neurotic states and many others. It is not by chance
that scientific and technological progress. acceleration and urbanization of
life led to a rise in expressly these diseases.

The change in psychosomatic relations is of considerable interest in the
presence of chronic systemic tension, when favorable and rather prolonged
conditions are created for development of a pathological process. However,
amazingly expressly such states in man have been studied very little. We
investigated the effects of subextreme and extreme environmental factors,

the influence of urbanization factors on mental adaptation, metabolism, change
in neuroendocrine and endocrine-metabolic relations in man. We studied the
role of these changes in formation of cardiovascular pathology-ischemic

heart disease and arterial hypertension.

118

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
The studies were conducted on four groups of men: 1) immigrants to northern 2
Asia under conditions of an intensive urbanisation process (Roril'sk,

marked influence of ecological and urbanisation factors); new arrivals to
nonurbanized settlements in northern Asia (settlement of Dikson. predominant
influence of ecological factors); 3) residents of an urbanized inhabited
locality in the southern part of Heat Siberia (Novosibirsk, chiefly the
influence of urbanization factors); 6) polar research markers at Soviet
Antarctic stations (predominant influence of social and ecological discomfort
factors .

Investigation of mental adaptation acquires particular importance in connec-
tion with the intensive exploration and industrial development of eastern and
northern parts of our country. creation of enormous territorial-industrial
complexes there, mining, appearance of cities and settlements. In these
regions, a new industrial and social infrastructure is being formed. Imple-
mentation of these programs involves a strong influx of people from different
parts of the country. The problem arises of man's adaptation to unusual
climate and geographic conditions, unfamiliar situation and change in living
stereotype. The effects of these factors are manifested first of all in
man's neuropsychological status.

It is important to stress that the mechanisms of psychological adaptation
differ from all other self-controlling and autonomous systems of the body

in that there is conscious regulation, which is based on personality assess-
ment. The latter is always perceived through emotions. Social and personality
sets acquire much significance. According to I. S. Kandror (1968), psycholo-
gical adaptation to the extreme conditions of the Extreme North is related
primarily to deliberate and adequate assessment of the harsh climate and geo-
graphic conditions, as well as certain social and psychological deprivations,
a rift from family and friends, restriction of range of customary activities,
etc. Psychological adaptation also has elements of habituation to a mono-
tonous environment, monotonous landscape and unusual photoperiodicity. All
this requires a profound change in man's hebits and inclinations.

According to our data, the emotional sphere is the first and most sensitive
adaptive mechanism that mediates the effects of the set of extreme factors

of the Extreme North on the organism. This monograph deals with investigation
of expressly these mechanisms.

The authors express their profound appreciation to N. L. Eochkareva. G. T.
Kovalevskaya, L. S. 0stanina, P. Ye. Vloshchinskiy, h. P. Hoshkin, L. H.
Polyakov and T. G. Pilatova, who participated actively in gathering and pro-
cessing the material used in this monograph.

Contents Page

Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Systemic Changes in the Human body in the Presence of

Chronic Stress Under Polar Conditions 9

Psychoemotional changes 9

Endocrine changes 1?

Metabolic changes 27

119

IND! OFIICIAL.UGIi(MVLY
I'UK UI'IILIAL uas. URL!

Chapter 2. Psychological Adaptation and Metabolic Changes in Man in
Antarctica
Psychoenotional changes
Endocrine changes
Metabolic changes
Chapter 3. Significance of Constitutional Factors to Man's
Adaptation
Chapter 6. Psychoenotional Stress Syndrome
Role of ecological and social factors in psychological adaptation
Anxiety as a sanifestation of nan's psychological deadsptation
Chapter 5. Psychosomatic Pathology Associated With Chronic Emotional
Stress. Ischenic Heart Disease and Arterial Hypertension
Sociopsychological factors in etiology of ischenic heart disease
and arterial hypertension in the North
The role of anxiety in develop-ant of isehenic heart disease
and arterial hypertension
Psychophysiological characteristics of individuals with ischsnic
heart disease and arterial hypertension
Emotional stress and metabolic changes in individuals with
ischenic heart disease and arterial hypertension
Conclusion
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981.

10,657
050: 1860/162

120

INDR‘OFIICIAI.IENE(MNLY
SOURCE AND GENESIS 0F HBNIAL IMAGE (GNOSIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS)

Kishinev OB ISTOCHNIKE I GENBZISB PSIKBICHBSKDGO OBRAZA in Russian 1981
(signed to press 27 Nov 80) pp 2-8, 118

(Annotation, foreword and table of contents free book "Source and Genesis of
Mental Image", by Anatoliy Panteleynonovich Saboshchuk, edited by n, V.
Popovich, doctor of philosophy, Moldavian Academy of Sciences, Department

of Philosophy and Law, Isdatel'stvo "Shtiintsa", 600 copies, 120 pages]

[Text] This book was reviewed and recommended for publication by A. I.
Babiy and s. B. Krymskiy, doctors of philosophy.

The monograph develops the thesis of Marxist-Leninist reflection theory con-
cerning substantive work as a source of perception and thinking. It provides
logical and psychological validation to the fact that the informative link
between an object and subject is mediated by exogenous and endogenous activity
processes, which serve as the source of structural organization of a mental
image. The most important result of this investigation is proof of the
direct link, unsediated by senses, between thinking and the outside world,
and the ensuing validation of the thesis that there are specific sechanisms.
distinct from sense organs, that implement this direct association between
thinking and objective reality. This book is intended for scientists, in-
structors and students of humanity faculties.

Foreword

A sharp ideological struggle is in progress between two main philosophical
world outlooks with regard to the question of the nature of the psychological
element, its place in the material world: between materialism and idealism.
It is specifically stated as the problem of relationship of psychological to
material processes occurring in a subject's internal and external worlds.
"The major basic question in all philosophy, particularly the latest," wrote
Englse, "is the question of relationship of thinking to everday life."l In
essence it covers all of the problems of philosophical world outlooks.
Along with traditional, ontological (which is primary, which is secondary)
and gnosiological (can one-learn to know the world), it contains psycho- ,
physiological, praxeological, personalistic, axeological and any other as-
pects. Each historical stage of developnent of philosophical thought con-
sidered far fros all these aspects, and dissimilar attention was devoted to

121

FIIICMHHCIAI.USEIMNLY
lNlR‘OFFWCIAl.lﬁ5EZ(M§LY

each of them. Depending on the practical and scientific needs, attention
was concentrated on some of them while others were shifted to the background.
Only dialectical materialism-the highest form of development of dialectics
and materialism-answers the main question of philosophy in a comprehensive
manner, taking into consideration all its sides and aspects.

The source of mental images is one of the most important problems, namely,
which exogenous and endogenous factors are associated with the contents of
a subject's mental images (sensations, perceptions, conceptions, etc.).
Idealism takes the psychological element out of the internal, self-contained
spiritual world of a subject or alsolute idea that precedes and generates
objective reality. For materialism, "... the ideal is nothing other than
the material transplanted into man's head and transformed in it."2 Trans-
formation of the material element into the ideal is a process of reflection.
Tangible phenomena and processes serve as its base data, while the mental
images that reflect them are the final results.

Of course, there is no need to dwell in detail on the importance and urgency
of this problem to development of philosophy. Suffice it to mention, in this
regard, that its scientific solution (we refer to the most general solution,
since solution of such problems is an historic process that cannot be
concluded at some stage of human cognition) undermines idealism and, at the
same time, is one of the most important confirmations of the dialectical
materialistic world outlook.

Representatives of pre-Marxist and non-Marxist materialism consider as the
only source of the psychological factor the objects and phenomena in the
material world that elicit, by affecting sense organs, perceptual or

mental pictures of them in the subject's head--subjective images. Such
interpretation can be expressed as the scheme of thing + image. It is char-
acterized by a passive contemplative approach to interpretation of the
reflection process, in which the mental image is viewed as the result of
unilateral and direct effect of an object on the subject's organs of reflec-
tion. This approach presents a number of unsolvable difficulties. He shall
discuss here three of them.

1. There are many phenomena. the origin of which cannot be attributed to
objects, in mental reflection. In particular, they include perceptual and
mental acts of constructing and transforming ideal images, which cannot be
attributed to changes occurring in the objective world. Representatives of
passive and contemplative materialism explained their occurrence on the
basis of inborn physiological or mental capacities of the subject, which
was in contradiction with the main premise of materialism: there is nothing
in the mind that is not present in the material processes it reflects.

2. The subject does not perceive an object directly, instead he perceives
the changes that it makes by affecting the subject's sense organs. Hence,

an umsurmountable difficulty within the framework of metaphysical materialism:
how does a mental image arise if an object affects unilaterally the subject's
analyzer systems, and why do we attribute the subjective state of our mind to
external objects as their objective features. Of course, one can again
answer these questions within the limits of theoretical analysis expressed

by the scheme of thing + image by again referring to congenital physiology

122
(physiological idealism) or the subject's mental (subjective idealism) capacity.
Both answers lead to recognition of predeternined harnony, which is inherent
in the teleological world outlook.

3. The passive and contenplative approach to the process of reflection was the
nain cause of absence in its representatives of a historical view of the
nature of reflection organs, and this was aanifasted by overlooking the quali-
tative specifics of organs of hunn cognition. reducing than to sense organs,
which were viewed as the sole receiver of infornation coming to the subject
from the outside world. But thinking reflects lastly the qualitative and
quantitative characteristics of objects that are inaccessible to the organs of
perceptive reflection. Sensualin was one of the philosophical.- directions that
tried to resolve the contradiction; its representatives proceeded fro- the
premise that thinking is aedieted. rather than direct, perception of reflection
of material reality and that. consequently. perception is the only inediete
source of thought. However, the numerous attespts to remove thinking fron
sensory elenents failed to yield positive results, since perception did not
have its own mechanisms capable of elevating it to the intelligence level.
Consideration of perception as the only source" of thinking and inossibility -
of removing thought,with all its specificity, from sensory elements constituted
a contradiction that resulted in either denial of the qualitative specifics of
reason, reducing it to senses, which is inherent ihﬂiricisn-and positivism.
or recognition of-resson'e.'ﬁin‘ate or God-given capacity to directly comprehend
the essence of things.

The comaon feature of all the above difficulties is that it is imossible to
provide conplete and conprehensive netsrialiatic validation of the mental
elenent on the basis of recognising it as the only source of external objects.
The presence of subjective eluents in the psyche, the appearance of which
cannot be explained within the linits of the passive-contemplative approach
to the reflection process. has always led to retreating fron naterialisn, and
it constituted the gnosiological basis of subjectively idealistic trends,
which always changed more or less systematically to objective idealism because
of their solipsistic perspective. lant—Fichte—Begel constitute the typical '
line of development of all philosophical trends that use subjective phenonena
as the basis, for which there is no materialistic validation at this stage of
development of philosophy. '

\
Harxist-Leninist classicists. who introduced into gnosiology the category of
"material activity,” which reflects interaction between object and subject
oriented toward satisfying the needs of nan or aninals. outlined the basic
solution to the problens related to the above-mentioned difficulties. V. I.
Lenin stated: ”The point of view of life, practice, should be the first
and basic point of view of theory of knowledge. And it inevitably leads to
naterialian. rejecting the infinite contrivances of professorial acholastics.
Naterial [substantive] activity perfores a number of functions in reflection.
The most inportant one is that it serves as the source of aental reflection
through its naterial interaction between object and subject.

Recognition of activity. practice as thenein source of nental reflection is
what distinguishes dialectical asterialist gnosiology fron all pre-lhrxist

123

FOIOFHCMLUSEONLY
FOIioFFKJAl.USE(M%LY

and non-Harrist epistemological conceptions. K. Marx indicated: "The chief
flaw of all prior materialism, including Feuerbachﬂuimaterialism, is that the
object, reality, sensuality is taken only in the form of an object or in

the form of contemplation, but not as man's sensual activity, experience
[practice], not subjectively. This is why it happened that the active
aspect, as opposed to materialism, was developed by idealism, but only
abstractly, since idealism, of course, does not know of real, sensual
activity as such.” -...- '-

Marxist—Leninist classicists found a common basic approach to solving the problems
that metaphysical materialism encountered because of its passively contem-

plative nature. This approach was defined and further developed in the works
of Soviet and foreign Marxist philosophers.“ however, the above-mentioned
difficulties, particularly the last two, never were defined by theory of
knowledge of dialectical materialism and thus, in our opinion, are attributable
to underestimation of the role of material activity as the source of mental
images.

For example, the opinion is held widely, witﬁ'rififihce”fo soIVIE§"Ehe‘prBSIem'
of genesis of the perceptual image in both gnosiology and psychology, that

the nental image owes its origin entirely to the exogenous effectsof objects

on receptor systems, which presumably have the capacity to receive and

project exogenOus information going to the brain. Thus, one of the proponents
of this view, L. H. Vekker, believes that "the initial mental structures are
determined in their original volume and composition by an object, whereas
action, which is a mandatory prerequisite for further structuring of informa-
tion, is still of a derivative nature in relation to this initial determination.
It builds the informational structure, but is not the base material for building
it. It involves expressly operator, but not operand, composition of informa- '
tion."‘ however. this does not eliminate the difficulty of explaining the
genesis of a mental image, but is transported from the entire class of images
to the part of it that consists of initial mental structures.

It was also found impossible to derive thought with all its specificity from
sensory data. Most researchers concerned with the problem of correlation
between senses and reason believe that perceptual reflection is the Only
source of thinking. In one of the recent works deeling_with the source and
genesis of thinking, it is noted ”that active [lively] contemplation of
reality, its reflection in sensations, including kinesthetic sensations, was
and remains the only source of our knowledge."{ .}#.£P£ opinion of authors who
share sensualistic sets, the contradiction between perception and thinking is
overcome through experience. The latter is correct but only provided thinking
is the direct reflection of objects in practical activity that are inaccessible
to sensory perception. But this is incompatible with the thesis of sensualism

that mental reflection of reality is mediated by the senses.

The difficulties we have mentioned are already an indication of the small

amount of work done on the general philosophical problems of the source, genesis
and mechanisms of mental reflection. This is recognised also by specialists

in the field of gnosiology and psychology of cognitive processes. V. 3. Tyuhhtin
writes: "In general, solution of the problem of the nature of the sensory

124

FOI;0IIIC1A1.USE¢MULY
inage is presently at the stage of plausible hypotheses.'." The sane can be

stated about cognitive nentel images. Thus, 1.. I. Antsyferova observes:
"Nongraphic knowledge, construed as abstract thought, is forned only on the
basis of the sensory level of cognition. But this thesis does very little

to advance the difficult problen that has-yet to be solved (underlined by a. I.)
of the substantive content of abstract categories of thinking. At the present
ties, the problen csn nerely he fornuleted as follows: maarywth'
abstract knowledge related to its sensory roots."

In our opinion, one can offer the correct explanation of genesis of nental
ineges only by relating it to definition of the Nanist,.thesis of naterial
activity as the source of neural activity. First of all, we met clarify the
neaning of the statenent aade by Mar: to the effect that an object nust
indeed be taken in the torn of nateriel experience—subjectively. In our
opinion, this scene: 1) reflection, transplantation of the naterisl into
esn's head and transfer-nation thereof into the ideal is never direct and
mediate; 2) the thing -t inage relationship is always aedieted by exogenous
and endogenous activity processes vhich, in addition to their i-ediate
function-do serve as a nean's'of fulfilling FftiI neai-TﬁrTBﬁ—i'Yierctive
function: they carry infer-nation from object to subject. Proceeding from
this definition end on the basis of data referable nainly to nodern pyscholo-
gical research, the author undertakes the task of finding the nain eleeents
involved in the infometional connection between the object and nental

inage that constitute as a whole the general nechanisn- of the interns]. ideal
plan of reflection. Perfornance of this task is linited to the narrow range
of neural ineges that includes perception end elasntary, neeningful,
abstract concepts.

W38
1. Marx, K. and Engels, F., Works," Vol 21, p 282.
2. 1514, Vol 23. p 21.
3. Lenin, V. l., "Co-plate works," Vol 18, p 155.
la. Marx, K. and Engels, P., ”Works," Vol 3, p l.

S. Yaroshevskiy, Tadeush 11., "Thoughts About Experience," Moscow, 1976;
Pavlov, ‘1‘., "Reflection Theory,“ Moscow, 1936;
Yakushevskiy, I. 6., "The Problen of Subject and Object in Classical and
Modern Bourgeois Philosophy,” noscov, 1965;
Leont'yev, A. 8., "Probl-s of lientel Develop-ant," Moscow. 1965;
Spirkin, A. 6., “the Origin of Consciousness,” Hoscov, 1960;
lden, "Activity, Consciousness and the Personality,” noscov, 1975, and
others.

6. Vekker. 1.. 14., "Rental Processes," Leningrad, Vol 1. 1976, p 311.
7. Panov, V. 6., "The Sensual, Rational and Experience," Moscow, 1975, p 135.

8. ‘l‘yukhtin, V. S. ”Inage," "Philosophical Encyclopedia," noncov, Vol lb,
1967, p 111.

125

MWWONLY
MWUSEONLY

9. Antoyferove. L. 1., "Introepective Bxperinente end Studiee of Thinking in
the Hurzburs School," in "Conway: neprevleniye ieeledoveniy peikhologii
nyehleniye v kepitelieticheekikh etrenekh“ [Hein Directions of leeenrch
on Peychology of Thinking in Cepitelietic Countriee]. Hoecov, 1966. p 73.

Contents Pepe

Foreword 3

Chapter 1. Object end Mental Inge 9

l. Object end inege 9
2. Object end perception 12
3. The neture of 'eecondery' treite l7
6. Object end ibetrect concept 26
S. Operationel etructure of nentel reflection 28
6. Probl- of necheniene of eeneuel reflection. Critique of

receptor theory of,perception 36
7. Problen of necheniene of Intel reflection. Critique of

eeneuelien 61
8. Problu of nechenim of nentnl reflection. Seneunlien end

theory of reflection of diniecticel neterielien 51

Chapter 2. heteriel Activity. end Mentel lye _ S9

1. Concept of uteriel ectivity 59
2. liietoricel forne of uteriel oftivity 65
3. Materiel eubetentive action ee the" 'oource of mental {use 71
6. Goal eettins end neteriel ectione 76
S. Tentative neteriel ection no the Mine source of ‘

perceptunl inege 81
6. Mecheniene of perceptuel reflection 88
7. rentetive cognitive action no the direct eource of ebetrect

thought 96
a. Hecheniene of ebetrectnreflection 106

Conclusion 115

COPYRIGHT: Itdetel'etvo "Shtiintee". 1981

10.657
(:50: 1840/15? - m ..

126

”MANNY