FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I OVH'

JPRS L/10004

22 September 1981

Korean Affairs Report

(FOUO 3/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
PGLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

Japanese Government's Position on Aid to Korea Reported
(TOKYO SHIMBUN, 16 Aug 81) ..........................

Psychological Profiles of Leadership of Chon Th-hvan Regime
Analyzed
(Yagasaki Seiji; KOKDBO, Aug 81) ....................

- a - [III - ASI

F0. OFHPIAI “SF ONI V
JAPANESE COVERNHENT'S POSITION ON AID T0 KOREA REPORTED
Tokyo ?0KYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 16 Aug 81 p l

[Textl The Government, on the 15th. firmed up the Japanese side's policy for coping
with the Japan-ROK Foreign Ministers' Conference, slated to be held in Tokyo on the
20th and the let. According to a clarification made by a Government source, its
policy is to make clear the nature of aid for "mutual inter-dependence and humanitar—
ian consideration," in regard to the problem of economic co-operation toward the ROK.
which has become the biggest focal point, due to the ROK side's strong requests, and
to decide on increasing the amount of economic assistance (yen loans) to the ROK in
the next fiscal year by about 50 percent, and on increasing the amount from 19 billion
yen for the current fiscal year to a little less than 30 billion yen. Meanwhile. as
regards the security problem, the Government intends to transmit to the ROK side the
posture of the Japanese side that (1) Japan is also contributing to the peace and
security of the Far East and Asia, including the ROK, through the firm maintenance of
the Japan-US Security Treaty, and (2) Japan cannot offer economic co-operation inter-
twined with security. and to seek the understanding of the ROK side.

As for defining the nature of aid to the ROK as "for interdependence and humanitarian
consideration," the Government source explains that "it aims at giving humanitarian
consideration. while fully recognizing the importance of diplomatic and economic '
relations with the ROK." It is viewed that this has the aim of carrying through our
country's posture in regard to foreign economic co~operation, which has been to place
emphasis on the stabilization of the people's livelihood and welfare, and also to
give consideration to the ROK's position, which emphasizes the ROK's "contribution to
security." by auding "inter-dependence" which has the implication of security. and

to use this, at the same time as the grounds for increasing the aid amount.

As for the standards for its decision to increase the amount of aid 'n the ROK in the
next fiscal year by about 50 percent, compared with the current fiscal year, and to

so! the amount at slightly less than 30 billion yen, the Government source explains

as follows: (1) When the amounts of aid for the current fiscal year to various nations
are compared. the aid amount to the ROK (19 billion yen), where the per capita GNP

is 1,310 dollars, is small. when compared with the aid amount of 21 billion yen to
Malaysia (per capita GNP is 1,150 dollars) and the aid amount of 30 billion yen to
Mexico (per capita GNP is 1,400 dollars); and (2) consequently, it is viewed that the
proper amount would be between 27 to 29 billion yen, which stands midway between the
amounts r”: Malaysia and Mexico.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In carrying out the increasing of the amount of aid to the ROK in the next fiscal
year, the Covornment will not agree to the "package-grant formula," which is being
sought by the ROK side. and intends to maintain firmlv the "accumulation lormula,"
which it has been following up until now, and under which each proivct. centurion
on projects connected with the strengthening of the social foundation. such as hos-
pitals and Schools, will be carefullv checked. It wishes to present the Japanese
side's policy at the administrative-level negatiations to be held between the two
countries. on the 22d, immediately after the Foreign Ministers' Conference, if

possible, and work out the details by the Japan—ROK periodic Ministerial Conference,
slated for September.

As for the security problem, our country, even while showing understanding for the
severe military situation on the Korean Peninsula. which is being asserted by the ROK
side, will transmit to the ROK side its position that it cannot offer military co-
operation or economic co—oporation for that purpose, in the light of its Constitutional
restrictions. At the some time, the Government intends to show clearly its perception
that our country is also contributing to the maintenance of security on the Korean

Peninsula, through its efforts for the firm maintenance of the Japan-US Security
Treaty.

Toward this policy of the Japanese side for the handling of the problem, the ROK
side has been showing. through various kinds of unofficial channels, the basic posture
that (l) the ROK is using one—third of its national budget for defense, and this is
contributing to the security of Japan, (2) it is hoped that Japan will recognize

this point and increase its economic co-operation toward the ROK, which is having
difficulties, and (3) it hopes to establish new Japan-ROK relations, standing on a
common perception of security. As a concrete increase in aid, it is sounding out the
Japanese side for two billion dollars (about 470 billion yen) a year for the five
year period for the 5th Five-Year Economic Plan, which it will start in January of
next year, or a totJl amount of 10 billion dollars (about 2,350 billion yen), as
economic co-operntion. lhe Japanese side's policy, firmed up on the 15th, takes the
form of rejecting the ROK side's request, in general outline, even though showing
some concessions in part, and hard-sailing at the negotiations between the two

countries in the future, including the foreign Ninisters' talks, is becoming unavoid-
able.
___ Development of Economic Co—ogeration toward the ROK over the Past 10 Years_

 

_____ Reimbursible Aid gYen Loans! Non-reimbursible grants—

3y Amount Main Objects Amount Main Objects _____

197] 38,060 Fostering of export industries: 130 Construction of technolog-
subway lines ical senior high-schools

1972 21.600 Raw materials and machines for 394 Construction of technolog—
industrisl use; expansion of ical senior high-schools
communications facilities

1973 21,600 Raw materials; machine 563 Construction of technolog—
equipment icnl senior high-schools

1974 31.320 Agricultural development; dams 500 Building of Engineering

Dept.. Seoul University

1975 23,620 Promotion of agriculture; 500 Building of Engineering
ports and harbors Dept., Seoul University

1976 21,500 Railways; promotion of 1,000 Building of Engineering
agriculture Dept.. Seoul University

1977 24.000 Promotion of agriculture; 717 Research institutes; medi-
super-high-voltage electric cal treatment materials
power transmission dam

1978 21.000 Machinery for agricultural use; 415 Medical treatment materials
medical treatment facilities

1979 19,000 Educational facilities; city ---
sewerage and disposal facilities

1980 19.000 Hospital facilities; educational ~--
facilities

(Note) The monetary amount is shown in the unit of 1 million yen.

COPYFIGHT: Chunichi Shimbun Tokyo Honshs 1981

CSO: 4105/220

3
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SI-I UNI)

S. KOREA/POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFILES 0F LEADERSHIP 0F CHON TU-HHAN REGIME ANALYZED
Tokyo KOKUBO in Japanese Aug 81 pp 39-51

[Article by Yagasaki Seiji: "The Mentality of the Chen Tu-hwan Regime"]
[Text] Prologue

The Chen Tu-hwan regime of the Republic of Korea, now engaged in real earnest in
building a Fifth Republic, constantly emphasizes that the Republic of Korea has
entered "a new age." calling the days of the preceeding Pak Chong—hui regime as

"the old age." To be sure. from the Japanese standpoint, there was an easy-to—
approach, easy-to-bcrriond feeling toward the key personnel of the Pak regime because
they were all proficient in the Japanese language, forced to learn it under the
Japanese rule in prewar days, but most of the key personnel of the present Chon
regime, because they have received postwar Korean education. no longer understand

the Japanese language, as to be expected, and there is no denying that this makes

it somewhat difficult to take easily to them.

But between President Chon and the late President Pak, both dyed-in-the-wool elites

of the Army. there are more similarities than dissimilarities in the basics of their
policies: "building up a rich country with a strong army by means of industrialization
For this reason, certain quarters still regard President Chon as "a second Pak,“ that
is, heir to President Pak.

Now, then, is the Chen regime really "new?"

For the answer to this question. it is indispensable to make an analysis of the
character of the Chon regime, an analysis of the mentality of the Chon regime, based
on objective data.

What is essential first of all in making an analysis of the character or mentality

of a regime. is picking out and examining the key persons in the pivotal positions

of the regime. In the case of the Chen regime, they are graduates of the ROK
Military Academy (hereinafter the academy), graduates after the academy had become

a four—year school-—so-ca11ed "0.88.“ [old boys——reserve or retired military officers]
still in the prime of life or currently active y0ung military officers. Of course,
there are also graduates from the Naval Academy or Air Force Academy and technocrats
who are graduates of first-class universities such as the Seoul National University,
who are playing important roles in various areas.

a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SIZ ONLY

But they are not given the right to make a final decision on any national policy.
This is reserved for the academy 0.83. In consequence, the key persons of the Chon
regime are exclusively academy 0.Bs. Therefore, the following analysis is focused on
the academy 0.83.

1. Their Background and Its Effects
(1) Their Background

The academy 0.3a. forming the nucleus of the Chen regime are regarded to be graduates
of the 11th class, the 1st class of the 6-year system. to the 18th class. The 11th
class. needless to say, includes President Chan and among the graduates of the 18th
class is Yi ﬂak-pong, senior secretary to the President for civilian affairs.

Graduates of the 11th class, who had entered the academy without hitting a snag in
academic advancement, were all born in 1936 (President Chon was 3 years behind for
he had gone to Manchuria in his primary school days), and are now 67 years old. They
are members of the generation who completed their primary school education under the
Japanese rule in prewar days, entered middle school in 1966, the year after the end
of Japanese rule, and escaped the Korean War by a hair because they were still high
school students. They entered the academy during the Korean War and graduated in
1955, 2 years after the armistice.

Meanwhile, graduates of the 18th class, who had entered the academy without hitting
a snag in academic advancement, were all born in 1961, and are now 60 years old.
They became primary school students in 1967, 2 years after liberation from Japanese
rule, entered middle school during the Korean War, advanced to high school after the
armistice, entered the academy in 1958, participated, when seniors, in the march in
support of the revolution at time of the military revolution, and graduated the
following year, 1962.

In other words, graduates of the 11th to 18th classes are in their 60's, the most
productive years of life.

From what localities, from what strata of society have the 0.8s. come? According to
'Whe 30nYear History of the ROK Military Academy" (compiled by the Committee for
Compilation of thc 30-Ycar History of the ROK Military Academy, 1978), the places of
birth by local; y for the graduates of the 11th to 13th classes (as of 1956) are as
follows:

 

11th Class 12th Class 13th Class

Kyongsang provinces (1) 69 (1) 66 (1) 69
Ch'ungch'ong provinces (2) 30 (2) 37 (3) 65
Cholla provinces (3) 26 (3) 31 (2) 66
Kyonggi Province (6) 16 (6) 21 (6) 26
Seoul (S) 12 (6) 17 (S) 22
P'yongan provinces (S) 12 (S) 19 (6) 12
Hang)ung provinces (7) 9 (8) 3 (9) 3
Hwanghae Province (8) 5 (7) 6 (9) 3
Kuhn-Jen Province (9) 6 (10) 2 (8) 7
Uhe1u ProviHCu (10) 3 (8) 3 (7) 8

Total 166 181 259

5
FOR OFFICIAL lfSE ONLY
FOR ()FFK‘l-ll. l'h'l". 031)

As the above table shows, for the llth and 12th classes, Kyongsang provinces top

them all with an overwhelming majority; for the 13th class, Kyongsang and Cholla
provinces lead with nearly equal numbers. Graduates of the 11th class from Kyongsang
provinces form the nucleus within the nucleus of the Chon regime, including President
Chon himself. To wit:

Deputy Chief of Staff. Army (active) Lt Gen Chong No-yong (of Taegu, North
Kyongsang Province)

Superintendent of the Academy Lt Gen Kim Pok-tong (of Taegu, North
Kyongsang Province)

No 2 Minister without Portfolio (reserve) Gen No T'ae-u (of Taegu. North Kyongsang
Province

No 2 Deputy Director, National Security Brig Gen Kim Song-chin (North Kyongsang
Planning Agency (formerly Central Intelli- Province
gence Agency, reorganized)

Director, office of Legislation Brig Gen Kim Yong-kyun (of Kosnng, South
Kyongsang Province)

Democratic Party National Col Kwon lk-hyon (of Sanch'ong, South

Assemblyman (district) Kyongsang Province)

-do— -do- Maj Gen Kim Sik (of Kangjin, South

Cholla Province)

-do- (at large) Col An Kyo-tok (of Ultchin, North
Kyongsang Province)

Now, the social background of these academy 0.33. Unfortunately. the "30-Year
History" does not provide their social background; thus there is no way to know the
social background of the graduates of the 11th to 13th classes. However, Mun Hui-sok's
"A Study of the Social Views of Cadets of the ROK Military Academy" (1967) provides
data about the graduates of the 22d to 25th classes, who are about 10 years younger
than their academy seniors which make it possible to reason by analogy the social
background of the seniors. what makes this possible is that 1966, the year the late
Mun Hui—sok (Marine brigadier general, deceased 1977), formerly Minister of Education,
conducted his survey, and the latter half of the 1950's in which President Chen gradu-
ated were both periods in the "agricultural" era when there was not yet a qualitative
change in the social structure prior to the so-called high-growth period in the
Republic of Korea.

According to Mun Hui-sok's book, the social background of the total number of cadets,
637, from [hm 22d to 25th classes, is as follovs:

(l) Agriculture/fishing 42.07 percent
(2) Small business 17.27
(3) Civil service 13.03
(a) General labor 9.26

(5) Clerical work 5.36
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

(5) Professional work 5.34
(7) Military and police 2.35
(8) Large business, mining 2.20
(8) Real estate income 2.20
(10) Other 0.31
Total 100.00* percent [*as given]

Next, their father's schooling is given as follows:

(1) Primary school graduates

(including dropouts) 42.86 percent
(2) Middle school graduates (-do) 18.84
(3) High school graduates (-do-) 12.56
(4) College graduates or
university dropouts 10.36
(S) No schooling 9.73
(6) University graduates 4.87
(7) Postgraduate university graduates 0.78
Total 100.00 percent

This shows that most of the academy cadets of the 11th to 25th classes came from
poor agricultural and fishing villages. President Chon too hails from a mountain
village in Hyopch'on County in the northern part of South Kyongsang Province. In
this respect he is similar to the late President Pak who had hailed from a hamlet
(Sonsan, North Kyongsang Province). The tenure of the late President Pak was known
as the "Kyongsang era," because he had surrounded himself with his juniors from
Kyongsang; here again, there is no denying similar tendencies of the Chen regime.

(2) A Sense of Justice

In general, those hailing from agricultural and fishing villages usually entertain
antipathy against the wealthy urban classes and many of them have such a strong sense

of justice that they are particularly allergic to those who have unethically accumulated
wealth. President Chan and company are no exceptions.

It was a manifestation of this sense of justice that on 17 May of last year the Chen
regime arrested as many as nine big-shot politicians including former prime minister
Kim Chong-p'il on charges of having unethically accumulated their wealth, followed by
a sweeping purge in the summer and autumn of the same year on the biggest scale ever.
By this purge were dismissed 232 high-ranking civil servants, 400 financial executives
including 4 bank presidents, 387 executives of state-operated businesses, 1,212 execu-
C1VL$ of agricultural and fishing associations, 611 education committee members,
46,000 gansters and undesirables. (On 23 June 1981 the high-ranking civil servants

an: sluts-operated business executives were depurged, thus opening the way to their
reemployment.)

(3) A Sense of Mission

Again, as the academy provides education at no cost to the cadets, it has been flooded
every year with applications from Outstanding children of poor agricultural and fish-
Eng ‘Illnges and as a result. competition has been keen every year. According to
"From the hwang River to Pukak," a biography of President Chon (by Ch'on Kum-song,
1981), in the autumn of 1951 the ratio of competition was 7 to l for the 11th class.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm (ll-"Hf! \l. “SI-I ()VIJ

Also, according to the "30-Year History," the ratio of competition from 1952 (the 12th
class) to 1972 (the 32d class) was as follows (ratio for the 14th and 15th classes is
unknown):

1952 (the 12th class) 11 to 1
1953 (the 13th class) 16 to l
...ll95&] Unknown
...ll955] Unknown
1956 (the 16th class) 22 to 1
1957 (the 17th class) 23 to l
1958 (the 18th class) 18 to l
1959 (the 19th class) 16 to 1
l960 (the 20th class) 15 to l
1961 (the let class) 13 to 1

Having broken through Such barrier. the academy cadets of those days took pride in
themselves even more than Seoul National University students, bursting with an elitist
consciousness.

How strong was their sense of mission based on the elitist consciousness is well
manifested in the speech President made at the ceremony of his retirement from military
service, viz.:

"After the war (the Korean War) the chaos of society reached the extreme but bursting
with a sense of mission that we must establish the tradition of the academy and become
soldiers of the national salvation column, and reaffirming our oath at time of
admission to the academy that we must dedicate cur passion to the altar of the country
and the nation...." (22 August 1981)

2. The Academy's Education and Its Effects
(1) The Academy's education

Next, the education these 0.33. received at the academy have played a major role in
the formation of their mentality. As opposed to their senior 0.33. up to and includ-
ing the 10th class who had received a quick, short-term training from 3 weeks to 1
year a. the most, the 0.83. from the llth class on down received a full years of cadet
training with characteristics directly imported from the United States, as follows:

(i) The Thayer System

This is the education system devised by Col Sylvanus Thayer, father of West of Point
(Superintendent for 16 years from 1817). Its characteristics are emphasis on self-
study. formation of small classes by academic achievements of students, and habituation
of voluntary study by means of daily examinations.

(ii) The Sell-Rule System

This system is aimed at the self—rule of in-academy unit life, establishment of
military discipline, and nurturing of habits as regular army officers through unit
command. Out of the cadets are selected a student battalion commander, student com-
pany commanders, student platoon leaders, and student squad leaders, who are charged
with the duties of self-rule.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIA

(iii) The llnnm‘ System

lhis is a system devised for the cadets to nurture a high sense of honor, detest
falsehood and injustice, and cultivate a fresh spirit of fairness and justice. Its
basic principles are: (1) tell no lies; (2) no cribbing; (3) no stealing; (4) report
on other cadets' violation of the code of honor. In connection with this honor system,
the [RJK] academy's motto of "ch'ung" [loyalty] and "yong" [courage] up to that time
was replaced by "chi" [wisdom], "in" [benevolence], and "yang" [courage]. This was
modeled on the Nest Point's motut: Duty, Honor, Country.

In other words, what this means is that every day of their life, every move of theirs
is strictly governed by stern rules in a world of competition based on real abilities
where there is no room for favoritism.

(2) The Right-Angled Thinking

As a result of such education, what the cadets of the 11th class on down have acquired
is the "right-angled thinking." “hat is meant by the "right-angled thinking" is an
attitude of thinking out things literally at a "right angle," that is, strictly on

the basis of principles and rules. This is indeed an educational result that can be
achieved only by a military school which holds faithfulness to principles, absolute
obedience to orders as the highest honor.

In particular, the 11th class, because it was the first class under the new system,
became the object of stern experimentation. Kang Chae-yun, who is a classmate of
President Chan and currently Deputy Director of the East-West Research Institute of
the evening paper CHUNCANG ILBO, wrote an essay "Reminiscences of Military Academy
Cadets as Principled Second Lieutenants" (the montly CHUNGANG, January 1980 issue).
Excerpts:

'ﬁhe cadets, on the first day of admission, were ordered to put on their academy
uniforms. The order spelled out detailed procedures how to wear the trousers
(specifying which side the testicles should be) and the cadets were beweildered at
first. Still, it was essential to shape the youths who had been brought up in
different ways. the academy way. For the first few months they were confined to the
acadeoy, with no contact whatsoever with the outside world, no leaves, no overnight
passes, and they were forbidden personal, individual contacts with officers, except
with fellow cadets.... No flexibilities, no expediencies were allowed; they were
educated to rise above worldly affairs. For example, to counnnt but on diction,
they were encouraged to pronounce each word clearly, and any mordent diction was
discouraged. Any flexibility such as 'it may not be according to the law but it stands
:c renalu that it should be so' was repudiated. As a result, everything had to be
'rzdh:-zn4led'--not only ‘right-angled work' in which the cadet draws in his chin,
states the front, and walks arching back his chest to an unnatural degree, but also
‘right-nngled eating' and 'right-angled dressing.'“

what is meant by the "right-angled eating" is eating, moving your elbows literally
at a right angle. This, it is reported. caused many comical scenes. President Chon,
too. in an interview by the SHOKUN (October 1980 issue), reminisced as follows:

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR ()l-'Fl('l \l. I'Slf ()Vl.\

"Accustoued to using a knife and fork in cutting up meat and eating it, there is
nothing to it for them (U.S. cadets), but we are accustomed to eating rice and soup
with a spoon. So, when we tried to eat, bending our elbows at a right atgle, fre-

quently there were comical scenes that here and there at the tables the soup was
spilled."

0n the other hand. such strict observance of principles lacking flexibility isUIJtud
tle academy from the soniety at large and branded it as a "lonely island of morality."
In consequence, all the good intentions, policies went round and round and got nowhere.
It was also a lack of flexibility that caused the industrial readjustment against
large financial cliques. which was carried out in parallel with the large-scale purge,
to run into a dead end. It would seem that it was their judgment that in order to
uproot the cause at rivalry of financial cliques for excessive investment, there was
no other way but to issue an uncompromising order. but inasmuch as the ROK economy

is a complex one intricately entangled with the world economy, the action was much
too “right-angled."

(3) The Organizational Sense

Again, inasmuch as they had been thoroughly trained to act efficiently in an organized
manner at conmmnd, the academy graduates alone became an unusually well-disciplined
collective in the ROK society where "individualities are too strong to get together."
So it is that Gregory Henderson, in his renowned book "Korea the Politics of the
Vortex“ (1968) summarizes the ROK military characteristics as follows:

"No civilian group or inscituation has come close to it [the Korean Army] in the
development of a definite and CUFPﬂrafivelY fairly administered career service. It

is the only Korean group...which...succeeded...attention over a long period to achieve
effective influence," "...the Korean Army became the first Korean organization...that
eliminated most of the sources of fluidity and disunity...," and "It [Korean Army]
became the strongest organization of the country...."

In particular, the academy cadets had to maintain unity of action 24 hours a day on
an in-academy unit basis. in his earlier mentioned essay, Kang Chae-yun reminisces:

"Even within the academy no cadets were allowed individual actions except when
summoned by instructor officers. Even when nature called, they had to go to the
bathroom in a group."

As a result, their buddy—consciousness, their comrade—consciousness could not but
heighten and even after graduation, has come to continue all this time. As is widely
known. President Chon on 12 December 1979 seized the real power of the military by
coup d'etat known as "12 December military purge." Behind the success of this sink
or swim gamble was action taken without notice to the [1.5. Command to mobilize
troops by the president's classmates--Kim Pok-tong. a member of the president's
in-academy unit. and Kim's matrimonial relative No T'ae—u, and another classmate
Chong Ho-yong.

But such buddy-consciousness frequently tends to take on a factional nature. In
particular. in the Republic of Korea where a hometown consciousness still remains
strong, there are tendencies to form factions on a hometown or high school basis.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USP. OVLY
FOR OFFK1AI.PSE()NL\

As a matter of fact, there was a case in which Yun P'il-yong, of Kyongsang province,
of the 8th class of the academy and Capital Garrison Commander, (currently President
of Korea Highway Corporation) had rallied a number of his academy juniors, of
Kyongsang province and threatened the [then] president, which proved his undoing.

In thie sense. three among those close to President Chon--ﬂn Hwn-p'yong (aide of the
Presid~ntia1 Secretariat, of the 17th class, of P'ohang), Ho Sam-su (senior secretary
of the Presidential Inspector's Office, of the 17th class, of Pusan), and earlier
mentioned Yi ﬂak-pong (of Pusan)--are all from South Kyongsang Province, and there
are certain quarters which suspect the existence of a South Kyongsang clique. There
is a rumor to the effect that the three generals metioned, No, Kim, and Chong, who
together with President Chon participated in the 12 December coup d'etat, are not
getting along with President Chon quite as well as supposed to be. It appears the
rumor is not entirely groundless in light of the fact that the three generals are all
from Taegu, North Kyongsang Province whereas President Chon is from South Kyongsang
Province. (Later, General No was promoted to the rank of a full general on 11 July
only to be placed on the reserve list and appointed on the 16th as No 2 Minister
Without Portfolio in charge of security. It would seem to mean that the rivalry of
Chen versus No has ended in the victory of President Chou that General No who had
been in No 2 post next to President Cho has been placed on the reserve list.)

By the way, Kwon Ik-hyon (of the 11th class) and Pae Myong-kuk (of the 16th class),
both currently National Assemblyman, and Chong Tong-ch'ol (of the 12th class), Deputy
Minister of Labor, who had all been removed from office for implication in the earlier
mentioned Yun P'i1~yong scandal, are among those who have been rehabilitated by the
birth of the Chou regime. '

3. The Military Revolution and Its Effects
(1) The Military Revolution

Next, it was the military revolution of 16 May 1961 led by the late President Pak
which exerted great influence on the mentality of young officers. At the time of
this revoluiion, the 11th class was 6 months after graduation from the academy and
generally in the company officer grade of captains. President Chon was also a
captain and was serving as an ROTC instructor at the Seoul National University.

The greatest of influence exerted by this military revolution on young officers was
the skepticism about the creed of civilian control and the growing belief in power
with emphasis on national interests.

The academy, as does the U.S. Military Academy, has taught the important of civilian
control, the political neutrality of military officers. In particular, Lt Gen Yi
Hal—11a, superintendent of the academy for 2 years from 1957 to 1959 (former ambassador
to Australia), was known for his reiteration of the importance of civilian control.
This was so because Lieutenant General Yi had been particularly critical of the way

the then President Syngman Rhee was manipulating military officers to his advantage,
dragging them into politics.

As a result, when the military revolution broke out, some of the senior cadets who
nad been rrained by Lieutenant General Yi were so beset by vexation as to how to view
this revolution that they sought the advice of Lieutenant General Yi now commander of
the 18L Army in a move, if necessary, to take part in putting down the military
revolution.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But the move of the senior cadets was discovered and checked beforehand by the
revolutionary officers and Lieutenant General Yi was also arrested. Thus an internecine
clash between the ROK military personnel was avoided and the military revolution
Succeeded.

(2) The Creed of Power and Political Training

This success implanted in most of the young officers the thinking "When it is judged
a national crisis, military ofiicers may break the principle of political neutrality,
wage a military revolution, and suspend the Constitution by armed force." The same
thinking justified the yusin coup d'etat of October 1972 and the coup d'etat of

12 December 1979.

As to this kind of thinking, the 0.5. Military Academy is thorough in teaching
civilian control, and the oath at time of admission clearly states in the beginning
"I, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United
States and bear true allegiance to the National Government;..." whereas the oath of
the ROK Military Academy at time of admission merely states "I swear to observe the
cadet creed and rules of morality."

'The cadet creed and rules of morality," according to the "30-Year History of the
ROK Military Academy,“ contains the following five major points and makes no mention
of the Constitution:

1. The cadet tells the truth and nothing but the truth.

II. The cadet‘s behavior is always fair and just.

III. The cadet always practices what he says.

IV. The cadet accepts nothing unethical.

V. The cadet holds himself responsible for his word and behavior.

In a nutshell, as mentioned earlier the ROK Military Academy too taught about civilian
control but was not thorough enough to make it a prerequisite 1f admission to support
the Constitution.

Regarding this point, one could anticipate from the side of the ROK statemen a
counter-argument "In the emergency situation of hostile confrontation with north

Koren it is unreasonable to demand civilian control identical to that of the United
States." To be sure, in such counter-argument there is an element of truth. But

when the question boils down to the proposition that it will be impossible to stand
up to north Korea unless civilian control is discarded, the opposition within the
Republic of Korea voices doubts and there seems room for further arguments. In that
sense, this has to be pointed out after all as one of the questions.

Again, the military revolution assigned a large number of young military officers

to parts of the administration under military government in the name of the Supreme
Council for National Construction, and as a result, the young officers trained them-
selves politically, in the process. Captain Chon Tu-hwan also impressed Pak Chong-hui,

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUM. liSF. 0NL\

then chairman of the Supreme Council, and became a secretary to the chairman for
civilian petition and then chief of personnel, Central Intelligence Agency. Captain
Chon returned to the army on the transfer of military government to civilian admin-
istration, declining the advice of Chairman Pak. But there is no doubt that (mptain
Chon had gained considerable political experience meantime. At first when President
Chen suddenly reemerged this time, it was said to be "the entry of a dyed-in—the-wool
military officer who only knows war, completely ignorant of politics," but looking
back now, it was far from the truth.

Moreover, it had remained a sort of conundrum how Captain Chon had come to impress
Chairman Pak, but according to "From the Hwang River to Pukak," it all began the
day after the outbreak of the military revolution when Captain Chon personally asked
Chairman Pak about the objective of the military revolution. Captain Chon had gone
to the army headquarters where Major General Pak was, prepared to kill him as well
as himself should it turn cut that the revolution had been motivated by personal
interest and gain. But after forcing his way into seeing the general, the captain
came to know the lofty objective of the revolution and find himself in complete
sympathy with it. Thereupon he flew back to his aima mater, the academy. posthaste
and laid the groundwork for the march in support of the revolution, it is reported.
This episode, it is said. had remained a secret solely because President Chon him-
self had never wanted to make it public. If true, then it must be said that even
when he was a mere captain. Chon Tu-hwan was already a man accomplished in politics
as well.

4. Participation in the Vietnam War and Its Effects
(1) Participation in the Vietnam Hat

Hhen commenting on the mentality of the young military officers, another thing that
must never be overlooked is their personal experience in the Vietnam War. This
experience has exerted great influence on them no less than did the experience in
the Korean war on the veteran military officers.

The participation of ROK combat units in the Vietnam War stretched over 8 years from
1965 through 1973 with an approximate aggregate of 300,000 ROK officers and men.
(Special report "The Triumphal Return of the ROK Army from Vietnam," March 1973
issue of the ASIA KORON)

How many of the 0.8. officers of the academy were among the participants? How many
of them were killed in action? There is no data available. But according to the
"BO-Year History," the first 0.8. group was a dozen academy graduates dispatched to
Vietnam in July 1965 as instructors for the mobile surgical hospital and T'aegwondo
martial art, followed by another group of 30 as members of the ROK Military Assistance
Team (the "Dove" unit) for Vietnam in February 1965; 250 as members of the Capitol
Division (the Tiger unit) in September 1965; about 150 as members of the 9th Division
(the white Horse unit) in September 1966. In other words, within no more than 2 years
a torai of 500 of the academy 0.3a. was dispatched to Vietnam.

In the case of the lat Regiment of the Capitol Division, platoon leaders, company
commanders, and regimental staff officers were all academy graduates; in the case

of the armored unitI 12 company commanders out of 14 companies were 0.88. and so were
70 percent of the platoon leaders.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()\'l.\'

As a result, most of the 0.35. up to and including the 26th class (1966) saw action
in the Vientam War, and some of them even reenlisted, it is reported.

Meanwhile, according to Vol 3 (published in October 1971) of the "War History of

the ROK Army Dispatched to Vietnam" by the War History Compilation Committee, there
was a total of 25 officers killed in action in a half-year period from July to
December of 1967: 3 each of lieutenants and second lieutenants of the Tiger unit;

1 captain, S lieutenants and 10 second lieutenants of the White Horse unit; 1 each

of major, captain, and lieutenant of he 100 Supply Command. In addition, according
to Vol h (published in October 1973) of the same war history, a total of 19 officers
was killed in action in another half-year period from January to June 1968: 12 Tiger
officers (3 captains, 6 lieutenants, 3 second lieutenants), 6 White Horse Division
officers (1 captain, 2 lieutenants, 3 second lieutenants), 1 major of the Construction
Aid Team. This means that in a 1-year period from 1967 to 1968 a total of 44 trmy
officers of the grade of second lieutenant and up was killed in action. There is

no doubt that most of the officers were the aforementioned platoon leaders, company
commanders, and regimental staff officers, and therefore, it could be said that most
of the officers killed in action were academy graduates.

By the way, President Chon participated in the war as commander (colonel) of the 29th
regiment of the White Horse unit for 1 full year from November 1970 when the Paris
peace conference was in a stalemate. He was the first regimental commander Out of
the 11th class. This was a period when the Laotian battle was under way along the
Vietnamese-Laotian border areas, a battle which proved to be the final large-scale
operation of the U.S. ground forces. In this operation the ROK forces did not
participate but were solely engaged in searching and destroying Vietcongs throughout
Ninh Hoa County, Khanh Hoa Province north of Nha Trang on the central coast. Accord-
ing to the "From the Hwang River to Pukak" by Ch'on Rum-song, President Chou during
his 1-year service in Vietnam commanded three major operations--"No 25 Operation Bat"
(9 days), "No 1 Operation Eagle 71" (20 days), and "No 26 Operation Bat" (35 days)--
in which 258 enemies were killed and 26 prisoners and suspects taken, for which he
was conferred a Ulchi Medal. But his regiment also suffered casualties: nine dead
and a dozen wounded.

(2) The Anticommunist Spirit

The greatest of influence exerted by the experience of the young officers in the
Vietnam war on their mentality was their political ideology more than anything

else. That is, it was their conviction that the political confrontation between the
government and opposition forces within Scuth Vietnam had invited the aggression of
North Vietnam, and an extremely sensitive reaction to political confrontation has
since become their habit.

Such mentality was most graphically manifested in the trial of Kim Tae-chung. In
August of last year after the indictment of Kim Tae-chung and others, President Chon
said:

"Didn't Vietnam give us the best lesson? "hen the students, religious personalities,
journalists persistently indulged in reckless criticism as if they did not have a
country to worry about, they merely hastened the fall of their country in the end.
Now that they are under the communist rule, what kind of criticism are they making?

11;

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NH

It will never do to put our minds to ease in the belief that ours is absolutely
different from that of Vietnam when actually we are under the threat of the north
Korean communist collective with vigilant hostility targeted on our shortcomings.

One must never forget that only when the country and people are wholesome is there
room for intellectuals as well." (Interview by the KYONGHYANG SINHUN, 11 August 1980)

It is because of the big influence of the experience of theirs in the Vietnam War
that the military 0.8a. in their prime of life, the nuclear force of the Chon regime.
are maintaining an unusually stern stance against any pro-comunist word or deed.

Epilogue

The above is an analysis of the character or mentality of the academy graduates
formed through their family and social backgrounds, their education at the academy,
and major events that took place after they had been comissioned as officers. It
would appear that their sense of justice. their sense of mission, and their anti-
commist spirit are little different from those that prevailed at the time of the
Pak regime. To be sure, compared with the acadmny graduates of the Zd class through
the 8th class who had received education at the academy for short periods (from 3
months to 1 year), the cadets of the 11th class on down received 4 full years of
education and are accomplished in scientific knowledge and scientific way of thinking.
But such are merely technical elements and essentially. it may not be amiss to say.
they all have a similar mentality.

COPYRIGHT: Asagumo Shiubunsha 1981

12153
CSO: l0105/218 END

1‘3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY