FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10322
12 February 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR Or'FICIAI. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPR'L Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppl ied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Iimes within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the LES. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP 0!"
MATERIALS REPRODL'CED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(POUO 4/82)

CONTENTS

INTERNATIONAL
Book Attacks 0.8. Anti-Soviet Course
(N. V. Zlglldin; ANTISOVETISH V GLOBAL'NOY STRATEGII
INPERIALIZHA SShA. 1981) .................................... 1
Book Examine. Revolutionary Reform in Latin America
(N. F. Gornov, v. c. Tkochcnko; LATINSKAYA AHIRICA:
OPYT NARODNYKN KOALITSII I KLASSOVAYA IOI'BA, 1981) ..... ... 3

NATIONAL
New Typology for Atheioto. Believer. Outlined

(A. r. Reade; ATBISTICHBSKOMU VOSPITANIYU--DIFFBR£NTSIROVANN!
Ponxnon. 1981) .............................................. 5

REGIONAL

Uzbek Labor Problem, Proopects Described
(G. A. Shiater; ISTORIYA SSSR, Nov-Dec 81) .................. 8

- a - II" - USSR - 35 F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNAT IONAL

BOOK ATTACKS U.S. ANTI-SOVIET COURSE

Moscow ANTISOVETISH V GLOBAL'NOY STRATEGII IMPERIRLIZMA SShA in Russian 1981
eigned to press 3 Jul 8l)pp 1-2, 284-286

[Table of contents and brief description of book by N. V. Zagladin)
[Excerpts‘ Title Page:

Title: ANTISOVCTISH V GLOBAL'hoY STRATEGII IMPERIALIZHA SShA
(Anti-Sovietism in the Global Strategy of U.S. Imperialism)

Publisher: Mysl'
Place and year of publication: Moscow, 1981

Signed to Press Date: 3 July 1981
Number of Copies Published: 50,000
Number of Pages: 286

Brief Description:

On the basis of factual material, this book shows the influence of anti-Sovietism
in forming U.S. foreign policy; it sheds light on its use by American ruling
circles in attempts to stop the world revolutionary process and in the struggle
for U.S. "world leadership." The monograph discloses the basic forms of using
anti-Sovietism in the ideological struggle of American imperialism against the
USSR, countries of the socialist community and brotherly communist parties.

Table of Contents
Introduction .................. ........................................... 3

Chapter 1. The Transformation of Anti-Sovietism Into the Leading Element
of the Ideology and Policy of U.S. Imperialism and Its
Institutionalization............................................. 11

Chapter 2. The "Theoretical Basis" of Anti-Sovietiam: Palsification of
the Principles of Socialist Foreign Policy and Their Realization. 65

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON LY

Chapter 3. The Evolution of the Myth of a "Soviet Military Threat".......... 71

Chapter 4. The Relaxation of International Tension and Soviet-American
Relations Through the Prism of Bourgeois Conceptions................. 111

Chapter 5. Anti-Sovietism as an Instrument of Policy: From the Policy of
"Liberation" to the Strategy of "Peacefully Attracting" Countries
ot the Socialist Community Into the Sphere of Influence of
Inpatnlisnoc-aa.a.aeaoaoaoacnonoaococo-noncocoa-ecocoooooooooocooail 1’09

Chapter 6. Bourgeois Falsifications of the Essence of Relations of the USSR
Uith Countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America..................... 176

Chapter 7. Anti-Sovietism as a Tool of Ideological Diversions Against the
International Communist Movement..................................... 201

Chapter 8. The "China Card" in the Ideology and Policy of Anti-Sovietisn.... 222
Chapter 9. The Crisis of the Ideology and Policy of Anti-Sovietism.......... 240
Conclusion.................. ..... ............................................ 260

Footnotes and Source References.............................................. 262

COPYRIGH’: Izdatel'stvo "Mysl,'" 1981

C80: 1807/33

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BOOK EXAMINES REVOLUTIONARY REFORMS IN LATIN AMERICA

Moscow LATINSKAYA AHERIKA: OPYT NARODNYKH KOALITSII I KLASSOVAYA BGR'BA in
Russian 1981(signed to press 20 Feb 81)pp 1-2. 255-256

0

[Table of contents and brief description of book by H. P. Gornov and V. G.
Tkachenko]

[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: LATINSKAYA AHERIKA: OPYT NARODNYKH KOALITSIY I KLASSOVAYA BOR'BA
(Latin America: The Experience of National Coalitions and the
Class Struggle)

Publisher: Politizdat

Place and year of publication: Moscow, 1981
Signed to Press Date: 20 February 1981
Number of Copies Published: 30,000
Number of Pages: 256
Brief Description:

This book by M. F. Gornov, doctor of historical sciences, and V. G. Tkachenko,

a Journalist specializing in international affairs, is about the most important
events on the Latin American continent in the 1970's to the beginning of the
1980's. The authors analyze the revolutionary processes in countries of this
region and expose the policies of American imperialism and local reaction, the
nature of Latin American fascism. They show the process of unifying progressive,
democratic forces. The book devotes significant attention to the victory of the
Nicaraguan people and the struggle against fascist dictatorships in Salvador,
Bolivia and Chile. The book is intended for the general public.

Table of Contents

Preface........ ...... ........................................................ 3

Chapter 1. Latin America in the '70s........................................ 9
l. Exacerbation of contradictions...................................... 9

2. The planting of fascist, authoritarian regimes and the
imperialist policy of destabilization............................... 12

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

Local monopullcs--nllles of U.S. imperialism......................

a. The struggle for democracy. social progress and
revolutionary reforms in the beginning of the '70s................
5. Some special features of the revolutionary process in the region..
Chapter 2. The Experience, Significance and Lessons of Chile's Revolution.
1. National Unity: the experience of social-
economic revolutionary reforms....................................
2. The leadership of National Unity in the struggle
for winning a majority of the people....... ........... ............
3. The conspiracy of international and internal reaction.............
a. General rules and specific traits of
the revolutionary process in Chile... ...... .......................
5. Unity of anti-imperialist and democratic forces-~the chief condi-
tion for a successful struggle against fascism in Chile..........
Chapter 3. Victory of the Nicaraguan People Over Internal Reaction and
Imperialism................... ........ .........................
1. The path of the struggle..........................................
2. The victorious revolution........ ........ .........................
Chapter 4. The Struggle of Salvador's People for Freedom and Real
lndependence.......... ...... ...................................
1. The overthrow of General Romero's dictatorship....................
2. Creation of a democratic front ...... ..............................
Chapter 5. For the Unity and Solidarity of All Anti-Imperialist Forces....
1. Uruguay............... ..... .......................................
2. Argentina..................... ...... ..............................
3. Venezuela.........................................................
4. Bolivia ..... ......................................................
5. Colombia......... ...... ...........................................
6. Mexico. ........ .............. ......... ............................
7. Brazil..................................... ....... ................
8. Panama............................ ....... ............... ..... .....
9. Peru....................... .......... .............................
10. Ecuador.......... ..... .................................. ....... ...
11. Processes for unifying democratic forces
in Central America and the Caribbean..............................
Chapter 6. Intensification of the Ideological Struggle....................
l. The ideological expansion of imperialism........... ....... ........
2. Haoists--allies and accomplices of imperialism
and local reaction in Latin America.......................... .....
3. Social democracy and Latin America.............. ...... ............
Conclusion......... ....... ............. ........ ............ ........ ........

COPYRIGHT: POLITIZDAT, 1981

C80: 1807/39

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

19

25
b8

54
54

68
80

86

109

113
115
130

149
149

156

162
166
170
175
180
188
195
197
200
206
212

212

218
218

229
265

251
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

NEH TYPOLOGY FOR ATHEISTS. BELIBVBRS OUTLINED

Alma-Ata ASSISTICHESKDMU VOSPITANIYU--DIFFERENTSIROVANNY PODKHOD in Russian 1981
(signed to press 28 Feb 81). title page. PP 3-6

[Title page and excerpt from book "A Differentiated Approach to Atheistic Education".
by A.K. Rende. Znaniye Society of the Kazakh SSR. 28 pages]

[Text] A number of researchers have pointed out that the differentiated approach
to atheistic education includes three main aspects: social (residence. nationality.
class); demographic (age. sex); and ideological (attitude toward religion and
atheism. education. and consideration of religious dcnomination. modernistic trends
in modern religions and so forth).*

The need for a differentiated application of means and types and forms and methods

in atheistic education is associated with the fact that the general social features
making up the Soviet people still do not signify that they are completely equal.
Significant differences still exist in people's social positions. education.
qualifications. professional activities. degree of intensity in initiative in the
public sphere and so forth. The differentiated approach to atheistic work presupposes
a selective approach not only toward believers and waverers. but also toward atheists.
The most important thing is that it provides an opportunity of overcoming abstraction
in atheistic education and of carrying on a conversation not with individuals in
general but with a specific individual. makes it possible to take into account his
specific features. changes in consciousness. psychology and living conditions. and
opens up a way for improving the forms and methods of atheistic education.

The differentiated approach to atheistic education is impossible without a knowledge
of the degree of atheistic or religious conviction in a group of workers. In both
theory and practice it it usual to talk of two large groups of people. namely
believers and nonbelievers. or religious and irreligious. But on the question of

 

* H.Ya. Lensu. "Osnovy atcisticheskogo vospitaniya” [Bases of Atheistic Education]
Minsk. Vysshaya shkola, 1976. p 203; H.Ya. Lensu. V.A. Chernyak and A.I. Artem'yev.
"A Differentiated Approach to Atheistic Education." in "Voprosy nauchnogo ateizma"
[Questions of Scientific Atheism] 9th edition. Moscow. Mysl', I970 p 135; and
A.s. Onishchenko. "Sotsial'nyy progress. religiya. ateizm" [Social Progress.
Religion and Atheism]. Kiev. Naukova Dumka. 1977. pp l76-203.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL UNI-L ONLY

the typology of our]! ul' these groups tlwro in nu unified opinlun. A number ul
researchers distinguish up to eight different types among the irreligioua:

atheists, convinced nonbelievers. irreligious confornista, people who are indifferent,
nonbelievers with a reglious—positive world outlook. and so forth.*

In our view the most successful on the theoretical plane. and most suitable on the
practical. is the division suggested by other researchers using three signs for
the groups that are relatively generalized in terms of a whole series of specifics:
these are confirmed atheists, nonbelievers. and those indifferent or passive with
respect to religion and atheism.**

Each of the three groups of the irreligious population possesses a different degree
of atheistic conviction and activity.

Convinced atheists not only have a firm atheistic world outlook but are also quite
active in their everyday lives in speaking out against religion. The most active
of them occupy positions of militant atheism and as a rule they propagandize
scientific atheism and organize the atheistic education of the workers.

The irreligious or elemental atheists in the main also act as a socially active
sector of the population. They have sufficiently firm atheistic convictions. But
the degree of their atheistic activity is substantially less than in the first
group. They do not see a need to struggle against religion. Some of them have

a conciliatory attitude toward religion.

Those indifferent or passive to religion and atheisn are characterized by a lack

of belief in a god or other supernatural forces. In terms of their social activity
they differ little from the first two groups, but at the same time one of their
typical features is stheistic passivity.***

* H.K. Teplyakov, "The Victory of Atheism in Different Social Strata of Soviet
Society" in "Voprosy nauchnogo ateizma [Questions of Scientific Atheism],
4th edition. Moscow. 1967; V.A. Chernyak. "Formirovaniye nauchno-
materialisticheskogo ateisticheskogo mirovozzreniya (sotsiologicheskiye probleny)"
[Formation of a Scientific-Materialistic Atheistic Horld Outlook (Sociological
Problems)]. Alma-Ata. 1969; and D.H. Aptekman, "Formirovaniye steisticheskoy
ubezhdennosti rabochego klasss v razvitom sotsialisticheskom obshchestve"
[Formation of Atheistic Conviction in the Working Class in a Developed Socialist
Society]. Leningrad State University, 1979; and others.

** P.D. Selivanov. "Partiynoye rukovodstvo ateiaticheskim vospitaniyem" [Party
Handbook on Atheistic Education]. Moscow. 1973; H.Ya Lensu. V.A. Chernyak and
A.I. Artem'yev. "A Differential Approach to Atheistic Education" op. cit.; and
R.P. Platonuv. "V pniskakh vysokoy deystvennosti" [The Search for High
Effectiveness]. Moscow, 1976.

*** For more detail see P.D. Selivanov Op. cit. pp 99-102.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us now consider the typologicai groups of believers. Here. some researchers
distinguish two groups others three or more. In our view, all believers should

be divided into three typological groups: convinced or orthodox believers, elemental
or nonorthodox believers. and doubting believers. Each of the three groups has

its own specific features and characteristics signs that must be taken into account
when organizing atheistic work.

Convinced believers are those for whom the main bliblical myths and religious dogmas
determining the very essence of religion have become a personal conviction. They
are characterized by active participation in all religious services and open defense
of their religious views and actions. Many of the convinced believers engage in
missionary activities. Some in this group occupy positions of religious fanaticism
and extremism. and individual representatives have slid into the swamp of anti-
Sovietism.

The elemental believers mainly do not have firm religious convictions and haVe a
poor knowledge of dogmatics and mythology but nevertheless engage in quite active
but irregular participation in religious services. As a rule they do not try to
impose their religious views on anyone and do not openly flaunt them, although they
do not hide them.

The doubting believers are not distinguished by the wholehea"tedness and firmness
of their religious consciousness. know practically nothing about dogma and myths,
very rarely participate in religious services. frequently express profound doubts
about the truth of their convictions. and are unable to offer convincing proofs
for their religiosity. Many of them do not even believe in the existence of god.
life beyond the grave and other religious postulates.

If these groups are arranged according to the degree of weakening in atheism and
increased religiosity. the groups of convinced atheists and the convinced believers
form the two extremes. Each of these groups can be arbitrarily divided into
subgroups: in the former case militant atheism and in the latter. religious
fanaticism.

In the center stand the indifferent atheists and doubting believers. That is. the
closer to the center. the lower both the atheistic and the religious conviction.

COPYRIGHT: obshchestvu "Znaniye" Kazakhskoy SSR. [981

9642
C50: 1800/163

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UZBEK LABOR PROBLEMS, PROSPECTS DESCRIBED
Moscow ISTORlYA SSSR in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 81 pp 26-60

[Article by C. A. Shister: "Sources for the Replenishment of Uzbekistan's working
Class During the Stage of DevelOped Socialism"]

[Text] Among the basic directions in the development of social sciences during the
present stage, the 26th CPSU Congress placed research on the processes, which are
taking place in the social structure of Soviet society, in one of the first places.
The scientific analysis of replenishment sources for the working class occupies an
important place in the study of this problem.

A number of works, devoted to labor resource problems and the reproduction of man-
power in which this subject is touched upon, were published in Uzbekistan during the
Sixties and Seventies. However, questions on ways to more rationally use the
sources for replenishing the working class in the republic have still not received
the necessary treatment.

The goal of analyzing the activity of the republic's party, soviet and economic
organs in solving this problem has been assigned in the article. This will permit
more attention to be attracted to it and contribute to the dissemination of the
experience which has been accumulated in regions having an analogous demographic
situation.

i k t

The ratio of working class replenishment saurces is determined primarily by the
social structure of Soviet society and by those changes which are taking place in it.
During the stage of mature socialism, the tendency toward the rapid coming together
of classes and social groups and progressive eradication of the differences between
them is the leading one. L. I. Brezhnev declared in the report of the CPSU Central
Committee to the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union; "Our
goal is the creation of a society in which there will not be a division of people
into classes. And it is possible to say definitely: Re are gradually but confi-
dently moving toward this great goal.“

The movement of the Soviet pe0p1e towards social uniformity. which is determined by
the consistent policy of the party and state concerning the internationalization of

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the country's economic, social and political life, is shown also in the growing
rapprochement of the nations and nationalities in their social structure. This is

reflected primarily in the increase in the propo tion of republic working class
detachments. In 1959, workers were 39.2 percent of the employed population in
Uzbekistan;, in 1970 -- 45.7 percent; and in 1979 (based on Central Statistical
Directorate data) - 52.9 percent.

Horking class replenishment sources are identical for all the country, but their
ratio and use are conditioned a great deal by a republic's specialization within
the all-union division of labor. This specialization is planned by the union
government depending on natural conditions and material and labor resources. They
are determined by the settlement conditions which took shape historically, by the
nature of migration processes, by national traditions, etc. The fact that the
development of industry took place and is taking place where there is a significant
predominance in the population of rural area inhabitants who are oriented on
working in the agrarian sector of the economy and in the branches associated with
it, is a peculiarity of the Central Asian region, including Uzbekistan. Large
natural increases and an extremely low outflow of representatives of the indigenous
nationalities beyond the limits of their republic, which is conditioned by ethnic
features and national traditions, are typical of this region.

The working class itself is the main source for replenishing it. K. Marx wrote

that "the most progressive workers are fully aware that the future of their class
and consequsntly of mankind entirely depends on the upbringing of the rising
generation" . The Communist Party is displaying tireless concern for the replenish-
ment of the leading class in socialist society with its sons and daughters.

As the works of Soviet sociologists show, the children of worker families provided
a large part of the working class replacements during the Sixties and Seventies.
Thus, in the Len ngrad machine building industry, the reached 56 percent of all
those questioned ; in the Moscow region -- 77 percent ; in Bashkiriya -- 58.1 ;
and hiUzbekistnn , 51.3 percent (1971) in the Chirchikskiy Electrochemical Combine,
'the Tashkent Electronic Equipment Plant, and in the "Tashtekstil'maah" Plant.

The mentioned conformity to law has an objective nature. However, a subjective
factor plays a large role in it. A great deal of work is being done in Uzbekistan
under the leadership of the party organization to increase the portion of hereditary
workers in the overall number of industrial personnel. Party, trade union and
Komsomol organizations are indoctrinating the rising generation in revolutionary

and work traditions. Museums and rooms of fame, in which rich material on worker
houses is presented, are being established in enterprises. Documents on workers,
whose fathers took part in carrying out the socialist revolution in Uzbekistan,

are on exhibit in the Museum of Military and Work Glory in the Plant imeni
Oktyabr'skaya revolyutsiya.

Among the famous worker houses of the republic, one cannot fail to mention the Os'kin
family (Tashkentskoye Aviation Production Association) whose sncestors,- Mikhail
Nikolayevich, and his wife, Klaydiya Vasil'yevna gave 60 years to their native plant
and brought five children to it ; the Nuritdinov family of mettalurgists who are

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
working in the roll ing workshop of the Uzbek Mettuilurgicnl Plant imoni V. l. Lenin
[or the third decade, -- the senior member of the family -- Said, a Hero of
Socialist Labor -- for more than 30 years; the Val'kov family who have worked in
one of th machine building plants of Uzbekistan's capital in toto for more than
100 years ; and the lkxamovs from the Namanganskiy [avrov] Cloth COIIbiﬂe

imeni 25th CPSU Congress, the "oldest" worker dynasia in the republic -- the total
length of its work activity is more than 250 years.

Investigations which have been conducted by us in a number of Uzbekistan's
enterprises, testify that many of their workers are second and even third gen-
erations of worker dynasties. In the Chirchikskiy Electrochemical Combine. the
parents or close relatives of 18 percent of those questioned in 1961 and of 23
percent in 1971 had worked there. In the "Tashtekstil'mash" Plant. the parents of
23 percent of the workers had worked in the plant according to a 1971 investigation
(some had worked there from the day of its founding or had been evacuated with

the plant during the Great Patriotic war).

It is necessary to point out that statistics do not give exhaustive information
on working class replenishment sources; however, information from specific
sociological research in the republic's industrial enterprises confirms the
conclusion that the role. of the working class as a source for forming its own
replacements is growing in Uzbekistan just as throughout the entire country. and.
consequently1 the absolute nuaber and proportion of hereditary workers are
increasing.

The kolkhoz peasantry continued to be one of the major sources for replenishing
the working class during the Sixties and Seventies. however, as is pointed out
in the literature, its share gradually decreased on the whole throughout the
country. By the Seventies. the opportunities for drawing kolkhoz workers

into the ranks of the working class had practically been exhausted in many areas
of the country in connection with the rapid urbanization rates. Whereas the
USSR rural pepulation decreased by 3.1 million individuals during the period
between the 1959 and 1970 All-Union Population Census. it decreased by 6.9
million individuals between 1970 and 1979. In nine years. the overall number of
rural peOple decreased by 0.5 poigts at a time when the urban pOpulation share
increased from 56 to 62 percent.

The mentioned tendency does not operate with equal force in all regions of the
country. Baaed on the degree of decrease criterion, the most urbanized republics
of the Soviet Union now are: The Estonian SSR (70 percent), the RSFSR (69 percent),
the Latvian SSR (68 percent). the Armenian SSR (66 percent), The Ukrainian SSR

(61 percent), the Lithuanian SSR (61 percent), the Belorussian SSR (55 percent)

and the Kazakh SSR (51. percent).

However. in the republics of the Central Asian region where -- with the exception
of Tajikistan -- the proportion of the rural population also had a tendency to
decrease, the absolute number of the rurunl population grew in Kirghizia by 18
percent. in lhbekistan by 21 percent, anhin Turkmenia by 28 percent during the
period between the 1970 and 1979 census. The highest growgh in rural population
was observed in Tajikistan (36 percent) during this period.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, in contrast to a number of the country's central rayons, the rural pepulation,
including the kolkhoz peasantry, has large potential Opportunities available in
Uzbekistan. just as in the other Central Asian republics, not only for its own
reprodmmion but also for replenishing the working class.

when evaluating the labor resources of Uzbekistan and the opportunities for re-
distributing a portion of the able-bodied population from agricultural production

to industry, planning organs proceed from the fact that the population is distribut-
ed extremely unevenly over the republic's territory. In this connection, some
rayons and oblasts have experienced a shortage in manpower; others -- a surplus

in it. On 1 January 1980, the population density in Uzbekistan reached 35.2
individuals per one square kilometer. However, whereas it was equal only to 5.6
individuals in the Karakalpakskaya ASSR, 9.0 in Bukharskaya Oblast. 25.7 in
Dzhizakskaya Oblast, and h0.7 in Kashkadar'inskaya oblast; it was 328.5 individuals
in Andizhanskaya oblast, 244.1 in {grganskays Oblast. 233.6 in Khorezmakaya Oblast.
and 163.0 in Namanganskaya oblast. The population density continues to grow in

a number of overpopulated oblasts. From 1970 to 1980 alone, it increased by 76.4

individuals in Andizhanskaya Oblast. by 56.5 in Ferganskaya Oblast, and by 35.8 in
Namanganskaya oblast.

In these oblasts. the size of sown areas for each worker employed in agriculture
is decreasing more and more sharply. This is having a negative effect on the
Opportunities for using existing labor resources on the kolkhozes, and consequent-
ly, on increasing labor productivity.

Estimates of the UzSSR State Committee for Labor show that scientific and technical
progress and the growth of labor productivity, which has been achieved based on it.
are leading -- especially in agriculture -- to the freeing of workers and making
the redistribution of a portion of the labor resources in branch and territorial
sections possible and at the same time necessary. In 1970, 29 percent of the
total number of Uzbekistan's able-bodied kolkhoz workers could have been freed.
During subsequent years, the percent of workerskeptabove the required number
became even higher on the republic's cotton growing kolkhozes.

The study of the nature of migration processes and the distribution and use of
labor resources in Uzbekistan lends many researchers to conclude that the needs

of industry for working cadres cannot be satisfied by the move of the republic's
Surplus rural population to the cities. In carrying out the CPSU's policy to
equalize the econowic levels of the republics and in considering the specifics or
migration, the low mobility of the rural -- especially the indigenous -- population
and the high prosperity of a number of rural regions in labor resources. the
Communist Party of Uzbekistan is carrying out a broad system of measures to indu..-
iializc the republic's small and medium cities and rural rayons. In doing this.
the party proceeds from the fact that the siting of industrial installations in
agnxrian type rayons and the drawing of the rural population into the ranks of

the working class will contribute to changing the peOple's way of life and their
social and psychological constitution.

The creation of industrial installations in small and medium cities and in rural
areas does not always mean the construction there of new independent enterprises;

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
as a rule. they are branches of plants, factories and large industrial associations
or their shops which produce parts. The economic effectiveness of the creation of
these installations does not evoke any doubts. Their opening does not require
large capital investments. The plants themselves, when they have transferred

the output of individual units and components to the branches, receive an Opport-
unity to concentrate their efforts on the more important tasks. In addition, the
creation of these small enterprises is not connected with the move of workers,

large scale housing construction, etc. F. Engels wrote: in order that "... people,
who have been ousted from agriculture. net be left without work or forced to

crowd inig cities, it is necessary to employ them in industrial work in the village
itself.‘

The policy of improving the planning of siting productive forces and the construct-
ion of industrial installations in small cities and urban settlements was reflected
in the decisions of the 16th (1961), 17th (1966) and 18th (1971) Congresses of

the Uzbek Communist Party.

Speaking at the 19th Congress of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan (1976), Sh. R.
Rashidov pointed out that, within the system of measures which have been carried
Out by the Uzbek Communist Party for the development of productive forces, the
equalizing of the economic development level of the oblasts and the industrializa—
tion of rural rayons and small cities have had large social significance. It is
necessary to follow this line in the future. The erection of enterprises in

the village will permit a working class to be formed tbgre and productive forces
to be developed in a more planned and rational manner.

It is necessary to point out that the work performed in Uzbekistan to industrialize
agrarian rayons and small cities contributes to the policy of limiting the growth
of large cities and to the development of the economic structure of prospective
small and medium cities.

Akhongaran is one of the new industrial centers which arose during the years of the
8th and 9th Five-Year Plans in Uzbekistan. A cement combine, a ferro-concrete

item plant, the “Santekhlit” Plant, and the "Stroypiastmass" Combine were built
here. The urban settlement grew with new housing and social and personal services
enterprises. Akhsnguran became a rsyqa center in 1971, and was converted to a

city of oblast subordination in 1976.

The development path of another city in Tashkentskaya Oblast, Narimanov -- the
former Bektemir, is similar. Its industrial appearance took shape during the

years of the 9th Five-Year Plan. A total of 50 industrial enterprises and con-
struction, motor trsnSport and other organizations and establishments were Operating
here in 1976. The number of enterprises doubled in comparison with 1970; and

the volume of products produced, which number more than 20 types of different
industrial items (metal structure, reinforced concrete, etc.) tripled. Housing
assets (less individual houses) exceeded 100,000 square meters; and s hauls, pre-
school establishments, hospitals, dispensaries, etc. are being built.

In accordance with "The Basic Directions for the Development of the USSR National
Economy for l976-l980" which was adapted by the 25th CPSU Congress, even more

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
substantial changes for the better in the siting of productive forces in Uabekistan
took place during the 10th Five—Year Plan. As was pointed out during the 20th
Congress of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan (1981), the Central Committee of

the Communist Party and the government of the republic did not disregard a single
valuable initiative aimed at giving a new and vital impulse to small cities,
settlements and rayon centers. During the 10th Five-Year Plan, 290 branches and 22
workshops, in which almost 30,000 people were employed, were created in Uzbekistan.

Significant successes have been achieved in Andizhanskaya Oblast. During the
years of the 10th Five-Year Plan. 60 enterprises, branches and workshops were put
into operation in various rayons of the oblast. The commissioning of the first
section of the Andizhauskiy Cotton Combine a year ahead of schedule was a great
victory for the oblast's working class' party organization. Five of its branches,

two of which were put into operafion by the opening day of the 26th CPSU Congress,
are being erected in the oblast.

There were, all told, three industrial enterprises on the territory of unploughed
Dzhizakskaya Oblast in the early 1960's. They became more than 60 during the 10th Five-
Year Plan. Alkaline battery plants; a carpet combine; a lead-cement mine; a factory for
obtaining wollastonite concentrate; and food industry, cotton processing, construct

ion industry, transpgzt, and communications enterprises were built at the new
technological level. Similar examples can be cited for other oblasts.

Positive changes for the better in the distribution of industrial production
personnel occurredas a result of the carrying out of the party's policy on improv-
ing the siting of productive forces in the republic.

Before the beginning of the Seventies, the main mass of industrial workers was
concentrated in the larger industrial centers. Thus, in 1970, 542 of all its
industrial production personnel were concentrated in Tashkentskaya Oblast
(including Tashkent), where 21 percent of the UzSSR population lived. At the time,
industrial production personnel were only 7.5 percent of the total number in
Syrdar'inskaya. Kashkadnr'inskaya, Surkhandar'inskaya, andzghorezmskaya Oblasts
which had a 22.6 percent share of Uzbekistan's population.

0n 1 January 1978, 23.5 percent of the republic's entire pOpulation (i [sic] 2.5
points in comparison with I970) lived in Tashkentaakaya Oblast (including the city
of Tashkent); however, the preportion of industrig production personnel had
decreased by 6.2 points and stood at 67.8 percent. During this same time,

in the four compared oblasts (although the number of people here decreased from
22.6 to 20.4 percent), the proportiga of industrial production personnel grew by
2.1 points and reached 9.6 percent.

During the Sixties and Seventies, the proportion of workers and employees in
industry located in rural areas almost doubled thanks to the successful work of
Uzbekistan's party organization in industrializing agrarian rayons and in drawing
rural inhabitants into industry:

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1. Dynamics of the Proportion of Uzbekistan's Workers
and Employees During the Period 1960 - 1970

1960 1970 1975 1977
In urban settlements 92.6 87.8 87.5 86.7
In rural areas 7.4 12.2 12.5 13.3

Despite the fact that the number of industrial workers is growing from year to
year due to the flow of rural inhabitants. this manpower reserve is not only not
decreasing but, on the contrary, is increasing in connection with the high natural
increase. Based on forecasts for 1990, the number of people in the republic will
reach 22 million individuals. This will require even greater efforts tozéncrease
the number of work sites and expand the training of qualified personnel.

A resolution of the 20th Congress of the Comunist Party of Uzbekistan points out
the special 9portance of creating branches of enterprises in small cities and
rural areas. It is planned to open [050-500 35 them, including on kolkhozes
and sovkhozes. during the 11th Five-Year Plan.

However, it would be a mistake to think that the striving for a more rational
siting of industrial enterprises is not running into serious problems. One cannot
fail to note that the textile combines which have been constructed in Andizhan and
Namangan have not worked at full capacity for a long time because of a shortage of
manpower -- at a time when there are considerable reserves of able-bodied people

in these cities. The opening of even small installations and workshOp branches
requires the creation of an infrastructure servicing production -- the construct-
ion of schools, children's institutions and medical facilities, the organisation of
transport and communications, etc. The solution of these tagks does not always
keep step with the erection of the industrial installations.

The training of qualified personnel is also an important and complicated problem.
In contrast to many of the country’s central rayon: where kolkhozes are experienc-
ing a critical shortage of manpower in connection vith the flow of rural youth to
the cities. the redistribution of kolkhoz youth to industry and other branches of
the national economy has taken place at slow tempos in Uzbekistan. For example.
in 1968. 36 percent of the total number of able-bodied youth and juveniles stayed
to work on the kolkhozes and in 1970 —- (.3 percent. This exceeded the number of
young people who went to factories and plants 1.9-fold. It is necessary to point
out that 68 percent of the Juveniles up to 18 years of age who arrived on the
kolkhozes had a secondary education (complete or incomplete).

The situation changed during subsequent years. In 1974-1975. of those who finished
the eighth and tenth grades in general educational schools. 60.2 percent of those
sent to the national economy were employed in agriculture. Graduates of rural
school eighth and tenth grades formed the main mass (97 percent).

The replenishment of the republic's kolkhozes and sovkhozes with youth having a
secondary education undoubtedly increases the cultural and technical level of

11.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
agricultural workers: however, agricultural production in not H a condition at
the present time to provide all this use of young men and girls with work which
corresponds to the level of their training. This is not always taken into
consideration by public organizations. Cases are not infrequent where in places
with a large surplus in the rural population and a low migratory mobility, they
call upon the pupils to advance with an initiative of the type "as an entire

class -- to the native kolkhoz", 3 lthough there is not enough work for the
existing workers on that kolkhoz. These tendencies are also found in Uzbekistan.
Thus, as a positive example of the pupils' purposeful professional orientation,

the press told about the initiative of the Romsomol graduates in one of the
schools of Pastdargomskiy Rayon of 5a kandskaya Oblast who stayed as an entire
class to work on their native kolkhoz, although 125,000 people (93 pszcent)
uved in rural areas and only 9,000 (7 percent) in cities in this rayon. In 1977,
more than 12,000 young men and women of Samarkandskaya Oblast in answer to an
initiative of their peers -- graduates of hoools in Kostromskaya Oblast -—
stayed to work in agricultural production. Meanwhile, in KostrOmskaya Oblast
with a population density of 13.3 people, the proportion of the rural population
was only 37 percent on 1 January 1977 -- at a time when the pOpulation density in
Samarkandskaya Oblast was five-fold gregger (67.5 people) and 70 percent of the
entire population lived in rural areas.

The present conditions of the country's social and economic development require
that the indoctrinational work among youth,who live in the thickly populated
rural rayons of Uzbekistan, stir up the migratory mobility of the young men and
women and contribute to their professional and cultural growth and to an increase
in the proportion of industrial workers.

The new policy for developing professional and technical education in the village,
which contributes to strengthening migratory processes and social shifts, must
play an important role in the solution of this task. The Communist Party of
Uzbekistan is orienting party organizations toward the creation of professional
training establishments in rural areas for the training not only of agricultural
personnel but also of construction and industrial cadres. The following fact
testifies to the effectiveness of this way of solving the problem. In 1972, a
branch of the Namanganskiy [avrov] Cloth Combine imeni the 25th CPSU Congress
with a capacity of more than 400,000 linear meters of [khantalas] and [bekassb]

a year was put into operation in Uchkurgan. Long btfore the Opening of the enter-
prise, the party organization and board of directors were concerned about personnel.
Experienced workers were sent to the branch for their training; at the same time,
the graduation of a special professional technical institute levy was arranged on
a branch basis. A total of 180 young men and girl from the Uchkurganskiy Rayon
underwent training and received work certificates. These measuresensured the
normal and uninterrupted work of the shop from the very beginning.

A complete networkof professionaltechnical hstitums servicing the rural area

has already been created in the republic. The "Navoiazot" Production Association
has opened a GPTU [city professional technical institute] on the Kolkhoz imeni

F. Engels in Gizhduvanskiy Rayon of Bukharskaya Oblast; and the oil workers --

in the settlement of Kakaydy in Dzharkurganskiy Rayon of Surkhsndar'inskaya Oblast.
Personnel are being trained in Leninskiy Rayon of Andizhanskaya Oblast for a branch
of the tractor plant. Those professionaltechnical institutes are contributing to

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the solution of an important social task -- the training of rural youth in urban
professions and the shift of surplus manpower from rural areas to3§he cities
where the need for qualified specialists is continuously growing.

However, these measures are insufficient to solve the problem completely. Accord-
ing to estimates of the Uzbek SSR Gosplan and the UzSSR Academy of Sciences, only
61.6 percent of all the workers trained in the republic (as opposed to 26.5 per-
cent in 1975) will have a professional technical education. ln this connection,
The USSR Cosplan has pointed out that "along with the priority development of a
network of professional technical institutes in the republics of Central Asia and
the Transcaucasus, it is also necessary to send the youth of these republics for
training in as er regions of the country with the agreement of the interested
departments". One must send a larger number of youth (especially rural) to

the country's all-union leading construction projects where they can acquire a
work profession and improve their qualifications.

Of course, the reorientation of a portion of the rural population, especially youth.
to industrial types of work muSt be built on a scientific foundation which is

based on the optimum age structure of those employed in agriculture. It is necess-
ary to correlate the solution of this important social problem with the Opening

up of new lands which is taking place in the republic and with the planned transfer
of a portion of the flow of Siberian rivers to the Aral Sea basin.

The training of industrial workers in the village has an important political
aspect -- it is actively contributing to a growth in the preparation of workers of
local nationality in the republic's working class.

Statistics testify that in Uzbekistan, just as throughout all of Central Asia, the
indigenous population forms the larger part of the inhabitants in the rural areas
where significant reserves of manpower are concentrated. According to data from
the 1970 All-Union Population Census, Uzbeks were 95.5 percent -- in Samarkandakaya;
85.1 percent -- in K1shkadar'inskayaao 81.4 percent -- in Namanganskaya; and 80.2
percent -- in Andizhanskaya Oblasts.

I
The construction or industrial installationsin oblasts with surplus labor resources
contributes not only to an equalization of the level of industrial development but
also to a more intensive drawing of persons of local nationality from predominantly
single nationality rural collectives into industry and international worker collect-
ives. This process requires a great deal of attention from party, state and public
organizations. Questions. connected with it, have been repeatedly discussed during
congresses of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan and plenum: of the republic's
Communist Party Central Committee. Appropriate decisions have been strictly
implemented by oblast, city and rayon party organizations and by the collectives
of industrial enterprises. All this has contributed to raising the number and
proportion of workers of local nationality. '

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

hnscd on data from thc 1959 and 1970 all-uiion censuses and from one-time registra-
tions, in Uzbekistan people of the main nationality (Uzbeks)* were 26.7 percent

in industry in 1959, 31.2 percent in 1967 and 35.5 percent in 1973. It is import-
ant to emphasize that a growth in the number of Uzbeks was also observed during
these years in other detachments of industrial workers. The proportion of Uzbeks
in construction grew from 30.1 percent to 34.8 percent from 1967 to 1973; in
transport - from 35.8 pgicent to 41.2 percent and in communications -- from 35.9
percent to 40.7 percent.

During 1967 - 1973. the proportion of representatives of the main nationality grew
at more rapid rates in light industry —- from 44.5 percent to 53.9 percent, in the
food industry -- from 34.2 percentbio 45 percent, and in the oil industry --

from 34.1 percent to 42.8 percent. This is explained to a considerable degree
by the fact that many of the enterprises in these branches are located in rayons
where the Uzbek nationality predominates.

However. in a number of branches of heavy industry which are connected with more
modern equipment and production technology, the proportion of the indigenous
population was significantly lower than the general republic level.

The Central Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan is directing the activ-
ity of the State Committee for labor, ministries. departments. and party organ-
izations to the formation of national cadres for industry considering an import-
ant demographic factor -- the high rates of natural increase among the local
nationalities. The 1979 population census showed that the 8 oportion of Uzbek: in
the overall republic population increased from 62.1 percent to 68.7 percent
during the period 1959 - 1979.

The problem of attracting the representatives of local nationalities to industry
was 5 subject of review at the 6th (1972) Plenum of the Uzbek Communist Party
Central Committee which discussed the question "0n Further ngroving work With
Cadres in Light of the Decisions of the 24th CPSU Cantress" .

The training of national cadres in the republic received a new and broader scope
after the 25th CPSU Congress which pointed out that "the improvement of the train-
ing of local qualified cadresagontinues to be one of the urgent problems of
primary party organizations."

Improving the work to implementthe decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress and the 19th
Congress of the Comunist Party of Uzbekistan could not fail to affect the further
growth of the proportion of persons of local nationalities in the industrial
detachments of the workers. Whereas the proportion of Uzbeks was 35.5perccu in ind-
ustry in 1973, it was 38.2 percent in 1977; in constructio .—-34.8 and 35.6 percent
respectively; and in transport -- 41.2 and 44.4 percent. As in previous

years, the highest proportion of persons of the main nationality (Uzbeks) was

*Kszakhs, Tajiks. Karakalpsks, Kirghiz and Turkmens are also regarded as
local nationalities. Counting them. the percent of industrial workers of local
nationality is significantly higher. However, the Central Statistical Directorate
singles out from all the workers only persons of the main nationality Uzbeks) in
the one-time registrations.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the textile (57.5 percent), light (56.0 percent). food (45.4 percent). and 011
(43.0 percent) industries. In machine building, it reached 18.3 percent (+ 2-3
points) in comparison with 1973. and in the chemical industry -- 20 percent

(+1.7 points). As can be seen, the tendency. noted in the Sixties, also developed
steadily during the 9th and 10th Five-Year Plans.

The growth in the number of national cadres by attracting rural inhabitants to
production was also a direct result of the new work forms which the collectives
of a number of industrial enterprises are using.

In the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine, the proportion of local cadres as part of

the workers had not reached 20 percent by the beginning of the Sixties. The
situation became worse after the 1966 earthquake and due to the opening of textile
combines in the republic's oblast centers. It managed to improve after special

bus service between the enterprises and near-by rural rayons with surplus labor
resources —- the Kommunisticheskin Kalininskiy, 0rdzhonikidzevskiy. Srednechirchik-
akiy. and Toshkentskiy rural rayons-- was organized on the party coamittee's
initiative. This permitted Uzbek girls to be enlisted in the work. Each day.
about 500 young girls -- representatives of the local nationalities and yesterday's
kolkhoz workers -- took their work positions at weaving, spinning, carding and
other textile machines. It is possible to judge the growth of national cadres in
the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine from the data in Table 2 which testifies that
their pr0portion in the number of workers in the combine grew more than twofold

and the number of Uzbek woaen —- almost fourfold.

Table 2. Proportion of Persons of Local Nationality in the
Number of Horkers at the Tsshkentakiy Textile Combine*

__________.________________________________________________________________________
1966 1970 1973 1975 1975 1979

Total of persons of [sic]

local nationality 17.1 20.6 29.9 31.9 36.6 40.3
including Uzbcks 14.1 13.4 23.2 24.7 37.2 31.6

Males of local nationality 10.1 11.5 12.5 13.0 16.9 14.4
including Uzbcks 9.4 10.6 1 O 11.5 11.9 12.7

Females of local nationality 7.0 8.6 17.4 18.9 21.5 25.9
including Uzbeks 4.7 6.8 12.2 13.1 15.2 17.9

a
The table was compiled based on data from the work and wages section of
the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine for 1 January of each year.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Trnv, [he pvruuunvl prohivn Hi the combine has still not been cumplvtvly solved;
a shortage remains. Not all workers have high indicators in labor productivily
and good discipline at first. The percent of flucuation in the enterprises is
great. However, the positive prospects for a pendulum migration to draw female
kolkhoz workers into the ranks of the working class are undoubted. It is import-

ant to point out that the parents of the Uzbek girls regard these social changes
positively.

An analysis of the republic's social and economic life shows that the migration

of labor resources from the village to the city is in the formation stage. Never-
theless, with each year it exerts a transforming effect on an ever greater number
of people. Many rural inhabitants, when they are included in industrial production.
rapidly adapt to the new conditions and achieve high indicators in work.

The name of Dil'bar Kul'matova is known today not only in Uzbekistan. She arrived
in Tashkent from Akkurgan in 1970 after finishing a secondary school. A year of
studies in a professional technical institute -- and Dil'bar became a worker in
the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine. The young weaver very soon became one of the
combine's best production workers and the initiator of and participant in work
initiatives. She began to service 48 weaving machines when the typical norm was
24. Today, Dil'bar is a deputy to the USSR Supreme Soviet, a Leninist Komsomol
prize winner, and a Vinogradov sister; she has been awarded the order "Badge of
Honor." She combines her work with studies in the Tashkentskiy Institute for the
Light and Textile Industries without giving up work. Her three sisters are also
working in the combine.

The Maviiyev family of airplane Egildera, whose parents were agronomists, enjoys
widespread fame in the republic. Rural inhabitants -- the three Yuldashev
brothers -- have also founded a dynasty of miners The oldest one -- Babanazar --
has been awardeggthe orders of Lenin and the Labor Red Banner for his many years
of heroic work.

The need to expand the training of qualified worker personnel from the local
population. especially from the rural youth in the republicssef Central Asia, was
emphasized again in the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

Along with the steady growth trend in national cadres within the composition

of Uzbekistan's workers, the speeding up of scientific and technical progress

and the industrialization and urbanization of the country are accompanied by

the internationalization of all public life. The composition of the working class'
republic detachments is becoming more and more multinational.

For example. workers of 45 nationalities are working in the Almalykskiy Mining and
Metallurgical Combine; of 41 -- in the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine; of 32--

in the Chirchikskiy Electrochemical Combine; of 30 -- in the Bekabadskiy CgTent
Plant; and of 27 -- in the Tashkentskiy Plant imeni the October Revolution.
Qualified specialists who have arrived from the RSFSR. the Ukraine and Belorussia,
are actively contributing to the accelerated development of productive forces and
to the formation and improvement of the training of worker cadres.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Some authors justifiably think that it is illegal to call the republic's worker
detachments national detachments because this socialist class was formed in the
republics from the beginning on an international basis, being an integral comp-
onent of the USSR working class -- the leading social force of the indestructible
unity of the Soviet people. It seems that it is more correc: to classify them

as re blic detachments of the working class (RSFSR workers. Ukrainian SSR workers,
etc.) It is necessary to emphasize that it is the working class which embodies
the international unity of the Soviet Union's worker detachments and which is
exerting a growing influence on improving the social uniformity of the nations

and nationalities which form a single Soviet people.

The able-bodied population. not employed in public production. is an important
source and reserve for replenishing the USSR working class, including that of the
UzSSR. However, this reserve had basically been exhausted in the country as a
whole by the end of the Sixties. Whereas, more than half of the increase in
workers in public production (53 percent) had been obtained from 1961 to 1965

by including in it persons engaged in housekeeping or in the private auxiliary 53
economy. there were twice as many fewer in the next five year period (1966-1970).
0! the 130.5 million working age individuals. those employed in the national
economy and students were 120.6 million individuals or 92.é percent in 1970 as
opposed to 82 percent in 1959. The number of persons engaged in housekeeping

and the privasg economy decreased from 17.9 million in 1959 to 5.9 million individ-
uals in 1970.

when defining the prospects for drawing the able-bodied population into production,
the 25th CPSU congress pointed out that the problem of using labor resources
during the Bighti g would become even more acute because of the decrease in their
natural increase. This proposition was again emphasized during the 26th CPSU
Congress. It is sufficient to say that, during the period 1981-1990, the total
growth of the working age population will decline to 3.8 percent as opposed to

18 percent in 1971-1980. However. the unfavorable demographic situation, which

is taking shape. does not affect a number of republics with high natural increases
and the presence of a significant portion of able-bodied peOple not employed in

the national economy. Speaking on 22 September 1978 in Baku on the occasion of

the presentation of the Order of Lenin to the city, L. I. Brezhnev pointed out

that in Azerbaijan and the other republics of the Caucasus. as well as in Central
Asia. a considerable par ion of the able—bodied population had still not been drawn
into public production.J Basically, this consisted of women who had never
worked in the national economy or who had left an enterprise after marriage and
who were engaged in raising children and housekeeping or in the private economy.

In the UzSSR, the inadequate drawing of the unemployed able-bodied population

into puinc production is typical not only of rural areas but also of cities.

At the end of the Sixties, the proportion of this category of the population was
30 percent in the urban population centers of Tashkentskaya, Andlzhans ya and
Bukharskaya Oblasts and more than 40 percent in Syrdar'inskaya Oblast. At the
same time. 92 percent of the non—working peOple of working age in Tashkent were
women; of them. 80 percent had children. A similar situation was also observed
in other cities. This is one of the reasons why Uzbekistan. just as Other Central
Asian republics. considerably lags behind several union republics based on the

20
FOR OFFICIAL LSI-I ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proportion of women in the total number of workers and employees. Thus, whereas
for the USSR on the whole and for the Latvian 85R, the Estonian SSR, and the
Belorussian SSR this indicator in 1970 was equal to 51-53 percent; forsshe Uzbek
SSR, the Turkmen SSR and the Tajik SSR it ranged from 38 to 41 percent.

The question of drawing women into paoduction is a complicated social problem. It
requires the development of scientifically based recommendations for the country's
different rayona with a consideration of their specific natures. This problem is
especially acute for the Central Asian region where the percent of families with
many children is high. This is mainly typical of the indigenous nationalities.

In the Seventies, guided by the decisions of party and soviet organs, the work
collectives of individual enterprises began to use new ways and methods to draw
women to production. The Kokandskiy Stocking Knitting Combine has experienced

a shortage of personnel for a long time. In accordance with a decision of the
party and trade union organizations, the shOp chiefs and other section and service
leaders were sent to the Makhallinskiye committees to attract the housewives to
work. Considering that the majority of those not working were mothers with many
children. the enterprise made arrangements for their children in pre—school
establishments and organized the women's training in work professions. As a
result, it turned out that there were rather a lot who desired to work in the
combine. Additional city bus routes, especially to remote rayons, were set up
with help of the party's gorkom and the gorispolkom, and eating was arranged in
the enterg§ise's dining hall. All this permitted the combine to end the personnel
shortage.

When performing the great deal of work to draw women into public production, the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan strengthened control over
the performance of political and indoctrinational work among them on the spot.

In May 1970. the tasks of Uzbekistan's party organization in further improving the
activity of women in the construction of communism were iscussed during the
l8thP1enum of the Communist Party's Central Cemmittee. Considering that a
significant part of them were not being drawn into public production because of
the shortage of pre-school establishments. the Central Committee of the Uzbek
Communist Party and the UzSSR Council of Ministers adopted on 2 October 1970 the
resolution "0n the Condition and FurEhCL Development of Public Pre-School Education
in the Republic" which planned for the number of places in kindergartens and day
nurseries to be brought to 407,800 In 1970 and 735,000 in 1975.

The 18th congresgzagg the 6th Plenum of the Central Committee of the republic's
Communist Party. ' the 25th CPSU Congress, and the 19th Congress of the
Communist Party of Uzbekistan played an important role in solving the problem.

As a result of the large organizational work. definite positive changes for the
better in attracting women to production aetivity in the various branches of the
republic's national economy occurred during the Seventies. whereas the proportion
of women in the total number of workers and employees in Uzbekistan was equal to
40 percent in 1965, it was equal to 63 percent in 1976; when campared to the
all-union indicators. the deviation decreased from ten to eight points.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
However. this indicator continued to remain relatiVeiy low for indigenous nation-
alties even in branches where female labor is widely used. The providing of
industrial enterprises and construction organizations with worker personnel is
linked to a definite degree with the drawing of women into the service area. In
Uzbekistan the proportion of female workers in such branches of the service area
as state trade and public catering was much lower than in the majority of the
other republics and the Soviet Union as s whole. In 1970. female workers in the
country's trade and public catering system reachega9l percent of the total

number employed, but in Uzbekistan -- 57 percent. This indicator was especially
insignificant in such oblasts as Samanganskaya (25.4 percent), Kashkadar'inskaygs
(33.4 percent), Andizhanskays (38.9 percent) and Samarkandskaya (40.9 percent).

It is quite evident that the drawing of women into the trade and public catering
organization would permit the freeing of a significant number of men who could

fill up the ranks of industrial workers. New tasks in this area have been assigned
to the republic by the 26th CPSU Congress and the 20th Congress of the Commmnist
Party of Uzbekistan.

As was pointed out in the report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th Congress
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. "a number of measures to improve
working conditions for working women, family relaxation and personal and cultural
services were adopted in the 10 Five-Year Plan ...; however, ... a noticeable
change has still not occurred." In connection with this, the congress outlined
ways to improve this work further during the 11th Five-Year Plan, pointing out

the need to consider carefully the distinctive features of the situation in the
different republics and rayons.

The decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Councik7of Ministers. "0n
Measures To Improve State Aid to Families who Have Children" will play an
important role in the further attraction of women to public production.

An analysis of the basic directions of the activity of party Soviet and economic
organs in Uzbekistan permits the conclusion to be drawn that definite positive
experience in the rational use of labor resources was acquired in the republic
during the Sixties and Seventies. Industrial enterprises were established in the
thickly populated rayons of the republic and in rural rayons. the prospects for
using a pendulum migration to replenish the ranks of industrial workers with
rural area inhabitants were outlined. and efforts were made to attract unemployed
able-bodied peOple, especially women, to industry.

All this contributed to intensifying the integration processes, improving the
republic's social structure, and increasing the work activity of all classes and
social groups.

At the same time, the available experience requires further development and
improvement since Uzbekistan. just as the other Central Asian republics and a
number of rayons in the Caucasus. is one of the regions where a considerable
proportion of the country's labor resources is concentrated at the present time.
The drawing of these reserves into public production. including all-union industry.
is one of the most important social and economic tasks assigned by the 26th party
congress.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4.

5.

6.

"Regional'nyye Problemy VosprOizvodstva Rabochey Sily v Uzbekistane" [Regional
Manpower Replacement Problems in Uzbekistan], Tashkent, 1965; G. A. Shister,
"Promyshlennyye Rsbochiye Uzbekistsna (Izmsneniya v Chislennosti i Sostav)-
1959 - 1970" [Uzbekistan's Industrial Workers (Changes in Number and Composi-
tion). 1959 - 1970], Tashkent, 1975; K. Bedrintsev, N. Nishsnov, and A.
Trubnikov, "Small Cities in the Replenishment o! Uzbekistsn's Productive
Forces", KOMMUNIST UZBEKISTANA, no 8, 1977; V. V. Mikheyeva, "Trudovyye
Resursy Malykh i Srednikh Corodov Uzbekistsns i Perspektivny Ikh Ispol'zovaniya"
[The Labor Resources of Uzbekistan's Small and Medium Cities and the Prospects
for Their Use], author‘s essay dissertation for candidate of economic sciences.
Tashkent. 1975; 0. B. Ata-Mirzayev, "Regional'noye Prognozirovaniya
Rasseleniya i Uprsvleniya Protassom Urbanizatsii" [Regional Forecasting for
Settlement and Control of the Urbanization Process], Tashkent, 1979;
"Sotsial'nyye Problemy Razvitiya Proizvoditel'nykh Sil Uzbekistsna" [Social
Problems in the Development of Lbbekistsn's Productive Forces], Tashkent.

1980.

"Materialy XXVI S'yezda Kommunisticheskaya Partii Sovetskogo Soyuz: [Materials
on the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union], Moscow,
1981, p 52.

"Itogi Vsesoyuznoy Perepisi Naseleniya 1970 Coda" [Results of the 1970 All—Union
Population Census], Vol 5, Moscow, 1973, p 29. '

K. Marks and F. Engels, "Sochineniys" [Works], Vol 16, p 198.

"Sotsial'noye Razvitiye Rabochego Klassa SSSR" [Social Development of the
USSR Working Class], Moscow, 1977, p 27.

M. N. Rutkevich, "Tendentsii Razvitiya Sotsisl'noy Struktury Sovetskogo
Obshchestva" [The Tendencies in the Deve10pment of the Social Structure of
Soviet Society]. Moscow, 1975. p 38.

A. Sh. Tashbulatov. "Social Problems of Unqualified workers" in the collection
"Filosofiya, lstoriyn KPSS, Politekonomiya“ [Philosophy, the history of the
CPSU, Political Economy], Issue 23, Ufa, 1971. p 133.

UDARNIK (organ of the party committee, trade union committee, Komsomol
committee, and board of directors of the Tashkentskiy Aviation Production
Association imeni V. P. ChkalovJ 15 January 1969.

ANDIZHANSKAYA PRAVDA, I. September 1979

NAHANGANSKAYA PRAVDA, 1 May 1979

"Sotsial'noye Rszvitiye ... op. cit.. p 26

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
L2.

L3.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Ibid., p 21

"Naseleniye SSSR Po Dannym Perepisi 1979 G." [The Population of the USSR
Based on 1979 Census Data]. Moscow, 1980, p 3 .

Ibid., p 4.

Ibid.

"Narodnoye Khozyayatvo Uzbekakoy 888 v 1979 c. Statist. Yzhegodnik 'l‘SSU
Uzbekskoy SSR" [The National Economy of the Uzbek SSR in 1979. Statistical
yearbook of the Uzbek SSR Central Statistical Directorate]. Tashkent, 1980.
P 60

O. Apostolov, "Urgent Problems in the Professional Orientation of Youth",
KOMHUNIST UZBEKISTANA,N0 2, 1979. p 43.

Cf. Marx and Engels, op. cit., Vol 19, p 3105.

"XIX S"yezd Kommunisticheakoy Partii UzbekiStana. Stenogr. Otchet"

[The 19th Congress of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan. Stenographic Report],
Tashkent, 1978, p 60.

PRAVDA VOSTOKA, 11 June 1977.

Ibid., 14 March 1976.

"Report of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan to the
20th Congress of the Comuniat Party of Uzbekistan. Report of Sh. R. Rashidov,
candidate member of the CPSU Central Comittee Politburo and first secretary
of the Central Comittee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan", PRAVDA
VOSTOKA, lo February 1981.

PRAVDA VOSTOKA, 6 February 1981.

Ibid.

Calculated based on "Trudovyye Reaur sy Uzbekistana" [Uzbekistan's Labor
Resources], Tashkent, 1970, p 63.

Calculated based on "Chislennost' Naseleniya Uzbekskoy SSR na 1 Yanvarya
1978 (3." [Number of People in the Uzbek SSR on 1 January 1978]. POpulation
and Public Health Statistical Section, UzSSR Central Statistical Directorate.
Ibid.

PRAVDA JOSTOKA, 4 February 1980.

Ibid.. 7 February 1981.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

37.
38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

63.

£6.

45.

Ibid., 5 February I981.

Cf., for example, the material on Akhangaran and Shirin in PRAVDA VOSTOKA,
11 June 1977 and 28 September 1978.

LITERATURNAYA GAZETA. 3 October 1979

S. Akhmedov. "0n the Forward Edge of the Five-Year Plan", PARTIYNAYA
ZHIZN' (Tashkent), No 3. 1978, p 60.

Calculated based on “Administrativno - Territorial'noye Deleneye Uzbekskoy
SSR [The Administrative Territorial Division of the Uzbek SSR[, Tashkent.
1975 p 260.

Akhmedov, op. cit.. p 60.

"Narodnoye Khozyaystvo SSSR ea 60 Let. Yubileynyy Statist. Yezhegodnik"
[60 Years of the USSR Rational Economy. Jubilee Statistical Yearbook].
Moscow, 1977, pr 50 and 53.

PRAVDA vosroxa, 2 May 1979.

Ibid., 9 August 1978 (Editorial)

PLANOVOYE Knozvnvsrvo. No 11, 1976, p 22.

Calculated based on "Itogi Vsesoyuznuy Perepisi Naseleniya 1970 Code"
[Results of the 1970 A11-Union!k>pulution Census] Part 4, Moscow, 1973.

pp 211 - 221.

C. A. Shister. "On Some Tendencies in the Development of Uzbekistan's work-
ing Class Under the Conditions of Developed Socialism." NAUCHNYY KOHMUNIZH.
No 3, 1977, p 30.

Ibid.

"Narodnoye Khozynystvo Uzbckskoy SSR v 1971 C. Statist. Yezhegodnik"

[The National Economy of the Uzbek SSR in 1971. Statistical Yearbook].
Tashkent, 1972. p ll.

"Itogi Vseaoyuznoy Perepisi Naseleniya 1979 Coda" [The Results of the All-
Union 1979 Population Census], Part 1, Tashkent. 1980.

"On Furtlmer Improving the Work With Cadres in Light of the Decisions of
the 24th CPSU Congress. Report of Comrade Sh. R. Rashidov, first secretary
of the Uzbek Communist Party Central Committee to the Plenum of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan on 15 February 1972",
KOHHUNIST UZBEKISTANA. No 3, 1972, p 27.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
46.

47.

48.
49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

56.

SS.

56.

57.
58.

S9.

60.

"XXV S"yezd Kommunistichcakoy Partii Sovetskogo Soyuza. Stenogr. Otchet"
[The 25th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Stenographic
Report]. V01 2. Moscow. 1976. p 292.

TSSU UzSSR leSSR Central Statistical Directorate]. Department of Statistics,
Labor and Wages.

TASHKENTSKAYA PRAVDA, 7 September 1978.
[bid., 26 August 1978.

"Materialy XXVI S"yezda KPSS" [Materials on the 26th CPSU Congress]. Moscow,
1981, p 135.

Sh. R. Rashidov, "Znamya Druzhby" [The Banner of Friendship], Moscow. 1977,
p 138.

CE. V. A. Yezhov, A. Z. Bakser and I. P. Trufanov, "Rabochiy Klass SSSR v
Cody Devyatoy Pyatiletki (1971-1975 66.)" [The USSR working Class During
the Years of the 9th Five-Year Plan (1971—1975)]. Leningrad. 1978.

"Sotsialnoye Razvitiye..." op. cit. p 29.

"Vsesoyuznaya Perepis' Naseleniya 1970 g" [1970 All-Union Population Census],
Moscow, 1976. pp 217 - 218.

XXV S"yezd Kommunisticheskoy Partii Sovetskogo Soyuza“ [The 25th Congress
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union]. Moscow, 1976. Vol 1, p 67;
V01 2, p 20.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim Kuraom.Rechi 1 Sta ti " [Leninist Course. Speeches
and Articles]. Vol 7, Moscow 1979, p 672.

"Trudovyye resursy... op. cit., p 66.

Ct. "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR..." op. cit., p 670.

A. p. Myskina. "v Novykh Usloviyakh Khozyaystvovsniya" [Under New Management
Conditions]. Tashkent, 1978. pp 15 - l7.

PRAVDA VOSTOKA, 22 Hay 1970.

61.1b1d.. 11 October 1970 and 17 February 1972.

62.

63.

65.

Ibid.. 3 Mar 71.
Ibid.

"ltogi Vsesoyuznoy Perepisi Naseleniya 1970 Coda" ... op. cit. Vol 6,
Moscow, 1973. pp 166-236.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
65.

66.

67.

Shister, op. cit., p 123.

L I. Brezhnev'Txchetnnyoklod Tsentral'nogo Komiteta KPSS XXVI S"yezdu
Koununisticheskoy Partii v Oblasti Vnutrenney i Vnezhney Politiki" [Report
of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union in the Area of Donestic and Foreign Policy], Moscow,
Politizdat, 1981, p 74.

PRAVDA. 31 March 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Nauka", "Istoriya SSSR". 1981

8802
CSO:

1830/184 END

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY