FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10406

22 March 1982

USSR Report

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
(FOUO 3/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

(rouo 3/82)

CONTENTS

AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS

Evaluation of Parameters of Meteor Risk With Respect
to Radar Observations. Part I: Statement of

Problenoaaaaocooaooaooa-ooaoaoaoaoaooaoaooaoooooooooaoaoo 1

Evaluation of Parameters of Meteor Riaka with Respect
to Radar Observations, Part II: Approximation of
Ionization curveoc0.0.00.0...IIOOOOOOOOI’IOOOOOOI0.0.00.0 2

Recognition of Meteorological Objects by Energy Spectrum
of Fluctuations of Echo signal Intensities............... 2

Simulating Influx of Meteoric Matter along Radar
Observers, Report 4: Determination of Some Parameters
of RC‘COI'GEd Radio Meteors.aaooooeuoooooaaoooaaaooooooaaao 3

Statistical Analysis of Time-Series Estimates of
Parameters of weak Radio Meteors, Report 1:
Formulation of the Prohluooaoooo'aoooaaaoo-nocoooooaaoao 3

One Method of Evaluating Speed of Individual Radio

Meteors-oaoooo-oaooooooooo-ooooooaooaaoooaoooaaaaoaaoooao ‘

Device for Hookup of Statistical Quantity Analyzer to

CODpUCEI..................-.....u.........o....-.......-. 4

Automatic Goniometer, Report 1: Design Principles......... 5

Automatic Gonioneter, Report 2: Preliminary Signal
Processing............................................... 6

Automatic Goniometer, Report 3: Primary Signal
Processing............................-...o.n.u”nun 6

- a - [III - USSR - 213 8!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IKMIOFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

Automatic Goniometer, Report 4: Software for Automatic

Goniometer...............................................

Synthesis of Two-Scale Antenna System of Meteor Radar
Station Phase GonimterCOOOOC.00......IIIOOUOOOIOOOOOOII

Some Problems of Investigating Effect of Nonlinear
Properties of Radio Receiving Channel on Radar
Station Quality Indices.........................,........

Accuracy Limits of Recording Time Coordinate of Some
Pulse Signals in Channel With Finite Passband............

Possible Means of Construction and Selection of
Multichannel Voltage-to-Code Converters for Radio
Engineering Syste.a..........................-.......o...

Autocorrelational Properties of Quasi-Periodic Pulse

sequences........--c.........-..o.......o..u..ou.o......

Accuracy of Measurement of Time Delay of Useful Signal
Appearing With Interference Signal.......................

Self-Contained Navigation by Means of Maps.................
Extremum Correlation Navigation Systems....................

Accuracy of Estimating Polar Coordinates of Objects by
Optical Detection and Ranging............,...............

ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION

Approximation Method of Calculating Parameters of
Antenna Array Hith Passive Radiators.....................

Slot Antenn‘a for Aircraft......ou.........................
Microstrip Antennas........................................

Quasi—Optimal Filtration in Coherent-Light Device for
Measuring Polar Coordinates of Objects...................

Accuracy of Measurement of Sound Velocity in Air With
Doppler marOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIOOOIOOIOOGOOOOIOOO0..

Estimation of Energy Spectrum of Doppler-Frequency
Fluctuations During Radar-Acoustic Probing of
Atmosphere......................;........................

- b -

FOR 0FF1C1AL USEZCMULY

10

10
ll
12

13

16
lb
15

l6

l7

l7
Use of Ultra-Short—Have Radio Emission for Perturbation of
Ionoaphere....................................o.......... 18

Aligned Scattering of Radio Haves by Artificial
Inhomogeneities Produced by Radiation From Short-Have
Transmitter With Oblique Beam............................ 18

Methods of Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of
Nonstationary Scattering and Radiation of Electromagnetic

wachssseesassess-Doesoneaooooesoomeoasoooeaassseaoeoossa 19

Problem of Potential Precision of Time Position fixation
of Signal With Scale Comparison of Time Keepers.......... 20

Forming and Quantization of Complex of Envelopes of
Band‘Pa‘a Signals..........................u........-.-.o 21

Feasibility of Forming Compound Signals with Equipment for
Digital Frequency Synthesis.............................. 21

Adaptive Compensation of Interference Signals Correlated
on Long Time Interval.................................... 22

Effect of Piniteness of Transmission Band on Maximum
Error in Timing of Pulse Signals......................... 23

Signal Identification by Spectrum in Basis of Discrete
Exponential FunCtions....ooooooc.................o.o..... 23

Signal Identification by General Karunen-Loev
Indicators Determined From Energy Spectrum............... 24

Signal Identification Prom Spectra Obtained by Analyzers
of Parallel or Quasi-Parallel Type, Report 6:
Simulation of Basic Identification Rules Involving
Spectral Indicators...................................... 2‘

Classification of Signals According to Energy Spectrum
Under Conditions of A Priori Indeterminancy.............. 25

Distribution of Pulse Amplitudes in Some Industrial
Interference............................................. 25

Similar Methods of Reception of Multifrequency Signals..... 26
CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
Determination of Volterra Kernels of Multidimensional

Nonlinear Radioelectronic Circuits by Means of
.nonlimar Input signala'OOOIOOO0.00.00.0000...OOIIOOOIOO 27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJA1.USE10NLY

Signal for Circuit With Point-Contact Photoresistor in
MaximumrSensitivity Mode.................................

COMMUNICATIONS

Waves in Nonhomogeneous Multiconductor Transmission
Lines With Skin Effect...................................

Calculating Electromagnetic Waves in Multiconductor
Transmission Lines Using Matrix With Multiple Spectrum
and Parameters Slowly Varying Along the Line.............

Reflection Coefficient of Ellipsoidal Inhomogeneity in
coaxial mnneIOOOOOOICOO'IOOOOOIOOCCOOOOIOOOOIOOIOOOOOOO

Algorithm for Analysis of Signals in Nonhomogeneous
Con-mnication Channels...................................

Distribution of Doppler Frequency Shift in Meteor
Communication Line.......................................

Error in Calculation of Frequency Characteristics of
Meteor Communication Channel.............................

Method of Estimating Correlational Properties of Basic
Characteristics of Meteor Cmmmunication Lines............

Use of Codes in System of Remainder Classes for Data
Transmission Over Meteor Channel, Report 1:
Formulation of Problem...................................

Use of Codes in System of Remainder Classes for Data
Transmission Over Meteor Channel, Report 2:
Error Detection and Correction Capability of Such

CodeSoeeeeoeooeeooeeoosaeasasego-oeooeoeeaeoaaaeoaoooeooo

Systems for Remote Control of High-Frequency and Medium-
Frequency Radio Communications Bquipnent.................

COMPONENTS, HYBRIDS AND MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY
Modern Microelectronic Voltage-to-Frequency Converters.....

Parameters of Strongly Coupled Cavity Resonators...........

Effect of Cutoff Region on Characteristics of Irregular
hetansular Resonator.........nonunuuunu.nu...

- d -

FOR‘0FFK]A[.USE1DNLY

28

29

29

30

30

31

31

32

32

33

33

35 '
36

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Graphical Representation of Dependence of Resonance
Wavelengths on Geometrical Dimensions of Resonators.
Report 3: Some Generalizations Based on Conformal

Mapping..................................................

Scattering Matrix of Array of Two Slits in Rectangular
"aveWeOOOOOOOOOOO...0.000.000.0000...0.0.0...00.0.0...

Investigation of Varactor Frequency Multiplier with
Assistance of Functional Method..........................

High-Frequency Amplifiers Based on Surface Acoustic

Haves....................................................

Some Features in Design of High-Speed Analog Cummutators...

COMPUTERS

Error of Finite-Length Discrete Simulation of Random
Processes with Given Distribution and Correlation
Function on Digital Computer.............................

ELECTRON DEVICES
.Extension of Operating Range of Gunn-Diode 0scillators.....
Harmonic Generation in M-Type Traveling-Have Tubes.........

Multifrequency Operation of Mérype Amplifier Hith
Cathode in Interaction Space.............................

Effect of Longitudinal Nonuniformity of Electrostatic
Field on Characteristics of M-Type Traveling-Have

Tube...o....oo....o..........o...........................

Realization of Regime of Inverse Transformation in
Automatic Phase Traveling-Dave Tubes.....................

INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENTS

Capacitive Vibration Transducer for Measuring Amplitudes
of Mechanical Vibrations of Mounting Plates..............

Investigation of Temperature Field of Circular Waveguide...

Analysis of 2-Channel Interferoneter with Prismatic
Light Dividers as System of Coupled Multipoles...........

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

37

37

39

‘0

61
41

42

62

63

66

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MICROWAVE THEORY AND TBCRNIQUES

Device for Investigation of Amplitude and Phase
Instabilitiea of Highly Sensitive Microwave Sand
m11f1er....0000000000000..0.000.000.0000...00......O...

rowan ENGINEERING

Exponential Voltage Generators With Control of
Nonlinur1CYO0.0.0.0.0...O.IC0.0..OOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOQOOQOO

Measurement of Levels of Continuous Component of Audio-
Frequency Interference Prom Power Network................

Spectrum of Continuous Interference Conponent Prom
PM: Network.00.00.00.0000.000.00IOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO‘O

QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, memo-omcs
Transmission of Holograms in Real Time Scale...............
Effect on Density of Information Recording of Loose

Joining of Photo Effect Carrier to Screen of Cathode
Ray ‘mbe Hith Fiber Face Plate...........................

- f -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

66

67

47

69

$0
AESOSPACE 6 ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS

UDC 523.503

EVALUATION OF PARAMETERS OF METEOR RISK RITE RESPECT TO RADAR
OBSERVATIONS, PARI I: STAIEHENT 0P PROBLEM

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 29 Feb 80) pp 53-56

VOLOSHCEUK, Yu. 1., candidate of technical sciences and KASBCEEYEV, L. 3.

[Abstract] The development of space travel requires a detailed investiga—
tion and production of solutions with respect to a number of applied
questions. One of then is the safety of travel in cosmic space. According
to a 1977 work from the literature, a risk of damage or destruction of
space craft exists in the cosmos, as the result of an impact with meteor
bodies. Because of the technical difficulties of collection and analysis
of meteor substances directly in cosnic space, planners are forced to use
in their calculations averaged evaluations which are based on investiga—
tions of damages to aircraft returned to earth and a general prediction of
the distribution of meteor substances in space near the earth. In the
present work it is proposed to obtain the characteristics of meteor risk,
allowing for the time and projectory of flights of cosmic apparatus by

an indirect path--on the basis of an analysis of radar observations of the
penetration of meteor bodies into the earth's atmosphere. This proposed
method has determined limitations, e.g., with selectivity of the equipment
used, and it does not give a complete picture of meteor phenomena. However.
at the present-day stage it is the most successful method of determining
the statistical characteristics of flights of meteor bodies into the space
near the earth. A method is also proposed for obtaining a distribution law
for the electron density of meteor trails with a uniform law of distribution
of image points. ?igures 1: references A: 3 Russian, 1 Hestern in

translation.
[81-6415]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 523 .503

EVALUATION OF PARAMETERS 0F METEOR RISKS WITH RESPECT TO RADAR
OBSERVATIONS, PART II: APROXIHATION 0P IONIZA‘I'I’JR CURVE

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 29 Feb 80) pp 56-58

KASHCHEYEV, L. 3.

[Abstract] Statistical processing of the results of radio-meteor observa-
tion is connected with use of the vaporization curve of a meteor substance.
This curve makes it possible to put into rigorous conformity the height

of image points and the amplitude of a reflected signal for each separately
taken trail. The curve of the linear electron density of the meteor trail
is approximated by a third degree polynomial. The effect of the initial
radius in the area of the maximum of the ionized curve is approximated by

a linear equation. The results are presented of calculations, the precision
of which is varified by the method of statistical tests. Figures 1;
references: 6 Russian.

[81-6615]

UDC 551 . 1 501 .81-509 . 31108

RECOGNITION OF METEOROLOGICAL OBJECTS BY ENERGY SPECTRUM OF FLUCTUATIONS
0P ECHO SIGNAL INTENSITIES

Khar'kov RADIOTBKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 27 Feb 80) pp 69-78

BBZRUK, V. M., KORYTTSEV, I. V., OHBL'CHENKO. V. A., candidate of
technical sciences, PILIPENKO, Yu. L. and PRDSHKIN, Ye. 6., candidate of
technical sciences

[Abstract] An algorithmic method is proposed for construction of information
criteria for meteor objects and automatic identification with respect to
them. The energy spectrum of fluctuations of echo signal intensities is

used as the initial description. The identification algorithm is based on
the spectral-statistical method of identification (Karunen-Loeva). The
algorithm makes it possible to construct an automated system for processing
echo signals. The efficiency of the identification system was checked by

the method of simulation modeling on a computer. Figures 3; tables 1;
references: 11 Russian.

[81-6b15]

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
UDC 621.396

SIMULATINC INFLUX 0F HETBORIC MATTER ALONG RADAR OBSERVERS.
REPORT 4: DETERMINATION OF SOME PARAMETERS 0P RMRDED RADIO ERRORS

Khar'kov RADIOTEICHNIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 23-25

KHOPOVA, I . P .

[Abstract] The transformation operator for converting the parameters of a
meteor particle such as its mass, velocity, trajectory etc. to parameters
of the signal recorded by a receiver such as its amplitude-time character-
istic, phase, delay time etc. has been established on the basis of the
minimum-(ru)error criterion, according to a model which takes into account
the processes of meteor trail formation and the reflection of radio waves
by a meteor trail. with this operator available, it is now possible to
estimate the initial distribution of meteor parameters not directly observ-
able by the radar method. Accordingly, for the MARS high-sensitivity
meteor measurements complex at the Khar'kov Institute of Radioelectronics
there have been determined the dependence of the least recordable mass

"0 on the velocity V, and the exponent n of the 8 - 80V“ relation for the
ionization coefficient. Numerical experiments were made in order to calcu-
late the diurnal variations of these parameters, to supplement inevitably
inadequate measurements. According to these data. the velocity of meteors
is maximum in September and minimum in March, their altitude is maximum
during the day and minimum during the night. The differences of 20 km/s
and 7 km, respectively, are equivalent to changes in the sensitivity of
instruments. Figures 2; references: 3 Russia .

[83-2615]

UDC 621.396

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF TIMB-SRIBS ESTIMATES OF PARAMETERS OP WEAK
RADIO METEORS, REPORT 1: FORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No (07, 1978 pp 69-71

VOLOSHCHUK. Yu. 1., candidate of technical sciences, and HALYNYAK, H. 1.

[Abstract] The statistical analysis of readings of a high-sensitivity
radio meteor measurements complex is considered, specifically the problem
of reliability of their interpretation. Representation of the readings of
any meteor parameter in the form of a time series rather than lengthening
of the period of averaging will ensure a higher reliability without smooth-
ing the behavior of this parameter at the individual instants of time and
thus masking its characteristics. An inspection of such random series
reveals that they are nonstationary and contain seasonal camonents with
various periods. Parametric analysis, particularly with the aid of models
of autogression and a sliding mean. is most effective here and, although it

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

requires much a priori information, it yields very accurate estimates of
these seasonal components. It also facilitates the study of the physical
nature of phenomena which a time series describes. Figures 2; references 5:
4 Russian, 1 Western (in translation).

[83-2415]

UDC 621-396

ONE METHOD OF EVALUATING SPEED OF INDIVIDUAL RADIO METEORS

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 26 Feb 80) pp 58-63

DAVIDENKO , H . G .

[Abstract] A method is considered for an evaluation of meteor speed,
which utilizes all the information included in the amplituda-time charac-
teristics of a reflected signal, and is based on an analysis of spectral
and correlation characteristics of the enveloping reflected signal.
Formulas are derived which make it possible to model and analyze signals
reflected from meteor trails with various values of the parameters R, A,
V. The method was checked by the real signals of a radar station of the
Khar'kov Institute of Radio Electronics. The speed of the meteor body, V,
was computed by two methods: diffraction and the method presented in this
paper. It is shown that the proposed method gives an evaluation of V close
to that obtained by the traditional method. Figures 3; references:

2 Russian.

[81-6415]

UDC 621.396
DEVICE FOR HOOK”? 0P STATISTICAL QUANTITY ANALYZER T0 COMPUTER

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 25-27

VOLOSHCHUK, Yu. t., candidate of technical sciences, KOVTUN, I. A. and
KHOPOVA, I. P.

[Abstract] For several years the highly-sensitive automatic radar complex
MARS at the Khar'kov Institute of Radioelectronics has performed preliminary
as well as primary and partial secondary processing of meteor data. This
complex can determine the orbits of meteors, their radiants, velocities and
altitudes, also their quantitative content. Both hardware and software have
been developed for calculating the density of meteoric influx from the
quantitative content in real time with the aid of minicomputers rather than
through weighting which requires a computer with a large memory. The

FOR OFTHCJAI.USE1MNLY
UDC 621.369
AUTOMATIC GONIOHETER, REPORT 1: DESIGN PRINCIPLES

Khar'kov RADIOTBKRNIKA in Russian No 47. 1978 pp 3-9

KASHCHEYEV. B. L., doctor of technical sciences. and ZEUKOV, V. V.,
candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] The design of automatic goniometers for meteor radar stations

:n a geophysical measurements system including three principal antennas is
considered which will ensure sufficiently sensitive and accurate operation
in the pulse mode. The angular coordinates and the range of a meteor trail

signal ensures an accurate determination of the direction cosines. Increas-
ing the statistical sample of reflections during the existence of a meteor
trail ensures a higher signal-to-noise ratio. Ambiguity of phase angle
readings is removed by simultaneous additional measurements from other anten-
nas at other base distances than that between the three main antennas.

with a reference signal from either a separate auxiliary source or the cen-
tral main antenna. The range is determined from the time by uhich the
signal reflected by the meteor trail lags behind the probing signal, the
error of range measurement being reduced by accumulation of many readings

in the computer memory and an ambiguity of range readings being avoided
through the use of two scales (base scale of 500 pulses/s and code scale

of 100 pulses/s). Errors caused by refraction of radio waves by the tropo-
sphere and the lonosphere (D-layer and E-layer), as well as caused by a

wind gradient in the meteor region. are treated as random quantities and
have been estimated. The reflected signal is known to pass through the
entire approximately 1 km high Fresnel zone. References 13: 6 Russian,

7 Western (two in translation).

[83-2415]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.J69
AUTOMATIC GONIOHETER, REPORT 2: PRELIMINARY SIGNAL PROCESSING
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 9-14

ZHUKOV, V. V., candidate of technical sciences, OLBYNIKOV, A. N. and
OLEYNIKOV, V. N.

[Abstract] Preliminary signal processing by an automatic goniometcr in a
meteor radar station includes detection and then filtration of useful signals
as well as formation of triggering pulses for the next signal processing
stage. An automatic goniometer must be calibrated first, which is done most
effectively on an episodic basis using a source of radio waves at a fixed
location in space. The automatic goniometer described here is a S-channel
device containing five staggered antennas with a receiver each, five pulse-
type phase meters, one mean-range meter, calibration and control equipment,
also one radio transmitter with an antenna, a sync oscillator, an interference
suppressor, and a Dnepr-l digital computer. A phase shift simulator for
first calibration and checkout consists of a 200 kHz quartz oscillator and
two channels with matching devices, an inductive phase shifter and a fre-
quency halver. There follows a frequency converter transposing the phase
shift to 500 kHz, near the intermediate frequency of the automatic goniometer,
with 600 kHz serving as the reference frequency. With parasitic amplitude
and phase modulation thus eliminated, the output signal is modulated with a
sequence of video pulses and can be mixed with noise. Second calibration

is done with the aid of a simulator of low-frequency meteor reflections in
the form of pulses of 0.2-15 s duration. Interaction between channel
equipment of the automatic goniometer and the computer is effected in the
alternatingly "store" and "read" mode. Pigures 1; references: 9 Russian.
[83-2415]

UDC 621.396
AUTOMATIC GONIOHETER, REPORT 3: PRIMARY SIGNAL PROCESSING
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 72-78

OLEYNIKOV, V. N., OLEYNIKOV, A. N. and ZHUKOV, V. V., candidate of
technical sciences

[Abstract] An automatic goniometer for meteor radar systems has been
developed which includes pulse-type digital phase meters and stable thermo-
static quartz filters. The primary signal processing involves estimating
the phase shifts in spaced antennas and the delay time of signals reflected
by a meteor trail. The error of phase meters due to a discontinuous phase
characteristic can be eliminated by a preliminary analysis of a phase shift
and, if it is close to 0’ or 360°, introduction of an additional fixed 180°

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
phase shift, or by halting the frequency of the input signal and thus
widening the instrument range from 0 to 720°. The first method is noise
immune, but the second method is simpler. The equipment for implementing
the second method includes an intermediate-frequency stage, an amplifier-
limiter, and a pulse shaper. The quantization error here depends on the
frequency of quantizing pulses and on the radio of intermediate frequency
to quantization frequency. Errors of phase-difference measurement are
caused by instability of both frequencies and by Doppler frequency shifts.
The range meter for measuring the mean oblique distance has two scales,
one for rough readings unambiguous up to 1500 km and one for fine readings
unambiguous up to 300 km. A computer calculates the distance to the re-
flecting region of a meteor trail and the rms error of measurement from data
on the pulse duration and the time interval from leading edge of reflected

pulse to next probing pulse. Figures 2; references: ll Russian.
[82-2615]

000 621.396
ADTOHATIC GONIOHETER, REPORT 4: SOFTWARE FOR AUTOMATIC GONIOHBTBR
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 79-85

ZHUKOV, V. V., candidate of technical sciences. OLEYNIROV, A. N. and
OLEYNIKOV , V . N .

[Abstract] The automatic goniometer developed for meteor radar systems
operates with a Dnepr-l third-generation small digital computer. This
computer has an immediate-access memory with a capacity of 4092 26-digit
numbers and a permanent memory with a capacity of 3072 26-digit numbers.
The computer operates according to programs which occupy 3072 numbers

in the immediate-access memory and 516 numbers in the permanent memory.
The goniometer-computer interaction is effected according to a discontinuous
program start-reset-proceed-stop. The computer proceeds to calculate the
main parameters of a meteoric reflector, in eight stages, according to a
second discontinuous program. Figures 2; references: 7 Russian.
[82-2415]

UDC 621.396.96

SYNTHESIS OF TWO-SCALE ANTENNA SYSTEM OF METEOR RADAR STATION PHASE
GONIOHETER

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 26 Mar 80) pp b7-52

ZMUKOV, V. V., candidate of technical sciences and OLEYNIKOV, V. N.

[Abstract] In geophysical and astronomical investigations, a meteor
radar station (HRS) with a goniometer device makes it possible to employ

7
FOR(Nﬂﬂ(JALlﬁﬂEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more complex models of interpretation of observation material and to clarify
the dependence of the structural and dynamic parameters of the atmosphere on
height. Present-day phasometric gnniometer systems of a HRS must have a
high accuracy of determination of the angles of arrival over a wide interval
of their measurements. In the general case realisation of contradictory
requirements leads to a two-scale method of measurement. The present work
displays the principal relationships for multiscale and two-scale systems,
and Jescribes the method of choice of the optimum dimensions of antenna
bases of the simplest two-scale antenna system of a HRS phase goniometer.
Figures 1; references 24: 23 Russian, 1 Western in translation.

[81-6415]

UDC 621.372

SOME PROBLEMS OF INVESTIGATING EFFECT OF NONLINEAR PROPERTIES OF RADIO
RECEIVING CHANNEL 0N RADAR STATION QUALITY INDICES

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 13 May 79) pp 39-62

IVANOV, H. A.

[Abstract] It is possible to consider real radar stations as linear only

in the relatively narrow dynamic range of signals at the input of its radio
receiving channel. Outside of this, it is noticeable that the nonlinearity
of the characteristics of radio devices has an effect which leads to a
reduction of the quality of operation of a radar station. The effect of the
nonlinear properties of radio receiving channels on the quality of func-
tioning of a radar station is still insufficiently investigated. The object
of the present work is to develop procedures for an analysis of the effect
of nonlinear processes in radio receiving channels on the quality indices

of radar stations. The procedure developed for investigation is based on
the use of a functional method. The concept of an effective signal-to-
noise ratio at the input of equivalent linear receivers is proposed. Ex-
pressions are derived which make it possible with comparative simplicity

to determine the deterioration of the signal-to—noise caused by the non-
linear distortions in the radio receiving channel. Sufficiently suitable
formulas are obtained, applicable for evaluating the effect of nonlinearity
of the characteristics of radio receiving channels on the precision of
measurements. resolution, information properties, probability of detection of
targets, and the noise immunity of radar stations. References: 6 Russian.
[81-6615]

FON(Nﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(NNLY
UDC 621.317

ACCURACY LIMITS OF RECORDING TIME COORDINATE OF 8013 PULSE SIGNALS IN CHANEL
WITH PINITE PASSBAND

Khar'kov RADIO‘IEOINIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 113-121

DUDNIK, B. 8., candidate of technical sciences, “Slim, 3. I... doctor
of technical sciences, KOVAL', Yu. A., candidate of technical sciences,
and MOISEYEV, V. P.

[Abstract] The maximm accuracy of recording the tine coordinate of most
cannon pulse signals in measuring-and-information or radar systems is
estimated, taking into account the presence of additive fluctuational
interference and the finiteness of the channel passband. The analysis is
based on the theory of optimal detection and measurement, and is applied to
signal recording according to the minimum-error criterion. the standard
deviation as well as other parameters characterizing the accuracy (minimum
standard deviation, optimum x - 2“,, energy utilization factor) at either
constant signal energy or constant signal power are calculated for simple
signals (rectangular, triangular, trapezoidal, cosinusoidal, bell-curve,
3:“ pulses) and for intricate signals (with linear frequency nodulation,
with phase manipulation, 2-frequency signal). Figures 3; tables 3;
references: 5 Russian.

[82-2415]

 

UDC 621.3764

POSSIBLE MEANS 017 CONSTRUCTION AND SELECTION OF HILTICIIANNEL
VOLTAGE-TO-CODE CONVERTERS FOR RADIO ENGINEERING svsrms

Khar'kov RADIUI‘EKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 14 Jan 80) pp 17-22

KLB‘IIN, A. A. and MESHOV, V. N., candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] Multichannel systus of detection with, digital processing of
signals are widely used in present day radar techniques. Inseparable units
of such radio engineering systems are voltage-to-code converters (VCC) which
bring about quantization of signals in detection channels, and distribution
of voltage codes into digital computers. The present work considers the
special features of choice and construction of such VCC. Formulas are de-
rived for evaluation of the high-speed characteristics of converters using
selected elements of the base. Recommendations are made with respect to

use of multichannel converters. It is shown that it is only possible to use
a few of the large number of known structures of aultichannel VCC in present
day multichannel radio engineering systems with digital processing of signals.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among NVCC of successive action it is advisable to select series parallel

and "conveyer" coding of channel voltages, based on digit-by-digit procedures.
with a large number of channels and a small time for coding, the most
favorable is a counting-parallel HVCC. The final choice of a HVCC for radio
engineering systems is made as a result of a detailed analysis of the

requirements imposed and the permissible equipment cost. Figures 2;
references 6: 5 Russian, 1 Western.
[81-6415]

UDC 621.391
AUTOCORRELATIONAL PROPERTIES OF QUASI-PERIODIC PULSE SEQUENCES

Khar'kov mmrmmm in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 44-47

TYRSA, V. Ye., doctor of technical sciences, KOSTYUKOV, 0. A. and
KARPUKHIN, A. V.

[Abstract] The correlation is established between two pulse sequences which
have been generated according to the same law but along different quasi-
uniform scales, as in the case of radar signal synthesis by means of angle-
tine-code converters. The pulses are assumed to be of infinitesimally short
duration and regarded as mathematical points. The system of equations
describing the coincidences of one point on one scale with all k points

on the other scale in N sliding steps is transformed into a system of
numerical difference equations. With these equations can be constructed a
(kxN) table for an analysis of coincidences and thus of the autocorrelational
properties of such pulse sequences. This is demonstrated here on two

scales, one twice as long as the other. Figures 2; tables 1; references 3:
2 Russian, 1 Western (in translation).
[83-2415]

UDC 621.396

ACCURACY OF MEASUREMENT OF TIME DELAY 0P USEFUL SIGNAL APPEARING WITH
INTERFERENCE SIGNAL

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 125-128

KARLOV, V. D.

[Abstract] In radar practice it is necessary to measure the time delay

of the useful signal and to determine the payoff of interference suppres-
sion. Here a useful signal and an interference signal appearing together

at the radar receiver are considered, their amplitudes and phases as well

as their time coordinates not being known. Assuming that all these parameters

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
do not change.during the measurement period, the maximum attainable accuracy
of a measurement of the time delay is evaluated for a narrow-band useful
signal. The complex envelope of the probing pulse is, furthermore, assumed
to have a rectangular frequency spectrum. The results of calculations indi-
cate that the accuracy of measurement depends not only on the degree of
overlap of both signals and on their phase difference but also on the

amplitude of the interference signal. Figures 2; references: 3 Russian.
[82-2415]

UDC 621.396.963
SELF-CONTAINED NAVIGATION BY MEANS OF MAPS

Moscow ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELBKTRONIKA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 3-28
RZHBVKIN, V. A., candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] Self-contained radioelectronic navigation systems utilize
information separated from signals which are reflected or scattered by
natural reference points such as heavenly bodies or the surface of the earth.
These systems include Doppler systems and systems for navigation by means of
maps, also called chart comparison systems. A survey of the state of the

art of these systems is presented here. Topics discussed include Doppler
self-contained navigation systems, classification of chart comparison sys-
tems and their structure, relief measuring systems, radiometric systems,
acatterometric systems, preparation of standard maps, methods of analyzing
maps, comparison of maps by means of boundary correlation methods and
methods of estimating the accuracy of the agreement of maps. Doppler navi-
gation systems are being improved slang the lines of using a modern element
base and methods of error compensation. Two types of Doppler navigation
systems are being created: high-precision for high-speed aircraft and lower-
precision for low-speed systems. The specifications of Doppler navigation
systems of different generations are compared. A structural diagram of a
chart comparison system is presented; this method of navigation is based on
comparing maps prepared during the aircraft's flight with standard charts of
the same locale. The trend of introducing chart comparison methods and
systems of navigation has become very popular in recent years for the pur-
pose of improving the accuracy of the navigation of manned and unmanned air-
craft. Relief measuring systems are designed for low-altitude aircraft.
These systems are based on comparing relief maps of the terrain. The

TERCOH system's capabilities are the most widely discussed at the present
time. Refief measuring systems are poorly effective when an aircraft travels
with an insufficiently distinctly pronounced relief. For this reason it is
suggested that these measuring systems be combined with radiometric naviga-
tion systems, which are good for this purpose. Flat terrain, because of its

state of high development by man, provides good radar and radiometric data
for preparing maps. The main advantage of radiometric chart comparison

methods and systems is the simplicity of preparing standard charts of the

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

terrain. The accuracy of plotting an in-flight map depends on the sensi-
tivity of the radiometer, which is limited by the intrinsic noise of the
receiver and antenna. The sensitivity of modern radiometers can vary over
the range of 0.02 to 0.5 °K. The promise of the combined use of radar and
radiometric maps for improving the quality of maps plotted is discussed.
Scatterometric systems can be used for navigating an aircraft at relative-
ly high altitudes and when relief measuring systems become ineffective

over relatively flat terrain. For flying at lower altitudes it has been
suggested that a scatterometer be combined with a radio altimeter. The
scatterometer measures only the reflection or scattering coefficient while
scanning the surface of the earth. In one case a special "image diagnosis"
laboratory has been created for studying the development of standard maps

of the terrain for surface correlators, including radio electronic, infrared
and optical systems. The development of methods of preparing such maps is

a central concern. Maps produced in flight are compared with standard

maps by means of the usual methods of computing normalized cross corre-
lation functions or modificatioas of these methods. Boundary correlation is
one such method. A boundary is the interface of two abutting sections of
terrain which differ in reflection or radiation properties and have a unique
configuration as compared with other sections of the same terrain. The
standard map is prepared in the form of a template. Chart comparison methods
of navigation represent a relatively new trend in the improvement of aircraft
navigation systems. It is a trend which is still largely in the research
stage. Figures 5; tables 5; references 31: 10 Russian, 21 Western.
[97-8831]

unc 629.7
EXTREHUH CORRELATION NAVIGATION SYSTEMS
Moscow ZARUBBZHNAYA RADIOBLBKTRONIKA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 28-53
BOCHKAREV, A. M.

[Abstract] In extremum correlation navigation systems reference informa-
tion on the characteristics of a specific section of the terrain is compared
with instantaneous information arriving from an airborne sensor. The true
position of the object is determined by the comparison and a correction signal
is sent to the “coarse" navigation system, usually an inertial navigation
system. The name "extremum correlation system" results from the fact that
various methods of correlation processing are usually implemented in the
comparison unit. These systems are receiving rapid development at the pre-
sent time. A "morphological" classification of extremum correlation naviga-
tion systems (KBSN's) is given, based on the isolation of key features and

a description of every possible variant of implementing these features.

The discussion concentrates on correlation processing of two-dimensional
image signals, which are functions of two space coordinates and time.

Host systems operate according to this principle. A major problea in

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
developing KESN's and in selecting the extremum correlation algorithm is
the identification of elements of images which can be predicted with a

high degree of reliability. It is impossible to predict an inage down to
the finest details because such unknown factors as temperature, weather

and solar activity influence an image obtained by means of a high-resolu-
tion scanning infrared sensor, for example. Therefore the parameters of
physicai fields of the earth are not ideally stable. A table of various
levels of predictability of images and of the possible correlation algorithms
which can be used for them is presented. Correlation algorithms are classi-
fied in terms of method of extremua correlation processing, approach to
image processing, advantages and disadvantages. A brief history of the
development of KESN's is given. thremum correlation processing algorithms
are discussed in detail, including the classical correlation algorithm,
difference correlation algorithms, processing by means of paired functions,
processing by using invariant factors, the amplitude ranking correlation
algorithm, correlation processing employing sums of gradient vectors, two-
level correlation algorithms, structural nethods of extremua correlation
processing, the line feature matching algorithm and the phase correlation
algorithn. The latter is teem-tended for correlation processing of images
obtained under various conditions of illumination. Pros the technical
viewpoint KBSN's come under the heading of the most ideal airborne radio

electronic systems. Figures 11; references 30: 4 Russian, 26 Western.
[70-8831]

"00 531.74

ACCURACY OF ESTIMATING POLAR COORDINATBS 0P OBJECTS BY OPTICAL DETECTION
AND RANGING

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 60-63
GAVRISH, T. V. and TYRsA, V. Ye., doctor of technical sciences

[Abstract] A coherent-light device for measuring the polar coordinates of
stationary objects has been invented where a time interval serves as the
information carrying parameter. This time interval begins when the scan-
ning beams turn to the reference direction and ends when the reflected signal
arrives at the receiver. The beginning of this time interval can be easily
established, but its end must be determined by statistical methods taking

into account the tendon nature of the signal and the presence of additive
noise. This noise is a shot noise consisting of photon noise in the signal,
ambient noise, and internal noise in the photoelectron multiplier. Here the
accuracy of measuring the signal delay time with a threshold device on the
basis of the Neyman-Pearson criterion of false-alarm probability is estimated,
assuming a high signal-to-noise ratio in the case of a near object only 1-2 km
away, whereupon expressions are derived for the dispcsion and the bias of
range and azimuth estimates. References 3: 2 Russian, 1 western (in
translation).

[82-2615]

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANTENNAS & PROPAGATION

UDC 621.396

APPROXIMATION METHOD OF CALCULATING PARAMETERS 0F ANTENNA ANNA! WITH
PASSIVE RADIATORS

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 19 Mar 79) pp 103-108

NAGIBIN, I. 8., candidate of technical sciences and YBGOROV, B. A.

[Abstract] The calculated relations presented in this work make it possible
to compute the added resistances of antenna array dipoles on the basis of

the mutual resistances, taking into consideration the dimensions of the
elements and the distances between them, as well as to find the current
distribution in the real dipoles of an array, with the aid of the method

of induced electomotive forces. It is proposed to determine the directional
properties of the antenna by equivalent currents, obtained with the aid of
expressions for the effective length of the dipoles. References: A Russian.

[81-6415]

UDC 621.396.677.8
SLOT ANTENNAS FOR AIRCRAFT
Moscow ZARDBEZHNAXA RADIOELEKTRONIKA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 71-83

LUNA“, V. 1., candidate of technical sciences, GOTSULXAK, A. P. and
IL'INOV, H. D.

[Abstract] The design of slightly protruding slot antennas fed by wave-
guides and resonators is discussed. These antennas are suitable for use as
hidden antennas on aircraft and have the advantages of simplicity of design,
ease of fabrication, of natching well with waveguides and resonators, of

the ability to use standard waveguides as feeding systems, of small size,

of the ability to receive and transnit at the same tine and of the ability
to be combined to form arrays with a controlled beam. They also do not
have an averse influence on the aerodynamic characteristics of aircraft.

14

FOI.0F11C1AI.USEI)NLY
Designs of individual slot antennas are described and discussed, beginning
with the very first design incorporating lengthwise slots in the wide walls
of rectangqu waveguides. A slot antenna in the fora of a coaxial line is
described, whose inner conductor is a tube of natal and whose outer conductor
is an insulator tube netalized on both sides, with partial raoval of the
netalization from both sides of the outer conductor to form a ring slot.
Also discussed are a 4-band resonator-slot antenna, a niniature resonator-
slot antenna, a miniature slot antenna, a resonator-slot antenna with a
T-shaped slot in the resonator lid, a 2-band resonator-slot antenna, a
microwave antenna executed with a cross-shaped slot in a shallow square
resonator excited by aeans of four pins arranged syuetrically around the
center of the lower wall of the resonator, an antenna with flat spirals in
the aperture for relative constancy of gain over a wide frequency band, a
wideband antenna with two flat spirals printed onto an insulating substrate
with the other ends of the spirals connected to curved dipole eleaents also
lying on the substrate to for: a special type of resonator, and a slot-
dipole resonator antenna. Antenna beans are discussed, with emphasis on
the influence of antenna housings on antenna characteristics when slot
antennas are installed on various loving objects. The curvature of adjacent
sections of the conducting surface of the housing exerts the greatest in-
fluence in this regard. Examples of the use of slot antennas are given.
with eaphasis on use on aircraft, and the designs of antenna arrays and
control of antenna array beans are discussed. Briefly discussed are an
antenna array for aircraft radar and a two-dimensional phased array with
controlled polarisation of the radiated field. Figures 16; references 59:
22 Russian, 36 Western.

[70—8831]

UDC 621.396.677.8

HICROSTRIP ANTENNAS
Moscow ZARUBBZHNAYA RADIOBLEKTRONIKA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 99-115

LMAN, V. 1., candidate of technical sciences, IL'INOV, H. D. and
GOTSULYAK, A. F.

[Abstract] A sunnary is given of designs and methods of analyzing micro-
strip antennas with a radiating element of simple fora, which have becoae
widely used because of ease of fabrication and acceptable electrical
characteristics. Microstrip antennas have been developed to satisfy the
need for lightweight, low-profile, conformal, inexpensive antennas for use
on missiles and aircraft, for exaaple, without disturbing their aerodynamic
properties. A nicrostrip antenna radiating eleaent contains an ideally con-
ducting plate consisting of a dielectric substrate sandwiched between a
radiating element and shield. Different shapes of nicrostrip antenna
radiating elements are presented and discussed, along with calculation of
the characteristics of nicrostrip antennas with a rectangular radiating

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

element. A theoretical study is presented of microstrip antennas with a
round radiating element, in which the calculation of fields in the remste
zone, including taking the dielectric into account, is discussed, in addi-
tion to the total radiated power, directive gain, losses, efficiency and
input impedance of a microstrip antenna. Hicrostrip antenna arrays are
discussed, including an antenna array with uniform amplitude and broadside
distribution, a b-elenent linear array, a 2-dimensional array, a 2-frequency
array and an 8-element antenna array module. Diagrams are shown of a micro-
strip-dipolc antenna and of one such antenna with circular polarization.

The dependence of the input impedance of a 2-frequency microstrip antenna

on frequency is discussed with two excitation variants. Microstrip antennas
are considered an established modern trend which is promising and will re-
ceive further development. They can operate in the 0.3 to 17 GHz band.
Further development should proceed along the line of improving the efficiency
of microstrip antennas and the materials and fabrication technology for their
elements, along with the development of systems and units for feeding
individual radiating elements and arrays. Figures 31; references 26:

12 Russian, 16 Western.

[97-8831]

UDC 531.7b

QUASI-OPTIHAL FILTRATION IN COHERENT-LIGHI DEVICE FOR MEASURING POLAR
COORDINAIES 0P OBJECTS

Khar'kov RADIOTBKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 63-67

GAVRISH, T. V. and TYRSA, V. Ye., doctor of technical sciences

[Abstract] One task in measurement of the polar coordinates of a stationary
object with a coherent-light device is estimating the time coordinate of

the reflected signal, a signal which appears submerged in additive noise.
Here quasi-optimal filtration is considered, inasmuch as optin filtration
of a deterministic signal s(t,1) from a nonstationary normal noise n(t) with
a spectral density “0 and a correlation function k(t,t + At) . 1/ZNo(t)6(At)
is difficult. The problem is solved for far objects and a correspondingly
low signal-to-noise ratio. The time interval which carries information
about brightness-modulated signals is estimated according to the maximum-
likelihood principle, whereupon a filter is synthesized for symmetric trape-
zoidal video signals leaving the photodetector. This filter minimizes the
dispersion of estimates of the time coordinate on the probing range of
distances. Figures 1; references: 3 Russian.

[82-2b15)

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 531.508
ACCURACY OF MEASUREMENT OF SOUND VELOCITY IN AIR HITH DOPPLER RADAR

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 67-72
BABKIN, S. I.

[Abstract] Smog control involves determination of temperature profiles and
vertical wind velocities, for which a radioacoustic instrument measuring the
velocity of sound has been developed on the basis of a Doppler radar. It
consists of a microwave transmitter, a reference oscillator, a receiver, a
tracking filter, an audio oscillator, a frequency meter and a recorder.

The principal sources of error are instability of the transmitter frequency,
inaccuracy of Doppler frequency measurement and recording through narrow-
band filters, instability of the receiver parameters, atmospheric turbulence
causing fluctuations of parameters of the reflected signal, spacing of the
antennas and misalignment of the acoustic transducer. The total estimated
rms error of one sound velocity measurement is 0.72 m/s so that repetitive
sounding is required, n - 16 measurements reducing the error of temperature
determination to o.3°c and n - 50 measurements reducing the error of wind

velocity (vertical) to 39.1 m/s. Figures 1; tables 1; references 6:
A Russian, 2 Western.

[82-2415]

UDC 621.391

ESTIMATION OF ENERGY SPECTRUM 0P DOPPLER-FREQUENCY FLUCTUATIONS DURING
RADAR-ACOUSTIC PROBING 0P ATMOSPHERE

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 89-93
KORYTSEV, I. V.

[Abstract] The performance of a radar-acoustic system during probing of the
atmosphere, with filtration of high-frequency interference, is evaluated in
terms of estimates of the energy spectra: of Doppler-frequency fluctuations.
The analysis involves the discrete analog of the Fourier transform of finite-
time realizations (or of the correlation function). On this basis the dura-
tion is determined of a realization in N readings necessary for accuracy, the
accuracy in turn depending inversely on the number of degrees of freedom in
the chi-square distribution of the sum of the squares of independent random
quantities (reading errors). Figures 1; references 6: 1 Russian,

5 Western (two in translation).

[82-2615]

17

FOR‘OFFM]AI.USE40NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.371
USE OF ULTRA-SHORT-HAVB RADIO EMISSION FOR PERTURBATION 0F IONOSPHBRE

Khar'kov RADIOTBKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 121~125

TKACHEV, G. N., candidate of technical sciences, VERGASOV, A. A. and
KARLOV, V. D.

[Abstract] Perturbation of the ionosphere up to the peak of the P-layer by
shortwave radio emission is inefficient because of the appreciable absorp-
tion. Consequently, perturbation by ultra-short-wave radio emission is
preferable. In this case, however, a perturbation can ocCur only when the
intensity of the exciting field exceeds some threshold. Here nonlinear ef-
fects occurring in the field of two ultra-short~wave radio pulses are analyzed
on the basis of theoretical relations and experimental data. The role of
"magnetic" nonlinear effects has been found to become appreciable, and the
threshold field intensity to become much lower, when the difference between
the carrier frequencies of the two pulses is equal to the Langmuir frequency
of electron vibrations (each carrier frequency being much higher than this
Langmuir frequency). The perturbation of the particle distribution is cal-
culated using the Vlasov equation and assuming a Maxwell distribution of
charged particles in the quiescent state. The characteristic time and the
threshold electric field intensity are estimated for typical ionospheric
conditions. A comparison of the results with experimental data indicates
some differences, attributable to diffuse reflection by the Pz-layer of
signals coming from two ground transmitters and to standing rather than
traveling density waves of charged particles induced during insufficiently

long excitation periods. Figures 1; references 2: 1 Russian, 1 Western.
[82-2415]

UDC 621.371

ALIGNED SCATTERING OF RADIO HAVES BY ARTIFICIAL INHOHOGENEITIES PRODUCED
BY RADIATION FROM SHORT-HAVE TRANSMITTER WITH OBLIQUB BEAM

Khar'kcv RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 129-132
NOVOZHILOV, V. 1., candidate of technical sciences, and VERGASOV, A. A.

[Abstract] Earlier experiments made by other authors with action of vertical
short-wave radio emission on the ionosphere have revealed that such waves
disturb the uniform distribution of the electron concentration and thus pro-
duce artificial inhomogeneities. An experiment was made by the authors of
the present work with the use of a powerful shortwave transmitter with an
oblique beam in the east-west direction, its purpose being to determine the
scales of such inhomogeneities and to detect aligned scattering of radio
waves by them in this case. The transmitter-receiver set was spaced so as to

18

FOR OFHCML USE ONLY
satisfy the geometrical conditions of sensitivity to aligned scattering.
Satisfactory data were obtained for a correlational analysis. Figures 1;

references 5: 3 Russian, 2 Western.
[82-2415]

UDC 621.396.67+621.396.96(067.l)

METHODS OF THEORETICAL AﬂD EXTERIHENTAL INVESTIGATION OF “ONSTAIIONARY
SCATTERING AND RADIATION OF-ELECTROHAGNETIC WAVES

Moscow ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELEKTRONIKA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 3-27

ASTANIN, L. Yu., candidate of technical sciences, and KOSTYLEV, A. A.,
candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] The basic methods of studying nonstationary problems in the
scattering and radiation, or reception, of electromagnetic waves are dis-
cussed. The properties of electrodynamic entities, because of the space-
time nature of the problem, must be described by means of families of
dynamic characteristics determined for various angles. For a selected
angle the problem is solved by means of methods of the theory of chains
with lumped parameters. Polarization effects are also taken into account
in determining dynamic characteristics. The problems discussed can be
solved both in the time and frequency regions and the existence of a mutual-
ly unique relationship between solutions obtained in this manner makes it
possible to select the approach most appropriate for a specific problem and
to compare solutions arrived at by various methods. The properties of radia-
tors and scatterers are described by means of standard test effects, i.e.,
the signals exciting the antenna in the case of radiating antennas and plane
fields striking the object in the case of scatterers or receiving antennas.
Analytical, numerical and hybrid methods of investigation are employed for
a theoretical solution to nonstationary electrodynamics problems. The
effectiveness of these methods varies for various groups of problems. The
main advantage of analytical methods is the ability to find a graphic
relationship between the results of a solution and controlled parameters of
a problem. Analytical methods are especially important in the high-frequency
region, for the use of numerical methods involves a body of computations which
even modern computers are not up to handling. Topics discussed include non-
stationary radiation of elementary radiators, nonstationary radiation of a
cylindrical dipole of finite length, nonstationary radiation of aperture
antennas, and the interrelationship of antenna characteristics in the non-
stationary radiation and reception modes. Existing analytical methods are
characterized by a limited range of application, particularly with respect
to the frequency band. Separate methods are used for the low-frequency,
high—frequency and resonance regions. Numerical methods, possible because
of the use of computers, supplement analytical methods in
ary problems involving the use of ultrawideband signals. Numerical methods
can be used for the Rayleigh and resonance ranges, where great difficulties

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are encountered when using asymptotic high—frequency methods. The use of
the method of integral equations for solving nonstationary problems is
discussed and a comparison is made of computing programs for solving non-
stationary problems. Hybrid methods, representing the combined use of
analytical and numerical methods, are discussed. Experimental methods for
studying the ultrawideband characteristics of elements of the radio
channel discussed include methods of measuring the ultrawideband charac-
teristics of antennas and microwave equipment and methods of measuring

the ultrawideband scattering characteristics of a radar object. Hethods
of designing ultrawideband measuring apparatus are discussed, along with
methods of processing measurement data. The combined use of theoretical
and experimental methods is necessary in studying nonstationary scattering
and radiation of electromagnetic waves. Analytical methods in particular
make it possible to evaluate the influence of the design parameters of a
piece of apparatus on its electrodynamic properties. However, experimenta-
tion becomes the main tool for research as problems become more compli-
cated. Comparison of the results of theoretical and experimental research
plays an extremely important role. Figures 7; references 142: 23 Russian,
119 Hestern.

[70-8831]

UDC 621.317

PROBLEM OF POTENTIAL PRECISION OF TIME POSITION FIXATION 0P SIGNAL WITH
SCALE COMPARISON OF TIME KEEPERS

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 28 Mar 80) pp 63-69

BAVYKINA, V. V. and KDVAL', Yu. A., candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] Stability of the reproduction of the dimensions of time units
and the prospects for further improvement of the characteristics of
standards advance an increase of the precision of mutual comparisons of the
dispersed keepers of the time scale into a number of primary problems. A
successful solution of these problems makes it possible substantially to
improve all the system of metrological assurance of time measurements.

An error of comparison so standards results from many factors. especially
by a change of the delays in transmission channels of signals because of the
instability of the propagation time and the inaccuracy of fixation of the
time position of the signal in a reception--registration system. The
potential error of fixation of the time position of a signal is determined
with the aid of the theory of evaluation of strong signals. The potential
error of measurement of the delay time of the signal with an unknown ini-
tial phase of the carrier is given. In the present paper an analysis is
made of the dependence of the potential precision of fixation of the time
position of a signal on the signal-interference ratio, with errors in
determination of time position of the signal taken into account. The

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
dependence is considered of the dispersion of the error of fixation of the
time position of the signal on the relationship of the observation interval
and the correlation interval. The threshold signal-interference ratio
necessary for normal functioning of a system of evaluation of the time
position of a signal with ideal autocorrelation functions is determined.

Figures 3; tables 1; references: 7 Russian.
[Bl-6‘15]

UDC 621.317.757
FORMING AND QUANTIZATION 0F COMPLEX 0P BNVELOPBS 0P BAND-PASS SIGNALS

Khar'kov RADIOTBKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 28 Jan 80) pp 12-17

HIROSHNIKOV, A. N. and CHAYKOVSKIY, V. I.

[Abstract] This paper is partially based on previous work in 1966, 1977
and 1979 by V. I. Chaykovskiy (see above). Possible variations of forming
a complex of envelopes of band-pass signals and its discrete equivalent

are considered. The structure of a device for realizing a procedure for
forming a complex of envelopes is shown in figure 1, and the structure of

a device for forming a complex of envelopes with the use of clipped
reference signals in figure 2. The two methods are based on a preliminary
formation of a complex of envelopes in analogous form and its quantization
with the aid of an analog-digital converter. Relations are derived which
make it possible, as shown in figure 3, to organize forning of a discrete
sequence of readouts of a complex of envelopes of a band-pass signal

without preliminary analog processing. Forming of the readouts of a complex
of envelopes of a filter on employed in the device is by a band-pass filter,
which limits the effective range of the device by the band As and decreases

the level of quantification noise. Figures 2; references: 5 Russian.
[81-6615]

UDC 621.373

FEASIBILITY 0F FORMING COMPOUND SIGNALS WITH EQUIPMENT FOR DIGITAL
FREQUENCY SYNTHESIS

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 27-31

BOTSMAN, P. D.

[Abstract] It is demonstrated that a universal device for forming arrays
of multidigital signals with a programmable structure and with coherent
modulation laws can be constructed with equipment for digital frequency

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

synthesis. A single-ring digital frequency synthesizer for this purpose
consists of a reference oscillator, a synchronizable oscillator, a low-
pass filter and a phase detector. According to the fundamental differen-
tial equation and the transfer function describing this device, an incre-
ment of the variable frequency division factor produces an increment of
the frequency of the synchronizable oscillator. Further calculations
including application of the limit theorem reveal that, in fact, various
frequency or phase manipulated signals with coherent envelopes and without
amplitude variations during transients can be formed. Their parameters
can, furthermore, be stabilized by means of phase-type automatic frequenCy

control. References: 6 Russian.
[83-2415]

UDC 621.391

ADAPTIVE COMPENSATION OF INTERFERENCE SIGNALS CORRELAIED 0N LONG TIME
INTERVAL

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 66-68

cmuzov, Yu. v., moron, A. A. [deceased], DUDNIK, n. s. and
smnov. s. F.

[Abstract] Adaptive compensation of radio interference by means of an
auxiliary reference channel is considered, this being more effective than
direct filtration. A compensator is shown which does not have a separate
reference input but shunts the main channel and contains a time-delay
element in front of the compensator. The time delay must be such that at
the compensator input there will appear wideband signal components un-
correlated and interference components correlated, owing to their periodi-
city, with the signals at the main input. A performance analysis of this
system, which includes a controllable phase shifter and a phase detector,
reveals the existence of a phase feedback with inertia. When the transient
period here is much longer than the signal correlation time and much
shorter than the interference correlation time, then the compensator will
extract the signal almost without distortion, with high-frequency interfer-
ence suppressed, independently of the phasing. However, a delayed and
partially distorted "companion signal" will also appear. Figures 4;
references 5: 4 Russian, 1 Western.

[83-2615]

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
000 621 . 391

EFFECT OF FINITKNESS 0P TRANSMISSION BAND 0N MAXIMUM mos IN TIMING 0P
PULSE SIMS

Khar'kov mmrmm in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 60-66
KOVAL', Yu. A.,' candidate of technical sciences, and Hoismw, I. V.

[Abstract] Minimization of the inaccuracy in fixing the instant at which
pulse signals appear at the output of a device is considered, specifically
the effect of the finiteness of the transmission band on the mint:
error in the case of channels with an approxintely rectangular amplitude-
frequency characteristic. The analysis is based on the criterion of aini-
mua dispersion of pulse timing, in a tradeoff relation with the signal-
to-noise ratio and interference i-unity. The results extend to phase-
manipulated signals with a rectangular envelope. Eigures 1; references:

5 Russian.

[83-2515]

(DC 621 . 391

SIGNAL IDBITIPICAM BY SPECTRUM IN BASIS 01’ DISCRETE EXPONKNTIAL
FUNCTIONS .

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian Ho 50, 1979 pp ﬁ-lo

GEL'CHENKO, V. A., candidate of technical sciences, and
HATEVITSKIY, Ye. 0., doctor of technical sciences

[Abstract] Signal identification through measurement of the signal
spectrum in a basis of discrete exponential functions simplifies the pro-
cess, inasmuch as an analog spectrum analyzer can be replaced with a
digital one. This process is described and an identifier system is con-
structed which uses basis functions of the natural basis of the signal
ensemble as informative indicators. Such a basis is obtained from the
general Karunen-boew expansion, whose fast convergence allows a signal

to be represented as a vector of minimal: dimensionality. It is often
more expedient to determine the signal spectrum in two steps, first in an
intermediate basis which yields primary indicators and then in a second
basis for adaptive identification with conversionfrom the nonoptinun DEF
(discrete exponential functions) basis to an asymptotically optimum basis
according to a rulevhich minimizes the aean error probability. The
equipment for such an adaptive-identification node of operation consists
of an analog-to-digital converter and a special-purpose computer, the
structural variant of informative indicators depending on the particular
problem at hand. References: 7 Russian.

[82-2415]

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621 . 391

SIGNAL IDENTIFICATION BY GmERAL KARUNEN-LOE" INDICATORS DETERMINED FROM
ENERGY SPECTRUM

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 10—17

OHEL'CHENKO, V. A., candidate of technical sciences, HATEVITSKIY, Ye. 0.,
doCtor of technical sciences, BBZRUK, V. H. and BALABANON, V. V.

[Abstract] Signal identification is considered where the indicators have
been constructed on the basis of the generalized Karunen-Loew expansion
according to estimates of the energy spectrum. All the information neces-
sary for identification.of signals is assumed to be lumped in the first
two moments of their distributions,.and the adaptive sample is assumed

to be known. The energy spectrum can be described in the time domain and
in the frequency domain, through a Fourier transformation, with an appro-
priate estimate of the correlation function. Indicators are constructed
in two steps, first primary indicators facilitating a discretization of
the original description and then informative secondary indicators. An
asymptotically optimum decision rule which minimizes the mean error proba-
bility is established after the chi-square distribution of spectrum esti-
mates has been approximated with a normal distribution. The equipment

for such an adaptive identification includes a high-speed spectrum analyzer
and a digital computer. An experiment was performed using a parallel-
type analyzer and a Yes-1020 Unified System computer, with complex ex-
ponential function in the time domain as primary indicators and a decision
rule which yielded the first five basis functions corresponding to the
largest five eigenvalues as informative indicators. The results demonstrate
the feasibility of signal identification by only a few informative indica-
tors, with approprinr. smoothing coefficients. but also that the accuracy
of identification will improve as the number of such indicators is
increased. Figures 2; tables 2; references: 8 Russian.

[82-2415]

UDC 621.391
SIGNAL IDENTIFICATION PM SPECTRA OBTAINED BY ANALYZERS OF PARALLEL 0R
QUASI-PARALLEL TYPE, REPORT 6: SIMULATION 0? BASIC IDENTIFICATION RULES
INVOLVING SPECTRAL INDICATORS
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 36-45

OMEL'CHENKO, V. A., candidate of technical sciences, HATBVITSKIY, Ye. 0.,
doctor of technical sciences, BALABANOV, V. V. and BEZRUK, V. M.

[Abstract] Signal identification by statistical testing is considered,
this method involving measurement of primary physical indicators by either

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a parallel or quasi-parallel spectrum analyzer, with initial compression
by the generalized Karunen-loew expansion and subsequent fast Fourier

transformation. The signal distribution in the space of secondary indi-
cators can be arbitrary with interdependent parameters, but for simpli-

city is approximated here with a normal one. The indentification process
has been simulated on a Yes-1020 Unified System computer“, the adaptive
algorithm including estimation of the joint correlation matrix, calculation
of the orthogonal transformation matrix, and estimation of the statistical
characteristics, all progressed in the roman language. Typical results
of identification by this procedure are shown for signals coming from a
pseudorandom-sequence generator. Figures 3; tables lo; references 3:

2 Russian, 1 western (in translation). ‘

[83-2615]

UDC 621.391.153519.2

CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNALS ACCORDING TO ENERGY SPECTRUM UNDER WITIONS
01’ A PRIORI INDETBRMINANCY

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 29 Jan 80) pp 3-12

OMEL'CHENKO, V. A., candidate of technical sciences, HATEVITSKIY, Ye. 0.,
doctor of technical sciences, sszwx, V. H. and WW, V. V.

[Abstract] The paper is devoted to the use of the spectral-statistical
method for classification of signals according to the energy spectrum
method. After a statement of the problem, the information characteristics
of signals are considered, which are constructed according to the energy
spectrum on a base of the Karunen-Loeva expansions and a multiple discrimi-
nant analysis. A decision principle is derived with respect to the
criteria of maximum empirical risk. The special features of systems of
recognition are considered, and the results of experimental investigations
are presented. Systems of recognition are realized on the base of a
Minsk-32 computer and a 60-channel analyzer of spectra of the parallel
type. The programs were composed in the Portran language. Figures lo;

tables 6; references: 15 Russian.
[81-6415]

UDC h21.391
DISTRIBUTION OF PULSE AHPLITUDES IN sour INDUSTRIAL INTERFERENCE
Khar'kov RADIOTEKNNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 21-25
GORDILOV, A. A.

[Abstract] The inunity of radio receivers to industrial interference
depends not only on the mean level but also on the fine structure of such

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an interference. The anplitude distribution of industrial interference
pulses is not always a log normal one, as usually characterized. An
experimental study was made to determine this distribution with a.c.
commutator motors used as the source of interference. The measuring
equipment included antennas, interchangeable high-frequency amplifiers

with noninductive. detectors, and an 58-2 memory oscillograph. As ampli-
fiers served either of three receivers SIN-3 (f I- 300 “Half ‘—' 120 klir),
PA—lZa (f0 - 2 MHz, Af i 9 kHz), 66-R‘l'H-A2-Clﬂ to - 150 MHz, bf '- 28 kHz).
The data, processed in the form of statistical series, fit an exponential
distribution of the F(A) - 1 - e":A kind with o50.3-0.8, in agreement with
the theory of sliding contacts._ Two interference components are dis-
tinguishable: one approaching a Gaussian fluctuation noise with mall
amplitudes and a high pulse repetition rate, one with larger amplitudes
and a lower pulse repetition rate. The first component is caused by cur-
rent mainly flowing through "metallic contact spots" produced by breakage
or electrical breakdown of the contact film, the-second component is caused
by interruptions of contact between brushes and conutator bars with
attendant arcing. Figures 2; tables 1; references 6: 4 Russian, 2 Western
(in translation).

[82-2615]

UDC 621.398
5mm METHODS 01’ RECEPTION 0F HULTIPRNUHICY SIGNALS

Khsr'kov RADIOTEKBRIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 28 Apr 80) pp 42-47

ZHURAKDVSKIY, Yu. P. and MIOINATSKI, V., candidates of technical sciences

[Abstract] The problem of detecting errors with the aid of multi-
frequency signals is considered. It is shown that use of an interference
detector is effective during detection of distorted signals which give a
large number of errors, if it is derived at a simple receiver. In order
to increase the noise inunity of multifrequency signals a generalized
differential circuit (CDC) for inclusion of filters can be used in the
receiver. This method was proposed in 1971 by Yu. P. Zhurakovskiy (see
above). CDC makes it possible to avoid false operation of the threshold
elements connected to the output of the receiver. In addition to a dis-
cussion of the general characteristics of the receivers, a detailed
analysis is presented of_ the noise inunity of receivers in the case of
reception of multifrequency signals. Pigures 3; references: 2 Russian.
[81-6415] ' '

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIRCUITS & SYSTMS

UDC 621.372

DB‘I‘BRKIHATION 0F VOLTKRRA KERNKLS 0P MULTIDWSIONAL NMIW
RADIOELBCTRONIC CIRCUITS BY MEANS 0? 'NONLINEAR INPUT SIGNALS'

Khar'kov RADIOTEKRNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 25-34

mm. B. 1., doctor of technical sciences, SUL’IANOV. A. 8.,
candidate of technical sciences. and IVAROV, H. A.

[Abstract] Analysis and synthesis of nonlinear radioelectronic circuits by
the method of Volterra kernels is very convenient and effective, linear
systems being regarded here as a subclass of nonlinear ones. Hith the use

of "nonlinear currents“. the process of deternining the Volterra kernels

from a given system of nonlinear equations describing a circuit can be re-
duced to a precisely defined sequence of operations easily performed with

the aid of a digital computer. Here this principle is extended to the

larger class of multidinensional circuits describable by a nonlinear equation

of the
- a $214. . b 1
z: 22% ;

kind, where :1 is the i-th input signal and y is the output signal. Because
the dimensionality of "nonlinear currents" is not necessarily the same as
that of the electric current, they are replaced by nore general "nonlinear
input signals" with a dimensionality depending on the specific conditions of
the problem. The latter concept is further extended to nonlinear elements
excitable by signals of a more general form. Solution of the equations
yields recurrence relations for the "nonlinear input signals" and deternining
the Volterra kernels with the aid of these relations involves linearization
of both the square matrix of coefficients in the system of nonhoaogeneous
equations of state and the matrix of external (input) actions. The procedure
is demonstrated on a circuit consisting of a nonlinear capacitance across two
a.c. voltage sources in parallel, one in series with a nonlinear resistance
and one in series with a linear element characterized by a transfer function
“(3). Figures 1; references 3: 1 Russian, 2 Hestern.

I82-ZMS]

27

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621 .383

SIGNAL FOR CIRCUIT WITH POINT-CONTACT PHOTORESISTOR IN MAXIM!!!-
SENSITIVITY WDB

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 93-98
CHUZHIKOV, I. T., KOLBSNIKOV, S. P. and RUDNEVA, L. V.

[Abstract] A photoelectric image converter is considered which consists of
a glass disk with many implanted thin conducting bars. There are also two
conducting grids implanted in the disk, one at each face, surrounding each
bar but insulated from all and also from one another. On the receiver face
is deposited a photosensitive film making electrical contact with the bars
and with the respective grid, on the other face is deposited a load film.
Polycrystalline PbTe. having a high electrical resistivity and being highly
sensitive in the infrared range, is the most suitable material for photo-
resistor films. Here the performance of such a circuit is analyzed for a
determination of the necessary signal voltage and the optimum design
parameters. Figures 3; tables 1; references 5: 6 Russian. 1 Western.
[82-2415]

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CWCAHMS

UDC 621.372
WAVES IN NONHGDGENEOUS HULTICNDUCTOR MMSSIM LINES WITH SKIN EFFECT
Khar'kov RADIO‘I'EKHNIKA in Russian lo 67, 1978 pp 52-56

DIKAREV. V. A., candidate of physico-sathuatical sciences, and
NUZHNYY, Yu. S.

[Abstract] High-frequency processes in a nonhonogeneous mlticonductor
transmission line with skin effect are analyzed on the basis of asymptotic
solutions to the modified syst- of telegraph equations

:2 % - A(x, )X (a S x S b), where e - (mod/2 (n- frequency) and

X - (V1,...,V.,I ,....I‘) is the sought vector-function vith V1011 denoting
the transforms o voltages and currents in the k-th of I conductors. The
(2112:2111) matrix-function A(x,e) has an asymptotic expansion at t -> 0 which is
uniform on the interval [a,b]. The solution reveals what waves exist and
their mode of propagation. Here only the skin effect is calculated and,

for illustration, the method is applied to a metric single-conductor line
as well as to a syn-etric 2-conductor one. References 5: 6 Russian,

1 Hestern.
[83-2415]

UDC 621.372
CALCULATING EWMIC WAVES Ill WLTICOIIDUCTOR WMSSION LINES
USING MATRIX um! MULTIPLE SPECTRUM All!) PARAMETERS SLOH‘LY VARYING Amm
THE LINE
Khar'kov RADIOTEIOINIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 56-60
MUHEYKO, I. V.
[Abstract] Approxilate solutions to the generalized systa of telegraph

equations in the matrix for:- Y' - A(x,m)Y, with x the coordinate of length,
m the frequency and Y denoting a 2n-dinensiona1 vector-function of voltages

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and currents, are sought by an asymptotic method. The matrix A(x,u) can
have eigenvalues retaining a constant multiplicity throughout the range

of variable x, but is everywhere within this range reducible to diagonal
form through a nondegenerate linear transformation. The problem reduces to
a system of linear differential equations with variable coefficients and
with boundary conditions at both ends of the line. An exact solution is
impossible, a solution by conventional numerical methods becomes unwieldy
and inefficient for a large number of multiple eigenvalues. but a fast
converging series can be obtained when the parameters vary slowly along the
line. References: 3 Russian.

[83-2415]

UDC 621.372

REFLECTION COEFFICIENT 0F ELLIPSOIDAL INHOMOGMITY IN (”AXIAL CHANNEL
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 78-81
BOYKO, A. P. and Booouomv. A. S.

[Abstract] Measurements of microwave power by the ponderomotive method must
take into account interaction of electromagnetic waves and inhomogeneities
in coaxial channels, specifically reflections. Here the reflection coef-
ficient (ratio of amplitude of reflected waves to that of incident waves),
characterizing the secondary fields, is calculated for an ellipsoidal in-
homogeneity and a propagating IBM-mode. In this case the reflection coef-
ficient is found to be proportional to the volume of such an inhomogeneity,
to increase parabolically with rising frequency, and to increase exponential-
ly with increasing dielectric permittivity of the ellipsoid material.
Figures 3; references: 3 Russian.

[83-2k15]

UDC 621.372
ALGORITHM FOR ANALYSIS OF SIG‘ALS IN NWENEOUS COMICATIG‘ CHANNELS
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 47-51

DIKARBV. V. A., candidate of physico-mathematical sciences, and
HEL'NIKOV, A. F.

[Abstract] An algorithm of signal analysis is shown which takes into
account distortion of signals in nonhomogeneous multiconductor cammunication
channels. It is based on the telegraph equation in matrix form

:2 gé - A(x,c)x, where e - (imf'l/2 (w-frequency), which describes the

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
propagation of oscillations through such a channel. The matrix A(x,c)

has an asymptotic expansion which is uniform on an interval [a,b] on which
there exist p linearly independent smooth vector-functions. The matrix
A1(x) is assumed to be positive-definite, in accordance with the law of
energy conservation. The algorithm yields a solution to the corresponding

eigenvalue problem. References 7: 6 Russian, 1 Western.
[83-2k15]

UDC 621.391
DISTRIBUTION OF DOPPLER FREQUENCY SHIFT IN METEOR COMMUNICATION LINE
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 16-16

YBLISEYEV, V. I. and CHERNYY, V. I.

[Abstract] The parameters characterizing the distribution of the r‘opler
frequency shift in a meteor communication line are evaluated according to
the fundamental relation for the change in the phase path during the
measurement period and on the basis of a statistical analysis of readings
taken over such a period. Measurements have been made with meteor channel
equipment along a 700 km long meridional route, using a signal of 60 micro-
second duration with a carrier frequency of 57 an: and linearly frequency
modulated over a 6 MHz band. Readings were taken over 8 h periods from
midnight to 8 AM. Here the results are presented in the form of a histo-
gram, useful for the design of meteor communication receivers. Figures 1;

references 6: 5 Russian, 1 Western (in translation).
[83-2415]

UDC 621.391

ERROR IN CALCULATN‘J 0P FREQUENCY CHARACTERISTICS OF METEOR COWNICATION
CHANNEL -

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1978 pp 17-20
YELISEYEV, V. I.

[Abstract] The frequency characteristics of communication channels are
calculated most accurately, from known time characteristics, by the method
of Fourier integrals. Here the total error of such a calculation for
meteor communication channels is estimated, taking into account the in-
accuracy of the Kotel'nikov series used for time discretization of signals
as well as the inaccuracy of their amplitude quantization. Other independ-
ent errors include those caused by amplitude fluctuations, noise. non-

linearity of the oscillograph sweep and random deviations of readings from
true values. References: 6 Russian.
[83-2615]

31

FOR 0FF“JA1.USE1)NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396

METHOD OF ESTIMATING CORRELATIONAL PROPERTIES 0? BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF
METEOR COWICATION LINES

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIRA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 85-89

AKSENOV, Yu. V.

[Abstract] The characteristics of a data transmitting meteor channel vary
continuously as the result of various causes and, therefore. optimization of
its performance requires immediate estimations of its parameters. This can
be done by measurements and statistical analysis, taking into account the
real time of detection of essentially random deviations, or by prediction

of the channel behavior on the basis of models. The first method requires
minimization of the time of system response to external perturbations
during operation and is most effectively implemented by means of adaptive
control. The second method requires a tradeoff between accuracy and simpli-
city in terms of the number of parameters included in a model. Such a
tradeoff can be established only through an analysis of correlations be—
tween individual model elements. Here the number of reflections by a meteor
trail per hour is selected as the fundamental element and, on the basis of
calculations of the empirical correlation factors, a close but variable
correlation (0.85-0.95) is established between this parameter and the total
duration of recorded flares (total on-time of threshold device in the
receiver) per hour, a weaker but stable correlation (0.7-0.89) between the
total duration of flares and the maximum duration of a flare, and a weak
correlation (0.10-0.15) between the total duration of flares and the mean
duration of radio reflections by a meteor trail. Hardly any correlation is
found between other parameters such as minimum amplitude and minimum duration
or minimum duration and maximum duration. Most importantly for prediction
purposes, the correlation between the number of reflections per hour and

the maximum duration of a flare is close and steady (r - 0.8) at a zero

probability of noncorrelation. References: 6 Russian.
[82-2415]

USE OF CODES IN SYSTEM OF REMAINDRR CLASSES FOR DATA TRANSMISSION OVER
METEOR CHANNEL, REPORT 1: FORMULATION 0P PROBLEM

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 51-56
VOLOSHCHUK, Yu. I., candidate of technical sciences, and GRANKIN, P. F.

[Abstract] The problem of selection and design of codes for transmission
of messages over a meteor channel is analyzed, codes which consist of an
information carrying part and a monitoring part. Binary codes are con—
sidered with a system of numeration in the remainder classes, where a number

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
is represented by the remainder of its division by a selected base. Because
interdigital coupling is completely absent here, unlike in the conventinal
system of positional numeration, all rational operations can be performed

in parallel on each digit individually and thus much faster with simpler
equipment. Other advantages of such codes include equal treatment of both
parts and the possibility of adaptation to different interference backgrounds
without significnnt modifications of encoder and decoder equipment. Con-
version to the positional numeration system is shown. References 8:

6 Russian, 2 Western (one in translation).

[82-2415]

UDC 621.396

USE OF CODES IN SYSTEM OF REMAINDER CLASSES FOR DATA TRANSMISSION OVER
METEOR CHANNEL, REPORT 2: ERROR DETECTION AND CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF
SUCH CODES

Khar'kov RADIOTBKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 56-60
GRANKIN, P. F. and POSOSHENKO, V. A.

[Abstract] An interference immune code in the system of remainder classes,
a code with an information carrying part and a monitoring part, is construct-
ed for general and specifically meteor transmission channels. The informa-
tion bases are selected so as to cover the entire operating range with the
minimum number of digits, and the monitor bases are selected identically so
as to fully ensure detection of errors. Moreover, an infornation carrying
symbol will not change upon conversion to the positional numeration system
with fewer bases. These principles are demonstrated on a code with bases
P1 - 3, P2 = 5, P3 - 7. P4 - 11, P5 - 13 for transmission of numbers from
0 to 32. The redundance here is superfluous from the standpoint of check-
ing the information for errors, but is necessary for reliable transmission

in the presence of interference. Figures 1; references: 2 Russian.
[82-2415]

UDC 621.396:621.398.9

SYSTEMS FOR REMOTE CONTROL OF HIGH-FREQUENCY AND MEDIUM-FREQUENCY RADIO
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT

Moscow ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELEKTRONIKA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 47-65
VENSKAUSKAS, K. K., candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] In recent years the carrying capacity and efficiency of HF and
HF radio communications systems have been improved by the creation of

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

remote-controlled equipment which adapts to the influence of noise and
changes in radio wave propagation conditions and thus makes it possible to
create totally unattended systems. A survey is presented of the design
principles and key specifications of non-USSR remote control systems for
radio communications equipment in the HP and MP bands. Several remote con-
trol systems are described in order to show their typical design features
and differences in specifications. Remote control is accomplished central-
ly by means of a computer. The noise immunity of communications systems is
improved by placing radio centers in places with a low level of industrial
noise, so that maintenance costs are reduced and the efficiency and reliabil-
ity of systems are improved. Remote control systems are divided into three
types: systems for the remote control of large radio center equipment, of
radio receiving equipment and of radio communications equipment. The first
category includes the Philips (Netherlands) PARCS system for HP receiving
and transmitting equipment of radio centers; the "Matelo" system developed
by the English Harconi firm, which was first designed for the remote control
of naval aviation communications radio centers and then was given broader
application; the IPSS9 and IFS6 systems developed in the PRC, designed for
controlling a radio station in Blmshorn and Usingen, respectively; and the
Marconi Communications Systems digital H6800 remote control system for radio
receivers and transmitters. The second category includes the Plessey
(England) PRC 2250 system designed for remote control of the PR 2250 radio
receiver; the Philips RL 157 system for the remote control of R0 156 radio
receivers; and the Mackay Marine (USA) 3020 RC system for the remote con—
trol of series 3020 receivers. The third category includes the Rockwell
International (USA) BOT-32 system for remote control of strategic communica-
tions equipment; the Rohde and Schwarz (PRC) TREE-488 system for type BK 070
receivers, SK 1005 transmitters and xx 104 and xx 403 radio stations; the

F 76000 system developed in Denmark and used for controlling radio communica-
tions equipment such as type S 76000 transmitters and M 76000 receivers; the
Philips RC 790 system for controlling transmitters with an RC 790 driver and
the RM 795 radio station; and the UUIP (Sweden' firm's AU-3-1013 remote
control system for overall control of radio communications equipment and
terminal and auxiliary equipment. There has been a worldwide trend in
recent years toward creating adaptive communications systems utilizing
unified remote control systems similar in design principles and specifica-
tions. These systems employ the address-multichannel principle of trans-
mitting remote control information with heavy emphasis on address transmis-
sion. Sporadic and cyclic operating modes are used with a common-group or
individual type of remote control information transmission. Transmission
speeds vary widely from 50 to 2600 bits per second in keeping with CCITT
standards. Figures 10; references: 23 Western.

[97-8831]

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COMPONENTS, HYBRIDS 6 MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY

UDC 681.325.3
MODERN HICRDELECTRONIC VOLTAGE-TO—PRBQUENCY CONVERTERS
Moscow ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELEKTRDNIKA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 100-106

CEISTYAKOV, N. P.

[Abstract] The parameters of microelectronic voltage-to-frequency converters
being produced by firms in the USA are presented in a table. These data
provide a basis for a survey of the state of the art of these devices. All
of these devices convert both unipolar and bipolar signals with a maximum
input signal amplitude of 10 V and a maximum speed of response of 1 ME: in the
Analog Devices 460 J model. In the Burr-Brown VPC-SZ conversion nonlinearity
is not greater than 0.005 percent. Temperature instabili of the trans-
mission factor for all of these devices varies fro. 20°10‘ per degree
Celsius to 100-10"6 per degree Celsius. Voltage-to-frequency converters
produced presently for the most part are matched in terms of output signal
level with ‘l'l'L logic, making a buffer unit necessary for matching with other
logic elements. The low cost of these devices is an important advantage.
Conversion nonlinearity and transconductance are the basic parameters for
evaluating the fitness of a voltage-to-frequency converter. The three main
methods of designing these devices differ with respect-to the type of feed-
back employed: They either have an open feedback loop or have pulsed feed-
back or 6-0 modulation. The principles underlying these methods are dis-
cussed. Illustrating the principle of 6-0 modulation is a bipolar integrated
circuit device developed by Raytheon; it has conversion nonlinearity of not
greater than 0.025 percent at frequencies to 100 kHz and not greater than
0.015 percent at frequencies to 1 kHz. The microcircuit includes a reference
voltage source, a precision voltage-to-current converter, a current switch,
an operational amplifier and a highly stable one-shot multivibrator con-
sisting of an R-S flip-flop, a sawtooth voltage generator and a comparator.
Modern voltsge-to-frequency converters can be improved by improving conver-
sion transconductance, enabling the matched operation of these devices with
microprocessors, and by developing a device of this type based on HOS
technology and having an integrating capacitor located outside of the case.
The advantages of these devices make it convenient to use them for designing
various devices for analog information processing, such as high-resolution

analog-digital converters. Figures 10; references 18: 9 Russian, 9 Western.
[70-8831]

35

FtNlCHHHCJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.372

PARAMETERS OP STRONGLY COUPLED CAVITY RESONATORS
Khar'kov RADIOTEKRNIRA in Russian No a7, 1978 pp 91-97

PASHCHENKO, 2h. 3., candidate of technical sciences, and
TERESHCHENKO, A. I., doctor of technical sciences

[Abstract] Cavity resonators are used as microwave circuits, either as
independent devices or as components of larger complexes. Here the
performance characteristics of strongly coupled cavity resonators in a multi-
cavity device are calculated by the matrix method. which reduces the sys-
tem of integral equations for partial regions of a geometrically intricate
surface to algebraic equations for the equivalent matrix elements. Accord-
ingly, expressions are obtained for self- and mutual adnittances in an N-
cavity resonator. All elements of the admittance matrix are functions of
the frequency, and a solution of the corresponding eigenvalue problem
yields the spectrum of natural frequencies. The Q-factor of each component
cavity can also be easily calculated. The method is demonstrated on a
simple array of two cylindrical resonators in parallel, such a device

being used for improving the stability of a NH3-maser. Figures 2;
references: 6 Russian.

[83-2415]

UDC 621.372

EFFECT OF CUTOFF REGION 0" CHARACTERISTICS OF IRREGULAR RECTANGULAR
RESONATOR '

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 97-100

FILATOVA, N. A. and BURTOVOY, D. P., candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] A rectangular resonator with cutoff is considered, such an
irregular waveguide resonator being often used with semiconductor micro-
wave devices. Its Q-factor and resonance wavelength are calculated as
functions of the location of the movable metal end wall, perpendicular to
the resonator axis, in the cutoff region. The needed expression for the
crest factor takes into account the appropriate boundary conditions for the
electric field. Numerical results have been obtained with the aid of an
H-222 digital computer for a trapezoidal resonator with a skin-effect
layer and a propagating H101-mode. An increase of the length of the cut-
off region is found to decrease the resonance wavelength, but with a
smaller frequency drift than in a regular rectangular resonator, and
correspondingly to increase the Q-factor. Experimental data confirm this
theoretical conclusion. Pigures 3; references: 1 Russian.

[83-2615]

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 621.372

GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION 0P DRPIIM OF RESONANCE Hamms ON

GWCAL DIMENSIONS OF RESONATORS, mar 33 SM GENERALIZATIONS
BASED ON CONFORHAL MAPPING

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 88-91

PASHCHENKO, 2h. P., candidate of technical sciences, and
TERBSHCHENKO, A. 1., doctor of technical sciences

[Abstract] A universal expression for a resonance wavelength in resonators
of various shapes, as a function of the geonetrical characteristics of
resonators including a form factor, is presented in the form of families of
CIA -o/A , c/ -b/A , b/A -o/A , c/ -r/A and c/A -r IA
“:53: forrflfmodesxrgd n es. 3e c 53%» 33th 0 e: resonatgf",I callandes
b are the sides of a rectangular resonator, r is the radius of a cylindrical
resonator, r1 is the inside radius of a coaxial or butterfly resonator, and
Ares is a resonance wavelength. By plotting the coordinates of a point on
such a curve corresponding to resonance in a certain node, one can determine
the necessary dimensions of a resonator of a given shape. A more extensive

graphical procedure will yield the design of resonators of other shapes as
well. Figures 1; references: 3 Russian.

[83-21015]

UDC 621.396
SCA'ITBRING MATRIX OF ARRAY OF TWO SLITS IN RECTANGULAR WAVEGUIDE
Khar'kov RADIOTBKHNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 72-78
KATRICH, V. A.

[Abstract] The scattering matrix of two oblique slits in a rectangular
waveguide is calculated, the slit generally having an arbitrary mutual
orientation but in special cases intersecting or located with an overlap
along the waveguide axis. The partial self- and nutual adaittances of such
a pair of slits are calculated by a simple method of solving the problem
of excitation. The waveguide is first assuned to be infinitely long with
an infinitesimally snail wall thickness. The energy parameters, namely
reflection and transmission coefficients, are then calculated for an x-
slit. The effect of higher harmonics is evaluated and found to be small,
decreasing further with increasing thickness of the waveguide wall as
wcll as upon insertion of a dielectric filler. A sine half-«wave thus
adequately approximates the electric field distribution along such slits

for engineering design purposes. Figures 1; references: 8 Russian.
[83-2415]

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.396.6

INVESTIGATION OF VARAC'NR FREQUENCY HUL‘IIPLIER WITH ASSISTANCE 0F
FUNCTIONAL METHOD

Khar'kov RADIOTEKRNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 19 May 80) pp 82-86

IVANOV, H. A., HAKARKNKO, B. 1., doctor of technical sciences and
SULTANOV, A. 5., candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] A new approach is proposed for an investigation of frequency
multipliers with assistance of the functional method. The results of numeri-
cal calculations. fulfilled with the assistance of the "Minsk-32" computer,
for the concrete circuit of a varactor frequency doubler with a parallel
connection of a varactor, corresponds well with experimental data. The
proposed approach to an analysis of frequency multipliers has a general
nature, because introduction of a considerable number of sinplifying assump-
tions and hypothesis is not envisaged. The approach in question should be
used for a wide class of frequency multipliers. Figures 5;

references: 3 Russian.

[81-6415]

UDC 621.396.966
HIGH-FREQUENCY AMPLIFIERS BASED ON SURFACE ACOUSTIC WAVES

Moscow ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOBLBKTRONIKA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 66-83

GAVRILIN, V. I., GULYAYEV, A. 11., candidate of technical sciences, and
KARPEYEV, D. V.

[Abstract] A summary is given of the physical processes and basic theories
of surface acoustic wave (SAN) amplification and questions are discussed
relating to the design, fabrication technology and application of accusto-
electronic amplification structures. Recently the simplicity, compactness
and pronise of SAW amplifiers employing a layered piezoelectric-seniconduc-
tor structure have created great interest. This structure makes it possible
to compensate the losses of a few dozen decibels characteristic of previous
SAW devices and also to achieve amplification of a high-frequency input
signal. The operating principle of an SAH amplifier is discussed, together
with the propagation and excitation of surface waves, the interaction of a
surface acoustic wave with charge carriers and Adler's model (1970, 1971)

of the amplification effect. Designs of SA" amplifiers are discussed,

along with fundamentals of the theory of SAW amplification, including the
Kins-Reeder theory (1971) and the theory of the amplification of a surface
acoustic wave for a nonolithic structure. Experimental data are presented
on amplifiers utilizing a CdS piezoelectric semiconductor chip and amplifiers

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with a layered structure. The latter have surpassed the former because of
the bad piezoelectric and especially semiconductor properties of cas chips.
Experimental data are presented on an LiNb03-In8b film structure, on the
influence of an external nagnetic field. the noise properties of anplifiers
and carrier trapping effects. The fabrication technology for SAN anplifiers
is discussed in detail, along with application of the SAN amplification
effect. One application discussed is acoustic convolvers possessing in-
trinsic two-way amplification. A device is described which achieves a

gain of 20 dB with a supply voltage of 50 V and at the same time functionally

processes a high-frequency signal. Figures 19; references 123: 9 Russian,
11!. Western.

[97-8831]

UDC 621.398
SOME FEATURES IN DESIGN OF HIGH-SPEED ANALOG MAYORS

Khar'kov RADIOTEIGINIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 104-109

KULESllOV, V. N., candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] The performance of analog-to-digital converters in multichannel
radio engineering equipment depends largely on the characteristics of the
analog components and, particularly, of analog comtators. Their basic
performance parameters are switch-on time. switch-off time, and the referred
error of switching of channel voltages. Here the design of analog counta-
tors for maximum speed and accuracy is analyzed in terms of operational
logic. It is also analyzed from the standpoint of tradeoffs between the
necessity to isolate control circuit from switch circuits on the one hand

and the speed of operation as well as mufacturability on the other. Cir-
cuit integration is, accordingly, a problen. Host promising is the use of
field-effect transistors, especially enhanced HOS transistors with a p-channel,
as switching elements. A circuit is shown which consists of a switch with
two such transistors in series and a compound control stage with two bipolar
transistors. The performance of a 2-step analog conutator built with these
components and operating according to an appropriately adjusted logic appears
to be satisfactory, pending an error and transient analysis. The design can,
furthermore, be easily adapted for microelectronic (silicon) circuit

integration. Figures 2; references: 2 Russian.
[82-2415]

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CMUTBRS

UDC 681.142

ERROR 0P PINI‘IB-LENG‘I'H DISCRETE SINUIATION 0P RANDOM PROCESSES WITH GIVEN
DISTRIBUTION MD CORRELATION FUNCTION ON DIGITAL COMPUTER

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 98-104
SIHOVSKAYA, S. P., candidate of technical sciences, and LBBBDEVA, 0. M.

[Abstract] Random processes can be simulated on a digital computer according
to programs which generate from a sequence of dependent quantities with a
given mean value and standard deviation fron independent uniformly or normal-
ly distributed random numbers. Universal algorithms used for this are un-
economical in terms of machine time and, consequently. maximally economical
special-purpose algorithms are preferred. Here problems of practical imple-
mentation of such discrete-simulation algorithms are examined, particularly
the error of finite-length sequences simulating a stationary random process.
Considered are a stationary normal random process with given correlations and
a stationary Rayleigh random process with an exponential correlation function.
Calculations made on Yes-1020 Unified System and Minsk-32 computers, respec-
tively, are compared with theoretical calculations. The results indicate
that in each case the accuracy of simulation and the error of the correla-
tion function depend on the length of the realization sequence, the error
still being large with N - 100, but becoming insignificant with N - 1000
discrete ordinates. Figures 2; tables 2; references: 2 Russian.

[82-2615]

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ELECTRON DEVICES

UDC 621.375

EXTENSION OF OPERATING RANGE OF Gum—DIODE OSCILLATGIS
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 100-102
MOLYAVKO, V. 1., candidate of physico-nathenatical sciences

[Abstract] An experimental study was nade for a Gum-diode oscillator with
a II-waveguide resonator. The device included plungers for nechanical
tuning and a varactor for electronic tuning. also a low-pass filter and a
load connected through a stripline Y-inductor. Its amplitude-frequency
characteristic was neasured over the 3.7-1.2.8 GB: range and found to be
notched. The frequency deviation due to an increase of the varactor voltage
was found to alternate from positive in the bands 3.7-5.7, 6.8-9.7, 10.2-
11.3 CH: to negative in the bands 5.7-6.8, 9.7-10.2. 11.3-12.8 Gila. With
an AA7OBA Gunn-effect diode and a nininun resonator Q-factor of 3000, the
maximum continuous pawer output was 2 law. at a bias voltage of 8.5 V and a
diode current of 160 M. (Text illegible.) Hith a 2A602D varactor diode,
the maxim tuning range could be extended to 180 MHz. The results indicate
that a II(or H)-uaveguide resonator appreciably widens the operating range
of such an oscillator. Figures 2; references: 1 nonRussian.

[83—2415)

000 621.385
HARMONIC GENERATION IN H-TYPB TRAVELING-HAVE TUBES
Khar'kov RADIO‘I‘EIOINIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 102—106

BELOUS, B. A., GBRASDIOV, V. P. and $821“, A. 6., candidate of physica-
mathematical sciences

[Abstract] A unisegnental H-type M frequency mltiplier is considered

and the conditions of efficient her-chic generation are established on the

basis of a rigorous analysis. The self-consistent system of integro-
differential equations describing the interaction of the fundanental-frequency

61

ron omcm. usi: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

signal and of its second and third tine harmonics with the electron beam in

a multifrequency H-type traveling-wave tube have been solved nulerically.
Here the calculated distributions of the power of each harmonic component
along the interaction space are shown, as well as the output power at each
frequency in some cross section near the center of the interaction space as

a function of the ratio of coupling resistances Rl/RZ and R1/R3. respectively.
Figures 3; references 8: 6 Russian, 2 western.

[83-2615]

UDC 621.385

HULTIFREQUENCY OPERATION OF M-TYPB AMPLIFIER RITE CATHODB IN INTERACTION
SPACE

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 107-110
CHURYUHOV, G. I. and SHBIN, A. 6., candidate of physico-nathematical sciences

[Abstract] An M—type amplifier with the cathode in the interaction space can
serve as a device where the electron bean interacts with complex high-fre-

quency fields containing several signals at different frequencies. Here such
a device with a cylindrical structure is analyzed, including the case of a

large frequency separation between signals. Since calculations in a cylindri-
cal system of coordinates are very difficult, this cylindrical structure is
replaced with a quasi-plane one on the assumption that the cathode and the
anode have approximately equal radii. Calculating the interaction involves
calculating the trajectories of electrons and fields. The problem reduces to
solving the corresponding equations of motion in normalized Lagrange coordin-
ates and this is done here for the interesting case of the high-frequency
field drifting to the input of the device, assuming negligible space-charge
fields and no reflections at the ends of the retarding system. On this

basis have been determined fundamental and second-harnonic gain and power
distributions along the interaction space in a model of such an anplitron
without dispersion and with a frequency-independent coupling resistance.
Figures 3; references: 5 Russian.

[83—2415]

UDC 621.385

EFFECT OF LONGITUDINAL NONUNIPORHITY 0P ELECTROSTATIC FIELD 0N
CHARACTERISTICS OF H-TYPE TRAVELING-"AYE TUBE

Khar'kov RADIOTEKBNIKA in Russian No 47, 1978 pp 110-116

SOVA. A. V.

[Abstract] In an H-type traveling-wave tube the longitudinal nonuniformity
of the electrostatic field. resulting from interaction of the electromagnetic

42

FOR OFTNCIAL.USEGDNLY
wave with a periodically nonhonogeneous structure, causes the output charac-
teristics of such a device to depend on this nonuniformity. Here this
dependence is analyzed for a retarding system with a comb structure. The
eQuations of motion for electrons in the two-dimensional case and the Laplace
equation for the electric field potential are solved for a gap region and a
slot region. A numerical solution reveals how the amplitude of the funda-
mental component and that of the second harmonic vary with gap height and
slot width. The output characteristics of a magnetron amplifier, namely
power and phase shift, are then calculated as functions of the magnetron
length for various values of the field nonnniformity parameters as well as
for a uniform electrostatic field. The results of calculations for a mono-
chromatic input signal are compared with results of measurements. Figures 1;
references: 1 Russian.

[83-21015]

UDC 621.385.6

REALIZATIM 0F REGIME 0F INVERSB TRANSFORMATIOII Ill AIM'HC PHASE
TRAVELING-HAVE TUBES

Khar'kov RADIOTEICIINIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 31 Mar 80) pp 1110-118

BONDARENKO, B. N. and KRYZHANOVSKIY, V. G.

[Abstract] The present work is concerned with the use of autophase traveling-
wave tubes (TNT) as converters of microwave energy into direct current. A
determination is made of the requirements imposed on autophase M in order
to obtain a maximum efficiency. This consideration is conducted within the
framework of a one-dimensional theory formulated in 1979 by the above authors
on the basis of the electron—wave processes in O-type M. Problems con-
nected with construction of the device, with power supply sources and other
items are not touched upon. Use of the autophase M as a converter of
microwave energy into directed current is promising. Numerical calculations
and graphs are presented. Figures 2; references 6: 5 Russian, 1 Western

in translation.

[81-6415]

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INSTRUMENTATION 8 MEASUREMENTS

UDC 531.7

CAPACITIVE VIBRATION TRANSDUCER FOR MEASURING AMPLITUDES OF MECHANICAL
VIBRATIONS 0P MOUNTING PLATES

Khar'kov RADIOTEKRNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 109-113
SHINKO, V. I. and PROLOV, V. A., candidate of technical sciences

[Abstract] A capacitive vibration transducer is proposed for detecting small-
anplitude audio-frequency vibrations of a chassis and subsequent measurement
of the vibration amplitude. It consists of a controlled quartz oscillator,
a matching device, a high-frequency amplifier, a limiter, a frequency detec-
tor, a low-frequency amplifier and a linear rectifier. The frequency detec-
tor and the rectifier are built with integrated microcircuits, KZDSZ4Z and
lUTChOlA series respectively. A special construction of the capacitive
probe, a center rod on a pad inside a brass yoke filled with a dielectric
and a coaxial connecting cable, ensures high sensitivity and interference
immunity of the transducer. A circuit and performance analysis indicates
that this instrument has a very linear "vibration amplitude-signal"

characteristic. Figures 2; references: 4 Russian.
[82-2415]

UDC 538.569:536:621.372.823
INVESTIGATION OF TEMPERATURE FIELD OF CIRCULAR HAVEGUIDE

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 19 Mar 80) pp 108-114

VARLAHOVA, N. A., KUKUSH, V. 0., candidate of technical sciences and
mmwmm,chcmuuwofumeluumu

[Abstract] The results are presented of an investigation of the temperature
of the walls of a circular waveguide, conducted with the object of develop-
ing measuring equipment for microwaves of large levels. The physical model
is a tube with a uniform interior diameter, the middle part of which is

44

FOR OFFNJAI.USIZONLN
thin-walled with a length 1 and a thickness 6 (absorptive wall). It is

made of a high-resistance alloy (constantan, nichrome, etc.). The terminal
parts are sections of a thin-walled copper waveguide, the temperature of
which is kept constant. In the case of passage of electromagnetic waves
through this waveguide channel, part of the microwave energy is absorbed

and the temperature of the thin-walled section is increased. A precise
analytical solution of the problem of temperature distribution in the wave—
guide system investigated encounters significant mathematical difficulties.
However, the structural features of the microwave measuring devices and the
known physical characteristics of the heat exchange makes it possible to
simplify the problem under consideration, in practice not reducing the preci-
sion of the results produced. The analytical expressions presented for the
temperature field of the wall of the circular waveguide and the graphic
dependences make it possible to calculate the parameters of concrete measuring

devices. Figures 3; references: 6 Russian.
[81-6415]

UDC 621.372

ANALYSIS OF 2-CHANNEL INTERFEROHETBR HIT“ PRISHAIIC LIGHT DIVIDBRS AS
SYSTEM OF COUPLED HULTIPOLES

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 67, 1978 pp 81-88
ADONINA, A. I., candidate of physico-mathematical sciences

[Abstract] The characteristics of a 2-channel interferometer with prismatic
light dividers are analyzed theoretically by simulation of its components
with multipoles. For simplification without significant reduction of accuracy,
it is assumed that the input face of each prism has an area much larger than
the cross—sectional area of the incident beam and that all faces are infinite-
ly large so as to make diffraction at the prism edges negligible. The two
prisms are simulated with octupoles, the latter coupled through two quadru—
poles simulating two loads: a dielectric plate between lateral faces of the
prisms and a long line of rereflecting mirrors other lateral faces of the two
prisms. 0n the other side each octupole is connected to a quadrupole
simulating a load on the'idle face of the corresponding prism. The entire
system is then replaced with an equivalent octupole which has four arms. Its
scattering matrix is calculated. The results indicate that the resonance
characteristics of this interferometer are better than those of a prismatic
wavemeter but worse than those of a Pabry—Perot interferometer. Figures 3;
references: 4 Russian.

[83-2415]

65

FOR1OFFKJAL.USEIMNLY
FOR Oi—ﬂCIAL USE ONLY

HICRWAVE THEORY 8 TECHNIQUES

UDC 621.317.799:621.385.6

DEVICE FOR INVESTIGATION OF AMPLITUDE AND PHASE INSTABILITIBS 0F HIGHLY
SENSITIVE HICRWAVE BAND AMPLIFIERS

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 13 Mar 80) pp 119-122

SWAROV, Ya. L.. doctor of technical sciences, CEKBPAK, N. T., candidate
of physicomathenatical sciences and TRIDUB, A. V.

[Abstract] The paper describes a device developed by the authors for ex-
perimental investigation of phase and amplitude instabilities of assets,

in which measurement of the phase shift or a change of the amplitude are
accomplished at operational frequency (7 Clix), and a weak total signal is
amplified by a superheterodyne receiver and fixed by a recorder. The de-
vice can be used for measurement of stability and other types of microwave
band amplifiers intended for amplifying both weak and more gowerful signals.
The device makes it possible with small input signals (~10' H) to measure
phase shifts to 0.005', and measurement of amplitude to 0.002 dB.

Figures 2; references: 1 Western.
[81-6415]

46

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POHER ENGINEERING

UDC 621.373.52
EXPONENTIAL VOLTAGE GENERATORS RITE CONTROL OF NONLINEARITY

Khsr'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 17 Jan 80) pp 78-82

BORISENKO, A. A., GUBAREV, S. I. and KDZNETSOV. V. N., candidates of
technical sciences

[Abstract] An equivalent circuit is proposed, on the basis of which a
mathematical model of the functioning of exponential voltage generators
with a discrete-controlled slope is worked out. One of the variations
of its practical realization is presented. It is seen that a linear form

of the output voltage is a particular form of the exponential. Figures 2;
references: 4 Russian.

[81-6415]

UDC 621.396

MEASUREMENT OF LEVELS OF CONTINUOUS COMPONENT OF AUDIO-FREQUENCY
INTERFERENCE PROM POWER NETWORK

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 50, 1979 pp 17-20
YATSYSHIN, V. I., candidate of technical sciences, and TSATURYAN, E. N.

[Abstract] Measurement of levels of the continuous component of interference
from power networks is difficult because of the unavailability of standard
instruments with an adequate resolving power. A technique for measuring

the weak audio-frequency interference has been developed with the use of
laboratory equipment including Helmholtz rings calibrated with respect to
magnetic field intensity and a set of tunable receivers with ferrite anten-
“as. One of these instrument receivers, with a fixed bandwidth of 10 Hz,
records the amplitudes of interference harmonics near which the continuous
interference component is measured with receivers having adjustable band-
widths. The effective interference level is determined as the sum of

47

FOR 0FFﬂ]Al.USE¢ONLY
FOR¢0F11C1Al.USEi)NLY

receiver responses to the continuous component and to the lumped harmonic
component respectively, the former being proportional to the square root of
the bandwidth and the latter being proportional to the n-th power of the
bandwidth (n denoting the number of discriminator stages in the amplifica-
tion channel). The ratio of the amplitudes of the respective voltages is a
direct estimate of the difference between the levels of the two interference
components, and also an indicator of the minimum detectable useful signal.
With only one discriminator stage using an active filter in the amplifica-
tion channel. experimental measurements were made of the continuous inter-
ference component between the 18th and the 19th current harmonics in an
industrial power network. More accurate results can be obtained by extrac-
tion of beats between the two interference components. Pigures 1.
[82-2415]

UDC 621.396
SPECTRUM 0F CONTINUOUS INTERFERENCE COMPONENT PROM POVER NETWORK
Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian 80 50, 1979 pp 20-21
YATSYSHIN, V. 1., candidate of technical sciences. and TSAIURXAN, E. N.

[Abstract] The continuous component of audiofrequency interference from
industrial power networks was measured by suppression of the harmonic com-
ponent with the aid of narrowbbend comb filters. Here the results are
shown: the averaged spectral distribution of the continuous interference
component, approximately a 1/f2-distribution, referred to a 1 Hz band.

For comparison, the spectral distribution of voltage harmonics was measured
with tunable receivers (10 Hz bandwidth) inside Helmholtz rings and found
to be approximately a 1/f3-distribution. The continuous component does not
exceed 11 of the harmonic component near 50 Hz. Therefore, the improvement
of the transmission of useful signals over communication channels is worth
the cost of suppressing the harmonic interference component. Figures 1;
references: 1 Russian.

[82-2615]

48

FOR OFTWCJAI.US£|DNLY
QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, ELECTRD-OPTICS

UDC 778.4;621—397

TRANSMISSION OF BOLOGRAHS IN REAL TIME SCALE

Khar'kov RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(manuscript received 28 Sep 79) pp 86-90

ALEKHIN, V. 1., candidate of technical sciences and BORDUN, V. P.

[Abstract] A process is considered for recording an amplitude (absorption)
hologram transmitted via a communication channel, by the method of line
scanning in the form of a rectangular raster, and for recovery of images in
a real time scale. It is shown that the required frequency of transmission
of hologram frames is possible with a specific speed of erasure. Some pos-
sible methods are described for weakening parasitic images appearing as the
result of pulsation of frames during recovery of holograms. The relative
amplitudes obtained by undesirable images are sufficiently high. By en-
larging the frequency of change of frames, it is possible to decrease the
amplitude of the spectral components of holograms. The previous frames of
the hologram will‘not noticeably distort the recovered images because they
differ little from one another. However, it is difficult in practice to
realize a system according to such a principle, because it is necessary to
enlarge its broadbandness. It is considerably more convenient to remove
the undesirable images by a change of the form of the erasure curve. The
closer the form of this curve approaches rectangular, the stronger the re-
quired effect appears. 'In fact, if the erasure is performed through the
time Tk' then the pulsations are absent and the preceding frame of the holo-
gram is completely erased. In order to obtain the form of an erasure curve
close to rectangular it is possible to use a material for recording with a
large time constant‘T. Photochromy materials, the erasure speed of which is
considerably increased during infrared irradiation correspond to a certain

degree with these requirements. References 3: 2 Russian, 1 Western.
[81-6415]

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE_ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621 . 391

EFFECT ON DENSITY OF INFORMATION RECORDING 0? L003! JOINING 01’ PHOTO
EFFECT CARRIE TO SCREEN OF CATHODB RAY TUBE WITH FIBER FACE PLATE

Khar'kov RADIO‘I'EKHNIKA in Russian No 57, 1981
(aanuscript received 28 Sep 79) pp 91-95

WIN, V. 1., candidate of technical sciences and BORDUN, V. P.

[Abstract] A fundamentally new stage in the field of creation of opto-
electronic devices for filtration and processing of radar signals is the
development of such devices on the base of a cathode ray tube (CRT) with a
fiber face plate. Use of a CRT lakes it possible to increase the efficiency
of transfer of light energy to the plane of the photo effect carrier, to
raise the density of intonation recording, and to increase the recording
speed. All these advantages. however, are retained only in the case where
during recording of information the photo effect carrier is found in contact
with the fiber-optical shield. The present work evaluates the effect of
loose joining of the photo effect carrier on the brightness of the CRT bean
in the plane of the photo effect carrier and the resolving power, which
determine the density of information recording on a unit of area of the
photo-effect carrier. Figures 3; references 3: 2 Russian, 1 Western in

translation.
[81-6415]

080: 1860 - END -

50

I

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY