FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

JPRS L/10328
17 February 1982

Worldwide Report

LAW OF THE SEA

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language

sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDHIDE REPORT
LAN or THE SEA
(POUO 1/82)

CONTENTS

NEAR. EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Hague Court. Hearing Arguments on ‘mnisian-Libyan Sea Frontier
(Samir Gharb1;JEUNE AFRIQUB, 21 Oct. 81) ....................

SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA
HAGUE COURT HEARING ARMS 0N WSW-LIBYAN SEA Fromm
Paris 3m APRIQUE in French No 1085, 21 Oct 81 p 27
[Article by Samir Ghsrbi: "A Smell of Gasoline"]

[Text] The final Tunisian-Libyan confrontation aver delimitation of their neri time
frontier began on 16 September in The Hague International Court of Justice (ICJ).
Contrary to those that preceded it in 1976 and 1977, in the open sea, this has
been very peaceful. Indeed. courter is conpulsory in this "world tribunal"
established by the United Nations in 1945. One of the cor-Ion expressions is

"our eminent adversaries," another, "fraternal countries." But to get to this
point it took 8 years of fruitless negotiations (1968-1976) followed by a serious
crisis. At last resort, on 10 June 1977 wisdon won out: the two governments
signed a compromise calling on the 10.! to decide not only "the principles and rules
of international law which could be applied" to delimit the continental shelf,

but also to ”clarify a practical way" which would enable experts of the two
countries to ark the frontier "without any difficulty."

The nutter is very complicated. It involves scientific, economic. juridical.
and historical facts. The issue is especially crucial to Tunisia since the dis-
puted zone is rich in petroleum.

Following the 10 June 1977 compromise, each government submitted to the court the
documents necessary to support its position (memorandum. counter-memorandum and
reply). It is the oral proceedings now underway in The Hague. with an initial
stage of Tunisian testimony (16-25 September) and Libyan testimny (beginning

29 September) before 15 independent judges, presided over by Nigerian Taslim
Olawale Elias.

0n the two sides there are some 50 lawyers. experts and advisers; British,
American. French. Italian, Tunisian. and Libyan. Most are outstanding specialists
in international law. geology, geomorphology, physiography, and oceanography...
Sons are from such prestigious universities as Cartridge. Paris. Geneva, Cornell.
etc. But the positions they are defend'ng on behalf of the government which
hired then result in very different lines leading from the land border point, has
Ajdll‘. The Tunisian representatives maintain that the predominant orientation of
Tunisia's coast is east. However. the opposing party considers this direction

to be "abnormal" and "accidental" and thus negligible in relation to its own

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
million

31 perspective.“ The Libyan repres
been north . Since

antinent
hrust of the A
line of the maritime frontier, it is

srs, affirm that the t
that will decide the
more than geological .

is the orientation
key to see that the difficulty of the debate is

an delegation's intention to counter
islands of Djerba

also rejected:

:libetntions

he key to the
he natural ex
nd Kerkennsh.
:hese lines pass

:ives propose a
west. It is up to

tension of

The Tunis
in front of t
line proceeding due

the court to dec
ions will last at

eversl o
In contrast,
front of the Tunisian

juridical factors. Its deliberat
The judgment, which will be voted by absolute majority of the judges, is “compul-
ive. and without appeal." The two parties. within a period of 3
proceed themselves to marking the
the ICJ

sory, definit
renewable). will be required to

months (once
of deviation from, or respect, the judgment.
ble to the Security Council,

“which has power

   

°MAIJS

IE:
Rugs

    
 
  
  
  

Delimitation

‘ proposes
par la Libya .
O

0’.
0‘ Delimitation .

C
.0" . proposes . .
‘ par la Tunme
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GHANA

BRIEFS

N0 ILLEBAL FISHING CLAIMED--Following the information that the Ghanaian Navy had
arrested the Ivorian tuna fishing vessel "Laurent," we have received the following
letter from the ﬁts Chevannes-ﬂerceron-Ballery company in Concerneau: "As the
administrators in charge of this vessel, we would like to note that it was not
'seen fishing in the country's territorial waters,' as had been announced. The
vessel was arrested on 14 December at 2315 hours GMT when it had stopped for tech-
nical reasons approximately 60 miles from the Ghanaian coast. We were able to
prove that the vessel had not been fishing during the 48 hours preceding the arrest
and the vessel was released on 31 December." [Text] [Paris MARCHESITROPICAUX ET

MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 1107]
COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeaux et Cie Paris 1982.

C50: 5200/ 5624 END

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY