FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/10386

5 March 1982

Translation

OCEANOGRAPHIC WORK IN
POLAR REGIONS OF WORLD OCEAN
BY

N.l. Blinov, v.v. Dremlyug and V.A. quantsov ‘

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mm USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRnEﬂfLAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
OCEANOGRAPHIC WORK IN POLAR REGIONS OF WORLD OCEAN

Leningrad OKBANOGRAPICHESKIYB W V POLYARNYKB RAYONAKB HIROVOGO
cm in Russian 1980 (signed to press 21 Oct 80) pp 3-29, 70-79,
86-92, 107-111. 117-189, 212-236

[Excerpts from monograph by Nikolay Ivanovich Blinov, Valentin.
Valentinovich Dremlyug and Vladimir Aleksandrovich Romantsov, Oceano-

graphic Work in Polar Regions of the World Ocean', responsible editor
P.A. Gordiyenko, Gidrometeoizdat, 1,000 copies, 240 pages]

0

CONTENTS

mtmducdonooaoaaoaaoaoaaoaaaoooooaooooseaoooaoososo'o0.900.000.000000000000 1

(hapter 1. Organisational-1h thodolnsical Principles for laplnmnting
Mognpuc Work M! I“ in mac uneaooooaaosaos-ooaaaaasa

1.1. Features of Arctic Basin as Gajact of Invesd:ation....................

1.2. alien]. “Ccnptim of mum Embaaosaaaaaaaoaoaaasaaaao-uooaooa'oo

808~t~

1.3. “”8““ 0mmogt’aph1c sum-cassavaaaaaaaoaooaososataaooaao-aoaoao

l. 3. 1. me principal tasks of ascmscale oceanographic surveys are
the iqlamtation of Intisided oceanographic, ice. anaero-
logicsl and other observations in the Arctic Basin and in
arctic seas, as wall as sciantitic-a‘ethoblogical studies
in .im b, m. ”1’” nmodOOOOQ0.000000DOOOOOIOOIOOOOOCOOOOOOOO m

1.3.2. lbthodologicsl principles and orsmisational structure of
“cued. .m...O...0.0.00.00...OOOOOOOOOIOO;O0.00000000000000 11

1.3.3. hthod for inlehn'tin: oceanographic survey".................... 11
1.1». Oceanographic Work on Drifting Stations................................ 16

labels Pmdp.1 wk.-aas.Ossooosassooooaooaooaosaaao00.000000000000000. 1‘

-a- [I-BSR-Rm]

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

104.2. m md ”duh a: ominns wrkCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIO...
1.6.3. SP station can) and its siting on 1109.........................

1.10.10. Advantages and disadvantages of aerial and shipboard
sathods tor establishment SP ("Bevamyy Polyus")

.udmooaosoooooonooooooooooooooooooooooooooloooooooono.on...

10405. hum-“Chaim .‘pwrt of 8? .uWOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...
105' new mosr.w1c "oﬁOOOOIIOOOOOOOO0.00....0.0.00.000000'01005‘...
1.5.1. Organisation of field oceanographic observations fron ice......

1.5.2. Peat-urns of the organization of roaﬁbead oceanographic
w..mdou m inOOOOOOOOO.IC.00OOOOOQQOOOOCOOOOOOOOOC.0....

Chapter 4. "uchnical Apparatus for Sea Bxpcditionn.......................
4.1. Expeditionary 8bips.................................................
4.2. Navigation of Expeditionary Ship in Ice.............................
6.5. Buoy Oceanographic Stations.........................................

5.4. Evaluation of Effectiveness of Technical Appsratu Used in
manosr‘phic work.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00000......ODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Gaspar 6. Shipboard Ocamographic Radar (Duplex (sane)..................
6.2. so” ”wratm .‘d In’tmnt.00000000000000009.I'OOOIOOOOOOOOO;DOOO
6.3. Ihthod for ”at Survey of Iaoooooooooooooooooosaooooooaooooooooooo

6.1:. Use of. Shipboard Radar for hunting Static anamctoriatics of

"amoqaooooaoaOo.otoo.totooooootooooooooaooaoooooosooaooovoooooocoo

6050 hdﬂl’ Ema for mm in“ mnnt.oooooiaoooooooooooooosooooooooo

Chapter 7. Sign-8 Shipboard Intonation Hydromoaorologicsl
“mud 8"“.0000000000000......00....OOOOOOOIOOOOOCOOOOOCOO

7.1. Purpose and General Principles of Structuring of Systen for
sdmufic “Searﬁ smuDOOOOODOOOOO9.0.0.0...ODO'ODOOOOOOOOOIOOIOO.

7.2. hkeup and Structure of Systen and natures of Its Mctioning......

7.3. eagle: of Technical mvicea for Collection ad Processing of
Hydmmmlouc‘l Infomtion (Km “061)....00000000000000.0.0...

70‘s mule-“1“]. supmrc Of sy‘tetsl0000000.000oooooooooooooooooooooooo

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 8. helmical Apparatus for the 001th ad balsa-y of

D.“ — sin-soc.0O00Ooasooosssssssssoooosstossooooosssosssoot

8010 m-burd “a hunting “lamsssssssosoososoosoo000.000.000.00...

8.1.1. HUB Inmtic “81“” system"...o..."noun”..unuuuo

801.2. “1de .hiph‘rd .cdnmtdc ”.m assasssooaoosaossssssoos

8.1.3. Complex for autontic processing of data fmn radiosond-
masurnmnts of tho stmaphere (”GA-3")“.....................

8.1.5. Automtad vsvs nsaaurennt conplax.............................
8.1.5. Ocamogrsphic autonated batholnter-sonds sounding m1u.......
8.1.6. Autcnatic digital unit for masnring amt direction and
va1ocity, unparatura, conductivity and hydroctadc
preaaure of sea water (ann- instannt)........................

8.2. 8‘”;er all), smuonosO.sOsOsssssaosaosssssoosssolssosssssssoossooo

9.4. Use of Auto-atad Systans and Blactmnic Gowutara in oceano-
graphic Work ml Ice (but..o..........uonuuoo"nun”...nn

(hapter 10. Prospects for Developnnt of blinds tor Oceanographic
”C‘Idl 1n Ia'mwud km of ‘1‘. mt“ mascasoosoaoso

10.1. .meml Prmdph...l0..O...OOOOOOOOOCOODOO...IOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...
10.2. Oceanographic Work in the Arctic Basin..............................
10.2.1. Synchronous oceanographic aurvsys..............................

10.2.3. Stationary long-tern oceanographic observations at on-
‘mt [)0th (or mam)osssasosssssossoosoosaooaasosaasoosoao

10.30 Wuo‘r‘wic work no. ship'ssoosso'ssssssoosoonoooosoosssossssosoi

10.4. Prospects and Tasha for Immveunt in Shipboard Automated

syaunosoaosoossoosootosossosssosoossssssoosooosossoossoassoooaossoo

10.6.1. Tasks in inroving individual nuurennt cowlexes and
broadening of annotation mama...............................

Bibnographyoasssaasssssass.ossssssssoassossssssssooasoooooosssootsossaooso

l-‘Oll omcm. us: ONLY
[Text] Introduction. The polar areas of the world ocean and especially the Arctic
and Antarctic Oceans are being investigated as a physical mediun whose parameters
and regine must be known in order to solve any scientific and practical problems:

development of the theory and nethods for sea hydrosetsorological forecasts for
different tines in advance, scientific-operational support of navigation along the

Northern Sea Route and navigation in the Antarctic. planning. construction and
rational operation of ports and hydraulic structures.

A knowledge of the natural conditions in a particular region is of fundamental im-
portance when using its mineral, biological, chemical and energy resources. which
are acquiring exceptional isportance in the economic sastery of the regions of the
Arctic and for the country as a whole. A study of the nature of the polar regions
is also necessary for an understanding of the physical essence of the processes and
mechanism forming the earth's climate and controlling its variations on both re-
gional and global scales.

Up to the late 1960's oceanographic work in the Arctic and Antarctic Oceans was di-
rected to a multisided investigation of their hydrometeorologicsl and ice ragines.
to establishing the spatial-tmoral scales of variability of hydrometeorological
processes, clarification of the natural patterns and cause-and-effect relationships
among the different phenomena transpiring in then. At the same tine, it was found
to be necessary to increase attention to the solution of fundamental problems di-
rected to study of the extremal states of the earth's dynamic shells, their explan-

ation and prediction.

Accordingly. in 1970 a group of scientists of the Orde'r of banin Arctic and Antarc-
tic Scientific Research Institute. under the direction of A. P. Treshnikov, corres-
ponding nenber USSR Academy of Sciences, developed the scientific program of the
Polar Experiment (POLEX), bringing together a nunber of major scientific problems
related tc study of the oceanic waters and climate of the Arctic (Pom-North) and

roe own. use can
ROITOFFICIAI.UEIZCH'LY

Antarctica (POLEX-South). This program provides, in particular, for an investiga-
tion of the processes of macroscale interaction between the atmosphere and ocean
in the polar regions, a quantitative evaluation of their role in formation of the
energy balance of the ocean-atmosphere system, study of the mechanisms forming
macroscale long-period variations of hydrometeorological processes in the Arctic
and Antarctica.

The Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute proceeded to the implement-
ation of theoretical and experimental studies under the POLEX program in 1971-1972.
In 1973 the implementation of the program in the Arctic Ocean was initiated by the
carrying out of macroscale oceanographic surveys in the Arctic Basin. In 1974 sim-
ilar studies were initiated in the Antarctic Ocean.

The carrying out of multisided in situ experiments under the POLEX program is accom—
plished on scientific research ships, on “Severnyy Polyus" drifting stations, in

the network of polar stations and at the observatories of the Arctic administra-
tions of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring and
the "Sever" aerial expeditions.

The solution of major scientific problems and global problems in hydrometeorology
should be accomplished with broad international cooperation. For this reason the
POLEX program as a national scientific program of the USSR was included in the in--
ternational Program for Investigation of Global Atmospheric Processes (GARP).

The implementation of oceanographic work in the polar areas of the world ocean
under the programs of major in situ experiments required improvements in the meth-
ods for their organization, the employment and creation of new technical appar-
atus, instruments and equipment, development and improvement of measurement methods
and processing of the collected information on an electronic computer.

The most promising direction in work for the creation of new technical apparatus
and methods for oceanographic investigations is the systemic approach, that is,

the combining of the principal stages in the collection of data (collection-pro-
cessing-accumulation of data), realized in the form of an automated data system.

An erample'of such a system, used on the scientific research ships of the State
Committee on Hydrometeorology_and Environmental Monitoring, is a shipboard auto-
mated hydrometeorological measurement system which is used in the collection, reg-
istry, computer processing, accumulation and dissemination of a considerable number
of hydrometeorological parameters.

a

In oceanographic work from the ice on the "SeVer" expeditions and at the "Severnyy
Polyus" stations use is made of specific research methods, instruments and tech-
nical gear in whose creation allowance is made for the need for using them under
special climatic conditions (low air temperature, wind loads, frequent fracturing
of floes, etc.). An important role in the planning and implementation of this work
is played by proper allowance for living conditions and adherence to safety measb
ures.

The implementation of expeditionary work is a costly measure. Accordingly, it is

important to solve the problems of their optimum planning. Only on the basis of
such planning is it possible to obtain the maximum effect from scientific research.

2

INJI‘OIIICLAI.IMII(MVLY
The planning of work from drifting and fixed ice, supported by aircraft, must take
into account the possibilities for aviation and provide for those changes in
weather and the state of ice which frequently to a decisive degree exert an influ-
ence an the success in carrying out the principal tasks of the expedition.

The optimum planning of oceanographic work from ships provides for solution of the
following problems: discrimination of quasihomogsneous regions of the ocean; choice
of rational discreteness and total duration of measurements; determination of time
scales of variability of hydrophysical fields; spatial distribution of observa-
tions; choice of corresponding equipment, instruments and technical means for ex-
peditionary work; allowance for weather conditions in the observation region.

In the Arctic and Antarctica considerable experience has now been accumulated in
carrying out oceanographic work at polar stations, on the "Severnyy Polyus" drift-
ing scientific research stations, on the "Sever" high-latitude aerial expeditions
and on expeditionary ships. This article is devoted to a generalisation of this
experience.

In this book special attention is devoted to a description of technical means, in-

struments, methods for oceanographic measurements and processing of information on
an electronic computer, which are used in oceanographic investigations from ships
and the ice cover.

Chapters 1-3 were written by N. I. Blinov, Chapters 4-6 by V. V. Drenlyug, Chapters
7-9 by V. A. Romantsov. The section devoted to exposition of the experience in us-
ing electronic computers in work on drifting ice was written by V. A. Volkov, Yu. A.
Grodetskiy and V. V. Lukin. Chapter 10 gives the prospects for development of meth-
ods for oceanographic research in the polar countries in the form in which they are
visualized by the authors.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1980

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USIINNLY
momaumomv

OCEANOGRAPBIC WORK man 103 IN ARCTIC BASIN

CHAPTER I. ORGANIZATIONAL-WWICAL PRINCIPLES NR IMPLEMENTING WC
WRK FROM ICE IN ARCTIC BASIN

1.1. Features of Arctic Basin as Object of Investigation

The Arctic Basin of the Arctic Ocean is the region of the world ocean which is the
nest inaccessible and complex for investigation because of its climatic and phys-
iographic features, such as drifting ice, covering the entire area during the en-
tire year in an almost continuous armr, the desertlike character of its expenses,
the severity of weather conditions, and the polar day and polar night.* Any of
these factors nakes difficult the inlenentation of oceanographic work. However,
the totality of these factors can constitute the nest seriom obstacle for carry-
ing out investigations, which require considerable expenditures of material and
technical resources, organisational and physical efforts.

The presence of thick and strongly htn-Iocked drifting ice in the Arctic Basin, even
with the present-day level of technology, is a serious obstacle to the penetration

of researchers into the high latitudes by leans of sea (including icebreakers) or
surface transport. Air and underwater transport is an exception. however, the ef-
fectiveness of its use for investigation of the Arctic Basin is linited by both
its natural features '(polar night, thawing and hulasckiu of ice) and by the tech-
nical possibilities of the means of transport themselves. And nevertheless, the
aircraft is at the present tile precisely the principal neans of transport for
implementation of such work.

The Arctic Basin has an area greater than 5 ailiion square kilometers. All this
enormus ocean area is virtually deserted. "hen undertaking expeditionary work
there researchers are forced to take everything with then, down to the sunset da-
tail. With nodern scales of expeditionary work and present-day requirensnts on
living conditions the ease of expeditionary equip-ant and gear anounts to tens and
sometimes even hundreds of tons. The deserted nature of the Arctic Basin and its
severe climatic conditions require the creation and use of corresponding leans

and metth for the life support of people and their safety during oceanographic
work. -

 

* Since Soviet researchers are not carrying out work over the entire area of the
Arctic Basin, but only in its parts located to the north of Gremland, the Can-
adian Arctic Archipelago, Alaska and the Eurasian coast. in this monograph it is
precisely these areas which are given the nsne "Arctic Basin."

summon“
The severity of climate in the Arctic Basin is governed for the most part by-the
low air temperature. high humidity and relatively strong winds. The low air tem-
perature not only favors the formation of thick ice in the Arctic Basin, but also
exerts a considerable influence on man' s conditions of life and performance,
physical-mechadicﬂl qualities of materials, operation and servicing of equipment
in the open air. etc.

It is rather difficult to move and work in the severe cold because the slightest
carelessness canjhp dangerous for health (for example, when there is severe cold
it is dangerous to come into contact with metal with unprotected parts of the
body). In particular, the efficiency of man's activity in the open air is sharp-
ly reduced at temperatures below -3o....-3s°c. Accordingly, when carrying out work
in the Arctic Basin appropriate warm clothing is worn and shelters are heated
year-round.

At a low air temperature many materials change their properties. Metals and even
rubber become brittle, articles of skin become hard and break and tear easily.
Some types of plastics become brittle in the cold (for example, photographic film
becomes fragile and breaks easily), whereas ordinary types of lubricating oils
lose viscosity (thicken). Equipment and gear kept in the open air are covered
with frost.

The wind in the Arctic Basin, where there are virtually no serious natural ob-
stacles for reducing its effect, is rather significant, especially at a negative
air temperature exerting an important influence on the conditions for implement-
ing work (Table 1.1).

Hind is one of the principal reasons for ice drift in the Arctic Basin. A strong
and persistent wind causes an intensive movement of the ice, accompanied by the
fracturing and hummocking of ice, especially significant when there are abrupt
changes in its direction and velocity.

A strong wind causes high and low blizzards which are dangerous in the polar night
when any movement of man (especially beyond the limits of camp) is very difficult

and risky due to poor visibility and the lack of characteristic natural landmarks.

Increased air humidity, especially during summer during the melting of snow and
ice, is also a considerable problem when carrying out work in the Arctic Basin.
The unfavorable effect of moisture on clothing and gear is aggravated by the
presence of salts in the moist air. Penetrating into the instruments, equipment
and gear, the moisture and salt can put them out of operation, and penetrating in-
to clothing (especially footgear), lessen the heat-insulating qualities and make
difficult its drying.

The high air humidity at a negative temperature favors the formation of glare, hoar-'
frost and frost on the surface of objects exposed in the open air. Sometimes the
glaze or frost are so thick that they put structures out of operation (the guys

of masts break, the supports of radio antennas snap, etc.), meteorological, ac-
tinometric and other instruments malfunction.

IIIICIHHC1A1.USECH‘LY
-as—a

I o—t—s—Ia—u—m-en—a—as-as-J

:1, : i man-21333.13
gun—35.1-u-n-a-31444444
* he 1-31333'i33 _..-“ 3.1-5:
0 . - — .. ..
I. u.o—e-n—IO-n—el-n—a_a.u.a_..n_u
. —1 —Is —ll —I -a 4 —u .n -11 -g;

: 31-7-u-a-n-u—03m332243 -1...

Notes. 1. In the cited table the equivalent cooling effect of the wind was comput-
ed for a temperature of the human skin of about 33°C. 2. with wind velocities

1) Wind velocity

2) Air temperature, °C
3) kl/hour

4) nlsec

The polar night exerts a rather serious influence on working conditions in the
Arctic Basin. Around-the-clock darkness, even at the modern level of power and

that the nest frightful thing is "...not so much the eternal darkness. as the
monotony and deadly boredon paralyzing the nind" [78, 95]. In addition to psycho—
logical effects, thia polar night exerts on the hunan body a negative physiolog-
ical effect which has not yet been adequately studied [63, 46]. Light starvation
leads to disruptions of mineral metabolism in the human body, which in the past

in many cases was one of the principal causes (together with inadequate nutrition)
of disease among polar workers.

During the polar day in the Arctic Basin there is a rather intensive light and UV
irradiation which under definite conditions can lead to affliction with "snow
blindness." The reason for this disease is the great albedo of the snow surface,
reflecting the blinding rays of the sun. The probability of affliction with "snow

blindness” is especially great in April and-Hay when the greatest number of cloud-
less days occurs.
Idduudua - GUS... -ecvsuc—c

no nouuuoaoun nowuodsaaa and: oaoavou
uauaaasuo «o douuauono

can wauou>uoo Anaoouoav caucuauaaoo
>ua>uuuavoun sup: nuances

ascendanco unabuu
can coauusvoua Aoouaouanloov «cacao:

oaaduoual .ooono .undnuoao mo

nowuuoaoun nowuonaaaw and: onuouos
oaauuauuﬂ

no unannououn acuunmauua acoouo3
«noun

vauoo uaw>ua can nouuustun nnoouoz
ucolmuavo

no huwnunnunou Hauowuauomo nun-ho:

anew»
Iwucoo uuoaaso omen nuduuaouuaa

now nouauuvuomnc mun-no non-ouoau
unulawsuo mo

cowuauumo can uuuoapuoa oouaouaaaoo
oaowuouci .noogo .undnuoao no
aduuuonoua maauaasnauluaoz «weaves
«cognac

3:00 ”cabin use cowuosvoua nuonuoz
huq>uuoavoun sac: nausvum

usuouoaaa acou=£OUu mo
oouuouuouuauqzu Hanouuauoao «guano:
unowuouuu

mo mocha .30. mo oouuuonoun oomaosu

auowuuvcoo .
cuwalsuoa .uaulawsau .udnauouna no

.e

.n
.N

.n

.c
.n
.N

.u

.h
.o
.n
.¢
.n

.N

{A

nuouunu u-ounoHo

IQOOuoI uoguo no uuoouuo u~a¢uo>uu
In: an Conan-«nun hvon ouoavuu
onowudvuoo undac>oa Ao:0tu03v
nouuoaanaoo vac cone-nauuon auusvom

onowuwuaou
«auscuuonsm ﬁnance wuuuuquuuql no
nousuwvaonno manage hvon oouaouunn
auouoou ”augmeno

Iuoouoa nozuo mo ouoouuo annouo>au
ta: 0» ouuauouoou avon monsoon
«unannouuon cousvum

mucuuau “no“
aonOHOOuua nonuo no mucouuo ones
Inoboua: ou «unauuaoou soon nooavou
. oﬁoouao

unnuod ao>o vac auapuuouu ou acowu
Invaoo ounuuobouns nova: awed coo
uaowuwvaoo w:«:o«u

nuasu awake: unwauauuaul cu avon
an nousuuvconxa anyone moadauouu

cucuHHOuuon can huuuanoa oooavux

ounce; no

.N
.H

.n

.N
.H

.v

.n

.N

.H

unannuua nod one
an“: .eaaa uuouum

uuananaz pic gnu:

ausuuuumaou Maw 30;

Out. ’I- l

7

FOI»0FFHJAI.US£(NVLY
hysiological ef-
proceoaeg predom-

conditions favor.

of situations

nychological symptoms
During 1901-1903 a participant on a_Swedish Antarctic expedition, Baudman, carried
out a number of experiments for the purpose of evaluating the effect of air temper-
ature and wind velocity on the human body and proposed that the severity of cli~
mate and weather be evaluated using_the severity coefficient:

c - (1-o.oar)(1+o.272v),

where c is the severity coefficient; T is air temperature, 'c; v is wind velocity,
m/sec.

P. A. Gordiyenko generalized numerous data from his daily observations of weather
severity during drift on the SP-d (1955-1956) and recommended some limitations

‘when working in the open air with corresponding severity coefficients C (Table
1.3) [129]. '

The examined climatic and physiographic features of the Arctic Basin, exerting an
influence on the implementation of oceanographic work (on the personnel of ex-
peditiona, equipment, instruments, gear, transport and other technical facilities,
fuels and lubricants, etc.), determine the specific nature of this work.

Table 1.3
C coefficient Limitations when working in open air and precautionary measures
0.0-2.5 No restrictions
2.5-4.0 Duration of continuous work not more than 3-4 hours; 1 hour
break. Gloves or mittens worn for protecting hands
6.0-5.5 Duration of continuous work not more than 2-3 hours; hourly

breaks with mandatory retirement to shelter for 5-10 minutes.
Fur mittens worn on hands; face best covered with special oint-
ment

5.5-7.0 Duration of continuous work not more than 1 hour. Smearing of
face mandatory. Harm suit impermeable to wind

Above 7.0 Best not to work in open air. In extreme cases work place should

be sheltered from wind. Clothing - down suit with hood imperi-
cable to wind. Mandatory that face be carefully smeared

Note: K. Rodal' [94], on the basis of experience among natives in the North, is of
the opinion that smearing of open parts of the face and hands with fat or special
ointment during work in the open air not only does not give a positive effect, but
is even harmful;

1.2. General Description of Research Methods

In our country, in connection with the vigorous development of the economy in the
Far North and the development of navigation along the Northern Sea Route, the
study and exploitation of the Arctic Ocean is a highly important national economic
task.

FOI¢0FIIJA1.USEII‘LY
FOI‘OFUKJAI.USE(HVLY

Already beginning in the late 1930's Soviet polar workers, taking into account
the practical and scientific problems to be solved and relying on the experience
of many expeditions and the attained level of technology, have been developing
and introducing into practical use two methods for the effective study of the
Arctic Basin: 1) organization of long-term scientific research stations on the
drifting ice and 2) implementation of oceanographic and geophysical surveys over
the entire area of the basin using so-called "flying observatories” [113]. The
basic means of transport in both methods is becoming the aircraft, which is demon-
strating its effectiveness in work under the severe climatic conditions of the
Arctic Basin. The use of aircraft as "flying observatories" has become the basis
for the "Sever" high-latitude expeditions, since an aircraft with a group of re-

searchers aboard can fly into the necessary region and in case of necessity re-
peat flights [25, 78].

In the early 1950's, for observations of the drift of ice and hydroseteorological
and ice conditions in the Arctic Basin, in addition to the 8? stations, the "Sever"
expeditions and ice aerial reconnaissance, drifting automatic radiometeorological

stations came-into use (DARHS - dreyfuyushchiye avtomaticheakiye radiometeoro-
logicheskiye stantsii).

It goes withOut saying that time has introduced definite corrections into'these ob-
servation methods and nevertheless at the present time they remain the moat ef-
fective in the multisided study of the nature of the Arctic Basin.

1.3. Macroscale Oceanographic Surveys

1.3.1. The principal tasks of macroscale oceanographic surveys are the implementa-
tion of multisided oceanographic, ice, meteorological and other observations in
the Arctic Basin and in arctic seas, as well as scientific-methodological studies
in situ by the polygon method.

The makeup, volume and direction of oceanographic and geophysical work in such sur-
veys vary in dependence on the practical and scientific problems which can be

solved in a definite stage in study of the Arctic Basin. For example, during the
course of the 1950's (from 1948 through 1960) the principal scientific task of
macroscale oceanographic surveys was obtaining a sufficiently complete idea con-

cerning bottom relief of the Arctic Basin, concerning the vertical and spatial
structure of the thermochemical and dynamic fields of its water masses, etc.,

which is reflected in some increase in the number of oceanographic stations [38,
39] occupied by the "Sever" expeditions.

Beginning in 1973 the scientific task of the "Sever" expedition was implementation
of in situ investigations under the POLBKS (POLE!) program. This program provides
for study of extremal states of moving media in the polar regions of the earth.

their explanation and prediction [13, 115]. Within the framework of the expedi-
tion the formulated problem is solved by means of an oceanographic survey, includ-
ing oceanographic, meteorological and ice observations at definite points uniform-

ly distributed over the entire area of the Arctic Basin at a distance of 150 or
300 km from one another.

10

FilltlﬂﬂC1A1.USEiﬂVLY
1.3.2. Hethodolbgical principles and organizational structure of macroscale sur-
veys. At the present time macroscale oceanographic surveys are being carried out
during the spring period and organizationally these can be subdivided into three
stages: preparatory, field, and report.

In the preliminary (or organizational) stage all types of organizational-economic
measures are taken directed to a timely and careful preparation for the expedition.
In this stage the program of scientific research and the working plan of the exped-
ition are prepared, discussed and approved; the personnel of the expedition is
selected; expeditionary gear and instruments are received from warehouses.

The field stage of expeditionary work is continued from March through June because
in February (especially during the first half) the polar night still,continues
over the greater part of the Arctic Basin, but in June the melting of snow and ice
is already beginning. [It is not impossible that with the introduction of helicop-
ters into expeditionary work this period can be expanded.] '

During the field period the organizational structure of the expedition provides
for the separation of personnel into two groups: operational and scientific, which
in turn are broken down into detachments.

The Operational group, directed by the head of the expedition, ensures engineering-
technical support of the scientific detachments of the expedition. The personnel

of this group are situated at all the shore and island bases of the expedition
where they are engaged in preparing and dispatching expeditionary freight to the

SP ("Severnyy Polyus") stations, ice bases and polygons, etc.

The scientific group is engaged in the direct implementation of the scientific pro-
gram of the expedition. The number of detachments in this group is determined by

the makeup and volume of the work provided for in the scientific program.

The report period is the final stage in the expedition, during which the partic-
ipants prepare a scientific-technical report on the work which has been done and
reduce the field observational data to good order. '

1.3.3. Method for implementing oceanographic survey. Such a survey involves the
implementation during a relatively short period (1 1/2-2 months) of sporadic
hydrological, meteorological. ice and other observations at stipulated points
quite uniformly covering the area of the Arctic Basin and the arctic seas. De-
pending on the area of the investigated ocean sector the survey can be carried out
simultaneously by several detachments which are supplied with aircraft with skis.
[Up to 1977 such surveys were made with Li-Z aircraft, whereas in later years

they were made with An-Z aircraft.) The aircraft are equipped and outfitted with
emergency supplies (food, tents, fuels. equipment for preparing and heating food,
sleeping bags, etc.). Surveys in the arctic seas and adjacent regions of the Arctic
Basin are carried out from shore bases. A survey of the high-latitude part of the
Arctic Basin is carried out from temporary bases specially organized for these
purposes on the drifting ice (Fig. 1.1). The SP stations are commonly used as such
bases. The organization of temporary bases on the drifting ice is very complex.
Accordingly, sometimes when carrying out an oceanographic survey aircraft are
refueled on the ice by aircraft tankers, this making it possible to increase the

11

ll“!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.llil(HVlY
EOI‘OFIICIAI.IEEEIHVLY

work radius. Bases (both on the shore and on the ice) are used for resting of the
aircraft crews and scientific personnel of the detachments, for the fueling and
inspection of aircraft, for hydrochemical analysis of sea water samples, for

critical examination of observational data and their primary processing. At one
of the bases there is a synoptic group supporting the work of the expedition' s

detachments with meteorological forecasts.

The specific conditions for implementing an oceanographic survey required the cre-
ation of special light and portable instruments and other expeditionary gear [13,
[89]

The principal complexity in the work of the oceanographic flight detachments is
the choice of landing areas from the air for sites where observations are planned

and the actual landing on them. Therefore, each aircraft participating in the im-
plementation of an oceanographic survey carries an experienced hydrologist - ice
scout. Knowing well how to determine the characteristics.of ice from aboard an

aircraft, in addition to in-flight ice observations he helps the crew to select
landing areas and prepare a sketch map of the locality at the landing point.

After carrying out the observations and landings at two or three points or more
(their number is dependent on the fuel supply aboard the aircraft) the flight de-
tachment returns to base. After refueling the aircraft and resting, the detach-
ment takes off to investigate the next points. The duration of the stay of the
scientific group on.the ice at each survey point is determined by the volume and
time required for carrying out the observations and can be from several hours to
several days.

The aircraft (one or more), after delivering the scientific detachment to the sur-
vey point, while the work is being done remains the entire time on the ice in
readiness fer a takeoff. After completing the planned complex of observations

at a point the aircraft proceeds to the next planned point. These "jumps" from
point to point and return to the base continue until observations have been.made
at all the points planned in a stipulated region.

Emergency situations can arise when carrying out an oceanographic survey; they must
always be kept in mind and appropriate precautionary measures must be taken.

Such situations include:

-- the aircraft breaking through the ice during landing on a floe with a thickness
less than that admissible for a particular type of aircraft;

- entry of the aircraft skis into fissures which are filled with snow or covered
with young ice;

- fracturing of floes on which the aircraft is situated caused by movement of the
ice in a particular region;

-- collision of the aircraft with high hummocks during its landing or takeoff,
which can lead to the crashing of the aircraft and even the death of people;

- falling of people into fissures or under the ice during their movement along
the ice, which can lead to different kinds of serious traumas;

- fire in the aircraft during refueling, heating and starting of motors;

- fire in living and work tents when using gas heaters and stoves for their heat-
ing or food preparation;

12

ltlltlﬂWC1A1.lEHBIIVLY
- poisoning by propane or carbon monoxide gas fumes when using gas heaters and
solar stoves in tents and also by exhaust gases from motors operating in tents;

-- frostbite and colds;

- getting lost when moving on a floe at the time of poor visibility (in blizzards,
fog, etc. ;

-- sudden appearance and attack of a polar bear.

Since assistance cannot always be rendered in time due to the lack of flight
weather, duration of the search. etc., the mentioned and many other contingenc-
ies can lead to more serious consequences. Taking these circumstances into account,
the operation of aircraft in an oceanographic survey, involving landing on the
drifting ice, is usually carried out "in pairs" (that is, two aircraft operate
simultaneously and keep watch over one another). This safety procedure is execut-
ed in two ways: either both aircraft go to the same point or go to a number of
near-lying points. In the first case one aircraft lands on a selected floe, where-
as the second circles nearby, monitoring its landing either visually or by radio.
After a successful landing of the first aircraft the second lands on this same
floe, but when parking proceeds to the opposite end of the floe so that in the
event of a sudden fracturing of the floe both aircraft will not be in the same
region.

In the event that the aircraft go to points which are near one another they main-
tain constant radio communication with one another. If they both reach the neigh-
borhood of their destinations simultaneously, one of then (by instructions from
the group leader) mandatorily awaits communication from the other that it has
landed, after which it also lands..The crew of the aircraft already on the ice
monitors its landing by radio. It is not without reason that such close attention
is given to landing conditions, since despite more than 60 years of experience

in the working of fliers and scientists in the Arctic, no one is safe from all
kinds of accidents and errors caused by complex natural conditions. After all,
the landing is accomplished on a floe, which the flier sees for the first time
and at that, from a flying aircraft. The flier and hydrologist-ice scout, deter-
mining the suitability of the floe for landing, rely for the most part on their
experience. In order to lessen the possibility of error in evaluation of the suit-
ability of a floe for landing, the lending is made only when there is good vis-
ibility.

A successful landing is still no guarantee against further emergency situations.
The floe on which the aircraft is situated can split apart at any time. It is

dangerous if the fissure lies beneath the aircraft skis. In this case all measures
are taken for an immediate takeoff or (if the size of the floe allows) the air-

craft is moved to a different place. Accordingly, in work on a floe one of the
members of the crew continuously monitors the ice conditions.

When making oceanographic surveys the expedition participants must live and work
on the drifting ice. Accordingly. in the organization of such work much attention
nust be devoted to the problem of living quarters, heating and clothing. As liv-
ing and working quarters in oceanographic flight detachments use is made of tents
of the Shaposhnikov design (KAPSh-l, KAPSh-Z and KAPSh-S), ensuring normal condi-
tions for the work and life of people in them. The tent design is such that two
persons can assemble each in 20-30 minutes and in case of necessity they can be
transported to a safe place in assembled form (Fig. 1.2). The heating of the

13
ITIICHHHCIAI.IIIB(HULY
FIHIIIWNCIAl.lEﬂ£(MVLY

tents (and also food preparation) in the expedition's flight detachments is ac-
complished using gas stoves, propane being used as the fuel.

1.5. Oceanographic Work on Drifting Stations

The successful completion of the work of the SP-l station in 1937 confirmed the
viability and effectiveness of the method for studying the nature of the Arctic
Basin by the use of drifting stations. Beginning from 1954 and to the present time
in the Arctic Basin two and sometimes three drifting stations of the "Severnyy
Polyus" type have been operating there year-round. when the drifting station

moves out beyond the limits of the Arctic Basin its personnel are evacuated, the
station is shut down and a new station is organized to the north of the Chukchi
and East Siberian Seas to replace it.

1.6.1. Principal tasks. The SP ("Severnyy Polyus") stations are used for long-term
(year-round) multisided oceanographic investigations and related meteorological.
aerological, geophysical and other observations. They also serve as bases for
carrying out experimental scientific research and scientific-methodological stud-
ies under clear-cut specialized programs related to the solution of specific prob-
lems following from the scientific program of the sections of the Arctic and Ant-
arctic Scientific Research Institute.

Among the principal scientific problems in the field of oceanography subject to
study by observations made on the SP stations are: determination of the principal
patterns of hydrological and ice regimes of the Arctic Ocean and their variabil-
ity; study of the principal patterns of circulation of water and ice in the Arctic
Basin and their changes; study of the mechanism and physical essence of processes
of interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere through the ice cover; clar-
ification of the conditions for the formation of long-period (climatic) oceanic
processes in the polar regions of the earth and elsewhere.

The modern Soviet SP drifting station with respect to its tasks, breadth and vol-
ume of investigations carried out, technical outfitting with equipment and in-

struments, is a full-scale scientific research observatory. The SP stations are

the most important (and for the time being the only) source of year-round infor-
mation on natural processes and phenomena transpiring over enormous expanses in

the high-latitude Arctic Ocean.

The principal shortcomings of operation of the SP stations are the following: the
passive position of the SP stations during the period of drift, precluding the
carrying out of oceanographic observations over a long period of time in one and

the same region; vulnerability of the stations during the movement of ice (com-
pression, fracturing. humnocking) and other dangerous phenomena (Fig. 1.3); com-
plexity of organization and support of the 8P stations.

1.6.2. Means and methods for organizing work. Two methods are used for landing
on the ice of the SP scientific research stations: by air and by ship. For the

time being the aerial method remains the most important. Amng the 26 stations
organized by the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute in the Arctic
Basin, 20 have been occupied by means of aircraft and only a (SP-10, SP-19. SP-22.
SP-2é) have been occupied by icebreakers and sea ships. An evacuation of SP sta-
tions is accomplished only by aircraft (except for the SP-l station, which was

14

mmmmr
evacuated from the flue by means of the "Nurses" and "Taymyr" icebreakers.

Aerial method for organizing SP stations. Transport aircraft (Li-2, 11-15, 11-18,
An-2, An-26, An-lZ) are used for delivery to the ice and organization of the SP
stations. One oritwo aircraft participating in the expedition must have skis in
order to land the first group of people on the floe selected for the future sta-
tion, having the task of preparing a landing strip and receiving transport air-
craft (usually the flight group leader). The organisation of the drifting sta-
tions by meanslofgaviation is accomplished primarily in April, when the weather
most favorable for flights appears in the Arctic.

The setting up of a new SP station on the ice is preceded by a search for and
choice of a suitable floe in the region where the station is planned.

The choice of a floe is a complex and highly responsible matter. The laws govern-
ing the fracturing of ice have not yet been established. In some cases a peren-
nial floe which outwardly is very solid will fracture, whereas in other cases
even a weak ice field drifts across the entire Arctic Basin almost without being
destroyed.

In organizing the SP stations a search is made for the strongest floe, which is de-
termined by its age. The older the floe, the thicker, more monolithic and stronger
it is. When selecting a floe for an SP its size is also of importance. It is un-
desirable that the station be established on a solid small floe (area less than
1-1.5 kmz) since even with partial fracturing its remaining parts will have a

size inadequate for safety and the people will have to be transferred to a new
floe. It is also recommended that a floe of excessively great size not be used

for establishing a station due to the high probability that some part of it will

be subject to fracturing.

For the siting of a station it is best to select isolated pack-ice flees of a cir-
cular or oval configuration with an optimum area of 5-10 klz. situated in the
neighborhood of younger (one-year or winter) ice, which can serve as a sort of
shock absorber against the pressure of adjacent packrice fields [12].

The external feature of pack-ice flees is a slightly hilly (smoothed) surface.
Such floee as a rule are monolithic and have a quite great thickness. The ideal
floe for the organization of a drifting station is an ice island.

In the organisation of a station it is important not only to select a durable floe
but also that a landing strip can be prepared on it (or in its immediate neigh-
borhood) relatively simply for the reception of transport aircraft with wheels.
Aircraft with skis first deliver the flight leader group to a floe suitable for
construction of a flight strip, together with equipment and gear, and also the
specialists of the "Sever" expedition operations group. One of the aircraft, de-
livering the flight leader group to this floe, in order to ensure its safety re-
mains there until the tents or huts are set up. together with heating facilities
and a radio station. Only then does the aircraft depart from the floe.

The tasks of the flight leader group include: preparation of the landing strip; its
maintenance in a working state during the entire period of organization of the

new drifting station; assurance of reception and unloading of transport aircraft
delivering station freight to the floe.

15

IOI1OFIKJAI.UBE(IVLV
carriages. In such cases the setting out of the station is accomplished through

an intermediate base (or a so-called "juspoff" airdrone), organized at a ainilun
distance from the ice field selected for the SP. Ploes forned during the course of

late autunn'or winter are best suited for the "juspoff" airdrone. They have a
thickness adequate for the landing of transport aircraft (as a rule, not less

The negative aspect of setting up a station through a "Jmoff" airdrone is not
only the cowlexity and great anomt of work involved, but also the'double hand-
ling of the freight delivered for it (the station freight is delivered free a

shore point first to the ”junpoff," and from there, in stall aircraft, helicop-
ters or tractor trains, is transported to the station floe). The station person-

nel in this case are divided into two groups. One group is at the "jun'poff"
point and unloads the aircraft arriving fron shore bases and loads An-2 aircraft

orhelicopters and maintains the airdrone in a working state. The second is locat-

ported by tractor, for which ice roads are laid out on the drifting floss from the
airdrone to the SP station.) In the organization of a station through a "junpoff"

event of fracturing of the landing strip floe a small quantity of freight is al-
ways easier drawn away fron the emergency zone into a safe place.

If the region of organization of s new SP station is situated not far from shore

bases, for landing the flight leader group on a floe helicopters can be used in-
stead of an aircraft with skis. ~

this purpose. In some cases both have been used simultaneously. The type of ship
or ships which should be used for the delivery of personnel of the new 31’ station
and its impedimnta to the floe is determined by 'the ice conditions on the ap-

proaches and in the neighborhood of this floe. The gear and personnel for the new
station are delivered by aircraft from Leningrad to the sea port nearest the site
of its organization. where they are loaded aboard ships. The floe for the new

station is subjected to reconnaissance fron an aircraft. The selection of a floe

l6

MOMIISEONLY
is accomplished the same as in the aerial method for organizing the SP station.
During the search for the floe an ice reconnaissance is made along the path of
the probable course of the ships from the port to the place where the station is
to be situated. This reconnaissance also determines the need for the ship to be
accompanied byaan-icebreaker. The movement of the ship'carrying the cargo and
personnel for the station is accompanied by Ln ice reconnaissance aircraft and
the ship's helicopter, especially with approzch to the floe for the new SP sta-
tion. The ships advance right up to the floe, moor to it and proceed to unload-
ing. They depart from the floe only after normal life has been established at the
new station and stable radio communication with the continent has been initiated.

1.4.3. SP station canp and its siting on floe. The camp of a drifting station is
a singular settlement of huts. tents, plywood pavilions and other engineering
structures. The camp shelters can be classified as residential, service and lab-
oratory, as pavilions, warehouses, garages, etc., which depending on their pur-
pose are located either in prefabricated-panel huts of the Kanaki-Ovsyannikov
design or in KAPSh-l, KAPSh-Z and KAPSh-3 tents. Since the thickness, and accord-
ingly, the load-carrying capacity of perennial sea floss and ice islands differ
greatly, the character of the siting of SP station camps and individual struc-
tures on them has some fundamental differences.

On a perennial floe the 8? camp is sited taking the following requirements into
account. First of all, it must not be congested because in winter this leads to
its increased snow accumulation and a considerable bending of the floe, and in
summer it causes the accumulation of an enormous volume of melt water in the ter-
ritory of the camp. The great weight loads concentrated due to the crowding of
the camp in a small area of the floe cause considerable additional stresses in
this place which can favor deformation of the floe or even its fracturing. In
addition, in the case of passage of a fissure through the territory of a crowded
camp many of its structures may be in its zone. It is desirable that the heaviest
equipment of the station (such as aerological theodolite, tractor, diesel, etc.)
be uniformly distributed over the territory of the camp.

The following can be said on the basis of the long-term experience in rational
layout of the SP station camp (which is the arrangement adhered to in recent
years). At the center of the camp there is an electric power station and 10-15 m
away there is a recreation and meeting room. All the other structures in the
camp are arranged around them, taking into account the mentioned requirements.
The aerological pavilion and the radio station are situated at opposite sides of
the camp so that the masts and antennas of the latter do not interfere with the

launching of radiosondes. The meteorological site is situated alongside the

radio station, but no closer than 100-150 m. with the placement of the electric
power station at the center of the camp the extent of the cable lines from it to
the users is optimum. The positioning of the wardroom alongside the electric power
station, in addition to convenience in day-to-day living, makes possible its heat-

ing by utilizing the heat of the diesel cooling system. Fresh water is also fed
from there to the galley; the fresh water is melted from the snow also due to the
heat from the diesel cooling system.

The positioning of the station camp on the floe itself also is of more than a
little importance. It has been established by experience that the camp should not
be sited at the center of the floe because if the floe is fractured during

17

FIIIIDIFIC1A1.U§I:(RULY
ROI‘OFIWCIAI.1EII(MVLY

movements of the ice. most commonly breaking in half, there is an increased prob-
ability that the territory of the camp will be in the zone of the fissure or
break. For this reason the station camp is usually situated closer to one of the
edges of the floe in the strongest, that is, the thickest, pert.

On an ice island the station camp is usually situated no closer than 150-200 m
from its edge. in that part where it is possible to form a hole through the ice

to be used for hydrological measurements (usually near the edge, where there is
shore ice). -

1.6.4. Advantages and disadvantages of aerial and shipboard methods for establish-
ing SP ("Severnyy Polyus") stations. with the availability of aircraft with skis
with a sufficiently great flight range and payload the advantage of the aerial
method is the possibility of organizing an SP station in virtually any region of
the Arctic Basin.

The shortcomings of the aerial method are: organizational complexity and great
time input in all types of work (ice reconnaissance, construction of airdroees on
ice and their maintenance in a working state, landing of flight leader groups,
loading and unloading of aircraft, supplying of aircraft flights with current.and
prognostic meteorological data, etc.); small economic efficiency of the aircraft
used in this work (small payloads during distant flights); limited use of‘air-
craft during the greater part of the year (due to the polar night and the su-Ier
melting of ice); high degree of danger of all types and stages of work (flights,
landings, loading and unloading), presence at ice airdromes, etc.); rather pro-
longed period for setting up the station: great dependence on weather conditions
(necessity for flight weather simultaneously over a considerable territory).

The advantages of the ship method are as follows: high economic effectiveness (on
a single voyage the ship can deliver to the floe virtually everything necessary
for the life and work of station personnel over a long period of time); all the
organizational measures are relatively simpler; low dependence on weather condi-
tions; considerably lesser degree of danger in carrying out all types of work;
relatively short period for construction of camp and establishing scientific work
at the station.

Among the shortcomings of the ship method are the following: period of use limited
in course of year (August-September); possibility of setting up stations only in
those regions which ships can reach under specific ice conditions; need for using
aviation during subsequent years of station operation. ‘

0n the basis of a comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of the considered
methods it can be assumed that with an increase in the power of icebreakers and
thereby broadening of their possibilities for overcoming great ice masses the

practice of using ships for organizing the "Severnyy Polyus" stations will be ex-
panded.

1.6.5. Material-technical support of 8? stations. The annual consumption of differ-
ent materials and fuel by an SP station (with the average number of personnel being

15-18) is at the present time about 100 tons. If all this volume of freight is com-
pletely unloaded on the floe, together with the mass of all the station structures

18

FOI!0FFKJA1.USBGHNLY
and its technical facilities, this figure increases by a value of approximately
1502. In different emergency situations associated with fracturing of floes, the
station personnel has a very difficult time in saving all the property from the
vices of the calamity and resiting it. And if there is a supply of expendable mat-
erials at the station for several years, with fracturing of the flea a small group
is duly incapable of saving it or moving it to a safe place.

In addition. the great weight loads concentrated on a relatively small area of the
floe cause its flexure in this place and an increase in stresses in the ice
capable of exerting a negative effect on its strength. At some SP stations under
the weight of the load and snow acctnulating between the structures by the end of
winter the floe bends in the region of the camp to such an extent that sea water

penetrates up through the hydrological measurement hole and flows out over the
surface of therfloe. '

For this reason the supplying of the 81’ stations with all types of expendable mat-
erials is accomlished by aircraft twice a year — in spring and auttnn. This sup-
plying of the stations twice a year makes it possible, in addition, to replenish
the personnel twice annually with fresh foods (vegetables, fruits, etc.) and
thereby (which is very important) bring about a reduction of preserved foods in
the diet of the polar specialists. In addition, with deliveries to the station
twice a year it is easier to organize the storage of a relatively small quantity
of food and other materials.

The material-technical supply of operating 8? stations both in spring and in the
autumn is accomplished by serial methods through shore stations situated close

to the SP station. Accordingly, the station personnel construct airdromes on their
floss which are maintained in an operational state during the entire lifetime of
the station.

1.5. Field Oceanographic work

So-called £1614 oceanographic observations are made for studying the hydro-
meteorological and ice regimes of arctic seas at some Soviet polar stations and
observatories situated on the coast and islands. Such observations are made eith-
er at one permanent point (station) or on an oceanographic profile. The places
for fie“ stations and profiles for each polar station (observatory. etc.)
are constant and are established taking into account the physiographic and hy-

drological characteristics of the region. The distance of field , stations from

shore points is different and can be from several kilometers to tens and even up
to a hundred kilometers.

During the sum-er period. if ice conditions permit, {1 14 oceanogra hic‘observ-
ations are made from small boats or whaleboats, and in ter exclus ve y from the

shore ice .

The makeup and frequency of the field oceanographic work are determined both
by the amber of corresponding specialists at a particular polar station and by
the availability of instruments, gear and transportation facilities.

At field stations or on profiles observations are made of the physicochemical

and dynamic characteristics of waters, meteorological (and at some places also
actinometric) elements and state of the ice cover.

19

MWWMY
MWLBEONLY

In the [1.314 ' studies of observatories, in addition to standard observations,
there can be observations of a scientific-methodological character. The duration
of observations at field stations is determined by scientific programs and
can be from one day to a month or more.

In work at field stations at the present time use is made for the most part

of the same instruments and equipment as at 51’ stations and on the "Sever" expedi-
tions. During recent years the transport vehicles employed for the delivery of
people with the necessary gear and equipment to a £131.]. station has been
cross-country vehicles and tractors. In the case of a considerable distance be-
tween the field station and the SP the delivery of people and gear to the work
region is accomplished either by an An-Z aircraft or a helicopter. At some sta-
tions sledge dogs are used for this purpose.

1.5.1. Organisation of field oceanographic observations from ice. A continuous
motionless ice cover (shore ice), whose width. depending on local conditions can
be from several to hundreds of kilometers, is formed from autumn through the end
of spring (September-June) along the shores of arctic seas.

The beginning of field observations from the ice is determined by the times
when the ice cover attains a thickness guaranteeing the safety of movement and
work on it.

The data in Table 1.6 [21] are used as guidance in planning and organising
field work from the ice using surface and aerial transport facilities.

In addition to the data in this table, making it possible to judge what thickness
of sea ice is capable of supporting definite weight and dynamic (moving) loads over
a prolonged time, in the planning of field work an allowance is also made for
the stability of the shore ice, determined'by the character of local conditions.
The most favorable regions for the existence of shore ice over a long tin are

bays, gulfs, islands, sectors of the coast with very incised shorelines, protected
against strong winds capable of smashing the shore ice.

The site in the ice for making field observations is selected where there are

no underthrusts and other major irregularities of its lower surface and also nearby
there must be no hum-necks or other floes which have a greater degree of settling.

The positioning of field stations (and also stations on the profile) within the
range of visibility of the shoreline is determined using reference points situated
on the land by means of .optical geodetic instruments (theodolite, compass, etc.).
Beyond the limits of shore visibility their position is determined either by an as-
tronomical method or using appropriate instruments (thsodolites, sextants. etc.) or
by the route plotting method (using azimuth and the route covered). 0n field '
oceanographic profiles the method of oceanographic observations (including prepar-
ation of the hole for hydrological measurements) for the most part is identical to
that in an oceanographic survey on the "Sever" expedition, and at field sta-

tions is identical to that at the SP stations (see Chapter 2). The requirements on
instruments and equipment remain the same as when working with them at field
stations.

20

mmmmv
Table 1.4

Hininum Thiclmsss of Sea Ice Ensuring Safety of lbvemsnt and Work at a
Stable Negative Air 'ranperature

Transport ' Total mass, tons Hinim ice thick- liinim ahissible
ness. III distance to outer

edge of ice of giv-
an thickness, m

Man in hiking gear Up to 0.1 12 S
loaded sledges with
sledge dogs Up to 1.0 20-25 . 12
Car or cross-country
vehicle - Up to 3.0 ‘0 20
Up to 8.0 50 25
Tractor with treads Up to 10.0 60 30
Aircraft or helicopter
with skis (wheels) Up to 6.0 60(50) 50
Up to 12.0 6000) 100

Note 1. With the appearance of snowfields on the ice novement and work on it are
possible with thicknesses 1.5 tines greater than those indicated in this table. '2.
With the appearance of through fissures, washed-out hollows and thawed patches. in
the ice the use of cars, airplanes (helicopters) or other transport vehicles can-
not be allowed. -

The hydrological pavilion over the measurement hole at field stations, in con- _
trast to at SP stations, can be set up not only in a KAPSh-l tent, but also in a ply-
wood hut, which inside is lined with felt or other heat-insulating material. In the
hot, as in the tent, there is a work table for the titration of. samples, shelves,
lockers for instruments, a winch with a cable and other gear. 0n the hut floor there
is a hatch which foldsback, over which, beneath the ceiling, a block-and-tackle is
placed. During work the block-and-tackle is set over the neasurement hole in such

a way that the hatch opening coincides with it. The hut is also used when runn-

ing field oceanographic profiles. In this case it is constructed on sledges
which are towed by a tractor or a cross-country vehicle. when using cross-country
vehicles the pavilions are son-tines mounted in their bodies. In this case the ob-
servations are made in light tents of the KAPSh-J type which can be dia-ntled.

1.5.2. Features of the organization of field oceanographic observations on ice.
The organization and implementation of f isld work from the shore ice are in
many respects identical to the methods for carrying out work from the drifting ice.
In the organization of oceanographic work at the SP stations and on the "Sever" en-
peditions, as well as on the Soviet Antarctic Expeditions, extensive use has been
made of the experience in carrying out coastal and field hydro-steorological
work at polar stations. In turn, nany organizational and technical (instrunsnts,
gear, etc.) attainments of the 8? stations and "Sever" expeditions are being intro-
duced at polar stations into the practice of field oceanographic work. Por ex-
ample, such oceanographic instrussnts and equipment as the BPV current meter, MRI:
bathoneters, ”Severnyy Polyus" winch, KAPSh tent, PDKO but and others have cone intc
use in field work.

21
M WHOM. USE ONLY
FOI:OF?1C1Al.lEﬂE(HULY

A special feature of field work is the delivery of specialists and supplies to
field stations and to oceanographic profiles on the ice by use of surface

vehicles. Only at individual stations is use made of aircraft or helicopters. Such

excursions on the ice for field work are made each month during the course of

the entire winter and spring. when making field oceanographic observations it

is necessary to adhere to some safety rules [88]:

-- it must be taken into account that after the shore ice attains a thickness ade-

quate for movements and repeated crossings in individual places there can be see-
tors of thin and weak ice;

-- constant weather and ice condition observations must be made;
-- movements must be avoided during blizzards. The storm must be waited out in a
tent, the body of a cross-country vehicle-or in a snow shelter;

- crossings through hunmocked sectors of ice (especially fresh hummocks) must be
avoided;

- there must be special care taken when there are fissures and seal holes. Broad
fissure (0.5 m or more) are best avoided. If this is impossible, for their cross-
ing it is necessary to lay down floors or bridges of logs and boards;

-- there must be no movement along the ice during darkness along an unchecked
route;

-- when making any crossing of the ice, regardless of the type of transportation
or remoteness of the f1¢1d station it is necessary to carry along an emergency

supply of food, means of signaling and way to communicate with the station, fuel
and means of heating, compass, etc.;

-- it is necessary to check carefully the furnishing of personnel with the necessary
gear prior to every trip to the site of field work or oceanographic survey.

During oceanographic work on the shore ice, especially not far from its edge. a part
of it can be detached with the people still on it. In such a case it is first of all
necessary to make use of available means of rescue (small boats, rafts, etc.) in an
effort to make one's way to the intact part of the shore ice, taking along primarily
food, means of heating (and fuel), signaling and communication, and observational
data. If the evacuation of personnel and gear to the main part of the shore ice is
impossible, a temporary camp is organized on the detached part of the shore ice (if
there is a necessity for this), in its most durable part; everything is transported
there which will be necessary for the life support of personnel (tents, food, fuel,
etc.). All the supplies of food, fuel and clothing are distributed in such a way

that they will last as long as possible. Serious attention is devoted to means for
communication and signaling for the apeediest possible detection of this camp.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1980

22

FOI'OIIWCIAI.IEHE(H§LY
CHAI’TBR lo. TECHNICAL APPARATUS FOR SEA EXPEDITIONS
6.1. Expeditionary Ships

General requirenents imposed on expeditionary ships. The specifics of oceanograph-
ic work carried out in polar seas imposes the following requiruents on expedition-
ary ships: -

— high navigational qualities, that is, the capacity for carrying out safe and ef-
fective voyages in any season of the year, at any latitudes and under the most con-
plex hydroneteorologieal conditions; -

— presence of adaptations ensuring anchoring at considerable depths (to several
thousand meters); _ -

- presence of special apparatus for the setting-out of self-contained buoy sta-
tions and also winches and auxiliary mechanisms for the lowering and raising of in-
struments. In the designing of the ship the nuaber, type and characteristics of the
winches, block-and-tackle, special platforms and other deck equipnent should be de-
signed with allowance for the specific purposes of the expeditionary ship and the
technology adopted for work with the scientific equipment;

- presence of laboratories containing recording apparatus, for preparation and re-
pair of equipment, as well as for prinry processing of observational data. These
laboratories must be of the necessary site and be conveniently placed on the cor-
responding decks.

The typical laboratories on expeditionary ships, carrying out a complex of, hydro-
meteorological investigations, are: a)meteorologica1, b) oceanographic, c) hydro-
chemical, .d) hydroacoustic and geophysical. e) interchangeable purpose (dependent
on the purpose of the investigations). Ice laboratories must be present on ships
carrying out oceanographic work in the polar regions.

The presence of a shipboard electronic computer center is extremely desirable.

Expeditionary ships are complex engineering conplexes consisting of several subsys-
tems organically linked to one another and interacting with one another (Fig. 6.1).

The complex consists of the following subsysteas:

- Navigational control of ship 1. Includes navigation instruments and equipment
for plotting and determining the position of a ship, control panel and also connec-
tion with other subsystene.

Control of the ship's engines 2. There is apparatus for monitoring and regulating
the principal and auxiliary engines of the ship, electric notors and other auxil-
iary mechanisms (active rudder, rudder controls).

23
”MUSEUMS
Pig. &.1. Engineering complex of Scientific research ship. 1) navigational control of
ship; 2) control of ship movement; 3) stabilisation control; A) control of elements
for data collection and processing; 5) control of auxiliary apparatus; 6) control

of external cemmunication; 7) control of auxiliary equipment.

Control of ship stabilization 3. This includes different systems for the damping
of rolling and stabilizing apparatus. It makes it possible to maintain an invari-
able spatial position of individual instruments or groups of instruments during
rolling.

Control of elements for data collection and processing a. It includes complexes of
systems of sensors and recorders for hydrometeorologicsl and other parameters.
Such complexes can be situated directly on shipboard, can be lowered over the
side on an electrical or supporting cable, and can also be placed autonomously in
the sea (buoy stations). In certain cases they are carried aloft in rockets,
balloons and helicopters from the ship's deck. In addition, provision is made for
the reception of hydrometeorological information from aircraft observatories and
artificial earth satellites. The processing of observational data is with small
mechanical calculators or electronic computers. and in the case of large ships -
in a special electronic computer center.

Control of auxiliary apparatus and instruments 5 for supporting hydrometeorological
and other observations: special winches, booms, cranes and platforms.

Control of external communication 6. Includes apparatus for radio communication.
teletype communication, radar, hydroscoustic instruments, etc.

Control of auxiliary equipment 7 -- shipboard booms. fire systems; rafts and small
boats present aboard the ship. -

Principal types of ships employed in expeditionary work in polar regions of the
world ocean. Special ships of a so-called "ice class" (Table 6.1) are used in icy
seas.

The most promising are the following types of ships, intended for expeditionary
work in the polar regions of the world ocean.

24

llll(lﬂﬂ(1Al.UGB(liLY
Technical-operational characteristics Type of ship

"Issledovatel'" "Dnitriy "Professor
Ovtsyn" Vise"
Length, m 56.7 67.0 123.9
ﬂidth, n 9.3 11.8 17.0
Draft, n 6.1 6.6 ' 6.1
Displacement, tons 1125 1600 6930
Engine power, HP 1000 2000 8000
Speed in open water, knots 11.5 16.0 17.0
Length of autonomous voyage, days 35 ~---- 50
Ice class L-l In. L-2
Crew, persons 25 30 ' ' 85
Scientific personnel, persons 15 12 ' 50

1. Ships of the "Issledovatel'" type. These are used in conducting a patrol hydro-
meteorological service, investigations of the interaction between the ocean and
the atmosphere, and also for carrying out geological and radiological investiga-
tions. The sailing tine and region are unlimited, with allowance for entry into
broken ice. It is assumed that in the coming years this type of ship will become
the nest important for the State 00-ittee on hydrometeorology and Environmental
monitoring. '

The ship has provision for the duping of rolling, making it possible to carry out
work even when there are considerable waves, and also a rudder control apparatus.

For scientific research work the following winches are installed on the‘ min deck:
LBROK-l,2 (cable length 12,000 m) with a controller and crane; LB-SS (cable length
1,200 n). In addition, there is a manual damper for work with the Dirt (CH-15)

current meter.
An LETR-7 winch is installed on the ship for the placement of ebyssal buoy stations.

The ship is outfitted with two hydrological, a hydrochenical, an aerological, a
radiosynoptic and a meteorological laboratory. There is a special apparatus room
for the "Heteorit" radar, the "Husson" system and the "Bereska" apparatus, which
makes it possible to carry out a full couple: of radar aeroneteorological observa-
tions.

2. Ships of the "Dmitriy Ovtsyn" type. These are intended for carrying out hydro-
graphic and oceanographic investigations both in the Arctic and in other regions
of the world ocean. The ship is reinforced at the ice level and has means for the
damping of rolling.

The ship has hydrographic, geological and other laboratories outfitted with every-
thing necessary for carrying out scientific investigations.

25

“WWW?
HOI1OFFIJAI.UUE(NNLY

3. Ships of the type of the scientific research vessel "Professor Vise.” These
are intended for carrying out multisided scientific investigations in any regions
of the world ocean.

The ship carries the latest radionsvigation equipment: radars, echo sounders,
LORAN and DECCA apparatus. The ship has means for damping rolling, an active rud-
der and rudder control apparatus.

The deep-water anchoring apparatus consists of two drums holding about 20,000 m of
8-mm cable and a powerful winch ensuring the anchoring of the ship at virtually
any depths. .

This same system, in combination with two loading booms, can be employed in the
setting-out of self-contained buoy stations in the ocean.

The ship has more than 20 different laboratories. The aerometeorological complex
includes meteorological and aerological laboratories and stabilized radar systems,
even during rolling of the ship making it possible to use radar in ascertaining
the precise position of observed objects. The primary converters of the actino-
metric instruments are extended by means of a special boom for a distance of 8 m
in front of the stem, thereby precluding the influence of the ship's hull on

their readings. The weather bureau is situated in the meteorological synoptic lab-
oratory and in the radiosynoptic laboratory, outfitted with radio receivers and
"Ladoga" phototelegraphic apparatus. An apparatus for the launching of meteorolog-
ical rockets is situated on the stern deck. There is a shipboard electronic com-
puter center. Powerful radio transmitters ensure the transmission of the collected
information fron any point in the world ocean to reception centers.

The ship carries equipment for carrying out a full complex of oceanographic invest-

igations (Fig. 6.2). There are six electrified winches for working with batho-
meters, bathythermographe, photothermographs and instruments for measurements of

currents o

In the vertical sounding of water masses use is made of sounding bathe-eters for

automatic measurement of water temperature and salinity at drift to a depth of
2,000 m. while the ship is proceeding on course the current velocity and direc-
tion are measured with an electromagnetic current meter (KNIT). The three hydro-

logical laboratories contain EHIT recorders, a wave meter, ATsIT apparatus and oth-
er instruments, as well as equipment for a hydrochemical analysis of sea water.

6.2. Navigation of Expeditionary Ship in Ice

"hen implementing expeditionary work in the polar regions of the world ocean the
navigation of ships occurs amidst the drifting ice, constituting concentrations

of individual fields and floes, which under the influence of the wind and currents
change their continuity, and also amidst a continuous fixed ice cover - shore
ice. Navigation in a region of concentration of icebergs is a special case.

The passability through ice is dependent on the type, properties and continuity of
the ice cover and on the technical-operational characteristics of the ships -
strength and reinforcement of the hull and engine power.

26

INDI‘OIIICIAI.Il§li(IiLY
Fig. 4. 2. Basic hydrometeorological equipment of ships of the type of the scientif-
ic research ship "Professor Vise."

KEY:
l. Meteorology 7. Automatic buoy station
2. Act inometry 8. Bydrophone
3. Waves 9. ATaIT apparatus

6. Oceanography
5. Electronic computer
6. Aerology

Depending on the type and continuity of the ice cover the navigation of ships is
in three regimes of movement: 1) on variable courses in order to avoid concentra-
tions of continuous ice or individual large ice formations (extensive hummocky ice
fields, icebergs); 2) forcing of the drifting ice along the stipulated_course with
a forced decrease in the speed of movement for safeguarding the hull aL the time
ofwnmmmwuhmekq3)wumuucmummsuﬁumiuorwnehem

n thrusting regime.

We will examine two rates of ship movement which are used in ensuring safe naviga-
tion in the ice [81]:

maximum attainable speed - the speed which the ship can develop under definite ice
conditions with use of total engine power (with given reinforcement of the hull);
maximum admissible speed - the speed which is determined by the designed strength

of the ship's hull, for the most part its prow (under the condition of damage-free
collision of the ship with the ice).

For safe operation of the ship in ice it is desirable that the admissible speed
somewhat exceed the attainable speed. -

The determination of the maximum safe speed at which a ship can move in drifting
ice of different thickness h and extent r (or mass 0, - rh) is accomplished using
the graph (Fig. 4.3). For this purpose Vad, - f(Dr) and Vadm -f>(Dr) are compared
on the graph. If the curve of attainable speed lies below the curve of admissible
speed the ship can fully use its power for movement in broken ice without fear of

27

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USB(NVLY
FOI‘OIIICIAI.IEHE(NVLY

inflicting damage; if the curve of attainable speed lies above the curve of admiss-
ible speed the ship cannot use the full power of its power plant.

As a convenience the 1g Dr values are plotted on the xpaxis in place of the abso-
lute value Dr.

The change in the speed of ships is primarily dependent on the type and continuity
of ice cover (Fig. 4.4).

With an ice continuity up to 6 scale units the greatest speed losses are observed
during navigation in large broken ice, and with an ice continuity above 5 scale
units -- during movement amidst ice fields.

The general character of decrease in the speed of movement of the scientific re-
search ship "Professor Vise" in the ice is determined by the equation

2

vice - a3 + b3 + c, (4-1)

where B is ice continuity, in scale units, a, b, c are empirical coefficients de-
pendent on the type of ice and the technical characteristics of the ship.

During movement in the wake of a powerful icebreaker the decrease in speed in the
ice is less than when moving alone. With an increase in ice continuity there is an
increase in the difference in speeds when proceeding alone and in the wake of an
icebreaker (Fig. 6.5).

The navigation of ships in the ice when they perform expeditionary work has its
specific features. For example, ships of the "Dmitriy Ovtsyn" type first of all
carry out expeditionary work in ice with a continuity of not more than five scale
units, which in most cases makes it possible to move along a stipulated run or
section. Second, movement of the ships occurs at a stipulated speed Vstipo which
satisfies the most effective operation of the instruments (echo sounders, EHIT

apparatus. etc.). With such a speed the engine power is not fully used and the
decrease in speed in the ice occurs more intensively than during free navigation.

The forcing of continuous ice occurs in a thrusting regime [20] and is determined
by the expression

IEQ;:£L;: ( ;
[3P . ult(imate)] F3 M” +_k,t'

(6.2)
where R is the actual thrust of the screws, H;Z§is the coefficient of suction of
the screws; [i is a coefficient characterizing the configuration of the hull; B

is the ship's width, mg kg and k3 are empirical coefficients for each type of

ShiP: (Yul: is the ultimate bending strength of the ice, N/mzz 1 18 ice thickness,
ll. '

P. A. Gordiyenko, A. Ya. Buzuyev and G. N. Sergeyev [35], analysing in detail the
degree of influence of the principal parameters of the state of ice on the rate

of movement of ships of the ice class and icebreakers, established that the rate
of movement of ships in hue-lucky ice decreases the greater relative to the speed

28

FilltlﬂﬂCIAl.lﬂﬂE(ﬂ'LY
in even ice the greater the degree of hmmocking of the ice; during the period of

melting the speed increases with an increase in the degree of ice destruction; in
continuous even ice of one and the same thickness during the period of its melting

the speed is considerably greater than in the developing ice during the autun-win-
ter months; an increase in ice destruction by 1 scale unit leads to an increase

in the speed of ship's movement on the average by 202 in comparison with the speed
of movement in the ice with a degree of destruction of 1-2 scale units.

__‘ f__., ..._.-...-_._

'w

   

Fig. 6.3. Dependence of admissible (1) Fig. 4.15. Losses in speed of novsment
and attainable (2) speeds of ship of the during navigation amidst ice of dif-
class In. on extent of drifting ice. Vship ferent types and continuity for ships
- speed at which ship can safely inact of the type of the scientific research
on edge of ice field. ship "Professor Vise." 1) large broken
Vy.) ice; 2) small broken ice; 3) ice fields.

 

0 1
. O 6 8 I"
mute.” Ice continuity, units

Fig. 10.5. bosses of speed for ships of the "mitriy Ovtsyn" type. 1) when carrying
out expeditionary work; 2) during autonomous navigation; 3) in wake of icebreaker.

In an examination of the influence of the principal parameters of ice on the speed
of ship movement it is necessary to take into account sons difference in the char-
acteristics of Antarctic and Arctic ice. D. D. Haksutov [81] notes that in autun
and winter in Antarctica the broken ice rapidly freezes together, heavy snowfalls
and blizzards level its surface with the formation of fields rising 100-150 cm

above the water surface. with a snow layer of 100 cm or more. It is difficult even

29

MWLUSIONLY
FOR<0FFHJAI.08840NLY

for icebreakers to force such ice and it is frequently inpassable for the trans-
port ships generally employed for navigation in the ice.

Shore ice, under the weight of snow saturated with water, sinks somewhat. These

unconsolidated layers constitute a considerable impediment to splitting of the
shore ice during its forcing by a ship. In addition, the "cushion" of sea ice and
snow forming along the sides and stem also creates additional resistances. Some-
times even in operation in "runs" at the time of forcing of.the shore ice the ship
advances only insignificantly. These qualities of Antarctic ice are not taken into
account by formula (4.2).

The icebergs in Antarctic seas make difficult the navigation of ships and consti-

tute a serious danger for them. During navigation in Antarctic ice the ships must
have radar systeas making possible the tinely detection of different types of ice-
bergs and they must have adequate engine power and maneuverability in order to
avoid collision with icebergs.

As a unified index of ice navigation conditions. P. A. Gordiyenko and A. Yu. Buzuyev

introduced the concept of the coefficient of difficulty of ice navigation Kd1f,
which determines the ratio of the time expended on movement of the ship along the
track under specific ice conditions to the time expended on movement along this
same track through open water.

The general expression for the Kdif parameter is

[It ushere- - Lﬁz Linn Lﬁig (4,3)
”inp- open] ’ Kdif yap 50+Vs-u so + +Vl-s S. I 30 '

where V0 is the speed of a ship of a particular type in open water, knots; so is the
total extent of the considered track, miles; sshore’ $9.10. sopen is the extent of
sectors with different (unifdrm) ice conditions (shore ice, continuity of 9-10
scale units, open water respectively). miles; Vshore’ V9_10 are the ship's speeds
under stipulated ice conditions during an individual voyage, knots.

Table 4.2 gives an example of computations of novement of the scientific research
ship "Professor Vice" in different kinds of ice and gives the corresponding coef-
ficients of difficulty in ice navigation. -

Features of implementation of oceanographic work during navigation in ice. Among
the expeditionary ships it is ice-hydrological petrol (IE?) ships which most fre-
quently must enter into the ice. The principal tasks of the I“? are observations
of changes in the ice and hydrological regime of the ice edge zone and the opera-
tional transmission of this information to the sea operations staffs along the
Northern Sea Route. For solving these problems the In! ships deter-inc the geo-
graphical position of the its edge or individual concentrations of ice, ice con-
tinuity. form, extent and age of drifting ice, and also the form of the fixed
ice. During recent years the tasks of the 18? include oceanographic studies which
are carried out in-hydrological surveys and along profiles, such work being done
nlong prestipulated routes. when carrying out oceanographic work amidst ice of
different continuity it is necessary that the following circumstance be taken in-
to account. Drifting ice, even thin ice, makes difficult the lowering and raising

30

mmmm'v
of instruments on a cable lowered over the side. For this reason the instruments
must be lowered on the side on which the ice has the least continuity. During calm
weather the rate of ship movement occurs due to the current operative at the entire
depth equal to the ship's draft. This speed is usually less than the speed of move-
ment of the ice in the surface layer of water. Accordingly, the more continuous ice
is situated on the side on which the current is operative. In the presence of a

wind the rate of ship drift is greater than the rate of ice drift and as a result
on the windward side there is a thinning of the ice and on the leeward side it is
less continuoud.‘

Table 4.2

Computation of Coefficient of Difficulty of Ice Navigation of Scientific Research
Ship "Professor Vise"

Number of Time during Length of Average speed Ice continuity Ice Kdif
route seg- which route route seg- in particular in particular form

ment segment is ment, miles segment, knots segment, units

covered, in

hours/minutes
1-2 06 10 29.8 4.8 8 HBL* 3.54
2-3 01 45 3.5 2.0 9 KBL** 8.50
3-4 02 40 4.8 1.8 8 KBL 9.40
4-5 ' 01 52 35.2 16.5 4 HBL 1.03

so - 73.3 Kdifav

*Small broken ice . 3.02
** Large broken ice '

If the oceanographic work is carried out in continuous ice it can be recommended
that the ship be anchored to the ice alongside a large floe.

It is best that the cable with the instruments be lowered over the ship's side in

a hole specially prepared in a floe. During summer this can be done using places
where melt water lies on solid ice or in large fissures. It is not recommended that
a cable with instruments attached be lowered into leads since they frequently change
their width and can close up completely.

The sounding lead or base methods, described in detail in [103], are used for de-
termining the joint drift of the ship and floe.

When navigating amidst the ice it is always necessary to take into account the in-

fluence of low air and water temperature on the implementation of oceanographic
work. For example, with supercooling of the current meters in the open air (at a

negative temperature) after their lowering into the water ice overgrowths are form-
ed on the instruments which make difficult the rotation of the current meter

blades and sometimes completely stop them. With supercooling of bathoaeters it is
common to observe cases of nonactivation of the triggering-mechanism of the baths-

meters. It is difficult to take samples from the bathometer as a result of

31

FOI‘OIUHCJAI.UEEII‘LY
POI OFFICIAL 188 ONLY

freezing of the barrel of the discharge cock. At a negative air telperture the
glass of the thernoneters is covered with an ice crust, which nukes difficult
readings on the thermometer scales.

cable, as a result of which they move along the cable and in individual cases
break off.

In the case of a low ambient temperature it is possible to recommend the following
measures for improving the conditions for the implementation of oceanographic seas-

urenents. The instruments prior to suspension on a cable must be in a were roan.

heating of such apparatus is accomplished by placenent of containers of hot water
in them. After raising the instruments from the water they must inediately be
placed in rooms where the water samples are taken and readings are node of deep-
water thermometers and current asters.

COPYRIGHT: Gidroneteoizdat, 1980
4.5. Buoy Oceanographic Stations

At the present time extensive use is being made of the placement of oceanographic
instruments on buoy stations for long-tern operation.

One ship can service several buoy stations, which broadens the region of simultan-
eous work. For example, even a small ship (with a displacement of 500—800 tons) can
set out 5-8 buoy stations with 30-40 instruments..The equipment of any buoy station
includes: basic (supporting) and signaling buoys, cables, anchor and signaling
equipment, and also individual or standard-produced oceanographic instruments.

Buoy stations can be a component part of an oceanographic section when they are
set out at control points for detecting changes in the oceanographic characteris-
tics during the time when work is being carried out along the entire section. They
are also set out for prolonged work at sea during specialized observations in en
oceanographic polygon.

It is cos-on to use a scheme of a buoy polygon in which there is a self-contained
buoy station at the center of a square with sides 10-15 miles. At the site of its
placement and at the corners of the square (Fig. A 7) the ship at definite time
intervals nukes one or more abyssal standard observations of temperature, salin-
ity and other oceanographic characteristics.

"hen the stations are placed in the open sea their position can be determined nost
precisely by radio apparatus. Hhen there is no possibility for such a determina-
tion it is possible to obtain the observed position of the station by astronomical
methods. If the buoy stations are set out within the range of visibility of the
shore, their coordinates are determined by ordinary navigation nethods (radar,
direction finding).

  
      

an no an up nun:

Pig. 4. 6. Dependence of duration of acceleration S“ C(1) and slowing 8.10w (2) on
number of rpm for ships of the “Professor Vise" scientific research ship type. 1)
acceleration; 2) slowing.

The search-for the stations can be successful with satisfaction of the following
conditions: the coordinates of the stations at the tine of their placement have
been determined with the maxi-an possible accuracy; the viability of above-water
signaling buoys and narkers has been ensured: a precise reckoning of the course of
the ship at the tins of search has been accomplished; favorable weather conditions
have been selected.'

33
FOI1OFFKJAI.USB¢HVLY
POIOFFKIALIJSEONLY

Station 3 Station 4
an: ant

   

Station 1
an

an: 6m:

 

Fig. 4.7. Diagram of buoy polygon. Pig. b.8. Diagram of forces with exposure
of buoy to wind and current.

    

ﬂour

w"

  

1

Wind 5
‘

i

.

.

Fig. 4.9. Diagram of forces with exposure of buoy to waves. Position of buoy} l)
with undisturbed level; 2) at wave crest; 3) at foot of wave. -

Effect of current, wind and waves on component parts of buoy stations. A self-con-
tained buoy station is subjected to the influence of the wind, waves and currents

creating aerohydrodynanic and mechanical loads on its component parts (Fig. 4.8).

After positioning, the cable connecting the buoy to an anchor is drawn out along
the direction of the current and is deflected from the vertical by the angle cc.
when the angle of deviation becomes constant, the joint pressure of the wind and
current, determined by the OC vector, begins to be operative, and this will tend
to submerge the buoy. In the case of a great buoyancy of the buoy (vector 0A) the
beacon remains at the surface even when there are considerable wind and current
velocities. In the case of a low buoyancy of the buoy and with a strong pressure
of the wind and current the buoy can disappear under the water along the arc of

the circle PB.

34

EIIICIHNCIAI.USEGNVLY
With a direction-of the waves coinciding with the direction of the wind and cur-
rent the maximum pressure of the wave on a buoy and cable will be observed with

the passage of a crest (Fig. 6.9.1). In this case the pressure can be so great
that the buoy will be submerged under the water along a curve with its center at

the point 01. With the passage of the wave slope the beacon occupies the position
2'

If during the passage of the wave its pressure exceeds the pressure of the wind

and current, but is less than with passage of the crest, the beacon and buoy
are deflected in the opposite direction relative to the position 2.

With appreciable wave pressure there is a nodding of the beacon - a deepening

of the beacon on the crest and its emergence from the water at the foot of the
wave.

For the proper placement of buoy stations and their normal operation under storm
conditions it is necessary to compute the loads on them in accordance with [103].

Displacement of deep-water stations under influence of wind, waves and current.
Buoy stations set out at great depths in the open sea can be displaced consider-
able distances from the point of their initial placement under the influence

of the wind, waves and currents.

Such displacements of buoy stations cause considerable errors in determining cur-
rent parameters from the records of automatic recorders placed on the stations.

For computing the aerohydrodynamic loads operative on the buoy station, outfitted
with the most frequently used GM-Sl or "Pinch" buoys, use is made of the expres-
sions:

‘ .-.

for the (aw-51 buoy " 'F"_0"8aa7-L’a+o,15o'+40.8(u+1:—):
[ar - ah - aerohydrodynamic] ($.25)

 

 

for the "Pinch" buoy

II It
F,=0.lBu’Td+0.w+6l-2(“+T)' ((6.26)

where Fah is aerohydrodynamic pressure, a; H is the depth of placement of the buoy
station, m; L is the length of the let-out cable, m; d is the cable diameter, m; u
is current velocity, m/sec; w is wind velocity. m/sec; h is wave height, a; '6 is
wave period, sec.

Under the influence of acrohydrodynamic loads the buoy station is displaced from
the point where the anchor touches the ground. Computations of displacement of the

buoy station with exposure to the wind, waves and currents are made using the for-
mula

0-x“. u“ +. 'M '_. ,
[ar - aerohydrodynamic] P ”4%). ] [20%).] (4.27)

35

INHICIHNC1A1.lEIE(N‘LY
Fl!!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEli(ﬂ‘LY

where D is buoy station displacement, m; P is the mass of a running meter of cable,
kg/m.

The aerohydrodynamic load with an increase in wind velocity and wave height increas-
es nonlinearly (Pig. 4.10s).

The displacement D of the buoy station increases rapidly to definite wind velocities
and then with a further increase in wind velocity the displacement of the station

is slowed.

With an increase in current velocity the aerohydrodynamic load rah gradually in-
creases (Fig. 4.10b); it is also dependent on wind velocity.

The displacement D of the buoys in the case of low wind velocities (w - 10 n/sec)
occurs more intensively than in the case of high wind velocities (w - 20 n/sec).

 

n/sec

Fig. 4.10. Influence of wind, currents, waves and length of let-out cable on the
aerohydrodynanic load P and displacement D of buoy station. 1) aerohydrodynanic
load; 2) displacement of buoy station.

36

ltlltﬂﬂﬂCIAl.llﬂE(l‘LY
Fig. b.11. Buoy station of "Kolokol" type. 1) float; 2) natallic cable; 3) tube with
bracket; 6) metallic tube; 5) framework; 6) instrument-automatic recorder; 7) metal

weights; 8) base cable; 9) lower ring of framework; 10) signaling buoy; ll) buoy
line; 12) anchor. ' .

 

Fig. 4.12. Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute buoy station. 1) sup-
porting buoy; 2) main cable; 3) bracket with instruments; 4) anchor; 5) signaling
buoy; 6) lines connecting signaling buoys; 7) additional signaling beacon; 8) lines

connecting signaling beacon.

Hith constant wind, waves and currents the aerohydrodynamic load rah and displace-
ment D increase with an increase in station depth 8 and cable length L.

The acrohydrodynamic load rah increases proportionally to the increase in the total
length L of the cable and the displacement D of the buoy increases nonlinearly

(Fig. 4.10c).

At the same time it can be seen that with an increase in wind and current velocit-
ies and wave height the absolute values of the aerohydrodynamic load Fah and dis-
placement D increase.

37
FUICHWEHA1.USB(HNLY
FIIICNHWCJAI.UBEGDNLV

The aerohydrodynamic load Pah and the displacement D are dependent on buoy para-
meters. Por one and the same wind velocity and current velocity and wave heights
the aerohydrodynamic load P h and displacement D for the "Pinch" buoy will be great-
er than for the GH-Sl buoy especially with a cable length greater than 1,500 m).

Specifics of operation with buoy stations in seas with ice cover. Special designs
of buoy stations are used in regions where drifting ice may appear during the per-
iod of implementation of oceanographic work.

Bottom apparatus of the "Kolokol" type can be used in the case of insignificant
depths (not greater than 10 m) (Fig. 4.11).

At depths greater than 20 m and with the need for suspending of instruments at sev—
eral horizons it is recon-tended that use be made of systems of buoy stations with a
main submerged buoy (Fig. 4.12).

The fundamental features of this scheme are: increased strength of all station cosr
ponents; presence of a sunken main buoy and two or three surface signaling buoys;

placement of an additional signaling beacon at some distance from the site of place-
ment of the buoy station; inclusion in the station system of an automatic cable

disconnector for releasing the connecting line from the anchor prior to the float-
ing up of the submerged buoy.

With the placement of buoy stations with above-water buoys in icy seas it is recom-
mended that the following basic requirements be met: during the period of station

placement the distance to the ice edge must be not less than 30-60 miles; with ap-
proach of the ice edge to a distance of less than 15 miles the self-contained sta-

tion must be raised with the first opportunity; when the ship is in the immediate

neighborhood of the station it is raised at once with the appearance of any threat
from drifting ice.

The checking of proper operation of self-contained buoy stations in icy seas must
be accomplished at least each 10-30 days, depending on specific ice conditions.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1980

38
FIIICHNNC1A1.USEGHVLY
5.6. Evaluation of Effectiveness of Technical Apparatus Used in Oceanographic Hork

The optimum planning and organization of oceanographic work must provide for the use
of such technical apparatus as can be regarded as efficient.

The choice of the corresponding technical apparatus is determined by:
1) technical efficiency, by which is meant the possibility of carrying out of ocean-

ographie work at set times in a full volume under different hydromateorological con-
ditions; '

2) economic efficiency, which determines the excess of the coat of the results of

oceanographic work over the expenditures on the creation and operation of technical
apparatus.

In a general case a technical apparatus or complex of apparatus, which under the
condition of implementation of planned oceanographic work requires minimum expendi-
tures, is economically more efficient.

One of the factors in increasing the economy of oceanographic work is a shortening
of its duration, since the operating expenditures on the use of technical apparatus
increase proportionally to the time of its use.

However, in the planning of sea expeditions for the purpose of more efficient use of

technical apparatus it is necessary to take into account the specifics of implementa-
tion of different kinds of oceanographic work.

for example, it is possible to reduce the duration of work along an oceanographic
run by a decrease in the time expenditure in making measurements at each station,
but at a multiseries station the total duration of observations cannot be reduced.

A reduction in the duration of an expeditionary voyage, and accordingly, an increase
in its efficiency, can be obtained by means of:

a) cruising along the most advantageous routes, with hydroeeteorological conditions
taken into account; .

b) use of automated modern equipment and instruments, making it possible to carry
out a stipulated volume of measurements during a shorter time interval.
Efficiency of voyage of expeditionary ship along most advantageous route. Modern ex-

peditionary ships make voyages to a region of oceanographic work and back to the
port of origin reckoned in the hundreds and at times in the thousands of miles.

39

FOIKOIIICIAI.IEII(IULY
MWIBEONLY

In this case it is recomended that the voyage be made along the most advantageous

route by which is meant the route which can be covered in the shortest tile,
selected taking into account the probable hydrometeorological conditions ensuring

safety of the voyage.

If we use cord for denoting the travel time on an ordinary voyage and ti”: for de-
noting the travel tine during the most advantageous voyage, the gain in. travel time

A cmost is determined by the expression

Atmost ' tord ' “0811' (5"0)
The travel time along the most advantageous lrout_e._in ,days_i,s detenined as
l 8
[1' - current, tn“ -§T_—' (5.101)
B - wind-waves] 2 “WW-“l:

l-'
where s is the t-.ta1 route of the ship, niles; Kcur1""’ Kcurj, are the coefficients
of the ship's speed. taking into account the effect of the current on individual

segments of the route; V(wh wave) ,...,V(uh wave) is the ship's speed in the pres-
ence of wind and waves on segment; of the track with different hydro-eteorological

conditions, knots.

Accordingly, if the main task is a reduction in travel time in the region of ocean-
ographic work, it is necessary to select such a route for the ship in whose indi-
vidual segnents there will be minimum total wind-wave losses in navigation speed
and an accompanying current with a considerable velocity.

How we will examine in greater detail the effect which can be obtained for an ex-
peditionary voyage in the case of navigation along the most advantageous route.

with navigation along the mat advantageous route in the region of oceanographic
work and return from it to port we obtain a time gain A cm“, which makes it pos-
sible to increase the time of presence in the stipulated region by Atocsam and
accordingly. also increase the volume of expeditionary investigations or carry
out investigations of a stipulated volume during a shorter tin.

The operational expenditures R per one ship in the case of free navigation without
allowance for hydrometeorological conditions are determined _as follows:

Rord ' cmovetord 4' coceantocean + cstop‘stopo (5.42)

in the case of navigation along the most advantageous route as

Rmsc - clove(t°rd - Atmst) + cocean(cocun + Atocean)+ cscoptatop9(s.‘3)

where Cue“, coca“, Cato? are the daily expenditures 'on operation of a ship during
movement, during oceanographic work and during stopping, rubles; tmove' tocean'
tstop are the durations of movement, oceanographic work, stopping, days.

The change in operating expenditures during navigation along the most advantageous
route in comparison with ordinary navigation is equal to

60

MWWMY
AR " amat ' R0rd ' (C ocean ‘W (5-44)

If the value of scientific information per day is q arbitrary units, during the
time tocean ord it will be equal to

roean ord " t‘ocean ordq' (5.45)

The voluae of scientific information during the time tocean most is

roean most ' “ocean move +At°¢mh ' tocean muq (5.66)
The increment in scientific information during a voyage along the most advantageous

route is
AQMQt - roean m8: - roean 0rd . Atocun Ultq (5"7)

The ratio of the increment of information during navigation along the most advan-
tageous route Aqua to the volume of information in the case of free voyaging
roean is determined by the coefficient of increment of scientific infomtion

KQ ' QA‘ocean most/roean ord- (5-48)

The difference in the daily expenditures on operation of the ship when carrying
out oceanographic work and during free movement is

cocean "' cmove ' Acocean move' (5.49)

The final annual economic effect of navigation of an expeditionary ship when moving
along the most advantageous route is determined by the expression

3 most ' (“most '4 cocean movetocean most + a”?
(5.50)

where K is the specific capital investments; B is the coefficient of efficiency
of capital investments.

It follows from (S. 50) that the annual economic effect is proportional to the co-
efficient of increase in scientific production Kq.

Efficiency of use of automated instruments. During vertical sounding of water mass-
es as a rule use is made of three groups of instruments:

1) series of discretely operating instruments, triggered by means of signaling
weights;

2) series of instruments with an autonomous triggering device;

3) individual instruments with discrete or continuous action.

The duration of measurements with these instruments at a single-series oceanograph-
ic station is determined by the formulas (5.10), (5.16), (5.17).

lo].

“WWW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We will examine what time gain can be obtained when in uniform oceanographic leas-
urements use is made of instruments in groups 2 and 3 instead of l and instruments
in group 3 instead of- 2.

We will use the following notations for instrument groups 1, 2 and 3 respectively:

tlw.raise 1. tlow- aise 2, t ow—raise 3 - time of lowering and raising the in-
strunents, te 1, {exp 2 - urstion of instrment exposure at the horizon; tweight
-- duration ogpfalling of signaling weight; tu. tLZ’ £13 - duration of letting-out
and drawing-in of cable with instruments; Arm 2. ALI , A ‘12 3 is time differ-
ence in letting-out and drawing-in the instruments for each of two cowared groups.

Then for a single oceanographic station of n horizons we will have the following
computation formulas:

ATnl’z " Till ' Tmz " “A tlow-raise1,2 4' Atexp 1,2 +A t1.1.2 + tweight; (5-51)

“m3 ' Tun “ m3 " “tlow-raisel' tlow-raises + texpl +Atu,3 + tweight; (5.52)
ATs12,3 ' T012 ‘ Tn3 " “low-raiser Claw-raise3 + texpz +AtL2.3- (5~53)

For an oceanographic station of In series at n horizons the computation of change in
the duration of measurements is made using the formlas

AT111,2 ' Tml ' 7:12 ' "(atlow-raisel + tu) ‘ (“claw-raisez + ‘12); (5'5‘)
ATull,3 ' Tml ' 1‘33. [(“tlow-raisel + texp) + tLl " tL3] ' claw-raise3‘ (5'55)
Arnzs3 I Th2 - I.” . ntlow—raiseZ - clog-raige3 + “‘9.po + th - “:13. (5'56)

. The advantage of instruments in group 2 over group 1 is that when mking multiseries

oceanographic stations no time is lost in lowering and raising the instruments, lett-
ing-out and drawing-in the cable. and also in lowering the signaling weight. In

each series of measurenents of instrument group 3 there is a greater tins gain in

comparison with groups 1 and 2 both at single-series stations and at nultiseries
stations because for group 3 no time is lost in lowering each instrument to the
stipulated horizon, exposure of the instmment series and dropping the signaling
weights

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1980

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.C'IMPTBR 6. SHIPBOARD OCWOGRAPHIC'IADAR comm (8030)
6.2. SORC Apparatus and Instruments

The shipboard oceanographic radar complex consists of a radar station operating in
the centimeter or nillimeter range, 'an additional linear sweep indicator, photo-
attachment, and also radar beacons and buoys.

The principal components of the radar station are: transnitter, antenna, receiver
and PM (plan-position indicator).

In measurements of oceanographic characteristics it is necessary to know the fol-
lowing radar characteristics.

The mxilun effective range is determined using the theoretical formula

Dmsx - PpullccsAsirrdo ’ '
V '§";<4:;)2 (6.16)

mi

where Ppul'se is the pulse power irradiated by the radar antenna, U; G is a coeffic-
ient characterizing the radar antenna directivityé Pain is the minimum power at the
radar receiver input, H; 3A is antenna surface. s 3 sin is the surface of the ir-
rgdiated object, m2; 6° is the specific effective area of scattering of the object,
I e

The dead zone is the area around the ship within which it is impossible to detect
objects. This area is dependent on antenna height hA, the width of the radar ray
in the vertical plane ﬂ. The radius of the dos; zone is determined as:

0.1. - hi cts . (6.17)
The time of antenna revolution during which a fixed imge of the object is regis-
tered on the radar indicator screen is ﬁlo sec for shipboard radars.

when determining the parameters of ice. waves and currents the observer nust work
with the PPI.

The purpose of the PPI 1.‘ the transmission to the observer of a clear and precise
image of the observed objects and a determination of their position in azimuth
and distance relative to the ship's position.

The bearings of the echo signal pips are determined using the azimuth circle fram-
ing the PPI screen by means of a rotating line.

«'03

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are fired and moving range circles for measuring distances; there is a coun-
ter for neasuring distances.

It must be mandated that the distance free the center of the screen to the echo
signal pip is dependent not only on the distance to the object. but also on the
range scale used, that is, on the maximum distance which can be registered on

the screen during particular observations. ..
- J

Illil n n '

Fig. 6.1. Pulse-coherent phase meter. 1) trsns- Fig. 6.2. Photoattachnent of

mitting antenna; 2) receiving antenna; 3) trans- PPI screen. 1) angle bracket;

nitter;_ A) nain radio block; 5) phase detector; 2) slots in vertical wall of

6) spectra: analyser; 7) registry block. bracket; 3) fork; lo) canera; S)
radar screen.

The following range scales apply for the radars most cox-only used on Soviet ships:

Type of radar Range scales. niles
"OItean" ' 1 2 I. 8 16 32 610
"Don" 0.8 2.5 5 15 30 50
"Intaiya" 0.5 1 2 lo 8 16

The additional linear sweep indicator makes it possible to register echo signals
fron objects in the form ’of pulses whose size and frequency correspond to the re-
flectivity of the objects.

In sone cases the linear sweep indicator is used in determining the energy. fre-
quency and width of the reflected spectrun from the oceanographic object.

A pulse-coherent phase meter (Pig. 6.1) was developed for investigating the change
in the spectrum of radiation with scattering by ice or the wave-covered sea sur-
face. The frequency spectra: of the reflected signal can be deternined from the
instrument by two procedures - fron photographs of the spectru- analyzer screen
and by neans of computations fro- a simultaneous record of voltage from the phase

detector output.

The photoattachnent for photographing the PPI screen by snail cameras is a detach-

able tube in the for: of a truncated cone made of sheet alumina. The lover end of
the tube is set on the outer ring of the PP! and the camera is attached to the

upper end.
(.1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1n the upper part of the tube there is a slot for observing the PPI screen. When
photographs are taken this opening is covered by a flap of closely woven black
fabric.

A photoattachment (Fig. 6.2) can be employed for photographing the PPI screen.

A camera 2 is attached by means of a special angle bracket 1. The camera. by means
of the fork 3 and the slot in the vertical wall of the bracket b, can be moved in
the horizontal and vertical planes. The basis of the photoattachment is a large-
format camera of the PK type (frame size 13 x 18 cm) which with a diameter of

the matching block screen 210 mm makes it possible to obtain photographs at a
scale 1:2.

It is necessary to adhere to two principal requirements when installing any photo-
attachment. First, the photograph plane rust be rigorously parallel to the plane
of the radar image. Second, the center of the negative must coincide with the cen-
ter of scanning of the PPI screen.

An important consideration in such work is the choice of the image scale and the
photosurvey time intervals.

when using small cameras (FED. Zenit, Kiev) the image of the radar screen is ob-
tained at a considerably reduced size. For example, with a radar PPI diameter of

300 mm when surveying on a frame measuring 26 x 30 mm its image will measure 24
mm. In order to obtain an image from a frame at a scale of 1:25.000 when working‘
with a 1.5-mile radar range scale it is necessary to enlarge the negative 11‘.
which results in a marked decrease in the clarity of the photoimage.

When using cameras with a frame width 6 cm it is necessary to enlarge the negative
3.7x and with use of wide-film cameras with the frame measuring 13 x 18 cm an en-
largement of 1.85x is necessary.

Taking these considerations into account, in a radar survey of oceanographic ob-
jects it is possible to reconmend the use of wide-film cameras.

e

Types of radar beacons and buoys used in determining currents. In radar observa-
tions of currents it is possible to use beacons and buoys which consist of the
following principal parts: carrier buoy, latticswork corner reflector, underwater
sail.

In order for the radar beacon to be visible on the radar screen with any position
of the beacon relative to the radar ray it carries sets of several triangular re-
flectors. Experience has shown that rhombic latticed reflectors are most conveni-

ent in work (Fig. 6.3). Such reflectors, with small dimensions, have an adequate-
ly great reflectivity but at the same time an insignificant sail effect.

The size and the shape of the underwater sail for the radar beacon should be such
that despite a relatively small area the sail has an adequately great "water" drag.

An indicated by experience, the best shape of sail is one in the form of four pan-
els, arranged at an angle of 90° to one another. The panels can be attached rigid-

ly. In this case the sail has constant dimensions. In the case of a soft attachment

45

IN)! OFFICIAI.IHHE(XVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the sail can be folded. The nest successful dimensions of the sail are those for
which the relationship of the above- and below-water parts of the beacon will be
1:15-1:20. '

when working from ships it is possible to use a beacon of the T-Z type (Fig. 6.6).

The beacon is easily dismantled. All parts can be replaced by similar parts but
of a different size. Thus, it is possible to change the length of the shaft and
the size of the reflector. It is also possible to install an underwater sail of
different size. with the buoy buoyancy factor taken into account.

The height of the above-water part of the beacon and the size of the latticed
"rhonbic" corner reflector were selected in such a way that the radar visibility

of the beacon with a height of the radar antenna above sea level wasﬁs niles.
In addition, it was taken into account that the beacon lust. insofar as possible,
rise insignificantly above the water in order to reduce the wind drift .of the
beacon and for better stability. The optinun ratio is sabove/sbelow - 1/15.

 

Fig. 6.3. Rhonbic latticed reflectors. Fig. 6.6. T-2 radar beacon. 1) Iatticed
corner reflector; 2) Dural jointed shaft;

3) carrier buoy: lo) guide cable; 5) sail
crosspiece; 6) folded sail

The lowering and raising of the beacon can be scconplished annually by two observ-
ers from a small boat or frou aboard ship by means of a boon. In individual cases

portable buoys of the “-2 type can be used [103, Fig. 18.2]. Such a radar buoy has
an adequate buoyancy factor and rises above the water to the height of the reflec-
tor plus 1/4 part of the float. The ratio of the above- and below-water parts of
the “-2 buoy is 1:8. with a pyranidal reflector (30 en side) the reflectivity is
Seff - 37 n . In observing N-Z buoys with such reflectors a radar with a lO-n anten-

na tracks buoys for 3 miles. But with waves over class 3 the reflected pulses fro-
such buoys are cluttered on the radar screen by echo signals from waves.

106
MMWONLY
6.3. Method for Radar Survey of Ice

Three procedures are used in a radar survey of ice: visual observation: of ice on
the PPI with subsequent plotting of the ice on a blank nap; photographing of the
PPI screen and mosaicing of the photographs; determination of the sea area occupied

by ice and its continuity within the limits of the range of visibility of the cor-
responding radar scale.

In naking observations of ice on the PPI screen it must be remembered that sea ice,
depending on extent and hummocking, gives a reflected signal which varies in inten-
sity. As a result, there will be extremely different ice images on the radar screen.

Low, smooth floes are very poor objects for detection as a result of their small
vertical dimensions and unfavorable configuration. For example, even continuous ice
does not give images on the radar screen. This is attributable to the fact that the
radio ray is almost tangentially incident on such ice and the radar receiver re-
ceives so little energy that there will be no echo signal on the screen. Such an ice
field can create a pattern on the radar screen which is similar to the image of a
polynia.

Thus, during a calm, when there are no signals from waves on the radar screen, it
is impossible to be sure what is responsible for the absence of echo signals -
whether because there are no waves or because there is continuous ice cover near
the ship. In this case it is necessary to take into account a number of additional

indirect criteria (decrease in water and air temperature with approach to large ice
masses).

The clarity of the signals reflected from the ice is increased with an increase in
its unevenness and with its rise above the water. Individual small and large broken
floes of different extent give clear echo signals on the radar screen.

On the PPI screen it is easy to see the edge of the continuous ice from the direc-
tion of the open water. '

 

Fig. 6.5. Detection of icebergs by radar. a, c) weakly reflected signals, b) strong-
ly reflected signals.

Floating fields and fragments of fields give strong reflections, which as a result
r\f their movement change their position and form. If the broken ice again freezes

together, numerous "flanges" are formed where the ice freezes together. Such ice
gives a great many echo signals nonuniformly arranged over the screen.

Large icebergs with almost precipitous sides are usually good objects for detection.
Icebergs with gentle sides give a mirror reflection in definite directions, as a
result of which the echo signals from them are weak (Fig. 6.5). Such icebergs, even

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of very considerable extent, are not readily detected. Icebergs which have partial-
ly gently sloping, partially steep slopes, may be poor or good objects of detec-
tion, depending on the slope facing the radar.

With a calm sea in a fog high and large icebergs are detected at a distance up to
15-20 miles, whereas their fragments, depending on extent, are detected at a dis-
tance up to 2 miles.

'waves on the sea exert an influence on the detection of individual hummocked floes
on the screen. When there are moderate waves individual large ice fragments give

clear echo signals; at a distance up to 1.5 miles it is even possible to differ-
entiate the form of the individual floes. Hith an intensification of waves above

class 6 the images from individual large ice fragments are cluttered with echo sig-
nals from waves.

Photographing of PPI. A radar survey can be carried out by photographing of the
radar image of ice on the PPI screen. At the time of photographing of the PP! screen
a special ice radar survey log is used for entry of the characteristics-of the par.
ticular ice formation, observed visually, the distance to it, the course angle or
hearing to the object of the survey and radar scale.~Bach of these photographs

gives some idea concerning the nature and quantity of ice in a particular region

of the sea.

A radar can be used in the mapping of ice conditions in the region of expeditionary
ship navigation by the successive photographing of the selected sector of the sea
surface.

It must be taken into account that since the radar image on a moving ship constant-
ly changes, one photograph gives only a static picture corresponding to some one
point at which the ship is situated at a definite moment in time.

Experience has shown that a necessary and adequate condition for carrying out this
work is photography, carried out successively from three position points of the
ship. Accordingly, the photographs must have a triple overlap. Depending on the
distance between the boundary of the zone of observations and the ship's track it
is necessary to select the radar range scale which should be used in carrying out
the photographic work. It is recommended that the working surface of the PP! screen
be limited to 6/5 of its radius.

The photographic base between successive photographs and the PPI range scale is de-
termined as
I Bph - 0050": cos CA, (6.18)

where ”max is the maximum range of visibility at a given radar scale, miles; CA is
the course angle at the boundary of the zone along the edge of the PPI screen, °.

The time interval in minutes between two successive photographs can be computed us-
ing the expression
t - éosph/v, _ (6.19)

48

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where V is the M's speed, knots.

The mosaicing of the photographs is accomplished by the matching of the course
plotted on the dghotograph and on the basis of the distance covered by the ship be-
tween the name I’of two successive photographings of the object.

Determination of ice continuity. When determining its continuity K it must be take
en into account that in connection with the peculiarities of the image of the echo

signals on the PPI screen there is a so-called "apparent" ice continuity It,”
[106].

The sea surface, covered with ice 31“. within the limits of the area of radar ata-
tion resolution Sr”, is determined by the dependence

Iii
sice " l‘sres " a In Dseco, (6.20)

where c is the velocity of radio wave propagation. m/sec; ‘5 is duration of the radar
pulse. sec; 7 is the width of the antenna directional diagram in the horizontal
plane. '; D is the distance from the ship to the observed object, m; 91s the in-

clination of theradar beam to the horizon. '. -

'Hith a mean cross-section of the flee darn the apparent continuity within the lim-
its of the area of' radar station resolutuon is

 

5. km -
=-—Dsec0.
[CP ' mean; It - ice] K,” ' 2'1 M. (6.21)
6

It follows from formula 6.21 that the "apparent" ice continuity In in the case of

P
real continuity K changes in dependence on pulse duration ‘6, determining the used
radar range scale and the distance D at which ice continuity is determined.

Since with a change in the 9 angle in the range 0-20' the sec 9 value changes from
'l.0 to l'.l; in formula (6.21) we will assume that access 1, then the actual contin-

uity is determined using the formula ._
K - Kaw9°d§m (6.22) .
‘6 .

Figure 6.7 is a graph for determining the actﬁal‘.’ ice continuity on the basis of the
"apparent" continuity with different pulse durations 6 and changing distance D. Us-
ing formulas (6.20),, (6.21) and (6.22), as well as Fig. 6.6, it is possible to draw
the following practical conclusions:

It is evident that K - only at the distance

90.12
”app ' m" . (6.23)
ct?
Proceeding on this basis, when making radar observations of ice it is necessary to
set the movable range circle at the distance D - ”app in such a way as to be able
to estimate continuity within the limits of the zone where the error in determining

K is minimum.

“app

 

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In determining the continuity of finely broken ice it is necessary to use large-
scale radar scales (with a pulse duration ‘6' 0.1“ set).

For large broken ice a sufficiently reliable determination of continuity is possible
only with large scales, but with a pulse duration f- 0.5ﬂsec.

A determination of continuity of field fragments requires the use of small scales
with a pulse duration ‘6 - 0.5usec.

For fragments of fields with dmean greater than 400 m and ice fields a determination
of the actual continuity gives extremely approximate results.

 

 

Fig. 6.6. Determination of actual continuity K of ice with dmean .- 100 m on the ba-
sis of "apparent" continuity K, p for different pulse durations and varying dis-
tance D. 1) ‘t - 0.12psec, D - 8.5...l.5 mile; ﬂ - 0.5Psec, D - 3 miles; 2) ‘L-
0.5psec, D - lo miles; 3) 1, . 0.5 psec, D - 5 miles.

6.1.. Use of Shipboard Radar for Measuring Static Characteristics of Waves

At the present time it is possible to define two methods for observing waves by
means of a shipboard radar.

Nave observations on PPI screen. In this method the image of waves is photograph-
ed on the radar PPI screen. A camera of any model is mounted over the radar screen
at a constant focal length by means of a special tube. lhe exposure time should cor-
respond to the period of one antenna rotation. In this case there will be a full
circular scan of the wave-covered sea surface. If the exposure time exceeds the
period of radar antenna rotation there will be double exposure on the photograph.

The course line and the azimuth circle must be present on the radar screen for
orientation when taking photographs. Observations of the statistical characteris-
tics of waves are made at the times when photographs are taken.

When using this method it is important to know what minim and maximum lengths of
sea waves can be observed, taking into accomt the technical parameters of the
specific. shipboard radar station.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 6. 2

Minimal Lengths of Haves Rm Observed at Different Radar Scales as function of

Distance. a
Distance froa Radar scales, miles
ship to wave D,
tiles 0.8 2.5 5.0 15; 30; 50
"Don" radar JD - 25 n JD - 35 I JD - 80 a JD - 150-200 II
0.2 26 36 80 200
0.5 30 39 82 —-
0.8 36 - -- --
1.0 — 68 86 203
2.0 - 76 103 210
2.5 - 89 116 ~-
3.0 - - 127 223
6.0 - - 153 239
5.0 — - 182 258
Continuation
Distance from Radar scales, miles
ship to wave D,
miles 1.0 2.0 6.0 8.0
"Okean" radar 50-201: [n-26n 50-33" fly-.150-
0.2 22 27 60 168
0.5 27 32 65 -- .
0.8 31 37 69 178
1.0 37 39 53 181
1.5 -- 68 62 3'"
2.0 -- 59 72 199
2.5 . - - 82 --
3.0 -- - 90 . 218
6.0 -- — 112 240
5.0 - — —- 260

The minimal: dinensions of sea waves, which can be deter-ined using a radar, are
computed using the formula

 

I .
al=VOD+¢Ds (6.24)

where 31, is the minimum distance between two crests of a sea wave at which the
pulses reflected from the. are still visible separately on the radar screen. I; J D
is the minim distance at which the wave crests are visible separately in depen-

dence on resolution in distance I, . and the distance D from the radar to the wave,
a; OLD is the minimum distance at which two wave crests are still visible separate-
ly as a function of resolution in angle d , n.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Om
2.0

 

O 5

   

roe OWL use ONLY

   

0 0 In

Fig. 6.7. Minimum dimensions of waves observed with Dr radar. 1) scale I - 1 km;
2) scale II - 2 In; 3) scale III - 8 kn.

J 6

5 6

    

I 8

in

Fig. 6.8. Dependence between wavelength X and distance D. 1) "Don" radar. scale 0.8

nile; 2) LPr radar, scale 0.54 nile.

Table 6.3

Maximum Wavelengths 0m as Function of Distance D Between Radar Sat andhave Crest

D miles

0.08
0.12
0.26
0.36

"Don"
scale
0. 8
mile

890

780
630

llokun"

scale
1. 0
mile

1150
1050
912

LPr
scale
0. 56
mile

600
560
420
270

nniles

0.108
0.50

0.60
0. 72

”Don"
scale
0. 8
nile

480
460
260

70

"own"

scale
1 . 0
mile

815
800

690
505

LP):
scale
0. 54
mile

105
65

Formla (6.24) is used in computing the minim wave dimensions Asia which it is
possible to observe for different scales of ”Don" and "Okeaa" radars (Table 6.2).
Computations indicate that the minimum wave lengths which it is possible to observe
using these radars increase with increasing distance of the waves tron the radar
and with transition from large to smaller scales.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hence the practical conclusion can be drawn that in observations of sea waves
using the "Don" and "Okean" radars it is necessary to use large scales 0.8, 1.0,
2.0 and 2.5 miles, and also make observations near the ship.

 

Fig. 6.9. Photograph of radar image of wave—covered sea surface, n - a m, ).-60 m.

The use of the LPr (pilot's guidance) radar for determining the characteristics of
sea waves (Fig. 6.7) is highly promising. Its high resolution, about 0.3° in angle.
and with a range of 5-6 m. makes it possible to observe the minimum dimensions of

waves with a length of 5—8 m, that is, virtually from the moment of their develop-

ment in the sea.

In computations of the maximum wave lengths which can be observed at different
scales of the shipboard radar it is necessary to take into account the circum-
stance that the height of the crest along the wave front is different and accord-

ingly. the intensity of the pulses reflected from individual parts of the crest
is noc the same. Therefore, in order to obtain an objective picture it is neces-

sary to trace a wave along the entire length of the crest on the radar screen.

In order to compute the maiimum length of a wave whose crest is completely visible
on the radar screen the distance D and the wavelength A are expressed in fractions
of the radius R of the radar screen. Then the dependence (Pig.'6.8) between these
parameters is determined by an equation of the type:

v+0390-o}42-— o. (6.25)

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equation (6.25) is used in computing the maximum lengths of the waves which can
be observed at the greatest scales of the "Don," "Okean" and LPr radars as a
function of the distance between the radar and the wave crest (Table 6.3).

Since even in the open sea the wave lengths rarely exceed 200 m, on the basis of
computations it can be concluded that using the "Don," "Okean" and LPr scales

it is possible to observe the largest waves along the entire extent of the crest.
However. it must be remembered that with D) 0.75 R there can be cases when the
the largest waves cannot be registered along the entire length of the crest. In
order to observe such waves it is necessary to adhere to the distance D:f0.75 R.

Thus, a mandatory condition for use of the two-dimensional method for observing
the statistical characteristics of the waves by a shipboard radar is the separate

represencation of pulses on the screen from two adjacent wave crests. It is also
desirable to trace the reflected pulses along the entire length of the wave crest.
The interpretation of the radar photographs of waves and the determination of the
statistical characteristics of the waves is accomplished in the following way.

First the photograph is used in determining the general direction of wave propaga-
tion on the basis of the form and radar screen position of the so-called oval of
wave reflections. Such an oval usually has an asymmetric position relative to the
center of the radar screen and its more elongated part is situated on the wind-
ward side (Fig. 6.9).

The direction of the waves is determined along a line which divides the elongated

part of the "oval of wave reflections" in half. The accuracy in determining the
direction of waves is assumed to be t5°.

The wave length is determined by measuring the distance between the wave crests
directly on the radar screen photograph with the image scale taken into account.
For this purpose segments of straight lines are drawn; these are perpendicular to
the direction of wave propagation, through the brightest reflected pulses. The dis-
tances between the segments is measured with an accuracy to 0.2 mm on the basis of
the zones between the scale range circles; then the distances are averaged by zones
and with allowance for the image scale are converted to wave lengths in meters.

 

Fig. 6.10. Echo signals from waves on radar linear sweep Screen.

The mean values of the wave lengths, obtained on the basis of data from a radar sur-

vey of sea waves, can be used in computing the mean period of the waves using the
formulas of spectral theory [24]:

54
FOR 0FFNJAI.USE|3NLY
a) for unsteady waves

;— i.
“ |.o4' (6.26)
b) for well-developed waves
1 .
'3 V136 (6.27)
c) for swell
?. i
[.56’ (6.28)

Determination og,statistical characteristics of waves on radar linear sweep screen.
In this method.the echo signals reflected from the waves are studied on the linear
sweep screen of the radar (Fig. 6.10).

It is assumed that the distance between the pulses on the scale corresponds to the
length of a sea wave. It is also possible to measure the velocity of propagation of
waves which nove along the marker sweep in the course of 10-15 see.

A modification of this method has been developed in the Soviet Union. In this meth-
'od it is not the shape of the reflected signal which is studied on the linear
sweep, but its energy, frequency and spectral width.

The spectral width of the reflected signal is related to the parameters of sea
waves, as pointed out by n. M. Fuks [122], by the expression

all V7}. (6.29)
8‘
where 15f is the spectral_width of the reflected signal, Hz; g is the acceleration
of free falling, n/secZ; h is the mean square height of sea waves, n; I'is the lean
period of sea waves, sec.

 

It can be seen from formula 6.29 that the spectral width 13f of a reflected signal
increases with an increase in the height and frequency of sea waves.

The spectral width of the reflected signal is measured using a special attachment
connected at the input of the radar videochannel. The attachment indicator makes

it possible to make observations of change in voltage, which is proportional to the
spectral width of the reflected signal.

6.5. Radar Method for Determining Currents

“sheep and sequence of observations of currents using radar beacons. The range of
observations includes: 1) determination of ship's position by reckoning or observa-

tion; 2) registry of beacon position at a particular nonent in time; 3) observation
of wind and waves.

The ship's position is determined by the usual procedures employed in navigation.

In each specific case the procedure selected is that which gives the maximus ac-
curacy in determination.

55

was omcm. we may
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Individual positions of the radar beacons are registered on the PPI scales with
subsequent plotting on work sheets or a map. The bearing is read from the circular
radar screen with an accuracy to 0.5° and distance is read iron the lovable range
circle with an accuracy to 0.01 mile. At the same time the ship's course is read
from the PPI scale.

The time intervals between successive readings on the radar scales are selected
taking into account the velocity of the registered current and the employed radar
range scale. The minimum time interval between two readings must be such that two
successive pulses from the beacons will be visible separately. It is evident that
the time intervals are considerably reduced with an increase in current velocity
and increase with transition from one range scale to another.

In addition to the readings on the radar scales during observations of movement of
the beacons each half-hour a determination is made of the wind velocity and direc-
tion, as well as the direction and height of waves. All the data from radar observ~
ation of currents are plotted in a special log "Radar Observations of Currents."

The following work procedures have been developed for determining currents by the
radar method from a ship: 1) determination of current elements using a single radar
beacon and 2) determination of current elements using several radar beacons.

The details of the method for determining currents by different procedures have
been set forth in [50, 103].

Determination of vector of currents using data obtained by radar observation of
movement of beacon. If observations of radar beacons are made under conditions of
considerable wind drift (relationship w/u)’102) the total drift of the beacon is

Vdrift'

The vector of total drift Vdrift during the observation.period is obtained in the
following way. The individual positions of the radar beacon are plotted on the
work sheet or map on the basis of the distance and direction at the moments of
their determination. By connecting the initial and final points it is possible to
obtain the total drift vector during the time of observation.

A number of procedures have been proposed for discriminating the current vector
from the total drift vector [30, 77]. However, in order to solve the problem of

discriminating the current vector by the method proposed by these authors it is
necessary to know the coefficient of beacon drift.

The following procedure can be used successfully in the mass processing of data
from radar observations of currents.

It follows from expression (6.8) that “cur - vdr ft - v ift’ [here Vdrift is

the velocity of angular drift, Vdrift' is the ve ocity 0 general drift]. The
wind drift vector can be determined from expression (6.9). In this case the direc-
tion of wind drift is assumed to coincide with the wind direction (o‘drift -0Lw).
By finding the values thift' and c‘drif: it is possible to determine the cur-
rent velocity “cur by use of a vector circle or using the ”Tables for Processing
Observations of Currents at Sea" [79].

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Photosurvey of sradar images of beacons for determining currents. Observations of
surface currents with use of radar beacons can be ads by the method of a photo-
survey on the radar screen.

The essence of such observations is as follows. Individual positions of the radar
beacon saving in the current are registered by a photosurvey of the radar screen
at definite time intervals on a single frame. which makes it possible to obtain
the pattern of successive mement.

In order to obtain the vectors of the surface current on the photograph, and not
the vector of total angular drift. it is necessary to carry out detailed observa-
tions using beacons for which the ratio of the above- and belowuwater parts is not
less than 1:15. ' -

Only under such conditions will the wind drift of the radar beacons be absent or
not exceed 101 of the angular drift of the beacon in the current.

The size of the image on the radar screen is also dependent on what radar range
scale is used in making the observations. However, the choice of the radar range
scale is dependent on the duration of observations of movement of the radar bea-
cons and on the velocity of their movement. It is evident that the range scale
should be selected in such a way that the length of the hourly current vector
does not exceed the limits of the radar screen. '

Table 6.6
Range Scales of "Don" Radar Used in a Photosurvey as Function of Observed Current
Velocities
Current velocity, knots 0.5 1.0 2.0 3.0 6.0 5.0
Scale I I II. II II III

For selecting the scales it is customary to use special tables (Table 6.10).

When photographing the radar screen it is necessary to predetermine the ainimum time
intervals between successive exposures on one and the same frame. These time inter-
vals are determined taking into account the minimum resolution with respect to' hear-
ing and distance to the edge of the radar screen for the corresponding scales. The
tine intervals between successive exposures on one and the same frame must be such
that on the photographs it is easy to see individual pulses from radar beacons.
These time intervals are obviously dependent on the scale of the photosurvey and

the current velocity (Table 6.5).

The duration of exposure for each successive photograph is usually 1-2 revolutions
of the radar antenna (about 6-8 sec).

In order to obtain clearer images of reflected pulses on a single frame it is neces-
sary to take the first photograph of the radar screen with range circles and a
course scale.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

Table 6.5

Minimum Tine Intervals Between Individual Photographs on Single Frame as Function
of Current Velocity and Photosurvey Scales on Screens of "Don" Radar, minutes

Current velocity, knots Radar scale
I II III IV
0.5 6 20 60 ' 90
1.0 3 10 30 105
2.0 2 S 15 20
3.0 l 3 10 15
6.0 - 3 6 10

Subsequent photographs on the same franc are made through black paper with a small
aperture (1-2 In) which is moved under the necessary reflected pulse from the

radar beacon. In this case the radar conditions are quite clearly depicted on the
screen.

If such a radar survey is made at many points over some water surface and then
such photographs are mounted, it is possible to obtain a map of surface currents
in the region of interest.

The mounting of individual photographs is accomplished by matching one and the same
reference points and positions of the ship on successive frames. which mt be
accomplished with some overlap. The central points of the survey and the time in-
terval between exposures are marked on the next frame for scconlishing the over-
lapping of the photographs; this is done in advance, in dependence on the map
scale and the scale of the radar survey.

Accuracy in determining current and observation error. The accuracy in determining
a current when using radar beacons is dependent on the scale of the radar and on
what distance the observations are made from the ship.

For example, the "Don" radar ensures a determination of direction to the object
with an accuracy to l' and a determination of distance on scale I of 0.20 cab. on
scale II — 0. 35 cab and on scale III - 1.5 cab.

The probable error in determining current velocity is determined by the expression

2
M-;"—',+-")- (6.30)

where A u is the probable error in computing current velocity, knots; r and r2
are the radii of the circle of error in the first and second determinat one of
the position of radar beacons, miles; t is observation time, hours.

The positions of the radar beacons are registered by the radar with respect to hear-
ing and distance. Accordingly, the radius r of the circle of error can be deternin-
ed using the formula

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m l/ (%)’+ AD'. (6.31)

where 0 is the distance to the radar beacon, nilee; A D is the error in the measur-
ed distance, Iiles; 8 is the error in the true bearing. '.

If in the first and second neasurenente the position of the radar beacon is deter-
mined by the distances 01 and 02 respectively, the error in determining current

velocity is deteqined:
”-4 e '
Au-—— 3 ——]/ (E)(D.+D.)'+2w. (6.32)

Using this formula it is possible to determine the probable error in determining
current velocity when observing radar beacons.

For exalple, for the "Don" radar the error in determining current velocity using
scale I does not exceed 0.07 knot, on scale II - 0.1 knot with a distance fron

the ship up to 2.5 niles and with a distance free the ship between 2.5 and 5 miles
is not greater than 0.2 knot.

An inportant practical conclusion can therefore be drawn: it is advantageous to
make observations of currents near the ship; This also governs the duration of ob-
servations: insofar as possible it lust be reduced to the minim. tine interval
during which it is possible to obtain reliable intonation concerning the current
vector.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoisdat. 1980

59

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOI4OIIICIA1.IEHE(MQLY

AUTOMATION OF COLLECTION OF OCEANOGRAPUIC DATA AND MATHEMATICAL SUPPORT FOR DATA
PROCESSING ON ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS

CHAPTER 7. SIGMA-S SHIPBOARD INFORMATION UYDROMBTEOROLOGICAL AUTOMATED SYSTEM
(SUDOVAYA INFORMATSIONNAYA GIROMETEDROLOGICHESKAYA AUTOMATIZIROVANNAYA SISTEMA)

7.1. Purpose and General Principles of Structuring of System for Scientific Research
Ships

The key role in oceanographic investigations in the ice-free polar regions is played
by the scientific research fleet, the scales of whose use during recent years have
increased appreciably. The need for increasing the efficiency of use of ships in the
solution of scientific problems of polar hydrometeorology and a sharp increase in
the volumes of collected primary information have advanced new requirements on the
methods for carrying out experiments and the instrumental base of investigations:
this has led to the need for automation of the collection and processing of data
from shipboard observations. It has been necessary to create an automated informa-
tion measurement system for scientific research ships as a local link in the branch
automated hydrometeorological system [116].

In the creation of an automated system it is possible to achieve a reduction in the
productive cycle for the collection of hydrometeorological information, an increase
in the productivity of labor and efficiency of scientific research, as veil as the
possibility for obtaining qualitatively new data on the natural processes transpir-
ing in the hydrosphere and atmosphere.

The development of the system was proceeded by an analysis of available experience
in the construction and organization'of shipboard automated systems aboard the sci-
entific research ships ”Akademik Vernadskiy" and "Mikhail lemonosov" and also aboard
ships of the United States, Great Britain, Canada and Norway. A review of these sys-
tems is evidence of the diversity of principles of their design (in the structure
of the systems and makeup of the measurement and computer apparatus). which is a
reflection of the differences in the level of technical apparatus for collection

of information. As common features in the organisational structure of the systems
one can mention that they contain measurement complexes linked in informational and
technical respects with the electronic computer of the shipboard computation center
(SCC) either directly through communication channels or through an intermediate
buffer unit. The sec electronic computer is linked to an on-shore computation center
(OCC).

Research ships carry different types of computers -- from intermediate-class elec-
tronic computers to minicomputers.

In the case of centralized data processing the scc has one intermediate-class elec-
tronic computer. In a decentralized variant there are several computers servicing
self-contained groups of equipment. The systems have a hierarchical structure [la].

60
IND! OI!‘C1A1.II§II(HWLY
It nust be noted that there are two trends in the creation of automated systems.
One of these involves the creation of narrowly specialised systems for studying
microscale phenomena in the ocean (turbulence, fine structure, etc.), similar

to the systems of the Marine Hydrophysical Institute, Ukrainian Academy of Sci-
ences. Another trend involves the development of systeas oriented to solution 4
of a broad range of research, so-called standard problems. Such systems function,
for exaaple, aboard the scientific research ships "Discovery" and "Oceanographer"
(NOAA, United States), belonging to the multipurpose or universal class of ships

[9, lb. 19]. BHF‘iﬁ can be noted that such a classification has an extremely er-
bitrary character. -

Worthy of note is the experience in creating self-contained measurement links with
minicomputers, in. eneral forming an automated system for data collection and pro-
cessing, aboard:t scientific research ship "Atlantic II." A distinguishing char-
acteristic of this system is that it is at two levels and is decentralised [132].
With respect to organizational scheme, the experience in automating observations
aboard NOAA ships in the United States is useful; this indicates the desirability

of creating shipboard automated systems with their division into classes in de-
pendence on the displacement of the vessels [130].

The application of the principles for creating a shipboard automated system is de-
termined by the specific characteristics of the investigated object, by the level
of technical outfitting (makeup of the measurement complexes, role of computer
equipment in the process of processing, accumulation, exchange and use of collect-
ed information) and is dependent on the technological scheme of the process of ex-
perimental observations and further movement of information. It is desirable that
the process as a whole be automated, not individual technological operations or
types of investigations [19, 70].

Within the framework of the problem of automation of standard shipboard hydrometeor-
ologieal observations the technological process of collection. checking, processing,
accumulation (storage) and dissemination (exchange) of data can be arbitrarily diva
ided into the following stages.

1. Collection of primary data. There is automatic measurement of parameters of the

medium, registry of the results of measurements (in digital form - on a technical
carrier and digital print-out units; in graphic form - on visual display units;
in analog form -- using curve plotters and automatic recorders [14, 19]). In this
stage the initial information is obtained, it is prepared for input into shipboard
computers, a visual critical checking of data is carried out, routine conclusions
are drawn concerning the course of experimental investigations. '

2. Input of results of observations on a technical carrier into the electronic comr
puter of a SCC for checking the quality of information, partial computer process-
ing and conversion of data in accordance with the computation model.

3. Output of data from the SCC computers, registry of the results of computations
in representative form for carrying out a speedy analysis of the results of inves-

tigations, registry of the true values of the parameters on a technical carrier for
exchange, dissemination and incorporation in the data bank. In this stage there is

also assurance of control of the experiment and active intervention in methods
and apparatus used in measurements.

61

FOI‘OIIICMULI13l1NWLV
InltoflIJAl.U§E(HVLY

Io. The transmission of data on a technical carrier to the scc of another scientific
research ship or 066 [14, 19, S3. 55].

5. Input of data on a technical carrier to the electronic computer of the 0°C, full
mathematical processing of the results of observations with use of information from

the data retrieval system (data bank); registry of initial data on a technical
carrier.

In this stage provision is made for an objective analysis and generalisation of the
results of experimental investigations; documenting of data in graphic form and
long-term data storage; exchange and dissemination of data on a computer carrier;
coordination, planning and optimization of control of a field experiment.

The cited generalized description of the technology of collection, checking, pro-
cessing, dissemination and storage of hydrometeorological data for scientific re-
search ships shous that for the entire process of movement of information from
the moment of its receipt to the time of its use there is a characteristic hier-

archical succession and sequence. The initial stage in the scheme is a measurement
process using shipboard apparatus and the final stage is the process of complete

analysis and storage of data at the OCC in the presence of feedbacka to the ini-
tial levels, whose intensity increases with movement of information to the final
stage. The existence of feedbacks makes the technological process of collection and
processing of information closed, in definite stages giving it the character of an
interaction. It is evident that the level of technological collection, conversion
and use of the results of the observations for a specific type of scientific re-
search vessel is determined by the volume and degree of complexity of the problems
to be solved [19, 53, 55].

The organised bringing together of the sources for the collection of information
with conversion and computation facilities of the research ship in some definite
way at some stage in implementation of the technological process leads to the for-
mation of a data measurement system (nus). The joining together and interaction

of the measurement and computation links of the system are attained by a unifica-
tion of the digital representation of information at the output, equivalence of the
formats of registry of data on a computer carrier, as well as the compatability of
the technical apparatus used in the collection and processing of data.

It is possible to automate the collection and processing of scientific infornation
on ships by three methods [19].

1. By outfitting research ships with electronic computers and measurement complex-
es (MC) in which the registry of data is accomplished on a technical carrier in a
computer code. The data are fed into the electronic computer from a technical carr-
ier through the conputer input unit (ID).

2. The measurement complex is joined to the electronic computer with the addition
of a central control unit and a standard time unit to the system. In this case due
to the diversity of the output characteristics of the measurement converters and
the apparatus for linking the measurement complex and the computer it is necessary
to use matching devices for tie-in of the measurement complex, which leads to a
complexity of the system as a whole.

62
IIIIOIFﬂJAl.USB(I‘LY
3. By developing standardized measurement and information apparatus for the sys-
tem. By joining all the measurement complexes with the shipboard electronic com-
puter, and if necessary, with one another. The requirement of a unified form of
data representation is retained. The system also includes an electronic computer
with which the measurement complexes are joined by the so-called KIOSK complex
(KIOSK - complex for data exchange of shipboard complexes),an apparatus for buf-
fer storage of data.

Taking into account the necessity for the forming of complex data masses from di-
versified hydrometeorologicsl information and compression of data, in the appar-
atus for the linking of measurement instruments and the processor provision is made

for a complex of technical devices for the collection and processing of hydro-
meteorological information.

The multisided processing of information and the preparation of results for documen-
tation are accomplished in an electronic computer in the shipboard computation cen-

tet.

The third method for creating a system is the most promising. Without question, in
the future the problem will arise of a feedback between the electronic computer and
measurement complexes due to the need for automating the processes of regulation

of regimes of the measuring and recording apparatus and the creation of cosputer
methods for monitoring observations in the ocean. However, with the existing level
of development of technical devices the development of the KIOSK complex was a
complex task, technically difficult to accomplish. Nevertheless, the practical ap-
plication of the principles embodied in the third method is extremely useful.

As a result of transformation of the first and second methods for system develop-
ment it was decided to create an aggregated built-up system with a variable make-
up of the equipment which is determined by the functions performed by the system
[14, 16].

The SIGMA-s (Fig 7.1) includes a subsystem for the collection and storage of data
(measurement complexes, recorders for one or two levels of representation of data);
a subsystem for standard processing on an electronic computer in.the shipboard com-
putation center ensuring the processing, checking and documentation of information;
a subsystem for the analysis, storage and regulation of data by means of which the
highest level of processing, scientific analysis, incorporation of data in the in-
formation system and monitoring of research is attained in the computers at the on-
shore computation center. The subsystems are functionally interrelated to one
another.

The algorithm for operation of each automated complex was prepared in such a way
that without precluding the autonomous operation of the measurement instruments
it is possible to join all the automated complexes together in a system [16, 15].
The use of a universal computer with an adequate storage unit and external memory
having a high speed at the level lO‘-105 operations per second in the shipboard

computation center makes possible the routine reworking of the collected data. The
KTS ASOGI complex ensures a linking of the peripheral data collection units with
the electronic computers in the shipboard and_on-shore computation centers.

63

FOI:0I!IC1A1.IKIICHULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 7.1. Structural-functional diagram of SIGMA-3 shipboard automated system.

KEY:
1) Collection and storage subsystem 8) Standard processing subsystem
2) Autonomous measurement complex 9) ms A8001
3) Reel telegraphic apparatus 10) Shipboard computation center
A) Cassette-type magnetic tape stor- 11) Electronic computer

age unit 12) Subsystem for analysis. storage

5) Measurement complexes and regulation
6) Tape puncher l3) On-shore computation center

7) Shipboard measurement apparatus

In oceanographic investigations the specialization of research ships is based on
their scientific purpose, displacement, degree of outfitting with measurement and
computation apparatus, physiographic characteristics of the regions investigated,
methods for the organization of in situ experiments, etc. As a result. the realisa-
tion of the principles for development of an information-measurement system for a
specific ship can be limited to some definite stage in the technological scheme en-

suring the necessary autonomy of a particular equipment group and accomplishment of
the actual volume of data processing.

Thus, in connection with the specifics of use of scienti‘ic research ships it is de-
sirable to introduce a classification of information-massacres: systems, dividing

them into three ranks corresponding to three relatively independent stages in the
technological scheme for the collection and processing of data.

A shipboard informationemeasurement system of rank 111 is intended for outfitting re-
search ships vith a displacement up to 800-1000 tons with limited scientific tasks

and ships carrying out research work en route (for example, ships of the USSR Hari-
time Fleet, USSR Ministry of the Fishing Industry). The information-measurement

61o

MWWONLY
system consists of one or more automated measurement complexes; it ensures the
collection and registry of data on the technical carrier of a standard storage
unit and informational compatibility with the on-shore computation center. The
cowining of automated measurement complexes is accomplished for the purpose of
solving the task in the first stage of the technological scheme. Data are process-
ed in a minimum volume. for which a rank-III system includes a program-controlled
minicomputer.

A rank-II shipboard information-measurement system is intended for outfitting re-
search ships with a displacement from approximately 1000 to 6000 tons. It includes
the apparatus of a rank-III system and a small electronic computer. Rank-II infom-
tion-neasurement systems ensure a compatability of the shipboard electronic computer
with the couputation devices of rank—III information-message“ systems and the on-
shore computation center, the implementation of the first and second stages in the
technological schese for the collection and processing of data.

A rank-I shipboard information-measurement system is intended for outfitting re-
search ships with a displacement of 5000 tons or more, which can be categorized as
multipurpose, in which the volume of data is most significant. It includes rank-III
apparatus and an intermediate-class electronic computer. A rank-I system ensures

compatibility of a shipboard computer with the computation devices in rank-III and
rank-II information-measurement system and the on-shore cowutation center and can

perform the functions of the first, second, third and fourth stages in the techno-
logical scheme [14]. ' -

The problem of building-up individual groups of equipment in relation to a ranking
system has been solved most completely for sctinometric systems and has been examin-
ed in [16].

7.2. Makeup-and Structure of System and Features of Its Functioning

The SIGMA-S incorporates the totality of technical measurement and computation de-
vices joined together for canon purposes and by a cannon functioning algorithm
and intended for the automation of the collection of shipboard hydrometeorological
information, checking, processing and its representation in a form convenient for
further use [llo].

Taking into account the purpose of the system, the measurement apparatus is contin-
ed into independent complexes automating the process of standard measurements and
storing data in the following scientific fields: meteorology, actinometry, tempera-
ture-wind sounding of the atmosphere and oceanography. The most rational set of com-
plexes has been developed and is the basis of a subsystem for the collection and
storage of hydrometeorological information, to wit:

1) marine automatic recording station (MARS -- morskaya avtomaticheskaya registrir-
uyushchaya stantsiya);

2) automatic shipboard actinometric system (ASAS -- avtomaticheskaya sudovaya aktino-'
metricheskaya sistema);

3) unit for the readout and punching of temperature-wind sounding data (in the Ritz-
"Meteor" system) "ORA-3";
I.) wave measurement complex;

65

MMWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5) oceanographic bathometer-sonde complex;

6) autonomous digital current meter (ATsIT -— svtonomnyy tsifrovoy izmeritel' tech-
eniy); '

7) submergible buoy station (PBS - pritaplivayemaya buykovaya stantsiya) with hy-
droacoustic signaling and search.

The first five complexes form a shipboard measurement group of apparatus. The ATsIT
complex, together with the submergible buoy station, forms an autonomous measurement
group of apparatus. Assurance of an informational compatability of individual links
in the measurement subsystem is attained by the development of a single level for

the representation of information at the output of the automated complexes. The means
adopted for this purpose is an intermediate data technical carrier - the punch tape.

a punched tape.

Storage in the form of a magnetic tape in a minicassette has been selected as the
standard intermediate means for data storage. The informational interaction of dif-

ferent technical means or processors in the common system at the necessary time
scale in this case is attained in a second, higher level -- the level of minicas-

sette data storage (KNHL) —- through a special unit for the reregistry of the con-

tents of the minicassette onto a magnetic tape compatible with the electronic com-

puter at the shipboard computation center. The use of this technical carrier makes

it possible to optimize the joint processing and analysis of the results of observ-
ations made at different levels and by different elements of the system.

Some measurement complexes of the system, such as the bathomster-sonde and the ATsIT,
include the cassette storage on magnetic tape feature. Encouraging results have been
obtained with the use of the minicassette storage unit for the collection and stor-
age of meteorological and actinometric information.

The dominating computation link in the system is the processor, whose type is deter-
mined by the rank of the system. For rank-I systems the principal computers are now
the "Minsk-32" and Yes-1020 computers, in whose regime a mathematical support of the
measurement complexes has been created.

For solving the problem of a logical organization of joint work, the computation sys-
tem of different units at a higher level than the level of the punched tape of the
shipboard computation center includes a complex of technical devices for the collec-
tion and processing of hydrometeorological information - the K15 ASOGI (kompleks
tekhnicheskikh sredstv apparatura sbora i obrabotki gidrometeorologicheskoy inform-
atsii). The principal purpose of the complex is providing a linking of the peripher-
al devices for the collection of information with the electronic computer'of the
shipboard or on-shore computation center.

Thus. the subsystem for the processing of data in the shipboard SIGMA-S automated sys-

tem structurally consists of a universal electronic computer and the KTS A8061. These
two elements, with the matching of some functions. and at the same time with

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
adherence to a definite hierarchy in the organisation of the computation process,
solve the problem of checking, processing, documentation, storage, dissemination
of hydrometeorological information and its storage in a memory bank.

INA. ‘ .
The final link in the setup for the collection and use of information in the SIGMA-a
system is the on-shore computation center. The technical outfitting of the on-shore
computation center includes a "Minsk-32" electronic computer and a considerable
array of servicing devices. A data bank is an integral part of the on-shore computa-
tion center; it his the elements of a data retrieval system. The task of the on-shore
computation center in the subsystem for the analysis, storage and regulation of
data is the collection, total processing and generalization of the results of ob-
servations made by different research ships in the waters of the Arctic and Antarc-
tic Oceans. The collected information is the basis for carrying out an objective
analysis of oceanic and atmospheric processes and fields for the purpose of obtain-
ing valid ideas concerning the spatial—temporal variability of natural processes and
phenomena. A scientific analysis is made drawing upon information from the data bank.
An important task of the on-shora computation center is the coordination of invest-
igations and the formulation of recommendations on a scientifically valid organisation
and implementation of experiments in specific regions of the ocean [15].

The long-term storage of the collected information completes the technological pro-
cess of collecting and using the results of experimental investigations.

7.3. Complex of Technical Devices for Collection and Processing of Hydrometeorolog-
ical Information (KTS ASOGI) ,

The complex of technical devices for the collection and processing of hydrometeoro—
logical information (:18 A8061 -— kompleks tekhnicheskikh sredstv apparatury share 1
obrabotki gidrometeorologicheskoy informatsii) as a structural part of the SIGMA-8
system is intended for the organization of joint work and the linkup of the measure-
ment systems of the shipboard information-measurement system with the computation
facilities at the shipboard computation center and at the on-shore computation cen-
ter [71. 108] .

The KTS ASOGI (Fig. 7.2) can be employed in shipboard information-measurement eye--
tens of all ranks for solution of the following problems:

- automated collection and registry of hydrometeorological information arriving
from shipboard measurement complexes on the magnetic tape of a cassette storage
element;

-- primary processing of observational data;

-- output of the results of primary processing to the magnetic tape of a cassette
storage element, digital printout unit and digital indicator based on a cathode ray
tube;

-- reregistry of data from the magnetic tape of a cassette storage element onto a
compatible tape 12.7 mm wide for subsequent processing of the data on electronic
computers of the "Minsk-32" and Yes types. The possibilities of the K18 ASOGI make
possible its use as the basic link in the collection and primary processing of in-
formation st hydrometeorological stations, observatories and observation platforms
not supplied with an electronic computer [14].

67

FINII)FFI(1A1.IX§EZCNVLY
FINI1)FF1CJAI.[EHE(MVLY

p.-

 

Fig. 7.2. Generalized block diagram of complex of technical devices for collection
and processing of hydrometeorological information (K18 A8061).

KEY:

1) Measurement complexes

2) Cassette elements for storage on magnetic tape
3) Printout unit

a) PEXVH "Iskra—lZS"

5) UZSHK

6) Cathode-ray tube

7) Curve plotter

8) Linkup

9) Electronic computer
10) Unit for reregistry of data
11) Storage on magnetic tape

The complex is aggregated and in the above-mentioned makeup is designated as the
"Iskra-lZSl" -- computer complex for the processing of hydro-eteorological inform-
ation. With a change in makeup -- in the complex the reregistry of data unit can
be replaced by a conversion block and a unit for the output of graphic information
(curve plotter) - the complex is designated the "Iskra-lZSZ" - computer complex
for the routine and continuous solution of scientific-technical and engineering
problems. The possibilities of the complex are increased by including in its '
makeup units for linkup with analog sensors and a cathode-ray tube, an external
storage unit. enhancing the memory volume, devices for direct input of data into
the electronic computer, etc.

The informational linkup of the shipboard measurement complexes with the [TS A3061
is accomplished by means of the KNHL elements. The procedure for processing the
results of observations is described in the generalized structural diagram of the
algorithm for the processing of hydrometeorological information.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The individual independent algorithm blocks have the following content:

1) registry of information from the shipboard measurement complex in the KNHL;

2) programmed control of the accumulated information;

3) primary processing and scaling of readings of the primary converters into real
physical values with introduction of the necessary calibration coefficients;

6) display and registry of the results of processing in a decimal form on rolled
tape of the printout unit or on the screen of a cathode-ray tube for checking and
drawing operational conclusions and in the KNHL for data storage and exchange.

In the latter case, if necessary the data are reorganized into the necessary
sequence;

5) reregistry of the KNML data masses on a magnetic tape compatible with the elec-
tronic computers in the shipboard computation center or at the on-shore computa-

tion center (using the data reregistry unit) for full mathematical processing.
statistical analysis, documentation and storage.

The KTS A8001 processor is a program-controllable electronic keyboard computer
(PEKVH - programmoupravlyayemaya elektronnaya klavishnaya vychislitel'naya mash-
ina) "1skra-125." which is intended for making computations in a regime of manual
and programmed control of different characteristics of hydrometeorological series
introduced from the KNHL and keyboard, the output of the results to the KNHL and
other servicing devices [108].

The makeup and technical specifications of the KTS A8001 make it possible to carry
out the collection and processing of data by several methods.

1. The collection and storage of data from the measurement complexes is accomplish-
ed in the KNML. The processing of data follows the replacement of the cassettes.
Such a scheme can be employed if data processing is carried out with s time shift.
In this way it is possible to attain a maximum economic effect because a single
PBKVH can be used for processing information from several measurement complexes.

2. The measurement complex is connected directly to the PEKVH. The collection and
processing of data are carried out simultaneously. It is desirable that the scheme
be used with the operational use of the collected information.

3. After primary processing the data can be stored in the minicassettes of one

of the KNHL constituting part of the PEKVH. With subsequent processing of data
on a more powerful electronic computer the information through the data reregistry
unit is reregistered from the KNHL tapes onto a 12.7-mm magnetic tape.

The KTS A5001 complex makes it possible to unify the systems for data registry in
automated complexes by means of employing a single interface and employing stan-
dard storage of data on magnetic tape in a minicassette.

The incorporation of the complex in the shipboard automated system ensures an in-
crease in the informational level of the system from an intermediate technical
carrier, a punched tape, to a magnetic tape. which considerably increases the
possibilities of storage of great masses of date and long series, as well as their
reproduction.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ATsIT autonomous measurement system and the hathometer-sonde complex include
a KNML component and the processing of oceanographic infatuation can be accom-
plished using the "Iskra-lZS" PBKVH.

0n the 18th voyage of the scientific research ship "Professor Zubov" (December
1975-Pebruary 1976) and the 3P-22 (1976) under real conditions for carrying out
experimental investigations it was possible to obtain positive results with the

linkup of the KTS ASOGI with analog sctinometric and meteorological primary con-
verters.

Thus, the high technical qualities and broad functional possibilities characteris-
tic of the KTS ASQQI ensure that the complex will play the role of a local computa-
tion element of the shipboard automated system, including for research ships not
outfitted with an electronic computer.

7.6. Mathematical Support of System

The mathematical support of the SIGMA-S system is determined as some combination
of specially organized and functionally related programmed computer elements used

in the processing and converting of input hydroneteorological information, in ac-
cordance with the special purpose of the system.

In its most general representation the mathematical support consists of universal
elements and special programs. The universal programmed means ensure an effective
use of a processor and peripheral servicing units. The special programs are in-
tended for computer processing of the measurement results obtained by means of the
automated complexes [15].

The universal elements are dependent on the parameters of the processor (speed,
volume of internal and external memory), its architecture, which in turn are deter-
mined by the class of electronic computer. For example, the "Hinskr22" computer
has an adequately diversified general mathematical support for control of opera-
tion of the input and output units, the organization of interaction of different
technical components and the checking of the correctness of functioning of the
equipment by use of test programs. translation of programs from algorithmic lang-
uages, solution of different standard problems, etc. At the same time, the system-
is servicing of the "Minsk-22" computer, intended for the formulation of programs
from individual modules (reregistry of information from some carriers to others.

etc.), is inadequately perfect.

The known advantages of the "Minsk-32" and Yes computers make it possible to cre-
ate a mathematical support with a better-developed automation level.

Adhering to the materials in [15], we will describe the mathematical support for
a system based on the "Minsk-32" electronic computer.

In its general part the support includes:

1) an operational system - the totality of programmed elements controlling the
solution of problems in the electronic computer in different regimes (multipro-
gram, with separation of time, compatibility, etc.).

70

FIHICHHHCJA1.US£<0NLY
The central part of this system is s program-dispatcher; it includes an archives
of standard programs in the load language;

2) an automated control system - computer tests and a system for the linkup

of the cowuter with automated data measurement complexes;

3) a general prﬂreming system - wide-purpose languages, translators, special
archives of standard programs for translators and program debuggers.

The special part of the mathematical support includes:
-- the AIS - automted information system;

- the SP0 -- programmed control system;

-- the 8K2 -- problem couplex system.

The AIS is a complex of systemic programs intended for the collection, storage,
revision, retrieval, processing and output of data. The shipboard A18 is facto-
graphic, that is, it performs the storage of data on the characteristics of hy-
drometeorological objects. The A18 includes an automated data retrieval system
(AIPS -- avtomatizirovannaya informatsionno-poiskovaya sistema) and a system for
the display and correction of data (801 - sistema otobrazheniya i korrektirovki
informatsii).

The AIPS is a translator-interpreter which accomplishes conversion of cot-armies-
tions (inquiries) from the input information language into the computer informa-
tion language and back. It also performs instruction concerning the character of
data processing. The AIPS operates in the following principal regimes: -
-- initial input and revision of the main data masses;

-- "reconstruction" of hydrometeorological elements on the basis of measurements
in a spatial discrete grid;

- data support for computation problems;

-- data retrieval for nonstandard formalized inquiries.

The data display system is a set of programs for standard printout of data to the
ATsPU and for its output to the display screens. This complex provides for the
programsd servicing of corrections of materials.

The SPU is a set of programs intended for organizing interaction among all the
mathematical support components. It includes the dispatcher of the operational
system, as well as programs for consultation of the measurement complexes in an
automatic interrogation regime. ‘

The sxz (problem complex system) is the largest in volume. It includes:

-- packets of programs for primary and standard processing of observations;

- programs for the statistical analysis of data;

- special programs (nonstandard data processing, navigational and auxiliary prob-
lems).

Programs for primary and standard processing are prepared for all measurement
comlexes, combined into a system. kamples of programs of the first kind are.

for example, programs for the processing of data from the bathometer-sonde, ATsIT
complex, "ORA" attachment, etc. [7, 69]. The concept of primary processing, canon

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for all the measurement complexes, is foraulated in accordance with [56]. That
source includes a block diagram of primary processing in a series of blocks. .

First block. Subprogrsms for input and technical control. created applicable to
codes and models in accordance with which the intonation is automatically regis-
tered on a technical carrier. The control is to check correspondence of the data
masses to the codes (syntactical control), the use of slogisms, etc.

Second block. The sorting and introduction of corrections and calibration coef-

ficients. The distribution of data is accomplished by different elements and the
true values of the measured parameters are obtained.

Third block. Smoothing of the data arriving from the primary converters. There is
correction of the series necessitated by the negative effect of different random
disturbances (for example, in the depth readings of a descending sonde under the

influence of drift and waves. etc.), making use of different approximation and
averaging procedures.

Fourth block. Discrimination of special points and layers. The position of the
portions of the record of greatest interest is refined more precisely. For ex-
ample, the position of the thermocline, inversion layers and intrusions in the
ocean, tropopause and special points in the atmosphere.

Fifth block. Obtaining derivative characteristics. The parameters necessary for
further processing and documentation of information.

Sixth block. Critical analysis. Here there is an evaluation of quality and rejec-
tion of erroneous data by statistical methods based on available information con-
cerning the law of distribution of natural variability of a particular element,
confidence interval of variability of the parameter within quasihomogeneous re-

gions; the matching of the results of measurements of different parameters is ac-
complished.

Seventh block. Obtaining and printout of form of representation. Printout of dif-
ferent generalizing tables and graphs graphically representing the results of meas-
urements and processing and constituting report documents for data collection by
storage centers and ship owners. Data are entered on storage punched tapes and mag-
netic tapes deteraining the level of dissemination and exchange of data on computer
data carriers at both national and international scales.

Eighth block. Preparation and registry of information on long-term data carriers for
the storage and organisation of banks of hydromsteorological data. Data are filter-
ed for eliminating excess and made more compact -- for accumulation of data subject
to storage. Definite information, collected vith large spatial-teqorsl averaging

scales, is subject to storage.

Random information. characterizing small-scale structure of variability. is incor-
poratad in the data bank only in the form of extremal records.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1980

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER 8. TECHNICAL APPARATUS FOR THE COLLECTION AND REGISTRY OF DATA - SIGMA-s
8.1. On-board Data Measuring Complexes

8.1.1. MARS automatic registry system. [MARS - morskaya avtomaticheskaya registrir-
uyushchaya stantsiya] The station is intended for the automatic measurement of hydro-
meteorological parameters in a cyclic program, their primary processing and regis-
try on a computer carrier; graphic registry of actinometer parameters; output of

data to the operator's central display and to a remote display which can be placed

in different positions on the ship; transmission of data from meteorological-actin-

ometric observations along a communication line to the shipboard computation center
[102].

The station ensures automation of standard hydrometeorological observations carried
out on scientific research ships.

The MARS station includes the following apparatus:

-- an array of primary converters;

—- central automation unit;

- operator's central panel;

-- remote display;

- unit for registry and control (telegraphic apparatus, automatically registering
instruments).

The conversion of the hydrometsorological and actinometric information into an el-
ectrical signal is accomplished using the corresponding primary converters, which
operate on different physical principles and have different output characteristics.

The diversity of output characteristics of the primary converters required that
in the design of the station use he made of matching devices, separately for dis-

crete and analog primary converters. which convert different output signals into a
single electric signal, and also are responsible for the preliminary processing and
storage of measurement data.

The data are fed from the matching devices to a conversion unit in which the infor-
mation is converted into a decimal code for visual display on a central display and

into an MTK-Z code for registry with the RTA telegraphic apparatus. In addition.
the actinometric information is fed to the KBP-é automatic recorder.

73
ROIIOIIICIAI.IINE(N‘lN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Visually observed information from the manual input panel is also fed to the oper-
ator's central display. '

Any information from the central display is fed to the‘ unit for forming and sub-

tracting information in which it is converted into the lax-2 code and is fed to
the RTA, and in case of necessity, through the conunication channel to the ship-
board computation center.

From the RTA the information on the punch tape is fed to. an electronic computer.
The unit for forming and subtracting the information organizes the output of the
telegram text to the remote display. .

Time reckoning is with a time unit which produces col-lands for cutting-in the sta-
tion and cutting in the primary converters for preparing for measurements at a fixed
times; it accomplishes synchronization of operation of all the units and registers
and shows the date and time of measurements.

The control unit is cut into operation by commands from the time unit. The control

unit cuts in the measurement channels and ensures registry of the measurement para-
meters on a teletype and the operator's display.

The unit for selecting the primary converters connects to the corresponding match-
ing devices those converters best suited for making measurements.

The principal operating regime of the station is sutomtic, in which it automatic-
ally selects the corresponding primary converters, measures, registers and feeds
out information into the line from the shipboard computation center.

8.1.2. Automatic shipboard actinometric system (ASAS - avtomticheskaya sudovaya
sktinometricheskaya sistema). The actinometric system is intended for the stabil-
ization of actinometric instnnents in the plane of the horizon, automatic point-

ing of the receiving surfaces of these instruments on the sun for the purpose of
obtaining high-quality and comparable data from actinometric observations under

shipboard conditions despite the disturbing effects of rolling [64].

The ASAS system ensures a multisided solution of the problems involved in the auto-
mation of sea actinometric observations carried out for the purpose of measuring
elements of the radiation balance and makes it possible to obtain all the informa-
tion with any discreteness and on any carrier: EFF-09 or KSP-lo tape, ngnetic tape
or using the MARS-l automatic station. The use of the system makes it possible to

inrove the quality of the primary information and broaden the complex of observa-
tions, as well as to optimize observations. It affords definite prospects for the

implementation of a number of special measurements. whose ismlementation under
oceanic conditions involves difficulties. The programs for processing on "Minsk-22"

and “Minsk-32" cosputers make it possible to compute the elements of the radiation
balance and the final results are printed out in tabulated form.

It is desirable that the ASAS system be used simultaneously with the MARS-l sta-
tion. Upon receiving signals from the ASAS system the unit for representative
selection of the primary converters of the MARS-l station can cut in the unshaded

71¢

momussmv
actinometric converters on the port and starboard sides, depending on the position
of the sun relative to the ship. The ASAS systen sends to the unit for the repre-

sentative choice of the primary converters a signal in the form of a voltage cor-

responding to the cut-in sector.

The ASAS system consists of several units which are electrically coupled to one
another and which form. depending on the type of scientific research ship on which
it is installed.-rdi£ferent configuration [16].

The complete ASAS outfit consists of the following units:

-- stabilized central post which includes a biaxial gyrostabilizer and system with
phototrscking of..the sun;

- stabilised posts, each of which includes a repeater indicator unit with systels
having phototracking of the sun and a resote control panel. The repeater indicator

unit stabilizes the instruments in the horizontal plane and the phototracking sys-
tem automatically tracks the sun;

-- remote stabilizers, each of which consists of a power gyrohoriaon and a control
panel. They are intended for the stabilization of the actinomstric instrusents
placed on them.

The ASAS system is controlled from a central post and from remote control panels.

The operation of the system is based on use of the possibilities of power gyroscop-
ic stabilization of instrueents and systens on moving vehicles and continuous auto-
matic direction-finding of the sun using special phototracking systems.

The central post biaxial gyrostsbiliser stabilizes the actinometric instruents and .
system for phototracking of the sun in the plane of the horizon.

In turn the central post gyrostabilizer is corrected by a pendulul correction sys-
tem, maintaining a horizontal position with allowance for the local vertical.

The extensible stabilizers operate autonomously. The stabilisation of the actino-

metric instruments in power gyrohorizons is accomplished by means of the stabiliz-
ing properties of the gyroscopes. -

The ASAS system makes possible the simultaneous accomplishment of actinometric ob-
servations of the following elements, with continuous registry on automatic record-
ers:

— reflected radiation and the radiation balance (using an albedometer and balance

meter, mounted on the gyrohox izon of the remote stabilizer (R82), placed on a boom
extending over the water surface);

75

mommmomx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tests and operation indicated the operability of system cosmonauts and their suit~
ability for stabilizing actinometric instruments in the plane of the horizon and
autosetic heliotracking of the sensing surfaces of these instruments under condi-
tions of rolling and movement of the ship with an accuracy adequate for observa-
tional practice. A comparison of the result of observations made using the stan-
dard method and employing the ASAS-HARS system indicates their satisfactory con-
vergence.

8.1.3. Couples for automatic processing of data from radiosonde measurements of
the atmosphere ("ORA-3"). The "ORA-3" unit is included in the outfit for automat-
ic processing of data obtained with the RKZ-"Heteorit" sounding system and is in-
tended for transformation of the spherical coordinates of the radiosonde (eleva-
tion angle, azimuth, range) into a digital code, together with the frequencies

of meteorological parameters, and also their output to a punch tape for subse-
quent processing on "Kiosk-22" and "Minsk-32" electronic computers in accordance
with a special program [118]. The apparatus consists of elements for the conver-
sion of coordinates and frequencies into a binary code, storage register, punch-
ing unit based on a T-Sl teletype, unit for control emanation of the data to be
punched, unit for input of initial data for punching and a control unit. The input
data for the apparatus are telemetric data on the spherical coordinates of the
radiosonde and the frequencies of the meteorological parameters arriving from the
output of the radar receiver and also the initial and calibration information neces-
sary for processing on an electronic computer.

The processing program ensures the possibility of automatic input of data from the
"ORA-3" complex into a "Minsk-32" electronic computer through a special unit

for the graphic representation of information, standard processing of data and
their registry on magnetic tape. .

8.1.10. Automated wave measurement complex. The complex is intended for measuring
and registry of wind waves. It ensures the collection and representation of data
on waves in a form convenient for input into an electronic computer employing a
(34-62 wave recorder and an analog-recording unit (ATsRD). This apparatus ensures
analog and digital registry of fluctuations of the wave-covered sea surface at a
real time scale. The digital representation of data on a technical carrier in com-
bination with mathematical support of the complex makes possible direct input of
data and their processing in "Minsk-22" and "Minsk-32" electronic computers.

The operating principle of the complex is based on measurement of the resistance
of a wire vertically submerged in the water in front of the ship's stem with the
simultaneous readout of variations of the ship's rolling by means of the primary
rolling converter, lowered into the water at the point of suspension of the wire
wave converter. -

The registry of the output signal of the Chi-62 wave recorder proper in analog form
is accomplished using a “P4 electronic potentiometer. At the same time the sig-
nal is converted into a discrete digital form. the instantaneous state of whose

code is displayed on the display panel of the decoding unit and which is register-
ed on a punch tape by means of a Pia-80 puncher.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
L»...

The organization and control of operation of all units of the analog-digital con-
version system, interrogation and comutation regime, are accomplished by a con-
trol unit. The control unit ensures the operation of the system in three code in-
terrogation regimes: l) automatic and fixed interrogation frequencies; 2) in a re-
gime with triggering from an external generator with a preset interrogation fre-
quency; 3) in a regime of single code interrogation at moments in time selected by
the operator. In each specific case the choice of the necessary interrogation fre-
quency is determined by the maximum admissible interval of discreteness in read-
ings for the greatest frequency of the process to be registered.

For solving a wide range of problems for investigating waves the complex has a
mathematical support, including several programs for checking the measured data
and obtaining the characteristics of the probebilistic-statistical description of
waves as a random process [69].

The full cycle of processing the measurement results provides for three stages: 1)
checking of the initial data mass; 2) computation of statistical characteristics;
3) spectral-statistical analysis.

8.1.5. Oceanographic automated bathometer-sonde sounding complex. The bathometer-
sonde complex [63] is intended for the remote measurement, transmission and regis-
try of the principal oceanographic characteristics: temperature, specific conduct-
ivity, hydrostatic pressure in regimes of vertical sounding or exposure at fixed
horizons in the depth range from 0 to 2000 m (Fig. 8.1).

The complex makes possible the taking of samples of sea water by means of a batho-
metric section outfitted with bathometers of the BH-68 type. The operation of the
bathomaters is accomplished automatically upon reaching the standard horizons or

by command of the operator.

The sounding data are registered in analog form and also discrete form on a tech-
nical carrier adapted for input into an electronic computer for subsequent computer
processing.

The bathometer-sonde complex is carried aboard scientific research ships equipped
with a cable winch and makes it possible to automate the process of collection and
processing of oceanographic data.

The complex includes:

- lowered apparatus with primary converters and bathometric section with 18 batho-
meters;

-- shipboard apparatus, including an instrument cabinet, control panel, remote dis-
play, telephone and registry apparatus system (PL-80 tape puncher, BUM-23 printout
machine, cassette-type unit for storage on magnetic tape (KNHL), KSP-h single-coor-
dinatc automatic recorder, PBS-021 two-coordinate potentiometer);

-- LK-Z cable winch.

The shipboard apparatus controls the operation of the sands and bathometric sec-
tion, converts the received information and displays it on an illuminated display
panel, remote display alongside the winch, at a real time scale - in decimal form,

77

FOI‘OFFRJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and also registers the data on different technical carriers: in a binary-octal form
.1 a punch tape by means of a punch; in decimal form on the digital printout unit
through an electrically controlled machine; in a special format on the magnetic
tape of a minicassette storage unit for the output of data to a specialized com-
puter for the reregistry of data on the magnetic tape of an electronic computer,
such as the "Minsk-32." In analog form the information obtained via one measure-
ment channel is fed out as a function of time on the graph paper of the KSP-b auto-
matic recorder and as a function of depth on the tape of a PDS-OZIH two-coordinate
automatic recorder. Such a choice of recorders is desirable and optimum because it
makes it possible to perform any possible operations with data -- from checking of
the quality, speedy analysis, processing on an electronic computer up to their in-
clusion in the memory units of the shipboard computation center or the on-shore
computation center.

A necessary element in work with the bathometer-sonde is its programmed (mathemat-
ical) support, making it possible to process the measured information on an elec-
tronic computer, obtain the true values of parameters of the sea medium and their
derivatives used in the subsequent scientific analysis.

The authors of [7] describe one of the first programs for a "Minsk-22" electronic
computer which can characterize the level of computer processing of data from the
bathometer-sonde attained by 1974. The program has now been improved and includes
the following structural blocks:

1) computation of calibration equations;

2) input of primary data, calibration coefficients, syntactical, logical control
and elimination of punched tape gaps or control block malfunctions [7, 101].

3) computation of true values of depth, temperature and salinity;

4) computation of derivative parameters;

5) printout of table;

6) plotting of data on magnetic storage tape.

sites

In the archives of shipboard computation centers of the Arctic and Antarctic Sci-
entific Research Center there are programs for the processing of bathometer-sonde
daze on "Minsk-22," "Minsk-32" and Yes-120 electronic computers.

The first temperature-salinity sondes of original designs were developed at the Har-
ine Hydrophysical Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences (ISTOK), and at the Institute
of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences (AIST) [120]. In contrast to the bathometer-
sonde the ISTOK and AIST complexes are intended for the most part for work in in-
vestigating the fine thermohaline structure of the ocean and therefore do not have
a bathometric section. Despite some diversity in the design and circuitry the ISIOK
and AIST sondes do not fundamentally differ from one another. In evaluating the
possibilities of the bathometer-sonde this makes it possible to limit ourselves
only to the characteristics of the AIS? sonde.

For the AIST sonde there is a somewhat greater response of the temperature channel,
a lesser mean square error in measuring temperature undgr static conditions (19‘.

a lesser total random error in measuring temperature CIT“, a lesser mean square"
error in determining salinity crg. However, the differences in the evaluations of

78

FOR omcuu. use ONLY
accuracy in measuring temperature and in determining salinity for the HST eonde
and bathometerbaonde occur only in the third decimal place and therefore for the

most part they are not of fundamental character.

 

Fig. 8.1. Oceanographic bathoneter-aonde.

KEY:
1) Telephone 8) PBS-021m
2) Control panel 9) Instrument closet
3) Control panel display 10) Remte display
lo) Registry apparatus 11) Winch
5) PL-80 12) Sonde
6) BUM—23 13) Bathonetric section
7) KSP-lo 14) Primary converters

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is an extremely significant difference in the accuracy in measuring hydro-
static pressure. The use of a vibrational-frequency converter (vibratone of the
DDV-200 type) in the AIST sonde as a pressure converter made it possible to at-
tain a high accuracy in measuring the depth of instrument submergence and preclude
the appearance of hysteresis, which is an obvious design advantage. We also note
that the time constant of the temperature sensor is close to half that of the

A151 sonde. Accordingly, the dynamic error in sounding with the bathometer-sonde
will be half as great.

Principal Technical Specifications of Sounding Complexes

AIST Bathometer-sonde
1. Temperature measurement range, °C -2...30 -2...32
Conductivity measurement range, mmho/cm 30...71 l7...7l
Pressure measurement range, HPa 0...20 0...2.26
2.24...20
2. Response
temperature, °c 0.008 0.01
conductivity, mmho/cm 0.01 0.01
3. Time constant of temperature sensor, sec 0.35 0.2
4. Error in measuring water temperature, '0
static 0.013 0.025
dynamic 0.020 0.010
total 0.026 0.027
Error in determining salinity,°/oo ' 0.028 0.030
Error in determining static pressure, 2 0.25 1.5 of
upper limit
5. Discreteness in measuring pressure, HPa 0.003 0.1
6. Interrogation cycle, sec 1.26 1.2; 2.4; b.8
9.6
20,08 ' 106; 3.2; 60‘;
12.8 (with
bathometric sec-
tion)
7. Registry and display
PL-80 tape puncher Yes Yes
KNHL digital magnetic recorder Yes Yes
BUM-23 digital printout mechanism No Yes
PBS-21 and KSP-é curve plotters Yes Yes
Control panel display Yes Yes
Remote display No Yes
8. Presence of bathometric section No Yes

Among the merits of bathometer-sonde design we should also include the presence of
a bethometric section which ensures the taking of samples and also a broader pos-
sibility of registry and display of the results of measurements, which involves an
optimum set of servicing devices, including a remote display and a digital printout
machine. The lack of a bathometric section in the AIST sonde precludes its use for
the automation of abyssal oceanographic observations. The representation of the

80

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Another merit of the bathometer~sonde is the possibility of its standard productio
because the complex is made of standard components. Such a possibility probably
does not exist for the AIST sonde because some components of the complex are pro-
duced in limited quantity and are unique, such as the primary salinity converter.

The use of high-response, high-speed sounding apparatus for the purpose of study-
ing hydrophysical fields has now come into wide use. Experience in such investiga-
tions. presented in [84. 120], indicates that it has become possible to obtain
qualitatively new data concerning the thermohaline fine structure of the ocean,
the origin, spatial-temporal variability of different forms of microstructure of
physical processes in the ocean. K. N. Pedorov correctly compares the results of
such investigations with the results of use of a microscope in biology. However,
the practical use of the apparatus involved different kinds of difficulties of a
methodological nature. Complexities arose in the interpretation of data measured

measuring temperature, conductivity and hydrostatic pressure in the ocean by means
of the bathometer-aonde, the problems involved in the interpretation of the col-

lected data and some aspects of use of the complex in oceanographic investiga-

accomplished under in situ conditions, as is indicated by the experience of inves-

tigations carried out on the scientific research ships ”Professor Vise" and "Pro-
fessor Zubov," and also similar studies with the AIST temperature-salinity aonde
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ‘

of actual change in parameters of sea water. In the final stage of the work the
functional dependences between the readings of the sands and the true values of
the measured elements are computed.

Potentiometric primary converters of the Uni-25 type (for depths 0-250 In) and HD-
ZOOT (for depths 250-2000 m) were used as hydrostatic pressure detectors.

The calibration of a precise converter is accomplished using the readings of a
counter unit with a known coefficient under calm weather conditions and in the
absence of a cable slope. The upper limit of the measurement range (180-250 m) is
refined by a determination of depth using temperature-depth meters in the bathy-
metric section. The approximate primary converter is calibrated for the most part
by using the readings of the temperature-depth meters.

Typical calibration curves of the 0114-25 and lib-2001' primary converters are shown
in Fig. 8.2. The graphs show that the calibration curves of both converters are
by nature nonlinear; the nonlinearity, appearing at the upper limit of depths, at-
tains 15% of the measurement range. The calibration curve, with an adequate degree
of accuracy, is approximted by a polynomial in the form -

H—a+bP+cP'. (8.1)

where H is the true depth accordingto the temperature-depth meters or the counter
unit; P is pressure determined with the bathometer-sonde; a. b, c are coefficients
determined by the least squares method.

Accordingly, the problem of calibrating the bathometer-sonde relative to depth es-
sentially involves a determination of the coefficients a, b. c in equations (8.1).

Frequently [26, 62] the calibration curve of the pressure measurement channel is
determined by a piecewise-linear function. Within the selected depth interval,
within which I! - HP) is linear, the true depth value is determined using a linear
interpolation formula.

The standard deviation, cowuted using a great number of measurements at horizons
spaced each 20 m, during lowering and raising is on the average equal for the en-
tire depth range 0.5-2.8 m.

82

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The indicated values characterize the random error in measuring depth with a pre-
cise primary pressure converter in the range 0-220 n, which in general corresponds
to the technical specifications.

 

Fig. 8.2. Calibration curves of primary depth converters in bathoneter-sonde con-
plex.

The fact of a systematic shift in depth readings during the lowering and raising
of the instrument. on the average attaining 2 n, should be noted. It was demon-
strated in [101] by use of the Student test that this difference is significant
and cannot be attributed to random factors. Accordingly, the readings of the pre-
cise primary depth converter during the lowering and raising of the instrument are
not identical. This conclusion is of considerable importance. A depth dispersion
of 2 m in the presence of high temperature and salinity gradients can be one of
the possible reasons for the appearance of hysteresis in the registry of the ver-
tical profiles of observed characteristics of sea water.

The following expression can be used for determining the number of observations
necessary for calibrating the pressc'z channel with the stipulated error

 

0
(In-m. (8,2)
and also the magnitude of the admissible error in measuring depth, which are cited
in [103]. It appears that in order to obtain information on depth with the error

admissible in oceanographic work it is sufficient to make 1-3 measurements which
are made under favorable hydrometeorological conditions.

83

INJI‘OUIICIAI.IIBEI(IVLY

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WWWMY

In the depth range from 200 to 1000 m (MD-2001‘ primary converter) the random error in
measuring depth is 3-12 m, which is 1.2-1.5: of the depth and corresponds to the
technical specifications of the instrtment.

With an increase in depth the measurement error increases, probably due to an in-
crease in scale nonlinearity. However, it is difficult to judge specific errors
without special investigations. Using temperature-depth recorders it is impossible
to register precisely the true depth of sonde submargence because during the time
of exposure of the thermometers the horizon where the instrument is located under
the influence of drift, even under favorable hydrometeorological conditions, can
decrease by 50-100 m. However, the conclusion can be drawn that the approximate
depth converter is of inadequate accuracy. For example. temperature-depth recorders
register depth at the horizons fron 300 to 2000 m [103] with an accuracy exceeding
the accuracy of the approximate depth converter by roughly a factor of 1.5-3. Dur-
ing the ship's rolling and irregular changes in drift (especially under the condi-
tions prevailing in the thermohslocline) an inadequate accuracy in measuring the
true depth of probe submergence leads to the appearance of considerable disturb-
ances in the registry of oceanographic characteristics which in the subsequent an-
alysis cannot be interpreted validly [9b].

The difference in the readings of the lib-2001' primary converter during lowering and
raising is manifested more sharply:

m" -.-. l0“; 05”" =6 I. (8' 3)

These discrepancies are also statistically significant.

As the primary temperature converter in the hathometer-sonde use is made of a copper
resistance thermometer (ETS-Zu) with a fundamental error 30.027‘0. In the course of
operation. due to temporal instability of the parameters of the sensor and elements
of the compensation circuit, there is an additional error in measuring temperature,
which, however, does not exceed the fundamental error. The nature of the temporal
distribution of this additional error is not known.

In order to determine the calibration curve of the tenperature measurement channel
a series of comparative observations is made using a lowering apparatus and deep-
water thermometers of the bathometric section. The observations are made in quasi-

homogeneous layers or layers with a small variability in temperature. It has been

established that the curve fr r the temperature measurement channel is linear and
has the form -

'1‘ - a + ht, (8.4)

where 1‘ is the true temerature value according to the deep-water thermostat; t
are the readings of the primary temperature converter of the bathoneter-sonde;

a,b are coefficients determined by the least squares method or in any other way.
The mean square error in measuring temperature on the basis of a long series of ob-
servations is o.ozs°c, which corresponds to the technical specifications of the

complex. The number of measurements with thermometers necessary for obtaining tem-
perature of a stipulated accuracy is 2-3. An investigation was made in [101) whose

86

POI omau. USE ONLY
purpose was a more precise determination of the scales of the temporal effect

of destabilizing factors on the results of calibration of the temperature convert-
ers and determination of the desirable interval between calibrations. It was found
that the results of calibrations carried out each 100 and 200 hours of work are
virtually identical and the coefficients of the polynomials differ by not more than
0.01‘ for all cases. This is an indication of the stability of the temperature con-
verter curve and the slowness of aging of primary converter parameters.

An inductive-type converter (transducer) is used in measuring conductivity. It con-
sists of two toroidal transformers connected inductively through the sea water.

The voltage across the transformer windings determines the specific conductivity
of the water.

In general, the calibration of the conductivity primary converter is accomplished
similar to calibration of the temperature channel, but due to the complex dependence
by which conductivity, temperature and pressure are related it differs in being
more time-consuming and requires very precise and synchronous measurements. An anal-
ysis of the degree of influence of each oceanographic characteristic on the com-
puted salinity values was accomplished in [26]. It was found that a change in con-
ductivity in the third place leads to a change in salinity by Avl°loo. A tempera-
ture change leads to a salinity change by the same order of magnitude. To be more
precise [120], within the range 5-25' the following expression is correct

Aseo.86m,

that is, the deviation of the measured temperature from the true temperature by 1’c

causes an error in determining salinity of 0.86°Ioo Pressure changes water conduct-
ivity by 122 and in the depth range from 0 to 1000 m this is 1-2.51. In the case of

deep-water measurements the influence of pressure can become decisive [26].

In order to carry out calibration three samples are taken using a bathometric sec-
tion in the layer which is quasihomogsneous with respect to salinity. The use of
the GH-6S electrosalinometer (or use of titration) makes it possible to determine
the true (mean) salinity value at a particular horizon. Then, using data on salin-
ity, temperature and pressure a determination is made of specific conductivity,
which can be obtained, for example, using the nomograms in [31]. On the basis of
the measured and computed specific conductivity it is possible to solve the equa-
tion

B-ap+b, (8.5)

where E is the true conductivity value; 1’are readings of the bathometer-sonde;

a,b are coefficients determined by the least squares method or by a different meth-
0d.

The conversion from conductivity in situ to salinity is accomplished using a known
system of formulas, on the basis of which a special program is prepared for the
processing of data on "Minsk-22, -32" and Yes-1020 electronic computers. The mean
square error in computing salinity on the basis of conductivity under static condi-
tions usually does not exceed 0.02-0.03°ioo.

Comparative observations with the primary converters of the complex and standard

instruments, carried out synchronously in quasihomogeneous layers and under sim-
ilar (static) metrological cpnditions, indicate a high degree of similarity of the

87
FIHIlIFIICIAI.IIIE(lVLY
FOI1OFFKJAI.UBBGINLV

results. However, comparison with the data from bathometric series, as a result of
the asynchronous nature of the observations in space and time, as well as the dif-
ferent inertia of the primary converters, does not yield positive results, in any
case, in the upper 300-m layer, where the natural variability of hydrophysical val-
ues is great. These data can be used only for the qualitative checking of sonde
readings. Source [101] gives an analysis of matched vertical temperature and sal-
inity profiles in the layer 0-600 m on the basis of observations with the bathe-
meter-sonde and standard instruments at two stations in the Atlantic. It is indicat-
ed that the discrepancies in the layers 40-300 m for water temperature can attain
O.3-1.S°C, for water salinity 0.03-0.15°/oo. In the upper quasihomogeneous layer
and in the lower lowbgradient layer they are small. Evidently, in the case of para-
llel measurements with lowbinertia aondes and standard instruments it is impos-
sible to achieve a complete correspondence of their readings due to fundamental de-
sign differences involved in the two methods. The substantially different inertia,
the dynamic error in sounding and the effect of spatial-temporal inhomogeneity of
the sea medium -- all this favors the appearance of a difference between the read-
ings of the bathometer-sonde and observational data at the oceanographic station.

The proper interpretation of the results of measurements with the bathometer-probe
was impossible without thorough allowance for different distortions introduced in
the observation process. The distortions can be of different nature. For example,
they can be caused by design features of the instrument (geometrical dimensions,
inertia, discrete representation of the information at the output), variability of

the oceanographic characteristics or disturbance of the structure of flow by the
moving instrument. The output signal of the complex is a result of averaging of

the field at definite spatial-temporal scales and its primary converters are low-
frequency filters.

Accordingly, all the measurements are accompanied by a dynamic error of low-fre-
quency filtering which is a result of transformation of the random hydrophysical
process by a low-frequency filter [95].

The water temperature, measured with an inertial primary converter, differs from
the actual temperature and is determined [96] by the expression

112) amzwv ‘1‘" - (8.6)

 

where T(z) is the actual temperature; T'(2) is the measured temperature; '61s the
time constant of the primary converter; V is the rate of sounding; dT'(z)/da is the
vertical temperature gradient.

The second term in expression (8.6) 8t -'LVCc determines the dynamic error. For
the surface layer the dynamic error can exceed the random error.

Under average oceanic conditions in the polar regions the vertical temperature gra-
dient characteristic for the layer 0-100 m usually does not exceed 0.1'C/m. With
Vmin - 0.3-0.5 the minimum value St . 0.006-0.0l’. In actuality, in local sectors
of the thermocline the vertical temperature gradient can be substantially greater,
which results in an increase 5t by several times, especially since'sounding with

a minimum rate is not always possible due to technical considerations. This value

of the constant (determined) component 8; can be excluded, taking this into account
in the processing program.

88
F€HICNHICIAI.USE(NVLY
The random part Sit arises during the ship's rolling, which can increase the rate
of lowering of the instrument due to the periodic component, equal to about 0.3-0.5
m/sec, and also due to the nonuniformity of winch speed. This error has the same
value as the constant 5:» but it is difficult to take into account. In general.
allowance for rolling is important in interpreting the results of sounding. It is
noted in [73] that under some conditions the influence of rolling is more important
than the spatial averaging of the primary converter and its inertia. Thus, the ac-
tual error in measuring temperature with the bathometer-sonde is

a? n V(a,)'+(6.)' - 0.097. (a. 1)

There is no dynamic error in measuring salinity since the primary salinity convert-
er is virtually inertialess. But the distortions caused by the dynamic error in
measuring temperature can lead to considerable errors in computing salinity. Dis-
tortions in the determination of salinity due to the inertia of the primary temper-

ature converter can be manifested in the appearance of characteristic wedges in the
salinity profile in sectors with high temperature gradients. However, if the water
temperature is measured later than the measurement of conductivity by a time close
to the inertia of the primary temperature converter, the error in computing salin-
ity, caused by the latter. is compensated. This conclusion can probably be extend-

ed to the bathometer-sonde [123]. In a.study of the thermohaline structure of a
stratified fluid it is necessary to organise a system of constant monitoring and

control of bathometer-sonde operation (the rcia of its movement, frequency of in-
terrogation of measurement channels). Without this the investigations carried out
will not be adequately effective.

There must be optimum matching of the parameters of the moving instrument. In the
case of a high speed the sounding is accomplished rapidly, but (under conditions
of sea stratification due to the distorting effect of inertia of the primary tem-
perature converter) distortions arise in the vertical profiles of temperature and
especially salinity, which make it difficult to interpret the collected data. At

a low speed the influence of the dynamic error can be avoided, but in this case
the time required for implementing the observations substantially increases. An
increase in the interrogation cycle reduces the vertical resolution of the measure-
ments, as a result of which it is possible to overlook interesting structural fea-
tures of the physical processes (inversions, “steps," etc.), whereas a decrease in
the discreteness of the measurements in a definite situation can lead to an excess
of information.

Source [62] gives a description of a variant of an automatic unit developed on the
basis of a bathometer-sonde and an “-6000 electronic computer. The unit makes it

possible to determine the gradients of water characteristics and shapes commands
for change in the rate of movement and discreteness of measurements for the purpose

of optimizing the sounding regimes. It can be postulated that in the future such a
unit will become an indispensable component of the automated system on shipboard.

The thermal inertia of the primary converter and the lowering apparatus, the dif-
ferent conditions for flow around the measuring instrument and the spatial-tempor-

al variability of the parameters of the water medium lead to hysteresis - a de-
viation of the vertical profiles of the characteristic during the lowering and
raising of the sonde.

89

IN3I10IIICIAI.IISII(HiLY
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

He wlii mention the principal distortions arising in this work. The measured depth
of the layers with a high gradient is greater than the true depth during lowering
of the sonde and less than the true depth during its raising. This difference is
proportional to the product V¢ . The measured field distribution is smoothed and
the registered gradients are less than the real gradients. The latter distortion
also decreases with a decrease in Vt , but its minimum value is limited by the vol-
ume of spatial averaging of the primary converter. The totality of these character-
istics, including the geometrical dimensions of the primary converter and the lowb
ering apparatus as a whole, determines the temporal and spatial resolution of the
instrument. The minimum dimension of the registered inhomogeneities and the spatial
resolution of the bathometer-sonde vertically can be determined using the formula

“ﬂ.“VW, (8'8)

where [it is the discreteness of measurement; V is the rate of sounding [120].

With V - 0.5 m/sec and different values of the discreteness of measurements we find
that depending on the cycle of measurements the bathometer-sonde registers the sea
water inhomogeneities having vertical dimensions exceeding 1.2 m, 2.5 m, 4.8 m, 9.6
m. The spatial (and teaporal) resolution characterizes an important quality of the
measurement system, especially in an investigation of small-scale phenomena when a
fictitious nonuniformity can be interpreted as a really existing detail of oceanic

microstructure.

It was demonstrated in [73], for example, how it is easy to take as the limiting
value of the period of internal waves possible in the investigated layer of the
ocean the minimum value of the period, which is dictated by the tactical-technical
specifications of the instrument, its spatial resolution.

The evaluation of the theoretically possible hysteresis has the form:

V‘i-V,
2

Now we will examine Fig. 8.3. All the curves are characterised by a hysteresis,
which is noted in the seasonal thermocline, whereas beyond its limits it is for the
most part absent. It can be noted that in the case of great sounding rates (1.2 ml
see) the sonde understates the thickness of the upper quasihomogeneous layer by 2-5
m during raising versus lowering. Naturally, a minimum [51(2) value is noted in those
cases when the rate of sounding and the interrogation cycle are less. Substituting
the actual values of the parameters into e reesion (8.9), it is easy to confirm
that for the cases (a, c, e) the computed T(z) values are close to the values
taken from the graph, but somewhat less than the latter. The difference can in part
be attributed to the effect of short-period internal waves, which during the time
of sounding change the vertical position of water layers with different character-
istics. K. N. Pedorov [120]. for establishing the real degree of hysteresis, recom-
mends the use of a rs diagram on which there is exclusion of the dependence of tem-
perature and salinity on depth, and accordingly, the influence of internal waves.
Another reason for the exaggerated £5T(s) values may be an inadequately correct de-
sign and construction of the instrument, as was the case for a model copy of the
bathometer-sonde, when the large volume and nonidentical conditions for flow

 

”(1).. «3,. (8.9)

90

FDRiDFFKJAl.USE(ﬂVLY
around the primary converters during the lowering and raising led to an exceed-
ingly great hysteresis. In this problem it is also important to know the precise
value of the time constant for the primary converter, whose temperature is fre-
quently greater than that indicated in the certificate due to the influence of
the inertia of the recorders and the thermal effect of the instrunent use. How-
ever, in standard production the design of the bathometer-sonde has been substan-
tially improved, its dimensions have been considerably reduced and the primary
converters have been moved to the lateral surface, which led to a definite in-
crease in the reliability of instrument readings due to a decrease in its hyster-
esis [101].

Therefore, the most probable reason for the relatively small hysteresis in the
bathometer-sonde is hysteresis of the DIM-25 primary depth converter, which is a
characteristic property of the potentiometric pressure converters in general.

Now we will briefly discuss the problems of reliability and effectiveness of oper-
ation of the bathometer-sonde under expeditionary conditions. By the term "relia-
bility" is meant the probability of faultless operation of the instrument for 200
hours

P ' I"loweringl’shipboardo (8.10)

where F is the probability of fault-free operation of the complex as a whole;
Fshipboard is the probability of fault-free operation of the on-board apparatus,
including the data recorders; Flowerin is the probability of fault-free operation
of the lowering apparatus with the bat ometric section.

For the standard-produced model of the instrument F;>0.90-0.9S.

The electronic part of the sonde has a high reliability. The control unit, batho-

metric section and automatic recorders operate virtually without malfunctions.

The BUM-23 digital printout unit has a rather high frequency of recurrence of mal-
functions and the reliability of the data on the punched tape of the PLPSO punch-

tape unit is inadequate. The latter required the development of a special program

for checking and correcting data with input into an electronic computer.

The automation of observations of temperature and salinity at an oceanographic sta-
tion with the use of a bathometer-sonde leads to an increase in the efficiency of
work by a factor of about 3. The bathometer-sonde is a more effective instrument
for hydrophysicsl investigations than standard instruments. Its use made it pos-
sible to shed light on some processes of fine structure of fields in the ocean.

The volume of collected information increases by two orders of magnitude.

The use of the bathometer-sonde in oceanographic investigations on the scientific
research ships of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute has be-
come extensive. The principal scientific problems solved using the bathometer-
sonde can be represented in the following form:

-- Study of the thermohaline structure and evolution of waters in a wide range of

spatial and temporal scales.
-- Study of the internal fluctuations of temperature and salinity in the oceanic

thermocline in the region of short and mesoscale processes.

91

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HNLY

For the first time in oceanographic work the bathoneter-sonde was used in an inves-
tigation of the high-frequency fluctuations of water temperature in the neigh-
borhood of the pycnocline on the 11th voyage of the scientific research ship
"Professor Vize" in 1971 when a cycle of measurements was made of fluctuations of
characteristics of the pycnocline at the scale of short-period internal waves [94].

In carrying out expeditionary invescigations for improving the method for multi-
sided study of hydrophysical fields and their spatial-temporal variability, pro-
vided for under the Polar Experiment program, the bathometer-probe was used on the
14th voyage of the scientific research ship "Professor Vize" and the 9th voyage of
the scientific research ship "Professor Zubov" in 1972 for investigating the fine
thermohaline structure of the active layer in the ocean [4]. Then data were obtain-
ed on the short-period variability of the temperature field, the stepped structure
and centers of small-scale hydrostatic instability in the oceanic thermocline were
investigated and a method was proposed making it possible to exclude the influence
of rolling and nonuniformities of drift on the results of a statistical description
of the measurements made with the bathometer-sonde.

Source [83] gives an analysis of the mesoscale variability of water temperature in
Drake Passage on the basis of the results of observations with the bathometer-sonde
at a multiday station. 0n the basis of a statistical analysis of the results of
measurements a description is given of the structure of variability and composition
of water temperature variations in the range of periods from 6 hours to 2.5 days.
The conclusion is drawn that the structure of mesoscale variability has a complex
multimode oscillatory character. The principal energy—bearing periods are two-day,
semidiurnal and diurnal. The semidiurnal period in the spectrum of fluctuations is
attributable to the effect of internal gravitational waves of a tidal origin on

the density stratification of the ocean. The two-day and diurnal disturbances in
the temperature field are related to the advecti;n of waters, the periodicity of
whose change has a ntteorological nature. The vertical structure of the fluctua-
tions is characterized by irregularity and spatial and temporal internittence.

Source [93] is devoted to a similar problem. In that study data obtained with the
bathometer-sonde, also collected in the region of Drake Passage, were used in an

investigation of the high-frequency fluctuations of water temperature.

Also of unquestionable interest are the investigations with the bathometer-sonde
carried out for the purpose-of studying the fine structure of hydrophysical fields,
devoted to the problems of mixing and turbulence, the characteristics of formation
of water masses and their interaction in the regions of oceanic fronts and eddy
structures.

The authors of [111] investigated the thermal structure of waters of the Antarctic
Ocean over the continental slope of the Antarctic continent in connection with a
discussion of the possible mechanisms of the vertical mixing of warm deep waters
with the above-lying cold winter surface waters and the subsequent formation of
bottom Antarctic waters on the continental shelf. The hypothesis of destruction of
internal waves with periods less than 70 hours on the continental shelf was express-
ed and partially checked. As a result of this process conditions are created for the
mixing of surface and deep waters, with formation of denser and colder water, which

92

liDR!0fIﬂC1Al.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
flows downward along the continental slope.

The authors of [3] investigated the structure of water masses in the neighborhood
of the Antarctic polar front and the features of development of processes leading

to the formation of thermohaline and dynamic inhomogeneities. They also presented

a classification of the vertical profiles of temperature and salinity with inter-
section of the hydrological frontal zone.

The let and 23d voyages of the scientific research ship "Professor Zubov" (1977
and 1978) were devoted to a study of the polar frontal zone in the Norwegian and
Greenland Seas. During these voyages a major complex of observations (a total of
about 600 stations) was carried out using the bathometer-sonde. An analysis of

the extensive data collected made it possible to obtain new information on the
physical processes transpiring in the region of a local sector of the polar hy-
drological front and its effect on the formation and variability of thermodynamic
anomalies in the ocean;

- a study was made of the state and dynamics of water masses of polar and Atlantic
origin, interacting in the frontal zone;

- a classification was made of the vertical profiles of temperature and salinity
directly on the front and on its northern and southern peripheries; zones of in-
stability and intensive mixing were detected;

- a study was made of the spatial-temporal structure and dynamics of eddy forma-
tions responsible for the formation of mesoscale disturbances in the temperature
and salinity fields;

-- data were obtained for investigating the relationships between the fine struc-
ture of the thermocline and mesoscale thermohaline inhomogeneities;

- a study was made of the advective nature of exchange of energy and mass between
polar and Atlantic waters in the form of a.cyclonic eddy, breaking through the zone
of the hydrological front in a direction from north to south;

- the spectral composition of high-frequency temperature and salinity oscilla-
tions in the seasonal thermocline near the frontal zone was determined more pre-
cisely.

8.1.6. Automatic digital unit for measuring current direction and velocity, temper-
ature, conductivity and hydrostatic pressure of sea water (ATsIT instrument). The
ATslT unit for self-contained digital measurement of current velocity and direc-
tion, temperature, conductivity and hydrostatic pressure of sea water is intended
for operation on an underwater buoy station and from aboard a ship in a self-con-
tained regime. The registry of data is with a magazine-type magnetic recorder plac-
ed in the body of the instrument. The ATsIT (Table 8.1) is an automated technical
apparatus for the collection of hydrophysical information in the oceans and seas

[8].

The data obtained on the state of the studied medium, recorded in the course of
measurement, averaged in time and volume, are registered periodically at equal time
intervals in accordance with the selected operating regime. The time constant of
the primary converter for current velocity, temperature and the magnetic compass
can be regulated in definite ranges, taking into account the requirements on the
frequency characteristics of the instrument. Provision is made for the following
regimes of periodicity of instrument operation: 3 sec and 30 sec during sounding

93

FOR10FUKJAI.USBINULY
IN1I10I1WCIAI.IEHE(”ULY

or brief exposure at a fixed horizon from aboard the ship; 5, 15, 30, 60 minutes

- during prolonged operation on the underwater buoy station. The supply of magnet-
ic tape and the capacity of the battery scurce of electric current were reckoned

at 10 measurement cycles. The processing of the measurement results, registered

in a magnetic minicassette, involves the printout of a table of true values of the
measured parameters. This is accomplished using "Minsk-32," Yes-1020 electronic
computers or with the "Iskra-lZS" PBKVM system by the input of data through a spec-
ial buffer magnetic recorder of the data conversion unit. The monitoring of the cor-
rectness of functioning of the instrument under laboratory conditions is accomplish-
ed through an on-board unit connected to the ATsIT. Provision is made for the pos-
sibility of connecting a T-Sl telegraphic apparatus to the unit for the output

of data to a punch tape for storage purposes or for their printout on a rolled tape.
A hydroacoustic connunication channel is provided for in the instrument for checking
the proper operation of the instrument in an underwater position and also for pos-
sible future relaying of data by radio via a buoy floating on the sea surface. The
communication channel consists of a radiating hydrophone and a hydroacoustic re-
ceiver, situated on shipboard, which is connected to the data conversion unit. The
registry of data in a reception regime is accomplished on a visual screen and with
the telegraphic apparatus. The effective range of the acoustic communication chan-
nel under the optimum hydrometeorological conditions is 2000 m [8].

With respect to design, the instrument is a sealed cylinder with a protective lattic-
ed framework in its upper and lower parts (Fig. 8.4). The body of the instrument is
fabricated from a titanium alloy and is intended for a depth of submergence 6000 m.

Table 8.1
Principal Technical Specifications of ATeIT Complex [8]
Parameter Measurement Measurement Principal
range discreteness error
Current
velocity, cm/sec 3-200 1 t3
direction, ° 0-360 1 5
Water temperature, °C -2-+38 0.01 10.03
Specific conductivity, mho/m 0-3.4 8-10“ 123-10-3
mho/m 2.6-6
Hydrostatic pressure, MPa 0—600 0.005 0.52 of
upper limit
in range 0-
30; 12 in
Angle of deviation of instrument range 0-600
axis from vertical, ° 0-130 0.1 11
Error in rate of programming
clock, sec/day - - 10.1

The ATsIT complex includes the following sensors:
- current velocity measurement converter;
- magnetic compass;

94

FINICIHWCIAI.IIIE¢HVLV
Fig. 8.4. General appearance of ATsIT measurement complex with support [8]. I) sus-
pension support; 2) cable; 3) conductivity sensor; 6) temperature sensor; 5) hous-
ing of measurement complex; 6) propeller-type current meter.

The instrument contains a two-component current velocity measurement converter of
the propeller type which is formed by two mutually perpendicular current meters
with a horizontal axis. making possible separate measurement of both projections
of the current velocity vector, and then, during the processing of data, taking
into account the orientation of the instrument relative to the magnetic meridian,
computation of total current vector. The reversibility of the propeller-type cur-
rent meters makes it possible to filter out the sign-variable wave component of
the current and improve the quality of the information when making measurements
in the surface layer, subject to the influence of wind waves [62].

The two-component measurement method allows an arbitrary orientation of the axes
of the current meters relative to the direction of flow and therefore the angular
stabilization of the housing in a stipulated direction is not required and a steady
I‘llilﬂlIC1A1.IJBEZ(ﬂ‘LV

moment is absent. However, it is necessary that during the time between two suc-
cessive cycles of reckoning the angular position of the potentiometera and mean
direction of instrument orientation relative to the directions of the compass be
known. This position is measured with a magnetic compass having integrating prove
erties. In order to decrease the integration errors of both the current meters and
the compass it is important that in the fluctuating flow the angle of orientation
of this instrument should be changed in the smallest possible range [8].

The magnetic compass is intended for measuring the angle of orientation of the in-
strument housing relative to the magnetic meridian. The compass is used'with a
fluid (electrolytic) converter of the angle of rotation of the compass card into
an electric signal.

A platinum wire resistance thermometer with an inertia of 3 sec was used as the
water temperature measurement converter. With such a time constant the primary temr

perature converter is used in a sounding regime or with a brief exposure at a fixed
horizon with an interrogation cycle of 3 sec and 30 sec. In order to register meso-

scale processes at the selected horizon the thermal inertia can be increased to 180
sec by means of installing an interchangeable heat-insulating bushing.

The instrument includes an induction-type primary conductivity converter.

water salinity is computed by a solution of well-known equations unambiguously de-
termining water salinity as a function of conductivity, temperature and depth.

The depth of instrument submergence is measured on the basis of hydrostatic pres-
sure, taking into account corrections for the vertical distribution of water den-
sity. The primary pressure converter is a spring-type manometer (Bourdon tube) with
an induction-type converter of the sensing element value into an electric signal.

The function of registry of the vertical angle and the introduction of such a cor-
rection is performed by a primary angleqmeasuring converter of the deviation of the

housing from the vertical in the plane of inclination of the cable. The information
(Fig. 8.5) registered by the complex is recorded directly in the course of the

measurements in a magnetic tape storage cassette.

The readOut of data from the magnetic cassette, input of data into "Minsk-32,"-Yes-
1020 or PKVM "Iskra 125" electronic computers, output of data to a display or tele-
type, is all accomplished by means of an on-boerd data conversion and processing
unit. Depending on whether the ship carries a large electronic computer or the KTS
ASOGI complex, or whether there are peripheral units for the output and display of
data, there can be several variants of the technology for machine processing of
ATsIT data. One of these is based on use of the "Minsk-32" and Yes-1020 computers.
which makes possible the readout of data in a continuous regime. In this case the
data are printed out in the form of a table and also can be registered in a system-
atired form in the format used by the processor. The use of the mentioned KTs

ASOGI apparatus (including on ships not outfitted with electronic computers) also
makes it possible to carry out primary processing of the information and accomplish
printout of orderly output of masses of data in decimal form through a digital
printout unit in a narrow format; a curve plotter is employed for the graphic rep-
resentation of data; a linkup makes possible the output of data to the teletype (in
a broad format) and, finally. by means of a rsregistry unit the data content of

96
IKIICINHKIAI.USB(MWLY
the minicassettea is transferred to a combined magnetic tape in the formats for the
"Minsk-32" and Yes-1020 electronic computers.

 

Fig. 8.5. Block diagram of data processing for AIslT measurement complex.
KEY:

l) nTsIT measurement complex;

2) Cassette-type magnetic tape storage;
3) Data conversion unit:

a) Display of data conversion unit;

5) Storage on magnetic tape:

6) KTS A8061 complex (complex of means for collection and processing of hy-

drometeorological data);

7) Digital printout unit;

8) Curve plotter;

9) Data reregistry unit;
10) tape puncher.

The use of a teletype makes it possible, simultaneously with the printout of the
codes, to plot information on an intermediate machine carrier for its subsequent
input and processing on an electronic computer which has a photoreadout unit.

Principles of method for calibration Bork. The specifics of the complex and its
design features make it necessary to develop a specialverification method and de-
termine the particular types of required technical and special means for perform-

ing such checking under both laboratory and expeditionary conditions [8].

97
FOI1HHHC1ALIIHEONLY
“WINONLY

The problem of carrying out calibration work under real experimental conditions

has not yet found an adequately comlete solution due to the complexity in organ-
izing such work due to technical reasons and the difficulties in choosing the op-

timum conditions for state of the media. However, it is difficult to reproduce
in situ conditions in the basin sufficiently completely. Precisely for this rea-

son the results of calibration carried out in a sea medium characterize the real
metrological possibilities of the apparatus.

The calibration of the two-component priury current velocity converter is carried

out in a linear hydrometric basin in which well-known procedures are used in model-
ing the range of current velocities stipulated by the technical specifications of

the Man. Experimental data are used in constructing the calibration curve of
the dependence of the number of revolutions of each current meter on current velo-

city vith subsequent scaling of the collected data into the angles of rotation of
the potentiometers and into the instrument output code. The current velocity mod-

ulus V is equal to
v- (m.Ah.)'+(m.M>'. (8.11)

where AR} - kél - k11_ is the code increment for the first velocity component;
Akz - k1 - k 1_1 is the code increment for the second velocity component; m1, :12

are the values of the graduation per code unit for the first and second velocity
components,

1.268
A!

whereA t is the discreteness of measurements, in see; a is the number of revolu-
tions of the blade screw corresponding to a particular velocity V.

m. n . (8.12)

Decimal
compass
code

 

_.___.___c_c_4_.__.
”’0 ‘70 an no so 2m m m m .xa' Compass angle
mm

Fig. 8.6. Calibration curve for magnetic compass in Half complex. 1) first pair
of emitting electrodes; 2) second pair of emitting electrodes.

98

mamauscmv
Then a dependence is established between the number of revolutions of the current
meters on the angle of orientation of their axes relative to the flow and a direc-
tional diagram is constructed. with a proper geometrical configuration of the cur-
rent meter-fairings profile the directional diagram has a cosinuaoidal form with-
in the limits ofbthe established tolerances of S: for the velocity range 100-200
cm/aec and 102 with velocities 3-15 cm/sec.

During the carrying out of the calibrations and during subsequent work with the
complex it mustubeftaken into account that the principal error in measuring cur-
rent velocity with a two-component primary converter is caused primarily by the
unit for conversion of thelnmber of current meter revolutions into an electric
signal and also a mechanism ensuring the initial response of the primary convert-
er. The operating principle of the ATsIT primary velocity converter requires its
single calibration after manufacture.

The magnetic compass is calibrated by rotating the body of the instrument in a
turning circle by stipulated angles under conditions of absence of magnetic dis—
turbances. The normal operability of the compass is checked in the range of a total
working angle of 360’ and corrections for deviation are eliminated. The calibration
is carried out twice for each pair of emitting electrodes (Fig. 8.6). The shape

of the compass characteristic is virtually linear with a sharp bend at the point

of lead-in of the emitting electrode. The existence of a bend in the curve creates
an ambiguity in readout of the angle which is eliminated with the use of two read-
ings on the two curves with "inflection" points spaced in angle (that is. for each
component it is necessary to find two angles corresponding to the read-out code of
the corresponding component). From the two pairs of angles one angle is selected
from each which are closest to one another. The average of these two values of the

angles is used as the compass reading.

The fluid primary converter of the angle of deviation of the instrument axis from
the vertical is calibrated by means of an angle-measuring device supplied with

a plumb line in the range 0-30'. The angle of inclination‘Y of the instrument in
the vertical plane is determined using the expression

«in
7 ‘(k—k°)-‘_k-..—k+u' (8.13)

where k is the code of the computed angle; to is a code corresponding to 1/- 0';
k‘gg is a code corresponding to')’- -30°; k+30 is a code corresponding to y’-
+3 0

The k0. k.3o. k+10 values are given in the instrument logbook.

the statistical characteristic of the platinum resistance thermometer is determined
from the expression

0.5 + LOWS-10"“

R' '"" R“ 0.5— tons-loan ’

(8.14)

where Rt is thermometer resistance with the measured temperature, t ohms; ago is
thermometer resistance with k - 0; k is the value of the decimal code at the out-
put of the measurement converter.

99

FIHI(HHNCJAI.US£1MVLY
FOR¢0F1WCJAL.USIZ(MVLY

The measured value of the resistance of the platinum resistance thermometer is
scaled into the temperature value using the formula

R.-R.(I +3.m6847-10"t—5.847.l0-'!’). (8.15)

where t is medium temperature, 'c; no is resistance of the platinum resistance
thermometer at 0°C.

Accordingly, for calibrating the temperature channel it is necessary to compute
Rko and R0. The ago value can be determined using a resistance box introduced in
place of the platinum resistance thermometer into the temperature measurement chan-
nel, for which it is necessary to select such a resistance of the box with which
the read-out temperature code is equal to zero. The no value can be determined
from expression (8.15) with known at and t corresponding to one another. As the
temperature t it is possible to use the readings of abyssal thermometers obtained
in parallel measurements with the ATsIT under identical meteorological conditions
of thermostable layers in the sea. The temperature value is substituted into ex-
pression (8.15) and the ATslT temperature code and the Rko value are introduced
into expression (8.16). The R0 value is determined by joint solution of (8.14) and
(8.15). The measured temperature value with known R0, “k0 and k is determined

by computation of R: from expression (8.14) and by solution of expression (8.15)
relative to t.

The primary water conductivity converter makes it possible to measure the absolute
value of the total resistance of the water washing the coil. Using the measured
resistance of the coil, water conductivity is determined by computations. taking
the dimensions of the primary converter into account.

In analytical form the static characteristic curve for the primary converter has
the form for the first subrange

x,=C~0.0l54-ﬁ. ' (8.16)
and for the second subrange . .
. t .
c.—.c(o,omﬁ+o.onss). (8.17)

where ’1, ‘Xq are the conductivities for the first and second subrangee respective-
ly, mho/m; k is the digital value of the code at the converter output; C is the geo-
metrical constant of the converter, m'l.

The geometrical constant of the primary converter is determined as the ratio of the
total resistance. measured with the primary converter, to the specific resistance.

The stability of this parameter with time and nondependence on the ambient medium
is the principal criterion of primary converter quality. The geometrical constant of
the primary converter is measured under laboratory conditions using standard solu-

tions of a specific conductivity. Relative conductivity is determined using the

 

formula
is __ u
”m" a. a. , -_.,m . (8.18)
100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where 'V35, 15, o is the conductivity of normal water.

Water salinity is determined proceeding on the basis of a well-known algorithm, us-
ing data on-X'r.1, temperature and water pressure.

Thus, the calibration of the conductivity channel essentially involves determina-
tion of the C parameter. Under expeditionary conditions the true salinizg, temper-
ature and pressure values and the conductivity code value can be obtain from
parallel observations with the ATsIT and bathometar-probe. Then, using expressions
(8.16), (8.17), (8.18), by the successive approximations method it is possible to
select the corresponding value of the C constant with which the computed salinity
coincides with the salinity determined by titration.

The primary hydrostatic pressure converter is calibrated by employing a separate ap-
paratus including a hydraulic compressor and a standard piston-type manometer. The

characteristic curve is determined with a smooth rise and fall of pressure on the
scale for the entire range from 0 to 58.86.10“ GPa.

Under expeditionary conditions the calibration of the primary pressure converter is
usually accomplished by the method of parallel measurements of depth using the
Aral? and temperature-depth meter, as well as the readings of a counter unit (in
the upper 300-m layer) under favorable meteorological conditions and in the ab-
sence of the ship's drift. The code-depth dependence is represented by a straight
line and therefore is successfully approximated by a piecewise-linear function

whose parameters are introduced into the program for the processing of data on an
electronic computer.

Some scientific results of use of ATsIT complex. The scientific research ships of
the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute have now employed the

ATsIT in situ and considerable experience has been accumulated. A considerable
volume of observational data has been obtained, which makes it possible to an-
alyze the measurement principles employed in the instrument. Conclusions have been
drawn concerning the peculiarities of instrument design, the reality of the metro-

logical characteristics obtained and the possibilities of employing the complex in
oceanographic practice.

101

FOR OFFKJAI.USE‘ONIM
IIII()FF1C1Al.lﬂﬂB(HiL3

Observations were made for solution of scientific problems:

1) study of the spectral composition of short-period thermohaline fluctuations in
the neighborhood of the seasonal thermocline;

2) study of mesoscale variability of variations of temperature, salinity, current
vector at the northern periphery of the polar hydrofront;

3) investigations of the peculiarities of vertical structure of thermodynamic in-
homogeneities in the regions of probable formation of eddy formations.

We will examine some results of use of the ATsIT complex for study of a definite
class of physical phenomena and processes in the ocean.

During the period of the 21st voyage of the scientific research ship "Professor
Zubov" in making an oceanographic survey of the frontal zone of the Hohns Ridge
the southeastern periphery of the hydrofront during the period Z-b August 1977 a
system of formation of three eddies was discovered. Two of these were anticyclon-
ic and one was cyclonic, the diameter being about 15-20 miles. The existence of
eddy structures was clearly traced in the field of temperature and geostrophic

currents from depths of 800-1009 m to the surface.

J.

 

   
  

I
H
I’ 2 d
Fig. 8.7. Instrumental and geostrophic currents at SO-m horizon. 15-18 August 1977.
Norwegian Sea. Region of Hohns Ridge.

During the period 15718 August an attempt was made at a detailed investigation of
the central cyclonic eddy with the use of the ATsIT and bathometer-sonde complexes.
In the region where the eddy was situated the plans called for a regular grid of

18 oceanographic stations with distances of 5 miles between them. The following
observations were ends at each station:

102

FOR1OFFKJA1.USEINVLY
- sounding of the layer 0-2000 m with the bsthometer-sonds;

-- neasurement of the total vector current + drift using the ATsIT measurement com-
plex at the horizons 50 and 100 m;

-- determination of the true drift by means of the "Transit" SNS (satellite navi-
gation systemo (ensuring an accuracy in determination of coordinates of 200-220 I)
during the entire period of observations at each station.

6!!!

 

Fig. 8.8. Characteristic spectrum of temporal variability of current vector. Norweg-
ian Sea. Neighborhood of Hohns Ridge.

0n the basis of observational data 3. c. Borisov and B. A. vaeil'yev constructed maps
of the horizontal distribution of water temperature and naps of dynamic topography.
Vectors of true currents were computed. An analysis of the collected data (Fig. 8.7).
carried out by B. c. Borisov and B. A. Vssil'yev, demonstrated that in comparison
with the survey of 2-6 August there was a change in the sign of circulation in the
investigated region. In place of the cyclonic eddy an anticyclonic meander was form-
ed, clearly expressed in the field of currents obtained by the instrumental method

and general vorticity of the same sign in the field of geostrophic currents. In the
region of the meander there were considerable current velocities (up to 62 cm/ssc),
not corresponding to the small gradients of density and velocities of geostrophic

currents (about 12 cm/sec), which is evidence of a strong influence of ageostrophic
forces on the dynamics of the investigated formations.

103

FKHI(IHHC1AI.IEIB(HVLY
IIKICHWNCIAI.IENECMULY

In a specific situation, due to the inadequacy of initial data. it is difficult to

draw valid judgments concerning the path of movement and the possible evolution of

the detected cyclonic eddy. It is only possible to postulate that it was displaced

in a northeasterly direction and was replaced by an anticyclonic formation arriving
from the southwest, which moved with a mean velocity of about 10 cm-sec'l, close to
the velocity of mean movement.

The cited example shows that the method employed for investigation of local regions
of the frontal zone with the use of the ATsIT complex in all-probability will make
it possible to describe the real pattern of formation of thermodynamic inhomogen-
eities, although, without question, it requires an analysis of the accuracy of the
method employed.

The principal purpose of the ATsIT complex is self-contained measurements of the
parameters of state and dynamics of the sea medium at a buoy station [8]. Figure
8.8 shows the characteristic spectrum of temporal variability of the vector of cur-
rents on the basis of the results of observations using BPV-Z and ATsIT automatic
recorders at six buoy stations in the neighborhood of the frontal zone in the
neighborhood of Hohns Ridge. The ATsIT registered currents at the 250-m horizon.
The duration of the observations was from 20 to 30 days and the discreteness was
30 minutes. The results of observations of currents make it possible with a suf-
ficient reliability and detail to compute the validated evaluations of the spec-
tral density functions in the range of periods from 1 hour to 2-3 (sometimes 3-4)
days and thereby describe the temporal variability of the current vector, draw
conclusions concerning the spectral composition of the oscillations, and also
interpret the nature of their appearance.

0n the spectral curves everywhere there are energy bursts with characteristic time
scales of about 12.4 and 24.8 hours, and also a high energy level of the long-wave
part of the spectrum, indicating the presence in the series of currents of low-fre-
quency components with scales exceeding the length of the observation series. These
components make the principal contribution to the general dispersion of fluctuations
in the current field. The energy of the trend as a rule rapidly decreases with
depth, especially sharply at the upper horizons (for all practical purposes by an
order of magnitude) and more slowly in the deep layer (from 500 to 1000 m).

Some part of the energy is concentrated in the region of diurnal variations which
also have an obvious tidal origin. The spectrum of these variations is not subject
to deformations with an increase in depth.

8.2. Submerged Buoy Station

The submerged buoy station with hydroacoustic search and signaling is intended for
placement at sea for long-term self-contained operation of different recorders of
characteristics of the sea medium [110]. The complex of technical instrumentation
with which the station is outfitted, in combination with the units placed aboard the
scientific research ship, makes it possible to conduct a search, detect it and send
a signal for the floating-up of the carrier and instrumentation.

The submerged buoy station was developed for replacement'of traditional buoy ste-

tions with above-water buoys (autonomous buoy stations) for the purpose of in-
creasing the viability and duration of operation of self-contained apparatus in the

104
lﬂlltﬂﬂﬂIJAl.lElE(HVLY
open sea or beneath ‘ice. and also for enhancing the quality of the information re-
ceived by means of the neasurenent instrussnts which it carries. ‘

     

Figure 8.9 is a schemtic representation of the submerg-
ed buoy station. All the apparatus in the technical con-
plex and the nakeup of the equipnent used on the sta-
tion can be classified as on-board and underwater. The
on-board apparatus is located in the laboratory of the
scientific research ship. It consists of a transmitter,
receiver, signal indicator and an array of hydrophones
for the sound sources and is intended for use in search
and signaling the station to float up.

The underwater part consists of a supporting float with
bracings and attadment elements. hydroacoustic beacon 0
with primary depth converter, two paired cable releases,
self-contained oceanographic instruments, supporting
cable and anchor system.

A basic feature of the submerged buoy station is the
subuergence of a supporting float to a depth of about

100 a. This is fitted with instruments. An appropriate
choice is aade of the length of the supporting cable,
which is reckoned in dependence on the depth of the point
of placement, with current velocity taken into account.
The absence of simificant movements, usually caused

by nave-ants of a surface buoy under the influence of

the waves and other hydrometeorological factors. makes .
it possible to increase the viability of the station

and exerts a positive influence on the readings of the
instruments attached for work.

The search for and detection of the station is secon-
plished by means of a hydroacoustic signal of a defin-
ite periodicity and power which is shaped and sent in- ‘

to the water by a hydroacoustic beacon at a fixed fre- A

quency. The arrival of the ship at a point with the 3.3.;
stipulated'coordinates is ensured by sons navigational A
systems of the satellite navigation system "Transit," ' '

radar navigation systems "mesa," "mm" m ”Decca," fig. 3.9. Schenstic diagram
with which scientific research ships are usually out- of underwater 9"“ of '“b’
fitted. The beacon signals are received by the ship- ““3“, bu” ““1““ 1) "’9'
board sonar and if the ship does not have such a sys- porting floatsg.2) hydro-
ten -- by the "Poisk" hydroacoustic direction-finding acoustic beacon, 3' 1') BPV-
systen, specially developed at the Arctic and Antarc- 2 ”d ATsIT "3‘“th con-
tic Scientific liesearch Institute, by means of which 91“”3 5) 91'9“ 6) “3'6"“
it is possible to ascertain the bearing and distance accustic “1m“; 7) bottom
to the station with constant tracking of the latter. “cm“; 8) “”7 11”

In the isnediate neighborhood of the station there is

a signaling device which through a hydrophone-enitter sends coded call signals into
the water at a definite frequency. The signals are received by the submerged buoy

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

station, the station receiver cuts in an actuating mechanism, after which the
cable releases are triggered. As a result the connecting cable breaks loose

at a stipulated depth, usually near the anchor system. The anchor remins at the
bottom, but the framework and cable with the attached instruments rise to the sur-
face under the influence of positive buoyancy where they are hauled aboard by the
usual method. An indicator for bringing the station to the surface is a decrease
in the pulse repetition rate from the acoustic beacon.

The submerged buoy station complex has undergone successful in situ tests on a
number of voyages of scientific research ships of the Arctic and Antarctic Sci-
entific Research Institute and beginning with the 15th voyage of the scientific
research ship "Professor Zubov" (1976) has been used systematically for placement
of BPV-Z and BLT automatic current meters, photothermographs and ATsIT complexes
in position for long-term autonomous operation. The experience gained in work with
the submerged buoy station hadi-made it possible to formulate the principles of
methods and apparatus for setting out the station under real oceanographic condi-
tions.

Prior to setting out the submerged buoy station in the stipulated region. the
depths to the bottom are measured at the site of occupance of the oceanographic
station; a work chart is prepared showing true measurement depths.

The supporting float complex is usually assembled from three frameworks with at-
tachment elements, each with a lift of about 400 kg. The number of float units

is determined by the mass of the connecting cable with the instrtnnents, which may
be more than 1 ton. These float units are concentrated in the upper part of the
connecting cable, one directly above the other in such a way that the lower one
is situated at a depth of about 75-100 m. In order to avoid dangerous loads due
to inertia and drag the float units are allowed free movement on segments of cable
with a diameter of 10-12 m.

Two hydroacoustic beacons are suspended on a bracket somewhat below the last float
unit. Instruments are arranged on brackets, at the horizons recommended by the
observation program, lower on the connecting cable, depending on the purposes of
the investigations. The upper horizon at which the instnnaents are placed most
frequently is the horizon 100-125 In. Since a considerable static load is concen-
trated in the upper part of the connecting line, the upper segment of the connect-
ing cable is separated into an independent unit and is positioned from an individ-
ual winch.

The connecting cable supports all the instruments and apparatus and connects the
load-carrying floats and the anchor into a unified system. The connecting cable
set consists'of cables with a diameter from 8.7 to 4.9 In with the necessary fitt-
ings (pivots, hooks, eyes, etc.).

Instruments and pairs of acoustic cable releases are placed along the length of the
connecting cable at stipulated horizons. This pair of cable releases is fabricated
in the form of a unified rigid device. The latter are placed at a distance of 300-
1.00 m from the bottom. Such a depth of submergence ensures a guarantee against

the releases sinking to the bottom due to possible errors in determining the depth

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the site due to complex bottom topography or failure to reach the intended
depths in the case of a considerable drift. In case of necessity for correcting

the length of the connecting cable (due to a constantly changing depth of place-
ment) the anchor system and a segment of the connecting cable is also separated
into an individual link and is placed independently from an individual winch. As
a result of experimentation it has been established that an anchor system of two
reinforced concrete anchors with a total weight of 340 kg in the water reliably
holds the station in the position where it has been placed.

Computations of submerged buoy stations with depths of placement up to 6000 m and
with a safety factor along the entire length of the connecting cable amounting

to not less than 2 indicate that the static load, with allowance for mass of the
anchors, can attain 1.5 tons.

Pull computations of the static and dynamic loads on the station, full and resid-
ual buoyancy, restraining force of the anchors and depression of the float units
under the influence of the current are carried out in accordance with the recom-
mendations set forth in [103]. It has been determined experimentally that a posi-
tive buoyancy of 150 kg reliably ensures the surfacing of the station after the
triggering of the releases and setting-free of the anchors. An increase in posi-
tive buoyancy can result in a decrease in the restraining force of the anchors,
and as a result, to scraping of the station on irregularities of underwater relief
or to drifting under the influence of the current. A decrease in positive buoyancy
is a cause of a considerable aubmerging of the float units (and accordingly, the
instruments) in a strong current.

The in situ placement of a submerged buoy station is one of the most complex and
time-consuming tasks in oceanographic work. A great accuracy in computations of
the weight characteristics and buoyancy of the submerged buoy station is required.
In case of necessity, all the instruments, equipment and fittings mounted on the
station are weighed and measured. Precise date are required concerning the length
of the connecting cable and the forces holding the station in a stipulated place.

Inadequate allowance for any station parameter can result in uncorrectable conse-
quences. Jerkings of the connecting cable and inertial loads on it as a result

of the effect of the float unit mass and the entrained mass of water, due to a
considerable drag in the waves, involve a constant risk of losing the station. An

unmonitorable depression of the horizons at which the float units are situated
under the influence of the current and sinking of the beacons below the admissible

limit precludes the possibility of detecting the station in the ocean. Other as-
pects of work with submerged buoy stations, requiring precise allowance,-have been
indicated above. Unfortunately, the methods for designing submerged buoy stations
do not provide reliable methods for determining deepening of the station in depend-
ence on residual buoyancy, drag and current velocity, as well as the restraining
force of the anchors in dependence on their shape, mass and nature of the bottom.

Improvement in methods for in situ placement of submerged buoy stations should
probably proceed along the lines of increasing accuracy in computing the parameters
of the station and the most probable exclusion of random factors exerting a nega-
~tive influence on its reliability.

The submerged buoy station is a modern technical means for the placement of differ-
ent instruments for long-term autonomous operation. A submerged buoy station has

a number of obvious advantages over a traditional buoy station with a surface buoy

107
FfHICHﬂﬂC1A1.lﬂﬂE(MNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

and is free of the shortcomings characteristic of automatic buoy stations. First

of all, the submerged buoy station has a longer lifetime than an automatic buoy
station since it is influenced to a lesser degree by external factors. Another
advantage is a substantial increase in the accuracy of measurements of current el-
ements. The results of statistical processing of the results of current measure-
ments at three submerged buoy stations (8 horizons) and four automatic buoy sta-
tions (16 horizons) on the 21st voyage of the scientific research ship "Professor
Zubov" are clear evidence of a substantial increase in the quality of primary infor-
mation when working with automatic current meters on submerged buoy stations. When
registering currents at a submerged buoy station the dispersion of the random meas-
urement error, determined by extrapolation of the structural function to zero. in
the layer 125-1000 m is insignificant and at the upper horizons is 0-0.1 of the
natural variability of currents and at the lower horizons is totsllv absent. At
automatic buoy stations the measurement errors for the horizons 50, 125, 250, 500
and 1000 m average 0.70, 0.30. 0.15 and 0.10 of the current vector dispersion re-
spectively and can vary substantially distort the really existing pattern. Earlier
researchers [109] have repeatedly pointed out the inadequate accuracy in measuring
the current vector in the surface layers at automatic buoy stations, which intro-

duces a considerable "noise" component into the dispersion and mean values. It must
be added that the errors in measuring the current vector exert a strong influence

on the accuracy in computing different derivative values, including those for the
slope of the frontal surface in the ocean and the index of the degree of geostroph-
icity of real flows, which frequently leads to unstable and contradictory results.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1980

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER 9. IBIBGiCOHMEIB IN OCEANNRAPHIC MEASUREPENTS

9.4. Use of Automated Systems and Electronic Computers in Oceanographic Work
From Ice Cover

The specific copditions for the work of expeditions on the ice of the Arctic Basin

make difficult the carrying out of automation in the same way as on scientific re-
search ships.

These conditions include:

- the transporting of automatic equipment (AB) by air or sea transport at low tem-
peratures; -

-- instability of temperature and air humidity during operation of A3 in working
places; '

-- relative reliability of viability of the observation platform (sea ice) and the
associated impossibility of stationary placement of AB;

- limited possibilities of the power of expeditionary electric power stations;

-- need for rapid deployment and removal of AB associated with the possible ap-
pearance of emergency situations at working places in the ice camp;

-— limited number of specialists -_members of the expedition responsible for
the operation and technical monitoring of AB.

Without question, the basis for the AB on such expeditions should be, the same as
in the KTS ASOGI [complex of technical means for the collection and processing of
data], the use of a program—controllable electronic keyboard computer (PEKVH -
programmmo-upravlyeyemaya elektronnaya klavishnaya vychislitel'naya mashina), hav-
ing the necessary characteristics [119]. The most important of these are the fol-
lowing: adequate computation capabilities; simplicity in operation; possibility
for connection of a great number of external devices, including measurement sys-
tems; small mass and size.

Beginning in 1975, on the high-latitude aerial expedition "Sever" of the Arctic
and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute, for the purpose of primary process-
ing of observational data and speedy analysis, use has been made of the "Elektron-
ika 8-50" and ”Iskra-lZS" PEKVH; a special packet of programs was prepared for
this purpose. Despite the limitations in solving the formulated problems, this
automation in the processing of oceanographic observations, carried out both on
the SP drifting stations and on sea arctic expeditions on ships of the "Heyak"
type, has found its use. At the present time, in the processing of data use is
made of the nz-zs PEKVH, which is more modern and program~compstible with the
"Blektronika-SO” PBKVH.

In 1977 the "Sever" expedition carried out tests showing convincing results of

an expeditionary computer complex created on the basis of the "Iskra-IZS” PEKVH.
It included a magazine-type unit for storage on magnetic tape (KNHL -- kaseetnyy
naknpitcl' na magnitnoy lente), an PS-lSOO photoreadout unit, a T-Sl teletype and
an LKD—b two-coordinate curve plotter [29]. The joining of the latter three ex-
ternal devices to the PEKVH is accomplished by an input-output widener. In this
complex the KNHL is used exclusively for registry and input of programs and ref-
erence data. The teletype is used for the control of problems, input of primary
data, printout of the results and transfer of the data to a punch tape. The photo-
readout unit is intended for the repeated input of data into the PEKVN in the sub-
sequent processing stages. The curve plotter is used for the graphic representation

109

FOI‘OFFIJAI.U§E(HNLY
FOI‘OIIH(1AI.USIZ(MﬁLY

of the collected data and plotting profiles of the measured parameters and deriv-
ative values.

It can be seen that as the technical carrier, in contrast to the KTS ASOGI, use is
made of a punch tape, not a magnetic tape. The choice of the punch tape was dic-
tated by the greater reliability of this carrier and the fact that the collected
data are relatively graphic, as is especially important under the conditions of
arctic expeditions. The punched tape is ready for direct input into the on-board
computation center computer and additional reregistry on a wide magnetic tape is
not required for this.

The punched tape obtained after primary processing through the FS-lSOO can again
be introduced into the PEKVM and thereby the stages of both systematization and
analysis can be accomplished in this expeditionary computation complex.

The use of the KNHL only for the registry and input of the program makes it pos-
sible to solve rather complex problems by means of segment-by-segment loading of
the programs, whose length can exceed by an order of magnitude or more the volume
of the operational memory unit of the PBKVM, and this considerably broadens the
possibilities of a scientific analysis of data [119]. An additional KNML must be
introduced into the K13 ASOGI for these purposes.

The introduction of the teletype into the expeditionary computation complex made
it possible not Only to obtain standard processing and systematization documents
- observation data books and tables in the form close to that usually employed,
but also to organize all the programs in a dialogue regime. This simplifies the
Operator's work and reduces the probability of the appearance of errors.

The punched tape can serve as a component in the archives of oceanographic obser-
vations. Using the punched tape in both the PEKYH and with the large computer

in the shipboard computation center it is possible to obtain a composite TEN-3H
table, organize an archives of data from this expedition and carry out computa-
tions related to an analysis of the observations.

The organization of work in the expeditionary computation complex is governed by
the different regimes of receipt of data. The primary processing can be carried
out directly after the measurements (for example, when working on an SP drift-
ing station) or after the accumulation of some volume of data by the mobile de-
tachments of the "Sever" high-latitude expedition, when during one takeoff sev-
eral oceanographic stations are occupied. A nonuniformity in the receipt of data
is also characteristic for the work of different research detachments.

The expeditionary computation complex has proven itself under the difficult oper-
ating conditions of the "Sever" high-latitude expedition. which specifically in-
volves a frequent rebasing of the expeditionary computation center, which in turn
involves its repeated deployment and repacking of the equipment and its transport.
Thus, in the course of 2.5-3 months the computation center operates at five or six

different arctic points: on shore, on islands and on drifting stations; its route
in the air is more than 20,000 km.

110

ltﬂltlﬂﬂKIAI.USl(lﬂLY
In the considered expeditionary computation complex there is no automation of ob-
servations. However, this problem is solved quite simply for any primary converters
having an electric signal at the output.

The linking of mush converters as temperature-salinity sondes, strings of tempera-
ture sensors, etc. with the PBKVH is accomplished through interfaces specially de-

veloped for this purpose, cut in through the "input-output widener."

Such an organization of automated systems makes it possible to create programmed in-
strument complexes in which by programming, as the results are obtained and anal-
yzed, without man's intervention, it is possible to bring about changes in different
research investigations, such as a change in the spatial and temporal discreteness

of observations. The latter is especially important in study of rarely repeating
phenomena existing a short time.

An example of such a programmed instrument complex is the automated actinometric
complex created at the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute and WhiCh
has functioned well on the SP-ZZ drifting station [6].

Hodern trends in investigations of natural processes are tied-in to synchronous
measurement of several medium parameters at the same time. An extremely timely task
is now the creation of a multichannel recorder of data obtained at one and the

same time from different primary converters with the simultaneous entry of data on
a technical carrier. Such a recorder has been created at the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute. This is a cassette magnetic tape storage unit [29}.
The design of the KNHL itself is extremely reliable, as is especially important for
work on Arctic expeditions.

Thus, the use of complexes created on the basis of the PBKVH opens up broad pros-
pects not only for investigations carried out on drifting ice. They can be used in
solving many other problems on different expeditions: on small ships not outfitted
with electronic computers, in the network of polar stations, at sea ice operations
headquarters, etc. Their possibilities are especially widening with an increase in
PEKVM computational capabilities.

Such a machine, meeting the greater part of the requirements imposed on it, has al-
ready been created - the "Iskra-1256." This PBKVM and the complex created on its
basis will already find extensive use in investigation of the Arctic in the coming
years.

COPYRIGHT: Cidrometeoizdat, 1980

111
FIN!(HHﬂ(1A1.USEIDNLY
FOI*OF'HC1AI.IEIE(H'LY

CHAPTER 10. PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPMENT 0? METHODS FOR OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH IN
ICE-COVERED REGIONS OF THE WORLD OCEAN

10.1. General principles. Oceanographic surveys, studies in polygons and along in-
dividual profiles, carried out from ships and the ice cover, roadstead observations
and observations of the state of the sea from shore, work with the use of avia-
tion and artificial earth satellites, constitute the necessary information base

for studying the Arctic and Antarctic Oceans. During recent decades the area of
such observations has been continuously and actively expanded. The qualitative
side of observations is also increasing due to the use of new methodology for in-
vestigations and nodern technology. '

Neverthelets, it must be admittet that the degree of study of the polar regions is
inadequate and knowledge concerning hydrophysical processes and the patterns of
the water regime frequently have a fragmentary character even from a microscale
point of view. ‘

One of the reasons for such a status of study of the polar regions is the consider-
able extent of the ocean areas and the volumes of their waters, as well as the cli-
matic conditions making difficult the expeditionary hydrometeorological study of
the Arctic and Antarctica.

It can be assumed that even with the use of new technology, sharply increasing the
information yield of observations and the effectiveness of research, the inade-
quacy in study of polar areas will still for a long time stimulate the development
of oceanographic investigations of the Arctic and Antarctica.

The development of research is dictated by the interests of society, which are in-
separably linked to study of the ocean and the use of its resources (energy, biolog-
ical, geological, etc.), with the economic exploitation of its regions. These in-
terests will also increase with a deepening of our knowledge and comprehension of
the role of the polar regions in the processes which in general determine the
global state of the environment.

' without question, the expansion of investigations will be accompanied by a further
improvement in both the transportation base, observation platforms and technical
means of collecting information, as well as the methodology for planning, organiz-
ation and inplenentation of in situ experiments, including methods for processing
and transforming information by means of electronic computers.

112

mmmontv
In this section we present sone prospects and and specific tasks of developeent and
improvement of technical Dana and methods for oceanographic work applicable to in-
vestigation of the polar regions of the world ocean.

The mosition of the prospects reflects the ideas of the authors relying on the gen-
eralised experience in expeditionary investigations accuuﬂated by the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute and takes into account nodern tendencies in
the development of the instruental base. aachine technology, transportation facil-
ities and methods..,for aperiaental investigations in the ocean. The testbed for con-
ducting soae types of oceanographic work fron drifting ice in the Arctic Basin is

one of the possible variants for realising their development.

10.2. Oceanographic york in the Arctic Basin

The results of investigations in the field of oceanography of the Arctic Ocean are
evidence that despite definite successes in the nultisided study of the regime and
in the development of nethods for long-range hydroneteorological and ice forecasts.
inadequate work has been done on any problem relating to fundamental coqrehen-
sion of the nature of the ocean relating to explanation and prediction of extreael
states in the ataosphere-ocean-ice systen and to a comrthension of the physical
essence of the aechsnisns of energy transfornation in this systen.

Long-range ice and hydromteorological forecasting is still based in aost cases
solely on allowance for the external sequence of change of events and does not al-
ways take into account the internal factors and nechanisu responsible for such a
sequence. This applies, in particular, to variation on a clinatic scale (including
prolonged changes in the forms of circulation. ice content and hydrological regiae).
As an exasple. it is possible to cite the appreciable warning of clinete in the
northern hemisphere observed during the period 1921-1960. This phenonsnon has not
yet been adequately explained. Moreover, science still cannot predict the climatic
background in this region of the earth even in the caning decades. however, all'

the physicostatistical relationshi. ' and nethods for selecting predictors for the
regime characteristics of the arctic eons have been established precisely on the
basis of data for the mentioned period. Hhether these correlations will retain their
stability in the future or will begin to be "disrupted." this problea is prinary ahd
is directly related to the needs of the national economy. The need has arisen for
creating a systen of investigations which at the use tine would be of an adequate
scale and sufficiently detailed, with wide coverage, operational, sutonated and
economically optimum [115].

In the light of the discussed problem, the available naterials froa oceanographic
observations and the methods for their collection in the Arctic Basin at the present
tine do not adequately completely satisfy either science or practical needs. First,
because an oceanographic survey of the area of the ocean basin and sees, carried
out by the "Sever" expedition, is made only once a year (April-May), not supplying
data for other seasons of the year. Second, the observational data obtained at the
SP drifting stations, despite their great value and inportance, suffer a substan-
tial shortcoming - the drift of each SP station during one and the sane Ionths
and seasons of the year occurs in different regions and in the analysis they are
difficult to compare in tine and space. For science, however, as in practical work.
it is desirable to have long-tern yearbround observations in the very sane regions
of the Arctic Basin and seas.

113
FOR OFFICIAL USIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

The task of the inediate future will be the development of such new methods, and
with them technical and transportation means for oceanographic investigations in
the Arctic Basin which would be capable of ensuring observations in the necessary

regions over a long period in time and a great spatial resolution.

The vigorous development of technical means for making observations (artificial
earth satellites, automatic stations, buoys, instrusents, etc.), even with their
remote control, does not preclude the direct presence and participation of the
researcher himself in carrying out observations of natural processes and pheno-
mena in their natural manifestation. The principal method for further many-sided
scientific-productive study of the Arctic Ocean and especially its inaccessible
part - the Arctic Basin, in our opinion, as before, remains expeditionary.

The most promising methods for study of the Arctic Basin and arctic seas are syn—
chronous oceanographic surveys and stationary long-term oceanographic observations
at constant reference points and at drifting stations of the SP type.

The further most effective study of all aspects of the regime of the Arctic Basin
and its seas will possibly involve a desirable contination of these methods.

Below we will examine some of the methodological principles of these methods for
oceanographic research, the means for carrying them out with allowance for the
requirements on them following from the physiographic and natural characteristics
of the basin.

10.2.1. Synchronous oceanographic surveys. This sort of survey has as its purpose
the synchronous (or near—synchronous) implementation of sporadic oceanographic
and other observations in definite regions of the Arctic Basin with the required
spatial frequency of stations. These surveys mt be carried out not less than
once each season and observations in each such survey should be carried out at one
and the same points. It is proposed that the duration of a synchronous survey com-
pletely taking in the area of the Arctic Basin shoald not exceed one mnth.‘

The observational data obtained as a result of synchronous oceanographic surveys
will afford the possibility for creating a map of the state of waters in the Arc-
tic Basin during the period of the survey. The possibility of studying the dynamic
processes transpiring in the investigated regions in this case will be still ex-
tremely limited and tidal processes in general can be cowletely neglected. There-
fore, in addition to synchronous surveys, and in some cases in place of them, it
is desirable to carry out so-called autonomous-automatic surveys. In such surveys,
at a sufficiently great number of points, with the required frequency covering the
investigated ocean area, automatic recording instrumnts will be placed out'on the
ice and will regularly transmit hydrometeorological information. The automatic in-
strument cosplexes set out on the ice must operate for a sufficiently long period
of time. Automatic means for the collection of oceanographic and hydnometeorological
information will make it possible to have maps of the oceanographic elements which
similar to synoptic maps constitute an "instantaneous" picture of physical fields
in the ocean at different depths simultaneously with meteorological conditions.

In examining the two variants of "surveys" as the possible immediate prospects for

the development of oceanographic investigations in the Arctic Basin, it is neces-
sary to evaluate the real conditions. Suc "surveys" in the Arctic Basin are

114

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
time consuming, expensive and organizationally quite complex. Host importantly,
there is a need for appropriate transportation facilities, equipment and gear,
which for the most part does not yet exist and which must be developed.

In order to carry out oceanographic surveys it is necessary to use special transport-
ation facilities (sea scientific research vessels, icebreakers or submarines, air-
craft or helicopters), as well as instruments and gear.

Synchronous autonogous-automatic surveys. together with the necessary number of
automatic instruhents and corresponding transport vehicles for their delivery

and placement on the ice, require the presence of e well-operating system for de-
termining position and the collection of information arriving from them. This sys-
tem can operate either via a special artificial earth satellite or via radio track-
ing stations. '

The practical implementation of such surveys, by virtue of the physiogrsphic and
climatic characteristics of the Arctic Basin, requires transport vehicles which

at any season of the year are capable of delivering scientists to the regions of
interest to them and ensuring the safety of personnel and the possibility of carry-

ing out oceanographic work either directly from transport platforms or from the
ice. A transport vehicle intended for such surveys should have the following qual-
ities: high effectiveness in active overcoming of thick drifting ice, adequately
great autonomy or radius of action, high speeds of movement in the region of im--
plementation of a survey. possibility of operating at any season of the year.

Among all the known sea and air transport vehicles. having to an adequate degree
the mentioned qualities, taking into account the possible prospects of their de-
velopment, the use of either a scientific research submarine or dirigible will
evidently make it possible to solve the formulated problem [35, 38]. Even powerful
atomic icebreakers, having a high effectiveness in actively overcoming perennial
ice and a great autonomy, are ineffective in areal oceanographic surveys. Due to
the relatively small rates of movement in the ice this sort of survey of the Arc-
tic Basin and arctic seas (even when using several icebreakers) will occupy a con-
siderable period of time commensurable with a season of the year.

when using for an oceanographic survey either a scientific research submarine or a
dirigible it will be possible not only to make the necessary observations throughout

the year, but also to set up laboratories on them which are supplied with the cor-
responding instruments, including electronic computers. For example, instruments-

tion aboard transport vehicles will make it possible not only to broaden the num-
ber of elements which can be determined in sea water, but also to make an in situ

analysis of sea water samples, which at the present time are transported by air-
craft from one oceanographic station to another prior to arrival at a base, which
is a substantial methodological shortcoming in operation of the "Sever" expedition.

The use of aircraft or helicopters for oceanographic surveys in the Arctic Basin
and arctic seas, with their year-round employment taken into account, is possible
under the condition that they, in addition to the requirements indicated above,
will also have such design and flight-technical qualities as would enable them:
-- at any season of the year (including during the polar night) to make primary
landings on the drifting ice with the choice of a landing strip from the air (for

an aircraft a ski undercarriage is required);

115

IKIICHHWCIAl.llﬂE(ﬂ'LY
lilitlﬂﬂCJAl.UBE(ﬂULY

- to use for the landing strip a floe of relatively small size (600-800 m is the
most frequently encountered extent of even and sufficiently thick floss);
- with a flight range of 3000-4000 km have a payload of not less than 1000 kg;

- have a relatively small flight mass (about 15-17 tons), which will make it pos-
sible to use for the landing a floe with a relatively small thickness (60-80 cm).

A factor of more than a little importance is the hourly expenditure of fuels and
lubricants, especially when the aircraft or helicopter must be used in carrying

out work from bases organized on drifting ice for which the delivery of fuels and
lubricants involves complexities of an organizational, technical and economic char-
acter.

Unfortunately, at the present time there are still neither aircraft nor helicopters
with such (or close) flight-technical characteristics. Even if aircraft or helicop-
ters with such qualities are created, for the considered work the helicopter must
be regarded as preferable because the possibility of using an aircraft is limited
to February-June. During the remaining part of the year the landing of an aircraft'
on the ice is virtually impossible either due to melting of the ice (sunset-autumn
period) or due to the polar night.

10.2.3. Stationary long-term oceanographic observations at constant points (or re-
gions). Such observations in essence are identical to the observations of weather
ships, which during the entire year at one and the sane points in the world ocean
make continuous oceanographic and other investigations. Regular oceanographic ob-
servations made together with meteorological and other observations over a period

of years at several representative points in the Arctic Basin will afford the pos-
sibility of obtaining data on the annual and long-term course of hydrometeorological
characteristics and its variability. In addition, the availability of year-round
materials in the "key” regions of the basin will make it possible to tie in data
from seasonal surveys. Stationary long-term c“-rvations at such points in the

long run will possibly replace the oceanographic investigations made on the SP
drifting stations.

In order to carry out such observations under the conditions prevailing in the Arc-
tic Ocean it is necessary to develop a method which would make it possible to ex-
clude the effect of the principal obstacle hindering its implementation - the drift
of ice. The constant movement of the ice does not allow the above-water transport

vehicle from which oceanograpuic work is carried out in the basin to maintain its
position in constant geographical coordinates.

One of the promising methods for carrying out long-term observations at a constant
point (or region) can be as follows.

A transport vehicle with scientific personnel aboard, supplied with everything neces-
sary for a prolonged (year or more) stay in the research region, arrives at the stip-
ulated point and is moored (with its technical characteristics taken into account)

to one of the floss, after which the scientific personnel proceed to implementing

the planned program of observations. It is assumed that some of the observations

are made directly from aboard this transport vehicle and some from the ice. The
necessary living and laboratory rooms are situated directly on the transport

vehicle.

116

IIHICHHNCIAI.USE(NVLV
Since the rate of general drift of ice in the Arctic Basin per day averages 3-5 km,
the transport vehicle in the course of 10-15 days can remain moored to the floe.

As soon as the transport vehicle withdraws from the stipulated point by 50-75 km,
the instruments and gear situated on the ice are disassembled and loaded on it and
it returns to the initial point. The movement to the new place together with disas-
sembly, loading, unloading and installation of instrunents should require no more
than a day. Such movements of the transport vehicle will take place regularly dur-
ing the entire period of observations at the stipulated point.

The implementation of such a method for carrying out oceanographic work in the Arc—
tic Basin requires a corresponding transport vehicle capable of withstanding (or

avoiding) the effect exerted upon it by compressive forces of continuous perennial
ice, relatively rapidly moving in it (or outside it), even under the conditions of

the polar night, or have a quite great autonomy. Among the most promising transport
vehicles for this purpose are: a powerful iccbreaksr or scientific research atomic

submarine. A dirigible is also not excluded.

0n drifting stations of the SP type, the practical introduction of new methods for
regular oceanographic investigations will transpire as individual elements continue
to be perfected,with the use of different technical and transport facilities. Ac-
cordingly, the importance of the 8? stations in the study of natural processes in
the Arctic Basin will persist for a long tine, despite the already mentioned nega-
tive characteristics of their operation.

Oceanographic work at the SP stations will be directed to a further investigation
of the problems of thermodynamic interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere:

structure and dynamics of waters, including mixing processes, stability, internal
waves, etc.

The continuation of the key role of SP stations in the investigation of the Arctic
Basin in the immediate future, however, does not preclude a further improvesent in
definite organizational-methodological principles of their operation.

In order to increase the viability of the stations, as the platform for their in-
stallation it is possible to use special ships whose hull would be capable for a
long time to withstand any effect upon it by the compressive forces of continuous
perennial ice [75]. The use of such ships will make it possible to install on them
laboratories which are outfitted with special automated measurement apparatus and '
cosputers, sosething which cannot be done in full measure on drifting stations. On
a ship it is possible to create far more convenient working and living conditions
than is possible on modern SP stations.

with the retention of the existing method for station operation (use of perennial
floes or ice islands for their placement) it is better that their organization be
accomplished using powerful icebreakers. There has been successful experience in
organizing SP stations by means of icebraakers. [The SP-lo station was established
on the ice by the atomic icebreaker "Lenin:'and the SP-22 by the diesel-electric
icebreaker "Vladivostok." The material-technical support of the SP-26 station was
accomplished by the "Sibir'" atomic motor ship.) The use of ships and icebreskers
simplifies the organization of stations since by employing them it is then

117

FOI‘OFFHJII.USI(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possible during this period to avoid primarily time-consuming work on construction
of a landing strip on the ice for heavy transport aircraft (which is inevitable
in the aerial method for organizing a modern SP station to which it is necessary
to‘ deliver more than 150-200 tons of different cargo).

10.3. Oceanographic Work From Ships

The presently existing technical facilities, instruments and equipment used on sea
expeditions do not make it possible in full measure to solve the scientific prob-
lems provided for in national and international programs for investigation of the
polar regions of the world ocean.

In this connection the question has been repeatedly raised of creating special
types of expeditionary ships capable of carrying out a voyage and executing work
not only in the marginal zone and amidst open pack ice, but also penetrating into
the mass of continuous ice or into shore ice.

Such expeditionary ships must be supplied with such laboratory rooms and special
equipment as will make it possible to carry out oceanographic work at low air
temperatures without danger of icing over of the instrments.

Evidently the prorotype of such ships is the scientific research icebreaker "Otto
Shmidt” and new ships of the ice class of the "Ovtsyn" type, intended for ice ex-
peditions. It is not impossible that scientific research submrines will be used 'on
a broader basis for oceanographic work in oceanic regions. It can be assumed that
at long-term stations scientific research submarines will operate in contination
with surface vessels which will perform the functions of an aeroseteorological ob-
servatory and supply observations in the meteorological complex synchronous with
oceanographic observations from scientific research submarines.

Accordingly, there should also be improvement in the method for carrying out ocean-
ographic work from ships of a new type. It is evident that automated instruments

must be used more widely (for example, of the bathythermosonda type); these will
reduce the working time at a single point, which is of very great iwortance in
working amidst the drifting ice. There must be a further improvement in methods
for setting out buoy stations when there is an ice cover.

10.4. Prospects and Tasks for Improvement in Shipboard Automated System

Positive results have now been obtained in the field of automation of collection
and processing of information on scientific research ships. Scientific-methodolog-
ical principles and concepts have been developed for the automtion of shipboard
observations which are realized in the form of a local shipboard automated hydro-
meteorological system of the first class in the stage of individual measurement
complexes linked to electronic computers. The introduction of the new instrumental
base favored the more effective inlementation of investigations under the POLEKS
(POLBX) program, as a result of which interesting inforsation was obtained on the
structure and characteristics of the natural processes transpiring in the hydro-
sphere and atmosphere in the polar regions.

118

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ing, accuulatidh‘i‘nd dissemination of information from the oceans and seas [116].
In examining the work of scientific research ships as an important form of funda-
mental study of the ocean, we arrive at the conclusion that it is necessary to im-
prove the developed automated complexes, taking into account the shortcomings de-
tected as a result of operation. There is need for refining individual methodo-
logical problems involved in the .32 of technical apparatus under field cond-

tions. There must he a broadening of the field of automation by including new
measurement complexes .in the system, increasing the set of registered parameters.
Finally, it is necessary to-proceed from available types of mathematical support for

the SIGMA-S shipboard system during 1980-1985 are definitely related to the develop-
ment of experimental investigations in the polar regions under the "FOLKS-Sever"
and "FOLKS-mg" (Pom-North and POLEX-South) programs. Below we give the prin-
cipal tasks in automation of shipboard observations in the inediate future.

automation regimes .

l. Constructive and schematic reworking of the MARS meteorological station and cre-
ation on its basis of a complex with a simplified electronic part. reduced dimen-
sions and more reliable sensors. There is a need for an increase in the accuracy of
measurement of meteorological parameters.

2. Realization of the technical design in an iuproved variant of the LSAS sctino-
metric system and its industrial production. The ASAs must be developed in an as-

sembly-unit principle, making it possible to build up the system from ousfit III

balance of the ocean and atmosphere. However, the determination of energy and mass
exchange near the ocean-atmosphere discontinuity on the basis of data from standard
measurements involves great errors. Accordingly, the realization of direct measure-
ments of the flows of heat, moisture and momentum over a water surface from aboard
a scientific research ship by use of an automated complex is an extremely important
prospect for the development of a shipboard automated system. The creation of such
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

a complex will also make it possible to develop investigations of the problem of
the heat and dynamic interaction between the atmosphere and ocean. consisting of
the necessity for parameterization of the principal physical processes transpiring
:It the air-water discontinuity. clarifying the relationships of the parameters of
turbulence and mean background conditions and the determining external factors, re~
fining the patterns of formation of the thermocline. etc.

As the basis for devaloping the new complex it will probably be feasible to use
the experimental apparatus developed at the Institute of Physics of the Atmosphere.
USSR Academy of Sciences and successfully mloyed on the expedition TROPnS-IZ
(mover-72) [28].

It is known that the method for temperature sounding of the active layer of the
ocean used in oceanographic practice by means of a bathythermograph has serious
shortcomings. attributable to the poor metrological indices of standard-produced
instruments and the need for a substantial reduction in the rate of movement of the
ship when making measurements. in addition. the character of movement of the bathy-
thermograph in the water also worsens the quality of the data, whereas manual pro-
cessing complicates the operational use of information. however. such observations
are important for investigating both brief processes and phenomena and synoptic
variability in the ocean, including under the conditions prevailing in ZOO-mile
economic zones, introduced by a number of countries where the stopping of foreign
ships is forbidden.

The use of a bathythermograph with a special sensor of the type of the American-type
XBT thermosonde eliminates the above-mentioned conlexities and limitations [92].
Encouraging results of work with the use of freely falling at probes for measuring
the thermocline profile were obtained on the 20th voyage of the scientific research
vessel "Professor Zubov" (1976-1977) during joint Soviet~American investigations in
the Antarctic Ocean.

The USSR has analogues of freely falling probes. The thermosonde is of the XBT type;
an experimental consignment was fabricated and tested at the GUNiO no SSSR and en—-
sures registry of the vertical distribution of water temperature while the ship is
proceeding on course. But this instrument requires improvement in its metrological
characteristics. 0n the basis of experience in developing the thermosonde it is de-
sirable to create a thermosonde of the XBT type with parameters not inferior to the
best foreign models.

A study of the forms of oceanic variability caused by turbulent processes of dif-
ferent scales occupies a special place in the problem of investigating the dis-
tribution of energy of movements in different spatial-tenoral intervals, investi-

gations of the mechanisms of generation, redistribution and dissipation of energy
arriving from external sources. For this purpose it is necessary to develop an

automated complex for investigating turbulent processes in the ocean. As the basis
for such development it is possible to use a complex created at the harine Hydro-

physical Institute. Ukrainian Academy of Sciences [1]. The recorders of the com-
plex are submersible self-contained instruments for studying the three-dimensional

velocity field and the temperature field in a broad range of frequencies (wave num-
bers). The complex must also meet all the requirements imposed on the automated

system as a whole.

120

FOIOFFICIALUSCONLY
MWLISEONLY

‘l‘ .
A shortcoeing of the infomtion on the state and distribution of different hydro-
chemical fields in the ocean lakes difficult the investigation of different thereo-
dynamic processes in the water layer associated with the formation and dynamics of
water asses and the development of biological life. This shortcoming of the data
must be at least partially filled by the develop-ant of measurement apparatus based
on principle mhing it possible to obtain intonation on the vertical hydroche-ical
structure with a high resolution [2]. The development should be carried out on the
basis of a sonde-bathoeeter with the inclusion in the canola of: neaaurement con-

verters for dissolved oxygen and the hydrogen index. whose technical realisation is
possible at the present tile.

The develop-eat of the cosputation element of the shipboard autosated systes is rep-
resented in the form:

- creation of an orgenieational-technicel subsystem for the accumulation and long-
tsrs storage of regise hydrometeorological infatuation in noise-inane form with
high densities of the record and rate of exchange with the electronic computer,

that is. a specialised bank of hydro-eteorological data for the polar regions.

Some of the basic principles of aatheeaticel and technical aethods for the practical
organization of a data bank are described in [27]. The stages in the realisation
of measures for the development of an auto-ted reference-data bank have been set
forth in [53. $4]:

- creation for first-class scientific research ships of a coquter data bank on
nagnetic disks (tapes) as an individual independent link in a specialised data bank
for the organisation of a speedy analysis of data and testing of the control ele-
ments of the subsystem for measure-eats and carrying out of in aitu experiments;

-- creation. in an expanded form, of a subsystem for the mathemtical support of

a third-generation electronic coQuter on scientific research ships for the check-
ing of the collected information. its standard and scientific processing, contes-
sion, transformation of data, statistical processing and model coeputations, accum-
ulation on equivalent for-ate of magnetic tapes for the purpose of exchange and
dissemination.

-- practical testing of the role of the cowlex of technical apparatus for the col-
lection and processing of hydro-neurological information (rrs A8061 - koepleka
tehhnicheskikh eredstv apparatury sbora i obrabotki gidroeeteorologicheskey infor-
matsii) on scientific research ships (classes I. II. 111);

-- introduction of program“ checking and correction of the information received
from measurement complexes.

Iaproveeent in the overall organisation and structure of the system evidently out
be carried out in the following directions:

-- determination of the degree of cosplexity and refinement of the principles of
operation of a local shipboard automated system of different classes in accordance
with the specific features of the scientific tasks facing the scientific research

fleet when it is used in the Arctic and Antarctica [116]; solution of problem in-
volved in the logical organisation of joint work in the Iakeup of a systea of dif~
rerent recorders of information and technical support of the data link between the
data couples and the electronic computer;

-- increase in the level of automation with exclusion of the registry of initial in-

formation on an intermediate carrier prior to its checking and primary processing
l56l;

121

"WWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- formulation of requirements and design of elements for regulating the controll-
ing effect on the measurement apparatus and its operating regimes for the purpose
of "closing" the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute automated sea
expedition computation data retrieval control system [53].

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1980

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

be

6.

8.

9.

10.

11.

Kolesnikov, A. 0., Panteleyev, N. A., Dyknan, V. Z. and Aretinskiy, G. Yu.,
"Automated Complex for Investigating Turbulent Processes in the Ocean,"
AVTMAIIZATSIYA NAUCENYKII ISSIEDOVANIY “GREY I W. SDIPOZIUH 1971, Ch 1
(Automation of Scientific Investigations of the Seas and Oceans. Synposiu
1971, Part 1), Semtopol', Izd-vo All UkrSSR, pp 24-36, 1972.

Barannik, V. P., Nechvalenko, I. 3., Khlystov, A. 2., et al., "Automatic Meas-
urements 1n Rydrochellistry," AWIZAISIYA “ABM ISSLEDOVANIY HORBY I
oxzanov. srurozruu. 1971, Ch 1, Sevastopol', Izd. HBI an UkrSSR, pp 10-16,
1972.

Alekseyev, G. V., Afanas'yev, 3. V. and Slirnov, N. P., "Antarctic Polar Front
in Drake Passage," TRUDY AANII (Transactions of the Arctic and Antarctic Sci-
entific Research Institute), Vol 365, pp 56-62, 1978.

Alekseyev, G. V., Vladimirov, 0. A. and Savchenkn, V. 6., "Hydrological Inves-
tigations in a Polygon Near Azores Islands," TRUDY AANII, Vol 315. pp 6-26,
1974. .

Bozhkov, A. T., nonantsov, V. A., Bub, A. P. and nepikov, A. V., "Analysis
of Water bases in Drake Passage Using the Plain Couponents Method," TRUDY
AANII, v01 346, pp 1a2-151.1976.

Andreyev, A. D. and Kochetygov, Yu. A., "Collection and Primary Processing of
Actinonetric Information Using the ASOGI Conplex," PROBLEM! AMIKI I ANTARK-

TIKI (Problem of the Arctic and Antarctica), No 53, pp 71-73, 1978. '

Afanas'yev, B. V., Pryanikov, S. H. and Kill, 1.. 3., "Experience in Conputer
Processing of Sonde-Bathoneter Data," PROBLEM? AVTGIATIZA‘ISII SUDOVYKB GIDRO-
HETEOROLOGICKBSKIKB NABLYUDBNIY (Problem in Autonation of Shipboard Hydro-
meteorological Observations), Leningrad, pp 102-107, 1977.

Balakin, R. A., "Autonomous Digital Instrunsnt for Measuring Hydrological Par-

ameters," PROBLEM? AVMAI’IZATSII SUDOVYKE GIDRGIBTEOROLOGICHBSKIKB NABLWD-
ENIY, Leningrad, pp 61-77, 1977.

Belyayev, V. 1., OBRABO‘I'KA I TBORE‘I‘ICHESKIY ANALIZ OKEANOGRAPICHESKIXH NABLYUD-
ENIY (Processing and Theoretical Analysis of Oceanographic Observations),

Kiev, Naukova Duke, 1973, 295 pages.

Belyayev, 8. N. and Pozdynin, V. D., ”Multidimensional Statistical Character-
istics of Sea Currents and Their Use," OKBANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 6, No

6, pp 1059-1069, 1966.

Blinov, N. I., "Oceanographic Investigations in the Central Arctic," PROBLM
ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI, NO 110, pp 53-59, 1963.

123

roatumuaALLsstnnx
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

“WISCONLY

Blinov, N. I., "In the [cc of the Arctic Ocean," DAL'NIY VOSTOK (Far East),
No 10, pp 110-129, 1976.

Blinov, N. I., Zakimrov, V. P. and Krutskikh, B. A., "Development of Investig-
ations in the Central Arctic," VOPROSY GEOGRAFII (Problem in Geography), No
101, pp 39-68, 1976.

Bogstyr', B. N., "Results of Studies for Creating a Shipboard Automated Systee
-- the Sim-S," PROBLEM? AWIZATSII SUDOVYKH GIDRMTEOROLOGICHESKIKH
NABLYUDRNIY (Problems in Autoution of Shipboard Hydro-eteorological Observa-
tions), Leningrad, pp 18-60, 1977. -

Bogatyr', B. N. and Prokof'yev, V. A., "Organization of Mathematical Support
for a System for Automated Processing of Observations on Ships of the USSR
Hydrometeorologicsl Service," PROBLM AVTOHAIIZA‘ISII SUDOVY'KH GIDROMBTEORO—
IDGICHESKIKB NABLYUDENIY, Leningrad, pp 101-68, 1977.

Bogatyr', B. N_., Sa-uahltin, V. A. and Tokarev, V. I., "Application of the Rank-
ing of Technical Apparatus Principle in the Auto-stion of Actinonetric Observ-
ations on Scientific Research Ships," PROBLDIY AV'rOMATIZA'l'SII SUDOVYnl GIDRO-
MBOROLOGICHRSKIK}! NABLYIIDENIY, Leningrad. pp 165-170, 1977.

Bogorodskiy, V. V., Gusev, A. V. and Spitsin, V. A., "Radiophyaical Investiga-
tions in the Arctic and Antarctica," PROBLDIY Amnu I ANTARKTIU, No 36-37,
pp 160—173, 1970.

Borisenkov. Ye. P. and Doronin, Yu. P., "Problem of Use of Artificial Barth
Satellites for Studying Polar Regions," PROBLEM! ARR'IIKI I ANTARKTIKI, No 17,
pp 5-13, 1966. ' .

Borisenkov, Ye. P. and Pedorov, 0. H., "Automated Systea for Measuring, Col-
lecting and Processing Hydrometeorological Inforletion on Scientific Research
Ships of the Main Adeinistretion of the Hydrometeorological Service (SIGMA-8).”
TRUDY AANII (Transactions of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research In-
stitute), Vol 301, pp 5-18, 1976.

Buzuyev, A. Ya. and Ryvin, A. Ya., "Cosputations of Ice Resistance to vaenent

of an Icebreaker Under Different Ice Conditions," PROBLEM! ARKTIKI I ANTARK-
TIKI, No 31, pp 69-73, 1969.

Bulatov, R. P. and Tarbeyev, Yu. V., PAHYATKA P0 TKXRNIKR BEZOPASNOS‘I'I PRI

RABOTAIG! NA L‘DU (Memorandum on Safety Procedures in work on Ice), Moscow,
Hbrskoy Transport, 1959, 36 pages. -

Burkov, V. A., "Experience in Placement of an Anchored Buoy With a Passive 'l'ar-

get at Deep-Hater Daylong Anchored Stations," TRUDY IOAN (Transactions of the
Institute of Oceanology USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 25, pp 45-51., 1957.

Vasil'yev, V. P., Malinin, V. N. and Smirnov, N. P., "Construction of an Auto-
mated Systee for Analysis of Aerological Infomtion," TRUDY AANII (Transac-
tions of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute), Vol 362,

pp 4-34, 1979.
121.

summon?
2“.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

35.

36.

VETBR I VOLNY V OKBANAKU I male. SPRAVOCHNYYE DANNYYB (Hind and Haves in
the Oceans and Seas. Reference Data), Leningrad, Transport. 1976, 360 pages.

Vite, Yu. Yu., HORYA SOVBTSKOY ARRTIKI (Seas of the Soviet Arctic), Leningrad,
Izd. Glavse'ﬁ‘a'orputi, 1943, pp 1-595.

Vil'danova, H. 1., Sobchenko, Ye. A. and Shatalov, V. A., "Introduction of the

Sande-BathoIeter into the Practice of Demographic Investigations,” METEOR-
0170an I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 5, pp 106-108, 1976.

Vlasova, Ye. N. and Prokof'yev, V. A., "Organization of a Specialized Archives

of liydroneteorological Data on Magnetic Tape," RUDY AANII, Vol 319, pp 211-
215, 1976.

Volkov, Yu. A. and Koprov, B. 11., "Method for Measuring Turbulent Flows of

Heat, Moisture and Honsntun Prom Shipboard." monks-72 (PROPER-72), Lenin-
grad, Gidroneteoizdat, pp 313-318, 1976.

Volkov, V. A., Gorodetskiy, Yu. A. and Lukin, V. V.. "Automted Collection,
Processing and Analysis of Oceanographic Infomtion on the Basis of Snell
Electronic Corputers," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrol-
ogy), No 12, pp 95—98, 1978.

Vorob'yev, A. 0., "Theoretical Principles for Determining Current Elements
From the Drift of a Freely Floating Buoy," um ZAPISKI VAHU [Expansion
Unknown], No 3, pp 69-52, 1952. '

VRﬂtENNYY‘B HETODICRESKIYB UKAZANIYA DL‘IA RABO‘I' IMI‘IBL‘NYH KOHPLEKSOH ZOND-
BATOHE‘I'R Interim Methodological Instructions for Operation of the Sonde-
Bathoneter), Odessa, 1976, 29 pages.

VRZHBNNYYE KETODICHESKIYB UKAZANIYA PO HASRINNOY 0mm I xm'momu
DANNY!“ GIDRM‘I’BOROLOGICUESKIICH NADLYUDBNIY (Interi- Hethodological Instruc-
tions on Computer Processing and Checking of Data From Hydro-steorological
Observations), No 9, Part 3, Sections 1 and 2, edited by D. M. Pilippov and
V. A. Rosantsov, Obninsk. 1976. 105 pages. -

Ganov, A. G. and Averbakh, N. V., ISPOL"ZOVAIIIYB RADIOLOKATSII V SUDOVOZHDBNII
(Use of Radar in Navigation), Moscow, Horskoy Transport, 1960, 237 pages.

Gordeyev, G. S. and Skurikhin, N. 11., "Calibration of Heasureeent channels in
the Hydrological Sonde-Bathoneter Complex Under Shipboard Conditions," TRUDY
COIN, R0 136. pp 83-88, 1977.

Cordiyenko, P. A.. Buzuyev, A. Va. and Sergeyev, G. N., "Study of the Ice Cover
on the Sea as a Navigation Medium," PROBLM ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI, No 27, pp
93-104, 1967.

Gordiyenko, P. A., "Scientific Observations Under Conditions of Drift of the

'Severnyy Polyus' Stations," PROBLM ARRTIKI I ANTARIO‘IKI, No 11, pp 9-24,
1962.

125

”WMWONLY
37.

38.

39.

60.

61.

a2.

63.

64.

65.

66.

‘7.

b8.

‘9.

FOI‘DFFRJA1.USE(NVLY

Gordiyenko, P. A., "SEVERNYY LEDOVITYY..." (Arctic Ocean), Leningrad, Znan~
iye, 1973, 57 pages.

Gordiyenko. P. A., SOVETSKIYB ISSLBDOVARIYA V VYSOKIRH SHIROTAKR ARKTIKI
(Soviet Investigations in the High Latitudes of the Arctic), Moscow, Znaniye,
1974.

Cordiyenko, P. A. and Kozlov, H. P., "High-Latitude Air Expeditions 1956-1962,”
PROBLEHY ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI, No 11, pp 105-106, 1962.

Gorbumov, Yu. A. and Horas, V. 0., "Principal Results of Use of Radiobuoys and

DARHS for Study of Ice Drift in the Arctic Ocean," PROBLEHY ARKTIRI I ANTARKP
TIKI, No 39, pp 33-39, 1972.

Grechin, H. A., "Conputation of Haneuvering Characteristics of a Ship Related
to Screw Operation," TRUDY TsNIIHP (Transactions of the Central Scientific Ra-
search Institute of the Navy), No 165, pp 38-55, 1973.

Denisov. A. s. and Kudryavtsev, N. F., "Tun-Conponent Recorder of Sea Currents
in a Layer Occupied by the Action of Wind Haves," TRUDY AANII (Transactions of
the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute), Vol 306, pp 243-264,
1972.

Deryapa, N. R. and Ryahinin, I. 7., ADAPTATSIYA CHELOVEKA V POLYAENYKH BAYON-
AKH ZEHLI (Man's Adaptation in the Earth's Polar Regions), Leningrad, Medita-
ina, 1977, 296 pages.

Deryapa, N. 3., Matusov, A. L. and Ryabinia, I. P., CHBLOVBK V ANTARKIIDE (Man
in Antarctica), Leningrad, Heditsins, 1975, 184 pages.

Dotsenko, S. V., TBORBTICEESKIYB OSNOVY IZHERENIYA PIZICHBSKIKB POLEY ORBANA
(Theoretical Principles of Heasureaent of Physical Fields in the Ocean), Len-
ingrad, Gidroneteoizdst, 1976, 151 pages.

Drenlyug, V. V., "Radar Method for Observations of Currants," RUKOVODSTVO PO
GIDROLOGICHESKIH RABOTAH V OKEANAKH I HDRXAKB (Manual on Hydrological Stud-
ies in the Oceans and Seas), Leningrad, Cidroneteoizdat, pp 278-292, 1967.

Drenlyug, V. V.,_"Bxperienca in Evaluating Navigational and Hydrometeorolog-
ical characteristics for the Rational Planning of Hydrological Studies on
Ships of the 'Professor Vize' Type," TRHDY AANII, Vol 325, 1974.

Drenlyug, V. V., "Allowance for Hind and Have Conditions in the Planning of
Sea Expeditionary Work,” CIDROLOGIYA I GIDROHBTBORDLOCIYA (Hydrology and ﬂy-
drometeorology), Leningrad, Isd-vo LVIHD ileni Ada. S. 0. Hakerov, No 3, pp '
51-59. 1976.

Drenlyug, V. V., "Use of Stochastic Values of Wind and Have Losses in Velocity
of Hove-ent in the Planning of Sea Expeditionary Hark," SUDOVOZHDBNIYB
(Navigation), No 18, pp 156-160, 1976.

126

ill!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.U§E(ﬂVLY
50.

51.

52.

53.

51..

55.

S6.

57.

58.

59.

60e

61.

Dreulyug, V. V., HE’I‘ODY OKEANOLOGICHBSKI'KB ISSLBDOVANIY I OBRABO‘I'KA NABLYUDBN-
IY (Hethods for Oceanological Research and Processing of Observations), Moscow,
nmammmm m, 1976, 180 pages.

Orenlyug, V. V., EFFEKTIVNOST' PLAVANIYA SUDOV PRI NEODNORDDNYKB GIDROIBTBORO-
LOGICHESKIKH USLOVIYAKH (Effectiveness of Navigation of Vessels under Nonuni-
forn Hydrometeorological Conditions), lbscov, Reklasinfornbynro M, 1977,

28 pages.
Drenlyug, V. V. and Shifrin, L. 3., NAVIGA‘I‘SIMNAYA CIDROMB’I‘EOROLOGIYA (Navi-
gational Hydroseteorology), Moscow, Transport, 1978, 303 pages.

Dyubkin, I. A., "Autonation of Processes of Collection and Primary Processing
of Scientific Information on Expedition of the Arctic and Antarctic Scien-
tific Research Institute,” "31808010an I CIDROIDGIYA, pp 97-103, 1973.

Dyubkin, I. A., "Hathenatical Support of the 'Sigu-S',” TRUDY AANII, Vol 301,
pp 19-30, 1972.

Dyubkin, I. A., Klyukvin, 1.. N. and Rountsov, V. A., ”Systen for Autosated
Processing of Deep-Hater Hydrological Data," RUDY AANII, Vol 301, pp 63-58,
1972.

Dyubkin, I. A. and Lodkin, I. 1., "Problen of Organizing the Shore Coordina-
tion-Conputation Center," mm AANII, Vol 301, pp 31-42, 1972.

Yevseyenok, G. N. and Olyunin, Yu. V., "Experience in Operation of the Cit-62
Have-Recording Complex on Hultitonnage Ships," PROBLEHY AVI’GIATIZA‘ISII SHOO-
VYKH GIWOROWCICHBSKIKI! NABLYUDBNIY (Problena in the Automation of Ship-
board liydronetcorological Observations), Leningrad, Cidroneteoiadat, pp 178-
186, 1977. (Collection of Reports at an All-Union Sendnar.)

Zagorodnikov, A. A., "Determination of Characteristics of Sea Waves in an An-
alysis of the One-Dimmional Spatial Spectrum of s Radio Signal," 1110!)?

1121 AN UkrSSR (Transactions of the Harine Hydrophysical Institute Academy of
Sciences Ukrainian $511), No 3, 1973.

Volkov, I. P., Hatusov, A. I... Ryabinin, I. P. and mryashcheva, N. Yu.,
”Importance of Sociopsychological Investigations for Optimum Organization
of Personnel at Antarctic Stations," ANTARKI‘IKA (DOKIADY KOHISSII) (Antarc-
tica (Reports of Collusion», Moscow, Ranks, No 16, 1975.

Zubov, N. N., V TSENTRB ARK‘I'IKI (At the Center of the Arctic), ibscov-Lenin-
grad, Izd-vo Glavsevnorputi, 1948, 390 pages.

Ivanov, K. N., Konar', V. A. and Stepanov, V. 11., "Experience in Operation of
a Unit for the Autoutlc Punching of Radiosonde Data - the 'Oka-3' — on the
Scientific Research Ship 'Professor Vize' on the TROka-M Voyage," PROBLEHY
AV'I‘OMATIZATSII SUDOVYKH GIDRG‘IBTEOROIDGICHBSKIKH NABLYUDENIY (Problems in Am:-
omation of Shipboard Hydro-eteorologicsl Observations), Leningrad, Cidroneteo-
izdat, pp 171-177, 1977. (Collection of Reports at All-Union Seminar.)

127

MOMGALIBEONLY
62.

63.

65.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

MOFI'ICIALUSEONLY

Boldyrev, V. 6.. Klimenko, V. A., Chernykh, V. V., et al., "Use of Sonde-
Dathoneter for Measuring Hydrological Parameters," TRUDY COIN, No 136, pp
83-88, 1977.

Bogachev, A. D., Gordeyev, G. S.. Dudko. B. 6., et al., "Results of Develop-
ment of the Hydrological Sonde-Bsthometer," PROBLM AMATIZATSII SUDOVYKB
GIDROHETBOROLOGICHESKIKH NABLYUDENIY (Problems in Automation of Shipboard ny-
droneteorological Observations), Leningrad, pp 78-85, 1977.

Shaydenko, A. Ya., Tokarev, V. 1., Sukhinin, B. V. and Busin, Yu. P.. ”Results
of Development of an Instrument Couple: for Stabilization and Orientation of

Actinometric Sensors and Prospects for Its Use in Actinometric Observations.”
PROBLEM? AVTQIATIZATSII SUDOVYKH GIDROHBTEOROLOGICEBSKIKH NABLYUDENIY (Prob-
lem in Autonation of Shipboard Hydrometeorological Observations), leningrad.
Gidroneteoizdat, pp 134-144, 1977. (Collection of Reports at the All-Union
Seminar.)

Klepikov, V. V. and Lukin, V. V., "Discrinination of Water “asses and Fronts
in the Antarctic Ocean From the Totality of criteria Using an Optim Cycle,"
INF. BYUL. SAE (Infernation Bulletin of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition), No
83, pp 52-56, 1972.

Klyukvin, L. N., "Algoritlm for Computing the Depth of Submergence of Batho-
Ileters on an Electronic Coupute'r," TRUDY MNII, Vol 342, pp 65-63. 1977.

Klyukvin, L. N., ”I‘lathod for Interpolation of Oceanographic Characteristics
Using an Electronic Comuter," TRUDY Mull, Vol 362, pp 610-79, 1977.

Kozlov, H. V.. "Automated Hater-Heasuring Cowlex," PROBLM AVTWATIZA'ISII
SUDOWKH GIDROHETBOROLOGICHBSKIKH NABLYU'DENIY, Leningrad, Gidroneteoisdat.
pp 116-120, 1977. (Collection of Reports at the All-Union Seminar.)

Kozlov, H. V.. ”System for Automated Collection and Processing of Data on
Haves Vith the Use of 'Hinsk~22' and Minsk-32' Electronic Computers," TRUDY

COIN, No 126, pp 215-222, 1975.

Kolesnikov, A. 6., "Automted System for the Collection, Transmission and Pro-
ceasing of Data on Physical Fields in the Ocean," AVTGWI'IZATSIYA mamas
ISSLBDOVAN‘I‘I MORE? I OKEANOV (Automation of Scientific Investigations of the
Seas and Oceans), Sevastopol', led-v0 an AR UkrSSR. pp 7-19, 1968.

Butrin. B. N., Nikul'tsev, G. S., Bogatyr'. B. N. and Novilwv, Yu. R., "Complex
of Technical Apparatus for the Collection and Processing of Rydroneteorological
Intonation (KTS ASOGI)," BKSPRBSS-INFOWATSIYA. SBRIYA AMATIZATSIYA SBORA I
OBRABOTKI GIDRMTEOROIDGICHESKOY mommn (Express-Information. Series on
Automation of Collection and Processing of Bydroneteorologicel Information).

No 8(60), pp 3-8, 1975.

Kort, V. 6., ”Principles of Planning and Organization of Oceanographic Re-
search," OMOLOGIGIBSKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA (Oceanological Research). No 27, pp
26-36, 1975.

128

POIOFIIGALUSIONLY
73.

75.

7s.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

85.

86.

Korchashkin,'ﬂ. N. and Osnidov, R. V., "Some Problems in Investigating the
Pine Structure of Hydrophysical lields in the Ocean by Sounding Instruments,"
ISSLEDOVANIYB OKEANICHBSKOY TURBULENTNOSTI (Investigation of Ocean Turbul-
ence), Moscow, pp 156-160, 1973.

'\.'.‘ -
Kravchuk. M. A., Ronantsov, V. A. and Smirnov, N. P., "Hater Masses of brake
Passage in Summer." TRUDY AANII, Vol 365, pp 70-82, 1978.

Kremer. B. A.. "Ice or Ships?", LBTOPIS' SEVERA (Annals of the North), Vol 5,
pp 116-131, 1971.

Krutskikh, 8., "Fundamental Problens in Scientific Research Hark of the Arc-
tic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute in the Ninth Five-Year Plan,"
PROBLEHY ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI, NO 39, 1972.

Kudryavtsev, N. F., "Method for Measuring Surface Currents According to Obser-
vations of the Drift of Freely Floating Buoys," PROBLEHY ARKTIKI I ANTARKIIKI,
No 2, pp 107-113, 1960.

Laktionov, A. P. and Shanont'yev, V. A.. "Use of Aircraft for Oceanographic
Investigations in the Arctic," BYULL. MBZEVEDOMBTVENNOY OKEANOGRAPICMBSKOY
KOMISSII AN SSSR (Bulletin of the Interdepartmental Oceanographic Con-ission
USSR Academy of Sciences). No 2, pp 65-76, 1958.

Makaimov, I. V., TABLITSY OLYA OBRABOTKI NABLYODBNIY MAD TBCHBNIYAMI V MORE
(Tables for Processing Observations of Currents in the Seas), Leningrad, Mor-
skoy Transport, 1957, 96 pages.

Maksutov, D. 0., "Some Characteristics of Designing of Ice Navigation Trans-
port Ships," TRUDY AANII, Vbl 309, 1973.

Maksutov, D. 0., ”Resistance to the Movement of Transport Ships in Continuous
Ice," TEDDY AANII, Vol 309, 1973.

Medvedev, N. P., SUDA DLYA ISSLEDOVARIYA MIROVOGO OKZANA (Ships for Investig-
ation of the world Ocean), Leningrad, Sudostroyeniye, 1971, 216 pages.

Afanas'yev, B. V., Medvedenko, V. V., Romantsov, V. A. and Sarukhanyan, E. 1.,
TRUDY AANII, Vol 364, pp 165-175, 1976.

Monin, A. 8., Konenkovich, V. M. and Kort, V. 6., IZMEMCHIVOST' MIROVOOO OKBANA
(Variability of the world Ocean), Leningrad, 1976, 262 pages.

Mustafin, N. V., "Oceanological Investigations in the Arctic," PROBLEHY ARKTIKI
I ANTARKTIKI, No 36-37, pp 19-33, 1970.

Nazarov, V. 8., Ovsyannikov, A. N. and Spidchenko, A. N., "Hydrological Valid-
ation of Regular Oceanographic Observations in the World Ocean," TRUOY COIN,
M0 105, 1971.

129

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USBGIHLY
87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

96.

95.

96.

97.

MOFI’ICIALUSEONLY

Nazarov, V. S. and Ovsyannikov, A. N., ”Determination of Possible Accuracy

in Computing Mean Daily Water Temerature Values From Observations in the
Ocean," TRUDY COIN, no 99, pp 25-33, 1970.

NASTAVLENIYE GIORGETEOROIDGICHBSKIH STANTSIYAH I POSTAH (Instructions for
Hydrometeorological Stations and Posts), No 9, Part 1., Second Edition, Len-

ingrad, 1967, 1.26 pages.

Nikitin, Ii. 11., SOVE'I’SKIYE NAUGHNO-ISSLEDOVA‘HL'SKIYB DRZYFUYUSRCHIYB STANTSII
(Soviet Scientific Research Drifting Stations), lbscow, Ind-v0 AN SSSR,

1961 , «‘03 pages.

Nikolayov, Yu. V., KIASSIFIKATSIYA GIDRGETBOROIDGICHBSKDCH PROTSESSOV S
POHDSHCH'YU EVH (Classification of Bydroneteorological Processes Using an
Electronic Oolputer), Leningrad, Gidroneteoitdat, 1976, 34 pages.

Nikiforov, Ye. 6., Sarukhanyan, E. I. and Smirnov, N. P., "Evaluation of
Divergence of Heat Flow in the Ocean," POLEKS-SEVBR-76 (POLKX-NORTH-76),
Part 1, pp 67-70.

Vorob'yev, V. P., Kuznetaov, Ye. 1., Obukhov, L. V. and Palevich, V. 1.,
ISSLEDOVANIYE IZHENCHIVOSTI GIDROPIZICEBSXIKH FOLEY V OKBANB (Investigation
of Variability of Geophysical Fields in the Ocean), Hoscov, Ranks, pp 185-
196, 1976.

Alekseyev, G. V., Afanss'yev, B. V., Ivanov, ll. I. and Olyunin, Yu. V.,
"Observations of Hater Tenemture Variations in Drake Passage in the Sun-
ner of 1976," TRUDY MNII, Vol 345, pp 63-69, 1978.

Vladiuirov, O. A., Nagurnyy, A. P., Nikolayev, Yu. V., et al., "Experience in
Use of a Sande-Bathoneter for Investigating High-Frequency Hater reaperature
Variations in the Pycnocline Neighborhood," TRUDY AANII, Vol 312, pp 32-61,
1976.

Paranonov, A. N. and Kushnir, V. 11., "Statistical Matching of a Measuring In-
strument With the Investigated Random Process," AVTOHATIZATSIYA NAUCENYKII Is-
SLBDOVANIY mm I OKBANOV. Ch 1. (Automtion of Scientific Investigations
of the Seas and Oceans. Part 1), Sevastopol', Izd-vo “61 AN UkrSSR, pp 118-
137, 1970.

Pozdynin, V. 1)., "Accuracy in Measuring Hater TeQerature by the Vertical
Sounding Hethod," HB'I’EOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA meteorology and hydrology),
No 11, pp 54-56, 1962.

POLOZHBRIYE O PLANIROVANII mRSKIXH I VOZDUSHNYKH BKSPEDITSIY GIORGETSLUZEBY
SSSR V OKEANY, WARKTIKU, VNUTRENNIYE I OKRAINNYYB HORYA I HORSKIYB US‘r'YA
REX (Regulations on the Planning of Sea and Air Expeditions of the USSR Hydro-
neteorological Service to the Oceans, Antarctica, Internal and Marginal Seas

and Sea Mouths of Rivers), Ind-v0 GUGHS, 1978, 16 pages.

130

mammomx
98.

99.

100.

101 .

102.

103.

106.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

Popov, Yu. N... Padeyev. O. V. and Kheysin, D. Ye., "Strength of Ships
Sailing in Ice." SUDOSTROYENIYB (Ship Construction), pp 219-221, 1967.

Rodal'. 1., 88m. PRIRODA I ZBIZN' POLYAPNOGO MIRA (The North. Nature and
Life of the Polar World), Moscow, Cos. Izd-vo Geogrsficheskoy Literatury,
1958, 267 pages.

Romntsov, V. A. and Sub, A. P., "Sons Results of Multidimensional Analysis
of Hater __es in the Norwegian Sea and Greenland Sea," TRUDY AANII, Vol
342, pp 24-3 ,‘ 1976.

Romantsov, V. A., Ivanov, N. 1.. and Hedvedenko, V. V., "Problens in the Math-
od of Oceanplo ica1 Research Using a Bathometer-Sonde," PROBLM AV'I'OHAI'IZATSII
SUDOVYIG! GI ROIDGICHBSKIKB NABLYUDENIY, uningrsd, pp 86-101. 1977.

Roshchin, A. 6., Bars-ykin, I. '1‘. and Budsrov. V. 1., "Measurement of Meteoro-
logical Parameters on Ships," PROBLEM! AVMA‘I'IZATSII SW mnemon-
owcrcassm NABLYUDENIY, Leningrad, pp 121-129, 1977.

RUKOVODSTVO P0 GIDROLOGICHBSKD! RABOTM V m 1 MYAKB (Manual on nydro-

logical Studies in the Oceans and Seas), Second Edition, Leningrad, Gidro-
neteoizdat, 1977, 725 pages.

Rybnikov, A. A., Marlevich, Ye. B. and Hersuleva, N. 3., "Methods for Comput-
ing Discreteness of Observations in Ocean," MD! COIN. No 99, pp 5-2‘, 1970.

Sabinin, K. D.. "Choice of Correspondence Between Periodicity of Measurements
and Inatrusent Inertia," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA Am. I OKBANA (News of the USSR

Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmsphere and Ocean). Vol 3, No 5, pp
537480, 1967.

Senikov, ‘1'. 'r., "Intensity of Signals Scattered by Ice Pomtions and Instru-
mental Method for Determining Ice Characteristics." RUDY ‘l’sNIIHI’, No 30, pp
113-123, 1960.

Zykov, I. D., Kravchuk. H. A., Olyunin, Yu. V., at 01., "Structure of Water
“asses and Geostrophic Currents on Antarctica-Africa Profile," TEDDY AANII,
Vol 365, pp 142-151, 1978.

Butrin, B. P., Nikul'tsev, V. P., Dogatyr', D. N. and Novikov, Yu. 8.. "Struc-
ture, Conposition and Prospects of Developsent of a Couple: of Technical Means
for the Collection, Accmulstion and Processing of Data Pro- a Scientific Ex-

perinent," PROBLEHY AVMATIZATSII SUDOW'GIDWROWICHBSKIKH NABLYUD-
ENIY (Probless in Auto-scion of Shipboard Hydroneteorological Observations).

Moscow, Gidroseteoizdat, pp 69-55, 1977. (Collection of Reports at All-Union
Seminar.)

Borisenkov, Ye. 9., Vladisirov, O. A., ngurnyy, A. P., et al., "Structural
Functions of Current Velocity Couponente and Hater Temperature for a Hydro-

physical Polygon in the Northeastern Part of the Atlantic Ocean," TRUDY MNII,
Vol 312, pp 12-19, 1976.

131

MWMONLY
110.

11].

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

INJIIOFIWCJAI.IENE(HVLY

Telyayev, N. I., "Self-Contained Underwater Buoy Station Hith Hydroecoustic
Search and Interrogation," PROBLEM? AVTUHAIIZATSII SUDOVYKH GIDROHBTBOROLOG-
ICHESKIKH HABLYUDENIY, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, pp 108-113, 1977. (Collec-
tion of Reports at All-Union Seminar.)

Alekseyev, G. V., Afanas'yev, B. V., Zykov, I. D. and hirnov, N. P., ”Ther-
mal Structure of Antarctic Haters Over the Continental Slope in the Neighbor-
hood of liolodezhnsya Station," TRUDY AANII. Vol 345, pp 138~141, 1978.

Titov, V. 3., "Some Results of Investigation of the Operation of BPV and 381'
Current Meters," TRUDY AANII, Vol 315, pp 120-137, 19745.

Tolstikov, Ye. 1., "Soviet Investigations in the Central Arctic," 11313030108-
IYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 5, pp 7-17, 1967.

Treshnikov, A. P., "Soviet Investigations in the Arctic," IZV. AN SSSR: SER-
IYA GEOGRAF. (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Geographical Series), No
3, pp 26-37, 1972. _

Treshnikov, A. P., "Results and Prospects of the Polar Experiment," PROBLEM!
ARKTIKI I ANTARKTIKI, No 56, pp 16-26, 1978.

Treshnikov, A. F.. "Investigations of the Earth's Polar Regions," PROBLEM!
SOVREHENNOY GIDRGIBTEOROLOGII (Problems in Pbdern Hydrometeorology), Lenin-
grad, Gidrometeoizdat, pp 205-228, 1977.

Treshnikov, A. F., Nikiforov, N. G. and Blinov, N. 1., "Results of Oceano-
graphic Investigations on the 'Severnyy Polyus' Drifting Stations," VOPROSY
GEOGRAPII (Problems in Geography), No 101, pp 49-69, 1976.

Trifonov, G. P., Pshonkin, V. S. and Plotnikov. G. A., "Complex for Automatic

Processing of Data From Atmospheric Radiosonde Observations." METEOROLOGIYA
I GIDROLOGIYA, No 1, pp 98-104. 1972.

Ul'yev, V. A. and Titov, V. N., "Cassette Accumulator on Magnetic Tape,"

RAZRABOTKA I ISPOL'ZOVANIYE NAUCHNYKH PRIBOROV V NADCHNO-ISSLBDOVATBL'SKIKH
UCHRBZHDENIYAKH GOSKOHGIDRGIETA (Development and Use of Scientific Instru-
ments at the Scientific Research Institutes of the State Comittee on Hydro-
meteoroloy) (TBZISY DOKIADOV) (Summaries of Reports), Obninsk, pp 7-9, 1979.

Pedorov, K. N., ‘I'ONKAYA TBRHOKBALINNAYA STRUKTURA VOD GHANA (Fine Therm-
haline Structure of Ocean waters), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat. 1976, 183

pages .

Fonin, L. H. and Koshlyskov, M. N., "Planning Methods and Scheme for Formulat-
ing the MODE-l Experiment," WICKESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA (Oceanologicsl
Investigations), No 27, Moscow, Nauka, 1975.

Puke, N. 11., "Radio Wave Scattering on the Have-Covered Sea Surface," RADIO-
PIZIKA (Radiophysics), Vol 9, No 5, 1966.

132

MOMMONLY
123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.
129.

130.

131.

132.

‘l._a

Dorkovskiy, M. T.. Volochkov, A. G., Prokhorov, V. I., et a1., "'AIST'
Digital Hydrophysical Probe," AVTOMATIZATSITA NAUCHNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY
OKEANOV I “OBEY. SIHPOZIUH 1971, Ch 1, Sevastopol', Izd. “GI AN UkrSSR, pp
61-66, 1972.

Chaplygin, Ye. I., RUKOVODSTVO P0 NABLYUDENIYAM NAD TECHENIYAMI NA POLYARNYKE
STANTSIYAKH I OBSERVATORIYAKH (Manual on Observations of Currents at Polar
Stations and Observatories), Leningrad, Morskoy Transport, 1957, 292 pages.

Chepurins, M. A., "Statistical Model of Objective Interpretation of Hydro-
neteorological Processes," TEDDY AANII, Vol 312, pp 197-203, 197‘.

Yushchenko, A. P. and Leskov, M. M., NAVIGATSIYA (Navigation), Second Edition,
Moscow, Transport, 1972, 360 pages.

"Arctic Field Equipment," ARCTIC J. 0? ARCTIC INSTITUTE OF NORTH AMERICA, V01
21, No 2, pp 1-11, 1963.

Claude, Riffand, DEMAIN LA MBR, Paris, 1972, 272 pages.

Gordienko, p.. or: ponanponscuuuc nan soanruuron, Dusseldorf, Econ.-Verlag,
1967, p 352.

Jones, E. E. and Asato, Melvin, "Recent Data Acquisition System Development
Aboard NOAA Ships," IEBE coup. sac. OCEAN ENVIRON. RBS., San Diego, Calif.,
No 7, pp 109-112, New York, 1971.

OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR THE AIDJEX MAIN EXPERIMENT, Washington, 1975.
Prada, K. 3.. Nichols, H. D. and Aldrich, J. c., "Computers at Sea-1972-0cean

72," I238. Conf. Eng. Ocean Environ. Res., Newport, l972-Neu York, pp 333-336,
1972. '

COPYRIGHT: Gidroneteoizdat, 1980

5303
C50:

8164/0164

133

FOI!0FIMJA1.USIIINLY