FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10392

I6 March 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IDTE

ms publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transaissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infatuation was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfaailiar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in. the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. Times within itens are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goveruaent.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(rouo 5/32)

CONTENTS

SCIDlCB POLICY

France '3 New Research, Development Strategy Analyzed
(Marc Albouy, Pierre-Frederic Teniere-Buchot;
meLEs, Jan 82) 00......O.0....QOOOOOOIOOOOOCOOOQOO.OO

-a- [In-wa-ln
l-‘OlOl-‘l-‘ICIALUSEONLY '
FRANCE'S NEH RESEARCH, navmmm sm'rmr ANALYZBD
Paris PUTURIBLBS in French Jan 82 pp 23, 29-60

[Article by Marc Albany and Pierre-Frederic Teniere-Duchotlx "Research and Tech-
nology-"Prospects Until 1985"]

[kcerpts] Hhile France managed to join the front rank of
international research between 1958 and 1967, we have since
then been witnessing the abrupt disemagenent of the govern-
ment as expressed by a research and development effort not
exceeding 1.8 percent of the gross doeeetic product. The new
ministration intends to respond to this long period of under-
investment by setting itself the target of devoting 2.5 percent
of the gross domestic output in 1985 to research and develop-
nent expenditures. This sudden change, which was designed in
1980 to launch the Eighth Plan and the tern of office of lin-
ister Pierre Aigrain, i: now being pursued with deternination
by the new administration which, the moment the 1982-1983 In-
terin Plan had been drafted, during autumn held a series of
regional meetings whose contribution was to be debated during
the National Research Conference (14-15 January 1982) in order
finally to lead to a Guidance and Programing Law. liarc Albany
and Pierre-Frederic Teniere-Buchot. the joint reporters of the
Interninisterial Group for the Interim Planz, here present the
objectives and nethods around which Prance's new research and
development strategy is taking shape.

Development Method and Contents of the 1982-1983 Interin Plan _ . .

.____-—-—~.

In accordance with prior guidelines, the 1982-1983 Interim Plan has two complement.-
ary objectives in the latter of research and developsnt:

To define an overall medium-tern strategy so as to attain the adninistration's objec—
tive under the best possible conditions;

Based on that strategy, to propose a coherent progrn of horizontal short-tern

' restoration measures and to sketch the -theaatic priorities which will be used for
' guidance in the study and implantation of coordinated research and development
actions.

The Interniniaterial Group charged with drafting the list of proposals presented to
the Central Planning Omission thus first of all decided to define a financial

I’Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

scenario leading up to 1985. In doing this, it fell back on the original experience
during the work of the Eighth Plan when several scenarios were studied (two long-
term hypotheses, that is, 1985 and 1990, to attain a DNRDIPIB [national research and
development expenditure/gross domestic product] ratio of 2.3 percent in conjunction
with two assunptions regarding the increase in the financial effort made by the
enterprisea)6.

Progress was made in two directions concerning the Interim Plan.

(1) The possibilities and the needs of the various sectors were spelled out more
specifically. On that score we can mention the financing effort of the enterprises:
although it looks relatively high (8 percent of the average annual volume increase
between 1982 and 1985), it is more in line with an assumption as to a progressive
"power" increase which presupposes energetic action by public enterprises (both old
and new) and a group of measures providing incentives for industrial research. The
same is true of the requirements of university research and telec‘ .munications.

He might also mention the share of the military budget allocated to research and
develop-eat which represents more than 20 percent of the DNRD: the figures given
for the financial scenario are compatible with the nilitary planning law.

Collaboration with the Defense Ministry in this respect was exemplary and is a bar-
binger of developments to come: the economic fallout fron activities connected with
defense as a matter of fact are so important on the level of the region that it is
no longer possible for the Plan to ignore tha.

Generally speaking, the Interim Plan tried to insert into the financial scenario the
possibilities and needs of the main actors: the distribution of the effort thus
springs from * consensus where each of the actors agreed to play his part in the
national restoration effort.

equal to 2.5 percent of the P13) with an execution target, that is to say, to make
sure that the research and development work done by the enterprises (both public
and private) will come to 1.5 percent of the P18 in 1985, that is to say, 60 percent
of the DNRD. This proposal received the unanimous support of the Central Planning
Omission and also got massive support from the Economic and Social Council.

It then cast light upon the extent of financial transfers necessary to attain this
second objective: the orders and the incentives from the government to the enter-
prises, in the matter of research and development, will have to increase from Pr8
billion at 1980 prices to more than Pr18 billion at 1980 prices for the period of
1980-1985. For civilian transfers alone, they will have to increase from 1.9 to
almost Fr9 billion at 1980 prices. here we have the real challenge on which depends
the future of French technology and industrial research. This transfer requires
the rapid implementation of new technological programs because the line of credit

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Research and TechnologyuProspects for 1985

Interministerial Research Year 1981, Payment Pleasures proposed for

Package (billions of 1980 francs) credits plus regular the 22-year plan, 1982-
expenditures 1983

Personnel _ . 6.7 +6.51 per year

Operational funds 2.25 +50: over 2 years

Infrastructure and current

related expenditures 1
Major plant and equipment 0
Incentive credits 0
Interministerial research

package 11. 3(1) +13. 62 per year

1 +20: per year (roughly)
75 +16X per year
5 +1002 over 2 years

(1) This figure corresponds to 11.5 billion 1980 francs in program authorisation;
Source: Report entitled "Le redressement de la Recherche at de la Technologie"
[The Restoration of Research and Technology], Interniniaterial Administrative Group
of the lnterin Plan, Paris, La Docusentation Francaise, 1981.

This financial scenario thus enables us to accentuate the central point of this
medium-range strategy and, continuing iron there. to draft the main lines of action.

The coherence of the entire scenario clearly showed the terms of the political
decision itself: either the government allows the enterprises to proceed at their
pace and in that case it would be forced massively to intervene on its own budget
to compensate for lack of industrial interest: it will eve: be forced, on that as-
sunption. to create its own technological develop-eat agencies. Or the govement
pursues a twin policy of incentives (through contracts with national enterprises,
through a set of bonuses and assistance for private enterprises). which will enable

it to relieve the pressure on its own budget and to "let things take their course"
instead of intervening directly.

The second alternative was selected: it is now well charted. The coherence of the
scenario proposed is sufficiently well founded so that any major lag in its imple-
mentation would seriously harm compliance with the objective established by the
administration. We met no longer waste tine or energy in wondering about the
road to be followed in an effort to perfect it (which indeed is a French failing);

instead we met resolutely work toward the attaiment of the objectives within the
required tine frame.

Starting with the 1985 financial focus, the group defined a 1983 scenario in terms
of financing and execution. But the critical point in 1983 is not only the inter-
polation of the 1985 projection. The Interim Plan as a matter of fact cannot be
just a simple reference point on a path to be followed because this means rapidly
correcting the idmlances and at the same time placing research and technology into
an orbit leading to the target. This twin operation will cost much in terms of
studies, reorganization, mobilization of competence, miscellaneous achievements.
and therefore funds. The 1983 scenario includes the cost for restoration and the
cost for placing the effort in orbit; it will require a larger inediate effort.

3
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
INDR 0iﬂﬂ€1Al.lEﬂ!(MVLV

_/

The financial scenario for 1985 has made it possible to detect the main lines of
action which will develop from the previously mentioned central problem:

while it is necessary rapidly to restore public research funds (operational funds
and infrastructure expenditures). this will have to be done harmoniously so that

we will be able fully to use a major infusion of funds during the next several years.
The research laboratories must be assured that we will not make the same old mis-
takes over again.

It is with this intention that a certain number of measures were included in the plan
concerning the improvement of management-—especially the drafting of good management
ratios-the implementation of an overall and decentralised funding policy for re-
search personnel, the practice of funding estimates and management procedures in
terms of complete coats, and a more precise estimate of the payment fund require-
ments. The increase in the hiring volume. established at 4.5 percent per year but
modulated according to personnel categories and laboratories, should permit the
necessary renewal of teams and. after the restoration of the proper level. should
guarantee a rise in basic and applied research. The speedup of the installation

of major scientific equipment and the addition of a certain number of projects will
run in the same direction.

The attainment of the objective involves the promotion of industrial research and
technical innovation.

There are three types of action which will be pursued or which have been launched
toward this end:

Using the tool of national enterprises and perfecting the tool of major technological
programs;

Promoting research and innovation within the enterprises; the principle of aid for
scientific personnel hiring--following the example of the PRG--was accepted by all
of the social partners and the methods involved should be studied rapidly. Old
measures (aid for innovation, medium-term innovation) will be perfected. The banks
and the industrial enterprises will be encouraged to create new financing companies
for innovation and risk capital companies. Finally. it is planned to double the
final aid package for industry;

Increase the possibilities of "outside" research through the resumption and expansion
of the innovation bonus, the encouragement of association research, the revival and
reorganisation of group research and technical assistance.

Preparations for the future involve the following:

Training (adaptation of the training of young people for and by research, insertion
of research activities into the various forms of teaching. supplementary training
of industrial supervisory personnel);

Organisation of research potential of higher educational institutions (especially
the big schools) capable of serving as lines leading toward industrial research;

I;
FOI1OIIHCZAI.USZ(NVLY
Cooperation between public and private research laboratories;

Transfer of knowledge with high-technology countries.

A certain nunber of these measures was provided for this purpose.

The involve-cut of the regions in national research and technology policy will be
carried out through the strengthening and better organisation of the regions'
potential and through a broader initiative on their part in certain areas (program
of regional interest, creation of cm facilities and collective resources, up-
grading efforts, efforts involved in scientific and technical information, as well
as technological assistance).

Bach ministerial department has contributed its thinking on each of the four major
axes of this action progra; the proposals have been debated. Only those proposals
which appeared most effective in defining the action program were selected for the

plan draft and this was done only after an opinion had been obtained fra the Central
Conission of Partners.

Bach ministerial department also was invited to express its research and technological
development requirements corresponding to its media-term concerns: the Ministry of
Culture for example mentioned the restoration of balance necessary with regard to
living creativity; the Ministry of Maritime Affairs raised the problem of a new
oceanographic vessel and the problem of funds devoted to research on living latter
(fish, marine crop cultivation. study of the urine snvirouent). Projects which
had been blocked until now have come up again, such as the human sciences research
library. Others have entered a new stage, such as the cryogenic trans-sonic wind
tunnel. These contributions have made it possible to outline some thematic priori-
ties which, added on top of the study missions already launched, will constitute
"the guiding thread" of a new research and technology policy.

In this respect, the Plan has selected:

Three sectors to be restored: culture, health, and lumen, economic, and social
sciences, particularly emphasizing the latter;

The in-depth development of technological programs in progress;

The need for carrying out as rapidly-as possible the six study missions already
adopted in the form of action programs“; '

Finally, to launch new missions in four fields: agriculture and food production,
materials, mechanics. and precision chemistry.

Interim Plan—Regional heetings--National Conference-ﬁnance and Programing Law

This effort-"which some people will find to be rather technocraticnmay be rather
surprising at a time when quite justifiably we are very such concerned with giving
all those involved in research a nore active role. Before judging it however we
must be aware of the constraints involved here. First of all, the Intern Plan had
to fit into an extremely tight administration schedule which persuaded the Inter-
ainisterial Group to work during vacations, a tine which is not at all propitious

S
roe omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for broad coordination. In this case, would it have been necessary to forget
about research in the Interim Plan whereas a year later. the Eighth Plan had as

a matter of fact assigned it top priority? Is it perhaps necessary to wait
several additional months in order to get the National Assembly to vote on the

necessary recovery actions while the time interval separating us from the target
keeps shrinking day after day?

Behind this question we come to the problem of the connection between the "techno-
cratic approach of the Interim Plan" and the results of the "democratic" debate in
the regional meetings and the National Conference.

There are three elements of reflection which enable us to place the roles and res-
ponsibilities in proper context.

(1) First of all. the thinking of the Administrative Group carefully avoided cer-
tain subjects on which it was advisable to have the scientific community express
itself. This is true for example of the status of personnel, the participation of
researchers in program orientation. and the management of the laboratories. mobility
and the organization of scientific and technical information. The same goes for
training for research and the revision of the scholarship and allowance system.
Fully aware that the actors concerned have much to say on these subjects and that
much was to be done, the Group sia;.v "opened the channels" and stressed the need
for an overall handling of the research personnel funding effort in a decentralized
fashion plus adaptation of the training program. '

Regarding other questions, such as team research, the Group only spelled out the
principles of reorganization without specifically indicating the method. The Plan
as a matter of fact should express itself on this issue which concerns the various
branches of industry. But the proposals of the National Conference will probably
enable us to work out the methods for this reorganization.

0n the other hand, it is evident that the basic researcher, involved in his own
work, does not have all the necessary information (especially figures) to draft the
overall medium-term strategy and to discern the broad outlines of action necessary
to restore the entire research establishment. The proposals of the Interministerial
Group and those from research personnel (through the regional meetings and the
National Conference) thus appear to us to be largely complementary.

The Interministerial Group for its part tried to pick only those proposals which it
considered capable of getting the broader agreement of the scientific community;
this is why it confined itself sometimes to just "opening the channels." In this
respect, the research missions of the various ministries have sufficient informa-
tion coming from research circles to prevent serious diasonances. And the first
result confirmed the prediction: there is no contradiction between the proposals
coming from the regional meetings and the Interim Plan draft.

(2) The shortage of funds. certain hasty measures taken at the end of the preceding
7-year term, caused a certain disaffection in research circles. followed by a growing
malaise. and finallv a large measure of irritation. It is clear that the restora-
tion of research cannot be accomplished only with money; it must involve the mobili-
zation of all actors in research, especiallv the researchers themselves.

6
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE¢MVLY
.>u...o§.§ 83:333. 8..ro 21.3.58.

93 3.8 we €33:qu .82 .8183: 833:3 3 628 .53 1335 on» no ~36 8325
19.3! dainty-«cases ﬂaws—"0.303 3" on a. Canasta on do a§cuoou 8.. anon—ad 302:“
.0233 one: .33- 33»: .5 S335: hoods—~08. and 53303— 3 tongue-coo coon—50.3 3581::
63:50 uses-:83?” saga-33:30:83 «0 959.332.: 3589.: Eng; 350305
9.3.3:: vanilla 353-3058. £585 2.9.28-6 339.23 33.35...» .3335 ~85:
owing-(Io .833: mogul». 23.3 ”Canal .0: cocouououlln soc-nu 82 no ganglia .3

 

  

35

4" .Ekiai
.¥£3§ig..iaitgfaiis.§"§
.IIGSigIIIa...

5:88.. + «a.
.tod
3823213898833

   

 

        
 

    

80.n—

  

0.3

        
      

0.: I «.m- . 83% £238.55 EI< N a .
an I}. 5 3 .a 2. .5...—

vd i o 96 n6 «6 Nn Cilia!» 8! I; H .3
ﬂ: 8o." n.0— ﬂn. v.2 1n. 21.33.83.839... 0.:
v.3 I 0.2 . . n :59 21869.5 Ion-8.8.8:.— a.

   

5: 85.. + 5....
8 he. 58 .¢
_ gaugiixigi
8 n:
i a... nn 3 S

i a 5 3 3

8 an n: on: n:

or 0.2

   

   

        
          

ﬂan

  

   

    

.6“ Jr «.9. 1.....953...‘ 8. In E...

     

o a $5. _ 352.3 52:83.: t
5.2. n.3, 9.20
|_ =5. ; 85...: a.

L. .IIIII.II I II. II. I. .II,.I....II|II

a. 39:.glo‘ga

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The regional meetings. first of all, and the National Conference then constitute
instruments of dialogue and of collective mobilization. The researchers must re-
affirm their existence and their social usefulness; they also have a need for ex-
pressing themselves, for organizing themselves in order to get the most out of the
funding allocated to them. The researchers in the public laboratories, the members
of the academic community. the industrialists who are operating on a lilited partner-
ship basis finally must get to know each other better, they must talk to each other.
and they must become aware--through the economic problems of their reaion-of the
stakes and constraints of the nation.

The Plan however also provides a building block which is essential to the entire
edifice: the massive approval of all of the social partners-~both in the Central
Commission and in the Economic and Social Council-—as a matter of fact constitute
indispensable backup support.

(3) In a guidance and programming law, retain those proposals which will emerge
from a National Conference on Research that can usefully complete and prolong the
planning setup.

The specific areas in which it seems necessary to provide complementation have al-
ready been mentioned: adaptation of training for and by research, status of re—
searchers and job opportunities, organization of laboratories, interdisciplinary
cooperation.

In addition to these fields, there are three important issues which deserve some
response: scientific and technical information, the technological evaluation office,
the old technology network; as a matter of fact, due to the lack of well-prepared
supporting information folders, the Interim Plan has not been able to dwell on

these three basic issues in a firm manner.

0n the other hand, certain supplementary steps suggested here either entail the risk
of harming instead of aiding research recovery the moment they threaten the overall
strategy or they involve measures which have already been debated and, in other
words, which have been settled. This is true, for example, regarding taxation in
support of industrial research. The proposal is well known and so is its motiva-
tion. France does not have any general measure providing an incentive for "in-house"
industrial research9 and this is why two types of measures, following the example of
foreign countries, may be advanced: either a tax deduction based on the increase

in research and development expenditures or a bonus for research personnel hiring.
The Ministry of the Budget and all of the representatives of the labor unions are
firmly opposed to the first measure because they consider it inopportune. unfair in
terms of taxation, and uncontrollable. The Barre administration already had re-
jected it, feeling that aid to investment was sufficient. How could one imagine
that such a measure has become politically supportable? Especially since all of

the social partners--in the Central Planning Commission-~accepted the principles of
hiring bonuses! Once again advancing the proposal of tax deductions may mislead

the people involved and may entail the risk of delaying the implementation of a
hiring bonus.

More generally speaking, the Economic and Social Council has expressed the role which
it wants to give to the Interim Plan. As a matter of fact it recommended to the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
administration to “make sure that the actions provided for under the Interim Plan,
the programs under the guidance law voted in 1982, and the programs in the future
5-year plan will not involve any duplication of effort10 that might lead to the
postponement of the achievements provided for in the Interim Plan and thus to the
weakening of its scope." To the extent that the guidance law will effectively be
based on the medium-range strategy and the action program spelled out in the In-
terim Plan so as to complete them, it will give the latter a guarantee of continuity.
Hence, the entire setup becomes a little bit complex: the 1982-1983 Interim Plan,
the 1982-1986 Guidance Law, the 1983-1987 five-year p1an-these find their justifi-
cation in the lasting character which the effort will provide for the restoration
of research and technology.

Beyond plans, strategies. and programs, the future is built through daily action.

The implementation of the strategy announced will demand great tenacity, an except-
ional effort in terms of organization and probably difficult decisions and chal-
lenges. After the big research festivities, which undoubtedly will take place during
the January conference. the mobilization of all of the various areas of competence
must not be relaxed. Will we manage to trigger or accept the indispensable coopera-
tive efforts regardless of where they come from? The challenge is too great and

too risky for the future of research and technology in France and we therefore canv
not fail to seize every possible opportunity in the course of this effort.

FOOTNOTES

1. Marc Albany is a lecturer at the Ecole Polytechnique and head of the study and
research division, General Planning Comissariat. In this capacity, he edited
the "research" chapters of the draft for the Eighth Plan and the 1982-1983 In-
terim Plan. Pierre—Frederic Teniere-Buchot is associate professor at the
National Conservatory of Arts and Crafts.

2. This article only expresses the opinions of its authors.

5. This commission includes the representatives of the labor unions and the associa-
tions as well as government experts.

6. This work was done by the group of experts charged with building the priority
action program.

7. Coordinated actions, research fund program contracts, incentive funding from min—
istries and agencies toward the attainment of the objectives.

8. These missions are as follows: biotechnology; jobs and labor; electronics; de-
Veloping countries; robots and machine-tools; efficient use of energy and geo-
thermia.

9. The innovation bonus is an automatic measure providing incentives for "outside"
research, reserved for the PM! [small and medium—size businesses].

10. And, of course, incoherences (authors' note).

COPYRIGHT: Association Internationale Futuribles 1982
END