FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10353
25 February 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 10/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
AIBTRALIA

Undercover Hark Brings Five to Court on Cocaine Charge
(TIE COURIER-MAIL, 8Dec 81)

Police Official Urges OK for Phone Tapping in Drug Cases
(Bill Birnbauer; THE AGE, 9 Dec 81)

Briefs

Marijuana Crop Burning

Policeman on Heroin Charge

RSV Drug Statistics

Qantas Steward Remanded in London
Drug Commission to NZ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Editorial Expresses Concern Over Heroin Addiction
(Editorial; MORNING ms, 25 Jan 82)

Briefs
Heroin Seized
Opium, Heroin Seized

PHILIPle

Briefs
Drug Abuse 'Not Alanning'

THAILAND

Corrections Official Comments on U.S. Prisoner Swap
(POST, 25 Jan 82)

Thai Governor Lauds U.S. DEA, Urges Foreign Aid
(Sophon mgkua; NATION REVIW, 1" Jan 82) ooaoooeeeooaooooooa

Editorial Calls Raid Related to National Security
(Editorial; POST, 31 Jan 82) ............... ..... .............

'VOFA' Comentary Calls 'BBC' Report on Drug Operation 'Resrettable'
(Voice of Free Asia, 1 Feb 82)..

Thai Paper Welcomes Burmese Move Against Khun Sa' 8 Shana
(Editorial; NATION REVIIM, 29 Jan 82)

Bangkok 'Nation Review'on lOmn Sa's Challenge to Sovereignty
(Editorial; NATION REVIDI, 26 Jan 82)

Thai Group Pursues Drug Leader Khun Sa
(Post, 11 Jan 81) .00IOI00‘I.0......000.0.0000...OOOOIIOOIIIIO

'THAI RAT' Column Scores Government Inaction Against Khun Sa
(Hai Tathip; THAI FAT, 25 Jan 82)

Thai Paper on Anti-Drug Drive Against Khun Sa
(Editorial; MATICHON’ 28 Jan 82) aaoaaoooaooooooooooooaooeooao

Poppy Eradication Program Progresses in Seven Villages
(NATION REVIEW, 1.]. Jan 82)

Pram Directs NSC To Help Wipe Out Opium Growing
(PM, 1“ Jan &) .0OIOOOOIOOOOOO.I.00.0.00...OIOOOOOIIOOODOOO

Briefs
Heroin Smuggler Jailed
Drug Trafficker, Opium Seized
lbrphine Seized in North-Central Province—Kamphaengphet
Heroin Seizure at Airport

-b-

NR OFFICIAL LBE ONLY
Chiang Mai Poppy Fields Destroyed

'hJor Drug Ring' Sought
Ties Between Kraingsak, Khun Se.
Hashish Plantations Raids

LATIN AMERICA

Briefs
MariJuana Arrests

BARBANS

Briefs
Call for Drug Stuck!

COLOMBIA

Briefs
Cuba Holds Ships, Crewmen
Marihuana Shipments Confiscated
Marihuana Shipment Confiscated
Paris-Bound Marihuana Confiscated

JAMAICA

'hro Thai Nationals Sentenced in Heroin Snmggling Case
(THE DAILY CLEANER, 22 Jan 82)..

MEXICO

Police Inspector Pound Protecting 'iraffickers
(EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO, 7 Jan 82;]:1. MARANA, 9 Jan 82) ...

Accused Official Recaptured
Jail Order Issued

International Amphetamine Trafficking Ring Discovered
(EL BRAVO, 19, 20 Jan 82)

Pills Seized, Officials Implicated
Traffickers Held for Trial

Judicial Police Capture Heroin Trafficker
(EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS, 9 Jan 82)

Briefs
Marihuana Traffickers in Custody
Increase in Young Addicts
Army Antidrug Assistance
Antidrug Cooperation in Sonora

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Drugs, Guns Seized. 79 Arrested in Nationwide Raids
(TRINIDAD GUARDIAN, 23 Jan 82)

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
AFGHANISTAN
Briefs
533-KG Opium Haul
2,122-KG Opium Haul

EGYPT

Drug-Control Agencies Intensim Efforts To Control Drug Inflow
(Muhammad Shakir; AKHBAR AIr-YAHM, 31 Oct 5 7 llov 81)

IRAN
Opium Worry Beads Found on Smuggler
(mm, 25 Jan 82)
Briefs
Drug Discovery
Opium Seizure in Shiraz
SUB-SAHARA! AFRICA
GHANA
Briefs
Marihuana Seized
sou'm AFRICA
Briefs
Mandrax Trial Postponed
WEST EUROPE
DENMARK
Scotland Yard Cooperates in Arrest of Hashish Smugglers
(Anders Hiig; mmcsxs TIDHIDE, 29 Jan 82)
Briers
Sold h0,000 Lbrphine Tables
FINLAND

Briers
Northern Finland Narcotics Overview

.. d _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SWEDEN

Paper Lands New Law on Forced Treatment of Drug Users
(Editorial; moms NYHL'I'BR, 16 Dec 81)

Brian":
Doss Against Prison Narcotics

UNITED KINGDOM

Interpol Arrests Two Nigerians on Heap Charge
(Aleye Ghenoba;1ml mommy, 15 Jan 82) . .........
UNDERCOVER WORK BRINGS FIVE T0 COURT 0N COCAINE CHARGE
Brisbane THE COURIER-HAIL in English 8 Dec 81 p 13

[Text] SYDNEY.—— A Queensland underk'e'vler detective «0 up e'deel to buy

$200,000 worth of pure eeeeine or two Sydney helele, Central Court wee
told yeelerdey.

5300/7526

The demure recorded 0 con-
\coeuon mm one o! the .up-

Dllm whlch unpueem him In

lhe deellne. u we: elleeed.

mm Riot. Mr K, Weller:

SI. were Dena mu Ola". an. e
an driver. at Woollenn.
3m m 90. e cleener.
Bendnlck. “they were Duh
charm! the: on: Sunday. el Ar-
nclme. they possessed end up-
nlled meme. Clull elso wee
chum null hex-ml mwlled eo-

ralne u Pom Polnl on October
2|.

The pollee proeewlor. ell
Brlen no“. seld the undercover

deleclne met Down: In Queens-z
lend. end wee cold CM! could-
nuppl)‘ lane quantities of co-'

cefnc Donn-a men manned lllc
delecllve elm e amnple ol the
drug.

831 note am the detective.

mulled Io Sydney on Oclober u
and um Cluu ev. me Res Hotel.
Klnu Croes. end we: mowed
with one end e lull men 0! co-
alne to: 85700. After runner ne‘-

munuone. Doums unecmr went

to the Amclllle Hotel.

an. m and both alumna --
evinced lo amply hell e kilo-j
great of coeelno to the «meme

lor 005.000. He eeld the meet ral-
ue of the crux: Imolved In we

den: was 3mm. ‘l'eeu on the
are; wheeled u. me we porter“
pure. me pun neerd.

mun” rmuumuom

"3'01":me-

ml. other men. ennui: tn-
voln'd in the mater. else ep-

" peered In rue-dam. new Ven

Joeph holler. 29. en mm. m
enereeu can hum annulled co-
celne ll Pom Palm. on Catcher
I. end Joeeph brain. 31. e le-
borer. ol Queueing. m
ell-rm with ham M
was mmbly eupecled at
having: been stolen or unlawfully
oblelmd on um el Wool-
lento.

A mm rnen. Weyne MM
Orovee. 20. sell-employed. at
South Melbourne. m chewed
wIIl- henna euwlled end noe-
eeeecdm town: yesterGey 0| Wool-

I.

an Ron new pence mm e
ﬂat el Mistral Woollehre.
yesterday mm end we pos-
melon of cocaine helm to
here I tolel velue or 060.000 He
an Crone ceme mm Mel-
bume lo any the an;

’ Hr Weller mm bell for
Omme end llllcr. and they were
amended unul Mona”. Dreole
he penned $500 bell end we: re~
mended until December 21.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030062-5

POLICE OFFICIAL URGES OK FOR PHONE TAPPING IN DRUG CASES

Melbourne THE AGE in English 9 Dec 81 p 3

[Article by Bill Bimbauer]

[Text]

CSO:

Telephone bugging anould be
allowed in investigations at
drug deals. acceding to the
Chief Commissioner 0! Police,
Mr Mick Mlller.

In the lamt annual ol
the Vlctoela Police. Mr Mil nld
the fallure to ,Ive pollce an el-
lectlveneanao

the drug
trade “may vellum perman-
ant aoclal ham".

lntat contlnuestohedla-
all lnthelaceolwelldoeu-
mudevldancetltatcooalduable

annlna and oeunlaatlon lot
Ellen drug deals I: undertaken by
telephone."
Mr Mlller also aald pawns
where W to enamtne lgjﬁal
n or l’l
olggeatad l‘p‘eople and “not!“ cant"-
taln clrcutnataneea, suspects".
Authotlty was reunited to take
physloloalcal speclmins front
people for forenalc examination.
aunrbone — 32 bll
m are no ena purer:
lor the very basic lncgstuative
technlmra and there are lndlea-
tlona t lnereaaln; Man 0!

5300/7526

crlmlnlls are e oi‘
cienclea.‘ he . “1
between demanding
breath (or anal s

an: d .
"mo! I I‘ll
a saliva e tron

of le suspected
”13:35.. crimes wt!

made: and rape.

“Yet there la pom
3? “m“ 12: 25:5"

.- mapac et
on limed mule“
he prevaﬂeate. arrest
late and lay-walking
may be arrested lor
atate that name an:
' demand to pollee'.‘

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030062-6
BRIEFS

MARIJUANA CROP BURNING--Helbourne.--Police today will burn a marihuana crop they
say is worth $5 million near Wentworth, in southwestern New South Wales. The
crop has been under police guard after a raid on Sturts Billabong, 30 km north of
Hentworth, on Monday night. Police said the crop consisted of about 50,000 plants
about a metre high, growing among grape vines. They said the crop would be har-
vested and burned today. John Clifford Treweek. 43, of Sturts Billabong.

appeared in court at Hentworth yesterday and was remanded on $10,000 bail until
March 3. Police told the court more arrests were likely. [Text] [Brisbane

THE COURIER-HAIL in English 9 Dec 81 p 26]

POLICEHAN ON HERO!“ CHARGE--Adelaide.—-A former Australian federal policeman was
involved in a conspiracy to import heroin into Australia with a street value of
about $1 million, Adelaide Magistrate's Court was told yesterday. Mr Paul
Charlton, of the Commonwealth Crown Law Department. said it was alleged that the
man was involved in a conspiracy to import the drug during 1979 and 1980. Damian
Howard Hahn, of Adelaide, was charged with conspiring with other persons to comit
offences against the Customs Act between May 1, 1979 and September 13, 1979. He
was also charged with conspiring with other people to import heroin into Australia
between September 14, 1979 and August 15. 1981. The offences allegedly occurred
in Adelaide. No pleas were taken. MrNick Hanos, SH, remanded Hahn to December 21
and allowed him $15,000 bail with two sureties each of $15,000. [Text] [Brisbane
THE COURIER-HAIL in English 15 Dec 81 p 21]

NS“ DRUG STATISTICS-~Sydney: The latest court statistics for NS“ show an increase
in drug offences, with more cases involving cannabis and an emphasis on the prose-
cution of drug pushers. The statistics for 1980, released yesterday. also showed
tougher penalties for drunken drivers, the Attorney-General, Mr Walker, said.

More convictions and higher fines for drunken driving followed Government measures
taken in 1978. he said. More breathalyser tests were made and licences were
suspended for longer periods. The report prepared by the NS“ bureau of crime
statistics and research showed changes to the law has led to some big drops in

the number of court appearances for some offences. Drunks and vagrants no longer
showed up in crime statistics, Hr walker said. They now were properly treated

as people with health and social problems. [Text] [Perth THE REST AUSTRALIAR in
English 18 Dec 81 p 18]
QAhTAS S'l'l-JIARD REMANDED [N LONDON--A chief steward with Australia's overs-seas air-
line. Qantas. has been remanded in custody in London on charges of possessing heroin.
(Mary Simmons), 52. who gave a London address. was charged along with six other peo-
ple over the seizure of more than AS400,000 worth of drugs in London last hovenber.
(Simmons') brother, Ronald. was also among those charged. No pleas were entered

and they will appear in court again next week. [Text] [3K1203l7 Melbourne Overseas
Service in English 0830 GMT 6 Feb 82]

DRUG COMMISSION TO NZ-The Australian Royal Commission into Drug Trafficking is
expected to visit New Zealand for 2 or 3 weeks toward the middle of the year armed
with New Zealand powers. The move follows a meeting in Wellington between the
attorneys general of the two countries. The New Zealand attorney general, Mr
McLay. said only technical and legal difficulties remain to be resolved. Hr McLay
said most of the Australian enquiry would concern with the activities of a New Zea-
land syndicate boas (Jerelin Briton) for murder. [Text] [BK120317 Melbourne Over-
seas Service in English 1230 GMT 11 Feb 82]
BRIEFS

OPIUM 0N LASHIO TRAIN—-At 1000 on 22 January, acting on information, a Lashio rail-
ways police squad headed by K0 Sein “sung and K0 K0 Aye searched passenger carriage
No a of the Laahio-Mandalay train as the train entered Hsipaw station. The team
found from Nan Hya U of Shwe Chedi Ward No 8, Kyaukme, six balls of raw opium,
weighing 6 viss [about 22 pounds] and worth about 20.000 kyat, hidden among the
vacuum flasks in a rattan bag together with other contraband goods. [Text] [3K120317
Rangoon HYANHA ALIN in Burmese 2 Feb 82]

MOULHEIN DRUG SUPPRESSION-Under the narcotic drugs suppression campaign of the
Moulmein Township People's Council. legal action was taken against 508 persons con-
nected with 400 narcotic drug cases between 1974 and 1981. A breakdown of drug
cases per year is as follows: 12 cases involving 17 people in 1974; 16 cases in-
volving 26 people in 1975; 5 cases involving 12 people in 1976; 66 cases involving
84 people in 1977; 88 cases involving 97 people in 1978; 88 cases involving 108
people in 1979; 60 cases involving 79 people in 1980; and 65 cases involving 85
people in 1981. Drug usage killed a woman in 1975 and three men in 1981. [BK120317
Rangoon MYANHA ALIN in Burmese 31 Jan 82]
BRIEFS

OPIUH SMUGGLER ARRESTED-«About 15 kg contraband opium valued at several thousands
rupees was seized by the Crime Branch of Delhi police following the arrest of an
alleged narcotics smuggler Parooq of Hadhye Pradesh from the Kingsvay Camp area on
Thursday evening. Crime Branch Deputy Police Omissioner R s Sahaye said that
the suspect was nabbed following a tip off. A trap was laid near the Ashok vihar
flyover after developing criminal intelligence. He said that during interrogation
Parooq had confessed having been involved in opium snuggling operations from Madhya
Pradesh into the Capital for past several months. Hr Sahaye said that the crime
branch had also seized imported goods valued at nearly Rs 15,000 following a raid
on the premises of a cloth merchant in Chadni Chowk on Thursday. The cloth Iner-
chant Rajinder has been arrested. [New Delhi PATRIOT in mglish 23 Jan 82 p S]
MINISTER CALLS FOR GLOBAL ACTION
Karachi MORNING ms in English 4 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] Islamabad Feb. 3--Pederal Finance Minister Gaulam Isnaq Khan has called for
concerted action at the global level to curb the menace of drug trafficking which
is growing at alarming proportions the world over, specially in the West.

At a meeting with the visiting Secretary-General of the Customs Cooperation Council
sir Ronald Redford here this morning the Minister stated that the Pakistan Govern-
ment had intensified its campaign against the narcotics smuggling. me drive he
said produced encouraging results. The Pakistan Customs authorities he added had
made record seizures of narcotics in the first half of the current fiscal year.
The value of the seized drugs ran fantastically high in the world market he said.

Rewards

The Finance Minister said that the anti-smuggling operations on the drugs count
cost the government quite heavily by way of rewards paid out to the informers and
the incentives provided to the customs staff. The Government he said was bearing
this merely as part of its international obligations. He suggested the creation of
an international fund by the Council with the help of leading Western countries to
finance the expenditures incurred by national governments of developing countries
on collection of information and payment of rewards and incentives.
EDITORIAL EXPRESSES CONCERN OVER HEROIN ADDICTION
Karachi FDRNING NEWS in English 25 Jan 82 p h
[Editorialz "Heroin Addiction"]

[Text] The report that heroin addiction has assumed analarming proportion in
Pakistan is not only disturbing but has also created a sense of horror among
parents whose children mostly students have fallen victim to this menace. Dis-
closing this, the Chairman of the National Coordination Committee for Health has
sounded a note of warning that the use of drugs has spread rapidly in Karachi,
Baluchistan and North West Frontier province. He also pointed out that heroin
addiction is the worst kind of addiction and difficult to treat. He expressed
his concern over the general and cheap availability of the drug in the under-
ground market. The recently started production of heroin is a very alarming
fact as the opium addicts are easily curable, but heroin addicts are very diffi-
cul t to cure .

It is all the more horrifying to note that it is being increasingly used by the
students of educational institutions, including medical colleges and universi-
ties. The report cannot be contradicted as this has come through a very reliable
source. In view of its dangerous effects, if the student community is not warned
and its dangerous reaction is not pointed out to them, there is every likelihood
that all educational institutions might fall victim to it.

A leading psychiatrist of the country and a member of the National Coordination
Committee has expressed his great concern over the prevailing situation saying
that once this addiction takes place, it will be very difficult to control it.

It is also a matter of great concern that the heroin addicts are considered
mentally handicapped. It means that now they are a burden on the society. What
is needed now is not only to start a campaign against this menace but better
health care facilities should also be introduced for curing drug addicts through-
out the country. Let the work be taken up jointly by the Health Department and
social welfare organisations.

CSO: 5300/5631
BRIEFS

HEROIN SSIZED—-Exise police yesterday arrested a person from Halir, and recovered
from his possession 2000 grams of heroin worth Rs. 2 crore in international market.
The accused has been identified as Mumtaz Hussein Rizvi. [Karachi MORNING NEWS in

mgnsh 4 Feb 82 p 11

OPIUH, HEROIN SEIZED--Peshawar, 12 Feb (PPl/APP)--The customs intelligence
wing hauled up 270 kilograms of opium and eighty kilograms of heroin. in an
operation on the Grand Trunk road here early this morning. Customs sources
said that the contraband, estimated to be worth about R580 crore in inter-
national drug market, was being smuggled down the country in trailer. This
was one of the biggest seizures of narcotics in the country. [Excerpt]
[CF170522 Karachi DAMN in English 13 Feb 82 p 1 CF]

CSO: 5300/5643
BRIEFS

DRUG ABUSE 'NOT ALARHINC'--Drug addiction in the Philippines. as compared to
the United States, Hong Kong and France, is not alarming. This was asserted
by Commander (Romeo J. Sanga), chief of the control, regulation and
intelligence division of the Dangerous Drugs Board. He spoke at a drug abuse
seminar yesterday. (Sanga) said the main drug problem in the country is
marijuana abuse. He said that of the 2,200 arrests made last year, 90 percent
involved marijuana users, and he added that only 27 heroin addicts were
reported last year. [Text] [HK130045 Manila Far East Broadcasting Company

in English 2330 GMT 12 Feb 82]

CSO: 5300/5642

10
CORRECTIONS OFFICIAL COMMENTS OR 0.8. PRISONER SNAP
BK250206 Bangkok POST in English 25 Jan 82 p 1

[Text] Thailand has agreed in principle to exchange prisoners with the United States
--the first time the kingdom has ever agreed to a prisoner-exchange treaty with
another country, Corrections Department Director-General Thawi Chusap revealed
yesterday.

However. he did not say whether a special Interior Ministry conmuttee appointed to
draft the treaty would consider exchanging Americans convicted of drug offences in
Thailand.

At present there are about 60 American prisoners here--thc largest national group
among the 500 foreign prisoners serving sentences at Bang Kwang maximum security
prison, Klong Prem, Lard Yao and other jails in Thailand. Most of the foreigners,
including the Americans. are serving jail terms ranging between 20 years and life
for offences under the 1979 drugs act.

High-ranking prison officials, however, are on record as saying that they would only
support a prisoner-exchange deal if narcotics offenders are specifically excluded
from it.

Mr Thawi yesterday did not mention whether the Interior Ministry committee would
consider exchanging U.S. drugs prisoners.

He said that Deputy Interior Under-Secretary Detchat angkomonchet had been appointed
to head the committee which would draft the prisoner exchanges treaty and that a
Foreign Ministry representative had participated.

The committee, which held its first meeting last Thursday, has not yet decided

what type of criminals would be exchanged or how long a prisoner would have to serve
before he could be considered under the treaty. However, it would not be necessary
to approve every exchange request made said Mr Thawi.

According to the proposals, an American prisoner repatriated under the treaty would
continue to serve thejail term handed down by a Thai court. He or she, however,
would be eligible for amnesty or parole granted by the United States. Likewise,
Thai prisoners repatriated from the United States could be freed under the amnesty
here, Mr Thawi explained.
Some other countries including Canada and France have also proposed prisoner ex-
change treaties with Thailand, said Mr Thawi. but no definite decision has yet been
made.

He added that he personally supported the treaty because it would reduce the cor-
rection department's costs in feeding and looking after the prisoners.

The U.S. move follows complaints by American prisoners of poor conditions in Thai
jails--comp1aints that foreign prisoners here underlined with a hunger strike last
summer. The strike eventually petered out but not before it got considerable cover-
age by newspaper abroad.

The controversial treaty proposals were first brought up in talks two years ago
between the Foreign Ministry and the U.S. State Department.
THAI GOVERNOR LAUDS U.S. DEA, URGES FOREIGN AID
BKlbOJlS Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 16 Jan 82 p 2
[Article by Sophon Ongkara]

[Text] Chiang Hai--Governor Chaiya Phunsiriwong has urged the international com-
munity to provide assistance in the marketing of various crops planted by hill-

tribesmen to replace poppy if they have the desire for the unsponsored crop substi-
tution program to succeed.

Marketing of crops, like poppy planting, should be treated as an international prob-
lem. This must be supported by other countries which appreciate a problem of Thai-
land if hilltribesmen's crops cannot be sold, the governor told the NATION in an
exclusive interview yesterday.

Stressing the government's policy to eradicate poppy fields, Governor Chaiya pointed
out that the crop substitution program, sponsored by the United Nations development
program, can succeed only when hilltribesmen-who are now willing to substitute
poppy with other cash crops--can sell their produce.

The domestic market ceiling is low, and this means that there will be surplus. If
Europe and other countries just look at only economic aspect. then the crop replace-
ment program will not succeed, he said.

He urged the developed countries not to cast a narrow view by limiting this problem
at provincial or national level. "I strongly propose that sales of hilltribesnen's
crops is also an international problem," he added.

The governor last Saturday took a high-level government team. including Deputy Prime
Minister Prachuap Suntharangkun, secretary general of the National Security Council
Prsson Sunsiri and top officials of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board to
inspect hilltribesmen destroying poppy fields in Ban Buak Chan of Mae Rim District.

Hilltribesmen in seven villages, covering 100 rai, have volunteered to chop down
poppy plants while three other hilltribe villages are still adamant to maintain
their plantations which cover about 40 rai.

Governor Chaiya said the crop substitution program has enabled Thais to consume

various vegetables and fruits such as peach, apple, strawberries, apricot. tea and
coffee trees.

13
There is an expected large surplus of coffee and red beans which Hestern countries
must help buy them. His Majesty the King's project has already proven that cash
crops might enable hilltribesmen to earn about 100,000 baht per rai, compared with
poppy which can yield opium worth 3,000-S,000 baht per rai, he said.

There is still no time-frame for the government to completely eradicate poppy fields
but there are many government agencies trying hard to dissuade hilltribesmen from
growing poppy plant, the governor said.

He said suppression drive against opium trade in the province has been effective with
cooperation from the Drugs Enforcement Agency (DEA). Chopping down poppy plants is
not the ultimate measures undertaken by the government which has been convincing
hilltribesmen that opium is not the panacea for all ailments.

The governor has been taking a hard-line stand against criticism by foreigners and
the Western press. He said a foreigner had asked him recently how he could let
poppy plantations going on right under his nose.

"I asked him. in turn, why well-education Westerners, who already understand the
hazards posed by drugs, continue to consume narcotics? and their continued consump-
tion has posed a lot of problems for us," he said.

Drovincial authorities recently proposed to the government reorganization of manage-

ment of hilltribesmen and the restructures of crops plantations. marketing assis-
tance, he said.

Thai Ambassador to Hashington Prok Amaranan yesterday visited the crop substitution
program at Khunchangkhian Village and 001 Sammun in this province.

CSO: 5300/5635

1h
ﬂlITORIAL CALLS RAID RELATED TO NATIONAL SECURITY
BK310315 Bangkok POST in English 31 Jan 82 pp 20, 21
[Editorial by Montri Chenwitthayakham: "It Became a Question of National Security"]

[Text] As the government campaign against the Shan rebel troops continues, a number
of puzzles about their leader, opium warlord Khun Sa. remain to be answered. espe-
cially his relations with Thailand. But more important is how the government action
has been related to the change in policy and its implications for our national se-
curity problem.

In his statement read by Government House Spokesman Dr Trairong Suwankhiri on Tues-
day, Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanon strongly condemned the past negligence in the
suppression of opium traffickers. Vowing that government operations will continue
relentlessly until Khun Sa's forces are pushed out of Thailand, Gen Prem said, in
part:

'ﬂhis group of drug traffickers is very dangerous to our country. They have, for a
very long time, been engaged in the drug trade in our country. Re have neglected
the situation for too long, and it is a great shame that in many ways Thailand's
sovereignty has been transgressed in the Ban Hin Taek area. such as in the collection
of taxes...."

Against whom did the prime minister direct his charges of past neglect of the pre-
.sent situation? Has General Prem been long aware of Khan Sa's movements and his
increased strength as well as the threat he is to the country? th had Khun Sa,
according to intelligence sources, been permitted totravel to Bangkok and Chiang Mai
'and to own a house on Sukhumvit Soi 71 and a shophouse selling jade near Phakao
.monastery in Chiang Mai?

Has Thailand recently made some agreement with the United States and Burma on the
suppression of Khun Sa's Shan United Army (SUA)? Certainly the attacks on Khun
Sa's troops took everyone by surprise. These are some of the questions to which
.many people want to know the answers.

0n the question of "past neglect". the phorographs of Khun Sa's vast barracks and the
large amount of weapons seized by the government forces bear this out.

15
Many of the modern and solid buildings in the barracks show that Khun Sa must have
been very confident of his security. The style of many houses, the swimming pool
and other luxuries made his headquarters look something like a housing estate in

the suburbs of Bangkok. It therefore seems impossible for the Thai authorities not
to know of Khun Sa's movements. But why did the government not destroy these facil-
ities a long time ago?

Commenting on the huge arsenal built by the SUA, Supreme Commander of the Armed
FMusﬁnkUuKmaMnMsathtmmsanmwtowummwmemucw
vernment by force. This is a very serious charge which he would not have made
without good evidence. It is, however, beyond the imagination of ordinary people
to see how Khun Sa could use his forces to overthrow the Thai Government based in
Bangkok.

Gen Saiyut also said the military had kept Khun Sa's movements under surveillance
since the first Prem government. That was nearly two years ago, but the public
did not seem to be aware of how grave was the danger posed by Khun Sa, except that
he has been known to be engaged in drug trade and to use armed caravans to carry
the opium.

If Khun Sa had the ambition to overthrow the Thai Government, he must have col-
laborated with some other forces. But we have learned that until lately he and the
Burmese communists had been enemies. We also learned that a few months before the
attack on Khun Sa's forces, the government had searched his Sukhumwit Road house.
So presumably the prime minister must have been informed of it. The fact that

Khun Sa was allowed to travel and to own a house in Bangkok and a shophouse in
Chiang Mai can only be interpreted that in the past, governments must have seen

the benefit of cultivating his friendship.

Khun Sa himself claimed that he had helped Thailand in the suppression of communist
insurgents and in protecting the western border. Indeed, he expressed surprise that
the Thai Government has taken harsh action against his forces. his forces, Khun

Sa said in his letters, were being built up for the purpose of fighting for a

Shan State independent of Burmese rule.

It is known that the Thai Government in the past did not want to open another battle
front along its northwestern border while the country already had its hands full

at its frontiers in the east and northeast. As those who have studied the minority
groups living along the Thai-Burmese border have explained, the Thai Government,
especially since the fall of South Vietnam and Kampuches in 1975, has been on
friendly terms with Khun 5a. This explains why he could own a house in Bangkok

and operate a shophouse in Chiang Mai, though in the names of his close relatives.

The Thai Government's policy changed when it became apparent Khun Sa's forces had
become too strong and was threatening Thai sovereignty. The "friendship" finally
collapsed when Khun Sa attempted to impose his rule in the Ban Hin Taek area and
began collecting taxes from the people.

In attacking Mae Sai market in Chiang Rai to avenge the Thai Government's suppres-

sion drive against them, Khun Sa's troops probably wanted to show the government
that they still have the strength to harass the townspeople even if they cannot

16
control the border area. In short, Khun Sa has grown to become a great danger to
Thailand and has to be dealt with.

On the question of support from the United States and Burma in the government can-

paign against Khun Sa, though it was not openly admitted, some sort of cooperation
must have been agreed upon.

Shortly before the attack on Khun Sa's forces, Foreign Minister Air Chief Marshal
Sitthi Sawetasila visited Burma. National Security Council's Secretary General
Prascag Sunsiri also left for a meeting in Burma a few days ago.

On Wednesday [27 January] American Ambassador to Thailand John Gunther Dean issued a
statement landing the Thai Government for its "courageous and forceful action"
against Khan Sa, which Mr Dean considered an "important blow against heroin produc-
tion and trafficking." Ambassador Dean's statement gives clear support to the Thai
Government's action, but the American officials denied the United States supplied
arms and other material aids to the Thai Government for this operation.

Host of the general public fully support the government's campaign against Khun

Sa's forces which have threatened our national security. The country has also won
praise from the United States and other countries which have long suspected that
some high-ranking Thai officials may have had a hand in drug trafficking. The drive
against Khun Sa will also help foster Thailand's better understanding with Burma.

He, however, cannot fully blamethepast governments for the policy of cultivating
friendship with Khun 8a or with any foreign forces along its western border such

as the KMT's 93d Division, as that policy might have served Thai national interests
at the time.

However, now the situation has changed. and the policy must change. This current
military action against foreign forces should provide us with good lessons in the
future formulation of our national security policy. There is the need for constant
reviewing of our policies. As General Prem has said, long neglect of the situation
can be very dangerous to our country. So is the lack of awareness of the changing
situation which brings new dangers.

CSO: 5300/5635

17
'VOFA' COMMENTARY CALLS 'BBC' REPORT ON DRUG OPERATION 'REGRETTABLE'
BKOllSOB Bangkok Voice of Free Asia in English 1100 GMT 1 Feb 82
[Station commentary: "The Khun Sa Operation; Where the Doubt Should Lie"]

[Text] It is now over 7 days since Thai border patrol police--and later on, Thai
rangers and army troops--launched an attack on the opium warlord and leader of the
Shan United Army at Ban Bin Tsek, a village on the Thai-Burmese border in the
northernmost province of Thailand. Newspapers and the international news agencies
have covered and are still writing about the suppression campaign. However. it
transpired that there have been some allegations about the intentions and sincerity
of the Thai Government in carrying out the operation. Therefore, it is necessary
to emphasize and repeat a few facts which should be incontrovertible:

l. The Thai Government employed over 1,000 border patrol policemen, rangers and
troopers in the assault on Khun Sa's headquarters. Many DOT: troops were held in
reserve. Helicopters and gunships were used, as well as OV-IO airplanes, which
not only acted as porters but also were used to drop bombs. Therefore, the Thai
Government was fully committed to using all forces necessary to destroy Khun Sa's
headquarters. The loss of 16 border patrol policement with 45 wounded is ample
testimony that Thailand was taking serious action.

2. Khun Sa and the Shan United Army have now lost their headquarters and a great
part of their sources including ammunition and weapons, food and medicine and the
printing press for their propaganda. The Shan United Army has also suffered over

30 deaths, many wounded and several hundred captured. Although Khun Sa himself has
not yet been caught, it cannot be denied that his capacity and power to deal in the
opium and heroin trade and his ability to use Thailand as a base for the Shan United
Army have received a serious setback. The Thai Government has never claimed that

it could in one blow smash Khun Sa. but after this campaign, it will be a very long
time before Khun Se and the Shan United Army are able to regain the position they
held before 21 January, if ever.

3. The Thai Government has long planned to use peaceful measures to push Khun Sa
out, but Khun Sa was obstinate, making the use of force unavoidable. There were
two main reasons why the attack on Khun Sa and the headquarters of the Shan United
Army was launched. One was because Khun Se is one of the world's biggest traf-
fickers in narcotics drugs. More than 70 percent of the opium coming from the
Golden Triangle comes from Burma, and the major part of this is handled by Khun Sa,

18
whose caravans bring the opium from inside Burma to makeshift refining camps along
the Burmese-Thai border. The heroin obtained is smuggled out to the world. This
practice is now broken, and the supply of heroin reaching Thai addicts as well as
to the addicts of the world should consequently be more scarce. The second inmort-
ant reason is that the Thai Government is serious in not allowing foreign forces to
use its territory as a base for attacks on another country. Gen Prem Tinsulanon,
the Thai prime minister. has made it publicly clear that while it may take time to
drive the illegal forces of Khan Sa completely out of the country. it was the go-
vernment's intention to drive them out.

4. Many other governments must also be gratified that the operationtathun Sa has
been disrupted, especially those governments which have to face the problem of
heroin addicition in their societies, and, of course, those families who have had to
face the excruciating problem of members of their families being addicted or who have
suffered from drug-related crimes. The Burmese Government should also benefit both
on the narcotics side and the fact that a prime mover against their government has
been dealt a super blow.

Given the above, it is most regrettable that on 25 January, (Jack Thompson), the
BBC Southeast Asian correspondent, inhis report concerning thesssault on Khun Sa's
headquarters cast serious doubt on the whole operation. saying that accounts given
by the Thai police spokesman were broadly exaggerated and overdramntlzed. designed
to impress outsiders of the Thai Government's seriousness. Although Mr (Thompson)
was using the old ploy of attributing such remarks to observers, he nevertheless
has to hear responsibility for airing them. If he could only see the sorrow and
grief of the families and relatives of the 16 border patrol policemen who sacri-
ficed their livea—-which was immediately recognized by the Thai Royal Family, who
sent Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakkri Sirinthon to preside at the cremation--
Mr (Thompson) would certainly have had no doubts of the Thai Government's commit-
ment to suppress drug traffickers and to expell foreign forces from Thai territory.
But Mr (Thompson) certainly could not have seen any of this, for you see, he made
his report from Singapore. The integrity of this BBC correspondent, therefore, is
certainly in doubt.

cso: 5300/5635

19
THAI PAPER WELCOHES BUFHESE MOVE AGAINST KHUN SA'S SHANS
BK299116 Bangkok NATION ntvmw in English 29 Jan 82 p I.
[Editorialz "Burmese Times It Right To Move Against SUA"]

[Text] Ever since the attack against Khun Sa and his Shan United Army was launched
last week, it was a foregone conclusion that the operation would be futile if the
Thai forces were successful only in pushing him and his armed units across the
border into Burma. If the all—out operation against the SUA has to succeed. it was
obligatory that the Burmese forces also moved to block Khun Sa's forces from enter-
ing their territory. That would be, in classic military terminology, the hammer of
the Thai forces smashing the SUA against the anvil of the Burmese forces. The ques-
tion had always been when the Burmese forces would move to become the “anvil“ and,
from all appearances, the timing is correct.

Hhile the objectives of the governments in Bangkok and Rangoon are the same, the
reasons for their combined action against Khun Sa are somewhat different. The

Thai Government does not want a drug kingpin operating a multimillion baht narcotics
operation inside Thai territory and also establishing himself as a warlord on Thai
soil and having his own domain of influence. From Rangoon's point of view it is
that the Shan United Army is posing a threat to Burma's national security since the
Burmese Government views the narcotics trade of Khun Sa as a means for financing

an army that unuld eventually prove a threat to Burmese sovereignty over the Shan
states.

There is much room for satisfaction in the combined operation-~more correctly,
coordinated operation--by Thai and Burmese froces against the SUA and Khun Sa. But.
at the same time, it would be wrong to surmise that it is the end of the SUA and
the drug traffic emanating from the Golden Triangle. Thailand's northwest, jungled
and mountainous, and the adjoining Burmese areas are not exactly suited for large-
scaJe military operations. And Khan Sa and his "army" are experts in pulling off
the vanishing act by disseminating themselves into the jungled areas to regroup
themselves another time when the pressure eases.

Naturally the current operations by the Burmese and Thai forces should be successful
but they must not rest on their laurels. It would need long and steady pressure
continued over years before the Golden Triangle traffic ceases or the threat to
Rangoon government's authority over the Shan states disappears. There is, however,
an important psychological factor involved and which Khun So has demonstrated al-
ready. In the time-worn traditions of warlords, it is just not sufficient for Khan

20
Sn to run and live to fight another day. Such an actﬂxiwould disrupt the loyalty
of the "soldiers" of the SUA whose service is more mercenary than patriotic.

Khun Sa seems to understand this very well because the morale of his "troops" is
very important to him. Not only did he threaten by letter that he would take
revenge but he did successfully his a police station in Mae Sai, Chiang Rai Province.
to demonstrate not only to the Thai troops but also to his followers that he still
had teeth and was not running away in the face of superior forces. But as the
situation develops, it appears that the bulk of the burden of annihilating the sun
is shifting to the Burmese forces.
BANGKOK 'NATION REVIEW' 0N KHUN SA'S CHALLENGE TO SOVEREIGNTY
BK260217 Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 26 Jan 82 p 6
(Editorial: "More Than Drugs Involved in the Khun Sa Battle"]

[Text] when we talk about Khun Se and about the battle that is raging in north or
northwestern Thailand between his forces and Thai forces, it is just not enough to
call him a 'Hrug kingpin," which he is of course, but we may have to resort to fin
de siecle vocabulary and call him a "warlord". A chill runs down the spine, to use
the same vocabulary, when we hear that 4,000 high-powered guns and 20 tons of am-
munition have been captured. It is only natural to speculate, how much was not
_captured--to speculate how many different caches he had in how many different places.

It looks like as if he had been receiving massive military aid from a superpower,
but that is of course nonsense. What Khun Sa had. and what Khun Sa has, is money
in quantities beyond our realm of speculation and we are living in a world, un-
fortunately, when money can buy anything. There has been a recent proposal from
the police department that those who are caught illegally possessing "war weapons"
should be awarded death penalty. But that same news item did not say how people
acquire "war weapons" but everybody in Thailand knows that various kinds of weapons
can be bought by anybody "for a price."

And Khun 5a is a man who can pay “any price“ for what he wants since he is in the
most lucrative trade in the world--buying opium, refining opium into heroin and

then exporting it to markets in Europe and America where they fetch prices which, in
kilogrammea, reach astronomical proportions. But buying arms, at any price, is

only possible if there are sellers. And we know, and our government knows, that
there are sellers--the question of checking the import of guns and ammunition by
private dealers and restricting them is as everyone knows just a red herring.

while we have already admired and given full marks to Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanon
for launchingthis action against the forces of Khun Sa and against a particular
opium caravan. it is necessary for Bangkok, of course in conjunction with Rangoon,
to determine how it is possible that he has been able to set himself up as a
"warlord" with his own army which is extremely well-equipped. What is even more
important for Burma and Thailand to consider is whether Khun Se is threatening the
sovereignty of both these nations by arrogating to himself feudal power over certain
areas.

22
Unfortunately. we have to say at least for the present, that Khun 8a is doing
exactly that-~having his own army. having his own area of 'bccupation" and exerci-
sing full power in those areas over which neither the laws of Burns nor those of
Thailand prevail. If this is the case, the only way to break the back of the 'Mur-
lord" is to keep consistent pressure against him--something in which both govern-
ments should cooperate. At the moment it is reported that Khun Sa is re-grouping
and is trying to hit back at the Thai forces. About this at least we are confi-
dent that he will have absolutely no chance of winning against the regular army but

it must be realized that he must not be allowed to assume such unqualified power
again.

Our contention, it may be evident, is not primarily against the narcotics traffick-
ing of Khun Sa. but against his challenging the sovereignty of Thailand on Thai
soil. There is-no question that his warlordship and narcotics are closely inter-
related, but there must be an effort to see that never again Khu Sa--for that mat-
ter any other “warlord"--can rise to challenge our armed forces.

CSO: 5300/5635

23
THAI GROUP PURSUES DRUG LEADER KHUN SA
BK110330 Bangkok POST in English 11 Jan 81 p 9

[Excerpts] Ban Hia Taek. (DPA)--Charlie Suraiya emerged from the tangled Burmese
jungle and collapsed, exhausted, at the northern outskirts of this tiny Thai border
village.

He brushed aside his shoulder-length hair and told the villages of his narrow excape
from an ambush by Muser tribes-am just across the border. "At first we thought he
was a comunist soldier," Ban Hin Tack vollage headman Kamdang Kawawong, 1.2, said.
"He was carrying a Chinese-made AK—47 assault rifle and Khmer Rough-style rice
bags. He showed us his badge that said he was Charlie Suraiya. soldier of the Ti
Army. But what is the Ti Army?"

The village headman's confrontation last October with the mysterious Charlie Suraiya
provides a startling insight into the Shan states of eastern Burma, a primitive
bastion of feudalism in the heart of Southeast Asia.

But who is Charlie Suraiya? And where does the Ti Army fit into the complex puzzle
of Shan State opium politics?

According to information gathered in the Golden Triangle and in Bangkok, Charlie
Suraiya is the nom de guerre of a member of a 39-man assassination squad sent by
Thailand into Burma to kill the most powerful opium warlord in the Shan states,
Chiang Chi-fu, also known as Khun 8a.

The American Drug Enforcement Administration has declared Khun Sa its 'humber one
enforcement target" and the Thai Government last year put a $20,000-dollar price
on his head.

Charlie Suraiys's assassination squad apparently succeeded in infiltrating Burma
from the northernmost Thai town of Mac Sai but failed in its mission ti kill Khun
Sa. Before they could hit their target, say Shan and Thai sources, most of the
raiders were killed in a jungle ambush by tribal troops loyal to Khun Sa.

The sources said the body of one Caucasian, believed to be an American agent, was
found at the scene of the battle.

2h
Villagers here said the bodies of five raiders were removed from the area by border
partol police helicopter. They said Charlie Suraiya was the first of nine survivors
to scramble out of the jungle on October 8 and 9.

The villagers said all nine long-haired intruders wore identification badges of the
Ti Army, standing for "Tai Independent Army." In the northern dialects "Tai" is
synonymous with "Shah."

Despite the Shan cover, Charlie Suraiya and his comrades reportedly spoke in a

eastern Thai dialect and identified themselves as Thai Army Rangers based at Korat.
Witnesses said that after reporting to a nearby Thai border patrol police outpost

the nine would-be assassins were whisked out of the border region by Thai helicopter."

The Thai military has made no official comment on the alleged cross-border incursion
but sources in Bangkok said the attempted "hit” was ordered by Prime Hinister Prom
Tinsulanon following repeated requests by the American Government to crack down

hard on the booming undenTriangle narcotics trade.

Western narcotics control officials are frustrated that after nearly a decade of
internationally-financed efforts to cut opium production the Golden Triangle this
year produced a record 600 tons of opium, half of which will yield an estimated 30
tons [as published] or pure heroin for local consumption and export to the West.
The other 300 tons will be consumed in the hilltribe villages and in the opium dens
of Southeast Asia.

The current crop, which will be ready for harvesting between now and mid-February,
is expected to be even bigger than last season's.

The supply glut has already sent opium prices tumbling, creating a unique form of
"inflation." Opium is recognised as legal tender here and has been jokingly referred
to as "the American Express of the Golden Triangle".

CSO: 5300/5636

25
'THAI RAT' COLUMN SCORES GOVERNMENT INACTION AGAINST KHUN SA
BK251209 Bangkok THAI RAT in Thai 25 Jan 82 p 16

[Column by Wai Tathip]

[Text] I feel very saddened by the loss of our border partol police and military
forces-by the numbers of those killed and those wounded--from the current opium war.
Also I feel saddened by the uncertainty in the government's policy. Which govern-
ment? Of course, the Thai Government.

Khun Sa or Chang Si-fu has had a hideout in Ban Hin Taek for a long time and every
previous government knew about him. his origin and his activities. There is no
question about his men and weapons. Khun So has a larger amount of weapons than
some of our battalions have. Ban Bin Taek is known worldwide as the source of
heroin production. Every inch of the narcotics-infested village is under Khun Sa's
control. It could be said that although the village is in Thai territory, no go-
vernment control has reached it. Although it is part of the kingdom where foreign
intrusion and armed occupation must be repulsed, the village has been a problem for
us all along.

While desiring to use Khun Sa's army as a buffer, our governments were also reluc-
tant at the thought of condemnation by other countries for having offered a hideout
to Khun Sa. This is how it has been. Because of such indecisiveness, Khun Sa

has been given time to build up his strength to the point where suppression is
impossible if it is to be carried out by the Thai Government alone. Without words
from the White House, we would not have read about the campaign mounted by ground
and air forces against Khun Sa as currently reported by the newspapers.

It is not likely that a man of the stature of Khun Sa would be captured or killed
just because of an arrest warrant offering 500.000 baht reward on his head. His
personal friends include several big politicians in Thailand. Khun Sa is not alone
in this regard: leaders of other minority groups having hideouts in the mountainous
border area north of Thailand reportedly have their close friends among the big-
shots in Bangkok.

The situation would not be this bad and we would not have lost such a large number
of policemen and soldiers in the current campaign if only we had a consistent and
firm policy with regard to Khun Sa or any other group setting up an independent
state inside our territory.

26
I am not sure myself whether the government's crackdown on Khan Sa's hideout will

achieve the expected result. From the point of view of the timing of the attack.

one can say that it is already too late. Khun Sa's influence has long been estab-
lished in the area--so long so that some forget that Dan “in Tack is part of Thai

territory. Our men entering the areas were disarmed by Khun Sa's men and not the

other way around. This is a known fact among government authorities. The picture
in my column is taken from the BANGKOK POST yesterday. Please have a look and re-
alize to what extent we have allowed this problem to grow.

I feel saddened for the loss of lives by my compatriots. Yet, I am even more sad-
dened by the failure of our governments to take responsibility for our own country.

CSO: 5300/5637

27
THAI PAP“ 0N ANTI-DRUG DRIVE AGAINST KHUN SA
BK281165 Bangkok HATICHON in Thai 28 Jan 32 p (4
[Editorial: "Rio Made Khun Sa Arrogant?"]

[Text] When reports about the government's campaign against Khun Sa broke out on
21 January, everyone lauded the government for its decisiveness. At the same time,
everyone was alarmed by the scope of IGIun Sa's strength and his influencc--by the
size of his stronghold at Ban llin Tack with its loo-bed hospital and about 10 tons
or S helicopters load of modern weapons and food supplies. and by the fact that he
has even acquired Thai nationality and that his friends include some bigshots in the
military and political circles.

There is a question. what and who were responsible for the growth and strength

of Khun Sa's force? Long the many answers are these. First, Khun Sa's force was
the product of the 0.8. strategy on encirclement of China adopted at the end of
World War II. Especially. it came into existence in the same manner as the forces of
the 93d Kuomintang Division and the movement of U Nu, that is, after Ne Win's trans-
formation of Burma into a socialist country, Burmese style. The growth of Khun Sa's
force then. cannot be isolated from 11.8. aid channelled through big military men
and warlords in the Thai Armed Forces.

Without such support at internationally and nationally high levels, it would be
impossible for Khun Sa to build up such a big army comprising some 6,000 men, with
large quantities of modern weapons.

Although he claimed that his army was set up for national liberation, Khun Sa cannot
deny the fact that his main business has been opium and heroin production and traf-
ficking.

According to a report compiled by the U.s. Elbassy in Thailand, 70 percent of the
entire flow of heroin and opium frustheColden Triangle came from Khun Sa. With
his wealth being accumulated from narcotics trading, with his strength in man and
weapons being built up with the backing of certain world powers and the support of
some nilitary and political figures in Thailand. Khun Se is not an ordinary drug
trafficker but a kingpin himself.

28
The decision of the Prem Tinsulanon government to launch a suppression campaign
against the group was a bold one and it will contribute to the efforts of cracking
down on the sources of narcotics which have affected world population for so long.
However, if the campaign against Khun Se is being carried out in isolation-~without
any consideration of reviewing the policy adopted by the previous governments, it
would mean that the probelm is not being solved at its root. The point here is:
the government shOuld not act as a medium for any foreign governments and should
not give support or backing to such illegal groups again. If we do not learn from
the mistake we have made, we will again fall into the trap of giving support to the
wrong people as we did with Khun Sa.

CSO: 5300/5637

29
POPPY MICATION PROGRAM PROGRESSES IN SEVEN VILLAGES
“110300 Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 11 Jan 82 pp 1, 10

[Text] "The main problem seems to be how to prevent certain groups of people from
down there to instigate the hilltribers up there to ignore the government's per-
suasion," says Squadron Leader Prasong Sunsiri.

The National Security Council secretary general. who accompanied a team of senior
government officials to one of the ten villages in Chiang Mai elated to become
"opium-free zones" on Saturday, told.the NATION yesterday that "certain people" from
the plains had gone up to the hills to start their own cultivation of poppy fields.
sometimes even hiring the hilltrivers to do it for then.

"I won't name then. But I an checking into these groups of people—and how to deal
with them effectively," Prasong said.

Hilltribers in seven villages in Chiang Mai have in the past two weeks voluntar-
ily chopped down their poppy fields covering about 100 rai of land.

"But we have yet to convince hilltribers in three other villages to do it. The
prime sinister has assigned the National Security Council to help coordinate this
work and the thrust of his instruction is to do it gently," the NCS secretary
general said. Prasong appears sympathetic to the plight of some of the hilltribes-
men.

"In some villages, the hilltribers plant poppies for opium for their own consump-
tion. And many of them are addicted to it. If they chop down the poppy plants and
have to buy opium from other sources. that wouldn't solve the problem of trying to
augment their income," he explained.

The three villages in question are Ban Khun Hang in Amphoe Sanpatong. Ban Puitai
and Ben Panghinpon in Amphoe Nae Chaem where about 40 rai of poppy plants continue
to stand out as a sore thumb in the government's efforts to create 10 opium-free
zones. The recent pressure from the U.S. Embassy had clashed head-on with the
political sensitivity among government leaders.

"The U.S. may want us to do it quickly. But they have to realize that we don't
want to turn it into a political issue. The hilltribers live in a very vulnerable
area. They could turn against the government or join the other side if we do it
with force." said a senior Thai official at the office of the Narcotics Control
Office.

30
when the 0.5. assistant secretary of state for international narcotics affairs,
Dominic DiCarlo, paid a visit to Bangkok last week, he was asked by certain American
newsmen on whether he was here to "pressure" the Thai Government to speed up the
process of creating the opium-free zones in Chiang Mai.

DiCarlo reportedly expressed understanding with the Thai problems. He said during
a one-day visit here last Wednesday that the u.s. and other governments would be
keeping a close eye on the Thai programme to see whether it could be applied else-
where. DiCarlo _was referring to the fact that the Thai programme was the first in
which crop substitution was being followed by eradication.

Squadron leader Prasong pointed out that the problem is not as simplistic as it may
look from outside. "For one thing, the areas under poppy cultivation outside these
villages may be larger than those slated for destruction. This is particularly true
with Dan Panghinpon in Amphoe Mae Chaem," he said.

The solution, he said, would take time-and the rackets behind the hilltribers must
be dealt with. Prasong refused to say how he will cut the connection, which had
been on for a long time.

The top-level government team, led by Deputy Premier Gen Prachuab Suntharangkun and
including secretary general of the ONCB, Police Maj Gen Phao Sarasin, saw Hmong
hilltribers uprooting their own poppy plants in Ben Bunk, Chiang Mai, without show-
ing any antagonism, on Saturday. The voluntary eradication, earlier set for Novem-
ber, was postponed until the end of December.

"With the seven villages. we have completed our tasks. Opium is harvested once a
year and we have to offer them rice and other kinds of food to offset the immediate
loss in income although they already got guaranteed prices for coffee, red beans and
vegetables under the substitution crop programme," Prasong said.

The overall opium production picture in the ”Golden Triangle," however, is far from
encouraging, according to Thai antinarcotics officials, who said another bumper
crop of opium is again expected this harvest, which is due to begin at the end of
this month. Last year's extremely good output of opium was estimated to be in the
tune of about 600 tons of opium.

Antinarcotics Thai officials said they had braced themselves for the new harvest.
They said they would step up their efforts to get alleged drug kingpin Khun Sa,
alias Chang Si-fu, who carried a 500,000-baht prize on his head. He is known to
run about nine heroin refineries along the Thai-Burmese border.

CSO: 5300/5635

31
PREM DIRECTS NSC TO HELP WIPE OUT OPIUM GROWING
BK160229 Bangkok POST in English 14 Jan 82 p 3

[Text] Prime Minister Gen Prem Tinsulanon has assigned the National Security Coun-
cil [NSC] to co-ordinate a scheme aimed at wiping out opium growing.

The prime minister yesterday chaired a meeting of Office of the Narcotics Control
Board [ONCD] at which he outlined the scheme aimed at eliminating opium growing
in the north.

The meeting was attended by ONCD Chairman Gen Prachusb Suntharangkun; ONCD Secretary-
Ceneral Pol Maj Gen Phao Sarasin; Foreign Minister Acm Sitthi Sawetsila; NSC Sec-
retary General Sqd Ldr Prasong Sunsiri; Interior Under Secretary Phisan Munsatsathon;
and representatives from the Agriculture Ministry and irrigation and public welfare
departments.

Acknowledging that opium and hilltribe problems are related to national security,
the prime minister assigned the NSC to co-ordinate with other concerned agencies to

achieve greater efficiency and to avoid duplication. The agencies include the ONCD,
the Agricultural Ministry, Interior Ministry and the public welfare. forestry and
irrigation departments.

Sqd Ldr Prasong said after the meeting that the prime minister expressed concern
for the welfare of the hilltribes, who total between 300,000 to 400,000. He said
Gen Prem believed that eradication programmes should coincide with a cash crop sub-
stitution scheme.

Gen Prachuap said that a special committee would be set up to take responsibility
for hilltribes crops substitution programme which is in addition to the United
Nations-sponsored crop replacement scheme introduced in certain areas of Chiang Mai
Province more than seven years ago.

General Prachuap said the hilltribes people had cooperated with the first poppy field
eradition programme begun this month in the 10 villages under the unsponsored crop
replacement programme.

Hilltribes farmers in seven villages had agreed to destroy their opium plantations
and the programme would be continued to cover the remaining three villages.

32
General Prachuap added that the prime minister had postponed a plan by officials

to destroy the fields because he wanted the hilltrihes people to do it themselves.
In exchange, they received rice and substitute cash crops.

The 10 villages targeted for the first poppy eradication programne ere Ban Khun
Hang, Ban Khun Chang Khian. Ban Doi Pui. Ban Phui T31, Mae 58 Mai, Ban Pa Hon,
Bunk Chan, Ban “in Phon. Ban Hae Tho and 001 Sam Hen.

CSO: 5300/5636

33
BRIHS

HEROIN SMUGGLB! JAILED—-The criminal court yesterday sentenced an American woman to
25 years imprisonment after finding her guilty of possessing 3.3 kilogram-es of

No lo heroin with intent to sell. The court first sentenced .‘b Candlee Lee Carpenter,
32, to life, but reduced the term to 25 years because she had pleaded guilty. In a
statement to the court she said she was suffering from tuberculosis, and claimed
she had been lured into heroin addiction by a Hong Kong Chinese, who supplied her
with drugs and later hired her to smuggle them to Paris. Ms Carpenter was caught
with the heroin hidden in the false bottom of a suitcase on the night of Septem-
ber 30 last year, as she as about to board an Aeroflot flight to Paris. In her
initial statement to police interrogators she said that she was hired for U.S$3.000,
of which she received $2,500 in advance, and she understood that she would carry
only 1 kilograIIae of heroin. She also admitted having been to Bangkok six times
before the arrest. [Text] [Bangkok POST in English 23 Jan 82 p 3 BK]

DRUG TRAFFICKER, OPIUM SEIZED--Chiang Mai--Narcotics police yesterday seized almost
130 kilogrammes of raw opium hidden in a secret compartment of a van allegedly owned
by fugitive drug trafficker Saman Nanawichit. The Volkswagen van was left unattended
at the house of Pol Sgt-Maj Surasak Phromphan who was arrested last Rednesday fol-
lowing the seizure of 3.5 kilogram-ea of No 4 first grade heroin and 47 kilograms
of marijuana. Surasak's arrest followed a joint investigation by police in Melbourne,
Australia, the u.s. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and Thai narcotics agen-
cies including the Office of the Narcotic Control Board (ONCD) and crime suppression
dividion's northern narcotics suppression squad. Three days before Surasak's arrest,
his brother-in-law, Suppha-at Chaodull, of Mae Hong Son, was arrested in Melbourne
and charged with possessing more than three kilograms of No 4 heroin. Information
given by Supphat-at led. to Surasak's arrest on December 30 and a swoop in Melbourne
on Tuesday which police said had smashed an international drug ring which had brought
more than A$2.2 million worth of heroin into Australia. Thai narcotics agents
allege that both Surasak and Suppha-at were members of the international drug ring
and involved with Saman Nanawichit in illicit drugs traffic. Saman is on the ouco
and CSD most wanted lists. Saman is a son of Sawas Nanawichit, whom police allege

is involved in drug trafficking and is believed to be in hiding in Bangkok. Mean-
while in Melbourne, a police spokesman said two men and two women were arrested in
Tuesday's raid on two luxurious Melbourne homes protected by electronic security
devices. The state-federal police team seized 3.5 kg of heroin said to have a
street value of A$3.5 million. A police squad codenamed "Aries" had tracked the ring
for a year and their tip-off had led to the arrest of Surasak's last week. The
spokesman said a syndicate using false passports and couriers in several countries
had brought the heroin into Australia on regular trips from Southeast Asia. [Bangkok
POST in English 7 Jan 82 p 2 BK]

MORPHINE SEIZED 1N NORTH-CENTRAL PROVINCE--KAHPHAENGPHET—-Two men were arrested yes-
terday morning at a checkpoint in Khanu Horalaksaburi District here after police
searched their truck and found 14 bags of morphine weighing 12.6 kilogrsmmes worth
300,000 baht. They were identified by Pol Captain Prasat Bunprawet, the chief of

the Salok Bat checkpoint, as Yen Kaeochai, 30, the driver of the six-wheel truck, and
Pranom Nuamchai. 30. his companion. Both men were tkan to the Khanu Worslaksaburi
police station, while the truck was confiscated by the police. [Text] [Bangkok POST
in English 15 Jan 82 p 5 BK]

HEROIN SEIZURE AT AIRPORT—-A well-known Thai movie producer, a starlet and a former
actress were last night arrested at Don Huang airport by customs officials and
accused of trying to smuggle about 7 kgs of heroin to Hong Kong. The three people.
film producer Pichai Noirod, alias Sia Lor, former sex bomb Vibhavadi Triyakul and
starlet Rasamee Suwannakit, were initially charged with possessing heroin with in-
tent to sell and smuggle the drugs out of the country. Acting on a tipoff that the
three people were to leave for Hong Kong at about 1900, customs officials of the
narcotics suppression unit were alerted to look for them. About half an hour before
the departure time, the three people showed up at the airline check-in counter and
the dustoms officials who had been waiting there approached them and asked for a
search of their luggage. Four packages of No A heroin were allegedly found in the
false bottom of two cases bearing Rasamee's name tag. Hiss Rasamee said she knew
nothing about the drugs and claimed that the luggage belonged to a wealthy merchant
who was arrested by Ladprao police 3 days ago. [Text] [Bangkok POST in English

2 Feb 82 p l BK]

CHIANG MAI POPPY FIELDS DESTROYED--Hong villages in Ban Buak Chan in the northern
Province of Chiang Mai have shown their willingness to eliminate their poppy fields
by uprooting the plants. Ban Buak Chan is one of the seven Hong villages in Mae Rim
District which have volunteered to destroy their poppy fields. The destruction of

3 rni of poppy plantation was witnessed yesterday by a high-level government team
led by Deputy Prime Minister Prachuap Suntharangkun. The eradication of poppy fields
is under the UN sponsored crop substitution program. Secretary general of the Na- '
tional Security Council Squadron Leader Prasong Sunslri says Hong villages do not
show any negative reaction and the government will try to slowly persuade them to
get rid of the crop. Mong tribesmen have begun planting tea and coffee trees to
replace poppy plantation. [Text] [BKlOObSS Bangkok Domestic Service in English 0000
GMT 10 Jan 82]

'MAJOR DRUG RING' SOUGHT--Police yesterday began hunting for a major drug ring which
was believed to have supplied the nine kgs of high grade heroin seized in Sydney
Sunday night. An informed source in the police department said the two Thai men
arrested in connection with the heroin seizure belonged to a drug trafficking net-
work linking Thailand and Australia. Its centre is located in Bangkok, the source
said. The two Thai suspects arrested after Australian customs officers seized the
drugs. estimated to be worth over 260 million baht, at the Sydney airport were
identified as Phusit Traimat, 34, and Prasoet or Prasat Yuyen, 39. The source said
that Thai police learned of the attempt to smuggle out the drugs from a tip-off and

35
the crime suppression division was ordered to keep a surveillance on the two men
since last month. He said police also had the identity of the two who left Thailand
on board Thai International flight No 985 at 0945 Sunday. A unit of policemen
rushed to the airport but did not find them and iumediately notified antinarcotics
officers of the Australian Embassy in Bangkok. Australian customs officers found
the drugs hidden in false bottom of a paper box carried by the two. The source

said that Prasoet was an employee of the Thai International. [Text] [BK220905
Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 20 Jan 82 p 1]

TIES BETWEEN KRAINGSAK, KHUN SA--Commenting on the clash between the Thai Government
and "Khun 8a" forces, Hatthana Khiaowimon, leader of the Free People's Party, told
HATUPHUM: "I believe this crackdown campaign against Khun Sa must be aimed at curb-
ing.the wealth of some persons having connections with Khun Sa. How would he be

able to mass such a big army unless he received support from somewhere.“ Natthana
noted that during the raid, Gen Kriangsak Chamanan, leader of the National Democratic
Party, was away in Taiwan. It is worth knowing why General Kriangsak made the trip
at this time. "Another point which struck me is the fact that the border polls

of the present supreme commander is different from when General Kriangsak was

supreme commander," the leader of the Free People's Party said. Concerning the
suppression of Khun Sa's group, Watthana said the raids should end after Khun Sa has
left the country. Otherwise. he would be forced to join hands with the Karena, which
would be a real burden for the Thai Government to suppress. "That's all I can offer
as comments. You will have to ask General Kriangsak if you want to know more about
it. He was once somebody at the supreme command headquarters," Watthana quipped.
[Text] [BK270946 Bangkok HATUPHUM in Thai 26 Jan 82 pp 1, 12)

HASHISH PLANTATIONS RAIDs-Nakhon Phanom Provincial Police Superintendent Pol Col
Prachit Soemsawin told station correspondent on 27 January that police authorities
have been conducting suppression operations against marijuana plantations in Tha
Uthen, Si Songkhram, Hukdahan and Dong Luang districts since the beginning of Decem-
ber. The authorities have captured and destroyed over 268,000 kilograms of green
hemp and over 43,785 dry hemp. The operation is continuing. [Bangkok Domestic
Service in Thai 1300 GMT 27 Jan 82 BK]

680: 5300/5637

36
BRIEFS

MARIJUANA ARRESTS-The biggest hail of the new year was handed down at magistrate's
court yesterday. American (Thomas Houndben) and Puerto Rican (Moses Rivera) were
given bails of $25,000 each after pleading not guilty to charges that they were

in possession of 5,000 pounds of marijuana. The men were arrested Tuesday morning

when their DC-b landed at an airport in the Abacos. [FL291910 Nassau Domestic
Service in English 1300 GMT 29 Jan 82]

030: 5300/2190

37
BRIEFS

CALL FOR DRUG STUDY--Opposition parliamentarian, Branford 'raitt, told Government
yesterday, that it was their responsibility to eliminate the problem of drugs.
Taitt, speaking in the House of Assembly, said there was a need to look at the whole
operation of drugs, marijuana, cocaine and the other harder stuff. He said that
too much marijuana had been passing through the airport, although he noted that the
customs officers there were very efficient. If one examined court cases, the news-
papers, and talked to people on the streets, Taitt said, one would realise a lot of
the drug was in the island. The naber of Parliament for St. Michael west, said he
believed it was a social problem, adding that even school children were being ex-
posed to what he termed, the dope culture. [Bridgetown THE NATION in English

13 Jan 82 p 12)

C50: 5300/7525

38
BRIEFS

CUBA HOLDS SKIPS, CREHHEN--Barranquilla, Colombia, 10 Feb (EFE)--Six Colombian
ships and SO Colombian crewmen have been detained by the Cuban authorities. This
was disclosed by Gerardo Castro Sarmiento. president of the Colombian Professional
Seaman's Association. According to him, initially the Cuban authorities suspected
the captured Colombian seamen to be part of a band of drug traffickers. Later,
Castro Sarmiento added, following an investigation in which the association parti-
cipated, it was established that all the crawmen were travelling in trading vessels
carrying commercial products between the United States and Colombian ports. The
president of the Colombian Seamen's Association expressed his confidence that Cuba
will soon release the Colombian ships and crew members. {Text} [PAllOAZ7 Madrid
EFE in Spanish 0250 GMT 11 Feb 82]

—-

HARIHUANA SHIPMENTS CONFISCATED--Barranquilla, 25 Jan--Units of the Antinarcotics
Police and the National Attorney's Office confiscated 80 tons of marihuana, valued
at about 180 million pesos, 5 motor vehicles, 6 motorboats, 1 light aircraft. and
several firearms in various operations carried out this past weekend in the
Department of Guajira. Also, during the action five persons who were in the area
where the operations took place were arrested. The first case took place in the
locality of Barrancas, where the Antinarcotics Police confiscated a cargo of

62 tons of pressed marihuana, ready for export shipment by air. In the southern
part of the Department of Guarjira. a second confiscation took place. this time
of 62 tons of the grass, valued at more than 20 million pesos. Two campers were
confiscated and two persons were arrested in this operation; the names of the
arrested persons were not made known by the police authorities. It was also
revealed that units of the Attorney's Office discovered a plantation with 320
marihuana plants, ready to be gathered. Three citizens were arrested in this
operation. They were identified as Manuel Hernandez. Pablo Riano, and Pedro
Gslindo. Also confiscated were 3 vehicles, 6 motorboats. and 1 light aircraft.
This crop of marihuana was valued at 64 million pesos. [Bogota EL SIGLO in Spanish
26 Jan 82 p 2] 8255

39
HARIHUANA SHIPMENT CONFISCATED--Puerto Viejo police seized 15 tons of pressed

marihuana, a DC-6 aircraft and several automobiles. No traffickers were cap-
tured during the operation because they fled as the police approached.
[PA142252 Bogota Cadena Radial Super in Spanish 2330 GMT 12 Feb 82 PA]

PARIS-BOUND HARIHUANA CONPISCATED--In the Eldorado airport the police confiscated
30 kilos of marihuana, intended for shipment to Paris. The cargo was in a

suitcase with a false bottom; its owner was not apprehended. This event, part

of antidrug trafficking operations, took place yesterday afternoon. [Text]
[Bogota BL TIEMPO in Spanish 9 Jan 82 p 6-A] 8255
Tm THAI NATIONALS SENTENCE!) IN BEROIN SWGGLING CASE

Kingston THE DAILY CLEANER in English 22 Jan 82 p 6

[Text]

‘l'trn Thai nntionnh. lonnd
t’r‘ith 5 lhi oi heroin in
out or in Seoul
heanded guilty tom
count: of hrenehtn; the
Dangerous Drop Law in
the St loner Clrenit
Court. New lny on

Mend
mmwwlﬂ.m
or live yenrl
“hm

lettiee Wright
“it-gored the tenteuet.
Vichien Inna-3. 43. tner
chnntol Jolenennlm
Rond,lnvho_h.1\n§--

an:e.‘ “31‘:th '

nun. el them no
tddreu. were 0th

urn-tin
19:53“: a
t

were each $3.860?
or live yenrr on eneh
count. m'tyncu to no
concurrent .
ll the ﬁner are not paid
tm trill nerve ﬁre yearn

M ntrotu renentcd h
Olga» Counzel. Mr. Ho"

nrd Cooke. Inn. were
Ithat on load". Septe-

'her 2| I’ll.

arrival on n Air t“Flori“
I ht at the hunter
In rnntionel Airport.

In]

Sent: .oltnernhere
tb Nt Squid. they

were lend to here.

"195d to their bodice.
are. of heroin tre

tetnl 0! tone 5 h.

and aid to nine 0.5 $4

million on the ille nl
drsna unrhet in t e

Debs Lloydle
the ﬁnreetice mu.
n'uwld the lien alter
,the drn. Int loud on

Ir. I.Initice‘xrg't;3‘?“

ttro men. told then:

23:? mm
He rel that no ny

.coeldheretthenenlree

‘ or they trere “in;
10min II n “denying
' nd“ lor the heroin.
ennltiet (or each
oﬂcnca unit he revere.
the judge and.
POLICE INSPECTOR FOUND PROTECTING TRAFFICKERS
Accused Official Recaptured
Nuevo Laredo BL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 7 Jan 82 Sec c p 3

[Text] Yesterday morning, in the third district court presided over by Ricardo
Rodriguez Villarreal. the preliminary statement was taken from a former State
Judicial Police group chief in Rio Bravo. Tamaulipas, who was accused of participat-
ing in the drug traffic with a ring of poisoners operating in that town.

In 1977, Benjamin Guerrero Mendoza, who was serving as group chief of the Judicial
Police and police inspector of Rio Bravo, was accused by an individual named David
Sanchez Gonzalez of having given protection to a ring of drug traffickers.

According to the charge brought against the police official at the time, it was
claimed that Benjamin Guerrero had provided protection for the shipment of marihuana
which was to be taken into the United States illegally, via the Rio Bravo.

It was also claimed that this official had received the sum of $1,500 for rendering
the aforementioned service to the drug trafficking ring; money which he had apparently
received from someone named Miguel Perales, alias "E1 Higuelillo".

The individual appearing as the witness for the prosecution at that time (David

Sanchez) claimed to the Federal Judicial Police that, for the purpose of smuggling
the drugs,the acchsed drove a car with the trunk filled with marihuana to the river
bank, where, inexplicably, the ”deal" did not take place, and the grass disappeared

from the site.

On 29 Hay 1979, Benjamin Guerrero Mendoza appeared before the Federal Public Ministry
agent and denied the charges brought against him by David Sanchez Gonzalez, claiming
that he did not know the aforementioned individual.

The recapture of Guerrero Mendoza was carried out by federal agents early this week
and, when before the federal judge making his preliminary statement, he again denied
the charges brought against him by David Sanchez, demanding that he be allowed to
confront that person, since he claims that this is all a matter of revenge wherein
there is a desire to harm him.

h?
Jail Order Issued

Nuevo Laredo EL HANANA in Spanish 9 Jan 82 Sec 8 p 7

[Text] The former State Judicial Police group chief and police inspector in Rio

Bravo, Benjamin Guerrero Mendoza. held in this town's jail, was officially imprisoned
as an individual presumed guilty of a crime against health in the degrees of marihuana
possession, transportation and trafficking.

Yesterday, in the third district court, he was notified of the decision of the head
of that court prior to his release.

In his preliminary statement. Guerrero Mendoza denied knowing his accuser. David

Sanchez Gonzalez, although he said that he had received threats from an individual
with the some name.

2909
080: 5330/64
INTERNATIONAL AMPHETAMINE TRAFFICKING RING DISCOVERED
Pills Seized, Officials Implicated
H. Matamoros EL BRAVO in Spanish 19 Jan 82 Set A p 3

[Text] Amphetamines worth over 100 million pesos which had been shipped from Germany
to Mexico by plane and brought in illegally were seized by Federal Judicial Police
agents who also arrested two of the leading drug traffickers.

Luis Amezcua Romero and public accountant Ruben Hernandez Macedo are identified as
the owners of the ton of amphetamines confiscated by the agents at the Mexico City
international airport.

The investigations conducted by Comdr Florentine venture Gutierrez. head of Interpol-
Mexico, were begun after Interpol-Germany reported on the volumes of amphetamines
leaving that country bound for Mexico.

Venture Gutierrez and his group started the probe at the Mexico City international
airport and in several ports in the republic, in order to find the smuggled ampheta-
mines. and managed to discover that Luis Amezcua Romero, an importer and exporter

of eels, anchovies, etc.. was bringing in the drugs, using normal import licenses:
but the papers cited different chemical substances.

Both Luis Amezcua and Ruben Hernandez were using false names and addresses. as well
as firm names of non-existent laboratories. to ship the amphetamines from Germany by
plane.

Jhe Federal Public Ministry agent Javier Coello Trejo is conducting this investigation
in cooperation with Comdr Florentino Ventura; and according to the confessions made

by the two men in custody, there are more involved in these activities, not only in
Germany and Mexico, but also in the United States, where most of the pills were being
distributed.

With the ton of amphetamines which was seized, it would have been possible to make
over 3.3 billion pills, the effect of which is to cause hallucinations among addicts.

Inspectors and Health Ministry Employees Accomplices of the Traffickers

.Mexico, D.F., 18 January (EXCELSIOR)--Count1ess customs inspectors and employees of
the Secretariat of Health and Assistance detailed to the Mexico City international

hh
airport are being investigated by the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic
since the discovery that their union delegate, Ruben Hernandez Hacedo, is "one of
the strong men" in the amphetamine smuggling.

In making his statement to the fourth district judge of criminal proceedings, Gilberto
Chavez Pliego, Hernandez Macedo admitted to having given counterfeit papers to inter-
national drug traffickers, so that they could bring all types of substances into the
tauntry for making toxic pills.

In addition to Hernandez Hacedo, Interpol and the Federal Judicial Police arrested
at the airport Luis Anezcua Romero and Abel Archundia Hernandez, alias "Hostachon",
who had 550 kilograms of amphetamines in their possession.

The Secretariat of Health and Assistance representative at the airport admitted to
having received large sums of money, and "pretended not to know anything, allowing
the psychotropic substances to enter the Federal District."

They intended to distribute the seized drugs in Tijuana, Baja California Norte.
where it is presumed there is a clandestine laboratory for making toxic pills, which
are priced at $2.00.

Traffickers Held for Trial
H. Matamoros BL BRAVO in Spanish 20 Jan 82 Sec A p 7

[Text] Mexico, D.P., 19 January (EXCBLSIOR)--This morning, before the fourth district
judge of criminal proceedings, Julio Chavez Priego, the three drug traffickers who
belong to an international ring trafficking with amphetamines in Germany, Mexico

and the United States were held for trial.

According to the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic. Luis Amescua Rojero,
Ruben Hernandez Hacedo and Abel Archundia Hernandez are accused of crimes against
health in their various degrees; and hence they are not entitled to be released on
bail. since the sentence with which they will be penalized exceeds 5 years in jail.

It was reported by the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic that the three
drug traffickers have admitted their guilt, and cannot argue that they were subjected
to torture or mistreatment, because their are medical reports proving the contrary.

Luis Amescua is the owner of a company engaged in importing and exporting various
products; Ruben Hernandez Hacedo served as representative of the Secretariat of
Health and Assistance at the airport; and Abel Archundia is the owner of a firm

named Taxis.

2909
cso: 5330/66
JUDICIAL POLiCE CAPTURE HEROIN TRAFFICKBR
Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NBCRAS in Spanish 9 Jan 82 Sec D p l

[Excerpt] The Judicial Police cmumander succeeded in arresting the notorious drug
trafficker Moises Almaras, alias "La Yufa", seizing from him four samples of heroin
with which he was engaged in transactions for the drug's distribution from this port
to the neighboring country of the United States.

In 1980, "La Yufa" was serving a 4-year prison term to which he had been sentenced
by the federal judge in 1976, when he was captured with 400 grams of heroin which he
was taking to the United States.

Comdr Mario Espinoza is said to have caught Moises Almaras as he was seeking customers
to make the contacts for the drug sales in the United States.

It was claimed that a prominent individual in Eagle Pass. Texas, is the one who has
been moving the drugs in this border port, using "La Yufa" as a "mule". This is why
it was impossible to arrest the aforementioned person as chief of the drug trsfric,
since he resides in the United States. His arrest will reportedly be accomplished in
cooperation with the authorities participating in the United States-Mexican antidrug

plan.

 

Moises Almaraz, alias "La Yufa". arrested with heroin samples in his possession.

2909
C50: 5330/66

h6
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA TRAFFICKERS IN CUSTODY--Two drug trafficking oilfield workers were moved
from Reynosa to Nuevo Laredo at the order of the federal court. They are Javier
Pardave chaps and Pedro lniguez Davila, the latter considered an accomplice of
several drug traffic ringleaders. It is known that the Federal Judicial Police
first arrested Javier Pardave Chaps with a marihuana shipment that he claimed to
have purchased from the brothers Francisco and Pedro Iniguez Davila. They brought
the marihusna into the United States by way of Reynosa, and carried it to Laredo,
Texas, to be taken to Nuevo Laredo, where they were selling it through the interven—
tion of an individual named Jorge. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL HANANA in Spanish 8 Jan
82 Sec B p 7] 2909

INCREASE IN YOUNG ADDICTS-Tlalnepantla Communal Farm District, Mexico, 10 Dec 81
(NOTIHEX)-—The lack of high schools and sports centers in the State of Mexico has
caused an increase in drug addiction in the underprivileged sections of the munici-
palities of Atizapan. Nezahualcoyotl, Tlalnepantla and Naucalpan, among others.

The representative of the Free Union of Settlers of the State of Mexico, Margarito
Villegas, said that this problem has arisen particularly in Valle de Mexico, where
the high drug addiction rate is 95 percent. The population moat stricken is that

of children and adolescents aged 10 to 20. He remarked that the guardianship courts
for minors in each municipality are filled every day with children and adolescents
affected by drug addiction problems. He deemed it an urgent need for the state
governor, Alfredo del Maze, to plan a rehabilitation center, stating that the organic
laws of the municipalities must be reformed to ban the sale of inhalants to minors.
[Text] [Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 14 Dec 81 Sec A p 1,

Sec E p 2] 2909

ARHY ANTIDRUG ASSISTANCE—-Nogales, Sonora--Even though the drug traffic on the border
is only on a minimal scale and a resumption of this activity of larger proportions

is not anticipated, the Mexican Army will continue its permanent campaign to prevent
the proliferation of drug trafficking in all its forms. In making the foregoing
report, the commander of the local military garrison, Gen Heriberto Bello Fernandez,
said that. in order to better attain this goal, work is being done in coordination
with the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, through the Federal Judicial
Police, exercising stringent control over this activity to prevent its spread. he
noted that the work being done for this purpose is part of operation "Condor" cover-
ing the entire national territory, with an increase on the border strips and in
locations where it is presumed there are marihuana and poppy plantations. The
relative calm noted in this respect in the border area is due to the intensive
surveillance being carried out by the federal authorities; nevertheless, no possibi-
lity has been precluded, and this is why the campaign is being continued constantly,
as it is elsewhere in the country. He added that, in the efforts to detect drug

1‘7
trafficking. the action is taken with strict obedience to the law, proceeding in
accordance with the circumstances, and depending on the cases that are discovered.
[Text] [Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 16 Jan 82 Sec A p 1112909

ANTIDRUC COOPERATION IN SONORA-After offering the backing of the Federal Judicial
Police in the state for the campaigns undertaken by the local town hall to combat
the drug addiction and consumption of inhalants in the low-income districts, the
commander of this entity, Rodolfo Noises Calvo, announced that a pilot operation
would soon begin in Sonora to detect plantations, using the air unit of the Attorney
Genersl's Office. On his introductory visit to the mayor of Hermosillo, Alicia
Arellano de Pavlovich, the new Federal Judicial Police commander said that the
assistant attorney general, Samuel Alba Leyva, would soon be here to start this
pilot operation. The activity to detect poppy and marihuana plantations will take
place simultaneously throughout the entire state, and for this purpose helicopters
and planes supplied with modern electronic equipment will be concentrated here.

The operation is being conducted in staggered fashion in all of the nation's states,
and it will be carried out in Sonora despite the fact that the latter is considered
only a passageway for the drug traffic, and not a state producing drugs. During the
meeting with the mayor, Comdr Rodolfo Moises Calvo pledged-to coordinate the action
of the entity under his command with that of the crime prevention police, to prevent
drugs from being brought into educational institutions as well as the low-income
districts. Mayor Alicia Arellano de Pavlovich discussed with the police chief the
town hall's various activities to achieve family integration, noting that her
administration is concerned over the young people using drugs and inhalants. She
also explained that the purpose of the many public squares brightly lighted that

the town hall has provided is to give the children and adolescents recreational
areas, in an attempt to divert their attention toward constructive activities,
preventing their consumption of alcoholic beverages or psychotropic substances
insofar as possible. [Text] [Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 14 Jan 82 Sec A

p 8) 2909

C80: 5330/64

b8
DRUGS, GUNS 381280, 79 ARRESTED IN NATIONWIDE RAIDS

Port-of-Spain TRmIDAD GUARDIAN in English 23 Jan 82 p 1

[Textl

C50:

SBVBNTY m Wm. WW “I“ mm“). were I“
end several firearms together I3th isms quantities 3mm
WVRW . “W, -witienpuoeopmm
s' ieentan " 1 ' at
WWW" ﬁrm-w 223" m 4'3
overs
{no '_ oftheooilcz 9‘" " "3°"
‘uﬁ'm :an Emmeocl Brunch. Women
Zapoln General nominal. Police Bunch Police Trash;
e raid on a Bei- ins Wm” Sect
tnont- ouse. the Police Ind , . el-
ssisedsSrevolva-antle .25 Swim ‘0 the PM“
somatic phenol! together tor t; muons. Mrynu':
non“: "' ﬁnal? ‘61:!“ ulna! '1 trip to the
m'rme.”t from "inview oi the existing
Soﬁe ol the .3 Immuni- situation involving crimes
timwereotthetype wn withtheussoitirearmsann
" ""'“""°"" '” h“ “’ ’°"“ W: “m““h';
heenhennsdhythecenevs hlhelmdlle.
' held :nariiuana of “i:
Anon the s .
weretwgmeowhoeresus- sndothefdrumxmtu
posted to be involved in the mm moo. have g
recent robes «order st day a series
2:...“ dam-”3% "em “* '36: name ”OPERATION
River ares. FAN" Firearms. Ammuni-
operations 0 sunset! M NOW)-
IM speerheeded b cow ”"1 PANIC
missioner of Police. r. Ran-
dﬂvh Bum“ 1. ensued “Althouh slot «mph-nu
'0'“ 3N 9° lumen was plotted on this opera-
policewomen drawn from m, an, a“. not mean
""‘w’ hunches “4 ’99 thet the situation ss re-
tions Minding the s ards crime in thi ooimtry
Tactical Unit. 0"“ Md fl very alumina. but be-

5300/7525

cause all our crimes are
highlighted thejmpressioo
is gained that this is so.

‘ However one must con-
sider that lost your there
were uite s number of
crimes ghll hted, but our
annual stat stlcs showed
we that were 1,000 crimes
less than to woo." .

The Commissioner
stressed that there was no
need for the public to psoic
es en upsurge in crime was
the-norms! trend precedtnla

or festive seasons. "it s
that Police cannot
handle." he said.

Continuous serveillance
would he maintained (or the
launch of further were
tioos. " e have no inten-
tion of standing in and ai¢
lowing s lew hidividuais to
hold this country to
ransom "

lie said he intended to
continue his supervision in
the field. so the! the people
could continue to enjoy a

s.

Mr. Burroughs further
stated that he proposes to
hold discussions with the
uni Department with a
view to havinge certain
in: “hygiiusha ﬁ'ﬁn‘g

to o
narcotics tried indietebiy,
in view of the rise in drug-
related offences. -
BRIEFS

533-KG OPIUH Emir-Kabul, January 24 (Bakhtar)~-Over 553 kgs of opium was confis-
cated by the incharges of the Kabul 10th security zone. The comander of the zone
said: ”After being informed, on January 20 at lo p.m. in the presence of the ninth
security zone representative, suspicious more in the market located in Poli Mah-
mood Khan were searched and as a result, 553 kgs of opium packed in 74 sacks were
recovered. Accused as narcotics smugglers, two persons named Rohollah and Abdul
Hakim, residents of the Nangarhar province, were arrested. The opium was delivered
to the Kabul customs house, and the case is under investigation. ['next]

2,122-KG OPIUM nub-Kabul, January 20 (Bakhtar).--‘rhe biggest haul of smuggled
opium, weighing 2,122 kgs, packed in 46 sacks, were seized on January 17 evening.
Disclosing this, the chief of the Kabul city first security zone, said that, on the
information of the security men on duty, Saraye Saadat, Baghe Alimardan, was placed
under supervision and watch. A search of the sacks ostensibly containing cumin
seed, licorice and plastic footwear led to the discovery of opium packages in sev-
eral of them. Further search by the security forces in cooperation with party ac~
tivists resulted in the discovery of 46 sacks of opium mixed with sacks containing
the other counodities. The chief of the security zone added that, a night later,
his 350,000 in cash, some medicine and 100 bullets were recovered from a room,
which was vacant and whose door was open Eight persons suspected to have had a
hand in the snuggling have been detained. They are: Noorullah, Sher Hohamd,
Mohamed Ali, Anwar, Mohamed Bsnail, Herza Mohamed, Daulat Mohamed, and Ghulan
Sakh, iron the Badakhshan province. A source of the security zone said that the
eight had confessed to their crime when interrogated. The case is being further
investigated. They were all engaged in trade in cumin seeds, licorice, and other
products of the province. The source said that the opium would be transferred to
the Kabul Customs and those detained further interrogated in the security zone.

C50: 5 300/5 364

50
DRUG-CONTROL AGENCIES INTENSIFY EP?ORIS TO CDNTROL DRUG INFLOH
Cairo AKHBAR AL-YANH in Arabic 31 Oct 8 7 Nov 81

[Article: "Orders Issued To Destroy Drugs Worth One Billion Pounds; Destruction
Carried Out at Rate of Four Times Monthly; Furnace Temperature Reaches Melting
Point; After One Deal, Drug Merchant Turns Into Millionaire; Ton of Hashish Costs
1,500 Pounds and Is Sold at One Million Pounds; Drug Problem Is National Issue;
Story of Ten People Who Control Drug Empire in Egypt"]

[31 Oct 81, p 5]
[Article by Muhammad Shakir]

[Text] On that day, Alexandria Port was in a state of emergency. Orders to
destroy drugs worth 5 million pounds were to be carried out. All the security
agencies were keeping an eye on the operation. The value of the drugs for which
destruction orders have been issued and carried out amount to one billion pounds.
The destruction process took place amidst extremely strict security measures.

The prices in the drug market have been moving. There is an inverse relationship
in this market. "hen the prices rise, then this is an indication that the
smugglers feel the heat of the pursuit and of the strict control.

One [completed] deal is worth a thousand deals insofar as the drug merchant is
concerned because the ton of hashish costs the smuggler 1,500 pounds and is sold
for nearly one million pounds. One deal is equal to the strike of a lifetime.
After such a deal. the smuggler starts to use such terms as (al-bawaki) [the

mourners] and (sl-aranib) [rabbits] and then they assemble (al-hallufah) [Pig]
and (al-khanzirah) [the sow].

Drugs are destroyed at the rate of 6 times a month. There is no deficit at all.
There are destruction seasons.

The destruction process continues until the drugs reach melting point and turn
into ash. The number of cases [against smugglers] is rising as a result of the

activity of the narcotics agents. The number has risen from 800 cases to
1,300 cases [no dates given].

51
The general intelligence people in charge of drug control say that the methods
of drug smuggling and the organization employed in the smuggling operations
keep, so the smugglers think, just beyond the reach of the control people. What
makes them go too far in imagining this is that the ton of hashish, for example,
doesn't cost them from the source to the distribution point more than 1,500
pounds whereas it is sold for early one million pounds. This is why we find
that the smuggler doesn't get upset if any quantity is seized and why neither

the [head] smuggler nor his aides take unnecessary risks. One deal smuggled is
equal to 1,000 deals [seized].

Despite all their precautions, crime doesn't pay, as it is said. The proof is
that two drug kings fell in one hour in Alexandria a few days ago.

The first is Mahmud abu al-Ms'ati Salih. He used to be a copper merchant and
then suddenly abandoned this trade and resorted to the drug trade. Before
Col Mahmud Yasin, the director of the Narcotics Bureau, and Lt Col Safwat
Darwish, the deputy director, Salih stated frankly that the copper trade in
which he had been engaged turned in no profit. Yusri Yaqut, the first deputy
district attorney, issued orders for jailing Salih.

The second one is known by the nickname of al-A'war [the one-eyed]. His real
name is Jabir Fathi Sulayman. He has a criminal record and is one of the
biggest drug dealers in Sidi Jabir. Maj Ahmad Muhammad 'Ata and Captain Tantawi
.of the Narcotics Bureau took part with Sulayman in his operations. All kinds

of disguise were used to catch him because this dealer is known for his extreme

caution, especially in regard to those whom he establishes contacts. Yet, he
too has fallen.

A high-ranking Narcotics officer has told me that the current phenomenon in the
drug trade is that this trade is conducted very cautiously. A drug merchant
subjects his aides to extremely precise tests before he chooses them because a
single deal could, in the wake of the rising prices of drugs, mean the strike

of a lifetime. After such a deal, the merchant starts to use the well-known
terms of (al—bawaki and al-aranib) and begins to ride luxury cars which the
smugglers have given some strnge names, such as (al-hallufsh and sl-khanzirah).
Some drug merchants keep after more while others turn to another activity. Some
of them pay key money and open offices under the guise of import and export
offices while others try to open showrooms.

At Alexandria Port, we had an appointment with the execution of orders to destroy
drugs worth one million pounds. The process of destroying the drugs is not

just one of burning them. It is an organized operation carried out with the
utmost precision. The procedures to destroy the drugs are fully equal to the
procedures followed in seizing drugs. even more stringent. 0n the day of
destruction, the port is in a state of alert. Telephone calls are exchanged
between Maj Gen Sami As'ad, the director of the Narcotics Department, Maj Gen 'Ali
Darraz. the assistant minister of interior and the director of the Alexandria
Post Public Department. Counselor Mahmud al-Hinnawi, the head of the Drug
Prosecution Office, Fu'ad Muse, the undersecretary of the Ministry of Customs,
and the general director of forensic medicine.

52
Serial Steps in Destruction Operation

Brig Gen 'Ati'f Nasif. the chief of the Alexandria Port Criminal Investigation
Office, says: "It is a must that the permission of the Prosecution Office be
obtained to take stock, open the warehouse or destroy the drugs. This is done
under full supervision to guarantee the soundness of the steps taken in
accordance with the law.

'There are several committees: The committee to prepare the seized drugs,
especially opium, for sale to the pharmaceutical companies licensed to purchase
such drugs. The drugs are sold according to a set price. The price of opium

licensed to be sold to the opium companies depends on the morphine concentra-
tion it contains.

"The destruction committee is headed by the prosecution representative and
includes a representative of the port's general police, the forensics department,

the customs and the Narcotics Department. The prosecution initiates the measures
to destroy the drugs."

Forty Pive-Year-Old Experience

Maj Gen 'Ali Darraz, the assistant minister of interior and the general director
of the Alexandria Police Department, says that the destruction of drugs has
developed recently with the development of all the police agencies, whether in
the port or in the Narcotics Department. This experience started, as proven

by documents, in 1936, i.e. 45 years ago, when the first drug destruction rules
were established. Earlier, seized drugs were kept in iron or steel safes at
security departments and were destroyed in a primitive way. It was recnetly

decided to gather all the seized drugs in one place and Alexandria Port was
chosen as the main center.

Maj Gen 'Ali Darraz adds that the old system used to cause the accumulation of
drugs whereas through this method all the seized drugs are destroyed as soon as
the final sentence in the cases involved is issued. Moreover. the new system
permits constant supervision.

Destruction Seasons

Brig Gen Hahrus Abu Gharib, the assistant director of the Alexandria Port
Security Department, has said that the destruction process takes place in
accordance with a set timetable. The republic's governorates are divided into
zones and each zone delivers the drugs seized in it to the main center on a set
date. Five days a month, from the 6th to the 10th of each month, have been set
for the delivery of these drugs. If the consignment is more than 50 kilograms.
the storehouse is opened according to a special procedure by way of the permanent
committee which includes representatives of the prosecution, the police agencies,
the customs and forensics. For example, the quantities received in accordance
with this procedure in 1980 amounted to 25,3b9,336,378 milligrams.

Dr Sayyid Abu Nada, the director of the Alexandria forensic laboratories, has
said that the process of destroying the drugs is carried out precisely and until
the furnace melts the drugs and turns them into ash. Let me give you an example.
Once I delegated a female colleague to attend the process. It so happened that
the quantity to be destroyed was large. Suddenly, the furnace went out of order
(the packages had been untied). The committee was compelled to transfer its
operation to another police district near al-‘Amiriyah. The precautionary
measures were taken to transport the drugs to the new place. The destruction
process continued until a late hour in the night and the colleague was unable to
inform her husband of the circumstances causing her delay. This caused the
husband to notify the police of her absence. After investigation, it was found
out that the wife was at a police unit. It turned into a big joke.

This example shows the degree of difficulty the committee faces in its work and
shows how a committee member cannot at all move away from the furnace before he

makes certain that the drugs are completely burned as long as the (packages)
have been untied.

The director added: "The burdens of this committee are increasing daily. Whereas
the number of cases had stabilized at a maximum number [for sometime], such cases
have risen [recently] to 1,305 cases as a result of the efforts of the drug

control people. The problem facing us is the problem of the seized drugs. There
are drugs seized since 1966 which have not been disposed of yet. There is no

doubt that the presence of a special drug prosecution office facilitates our work
and enables us to complete this work." Yahya al-Fazayiri, the first deputy
public attorney who supervised destruction of the consignment, said: "The
efforts required for this operation are increasing daily. The Narcotics Depart-
ment has begun to implement a project to construct large warehouses and modern
furnaces to burn the drugs in al-‘Abbasiyah area in Cairo. When this project

is completed, the Alexandria warehouse and furnace will be retired."

Counselor Mahmud al-Hinnawi, the prosecution director, has prepared a complete
evaluation of the process of storing the drugs, supervising the delivery and
takeover measures, issuing the permits necessary to accept seized drugs and
supervising the process of destroying the drugs, considering that the prosecution
is the authority with the fundamental jurisdiction in this regard.

Then begins the process of destroying the drugs.

The measures start with Yahya al-Fazayiri, the first deputy public attorney, who
summons Brig Gen 'Atif Nasif, the intelligence director, and Brig Gen Mahrus Abu
Gharib who represent the Alexandria Port police, Muhammad Jamil 'Abd al—Sami',
the representative of the Narcotics Department in Cairo, Dr Sayyid Abu al-Nada,
the forensics representative, and Muhammad Muhammad 'Abduh 'Abbas, the customs
representative, to sign the report. Maj Ahmad Muhammad Chabarah, the head of
the intelligence unit and warehouse supervisor, breaks the red wax seal on the
main door and brings out the required quantity amidst strong guard.

After the consignment was carried to the car, Yahya al-Fazayiri issued the

orders for proceeding to the furnace. There, the process of taking samples began.
The furnace was then ignited and the well-known smell of drugs began to spread.
The fires consumed tons of hashish and the operation went on for several hours
with all the committee members observing the fire. Every consignment burnt

puts an end to a long story of struggle between the Narcotics agents and the
smugglers.
[7 Nov 81, p 5]
[Article by Muhammad Za'za']

[Text] Our efforts to control drugs are not confined to domestic efforts. The
narcotics agents are spread in every part of the world, wherever this is possible.
They are present in the countries producing the drugs and they live among the

producers and the major world drug traffickers, watching their actions, observing
their movements and keeping an eye on the deals they conclude. If a deal is on
its way to Egypt, immediate plans are drawn up to seize it. If it is to be
smuggled to another country, this country's control agencies are contacted.

Our officers take part at times in the seizure operation [carried out by the
country concerned]. We have testimonies from the major world narcotics agencies
lauding the Egyptian drug control agency.

Drug prices have been rising rapidly. This rise is a healthy sign because it
means that the drug-control people are the cause. The greater the efforts they
exert and the tighter the blockade they build around these poisons and their
smugglers, the less the drug supply and, consequently, the higher the prices in
the drug market. This tremendous rise in drug prices means that the narcotics
agents are active.

The narcotics division is opening the files of the drug-smuggling emperors and
kings. There are four emperors followed by six drug-smuggling kings. These 10
men used to control all the opium, hashish and pills entering the country. But
all their monies have now been put under sequestration on a decisioa by the
socialist public prosecutor.

While closing the file of this dangerous trade, AKHBAR AL-YAHH focuses in this
report on the drug emperors in Egypt.

National Issue

Maj Gen Sami As'ad, the assistant minister of interior for social security, says:
"Maj Gen Muhammad Nabawi Isma'il, the deputy prime minister and minister of
interior, follows drug control with great interest by virtue of its being a
national issue connected with production, affecting the economy and strongly

tied to society's health and morals. With these concepts [in mind], I meet

with the minister of interior weekly to present to him any information the
department has. The deputy prime minister and minister of interior takes part

in discussing and providing guidance for the drug-control plan."

Maj Gen Sami As'ad adds: "Nabawi Isma'il has given us the go-ahead signal to
move forward without any limitation or any consideration for any personalities
and without paying any attention to any connections, provided that all our steps
are taken within the framework of the law. The deputy prime minister has had

and continues to have one reservation which he still stresses, namely that
nobody be done an injustice."

Maj Gen Sami As'ad continued talking about the efforts of the narcotics agents,

pointing out that their work is not confined to domestic efforts but goes
beyond to the drug production areas and that their work must be very careful.

55
Story of Big Ten

Maj Gen Hamduh Salim Zaki, the director of the Narcotics Department, says that
years ago in the drug world four emperors, followed by six kings, controlled

all the hashish, opium and pills entering the country and that they amassed
assets counted in the millions-assets that have been all put under sequestration
on a decision by the socialist public prosecutor.

The 10 major smugglers, led by the four emperors, lived a life that was more of
a myth. They did actually live the life of kings, but also a life like that

of mice at the same time. Despite their intelligence, they were cowardly and
hid themselves behind children who helped them in transporting the goods and

in shouldering the crime if caught by the narcotics agents.

The most dangerous of the 10 big smugglers and the most active among the four
emperors was smuggler Muhammad Salih Ayyub. He was characterized by individualism
in everything. He shared the secrets of his empire with no one. He planned

the deals personally, went to Beirut to import them by himself and returned

to the country to receive the drugs personally and to distribute them to his
agents with his own knowledge on dates set for them suddenly out of his extreme
eagerness to maintain the secrecy of his movements. This is why his secret
survived for such a long time. But he appeared suddenly on the screen of the
drug-control agents after becoming famous with his title of "king of the desert"
for the experience he had gained with all the paths and passages of the desert.

He loved to clash with the narcotics agents. The reputation of false daring
appealed to him and he started to open fire on whoever confronted him. In a
battle with the Alexandria drug-control agents more than 10 years ago. he shot
Lt Col Jamal Abu Shadi when the latter tried to seize him.

Muhammad Ayyub Salih then disappeared out of sight for a long time, as if the
earth had swallowed him, and, as usual, trusted nobody with his secret. not

even the closest members of his family. He continued to hide until the investi-
gations of the narcotics agents picked up his track and discovered that he had
been hiding in a furnished apartment he rented in Syria Street in the Engineers
Town in al-‘Ajuzah.

Ambushes continued to watch him and to observe his movements until he descended
to the street on 27 April 1973. As usual, he was armed with a pistol which he
always kept in his pocket to use when sensing any danger. He paused for a
moment when the narcotics agents approached to arrest him and then exchanged fire
with them in the street. The emperor crowned with the filth of crime met his
faith and dropped dead.

One End

Col Muhammad 'Abbas, the director of operations at the General Drug-Control

Department, adds: "If the question is where are the rest of the 10 major
smugglers, then the answer is: Badr al-Shafi'i is in jail serving a life
prison-term at hard labor in accordance with the sentence issued in drug case
No 66 in al-Ha'adi in 1976."

S6
Badr al-Shafi'i used to live in a luxurious two-story villa which he had

furnished with the most expensive furniture and used to spend with unmatched
extravagance.

Smuggler Hamamah Hu'ayzah lives in jail. serving a life prison-term at hard

labor. after being sentenced in drug case No 2664 in al-Burullus in 1975. He
was arrested after importing 2 tons of hashish from Beirut.

Smuggler Kahmud Rashwan, the owner of a car dealership in al-‘Aguzah, was
apprehended in criminal drug case No 33 in a1-'Aguzah district in 1973. The
case isstill in the courts even though 8 years have passed since his apprehension.

Anal 'Abd al-Salam is serving a life prison-term at hard labor as a result of the
sentence issued in criminal case No 164 in Wadi al-Natrun. He had exchanged

fire with the narcotics agents and had set fire to his car to conceal the
evidence of the drugs it contained.

Smuggler Sayyid 'Iraqi, one of two men specialized in smuggling opium. broke
out of jail 3 years ago but he has been rearrested. He is currently jailed and
will be presented to the court.

Smuggler 'Antar Hammam is serving a life prison-term at hard labor in accordance
with the sentence issued in criminal case No #2 in al-Nuzhah in April 1979. He
was the king of smuggling opium to Egypt.

Smuggler Muhammad Ibrahim Khalifah, known by the nickname of 'A212 Khalifah and
called the “pasha” in the drug world, is now serving a life prison-term in

Abu Za'bal Jail in accordance with the sentence issued in criminal case No 68
in el-Nuzhah criminal district in 1976.

The "pasha" started his life as a roving clearing agent at the Alexandria customs
office. He then opened an agency and started to trade in free currencies. But
he found in the world ~f drugs the sparkle of large and quick profit and so
stormed into the drug markets. He was always neatly dressed and often changed
his neat clothes and his luxury car more than once a day. The title of "pasha,"

which the major drug dealers and smugglers gave him. appealed to him and he
paid even further attention to his appearance.

The "pasha" lived in a beautiful two-story villa in Heliopolis which he furnished
with the most expensive furniture imported from Italy. He employed the services
of an interior decorator to design the decor for his villa which was guarded by
dvgs trained to attack whoever approached it.

Latest Figures on Seized Drugs

Brig Gen 'Abd al-Jawad Muhammad, the director of information at the Narcotics
Department. says that figures are the truest statements. The actual statistical

records on the nunbers of cases, the drugs seized in them and the number of
defendants arrested provide the following:

57
The number of cases seized by the narcotics agencies throughout the republic in
1980 amounted to 7,643 cases in which the number of defendants was 8,659
defendants. A total of 5,803 defendants were arrested in 5,108 cases in the
first 9 months of this year.

The volume of the quantities of hashish seized last year amounted to 11.657

kilograms. In the first 9 months of this year, a total of 27,043 kilograms of
hashish were seized.

The volume of the opium seized last year amounted to 3,1h7 kilograms [sic]. In
the period from the beginning of January to the end of September this year, a
total of 86,736 grams were seized. The volume of liquid opium seized last year
amounted to 24 cc. The volume seized in the first 9 months of this year amounted
to 43 cc.

[7 Nov 81. p 5]
[Article by Sabir Shawkat]

[Text] The beginning is simple. He enters a stitch [some sort of a coffee shop
where people gather to smoke hashish from the same pipe], imitating older people.
Then he falls into the swamp of drugs. What is surprising is that many youth
have become addicted at an early age. Hith addiction, the future is destrryed.

AKHBAR AL-YAHH has interviewed a number of addicted youth. They started in the
stitch and they have become addicts, taking Maxi [Haxifort] injections. which
are the ultimate in drugs.

The beginning was at a drug stitch in Shubra al-Khaymah where youth gather and
to which they come from various parts of Cairo for the purpose. The stitch
owner has 2 children who do the serving. The oldest, a 10-year old, says that
his father took him out of school a year ago to do this work which he hates
because they hit him if he makes a mistake.

An addict recounts his story with hashish addiction:

He is 22 years old and has a business diploma. His story with drugs started
when he was 16 years old. He got together by chance with a number of school
colleagues and one of them had a piece of hashish with him. The colleague had
seen his father melting the hashish in a coffee pot and drinking it for amuse-

ment. They tried it and for 4 months afterwards they continued to buy a small
piece of hashish. melt it and drink it.

Another addict is a 27 year old engineer. He says that he started using drugs
which he was still in the secondary school in sessions with friends on festive
occasions when 'hashish drinking' is permitted. He then began to buy hashish and
smoke it rolled in cigarettes.

In World of Maxi Injections

This is the most dangerous kind of drugs. Those addicted to the maxi injections
say that it is the ultimate in drugs. After using all kinds of hashish, opium,
pills and alcohol, the blood becomes immune and is not affected by them. So the
addicts resort to the maxi injections.

These injections are given fundamentally to race horses and they have the same
effect on the human body, namely to drug it while stimulating the mind and
keeping the person injected awake for 24 hours. A beginner uses 3 centimeters
which give the required effect. After 20 injections, the user becomes an
addict and even 15 centimeters can no longer give him the required effect.

A dropout student (25 years old) from the Secretarial Institute says that he
started using drugs when he was lb, imitating grownups and being influenced by
the sight of men smoking a hashish water pipe at weddings with overwhelming
ecstacy. After a while, pills became popular among the youth and he was happy
to use them.

[7 Oct 81, p 5]

[Text] The methods used by drug dealers are endless and their means are strange
and innovative, but they fall. Small operations have led to uncovering dangerous
international drug-smuggling rings. Cairo Airport is considered one of the main
inlets used by smugglers to bring drugs into the country. Smuggling via the
airport has its advantages. Smugglers and their aides hide amongst the passengers
exploiting the facilities set aside for the passengers, concealing drugs in large
or diplomatic parcels and employing new aides unknown to the police and customs
men.

Frequently, a small operation seized at the airport leads to a dangerous inter-
national ring. This is what Maj Gen 'Abd al-Huhsin Faraj, the head of the Cairo
Airport police, asserts, adding that the airport narcotics officers have learned
most of the means used in smuggling. This is why the smugglers have begun to
use old methods, thinking that the policemen have forgotten them. But most of
these endeavors fail and the smugglers ultimately fall.

The Cairo Airport criminal investigation records and files say that 250 kilo-
grams of opium, 165 kilograms of hashish, 10 kilograms of heroin, one kilogram
of qat and 60 kilograms of drug pills were seized in the past 5 months and that
a new smuggling line was opened between Cairo and Khartoum last month, with the
smugglers using this line to bring in heroin via Sudan and exploiting the fact
that the airport authorities were not aware of their use of this line. This
line had remained clean throughout recent years.

Means of Smuggling

As for the various means used by smugglers to bring drugs into the country,

Col Semi al—‘Awali, the director of the airport's criminal investigation bureau.
says that these means are numerous and varied and have become known to all the
airport's investigation officers. These means include bringing hashish oil in
whiskey bottles and inside television sets and electrical appliances after
removing their internal components and inside soap powder and cigarette packs
which are opened, filled with drugs and repacked. The smugglers also bring

the drugs by stuffing them inside furniture pieces and between layers of wood,
by taping the drugs into sensitive parts of the body and by using children for
the purpose because children are not suspect.

59
One of the best-known modern ways of smuggling is the ao—called "drug shirt"
which is a shirt lined with thin layers of drugs and sewn carefully so that the
smell of drugs may not escape from it. The smuggler wears this shirt under his
clothes. Diplomatic parcels are also used in smuggling drugs. The smugglers
also use preserved food cans which they fill with drugs.

ﬂow Are Smugglers Seized
Drug-smuggling operations are seized in different ways.

Col Ahmad Abu a1-‘U1a, the head of the airport intelligence, says that some

of these operations are foiled either by way of the information available to the
security men on the activities of rings and individuals or by way of the informa-
tion provided by secret informants about the smugglers. The necessary measures
are then taken to make the seizure, such as watching for the smuggler's arrival,
agreeing with the customs at times to facilitate his entry so as not to make

him notice that he is under observation. watching him outside the customs
department and seizing him while delivering the consignment to the members of

his ring and arresting the entire ring or arresting the smuggler by subjecting
hum to inspection at the customs office.

Suspect Planes

The intelligence chief adds: Certain planes arrive from the capitals of countries
famous for cultivating and smuggling drugs. These planes are watched very
carefully and a state of alert is declared among the security and customs men
when their passengers are inspected. Some of these capitals are Beirut and

Amman, as well as the planes coming from Pakistan and India and the planes
carrying passengers from Damascus. The endeavors of the smugglers to circumvent
these capitals have failed. The smugglers thought at one time to travel from
Beirut to Rome or Athens as transit passengers and then come to Cairo. But the
exit stamps on their passports from capitals famous for drug production and
smuggling exposed their attempts. They have now stopped using this method.

Most Expensive Bottle in World

Regarding the best-known smuggling cases seized at the airport, Col Muhammad
Hidayah, the head of the drug-control unit, says that a passenger arrived from
Karachi carrying a bottle of whiskey, which is ordinary. However. the bottle
fell accidentally and an oily liquid diffusing the smell of hashish flowed out
of it.

Shirt North 24,000 Pounds

One of the latest ways used by smugglers is to fashion hashish and opium in
thin layers, wrap them up in plastic sheets or cloth material and sew them into
sleeveless shirts which the smuggler wears above his underwear and under his
outer clothes. A shirt may contain 3 kilograms of hashish worth 26,000 pounds.
More than 10 shirts of this kind were seized in the past 6 months.

60
Another method which smugglers use is an old method which small-time smugglers
still employ. This is the method of stuffing the hashiah or opim in small
plastic ampules which the smuggler swallows after a 2-day feet so that his stomach
may absorb the largest number of ampules possible. These smugglers can be
discerned easily, says Col Ahmad Nada. the officer in charge of the airport

drug control, because they show the symptoms of exhaustion. reddened eyes and the

inability to maintain their balance. It is a terrible and constant struggle,
but they ultimately fall.

869 lo
C80: 5300
OPIUH WORRY BEADS FOUND 0N SHUGGLER

Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 25 Jan 82 p 2

[Text] Shahr Kord. KEYHAN Reporter. A smuggler with a record in Shshr Kord who
has been engaged in smuggling and distributing narcotics for years was caught the
last time with a large amount of narcotics by antinarcotics officers of Shahr Kord.
During the investigation of this smuggler, the officers found a large string of
worry beads made of sections of stick opium which the culprit was playing with in
an unconcerned manner. This string has more than 42 beads. which altogether make
more than six sticks of opium. and had been strung together in a skillful manner.

The name of the smugg1.r has not been ascertained yet, and the investigation of him
is continuing.
BRIEFS

DRUG DISCOVERY--The Central News Unit reports that the officials of the

[name indistinct] gendarmerie garrison of the Barn gendarmerie battalion
yaterday discovered 236 kg of Afghan opium dross extract in a van going from
Ben: to Kerman. In this connection two people were arrested. [Text] [1.0140346
Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 13 Feb 82 Lb]

OPIUH SEIZURE 1N SHIRAZ--The Shiraz Islamic Guard Corps have seized 8 kg of

opium and 500 grams of heroin from a nutter of persons. [GF170232 Shiraz
Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 14 Feb 82 GF]

CSO: 5300/5369
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA SEIZED—More than 300 pounds weight of dried leaves suspected to be In-
dian hemp has been intercepted by customs officials at the Tens Harbour, reports
the Ghana News Agency. The heap was hidden in crated containers, s gas cylinder.
two metal boxes and two large drums as edible oil for export. The haul, worth sev-
eral thousands of dollars, is regarded by customs officials as a record heap con-
signnent ever concealed for shipment through the port. According to Mr 8. ll.
Brewaidoo, Principal Customs Officer, the deal was detected at the week-end at the
state warehouse, where the consignment had been sent for custom examination prior
to shipment overseas. Hr Brew-Aidan said owners of the "wee" packages consigned

to addresses in Belgium, Dakar and Senegal, as personal belongings. bolted when

they were invited through their shipping agent, MARCO, for the examination.
[Text] [Accra DAILY GRAPHIC in English 18 Jan 82 p 8]
BRIEFS

MANDRAX TRIAL Foam-m well-known: boxing figures and prominent businessmen,
Mr John Dubs and Mr Bron Ngcobo, have appeared at a Johannesburg court charged
with dealing in Handrax tablets worth 12110250. They appeared on Monday following
their dramatic arrest at a Johannesburg hotel last September when the two sen were
tound to be in possession of 7 350 Handrax tablets. According to police, these
tablets sell at 815 each and in all could have netted 9.110250 in cash had the
transaction succeeded. Hr Dube (S7), is a former boxing promoter and now owns a
shop in Soweto. His co-accused, Mr Ngcobo (50), also owns a shop. Both men are
out on bail and their case has been postponed to March 3. [Text] [Johannesburg
5mm in Biglish 28 Jan 82 p 1]

C80: 5300/5639
SCOTLAND YARD COOPERATBS IN ARREST 0F HASHISH SNUGGLERS
Copenhagen BERLINGSKB TIDBNDE in Danish 29 Jan 82 pt II p 1

[Article by Anders Hiig]

[Excerpts] Scotland Yard and the Danish narcotics police
have uncovered an international "priest" gang.

Together with Scotland Yard in London the Copenhagen narcotics police have un-
covered and stopped a gang of smugglers that brought an unknown quantity of
hashish into Denmark. The gang's couriers were easily recognizable but customs
people at Kastrup and police did not suspect an English priest. A white priest's
collar around his neck, a pious appearance, sometimes a Bible or prayer book
under his arm. It was a simple and effective disguise.

Under the tight-fitting jacket was concealed a smuggling vest or abdominal belt
holding up to 20 kg of hashish. The case started to break when the narcotics
division received a good tip from Scotland Yard on Monday, 30 November 1981.

It said that the so-called priest gang had smuggled perhaps as much as 20 kg of
hashlsh into Copenhagen each week for the last 2 years. Investigation revealed
that quite a few shipments were lost and that others were smaller than that.
But they are prone to believe at the Copenhagen Police Headquarters that with
the gang's clever methods at least a ton of hashish of the sought-after "Black
Nepal" type was smuggled in. Here one courier and one importer have been ar-
rested and charged to begin with for the smuggling of 100 kg of hashish. That
is the quantity the police feel they have proof of so far.

Buyer in Karachi, Importer in Copenhagen

Oddly enough it was two unsuccessful actions that gave the narcotics police the

best insight into the gang's working methods--along with the tips and report
from Scotland Yard in London. The gang used a rather complicated transport

system which followed this pattern by and large:

The London gang's English contact man sat in Karachi, Pakistan, and bought
hashish at spot prices--for example 5000 kroner for 20 kg which could be sold
on the street in Denmark in small amounts for 1 million kroner. So there was
plenty of room for travel expenses and good profits for the buyers, backers,
couriers, contact men and the importers, middlemen and pushers in Denmark.

66
From London a courier was sent to Karachi. He got the drugs from the buyer who
had bought a plane ticket and reserved a seat on a PIA flight bound for Copen-
hagen with a stopover in Athens, Home or Zurich. At the stopover the first
courier left the plane after having hidden up to 20 kg of "Black Nepal" in the
plane's toilet. Then the priest courier entered the picture. He took the
place of the first courier on the PIA plane, unlocked the hiding place behind
the wall covering of the toilet with a special three-sided key, put on the
smuggling vest, sat down clad in the confidence-inspiring white priest's collar,
a little more coruplent now than a minute before, landed at Kastrup Airport and
was met there by a contact sun.

The tip on 30 November said that a Mr. Allan John Scott, alias Eric Cramp, was
on his way to Kastrup disguised as a priest, bearing 20 kg of hashish from
Karachi. The next day word was received that the smuggling flight had been
postponed until the following week. On 6 December a selected contact man, Hr.
Smorthit, arrived via Harwich-Esbjerg. The narcotics police shadowed him at
Kastrup where he bought a ticket to Goteborg, went into the transit lounge,
walked around for some time as if looking for something, telephoned and finally
went to an apartment on Carl Johansgade in Osterbro. He returned to Kastrup the
next day with the same negative results, waiting for the "pastor" in vain, in
other words Allan Scott from Zurich. The narcotics police received word from
Scotland Yard that the pastor had canceled his airplane ticket from Zurich.

After Mr. Smorthit's visit to Osterbro the police tapped the apartment's tele-
phone. They learned that a courier carrying 8 kg of hashish had arrived in the
country on 12 December, that he was obviously nervous about staying at a hotel
and wanted to come out to Carl Johansgade. This courier turned out to be one
of the top people in the gang, a well-known English criminal named Hailes. He
had apparently gone out on a smuggling trip himself because the gang was in
dire financial straits after having lost a couple of hashish shipments. One of
these, weighing 20 kg, was found by the police in a PIA plane in Rome.

At the Osterbro apartment the narcotics police seized 8 kg of "Black Nepal" and
arrested Mr. Hailes and the residents of the apartment who claimed to be an
Englishman named Michael Allen and his Danish wife. Later Interpol's finger-
print experts revealed that Hr. Allen was identical with Mr. Colin Sydney
Keremy, born on 2 November 1943 in Durban, South Africa and previously sentenced
to 5 years in jail in France in 1973 for possession of 32 kg of hashish. In
1978 he turned up in England under a third name, traveled to Denmark, got mar-
ried and settled down--the only occupation the police know anything about is
that he acted as a narcotics importer under the name of Michael Allen. The
police are not sure who he is and what his given name really is.

"But in the physical sense he really exists, they said in the narcotics divi-

sion.

Hhile Mr. Hailes has refused to talk to the police, Keremy has admitted two
smuggling incidents. Apparently these arrests on 12 December were such a well-
kept secret that the gang in London didn't suspect anything. At any rate on
17 December--a week before Christmas Eve--Scotland Yard informed the narcotics
division that the "pastor" Scott referred to previously, now using the name of
Stewart, was on his way via Esbjerg to meet a smuggler at Kastrup. He arrived,
was shadowed by the narcotics people, waited a whole night with his ticket to
Goteborg at Kastrup Airport for a plane that had been snowed in at the Zurich
Airport. So Mr. Stewart returned to London empty-handed and Scotland Yard
later informed the Danish colleagues that the gang's courier had been jailed
for 3 days in Pakistan and had been sent home to England. That is apparently

the reason why the "priest" gang hasn't visited Denmark since. As far as the
police know.

657B
050: 5300/2156

68
BRIEFS

SOLD 40,000 MORPHINE TABLETs--A woman regarded as the central figure in the
sale of a large quantity of morphine pills from Pakistan, 36-year-old Inger
Larsen, was sentenced by Copenhagen Municipal Court to a years in jail plus
confiscation of illegal earnings amounting to 350,000 kroner. Her husband, Ole
Moos Larsen, was recently given a similar sentence. The court found Inger
Larsen guilty of the sale of around “0,000 morphine pills and approximately
150 grams of amphetamine: in the period from the answer of 1980 to the spring
of 1981. The sales were made out of the couple's apartment on Carl Jacobsens
Vej in Valby. The case was a spin-off from the much bigger case against the
Pakistani citizen Zanorgh Khan. [Text] [Copenhagen nmmcsxz manor: in
Danish 29 Jan 82 p 3] 6578

C80: 5300/2156
BRIEFS

NORTHERN FINLAND NAROOTICS OVERVIEW-Jive number of drug related crimes in Northern
Finland has surprised researchers. In Kemi 30 drug smugglers and dealers were ar—
rested after the Kali Criminal Police initiated a stepped—up drug investigation
last November. The greatest number of those arrested were residents of Kemi. Ap-
proximately 100 users have become known to the police in the area of Kemi-Tornio
alone. The street trade is comprised primarily of hashish, marijuana,- and amphe-
tamines. The prices are high, a daily dose of hashish is lOO--200 markkas, mari-
juana 100 markkas, and amphetamines approximately 300 markkas. The street price
of a dose of heroin or cocaine is even 5,000 markkas. The drugs come to the north
from Sweden. among other places. but the police have also confiscated marijuana
grown in Lapland. In Kemi those arrested encompassed all social classes except
for the actual so-called underworld. The average age of the users is 20. The po-
lice in Kemi are now talking about a second drug wave, the first was in the begin-
ning of the 1970's. There is no definite interval between waves and researchers
believe that the nmber of drug smugglers, dealers, and users will continue to in-
crease. [Text] [Helsinki HELSINGIN 5m in Finnish 28 Jan 82 p 3] 10576

70
POLICE CRACK INTERNATIONAL DRUG NETWORK
NC161757 Paris AP? in English 1735 GMT 16 Feb 82

[Text] Paris. 14 Feb (AFP)--French police have cracked another major international
drug network by hauling in 650 kgs of hashish worth a million dollars at the mouth
of the Aude River in southern France, sources said here.

The haul, in which 12 people of Dutch. Belgian and French nationality were arrested,
followed two months of major breakthroughs for the French narcotics squad which has
successively smashed a Hong Kong based Chinese drug peddling ring, as well as Israeli
and Colombian-run networks.

Sources said that yesterday's take resulted from improved cooperation between French
narcotics. customs, and police officers and their European counterparts.

Dutch police initially set off the investigation leading to yesterday's catch on
a yacht anchored off Narbonne when they notified the French drug squad that a new
team of smugglers was bound for France.

The smugglers, headed by a 40—year-old Dutchman--three Belgians, eight Dutch nation-
als, and a 29-year-old French woman--left Holland on February 3 in several vehicles.
including a camping car and a Mercedes Benz pulling an inflatable motorized craft.

while nine of them set up camp near the River Aude on February 9, police kept tabs
on a yacht sailing from Morocco to France.

Police officers moved in late yesterday when the yacht dropped anchor and began
transferring goods into the inflatable canoe which were then loaded into the camping
car.

The last episode took pace at Paris' Roissy-Charles de Gaulle airport early today
when police arrested the group's three Dutch financiers who were about to board a
flight bound for Rio de Janairo.

CSO: 5300/2168

71
PAPER LAUDS NEH LA" 0N FORCED TREATMENT OF DRUG USERS
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETBR in Swedish 16 Dec 81 p 2
[Editorial: "Forced Treatment Issue Before the Riksdag"]

[Text] ﬂow is the law on the treatment of drug abusers (LVN) which the parliament
adopted on Tuesday different from the law on the care of alcoholics which it will
replace? The difference should be indeed dramatic. The decision reached day be-
fore yeaterday is the result of campaign of many years in the social service admin-
istration against compulsory treatment of adult misusers. The law on the treat-
ment of alcoholics is said to be based on l9thecentury patriarchalism. None less
than Olof Palue has described it as a "class law" and "an instrument for class
oppression."

The parliament adopted the new law practically unanimously. Anything suggestive
of patriarchalism and class legislation should have therefore now been eliminated.

However. in its basic features, LVM is strongly similar to the law on the treat-
ment of alcoholics. The following are the most important changes:

--Compulsory treatment includes, according to LVN, not only those who misuse alco-
hol but also those who misuse narcotics.

--The treatment period is limited to 2 months plus two. The law on the treatment
of alcoholics allows for the possibility of treatment lasting years. but in prac-
tice there are only a few severe misusers who are held longer than 2 months.

--LVM gives practically no directions on non-confining treatment. 0n the other
hand. a basic idea in the law on the treatment of alcoholics is that institu-
tionalization should be obviated by remedial measures out in society, for example,
probation. To a degree. these duties have been transferred to the social service

law.

But the basic ideas remain in the law on the treatment of alcoholics, which go
back to the first law for alcoholics in 1913. Like its predecessors, LVN is based
on the premise that emphasis in the problem of misuse lies in the social, not the

medical. sphere.

72
The law states in the first paragraph that the goal of the social service law is
to provide guidelines for the treatment of misusers. The social welfare board is
given the responsibility for implementing the decision of the provincial court
regarding compulsory treatment. According to the social service law. the social
welfare service has the responsibility for seeing that those needing treatment ob-
tain it. Thus, it is the social welfare service that in general has to take the
initiative for compulsory treatment. according to the LVN.

The government‘s proposal was better at this earlier stage than the decision
reached by parliament yesterday. The government proposed that the social welfare
boards should investigate the need for care according to the LVN and that other
authorities should refer misusers in need of care to the social welfare boards.
That is the normal procedure. But the Social Democrats wanted to preserve the
illusion of non-compulsory care and demanded that the need for care should be in-
vestigated by the local government board, not by the social welfare boards. And
so the parliament decided.

But the social welfare boards. according to the LVN, are obligated to refer ad-
dicts in need of care to the local government boards. This referral must be based
on an investigation since the social welfare boards have the basic responsibility
for care, according to the social service law. The decision of the parliament. in
other words, results in double work.

The view that addiction is basically a social problem means that addiction must be
attacked out in the community, where addicts live in freedom. Ambulatory treat-
ment is more important than institutional treatment.

The campaign against the alcoholic treatment law and its alleged "patriarchialism"
has unfortunately been successful in regard to ambulatory treatment. The possi-
bilities which the law allows are hardly utilized. The treatment of alcoholism
has ceased as an independent activity by being integrated into the social services
administration. The reason for its integration is the same as for the abolition
of compulsory treatment. Addiction has been looked upon as a symptom of bad so-
cial conditions and disrupted relations. It was held that what was needed was not
"treatment of the symptom" but an overall social view. It was just this treatment
of alcoholism and the compulsion on addicts that one was trying to get away from.

But the result of integration was that the questions regarding addiction were
lost in the social services administration. An inquiry in Stockholm a year or two
ago gave definite proof of this. The percentage of the total social welfare re-
sources allocated to alcoholism had as a result of the integration been reduced

approximately in half.

The social services administration gave an account in a 1980 report of how the
work is organized at the service centers. In one of these. the treatment of alco-
holism is assigned to "groups living singly" who work with such people needing
care who do not live in a family setting. In another center the treatment of al-
coholism is done in "adult groups“ who work with single people and adults without
children. At a third center alcoholism treatment takes place in "individual
groups," that is to say. in a group for singles.

73
when the abuse takes place in a family situation, it is customarily handled in
"family groups."

The expertise of these different treatment teams focuses, in other words, primarily
on the problems of people living alone and on the problems of family life respec-
tively. Misuse is a special aspect of the difficulties encountered by people liv-
ing alone (or as members at a family)--that must be the idea behind the new organi-
zation.

All experience indicates that the problem of abuse requires its own particular
care and expertise. The decision of parliament yesterday shows that belief in a
completely voluntary system of treatment is an illusion. Those people who have
worked for an integration of the social services have not succeeded in abolishing
compulsion in regard to adults. Instead. they have integrated the compulsory
feature regarding abusers into the other aspects of social services, which as a
result reflect a greater exercise of public authority than everyone had desired.

6893
C80: 5300/2103
BRIEFS

DOGS AGAINST PRISON NARCOTICS-—Stockholm, 17 Dec--Isak has now moved into the
Kumla prison. As a result Kumla and the institution in Norrtalje are the only
prisons in the country which have their own narcotics dogs. Isak, a labrador,
will serve both at the sections of Kumla and at other institutions. In addition,
the police and the customs service will get help when needed. There have been
problems with narcotics at Kumla, and there have been constant confiscations.

The officials at the institution at Kumla now are calculating that they will get
the situation in hand. [Text] [Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 17 Dec 81

p 5] 6893

CSO: 5300/2103

75
IMBRPOL ARRESTS TWO NIGERIANS ON HEMP CHARGE

Kaduna NEW NIGERIAN 1n 31911911 15 Jan 82 pp 1, 24

[Article by Alaye Gbenoba]

{Tiextl

CSO:

Organisation tinte

The

are Peter Mherekpe

ngdom.

‘I‘WO Nigerians have been arrested by the International Police
rpoli in connection with the 30 diplomatic bags said
to have contained weeds suspected to be Indian haw.

The two Nigerians were members of staff of the igerian High Com-
mission in the United Ki

who worked as 'commissaire‘ to the

Nigc an liigh Commission and Paul Eikhonmu who was employed in
the tocol section of the high commission.
. two men are now being remanded in prison custody and are ex-

pected to appear in a London court
anytimefrom now. _

This was disclosed on Wednes-
day by the Commissioner of
Police in charge of Force
Criminal lnvesti lion Depart-
ment (CID). A aghon C ose.
lkoyi. Lagos. Mr. (Iasimir
flhomas Akagbosu. while briefing
the Press on the effort of the
ﬁlice to track down the brains

hind the diplomatic bags stuff-
ed with lndian hemp.

.‘lr, Ahagbosu said that the

lice are 'desperately' looking

or two other men in connection
with thesame offence

The men are Elvis Uden Odoe
alias 'Uoctor William Aniuguwn'.
Alias 't-‘eltx Onesisi Odoe‘ and Ti-
p-.iTaiye.

He described Elvis Odoe as a
hardened criminal who had in
his possession different passports
under different names lie was
born at lsale Uku in Bendel State
and had worked with the New
Nigerian Bank in Bendel before
he left for the United Kingdom.

While in Britain. Odoc worked

5 300/ 2166

with GE Nigerian Fis'gh may.
sion in Britain for our months"
before hewas dismissed in me.

Mr. Atagbosu added that Mr.
Odoe had earlier been arrested
for illegal drug trafficking in lion-
tho and has had his passport
impounded. CID boas said
the suspect s It obtained other
passports and travelling tre-
mently to Britain.

Being a tamer staff of the bah
commission. he went on. r.
Odoe had easy access to the high
commission.

He is married to a West indian
national and has two children.

The police commissioner
however. believed thatdr. Odoe
is still in Nigeria as at now.

The other Ni ' n being look-
ed for by the ice in connection
with the inci t. the police chief
continued. is one leani Taiye
who worked in the cargo section
of the Nigeria Airways.

The olice commissioner
dsclos that 1‘ljani aged (21)
was seen in Britain frequently
before the hemp arrived in Lon
don on October to last vear

BED

Mr. Altaghosu therefore. up-
peaied to members of the public
who might be in pmscssion of any
information which could lead to
the arrest of the men to contact
any police command or station
throughout thecountry.

Answering re ' question.
Mr. Aka bosu however. said that
the dipfomtic bags of Indian
hemp had no bearing whatsoever
with the fire incident which
destroyed the office of the
Ministry of External Affairs In
Lagos.

According to him there wry
two sets of diplomatic bags in
whichthelndian hem wasfound

One set of the bags ongedtn
the Miniatrzcof External Affairs
while the ot rcame from the ex-
ecutive office of the President.
(Information Department-

l.a as.
e argued that there had been

fire incidents In other ministry
holdings in Lagos before. adding
that the external affairs ministry
fire incident roulil not he treated
in isolation