FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10077

27 October 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FouO 50/31)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

Ron omcm. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

JPRS 19/1007?
21 October 1!

WORLDHIIE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND Dmsenous Danes

.9000 50/ 81)

CONTENTS

ASIA

Heroin Death, Other Arrests Reported
(mm m, 2 ”’81)IOOOOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIO

Briefs
Police Seize Opium
' mania-Mandalay Railm Trafficher

INDIA

Briefs
Misc Heroin Pushers

PAKISTAN
Briefs
Pak Currency Seized

Massive Hashieh Haul
Karachi Hashieh Raul

PHILIPPINES

Briefs
Opium Traffic Increase

VIETNAM

Illegal Medicinal Use of Opiun Criticized
(mm "OI, 6 Aug 81) .0...0....0...OOOOCO‘IOOOOOIOOOIOOOOO
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

LATIN AMIGA
BOLIVIA

National Antidrug Director Explains Efforts to Coca Farmers
(EL MARIO, ” &p 81) .OOOOOOOOO'IOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

MEXICO n

Trafficker of Cocaine, Heroin Captured
(u v02 mumm’ 10M 81) OOOOCOOIQOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Heroin ‘h‘affickers Captured in Mexicali
(LA v02 mumm’ h&p 81) 0.000.000.0000.00.00.0000

Heroin Traffickers Captured in Chihuahua
(n mm”, 28mg 81) O...OOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0......

Trafficker mth Long Criminal Record Captured
(BL mL m smm‘, 19 &p 81) OUOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI5.00.0.0...

Briefs
Shipload of Harihuana Adrift
Antidrug Campaign Praised
Opium Gum Seized
Second Shipload of Harihuana
Opium Gun Traffickers Caught
Heroin Trafficker Atempts Suicide

NEAR EAST AND mam AFRICA

IRAN
Major International Snuggling Route Traced
(Km, 16 Aug 81) 00.0..0...IO0......IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
Briefs
Opium Seized
Tabas Opium Seizure
Shiraz Heroin Seizure
SAUDI ARABIA

Head of Anti-Narcotics Bureau Discusses Ih-ug Addiction,
Buforcement Measures
(Jamil Huhamad al-Hayman Interview; AL-YAHAHAH, 21 Aug 81)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9381‘ um
CYPRUS

Drugs Seized Amount to 100 Million Pounds
(m ms my, 3.8 wt 81) 0.0...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

GREECE

Briefs
Heroin Arrest

SWEDEN

Incarceration of Mg Offenders Increasingly Accepted
(Jan-Euert Strombeck; DACENS mm, 9 Sep 81) .........

Briefs
Interpol Warns of 'Chine-ﬂiite'

TURKEY

Paper Carries Conflicting Reports on Kaitlin Seizure
(MI WA, 12 kD 81) 00.00.000.00...IOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOC

'AKAJANS' Report
Anatolian Revs Agency Report

Briefs
Death Sentences Sought
PRC-Turkey Naccotics Control Cooperation

UNITED KIRGW

Court Told mugs Gang Used Computer for Sales Account:
(Ian Henry; M DAILY W, 1 Oct 81) ..............

Briefs
Bail Ordered Forfeited
Heroin Charges

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
HEROIN DEATH, m3 ARRESTS REPORTED
312111.46 Rangoon WANNA ALIN in Burmese 2 Sep 81 p 6

[Sunny] Houlaein, 25 August-ﬁnder the direction of the executive co-ittee

of the township people's council. the Houlnein township people's police force,

with assistance fron the local ward people's councils, has been carrying out an
operation to take effective action against narcotic drug dealers and distribu-

tors.

On 20 August. they found Cho Gyi alias Than “in unconscious froa a heroin in-
jection at house No 35 in Patala street in liaung Ngan Kwin quarter. Cho Gyi
died on the way to hospital.

House owner Daw Kyi Aye'a husband. Thein Kym. who adliniaterad heroin to Cho
Gyi, went into hiding. The authorities filed charges against his wife Daw Kyi
Aye under Section 3M4.

"The case also led to the arrest of Thain Kyaw's mistress, Daw Khin La “in and
her father 'J Kn Ko Gyi at their residence in Nah-yang ward where 650 kyats
worth of eight-packets of heroin were found. The two have been charged under
Sections 6.3 and 10.3 of the Narcotic Drugs Law.

On the same day, Haung Nyint 0. who lived in a guard's house in Pyidutha coa-
pound, Phetan, was found with 25 kyats worth of 6 packets of heroin, Mo pieces
of paper for wrapping heroin and 15 kyats in proceeds frol aaleof heroin. lie
was arrested and charges have been filed against hi- under Sections 6.3 and 10.3.

Similarly, Haung Aye of house No 9 in Daingwunlovin was arrested along with a
bottle of penicillin containing a snail anount of heroin, a syringe and a set

of hypodermic needles. Kala Pain of No 17 Hyettan quarters, Phetan, was arrested
with a set of hypoderlic needles. Charges have been filed against the. under
Sections 6.3 and 10.3.

It has been reported that the Hoanein township narcotic drug suppression tea
has arrested 27 persons, including 3 wonen, for using and selling narcotic
drugs in accordance with the Narcotic Drugs Control Law."

On 24 August. Thein Kyaw. who went into hiding after administering heroin to
Cho Gyi, was arrested at the house of Aung thin in Zegyo Se-ein. Houlnein.
Thein Kyaw was arrested along with a aaall packet of heroin, a penicillin bottle
containing a small anount of heroin and a syringe with a hypodermic needle.
Charges have been filed against his under Sections 6.3. 7.3 and 10.3 of the
Narcotic Drugs Law.

680: 5300/ 6904 1
BRIEFS

POLICE 82123 OPIUHuHayuyo, S Sep--Acting on inforlstion, Hay-yo Township Police
Conander I! Sein Lvin, City Police Station Officer I! Thein Tun and awe council-
lors from No 3 ward raided the residence of a Sim-Shah. Pia Air Pu. at 0600 on

A September and seized two balls of raw opiun weighing 3.26 kilograms and worth
5,600 kyat. The Hay-yo people's police station has filed charges under Sections
6.3, 10.3 and ILA of the Narcotic Dma Lav against Us Air Pu, 30, the house-
owner; and Haung Ail: Sein, 26. the opiul carrier of No 8 ward in Kyaube. [Text]
[81(211012 Rangoon WANNA All“ in Burma 15 Sep 81 p 6]

LASHIO-MAEDAIAY RAILUAY TRAFFICKBR--Bsipsv, 110 Aug—0n 10 August morning. railway
police corporal U Sein Haung and corporal U Than "in searched a basket carried by
passenger Dav "we of No 5 ward in Lashio, who was traveling in coach No 2, when
the Lashio-Handalsy railway No 132 reached Bsipav station. They found 1.5 visa
[1 visa equals 3.6 pounds] of raw opitn hidden in two hollowed-out pineapples

in ‘he basket. [Text] [3011412 Rangoon DRAMA ALIN in Burmese 22 Aug 81 p 4]

CSO: 5300/409010
BRIEFS

H120 HEROIN PUSHERS--The narcotics branch of the 081 in the biggest ever seizure
on Hednesday recovered one kg of heroin worth Rs 60 lakh in the international
market and arrested two persons, reports PTI. Acting on a tip-off, CBI offi-
cial kept a watch on a 5-star hotel and nabbed e Miro youth and his sister at
the hotel gate. A personal search revealed the contraband. Following interro-
gation their place of residence was raided and 'incrininating' doculents show-
ing the Hizo links with the international narcotics smugglers and 22 sun of
heroin were recovered. [text] [New Delhi PATRIOT in English 10 Sep 81 p 1]

080: 5300/7000
BRIEFS

PAK CURRENCY SEIZEDuThe Airport Custom yesterday afternoon foiled a bid of
currency smuggling and seized Pakistani Rs 22 lakh from a Dubai-bound passen-
ger. The Custom officials had received an information that huge Pakistani cur-
rency would be smuggled out of the country. after a constant vigil was started
on the out-going passengers. During surveillance the Custom officials became
suspicious of a passenger Shahid Hal-load who was due to leave for Dubai by the
Gulf Air flight 761. After the suspect completed the airlines briefing fort-eli-
ties, the Custoa officials subjected him to intensive interrogation. Later his
suitcase was searched which resulted in the recovery of Pakistani Rs 22 lakh
concealed in the inside of the suitcase in a thernosole packing layers. The
officials seized the currency and arrested the passengers. Further investiga-
tion is in progress and the Custom investigaters are on the look out of other
persons behind the currency smuggling racket. Last year Custom officials also
foiled two attempts of smuggling out Pakistani currency mounting to Rs 66 lakh.
APP [Text] [Karachi BUSINESS RECORDER in English 28 Sep 81 p 3]

MASSIVE HASHISH HAUL—Karachi coast guards have arrested Shahida Pervio, who was
involved in a drug smuggling racket with her two brothers. who have fled. Forty
mounds of charss and three msunds of hashish were seized fro. her house in Jan Goth.

[GP192028 Karachi NA A-B-WAQT in Urdu 13 Oct 81 p 6)

KARACHI HASHISH HAUL—Police in Karachi seized 5 kg of hashish fron Abdur Rauf at
the Karachi airport on 12 October. lie has been arrested. [GPl92028 Karachi JANG

in Urdu 13 Oct 81 p 2]

080: 5300/6523
BRIEFS

OPIUH TRAFFIC INCREASB--Manils, 18 Sept-Illicit opiun traffic fron Asia's pro-
duction area, through Bangkok and Manila to the markets of Australia and the
United States, is expected to increase considerably this year, anti-narcotics .
authorities warned. Thai customs officials, in an alert sounded at the on-going
20-nation customs conference here, said opiul poppy far-ers in the isolated bor-
der area were trying to make up for the drop in production in the past two years.
Opium dealers were also trying to speed up crop shipments in view of joint Thai-
US operations to burn poppy fields grown by hilltribeuen in the area, published
reports today said. Manila International Airport authorities were put on alert
after Thai officials also warned that illicit drug-snuggling runs were done
mostly by planes. not by ships as before.-NAB/APP [Text] [Rangoon m “HIKING
PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 19 Sep 81 p 5]

C50: 5300/ 10903
ILLEGAL MEDICINAL USE OF OPIUH CRITICIZED
Hanoi HANOI not in Vietnamese 6 Aug 81 p 4
[Article: "A Story a Day Column by The Builder: Special Drug?"]

[Text] A boy had diarrhea. his fanily went out begging for drugs and received
a little "good medicine" for the child. After drinking it, the boy sank into
deep sleep. His family carried him to the energency room in a comatose state.
with hypothermia. breathing accompanied by expiratory grunts and irregular
heartbeats. and despite adequate treatment the boy died.

What is the cause of the tragedy? His family was told that opiun is a "special"
drug; that is why when the youngster became 111 they hurriedly went out of their
way to beg for it. And the above life-threatening reaction happened.

At present, quite a few people still believe in the miracle of noxious opium.
They know that opiun is a medicinal agent. and since it is an expensive one they
prize it even nore. But opium is a drug and not a nedicine. And since even the
use of ordinary drugs should be guided by doctors, how can we use such poisonous
substances as opium without their advice?

9213
680: 5300/4510
NATIONAL ANTIDRUG DIRECTOR mums EFFORTS 1‘0 COCA FMS
La Paz El. MARIO in Spanish 30 Sep 81 pp 8-9

[Unattributed Article: "that National and Foreign Opinion Should Know About Drug
Traffic and Bow and when It Can be Bredicated in bolivia"]

[Text] Speaking before an assembly of peasant leedera in Villa
Tureni last Saturday the 26th. the executive director of the
National Council for the Tight Against Narcotics Traffic, Col
um Rene Ocanpo Honje, offers a lucid. coherent explanation
with revealing figures: $30 nillion for burning surplus coca
leaves and $200 nillion for a 5-year progran for the substitu-
tion end/or diversification of crops in Cochebenba and Le Par.

Coepaneros, settlers of the Chapare:

It is very gratifying to ee to be here anong you on the invitation of your
leaders, who viaited na twice in Le Pa: and asked as to nake tbie visit to Villa
Runari. I bring you fraternal and affectionate greetings fron the Host Excellent
President of the Republic. Haj Gen eelso Torrelio Villa. to whoe the National
Council for the Fight Against Narcotics Traffic is directly responsible.

I thank you profoundly for the cordial reception you have accorded me and for the
invitation extended to no by your leaders. I cone here to have a frank talk with
you on a nutter of aspects of intereet to the country es a whole. to the settlers
of the Chapare and to na as executive director of the Council. I an sure that we
shall understand each other cowletely because our language is a count: one;

that of the nilitary nen who speaks frankly and yours because you are a
representative part of the Bolivian people who know nothing of deceit or diehoneat
intentions. If none of us wants to deceive the other or hide the truth, no netter
how difficult it ia. aince we are all Boliviane there can he no doubt that we shall
finally arrive at the aolutiona of benefit to all.

The iaportant thing is that we becoee aware thet there exiata a serious problem
we can no longer ignore-«mar do we wiah to do so-end that we seek anong us all
the real way to face it and over-cone it. )ioreover. the real solution to thia
great problee. which is the traffic of narcotics, carries with it the eolution of
parallel problees, that is, your situation as hard-working settlers who generally
have been undergoing very hard living conditiona. alnost lacking credits and
neceaaary technical help fro. the various govern-ant agenciea operating in
interest or simply following the trend. people wash their bends of it by euphe-
sizing the magnitude acquired by the drug traffic end pointing out the involve-
ment, real or alleged. of even certein levels of several-eat. with greater reason
that sane position is being named by the intemtionnl press. which, hovever, has
at no time asked itself whether Bolivia hes had or he. the necessary external help

sensible to suppose thet with the capture of those five individuals e desth blow
will have been struck against the Bolivian drug traffic. There lust be my
The alternative to this unspectacular but obviously effective overall policy

is to discover a few drug traffickers every now and then, thus giving the people
the deceptive impression that the narcotics traffic is about to disappear when
actually the contrary is happening: Its headlong and already almost uncontainable
growth.

why Should He Fight the Traffic in Narcotics?

The first aspect on which all of us Bolivians must have an extremely clear idea
is that which says that we must be deeply interested in eradicating the traffic
of narcotics in Bolivia. In this respect there is implicit the criterion that it
must be the great drug-consuming nations. primarily the United States, which must
drastically reduce the use of drugs in their own midst. This would mean that
there would be no market for the supply offered by Bolivia. Obviously this is
true when viewed from only one angle. since it could also be said that if the
supply were to disappear there would be no demand either.

Actually the interest in fighting the narcotics traffic is reciprocal, in each
case attending to specific interests. Since the reason for cancernin this respect
in the large drug-using nations is obvious, let us place the accent on those
things which concern us as Bolivians. In this respect suggestions are often
made, even by circles which cannot be suspected of drug trafficking, which are
very strange and therefore erroneous. The first of these is of a quantitative
nature. It is emphasized that if it is the idle youth of the great industrialized
nations who are affected and not the youth of ours, we should not have to be
concerned. It is also stated that since the drug provides exhorbitant profits, it
should rather be a matter of studying how to insure the reinvestment in the country
of a larger share of those profits, something like the nationalization of nar-
cotics traffic.

Very well, even taking the enormous figures which the traffic of narcotics would
create in Bolivia as a benefit of inventory--although the immense share appears
to derive from the foreign sales process--the danger to Bolivia as a country as
well as for its youth is objective and inevitable. If we do nothing, it could be
a matter of a few years in which with or without elections, as happened before
with the tin barons, the national economy and politics would be determined by the
all-embracing power of the narcotics traffic, which could eventually even allow
itself the luxury of having axewlen at its service, promoting them to the high-
est levels of government by means of "coups de etat" or democratic elections.

It is obvious that every well-born Bolivian should consider such an ominous future
as absolutely undesirable .

But there is more. It is a completely mistaken idea that our young will not be
the victims of the use and traffic of cocaine and other mind-affecting drugs.
They are in an increasing manner, even in the junior highschools, although not yet
in the elementary. Actually the problem of drug addiction is worldwide, with
developing countries such as Bolivia not being exempted. their young assuming

the drug-using pathological patterns of more advanced circles, something which
should not surprise us in a world such as the present which is more and more
interdependent and in each of whose regions or nations drug dependency appears as
a way to evade an increasingly competitive and harsh reality filled with con-
flicts such as our modern society.
What is the Traffic in Narcotics and now Can it be Fought?

It is, therefore, tine that we recognize the objective reality of the problen of
the narcotics traffic in Bolivia, abandoning the type of guilt couple: which
appears to have become generalized as if all of ue holivians were powerless to
discover the aost viable ways to reduce it to its ninimm expression. We are not
among those who believe that with siqle lanentations or by nearing our clothing
we are going to evade reality. The problem is objective and we nust face it with
realism, understanding that we find ourselves before a veritable war on whose
results depends even whether we shall survive as a nation and as a people.
Obviously the task is far from easy, but it cannot be avoided. It is also true
that it will take tine. perhaps one or two 5-year periods. however, we nust begin
right now and then continue systematically and correctly.

I said previously that the narcotics traffic will not be eradicated by simple
repressive neasures, although the spectacularity which they nay assune could con-
fuse the citizenry. If some minor leaders are captured, others always appear who
are just as powerful or more powerful. In this respect we met reader that even
the 11.3. police. with neans infinitely superior to ours, have not been able to, -
nor can they, prevent the growth of narcotics traffic in the United States, which
as years go by is acquiring impressive dimension. In our case narcotics traffic
can only be reduced drastically to linits virtually submarginel if we understand
that it has three interrelated phases: the production of the raw material. that
is, the coca leaves, the manufacture of sulphate or basic cocaine paste which is
not necessarily produced in a single large factory , and finally. the traffic
itself. the export of the sulphate and sonetines of chloral hydrate.

Those three aspects are closely interrelatei to the extent that one cannot be
conceived without the others. Actually, if there is no production of the raw
material, which means the coca leaves, it would be impossible to nanufacture
cocaine sulphate and therefore it could not be exported. That is the reason for
the need to attack the weakest link in the chain of drug traffic, which is the
production of coca leaves. We do not propose, of course, the burning of all the
coca plantings but rather of balancing the supply and demand having to do with
traditional chewing, while at the same tinnwe make viable the sustained reduction
of the areas in which coca is grown by means of a proper policy of substitution
and/or diversification of crops.

Accelerated Over-production of Coca

Although figures are contradictory, depending on their source-of course they are
not up to date—all of then agree that the last decade has seen the cultivation
of coca leaves expanded in a cumulative and increasing aanner several tines
greater than in any other. In that respect the Chapare takes the prize because in
past years the increase in the growing of coca leaves has apparently been 20
percent accumlatively each year. There is more. while on the national level

it can be estineted that up to the present tine,of the 20,000 tons of leaves
produced no more than 50 percent went to cover the legal requiremnts of tra-
ditional chewing. in the case of the Chapare the percentages would be even more
alarming, since perhaps up to aromd 70 percent of coca leaf production will go
for the aanufacture of cocaine.

10
It is true that this greater production has for acne years brought a certain
prosperity to nany of the settlers of the Chapare in direct proportion to the
size of their coca plantings. Sons have perhaps even hecone nillionairea and'
have been able to Buy trucks, houses and other itens which. were previously out of
their reach. I do not nean to accuse you of being acconplices in the traffic of
narcotics by this, because you have only received crunbs fron those revenues. You
sold your coca to internediariee and it was no longer your responsibility as to
what they did with it or who they sold it to. but you have to understand that
this cannot go on; that neither the country nor the governnent can allow it
anynore and this is the nain reason of ny presence at this gathering. The nonent
has cone to attack the proﬁles at its roots, uhichneans to progran the progress-
ive but continuous reduction in the growing of coca leaves.

Objectives of the Second Census of Coca Leaf Growers

In the next few days, in the first half of October. with the cooperation of the
National Statistics Institute end the Military Geographic Institute. the National
Council for the Fight Against Narcotics Traffic will proceed to nuke the Second
Census of Coca Leaf Growers. The personnel of the Military Geographic Institute
will be duly identified. I recs-end to you that this tine each of you provide
exact figures with the certainty that the objective is not that of creating or
increasing any taxes for you or burning your coca fields. The only thing we
seek is to know exactly the area you have cultivated and how such you produce in
each harvest so that when you sell to the collection centers or suhcenters you
can be checked with the greatest accuracy possible and in a tinely nanner.

The coca fields existing at the tins of the census, and which will be naturally
recorded. shall be legal. Howaver. we shall not allow coca plantings to be
expanded. You nust keep this very nuch in nind. New coca fields will not only be
burned but those who plant then will automatically lose their right to ownership
of their land parcels and those who are renters will have their contracts canceled
and may also be accused of being ecconplices of narcotics traffickers. These are
aspects which are considered in the new draft low prepared by the council and
which will be forwarded for consideration of the president of the republic until
next Friday. 9 October.

I repeat the need for you to provide exact figures to avoid neny future problass.
No one will escape the Second Census of Coca Leaf Growers no natter how far away
he nay be. First of all, in surveying, the Military Geographic Institute has
organized its work in such a way that its personnel will note a cowlete sweep of
all the territory of Cochabanha and La Pa: and while it nay have to suspend its
work when the next rainy eeasonnakes it iapossihle to continue with it. it will
return to finish it next "arch. Second. we shall have the help of the satellite
which passes over Chapere several tines a week and takes photographs.

I told you that no one will escape the second census or its effects because the
registered grower will receive the pertinent certificate, which is the sane as

having a legal growing license. The person who for any reason is not reached by
the census will have aw-day period to go register. is a result, the collection
center and its suhcenters. with their conputeriaed figures, will know who anong

11
you should come to sell them your coca and hoe much you should sell them. who-
ever does not do so at each harvest despite having produced some, will not

grow another crop because his coca field will be burned._ You can rest assured
that it is simply a matter of time and personnel beforewe achieve this absolute
control because our objective is to prevent, if possible, a single drua of coca
from becoming cocaine sulphate. llaybe some of you will laugh, considering that
the Chapare is extensive, that many of its land parcels can only be reached on
foot or by beacsof burden and that coca fields have been spreading all along the
length of rivers. we shall face up to that real situation with the suitable
material aeans. Soon you will see several helicopters, which can land anywhere

and which the council will use to achieve a practically absolute control, flying
across the skies of Chapare.

Collection Centers, Traders and Domestic Cocaine Sulphate

Those who act in good faith have nothing to her when they come to the collection
centers of the Council. On the contrary, the truth is that we have established an
acceptable price of 1,500 Bolivian pesos net per drum to the grower. The strange
thing is that because you do not know it or because of habit many of you have been
selling your drum of coca leaves to the traders [rescstadores]. who have been
exploiting you, paying you only between 500 to 800 BoliVian pesos per drum. while
they sell it for as much as 7.000 Bolivian pesos to the narcotics traffickers.
This was even published by the press a few days ago. You should know that the
Council does not recognize any intermediary or trader. who if they operate are
doing so in violation of the law.

It is true that in recent months coca growers have had problems with the collection
centers and the subcontere of La Pat and Cochabamba. Since many did not register
in the previous census or they declared they had smaller amounts than they ac-
tually had. the collection centers refused to buy the coca and in some cases seized
it. That was a serious error and as soon as I learned about it I took remedial
action ordering that those abuses not be cosmitted against you and that they buy
all the coca you bring at established prices. This will also happen during the
second census and while everything is being organized and completed. Re are
interested in having all coca production come to the collection centers. It

would be very strange if we ourselves pushed you into selling your coca to the

traders of cocaine manufacturers since if we do not buy it, you have to sell it to
someone.

However, I also wish to speak to you frankly about a new phenomenon we have al-
ready detected on the long border with Peru and Chile, and which apparently has
proliferated even more in the Chapare. I refer to the fact that the smuggling
of coca leaves, due to the existence of the Council's collection center and the
existing controls, will now be minimal. Instead, in hundreds of scattered places
it will be the peasants themselves who will produce cocaine sulphate for the
narcotics traffickers, who would thus find it easier to collect cocaine paste,
taking it to the cities on road vehicles, boats and even on hydroplanes and light

aircraft. Ground coca would also be taken to the city of Cochabamba where it
wOuld be made into sulphate.

12
You may be assured that it is simply a matter of time, once we have the results

of the Second Census of Coca Leaf Growers computerized, to know houmany and which
of you operatein this way. It is better that you desist now when you still have
the chance, because once we discover it. the full weight of the law will fell

upon violators. It is not worthwhile for the peasants to run that risk of losing

their land and in addition spending several years in prison for manufacturing
cocaine sulphate.

National Coca Monopoly and International help

I take this opportunity to infers you and all Bolivia about the real projection
of the National Coca State Honopolywhich. is part of the National Council for the
Fight Against Narcotics Traffic. If we are seriously going to undertake the
eradication of the narcotics traffic in the country, the monopoly in buying and
selling coca leaves has two objectives: first, buying and selling in terms of
satisfying the legal demand of the traditional chewers; second. buying the
surplus coca leaves so as to promote their export for legal purposes, which in
any case will be minor. and the reminder will be burned.

In the first aspect, the state monopoly is complying—with the explicable initial
faults—with its objective. With the experience acquired. it will be a matter

of a short time. not later than the and of the year, for the operation of the
state monopoly to be practically perfect with respect to the purchase froa the
growers as well as the sale to the traditional chewers, level at which we also
seek to reduce the nunber of intermediaries to the mini-Il whose excessive pro-
liferation can only be explained, particularly in certain cities. because they
are channels of supply of coca leaves for the narcotics traffickers. He shall
thus be in a position to know how much we have bought and from whom for the
purposes of traditional chewing and through whom we have reached the chewers. whose
nueber it will be possible to establish with great euctitude.

However, it is proper that the citizenry have a correct idea with enough time

of what the purchase and destination of surplus coca leaves means, since they are
for the manufacture of cocaine. If we assume that the surplus would reach some
10,000 tons per year, although actually it can even be greater according to some
estimates, we would have no less than 22 million pounds of coca leaves in round
figures. which if purchased from the growers at 38 Bolivian pesos per pound would
mean we would need 757 nillion Bolivian pesos. something like 830 million in round
figures. In other words. every year for several years to come. while the results
of the systenstic policy of substitution and/or diversification of crops bacoae a
reality. we would have to buy and burn coca leaves in that aeount, which obviously
Bolivia does not have for that purpose.

It is here that we need the urgent cooperation of the international co-Inity, md
in particular that of the industrialized countries most affected by the manu-
facture and sale of cocaine. For a minimal of five years that sum would have

to come to us as an annuity. thus complementing the political will of the
Bolivian Government to eradicate this sinister traffic from the country. It is

to be noted that up this tine we have not had the slightest foreign coOperation
for the organisation of the state coca nonopoly or for the accoaplishment of the
Second Census of coca Leaf Growers or the rest of its activities. If that foreign
cooperation is not forthconing. what will happen is that the state coca monopoly

l3
will only accospliah one of its objectives. although effectively, that of the
regulation of supply and denand of coca for traditional chewing. 'l'here will
regain an inevitable parallel nsrket. which.“ uould like to prevent. in leaves
and above all in the nanufacture of sulphate, less detectable and easier to
transport than the raw material in bulk.

The Chapare and the Suﬁstitution of Crops

The reception I had in Carannavi a few days ago and that which you now give no
shows the country and foreign opinion that the peasant coca leaf growers fully
accept the need to substitute for the coca fields. which up to now have been

your main conercial surplus and could alnost he called your nainstay. If the
governsent, through the council. is truly going to reach you with sufficient
credit and pernanent technical help, I an certain that far free encountering
resistance we shall receive your full support. This will not he an easy short-
tera task either. If we know has to organise well and be truly sensitive to the
interests of the peasant class. we shall have achieved full success. but not over-
night and not even free one year to the next. but rather during the course of

several years, an average of 5 years. “hat is ieportsnt is that we lose no more
tine and we begin i-ediately.

This period nay seen exaggerated to those who do not know the rural area and
prinarily the coca leaf growing zones. To us that is the ninim tine. This is
because the subtropical zone where coca leaves are grown gives the appearance of
being of great fertility because it is always green. Actually it is not. The
soil is much poorer than that of other regions of the country, for example. the
valleys of Cochabanha, Chuquisacs or Tarija and certain regions of Santa Cruz.
You the settlers of the Chapare know this because of your own experience. You
know that this apparently outstanding region is no good for continuous farning
because its crops are snaller mar after year. This explains why after a certain
time you have to nova, you engage in what is called "agricultural migration."
Experience has also told you that the seas thing cannot be planted everywhere.
You also suffer free the exploitation of inter-adiaries and in any cases your
products spoil. All this explains why you see the cultivation of coca as your
salvation since this plant will give you up to four crops per year and generally
is resistant to the diseases which affect coffee, citrus or cocoa.

Therefore. a real policy of substitution for the growing of coca. which nesns an
undenagogic policy. has to begin with the recognition of that mltifaceted object-
ive reality and an attenpt to resolve it in its entirety. That supposes several
things on the basis of the supposition that we shall act in terns of the

defense of the interests of the peasants: Pronotion of the so-called perennial
crops of the tree type or sieilar things such as the oil or African pale, quinine,
certain types of citrus. elders and pines, as well as coffee, papaya and cocoa.
without prejudice to the ancouragensnt of the use of better growing techniques
for some traditional annual products and some new ones such as rice, pepper,
tomatoes and legunes in general; cooperation with the peasant through a complete
soil study, which in the case of the Chapare is already very such advanced

and since: complete by PRODBS [expansion unknown], so that it will be known what
can be planted where for best results: asking possible the introduction of new

lb
species and iaproved seeds, aspect in which the nu [aspansion unknown] has aade
advanced studies, although because of the. lack of funds the settlers of the
Chapare continue using their own aeedbads, and finally, to the greatest degree
possible. advancing toward an integrated rural developent of a new type, which
should be understood as the optima developnent of the naterial and hnnan
resources of a certain region and whosecentral point will be the establish-eat
of a cooperative agroindustry.

In this respect, coinciding with theory or couple-eating it. I wish to emphasise
that the leaders of the Chapare settlers the-selves in La Paz insisted that

we try to bring industrial plants here to this region. They gave es the ens-pie
of the papaya. which they now sell at a peso apiece but in the future they would
sell to their own plant to he ends into narnalads. which would nean that they
would have a guaranteed narket at a higher price. that can be done with papayss
aust be repeated as nuch as possible with other products.

The Council for the Fight Against Narcotics Itraffic, the Driving Force

This is the sense of the agree-ant we signed between the National Council for the
Fight Against Narcotics Traffic and the Bolivian Agricultural Bank. which makes
for the accelerated use of the funds which. had existed in the CROPOG [expansion
unknown] prograa. specifically neant for the creation of peasant cooperatives.

In this agreeaent are stated the specific conditions of that credit. which will be
at reasonable interest and will be repaid once the plant goes into production

during a period of several years. It is to be noted that the credit will also
include operating capital.

It is proper to state that the borrowers will be the cooperative or cooperatives
which do not yet exist but which we should organise during caning aonths. We have
the specialized personnel fron the Agricultural bank in its CRDPOG progran for
this organization and in addition to than the council will nets available a per-
manent support technician. moreover, the council will help in the preparation of
the necessary feasibility studies. because it is logical that we met demonstrate
to the bank that the project is profitable. which scene that it is possible for
the bank to recover its noney. For the rest. you met consider that the nachinery
for these plants is not available in the country but nust be imported free the
United States. all of which takes tine. Therefore, we can expect that once the
first cooperative is organized and the feasibility study is nade. the first
cooperative industrial plant can begin operations within the following 6 nonths.

In this manner the National Council for the Fight Against Drug Traffic appears
in one of its nain functions. which is that of promoting existing possibilities
which have not been taken advantage of as yet. Something ainilar to that which
we have just finished doing with the Agricultural bank will be done with other
agencies such as PRODBS and IB‘l‘A. which neans that we shall coordinate the best
use of those things which up to now have infrastructure and studies. since a

poor country such as ours cannot afford the luxury of unnecessarily duplicating
efforts.
to overall needs.
Foreign Cooperation For the Substitution of crops

Very well, in the event that the industrialised countries interested in eradicating

a tinely fashion, we shall. at the ease tine, still need foreign help to finance.
as soon as possible, a planned but sustained substitution and/or diversification
of crops in the growing zones of Cochehanhs and La Pas.

That substitution and/or diversification should be based necessarily on what the
growing of coca means for the peasant fanily. which as we have said is the main
source of incone because it is the only product they raise for sale and the rest
of the things they grow are for self-consumption. Since each hectare of coca
yields around 80 baskets in the four crops each year. this scene that the peasant
receives between 120,000 and 150,000 Bolivian pesos per hectare of coca. It is

we know that in terns of profits is alnost impossible or at least very difficult
to find. That is why we speak about substitution and/or diversification. it is
a natter of guaranteeing a radical change in their living conditions and work,

so that altogether. when they cease to grow coca or reduce the area in coca,

they cannot only saintain their income but even improve it. That will only be
possible in the nanner we esphaaized heretofore, not only by i-proving their
growing techniques. that is. insuring the use of higher technology. but above
all by linking the production of raw naterials to their trensfornation for their
own benefit, which means establishing a cooperative agroinduetry. If this is not

done, we shall never he able to asks the peasant cease cultivating at least their
present fields of coca.

Here also there must he foreign cooperation, not only in a tinely but sufficient
manner.. If we conservatively assume that altogether we shall have to replace
some 10,000 hectares of coca in Cochsbasba and Le Pas within the para-stars
explained, that is, the introduction of new perennial crops and new cultivation
techniques and improved species, but above all the establishment of cooperative
industrial plants, we have to think of a nininun investment of acne $20,000

per hectare, which means $200 nillion to be invested in the 5-year plan of
integral rural development in the coca growing zones of Cochehanba and La Per.

a figure which scene sufficient to us for the virtual eradication of the narcotics
traffic in Bolivia.

It appears to he a large sun, which of course is out of the reach of our dosestic
possibilities. However, it represents a good investment for the industrialized

16
traffic. Those countries would have to spend several tines that amount, thinking
only in material terns, in subsequent rehaﬁilitation services for their drug
addicts. It has to he a cheaper and better option for then to halt the supply of
drugs from Bolivia. He hope they will understand it that way.

For our part, just as in Caranavi, with this Iaeting at Villa Tunari we are
demonstrating that we have clear ideas on how to really fight drug traffic in
Bolivia. as well as the necessary political deternination for acconplishing it.

He only wait for the indispensable foreign help to cons since we are sure of

having the support of the people in general, and those directly concerned. the
settlers of the Chapare and Yungas. in particular.

8908
C80: 5300/2016

17
TRAFFICKER 0P COCAINE, HBROIN CAPTURZD
Mexicali LA V02 DE LA PRONTERA in Spanish 10 Sep 81 Sec 8 p 12

[Text] Mexicali-Peders1 Judicial Police agents detailed to this jurisdiction
succeeded in capturing a resident of the Mirsflores housing develop-ant who
admitted having sold at least a pound of heroin and another of cocaine on the
United States black market.

The authorities said that. in that country a pound of cocaine is worth about
$108,000, vhile the heroin has more or less the sane price.

The federal agents recently arrested Israel Gastslul Rocha. aged 35, as he was
arriving at his residence at No ‘37 Pelipe Angeles Avenue in the Miraflores develop-
nent. Be was carrying in his clothing an envelope containing 7 grass of cocaine.
left to him out of a total of 25 grass that he had purchased for 83,500 free an
individual residing in Culiacan, Sinaloa.

Yesterday, the Federal Public Ministry agent representing the Ministry of Law.
Rogelio Lopes Medina, provided the inforaation about the case following the
investigations conducted by the Federal Judicial Police con-ander, Pshlo Garcia
Martinez, and his agents.

Gastelun Rocha, a native of liguerita, in the nunicipality oi Badiragusto, Sinaloa,
was captured on 7 Septelber when he was arriving at his residence at 1300 hours
in his red Datsun pickup truck. with California license plates 39767".

According to the police, during the questioning Gastelun said that he had recently
purchased an ounce of cocaine fros an individual who had cone fro- Culiacan,
Sinalos, with a pound.

He also confessed that he had previously traveled to Calexico. California. in a
1965 Cadillac car in which he had concealed a pound of cocaine and another of
heroin.

he had nade several sales of the latter drug which he had in his possession and
which was seized from hin by the authorities, both in this capital and in San Luis,
Rio Colorado, Sonora.

The individual under arrest will he resended today to the first district court,
according to Lope: Medina.

2909

cso: 5330/68

18
HEROIN TRAPPICKERS CAPTURED IN MEXICALI
Mexicali LA V02 DE LA PRONTERA in Spanish 6 Sep 81 Sec 3 p 12

[Text] Mexicali-Padera1 Judicial Police agents arrested in this town five meebers
(including three women) of an international drug trafficking ring, and succeeded in

confiscating from them heroin valued at over 3 nillion pesos on the United States
black market.

Those under arrest are the expert chemist Francisco Reyes Padilla, aged 51, a resi-
dent of No 168 hidalgo Avenue in Mazatlan, Sinaloa; Beriberto Chan Sanchez. alias
"El Chino", aged 66 and residing at Mo 1170 Guanajuato Avenue in the Pueblo Nuevo
housing development in this town: Gabriel Lizarraga Martinez. aged 56. residing at
No 2177 Aguascalientes Avenue. in the Santa Clara development; Rebeca Preeae de
Gomez, aged 67, of No 1008 Third Street in Calexico, California; and her daughter,
Olivia Gomez Presas,.aged 35, of the sane address as her mother's.

The infornation concerning the case was provided yesterday by the agent of the Pede-
ral Public Ministry in this jurisdiction. Jose 3. Reta Diaz, after the Federal
Judicial Police cosmander. Pablo Garcia Martinez. had submitted to hin the report
containing the results of the investigation.

According to s. Reta bias, the individuals under arrest were remanded yesterday
to the first district court, accused of crises against health in various degrees,
depending on the extent of liability on the part of each.

The spokesmen for the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic noted that
Rebeca and Olivia were arrested recently as they were driving along Cristobal Colon
Avenue in a 1967 Chevrolet Inpala station wagon with license plates 814-812.

Upon being intercepted by the Federal Judicial Police agents, they appeared to be
extremely nervous, and were subjected to investigation. It was found that they
were about to convey 260 grams of pure heroin. apart free 30 grass that had been
greatly diluted, which Rebeca Preaas de Gone: was carrying tied with a belt under
her slip. She and her daughter were to receive $1,000 for carrying the drugs to
Cslexico.

0n the basis of the investigations that were conducted. it became evident that
Francisco Reyes had been engaged in drug trafficking for a long tine. He had
recently purchased 1.5 kilograms of poppy gun which he converted, through chemical
procedures known to hie. into a considerable aaount of heroin.

19
A short time ago he gave his girlfriend, Gabriela Lizarrege. the 260 gram of pure
heroin, and she contacted Rebeca Preaaa de Gone: (her friend) and the Letter'e

daughter (Olivia), to have then take the druge to the United States. which they
were about to do when they were arrested.

Hetiherto Chan ("El Chino") was engaged in eeeking cute-ere in the United States.

2909
(:80: 5330/ 68

20
HERO!“ TRAPPICKERS CAPTURED IN CHIHUAEUA
Ciudad Juarez El. PRONTRRIZO in Spanish 28 Aug 81 Sec 3 p 2

[Text] Yesterday. the Pederal Judicial Police dealt a heavy blow to drug traffickers.
They seized over a million pesos worth of heroin, but also succeeded in capturing
individuals such as Santos Ranirez Nunez, Raul Rodriguez Revels, Rogelio Neverez
Rurciaga and Marcelino Aviles Labra, who were engaged in this crininal activity

on such a grand scale that they even had their own laboratory in Guadalupe y Calvo.

Comdre Carlos Gabriel Santibanez Renee and Octavio Esquinca personally headed the
operation. which took then over 15 days and which deactivated. at least for several
years, such notorious traffickers as Santos Raeirez who. not even 3 months ago, was
serving a long sentence for crines against health in the United States, and Marcelino
Aviles, who is the brother of the notorious Carnalo Aviles. -

The two police chiefs, who have becoee scourgea of the drug business greats, learned
that Santos, Hercelino, Raul Rodriguez and Rogelio Nevarez were about to carry out
a multimillion transaction.

They followed in their footsteps, sticking to them like shadows; and thereby found
out that at 2100 hours on Rednesday. at the Herrera earket stand between the Cases
Grandes highway and Lopez Hateos Avenue, they were going to nest a purchaser from
the United States. who was to give them 1 million pesos for 260 grams of heroin.

Santos Ramirez Nunez and Raul Rodriguez Revels arrived at that location to keep
the commitment in a brand new 1972 Ford [.11).

Of course they were carrying two packages no larger than 5 inches long by an inch
and a half in dismeter, carefully wrapped in foil, with a final covering of clear
plastic over the latter.

Inside was that solid, blackish substance resenbling cajeta de celaya [a jellied
confection], but harder and darker, which has caused death or incurable lunacy to
so many millions of people.

But soeething drove the conspirator away. "he may have seen us. which we doubt,
but he suspected something. and did not arrive for the drugs," said Commanders
Santibanez and Esquince. "Ra escaped us simply becuase we did not know hin. nor
did we know whether he was on foot or going to arrive by car at where Santos
Ramirez and Raul Rodriguez were already located. In any event, we arrested the
latter.

21
"They tried to use the powerful weapons that they were carrying, but we did not
give them a chance. He questioned than, and they soon stated that, in their acti-
vities as drug sellers, in which they had always been engaged, they were being
helped by Rogelio Nevarez Burciaga and Marcelino Aviles Labra, who is also celled

'31 Chiaino' and who, as a trafficker, is as active and brazen as hie brother,
Carmelo, or more so."

The search for then continued, and it was discovered that Santos and Marcelino were
directing the group's activities together, and that they were operating on such a
large scale that they even had their own laboratory-in the direction of Santa
Matilde. which belongs to the auncipality of Guadalupe y Calvo. Chihuahua.

They indicated the location where the poppies were converted into gun, because
other agents had cone there to see when they arrested.

Today, the drugs, the two cars in which they were traveling, and of course the
arrested traffickers and the weapons seized tron then will be turned over to the
agent of the Federal Public Ministry.

"They dealt a big him; now they have really eaught the leaders," was the cm:

being aade among the various local police forces, referring to Oomndera Santibanez
Rsnos and Octavio Bequinca, and the rest of the federal agents who took part in
that investigation.

22
: Nunez, R
orders fr‘

inning"
TRAFFICKBR HIT]! W6 CRIMINAL RECORD CAPTURE!)
Culiacan El. 501. D8 SINALOA in Spanish 19 Sap 81 Sec 3 p 2

[Text] After a series of careful investigations, agents fron the Municipal Public
Security Directorate [DSPH] succeeded in capturing the anti-murderer Raul Zamora
Losiza, aged 26, so as to have him answer to the courts for the crimes of homicide,
drug trafficking, extortion, kidnapping, armed assault and any others which result
during the course of the pertinent preliminary investigation. ‘

This announcement was made yesterday by Mr Roberto Robles lendon, head of the 081’“,
to the news media.

Zamora Loaisa is e native of the village of Carmen, in the mmicipality of San
Ignacio, with a current residence at 161 Corona South, in this town.

The Municipal Police inspector, Robles Rendon, added at the press conference which
he held last night that Raul Zamora has a bad criminal record, with no fewer than
10 honicides co-itted with firearms ascribed to him.

At one tine anora Ioaiza served as a driver for Manuel Salcido Ureta, alias ”El
Cochi-Loco," with whoa he originally engaged in operations associated with drug
trafficking.

In his stateaents, he admitted that he had taken part in the escape of "El Cochi-Loco"
from the IRRS [Institute of Incarceration and Social Rehabilitation], where he acted
as driver of the pickup truck in which they fled bound for Navolato, accospanied by,
or in the custody of guards from the prison, who were arud with H-l rifles, heading
toward Navolato, where they murdered Vicente Angulo.

Raul Zamora Loire also said that his crininal record dates back about 10 years ago,
when, with Jesus Piaentel, son of a doctor with the same surname, they held up an
individual at the Hotel del Valle, robbing him of 70,000 peeoa.’ On that occasion,
both were jailed and booked by the mnicipal police. lie was confined in the Protec-
tive Institution for Minors, for stealing a bicycle fron a friend of his in the 5 de

Mayo housing development .

He later went to the mountains, where he met Manuel Salcido Users, in San Ignacio;_
and engaged in growing narihuana with hector Loaisa, alias "Bl Tonillo" and other
persons whose names he did not remember.
Three years ago, he participated in the abduction of a son of Matilde Loaiza, and
he and his accomplices received 60,000 pesos for his release. He also stated that
he had engaged in extortion of Felix Lara, a resident of La Labor, in the municipa-

lity of San Ignacio, whom he threatened with death through anonymous messages, and
from whom he demanded 50,000 pesos.

Using the same trick, he stole 40,000 pesos from Miguel Ochoa, a merchant located
in La Labor; while another of his victims was Miguel Urbina, from whom he stole

40,000 pesos, a month ago. Since this was bringing him optimal results among the
well-to-do people in that area, he continued it.

Next, it was the turn of Alfredo Acosta, a native of Cosala and owner of a bar and

a supermarket; following which he was arrested on that charge by agents from the
DSPM special services department.

A month ago, with a certain Enrique, he stole 1,200 pesos from Miguel Ponciano in
the Sinaloa housing development in this town. He robbed a grocer named Juan of

30.000 pesos, using anonymous threats. He also held up an American at the Tree
Caminos Motel, taking $1,000 and other items.

He worked in a machine shop in Canedo and Corona, where he stole the manager's car
and sold it to an unidentified person. The vehicle was later recovered by the police.

with an individual nicknamed "Bl Gaviota" he held up an unidentified person from
whom they stole a gold bracelet end cash, escaping to Tijuana, Beja California,
where they stole two care. He sold the first one at a car lot, and with the second
was arrested by customs officials and jailed in La Mesa for 5 years and 2 months.

He shot Vicente Angulo to death for pay, and years ago also killed Miguel Osuna,
in the same manner, at La Labor, in the municipality of San Ignacio, in the company
of Hector Loaiza Manjarrez and Antonio Manjarrer.

He later murdered Sergio Osuna, who had tried to make a profit from the marihuana
that they had planted, because they found him cultivating it at Cerro de la Sills;
he also killed Miguel Ruvalcaha for the same reason.

Last year, he admitted, he killed the brothers Jose and Mario Acosta at the Sinaloa
housing development in a gun-battle. He knew the victims by the nickname "Los
Chihuahuas" and killed then because of old grudges.

Four months ago, he killed two persons whose identities he claimed not to know, in
the S de Mayo housing development; and 2 months later, he killed Miguel Vega.

At a party in the San Ignacio area, Raul Zamora, together with a friend of his named
Enrique, attempted to assault a girl, who resisted. They shot her, not knowing
whether or not she was dead, because they fled.

This is a summary of some of the crimes the majority of which had Raul Zamoro Loaiza

as their intellectual and material perpetrator. Today, he will be turned over by
the DSPM to the State Judicial Police Directorate.

25
This is Raul Zamora Loaiza, aged 26, who has a bad criminal record, including no
fewer than 10 murders committed uith firearms and several extortiona and kidnappings,

as well has having been a drug trafficker. He was captured by the Municipal Public
Security Directorate.

2909
cs0: 5330/50

26
BRIEFS

SMIPLOAD 0P MARIHUANA ADRIFT-Mexico City, 16 September (IMPORMEX)-Ths Federal
Judicial Police, together with the Mexican Navy, discovered a ship on which 13 tons
of marihuana were found. adrift at sea. The incident took place in Jurisdictional
waters of the island of Cozumel. A ship of the Mexican Navy towed the vessel "Par
Horizon" to Isla Mujeres, where the pertinent authorities took over the case. The
Federal Judicial Police assigned to that locality reported that 700 packages were
discovered aboard the ”Far Horizon" containing a total of 13 tons of marihuane of
varying quality. the price of which per kilogram on the market would be 10,000 pesos.
It is thought that the ship, which did not carry a flag nor any identifying documen-
tation. had come from Colombia, a country which has become a platform for the national

drug traffic bound for the United States. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DB NUEVO
LAREDO in Spanish 15 Sep 81 Sec A p 2] 2909

ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN PRAIS£D~-Msxico City, 18 September (INFORMEX)-Representatives of
the 0.8. police agreed in stating that, with the permanent campaign against the drug
traffic in our country, Mexico has become a beneficial barrier preventing the entry
of drugs into the United States on a large scale, while Canada is one of the leading
corridors. In discussing the drug addiction problem in the United States, Sheriff
Tommy Robinson of Little Rock, Arkansas, remarked in an interview with INPORMBX that
the disintegration of the American family as an institution has prompted both youth
and adults to consume more drugs. he added that the high crime rate is due mainly

to this factor, whereas in Mexico family unity has helped to keep that rate lower.

He claimed to be unfamiliar with the sociological factors involved in the problea,
but noted that the consumption of marihuana in the schools on all levels of education
is alarming; commenting: "We need to learn your systems for curbing drug addiction,
so as to find the means of solving our problems efficiently." The head of the centers
for field study programs in the area of drugs in Texas, for his part, said that the
system against drug trafficking in Mexico was very advanced with respect to technical
and human resources. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DB NUEVO LARBDO in Spanish 19

Sep 81 Scc A p 2] 2909

OPIUM GUM SEIZED-Jeaus Iribe Alvarez has been placed at the disposal of the first
district court, to be tried for the crimes of planting. cultivating, harvesting,
purchasing and selling drugs. He has confessed and there is evidence against him

to warrant his being tried for the aforementioned crimes. as well as for drug
possession. In making the foregoing report, Hector Aviles Castillo, coordinator

for Zone 06 of the permanent campaign against drug trafficking established by the
Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, noted that a series of investigations
had culminated in the arrest of the presumed drug trafficker. He explained that the
accused resides in El Huejote, a town within the municipality of Bsdiraguato. where
he had concealed under the kitchen floor in his house four bottles containing a'dark
substance with a penetrating odor which is apparently opium gun. The combined four
plastic bags which Iribe Alvarez turned over to the investigators weigh 502 grass of
that drug. and were divided into one bag_with 168 grams, another with 148, a third
with 78 and the last one with 108 grams. They were all seized to be sent to the
laboratory for the purpose of determining exactly what kind of substance it is.

Also confiscated was a 1976 F-100 model Chevrolet pickup truck, with state of Sinaloa
license plates TU-l320, which had been used by the individual under arrest to trans-
port thedrugs that he had marketed on previous occasions. Finally. Avilee Castillo
remarked that, with the evidence in the possession of the agent of the Federal
Public Ministry, the subject was remanded to the first judge. so that the latter
might determine on the basis thereof the degree of liability to be assigned to him
and issue a sentence in his regard. [Text] [Culiacen BL SOL n: SINALOA in Spanish
14 Sep 81 Sec B p 2] 2909

SECOND SHIPLOAD OP HARIHUANA-Hexico City. 21 September (EXCBLSIOR)-At dawn today,
off the coast of Chetunal, the Navy and Pederal Judicial Police stopped an American
ship carrying over 8 tons of marihuana worth 100 million pesos. In less than 2
weeks the judicial authorities have apprehended two vessels carrying that drug.

The Federal Judicial Police disclosed that, aboard the American ship named "Sea
Hitch" over 8 tons of the aforementioned drug were discovered. The drugs had come
from Colombia and were to be taken to Miami. Florida. During the operation, Capt
John Mueller and Frank Lennon were arrested, as was the Colombian, Arnulfo Christopher.
According to Federal Judicial Police estimates, the drugs would be worth at least
100 million pesos an the black market. because most of then were of the high-priced
"red hair" and lamb's tail" varieties. [Text] [Mexicali LA 902 DE LA PRONTERA in
Spanish 22 Sep 81 Sec 8 p 15] 2909

OPIUH GUM TRAPPICKERS CAUGHT--The Federal Judicial Police discovered 260 grams of
opium gun in the residences of Marcelino Ojedo Aispuro and his daughter-in-law,
Pelipa Leon de Ojeda, who were therefore arrested and turned over to the agent of
the Federal Public Ministry. to answer the charges brought against them for crimes
against health in the degree of drug possession. The information supplied by Hector
Aviles Castillo, coordinator for Zone 06 of the permanent campaign against drug
trafficking. indicates that the presumably guilty subjects reside in the village of
Bagresitos, in the township of Tepuche, affiliated with this central municipality.
The federal official stated that. after an exhaustive investigation conducted by
members of the collaborating police force. it was learned that the aforementioned
individuals had made some sales of that drug; and hence they sought a means of
finding the opium gum. Aviles Castillo told EL SOL DB SINALOA that the poppy by-
product had been concealed in their residences in three bottles of the type used

to hold instant coffee. Two receptacles were found in the residence of Ojeda
Aispuro, one containing 80 grams and the other 100 grams; while the third bottle,
containing 80 grams of opium gun, was found in his daughter-in-law's house. also
buried for concealment. The pair, along with the drugs, was turned over to the
federal social representative so that, on the basis of the evidence provided,the
guilt of both individuals in custody could be determined and steps taken to iaplement
justice. [Text] [Culiacan El. 801. DE SIWA in Spanish 27 Sep 81 Sec 8 p 2] 2909

28
HEROIN TRAPPICKER ATTEMPTS SUICIDE-Carloa Jssao Trevino, aged 31, from Laredo. Texas,
was arrested by Federal Judicial Police agents because 66 grams of heroin were found
in his possession; and, upon being incarcerated in the cell at the Federal Palace.

he decided to commit suicide. However. he only managed to inflict sone ninor cuts
with the edge of a broken glass on his neck and left forearm. The uniformed police-
nan, Dolores Martinez. tried to take the broken glass away from him. and was wounded
on the hand in a struggle with the individual in custody. Both were treated at the
Civil Hospital. Jssso Trevino. a resident of 1915 Main Street in Laredo. Texas, was
arrested on Saturday night under circumstances that were not explained by the Federal
agents. It is thought that the 46 grass of heroin are only a sample that Carlos
Jasso Trevino was carrying to prove to a future customer the quality of his goods,
and that he has a large amount of this drug concealed in an unknown location. In
his desperation, the Laredo resident broke the glass in his cell and inflicted a

cut 15 centimeters long on his neck, in an attempt to slash his throat, but he did
not succeed. The questioning to which he will be subjected starting today will be
aimed at learning the identity of his suppliers, as well as his customers; because

it is known that there are many addicts of that drug on this border. The Federal
Judicial Police think that they are on the right path for finding even the ring-
leader of a drug trafficking group which has many branches in the country and abroad.
Carlos Jasao Trevino will be the one to supply valuable information for combating
these poisoners of the public health. [Text] (Nuevo Laredo EL HANANA in Spanish 21
Sep 81 Sec 8 p 6) 2909

cs0: 5330/50

2?
MAJOR INTERNATIORAL SWING ROUTE TRACE

Tehran W in Persian 16 Aug 81 p 12

[Text] mu CITY SERVICE--‘l'he public prosecutor of the Gonbad city-region
anti-drug court presented figures of the activities of the public prosecutor's
office and spoke about issues and difficulties ate-log fron the anti-drug
crusade in the region in an exclusive interview with mm. is also explained
the role of the Idol's system in turning villagers and far-era into addicts. and
how the feudalists have intensified this inhumn behavior and dragged the
villagers into exploitation.

Gholaﬂwsseyn Jansli. public prosecutor of the anti-drug public prosecutor's
office for the Gonbad city-region. concerning the activities of the Special
Anti-Drug Revolution Guards during the past four mnths, said: In four nonths,
through the efforts of the revolutionary brothers, sore than 230- kilogram of
opium. 2.5_kilograns of heroin, 5 kg of opiun-juice. and great eaounts of hashiah.
snuff and foreign cigarettes were seized. In this connection we arrested 150
persons, cost of who- were big dealers and fauna drug smgglers. Four persons
from this group were executed by order of the religious nagistrate. sanctioned by
the Suprene Judicial Council. All together. we have about 100 drug-related
prisoners at the mnent.

ﬂow is Opiun Juice Transported‘!

Tne special anti-drug prosecutor then spoke about the neth and helpers that
smgglers use to transport drugs, and said: Pollowing the arrest of four drug
bands. one of which was led by Qaderkhan. we ran into a band whose na-bers were
all wonen. After necessary exasination and investigation we found out that they,
working on an island, pour the cooked opiun juice into a large cauldron and soak
their clothes. particularly their undergarnema. blankets and other similar itens.
in it.

when the opiun juice dries, they put on their inpregnated clothes. and also
conceal the blankets among their gear. In this way they transport the opiun
juice to various points. Concerning how the opiua juice was retrieved fron the
clothes, he added: It becane clear that after they reach their destination, they
boil water in a large pot, and wash their clothes and things inrsgnated with
opiun juice in it. Then they let the water boil off , and sell the opiun juice
thus obtained.
International Snugglers Border Route

Gholaahosseyn Janali then pointed to the border route which has been created by
smugglers between Esfshan and Anarak in the Kavir Desert. and said: The greater
part of drug snuggling is carried out by this route. Iaaous, international
saugglers nove in caravans on this rodd. which has becoas known as the Saugglere
Border Route. They are equipped with all sorts of weapons, asaunition. car-
repair equipment, and caaping equipment. If this border route were to be
controlled. the lifeline of the snugglers would be cut, and the crusade against
snugglers could assume a sore fundamental fora.

Campaign Against Snuggling to Afghanistan's Soil

The revolution prosecutor of the anti-drug crusade, accoapanied by Boston
Hazzsnzadeh, an interrogator froa the prosecutor's office participating in this
interview. then went on to explain the situation of the crusade's programs and
the insufficiencies and needs of the office. and said: Hy brothers and I in the
special anti-drug revolution prosecutor's office of Gonbad, with the saallest
resources at our disposal, have expended all our energies in the anti-drug
crusade and the identification and arrest of snugglers. Sometiaes we have even
entered Afghanistan's soil to arrest a band. He have not the saallest fear of
death in our confrontation with saugglers, since we believe: Contrary to the
past hated regiae whose goal was the exploitation of the deprived and tyrannized
people. the Islamic Republic of Iran is strongly struggling against exploitation
and bondage of the people. The goal of inperialisl is to profit from the
deprived nations by addicting farmers and other workers of our country and
finally putting them under its power. But the Islaaic Republic will push
inperialisa's vile claws back onto its own filthy neck. as added: Due to the
special condition of the agricultural regions of our country, the big landowners
and feudalists affiliated with the Shah's resins, guided by Ashraf, the Shah's
sister. the anther of corruption who was the prine nover of the heroin bands
throughout the country. addicted the faraers and villagers in order to subdue
them and then sucked the life-blood fros then. He stated that the most iaportant
districts targeted by the landowners and affiliated feudalists were Gonbsd,
Ramadan, 'Ali Abad. Randal. Bojnurd. Isfahan and then other cities.

If We Had Sufficient Resources!

Concerning effective cooperation with the Special Anti-Drug Revolution Prosecutor's
Office. the public prosecutor said: The Galikesh Islaaic Revolution Koniteh and
secondly the regional gendarnsrie have cooperated effectively with the prosecutor's
office in the campaign against saugglers. I take this opportunity to thank the
Galikesh Revolution Guards and the officials of the regional gendarnarie for

their cooperation.

Gholashosseyn Janali, supervisor of the prosecutor's office. than pointed out how
drugs are transported in a wholesale and group fashion. and said: Just as I

have said before, if we have the necessary resources, such as radios, vehicles
and sufficient personnel. we will surely close the Kavir border route created
between Bsfahan and Anarak in one calculated action. Thus we will bring an end
to the self-interest and recklessness of smugglers who cause thousands of crines
for their own material interests. If we have the resources that are at the
disposal of the revolution prosecutor's offices in the centers. we will generally
dry up the root of the drug problem in the region. "hen drugs fron this region
do not reach Tehran, then the problee of the campaign against snuggling in Tehran
will be eliminated.

Gholanhosseyn Jamali in another part of his statemt said: In this period we
have becone acquainted with all the techniques of the smugglers, and we know
their helpers. but our hands are tied.

Concerning the people's cooperation with the snti-smggling caqaign unit of

this prosecutor's office, he said: The people's cooperation was extraordinary
and praiseworthy. However. there is a problen which has caused another difficulty
for us, which is the existence of addicts. They conprise about 70 percent of the
region's population. Portunately, after the revolution's victory. due to the
attention officials gave this problem, this figure has decreased to 40 percent.
We hope that with the resources that we will receive from concerned officials

we will quickly be able to bring this figure to zero. '

Revolutionary and Islamic Actions of the Religious Hegistrate

The revolution public prosecutor then suggested: If the country's borders are
closed by the Revolution Guards, the Hobilizetiou and volunteer forces, and if

we can also put addicts to work in work camps. we will have chosen the best
possible solution for the problem of snuggling and addicts. Jansli, concerning
persona arrested by the strike force or those who have had their property
confiscated, said: By the examinations carried out by the religious legistrete
and the revolution prosecutor. "Javad 'Ali Akbariyan.” a large number of prisoners
were freed and their confiscated property. east of which had been placed at the
disposal of revolutionary bodies, was taken back and delivered to the owners.

Jamali, in another portion of his statement concerning the methods of this
revolutionary mvement, said: Because we became aware that a min: of persons
have been arrested or have had their property confiscated for unfounded

reasons. we published an announce-ent and distributed it throughout the district.
He invited all persons having cowlaints against the anti-smggling cawaign
strike force to submit their complaints to the special prosecutor's office. We
then brought these complaints to the religious nsgistrate. and after requisite
examination, the necessary actions were taken concerning these complaints.

The special anti-drug revolution prosecutor then pointed to the execution of
smugglers. and said: The subject of the execution of smugglers has also become
another problem for us. When we arrest a snuggle! with a record with a large
amunt of drugs. and the religious ngistrate issues his death sentence, this
sentence lust be approved by the Suprene Judicial Council. As a result, after
sending this sentence for confirmation. it sometimes takes two or three months for
us to receive an answer free the Supreme Judicial Council as to whether this
smuggler should be executed or not. This causes problems for us, first of all
because we do not have enough space, and secondly because the criminal is aware
of his death sentence and spends his tine in anticipation. For this very reason I
request the Supreae Judicial Council to persit us to quickly carry out the mtences
of this group of criminals whose corruption has been established in every respect
and whom have been given Islamic sentences by the religious magistrate.

9557

CSO: 5300/5301 32
BRIEFS

OPIUH SEIZDuAccording to a report by the central news units from Ker-an, in an
armed clash which took place near the city of Jiroft between a brother from the anti-
narcotics squad of the Islamic Revolution guards corps of Zaramd and smugglers and
armed assailants, 50 kg of opium were seized from the smugglers. During this clash

one guard brother and one of the armed smugglers were wounded. [Text] [LD190557
Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1030 err 18 Oct 81]

TARAS OPIUM SEIZURE-With the assistance of Tabas citizens, the Tahoe Islamic
Revolution guard corps has seized 850 grams of opiul. l handgun, 2 rifles and an

amount of ammunition during the past week. [GP152023 Mashhad Domestic Service in
Persian 1630 GMT 15 Oct 81]

SHIRAZ HEROIN SEIZURE-The Shiraz antidrug squad has arrested an Afghan, who was
the leader of a drug ring, and his Iranian accomplice and have seized 30 kg of
heroin. [6F152023 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 (341' 15 Oct 81]

C80: 5300/5311

33
HEAD OF ANTI-NAMES BUREAU 018008838 MUG ADDICI’ION, matchma- MEASURES
Riyadh AL-YAHAHAB in Arabic 21 Aug 81 pp 16-21

[Interview with Maj Gen Jamil “aha-ad al-liay-an, director of the Anti-narcotics
Bureau, by Idris al-Daris: Narcotics Use Is on the Rise;" date and place not
specified]

[Text] Psychology has so far been unable to explain Ian's relationship with narcotics.
You see...why does nan get involved with narcotics of any kind? th does he want to
lose consciousness, even though intellect is God‘s gift to nankind and he has singled
him out over all other creatures? Does no search for the danger hidden in narcotics?
Does he search for pleasure, even though he knows that it is forbidden pleasure and
that it will only destroy him? Is it the nystery and excite-ant that surround the
world of drugs that nan seeks? Then what is the explanation for the spread of
addiction on the international level? he use of narcotics today has becone a world-
wide phenonenon. There was a picture on the cover of AlnTADIIZ, a few weeks ago,
showing a cocaine addict. It said that 11.8. losesv $6 billion each year on this
drug alone.

The list of narcotics is long: hashish, opiun, cocaine, heroin, nerijuana,
hallucinatory pills, and then liquor, all of which lead to the sane thing, death.

Do you know what secrets surround thisworld of drugs? Where does the kingdo- stand
anong Arab nations and in the world in terns of ﬂesh. snuggling and distribution?

This is what this interview sttenpts to answer, in a frank conversation with the
director of the Public Anti-Narcotics bureau, haj Gen Janil Huhamd al-haylsan.

At the outset of his talk, he said scathing that was just as true as it was serious:
that the use of stimulants and narcotics was on the rise. However, this fact. which
comes from a top official, should not disturb us, because there are sociological.
econonic and cultural explanations. The question ruins: Phat secrets surround the
world of narcotics? "here are we in the kingdo- with regard to this hidden world?
This is what this interview will answer.

[Question] Regarding the kingdon's experience with narcotics, can we say that it
currently takes the torn of phenomon?
[Answer] Regrettably, the use of stimulating and narcotic pills is on the rise. we
see this in more villages and cities of the kingdom. As for hashish and its deriva-
tives, such as opiun and others, it is not used in the villages; in other words, only
rarely does it circulate among the cones people in villages or snall towns.

[Question] Is this because we call hashish, opiul and other things "contemporary
narcotics?"

[Answer] Yes, we can call then that, in general, because of their use by the upper
class.

[Question] Is this because of their cost. their higher cost than pills, for example?

[Answer] First, because of this higher cost, and second, because of the difficulty
in obtaining then and knowing their sources. Obtaining morphine, cocaine and the
others requires a specific social level to facilitate the acquisition of such drugs.
By comparison, there are easy ways to obtain pills because of course, there are more
possibilities of indulgence and collusion by pharmacy workers. Also, the use of pills
does not leave an odor, as does a hashish cigarette, for instance. This makes it
easy for those who are weakwilled to use them, as opposed to hashish.

[Question] But don't laboratory tests show whether a person has med narcotic pills
and the like?

[Answer] Yes. Laboratory tests can determine that a person has used a narcotic
substance, through the analysis of stonach fluids and blood. Analysis shows if the
person has ingested alcohol or a narcotic substance.

[Question] Can we relate drug users to certain groups or classes?

[Answer] Yes, we can say that some drivers, apart from sons workers and students,
eagerly use pills of various types, stimulants and narcotics, to give themselves,

as they claim, unnatural energy to make long drives and to produce at work, and also
to help students study on examination days. Of course, these pills have adverse
effects, since they drain away nan's energy and efforts during the period of their
use. Continuous addiction to then leads the user to health breakdowns and physical
collapse, in addition to such effects, as we see and hear, as psychological trauma,
poor concentration and other negative effects caused by the use of such drugs.

As for morphine and cocaine, which are taken by injection, we can say that they are
distributed in wealthy and aristocratic circles, that is, the upper class.

As for the coupon people or lower class, they use hashish cigarettes.

If I enphasize that the drug phenomenon is on the increase over what it used to be,

I would not be remiss in saying that, due to the guidance of his royal highnesa the
minister of interior, his highness the deputy sinister of interior and the concern

of all officials in the government, there are plans to count all the various types

of drugs and to attempt to curb the activities of smugglers and dealers. A modern,
highly sensitive machine has been imported to detect all the various types of narcotics
in travelers' baggage and in hidden places in large vehicles, such as trucks and
refrigerated trucks. This machine will aid in accurately detecting narcotics in

35
vehicles and in homes. If a person has been arrested for possessing a quantity'of
drugs, then, naturally, the situation would require a search of his home. In such a
case, he could have concealed the drug in places that would be difficult to find by
merely looking. This sensitive machine can help to find drugs by sending out certain
frequencies and through specific indicators.

Moreover, there is coordination with customs officers at the borders and at ports,
whether air, sea or land, to stop this malady. Thanks be to God, we have succeeded
recently in arresting a number of travelers from certain countries who had in their
possession quantities of various drugs. All of this is thanks to God and then thanks
to the efforts and vigilance of border officials.

[Question] Do we ltnow the reasons for the increase in the use and circulation of
narcotics?

[Answer] As we all know, the kingdom is presently experiencing rapid development

and enomus growth. This necessitates bringing in large nubers of different
nationalities to take part in this growth. This large mmber of newcomers undoubtedly
has among it smugglers or dealers in and users of narcotics. This in turn affects

the Saudi society, most assuredly. The more society expands with liltiforeign
colonies, the more opportunity for increased influence and emlation. As evidence,

we do not see this phenomenon in small villages as we do in large cities.

Simplicity and continuity are found in the villages among the people of the cmmity,
whereas we find liberalization of different nationalities in the cities, in terms

of divergent customs and differing values, along with the element of travel abroad.
This factor, in turn, undoubtedly influences some young people, who have a weakness
with respect to religious inhibition, which could act as a barrier between then and
these perils.

[Question] The increased opportunity for drugs to enter though the ports and borders...
which way affords the most opportunity for smuggling. and what means are used most?

[Answer] The opportunity for bringing in narcotics overland is increasing the most,
primarily by means of large trucks and refrigerated trucks. This is undoubtedly due
to the opportunity for shipping drugs via large and refrigerated trucks, which are
filled with fruits, vegetables and assorted other goods and which come in large
numbers, increasing the difficulty of inspecting the- by the most desirable and
thorough methods. From now on, however, with the modern and sensitive machine, it
will be easier to inspect them, since it is sufficient for this sachine to make one
pass over the sides of these trucks to provide positive indication of the presence
of various things such as drugs. In addition, there are the efforts of the customs
personnel who work in the ports and who have appropriate experience and excellent
training, enabling them to detect most of the attempts made in this regard.

[Question] At what age is the use of drugs most intense, and what is your point of
view regarding the motives that compel a person to use narcotics?

[Answer] One cannot set a specific age for a user, but statistics and studies indicate
that the majority of drug users fall between 18 end 60. Beaver, this is not hard and
fast. We find men who are over 60 or who are under 18 who nevertheless use it or deal
in it. In any event, they are a small percentage.
[Question] Bow are investigations conducted to arrest narcotics dealers or users
of various types?

of the kingdom. We have a large section of experts working in the bureau, apart from
the citizens who cooperate with us and who have volunteered to lead us to every drug
dealer or user. In this connection, the Anti-Narcotics Bureau, at the direction of
the Ministry of the Interior, pays a very generous reward to any citizen or resident
who cooperates with the bureau in uncovering a drug dealer. As evidence of that. the
bureau, nearly 6 months ago, paid out SR 600,000 as a reward to one cooperating
citizen when he led us to a group selling drugs. The group was caught redhanded,

in possession of large conercial smomts of narcotics. The government, in the person
of the Ministry of the Interior, is very interested in the assistance of citizens who
cooperate with the bureau. I frankly feel that fighting narcotics, whether officially
with the officers, men and officials, or through the cooperation of citizens, should
be considered a holy war and divine service, since we are fighting those who are
trying to undermine our beliefs and kill our young people by dealing in and spreading
these poisonous, lethal sicknesses that kill any society they attack through the
narcotization of its youth. This belief is based on a religious and social View.
Therefore, I find this a suitable opportunity to call on all citizens to stand together
and to cooperate in rooting out this disastrous disease. They should rush to the
narcotics bureau's branch offices or to police stations, or elsewhere, to help us
find anyone who is trying to spread this disease in our Islamic society. The Prophet
says: "Those who appear abominable in your sight, they shall be changed by hand.

If this cannot be done, then by tongue." In other words, we should demand an end to
this by our hands, which is the mission of the bureau's persoctnel, or by our tongues,
which is the mission of all of us, as citizens and responsible persons.

[Question] According to our infatuation, the first specialized anti-narcotics group
in the kingdom was established 20 years ago, within the public investigations force,
and was composed of 2 men. Now, we see that this nucleus has grown and has evolved
into a separate bureau with branches in all the provinces. Have your methods developed

[Answer] First, I would like to say that the bureau has expanded, until it now has
38 branches throughout the kingdom. The bureau is in the process of improving these
branch offices and opening the largest possible number of centers throughout the
kingdom's cities and villages. Re are trying to concentrate our efforts on the
ports (land, sea and air) and on the borders. Our efforts will also be concentrated
on eradicating smuggling and dealing, because to step smuggling means to stop
distribution or sale. Putting an end to these two basic elements would mean that we
would stop the use of narcotics.

We in the bureau and its branch offices umber no less than 100 offices including some
graduates of the Internal Security Forces College and some others who have studied

in America, including those who have specialized in the study of narcotics. This is
apart from numerous officials and personnel who have taken courses in advanced
countries, and in some of the Arab states, in anti-narcotics methods.

[Question] Where does the kingdom stand relative to the Arab nations and the world
in terms of the size and influence of the narcotics problem?

37
[Answer] The fact is that the kingdom cannot be measured agath or conned with
some of the Arab states or other nations of the world. We are still fortunate,- thanks
be to God. I have conceded that this problen exists or, rather, that is regrettably
increasing. But the size of our problem cannot be compared with any other neighboring

Arab state, such as Lebanon, Syria or even Jordan. we are trying, intensively, to curb
and eradicate this phenomenon before it gets out of control.

[mestion] where do you think the responsibility lies for young people using drugs--
with the home, school or society? 0: is it a physical impulse, ate-ing from perverted
persons entering the country and youths traveling abroad and becoming exposed to
corrupt societies? 0: is it all of these factors coﬁined?

[Answer] The fact is that these factors all coﬂine to share in the responsibility
for some people using narcotics. I think that the home plays the major role in
guiding children, that is, those who are their guardians, raise and supervise them
and take care to keep then from bad companions or corrupt persons who might influence
them. I am reminded of a typical case about a man who lives here in Riyadh. he is

a high-ranking person, with social standing. But he also has a considerable conscience.
This father brought his son to the bureau and turned him in, after he caught his son
using pills. He said that he had advised him more than once to kick this habit, but
that he had failed. Because he cared for his son, he was afriad that he and his
future would be damaged by those pills,’ as a result of their negative effects on one's
health and mind. his only course was to hand him over to the bureau of narcotics for
treatment and deliverance from this disease. This case proves that the father had a
conscience and understood his responsibility. We successfully treated his son; he

is on the right path and, praise God, has kicked the habit. he has returned, as we
hoped, to being a well-adjusted young man, sharing in service to society.

[Question] But when someone like this son becomes involved and is arrested by the

narcotics bureau, instead of being turned in by his father, would there be a specific
punishment for him? ‘

[Answer] Undoubtedly, such a youth would be punished. However, there are provisions
covering students and young people who have no previous records and have only become
involved under the influence of specific circumstances. This allows for an attempt
to straighten them out and guide them away from the dangers resulting from damage

to their health, minds and nervous systems. Therefore, we have special methods for
dealing with penalties for those who fall in these categories.

[Question] What if someone involved with drugs turned hinelf in to your bureau,

without advice from anyone (after becoming aware that it was wrong)? Would a lesser
degree of punishment be inflicted?

[Answer] If it happened that seasons (and this has not occurred) came to the
narcotics bureau and turned himself in, after convincing himself that using drugs
was wrong, in such a case we would send him to a specialised hospital for treatment,
until he was cured, if he was an addict. In this case, he would not be punished.

[Question] But you would interrogate him about the source of his drugs?
[Answer] Of course. We would try as much as possible to influence him psychologically,

so that ultimately he cauld lead us to his supplier. In many cases, we reach an
agreement with him. He release him, so that he can assist us in arresting the seller

38
and dealer redhanded, because ultimately we and be are working for the good of society
generally, especially since he has repented of his deed and has become a good member
of society.

[Question] But can we know the way in which the one involved in or using drugs is
interrogated? Can it be described as harsh, for instance?

[Answer] Never. We have instructions preventing the use of force or violence with
people involved as users. Be assured that we do not strike nor endanger a person
who is a user. However, as I said, we have special methods and ways in this regard.
For example, if a person were arrested in possession of forbidden pills or hashish
for the purpose of using it, at that time we would try to persuade him that these
pills or hashish are injurious to his health, brain and psyche, and generally to
his entire future as a young men with aspirations and goals in life. we w0uld
persuade him that the person who helped him obtain these forbidden items was an
enemy of the society in which he lives. He would let him know about the punishment
that would be inflicted on him, as a result of his use of drugs, and then ask him to
cooperate with us by leading us to this dealer and helping us to arrest him, for this
would insure that his prescribed sentence would be reduced.

[Question] The drug addict is, in our view, more of a sick person than a criminal.
what are the means of treatment available to him, and do you participate in his
treatment, or is this the responsibility of other authorities?

[Answer] At present, this is considered the responsibility of the Ministry of Health,
because of its specialized psychological and medical clinics, which study addicts or
users and treat them. So far, the bureau does not have sanatariums to treat addicts.
There is some serious thought about establishing such sanatariums, at the present
time or in the near future.

[Question] Good. with respect to most of the treatment for these addicts, do you
think the treatment is good, and does it help the addict get out from under his
addiction forever?

[Answer] From the information available to me, I can report that the hospital

conducts the required medical analyses to learn the percentage of narcotic substances
in the blood. They then prescribe specialized treatment for him, to reduce the
precentage of these drugs. They administer special medication to help him to restore
his balance, so that the narcotic substances in his blood can be completely eliminated.
This is in addition to psychological treatment through counseling, advice and persuasion,
which has a basic role in the treatment. going hand in hand with the medical treatment,
so that the patient, or addict, ultimately is cured and restored to normal.

[Question] What ensures that this addict. after treatment, does not go back to drugs
again? Does the bureau play a role after that?

[Answer] The fact is that after the addict is cured and has kicked the drug habit,
we then release his. At that time, we obtain a pledge that he will keep away from
persons of ill repute, after informing him of the problems that have resulted from
his using drugs. He tell him about the drawbacks, such as prison and its resulting
damage to his reputation, aside from the restriction on his freedom imposed while he
is in prison. We mention the harm that can be done to his family or his children

39
in terms of neglect and the loss of custody over those who previously had need of
it, as well as the effect of that on his future, whether he be the father of the
family or a teenager still at a formative age.

In general, we say that he is the first and final loser. He advise him not to think
about the past, and we implore him to straighten out and to start again with a clean
slate. Then we keep a watch on him, by means of a special apparatus and specific
personnel, so that we can ensure that he doesn't fall into the clutches of drugs and
bad companions who were the cause of his downfall.

[Question] Does the bureau have a role in cooperating with the family, to see that
he does not get involved again?

[Answer] Certainly. If the guilty one is a young man, 18 to 20 years old, we will
contact his father or guardian and ask him to cooperate with us in monitoring his
behavior and movements and to give him guidance and advice about the dangers of drugs
and the harm they can cause his offspring by causing specific deformities, as well ~
as the residual effects of drugs on the heart and as a cause of cancer. This has
been medically proved, apart from the other harmful effects such as physical weakness;
mental, psychological and nervous damage; and so forth. Accordingly, he (i.e., the
guardian) should investigate the types of youths with whom the subject is associating.

[Question] Undoubtedly, addiction can kill young people, who are the nation's hope
and promise. What are the penalties prescribed for smuggling, trafficking and using?

[Answer] The penalty for smuggling is 15 years in prison and a SR 20,000 fine, along
with flogging. The sentence for dealing is 5 years in prison and a SR 10,000 fine,
and for using drugs, 2 years in prison.

[Question] But what if the smuggler is the dealer at the sane time? In that case,
would the punishment be doubled?

[Answer] I cannot giro you a definite answer for this case, because first there is
the conviction, and then the punishment is within the purview of the legal authority.
Each incident has its own circumstances and special situation. Our role is to write
up the case and handle the investigation. He then present it to the administrative
authority, who orders it turned over to the competent court, which in turn pronounces
the appropriate sentence.

[Question] Do these penalitiesthat you mentioned meet international standards?

[Answer] Yes, these penalitiea are internationally recognized, although there are
some nations that prescribe execution for smuggling and dealing, such as Iraq, Iran
and China. According to my information, the matter of the death penalty for smuggling
is under study here in the kingdom. It is being studied by legal authorities, since
smugglers are considered corrupters of the land, and God says in His holy book:

"The punishment of those who wage war against God and His Messenger and strive to
make mischief in the land is that they should be murdered, or crucified, or their
hands and their feet should be cut off on opposite sides...."

[Question] Regarding those who receive 15-year jail terms, are there circumstances
that could reduce this sentence?

ho
[Answer] The possibility exists, if three-quarters of the prison term has been
served, during which time he has repented of his crime, and if he has been observed
as being upright, making his prayers, and on good behavior-then (and this depends
on our evaluation ) he could be pardoned from one-quarter of his prescribed sentence
and released.

[Question] How are prison conditions?

[Answer] The bureau does not have prisons in the accepted sense, only dentention
centers for the period of the investigation. So, if someone if given a specific
sentence, he is turned over to the general prison.

[Question] The narcotics trade is an international trade, that is, it has organized
gangs. Is there cooperation between your bureau and other international bureaus in
this field, in other countries?

[Answer] Naturally, cooperation exists. There are international agreements through
INTERPOL, and there is special cooperation with neighboring states such as Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria and the Gulf states, for the exchange of information to shed new light
on smugglers and dealers and to help arrest them.

[Question] In the event a non-Saudi smuggler or dealer is arrested here in the
kingdom, what punishment would be dealt to him? The penalty prescribed in his country
or the penalty prescribed in the kingdon? would the sentence be carried out here

or in his country?

[Answer] In that case, when the accusation was proved, the penalty prescribed in
the kingdoa would be imposed, and he would be imprisoned here as well. If he were
a non-Saudi--and it would be the same case if a Saudi smuggler were seized outside
the kingdos-the penalty of the country in which he was seized would be applicable.
It would be carried out there, that is, he would be executed, for example, if he
were seized in a country whose government applied the death penalty for snuggling.

[Question] "hat is the largest amount of narcotics that you have seized? When
and where?

[Answer] The truth is that in the 3 months since I took over the bureau of
narcotics, we have not had a large operation to speak of. So far, we have run into
a number of small operations, some pills and a small quantity of hashieh, apart from
some foreign alcohol. As for alcohol manufactured domestically, it comes under the
jurisdiction of the police; they are authorized to deal with those cases. In any
event, cooperation and coordination exist between our bureau and the police. If we
are told about places that manufacture alcoholic beverages domestically, we would do
our duty in that case and vice versa for the police.

[Question] Frankly, does 'bersonal influence" play a role in narcotics cases?

[Answer] Influence has no effect on us. I would like to say to you, in all frankness,
that people are afraid to use influence in narcotics cases because they know what
problems would result and because suspicion would surround the "influence-user,"

who would fear his accomplice or the one he was dealing with. The law applies in

such cases, and there is no room for influence. People are equal before the law.

In
[Question] th doesn't your bureau cooperate with the nedia in preparing tapes and
programs that would show the harmful effects of narcotics on the mind and body?

[Answer] In fact, and at the guidance of His Highness, the minister of the interior,
we have tasked the loan Huhamad Ibn Sa'ud of Islsnic University to cone up with a
program of scientific forums, in which doctors and professors specializing in psychology
and nervous diseases would participate. The object would be clalify the harnfulnees
of narcotics and to explain the legal consequences of their use and distribution.
The Ministry of Information, moreover. will record and photograph these forms and
will broadcast then on radio and television. This will be done in the near future,
God willing. He in the bureau also intend to record these form on videotape

so that we can show then to those in prison who have been involved with drugs. We
also intend to distribute copies of these tapes so that they can be shown in schools,
universities and public forms, to uxinize the benefit and so that everyone will be
aware of the harnfulness of drugs and warned about the consequences of their use and
distribution.

7005
CSO: 5300/ 4756

1:2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060054-2

DRUGS SBIZBD AMOUNT T0 100 MILLION POI/NM

Nicosia THE CYPRUS "£210.? in English 3-8 Oct 81 p 3

, [T l The Aml-Nnrcoﬂco ao- mmwummw
3“ ”mummcnnnl’o- WMMMM»
licohumckodiom MMUXMQO.
can atom mmm- mummmmb
my W um - land canyon out his bod-

who“ Molt could m m -

Manuannmnouptonoo alum ‘
nmonmmmm a:

«magma/w much u“ o!
muommmmm WWW“
momma/101. Wind/Idol

“an

MIMImW “may.“ .
poo/commute» «gamma-ma
mtmmmw mamamm
mmlﬂ‘umw "WWW“
MOW“ EWWW' mmmmm
woo-3M Wham Madman-3w
mmumwlow ”hummus-ulna
mmwmmw mmmmwo
maximum-twat”. umawmmw
u. of When. My manna -

m. . mum m in
,- am m m m on a:
W “I remnant-unnum-

‘I’mwmu hummus m
mutootmam wamoumxmwm

' hWhtMcuo/nnw MWummnw
um Dom “WM-momma.»
mu. homomom- GW-

, ammuuum
Mﬁmnmm
mmmwmm

wommmb»
lie. mm mm
MMMMnWM
wall-woman“-
Iog mmmm
one IN “WED!” 20-

mum

thwm
WMWhIMN

cso: 5300/5312 '

1:3

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060054-2
GREECE

BRIEFS

HEROIN ARREST-4 Turkish citizen was arrested at the Greek-Turkish border early
Tuesday in possession of seven and a half kilos (l6 and a half pounds) of heroin,
police said. They identified him as Ssvsakli mu. #5, a restaurateur born in
Istanbul and resident in Vienna. Austria. The drug. worth an estimated 150
million drachnaes (about 2.7 aillion dollars) use hidden behind the dashboard

of his car. they said. Police said that Ranti claiaed complete ignorance of the
presence of the drug. lie said. however, that during his stay in Istanbul he had.
lent the car to an Iranian acquaintance for a couple of hours. He also said that
he had been given 2,000 dollars by the nun and had nade arrangements to meet him
st Belgrade, Yugoslavia, on his return trip to Vienna. The Iranian's name was
not given. Police said that Interpol has been notified of the arrest because of
their suspicions that an international drug ring might be involved. Haiti was to
be charged by a public prosecutor later in the day. [Text] [Athens arms ms
in English 30 Sep 81 p 6] .

C50: 5300/5310
IRQRCBRATIQI OP DRUG OPENERS INCEASIIBLY mn-
Stockholn moans mm in Swedish 9 Sep 81 p 21

[Krticle by Jan-avert Stronback: 'Nils Bejerot. Psyduiatrist Who Demanded Incarceration
for Drug Addicts. Bis Ideas In Pavory

[fext7 Nils Bejerot was a controversial nuts for a lag tile

in the debate about narcotics and treat-ent in Sweden. But
now there is a climate of support for this psychiatrist,
professor and debater. More and sore people support his demand
of obligatory treatment for drug addicts. Bejerot was earlier
also involved in other issues--as an oppment of the world of
the newspaper comics; and a an active cmunist.

A dark man she deeands fire treasures be taken against drug abusers and prismers. A
reactionary police doctor who has got it into his head that the narcotics abuse
spread by the drug addicts infecting each other in an epideeic over the whole country.

Opinions and assertions such as these have been found in the hailstor-s around the
psychiatrist, teacher. debater and professor Nils Bejerot during the period he has
been in the center of the debate over drug abuse in Sweden.

But in recent tines other judgements have becoe nore omen: A pimeu in narcotics
treatment who was the first to see where it was all heading. An astute pole-ist mo
early realized that only restrictive and unccnprcaising positions taken by the cm-
nunity can prevent young people fro ending their days in the gutter and trash cans.

This Bejerot will be 60 years old on 21 septenber.

If this birthday would have fallen 10 years ago, 1971, it is likely that the con-
gratulatory messages to the lonely Bejerot would have consisted of innuerable hate
letters.

Now, instead, he is cmgratulated by-an increasing nuber of followers. On his birthday
a new edition of his first bod: am, 88318, mm will be published...lhen he wrote

this book in 1954 he dealt with how a drild's fantasy is affected by lodring at
cartoons days on end.

Anong the birthday presents is to be found a bibliography m the prolific professor‘s
works prepared by ENS. Riksforbundet harkotikafritt Sashalle [Federation of Narcotics
Free Cmnitﬂ. This organisation is a creation of Bejerot's, and has the sale ideology
as the ﬂassela cmune.

1:5
Judging from all the more usual contributions to the drug abme debate, the earlier
controversial viewpoints about daligatory treatment for abusers, for example. have
gained a firm hold. More and more people have been impressed by the capability of
the liassela comune farm to save 8 youths cut of 10 by taking them into custody by
force and an almost total supervision by the personnel 24 hours a day.

Pleased to Be Right

To be right is me thing but to get tobe right is indeed not possible for everybody,
he says contently when we meet.

Be is just coming back fraa a duty call. After a call from the police he had to make

a diagnosis of a deranged wosan who had jumped around the tracks at Stockholn's
Central Station.

“Since I becne a psychiatric consultant for the Stockholm Police in 1957, I have
performed 12,000 such acute exasinations, he says. and states that he is also a con-
sulting psychiatrist at the public detention center, before he changes subjects and
lets loose with an intensive spate of words about the overplayed narcotics liberals
and pop radicals.

Important to Renounce

Bejerot is known for his accuracy uhidi has been expressed by the fact that he and
his research assistants continually count the needlenarks on the people arrested by
the Stockholm policeusmething his opponents have been caused by.

Nonetheless. by this rather simple method he has discovered that the meter of drug
addicts increases when the community shows a liberal attitude to drug abuse and
decreases at other times.

Therefore it is possible to go far in the war against narcotics just by the comnity
showing that it is not acceptable. It is actually not much more difficult than that.
says Bejerot. and refers to the great c-paign against spine in China, men 90 percent
of the abusers quit in fright.

"The narcotics problem is primarily a political issue, not a custody issue. And
those who sust be incarcerated must be treated according to the Baeeela model.’

I raise the objection that the incarceration is costly.

“Yes, it is costly. Bach space in an institution costs 300 kroner for every 24 hours.
But compare that with spaces withinthe mental institutions that cost 1500 kroner for
every 24 hours. And at the Osterakers Institution every space costs 4.000 kroner for
every 24 hours. It is definitely better if it is possible to get hold of the youngsters
in time so that they do not becae criminals and end in jail.’

Bejerot himself explains that he is not any right but also provides what is right:

1:6
Desire Strongest

“(he must have worked in close contact with drug addicts for at least 6 to 7 years in
order to understand the mechanic: of the dependency; that the yearning for narcotics

is stronger than the sexual drive and it can therefore not be expected that the drug
addicts thenselves will be motivated to give it up.

"the romantic youth groups that left the institution of society in the sixties have
now care to realize that.‘

Bejerct has worked with narcotics addicts and ha been engaged in the narcotics

debate since 1954. It was by coincidence that he then sade the diagnosis in the first
Swedish incident involving a 15-year old girl abusing anphetnines. It was this
incident that made him choose this area of social nedicine.

Active Columnist

It is otherwise likely that he would have continued to live in the world of oonics.
or that he would have beccne a full-time politician for the Cmunist Party. He does
have a past both within Clarte and the old SKP.

‘Fran 1946 to 1957 I devoted my whole life outside the medical field to the Cmunist
Party. I was involved in building the 32-nile 1mg railroad through the Bosnic Alps
in Yugoslavia in 19") along with 80,000 pioneering youths. Incidentally. it was
there where I met sly wife, Carol. tho is English..

'But the disclosure of Stalin's terror at the 20th party congress in 1956 was a cold
shower for me. I became passive and eventually left the Party.‘

50 where does he stand politically today?

"I consider syself a social democrat d the thirties type. Then the ideali-u Era
the cradle of the labor novelent was alive; the idealiu of both social security and
social order.

Pleasure and Displeasure

Although Bejerot now receives much less opposition for his views on obligatory treat-eat
and forced incarceration of abusers, there are still ideas in his analysis about which
he has difficulties in convincing the people around his.

'rhat applies. for exanple, to what he calls the "pleasure-displeamre-principle" and

he brmght out in his book 'Abuse and Misunderstanding“ this spring. Then even critics
who share Bejerot‘s views in other respects protested.

'By this concept ! mean that nan is governed by the principle of seeking pleasure

and avoiding displeasure. A drug addict prefers the pleasurable narcotics 'high' to
anything else."

But it is not particularly pleasurable to lie in the gutter needing a fix?

h?
“No, of course not. But the persm prefers the occasional happiness. the pleasure
of the nanent, if this has not been formed back through learning.

When I ask about his otm pleasure-displeasure-behaviwr, he takes his caffein dependency
as an example.

”Although I have catarrh of the stmach and a mole box (1 novalucol in the refrigerator
and understand what it means, I drink my 10 caps of coffee every day. But this
acquired knowledge is not able to cvercae my desire for coffee.

“Further-ore, I feel a great desire for wicked formulations and throw the. at my
adversaries. although I know it is not useful.“

Must 'l'ake Respmsibility

It is perhaps this desire and bad habit that have nade Bejerot's 'contagicus theory"
the beginning of so many crucial objectims.

"I just think that an abuser transfers his dependency to the people in his environsent.
That is not any more surprising than that other habits and dependencies spread
through daily contact with people.‘

And what about all the first measures to be taken against criminals?

"I want all people to take full responsibility for their actions, and I want a new
penalty system. Let the youngsters who are caught with hashish do cassunity service,
such as washing cars or rake leaves in some celetery.

"rhat will be better than giving then fines they cannot even pay.“ he says.

”The police must concentrate their efforts on the individual abusers in the street;
see to it that it becanes so difficult to get hashish that they quit. Better this
than to put all the efforts into catching an occasional narcotics kingpin who will
only be replaced by another.

While we spoke, the telephone has run incessantly withwt Bejerot becoaing disturbed
and answering.

The constantly plugged-in answering service handles that detail.
It is sostly synpathizers who call now, myway.

But I refrain from asking my last question of whether he does not actually feel the
greatest pleasure when he is out of favor.

9593
C80: 5300/2002

148
BRIEFS

INTERPOL WARNS (P ‘CBINA-NHITB' «Via its narcotics ottice in Paris, Interpol has issued
a warning about a new and highly dangerous drug whidi was used by eight drug addicts
in Rotterdam, Holland, last week. All eight were hospitalized totally paralyzed. The

poison, which is found to be 100 times strong" thamheroin, goes by the n-a ‘China-
White" in the narcotics circles. The liaison officer of the National Swedish Police
Board in Haag, Bo Johannsscn, tells DAGBNS manna that than is every team to warn
Swedish drug abusers against this poison. 8.0991109 of various natcotics ptepazations
from the Netherlands to Sweden is extensive and it is not out of the question that
this new poison could also reach Sweden. [M57 [Etockhola moms mm in Swedish

16 Sep 81 p g7 9583

(:80: 5300/2002

119
PAPER CARRIES CONFLICTIM REPORTS ON HASBISB SEIZURE
AKAJANS Report
Adana YKNI ADANA in Turkish 12 Sep 81 p 5

[Text] (AKAJANS)--In an operation carried out on the basis of a tip, narcotics
branch teens from the Blazig Security Directorate seized 30 kilos of powder hashish
and in addition to this, 1.3 kilos of narcotic substances in the Afsin and Blbistan
districts of Kahranamarss [province], it wee revealed.

During the operations carried out in Kahranauaaras' Afsin and Blbistan districts.
narcotics substances with a market value of approxinstely 3 nillion lira as well es
lo persons said to have engaged in narcotics snuggling were taken into custody. A
statement on this issue. Blazig Security Directorate officials said that searches
of the apprehended suspects nased Kebri Ulger, Ilyas Yildir, Ali Fergan and Yusuf
Torun produced 1 llo-shot 9 nillineter pistol, l cartridge clip and 5 bullets. The
suspects were then taken into custody.

Officials revealed that the investigation of narcotics snuggling was continuing on
an intensified basis.

Anatolian News Agency Report
Adana YEN! ADANA in Turkish 12 Sep 81 p 5

[Text] Blazig (AA)--Following joint operations carried out by Security Directorate
Narcotics Bureau personnel and Kahranannaras Narcotics Bureau personnel. 1330 kilos
of hashish, of which 30 kilos were in powder fore. were seized.

According to a statesent Isde by the Security Directorate the province's bureau
teams seized 1330 kilos of hashish—30 in powder fern—l pistol. l cartridge clip
and 30 bullets in operations undertaken beginning 1 Septesbsr in the Afsin Blbistan
districts and villages.

The Security Directorate officials have taken into custody the individuals naled
Kadir Ulker, Ilyas Yildiz, Ali Fergan and Yusuf Torun in connection with the hashish
and have initiated questioning.

CSO: 5300/5309
DEATH SENTENCBS SOUGHT—Izmir, (TﬂA)-The trial of 15 persons who attempted to snuggle
683 kilos of hashish and heroin out of the country fron lair on the freighter
Gaziosnanpasa began yesterday. They are being tried by the Aegesn Army and Martial
Law CIR-land Mo 2 Military Court. The Military prosecutor has denuded the death
sentence for all of the suspects. Following verification of the identities of
Ranazsn Tipci, Malit Usta, Bahri Sahin, Yakup Bayrak, Osman Kara, Basin Tahsin Meta,
Huseyin Aydogan, Barullah Nalcakan, Bassn Kut, Nejat Kaimr, Osman Sivri, Basan
Karadag, Kaye Taspinar, Mustafa Ahoy, Banazan Yilnas, apprehended and being tried
on charges of conspiring to snuggle narcotic substances, thanilitary prosecutor read
the indictment and the trial was put off to a future date. Elsewhere, the trail of
21 suspects—11 of when face the death penalty-~01: charges of setting up an organ-
ization to engage in narcotics snuggling was reopened in the Aegean Amy and Martial
Law Comand No 1 Military Court. During questioning, one of the suspects, retired
police official Rusten Serez, said: "I got the hashish from an Iranian." The other
suspects, however, rejected the charges contained in the military prosecutor's in-
dictsent and requested that they be released. However, the bench rejected the sus-
pecta' requests for release. [Text] [Istanbul MILLIYET in Turkish 2 Oct 81 p 11]

PRC-TURKEY NARCOTICS CONTROL COOPERATION-Ankara, (AM-«The council of ninisters
approved an agreement providing for cooperation between Turkey and the Federal
Republic of Germany in fighting illegal narcotics trade and transport. According
to the agreement in question, the west German government will provide equip-ant
aid worth 15 million marks to Turkey to be used in fighting illegal narcotics trade
and transport. [Text] [Istanbul TECUMAR in Turkish 28 Sep 81 p 8]

C50: 5300/ 5309

51
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060054-2

a

COURT IOLD DRUGS GANG USED COMPUTER FOR SALES ACCOUNTS

London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 1 Oct 81 p 3

[Articlo by Ian bury]

[Text]

Tm: SMUGGLBRS of the largest amount of

cannabis ever seized i

n the United

Kingdom bought a £2,000 computer to keep
account of sales within a month of the drug
being brought in, an Old Bailey jury was told

yesterday.

“The way in which the. accounting was done .
leaves one with a degree oiadlniration." said Mr Jon

Room. Q C, prosecuting. -

He said that an account
hook found on Dust:
Rowan» Mans. 36. when he
was arrested ahowed. that
sales by the end of April last
year- realised nearly £2
million.

Most oi the ntoney - some
(1.250.000 — was sent abroad.
It ended up in account} in Neg
Yorit. [do one. Zurich. Cah-
iornia a with a Cavntan
Islands registered company.

Arr-an menta [or its tranaier
iront Br tain through Goerneey
were said by Mr logs? to
have been made hy trick
Lane. the -hrothervin-Iau oi
Marita.

Three men accused oi heina
part oi the British “graduate
connection" of the gang nlead
not guilty to charges of evasion
oi the prohibition of drug! and
BOSSQSIOII oi dam. Five other

ritonn have admitted chorus.

The three on trial are Manes.

an Oxford graduate. oi Hans
Road. Chelsea: Moaw 5mm

Pam. 41. a California
University graduate. of no
settled addreaa: and Rain
Honour. 34. alao an Oxford
graduate. oi Oehlanda Avenue.
otter: Bar.

Onto-a team ‘hlown'

An undercover Cum teen
on the trail of the onto ing
ring was e hv e “ re
he ta " aig accidentally picked
In. in a gang mother on a
oochet eaaette player. tho ,iurv

Two American hecitera oi the
muggiiu gang. code-named
Eagle. led aending out the

e “Start «netting the
eagle has blown. destroy those
two plecea oi oener.” it wee
said.

Then other members—
ooe dubbed e tonta die.
5°"3wf’ m. "mm";
ran v
their record tom conslgntnent

intheeeaolthewestcoaatot
Scotland.

“Over on m'wm m
ashore.” Mrﬂooensaid.”1'he.v

52

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPa2-00850R000400080054-2
were followed .05“ end
ran Winiom w tho ded-
denul rodio' skull was picked
"D-

Mr Roger: said '25:““1;
expense new in
Marla showed he um “ﬁning
oﬂ" his rlndpale. i .

It was also aid that villain
I month at the India of the
dru conﬂuent In "and
No had moved into I ‘some-
what entree vogot"
behind Kerr and; £500“ a

"I: was one at he lmIe ex
manna which bean to
me; said Mr- Rogers to
money from the drug sales
“tone ﬂooding It.“

The he do ad
amino“; ' m loomed
BRIEFS

BAIL ORDERED rostrum-A magistrate at Lewes, Sussex, yesterday ordered sureties
to forfeit a total of 19,000 pounds bail for seven nan who failed to turn up for
a comittal hearing in the Sea Rover drugs snuggling case. Sone 10,000 pounds had
been deposited for the appearance of the tug's Dutch captain and four Dutch sen-
bers of the crew, 5,000 pounds was for Brnest Appleby, 36, cafe owner, and Brian
Elton, 30, deckhand, both of Oldhan, Lance. 0f 11 teen charged with conspiracy

to snuggle cannabis resin into Britain after the tug Sea Dover was chased across
the Channel and detained at Newhaven, in Hatch, only four appeared this week for

the co-aittal hearing. They were cousitted in custody for trial at levee Crown
Court. [Text] [london I'll! DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 10 Oct 81 p 3]

HERO!!! mass-4m Iranian wensn with s six-nonth old baby, who was taken off a
Los Muscles-bound Pan An judo jet st nesthrow on Saturday, has been charged with
drug snuggling. Hrs Rehab Cell, 28, was remanded in custody for a week by

Uxbridge assietrates yesterday, accused of inorting nore than lo lb of heroin,

worth 150,000 pounds. [Text] [london m DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 13 Oct 81
P 17]

cs0: sazo/oos END

Sh