FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10010
24 September 1981

Latin America Report

(FOUO 23/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
HKTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
BRAZIL

Cut in BBC Portuguese Broadcasts Criticized
(Editorial; LATIN AMERICAN DAILY POST, 11 Sep 81) .

CUBA
Concepcion Calla 8113': Trip a 'Fiaaco'
(Eloy Concepcion; PRBLA, I“ Sep 81) ...............
'PRBLA' Lists CIA 'Attackc' on Cuba
(Victoria H. Cope; PRELA. 16 Sep 81) ..............
Faustino Perez Rejects Stafford'a IPU Remarks
(PRELA. 17 Sep 81) ......................... ..... ..
NICARAGUA

Arab Countries, PLO Supply Significant Aid
(Denis Rope; JEUNE AFRIQUI. 12 Aug 81) ............

Tinoco Calls for Stronger Noncligned Movement
(mm. 30 Aug 81)

D'Bacoto Interviewed by Mexican Paper
(PRELA, a Sep 81) .................................

- a - [III - LA
Briefs
Mexican-French Decision Praised

PANAMA

'PRELA' Reports Tortijos' Brother Skeptical, Suspects CIA
(PRELA. 7 Sep 81) .................................

PERU

Communist Party Rejects Ortiz as 11.8. Envoy
(PRELA. 27 Aug 81) ................................

Con-unis: Party Criticizes Government Policies
(PRBLA. 8 Aug 81) .................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SMION INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

SEACA VISITS VENEZUELA--Caracas. 6 Sep (PL)-Jamaican Prime Minister Edward Seaga
will start a 3-day official visit to Venezuela on Thursday, invited by President
Luis Herrera Campins. During his stay in Venezuela Seaga will meet with Foreign
Minister Jose Alberto Zambrano Velasco and will hold work sessions with several
ministers of Herrera Campins' Christian Democratic cabinet to examine the current
bilateral cooperation agreements. According to the Caracas newspaper EL NACIONAL,
Herrera Campins and Seags 'bill review bilateral relations and current agreements.
and will explore areas of mutual interest" to establish new fields of cooperation.
The invitation to Jamaica's prime minister is part of the diplomatic offensive that
the Social Christian government of Venezuela. visibly identified with Seaga and the
Christian Democratic regime of El Salvador. is carrying out in the Caribbean and

Central America. [Text] [PA982000 Caracas PRELA in Spanish to PRELA Havana 1902
GMT 6 Sep 81]

cso: 3010/1820

1
mo nmnu use may
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION ARCENTIN

BRIEFS

REUNITINC PERONISH--Mexico City, 27 Aug (PL)--Mario Firmenich, secretary general
and commander in chief of the Peronist Montonero Movement, said that Argentina's
problem is one "of liberation or dependency and not of civilians or military."
In an interview with Mexican journalist Mario Menendez Rodriguez, director of
the weekly newspaper POR ESTO, Pirmenich insisted on the reunification and
transformation of Peronism. The Hontonero leader also suggested a deep unity
with the radical civic union to help form, with firm determination. a liberation
front whose goal would be to achieve power. In the newspaper POR ESTO, Firmenich
analyzes the chances of the political convergence process called "multiparty"
and says that this is an initial positive step, but not enough. He adds that
there are two tendencies in the multipartyprocesszone that wants to make it a
civilian organization for a political-military convergence and a second that

favors the formation of a national liberation front. [Text] [PA280441 Havana
PRELA in Spanish 2215 GMT 27 Aug 81]

C80: 3010/1782

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COU'Kl'l'RY SBCT ION BRAZIL

CUT IN BBC PORTUGUESE BROADCASTS CRITICIZED
"121803 Rio de Janeiro LATIN AMERICAN DAILY POST in English 11 Sep 81 p 4
(Editorial: "BBC Brosdcasts"l

[Text] As to the Thatcher government's decision to eliminate the BBC's Portuguese
language transmissions to Brazil, we wish the English prime minister all the bad
luck possible.

The move is apparently the result of Thatcher's budget cutting seal. a "now what
can we cut here" measure motivated by a quick look at the right hand side of the
ledger where the figure 360,000 pounds a year is registered. As usual in such
cases, all logic is reduced to the magical argument of "savings." we question.
however, whether even within the narrow confines of "savings" this decision can be
defended.

According to the British Government there are "less than 200,000 regular listeners"
to the BBC Portuguese-language service in the seven najor Brazilian cities.
Asming that "less than 200.000" is Thatcherase for "close to 200,000" this amounts
to about 1.3 pounds per listener per year. For this 1.3 pounds expenditure, the
BBC and through it British society and culture, receive daily entry into the home
of a middle to upper class Brazilian. This individual, by his education. income
and social class. is within the top percentile of his society in influence and
prestige. His society is at present the eighth largest econay in the free world,
the wealthiest and most powerful nation in Latin America and one of the emerging
leaders of the Third World. Bis country's gross national product is twice that of
Mexico. one of 18 Latin American nations that receive the BBC Spanish service
which will not be cut.

By any objective measure then, this Brazilian listener is a valuable customer.

Not only is he a member of the affluent class of a nation with 120 million citizens,
representing one of the world's largest consumer societies. but he is also an
opinion maker within that society. From the point of view of the business world

he is a top-of-the-line custaaer and Britain via the BBC is reaching this fellow

each day of the year for a total yearly output of 1.3 pounds. We in Brazil call
that a bargain.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In its argument before the House of Lords, the Thatcher government stated in
defense of elimination that Britain's exports to Brazil are less than to Austria.
This may be true today but we wonder what will be the case 20 or even 10 years
from now. Certainly both momenta: and potential are on the side of Brazil.

The shortsightedness of the Thatcher approach was revealed by her spokesman in
the House of Lords when he remarked that the Spanish service "goes to 18 countries
and is in fact understood by sale in Brazil." In other words, let them listen to

Spanish. The opposite,of course is equally true, Portuguese is understood by some
outside of Brazil. '

As friends of Great Britain we continue to hope that this important and traditional
link between non-English speaking Brazilians and the United Kingdom will not be
broken and Parliament will force the goverment to back down. Certainly we hope
that in the coming debate some mention of the importance of Brazil will be made.
After all we are not talking about a banana republic.

A good businessman always knows a good customer when he sees one and Britain at
present is holding 200,000 of them in Brazil by the grace of the BBC and at a
yearly cost of 1.3 pounds per head. Cutting them off may seem to some to be a
good savings but to us keeping them would be even better business.

cso: 3020/150

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SBCT ION CUBA

CONCEPCION CALLS HAIG'S TRIP A 'FIASOO'
PA161365 Havana PM in Spanish'l735 GE 16 Sep 81
[Article by Eloy Concepcion: 'Hsig: Lies as a Heapsn"]

[Text] The U.S. attempt to calm mropean protests over its warmongering policy
by sending Secretary of State Alexander Haig on an urgent tour has resulted in
a new fiasco.

In West Berlin some ”.000 persons booed Reagan's envoy. They used the most radical
epithets against war and in favor of peace while Haig, surrounded by police officers.
signed the golden book of the city. which is occupied by U.S. troops.

Upset and annoyed by the demonstrators, llaig had to resort to one of his favorite
weapons (in addition to the neutron bomb) to refute the angry FRG youths: the lie.

The United States used in Vietnam a chemical product called "agent orange" to
break Vietnam's resistance to the U.S. invasion of its territory. Now, through
its secretary of state, the United States is accusing the Soviet Union of using
toxic substances in Southeast Asia.

There are currently thousands of Vietnam veterans in the United States who were
affected by "agent orange." The Vietnamese fields are damaged by the chemical
war waged by the U.S. Army in the area.

Haig forgot to mention other things in Europe: the United States is using bac-
teriological warfare to spread epidemics in countries with which it doesn't agree.

The U.S. Army has the largest arsenal of chemical weapons ever in the history of
a country in times of peace.

The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency spends millions of dollars on experiments
with animals and human beings to "test" products. insects, microbes and bacteria
so as to use them in its operations against other countries.

President Reagan has ordered the manufacture of the neutron bonb, to later distri-
bute it throughout Europe. The hawks in the Pentagon consider the neutron bomb

a "clean" weapon because it "only" kills human beings and leaves installations
intact so that they can later be used by the United States.

S
was OFHCIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Naturally, the secretary of state could not say these things and resorted to lies,
which are his favorite weapons.

With the shouts of "we want peace" resounding in his ears in Berlin, anger took
hold of the soldier-diplomat Haig and he began shouting insults against the
Soviet Union and the European countries which were showing "apathy" toward the
v.5. policy.

His anti-Soviet phobia extended to Vietnam. Libya and the 008. He questioned
the possibilities of success of the arms liaitation talks which have not even
started due to Washington's lack of interest.

The Hhite House experts convinced Reagan of the urgent 0.8. need to send an envoy
to Europe to try to quiet the protests from govern-eats and peoples regarding
the U.S. attempt to return to the cold war era. using as the setting a continent
which has already experienced several destructive wars.

Haig began his trip with the enthusiasm befitting Reagan's main foreign policy
spokesnan...but he has returned upset because he was not able to convince any
government or silence the boos. Instead he witnessed how the stars of his flag
were being replaced with crosses, and an eagle, under fire, lay dying.

CSO: 3010/1831

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

'PREA' LISTS CIA 'ATTACKS' 0N CUBA
PA162302 Havana PREIA in Spanish 1300 GMT 16 Sep 81
[Report by Victorio H. Cops]

[Tut] When the Cuban hbassy in Santo Domingo was assaulted and its diplomats
were attacked, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and its allied terrorist
groups began the longest series of aggressions against a nation ever seen.

The history of the aggressions by 0.5. agents against Cuban diplomatic officials

is as old as its revolution, Cuban Foreign Minister Isidoro Halnierca told
PRENSA LATINA.

The following is an account of the terrorist actions carried out by the 11.5.
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) against Cuba.

1959
June Terrorists nachinegunned the vehicle of the Cuban Abassador to
Port au Prince. Haiti.
July The Cuban consul to the 0.8. city of Miami in the state Florida
is attacked and wounded.
December The Cuban Blbassy in Guatemala City is the target of a dynamite attac
1960
October The Cuban consulate in Miami is attacked.
November Terrorists attack the Cuban mbassy in Lin, Peru at gunpoint.
Deceulber The Cuban diplomatic mission in San Salvador, El Salvador is attacked
1961
January Terrorist groups hurl incendiary bonbs at the Cuban “easy in
Teguciagalpa, Honduras.
April The Cuban diplomatic mission in Panana City is attacked by gunfire.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Terrorists hurl boats at the Cuban Blbassy in Panama City.
Terrorist groups fire at the Cuban diplomatic mission in Panama City.

Two Cuban diplomatic officials in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil are
attacked and the Cuban consulate in Barranquilla, Colombia, is
machinegunned.

The Cuban Elbassy in La Paz, Bolivia is attacked and sustains heavy
material losses.

A bomb is placed in the Cuban consulate in Panama City.

A bomb explodes in the gardens of the Cuban mission in the
Panamanian capital.

A diplomatic official of the Cuban mission to the United Nations
and two other citizens of that Caribbean nation are detained and
wounded.

A comercial flight carrying two Cuban diplomatic Couriers explodes
while flying over Peru.

Terrorists storm the UN General Assembly sessions and attack the
Cuban delegation.

Terrorists hurl a bomb at the UN building in New York while Cuban
Minister Comander Che Guevara is speaking.

Terrorists attempt to assassinate the Cuban charge d'affaires to
Athens. Greece, and two Cuban citizens are wounded.

Terrorist groups stage a dynamite attack agath the Cuban Embassy
in Mexico City. .

A bomb explodes in front of the Cuban Foreign Ministry in the city
of Ottawa, Canada.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The charge d'affaires of the Cuban mission at the United Nations is
wounded by a letter bomb sent through the mail.

A bomb explodes inside a vehicle owned by the Cuban Embassy in
Mexico City.

Terrorist elements attack the consul general of Cuba in Hong Kong,
British colony.

A bomb is placed at the Cuban comercial office in Montreal, Canada.
A bomb explodes at that Cuban office.

A bomb is placed at a New York hotel where a Cuban reception is
being held.

Terrorists attack the Cuban consulate in Canada. A bomb explodes
near the Cuban mission at the United Nations, New York. A bomb

destroys the home of an official of the Cuban diplomatic mission
at the. United Nations.

The Cuban ﬁnbassy building in Tokyo, Japan is destroyed by a fire.
Cuban tourism offices are attacked with bombs. A powerful bomb goes
off at the entrance of the Cuban consulate in Milan, Italy.

Terrorist groups try to assassinate the Cuban ambassador to the
United Nations.

A bomb is placed at the Cuban consulate in Montreal, Canada.

An incendiary bomb is hurled at the Cuban mission at the United
Nations. New York.

An attempt is made to attack the Cuban ambassador to Mexico from
a moving vehicle.

An official of the Cuban habassy is wounded in Brazzaville, Congo
during an attempt to attack this diplomatic mission.

A bomb is placed at the Cuban comercial office in Montreal, Canada.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Terrorists burn a car belonging to the Cuban mission at the
United Nations, New York.

A terrorist attack is carried out against the Cuban comercial
office in Montreal, resulting in one Cuban official killed.

A bomb is hurled at the Cuban consulate in Mexico City.

A bomb is hurled at the home of the Cuban commercial adviser in
Santiago, Chile. An attempt is made to burn a car belonging to

the Cuban mission at the United Nations, New York.

Bombs are placed in the cars of three officials of the Cuban Embassy
in Santiago, Chile. A bomb that was going to be placed at the Cuban
Embassy in Paris, France explodes in the hands of a saboteur.

The army of the military junta headed by Gen Augusto Pinochet attacks
the Cuban Bnbassy in Santiago, Chile, the ambassador and other Cuban
officials are wounded in the attack.

An attack is carried out against the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City.
Book-bombs are sent to the Cuban diplomatic missions in Canada,
Argentina, Peru, Mexico and Spain, injuring several persons.

A postal package sent to the Cuban Bnbassy in Spain explodes in
Madrid.

A bomb is thrown at the Cuban mbassy in Kingston, Jamaica.
A bomb goes off at the Cuban consulate in Madrid, Spain.

A bomb explodes on one side of the Cuban Bubassy in London, Great
Britain. The Cuban consulate in Merida. Mexico is attacked.

A bomb explodes at the Cuban Embassy in Paris, France.

Attacks are carried out against the Cuban diplomatic missions in
Kingston, Jamaica; Damascus, Syria, and Lima, Peru.

A bomb explodes in the car of the Cuban ambassador to Mexico.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A bomb is hurled at the Cuban mission in Mexico City.

An attack is carried out agath the wife of the Cuban comercial
attache in Mexico City.

An attack is carried out against the Cuban Enbassy in Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Terrorists send a letter—bomb to the Cuban Essay in Caracas.
A boat explodes in the car of the Cuban ambassador in Mexico City.

A package containing books put out by the United Nations explodes
at the Cuban mission at the United Nations in New York, injuring
an official.

A powerful bomb placed in the Cuban Messy in Lisbon, Portugal
kills two Cuban diplomatic officials.

A bomb explodes in the building of the Cuban mission at the United
Nations in he: York.

A letter-bod) is sent to the Cuban Embassy in Madrid, Spain. An
att-pt is made to kidnap the Cuban consul in Merida, Mexico and
a Cuban technician is killed.

Two officials of the Cuban hbassy in Buenos Aires, Argentina
are kidnapped and are never found.

A bomb is placed at the Cuban unbasay in Georgetown, Guyana.
The Cuban Embassy in Caracas, Venezuela is fired upon.

Two bombs go off at the Cuban Bnbassy in Bogota, Colombia.

The Cuban military attache in Lima, Peru is attacked.

The Cuban mbassy in Caracas, Venezuela is fired upon.

A bomb explodes at the Cuban mission at the United Nations in New York,
injuring one person and resulting in great damage.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A dynamite attack against the Cuban mission at the United Nations,
New York occurs.

A bomb explodes at the Cuban mission at the United Nations. New York.

The Cuban ambassador's residence in Lima. Peru is fired upon.

A bomb explodes outside the offices of the Cuban interests section
in Washington.

A bomb explodes at the Cuban mission at the United Nations, New York,
damaging the installations, its cars and nearby buildings.

A bomb explodes at the Cuban mission at the United Nations, New York,
damaging the building and a car owned by a diplomat.

A bomb explodes at the entrance to the Cuban consulate in Montreal,
Canada .

An attack is defeated when a bomb is found under the car of the
permanent representative of Cuba to the United Nations, New York.

Terrorist groups kill an official of the Cuban mission at the
United Nations, New York.

A bomb is found at the Cuban consulate in Montreal, Canada.

831

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECI‘ ION CUBA

PAUSTINO PEER RUMS STAFFORD'S IPU mans
PA170138 Havana PRBLA in Spanish 0065 M 17 Sep 81

[Text] Havana, 16 Sep (PD—Faustino Perez, vice president of the Cuban delegation
to the 68th IPU conference, today refuted statements made by 0.8. Senator
Robert Stafford and reiterated the opinions expressed by President Fidel Castro.

Citing Cuban national hero Jose Marti, the Cuban deputy said that 'hnrds are for
telling the truth, not for hiding it."

A great majority of the delegations attending this conference, he said, have
expressed their support for the Cuban president's declaration, emphasizing its
historic importance. Others—a very few, to be sure--have had divergent opinions,
although "no serious arguments," he said.

Perez said that he wished to make certain statements out of respect for those
who feel that words have a more worthy function than serving as instruments for
deceit and hypocrisy: that is, most of those gathered at the conference.

Referring to statements by Senator Stafford in the morning session, the Cuban
legislator emphasized the lack of real argument with which Stafford rejected
Pidel Castro's declarations.

He said that Stafford could not refute the fact that his country's government
has pursued an aggressive pol icy against Cuba for over 20 years.

Faustino Perez asked who could be convinced by the Reprblican Senator that his
government is not primarily responsible for the conflicts that threaten peace in
the Middle East, Southern Africa or Latin America. '

He challenged the experienced senator to justify "the criminal economic and
comercial blockade" imposed by the United States against Cuba.

He said: ”Lacking argments, Hr Stafford resorted to insults. adopted a
pharasaical attitude and, of course, following a deeply-rooted tradition among
yankee rulers. told a couple of lies."

lie reiterated the Cuban President's charges regarding the use of bacteriological
weapons against Cuba, citing irrefutable proof taken from the 0.5. Senate itself.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Perez demanded that Senator Stafford return to the rostrum to explain the measures
his country's senate is taking to end the subversive, criminal activities of the
CIA, activities that are perfectly well known to the legislative body he
represents.

He added that perhaps the silence on this subject should be attributed to com-
plicity in these activities.

The Cuban diplomat said that it is not true that the United States was a philan-
thropic supplier of products needed for the campaign against the dengue epidemic.
0n the contrary, he said, it delayed for almost 1 month the shipment of the
"abate" requested through the pan—American health office.

Perez also said that Cuba did not send persons with mental deficiencies to the
United States via Mariel. He rejected Stafford's statements in this regard as lies.

Similarly, he criticized a sarcastic statement by a British delegate regarding
the "model" Haze prison, where 10 Irish Republicans have died. and he ridiculed
an aggressive attack by Australian deputy Cohen.

He insisted on Cuba's belief that "peace is the most urgent of mankind's require-
ments" and that "there can be no development without peace."

To return to the process of dialogue and detente that the U.S. Government has
interrupted. Perez said, it is imperative that we be concerned about the hundreds
of millions of people who are burdened with hunger, illiteracy and disease.

He emphasized that Cuba, its government and its legislature, are permanently

committed to peace and development and will support the proposals drafted at the
IPU preparatory conference in Manila to stimulate dialogue and safeguard detente.

CSO: 3010/1831

1
FOR OFFICIALhUSl-Z ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NICARAGUA

ARAB COUNTRIES, PLO SUPPLY SIGNIFICANT AID
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1075.12 Aug 81 p 39
[Article by Denis Rope: "Arab Aid"]

[Text] Libya, Iraq, Algeria and the PLO [Palestine Liberation
Organization] are filling the gap left by America's default on
aid to Managua.

The 30 Soviet-made tanks of the Nicaraguan army were not, as first believed. sup-
plied by the USSR, but rather by Algeria. Another Arab country, Iraq, has also
declared it is ready to come to the assistance of this small Central American
country. Libya, which has already deposited $100 million in the Central Bank of
Managua, the capital city, is reportedly considering contributing to some major
agricultural development projects.

The PLO, which has a representative in Managua, seems to have given the word to
"revolutionary" Arab countries to provide development assistance. An "offensive"
of this scope has never previously evolved in a region hitherto subject to the
exclusive influence of the two Superpowers, especially the United States.

Moises Hassan, sinister of construction and former member of the junta, explains
it this way: "We have common interests- he says, "--the Arabs and ourselves.
For we recognize our weakness, and the fraility of our independence. Libya,
Algeria, Nicaragua, and the Palestinians have learned what it is to be dependent
on foreign powers and their representatives. The Americans will never be able
to understand us because they have not had to endure great suffering. He have
not yet completely achieved our independence, and the big powers cannot bring
themselves to accept our freedom..."

Nicaragua has been especially "free" since Hashington, which ended economic aid
to the country on 23 January, accusing it of having supported the Salvadoran
insurrection, reaffirmed that decision in April. However, the authenticity of
the "documents” proving Nicaraguan support to the Salvadoran guerrillas has been
thrown into serious question by a former CIA agent, Philip Agee. To put its
allies off the scent, Hashington got three countries-the wealthiest on the con-
tinent (Canada, Mexico, and Venezuela) -to agree to the idea of meeting at
Nassau (Bahamas) 11-12 July for the elaboration of a proposed "Mini-Marshall
Plan" aimed at the countries of the Caribbean and Central America. No concrete
program emerged from that meeting.

15
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aggressiveness

The four governments only agreed to act together where they are in agreement and
separately where they are not. The United States reaffirmed its commitment to
support private sector development in Jamaica, leaving it to Mexico and the other
countries to help the more or less socialist states such as Grenada, Cuba. and
Nicaragua. The latter country, uhich has only received limited aid from the USSR
($50 million) and Mexico ($150 million) is believed to need an additional $500
million in 1982 just to keep the economy at the current level.

Before more than a half million of his compatriots meeting on the occasion of the
second anniversary of the fall of dictator Anastasia Somoza (17 July 1979), Daniel
Ortega, one of the leaders of the junta. stridently criticized President Reagan's

"aggressive and dangerous" policy. Aggressive. because it eliminated assistance
totalling $81.1 million. Dangerous, because it has led to Sandinista gavernment
to take measures tending toward socialism if not Castroism: the nationalization
of 14 companies accused of "economic sabotage" and state confiscation of unused

agricultural holdings (holdings larger than 349 or 698 hectares, depending on
the region.

These decisions risk permanently alienating United States support. But it is not
true that the purpose of the aid from the Arab countries will be to promote
"revolutionary solidarity"? A solidarity in which Fidel Castro himself, it is

said. already has an interest, excessively tied as he is to Soviet aid ($10 mil-
lion per day)...

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

9516
C80: 3100/927

16
F0R10FFHJA1.US£ZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION NICARAGUA

TINOCO CALLS FOR STRONGER NONALIGNED MOVEMENT
PA302050 Havana faELA in Spanish 1805 GMT 30 Aug 81

[Text] Managua. 30 Aug (PL)--Nicaraguan Deputy Foreign Minister Victor Hugo Tinoco
has called for a stronger nonslignad movement, to confront the threats and aggres-
sions against the underdeveloped world.

"He feel that the international situation prevailing on the 20th anniversary of
the movement requires that it be strengthened." he told PRELA.

Tinoco added that the 0.8. Government "shove a tendency to threaten and attack"
in several areas of the world. citing the recent invasion oftbePeople's Republic
of Angola by South Africa as the latest example.

He added that the attacks against the young African nation go hand in hand with
the destabilizing maneuvers against the remaining "frontline" countries.

Tinoco denounced the “increasingly open and evident" 0.8. support for the regime
in Pretoria. against all UN recommendations.

Another focus of attention, he said. is the situation in Central Anerican. where
there are threats of intervention by the United States. which has already sent
hundreds of military advisers there.

He added that the shipment of 0.5. weapons to the nost reactionary countries in
the area (El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras) are helping to create further
tension there.

Tinoco noted that the Middle East and Southeast Asia continue to be trouble spots.
requiring that the nonaligned movement's unity be strengthened.

Specifically referring to the Middle East. he said that it is a crucial part of
the world, one of the weakest links in world peace because of the struggle between
"Israel's intransigent position" and the Arab countries.

He voiced the opinion that the nonaligned move-eat must solve "a number of someuhat
uninportant internal conflicts that have risen" to be able to fully carry out its
role of solidarity with all struggling peoples.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tinoco noted that the recent U.S. tendency to revive the aggressive "big stick"
and "gunboat" policies calls for more cohesion among the nonaligned member states.

He stressed that Nicaragua attaches great importance to the movement, made evident
by the fact that it joined immediately after the revolutionary victory of 19 July
1979.

He recalled that the Nicaraguan delegation to the sixth summit in Havana, Cuba,
firmly embraced the movement's fundamental and precise positions, such as its
opposition to imperialism. colonialism, zionism and apartheid.

C50: 3010/1824

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTS! SECTION . NICARAGUA

D'BSCOTO INTERVIEHED BY MEXICAN PAPER
PA061342 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2205 GMT 4 Sep 81

[Text] Mexico City. 4 Sep (PL)--Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Miguel D'Escoto has
said that Mexico's attitude regarding Central America is one of solidarity in the
quest for greater justice and delocratiaation in the region.

During an interview with the newspaper EXCZLSIOR. D'Bscoto fielded questions on
several current issues and established Nicaragus's position.

he referred to the 0.8. intervention in honduras, and more particularly in El
Salvador. where "that country keeps dozens of nilitarynen who are advising the
armies of those regimes."

He added that. obviously. we are speaking of a country (the United States) which
does not adhere to law too such. because the fundanental right it has always
respected is force and it thinks force gives it rights.

He said that. rather than oppose the interests of the region, Mexico is trying
to place itself on the side of anything that leans lore justice.

History has nade us regard the United States as a synonym of intervention. It
is inpossihle to talk of intervention without thinking of the United States.

D'Escoto referred to the situation in El Salvador during his interview with
BXCELSIOR.

He was questioned about the likelihood of a political negotiation of the Salvadoran
conflict. He responded that this is unlikely at the present tine because the
Salvadoran arny seems to be utterly opposed to it.

"They clain that the political solution will he found through an election. but it
is hard to think of an election at this juncture," he said.

Regarding the Nicaraguan process and the attacks against it. D'Escoto said that
"I have'yet to notice the respect the United States shows for the self-determina-

tion of peoples."

"Nevertheless, the revolutionary process is going forward in Nicaragua, with or
without the North Americans. Its fundamental guarantee is the people and the
people's determination to have a free fatherland or die," he said.

CSO: 3010/1824

19
FOR 0F11C1A1.USE1DNIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SBCTIQ‘ NICARAGUA

BRIBPS

MEXICAN-MOB DECISION PRAISBD-Jlanagua, 29 Aug (PL)--Oo-nander Daniel Ortega
Saavedra. coordinator of the junta of the government of national reconstruction,
said today that the recognition of the MN and of the Revolutionary Democratic
Front. YDR, of El Salvador by Mexico and France was a very significant act.

Just before boarding the plane that will take his to Libya, he praised the deci-
sion to consider the m and the FDR as "a political representative force.”
Ortega said that it was a very serious and responsible decision. greatly increasing
the possibilities of a political solution to the Salvadorans' trenendous crisis
and tragedy. He added that the decision coincides with the views expressed by
the Nicaraguan revolutionary govemnent on the situation in El Salvador. [Text]
[PA300346 Havana PRBLA in Spanish 2130 our 29 Aug 81]

CSO: 3010/ 1826

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION PANAMA

'PRELA' REPORTS TORRIJOS' BROTHER SKEPTICAL, SUSPECTS CIA

PA080019 Havana PRZLA in Spanish 2141 GMT 7 Sep 81

[Text] Mexico City, 7 Sep (PL)-Hbises Torrijos, brother of former Gen Omar
Torrijos, said that there are still doubts about the causes of the death of the
Panamanian leader. He revealed deatils about a former plan against Torrijoa.

Moises Torrijos told the newspaper BXCELSIOR that evidence leads bin to believe
that the airplane accident in which his brother was killed was planned, but he
stressed that the tern murder cannot be used yet.

He said that the government collaission investigating the accident explained that
when an airplane crashes, the wreckage, as well as the bodies of the passengers.
are spread out over an area.

He said, "However, the plane in which Torrijos was traveling was smashed to bits
and the bodies burned."

He said, "Those who say that a watch which was stopped at 1165 and a canteen were
found, are making up a legend, because the truth is that nothing was found."

He added that a group of friends of the Panamanian leader are sponsoring an investi-
gation of the accident, parallel to the official investigation.

He said that in 1973, the CIA made plans to murder the general, because he was
trying to recovertheso-called Panama Canal zone.

Hoises Torrijos told BXCELSIOR that two former CIA agents had told General
Torrijos of details of the plan.

680: 3010/1826

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ooumu SECTION PERI]

COMMUNIST PARTY REJECTS ORTIZ AS 0.8. ENVOY

PA310316 Lina PRELA in Spanish to PRELA Havana in Spanish 2300 GMT 27 Aug 81

[Text] Line, 27 Aug (PD—The Peruvian Co-unist Party [PCP] has rejected the appoint-
nenc of Frank Ortiz as 0.3. ambassador to Peru because he pronotes the subversive
and terrorist actions of the Peruvian right.

In a press conunique, the PCP said that in 1969 Ortiz, in his capacity as an embas-
sy official, led a dangerous espionage network and was forced to leave Peru because
he was condenned for his evil activity.

It said that while he was ambassador to Guatenla Ortiz Iaintained ties with extrene
rightist military groups that operate there.

The appointment of an official with such a record as albassador to Peru, according
to the PCP, reflects the [1.8. policy of returning to the cold war, especially in the
Southern Cone, where the CIA and other neddlesone 0.8. organizations operate.

It also considered the appointment as indicative of the Peruvian Government's inple-
Ientation of "a defeatist and denationalizing policy."

After stating that this policy particularly benefits the 0.5. nonopolies, the PCP
warned that Ortiz ' presence in Peru will lake the domestic political situation even
lore tense.

"Unquestionably, Ortia' presence would increase the subversive and terrorist action
pronoted by the Peruvian right." it added.

President Fernando Belaunde Terry himself recently confirned Ortiz' appointment and
said that he would give his "agreement."

The decision was made despite opposition. even though sectors close to the govern-
sent have called for the rejection of Ortir' : appoint-ent.

080: 3010/1820

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION PERU

CW8? PARTY CRITICIZBS GOVERNMENT POLICIES

PAO90063 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1330 GMT 8 Aug 81

[Text] Lima, 8 Aug (PL)--‘rhe Peruvian Conunist Party (PCP) has accused President
Fernando Belaunde Terry of manipulating facts and figures to nake it seem that

his first year of governnent has been successful. According to the PCP, there
has been no such success.

In a lengthy document on the president's address to the nation on 28 July. on the
occasion of his govemnent's first anniversary, the PCP stresses the country's
current economic crisis.

It warns that by year's end an even bigger fiscal deficit is expected, the inter-
national reserves vill have been reduced, inflation will be higher and production,
particularly production that is geared to the overseas market, will experience
only a small growth.

These are the results, the docment adds, of the U.s.-inspired political nodel

ilplemented by Prise Minister Manuel 01104! and his collaborators, which seems to
benefit the foreign monopolies and the big local capitalists.

According to the comunique, the current economic policy has placed the burden
of the crisis on the people's shoulders.

In this regard, it denounces the reduction of wages. the rising unemloymsnt,
the higher cost of living and the declining consulption.

After condeming the country's opening up to nonopolies, it accuses the government
of having become a "civilian dictatorship" that rules the country without any
regard for the legislature.

It adds that in View of the people's resistance to that policy, the executive
branch has responded with repressive measures, such as the controversial "anti-
terrorist law."

Further on, the PCP communique condemns the return of the mass media to private
hands and the plans to limit the right to strike.

According to the document, the Peruvian crisis is not only characteristic of
the present noment. but is also a structural crisis, since the country's productive

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

forces have been limited by the economic domination of the monopolies, thus
creating the dependence and underdevelopment that 0.5. imperialism imposes.

After stating that the country must replace that backward structure with a progres-

sive one, the PCP proposes the nationalization of monopolies and a number of
other measures. It also hails the leftist unity coalition which is based on a

broad popular unity, as a key instrument in inlementing these measures.

(:80: 3010/1787 END

214
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY