FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10157

3 December 1981

Translation

RADIATING PROPERTIES OF SHOCK WAVES IN GASES

By

M.A. Tsikulin and Ye. G. Popov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
Moscow IZLUCHA'I‘EL'NYYB SVOYS'I'VA UDARNYKH VOLN V GAZAKH in Russian 1977

[Book by FLA. Tsikulin and Ye. G. Popov, Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka," 173 pages]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10157

3 December 1981

RADIATING PROPERTIES OF SHOCK WAVES IN GASES

CONTENTS

MnomtionOIOOOOOI00....O....0.I0.0.00.00.00.00.0.0.0.0...DOOIOOOOOOOOOOCCIOOO

Poreword.. .

cocoon-cassao-oosoossouse...so...ooooososcone-soooooooooooooosnoso.

Table of Contents.............................................................

Chapter I.

o
o

HHH
0

ri-l
.

Chapter 2.

2.3.
2.4.

Ozapter 3.

Huh)
.

UNH
.

Chapter 4.

§&
.

NH
.

Certain Problem of Radiating Gas Dynamics........................

Investigation of Strong Shock Haves in Gases.......................
Problems of Ibving large Cosmic Bodies in the Atuosphere...........
Problem of Experimental Investigation.............................

Producing Strong Shock Waves in Gases.............................

Exciting Shock Haves When Detonation Huts Into the Gas............
Producing Shock Waves by Detonating (barges With a Cumulative

Gunnel............................................................

Producing Strong Shock Waves by Compressing Gas Under
Conditions of Acute-Angled Geomtry................................
Other Hathods of Producing Strong Shock Haves......................

Ibthod for masuring the Intensity ‘Delperature and Other Values. . .
Basic Concepts of the Badiation ‘n'neory.............................
Phasuring the Intensity 'relpersture by Photography. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
mthod of Spectral Investigation of Radiation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Radiation Properties of Shock Haves Determined by hsults of

:he Exwriuntooooooooosooso.aooooooooeooooooosoooo-oo-oooosoooooo

Intensity of Strong Shock Waves in Air.............................
Intensity of Strong Shock Waves in Inert Gases.....................

[I - USSR - K FOUO]

"A“ Ann- C. .a—— 4......

14
2h

26
26

28

33
35

37
37
50
56
61

66
70
chapter 5 .

MUIU'U'

Chapter 6.

C‘O‘O‘O‘

e

. .
#uNo—o

éunp

0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pesults of Spectral Investigation of Radiation....................
Instability of the Flat Front When Shock Waves Have in

channel‘s.oItooesoooooasocoestoso.oeossooooosoosooOIs-eeaeaoooosso

Evaluation of the Influence of the Front Structure on Shock
"ave hmtunDUDOOCOOOCOOOOO0......OOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOCI.0.0.0....

Effect of we klmtion “yerIOOCC0.000000000000000000COCOOOOOOOO
Radiation Heat Exchange at the shock Have hont...................
Radiation Shielding by Heated Iayer...............................
Shielding of Radiation Front in 088 Hi:tures......................

Explosion Radiation Sources......................................

Explosion Radiator for Phooomtry Purposes........................
mcallatim of an Ultraviolet Shock.c.c....u.......u...........
Efficiency of Explosion Sources...................................
Certain Results of Investigating the Effect of Radiation with

a Continuom Spectrum on a Hard Stbstanoe.........................

Bibliography...o.................-o.....o.oooo.o..o..-.o.o.o..-..........o...

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

78
93

101
105
112
120
133
161
141
1/03
151
165

177
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(JNLY

Annotation

This monograph contains experimental investigations of the radiating properties of
large amplitude shock waves in gases. A review is given of methods for obtaining
strong shock waves in ratified and dense gases and experimental results. Installa-
tions and the methods used to record the parameters of the shock waves are described.
Explosion sources as a method for obtaining powerful radiation with a continuous
spectrum were especially considered. Results are cited of studies of the intensity
of the shock waves in the air and in the inert gas of various densities ( at
temperatures of up to 120.0000); their spectral investigation; measurement of the
angular distribution of the wave front: and the shielding and other phenomena
accompanying the radiation of strong shock waves. The possibilities of raising the
efficiency of the explosion sources further are considered. Examples are cited of
using the investigation results in astrophysics. physics of meteor phenomena. gas
dynamics and plasma physics.

The book is intended. for specialists in the area of shock wave physics, plasma
physics. astrophysics. and meteor physics. post-graduate students and students of
the indicated specialties.

Foreword

The book cites results of the experimental investigations of the radiating properties
of strong shock waves in dense gases which were carried out by the authors in the
Earth Physics Institute {IPg/ imeni 0. Yu. Shnidt of the USSR Academy of Sciences
during 1966-1969.

The experiments were organized primarily due to an increasing interest in the
dynamics of radiating gas. Investigations in this area. related to many phenomena.
for example. a strong explosion. the movement of cosmic bodies in the atmosphere.
the effect of laser,radiation on a substance. were moved forward considerably in
recent years by the following Soviet scientists: Ya. B. Zel'dovich. Yu. P. Rayzer.
N. G. Basov. O. N. Krokhin. L. M. Biberman, K. P. Stanyukovich. I. V. Nenchinov and

others.

1
FORIOFFKJALIEEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Various authors have established the basic possibility of using strong shock waves

in gases as a powerful high temperature radiator. By creating shock waves in dense
gases by means of condense explosive substance (VV), it is possible to obtain large
radiation flows in small installatfons. Especially efficient in this respect are
shock waves in heavy inert gases. The absence of expenditures for dissociation and
the large atomic weight of the latter facilitates the achievement of high temperatures
behind the shock front, and the transparency of the gas ahead of the front to hard
ultraviolet leads to the radiation of considerably flows of energy by the wave.

The explosion of a VV charge in an atmosphere of heavy inert gas is used as a flash
lamp in high speed photography {1-1/ . Recently, many investigators, in particular,
Wanless {8_/ proposed the use of such lamps for optigal_pumping of quanta oscillators.
I. V. Nemchinov, M. A. Tsikulin and I. F. Zharikov 4 9_/ investigated by means of an
explosion source, the effect of powerful ultraviolet radiation on various materials,
their intensive evaporation and dispersion. A. N. Dromin and S. D. Savrov were able
to detonate an explosive substance [10_/ by a light pulse from such a source.

Using an explosive source, A. A. Provalov and the coauthors Z ll_/ observed a
self-shielding phenomenon of the body surface from powerful radiation. The authors

[12'14_/ proposed a high-temperature radiator of the explosion type, suitable for
photometry.

Radiation of shock waveswas encountered in solving important practical problems
related to strong explosions and the movement of cosmic bodies in the atmosphere.
By setting up experiments with strong shock waves, it was possible to expand the
investigation of optical properties of gases heated to a high temperature and
investigating the effect of powerful radiation flows on a solid substance (ablation
of solid bodies).

The shock wave remains an object of thorough experiments and theoretical investi-
gations that provides valuable information on dissociation, ionization and other
elementary processes in heated gases. 'Much attention is being devoted to lumi-
nescence, carrying various information about these processes. A detailed analysis
of the volumetric gas radiation in numerous experiments in shock pipes can serve as
an example of this. Strong shock waves in fairly dense gases, which are
high-temperature surface radiators, may be obtained by explosive substances. Such
shock waves present the possibility of studying experimentally the processes in
dense plasma whose theoretic description causes many difficulties.

The carrying out of experimental investigations in the indicated direction requires

a fairly high level of the measurement techniques of high-speed phenomena. The
implementation of this work was made possible by the fact that the School for
investigating Explosion Processes, headed by academician M. A. Sadovskiy. achieved
certain successes in understanding the essence of explosion phenomena, as well as

in the development of the recording methods and apparatus. Optical and electronic
devices developed at the IPZ for recording high-speed processers, used in our work,
make it possible to study fully the complex physical pnocess which is the propagation
of a strong shock wave in gas.

A certain relationship between the investigations of explosion processes with such
an especially astronomic problem as the movement of space bodies in the atmosphere
of the earth, is due to one and the same object of the investigations--the shock
wave, formed in the air when moving at supersonic speed. The well known papers by

K. P. Stanyukovich { 15, l§/,_V. 5. Bronshten { l7, l§/ and others, as well as the
paper by one of the authors 4 19_/ proves the common nature of these phenomena again.
Therefore. the authors hope that the results of laboratory experiments on investi-
gating the radiating properties of shock waves in gases, cited in this book, will

find application in solving astronomic phenomena.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The work developed in several directions. The first, although an auxiliary but
necessary direction, was in developing methods for obtaining strong shock waves.
As a result, it was found possible to obtain shock waves with velocities of up to
80 km/sec and temperatures greater than 105°K in gases with normal density (at
atmospheric pressure).

The second direction was studying the radiating properties of strong shock waves and
their relationship to the front structure. Here, along with experimental results
such as nonstationary shielding of the radiation front at certain conditions,
theoretical results were also obtained, in particular, a deduction was made on the
important role of the nonequilibrium processes ahead of the shock wave front.

On the basis of the results of the first two directions, optimal installations were
developed to obtain powerful radiation flows with a continuous spectrum. Fairly high
parameters were obtained: density of radiation flow at the target-~15 to 20
Megawatt/cmz; radiatign time--2o to 30 microseo; the integral energy at the target
reached 130 joules/cm for a total irradiated surface of up to lOOcmz. Such
radiators were used in the laboratory to ablate bodies under the influence of
powerful radiating flows.

The description of the results of the work in the indicated directions makes up the
content of the book. Some results of the work were reported in physics seminars

of the Earth Physics Institute, the Problems of Mechanics Institute of the USSR
Academy of Sciences and scientific conferences of the Moscow Physio-Technological
Institute and published in scientific journals.

The Committee for Meteorites of the USSR Academy of Sciences showed great interest
in the work. The authors were supported in their work by M. A. Sadovskiy, P. V.
Kevlishvili, V. N. Rodionov, I. V. Nemchinov, N. M. Kuznetsov, Yu. P. Rayzer and are
grateful to them.

The authors also express their gratitude to staff workers who helped in the work and

participated in carrying out a number of experiments: Yu. Zatsepina, A. A. Provalova:
I. B. Markovich, I. I. Divnova, Yu. N. Kiseleva, P. A. Sorokina and I. I. Zotova.

M. A. Tsikulin and Ye. G. Popov

The manuscript of the book was still unfinished when my teacher, noted specialist

in the area of explosion physics. Mikhail Andreyevich Tsikulin, died. Staff workers
of the laboratory headed by M. A. Tsikulin, gathered up the uncoordinated material

of the manuscript and actively participated in completing the paper. However, we
apparently were not able to avoid imperfections in several chapters of the book.

In preparing the book for printing. V. A. Bronshten made a number of valuable comments
and additions. and also took upon himself the cares related to issuing the book.

Ye. G. Popov
2. Problems of moving large cosmic bodies in the

atmosphere
3. Problems of experimental investigation

Chapter 2.

Producing strong shock waves in gases

1. Exciting shock waves when detonation exits
into the gas

2. Producing shock waves by detonating charges
with a cumulative channel

3. Producing strong shock waves by compressing
gas under conditions of acute-angled geometry

4. Other methods of producing strong shock waves

Chapter 3

Method for measuring the intensity temperature and other values
1. Basic concepts of the radiation theory
2. Measuring the intensity temperature by photography
3. Method of spectral investigation of radiation
4. Measuring the intensity temperature by photoelectric
radiation receivers

Chapter 4

Radiation properties of shock waves determined by results of the
experiment
1. Intensity of strong shock waves in air

2. Intensity of strong shock waves in inert gases
3. Results of spectral investigation of radiation

4. Instability of the flat front when shock waves
move in channels

Chapter 5

Evaluation of the influence of the front structure on
shock wave radiation
1. Effect of the relaxation layer
2. Radiation heat exchange at the shock wave front
3. Radiation shielding by heated layer
4. Shielding of radiation front in gas mixtures

Chapter 6

Explosion radiation sources
1. Explosion radiator for photometry purposes
2. Installation of an ultraviolet shock
3. Efficiency of explosion sources
4. Certain results of investigating the effect of
radiation with a continuous spectrum on a hard
substance
Addendum
Adiabatic shock curves and internal energy of inert gases
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1977
2291
C50: I I ' '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CERTAIN PROHIBB OF RADIATING GAS MOS

Moscow IZWM'NYYB SVOYSM 00m V0111 V m in mseian 1977 PP 7-16,
22-28

[Chapter 1 from the book "Radiating Properties of Shock Waves in Gases", by M. A.
Tsikulin and Ye. c. Popov, Izdntel'stvo "m", 173 vases]

[Text] The specific success achieved recently in the dynamics of a radiating
gas is related to phenomena in which high energy concentration is reached and
which leads to the state of a gas with very high tewerature. Anong these phenon-
ena. besides detonation of an explosive charge in the gas. should be included nu-
clear explosions. the effect of a focussed laser bean and a powerful electric
discharge.

The problems of producing a high-temperature ionized gas-a hot plasnanled to in-
tensive research in this field. The nunber of papers published on pleas physics
is very great and continues to grow. He will not consider here the problems re-
lated to a rarefied plasna (these problems are related mainly to the electrodynan-
ics of a rarefied and dense conducting medial) and we will not pose the aim of
providing a complete survey of the state of the dynamics of radiating gases. We
shall note only the nain aspects in the results and the existing difficulties and
we shall consider the problas of notion of cosnic bodies in the atmosphere since
this is related to shock wave formation.

1. Investigation of Strong Shock Waves in Gases

The state of a high-temperature gas is still achieved under terrestrial conditions
only in the pulsed node when the main noeent is scattering of the initial formation
at high velocity. Shock waves of considerable intensity occur with sufficiently
high initial density of the gas in which scattering occurs and with sufficiently
large dimensions of the device and the shock-cospreesed gas behind the front be-
cones the subject of investigation. Therefore, investigations of a high-tapera-
ture radiating gas are mainly investigations of strong shock waves in gases.

Because of a number of features, shock compression of a gas becune one of the nest
important methods of achieving high taperatures. heating in a shock wave occurs
within a very short time comparable to the tines of relaxation processes in the
gas, which permits one to study the kinetics of these processes. During shock com-
pression, one can achieve very high teuperatures much greater than during adiabatic

FOR 05110“. US! ONLY
compression to equilibritn pressure. And perhaps the most typical phenomenon that

is the glow of the gas in the shock wave. Detailed investigation of. this glow was
begun in the 1950s when laboratory methods of producing strong shock waves began

radiation of the ambient air shock-heated by scattered products. In 1943 Ya. B.
Zel'dovich and O. I. neypunskiy [21] duonstrated the capability of achieving high
temperatures during shock compression of a gas with high atomic weight. Firing at

strongly compressed gas (hydrogen or helium) expanded and excited a shock wave in
the gas under investigation. From the gas-dynamics viewpoint, the burst decays
upon formation of a shock wave propagated toward the gas at lower pressure. A
rarefaction wave propagates in the opposite direction. A diagram of the processes

 

Figure 1. Operation of a shock 'mhe: audisgran of tube prior to operation:
b--pressure profile before rupture of diaphragm: c-e--pressure
proﬁles, temperatures and velocities of gas at sone moment after
rupture of diaphragm

[Key on following page!

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Diaphragm 3. Gas to be investigated
2. Working gas

The following is deleted here and further: p is pressure, 0 is the shock wave
velocity, u is mass velocity, T is gas temperature and c is the speed of sound.
The arrows indicate the direction of notion of the waves (the gas moves toward
lower pressure). The dashed line denotes the contact burst-"the boundary of the
'gases initially on both sides of the diephraw. A relationship between the pres-
sure behind the shock wave and the initial gas pressure in the high-pressure chan-

ber is found free the condition of equal gas velocity on the contact burst. Adie-
batic notion of the gas occurs on the rarefaction wave and the Riemann invariant

u + 2c/YW- l) is retained. Then free the condition u3 - O we find
{1

h

The gas velocity behind the shock wave is
T I —I (1.2)
u =4: —7—_-=L;rTLl'—_.ﬁ.
' ' '- (n+1; p.+n—

Having set u; and u; equal and having denoted the internal gee energy by e .
- cZ/YW- l), we find the relationship of pa and p1:

‘ —_‘.L
+ a. "" ,
l'3=pl{‘ —(PIIPO-‘)1/.l(n+”m|_ )PR'O- } (1.3)

The ratio of densities on the shock burst is 01/90 . (y; + l)/(Yi - l) for a strong
shock wave and the temperature behind the shock front is then equal to

(1.4)

_ 7-! 7
TI To 71+ Pa '

The shock wave intensity p1/po and together with it the temperature behind the

shock front T1 may be very high with sufficiently high pressure drop on the dia-
phragm p3/po. A significant parameter in this case is the ratio of internal gas
energy in the high- and low-pressure chambers e3/eo. The higher this ratio, the

higher the shock wave intensity and gas temperature. Raving expressed the internal
gas energy e by temperature T, the molecular weight in end the adiabatic index 7,

we find

:1- ?s—1 T
.. TTI‘ﬁT" (1.5)

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The higher the gas temperature in the highepressure chamber and the greater the
molecular weight in the low-pressure chamber, the stronger the effect will be.

In 1953 Hollyer et al [23] first observed the glow in a shock tube filled with
xenon. The glow occurred at the meant the shock wave was reflected from the open
end of the tube and the glow spectrum changed from linear to continuous as the
shock wave amplitude increased.

Petschek et al [24] later observed the glow of argon in a shock tube which also
contained lines on a background of the continuous spectrua. Since then the voltne
of research performed in shock tubes has increased continuously.

However, one should note the essentially limited capabilities of a shock tube in
achieving high temperatures. Re find the finite intensity of a shock wave from
formula (1.3) with infinitely large pressure drop on a diaphragm p3/po + a. This
is related to the fact that the gas behind the rarefaction wave cannot be cooled
below absolute zero (gas condensation actually occurs much earlier). For the case
of different gases (for example, e0 << e3), from formula (1.3) for p3/po + ., we
find the maximum values of pressure and temperature behind the shock front:

r... = "+1 1y. ‘_.,_

 

P. n—I 1.—l r. ' (1.6)
'r. ,
#7”- ,fi’. 3* (1.7)

Using the most advantageous combinations of gases, one can find a more than 100-
fold temperature increase (Table 1).

Table l
IIe— g1: ‘ lie—Xe m—ro
'J'. ‘91 33 .10
Turf. 23 ms no

 

When one uses the reflection of a shock wave from the closed end of a tube, one can
increase the temperature additionally by a factor of (3Y1 - l)/Y1. which is also
twofold greater at Y1 - 1.2. Thus, one can achieve an approximately 1,000-fold
teuperature increase in a shock tube; however. the real number is tens of times
less due to gas ionization behind the shock front.

New capabilities were discovered with the appearance of electric discharge shock
tubes. The shock wave is formed in these tubes as a result of rapid expansion of
a gas heated by a powerful capacitor discharge and also by acceleration of the
plasma formed by the magnetic field of the discharge. The working principle of
the tube is shown in Figure 2. The bus along which current is fed to the discharge

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gap is laid along the outer surface of the tube, inside which the discharge occurs.
The plasma formed by the discharge, in addition to its own expansion, is ejected
by the magnetic field of the discharge current since the conductors with opposite
direction of current (in the bus and in the discharge) are repelled. Plasma scat-
tering (at initial pressure of 0.7 mm Hg in the tube) at velocity up to 90 lea/s
was achieved in the first device of this type and in this case the tnperature
reached 120,000‘K [25].

I
.—

I
—>

L

Figure 2. Diagram of Electric-Discharge Shock 'rube

Modern electric-discharge tubes make it possible to produce shock waves with
velocities greater than 100 We and gas temperature of more than 105 °K behind the
front. Such high velocities and temperatures are achieved in strongly rarefied
gases (the gas pressure in front of the wave does not exceed several in Hg).

The dimensions of shock tubes and the density of the gas filling them are usually
such that the heated zone is optically thin and radiates in all directions. Care-
ful analysis of this radiation provided much valuable data on dissociation, ioniz-
ation and other elementary processes in heated gases. A rich arsenal of procedures
and means was worked out, that includes along with methods of astrophysics (analy-
sis of the shape of spectral lines), new methods based on the use of electromag-
netic radiation in different regions of the spectrum and beams of neutral and
charged particles. A modern shock tube is a coupler piece of equipment frequently
created to investigate some single problem and outfitted with unique apparatus.
The experimental material obtained in shock tubes is enormous. The number of pub-
lished papers is counted in the thousands and there are many survey articles and

books .

shock waves in which the heated region with the optically dense became the subject
of investigations very rarely. all the features of radiation are determined in
this case by the narrow layer of gas adjacent to the wave front. It is for this
reason that one can talk about the radiating properties of a strictly shock wave
without relating them to the entire region of a shock-heated gas. These shock
waves occur, for example. upon entry of large cosmic bodies into the atmosphere

at high velocity and during nuclear explosions. mdar laboratory conditions the
shock waves that radiate in a similar manner can be created in gases at atmospheric
pressure by means of powerful explosives. And although the specifics of experi-
ments with explosives sustained the investigations, a nuuber of interesting results
has been obtained on this route during the past few years.

The glow of shock waves with velocities of approximately 8 km/s, which can be pro-
duced comparatively simply upon the emergence of an explosive detonation to a

FOR OPHCIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spectrum was the same as that of a black body with temperature of 35,000'x. Later
Stettbacher [27] made similar measur-Ients for shock waves formed upon the dis-
charge of a detonation from an explosive (tetranitromethane + toluene) into argon
and air. The color temperature of the wave front was 27,000“): in experiments with
argon and lO,500°K in experiments with air. Roth [28] very carefully measured

the glow intensity distribution through the spectrum. The shock wave in his exper-
iments was stimulated upon discharge of the detonation from an explosive (trotyl +
+ hexogen and then trotylhenogen) into argon. The color temperature of the front
was 29,000 1 1,000°x and was appreciably above the temperature of the attack-heated
argon (24,000'10, calculated from shock relations. In 1965 Conger et al [7] at-
tupted to compare the intensity of visible and hear ultraviolet radiation (A - 230-
330 nm) during explosive of a pentolite charge in anon. The color temperature of
the front of 20,000'K, which was somewhat lower than the temperature of a shock~
heated gas (23,500°K) obtained by calculation. corresponded to the intensity ratio.

color tewerature of the front to the calculated temperature of the gas behind the
front confirmed the opinion of investigators that the shock wave formed upon dis-

confidence in this appeared only after I. Sh. Model' (29] presented the results of
measuring the absolute glow intensity in 1957. The shock wava in his experiments
was stimulated upon discharge of the detonation from an explosive (trotyl + hexogen
and later trotylhexogen) into air.‘ The absolute glow intensity measured behind a
red light filter was like that of a black body with temperature of 10,000‘K and
this value coincided with the temperature of shock-heated air calculated from the
wave velocity known from experiment. Recording the increase of glow intensity

ments. All concepts toward this calculation were previously based on estimates of
the absorption coefficient by the Kramers formula. the applicability of which to

The data presented in papers [13, 14, 30-32] also indicate the similarity of a
shock wave to absolutely black radiation.

The temperature and emissivity of a shock wave increase significantly with an in-
crease of amplitude. Thus, if the density of the luminous flux from the front is
equal to 1.6-106 W/cm2 at shock wave velocity of 8 km/s in argon, it is then

1.6-107 W/cm2 at velocity of 16 km/s. This explains the interest in the stronger

'We touch on the experiments with very strong shock waves, described by I. Sh.
Hodel', somewhat later.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Temperature Profile of Strong Shock Wave With Regard to Radiation
(dashed line-without regard to radiation)

Fundamental theoretical investigations of the role of radiation in strong shock
waves were carried out by Its. a. Zel'dovich and Yu. P. Rayzer. The results of in-
vestigations were published in 1957 in a cycle of articles [33-36] and were later
included in a monograph [37] . It is shown that luninous heat transfer rearranges
the structure of the front at high amplitudes (Figure 3). The gas in front of a
strong shock wave is heated by powerful shortwave radiation from the front so much
that it begins to absorb longwave (specifically, visible) radiation from the front
and shields it. Therefore, the brightness temperature of the front, initially co-
inciding with the true gas tanperature behind the front, lags behind it as the
shock wave amplitude increases, passes through a maximum and decreases to a rather
low value determined by the natural glow of the heated gas in front of the front.
As an illustration. let us present the results of quantitative estinates of the
phenomenon for a shock wave in air of normal density. made by Yu. P. Rayzer [351.
The dependence of the brightness tnperature of the shock wave front in red light
on the true temperature of the air behind the front is shown in Figure 4. The
shielding effect is still small at gas temperature behind the front of T1 -

- 65,000'K and the brightness temperature 1y. is equal to gas teqperature '1'1. But
even at T1 - 90,000'K shielding of the front in red light is appreciable and Ty; -
- 80,000°x. A further increase of amplitude intensifies the shielding of the
front so much that it leads to a decrease of brightness tesperature. Thus, Ty; -
- 67,000'x at 1‘1 = 100,000“): and the brightness temperature decreases to a maximum
value of Ty. - 17,000°K at even higher amplitudes. which almst does not vary until
the wave amplitude increases strongly.

7.
1mm
was.

‘MIII‘! I;

Figure 4. Dependence of Brightness Imperature of Front on True 'l‘esperature
of Air Behind host

11

FOR (WHOM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sharp difference of the brightness temperature of the front of a strong shock
wave from the calculated temperature of the gas behind the front was observed by
I. Sh. Model' {29]. Shock waves with velocity of 17 Ion/s were created by means of
explosives in gases with high atomic weight (xenon, crypton and argon). Very high
temperatures were achieved in this case-according to I. Sh. Model"s calculations,
We took into account the multiple ionization and radiant cooling of a shock-
heated gas, the temperature of xenon, crypton and argon were '1‘ - 110,000, 90,000
and 60.000°I(, respectively. However, the brightness temperature of the front
measured behind a red light filter was several times lower for all three gases and
Ty; = 3S,000-30,000°K. This divergence was not contained in the temperature mea-
surement error (1 15 percent) and was explained by shielding of the radiation by
the heated gas in front of the front.

In the paper of I. Sh. Model' [29], the brightness temperature of the front was
measured with the same value of shock wave amplitude. The variation of the bright-

be followed experimentally for a long time due to the absence of simple methods of
producing rather strong shock waves. In 1964 LYe. Voytenko [38-40) proposed an
effective method of producing strong shock waves by means of explosives and two
years later A. Ye. Voytenko, I. Sh. Model' and I. s. Samodelov [41] observed the
lag of the brightness temerature of the front behind the calculated temperature
of the gas behind the front in experiments with xenon and air. The gas temperature
behind the front reached '1' - ll0,000°l( at wave velocity of D I 43 km/s, while the

only Ty. - 72,000°K. The brightness temperature of the front in xenon reached its
own maxinum: value of Ty. - 50,000°K ('r r 120,000°K) at D - 18 km/s and decreased to
a limiting value of Tya = 22,000’K with a further increase of amplitude.

The radiating properties of strong shock waves in argon, xenon and air was studied
by the authors jointly with Yu. A. Zatsepin [42]. The brightness temperature was
measured imediately in several sections of the spectrum from the visible and ultra-
violet regions. Not only the separation of the brightness temperature of the front
from the calculated temperature of the gas behind the front but the variations in
the intensity of radiation of the front at different angles indicated shielding of
radiation at high amplitudes. The effect of shielding in the ultraviolet region

retical concepts about shielding of radiation in strong shock waves. Shielding was
observed in experiments at significantly lower shock wave amplitudes than followed
from theoretical estimates. me possible reason for the differences--the absence
of thermodynamic equilibrium in the gas before the front of a strong shock wave--
was noted in [42]. To substantiate this hypothesis, one of the authors compared the
times of relaxation processes in the heated layer in front of the front to the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time the gas was in the layer [43]. It turned out that some of the processes can
remain incomplete. Consideration of this circumstance improved agreement with
experiment.

Absorption of radiation by the narrow layer on the front where ionization of a
shock-heated gas develops leads to additional decrease of the brightness tempera-
ture of the front. The authors of [13), studying the glow spectra of shock waves
formed upon discharge of detonation from an explosive into inert gases, reached
the same conclusion. The absorption lines of ions in the emission spectrum of
shock waves were recorded and a decrease of the brightness temperature of the
front was observed. These results could not be explained by radiant heating of
the gas in Front of the front, which was still too low in these experiments.

gases is not contained within the framework of existing theoretical concepts. The
characteristic features of the phenomenon found in experiments indicate the devel-
opment‘of a much wider shielding layer in front of the shock wave front than was
assumed. It is appropriate to note in this regard that a significant electron
concentration far in front of the shock wave front (the so-called "precursor') was
observed repeatedly in experiments in shock tubes. There are indications that
electron diffusion from a shock-heated gas to the region in front of the front
plays a specific role in formation of the ”precursor." The argon temperature be-
fore the front (presumably due to energy transfer by these electrons) reached
8,000'K in [44). However, most investigators link the formation of the ”precurs-

ance lines and their subsequent photoionization. L. H. Biberman and B. A. Veklenko
[45] showed that a layer of excited atoms forms in front of the shock wave front
due to absorption of resonance photons in the lens of the lines and subsequent

acts of re-radiation similar to diffusion. This process was considered in [46]
with regard to photoionization of excited atoms. There is no unified opinion on
the causes of ”precursor' formation. Further investigations will show whether

the phenomena touched on above are related to unsteady shielding of the radiation
of strong shock waves.

13
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

52. Problems of moving large cosmic bodies in the atmosphere

In the light of the progress made in the dynamics of a radiating gas, great

significance is being attached to the studies of the movement of large cosmic

bodies in the atmosphere during which powerful shock waves are formed, and the
temperature of the gas behind the front reaches high values so that radiation

acquires an important role in this physical process. In particular, the broad

cZass of meteor phenomena in the earth's atmosphere belongs here. Of the great

variety of aspects of studying meteor phenomena, among which it is possible to

'nane estranomical, cosmogonic, chemical and other studies [47], let us mention

the problems pertaining to meteor physics, the problems of the movement of bodies

in the atmosphere, in rarefied and dense gases. On approaching the earth, cosmic

bodies experience acceleration as a result of the earth's attraction: bodies with

zero velocity accelerate to 11 km/sec -~ this is the lower limit. The upper limit

is defined from the addition of the orbital velocity of the earth (30 km/sec)

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the maximum possible heliocentric velocity of meteor bodies which is equal
to 42 km/sec for nonhyperholic orbits. Thus, the extra-atmospheric velocity
falls within the limits of 11-72 km/sec.

At such velocities, meteor bodies experience strong interaction with the
air in the atmosphere: in the upper layers, in the molecular flux mode, and
in the lower layers, in the continuous flow mode with the formation of a powerful
shock wave. In the molecular flux mode at altitudes of 80-120 km where the free
path length of the molecules is much greater than the dimensions of the meteor
bodies, interaction with the air takes place just as with individual molecules.
This interaction leads to loss of mass of the meteor by evaporation under the
effect of the impact of the air molecules and to the excitation of the atoms of
the evaporated material which determines the radiation of meteors.

In the continuous flux mode, behind the front of the shock wave formed
ahead of large cosmic bodies, the gas has a temperature from tens to hundreds or
thousands of degrees, and radiant energy fluxes developed to values on the order
of 109 watts/cm3. These processes determine both the loss of mass (ablation) of
the meteor body and its radiation. The study of the radiative properties of such
shock waves, the radiant energy transport and the effect of powerful radiation
fluxes on matter is of great scientific interest.

At the present time there has been significant improvement of the physical
theory of meteors - small cosmic bodies entering the earth's atmosphere and com-
pletely burning up in its upper layers. Meteors are recorded by their glow;
the method of radar tracking of meteor trails was developed only recently [48].
The greater part of the available data on the cosmic bodies in the atmosphere per-
tains to meteors, the movement of which is not accompanied by the formation of

a shock wave. This sampling of observation data is explained by the comparatively

15
FOR OF11C1AL.USEGJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(3)
5" 'lvi'm"!

I)

    

“ll

Figure 5. Distribution of meteor bodies by mass

1, 2 -- microcraters on the moon, 3 -- craters or the moon, I. --
asteroids, 5 -- Apollo group (Whipple), 6 - comets (Whipple),

7 -- meteorites (Braun), 8 -- meteorites (Hawkins), 9 -- meteors
(Hillman, Bohrland). 10 -- meteors (Hawkins, Apton), 11 -- meteors
(Lindblad), 12 -- meteors (Watson), 13 -- cosmic dust (Weinberg),
16 -- zodiacal light (Alsasser), 15 -- "Pegasus." 16 -"£xplorer,"
17 -— "Mariner," 18 - "Pioneer," 19 -- "Lunar Orbiter,"

20 -- 003-111
Key: 2
a. m' sec-1)
b. m(g)

high frequency of meteors and the presence of regular meteor flow. The graph in
Figure 5 presents comparative data on the frequency of meteor phenomena of differ-
ent scales -- from cosmic dust with a particle mass of 10'15 g to asteroids. The
logarithm of the mass is plotted on the x-sxis in gram, and the logarithm of the
meteor body flow per square meter per second is plotted on the y-axis.

Let us present the basic principles of the physical theory of meteors [/49].

From the law of conservation of momentum we have

(1.8)

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where m and v are the mass and the velocity of the meteor body, 9 is the air
density, 8 is the cross sectional area of the meteor body, I‘ is the drag.

Expressing the cross sectional area S in terms of the mass m, the density
of the meteor body 6 and the shape factor A, we obtain the first equation of the
physical theory of meteors -- the braking equation

.3. .. —-I‘A6-'|-m"‘1w‘. (1.9)

One of the basic principles in the physical theory of meteors is the prin-
ciple that energy transmitted to a meteor body by air molecules colliding with it

is predominantly spent on evaporation of it:

I (1.10)

where Q is the energy of evaporation of one g of meteoric matter, A is the heat

transfer coefficient (the fraction of the kinetic energy of the air mlecules

colliding with the meteor body spent on evaporation). The heat transfer coefficient

A turns out to be a comparatively large value on the order of 0.5.

From (1.8) and (1.10) we obtain the second basic equation - the mass loss

equation a... d.
4—: ““"w'JT' (1.11)

where o-A/ZI‘Q depends weakly on the velocity so that when the mass of a meteor body

decreases significantly, the velocity loss is very small. The basic equations also

include the glow equation

’=--;-‘(%F)V' (1.12)
and the ionization equation
ﬂ in
a = —W(7F)' (1.13)
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USP. ONLY

where I is the radiation of the meteor per unit time, 1' is the fraction of the
kinetic energy of the meteor atoms converted to light energy (luminosity),
o is the linear electron density of the meteor trail. 8 is the number of free
electrons generated by one evaporating atom of the meteor body (the ionization
factor), n is the average mass of an atom of the meteor body.

Combining equations (1.11) and (1.12), it is possible to express the value

of o in terms of measured values of the brightness of the meteor I and its veloc-

ity v:

u=—l/(§Id¢)v:—:-. (1-14)

By processing actual data obtained by camera recordings. in reference [50},
reliable confirmation was found for the fact that the value of o varies little with
variation of the velocity and mass of the meteor.

The primary recording technique and source of information about meteor
phenomena remains recording the glow of the meteor in the atmosphere. Therefore
the importance of the radiative properties of meteor bodies is unquestioned.

The visually noted brightness of a meteor trail is related to the radiation
intensity of the meteor I {51] and it is denoted by the absolute stellar magnitude

M = 245—2.!» lg I. (1. 15)
and it is also related to the illumination 2 on the earth's surface created by the

meteor radiation and expressed by the visible stellar magnitude m [52]:

(1.16)
1; .. 2,1-10"-2.512"“ lux

The stellar magnitude is related to the initial mass and velocity of the

meteor body. A meteor of zero stellar magnitude corresponds to a velocity of

60 km/sec and an initial mass of about 1 g.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A great deal of actual data have been accumulated on the radiation of
meteors. The application of night photographic patrolling using special cameras
for automatic recording of meteors equipped with obturators for measuring the
velocity and diffraction gratings for recording the glow spectrum of the meteors
offers the possibility of simultaneously measuring the brightness of the meteors 1,
their velocity v and the spectral characteristics.

The recorded spectra of meteors (their nuiaer in 1971 exceeded 1300 [53])
basically are of a linear nature with luminescence of the lines of the atoms making
up the meteor body. This indicates that basically the meteor radiation is
recorded in the molecular flux mode where the atoms of the meteor body excited by
inpacts with the molecules of the air emit. Meteor physics is still experiencing
a number of difficulties with its improvement. A survey of the physical theory of
meteors indicates that many values entering into the equations are insufficiently
precisely known and subject to significant refinement; therefore it is necessary
to exercise caution with regard to the conclusions of the theory. For example,
the estimation of the density of meteor bodies from velocity data based on optical
measurements diverges strongly from the actual measured value as it turned out for
the Prshibram meteorite [54] (by the estimate based on trajectory measurements
0.1. g/cm3. actually according to the specimens found 3.6 g/cm3) and for the Lost
City meteorite [55]: according to the optical measurement data 0.1 g/cm3, and
actually for the bronzite chondrite which this meteorite turned out to be, the
density is 3.8 g/cm3. The exact determination of the constants 'r and B in the glow
and ionization equations (1.12) and (1.13) has great siyiificance. This offers
the possibility of a quantitative comparison of the results of optical and radar
measurements which recently have been acctnaulated very rapidly. Hhereas the meteor
problem has not been fully resolved theoretically. in any case there is a large

amunt of factual data for the solution of this problem.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another situation is observed for the phenomenon of the movement of quite
large cosmic bodies in the atmosphere. First of all, here we note the extra-
ordinary shortage of factual data from recording the glow of large bolides although
this phenomenon is not so rare, as is clear from the graph in Figure 5. Many
processes pertaining to this phenomenon have not even been isolated for detailed
study as a result of the complexity and absence of the data.

With the formation of a powerful shock wave in front of the moving cosmic
body, many physical processes occur, among which it is possible to isolate the
following as independent: ionization of the gas behind the shock wave. the radia-
tion of the powerful shock wave. radiant energy transported in the heated gas
behind the front (Comparable to or exceeding the hydrodynamic transport. the
effect of radiation on the matter of the cosmic body and destruction of it under
the effect of radiation (ablation). All of these processes also determine the
laws of movement of a large meteor body in the atmosphere, the variation of its
mass and velocity.

The progress recently made in plasma physics. in the dynamics of the high-
tcmperature gas and in adjacent fields have determined the well-known progress in
the mentioned problems of the movement of cosmic bodies in the earth's atmosphere.

A large number of papers have been written on the ionization of a gas
behind a shock wave and the optical properties of the ionized gas, including as
applied to meteor physics [17-19, 56-100]. This problem is the best developed.

Intensive studies of the problem of the effect of radiation on matter
have been started [9-11. 101-120]. Here it is especially necessary to note the
large number of papers on the effect of laser radiation on matter appearing in
connection with the rapid development of laser engineering [101-120]. Neverthe-

less, the study of the effect of radiation with a continuous spectrum is of the

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

greatest interest for the problem of the ablation of cosmic bodies in the
atmosphere.

In spite of the development of such research on the general physics level
the studies of the ablation of bodies in the situatim of flow of a continuous
gas around then have been node at random. It is necessary to note that a detailed
investigation of the specific process of the ablation of a cosmic body under the
conditions of radiant energy transport in a dense gas flow behind the shock wave
front can give a result which will be difficult to reconcile with the results for
small meteoroids by selecting the value of the coefficients in the basic equations.
In this respect, as was pointed out earlier [17, 19], the experinents have great
simificance. It is possible to set up experiments on the mdern level of the
development of engineering reproducing the actual meteor flight conditions and
processes occurring on interaction of then with the air. The flight of meteors in
the upper layers of the atmosphere at a velocity of 16 Its/sec has been reproduced
by shaped-charge firing of Ietal balls from a rocket at high altitude [121]. The
glow spectrum of a meteor with a velocity to 56 km/aec has been reproduced by the
effect of an electron beam on a specimn [122]. Under laboratory conditions it is
possible to accelerate metal particles to a velocity of AO km/aec [123. 1210] using
an explosive charge. An interesting study of the ablation of solid states simu-
lating meteor bodies was performed using a plasmotron producing a plasma flux at a

temperature of 10000°K [125]. '

New possibilities for studying the effect of powerful radiation fluxes on
meteor bodies are being opened up in connection with the use of explosive high-
temperature sources of light, the emitter in which is a powerful shock wave in a
gas. By this method it is possible to obtain a light source with a tewerature _

of more than 100,000'K, producing a radiation flux for the investigated specimen

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a density on the order of 100 Watts/m2. Under the effect of such a power-
ful radiation flux the material of the specimen evaporates, and further effect

of the radiation occurs in the presence of a layer of vapor over the surface of
the specimen, which reproduces the ablation conditions of a meteor body behind the
powerful shock wave. This method is being developed by the authors of [9, 11]

in cannection with studying the radiative properties of powerful shock waves in
gases.

Hhat has been stated with respect to the ablation of large cosmic bodies
can also be applied to their movement in the earth's atmosphere. to the law of
variation of their mass and velocity. It is necessary to expect that variation of
the specific process of the interaction of a meteor body with the air flow from
small meteor bodies to large meteorite-forming bolides will have its impact on the
basic equations. the values of the coefficients in them, and their dependence on
the velocity. This is nOted when processing the results for a large bolide [126]
when the value of the coefficient a in the equation (1.11) quickly decreases with
a decrease in the velocity from 0-9010"13 at v-20 km/sec to 0-2'10'“13 for v-7 km/sec.
Accordingly, it is necessary to note the result obtained in reference [127] from
estimating the intensity of the ablation of a meteor body in the radiant thermal
conductivity mode in the gas and in the vapor behind the shock wave front where
the mass loss turns out to be proportional to the velocity of the meteor body
which. as was demonstrated [17], does not differ from the solution of equation
(1.10) with constant coefficient A. In reference [127] an effort was made to
estimate the nature of the variation of A and its influence on the ablation.

In equation (1.12) which describes the glow of meteors, it is proposed
that the radiation energy is proportional to the kinetic energy of the lost mass
of the meteor body inasmuch as the emitter is the atoms of the meteor body

excited by the air molecule impacts. "hen a large meteor body is moving in the
22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

atmsphere, the enitter is the shock wave that is formed; in this case the
radiation process is accompanied by the fol-nation of a shielding layer ahead of
the wave front and other effects;

Thus, the problem of the radiation of a large meteorite-forming bolide is
more complicated than the radiation of small neteroids. The results of .the emer-
inental study of the radiative properties of shock waves in gases presented in the

given book will promote the stotenent of this problel.

23"

l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
n FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Problems of Experimental Investigation

The deficiency of experimental data on the radiating properties of a gas in op-
tically dense layers and in strong shock waves in dense gases was noted in pre-
vious sections during survey of some problems of the dynamics of a radiating gas
related both specifically to the radiating properties of shock waves and to a:'
pli ed problems.

An optically dense shock wave rarely became the subject of investigation. This
situation is explained by the specifics of experiments with explosives except
these waves have not yet been produced in them. The glow of shock waves with
velocities of approximately 8 km/s, which can be produced comparatively simply
upon discharge of a detonation to a boundary with a gas, was studied in more de-
tail. However. the contradictory results obtained (7' 28] require further eXPer‘
iments. The glow of shock waves with velocities above 10 kn/s was studied in only
two papers [29: 41]. The main purpose of these investigations was achieved--to
detect the self-shielding of strong shock waves predicted by theory under

24
FORIOFFKJA1.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

laboratory experiuent conditions. however, if the spectral composition of visible
radiation was studied during discharge of detonation and if the first measurements
were made in quartz ultraviolet, then one would have to make a judgment about the
radiating properties of stronger shock waves only from measurements in red light.
'me angular distribution of the radiation of the front was not investigated in a
single one of the papers known to us, although the idea of a shock wave as a radi-
ator remains incomplete without it. with regard to the theoretical aspect of the
problem, the influence of a number of effects on the radiating properties of shock
waves has still not been studied. Thus, the estimates of the optical thickness of
the layer on the front in which gas ionization develops, which we made, shows that
the layer can appreciably affect the nature of radiation of the shock wave. One
can also show the absence of thermodynamic equilibrium in the heated layer before
the front, which should be taken into account when calculating the brightness tem-
perature of strong shock waves.

Familiarity with papers whose main results were discussed above and estimates of
the influence of some effects on the radiating properties of waves determine the
need to set up systematic experiments. we posed the following specific tasks:

--to estimate the influence of the shielding effect of strong shock waves on
their radiating capability on the basis of measurements of brightness temperature
in different regions of the spectrun and with different initial gas pressures:

--to compile a more complete concept of the spectral composition of the radi-
ation of shock waves by measurements in the ultraviolet, visible and infrared re-
gions of the spectrum and to obtain data on the angular distribution of radiation:

--to calculate the brightness temperature of shock waves in some gases and to
compare the results of experiment and calculation on the basis of existing theo-
retical concepts.

Based on the results of experimental investigation of the radiating properties of
waves, it was suggested that one turn to problems related to the use of a shock
wave as a light source. Almost all the papers published on this problem are de-
voted to generation of lamp flashes for high-speed photography. ll‘he authors re-
cently suggested that an amplitude-stable strong shock wave created by specially
shaped explosive charges 'be used as a high-temperature brightness standard [12-14].
I. v. Nemchinov earlier pointed out the possibility of using explosive sources for
experimental investigation of the effect of powerful ultraviolet radiation on a
solid. The authors designed a source suitable for these purposes in which the
radiator was a strong shock wave in argon. A glowing region occurred above the
targets exposed to a radiation source and the piezosensor installed below the tar-
get recorded the mechanical pulse [9, 11). Further investigations in this direc-
tion were concentrated on solving the problem of generation of an explosive source
with radiant flux density of 107 N/cua2 and above for experimental study of optical
and mechanical phenomena that accompany the effect of powerful radiation with con-
tinuous spectrum on a solid.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRODUCING s'rRom SHOCK mm IN (EASE
Macaw IZLUCHATBL'NYYE SVOYS‘I'VA UDARNYIOI V018 V 6AM in main 1977 pp 24-36

[Chapter 2 from the book "Radiating Properties of Shock Waves in Gases", by H. A.
'rsikulin and Ye. G. Popov, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 173 pages]

[Text] Experimental investigations of surface-radiating shock waves are closely

related to the method of producing them in dense gases. uplosives are ueed to
produce these waves in the papers known to us. If one takes into account that the

pressure behind the front of strong shock waves in dense gases can reach 104-105
atmospheres, the use of explosives is the simplest and still the most practically

unique solution.

Production of strong shock waves by means of the focussed admission of pulsed
lasers may be promising to study these waves in gases. Experiments are described
in the literature [128-130] in which a process similar to a strong explosion oc-
curred ai'ter gas absorption of this emission and the velocity of the shock wave

was initially equal to approximately 100 Jul/s.

1. Exciting Shock Z‘isves when Detonation Exits into the Gas

This method of producing shock waves is the simplest and met thoroughly studied.
L. D. Landau and K. P. Stanyukovich [15) calculated the motion or disintegrating
detonation products [15]: references to experimental papers can be found in the
survey of Ya. B. Zel'dovich and Yu. P. aayzer [36] and in the survey of Lochte-
Holtgreven [1311. Yu. N. Ryabinin, I. I. Tenn and H. A. ‘l‘sikulin [19, 1321
studied the similarity of shock waves from eXplosive charges in the near some.

A nutter of simplifications that raise doubts of the accuracy of the results is
usually made when determining the parameters of a shock wave by calculation.
Therefore, when the question of the parameters or a shock wave created by a spe-
ciric device arises, experimental methods of determining that: are preferable.

A plane shock wave in a cuvette with the gas under investigation was created in

our experiments by the device shown in Figure 6. The velocity of the shock wave
was determined by photoscanning achieved by means of the SIR-2 device in the slit

photochronograph version.

26

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Device for Producing Shock Waves: luaupplunentary charge (lens)
that produces a plane detonation front: Zucharge 50 In in diam-
star and 60 an long cast from at 40/60 (mixture of 40 percent
trotyl and 60 percent hexogen): 3-glass cuvette 200 an long with

quarts window

The highest velocity of a shock wave measured during the first nonmt after dis-
charge of the detonation caprised the following in different gases (in Inn/s) x

 

no ﬁe m M It Is
II.‘ 10.5 9.8 0.‘ 8.1 8.8

 

The density and effective index of the adiabatic curve of the gas are contained in
solution of the prohlen of scattering of detonation products to the gas. Since the
adiabatic curve of the gas is approximately identical at high temperatures for dif-
ferent gases, the velocity of the shock wave should depend only on density. 1his
dependence is approximated by the straight line in the coordinate axes selected in
Pigure 7.

ﬂaw/mil)

II It (2y ‘I

I ° W

I n, Ir x.
w t 4; up

Figure 7. Dependence of Shock Have Velocity D During Discharge of Detonation
from 1!; 40/60 on Gas Density 0 Related to Air Density

Key:
1. )m/s 2. Air

Along with the good recurrence of the results with this method of shock wave pro-
duction, we note the weak influence of charge size on the value of velocity near
its surface. Thus. a decrease of the diameter and length of the charge by one-half
in experiments with argon and air did not lead to an appreciable decrease of ve-
locity. The stronger attenuation of the shock wave along the length of the cuvette
observed in this case agrees with the conclusions on the similarity of shock waves
from explosive charges [19, 132]. This influence of charge sire, naturally fron
the theoretical viewpoint, permits one to conpare the results to the neasurnents
of other authors.

27

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lochte-Holtgreven [131] gives a velocity of 9.5 km/s of a shock wave in air upon
discharge of a detonation from m 50/50. It the linear dependence of shock wave
velocity on the velocity of explosive detonation observed in [132] is used, the
given value is equal to 9.8 lea/s upon recalculation for T6 40/60 and coincides with
our measured values.

Christian and Yarger [133] achieved a lower velocity of 8.7 Jan/s than in our paper
upon discharge of a detonation from 'l’G 40/60 into argon. no difference is easily
explained by the fact that a plate of inert material was located between the ex-
plosive and the gas in [133]. Anderholm [30] presents a value or D - 9.3 We
close to our value. Roth [28] presents a velocity of 8.3 Ion/s upon discharge of

a detonation from m 40/60 into argon: this value does not agree by the temperature
measured by him (a velocity of D - 9.5 km/s corresponds to this temperature) and it
does not agree with our value of D I 9.4 lea/s.

Unlike the other experiments described above, Roth [28] did not observe attenuation
of the shock waves in argon near the charge. It is appropriate to note in this re-
gard that attenuation of a shock wave in argon near the charge was also not ob-
served in our first experiments with the devices shown in Figure 6. 'me reason for
the confusion was bending of the front near the cuvette walls toward the motion of
the shock wave.‘ Having separated the wall from the charge, this bending could be
prevented and attenuation of the shock wave could be observed by measuring the ve-
locity of the plane section of the front. Apparently the divergence of the mea-
sured value of shock compression 01/00 - 7.9 with the calculated value of 9.3 and
to the measurements of other authors (01/00 - 9.4) [133] is also related in [29]

to bending of the front near the well.

Unfortunately, measurements of shock wave velocity in xenon and other gases, which
would permit better judgment of the results obtained here and which would permit a
check of the function in Figure 7 that generalizes similar measurements, are not
described in the literature.

Although methods of producing stronger shock waves have been developed recently,
the possibility of achieving a temperature up to 30,000-40,000’K behind the front
supports the interest in these types of experiments during discharge of detonation
from powerful explosives into heavy inert gases.

2. Producing Shock Haves by Detonating Charges With 0. Cumulative Channel

Shaped charges were and remain the subject of numerous investigations. Koski et
al, N. N. Novikov, Nova): and others produced jets with velocities of 60-100 km/s
[134-137] when metal shells were squeezed by explosion of these charges. However,
such high velocities are achieved only in a strongly rarefied gas. Thus, if the-
jet moves in it at velocity of 60 Ian/s during initial argon pressure of 10-3 nun Hg,
an increase of pressure to 100 m Hg reduces the velocity to 8 Ion/s [136]. Cylin-
drical shaped charges described below are more effective to produce strong shock
waves in a dense gas. The jet in the channel of these charges is toned during
collapse of detonation products (gas cumulation) rather than by collapse of the

 

.mis problem is considered in more detail in Chapter, Section 4.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

metal shell. Shock waves with velocities of approximately 16 km/s can be produced
in gases with initial pressure of 760 II ﬁg by using these charges.

 

Pigure 8. Flow Pattern During Detonation of slaped marge. Wnexplosion
products

Let us consider the gas dynamic flow pattern and let us estimate the velocities of
the jet and the shock wave. The flow pattern in the coordinate system where the
detonation front is quiescent (Figure 8) is steady. It is assmaed that the ex-
ternal dimensions of the charge are rather high and can be disregarded.

For steady flow along the streamlines, the Bernoulli integral is retained

.s
acoust.
“L T (2.1)

On streamlines beginning with the detonation front,

'1 's
”‘+T""'+T' (2.2)

where w2 and u2 are the enthalpy and velocity of products behind the detonation
front and w; and u], are the same values in the jet. Equality (2.2) is also tul-
filled on a special streamline passing along the axis of synetry with unlimited
external dimmions. The equation of state of the explosion products p - M“,
together with relations on the detonation burst, yields

 

u;-u.+v-=W(n+().' (2.3)
to.- .l' p49,. (2.4)
P: -= paw/(n +1). (2.5)

m= '4" on. (2.6)

 

where u; is the velocity of the products behind the burst in a fixed coordinate
system. V is the rate of detonation of the explosive and 9W is its density. wr-
ing flow into a vacuum w; - 0; during flow into a gas

29

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

w1-—p1/p1= “ 1 (%)'"%.' (2.7)

and pressure p1 is found from relations on the contact burst between the jet of
the explosion products and the gas shock-conpressed by it. If U is the flow ve-

locity in a fixed coordinate systuu (it is the velocity of the piston creating the
strong shock wave). then

PI-Pnaﬂxgﬂ-Wu (2'8)

where Y is the effective index of the adiabatic curve of a shock-heated gas and
no is the initial gas density. After the derived expressions are substituted into

equality (2.2), the following equation is found for dimensionless flow velocity
It - UN:

.1 2 r'.

m- =' (1 — W + FIE—(177)". [(1 +1)Po/Pss)

u M
H

(2.9)

One can note imediately that the flow velocity is linearly related to the rate or
detonation V. During flow into a strongly rarefied gas so + 0 and

 

11.=-(1+’,“1‘.'__i )v; (2.10)

if one assmnes that n - 3, then U - 2.06 V. let us compare (2.10) to the known
expression for the velocity of products after the detonation wave has been dis-
charged into a vacuum

311—1
Un=mVS

(2.11)
if n = 3, then 0 . V. higher scattering rates Up = 1.5 V have been observed ex-
perimental 1y. The divergence is caused by the fact that the explosion products

are easily described by a power equation of state with index n - 3 at densities of
o 'v ow, whereas the index decreases to n - 1.3-1.4 upon expansion into a gas at

90 << ow [138]. he process of product expansion can be fully described by intro-
ducing the effective value of n I 2. Thus, we find up - 1.67 V i'or this value of
n, which is close to the experimentally observed velocities. It is obvious that

the value 11 - 2 will better describe the expansion of products upon detonation o!
a shaped charge. 'me flow velocity is u - 2.15 v for n - 2 and no r O. 'lhus. the

uncertainty in selection of the value of n hardly affects the flow rate in the
channel.

Let us present the results of calculating the flow rate 0 and the shock wave I)
found after substitution of ow - 1.69 9/133 and v - 7.3 lull/s (m 10/60), normal

gas density no and index 7 or an ionized gas into equation (2.9) (see Appendix).
M

Li: M Xe n-os
E

(I. W8 11-2 16.‘ 10.1 16.1 18.8
11:3 15.9 15.9 15.11B.1

I). we 11-12 111.3 111.1 111.5 —
“'3 11.1 11.11 13-0 .-

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us emphasize again that, as follows from these data, the problem of the value
of index n plays no significant role. On the other hand. the flow velocity is

weakly dependent on gas density and is almost equal to the flow velocity to a
vacuum.

The considered problem (Figure 9) has one typical dinensionnthe diameter' of

the shaped channel d. The solution obviously correctly describes detonation of
a charge of limited dimensions if the length of the charge channel l »d and outer
diameter 9 >>d. It is also obvious that it is sufficient to require that l ”d
for the existence of steady flow. However, the Bernoulli integral on a special
streamline passing along the axis of syuetry is not expressed in this case by the
same relations on a detonation burst. It is qualitatively clear that the dis-
charge frcm the size reduces the flow velocity at O 'b d and the flow velocity will
asymptotically approach the values calculated above at ald + 0'.

More than 100 experiments were conducted in which the effect of charge configura-
tion and of different explosives on the flow velocity and the shock wave in a gas
was studied.

After initiation the detonation wave energes to the botton of the charge channel
(see Figure 9) and excites the shock wave in the gas. An advancing detonation
front of the jet is formed as a result of subsequent collapse of products in the
channel (Pigures lo and 11). The flow velocity increases and accordingly the
shock wave velocity increases. Covering a path of approximately 8-10 diameters
of the channel d, the shock wave gains maximum velocity and maintains it during
subsequent motion in the channel. A ptwtochronogran of a shock wave and jet in a
glass tube attached to the charge is shown in figure ll (a truncated charge with
l - Sd was used in the experiment, which made it possible to observe the acceler-
ation of the jet and the shock mve to marinas velocity in the tube). The value
of the maximum velocity depends on the ratio of diameters {b/d. me shock wave
velocity increases with an increase of ratio. '

a? G

p._._.

  

     

\l

   

RN-

        
   

Pigure 9. Shaped Charge: l—-length of charge; 6--depression for detonator

The adherence to geometric similarity in motion of the shock wave was checked in
experiments with charges whose channel diameter d varied from 3 to 18 In. It

 

tAxial symetry is not used in solving the problem. It is easy to show that the
results are valid for the case of plane symstry and generally for a channel with
arbitrary cylindrical surface.

31

FOR omcuu, USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

turned out that similarity is disturbed with thin channel walls (a - d s lo m for
‘l‘G 40/60) . The velocity of the shock waves decreased in these cases. Deviation
from similarity can be explained by the proximity of the wall thickness to the
critical diameter of explosive detonation. Experiments with charges of cast
trotyl for which deviation from similarity was checked more intensively, indicate
this. Figure 12 reflects the noted characteristics Were the dependence of steady
shock wave velocity in air on the ratio of diameters ﬂ/d of a charge of is 40/60
are plotted from experimental results.

I, tar/tel!

 

z s I I ﬁt

Figure 12. Dependence of shock Wave Velocity on Ratio of Diameters D/d:
dark circles--d - 8 use; light circlesud - 15 m: l and 2--
calculated values of velocity at Wd e-for n - 2 and n - 3,

respectively

The velocities of shock waves and the detonation rates of charges of different cast
explosives were also measured in the experiments. Both velocity and the rate of
detonation was measured in a separate experiment, for which the charge and glass
tube attached to it were placed in the visual field of the photochronograph. The
results of the measurements are presented in Figure 13.

I, lﬁ/‘u (1 )

   

II
If
[C

7 I Kim/aw

Figure 13. Dependence of shock Have Velocity in Air on Rate of Charge
Detonation

Key:
1. Rule

The effect of initial gas pressure (or rather of density) on the shock wave veloc-
ity in the channel can be judged from the following values measured in experiments
with argon (charge dimensions were d - 25 sun. 1 - 180 mm and 9/d - 2.4):

32.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a. mag no an 200 100 so
DJus/s' 11.0 12.2 13.8 13.3 11.5

Formation of the jet surpassing the detonation front was observed in several ex-
periments with charges having the plane of synetry (two parallel explosive
plates).

Comparing the results outlined in this section. one can state that there is good
agreement of approximate theory with experiment. Analysis of flow and an estimate
of flow and shock wave velocity do not take friction into account. It is obvious
that lengthening of the jet and column of a shock-heated gas leads in the final
analysis to intensive slowing of than in the channel as the charge detonates. Con-
tact with jet products and the shock-heated gas may cause breakdown or detonation
of the explosive. In some experiments the length of the channel reached 30 d

(40 d with attached tube) , but a reduction of shock wave and flow velocity was not
observed. Friction and interaction with the explosive in the channel still appar-
ently play no significant role at l/d s 30 (according to (139], these effects are
manifested at l/d 2 100).

Using a lens with delay of the detonation front near the axis to initiate a shaped
charge, shock waves with velocities up to 20 lam/s were produced in air and argon.
Velocity was increased from ls to 19 Ina/s when conical constricting nozzles were
installed at the channel output.

Shaped charges are used extensively in this paper during investigation of the red-
iating properties of strong shock waves. The stability of shock wave amplitude
in experiments with these charges gave the authors the idea of using it as the
radiator inahigh-temperature explosive brightness standard.

3- Producing Strong Shock waves by Compressing Gee Under Conditions of
Acute-Angled Geometry

A. Ye. Voytenko (38-40] developed this method of producing shock waves. The capa-
bilities of the nethod characterise shock wave velocities of 43 km/s in air and
37 We in xenon measured in [41] (the initial gas pressure was atmospheric).
Velocity comprised 90 Jon/s in [38) during flow of shock-coupresaed hydrogen into
air rarefied to 10‘1 to 10'2 In ﬁg: a plasma with temperature of approximately
200,000'K can be produced during shock deceleration of a hydrogen jet.

This method is used in the present paper with several nonessential changes during
investigation of the radiating properties of strong shock waves (D ’ 20 lcm/e).

The shock wave velocity reached 80 We and the temperature behind the front was
T - 120,000°K in experiments with helium of normal density. A plasma with taper-
state of 300,000°x and particle density of 151-1021 cm’3, higher than in [38], can
be produced in the reflected wave. rurther improvement of the method that permits
production of as high-temperature dense plasma as desired under laboratory condi-
tions is of undoubted interest for the problm of thermonuclear fusion.

A device to produce strong shock waves is shown in Figure 14. The lens 1 initi-
ates a plane detonation wave in charge 2 of hexogen pressed to density of '

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.74 g/cm3. Plate 3 accelerated by the explosion products squeezes the gas in
chamber 4. The mass velocity of the gas is close to the phase velocity of the
point where the plate joins the chamber and exceeds several tines the flight
velocity of the plate. The heated compressed gas is expelled into the tube 5 and
generates a strong shock wave.

 

Figure 14. Device to Produce Strong shock Waves in Gases: l--lensp 2--
charge 84 mm in diameter and weighing 500 grams; 3--duralium
plate 1 an thick: 4--duraliua chamber with radius of curvature
of R - 84 an (6 - lo an): S--glass tube 10 mm in diameter and
200 mm long.

According to [38-40], an increase of the radius of curvature R of chamber 4 in-
creases the shock wave velocity, but the shock wave velocity decreases at R > ¢
(presumably due to friction and heat dissipation). In our experiments chamber 4
had optimum radius of R - a in this regard. it: reduce friction and radiant heat
dissipation, chamber 4 and plate 3 were polished to a mirror finish. In [41],
chamber 4 was filled with hydrogen and was separated by a thin diaphragm from tube
5 containing the gas to be investigated. In our experiments with the chamber
filled with helium, no appreciable increase of shock wave amplitude in the gas un-
der investigation was observed: therefore, in most cases both the chamber and tube
were filled with the gas to be investigated (a diaphragm was not installed). Plate
3 was glued to the charge 2, by which the air inclusions between the plate and
charge were removed, which could lead to ruptures of the plate during explosion.
Because of this it was possible to use thinner plates than in [41], without the
danger of their breakdown. A linear dependence of shock wave velocity on plate
velocity was observed in [40]. The use of a more powerful explosive and thinner
plates in our experiments than in [38-41] and also the closer contact between the
charge and plate favored acceleration of the plate to high velocities. 'me plate
velocity was measured and was equal to 6 lea/s in one of the experiments.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

r.
4. Other Methods of Producing Strong Shock waves

The methods suggested below were tested in the search for more effective methods
of producing strong shock waves. Although these nethods were not used in investi-
gation of the radiating properties of. shock waves, the results are of definite
interest.

If a detonating rod is placed in a channel (figure 15), a piston moving at the
rate of detonation is formed under certain conditions of scattering products by
closing the channel walls. Obviously, pz 1 m, where p2 is the pressure in the
expanding products and p1 is the gas pressure in the shock wave, is required. as-
pressing pressure p1 by piston velocity V and seeming that n - 3 in the power
equation of state of products with one-half decrease of density behind the detona-
tion explosion and n - 1.3 with a further decrease of density [138], the condition
pz 1 p1 can be reduced to the following:

0.05» (8.13)” > £519.. (2. 12)

where so and s are the cross-sectional areas of the rod and channel. We find
8/50 _<_ 18 for 00 - 1.3-10‘3 g/ca3, Y - 1.2 (air), V - 7.8 Inn/s and ow - 1.69 g/aa3
('rG 40/60).

   

    

W/I/III/III/I/I/I/I/I/I/I/III/IIII/II/IIIIIII.

’ _
===n====
‘—

III/II/IIIIIIIIIIIIIII/I/I/I/I/I/I/I/IIII/[Ill

      
 

“\‘V m

     

Figure 15. Production of Shock Wave Upon Detonation of a Rod in a Channel

In the experiments a at 40/60 rod 300 an long was placed in a steel tube 50 u in
diameter and with wall thickness of 5 III. Filling the cross section of the tube
with shock-heated air and argon was observed at 5/80 1 16, which is in good agree-
ment with the given estimate. This filling was not observed at 5/30 > lGP-the
shock-heated gas slipped between the tube walls and explosion products.

The problem of detonation of a rod in a channel has much in cannon with that of
detonation of a shaped charge. Specifically. one can show that the explosion
products will overtake the detonation front at p2 > p1 and their velocity will
approach the calculated values in Section 2 at S/So * 1. In experiments with

5/50 - 4, the shock wave velocity in air comprised 9.5 We. Mass gas velocity of
8.6 kn/s in the wave, which exceeds the rate of detonation of m 40/60, corre-
sponds to it. This excess may be an indirect confirmation of the formation of a
jet overtaking the detonation front. ﬂowwer, the possibility of an increase of
the rate of detonation of the explosive cannot be excluded. A similar explanation
is suggested in several papers on investigation of the ”channel ettect”-the ef-
fect of e shock-heated gas on an explosive in similar experiments [140].

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experiments were conducted to intensify shock waves during motion in a constricted
conical channel (Figure 16). The channel, out in a strong steel ingot, usually
did not break down under the effects of the explosion. A shock wave with concave,
approximately spherical front was created by a charge of cast it 50/50 weighing
500 grams with delay of the detonation wave in the center. The effect of angle 8
at the vertex of the cone on amplification was studied (see Figure 16, a). It is
clear that the wave will be attenuated at small value of 8 rather than amplified
(as occurs in a tube with parallel walls). Shock wave velocity in the attached
tube comprised D = 9 Ida/s in experiments with argon and air at B . 22' and D -

- 12 )cm/s at B - 26 and 8 - 30°. To evaluate the capabilitiee of the method, a
transparent plexiglass cone was attached to a steel truncated cone (see Figure

16, b). In experiments with air, the shock wave was decelerated sharply (to D -
= 5 Jen/s) without travelling 0.4 cm to the vertex of the cone and having velocity
of D - 26 Ion/s. The wave was decelerated over a distance of approximately 5 cm
from the vertex in argon, having velocity of D - 12 km/s.

From the gas-dynamics viewpoint, the motion in the cone is equivalent to a con-
verging spherical shock wave. The problem of convergence of the shock wave to the
center has an automodel solution R N Itlc, where R is the radius of curvature of
the front, a :- 0.715 for the index of the adiabatic curve y - 1.4 and u e l at

y -* l [15]. Analysis of photochronograms of a shock wave in a cone with air
showed that motion is close to automodel at R < 6 cm and up to deceleration (R -
- 0.4 cm) with automodel index a I 0.75 1 0.05.

An explanation for premature deceleration of the shock wave in experiments (not
at the vertex of the cone) should apparently be sought in the instability of the
converging spherical shock wave. This instability could be manifested due to the
asphericity of the shock wave created by an explosive charge or due to subsequent
distortion of the shape of the wave front when it interacts with the channel wall.
The latter is the most probable since the shock waves were created by identical
explosive charges both in argon and in air. At the same time curvature of the
front caused by heating of the channel walls and by radiation of the shock wave
adjacent to them could be observed directly in experiments with argon. We shall
dwell on these experiments somewhat later (Chapter 4, section 4). We note here
that addition of a slight air impurity to the argon, which intensively absorbs

the ultraviolet radiation of the shock wave, led to the fact that the wave was de-
celerated later than in pure argon 2-3 cm from the vertex of the cone at D - 14-15
km/s.

..... l 1....

 

Figure 16. Amplification of shock wave in cone. SPRnhigh speed photo-
recorder 36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

i-mOD FOR MEASURING THE Imam?! 1mm AND 01m VW
Moscow IZLDCHATBL’NYYE SVOYSI'VA WK}! VOL“ V m in Russian 1977 pp 37-61

[Chapter 3 from the book "Radiating Properties of Shock Waves in Gases". by n. A.
Tsikulin and Ye. G. Popov, lzdatel'stvo 'Nauka", 173 pages]

[Text] The paraaeters that characterize the radiating properties of strong shock
waves in gases and namely the radiant flux density in various regions of the spec-
trun and accordingly the brightness tenperature in these regions were measured

with time resolution using modern optical and electronic equipment to record high-

speed phenomena. The photographic method was used in the visible and near ultra-
violet regions and the photoelectric method, which also duplicated masurenents in
the visible regions, was used in the infrared region.

1. Basic Concepts of the Radiation Theory

The radiating properties of strong shock waves in gases, like other self-luluous
objects. are analyzed by couparison to the radiation of an absolutely black body.
since the radiation intensity of a black body is dependant only on temperature, it
is possible to characterize the brightness of radiators by the corresponding tem-
perature of an absolutely black body or brightness temperature.

Let us present in more detail, following [37], the sale concepts of the physical
theory of radiation.

The following three main values are introduced by means of the photon distribution
function by frequencies v in space r and by the directions of prop-
agation of radiant energy near the solid angle vector 9.

The spectral intensity of radiation IV is the amount of radiant energy in the
spectral range dv passing within one second through an area of l on? placed at

point r perpendicular to the direction of propagation lying in the element of solid
angle as near vector 9:

lv-W’(vs '0 a). (3.1)

where hv is the photon energy and c is the sped of propagation. The dimensional-
ity of this value is erg/cnzosteradian. After integration by frequencies, we find
the radiant flux density per unit of solid angle-erg/olz-s-steradian.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The spectral radiation density 0‘, is the amount of radiant energy in spectral
range dv in 1 cm3 of space:

c
(u) (u)

(La In 8 [an - #81410. (3.2)

'Ihe dimensionality is erg°s/cm3. After integration with respect to frequencies,
we find the energy densityuerg/au3.

the spectral flux Sv is the amount of radiant energy in spectral range dv passing
within 1 second through an area of 1 cm? in all directions:

s,=Iwc S IcosOdQ= S I.cos_0d0. ‘3-3’
(«I (0')

The dimensionality is erg/m2. After integration with respect to frequencies, we
find the energy flux density-~erg/c-2-s.

With isotropic distribution of radiation when t and Iv are not dependent on direc-
tion :2, the radiation density is equal to

U'meI3if—Is- (3.4)

and there is no flux: SV - 0 since an identical number of photons is transported
in both directions.

For a medium in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium at constant temperature '1', the
radiation field is also equilibriun, i.e., the number of photons emitted by matter
during 1 second in l m3 in a given frequency range dv and in a given direction 9
is exactly equal to the number of absorbed photons. The field of equilibrim radi-
ation is isotropic, i.e., it is not deper .-nt on the direction and on the specific
properties of the medium, being a universal function of temperature and frequency.

The function of the spectral equilibrium radiation density 0v? introduced by Planck,
has the form

U _ Gnhv' I .
"" va (3.5)
hence
I __ 21w! I
"" J ehvll’__' - (3.6)
38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These for-ulas k - 1.38.10'15 erg/deg is a Boltalan constant and c is the speed of
light.

We find the value of unidirectional flux, i.e.. the anount of radiant energy pass-
ing in one direction through a unit area by integrating I“, with respect to a
hemisphere:

S! - I ”soda.

Substituting I here and bearing in eind that

VP
we Wuslneﬂdm (3.8)
we find
s,,=2a§I.,msosinedo =- x]... (3'9)
0
W 1 (3.10)
5w” 7— Wtr
The integral unidirectional flux with respect to the spectrum is
s, .—. S Sodvaor'. (3.11)

where 0:: 77%;. 55.67.10“ ”ﬂatten-um? is a Stefan-Beltran constant.

There is a very general confirmation for the ration of the absorbing and radiating
capability of bodies. Assume that a cavity filled with equilibritn radiation is
identified in an arbitrary body with constant temperature 1', sufficiently long so
that radiation does not penetrate it fully but was absorbed. A radiation flux svp,
part of which is reflected and part of which is absorbed by the body. impinges on
the surface of the body from the cavity. bet the reflectivity of the body be It,
and let the absorptivity be Av - l - Rv. The amount of radiation absorbed in the
body is svr'av. Due to equilibrium, the same amount of energy is radiated by the
body into the cavity Jv - SVp av. The values of Aw RV and JV are the character-
istics of the body, but the ratio Jv/Aw i.e., the ratio of the radiating capacity
of the body to its absorptivity is not dependent on the property of the body and is
a universal function of frequency and tenperature:

NA. = .,. (3.12)

his statement is called Kirchhoff's law.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A body which fully absorbs the radiation impinging on it, i.e., for which Av = 1,
RV - 0 and JV - svp, is called an absolutely black body.

Let us consider a sufficiently long body with constant temperature '1' and with re-
fractive index equal to unity in which radiation is in equilibrium with the matter
and let us mentally cut it into two parts and let us take away one part. The uni-
directional radiation flux through a plane from the direction of the body is then
sz° Thus, a plane space filled with matter with constant temperature '1' radiates
from the surface like an absolutely black body with temperature T.

Let us calculate the luminous flux 0 per unit area do with radiating area d): lo-
cated at distance R (Figure 17):

«m: ’ﬂ'ﬁ'ﬂLdE. (3.13)

where I is the equilibrium radiation intensity from the surface of the radiating
body. Expressing dz by R and angles 81 and 92, one can in each specific case cal-
culate c at a given point of space. For example, if area 2 is the circular layer
in a disk, one can easily calculate the radiation flux 0 on the axis through area
a parallel to the disk. From Figure 18, 61 - 02 and 6 and

d2 :2 2!!!!” I.
30:10. (3.14)
Hence,
a.
d! 1 2n! sinOcosOde = xlsin'o.
§ (3.15)
or
m = swam». (3.16)
In similar fashion, we have for a radiating sphere (Figure 19)
. nae
d2=2ﬂltsln0gWI (3.17)
D.
«I»: 23/8 sin0.oos0.d8,-nlsin’0.. (3.19)
O
(D :- S.,sin’9.. (3.19)

Measuring 6 and then determining the value of sup from geometric concepts, we can
clearly determine the temperature of the radiating body.

These measurements are usually made with out making absolute measurements of radi-
ation flux, but by comparing it to the flux from a standard source. We shall re-
turn later to this problem.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1?. Calculation of Radiation Flux Density

 

Figure la. calculation of the Flux Density Iron a Disk-Radiator

Thus, the flux is determined at some distance for flat disk and spherical radiators
by the square of the sine of half of the angle at which this light source is visi-
ble since specific differences of shape of the light source are uninportant. 'ihere-
fore, both the sphere and generally any source of circular radiation are visible as
a flat disk to us. 'ihis property is the consequence of W's law or the law of
cosines which says that the radiation flux through a surface is proportional to the
cosine of the angle between the direction of propagation of the radiation and the
normal to the surface.

The condition of “blackness” of a given body is total absorption of the radiation
impinging on it, for which the dimensions of the body should exceed any-fold the
length of radiation travel, i.e., the optical thickness of the body should be
great.

at us consider the equation of radiation transfer in a nedius.

An amount of radiation Ivdadt flows in an elasentary cylinder (Figure 20) with area
of the base do and height ds whose axis coincides with the direction of the lumin-
ous flux during tine dt to the base located at a point with coordinate a while

(IV + d1v)dodt flows from the base located at a point with coordinate a 4» ds. The
increnent of been intensity consists of the local increment during the passage of
path ds by the light and of the inth upon transition fro. coordinate s to co-
ordinate s + ds at a given wt of tine:

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘HCIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 19. Calculation of Flux Density from a spherical Radiator

    

" ‘4'

Figure 20. Deriving the Equation of Radiation Traneter
a!

6": —'—£ a!' d
d‘ ‘ +77— " (3.20)

Bean intensity varies due to enieeion and abeorption of light in the given elemen-
tary cylinder. 'me amount of radiation emitted in the cylinder during tine dtv ie

equal to
(t
Iv(i+ wlv)doao' (3.21)

where j\, is the enissive capacity of matter. 'lhe second ter- in parentheses takes
into account the eo-called stimulated or induced enieoion (the probability of stin-
ulated emission of a photon of given frequency and given direction is proportional
to the radiation intensity of the eane frequency and the eane direction existing at
a given point of space). An amount of radiation XvIvdodtde, where le is the ab-
sorption coefficient, is absorbed in the cylinder during the cane tine. Compiling
the balance and dividing the derived expreeeion by the product of differentials
dodtds, we rind the equation

I 0!. 0'. '
TT+T"'(‘+1%V")—”J" (3.22)
42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The ratio of the emissive and absorption capability of the body. according to
Kirchhoff's law, is a universal function of frequency and temperature in a state
of equilibriun

I. I,
T, = ﬂ; .
”W," (3.23)

where radiation intensity Iv is substituted for the equilibrim value IV? (3.6),
hence

I- - xiv.“ — rm"). (3.24)

let us remove the parentheses in the right side of equation (3.22) and let us re-
place j'v in the second term for the derived expression into which we substitute the
expression for lop. The right side of equation (3.22) then assures the fern

"bk“ —¢-N")l,. (3.25)

Hence, it is obvious that stimulated emission can be interpreted as a decrease of
absorption -. part of the photons seem to be absorbed and emitted again at the sane
point with the same frequency and in the sane direction. These acts of “reradia-
tion" can formally be disregarded if one asst-es that the absorption coefficient
has a somewhat smaller value:

x; - x.(l - cw"). (3.26)

In this interpretation Kirchhoff 's law acquires the following form

I. a x'J... (3.27)

and then the transfer equation is written in the following form

1 3'. 3’.

. 3.28
TT'F'F'M’w‘L" ( )

Noting that the differential expression in the left side is a final product of in-
tensity along the path of propagation, we rewrite the equation in the for:

4), . '
7+ “Jr =' ”W (3.29)
Equation (3.29) has the solution
I. -3 1.,oxp[—S ulda']uZd-' + count. (3.3a)
(.3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us consider examples. net a body with constant temperature '1' occupy an infin-
ite half-space s > 0 and is limited 1%; plane surface. The intensity near the
surface is then equal to

1. =3 In!” 4" = 1.... (3.21)
.

i.e. , it is equal to the radiation intensity of an absolutely black body with test-

perature 'r (in this formula r.=Sx;dg is optical thickness).

0
Let us consider the radiation of a plane layer of finite thickness A. For radiation
intensity we have

4m.

-‘ do
l.(0)=. S I", Jmowirulwu_eq.mox (3.32)
.

here w is the optical thickness in a direction perpendicular to the surface. For
an optically thin layer 1‘, << 1 we find

I. _ 1.,er0 (3.33)

--the brightness of this radiating body increases with deviation of the observation
angle from the normal.

Thus, an optically thin layer radiates differently at different angles. i.e., not
according to Lanbert's law. One of the methods of experimental checking of the
“blackness" of a body is based on this effect: if the radiating body is of dif-
ferent brightness at different angles to the surface it does not radiate like a
black body.

Not only the radiation intensity at a given angle to the surface is of interest,
but the radiation flux from the surface of the body, i.e.. the radiation flux
emerging in all directions--the ao-called spectral surface brightness, is also of
interest.

For the radiation flux we have (see (3.7))

, =.- 1.0090(5).

Substituting the expressions for Iv and dz}. we find

'31

°' (1
s, = 2n Scmosi..ode§ I..¢"J‘°" “:0 . (3.35)
O .

 

O!

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

I

s, .-_ 2:3 I.,dt.§c""""d(eo30).
- - (3.3s)

Having subetituted l/eeso - v, we have

(3.37)

§e-tJm.d(mO) _ §f~"% - 5g (R).
I

where 5.0) =Se-xv.d_: ie the integral exponents. Instead of (3.36) we now find

I U

s. " 2 S mun)“. (3. 39)
O

For a semi-infinite body .8 E'(‘)d""/a I S. -S.,. For a layer of finite thick-
ness 1‘, we have

S - 28., g 8.05M". .- S.'[1 —. 25,3,» (3,39)

The values of l - 2 33(w) at given values of 1", are given in ‘rable 2.

Table 2.

 

The following effective parameters can be determined for a radiator different from
an absolutely black body:

“the spectral brightness temperature for a given wavelength. setting the
given spectral flux sv equal to the corresonding value for an absolutely black

body:
S. = 3,, (Tu); (3.40)

--the integral brightness temperature for a caplete flux from a given radia-
tor 8, setting this value equal to the ooeplete flux from a 'black" radiator:

~45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:1

s = " (3.41)

The integral brightness tomerature averages all the specific characteristics of
the radiator. Therefore, it is more convenient in most cases to use the spectral
brightness temperature. We shall subsequently use only this concept and will omit
the word “spectral" and the subscript .

The brightness tesperature for an optically thick body is usually dependent on fre-
quency. This is related to the fact that the layer radiating from the outside near
this body is one with thickness 2-3 lengths of radiation travel. But the edge of
the body is not heated uniformly and the temperature decreases toward the surface
due to radiation losses. Due to the dependence of the absorption coefficient on
frequency, the travel distances of different photons are different since different
photons emerge to the outside from different depth where the temperatures are
different.

For example, the total absorption coefficient for water-hydrogen-liks atoms, which
includes free-bound and inhibited absorption by electrons in the atom, is given by
the Unsold-xramers formula for small photons less than ionization potential hv << I

l—hv
-.-. «w «mm ‘17- N «an-n
"v WWI: EO'MJO-j—FZLT‘ as", (3.42)

where z is the nuclear charge, N is particle concentration and r - thT and x1 -
- I/k'r.

We then find the radiation paths 13 > 12 > 11 and according to this T3 > '1‘; > T1
near the edge of a radiating body where temperature decreases toward the surface
for frequencies v3 > V; > v1, i.e., “blue“ photons are hotter than 'red" photons. If
one is given the flux distribution in the frequency function (5”) for an absolutely
black body at a specific integral brightness temperature, the observed flux dis-
tribution by frequencies is shifted toward the blue direction.

we considered the condition of the 'blaclmess" of the body and established that ,
the optical thickness of the body should be great for this. he absorption coef-

ficient of matter is equal to the absorption cross section per particle multiplied
by particle concentration. The absorption coefficient corresponding to resonance

absorption in the spectral lines whose absorption cross section is very high aer-
ges to the forefront with low particle concentration.

In classical theory the model of a radiating atom is an elastically bound electron
which oscillates near a position of equilibrium-a harmonic oscillator. since the
oscillating electron moves in accelerated fashion, it emits light.

If the energy losses during the period are low, the rate of radiation is calculated
by the formula

c 2 "w‘
=77 ' (3.43)

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where w is acceleration. Since for an oscillator w - duzvgr, than free (3.43)
we find the equation of energy loss

,4»! _ 3W 4 an":
1F“.ms---g—w‘u——gy-W- 040

where w - 413::er2 is the oscillator energy. 'lhe value

“’64

is called the attenuation constant and is an inverse value of time during which the
oscillator energy decreases by a factor of e.

Considering the problem of stimulated oscillation of an oscillator with attenuation
in the light wave field and calculating the work of the field, i.e., its energy ab-
sorption, we find the effective absorption cross section of the oscillator

ﬂy I

o.=.a;;? (3.46)

(V-Vap+({; . '

hence, the maximum absorption cross section in the center of a line with wavelength
A is:
3

_s
0.13mi.

This is a very high value. For example, for x - 650 nu at N - 101° cm'3, the ab-
sorption coefficient comprises

xv —' 0.” " 2'10. 6“. (3s‘7)

and the radiation path is 1v - 5°10'10 an, whereas the radiation path comprises a
value on the order of a meter for the braking mechanism or by the Unsold-Kramere
formula with the same particle concentration and with low temperature of approxi-
mately 104°K.

Thus, conditions of the "blackness“ of radiation are achieved primarily in the cen-
ters of spectral lines. And since the radiation of a body cannot be greater than
that of an absolutely black body, the intensity of the spectral line when the con-
dition of “blackness" is reached "pushes against" the curve for a black body at
given temperature (Figure 21). A characteristic feature of the spectral line that
reaches saturation is a flat section at the apex of intensity. 'lhe temperature--
the same brightness temperature, but already determined by the spectral line, is
also determined by the intensity of these saturated spectral lines.

If the intensity of the spectral line does not reach saturation, the matter becomes
considerably more complicated. In guantua theory the spectral line intensity of

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5 1‘ / / ' 5
. , %//////////////n 15,

\\\\\\x.... _

Z
Z
¢
‘%

 

. a
Figure 21. Radiation Spectrum of Body Opaque in Center of Sons Lines

frequency on of transition from state n to state I, i.e., the energy emitted in
the line of l «3 within 1 second is equal to the product of the number of suit-
ting atoms Nu by the value of the photon hvm end by the probability of transition

Ann:
I... =- N.-hv__-Am_ (3.43)

The probability of transition Ann is an internal property and is not dependent on
external conditions with respect to the stow-on taperature, particle concentra-
tion and so on.

According to Kirchhoff's law or the principle of detailed equilibriui, one can es-
tablish the relationship between the probabilities of emission and absorption for
a given transition. Making the analogy with classical concepts about the atom as
a set of oscillators, the absorption or radiating capacity of the atom in a given
line is usually characterized by the number of classical oscillators with natural
frequency mn which would produce the same effect as the atom being considered.
This number f is called the oscillator forcenthis is an average value calculated
for one degree of freedom of the electron. ‘rhe total force is three times higher
according to the fact that the electron in the atom has three degrees of freedou.
Everything is usually expressed through the absorption force {9091' bearing in
mind the relation

l

loan. 3 JIneIi—u‘m

“‘ (3.49)

where g is the statistical weight of state. The following determination occurs for
the value £121: 3 trumizl - tum/Yuma ratio of the probability of transition

n r m to the classical attenuation constant y. For a classical oscillator am - I’
and fnm - 1/3. We then have

1., - 332'— Iw../...~.
‘n (3.50)
Bearing in mind that N =h-N.cxp(--E4:75'-)J where subscript 1 denotes the
n '1

ground state and substituting the value of y into (3.50), we find

8n‘he’v’.gn I?" _ r:
I..." Win—Nie’p(——kT—.)- (3.51)
108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Knowing the constants for the given levels of the stun and measuring the intensi-
ties of the corresponding lines, one can determine the tuxperature and particle
concentration of the radiating body. 111s values of oscillator forces which are
unknown for far from all atans cause the greatest difficulties. This value is
difficult to calculate precisely and is usually determined experimentally.

In conclusion let us dwell on the units of measurement of light values. clarity is
necessary in this problem when discussing the different aspects of the radiating
properties of shock waves in gases.

Since radiation is essentially a phenomenon of radiant energy transfer, it is nat-
ural that these values are measured in energy units. We shall also proceed in
this manner when discussing the results.

Determination of the main values of radiation theory with the following dimensions
was also presented above: spectral intensity Iw-erg/cnz-steradian. spectral
density Uvuerg-s/cm3 and spectral flux svnerg/onz.

The following determination of energy flux 1’ in a bean of light with the spectral
distribution 8; occurs in illumination engineering:

F _ “mm“ (3.52)
where 8) is essentially spectral flux 5» integrated by the source area, It is a

coefficient and v; is the so-called visibility curve corresponding to the averaged
spectral sensitivity of the human eye. The unit of value of P is the lumen.

Further, the ratio of the value of flux inside a small solid angle near a given
direction of radiation has luminous intensity

I _-dF
‘ E" (3.53)

If the source radiates uniformly in all directions, then «I - P. The unit of
luminous force is the candle--the luminous force of a source yielding a luminous
flux of one lumen inside a solid angle equal to one steradian.

The illumination at a given point is the flux per unit area:
[5 '= ands; (3.54)
and is calculated in units of lumens/I:2 (lux) or lumens/cm2 (phots).

The luminosity of a light source is the ratio of the total luminous flux of the
light source to its area:

I: - was (3.55)

with units similar to the units of illumination: radius and radphot.

(.9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The brightness of a light source is the ratio of the luminous force in a direction
perpendicular to its surface to the size of the surface:

€006 IF (3.56)

The unit of brightness is the stilb or candle/c1112. The unit nit or candle/n2 equal
to lo" stilb is also used. It is obvious from determination of the brightness of
a source 3, luminous force I and luminous flux 1" that it is the brightness or the
source a that is the analog of radiation intensity Iv with the difference that
brightness B is averaged by the light sensitivity or the human eyeuthe visibility
curve. The visibility curve VA is given in Figure 22 in the tern of the relative
sensitivity of the eye averaged for many individuals with normal vision. The high-
est sensitivity, i.e., the highest color sensation, was detected for wavelength or
555 nm and is taken as the unit.

V

‘ _._
II{
41‘

44
((2

WI )7! I” A, m

Figure 22. Visibility Curve

Introducing the visibility curve in relative form, one must absolutely determine
the value of coefﬁcient K in formula (3.52). me experimentally deternimd value
of K, measured from comparison of luminous flux P and spectral distribution 81, was
equal to 683 linens/watt according to the latest measurements.

2- maturing the Intcns ity Temperature by Photography

'l‘ne main element in the photographic method of recording luminous radiation param-
eters is the light-sensitivity of the photoemulsion. after being developed, as a
result of the effect 01' radiation (exposure). the photoemulsion reveals darkening
which can be analyzed by its capability to retard radiation. The measure of
opaqueness--the optical density or density of darkening A--is the common logarithm
of the ratio of incident flux F0 to the passing flux P1 during translucence of the

developed film
I
A .-.: Is ‘7'.- .

The dependence of darkening density A on the logarithm of radiant energy density
(exposure) lgOt, acting on the photomulsion, is expressionby the characteristic
curve (see Figure 23 in which the typical regions are noted). the normal work of
the photoemulsion as a measuring elcnsnt is accomplished on the condition that the
darkening density does not go beyond the bounds of the linear section. One resorts

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to different exposure times t to remain within the limits of this section upon com-
parison of objects differing strongly in brightness from each other (lo-30-fold or
more). In this case one relies on the eo-called law of intersubstitution. The
latter means that all things being equal, darkening density is dependent only on
the product H - 0t rather than on each value separately. However, if there is a
large difference of exposure times, deviations from this law are observed. The
dependence of the exposure logarithm lgﬂ, which yields the same darkening density
A - const (isoopacity) , on absolute exposure time is given in the graph of Figure
24. It is typical that no deviations from the law of intersubstitution are noted
in the range of 10'5 to 10-8 second (141, 142].

 

um

Figure 23. Characteristic Curve of Photoemulsion: l--fog and zone of under-
exposures; 2--zone of linear exposures; 3-zone of overexposures
and solariution; tge - yucontrsst coefficient

L,”
1,!

U
[I
a

-I -¢ -1 I 2 mt

Figure 24. Isoopscity of High-Contrast Panchromatic Film (according to [141,
142])

The quality of photoemulsions has recently reached a high level in many respects.
For example, the spectral sensitivity of photoemulsions extends from 120 nm in the
far ultraviolet to l,lOO-l,2oo n- in the infrared region of the spectrum. 'the ab-
solute sensitivity of some photoemulsions exceeds by tens and hundreds of times
the sensitivity, for example, of ordinary aerial photographic film, uhich permits
objects to be recorded with couparatively low brightness temperature (on the order
of 10,000’K with exposure time of 10-7 to 10‘8 second). 'me resolution of the pho~
toemuision reaches several hundred lines per millimeter, which still makes this
measuring element incomparable to any other light sensitive element. Taking this
into account, the photographic method must be noted as one of the most effective
methods of investigating radiation processes.

. 51.
FOR OFFICIAL IBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Sh. Model' [29] used photographic photometry methods to study the brightness
of shock waves: he had already described the details and advantages of this method.

pyrometer at the moment of filming, was used as the comparison standard. The
standard was photographed twice at different rotational frequency of the photo-
chronograph mirror, which corresponded to different exposure times. The results

of these filmings were used to construct a linear section of the characteristic
curve of the photoemulsion. a shock wave, being a brighter object, was photo-
graphed at higher mirror rotational frequency than the standard. The law of inter-
substitution was applied when plotting the characteristic curve and when determin-
ing the brightness temperature. The accuracy of measuring a towerature of 30,000-
35,000°K is estimted at 1 15 percent.

This method was ilproved in [32. 41. 42]. An SPR device more improved than the
photochronograph described by I. Sh. Model' was used to record brightness (the er-
ror related to the inaccuracy of determining the mirror rotational frequency was
actually eliminated by this). Althoughan IPK-SO xenon lamp (brightness towers-
ture of 6,300 i 200°K in red light) is a more convenient cosparison standard than
the sun [41], the disadvantages related to the great difference of the brightness
of the standard and the shock wave were retained. These disadvantages were elim-
inated in [42, 32] , where an Ev-39 flash lamp with brightness temperature of
41,000‘K was used as the comparison standard.

of a shock-heated gas [32]. The specifics of explosive experiments, specifically
the laboriousness of experiments to produce strong shock waves (D > 20 Ion/s) forces
one to be limited to minimum statistics and to extract as much information as pos-
sible from each experiment. Therefore, the noted advantages of the photographic
method predetermined its widespread use in the experiments described here. We de-
veloped the method jointly with Yu. A. Zatsepin.

densities produced on a photoemulsion during slit scanning of a shock wave and
brightness standard on the sen-2 device. The ultraviolet (let - 330 nm). violet
(leg - 432 mu), blue (Xe: . 442 nm) and yellow (1“ - 560 am) sections of the
spectrum were separated by light filters. The transmission curves of the light
filters used in the experiments. measured on the SP-4 spectrophotometer, are pre-
sented in Figure 25. The effective length A“ is determined with regard to the
spectral sensitivity of the photoemulsions.

The lenses of the SPR-z device are replaced with quartz lenses, which were special-
ly designed by N. M. sitsinskaya for A“ - 330 nm and were manufactured at the on
IFZ [Special Design Office of Institute of Physics of the Earth imeni 0. Yu.

placed on the focal arc of the photochronograph. A mercury lamp is used for
illumination.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[/4 _..__.‘_._ _ - -__-.._...
ll
4a
4:

n - a (I am: we

rigure 25. Transmission Curves of Light filters Used

me brightness standard is an Bil-39 pulsed light source that radiates like a black
body with temperature of 41,000‘x over a wide spectral range of 200-600 nm [143].
The proximity of the brightness temperature of the stuzdard to the measured tower-
ature reduces the error of the method and permits one to avoid the procedures that
compensate for the large difference in brightness of the standard and shock wave.
The standard and shock wave are photographed at idmtical error rotational frequen-
cy. Because of the short (180 microseconds) lumisious pulse of the sv-39 source.
one can do away with shutters that cut off one rotation of the photochronograph
mirro (the same is true of filming the shock wave).

The darkening marks are imprinted when filming the standard to plot the character-
istic curve of the photoemulsion in each experiment. A graduated attenuator is
placed on the focal arc of the sen device for this purpose. Wonization of the
position of the rotating mirror with the 51-39 flash in is selected such that the
photoemulsion is exposed behind the graduated attenuator during the entire period
of the flash when its brightness remains unchanged. The standard and darkening
marks photographed in this manner are presented in Figure 26. If the temperatures
to be measured are expected to be higher than the standard tuperature, the darken-
ing marks are imprinted first by the same method and at the same mirror rotational
frequency, but with oospletely open lens diaphragm of the SPR device (so that the
range of darkening densities of the marks always encompasses the darkening densi-
ties fron the standard and shock wave). The identity of the conditions for film-
ing the marks, standard and shock wave permits one to avoid relying on the law of
intersubstitution when determining the brightness teaperature.

when filming the av-39 source, the SPR device is adjusted so that its slit cuts
out a strip in the center 0.5 so wide from the discharge opening of the source.
Thus, the radiation of the central spot of a discharge 1 III in diameter, for which
brightness temperature of 41,000'K is guaranteed, is separated during time scan-
ning from the radiation of the peripheral regions of the discharge with lower tem-
perature. ‘no increase the image size of the radiator of the int-39 source on the
negative (and thus facilitate densitometry of it), the latter is photographed from
the closest possible distance 11 equal to 2 meters for the SPR-Z device. It was
required that the visual field of the photochronograph encompass no less than 15 an
for simultaneous recording of the brightness and velocity of the shock wave. A
distance of 12 - 5 meters satisfied this condition. The difference in distances
is taken into account by multiplying the ratio of radiation intensity of the shock
wave and the standard, measured by the darkenings, by the value , where

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

correcting factor is close to l at f « 11 and 12 and is equal to 0.873 in the
experiments. The distances 1; and 12 are measured with accuracy of 3 1 cm, to
which corresponds the negligibly small contribution of intensity i 0.1 percent to
the measurement error. The identity of the conditions for filming the standard and
shock wave is atmered to in the remainder. Specifically, establishing the width
of the slit and diaphragm of the photochronograph objective during adjustment to
the standard is not violated during subsequent filming of the shock wave. The sf-

tOgether.

the focal arc). 'Ihe error in measuring the radiatiOn intensity, introduced by the
fluctuations of. density. was determined by the characteristic curve of the photo-
emulsion and did not exceed 1 2 percent. The accuracy of relative measurements

is taken into account. A lo-stsp attenuator that yields a suti’icient number of
gradations of darkening densities for correct plotting of the characteristic curve
is used in the experiments. As shown by measurement of the transmission of the
attenuator fields on the MP-4 microphotometer, the error is determined to a signif-
icant degree by the nonuniformity of transmission within the field,‘ comprising
+ 2 percent. Taking the foregoing into account, the maximtxm error of relative

During absolute measurements, the EV-39 source adds an error of 1 7 percent in the
range of X - 300-550 nm and: 10 percent in the range of A - 200-300 nm [143]. The
error in absolute measurements from the Bil-39 is taken at t 12 percent in the sec-
tion of A - 550-600 nm, while the brightness temperature of the source is 38,000'K
[144]. The accuracy of absolute measurements of brightness temperature, correspond-

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l‘able 3. Accuracy of Measuring Brightness Temperature T/‘r, percent

.._

740‘" K I 2 3 d 0 8 '0
l - 560 "I ‘5 8 0 0 £0 Ii 12
1 I ‘32 "I 3 5 6 1 O O 10
1- 3” "I 3 I 5 . 0 1 8 0

-——-————-—-——-—_______

The velocity and brightness taperatures oi the shock wave front , corresponding to
the radiation normal to the front and to radiation at an angle of 45' to the front.
are measured siluiltaneously in each experiment and the optical thickness of the
shock-heated gas is checked. Part of the measurcnents me made simultaneously in
the ultraviolet and yellow regions of the spectra. Setting up the experiment in
this manner made it possible to make use of the cooperatively high accuracy of rel-
ative measurements and to compare the results obtained in a separate experiment.

It is shown in figure 27, a and b how the brightness temperature of shock waves as
measured simultaneously at different angles. 'lhe shock wave in a glass cuvette 1,
filled with the gas to be investigated, is excited after rupture of diaphragm 2 and
is recorded through the n window 3 (in version b after reflection from the mirror
4) by a photochronograph in the form of the longitudinal seaming l in rigure 28.
The brightness temperature corresponding to radiation normal to the front is deter-
mined from this seaming. The radiation emerging at an angle of 45‘ to the front
is reflected from the mirror 4 (directly in version b without reflection) and is
recorded by the photochronograph in the form of the inclined scanning 2 in Figure
28. The brightness temperature corresonding to radiation at an angle of 45' to the
front is determined from this scanning.

   

I

Figure 27. Diagrams of Simultaneous Recording of Brightness and Velocity of
Front: l--cuvette; 2--diaphragm; 3-windom Cumirror

Key:
1. 1b SFR

since the thickness of the gas layer radiating at angle or 45' ispinges linearly
upon approach to the well of the cuvette, the optical thickness of a shock-heated
gas can be estimated by the variation of the darkening density of the inclined scan
from one of its edges to the other.

he inclined scan 2 in Figure 28 fixes the position of the shock wave front in tine
and permits one to measure (by its slope) the velocity of the front. The error in
measuring the velocity did not exceed 1 3 percent in the experiments.

55 \
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one detail in Figure 28 merits attention. The brightness section of the front
disappears in time. being forced out by the less bright section adjacent to the
cuvette walls. It will be shown later (in Section 4 of chapter 4) that this sec-
tion of lesser brightness corresponds to sharp bending of the front near the cuvette
wall. It is interesting to note here that it is obvious from the sloping scan in
Figure 28 that the velocity of the bright section is lower than that of the section
adjacent to the walls (by 4-5 km/s in the given case). The possibility of dis-
tinguishing the velocities of individual sections of the front was useful for cor-
rect interpretation of the experimenta: :asults. The diagrams of simultaneous
recording of the brightness and velocity of the front shown in Figure 27, a and b
almost repeat the diagram described in [29, 41) and shown in Figure 27, c. However,
the existing differences lead to the fact that it becomes impossible in version c to
measure the velocities of the individual sections of the front, to measure the

brightness temperature of the front at an angle and to check theoptical thickness
of the shock-heated gas.

The reflection coefficients of mirror 4 (see Figure 27) and the transmission of the
cuvette wall at the corresonding angles are measured on the 53-4 spectrophotometer
and are taken into account when determining the brightness temperature. The error
in measuring than is low (1 0.5 percent) and is essentially not reflected in the
accuracy of absolute measurements of intensity and brightness temperature. The ac-
curacy of relative measurements of radiation intensities of the front at different
angles, related to discharge of hardly differing intensities, is estimated at i 3
percent with regard to this error.

The simultaneous measurements in the ultraviolet and yellw regions of the spectrum
were made for a number of experiments by using two synchronously operating Sta-2
devices and the diverging light beam of a semitransparent mirror.

A stable shock wave in air with known brightness temperature is photographed along
with the EV-39 source in some experiments to check the correctness of the results
(described in Section 1, chapter 6).

3. Method of Spectral Investigation of Radiation

Measurements of the brightness temperature in some regions of the spectrum separ-
ated by light filters do not provide a full idea of the spectral composition of the
radiation of shock waves. These experiments were supplemented in [28, 30, 31] by
spectral investigation of radiation in the visible region, which is qualitative in
nature and is limited in [31] by an attempt to estimate roughly the color tempera-
ture of the shock wave from the spectral sensitivity of the photoemulsion. At the
save time combining spectral methods with photometry methods makes it possible to
extract the most detailed data (qualitative and quantitative) on the radiation of
shock waves from the spectrophotochronograms. We used this method in [13, 32) to
study the spectral brightness of shock waves in the ultraviolet and visible regions.

The time-resolved spectra of ultraviolet and visible radiation (A I 220-700 nm) of
shock waves are recorded by the 59-111 transmission spectrophotochronograph [145].
The SPR-Z photochronograph with SP-77 and 59-78 spectral attachments is also used
for this purpose in the visible region [146]. To record large details in the spec-
trum, one can have low scattering and to record small details. for exasple, narrow

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

lines, one can have high scattering. Therefore, several versions of spectral
recording are used in the experiments.

1. the sen-2 device with 59-77 prism attach-em: the reverse scattering is 100--
200 A/mm, resolution is approximately lo I and a section of A - 390-700 nm is
encompassed.

2. The SFR-Z device with the Oran-lo aperture-ratio input lens and SP-78 attach-
ment: reverse scattering is 42 n/n, resolution is 4 A and a section of A). - 100 nm
is encompassed during one procedure.

3. The SP-lll device with interchangeable diffraction grating of 200 lines/us:
reverse scattering is 42 n/m, resolution is 4 A and a section of AA - 200nm is
encompassed during one procedure.

4. The sp-m dﬂice with grating of 600 lines/mm reverse scattering is 14 i/m,
resolution is 1.4 A. a section of AA - 70 nm is ecompassed during one procedure.

5. The SP-lll device with grating of 1,200 lines/In; reverse scattering is 7 i/nm.
resolution is 0.7 A and a section of AA - 35 an is encompassed during one procedure.

The time resolution in versions 1-5 is equal to 10'7 second.

when investigating the radiation of shock waves in inert gases. version 3 is used
whose spectral resolution was adequate to detect and study the lines in the spec-
trum. Experiments with shock waves in air were conducted using all the enumerated
versions.

A 9-12 quartz spectrograph and STE-l spectrograph that provide resolution of 0.1 a
were also used in attempts to detect the narrow lines in the radiation spectrum of
a shock wave in air. The shock wave amplitude within 15 microseconds in these ex-
periments, although it lengthened the exposure of the photographic mulsion, re-
mained constant after which the glow of the shock wave was cut off (see Section 1.
Chapter 6 for cutoff).

The sufficiently high contrast of the panchrome-type lS aerial photographic film
used to record the spectra is enhanced by developing in 0-19 contrast-effective
developer. 'me developing time (approximately 10 minutes). corresponding to the
maximum contrast of the negative, is selected experimentally. Because of these
measures, one can confidently record the lines whose intensity differs by one per-
cent or more from the adjacent continuum (the darkening inhomogeneities of the
negative noted in Section 2 are random and smoothly variable with respect to the
recorded lines and do not prevent detection of them on the spectrophotochronograme).

Spectral brightness temperature is determined from photometric comparison of the
spectrophotochronograms of the shock wave and the BV-39 brightness standard. The
darkening marks are imprinted simultaneously with filming of the standard, for

which the step attenuators with known spectral transmission of the fields are
placed on the focal arcs of the sea-2 and SP-lll devices. 6. P. Ilyushin and

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONlY

v. G. Klokov synchronized the SP-lll device, due to which the process of filming
the standard with the marks and shock wave was similar to that described in Sec-
tion 2. The shock wave and the 81-39 source were photographed at identical
distances.

The spectrum of a mercury lamp used subsequently to tie in the spectrophotochrono-
grams and identification of the lines is imprinted imediately prior to the explo-
sive experiment or filming the EV-39 source with the mirror of the SP-lll device
rotating. The linearity of dispersion of the device made it possible not to com-
plicate the experiment by imprinting a more detailed comparison spectrum. The
weak continuum of the track did not remain on the spectrophotochronograms in the
radiation spectrum of the mercury lamp.

In the remainder, the method of measuring the spectral brightness temperature re-

peats the method of measuring the brightness temperature, described in Section 2,

in individual regions of the spectrum separated by light filters. The accuracy of
absolute and relative measurements is the same as for the method in Section 2.

The sv-39 source with darkening marks, a stable shock wave in air with known bright-
ness temperature (as a control) and the shock waves in each of the gases to be in-
vestigated were photographed under identical conditions in experiments with inert
gases. The results of filming are processed together. This makes it possible to
use the higher accuracy of relative measurements when comparing the spectral

brightness of shock waves in each of the gases to each other.

Since the possibility of measuring the velocity of a shock wave in the experiments
is lost when working with spectral devices, either charges and devices that yield
a shock wave easily reproducible by velocity are used or the spectral method is
used jointly with the method described in Section 2. In the first case the veloc-
ity of the shock wave is measured in preliminary experiments and in the second a
synchronously operating spectral device and photochronogreph, the light beam to
which is separated by a semitransparent mirror, are used. Radiation normal to the
front is studied in experiments by spectral methods.

An end window is installed on the cuvette in experiments with inert gases. The
cuvette is evacuated to 10'3 um ﬁg and is filled with a gas to the necessary pres-
sure. The cuvette is also filled with argon and helium by prolonged pumping (ap-
proximately 5 min) interrupted by an explosion. A cover with a slit through which
the gas escapes is installed instead of an end window in this case and the radia-
tion of the shock wave is investigated. The content of the impurities in the argon
crypton and xenon used does not exceed 0.01 percent and the impurity is 0.005 per-
cent in helium and neon. An exception is an impurity of 1 percent xenon in crypton.

In order to disregard the transmission of the end window, the latter is introduced
into the light been when filming the brightness standard.

The density of the radiation flux from the front is estimated in experiments with
inert gases at approximately 105-107 W/cm2 and in experiments with helium up to

3408 H/cmz. Absorbing such powerful radiatiou, the walls and end window of the
cuvette may lose their initial transparency. The and window located normally to

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the radiation is under more severe conditions in this regard. To attenuate the
effect of radiation on the window, long cuvettes (ratio of length to diameter is
equal to 10-20) are used. Strong shock waves are attenuated in these cuvettes as
they approach the window. Estimates showed that the density of the radiation flux
on the walls and window of the cuvette and the length of its effect do not exceed
those values in experiments which explosive sources produce (described in Section
2, Chapter 6). Special experiments were set up in which quartz, silicate and plex-
iglass plates were exposed to an explosive source. The shock wave was observed
through the plates by means of a photochronograph. The transmission coefficient
of the plates and the time variation of the transmission was determined from com-
parison of the darkening densities on the negative due to radiation of the shock
wave travelling past the plate and through it. The transmission coefficient of
quartz and silicate glass did not vary, while that of plexiglaes decreased by 30-
50 percent by the end of exposure to the source (within 20 microseconds). There-
fore, windows of silicate glass were used in the experiments when investigating
the visible radiation of a shock wave and windows of quartz were used when inves-
tigating ultraviolet radiation.

4. Measuring the Intensity Temperature by Photoelectric Radiation Receivers

The photographic method is inapplicable when investigating the radiation of shock
waves in the infrared region of the spectrum. Although there are photoemulsions
suitable for the near infrared region, it is difficult to record the radiation of
a shock wave in time due to their low sensitivity. This disadvantage of the photo-
graphic method is compensated for by the photoelectric measurements described be-
low. The feasibility of these measurements, including measurements of visible
radiation, also includes the fact that it is possible to compare the results to
the results of measurements by the photographic method. The fact of coincidence of
one and the other gives reliability to each of the methods used.

Radiation in spectral sections with A“ - 500, 660, 660 and 778 nm and Al - 10 nan,
separated by light filters (see Figure 25), is recorded by an PEG-22 photomultipli-
er (range of sensitivity l - 4,200 nm and maximum sensitivity at l I 700 mm). Radi-
ation in the infrared section at *ef - 1,300 nm and Al - 40 nm is recorded by an
FD-GI germanim-indim photodiode (range of sensitivity - soc-1,800 nm and maxi-
mum sensitivity at A - 1,500 nm).

The signals from the PEG-22 and FD-GI are transmitted to OK-33 and OK-UH oscillo-
graphs and are photographed.

The brightness standard is an 5110-300 light-measuring lamp. The brightness tan—
perature of the tungsten strip of the lamp is measured in the spectral section
of leg - 660 nm by means of the BOP-51 precision optical pyromster and is equal to
2,600 1 lO°K. The brightness temperature of the strip of the remaining spectral
sections is determined from the results of these measurements and the tabular
values of spectral darkness of the incandescent tungsten.

a diagram of photoelectric measurements is shown in Figure 29. The lamp strip or
the shock wave 1 are projected by objective 2 so that their image conpletely fills

the opening in the screen 4. The large difference of brightness of the shock wave
and strip (reaching approximately 105 for A“ - 500 nm) is compensated for by

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coincide; the electronic apparatus records only the coincidence of signal ampli-
tudes in this case. The brightness temperature is then determined from the results
of measuring the diameter of the diaphragm opening on the comparator.

7 J 2 I ;

Figure 29. Diagram of Photoelectric Measurements: l--shock wave front or
standard; 2--objective: 3--diaphrdgm3 4--screen with opening:
Suground glass; 6~-light filter: 7--photcnultiplier

are corrected by the ground glass 5, after which the light impinges on the photo-
cathode through the light filter 6. Scattering of radiation by the ground glass was
checked in the following manner. The diaphragm 3 was placed (within the objective)
in its own plane when the lamp was switched on; the current of the tau-22 was mea-
sured simultaneously by a milliameter. The readings of the millameter did not
change when the diaphragm was moved, which indicated the effectiveness of scatter-
scattering.

The light signal from the strip lamp is simulated by a rotating disk with openings
(not shown in Figure 29) and is photographed from the oscillograph screen.

For the infrared region of 1.: - 1,300 nu, the difference of brightness of the
shock wave and lamp strip is not as high in the experiments (no more than 256 times
it); therefore, the same diaphragm is used in measurements and calibration. The
image of the strip or shock wave is projected through the light filter directly on-
to the inlet pupil of the photodiode and completely fills it (there is no screen 4
and ground glass 5). The signal from the lamp is measured on the load resistor of
the photodiode by a millivolmter and is compared to the signal from the shock
wave recorded by the oscillograph. The linearity of the photodiode is first
checked and slight nonlinearity of the oscillograph is taken into account.

The accuracy of photoelectric measurements is estimated with regard to the error of
measuring the temperature of the strip by a pyrometer, the error upon comparison of
the signals on the oscillograms, the error of measurements with a millivolmeter
and milliameter, the error in measuring the diaphragm diameter on the comparator
and the inaccuracy of tabular values of the darkness of tungsten. This analysis
provides accuracy of absolute measurements of intensity of z 10 percent for *ef -

- 600, 778 and 1,300 nm and 1 12 percent for A“ - 500 and 560 nm.

Charges that produce a shock wave easily reproducible in anplitude and whose veloc-
ity is measured in preliminary experiments are used during photoelectric
measurements.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

RADIATION HIOPERTIES OF SHOCK WAVES W BY RBULTB OP m mm

Hoscow IZHJCHATEL'NYYE SVOYSTVA mm VOLN V cam in main 1977 pp 62-9];

[Chapter h from the book "Radiating Properties of Shock Waves in Cases", by M. A.
Tsikulin and Ye. c. Popov, Izdstel'stvo "Nam", 173 pages]

[Text] Propagation of a strong shock wave in a gas was accompanied by inten-
sive glow. Despite the brevity of the process, this glow was always observed vis-
ually in the form of a blindingly bright flash at the moment of explosion. The
gas which was under atmospheric pressure and at room temperature underwent approx-
imately tenfold coapression in the shock wave and was heated to 104-105'K depend-
ing on the wave amplitude. The heated gas radiated like an opaque body from the
surface due to the high density and significant ionization. And this is the main
difference from experiments in shock tubes where the gas density and tewerature
are such that the heated region is optically thin and radiates in all directions.

Data of the classical (the Inmsold-Kramers fornula) or of the quanta-mechanics
(Siberian-Norman formula) theory of radiation absorption, for exasple. indicate
the great optical thickness of the heated gas in experiments. According to quan-
tum-mechanics theory, the paths of the visible and near ultraviolet radiation in a
shock-heated gas are on the order of 10‘1 to 10’3 cm and the value of 10'1 cm cor-
responds to the lowest temperatures measured in experiments. The dimensions of
the heated zone are at least an order higher. Unfortunately, it is difficult to
judge the extent to which existing theories of radiation absorption are applicable
to a very dense plasma behind a strong stuck wave front. Therefore, proof of the
opaqueness of a shock-heated gas, obtained directly from experiments, is of great
value. Por example. the nature of variation of radiation intensity from the front
of shock waves formed upon discharge of detonation from the explosive to a baundary
with a gas indicates this. The fact is that the radiation intensity increases in
proportion to the thickness of the layer inediately after discharge of the deton-
ation while the layer of shock-heated gas is still Optically thin. However. the
increase of radiation intensity stops when the thickness of the layer increases so
much that it becomes opaque as the shock wave propagates. In experiments the in-
crease of radiation intensity occupied a rather short time so that one almost al-
ways dealt with optically dense shock waves. confirmation of the opaqueness of a
heated gas over a wide range of shock wave amplitudes was achieved when radiation
emerging at an angle of 45' to the plane of the front was recorded. The thickness
of the gas radiating at an angle of 45' decreases linearly as it approaches the

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wall of the cuvette along which the shock wave is propagating. Therefore, the
optical thickness of the gas can be estimted by the variation of radiation in-
tensity near the wall. This problem was analyzed in detail when describing the
method of measurement.

No appreciable decrease or radiation intensity near the cuvette wall was observed
in experiments with strong shock waves, i.e., the gas behind the front radiated
like an opaque body. Taking the resolution on photochronograms into account, it
was also possible to estimate from above the paths of radiation in a shock-heated
gas. The latter were known to be less than 10'1 cm. Radiation intensity at an
angle of 45' decreased near the cuvette wall only at comparatively low shock wave
velocities (for most gases at velocities of D I 5-8 luvs). To ensure opaqueness
or the gas behind the front, large-dimension cuvettes with diameter of not more
than 10-15 as were used at these velocities and cuvettes of 25 and even 50 an in
diameter were used in experiments with strong shock waves. Thus, it was possible
to significantly increase the dimensions of the heated zone and to make it optical-
ly dense. And even so the heated zone became optically thin at still lower velo-
cities and radiated in all directions: in this case the radiation intensity from
the front both at an angle of 45° and at normal angle decreased sharply so much
that the instrunents could no longer record it. The lowest of the velocities at
which radiation intensity was still measured defines those cases for each of the
gases when the shock wave was optically dense and cases when it became optically
thin.

ﬁmfm

  

5 II _ II I” ant/aw

Figure 30. Brightness Temperature of shock Haves in Air: dark circles--
X a 330 nm; light circles-d - 432 nm; light squares-d - 560
nm; light triangles-d - 650 any +--tenperature of shock-
heated gas restored by values of brightness temperature at
different angles

The main results of the investigations are the measured values of brightness tem-
perature and the velocities of the shock wave front. The brightness temperature
of the front was measured ever a wide range of shock wave amplitudes by using
light filters that separate narrow sections of the spectrum from the visible

62
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

.r II 2/ 2mm

Figure 31. Brightness Temperature of Shock Waves in Argon: dark circles--
A - 330 amp light circles-d - 432 neg light squares-4 - 560
nan +--taperature of shock-heated gas restored from values of
brightness temperature of front at different angles

region and the quartz ultraviolet. The velocity and brightness teaperatures of

the front corresponding to the intensity of radiation normal to the front and to
radiation intensity emerging at an angle of 45‘ to the plane of the front were
measured simultaneously in each experiment. The measurements were made inediete-
ly in two different sections of the spectrun in some experinents. Setting up the
experiment in this manner sads it possible to use the comparatively high accuracy
of relative measurements and to oospare the results obtained in individual exper-
iments to each other (it was not always possible to compare the results of differ-
ent experiments in detail due to the instability of radiation of high-amplitude
shack waves). The values of brightness temperature measured sinultaneously in two
different sections of the spectrum or at different angles to the plane of the front
are joined by arrows in Figures 30-38, where the results are presented. The arrow
from a point corresponding to the radiation normal to the front indicates the point
corresponding to radiation at an angle of 45° to the front if they did not coincide
within the relative measurement error (unlike the values for different sections of
the spectrum when the arrows indicate both points inediately). the absolute
neasuruaent error in Figures 30-38, even without saturated parts. is not denoted.
Its value can easily be presented from Table 3, reduced upon description of the
measurement method.

The radiation of shock waves for several fixed amplith was subjected to espe-
cially thorough investigation. The tine-resolved radiation spectra of shock waves
were recorded by using a spectrochronophotograph. The brightness temperature dis-
tribution of the front within a broad spectral interval encompassing the quartz
ultraviolet, visible and infrared regions. was measured by the intensity of radia-
tion normal to the front. The results of these measurements are presented in Pig-

ures 39 and 40.

63

POI! OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

f-II‘,'°n

 

II [I W I, III/ta

Figure 32. Brightness mperature of Shock Waves in Xenon: dark circles-
A I 330 mu light circles—X . 432 ne and 442 nm light squares--
l - 560 mu light triangles-4 - 650 mu +--telsperature of shock-
heated xenon restored from values of brightness tesperature at
different angles

Flij“!

 

[I 4" ﬂ 1, nr/tﬂ

Figure 33. Brightness Mperature of Shock Waves in lleliuu light circles--
A - 432 mu light squares-d - 560 may h-tesperature o! shock-
heated helium restored from values of 1y; at different angles

Canpsrison of the brightness tenperature of the front to the gas twpereture behind
the front evokes special interest when investigating the radiation of optically
dense shock wsves. The gas temerature behind the front. calculated from the shoe):
wave velocity known from experiment, is presented in figures 30-40. Detailed de-
scription and the results of calculations are given in the Appendix.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

/' 4’4.“
III

III
a
II

I
II J! )7), tar/ta

Pigure 34. Brightness Mpereture of Shock Waves in Neon (A - 432 nu):
‘ the points are taken tron [169] for D > 12 We

NI“! '1!

 

I II II J lav/m

Figure 35. Brightness Temperature of Shock waves in Argon with Air Impurity:
dark circles-d - 330 nu; light circles-d - 442 may light
squares-d - 560 nm curve-calculated tesperature behind front

for pure argon

The radiating properties of shock waves in air and in inert gases differ appreci-

ably. A umber of teatures were discovered in experiments with inert gases that
forced one to re-evaluate the capabilities of a shock wave as a radiator. The
transient nature of radiation by strong shock waves and the presence 0! absorp-
tion lines in the spectrum could not be explained on the basis of existing theo-
retical concepts. On the one hand, it was required to determine and to scrupu-
lously describe the experimental results, being limited in this case only to sons
of the more obvious conclusions. On the other hand, one had to reconsider some
what the theory or radiation of strong shock caves when interpreting the results

(see the next chapter).

65

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

har'm

    
  

J I! .0. III/“w

Figure 36. Brightness Temperature of Shock Waves in Argon at Pressure of
po-300mﬂg, A-432nm

f-ll'."l

 

J II JIM/mt .

Figure 37. Brightness Temperature of shock Waves in Argon at Pressure of
po-lOOmmHg, A-432nm

l. Intensity of Stronn Shock waves in Air

The values of brightness temperature and velocities of the shock wave front in air
measured in experiments are presented in Figures 30 and 39. In figure 30, the re-
sults of our measurements are supplemented by values of brightness temperature of
the front in red light measured by A. Ye. Voytenko, 1. sh. Model' and I. S. Samo-
delov [41). The theoretical dependence of the temperature of shock-heated ionized
air on wave velocity, calculated by N. M. Kuznetsov [147], is presented in the
same figure ror comparison.

If the shock wave velocity did not exceed 20 Jun/s, the brightness temperature of
the wave front was identical in different sections of the spectrm (Figure 39).
The values of brightness tesperature corresponding to the intensity of radiation
normal to the front and to radiation intensity at an angle of 45' to the plane of
the front also coincided with each other. All the measured values of brightness
temperature at velocities of D - 820 We are applicable within error to the theo-
retical curve for the gas temperature behind the front.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 38.

Figure 39.

Figure 40.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

f-ll'f‘l

 

.5 II A car/as

Brightness Temperature of Shock Waves in Argon at Pressure of
po-SOan, x-uzm

I -/J',"II
.‘ _ .__- ____—_,.___
.D-IJJAw/cll

 

4? dt’ 46' (I [I /,Z 15,:

Distribution by Brightness Temperature Spectnn of Shock Waves
in Air: dark circles-45ml! spectrophotochromgrams: light cir-
cles--photoelectric measurements: straight liner-gas tapera-

ture behind front

7 73":

 

4'” Ill '0’ m A rm

Spectral Distribution of Brightness Temperature of Shock Waves
in Inert Gases: light and dark circlee--£ron spectrophotoohron-

ograms; straight liner-calculated temperature of gas at first
moment of detonation: dashed line-calculated temerature behind

front at moment naximn brightness is reached

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, at high velocities, beginning at D = 25 Inn/s and above, the brightness
tewerature of the wave front for the visible sections of the spectrum was always
appreciably below the calculated temperature of the gas behind the front. The
deviation of the indicated temperatures exceeds 20,ooo°x for the highest veloci-
ties presented in Figure 30. The total error which the measurements and calcu-
lations introduced is at least one-third less. In one of the experiments whose
results are not presented in Figure 30, A. Ye. Voytenko and colleagues (41] man-
aged to produce a shock wave in air with velocity of D o 55 lea/s. The calculated
gas temperature behind the front is equal to 160,000'K at this velocity, but the
brightness temperature of the front measured in experiment was only 25,000°K.
Judging by everything, the maximum brightness temperature of the front of shock
waves in air is reached for the visible region of the spectrum at velocities of
D - 35-45 km/s and is equal to 70,000-80,000'K.

Thus, the brightness temperature of the front initially coincides with the calcu-
lated temperature of the gas behind the front with an increase of the shock wave
amplitude, then lags behind it, passes through a maximun and decreases to a rather
low value. An explanation of this phenomenon is given in the papers of Ya. B.
Zel'dovich and Yu. P. Rayzer [33-37) . The narrow layer of air adjacent to the
strong shock wave front is ionized by powerful shortwave radiation and, losing
transparency, shields the front. The brightness temperature of the front becomes
lower than the gas temperature behind the front and the shielding effect is in-
tensified so much so that the brightness temperature passing through a maximum de-
creases to a limiting value determined by the natural glow of the shielding layer
as the shock wave amplitude increases. Theoretical estimates of the maximum and
limiting brightness temperature of a shock wave in air, based on these concepts,
are in satisfactory agreement with experimental data. This problem will be con-
sidered in detail in the next chapter.

A difference between brightness temperatures corresponding to normal radiation and
radiation at an angle of 45', appeared at high shock wave velocities together with
a lag of brightness temperature of the front behind the calculated gas temperature
behind the front. Therefore, the points belonging to visible sections of the spec-
trum in Figure 30 seem to split at high velocities (with the exception of values
for the red section A - 650 nm from [41], which were measured only by the intensity
of radiation normal to the front). The difference is small, but it was recorded
confidently due to the high accuracy of the relative masurements. And, which it
is important to note, the brightness temperature of the front corresponding to
radiation intensity at an angle of 45' was always below the brightness temperature
corresponding to the intensity of radiation normal to the front.

This difference of the indicated brightness temperatures may be experimental proof
of the existence of a low-temperature layer that shields the radiation of the high-
temperature zone of gas behind the front regardless of the dependence on comparison
to the calculated gas temperature behind the front. Moreover, the optical thick-

ness of the shielding layer can be determined from experiment if one disregards its
natural glow in the case of weak shielding. The optical thickness of the shielding
layer 1 is then related to the intensity of radiation normal to the front I], and to
the radiation intensity at an angle of 45° to the front I; in the following manner:

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I. 2 he", I, a {’43}. (4.1)

where Io is the radiation intensity from the heated gas behind the front. Hence,

IK YF—u

”75.13:..7'}. (”1.65) . (4.2)

The intensity lo determined in this manner permits one to find from intensities I1
and I; known from experiment the true gas temperature behind the front under condi-
tions of shielding (the true temperature is equal to brightness teeperature in the
absence of shielding, the criterion of which may be coincidence of the measured
values I], and 12). Some of the values of gas temperature behind the front obtained
in this mamer are presented in Figures 30-38 and coincide within the limits of er-
ror to the theoretically calculated values.‘

No difference of the brightness temperature of the front at different angles nor a
leg of it behind the calculated temperature of shock-heated air was observed in
the ultraviolet region of the spectrum Judging from experimental data (see Fig-
ure 30), shielding of radiation in this region of the spectrum should be expected
at higher shock wave velocities than in the visible region.

The results indicate the greater transparency of the shielding layer to ultravio-
let radiation and agree in this case to theoretical data on the nature of the
spectral dependence of radiation absorption by ionized gases. Thus, according

to the Unsold-Kramers formula, the absorption coefficient of radiation with wave-
length of X a 330 nm is approximately one-half that of radiation with wavelength

A - 560 nm. The results of experiment of quantum-mechanics theory [91], which
takes into account the hydrogen dissimilarity of absorption by nitrogen and oxygen,
is explained even better--the considered coefficients here differ approximately
fivefold. For example, shielding is appreciable at D - 31 lea/s in yellow light
(A - 560 nm) (Pigure 30) and the optical thickness of the shielding layer is esti-
mated fron experiment (1’ - 0.15) whereas I I 0.03 in the ultraviolet region (X -
a 330 nn) due to the difference of absorption coefficients and the lag of bright-
ness temperature comprises only approximately 2,000'K, i.e., there should essen-
tially be no shielding. In red light where the absorption coefficient is approxi-
mately l.S-fold greater, a value of 1' - 0.22 is found and the brightness
temperature for radiation normal to the front is Ty. - 61,000'K and agreuent with
measurement results is obvious here.

 

.In time the following question arises: can one follow with optical means the gas
teuperature in strong shock waves, for example, during powerful explosionts. It
was assumed that this could not be done due to shielding of radiation by the heated
layer before the front. The results presented here indicate that if the radiation
intensity from the front is measured at two different angles, then the gas temper-

ature behind the front can be determined up to amlitudee when the natural radia-
tion of the heated layer becomes significant.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Intensity of Stronn Shock Waves in Inert Cases

The experimentally measured values of the brightness temperature and the
velocity of the shock waves in inert gases are presented in Figures 31-38, 40.

The theoretical relations for the temperature of shock-heated ionized gases as a
function of the wave velocity calculated by the authors are presented also for
comparison.

As has already been noted earlier, the least of the velocities for which
the measurements were performed were limited by the necessity of insuring quite
large optical thickness of the shock-heated gas. The maximum velocities, as a
rule, were limited by the possibilities of the devices used to obtain the shock
waves. In low—density gases, for example, in helium, it was possible to achieve
higher velocities than in heavy gases such as argon or xenon. For these regions.
the velocity range of the shock waves encompassed by the experiments was different
for each of the gases (in argon, for example, this was 8-26 km/sec, and in helium,
20-80 km/sec). However, in spite of these and certain other differences, the
qualitative nature of the radiation by shock waves in inert gases was identical.

Just as in the experiments with air, if the shock wave velocity in inert
gases did not exceed a defined value, the brightness temperatures of the wave

front coincided in the different sections of the spectrum and at different angles.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Comparison of the brightness temperature of the front with the calculated gas
temperature behind the front also occurred in this case. The shock waves in
xenon, for which the brightness temperature of the front in the visible part of
the spectrum wns systematically below the calculated value of the shock-heated
xenon already at low velocities of 0-5 to 9 km/sec, constituted an exception.
Thus, in a defined range of velocities the nature of the radiation by the shock
waves was the same as for an absolutely black body, or it approached it (the
experiments with xenon). At high shock wave velocities the brightness temperatures
corresponding to radiation from different segments of the spectrum and at differ-
ent angles to the plane of the front ceased to compare with each other and turned
out to be below the calculated gas temperature behind the front.

However, in contrast to the experiments with air, when studying the shock
waves in inert gases, a decrease in the brightness of the wave front was observed
with time. This was manifested especially clearly in the experiments where the
shock wave front did not change, whereas the brightness temperature of the front
dropped noticeably in a few microseconds. For exaqale, in one of the experiments
with xenon with a constant velocity of the shock wave of 0-12 kn/sec, the bright-
ness temperature of the front in blue light dropped from 67,000 to 22,000'K in
2 microseconds (the radiation intensity from the front decreased by 5.5 times).

A simultaneous decrease in brightness over the entire area of the front was rarely
observed. More frequently two or three spots not having clear boundaries appeared
on the glowing front. The brightness temperature of the spot was reduced signifi-
cantly in a few microseconds, and the spots themselves increased in size and
encompassed the entire front. The large dispersion of the values of the bright-
ness temperature at velocities of D>14 km/sec in argon, D>10 km/sec in xenon,

D>25 km/sec in neon and D>3S km/sec in helium is connected with this nonsteady

71
FORGDFFNJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radiation of the shock waves. The drop in brightness of the front with time

was also noted at lower velocities. Thus, in a series of specially stated exper-
iments1 the shock wave in argon at a velocity of 0-12 km/sec was created in a tube
84 mm in diameter; here the brightness temperature of the wave in blue light drop
dropped from 33,000 to 28,000°K in 25 microseconds (the radiation intensity
decreased by 352). A reduction in the intensity of the visible radiation from
the front for a still lower velocity of 0-8.3 kn/sec was reported by Roth [28].

In his experiments the shock wave was created in a tube lOXIO cm in cross section
with exit of the detonation fron Tc 40/60 to the argon; a noticeable decrease in
intensity by approximately 202 was observed in the first three microseconds after
exit of the detonation. and in the glow spectrum of the shock wave, absorption
lines appeared after 3 microseconds. The appearance of the weak absorption lines
1 microsecond after exit of the detonation into the argon was also observed by the
authors of [13]. Hawever, the nonsteady nature of the radiation from the front

at such low velocities was manifested primarily in the form of these weak absorp-
tion lines. The reduction in radiation intensity recorded by Roth is more

naturally related to the damping of the shock wave. Taylor and Kane [31], who

observed a decrease in radiation intensity in analogous experilnnts, hold to the

2

same opinion. Somehow or other at low velocity the nonstationarity of the

radiation was weakly manifested. It was only noted in experinnnts where the area
of the shock wave front was completely large. It is possible to propose that with

an increase in the front area the effect becomes more intense. Under the

 

1He are talking about experiments with explosion sources of light which will
he described in Chapter VI.

2A possible reason why Roth did not detect the dalping of the shock wave is
discussed in §1 of Chapter II and 54 of Chapter IV.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

condition of our experiment. as a result of the restriction on the weight of the

explosive charge, this proposition could not be checked by further increase in

the area of the front. However, experiments were run in which the diameter of
the couvettes was decreased from 15 to 8 III. The nonsteady reduction in bright-
ness of the powerful shock waves in narrow couvettes was insignificmt, and non-
uniformities of the brightness with respect to area of the front did not occur.1
The maximum brightness temperatures under the conditions of a reduction in bright-
ness of the front with time were obtained in the same experiment, where the shock

wave velocity increased sharply, for example. after rupture of a thin diaphragm

separating the couvette into two parts. Here the highest temperatures were

measured after a reduction in brightness came for the individual sections of the

front.

lar, the dependence of the brightness not only on the velocity, but also on the

acceleration of the front are, in the opinion of the authors, caused by a delay in

llt is possible to use the influence of the couvette dimensions on the nature of
the radiation by powerful shock waves to explain the divergences in Figure 32
where the results of A. Ye. Voytenko, I. Sh. Model' and I. S. Samodelov [41] are
presented along with our results. The diameter of the couvettes in reference [61)
judging by the moving image camera recording of the experiment presented there
was 5 am. so that the nonsteady reduction in brightness and the dispersion of

the experimental points caused by this were less (according to [41), the mean
square divergence of the points reached 1152). In addition, the values of the
brightness temperature in red light carried over from [41] to Figures 1), 32 are
average. In order to reflect the nonsteady nature of the radiation by powerful
shock waves in inert gases, the results of our measurements in Figures 30-38 were
intentionally not averaged. Accordingly, let us note that previously I. Sh. Model'
129] measured the following values of the brightness tewerature of the front in
red light: Th-30,000°K for D-l7.6 Ion/sec in Ar, “-34.0001 for 0-17.12 km/sec

in Kr and Th-35,000°K for n-16.9 km/sec in Re. I. Sh. Hodel', et a1. [41]

explain the divergence of the last value from their later data in that under the
effect of the shock wave emission, the windows made of organic glass used in
reference [29] lost their transparency. However, the noted'divergenca can be
explained also by the nonsteady state nature of the radiation of the shock waves.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OVI.\'

-

\u.

the formation of the shielding layer. Let us note the time of formation of the
layer beginning with the endsting ideas about the shielding of radiation in power-
i'ul shock waves. Ionizing radiation heats up the gas in a narrow layer in front
of the shock front in the time t-l/D, where l is the length of path of the radiation,
D is the velocity of the front. In inert gases of normal density 1210’3 cm [148].
Setting D-lO Ian/sec, we obtain 1:10'9 sec. This is ~103 times less than the delay
observed in the experiments. However, consideration has still not been given to
the fact that the intensity of the ionizing radiation reaches its maximal value
some time after excitation of the shock wave when the layer of shock-heated gas
becomes optically dense for this radiation. The buildup time of the intensity is
characterized by the iatio 2/0, where now 2 is the length of path of the ionizing
radiation in the shock-heated gas reduced to the gas density ahead of the front.
For estimation of the length of path 1., data on the ionization composition of the
shock-heated gas presented in the appendix were used. The photoionization cross
sections of the atoms were taken from reference [1108], and the photoionization
cross sections of the ions were assumed to be hydrogen-like. As applied to the
experimental conditions, the ratio llD turned out to be within the limits of 10‘“9
to 10‘7 sec. Thus, the time of formation of the shielding layer ahead of the
front is better dictated by the time of formation of a region that is optically
dense for the ionizing radiation behind the front. Nevertheless, this time is
too small to explain the delay observed in the experiments. It is possible to go
beyond the scope of the developed ideas and propose that for some reason a broad
shielding layer was set up in the experiments bl cm wide. Then the characteristic
setup time £/D~10'6 sec agrees with the experimental data.

In contrast to the experiments with air. in inert gases the intensity

distribution of the radiation from the front at different angles had a different

74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

nature at large amplitudes. The amomt the intensity of the radiation normal
to the front exceeds the intensity of the radiation at an angle of 45° was retained
only for the first moment after excitation of the powerful shock wave. After
2-5 microseconds the intensity of the radiation normal to the front; decreasing
with time, became lower than the radiation intensity at an angle of 45°, for which
a slower decrease with time was observed. This type of nonstationarity was mani-
fested especially strongly in the experiments with helium (see Figure 33) and also
in the experiments with argon at reduced pressures (see Figures 36-38). Thus, in
one of the experilents with helium 0.5 microsecond after excitation of the shock
wave, the velocity 0-78 km/sec, the brightness temperature of the front
Tb-78,000°K for nonmal radiation and Tb-73,000°K for radiation at an angle of 45°
were measured. and 2 microseconds after, the brightness temperature of the front
for normal radiation dropped to Tb-32,000°K and became lower than the brightness
tcmperature Tb-56,000°K for radiation at an angle of 45° (after 2 microseconds the
velocity was 0-60 kn/sec).

The diagram of the recording of the shock wave radiation presented in
Figure 27 gives the simplest interpretation of the result obtained -- the shield-
ing layer which is narrow at the first point in time after excitation of the shock
wave broadened in 2 microseconds to several diameters of the couvette (that is, to
1.1 cm), and the radiation at an angle to the front did not intersect the entire
shielding layer. It is even more correct to talk about a plug of semitranaparent

gas occurring in the couvette ahead of the shock wave front instead of a layer of

gas.

Decreasing with time, the brightness temperature for the segment 1-330 nm

became lower than the simultaneously measured temperature for the section 1-560 nm

(see Figures 31-33). This obviously means that the absorption coefficient of the

75

FOR OFIIC1A1.lEHE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OVI.\'

radiation by the gas in the shielding layer for the section 1-560 nm was less

than for the section .\=330 nm. However, from the theory it follows that this
spectral dependence of the absorption coefficient occurs only at comparatively low
temperatures. below 15,000°K in Ar and below 10,000°K in Xe.1 However. at such
low temperatures, only a layer on the order of 1 cm thick can noticeably shield
the radiation.

In some experiments with xenon at velocities of mm km/sec it was possible
to observe an increase in the brightness of the front in 1 microsecond with
approximation of it to the end windOw of the couvette. This result also indicates
that ahead of the shock wave front at a distance on the order oi 1 cm there was a
plug of semitransparent gas shielding the radiation from the front. No buildup
of brightness of the front was observed in the narrow couvettes 8 m in dialeter
before its arrival at the end window. Obviously, in narrow couvettes the condi-
tions for the formation of such a plug ahead of the front were worse, which also
appears to be entirely natural. In order to avoid confusion, let us note that in
the experiments with other inert gases the end window either was not installed
(argon, helium) or the observations were disturbed (argon at reduced pressures) by
the instability of the plane front which will be discussed in 54.

Thus, in order to give a noncontradictory explanation to the above-
enumerated characteristics of the radiation of powerful shock waves in inert gases,
it remains to confirm the previous proposition that a shielding layer on the order
of 1 cm thick is observed ahead of the shock wave front in a time on the order of

1 microsecond. Again we emphasize that the formation of such a wide layer cannot

]Analyzing the spectral dependence of the absorption coefficient, we considered

the corrections for the nonhydrogen nature of the absorption calculated in
reference [921.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be explained on the basis of the existing ideas of shielding the radiation of
powerful shock waves by a layer arising as a result of photoionization of the

cold gas ahead of the front by short-wave emission. Without touching on the possi-
ble nature of this layer, let us consider the results of measuring the brightness

temperature of shock waves in the front with an admixture of air.

In the first experiments the couvette was filled with argon not by purging,
but by forcing out the lighter air. It was assisted that the air admixture, unavoid-
able in this filling approach has no influence on the shock wave brightness. The
values of the brightness temperature measured in these experiments are presented
in Figure 35. A comparison with the results of Figure 31 for pure argon (filling
by purging) indicates the significant influence of the admixture - the bright-
ness temperature of the front of the powerful shock waves in argon with air ad-
mixture turned out to be appreciably lower. In order to see that the air admixture
is at fault in this divergence, three experiments were performed in which the
volumetric concentration of the air was checked and amounted to 51. The data
from these experiments sell well within the results presented in Figure 35. All
of the above-noted peculiarities of the radiation of powerful shock waves indi-
cating the formation of a broad shielding layer ahead of the front were manifested
in argon with air impurity. In particular. with approach of a powerful shock
wave to the end window of the couvette the brightness temperature of the front
increased in 1-0.5 microsecond, reaching the same values achieved in pure argon
by the time of arrival at the window (these values are not presented in Figure 35).
Arranging the couvette parallel to the slit of the moving image camera (the radia-
tion recording time is presented in Figure 27. c), it was possible directly to
observe the formation of the weakly glowing plug ahead of the front extending

a distance of more than 1 cm. For a long time this glow ahead of the front was

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

connected with reflection of the couvettt walls. Subsequently, it was noted

that the glow is nor manifested immediately. but 1-2 microseconds after excita-
tion of the shock wave (in contrast to reflection which was also observed, but
arose immediately). Similar glow was also observed in experiments with pure inert
gases, but, being weaker, it was not so clearly isolated against the background
of the reflection.

In the conclusion of this section let us note that the efforts to convert
to strict quantitative studies of nonateady phenomena in powerful shock waves
have run into a number of difficulties. First of all these include the highly
unstable nature of the phenomena themselves when apparently in identical experi-
ments nonsteady changes in intensity have been quantitatively distinguished. It
is convenient to investigate these phenomena in experiments where the shock wave
velocity does not change noticeably for at least 10 microseconds, but such waves
cannot be obtained with a velocity of D>15 km/sec. Great difficulties have also
arisen from the inscability of the plane front during movement of the powerful
shock waves in the couvettes. This phenomenon is the subject of M of the given
chapter, and here we shall only note that as a result of the disappearance of the
plane front 5-10 microseconds after excitation of the shock wave frequently it has
not been possible to establish what values the brightness temperature will drop to

as it decreases with time.

3. Results of Spectral Investigation of Radiation

From the results of the studies presented in 51. 2 of this chapter, it is
possible to draw the conclusion that shock waves with velocities of D-8 to 20 Its/sec
in the air, 0-7 to 14 Ian/sec in argon. D-7 to 25 km/sec in neon. and D-20 to 35
Ion/sec in helium radiated just as an absolutely black body in the experiments.
This is indicated by the comparison of the brightness temperatures in the various

sect‘ ms of the spectrum and at different angles to the plane of the front among
78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

each other and with the calculated gas temperature behind the front. For the
same reasons it: is necessary to consider the radiation of shock waves with the
velocities of D=4 to 10 km/sec in xenon similar to absolutely black; in the given
case the brightness temerature of the front in visible light was somewhat below
the calculated temperature of the shock-heated xenon. which indicates the radia—
tion shielding. These conclusions were more precisely defined during spectral

studies of the radiation of shock waves, the results of which are presented below.

 

Figure 41. Moving image camera photograph of shock wave radiation
in the air obtained using the SFR-Z camera with SP-77 attachment
(A=390—700 nm)

1 —— detonation exit to the bottom of the channel, 2 -- stable
shock wave in the channel, 3 -— drift of the shock-heated gas

out of the tube

 

Figure 42. Moving image camera photograph of the radiation of a
shock wave in the air with a velocity of D-llo kn/sec obtained using
the SP-lll (A ==220 to 1000 nm)

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 175E ONLY

 

Figure 43. Moving image camera photograph of the radiation of a

shock wave in the air at a velocity of 0-11. Ion/sec obtained on the

STE-l camera

The top line is blue light, the botton line is yellow light, in the

upper right hand and lower lefthand corners are the ultraviolet

(D390 nm) and red (R700 nm) ends of the spectrum

A study was made of the radiation spectrum of shock waves in the air with
velocities of D-9 to 14 km/sec. The spectrum was recorded in the range of
).-220 to 700 nm with resolution in time. Several impressions from the moving
image camera photographs are presented in Figures 41-63. The radiation spectrum
turned out to be continuous. In spite of the most careful examination of the
moving image camera photographs, no lines could be detected on them. Let us note
that the procedure used made it possible to record quize powerful lines, the
intensity of which differed by 1% or more from the adjacent continuum.

The maximum resolution achieved on the moving image camera SP-lll with
diffraction grating of 1200 lines/mm was 0.7;. At the same time, experiments have
been performed in which the investigated radiation of the shock wave was specially
cut out, and the recording was made by the STE-1 or 0-12 spectrograph with resolu-
tion of 0.1;. The impression from the spectrogram taken in this way is presented
in Figure 43. However, even on these spectrophotograms with resolution of
0.13 the lines were absent.

In accordance with [149], we estimated the possible width of the lines

under experimental conditions. Different mechanisms lead to broadening of the

0
lines to M~0.1 to 100A. The least line width is limited by doppler broadening

of “-0.13.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Apparently the absence of the lines in the spectrum is caused by the nature
of the shock wave emission and not by the possibilities of the procedure. This
nature of the emission, which is extraordinary for a gas heated to high teqera—
tures. makes the shock wave similar to incandescent bodies.

As is demonstrated in 51, in order to determine the dasence or presence of
shielding of the radiation in shock waves there is no necessity for performing the
tedious calculations of the parameters of a multiply ionized gas beyond the front
or to take absolute measurements of the brightness temperature of the front - it
is sufficient to compare the intensity of the radiation from the front at differ-
ent angles. The absence (presence) of lines in the radiation spectra: of the
shock wave can also serve as proof of the absence (presence) of shielding.
Actually, inasmuch as the absorption coefficient in many of the lines is much
greater than in the adjacent continuum even weak shielding of the radiation leads
to the appearance of absorption lines in the spectrum. The procedure med for
recording the lines permits the statement that the shielding of the radiation in.
the lines and (the more so in the continuum) did not exceed 11.

The spectral moving image camera recordings offer the possibility not only
of more precise determination of the qualitative representation of the radiation
by shock waves, but also the simplest means of measuring the brightness tempera-
ture of the front inside a wide segment A-220 to 600 nm. If we consider that in
addition to this the brightness temperature was measured in the infrared and
visible regions with the application of photoelectric radiation receivers, the
results obtained encompass altogether the spectral range of 1-220 to 1300 ml.

The brightness teaperature of the front measured by different means was identical
for different sections of the spectrum and coincided with the calculated tempera-

ture of the gas beyond the front (see Figure 39). On movement of the shock wave

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with constant veloeity when the geometric thickness of the heated gas increased,
the radiation intensity from the front remained unchanged. The noted event is

evidence of the great optical thickness of shock-heated air in the experiments.

 

Figure 44. Spectral moving image camera recordings of the radia~

tion of shoek waves obtained on the SP-lll in the range of

i-ZZO to 420 nm

1 -- xenon, 2 -- krypton, 3 -- argon, 4 -- neon, 3 -- argon

(i=460 to 660 nm); the spectra are marked off by the reference

lines from a mercury lamp

Thus, the above-presented results confirm the conclusion that in the air
the shook waves endt in a defined range of amplitudes as an absolutely black body.
It is hardly possible to mention another high-temperature source which radiates
similarly in such a wide spectral range. Based on the results obtained, the
authors proposed the use of an amplitude-stable shock wave in the air as a high-
temperature standard of the radiation of an absolutely black body [12-14]. The
explosion type emitter suitable for photometric purposes is described in
Chapter VI .

A study was made of the radiation spectrum of shock waves in neon, argon,
krypton and xenon formed on exit of the detonation from the TC 40/60. The spectrum
was recorded in the range of l=220 to 450 nm (for argon, in the range of

X-ZZO to 660 nm) with resolution in time. The impressions of the spectral moving

image camera recordings are presented in Figure 44. The radiation spectrum of the

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shock waves in inert gases turned out to be continuous; however, weak absorption

lines were superposed on the continuous background of the shock wave radiation

in 81'8”. krypton 811‘ xenon.1 Different radiation intensities in the lines and

t1 e adjacent continum did not exceed 5%. The detected lines were collected in
Table lo. For identification of the lines,‘ the information from [150] was used.

It was possible to establish that almost the lines belong to the atoms and ions of
the gas through which the shock wave was propagated. Lines Nos 1, 2, and 3 ob-
served in the experiments with argon constituted an exception. of them, only line
No 1 belonging to atomic hydrogen is identified for sure. Another characteristic
feature of these three lines is appearance of them not immediately after the
beginning of shodc wave glow. but after ~1 microsecond (the remaining lines
appeared simultaneously with the continuum). Similarly to this, the occurrence of
these lines is connected with photoexcitation of the admixtures ahead of the front
by the ultraviolet radiation of the shock wave. The appearance of not only lines,
but also typical molecular bands -10 microseconds after the beginning of glow was
observed in the experiments with neon.

The intensity of the emission from the front incremed sharply during
the first moment after exit of the detonation, and then it dropped slowly. The
reduction in the radiation intensity arose from gradual danping of the shock wave
observed in the preliminary experiments (56 of Chapter II). This is indicated by
the fact that the brightness temperature of the front measured at different points
in time coincided with the temperature of the gas after the front which was
calculated by the velocities measured at the same points in time. The nonsteady

shielding of the radiation described in the preceding section could also lead to

 

 

1The greater part of the lines on the moving image camera recordings are so weak
that they did not print on Figure 64.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Have Lengths of Lines in the Emission of an Inert Gas Plasma

—————_——_—_—_

 

Line No A, A dentification Line No A. A Identification
, Argon
1 6562.85 H 8 {4300.10 Ar
6562. 73 " 4272. 17 "
2 6407 - 4277.55 Ar+
3 6186 - 4266.29 Ar
4 5606 . 73 Ar 9 4259. 36 "
[5572.55 " 4266.53 Ar+
5 5559.62 " 10 4251.19 Ar
5558. 70 " 11 {4200.68 "
4510. 74 " 419 8. 32 "
6 {4522. 32 " 12 ' 4191.03 "
7 4323 — {4190. 71 "
13 4158.59 "
14 3545.84 Ar+
3545.58 "
Krypton Xenon
f 4418. 77 Kr+ 1 4193. 15 Xe+
44417.24 Kr 2 4180.10 "
L4416.88 Kr+ 3 3967.54 Xe
4386 . 54 Kr 4 3948. 16 "
2 4389. 72 " 5 {3083. 54 Xer'
4385.27 " 3082.62 Xe
3 4369.69 " 6 3073.49 Xe'H'
4 4351. 36 Kr+ 7 3054.49 "
4351.02 Kr+
5 4317.81 Kr
r 4268.81 "
6 14268.57 "
7 4259.44 "

small additional reduction in the intensity.

In this connection let us note that

the reduction of the brightness temperature as the shock wave damps Occurred

faster than the reduction in the temperature of the gas behind the front calculated

by the wave velocity.

However, the accuracy of the measurements was insufficient

to record these small differences with certainty (not exceeding -2000°K). The

absence of significant shielding is also indicated by the nature of the spectrum

itself -- the presence of only weak absorption lines in it.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INHIOFFKJAL.USE(MNLY

The buildup of the radiation intensity at the first point in time after
the beginning of glow is explained by the fact that immediately afer exit of the
detonation the layer of shock-heated gas is still very thin and emits volu-
metrically. Therefore the radiation intensity proportional to the thickness of
the layer increases as the shock wave is propagated until the layer becomes
optically dense. In experiments with xenon and krypton the buildup of the radia-
tion intensity in the range of 1-220 to 650 nm occurred rapidly (judging by the
spectral moving image camera recordings, in 0.6-0.1 microsecond). In the same
time the radiation intensity built up in the range of 1-300 to 660 nm in experi-
ments with argon. Inasmuch as time resolution on the spectral moving image camera
recordings was 0.1 microsecond, the actual intensity buildup possibly occurred
even faster. However. in the range of 1-220 to 300 nm the buildup time of the
radiation intensity in the experiments with argon noticeably exceeded the time
resolution, and for A=220 nm it reached 2 microseconds. The radiation intensity
from the front built up still more slowly in the experiments with neon; for
example, for A-éSO nm, in 2 microseconds; for A-260 nm, in 6 microseconds.

By the buildup of the radiation intensity after exit of the detonation it
is possible to measure the radiation absorption coefficient in the shock-heated

gas. The-intensity of the radiation of the flat layer in the direction of the

normal is

l=l.(i—r"‘). (4.3)

where x' is the absorption coefficient. d is the thickness of the layer, 10 is the
radiation intensity for x'd>>l when the layer is optically dense. In turn, the
thickness of the layer of shock-heated gas is

d - D-tld. (4.1.)
where t is the time after detonation exit. D is the shock wave velocity. 6 is the

gas compression in the wave. From (6.3) and (4.4) it is easy to obtain
85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"6‘" "—73-“0-7'7)’ (4.5)
The variation of the intensity I/I0 with time and also the wave velocity D
are measured in the experiments. The gas conpression 6 can be calculated quite
exactly from the shock ratios or measured directly in the experiment as Christian
did [133]. The shock compression cannot be considered in general and the absorp-
tion caefficient x'lo found reduced to the gas density ahead of the front. Thus,
the absorption coefficient of red light (1-650 nm) was measured in shock-heated
air by I. Sh. Model' [29]. The measurements were performed for two temperatures:
x'l6-3.7 can"1 for T-10900°K, x'l6-1.66 cm’1 for T-7480'C; the temperatures them-
selves were determined experimentally by the intensity Io. Analogous measurements
on emanation of the detonation from the TG 40/60 into the argon were performed
by Roth [28]. In these papers the radiation of the individual sections of the
spectrum was isolated by light filters and recorded by the moving image camera [29]
or photomultiplier [28]. However, for detailed measurements of the absorption
coefficients of heated gases it is more convenient to use the spectral moving

image camera permitting a broad range of the spectrum to be encompassed in one
procedure. Although in our experiments this problem was not specially stated and,
in particular, the time resolution on the spectral moving image camera recordings
was not always sufficient for performance of precise measurements, the results ob-
tained are still of defined interest.1 These results, just as the results of Roth

are presented in Table S.

1In his experiments I. Sh. Model' placed a metal plate between the explosive and
the gas. As a result of this, on the one hand, mixing of the explosion products
with the shock-heated gas was prevented, and on the other hand, the damping of

the shock wave near the charge was less. The plate also separated the glow of the
explosion products from the glow of the shock-heated gas (in experiments with
iner: gases the latter was ~102 times more intense). In the Roth experiments the
plate was placed between the explosive and the gas only in a few control experi~
ments and, as it turned out, had no significant inf11ence on the measurement
results. In our experiments the plate was not used.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_—___—__—————_———————-—

Table 5.
A. nm 600 500 450 400 300 230 Remarks
x'l6. cm'1 8.8 7.4 6.2 5.2 - - Roth experiments
[28]
x'ls, cm'1 10 1o 10 10 4 1 Our experiments
with argon

In the experiments with neon the following values of the absorption
coafficients were measured: x'/6-1 cm"1 for A-éSO nn and x'l6-0.3 cm'1 for A-260 nn.
for xenon and krypton in the entire investigated range of the spectrum
x'l6210 cm‘l. In the experiment with krypton Roth [23] obtained a value of
x'l5-10.1 curl for A-aso nm.

It is interesting to note that theory predicts an increase in transparency
of the heated gas with a decrease in the radiation wave length A, especially
sharply manifested for x<x1 when all of the excited levels are involved in the
absorption. For argon and neon the limiting wave lengthsxl are 290 and 260 nm,
respectively. The radiation intensity buildup time in the experiments increased
rapidly with these values of A.

Thus, the radiation intensity from the front initially built up as a result
of an increase in the optical thickness of the heated gas; then it decreased as a
result of damping of the shock wave. The distribution of the brightness tempera-
ture of the front with respect to the spectrum corresponding to the maximum radia-
tion intensity is presented in Figure 40. The brightness temperature of the shock
wave front in argon in the region of 1-300 to 600 nn was constant with respect to
spectrum and it coincided with the gas temperature beyond the front calculated by
the velocity on emergence of the detonation (0-9.4 km/sec). However, for A<300 nm,
a reduction in brightness temperature was observed. The reduction was caused by
the fact that the time of formation of the optically dense layer of heated argon

in this part of the spectrum was comparatively long and in this tine damping of
87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the shock wave turned out to be noticeable. If we compare the brightness tempera-
ture not with the argon temperature at the first point in time after emergence

of detonation, but with the temperature at the time of occurrence of the maximum
radiation intensity, good agreement is obtained (see Figure 40). Two microseconds
after emergence of detonation when the shock wave became optically dense in the
entire investigated region, the brightness temperature was constant with respect
to spectrum. For neon the builduo of the radiation intensity was still more pro-
longed than for argon, and the effect of the shock wave damping on the spectral
dependence of the brightness temperature was also stronger. The buildup of
intensity slowed sharply for A<260 nm in neon and A<290 nm in argon. Rapid
decrease in brightness temperature occurred from these values of A on approaching
the ultraviolet end of the spectrum (see Figure 40).

For xenon and krypton the maximum in the spectral dependence of the
brightness temperature is characteristic. The damping of the shcck wave had no
influence on the type of function. for the radiation intensity built up rapidly.
The presents of the maximum is, in our opinion, connected with the peculiarities
of the structure of the front in these two gases as a result of their high atomic
weight and high temperature beyond the front. We shall discuss the interpretation

of this and other experimental results in more detail in the following chapter.1

*—————

1It was noted earlier that the brightness temperature of the front in the visible
part of the spectrum measured after the light filters is lower than the tempera-
ture of the shock-heated xenon even for comparatively low velocities 0-4 to 10 km/
sec. The spectral dependence in Figure 50 confirms these results. Let us also
note that the decrease in brightness temperature toward the red end of the
spectrum obviously continues also for A>450 nm. Thus. according to the data of
[41], the brightness temperature of the front for 0-8.3 km/sec (corresponds to

the emanation of detonation in xenon) is equal to 26000'K in red light.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The presence of absorption lines in the spectrum and the deviations in
the spectral distribution of the radiation intensity indicate that the shock waves
emit as a black body on emergence of detonation only in the roughest approximation.
At the same time it is worthwhile to consider the results obtained without going
into all of the details. The intensity of the radiation from the front was

determined primarily by the gas temperature after the front which increased on

going to gases with larger atomic weight.1 The increase in temperature as a
result of an increase in the atomic weight of the gas frequently was felt in the
fact that the shock wave velocity on emanation of detonation into heavier gases
decreased. Thus, if on going from neon to xenon the velocity did not change, then
the temperature after th- iront would be SOOOO'K. The temperature of 40000°K
obtained on emanation of detonation in xenon is quite high. The possibility of
obtaining higher temperatures and larger radiation fluxes on emanation of detona-
tion into heavy inert gases constantly attracts reseachers to this type of experi-
mentation. Special hope a in this respect come from the use of more powerful
explosives. Accordingly, let us note that in two experiments with argon instead
of TG 60/60 hexogene was used pressed to a density of 1.74 g/cm3. The intensity
of the visible radiation in these experiments was 102 higher, and ultraviolet,

15-201 higher.
The measurements of the spectral brightness most completely characterize

the radiative preperties of shock waves. Hith respect to intensity of the visible

 

1Comparing the results of the measurements for different gases to each other, it
is necessary to consider that the error in the relative measurements was three
times less than the error in the absolute measurements noted in Figure 40. Let
us also note that the dispersion of the experimental points from experiment to
experiment reached the error in the absolute measurements (in Figure 40 the curve
for each gas is averaged with respect to three experiments), but the relative
arrangement of the experimental curves was retained.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radiation on emanation of the detonation from the TG 40/60 into argon, Roth [28]
measured the brightness temperature of the shock wave. In his experiments the
radiation was isolated by narrow interference light filters, and it was recorded
by a photomultiplier. The brightness standard was a tube with a strip of tungsten.

The following values of the brightness temperature were measured at the time of
maximum intensity.

A, nm 600 500 450 600

'1‘. °K 31,500 30,000 29,000 29,000

The error in the measurements was estimated at ilOOO'K (except the section
with ken-600 nm where the error was larger). The spectral distribution of the
iadiation intensity corresponded to the color temperature of the front of 29000:
1000°K. In the experiment with krypton the brightness teuperature of the front in
the section with zen-450 nm was 38000°x.1 The results obtained by Roth and the
rest.ts of our experiments compare with each other within the limits of error.

Conger, et a1. [7] measured the color temperature of the front by the
ratio of the intensities of ultraviolet and visible radiation on emanation of the
detonation into argon. In these experiments the shock wave excited on explosion
of spherical pcntolite or cyclonite charges (explosive filler to 1'6 1.0/60). The
ultraviolet radiation A-230 to 300 nm was separated by a liquid filter and recorded
using a luminophor and photomultiplier. The color temperature of the front turned
out to be ZOOOO'K. The spectral function in Figure 100 corresponds in this case to

the color temperature of the front of 19000°K.

1In this unique experiment the couvette was first filled with argon which was
then displaced by krypton. As a result of the limited amount of krypton it was
not certain that it forced all of the argon out.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, using our data it is possible, at first glance, to relate the
results of references [7, 28] which do not agree with each other.

Anderholm [30] measured the integral density of the radiant energy flux
from an explosion in argon for the section of 1-200 to 600 mm. In his experiments
a cylindrical shock wave was used, the velocity of which dropped from 9.3 to 5 km/sec
during the time of recording the radiation. The flux density from the front
measured using a photomultiplier varied from 5.105 to 1.105 watts/a2. The maximal
flux density in the Anderholm experiments correspond, according to our estimates,
to the integral brightness temperature of the fruit of 23000'K. Conparing this
value with the results presented in Figure 40, it is necessary to consider that
the primary contribution to the radiant energy flux was made by the ultraviolet
radiation. In this region of the spectrum the brightness temperature in our exper-
iments was lower, and it was on the average the same 23000‘K.

Taylor and Kane [31] measured the brightness temperature of the front on
emanation of detonation from T6 1.0/60 to argon. The shock wave velocity in the
experiment varied within the limits of 9 to 8 km/sec. The radiation was divided
by gas plates into two photomultipliers, bypassing the light filters with effective
wave lengths of ken-5105 and 405 nm and halfwidth AA-ZO nm. The brightness
standard was a pulsed gas discharge tube. The measurements for different sections
of the spectrum gave identical results. The brightness temperature of the front
in the experiments varied within the limits of 26000 to 21000°K. The reduction in
brightness tenperature is connected with duping of the shock wave. The maximum

value of 26000°K coincides with the results of our measurements within the limits

of error.
One of the first measurements of the color temperature of the front of

shock waves formed during explosions was performed by Stettbacher [27]. The

91

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shock wave was excited on emergence of the detonation from the explosive
(tetranitromethane+toluene) which is similar with respect to effect to the

To 60/60. The color temperature of the front in visible light was 27000°K for
argon.

Thus. it is possible to prove good coincidence of the results of our
measurements with the data of other authors. The distribution of the brightness
temperature presented in Figure 40 has bound the available disparate results to-
gether pertaining to the different sections of the spectrum and obtained in
different ways.

A cowarison of the results of the papers known to us would be incomplete
if we did not discuss the radiation spectra of shock waves presented by a number
of authors. Conger, et al. [7] recorded the explosion radiation in argon in a
spectrograph. The radiation spectrum turned out to be continuous with powerful
argon lines superposed on the late stages of the explosion when the shock-heated
gas expanded and luminesced volmetrically. Roth [28] and Anderholm [30] mention
obtaining time-resolved spectra on emanation of the detonation into argon. The
spectra were continuous. Roth notes the appearance of absorption lines 3 micro-
seconds after emergence of detonation. The results of such experiments were
described in more detail by Taylor and Kane [31]. The spectrum was recorded in
the range of A-loOO to 700 nm. Weak absorption lines and radiation were observed
against the background of the continuum. In this paper a spectral moving image
camera recording is presented on which the absorption lines arising simultaneously

with the continuum are visible.

92

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

4- Instability of the Flat. .-‘.-ont ‘Jhen Shock Haves Move in Channels

In 1954 Shreffler and Christian [1511 described experiments in which they observed
bending of the plane front during propagation of a shock wave in a tube. The shoe!

a boundary with a gas. The shock wave was propagated through the tube over a per-
iod of several microseconds, maintaining a plane front. But a difference between
the velocity of all sections of the front adjacent to the tube walls and the velo-
city of the front in the central part of the tube then occurred suddenly. 'lhe
front was propagated more rapidly near the walls and “ran ahead“ with respect to
the remaining part of the front (Figure 45). The front easily seen in Figure 46
acquired this shape. Upon further motion, the shock wave was gradually attenuated
and the front again became plane. ntperinente were conducted with different gases,

by the shock wave radiation. Other characteristics of the phenomenon, for example.
disappearance of bending as the shock wave was attenuated or an increase of the
time between formation of the shock wave and the occurrence of bending with a de-
crease of tube cross section. also becane understandable with this explanation.
Shreffler and Christian varied their experiments. Specifically, a wire was eaten-
ded along the tube and then bending of the front in the direction of notion of the
shock wave was observed near it, as near the walls of the tube. uperinents in
which different obstacles were placed in the path of the shock wave are of great
interest. Thus, it was possible to establish that bending near the walls has a
sharply defined front and significant destructive force.

 

Figure 45. "x-t" Diagram of Shock Rave Motion in Tube Filled With Argon:
at x > :1, the velocity of the front near the tube walls in-
creases internittently and on the section an < x < :2 cos-
prises 11.1 ion/s (lo Ion/s at x > :2). The plane front not
affected by wall disturbances propagates at velocity of 8 We

Key:
1 . Hicroseconds 2 . We

The shock wave velocity did not exceed 9 kin/s in Shreffler and Christian's exper-
inents and the problem of which shape a front of stronger shock wave acquires re-
mained unclear. The investigations of Yu. A. Zetsepin et a1 [42) provided the

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

answer to this question. Moreover, we detected a significant effect of the insta-
bility of a plane front on the radiating properties of strong shock waves.

Development of a section of front near the cuvette walls, sharply differing in
brightness, was observed in the first experiment with argon and helium set up to
investigate the radiating properties of strong shock waves in these gases. The
brightness temperature of this formation hardly varied over the entire investigated
range of shock wave amplitudes and was comparatively low: 15 ,000-25 ,000°x in ex-
periments with argon and 25,000-35,000'K in experiments with helium. within 5-10
microseconds the bright central section of the front disappeared completely, being
absorbed by this formation (Figures 28 and 47). This decrease of radiation in-
tensity could not be the result of the small optical thickness of a shock-heated
gas. In the given case a moth decrease of radiation intensity at an angle of

45‘ was not observed as it approached the wall of the cuvette, as occurred at com-
parat vely low shock wave velocities. The intensity decreased intermittently and
was identical for radiation at an angle of 45‘ and for normal radiation. Due to
recording of radiation emerging at an angle of 45° to the cuvette axis. it was
possible to measure separately the velocities of the bright and diffuse sections

of the front. It turned out that the brightness of the front near the walls is ap-
proximately 20 percent higher than that in the central part of the cuvette. It im-
mediately became obvious that this difference of velocities should lead to bending
of the front. Specially run experiments confirmed this hypothesis. He made use
of the circumstance that the glow was cut off at the moment the shock wave touches
the end window of the cuvette to investigate the shape of the front.‘ The moments
of arrival of different sections of the front to the end window of the cuvette
were recorded by cutoff of the glow in the experiments. knowing the time differ-
ence of arrival of individual sections of the front and the velocity of the front,
it is easy to restore its shape. To follow the variation of shape of the front
during motion, the end window was placed at different distances from a diaphragm,
after rupture of which a plane shock wave was generated in the cuvette.

[I t: {I I!

Figure 48. Bending of Front During Motion of Strong Shock Wave in a
Channel

The results of these experiments are qualitatively illustrated by Figure 48. The
front plane the first 1-2 microseconds after generation of the shock wave near the
walls began to be bent in the direction of motion. This process was especially

 

I
A slight surge and then a sharp surge within approximately 0.1 microsecond was
observed when a strong shock wave was reflected from the window and there was a

decrease of radiation intensity. Cut-off of the glow was apparently caused by
breakdown of the transparent material of the window.

919

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intensive if the temperature behind the front exceeded 30.000°K. The plane section
of the front then disappeared completely within 5-30 microseconds. The front ac-
quired a funnel shape which was maintained during subsequent motion. The bright~
ness temperature of this front was approximately constant, lS,000-l7,000'x, over
the entire area in experiments with argon (it was somewhat higher, approximately
25,000'K) in the ultraviolet section) and was 25,000-30,000°K in experiments with
neon and helium. The experimental conditions were sometimes such that the shock
wave attenuated rapidly during propagation in a cuvette. If the shock wave velo~
city decreased to 7-8 km/s in argon or to approximately 20 km/s in helium, then the
front again became plane and the front immediately became equalized over its entire
surface. A front when at least a small plane section remained in the central part

while the diffuse bent section near the cuvette walls decreased until it disap-
peared completely. Yet another characteristic feature should also be noted-some
increase of brightness temperature of the plane section of the front near the
boundary with the bent section. Although the difference was slight, only approxi-
mately 3,000°K, it was always distinguished on a background of random fluctuations
of brightness temperature along the surface of the front. The distribution of the
brightness temperature of the front through the diameter of the cuvette reflecting
this characteristic is given in Figure 49.

Unique deformation of the front was observed in those experiments in argon where
the shock wave was created upon detonation of an explosive rod placed in a steel
tube. A shock wave with brightly illuminated plane front was initially propagated
in the channel formed by the tube walls and the rod. But slightly illuminated

bends, which increased and soon encompassed in the entire front, occurred both near
the tube walls and near the rod within approximately 5 microseconds.

other gases. In experiments with xenon this process proceeded more slowly at

Z

’ -I -a -z a 1 a r a:

Figure 49. Distribution of Front Temperature Along Cuvette Diameter in
One of Experiments with Argon (D - 14 Jul/s)

The results of experiments in which the cuvettes were filled with argon with an air
impurity are of special interest. In this case a front with insignificant bending

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

instability. The time
of bonding

The effect of th

the experiments. A
than in glass tubes.
inside by polished al

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the front bends due to reflection of the shock wave from the wall. As is know,

. during inclined impingement of a shock wave on a rigid obstacle, su-called Mach
reflection occurs in which the front bends near the surface in the direction of
propagation of the wave. The possibility of this flow was first linked to the
presence in the experiments of a unique conical channel for-ed by the broken-down
walls of the cuvette that flew in all directions. But this explanation had to be
rejected after the instability of the plane front was recorded in experiments with
thick-walled steel tubes which did not break down. Authors have recently tended to

assume that the flow converging with transient Inch reflection could occur due to
the presence of a layer of heated gas near the wall.

Comparison of the results indicates that the instability of a plane front is
caused by heating of the walls and the gas adjacent to it by the shock wave radia-
tion. The phenomenon was observed only at sufficiently high tesperatures behind
the front and consequently at high radiant fluxes from the front. The instabil-
ities developed more rapidly in helium, argon and xenon than in air. Actually,
inert gases with their high ionization potential are more transparent to ultra-
biolet radiation than air, which absorbed a considerable fraction of the radia-
tion of a shock-heated gas before the front. Thus, helim absorbs only approxi-
mately 2 percent of the Planck energy flux at a temperature of 30,000°K behind the
front, argon absorbs 13 percent, xenon absorbs 29 percent and air absorbs 71 per-
cent. men more convincing of the relationship of the phenomenon to shock wave
radiation is the fact that a slight addition of air'to argon prevented the devel-
opment of the instability. The thermodynamic characteristics of the gas in a
shock wave, specifically the temperature behind the front, essentially did not
change in this case, but the optical characteristics of the gas before the front
varied considerably. Air absorbed a considerable part of the radiant flux from
the front and consequently heating of the walls and the gas adjacent to them by
radiation decreased.-

We note yet another characteristic of the phenomemn--bending of a plane front in-
creased earlier and proceeded more rapidly with an increase of cuvette diameter.
Actually, the radiant flux density on the walls decreased more slowly as the dis-
tance of the wave front increased with large cuvette diameter than in small-diam-
eter cuvettes. Therefore, the gas near the walls in large-diameter cuvettes was
heated more strongly by the moment the shock wave arrived. The effect of the wall
mterial, observed in experiments, was apparently determined by heat dissipation,
more intensive in the case of metal walls.

It is very difficult to estimateatmich temperature the cuvette walls were heated
by radiation. beperiments will be described in Chapter 6 in which intensive evap-
oration of different materials, including setals, was observed due to the effect
of shock wave radiation. The effect of radiation was weaker in the experiments
described here due to the snail cuvette dimensions. The tunperature of the inner
surface of cuvettes rather did not reach the boiling point but even so was rather
high.‘ The temperature of a narrow layer of gas casing into contact with the wall
may be even higher since energy transfer by the electrons formed during the photo-
effect from the surface occurred along with ordinary thermal conductivity.

 

‘It was noted in [151] that nails placed into the tube were heated to incandescence
due to the effect of shock wave radiation.

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to some data [148], these "hot" photoelectrons may carry off up to ap-
proximately 10 percent of the incident radiant energy.

Assuming a decrease of gas density 00 near the wall due to heating and constant
pressure p1 in the plug of a shock-heated gas due to the subsonic nature of flow
behind the shock wave front. it is easy to explain the increase of front velocity
near the wall. The following relation is valid for a strong shock wave

2
-p.I=—'+'-p.D‘. ' (4.6)

In order that pressure p1 be identical at all points behind the front, a decrease

of gas density 00 near the wall should be compensated for by an increase of
velocity D.

Based on these concepts, the authors are tempted to artificially induce bending of
the front near the axis rather than near the walls of the cuvette. To do this,

the output end of the cuvette was smoothly joined to an expansion nozzle. The con-
figuration of the channel was such that the cuvette walls were partially shaded
against radiation of the shock wave initially propagating through the nozzle. Ab-
sorbing ultraviolet radiation by impurities, the argon in the cuvette was heated
and it was heated more strongly near the axis. A sharp discharge of the front
near the axis was observed in these experiments.

shreffler and Christian [1511 gave a somewhat different interpretation of the ex-
perimental results that they obtained. They link the occurrence of bending to
heating. radiation and rapid expansion of the gas adjacent to the wall. Acting
similar to a piston, the expanded gas, they feel, forms a secondary shock front
adjacent to the shock wave front near the tube wall. Reference is made in this
case to the fact that a sharply defined luminous front occurred above a target
placed in the tube even before the arrival of the shock wave. But investigations
(9, ll] showed that the occurrence of this glow was caused by evaporation and sub-
sequent ionization of the target material.

The target in these types of experiments was located normally to the incident flow
and therefore was subjected to a more powerful effect than the walls. But never-
theless the velocity of the luminous vapor boundary was always somewhat lower than
the propagation velocity of disturbances from the tube wall to its axis. Bending

Q
Interesting data that confirm these ideas of the mechanism of disturbances near

the wall were kindly presented by V. V. Adushkin to the authors. experiments were
conducted in which the shock wave of an explosion propagated along steel plates.
The shape of the wave front was recorded by a system of pressure piezosensors.
Radiation of the wave could not be taken into account since its amplitude was com-
paratively small. The plate was first brought to red heat by a burner and bending
of the front near the surface in the direction of motion of the shock wave was
then observed. G. I. Taganov first explained the ”thermal layer“ effect (see
[172]).

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the front in a tube lined on the inside with aluminum foil could be observed in
the same experiment, whereas a luminous region did not occur above a target of the
same foil placed in the tube. All this indicates the difference of phenomena com-
ing into play during interaction of a strong shock wave with the wall of a channel,
on the one hand, and upon irradiation of solids by a powerful luminous flux, on
the other hand.

some features make the phenomenon of instability of a plane front similar to that
of transient shielding of the radiation of the front described in Section 2. (mmpn
ter 4. They were both observed in experiments with inert gases and almost always
simultaneously. The typical times of development of the processes coincide by an
order of magnitude. The dimensions of the cuvette affected the course of the pro-
cesses in both cases and this effect was identical-~the course of the processes
skueddown with an increase of cuvette diameter. Both one and the other phenomenon
led to a significant decrease of the brightness of the shock wave front. The dif-
ference here is perhaps only quantitative--bending of the front was accompanied by
a more significant decrease of brightness. There is also similarity of the phe-
nomena in the fact that transient shielding was manifested most frequently in the
form of dark spots which, spreading. encompassed the entire front. A unique fea-
ture existed which made it possible to confidently separate these two phenomena

if the shape of the front was not monitored during the experiment. Bending was

Based on the internal similarity of the two phenomena, it is interesting to sug-
gest that they are essentially the same phenomenon. An important confirmation of
this would be achieved if the occurrence of dark spots could be related to defor-
mation of the front. The section of the front on photochronograms not affected by
wall bending seemed to be only approximately plane. however, we were unable to
establish any correspondence between the spots and the uneven surfaces of the
front.

It is difficult to judge the extent to which one or another details are significant
when thsnature of the phenomena has not yet been finally determined. The question
remains open whether the disturbances caused by heating the gas near the wall are
capable of leading to total disappearance of the plane front, as was observed in
experiments.‘ Although further investigations are required to determine the mech-
anism of interaction of a strong shock wave with the channel wall, already avail-
able experimental material permits one to make two important conclusions. First,
the flow mode with a plane shock front is not stable and is replaced by a flow mode
with convex, funnel-shaped front during propagation of strong shock waves in chan-
nels. A number of problems (attenuation of shock waves in channels, their effect
on obstacles placed in the channels and so on) has not yet been resolved in practic
tice, for which the result is of considerable interest. Second, conversion to a

 

I

At one time s. P. D'yakov [152] noted that a flow with a plane shock front is in
itself not always sufficiently stable. The criteria of stability which he derived

to small disturbances can be violated under certain conditions (specifically, upon
dissociation and ionization of the gas behind the front).

99

FORiOFFKJAl.USEZONL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flow node with convex front is accompanied by a significant decrease of the radi-
ating capability of the shock wave. This circumstance should be taken into accomt

when the question arises of the luminous effect of a strong shock wave, especially
when designing explosive sources of radiation.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EVALUATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE FRONT STRUCTURE 0N SHIXJK HAVE RADIATION
Moscow IZLUCHATEIHWYE SVOYSTVA UDARNYKH VOLN V GAZAKH in Russian 1977

[Chapter 5 from the book "Radiating Properties of Shock Haves in Cases," by
H.A. Tsikulkin and Ye. G. Popov, Izdatel’stvo "Nauka," 173 pages]

[Text] During the propagation of a shock wave, a sharp, discontinuous variation
of the parameters of the medium - pressure, density and telperature - takes
place. The shock wave. the asplitude of which at distances of several radiation
path lengths varies insignificantly; it almost repeats the classical emple of

an absolutely black radiator: the optically dense region of unifornly heated
material is bounded by a surface with a sharp temperature discontinuity. All of
the differences from the radiation of a black body are determined in the given case
by the nature of variation of the parameters of the media in the wave front, that
is, the structure of the front.

Shock compression and heating of the gas take place in a very narrow layer,
the so-called viscous shock compression. The width of the layer is constable to
the free path length of the gas molecules. Inasmuch as the radiation path length
is several orders higher under the same conditions, the layer is transparent and

has no influence on the shock wave emission.

In high-amplitude waves, dissociation, ionization and other processes
leading to the establishment of thermodynamic equilibrium in a heated gas take
place after the short-term shock compression. These processes also determine the
structure of the transition layer. In the conclusions with respect to the influ-

ence of the layer on the shock wave emission caution must be exercised, for the

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

width of the layer approaches the path length of the radiation in the heated
gas.

In addition, with an increase in weight amplitude the radiant flux from
the shock-heated gas increases rapidly, and beginning with some amplitudes it
makes up a noticeable proportion of the hydrodynamic energy flux in the wave.

The radiant heat exchange changes the structure of the front significantly. The
gas cools after viscous shock compression, radiating. Partially absorbing this
radiation, the cold gas is heated before the shock compression. The width of the
transition layer now is determined by the radiation path length - the largest
scale of length. The structure of such a layer has the most direct influence on
the radiative properties of the shock wave.

However, before analyzing the effect of the front structure, it must be
emphasized that even in the simple approximation of a temperature discontinuity the
shock wave is not identical to an absolutely black radiator. Light is reflected
from the front of the wave, just as from the interface of two media that are
diffrrent in optical respects -- a shock compressed heated gas and the cold gas
before the front. The estimates proposed below indicate that this fact sometimes

must be taken into account.

Let us use the simple expression for the reflection coefficient with a

normal decrease in light

 

ﬁUIITJ)" (5.1)

where n1 and “0 are the indexes of refraction of the gas on both sides of the
wave front (for example, in air of normal density no-l.0003 for visible light).

The relation of the index n to the gas density p is described by the expression

"-1!le

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

where K is the Gladstone-Daly constant, or the specific refraction. Even with
tenfold shock ooapression of the air n1-1.003 and the reflection coefficient
turns out to be negligibly small r-2-10'6.

In reality, the reflection coefficient is still smaller, for a real shock
wave is not an ideal discontinuity. Such an approximation is valid only in the
case where the thickness of the front is much less than the light wave length. In
gases of normal density the thickness of the yiscous shock cowression is on the
order of 10-5 cm, that is, comparable to the wave length of visible radiation.

In this case the reflection coefficient depends strongly on the structure of the
transition layer. The latter fact was used by Homing, et al. [153, 156] when he
investigated the structure of the front of weak (Mach number 2-6) shock waves.
They compared the values of the reflection coefficients calculated for different
angles of incidence and under different assuptions with respect to the structure
of the front with the values memured experimentally. The primary difficulty
consisted in ueasuring the reflection coefficient which, as was expected, turned
out to be very small - within the limits of 10's to 10"7 for different gases.

Thus, it is possible to neglect the reflection of the light in shock waves
of small amplitude. Usually weak shock waves do not emit as an absolutely black
body for another reason -- as a result of transparency of the volume of the shock-
heated gas. Powerful shock waves in which ionization of the gas takes place after
compression (causing their intense glow) are of the greatest interest to us. The
presence of free electrons greatly decreases the index of refraction of the gas.
The propagation of electromagnetic waves in a plasma is determined by the value of

the dielectric constant which in the absence of a magnetic field has the form

 

MN I '
or: 1— , (5.2)
M: 1—4-1
.
103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where an is the angular frequency of the electromagnetic wave, N is the nnmnber
of charged particles per cm3 of plasma, 7 is the frequency of the electron

collisions in the plasma. It is possible to find the collision frequency from the

formula r~
inn-W‘s
1‘ =- .

17w")

 

For plasma the magnetic pemeability nn-l so that the index of refraction
n=/E. Inasmuch as the imaginary part of the dielectric constant corresponds to
the absorption of the radiation, when calculating the index of refraction only
the real part is taken into account.

Let us consider an example which is characteristic of our enqneriments.

A shod: wave with a velocity D-llo km/sec is propagated through air of normal density.
The gas behind the front is tenfold coupressed, heated to a temperature of

25000°K. completely dissociated and singly ionized (2-1, “-1021 can-3). From (5.2)
and (5.1) for the reflection coefficient of red light with Jn-6.5-10'5 cm we obtain
r-0.22; for infrared radiation with 1-1.3'10‘4 can r-O.SZ. If the air in the wave

is heated to 50000°l< (D-23 km/sec), second ionization occurs (2-2). Under these
conditions we obtain 1-12 for red light and r-GZ for infrared radiation.

Thus, with an increase in the shock wave amplitude the reduction
coefficient increases. Inasmuch as formula (5.1) does not take into account the
thickness of the front, it is possible to expect only significant reflection of
the infrared radiation, the wave length of which is greater than the front width.
Noticcable reflection from the front of the electromagnetic waves from the adjacent
superhigh frequency region is known to researchers studying plasma in shock tubes.

In our experiments the plasma approached metals with respect to the free electrOn

1010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concentration. Therefore the effects connected with distortion of the radiation

during reflection must be manifested more strongly.1

51. Effect of the Relaxation Layer

In powerful shock waves, the relaatation layer in which ionization, dissocia—
tion, electron excitation and other processes develop leading to the establishnent
of themodynanic equilibriun in the shock-heated gas. is adjacent to the viscous
shock compression. Usually the width of the layer is determined by the ioniza-
tion relaxation of the gas as the slowest process. The possibility of shielding
the radiation of the equilibritn-hested gas behind the front by this layer was
noted by the authors of [13, 32]. Let us consider this problem in note detail here.

For estimation of the layer width let us use the paper by H. B. Zheleznyak
and A. Kh. matsakanyan [73] in which the data were gathered on the structure of
the relaxation layer of shock waves in the air. With a wave velocity D-llo Its/sec
recalculated for the initial air pressure po-760 :- Bg, the width of the layer is
2-7-10'5 on.

Now let us note the radiation path length under these conditions. The
coefficient of photoionization absorption will be found by the Bibernan-Noman

formula [91]

(5.3)

where N0 is the number of atoms per (:13 of ionized gas; (-50“, T) is the factor
taking into account the nonhydrogen-likeness of the absorption cross section by

the excited atons (Figure 51); y is the ratio of the mater of halflevels of the

atom corresponding to the given quantum nmbers n and I. to the analogous value

1
It is known that the incandescent natals do not emit as an absolutely black body

as a result of the reflection of light frat the interface.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the hydrogen atom; to is the statistical sun of the states of the atom.

The braking absorption coefficient will be found by the Kramers formula

x..=3.69-_10‘ 1, art. (5.4)

  

_-_.-l-...‘._.l__
. 4.! /,I u'll'uugg

Figure 51. Calculation of the coefficient of photoionization

absorption by heated gases. Values of the factor 5 by the

data of [92, 100]
Key:

1. sec‘1

In order to consider the effective decrease in the absorption as a result
of forced emission (see 51, Chapter III), the total absorption coefficient is
multiplied by l-th/kT. Then for the radiation path length we have

1/1. (at. +Ma)“ --e*""'). (5.5)

For example, let us calculate the path length of a quantum of red light
A-6.5'10'S cm (v-0.66'1015 sec-1). Here. according to [91] in foruula (5.3) the
factor (-0.5. The splitting of the levels on nitrogen and oxygen is 1-15 judging
by [[55]. The concentrations of the atoms, ions and electrons will be taken from
tables in [147]. After substitution of the numerical data in (S.3)-(S.S), we
obtain £v-6'10" cm.

As is obvious from the presented estimates, the path length of a quantum

of red light is an order larger than the thickness of the relaxation layer. For

radiation with a shorter wave length the path length is still longer so that the
106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

layer shields the visible and near ultraviolet radiation veakly. 0n the contrary,
in the infrared region of the spectra the shielding is significant. Thu,

for A-l.3'10"" cm the estimates give the path length of lv-IO“ cm comparable to
the layer thickness. Even if we consider that in the relaxatim layer the concen-
trations N1, "e and the electron temperature T are lower than behind the front and
we take the values that are half the equilibrium values as the average for the

layer. we obtain zv-z-m" on. In the last example the optical thickness of the

layer is ‘

I l '
1 =- x.dr =r- mom d1: s: T =- 0.3.
3 m3 (5..)

Key: 1. average

The intensity of the radiation normal to the front must decrease notice-

ably after passing through the layer
1 = he" - 0.71.. (5.7)
The oblique beam will be attenuated still more strongly.

_Now let us see how the shielding capacity of the layer varies on varia-
tion of the shock wave amplitude. With a decrease in amplitude, the temperature
of the shock heated gas decreases, and the radiation path length increases very
rapidly. As for the width of the layer, in the velocity range of D-S to 16 Ital/sec
it varies nonnonotonically. The largest value of 2-5-10“ cm is reached for
0-10 km/sec. However, the radiation path length turns out to be much greater
(estimates by the gas parameters behind the front give 9.‘,-10'2 cm for A-6.5'10’5 cm
and 9.v-2°10"3 cm for A-l.3-10"° cm). Consequently, with a decrease in the shod:
wave amplitude the relaxation layer becoaes more transparent.

For the velocities D>llo km/sec the information about the ionization
structure of the front is extremely meager. V. A... Bronshten and A. N. Chigorin

[18] performed the calculations for three values of the velocity 0-16, 47 and

107

FOR OMCML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

75 km/sec. For the initial concentration of the atoms after dissociation

"0-1020 cm‘3 and a velocity D-16 km/sec the relaxation time will be t-3~10'9 sec.
If the shock wave is propagated through air of normal density, then after compres-
sion and dissociation in the wave front the initial atom concentration

30-3-1020 cm'3 and, correspondingly, t-10‘9 sec. Let us estimate the width of

the relaxation layer as follows:

I = tDlﬁ.
where 6 is the average compression of the gas for the layer. After dissociation
of the air 6-6, and the equilibrium value of 6-11. As the average let us take
6-8. Then the width of the layer '32-10" cm. Now let us estimate the radiation
path length. As the averages for the layer let us take the values of the charged
particle concentrations and temperature half the equilibrium values. Then the
calculations by (5.3)-(5.S) give lva6'10'a cm for 1-6.5-10'5 cm and lv-10'4 cm for
1-1.3'10'1‘ cm.

Thus, with an increase in the wave amplitude the radiation path length
approaches the width of the relaxation layer. In order to be convinced of this
noteworthy trend, let us also consider the results of estimates for a shock wave
with a velocity 0-47 km/sec. In this case the ionization relaxation time (for
80-1020 cm‘3) will be t-6Jo'10’10 sec. In the recalculation for normal air density
ahead of the front ti-Ii-IO‘10 sec, and the layer width 2-2-10'“ an (it is of
interest to note that although the relaxation time has decreased, the layer width
does not change). According to the data of [18). setting the ayerages for the

layer 313-1021 cm 3, Mrs-102° an”, 22-4 and Tens-10" “K. we obtain zv-m" cm

for 1-6.5-10‘5 cm and 2.‘,-6'10'5 cm for 1-1.3°10" cm. The radiation path length

now is less than the layer thickness.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Let us collect the results of the estimates together; the degree of

transparency of the relaxation layer will be characterized by its optical thick-

ness 1 4”".

D, kin/sec 10 lb 16 47
1(A-6.so10'5 an) 0.02 0.06 0.3 2
10-13-10" cm) 0.1 0.3 2 3

_ From the presented data it is obvious that as the wave amlitude in-
creases the relaxatim layer becomes less transparent for radiation of the
equilibrium heated gas behind the front. The shielding first begins in the infra-
red region of the spectrum, and at sufficiently high amplitudes it extends to
the visible region.

In experiments at high velocities the bridatness teaperature of the front
was noticeably below the air temperature behind the front (see Pigure‘30). In
red light this difference occurred at velocities of D-lO to 35 km/sec. In yellow,
‘ blue and violet sections of the spectrum the lagging of the brightness teuperature
occurred at somewhat higher velocities D-25 to 35 Ice/sac. The lagging of the
brightness temperature and also the difference in briyltness of the front at
different angles recorded experimentally indicate the shielding of the radiation
in powerful shock waves. Up to now this phenomenon was explained by the shielding
effect of the heated layer which is formed on absorption by cold gas ahead of the
short-wave radiation front of the shock wave. However, by the estimates of
Yu. P. Rayzer and Ya. B. Zel'dovich [34-37]. This shielding becomes noticeable
‘only at the air temperature behind the front III-910’"! (D-36 Ion/sec). At this
temperature the intensity of the red light merging normally to the front must be

attenuated by 122. In the experiment the intensity is attenuated by 272 already

at T1-6'10”°K when the radiant flux heating the gas ahead of the front is ~5 times

109

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

less than for T1=9-10‘°K. It is hardly possible to explain the results of the
measurements behind yellow, blue and violet light filters only by the effect of
the heated layer. Obviously, for T1<9-10‘°K the primary role in the shielding of
the radiation was played by the relaxation layer.

The influence of the relaxation layer on the shock wave emission in
argon can be estimated using the data collected in the paper by L. H. Biberman
and I. T. Yakubov [66]. For T1-25000°K the relaxation time in argon is 6 times
greater than in air. Hence, the greater width of the layer 2-3°10" cm. However,
the lower degree of ionization of the argon and smaller initial number of atoms
(air dissociates) lead to the fact that the path length of the visible light turns
out to be ~100 times longer than the thickness of the layer.

We do not have information about the width of the relaxation layer of
more powerful shock waves in inert gases available. The problem of the structure
of the layer is complicated in the region of primary ionization by the mechanism
of the appearance of nucleating electrons. The estimate of the width of the
relaxation layer depends significantly on which of the propositions we begin with
when solving this problem. However. the part of the layer where the initial ioni-
zation of the gas develops in practice is transparent for light in view of the
low concentration of ions and excited atoms in it. In addition, N. M. Kuznetsov
[67] demonstrated that the problem of nucleating electrons in sufficiently power-
ful shock waves is removed in general as a result of photoionization of the gas
by radiation of the equilibrium-heated region in gases of normal density with
ionization potential I~13 ev for T1>24000°K. In such shock waves in a heated gas
an electron avalanche develops immediately. and the relaxation time is determined
by the energy exchange tine between the ions and electrons. which is proportional
to the atomic weight of the gas. These arguments can be confirmed, comparing the

relaxation times in argon and air by the available experimental data and the
110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculations. The atomic weight of argon is 3 tines greater than the average
atomic weight of air. The initial concentration of the argon atoms is approx-
imately 2 times less, for the air dissociates. Therefore in argon the relaxation
time must be 6 times greater, which agrees with the data of [66. 73].

It is possible to expect that in xenon; the atomic weight of which is
9 times greater than the average atomic weight of air, the relaxation layer is
much wider, and its shielding effect is stronger. Beginning with the above-
presented argments, we estimate the width of the relaxation layer in heavy inert
gas at T1-3°10"°K. The results of the estimates in the comparison of them with

the average path length of red light for the layer appears as follows:

Air Argon Krypton Xenon
9., cm 2.10-4 1.1o 10"3 1.7-10'3 2.2.10'3
2", cm 610" 1.410‘2 9-10'3 5-10“3

It is obvious that in such gases as xenon and krypton the relaxation layer must
shield the radiation of the shock wave noticeably. In the experiments the bright-
ness temperature of the shock waves in xenon is appreciably less than the gas
temperature after the front. The difference is especially high for the red section
of the spectra: (see Figure 32). The decrease in the brightness temperature
toward the red end of the spectrum was observed also on emergence of the detonation
in krypton and xenon (see Figure 100). A reduction in brightness .of the front was
recorded at a comparatively low gas temperature behind the front when the shielding
of the radiation by the heated layer was absent. Unconditionally. at high tempera-
tures T12105°K and higher; a powerful heated layer is formed ahead of the shock

compression which has a decisive inﬂuence on the radiative properties of the shock

wave. However, as for the reduction in brightness of the front detected experi-
mentally at temperatures of T1-2-101' to 6°10‘°K, it must be attributed to the

shielding by the relaxation layer.
111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The experiment provided another proof of shielding of the radiation
by the relaxation layer. 0n emergence of the detonation in heavy inert gases.
the absorption lines of multicharge ions were recorded. The number of lines
belonging to different ions is in accordance with the ionization composition of
the shock-heated gas (see Table 4 and the tables in the Appendix). Let us note
that the gas temperature in the heated layer was below 106°K in these experiments.
The presence in the spectrum of the lines with excitation potential of ~20 ev
cannot be explained by shielding by the heated layer.

52- Radiation Heat Exchange at the Shock Wave Front

With an increase in the shock wave amplitude, the radiant flux from the

1;

front S=oT1 increases rapidly. The short-wave radiation is absorbed by the cold

gas ahead of the front, and this heats this gas to a temperature of T_.1 The

shock wave is now propagated through the advance-heated gas, and the teuperature
after the discontinuity T+ is higher than in the absence of heating. The shock-
heatcd gas cools, radiating, and its temperature drops from T+ to T“. Thus, on
propagation of a powerful shock wave the gas first is heated by the emission, and
experiencing shock heating, is cooled, releasing part of the energy which also goes
to the creation of the radiation flux 5 (Figure 52).

In gases of normal density the effect of the radiation on the structure
of the transition layer will become noticeable for temperatures of about T1-105°K
where the radiant flux 5 becomes comparable to the energy flux of the material in

the wave. The layer width is determined by the path length of the quanta with

energy of several tens of electron volts near the maximum of the Planck

 

1In the next section it is demonstrated that the thermodynamic equilibrium cannot
occur in the gas ahead of the front, and it is necessary to talk about its
temperature provisionally. However. we have retained this notation in accordance
with references [33-37].

112

FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distribution. In contrast to the less energetic quanta of visible and infrared
radiation: these qmnta are not so intensely absorbed by the heated gas..- Their
path length turns out to be at least an order higher than the width of the layer
in which the ionization of the shock-heated gas develops. Therefore when investi-
gating the structure of the transition layer in the large plan, the details

connected with ionization relaxation of the gas disappear.

 

Figure 52. Temerature profiles of shock waves of different anplitude

Table 6. Ratio of the Radians Flux s-or‘ to the Energy Flux
of the Material pol) l2, 2

 

 

T1-1o-4°K 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1o

Helium 3.9 4.1 5.3 7.7 11.2 14.4 17.7 20.2
Neon 4.7 6.9 9.4 12.3 14.7 18.0 22.0 25.9
Argon 4.3 5.6 8.4 11.8 14.0 16.7 19.9 28.5
Krypton 5.9 8.6 12.6 18.1 25.3 31.9 37.8 43.0
Xenon 6.7 8.7 12.1 16.5 21.2 27.5 35.6 44.0
Air 1.8 3.1 4.9 6.9 9.4 10.6 13.0 15.5

In Table 6 data are presented from which it is obvious that with an
increase in amplitude the radiant flux increases faster than the energy flux of
the material in the wave. At the sane tine the energy losses to radiation in the
shock waves are limited and usually small. The fact is that ahead of the front
the gas is not transparent for quanta-,— the energy of which exceeds the ionization
potential of the atoms and molecules. 'In addition to photoionization, other

dasorption mechanisms occur in Iolecular gases. Let us present the boundary

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gases of the shock waves A beginning with which continuous absorption is observed
in the gases (the values are taken from the book by A; N. Zaydel' and
Ye. Ya. Shreyder [148]).

Gas Helium Neon Argon Krypton Xenon Air

A. an 50.6 57.5 78.7 88.6 102.2 190

At high temperature the flux 8” for the region of transparency of the
gas is a small fraction of the total flux 8. With an increase in temperature T1,
this fraction decreases still more. At the limit of very high temperatures the
flux S. belongs to the Rayleigh-Jeans part of the spectrum so that the losses are
proportional not to the fourth, but the first power of the temperature.

The effect of the radiation on the gas parameters in a shock wave will
be taken into account if the radiation energy flux is included in the relation at
the discontinuity along with the energy flux of the material. The relation
between the final and the initial parameters of the gas will be determined from

the expression (e is the internal energy)

"no“- = 000'
m. I‘ M:- = 9.0% (5.8)
9") (cl. .‘ ”Cl". ‘- [IL/2) r; 0.1),” —' S.-
It is important to note (and this is obvious from equations (5.8)) that
the final state of the gas depends not on the total flux S, but on the part 8.
of it which belongs to the region of transparency of the gas ahead of the front
and goes to "infinity" without inhibition.

Table 7 gives the ratio of the radiant flux S, to the energy flux of the

material in the wave characterizing the radiation losses and their influence on

the final state of the gas.

114

FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From this table it is obvious that the radiation losses in the shock
waves are limited. At low tenperatures almost all of the radiation goes to the
region of transparency of the gas ahead of the front. and the flux 3:01:
increases with an increase in the temperature more rapidly than the energy flux
of the material. However, as the maximum of the radiated energy in the spectrum
shifts to the region of nontranaparency of the gas dlead of the front, the situa-
tion changes -- the flux s. lags behind the energy flux material 6003/2. For
each of the gases there is a completely defined value of the nplitude (it
corresponds to the maximum of the ratio in 'l‘dale 7); for which the radiation
losses and their influence on the final state of the gas reach the highest value.
The negligible radiation losses in the air - no more than 0.52 of the hydrodynamic
energy flux - attract attention. Therefore for calculations of the air parameters
behind the front the flux s, is usually neglected in expressions (5.8).

Table 7. Ratio of the Radiant Plus S, to the Energy Flux of

the Material 9003/2, Z

 

r,-10“°°x 2 3 4 ' 5 ' 6 7 8 '9 10 12
Helium 2.8 3.2 3.9 4.5 5.6 6.9 7.4 7.6 7.4 7.2
Neon 4.4 4.7 5.2 7.1 7.5 7.6 7.6 7.8 7.5 6.5
Argon 3.5 3.7 4.6 4.6 4.9 4.8 4.7 4.5 4.3 3.7
Krypton 3.7 4.8 5.2 5.6 6.0 6.2 5.7 5.3 4.9 -
xenon 3.4 4.8 4.4 4.3 4.3 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.5 -
Air 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.2 -

In contrast to the air, the region of transparency of the inert gases
extends far in the direction of the vacuum ultraviolet. Hence, we have significant
radiation losses approaching 10%. When calculating the shock adiabats of inert

gases these losses must be taken into account. The corrections to the gas

parameters behind the front are easily found by representing them in the form

p.-p1+Ap., u¢-u.+Auw, and so on. Separating the terms of different order of
115 -

FOR OFH'JAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

smallness in the system of equations (5.8) and using the equation of state

e-(l/(y-l))(p/p), it is easy to obtain the following expressions:

' A". 5 ZS“.

Tam Poi '

AP. 0 23.

T" (34? W7“ - (5.9)
M. ”—2) 25..

T“ ‘ (IS—W W"

1w.- 6:. AP.

.7T_.=0£7--7T-4-038-—;r—.

Here 6-91/90-(y+1)/(y-1) is the shock compression of the gas. We found the
correction to the temperature using the interpolation formula e-a'l‘l'sp'o-12
which describes the results of the exact calculations well (see the Appendix).

The expressions (5.9) are also applicable for calculating the corrections
to the gas parameters at the shock compression. For this purpose it is necessary
only that the flux 5, be replaced by the flux -(S-Sa). Actually, in contrast to

(5.8) the relations at the discontinuity have the form

_ s - p.D'I2 — 3.. "(5.10)

A specific representation of the influence of the radiation on the
parameters of the shock-heated gas can be presented by the following example.
A shock wave with a velocity D-36.5 kn/sec is propagated through neon. Without
considering the radiation the gas parameters in the wave are as follows:
T1=100 000°K, p1-10600 atm, 91/90-9.15. Considering the radiation we have
T,-96000°K, 0,-10700 atn. p,/po-9.9; T+-110 OOO'K, p+-10300 atn. o+/00'7.3.

If we limit ourselves to the investigation of shock waves in gases of
normal density, the presented exanple illustrates, perhaps, the case of a strong-

est influence of the radiation on the final state of the gas after the front.
116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The radiation can be felt much more strongly on the state of the gas at the
front. This is caused by the fact that the radiant flux 8-8., increases with an
increase in the wave amplitude faster than the energy flux of the material. For
small amplitudes the flux s-s. pertains to the Hien part of the spectral and
increases very rapidly with temperature T1. At high amplitudes when in practice
all of the emission is absorbed in the heated layerIUthe flux is proportional
to the fourth power of the temperature T1. Prom Tables 6 and 7 it is obvious that
the ratio 2(8-8.)/00D3 increases monotonically with an increase in the amalitude.
The relations at the discontinuity (5.8): (5.10) supplemented by the
equation of state e-(1/(Y-1))(p/o) can be solved directly without assuming small-
ness of the corrections. The increase in precision of the parmaeters of the
shock-heated gas obtained in this way does not exceed 11 for ZoTlilpoD3<20L

For 2o'r’1‘Ip003>2oz these increases in precision will be approximate, for it is

‘0
1
when the temperature profile of the shock wave begins to differ noticeably from

necessary to consider the difference of the radiant flux 8 from (IT In essence,
the ideal discontinuity, the relations at the discontinuity must be resolved
jointly with the radiation transport equations (3.29), (3.7). In addition, it is
necessary to be given the relation between the internal energy of the gas, its
density and temperature. Joint solution of all these equations is a highly diffi-
cult mathematical problem. The situation is simler with the gas parameters
behind the front. For any mlitudes the flux 8. is a small fraction of the
hydrodynamic energy flux in the wave. Therefore expressions (5.9) are applicable
for calculation of the corrections. There will also he no large error in consider-

ing the flux 8. as part of the Planck flux at a temerature T1 for the region

of transparency of the cold gas ahead of the front. Moreover, for quite large

amplitudes when the radiation is almost capletely absorbed in the heated layer,

1.17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is possible to neglect the flux S. altogether, setting T_-T1, c.3e1, and so on.
Here the gas parameters in the wave front are more simply found, for the radiation
transport equations permit averaging over the spectrum.

In powerful shock waves the radiation has, although significant. limited
effect on the state of the gas in the front. The heating temperature T. is propor-
tional to the radiation flux 3-3“, and therefore it increases rapidly with an
increase in the wave amplitude. The amount that the temperature T+ exceeds the
final temperature T. increases correspondingly. At some temperature behind the
front Tn'rcr the heating temperature T_ reaches T.. This temperature Tcr (equal
to approximately 300.000°K for air) can be called critical, for it separates the
two significantly different cases of the structure of the shock wave front. For
the temperatures behind the front T~>Tcr the quantum energy flux will suffice to
heat the layer on the order of the path length in which the quanta are absorbed to
a temperature of T->T~. However, such high heating cannot be realized, for the
heated layer would begin to emit intensely and would quickly cool to a temperature
of To. The occurrence of the state with T_>T. would indicate that in the closed
system the heat is spontaneously pumped from the less heated layers of the gas to
the more heated ones -- a contradiction with the second principle of thermo-
dynamics.1 Indeed, the energy picked up by the radiation from the gas heated at
the shock compression is reemitted and heats the thicker layers before the discon-
tinuity.

Thus, in waves of large. supercritical amplitude the shock compression
is propagated through the gas first heated to a temperature of T_-T.. Taking this

into account, for the gas temperature after the discontinuity T1 it is possible to

—-———-——
As—

15tt1tt proof of the inpossibility of the state with 'r_>r_. is presented by
Ya. B. Zel'dovich [33].

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtain the following expression [37]: T+-(3-y)‘r.. For 7-1.25 we have
T+-1.7S 1". If we use the interpolation fornula e-aT‘l'sn-o'12 considering incon-
stancy of the heat capacity of the ionized gas; we obtain T+-1'.I6 T”.

The existence of a tenperature peak at the front of a powerful shock
wave can be characteristically felt in its radiative properties. The width of
the peak is deter-ined by the path length of the quanta with energy hv-(3 to 5) kT
which plays a primary role in the radiant cooling of the shock-heated gas. The
low-energy quanta (hv<<kT), in particular, the quanta of the visible light, are
absorbed by the ionized gas more strongly. The region of the temerature peak for
these quanta is nontransparent. The briﬂxtness temperature of the front must coin-
cide with the teaperature T+, that is, be higher than the gas temereture after
the front.

In the experiments no noticeable excess of the brightness tenperature
of the front over the gas temperature behind the front was observed. Moreover.
at his: shock wave velocities the inverse picture was observed. The divergence
should be considered the result of radiation shielding. Measuring the brightness
of the front at different angles. it was possible to estimte the optical thickness
of the shielding layer and reproduce the true tslperature of the gas radiating to

the outside. This tenperature always turned out to be above the teqerature of the

gas after the front (see Figures 30-33).

On energence of the detonation in xenon and krypton, the land-nan in the
brightness temperature distribution over the spectrum was recorded (see Figure 60).
As we have already noted, the drop in brightness taperature toward the red end

of the spectrun obviously was caused by shielding of the radiation by the relaxa-

tion layer in which ionization of the shock-heated gas developed. The transparency

of the region of the tenperature peak for ultraviolet radiation could be the

cause of a decrease in the briyltness tenperature toward the other end of the spec-

119
trua.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the conclusion of this section let us discuss the papers by Griem,
L. H. Biberman, K. N. Ul'yanov and N. H. Kuznetsov [156-158] indicating that the
radiation losses sometimes lead to disturbance of the thermodynamic equilibriua
in an optically thick medium, which, in turn, is felt in its radiative properties.
Although we are investigating optically dense shock waves. this has direct bearing on the layer
of gas several radiation path lengths wide radiating to the outside. According to

reference [157], the equilibrium population of levels with the main quantum
number n is insured if

. “a (2+1? op

where I: is the ionization potential of an ion with the charge 2-1. The estimates
show that for normal gas density ahead of the front in the temperature range of
T1=10"‘ to 105°K, the condition of equilibrium population of the excited levels is
satisfied. According to reference [158], the temperature difference of the

electrons re and the ion temperature T1 in a stationary optically thin plasma is

11:74:35 10- —(12-‘;‘—+T).

where A is the atomic weight of the ion. A is the Coulomb logarithm. The estimates
give ('1‘1--'I‘e)/'l'e<10'2 for Te<105°K. Thus, under the conditions of our experiments

the radiation losses did not lead to significant violation of the thermodynamic

equilibrium: in the shock-heated gas.
53. ..adio.tion Shieldin; ay Heated layer

The cold gas ahead of the shock wave absorbs quanta, the energy of which
exceeds the ionization potential of the atoms and molecules of the gas. Quanta are
also absorbed which cause resonance excitation of the atoms and molecules. As a

result, the radiation spectrum of the shock wave acquires the form detected in

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
" of the emission o

e "distortion
sh amplitudes the
trongly that it be

gas ahead of the discontinuity is

gins to absorb in the regions

0 only this. At hi

limited t
ave radiation so a

First of all, the

heated by shortau

rption to-

being cold,
the abso

delayed,
The brigttneas t
e: than the

of the spectrum where,

emera-

t of which by the
run will become law

perature

quickly decreases
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us discuss the quantitative estimates of the shielding performed
by Yu. P. Rayzer [35] in more detail for a shock wave in air of normal density.
The temperature profile of the heated layer was calculated from the expression
S — Dem. (5.11)
where S is the radiant flux heating the gas before the shock wave, e is the internal
energy of the gas in the heated layer. This relation is observed with good
accuracy in waves of subcrltical amplitude and also in the forward zone of tne

heated layer in waves of supercritical anplitude. The decrease in the flux 8 with

respect to the spectrally averaged optical coordinate r was taken in the diffusion

approximation:
:9 =- si-m'

where 80-03:. Being givon the Boltzmann relation for the absorption coefficient

T

considering the average absorption coefficient x constant and also using the

of visible light as a function of tenperature, n:consbexp(— '_M ) , and

interpolation relation e-Tl'l', it is easy to obtain the following expression for

the optical thickness of the heated layer:

0 0 I
"(7')‘Sx'd"" S ”.7472"? S mm.1.4 _ "F a?
o 1-
I

 

 

Figure 51.. Position of the layer radiating to the outside in
very powerful shock waves

In a shock wave with T1-65000°K in which the temperature ahead of the
discontinuity T_-9000°K, the shielding is absent. However, when T1-90000°K. when

1.22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'r_-20000°K, the optical thickness of the heated layer for red liﬂlt 0-650 nm) is
“$0.12. Here the brightness temperature of the front 132800001; With a further
increase in the wave mlitude the optical thickness of the layer increases, and
the brightness decreases; for examle, with a rise in temperature by a total of
10000°K, for T1-100,000°K, T_-25000°K,tv30.37 and Tb267000°K, that is, the bright-
ness tenperature is already less than 80000°K.

Thus, the brightness mutimun corresponds to the temperature after the
front T1-90000°K, and the maximum brightness temperature in the air is
Tb max-80000°K. For a temperature behind the front T1-160,000'K, T_:50000°K,
‘erl.5 and the shielding is almost complete. Under these conditions not only the
high temperature light from the gas after the discontinuity is absorbed in the
heated layer, but also the light of the strongly heated layers ahead of the discon-
tinuity. The moderately heated layer remote from the discontinuity emits to the
outside (crosshatched in Figure 54), in front of which the gas is so hot that the
radiation is noticeably shielded. The gas temperature in this layer is found from
the condition that the length of path of the red ligat in it compares with the
path length of short-wave radiation heating the gas (in more heated layers where
the path length is shorter, the light is emitted, but it is immediately absorbed;
the less heated layers do not absorb and do not emit because of their transparency).

This temperature, which is the maximal brightness teuperature of very powerful

shack waves in the air, is approximately 17000“K.1

1Since the absorption coefficient within the visible region of the spectrum varies

slightly, the estimated values of the brightness temperatures approximately per-
tain not only to red light, but also in general to the entire visible region of

the spect rum.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In experiments with air the shielding began at significantly lower
amplitudes of shock waves than follows from the presented estimates. As has
already been noted, when explaining the experimental results it is necessary to
consider the additional shielding effect of the relaxation layer in which the
ionization of the shock-heated gas develops.

Quantitative estimates of the shielding by the heated layer analogous to
the above-presented estimates for air were made in accordance with the primary
measurements of the brightness temperature of powerful shock waves in inert gases.
It turned out that the maximum brightness temperature in such gases as argon,
krypton and xenon must reach approximately the same values as in the air. However.
in the first experiments the brightness temperature of quite powerful shock waves
did not exceed éOOOO°K. In spite of all of the efforts more precisely to define
the calculatiOns. no agreement with the experimental data was obtained. The
impression was made that the gas temperature in the heated layer for some reason
was higher than follows from the estimates. One of the possible causes of the
divergences -- absence of thermodynamic equilibrium in the heated layer -- was
noted by the authors in reference [42] and is substantiated in [43].

The width of the heated layer is determined by the path length of the
quanta 1 absorbed by the cold gas ahead of the discontinuity, and the time the
gas is in the layer, by the value of t-l/D. In argon, krypton and xenon of
normal density 1210'3 cm and for D-lO km/sec we obtain the time :310'9 sec which,
as we shall see below. is comparable to the time of the relaxation processes in

the heated gas.
The internal energy E of the gas ahead of the discontinuity will be

found from the expression

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where, in contrast to (5.11). E is the energy of 1 m3 of gas, and

s a Zac'ﬁr’; unplug—1r! this
is the short-wave radiation flux causing ionization of the gas ahead of the dis-
continuity t-hv. The number of photoelectrons Ne per a3 is detenined analogously:
s -. DIV... (5.13)

where

s = ch"h’§ [same/1:1.) — 1|" shit

is the quantum flux causing photoionization'. Iron (5.12), (5.13) we obtain the
average energy of the photoelectrons ‘e’
e.=SIs—I. (5.14)
The values of “e and a. calculated by (5.13), (5.110) for a shock wave in
argon of normal density are presented in Table 8. He shall use these values to

estimate the tine of the different relaxation processes in the heated layer which

will occur as a result of photoionization of the gas.

Table 8
——_—_—_§__
1‘.-l!r'. "K an 35 at. so 10 so
”(m-v. nu" L1 5,» is on no 110
a" so 3,5 4.2 5.8 HA «I 13
cm I. .3 1.2 0.4 0.09 0,15 0,00
1.]: 0,9 0,3 0,08 0,02 0.01 0,01
w: as 25 so so 9 a '
T'_-In". “K M 12.5 15.6 18,1 22.0 ' 20.0
12-10". “K 1.1 5.0 13.5 in 30.1 24.0

 

The electron excitation relaxation time t* will be estimated by the

formula

(0 = "($an (5 15)

where [r —- o' 4(1-7t— P2) 0. is the deactivation rate constant. ve is the
x 0

average electron velocity. For argon levels with excitation potential lit-11.5 ev

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and a statistical weight g*-8, the effective excitation cross section ahc*k‘re,
where Ci'h-OJ'lO"17 cm2/ev [37].

The ionization relaxation time will be estimated by the formula

1
t‘ u a.N

. (5. l6)

 

I I ..
where “t'_6l(—n‘ 1' 2) "P (" 11'" )" is the ionization rate constant,

0 O

01=CikTe is the effective ionization cross section (in argon C1-2'10'17 cmz.’ev
[37]), "a is the atom concentration.

The results of the estimates are also presented in Table 8. For a tempera-
ture behind the front T1>3.5'10“°K the relaxation times of the electron excitation
and ionization are much less than the time the gas is in the heated layer:
t*/t<<l and t1/t<<l. Consequently, the "hot" photoelectrons will "cool" in inelas-
tic collisions with atoms. For T1<3.5-10‘°K (D<12 kin/sec) the excitation and
ionization of the gas in the heated layer cannot be completed: t*/t>l and t1/t>l.

Now let us consider whether the photoelectrons are able to put the "cold"
particles -- atoms and ions -- into thermal motion. The electron-ion relaxation

time will be estimated by the Landau formula

I. 3.15.m41"v(ev) (5.17)
- "’ WT“

where A is the atomic weight of the ions, A is the Coulomb logarithm (under our
conditions for 2-1 A-S [37]). The values of te1 turn out to be at least an order
higher than the time the gas is in the layer (see Table 8). Let us note that the
electron relaxation takes place much more rapidly: tee/teiime/m1110-s. In the
heated layer the electron temperature is set up. The electron-atomic relaxation

time can be estimated by the formula

0 (5.18)

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 3;a is the eleastic scattering cross section of the electron on the atoms
averaged with respect to Maxwell distribution (the values of aea were taken from
[159]). The estimates give tea/t-lo to 3).

Thus, the energy from the "hot" photoslectrons is not transferred to the
heavy particles -- atoms and ions - and they remain "cold" in the heated layer.
The entire excess energy of the photoelectrons is spent on further ionization and
excitation of the gas atons. Inasmuch as the absorption of light is determined
at the same time by the degree of ionization and excitation of the gas, it is
necessary to expect stronger shielding of the radiation than in the case of thermo-
dynamic equilibrium.

A cowarison of the relaxation times of the different processes indicates
that in the heated layer only partial thermodynamic equilibriul can be set up
when only the degreeof ionization and excitation of the gas correspond to the
electron temperature. The values of the temperature T'_ ahead of the discontinuity
calculated considering expression (5.12) for the case of partial thermodynamic
equilibrium are presented in Table 8. In the calculations only the contribution of

the ionization, excitation and kinetic energy of the electron to the internal
energy of the gas was taken into account. For comparison values of the tempera-
ture T_ ahead of the discontinuity are presented which correspond to complete
thermodynamic equilibrium of the gas in the heated layer. The absorption co-
efficient of the light by the heated gas depends quite sharply on the temperature.
Therefore, comparing the values of the temperatures T'_ and T_ to each other, it is
necessary to consider that the difference in the absorption coefficients and, con-

sequently, in the optical thicknesses of the heated layer will be more significant.

The partial thermodynamic equilibrium is established not throughout the

entire thickness of the heated layer. On going away from the discontinuity the
127.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

temperature T' decreases, and the relaxation processes in the gas are retarded.
Approximately at T'-l3000°K the excitation relaxation time compares with the time
the gas is in the layer.1 Far from the discontinuity the photoelectroas, losing
their energy in inelastic collisions with atoms and in elastic collisions with
secondary electrons, quickly "cool" to a temperature of Te213000°K. Thus, the
relaxation processes remain incomplete. The state of the gas here is significantly
nonequilibrium. Only at a temperature after the front T1>3.5'104°K does the
radiant flux heat the gas near the discontinuity to a temperature of T'>l3000°K.
Then the relaxation processes in some part of the heated layer adjacent to the
discontinuity are completed by establishing partial thermodynamic equilibrium.

This peculiarity reflects the temperature profile of the heated layer presented in

Figure 55.

 

Figure 55. Temperature profile of the heated layer
The comparatively broad region of strongly nonequilibrium gas far from
the discontinuity obviously makes a small contribution to the radiation shielding.

Although here the electron temperature is relatively high, their concentration

1The ionization relaxation time estimated by (5.16) for T'-l3000°K turns out to
be even greater than the time the gas spends in the heated layer. However, at
low temperatures the equilibrium concentration of the electrons is established
predominantly by the ionization of the excited atoms.

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

decreases quickly (exponentially) on going away from the discontinuity. This
region of the gas absorbs the radiation note weakly than would be absorbed if
partial themdynaaic equilibrium had been set w in it. Then the degree of
ionization and excitation of the gas would be higher. However. even for such
ionization and excitation the path length of the visible radiation turns out to be
much longer than the possible width of the heated layer. Thus, for T'-l3000°l{
the estimates by (5.3)-(5.5) give lv~10 en. Therefore for simlication of the
calculations it was proposed that the partial thermodynamic equilibriul is estab-
lished in the entire thickness of the heated layer.

The temperature profile of the heated layer was calculated by the formula

(5.12) where the radiant energy flux at different distances from the discontinuity

was found from the expression

hen

S 1—2 211: "h" 5:. l (1.) S loxp(elk1'.)— 1|" e’de (5- 19)

III-w.

where [(‘n)=28' '"E "Q is the function taking into accomt the absorption of
the flux with respect to the optical coordinate '- -SX.. 417 (Table 9). The
sections of the spectrum e.<hV<c',.1 were selected in such a way that the absorption
coefficient x, within the lilits of the section varied weakly. The boundary of the
first seguent was the transparency limit of the cold gas, that is. tl-I. The nutter

of sections was MS to 10 depending on the nature of variation of the absorption

coefficient x.

Table 9. Values of the Function lM-zfr'ﬁ-m
I

 

‘I’ 0 0,1 0.2 0.3 0.! 0.3 0,. 0.1 0.0 0,! 1.0

I 1.000 mm 0.1m 0.000 0.5“ 0,” 0.833 0.333 0.” 0.35! 0.110.
V 1.2 1.4 1.0 1,8 3,0 2.5 3.0 $0 5.0

I 0.108 0,121 0A“) 0011 0“! mm 00” 0M 0M

 

129

FOR omml. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The absorption coefficient was calculated by the formula

I
ll: 2 ".0" (5.20)
I-O

where 01 and N1 are the absorption cross section and concentration of the ions of

i-th multiplicity in the ground state.1 Broad experimental data [143] are avail-

able on the absorption cross sections of atoms 00. This data was used for the cal-

culations. The absorption cross sections of the ions were assumed to be hydrogen-

like:
a‘ : 1.9.10-"(1 + 1r(%)' w.

Double ionization of the gas in the heated layer was considered to be
sufficient in practice, that is, the sum (5.20) included no more than three terms
for the calculations.

The equations (5.12), (5.19) and (5.20) were solved jointly by the method
of successive approximations. In the first approximation it was assumed that the
gas ahead of the discontinuity absorbs as a cold gas (the sum (5.20) consisted of
only the first term). Using the tables of internal energy and ionization composi-
tion of the gas (see the-Appendix), the temperature profile of the heated layer was
found. and the absorption coefficient was more precisely defined (5.20). Usually
after three or four approximations the temperature profile did not change.

The optical thickness of the heated layer for radiation normal to the
front is ~
"5.8”“ (5.21)
The light absorption coefficient xv was calculated by the formula (S.3)-(S.S),
where the braking absorption by the electrons in the field of the multicharge ions

1The primary role in the heating of the gas ahead of the discontinuity was played

by the quanta hv~(3—S)kT which were weakly absorbed by the excited ions.
130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and also the light absorption by the excited ions, was taken into account in the
heated layer. The factor t; in (5.3) for Ar, Kr and Xe atoms was taken from
reference [92]. He had no information about the value of E for the He and Ne

atoms or ions. However, from references [92, 100] it follows that in the visible
region for different atom (and especially ions) £31. Judging by [155], the
splitting of the highly excited levels responsible for absorption of visible light,

YZIS for atoms and 7-1.5 for ions.

The brightness temperature Th was determined from the following expression

mder shielding conditions

(.w-r. _. a)" =- W“ - H" ' (5.22)

Here we consider the fact that the temperature peak after the discontinuity is

opaque for visible light. When rv>0.l the natural glow of the heated layer was con-

sidered:

H"._ ~|= If _ l". _. rr_ -l 4;
(e 1) (cm . ire -|§(e“' 1) e stag. (5.23)

where, in contrast to 1'". t;=-t;(z)=-§x.dz.

The calculations were performed for fixed values of the gas tenperatures
behind the front beginning with T1-6-105'K and then every 104'! until total shield-
ing and establishment of the maximum brightness tenmerature occurred.

The obtained relations for the brightness temperature of shock waves in
blue 0:430 nm) and yellow (1-560 nm) light are presented in Figure 56 as a funk
tion of the front velocity. Under the conditions of partial thermodynamic
equilibrium in the heated layer the shielding comes sooner (the solid curves in
Figure 56) than in the case of total thermodynamic equilibrium (the dotted lines).
However, the difference is small. The difference in the curves corresponding to
the yellow and blue light for which the absorption coefficient xv differed by
2-3 times was also small. The differences are concealed by the sharp dependence

of the heating teamerature on the wave amplitude.
131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

II I, II 7’ p.10/m(1)

Figure 56. Brightness teuperature of shock waves in inert gases.
The boldface solid curves are the partial thermodynamic equilibrium
of the gas in the heated layer; the dotted curves are complete
themdynamic equilibrium. The curves for blue light (Add!) nm)
are above the curves for yellow light (1-560 nl). The fine solid

lines are the tewerature T1 of the gas behind the shock wave front.
Key:
1. lull/sec

Nonsteady shielding of the radiation was observed in the experiments with
inert gases. Possibly the effect was caused by gradual development of a broad
region of nonequilibrium heated gas ahead of the discontinuity. However, at the
first point in time after excitation of the shock wave ahead of the discontinuity
only a narrow heated layer could occur. The values of the brightness temperature
measured at the first point in time (and these were maximal for the given tempera-
ture velocity) fit the curves in Figure 56 well.

The absorption of the radiation in the lines not taken into account by
our calculations leads to additional shielding. In the radiation spectrum of the
powerful shock wave there must be a large nunber of absorption bands, where the
lines appear at lower velocities D when the shielding in the continulm is still
unnoticeable. At such velocities the thermodynamic equilibrium of the gas ahead
of the discontinuity leads to'a qualitative difference of the spectrum from the

case of thermodynamic equilibrium. Thus, for D-lO km/sec, the ionization and

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

excitation of argon ahead of the discontinuity correspond to a teweraturs of
T'_~lOl‘°I(. Under these conditions it is possible to expect wed shielding in the
individual atomic lines, whereas for the equilibrium temperature T.-103°K the

argon is still entirely transparent.

5"- Shielding of Radiation mm. in Goa Mixtures

The possibilities of the shock wave as a source of light are easily
expanded by adding specially selected gas. The latter. playing the role of the
primary filter would permit adjmtment of the spectral composition of the shock
wave emission. 0n the other hand, the negligible and not always controllable
admixtures sometimes change the radiative properties of the shock wave significantly.
For exalple, in argon with an admixture of 0.012 air the radiation flux in the
spectral region 1-79 to 190 nm, to which at 11-3-1041 so: of the energy emitted
from the front belongs, is attenuated by 5 times at a distance of 1 meter from the
front.

The presence of the impurities can lead to shielding of the radiation also
in parts of the spectrum where the gas mixture is transparent. For example, it is
possible to show that an insignificant admiuture having no influence on the shock
adiabat of the gas can cause shielding of the front at low velocities D for which
shielding is absent in the pure gas. Moreover, by decreasing the admixture concen-
tration it is possible to anplify and not attenuate the effect. The temperature
profile of the heated layer in a gas with admixture is depicted in Figure 57. The
impurity heated layer caused by absorption of radiation by the impurity extends in
front of the narrow layer occurring as a result of absorption of the shortwave

radiation by the basic gas.

One of the causes of earlier shielding is preliminary heating of the gas

to a temperature of T__ in the admixture layer. Figure 58 shows the results of

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculating the brightness temperature of argon with an admixture of air consider—
ing this additional heating (curve 4). Curve 5 for pure argon is presented for
comparison. During the calculations it was assumed that the admixture layer is
quite broad and the relaxation processes in it are entirely complete. As is
obvious from Figure 58, the effect of the admixture in the given case is small.

The fact is that at high temperatures T1.105°K the greater part of the radiant flux

is absorbed by the argon in the basic heated layer.1

Figure 57. Temperature profile of the shock wave in a gas with
impurity (dotted line in pure gas)

A more significant contribution to the shielding of the radiation can be
made by the impurity heated layer. In pure argOn the shielding becoues noticeable
at a tenperature of T_=3-104°K when the path length of the visible light compares
with the path length of the radiation causing the heating. For many gases this
temperature is appreciably lower. Let, for example, the shock wave be propagated

in argon with an admixture of the vapor of alkali metals. The light path length in

1Comparing curves 4 and S in Figure 58 it is easy to note a curious detail -- the
brightness temperature at D<20 km/sec in argon with an admixture is higher than

in pure argon. The increase in emissivity in the region of transparence of air
X>190 nm is directly related to worsening of it in the region l-79 to 190 nm. The
absorption of ultraviolet radiation by air leads to a rise in temperature behind
the discontinuity (see Figure 57). This effect is small in the investigated
example. However, in other cases, in particular for low gas densities, when the
radiant fluXes are comparable to the hydrodynamic energy flux, the possibility of
increasing the emissivity of the shock wave with the help of impurities in certain
sections of the spectrum at the expense of others is of interest.

134
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the vapor coqares with the radiation path length during the heating in the
admixture layer at a temerature of 6403'! or for b-lO lei/sec. In this-example
the argon does not participate directly in the shielding — the width of the
admixture heated layer and the light path length in it are determined by the opti-
cal properties of the admixture. However, argon is a direct came of preaature
shielding. At low concentration of the admixture and temperatures below 10"1,
the gas mixture behaves as an ideal monoatomic gas. With identical internal energy

and heated layer the temperature in the mixture will be appreciably higher than in
the admixture gas alone (in the vapor of alkali metal). However, the maximum bright

ness temperature for gas admixture can be lower than for each of the coaponents of
the mixture separately.

r411";

  

M II J! Jim/m (

Figure 58. Brightness tewerature of shock waves in argon with
air admixture.
Curves 1, 2 and 3 correspond to 0.01, 0.1 and 12 air in the argon;
lo - without considering shielding by the admixture heated layer;
5 - for pure argon. In each pair of curves 1-3 the upper is
yellow light (A-560 am), the lower is blue light (1-430 nm), and
for the dotted curves lo and 5, vice versa.

Key:

1. km/sec

Let us return to the shock waves in argon with air admixture. The gas
temperature in the admixture heated layer is comaratively low. Thus, for
11-7~10"°l( the gas is heated in it to a temperature of 4.510"! and it absorbs
the light weakly. However, it is always possible to select a quite low concentra-
tion of the adaixture for which the admiaxure heated layer will be so broad that

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it will begin to shield the visible light. The lower the air concentration, the
broader the layer, and the less shielding occurs. This feature is reflected by
the results of calculating the brightness temperature in argon with air admixture
presented in Figure 58 (curves 1-3).

The influence of the air admixture on the brightness of the shock waves
in argon was detected experimentally. The data obtained here agree well with the
above-presented arguments. The significance of the broad admixture heated layer
is indicated by the weak glow of the gas ahead of the front recorded experimentally.
The glowing region extended a distance of about 1 cm. The width of the layer is
easily estimated also by the buildup of the brightness with approach of the front
to the end window of the couvette. When adding 51 air to the argon, the buildup
lasted t‘OJo microsecond. The front velocity was D-l3.5 km/sec. The width of the
layer 2~tD~0.S cm. The estimate of the width of the layer by the air cancentration
gives the same value with respect to order of magnitude. Actually. in air of
normal density the radiation path length 1-79 to 190 nm is 1-10'2 cm, and for air
concentration of 52, 1-0.2 cm.

Both in the experiments and in the calculations the maximum brightness
temperature of the shock waves in argon with air admixture is much lower than in
the argon and air individually. The quantitative divergences of the experimental
curve in Figure 35 with the calculated curves in Figure 58 can be ignored. The
fact is that when calculating curves 1-3 in Figure 58 the coefficient of absorption
of short-wave radiation by air was seemed to be invariant. The heating and the
dissociation of air ahead of the front lead to the disappearance of the molecular
mechanisms of absorption. The heated layer will be broader. The braking absorp-
tion of light by the electrons on the atoms, which plays a significant role at low

temperatures in the admixture heated layer, was also not taken into account. All
136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF HCIAL USE ONLY

of this must intensify the shielding so that for stricter calculations it is
necessary to expect better quantitative agreement with the experiment.

In the experiments with inert gases nonsteady shielding of the radiation
was detected. The characteristic features of the phenomenon indicate the develop-
ment of a broad shielding layer ahead of the discontinuity. This oould be an
admixture heated layer. The experiments in which the argon was specially diluted
by a small amount of air gave only a more sharply expressed effect. In the majority
of experiments the procedure for filling the couvettes obviously kept the admixtures

from getting into the gas except those already in it - 0.012 in argon and xenon;

0-0053 in helium.1 By the concentration of the adadxtures and their absorption
coefficients the width of the admixture heated layer 2-1 m, and the delay in its
formation t~£lD~lOO microseconds. Under the conditions of our experiments this
layer not only did not, but could not occur as a result of the small dimensions of
the couvette. Obviously, the above-investigated peculiarities of the shielding
in the gas with admixture can be manifested fully only in large-scale experiments in
which the couvette dimensions are greater than the width of the admixture heated
layer.

Volumtrically absorbing a small part of the shock wave emission by the

admixtures, the gas in the couvette was heated, according to the estimates, to
~103°K. If all of the radiation were absorbed, the gas temperature in the admixture
heated layer would reach ~15000°K in experiments with xenon, ~18000°K in experiments
with argon and ~30000°K in experiments with helium. At these temperatures the gas
layer ~1 cm wide absorbs intensely. Possibly the initial heating as a result of

LLet us present the cognition of the impurities in the argon, going by the

certificate on the bottle: 0.012 nitrogen, no more than 0.0032 oxygen, 0.03 g/m3
moisture for a gas pressure of 760 mm Hg.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the admixtures leads to an increase in the absorption and gradual heating of the
gas in the couvette with the formation of a broad shielding layer ahead of the

front.

Analysis of the possible causes of nonsteady shielding will be incomplete
if we do not discuss the paper [45]. In 1959 L. H. Biberman and B. A. veklenko
demonstrated that as a result of absorption of resonance quanta in the wings of
the lines and subsequent acts of reradiatinn similar to diffusion, a broad layer
of excited atoms is formed ahead of the shock wave front. The level population
in the layer is close to Boltzmann at a temperature equal to the gas temperature
behind the front. and the layer itself grows without limit with time (the excita-
tion wave goes to infinity). Considering the extinguishing of the excitation in
gas-kinetic collisions. the layer width is finite. In atomic gases the probability
of extinguishing is very low, and it is determined more frequently by the presence
of molecular admixtures. Thus, with air concentration in the argon of 0.011 and
an initial pressure of the gas po-lo mm Hg, the width of the layer £~1 m, and the
time of its formation t~10'4 sec. Recalculation for the case of po-760 mm Hg
will give 2-1 cm and t-l microsecond. It would appear that in the formation of
such a layer it is also necessary to find the explanation for the experimental
results. Recently Vulliet [160] calculated that an optically dense layer of

excited aron atoms is formed after the shock wave is propagated 2 cm at a velocity

of 0-8 km/sec.

The authors of references [45, 160] did not take the extinguishing (photo-

ionization) of the excited atoms by the shock wave radiation into account in the
calculations. This approach is to some degree justified for optically thin shock

waves which emit weakly in the continuum, but is suitable for optically dense shock

waves. Thus, at a temperature behind the front of T1~3°104°K for each resonance

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quantum capable of exciting an atom ahead of the front; an optically dense shock
wave emits ~102 quanta capable of extinguishing excitation. Therefore only that
concentration of excited atoms will be set up ahead of the shock wave front for
which the layer will absorb no more than ~10'2 of the visible and near ultraviolet

radiation. The heating of the gas as a result of this radiation absorption is of

the same order as for ~0.011 admixtures.1

Some authors, analyzing the results of experiments in shock tubes, dis-
cuss the poasibility of diffusion of the "hot" electrons free the region of the
shock-heated gas to the region ahead of the front. The process is similar to
thermoelectron emission from the surface of incandescent metals. In reference [bk],
the argon temperature ahead of the front (supposedly as a result of energy trans-
port by such electrons) reached 8000'K. The phenonenon has been studied insuf-
ficiently to estimate its role in our experiments.

In references [161-163] a study was made of the glow of xenon in a shock
tube. In spite of comparatively low temperatures T1f6000 to 9000°K, a continuous
glow spectrum was observed which appeared with a delay. An extraordinary explana-
tion for this phenomenon is proposed - the continuous glow spectrum is related
to the formation of Xe; quasimolecules and transition of them fro. the excited
stable state to the ground unstable state. Possibly these processes, occurring

ahead of the shock wave front in our experiments, were responsible for nonstationary

d..-

1The kinetic model describing the photochemical reactions ahead of the shock wave
front was proposed recently by Dobbins [46]. The investigation included radia-
tion transport far from the wave front in the wings of the resonance absorption
lines. partial capture of this radiation, subsequent photoionization of the
excited atoms, photoionization of the atoms in the ground state and certain recom-
bination and deexcitation processes. It is proposed that this model is applicable
to powerful shock waves in argon. The case of a shack tube is especially con-
aidered.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

shielding of the radiation. The other authors of [94] consider that the xenon
glow observed in [161-163] is ordinary braking radiation of the electrons on the
ions. In our opinion, at such low temperatures braking radiation of the electrons
on the atoms predominated.

It is of interest to note that the phenomenon of brightness absorption
has been observed by many authors in spark discharges [164]. Increasing the rate
of input of energy to the spark discharge channel, beginning with some value of
this rate, will not lead to an increase in the brightness temperature. 0n the
contrary. a decrease in brightness of the channel with time was observed. In
addition to quantitative similarity of the phenomena there is an interesting
quantitative correspondence between the maximum brightness temperatures of the

spark and the shock wave.

Xenon Argon Air
Spark (according to [164]) 27000°K 60000°K 45000‘K
Shock wave (our experiments) 66000°K 80000°K 75000°K

Higher temperatures -- about 90,000°K in air -- were observed during
discharges in capillaries. The absorption effect is perhaps connected with shield-

ing of the high temperatures in the spark channel to some degree similar to

shielding in a shock wave.

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WIDE RADIATION SOURCES

Moscow Izwcuam'mrs SVOYSM comm VOLN V m in Russian 1977

[ Chapter 6 frm the book "Radiating Properties of Shock Waves in Gases", by
M. A. 'rsnculun and Ye. c. popov, Itdatelstvo "m", 173 uses]

[Text] Measured tenperatures (70.000-140,000°x) place the shock wave in the
same series with brighter radiators. Based on condensed explosives in heavy inert
gases, one can create very coupact light sources having many advantages. These
sources are superior to the widely used pulsed gas-discharge lamps in the output of
visible and especially of ultraviolet radiation. Explosive flash lamps have long
been med successfully in photography of high-speed processes. And explosive sour-
ces have recently been used as a tool for investigating the effect of high-density
radiant fluxes on solids. Unlike lasers. having a broad radiation spectrum propa-
gated into the vacuum ultraviolet region, these sources permit nore complete sim-
lation of the phenonena that accompanied the notion of cosmic bodies in the atmos-
phere and strong explosions. The sources can also be used successfully for other
diverse purposes, for example, to investigate photochnical reactions or as a stan-
dard of an absolutely black body at high temperatures.

1. Explosion Radiator for Photometry mrposes

Light scurces with an incandescent body as a radiator are widespread in photometric
technology. An example is a measuring lamp with a tungsten strip or a uniformly
heated cavity with an opening that simulates an absolutely black body. The taper-
ature of these radiators does not exceed 3.000‘K whereas one encounters brightness
temperatures of 104-105"): and above when investigating some phenomena. 'lhe great
difference of brightnesses of an object under investigation and the comparison
standard frequently makes it very difficult to calibrate radiation detectors. A
high-temperature standard is convenient for this. The need for this standard arie
arises in neasurenent in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum where incandescent
bodies are not suitable in practice due to their low brightness. Attempts to adapt
the electric discharge in gases for these purposes were rather successful. The
recently developed lav-39 (av-45) pulse source radiates like a black body with ten-
perature of 41,000'K in the section A - 200-600 m [143, 144].

Experiments show that shock waves in air at telperatures of l0.000-50,000°K behind
the front radiate like an absolutely black body over a very broad spectral range
that encupasses the ultraviolet and infrared regions. The problu of using a

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shock wave as a black body radiation standard at high temperatures was considered
by the authors of [12-14].

To know the brightness temperature of a shock wave, using it as a pulsed radiation
standard, it is sufficient to follow the velocity of the wave front. Measuring
the velocity with accuracy of 1'1 percent by means of the spa-2 photorecorder and
resorting to calculated adiabatic shock curves, one can determine the temperature
with an accuracy of i 3 percent. However, it is preferable in practice to have a
source with a previously known brightness temperature constant over some time seg-
ment. To meet these requirements, we used an explosive shaped charge to produce
shock waves stable in amplitude (see Figure 9). The charge was cast from T6 40/60
and had the following dimensions: d - 8 m, 38 - 30, l - 120, L a 150 m, depres-
sion under the detonator cap 6 - 10 mm and weight of the charge of 168 grams.
Careful measurements of the velocity of a stable shock wave in air formed upon
detonation of this charge yield a value of 13.6 1 0.1 km/s. If one uses the cal-
culated adiabatic shock curve of air from [147], then the gas temperature behind
the front of 24,000 1 700°x corresponds to the measured velocity. The dimensions
of the charge were selected so that inaccuracies of observing them have a weak ef-
fect on the shock wave velocity. As already noted (section 2, Chapter 2), maximum
velocity whose value is almost independent of diameters D and d (see Figure 12) at
E/d 2 4 is established in the charge channel at l > 8d. If an increase of charge
weight plays no role, then selection of the highest possible ratio of ﬁ/d is
justified. The shock wave temperature also increases in this case. Thus, for
charges with d - 60 mm (ﬁ/d - 7.5), a velocity of 16.7 km/s and temperature of
32,000°K were measured. However, the weight of these charges is fourfold greater.

The type of radiation pulse upon detonation of a shaped charge can be judged by
Figures 10 and 41. with the selected dimensions, the glow time of a stable shock
wave in the charge channel is 5 microseconds. If a tube of cardboard or other
dense material not more than 160 mm long is attached to the charge, the shock wave
propagates through it without appreciable attenuation and the glow time is extended
to 17 microseconds (Figure 59).

Sometimes, for example, during photographic recording of the time-integral radia-
tion by spectrograph or in measurements of radiation with a calorimeter, it is con-
venient to have a calibrated square-wave pulse. The time of stable shock wave
formation is reduced from 5 to 2 microseconds if one uses an elongated charge (L -
= 180 mm), the bottom of which is not flat, as in Figure 9, but is in the form of

a conical recess. One can reduce the leading edge of the pulse even more--to 0.1
microsecond. To do this, the initial part of the channel where a stable shock
wave is established must be separated by a thin opaque screen (for example, carbon
paper). The screen is destroyed by the shock wave without introducing appreciable
disturbances. The trailing edge of the pulse is cut off within approximately 1
microsecond when the shock wave encounters a quartz or glass window attached to the
end of the accessory tube (Figure 60).

The results of measuring the brightness temperature of a stable shock wave in air
with velocity of 13.6 km/s are presented in figure 39. The temperature fluctua-

tions in time and to the channel cross section did not exceed 1 1,000°K. A tem-
perature variance was included in this same range from experiment to experiment.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The brightness temperature was approximately 1,000‘K lower for charges manufactured
from '16 50/50. Avoiding inhomogeneities in casting the charge and initiating the

charge strictly along the axis, it was possible in some experiments to reduce the
temperature ﬂuctuations to 1 400'K.

It is obvious from Figure 39 that a shock wave in a channel radiated like an ab-
solutely black body with temperature of 24,000'K over a wide spectral range of A -
- 220-1, 300 am. The radiation spectrum was continuous. The lines were not record-
ed even on spectrograms with resolution of 0.1 A. In this regard the proposed
source is similar to incandescent lamps although it differs from them by tenfold
higher brightness tesperature.

Having. replaced the air by another gas. one can increase the radiation temperature
and can penetrate the vaccum ultraviolet region. In several experiments the charge
channel was filled with neon; in this case the temperature increased to 32,000°K.
The temperature was raised to 40,000'x when the channel was filled with argon.
However, transient shielding and instability of the plane front complicated pro-
duction of stable radiation pulses in argon and heavier inert gases.

74:71";
a

[ﬂ m H As!

Figure 61. Dependence of Brightness 'nemperature of EV-39 Source on Radia-

tion wavelength measured by Means of uplosive Brightness
Standard

Thus, shock waves in air formd upon detonation of a shaped charge were a suffi-
ciently stable radiator. The source described here was used by the authors as a
brightness standard in laboratories and under field conditions. Its capabilities
are illustrated in this regard by figure 61, in which the dependence of brightness
temperature of the £V-39 source on wavelength A is shown [13]. The low weight and
”pocket“ size, the independence from an electrical system and other power sources
and the absence of noise typical for pulsed sources with an electric charge make
this radiator a convenient means of investigating explosive processes.

2. Installation of an Ultraviolet Shock

The effect of powerful ultraviolet radiation pulses on solids is accanpanied by a
number of interesting physical and gas-dynamic phenaena. mess phenomena can be
studied experimentally by means of special explosive installations in which a
strong shock wave is radiated in an inert gas [9-11]. nese installations are
similar to existing pulsed lasers by the radiant flux density and are far superior
to them in the value of the radiated energy.

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He achieved the maximum radiant flux density from the front of a shock wave in ex-
periments with helium. At shock wave velocity of D - 78 km/s the density of the
ultraviolet radiation (shielding of which can be disregarded) was estimated at

s. - 3.108 W/cmz.

However, development of devices designed to investigate the effect of radiation on
matter consist not only in producing maximum fluxes from the wave front but in
providing those geometric ratios which would permit fuller use of the radiated en-
ergy to affect the target being investigated. In this regard devices used to
achieve high shock wave velocity were ineffective. It follows from formula (3.16)
for a disk radiator that the flux density on the target depends on the square of
the sine of the angle at which the radiator is visible. Therefore, the flux densi-
ty on the target 0 - 3-10 3 W/s2 could be produced only for a very short time, on
the order of 10'7 second, when the wave would be in the immediate vicinity of the
irradiated surface. The integral energy density in time [5 80d distinguished
on the target would also be low, approximately 10 J/cmz. =,. I

The weight of the charge, which was limited to 1 kg in our experiments, is also no
less important when designing the installation. To compare explosive radiation
sources to each other, it is convenient to introduce the efficiency of the source

":1 ES
77' (6.1)

where E is the radiant energy density released on the target during operation of
the installation, 5 is the output cross-sectional area where the target is placed,
6 is the weight of the explosive charge and q is the heat value of the explosive.
Devices to achieve record velocities and temperature had an efficiency of only

n N 0.001 percent.

An explosive radiation source, under the effect of which intensive evaporation and
flight of different solids was detected, is described in [9]. The sources was a
shaped charge filled with argon (Figure 62). The inner walls of the channel were
lined with polished aluminum foil that reflected part of the radiation to the tar-
get. The mean velocity of the shock wave in the channel was D - 9 km/s and the
brightness temperature in blue light was Ty. - 26,000’K.‘ The plane front lost
stability and began to bend near the walls approximately 10 microseconds after

generation of the shock wave. Its temperature dropped in this case to Ty. -
- 17,000°x.

The radiant flux density 0 and the surface energy density 2 near the target axis
were calculated from the results of measuring the brightness temperature of the
front in blue light and its position in time. The inhomogeneity of the brightness
of the front through the channel cross section was taken into account in the cal-
culation. It was assumed that the shock wave radiated like an absolutely black
body up to the transparency threshold of argon. Circular regions of the mirror

 

.The value of brightness temperature refined compared to [9] is presented here.

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

    
 

  

‘3“:-

I!)

W

 
   
       
    
  

§

\

\ \ \§\\:\\\\\\\ _ ,

é

//
///A

  

 

V//////////////////////////////////////////All7///

 

{

Pique 62. Explosive Radiation Source: 1--1ena providing plane detonation
front: 2--charge of caet m 40/60 weighing 400 gran. (outer di-
aneter of 60 an, innex dial-eta: of 45 In and length of charge
of 165 II): 3--poliehod alumina: toil: 4--tatgot

   

Q ”M/m'u)
2.
I 2
I 7
(2)
3 [a 24 a! “an

ﬁgure 63. Flu): Density 0 with Different Poeitions of Target: 1-x - 21
on, a - 15 J/cmzy 2»: - 27 en, a - a/a2; aux - 33 an, r. -
15 J/an2

1 . DIR/an?
2. Hieroneconds

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 64. Explosive Radiation Source: 1--lana providing plane detonation
front.- 2--charge of cast m 40/60 weighing 400 grams, diameters

of 84 m and length or 70 my 3--polished aluminum foil: 4-
target

nah/0H (1)

  

(2)
° ‘4' mm

Figure 65. Flux Density 0 with Target in Different Positions: 1--x - 15
an, a - 20 J/cmz; 2--x - 25 cm, a - 31 J/cmZ. aux - 27 an,
a - 32 3/an

l. HH/anz
z. Microseconds

1106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

image of the shock wave front bounded by beams at angles of 00 (without reflec-
tion). 61 - 00 (single reflection), 62 - 81 (double reflection) and so on. are
formed on the reflecting walls of the channel. In this case formula (3.16) for a
disk radiator acquires the form

0 - aoT‘ [sin' 0. + 1: (sin’ 0, — sin” 0.) + I" (sin' 9, —
-Sll'0.) + one i'k‘(aill'9.~aill'o..l) + es: ’0 (6.2)

where K is the reflection coefficient of foil and a is a multiplier that takes
into account the opaqueness of argon for photons hv > 15.7 eV. According to
(148] , the reflection coefficient of alminum is weakly dependent on the angle of
incidence and hardly varies in the spectral region of interest to us. me lean
reflection coefficient for the spectrun was assured equal to k - 0.5.

The results of calculating the radiant flux density 9 and energy density 2 on the
target are presented in Figure 63. here is an Optimum distance for installation
of the target at - 27 cm for which the flux density 0 and energy density 8 are max-
imum. The shock wave reached the highest amplitude at this distance. The contri-
bution of reflection from the foil to energy E comprised approximately 30 percent.
The efficiency of the source was estimated at n - 0.01 percent.

The source described above was used to investigate the effect of powerful radiation
with continuous spectrm on a solid. 3 nmber of interesting results was obtained.
However. some deficiencies of the source were also determined during the experi-
ments. More than half the explosive products of the charge flew off to the sides
and did not participate in formation of the shock wave in the channel. The wave
due to detonation of the channel walls was intensified only toward the end of ac-
tion of the source when the temperature near the walls decreased due to bending of
the front. The aluminum foil with which the channel walls were lined reduced the

shock wave amplitude somewhat.

Experiments were conducted from the results of which a more improved design of the
source was developed (Figure 64). The latter is a charge cast from T0 40/60 in
the form of a cylinder with seven conical recesses, placed in a tube of polished
aluminmn foil. The ttbe diameter is two times greater than the channel diameter
of the source of the old design. The mean velocity of the shock wave when the
source is filled with argon is D - 11 We and brightness tunperature in blue
light is 30,000'K. The results of calculating the radiant flux density 0 and the
energy density 8 at the center of the target are presented in Figure 65. The max-
imum flux density 0 - 6 lav/cm2 is reached near the charge at x - 15 ca. The amp-
litude of the shock wave is highest at this location. The integral energy density
in time B is maximum when the target is installed at a farther distance, x - 27 cm.
Although the flux density on the target 0 decreases in this case, the time of oper-
ation of the source and the energy I: increase. The efficiency of the source at
this distance is n = 0.07 percent.

It is significant that the source of new design permits irradiation of a target
84 an in diameter (the maximal target diameter was 40 mm in the previous design).
Because of this, evaporation and scattering of the target material proceeded un-
der conditions similar to one-dimensional, which facilitated analysis and inter-
pretation of the results. The flux density distribution 0 through the target

1167

FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radius is presented in Figure 66. The nonuniformity of illumination initially in-
creased (it was maximum at a distance of y - 4 cm from the wave to the garget) and
then decreased as the shock wave approached the target. Reflection from the tube

walls was not taken into account in calculations of distribution but it is quali-

tatively clear that it reduces the nonunifornity of irradiation.

Imperiments were conducted on evaporation of sulphur targets to compare the source
of the old and new design. The rate of rise of the luminous threshold of the va-
pors comprised 0.8 We for the old design and 1.1 We for the new design. More
intensive glow of the vapors was also observed in the latter case.

m. —

47

I l J 40v

Figure 66. Flux Density Distribution 9 'mrough Target Radius, Related to
Density 00 at Center (y is the distance from the shock wave

to the target)

By using inert gases heavier than argon. one can reach higher temperatures at low-
er velocities D. Although the region of gas transparency decreases in this case,
an increase of temperature leads in the final analysis to an increase of flux
density 0 on the target. The energy density 3 released on the target increases
even more strongly since the operating time of the source is extended.

Experiments were conducted in which the source was filled with xenon. 1b avoid
losses of the scarce gas, the source was filled by preliminary evacuation rather
than by purging. changes were introduced in the design of the source for this
purpose compared to Figure 64. A charge with foil and the target were inserted

in a glass tube hermetically sealed on both ends by plates. The charge was ini-
tiated by a lens through the plate. The velocity and temperature of the front in
blue light at the beginning of operation of the source comprised D - 12 We and

'r a = 55,000°K, but dropped to values of D - 5.3 Isa/s and Ty. - 30,000'x within

2 microseconds. Despite the fact that xenon is transparent only to photons of

hv < 12.1 eV (argon is transparent for hv < 15.70 v). the flux density 0 and energy
density 8 increased appreciably (Pigure 67). When the target was installed at dis-
tance of x = 14 an, the flux density was maximum, 6 II 15 MW/cmz. me integral
energy density in time was maximum at x - 21 (a and was equal to E - 130 J/azl

the efficiency of the source for this distance was estimated at n - 0.3 percent.

1108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

swi’a-ru' (1)
t-xeu-m' (a) .

  

II I... (3)

Figure 67. Flux Density 0 and Energy unity r at Center of Target with
Source Filled with Xenon: the solid curves correspond to foil
reflection coefficient of 0.5: dashed line-without regard to

 

reflection
Key:
1. Wow2 3. microseconds
2. .J/cu2
' U II I.” (2)
Figure 68. Flux Density 0 at Center of Target Installed at Distance of
x - 27 cm with Different Initial Pressures of Argon: 1--
po -= so no Hg (2 - 14 a/enz); 2--po - 100 .- Hg (2 - 18 J/anzh
3--p8 - 300 mu Hg (3 - 27 a/cmz), 4--po - 760 a. Hg (2 - 34
J/cm )
Kay:
1. “/02 2. Hicroseconds

The source was filled with xenon to produce harder radiation with photon energy
up to hv - 21.5 ev. The man wave velocity on the section of x - 27 an was D - l3
Ion/s and temperature was '13,. - 30,000°x. no radiant flux density reached 0 - 4
MW/cnz and energy density 2 o 30 J/aaz.

169

FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 10
9.. In ﬁg | no I so ' I m I so
9.“ an 8 1 N 8 1- so 8 i so 8 1

D. l-“Il 9.8 10.1 10.2 10010.8 10-8 10-811.2 11.4 11.0 11.3 11.8
7'40". 'K 20 29 28 M521 as 23.58 21 23 25 286

 

The use of different inert gases in the source pereits one to study the effect of
the spectral composition of radiation and the density of the surrounding medium on
the target. The parameters of the source when it use filled with argon of reduced
density were also measured in this regard. The values of temperature and velocity
of a shock wave for three distances y to the target (3 - 27 as) at different
initial argon pressure are presented in Table 10.

Although the temperature does not vary very strongly with variation of the initial
pressure, the difference in the fluxes is significant (Figure 68). The difference
is even greater for energy 3 since the wave velocity increases with a decrease of

pressure and the operating time of the source is reduced. The energy 2 decreases

by a factor of 2.4 upon transition from initial pressure po - 760 m Hg to p0 - 50
run Hg. But if one takes into account the energy released during the sane time.

for example, during the first 22 microseconds, this difference decrases to a fac-
tor of 1.6.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

53. Efficiency of Explosion Sources
Under laboratory conditions when the weight of the used explosive charge

is limited, it is possible to achieve an increase in radiant energy only by
increasing the efficiency of the source. Its highest value n-0'.'3z was obtained in
a blast source with xenon. This is approximately 100 tiles more than in ordinary
devices designed to obtain powerful shock waves. The preliminary results of
several experiments indicate that as a result of further improvement of the struc-
tural designs of the source it is possible to achieve an efficiency of n-lz. For
this purpose it is necessary to use a sufficiently strong tube which will not be
destroyed on passage of the shock wave and which at the same time will insure
slower damping of the wave. Between the charge and the walls of the tube it is
necessary to leave a wedge-shaped gap, as a result of which the flight of the blast
products to the sides will also be med for the creation of a shock wave in the
tube. It is necessary to use a higher quality mirror coating which is obtained by
depositing aluminum in a vacuum. Significant reflection in the ultraviolet region
can be achieved if we avoid contact of the coating with air, for exanple, ined-
iately after deposition. fill the tube with an inert gas [148].

For further significant increase in radiant energy yield, theoretically
new solutions are needed. The source efficiency introduced in the form of (6.1)

is in essence the product of three cofactors:

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

= 1 .
'I 'II'IaI: (6.3)

where n1 is the energy transfer coefficient from the explosive charge to the shock
wave, n2 equals the efficiency of the shock wave as a radiator. n3 is the radiant
energy transfer coefficient from the shock wave to the target. Let us discuss
each of these coefficients in more detail.

The energy transferred to the wave is made up of the internal energy of
the heated gas and its kinetic energy. In a powerful shock wave they are equal to
each other. and for a unit mass of gas it is possible to write

e n u‘IZ. (6-4)

Expressing the gas velocity in terms of the front velocity u-(Z/(ﬁlDD,

we obtain the following expression for the energy transfer coefficient to the wave:

= i" w (6.5)
'II W 7—" ,

where V is the initial volume occupied by the gas (the volume of the working
chamber of the source), I) is the average shock wave velocity, 6 is the weight of
the charge, q is the calorific value of the explosive.

Shaped charges give higher shock wave velocity in the required direction.
The coefficient n1 is higher for them. For example, the charge which we used
which had seven shaped depressions created a shock wave with an average velocity
of D=11 kn/sec in argon. The charge cast without the shaping and having 1.3 times
more weight created a shock wave with an average velocity of 088 It‘ll/sec in the
working chamber of the scurce. Thus, as a result of shaping the coefficient

n1 was increased by 2.5 times.

A significant effect can be achieved on going over to high-density gases.
Although the average shock wave velocity is somewhat lower in this case, the

combination DOD2 increases. Thus. on going from argon to xenon, the average

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

velocity in the section x-27 cn decreased altogether from 11 to 10 kin/sec, and
the density 90 increased by 3.3 tines. As a result the energy transfer
coefficient increased by 3.3 tines, reaching a value of n1-182. The dependence
of the coefficient on the density is such (Figure 69) that on filling the source
with xenon with pressure of p0-3 to lo an it is possible to approach a value of
nl-SOX. There is a limit sonewhere here,- for the blast products expand in all
directions, and part of the charge energy is consumed on creation of the shock

wave in the surrounding air. If the charge is separated fro. the air by a nassive

rigid shell, then this limit can be shifted away.

m —---

  

' I l I I ’.,l/l (1)
Figure 69. The coefficient n1 as a function of gas density
90 constructed according to experimental data
Key:
1. g/liter
The greatest reserves for increasing the efficiency of blast sources con-
sist in increasing the effectiveness of the shock wave as a radiator. The work
done by a piston creating a powerful shock wave in a gas if it is reduced to a
mic time and a unit surface of the front is
- ‘
A_p.u-M'D-u—+1T"'D" (6.6)
The energy emitted from the unit surface of the front per unit tine is
S - sol“, (6-7)

where a is the factor considering the opaqueness of the gas ahead of the front

for the quanta hv>I. Then for the shock wave-enitter efficiency we have

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'h' #1433;- (6.8

From Table 11 it is obvious that with an increase in the temperature
the coefficient n2 first increases and then decreases (this smooth dependency is

distorted somewhat by the peculiarities of ionization in each specific gas). For

each gas there is a defined temperature range in which the radiation yield is

maximal.

Table 11. Coefficient n2 for Different Temperatures. X

 
    

740-"!

"0 2,1 2.5 2.8 3.0 L5 5.0 4.9 4.1 6.1 4.0 5.2
NO 2.9 3.2 LS 4.8 6.8 4.8 L9 4.8 4.0 3.8 3.‘
M’ 2.5 2,9 2.8 3.! 2.7 1.0 2,3 2.7 2.‘ LD 1.0
Kl’ 2,9 3.2 3.5 3.8 3.0 3.7 8,5 3.1 — — —
X. 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.7 2.5 3.5 2.5 3.3 — - —

Helium and neon are distinguished by high value of the energy deexcitation
coefficient n2=52. The application of these gases is expedient at temperatures
above 60000°K when, along with high efficiency. large radiation flux densities
with respect to absolute magnitude are achieved. Accordingly, experiments were set
up [165] in which couvettes 25 mm in diameter and the devices described in 53 of
Chapter II were used. For several microseconds the shock waves glowed with a
temperature of ~100,000°K. The radiant flux density was estimated at 108 watts/cmz.
The deficiency of the devices was the low energy transfer coefficient to the wave
nIZlZ. For gases with high atomic weigh the deexcitation coefficient n2 is
smaller, but it is higher than the energy transfer coefficient to the wave n1 so
that on the whole the efficiency of the source gains. Obviously the shaped
charges used in combination with xenon or krypton insure the highest radiant energy

yield.

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is possible to deterIune the effect of the initial gas pressure on
the efficiency of a shock wave emitter according to the data in Table 12.

Table 12. Coefficient n2 for Different Argon Pressures, X

TolO'l'°K 2 3 1..
po-760 an Hg 2.3 2.1. 2.9
po-300 Imn Hg 4.2 5.3 5.6
90-100 mm Hz 9.2 12 11.
po-SO mm Hg 15 22 23

The radiation yield increases quite rapidly as the gas pressure drops.

The growth is such that it almost compensates for the decrease in the energy trans-
fer coefficient to the wave (the product “1"2 at po-760 III Hg is a total of 1.2 times
greater than for po-SO In ﬁg). 0n the other hand; if the pressure increases above
atmospheric, the variation of the coefficient n1 slows (see Figure 69) whereas the
value of the coefficient n2 persistently decreases. Therefore the optimal initial
pressure insuring the highest source efficiency must be realized. According to

the data presented in Figure 68 for argon this pressure is approximately equal to
atmospheric pressure.

Intentionally selecting various gases, we have complained many times that
in nature there is no gas with such a high atomic weight as xenon and with such high
ionization potential as helium. As a result of the high atomic weight this gas
would be heated to high temperatures with effectiveness energy transfer to the
wave. As a result of the high ionization potential, the cold gas ahead of the
front would remain transparent in the far ultraviolet region so that a significant
proportion of the radiation from the heated gas would be emitted to the outside.
Considerationsabout this question have led us to the conviction that a medium with

the required properties can be obtained artificially.

4.55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

’ J: A! It Jun/aw (1)

Figure 70. Shock adiabats of alkali metal vapor and inert gases
Key.1. km/sec
All of the alkali metals have low primary, but quite high secondary ionization
pocentials. The estimates which follow below indicate that the radiation of a
powerful shock wave propagated in alkali metal vapor is capable of singly ionizing
the vapor far ahead of the front. However, the singly ionized vapor absorbs quanta
weakly with energy less than the second ionization potential. Therefore as a
result of the fast ionization of the body of the vapor powerful radiation begins
to reach the target uninhibited.

Let us try to substantiate this picture quantitatively. In Figure 70 we
see the temperature of shock-heated vapor as a function of the wave front velocity
(the initial vapor temperature was assumed equal to the boiling point at atmospheric
pressure: see the Appendix). A cowarison with the analogous relations for inert
gases which are also presented in Figure 70 is of interest. The energy expenditure
on the primary ionization of alkali metals is much less. Therefore in practice
for equal atomic weight (hue-20.18 and ANa-22‘99' AK-39.10 and AAr-39.94, AKr-83.80
and ARb=85.48. AXc'131°3 and Ac5=l32.9) higher temperatures are reached in the

alkali metal vapor. The noted characteristic feature itself leads to noticeable

increase in the energy deexcitation coefficient of the shock wave.

156-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 71. Calculation of the flux density in the center of the target
Let us demonstrate that the radiation is capable of quite fast ionization
of the body of the vapor separating the front and the target. Alkali metal vapor
at a temperature of ~1 ev in practice is entirely ionized. The expenditures on
eating the cesiul vapor to this tewerature, for sample, are 6.9 ev/aton. In
1 cm3 of vapor under atmospheric pressure at the boiling point (963°K), there are

7.61018 atoms so that the expenditures on heating 1 ca3 of cesiun vapor amunt to

8.11 joules. For heating a colm of vapor 1 cnz in cross section and 2!) cm long

it takes 250 joules. At the temperature behind the front 11-1051 this energy is

2

emitted from 1 cm of front surface in ~0.S microseconds. Thus, fractions of

microseconds are needed for the ionization of the body of the vapor separating the

front and the target. As a result, inasnuch as the ionized vapor absorbs very

1

weakly , the powerful radiation reaches the target.

Beginning with the fact that the quanta less than the second potential of
cesium (hv<33 ev) are not absorbed ahead of the front, the values of the "deexcita-

tion" coefficient n2 are calculated by formula (6.8).

T°10'[‘°K 3 I. s 6 7 8 9 10 12
n2,1' 26 as 35 27 36 u. so 55 60

1The estimates according to (5.11) give a path length in the vapor iv 2.0 7 cm for

small visible quanta hv: 2 av. However, for the quanta thlo to 30 ev for which
almost all of the emitted energy is needed, the paths turn out to be longer,
zvll to 20 meters.

'157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The presented figures indicate that by using alkali Metal vapor it is possible to

increase the efficiency of blast sources by tenfold.

Let us discuss the last of the cofactors which determines the efficiency
of the blast source -- the energy transfer coefficient from the shock wave to the
target. 1n the sources which we used this coefficient was n3=0.2, but it could be
increased, improving the quality of the reflector. For reflecting walls of the
cube the emitter will be not only the wave front, but also annular regions - re-
flections of the front in the tube walls (Figure 71). The radiant flux density at
the center of the target can be represented in the form of a series (6.2) or by

grouping the terms of the series in pairs, in the form

(Ii-=S(I—k)gk'sln'0 —S(l—k)£k'—, , “3;. (6.9)

Here S is the flux density from the front, I: is the reflection coefficient. Prom

Figure 71 it is obvious that rn-(2n+l)r, and instead of (6.9) we have

"" “5“‘*)2"%° (6.10)

The energy density E at the center of the target released during operation

of the source t will be

I I
“Sauna =So+ay— —§7‘,’4du. (6.11)
0

where x is the distance from the charge to the target. D-dy/dt is the front

velocity. Integrating this series (6.10) by terms and setting D-conat, we obtain
Sr 1—”
’9- —‘-1r—£*”("' 4' "'"W ”W (6.12)

If we assume that this target is installed quite far from the charge and
we set arctg Wu if. in (6.12), then for the energy density we obtain

the following expression:
158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"‘§‘%rr‘i‘- (6.13)

The data for the other distances are presented in Table 13.

Table 13. Values of the Energy Density B in Units of (1/2) (Sr/D)
for Different Reflection Coefficients and Distances

‘ '0 0,50 0.11 0.” 0.“ 0,0 0.” "I '
3 - 0.5 0.50 0,“ I.” I.” I.” I." 3

i '03 0.50 i.“ I.“ I." 3.15 2.3 5.01
i 'I' 0.. 0.62 I." I,” 2.33 3.70 3.” 1.

 

In the case where D-const the greatest gain from increasing the reflection
coefficient is obtained when installing the target at the naxinun distance r”.
Under real conditions when the shock wave dams, there is an entirely defined
distance from the charge to the target in which the energy density is maxi-a1.

The role of the reflector decreases here. Thus, in the previously described
sources the contribution of reflection was about 301. However, with an increase
in the reflection coefficient the optinal distance of installing the target also
increases. 0n the whole, as the estinates show.- for k-O. 7. as a result of the
reflector it is possible to achieve dotbling of the energy releued on the target.
For a reflection coefficient k-0.9 which is actually attainable only for the
visible and near ultraviolet regions, the contribution of the reflector can exceed
the contribution of the shock wave by several tines. The nost radical path of
increasing the energy transfer coefficient to n3-l is to "stop" the shock wave in
direct proxinity to the target. 0n braking the wave it would also be possible to
increase the tenperature of the shock-heated gas; which would provide an additional

effect. However, it is quite difficult to ilplenent this idea. It is possible,

159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

for example, to place a transparent wall in front of the target. Hawever, first,
the most transparent materials (fluorite, lithium fluoride) intensely absorb the
radiation with a wave length A shorter than 110 nm [148] and, secondly, after the
impact of the wave against the wall the latter cracks and completely eliminates
transparency.

It is possible to use the interaction of the shock wave with a magnetic

field. For effective braking of the shock wave fields are required with an intensity

on the order of [166]
_ “spy—IL 1.
”- [—771— 150‘] - (6.14)

For .'.»0=-10'3 g/cm3, 1-1.2 and 0-10 km/sec, we obtain "-6'105 nersteds. The pulse
magnetic fields of such intensity are entirely attainable under laboratory condi-
tions (for example, using magnetic shaped-charge generators in which obviously it
is possible to use the blast energy of the charge of the source itself).

The original method of braking the shock wave was proposed by the author
I. V. Ncnchinov. It is necessary to separate the gas with high atomic weight
(xenon) from the target by a layer of gas with low atomic weight, but high ioniza-
tion potential (helium). Then after passage of the shock wave the interlayer of
helium is forced out and the xenon heated to high teamerature brakes on the target.
As a result of low atomic weight the helium is heated insignificantly and remains
transparent. It is still better to use cesium vapor as the gas with high atomic
weight. The fact is that a narrow layer of xenon at the interface with helium
quickly cools by radiation and begins to shield the internal region heated to high

temperature. The shielding of the cesium plasma is negligible until it cools to a

temperature of ~ lO"°K.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibility of creating a light source in which the energy of a
gas cooling as a result of radiation yield has been studied experimentally by
I. I. Divnov. In the experiments a device of the shock wave tube was used which
made it possible to obtain a moving xenon-helium interface in a tube 15 II in
diameter and then heat the xenon by an explosive blast. The diagram of the exper-
iments is presented in Figure 72. Two ttbes filled with xenon (2) and helium (4)
are separated by the diaphragm (3). The latter is ruptured when the helium
pressure rises to a given value. After rupture of the diaphragm a shock wave is
formed in the xenon behind which the contact "xenon-helium" interface moves. when
the wave reaches the ionization sensor (6), the charge is exploded (1). The power-
ful shock wave created by the blast heats the xenon; In order for a rarefaction
wave not to occur after the shock wave reaches the interface with the helium in
the xenon. the helium density must be no less than the xenon density. This condi-
tion could be satisfied by selecting the initial gas pressures po-0.05 atmospheres
in xenon and po-ZO atmospheres in helium (calculating the rupture decay formed
during rupture of the diaphragm it follows that on both sides of the contact inter-

face the gas pressure and densities are identical and equal to p183 atmospheres

and 91310-3 g/an) .

Figure 72. Device for attaining a stationary volume of gas heated
to high temperature.

1 -- explosive charge, 2 — blast tube with xenon, 3 — diaphragm,
4 - metal tube with helium, 5 - glass window, 6 - ionization
sensor

161

FOR OFFKJAI.US£(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the experiments the brightness temperature of the glow was measured
through the window (5) using the FR-lOH camera. The velocity of the shock wave

front was measured simultaneously (the recording diagram appears in Figure 27, a).

The brightness temperature as a function of time is presented in Figure 73 for

one of the experiments. Up to the time t1 the blast shock wave was propagated in
the xenon of the initial density; an increase in brightness temperature was caused
by the acceleration of the shock wave in the charge channel. At t1<t<t2 the blast
shock wave moves through the xenon previously heated and compressed to density of
”1:400 in the shock wave formed after the rupture of the diaphragm. The time t2
corresponds to the shock wave reaching the interface with the helium. The decrease
in brightness for t>t2 is naturally connected with radiant cooling of the xenon.
was 12.2 km/

The shock wave velocity in the experiment at the time t <t<t

1 2
sec. This value of the velocity corresponds to the temperature in the wave of
7'10‘°K greatly exceeded the measured values of the brightness temperature.
Obviously shielding of the visible radiation occurred in the wave front. However,
on reaching the interface with the helium the shielding must disappear, and a
brightness temperature peak must be observed at the first instant (shown in

Figure 73 by the dotted line). However, in the experiment, sometimes as a result
of insufficient time resolution (10'7 sec), and sometimes as a result of turbulent
mixing of the helium and xenon the peak was not observed.

Let us note that the use of helium as the "light guide" makes it possible
to obtain large radiation fluxes with "wide" spectrum -- to the limit of trans-
parency of helium (hv<26.6 ev) - for comparatively low shock wave velocities. In
order to obtain such fluxes, heating the helium itself, a shock wave velocity that

is much larger is required. A large deficiency of such devices is the fact that

the helium interlayer separating the target from the highly heated gas does not
I62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

,U'f'l
I
h
l
I
II II # tau (1)

Figure 73. Brightness temperature (A f -432 nm) as a fmction
of time; the time the detonation reaches the bottom of the shaped
channel is taken as the origin
Key:
1. t, microseconds

protect it from high pressures developing during braking of the shock wave. How—
ever, in some cases, for example, when the cosmic body is moving in the lower
layers of the atnosphere, the simultaneous effect of powerful radiation and high
pressure is typical. For simulation of such phenomena it is even sinner to get
along without the helium interlayer, realizing braking of the shock wave by the

target itself.

Up to now we have considered the blast devices as an instruent for the
investigation of the effect of powerful radiation fluxes on matter. however, it
can also be used for other purposes. In some experiments the gas in the shock wav
was heated to temeratures above 105°K. 0n reflection of this wave from a rigid
barrier the tenperature would exceed 3'105'K, and the density would become 50 time
greater than the gas density at atmospheric pressure. Such a dense hot plasma is
a source of quite intense x—radiation. 0n expansion of 1 m3 of such plasma to
atmospheric pressure, a glowing ball is formed about 0.5 meters in diameter with
a temperature of about 30000'K. In essence. the existing devices using the chemi-
cal energy of an explosive permit simulation of many processes occurring during
a nuclear blast -- irreversible heating of the gas in a powerful shock wave,
adiabatic expansion of a abode-heated gas to atmospheric pressure with the

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formation of a fire ball, slow cooling of the fire ball by radiation. An artifi-
cial niniball can turn out to be an effective source of light similar to the
natural fire ball, from the surface of which a significant proportion of the

nuclear blast energy is released (tens of percentages [37]).1

Let us also note that the application of a shock wave as a radiator for
visible and near ultraviolet regions has its peculiarities. As we have already
noted, the reflector can play an important role. The efficiency of the energy
deexcitation in the different sections of the spectrum must be characterized, in
contrast to (6.8) by the spectral deexcitation coefficient

‘7 HP 5‘ 6.15)
'IN“ ‘T—W' (

where S; is the spectral density of the radiation from a front surface. For each
gas there is a defined amplitude of the shock wave for which the efficiency of

the deexcitation on the given wave length l is maximal -- this is obvious from

Tables 14 and 15.

 

Table 11.. Coefficient “(cm-1) in the Table 15. Coefficient marl) in
visible part of the spectrun the near ultraviolet region of the
(“500 nm) spectrum (1-300 nm)

T.-I.".°l| '.‘ '5 | a l at. , 70'." 0" I. I I5 ‘ u I ”II ”

______________I

II. M D 1 I12

no .ia 111 m 56 33 N. m :2: 22 :4 an

Nu m m IIIZ m 30 Ar 2" m 303 “I, "a

’5' m m 73 f‘ 3“ in an m 321 an m

M m m 19 .1: In x. 360 «a m 295 m

x. m m 71 63 5" Mr 20 45 as 1a 14

M, u M an m H

_._ -—

The idea of creating such a light source has been implemented to some degree in
reference [167].

161;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

54. Certain Results.of Investigating the Effect of Radiation with a
Continuous Spectrum on a Hard Substance

Applying the blast radiation source, I. V. Nemehinov, I. F. Zharikov
and one of the authors of [9] observed the formation of a glowing region above
the surface of the target which expanded at a velocity of about 500 m/sec. A
rise in pressure at the radiated surface to several atmospheres was recorded.
The formation of the glowing region was explained by intense evaporation and
ionization of the material of the target, and the rise in pressure, by the re-
action of the dispersing vapor. The correctness of this interpretation was later
confirmed when A. A. Provalov [11] was able to obtain spectra of the glowing region
containing the lines of the target material.

The picture of the effect of not very short radiation pulses on a solid
material can be imagined as follows.

On irradiation of the solid state the surface layer of the material is
heated up and evaporated. If the vapor weakly absorbs the incident radiation,
then it penetrates deeper and deeper layers of the material, and evaporates them
-- a transparency wave moves into the material [109]. However, even weakly absorb-
ing the radiation. for example, as a result of thermal ionization. the vapor be-

gins to heat up.

I. V. Nemchinov and c. G. Vilenskaya [116] performed calculations demon-
strating that with high radiation intensity the heating of the vapor and the
growth of absorption connected with it lead to the formation of a highly heated
opaque layer at the surface.

Thus, independently of the initial transparency of the vapor it is
necessary to expect the occurrence of a layer that shields the incident radiation.

However, the shielding of the surface of the body still does not mean that

165
FOR OF1WCJA1.US£10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

evaporation must cease. The heated vapor itself radiates. The intensity and the

spectral composition of this radiation are determined not so much by the power

of the primary radiation as by the optical properties of the evaporated material.
Thus, it is possible to use a focused laser beam to heat up the vapor from the out—
side to very high temperature. but as a result of opaqueness of the vapor only the
radiation of the comparatively cold inner layers reaches the surface of the body.
The phenomenon is analogous to shielding in powerful shock waves when the radiation
of the shock-heated gas and also the highly heated layer ahead of the front turns
out to be blocked, and only the light from the remote, moderately hot layers pene-
trates to the cold transparent gas.

The above-described concepts of self-shielding of the surface of bodies,
in spite of similarity to the already known shielding effect of powerful shock
waves«in gases, are in need of experimental confirmation. The theoretical calcula-
tions of the effect of the radiation of a continuous spectrum on a barrier were
performed in references [9, 111, 168, 169].

In our experiments targets made of various materials were irradiated by
a blast light source. The moving image camera recording of the dispersion of the
target vapor is shown in Figure 74.

The fact of glow of the vapor above the target indicated that the tempera-
ture of this vapor was about lOOOO‘K. The temperature could not be appreciably
higher than this. for lines of neutral atoms and molecules were present in the
glow spectrum. 0n the other hand, a noticeable continuum in the glow spectrum
indicated significant ionization of the vapor and, consequently, quite high temper-
ature. If we consider that the measured pressures in the vapor were from several
units to several tens of atmospheres, from equation p-nkT it is easy to estimate

the particle density which turns out to be on the order of 1018 cm'3.

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 74. Moving image camera recording of the dispersion of

the vapor from a target pressed from HgCl powder

1 - target, 2 - vapor interface (interface velocity 400-600 m/sec,
height of rise 7 In)

w—LEI

Figure 75. Diagram for obtaining the radiation spectra of

heated vapor.

l -- target, 2 - shock wave front of the blast source, 3 -

window, 4 - spectral moving image camera

In the experiments targets made of mercury applied to lead, pressed HgCl
powder and also 12 powder with 102 TII admixture were irradiated. The blast
source with seven shaped depressions held with argon was used (52). The distance
of the target from the charge was selected so that the energy density 3 released
from the target will be maximal. The recording layout is shown in Figure 75, and
the spectrum obtained. in Figure 76.

Figure 77 shows the radiation spectrum of mercury and lead vapor. First

the spectrum consists of individual lines of the atoms of the target materials.

The lines gradually broaden; some of them self-reverse with time, significant
parts of the spectrum are overlapped by the intensifying continuum, against the

background of which only the individual absorption lines remain. Let us present
167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFK1AI.USF.ONLY

the temperatures measured in mercury and lead vapor 3.5 mm from the target
surface in 1 microsecond before the arrival of the shock wave in the vicinity of

the vapor.

A, nm 546 1.95 472 371 359 338 315 304
T. °K 9700 9600 9200 11000 11000 10600 10700 10200

 

Figure 76. Spectral m0ving image camera recording of the glow
of target vapor from pressed HgCl powder; distance firm the
target surface 2.5 mm. Light band -- shook wave vapor

 

Figure 77. Spectral moving image camera recording of the glow
of moreurv and lend vapor in the visib1e and ultraviolet regions.
1 —~ vapor vmiesion spectrum, 2 -— shock wave spectrum of the source

Key:

168

FOR OFFICIAL I'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--.......

llldU$M~ (1)

1.”

Figure 78. Radiation spectrum of vapor (I2+102 Til)
Key.l. nm

The measarements were performed at the peaks of the most intense and
broadest lines or with respect to an intense continuuz. The temperatures turned
out to be close. The radiation spectrum of the vapor of a mixture of iodine and
tellurium iodide is shown in Figure 78.

Let us present the mean values of the temperatures measured at different

distances h from the surface of the target 1 microsecond before the arrival of

the shock wave.

h, m 4. 5 3.5 2.5

HgCl - 8900 10900
ngm 91.00 10300 7800
124-102 m - - 7900

Thus. the temperature measurements and estimates of the particle concen-
tration demonstrated that the vapor was in the form of a dense plasma with a
temperature of about lOOOO‘K. The narrow outer layer of the expanding vapor was
the brightest (see Figure 7A) and emits in a continuous spectrum (see Figure 76) -
obviously the temperature there is higher.1 With such parameters the vapor is in a
position to absorb the radiation incident on it intensely.

However, as direct proof of shielding we have the results of recording
the radiation reaching the surface of the target. This radiation was recorded

through a small opening of the target (Figure 79). The target consisted of seven

 

 

1The measurements gave a temperature of the outer layer of vapor of about 15000°K,
but it could be still higher, for this layer was not completely resolved on the
spectral moving image camera recording as a result of the narrow width.

169

FOR OFTWCJAI.USEI)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

samples of different materials. In the center of each sample a hole 0.5 mm in
diameter was drilled. The radiation recording was made using the SPR-ZM moving
image camera in which an iris limiting the field of view was installed in place

of the slit. The brightness standard, just as in the other experiments, was the
BV-39 source. The central part of the discharge in it was separated by a diaphragm
of the same diameter as the openings in the samples.

Figure 80 shows the effective radiation temperature passing through the
openings in the target. At the first point in time cowarison with the blast
source temperature was observed. This corresponds to the fact that all of the
radiation leaving the shock wave front in the direction of the target reached the
surface. At subsequent points in time, a sharp decrease in the effective tempera-

ture was detected for a number of samples. This is explained by the shielding

effect of the vapor closing the opening.1

_ I,
3/: J
:l-‘

Pigure 79. Diagram of the recording of radiation reaching the
target surface.

1 -- blast source shock wave; 2 -- target with opening, 3 -
moving image camera or spectral moving image camera

l'ln Several euperiments the diameter of the opening in the targets was 1 mm,
but in practice the same results were obtained as for a hole diameter of 0.5 um.

Consequently, the hole was quite small and had no influence on the development
of the shielding layer above the surface of the target.

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 80. Radiation shielding by vapor.
l -- brightness temperature of the source wave front;
2-6 -- brightness temperature of the holes in the samples
of sulfur (2), lead (3), asbestos textolite (6), potassium
chloride (5), carbon (6). The curves for the iron and
aluminum compare with curve 1.

Key:

1. microseconds

In the experiments described above, the radiation was recorded through a
light filter with Xeff-432 nm. The shielding appeared still more clearly when the
SP-lll device was used to record the radiation of a broad region expanded in a
spectrum. Targets made of KCl were used in these experiments, and the source (in
order to increase the irradiation power) was filled with xenon. A decrease in
brightness was detected first in the individual lines and then with respect to the
entire observed spectrum (Figure 81). The brightness temperature of the opening
dropped from SOOOO°K (the shock wave temperature at the beginning of the effect
of the source) to 6000°K during the time of operation of the source. Let us con-
sider the difference in the temperature of 6000°K and JOOOO'K which the shock wave
of the source had at the end of its operation. This difference corresponds to the
fact that as a result of shielding ~100 times less light flux reached the surface
of the target.

As a result of the recoil of the dispersing vapor, the pressure acts on
the surface of the target. The first pressure measurements under the effect of

171
FOR,0FFICIAL USE ONLY
s

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radiation from blast sources were made under conditions where the target vapor

dispersed into argon at atmospheric pressure [9]. Later Yu. N. Kiselev investi-

gated the mechanical effect of the radiation for different densities of the

medium surrounding the target (argon and xenon for po-760 mm Hg; argon for

[yo-300, 100 and SO tun Hg). The results obtained are of interest also because the

experiments were performed with more powerful radiation sources than in [9].
mewuwmwumumndwapmwduuusmwn meﬁuomawwu

calibrated (Figure 82) by an air shock wave of known amplitude formed on detonation

of a spherical charge of PETN [19].

When investigating the pressure on the target as a function of the inci-
dent radiant flux, a source filled with xenon was used. Inasmuch as the reflection
coefficient of the polished aluminum foil in the ultraviolet region is not known
exactly. it was not used in the given experiments. This made it possible to
calculate the flux density 0 on the target more precisely (the dotted line in
Figure 67). A lead target was placed at a distance PM or x-27 cm from the
charge which corresponded to different maximum flux densities 0915-106 and
¢-4.8-105 watts/cmz, but of the same density of the released energy 2-50 joules/cmz.
The pressure oscillogram obtained in these experiments are presented in Figure 83.
The shape of the signal on the oscillograms repeats the variation of the flux 0
with time (compare Figures 67 and 83) -- the pressure on the target follows the
decreasing flux. The instantaneous pressure as a function of the flux density
measured in the different experiments is plotted on one curve (Figure 81.).

Aluminum targets were installed in the experiments only at a distance

x-lla rm. Greater delay of the beginning of evaporation r=7.7 microseconds was

172
ton omau. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

observed here (for lead when x311. cm, "3.5 Ilicrosecnrnds).:l The maximum

pressure recorded on the surface of the aluminum target was p-32 atmospheres.

In the experiments simultaneously with measuring the pressure by the
SFR-ZH, the dispersion of the vapor was recorded. The maximum velocities of
ascent of the glowing lead vapor interface where u-370 and u-730 m/sec -
corresponding to the maximum fluxes 0-5.8-106 and 0-15-106 watts/m2. for
aluminum vapor with a flux 0-15-106 watts/cmz, a Velocity of u-650 m/sec wm
measured. The dispersing vapor excited a shock wave in the xenon. In the exper-
iments with sulfur for which the fastest velocity of spreading was recorded
(u-1000 m/sec), a slightly glowing shock wave front was observed ahead of the
vapor interface. Let us compare the pressures pshoclt wave calculated by the

velocity of the vapor interface (the piston velocity) with the pressures Ppiezo

measured by the piezopickup.

__—_________—.—_—.————————-—-—-—

Pb(x-27 cm Pb(x'14'cn) A1 (3-11. cm)
2
p kg/cm 16 145 32
mew , kg/cmz 13 1.2 33

shock wave

     

-—-—>/I

Figure 81. Spectral moving image camera recording of the
brightness of the opening in a K61 target (1-600-600 ml):
the reference line of mercury 1435.8 nm is visible)

 

 

‘I'Let us note that in [9] a comparatively low-power source was used, and evapora-
tion of the aluminum was not observed in general.

173
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SF. ONLY

 

——>t I

Figure 82. Oscillogram of the calibration signals; at the bottom
is a 100 kiloherlz sine curve.

- {5/3 , ‘ w. ,v-f.‘
m...mun)»Memmmnram”

,; 'r .
nusnl'I'll-I.ul--IIIIIIHII|I-...

 

Figure 83. E’rossure oscillcgram on lead targets under the effect
of the radiation of a source filled with xenon: a -- distance at
which the target is installed #14 cm, 5 —- x=27 cm.

The. time runs from left to right. The break in the recording

corresponds to the arrival of the shock wave. At the bottom is
a l megahertz sine curve.

R .//‘-.l (1)

“I

JI

M

 

1 __LJ n.1____l___1___l_J—I_l_1_l_l_
a a, / z a I I ll nun/M (2)

Pressure p on lead targets as .1 function of the radiation

 

Fiyuw R-‘o.
ﬂux donnity
Circles :— for x=?7 cm; dots -- for PM cr‘.

p. kg/cm"; 2. 2*, megawatts/cmz 17/

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JM-m/u' (1)

   

I.

III

11 «lausn«.f(2)

Figure 85. Pressure pulse J on the lead target for different
densities of the released energy E (the notation is the same
as in Figure 84)

1. J, dyne-sec/cm2
2. E, joules/cu:2

Good agreement of the pressures on the target surface and in the shock-
compressed xenon is present. Obviously, simificant pressure gradients in the
vapor layer are absent. This situation is possible when the speed of sound in the
vapor exceeds the dispersion velocity. The speed of sound in the ionized lead
and aluminum vapor (temperature ~10 000°K) is estimated at ~1000 and ~3000 m/sec,
respectively.

The effect of the density of the surrounding gas was studied by varying
the initial pressure of the argon filling the source. In Table 16 maximum

pressures p and dispersion velocities of vapor u measured on lead targets and

piezo
also the pressures in the shock-compressed argon pshock wave calculated by the

velocity u are presented. The pressure pulse on the lead target is illustrated in

Figure 85.

..,-—. .

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

n-o-n
H—
0-9..-

a/ a: u I 2 Mo,

Figure 86. Pressure p on a lead target at different densities p

of the surrounding gas reduced to argon density 90 for po-760 an Hg.
Circles -~ pressure in the experiments with argono at the time t-22
microseconds: dots -- pressure recalculated for one flux density
O-3 megawatts/cm2

 

 

Key:
l. p, kg/cln2
Table 16
p mm Hg 0 me watts/m2 k ICIIIZ I: II/ R / 2
0 ' ’ 8 I’piezo’ 3 ' 9“ Pshock wave' 3 cm
760 2.7 13.3 530 8.4
300 2.6 11.0 860 7.1
100 2.1 8.6 1260 5.7
50 1.7 5.6 1760 lo.9

In Figure 86 the pressure Ppiezo is recalculated for one flux density
¢-3-106 watts/c1112 (the recalculation was done by the experimental dependence of
the pressure on the flux density presented in Figure 86). In spite of the varia-
tion of the surrounding gas density from 5.85 g/liter (xenon at po-760 III Hg)
to 0.118 g/liter (argon at po-SO m Hg), the pressure on the target turned out to

be constant.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

21.

22.

29.

32.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Russian entries only]

[Russian title is the translation of the English book pdalished by
IL, Moscow, 1950]

Zharikov, I. P.; Nemchinov, I. V.; ‘l‘sikulin, H. A. MP [Applied
Mechanics and Technical Physics], No 1, 1967, p 31.

Dremin, A. IL; Savrov, S. D. DAN SSSR [Reports of the USSR Academy of
Sciences], No 179, 1968, p 6210.

Popov, Ye. 6.; Provalov, A. A.; Tsikulin, H. A. DAN SSSR, No 196, 1970,
p 805.

Popov, Ye. 6.; Tsikulin, H. A. WSOKOTEHPBRATURNYY IMPUL'SNYY IZLUGIATEL'.
AV'l‘. SVID. No 272611 [High-Temperature Pulsed Emitter. USSR Author's
Certificate No 272611], 1968.

Popov, Ye. 6.; Tsikulin, H. A. ZHETP [Journal of Experimental and Theoreti-
cal Physics], No 57, 1969, p 389.

Popov, Ye. 6.; Tsikulin, H. A. PREP, No S, 1970, p 164.

Stanyukovich, K. P. NEUSTANOVIVSEIYESYA DVIZMIYA SPwSIINOY SREDY
[Nonsteady Movements of a Continuous Medina], Moscow, Gostekhizdat, 1955.

Bum, F. A.; Kaplan, S. A.; Stmyukovich, K. P. VVEDENIYB V [COSMICBESKUYU-
GAZODINAHIKL' [Introduction to Space Gas Dynamics], Moscow, Fiznatuz, 1958.

Bronshten. V. A. PROBLEHY DVIZHENIYA V A‘l'mSFBRE KRUPNYKH HETEORITNYKH TEL.
[Problems of the Movement of Large hteoritic Bodies: in the Atmosphere],
Moscow, Izd—vo AN SSSR, 1963.

Bronshten, V. A.; Chigorin, A. N. TEPIDFIZIKA VYSOKIKH‘I'EMPERATUR.
[High-Temperature Thermophysics], Vol 2, No 6, 1964, p 860.

Tsikulin, H. A. UDARNYYE VOLNY PR1 DVIZHENII V AMSPBRB KRUPNYKH
PETEORITNYKH TEL. [Shock Waves During Movement of Large Heteoritic Bodies
in the Atmosphere], Moscow, Naldta, 1969.

Zel'dovich, Ya. 8.: Leypunskiy, 0. I. 2327?. No 13, 1963, p 181.

Gershanik, Ya. K.; Zel'dovich. Ya. 8.; Rozlovskiy. A. N. 281-101 [Journal of
Physical Chemistry], No 210, 1950, p 85.

Hodel', I. Sh. ZIIE'I‘F, No 32, 1957, p 714.

Popov, Ye. c.; Tsikulin, M. A. zmz'nr, No 57, 1969, p 522.

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
37.

38.

40.

41.

42.

43.

45.

47.

48.

49.

52.

53.
63.
65.

66.
6;.

68.

69.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zel'dnvich, Ya. 8.; Rayzer. Yu. P. UPN [Progress in the Physical Sciences],
No 63, 1957, p 613..

Zel'dovich, Ya. 3.: Rayzer, Yu. P. FIZIKA UDARNY'IOI VOL“ I VYSOKOTEHPERATURNYKH
GIDRODINAMICHESKIKR YAVLENIY [Physics of Shock waves and High-Temperature

Gas Dynamic Phenomena], Moscow, Nauka, 1966.

Voytenko, A. Ye. DAN SSSR, No 158, 1964, p 1278.

Voytenko, A. Ye. 231'? [Journal of Technical Physics], No 36, 1966, p 178.
Voytenko, A. Ye. PM”, No 4, 1966, p 112.

Voytenko, A. Ye.; Model', I. Sh.; Samodelov, I. 8. DAN SSSR, No 169, 1966,
p 547.

Zatsepin,.Yu.A.; Popov, Ye. 6.; Tsikulin, M. A. ZHETP, No 54, 1968, p 112.

Popov, Ye. c. PIS'MA V ZHETP [Letters to the Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Physics], No 9, 1969, p 176. ‘

Biherman, 1.. 11.: Veklenko, B. A. ZHETP, No 37, 1959, p 164.

Astanovich, I. S. HETEORNYYE YAV1£NIYA V AMSFBRE ZEMLI [Meteor Phenomena
in the Earth's Atmosphere], Moscow, 1958.

Posy, J. L.; Brasweli, R. N. RADIOASTRONOMIYA [Radioastronowy], Moscow, IL,
1958.

Levin, B. Yu. FIZICHESKAYA TEORIYA METEOROV I METEORNOYE VESHCHESTVO V

SOLNECHNOY SISTEME [Physical Theory of Meteors and Meteoric Matter in the
Solar System], Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1956.

Al'biCSkiy, V. A., et a1. KURS ASTIDFIZIKI I ZVEZDNOY ASTRONOMI [Course in
Astrophysics and Stellar Astronomy], Vol 1, Moscow, Costekhizdat, 1951.

Astanovich. I. S. ASTRON. VESTN. [Astronomy Vestnik], Vol 5, No 2, 1971, p 89.
[The Russian title is the translation published by I]. Press, Moscow, 1963].

[A translation of this article appeared in VOPR. RAKETN. TEKHN. [Problems of
Rocket Engineeringl, No 4, 1964, p 63].

Bibcman. 1.. M.; Yakubov, I. T. ZHTP, Vol 33, No 11, 1963, p 1344.
Kuznetsov, N. M. ZHTP, No 34, 1964, p 624.

Bibeman, L. 11.: Yakuhov, I. T. TEPLOFIZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERATUR, Vol 3, No 2,
1965.

Hibernian, L. 11.: Yakubov, I. T. TEPLOPIZIKA WSOKIKH TEMPERATUR, Vol 3, No 3,
1965.

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70.

71.

72.

73.

71..
75.

76.

77.

79.

91.

92.

96.

99.

100.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Biberman, L. 11., et 81. IZV. AN SSSR. HEX“. ZHIHC. I GAZA [News of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, Fluid and Gas Mechanics], No 6. 1967, p 46.

Losev, S. A.: Polymskiy, V. A. IZV. AN 35811. 1115101. ZHIDK. I GAZA, No 1,
1968, p 176.

Kozlov, G. I.: Rayzer, Yu. P.; Roytenburg, D. I. PHl‘F, No 1, 1968, p 11.0.

Zheleznyak, M. 3.; Hnatsskanyan, A. Kh. I'KPLOI’IZIKA VYSOKIKH Imam,
Vol 6, No 3, 1968, p 390.

Zheleznyak, H. 8. MP, No 6, 1970, p 126.
Nagremova, N. N.; Pashchenko, N. 1.; Rayzer, Yu. 1’. MP, No 5, 1970, p 11.

Unsold, A. VIZIKA ZVEZMKH AMSFER. [Physics of Stellar Atmospheres],
Moscow, IL, 1949.

Bates, D. K. SOVREPBNNYYE PROBLEM ASTROFIZIKI I PIZIKI SOLNTSA [Modern
Problems of Astrophysics and Solar Physics], Noscow, IL, 1950.

Ambartsmysn, V. A.; Hustel', E. R.; Sevemyy, A. 3.; Sobolev, V. V.
TEORETIGIESKAYA ASTIDI-‘IZIKA [Theoretical Astrophysics], Moscow, Costekhizdst,
1952.

[A translation of this article appears in VOPR. RAKETN. TBIGIN” No 11, 1959.]

[A translation of this article appears in VOPR. RAKBTN. TBKNN” No 7, 1959,
p 18.

Payzullov, F. 8.; Sobolev, N. N.; Kudryavtsev, Ye. M. DAN SSSR, No 127,
1959, p Slol.

1.0ch, S. A.: Generalov, N. A.; Terebenina, L. B. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA,
[Optics and Spectroscopy], No 8, 1960, p 570.

Bibeman, L. H.; Norman, 6. E. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA, No 8, 1960, p 433.

Biberman, 1.. 11.: Norman, 0. 15.; Ul'yanov, K. N. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA,
No 10, 1961, p 565.

Dronov, A. P.: Sviridov, A. 6.; Sobolev, N. N. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA,
No 12, 1962, p 677.

Biberlnsn, 1.. FL; Vorob'yev, V. 8.; Norman, 6. 2.; Yskubov, N. ‘1'. KOSN‘ICB.
ISSLED. [Space Research]. Vol 2, No 3, 1964, p 641.

Belov. S. N.; Ogurtsov, N. N.; Podnoshenskiy, I. V. OPTIKA I SPEK‘I‘ROSKOPIYA,
Vol 25, No 5. 1968, p 686.

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
101.
102.

105.

106.

107.

109.

110.
111.

112.

113.
114.

115.

116.
117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Krokhin, o. N. zn'rr, No 34, 1964, p 1325.
Basov, N. 6.; Krokhin, 0. N. ZHETP, No 46, 1964, p 171.

Anisimov, S. 1.; Ranch-Bruyevich, A. M.; Yel'yashevich, H. A.; Imus, Ya. A.;
Pavlenko, N. A.; Romanov. G. S. ZHTP, No 36, 1966, p 1273.

Afanas'yev, Yu. V.; Krol', V. H.; Krokhin, 0. N.; Neuchinov, I. V. PMH
[Applied Mathematics and Mechanics], No 30, 1966, p 1022.

Basov, N. 6.; Boyko, V. A.; Denent'yev, V. A.; Krokhin, O. N.;
Sklizkov, G. V. ZHETF, No 51, 1966, p 989.

Afanas'yev, Yu. V.; Krokhin, 0. N. ZHETF, No 52, 1967, p 966.
Nemchinov, I. V. PHM, No 31, 1967, p 300.
Krol', V. M.: Ncmchinov, I. V. PHTF, No 5, 1968, p 32.

Romanov, c. 5.; Stepanov, K. L. ZHPS [Journal of Applied Spectroscopy?],
No 8, 1968, p 783.

Krol', V. M. PHTF, No 4, 1968, p 18.
Vilcnskayn, G. 6.; Nemchinov, I. V. DAN SSSR. No 186, 1969, p 1048.

Afanas'yev, Yu. V.; Basov. N. 6.; Krokhin, 0. N.; Horachevskiy, N. V.;
Sklizkov. ZHTF, No 39, 1969, p 894.

Vilenskaya. G. 6.; Nemchinov, I. V. ZHPS, No 11, No 4, 1969.

Vilenskaya, G. 0.; Nemchinov, I. V. PHTP, No 6, 1969.

Basov, N. 6.; Krokhin, 0. N.: Sklizkov, G. V. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA.
TRUDY FIAN SSSR [Quantum Electronics, Works of the Physics Institute of the
USSR Academy of Sciences], No 52, 1970. p 171.

Nemchinov, I. V. PMM, Vol 34, No 4, 1970, p 706.

Gnoevoy, Ya. T.; Pctrukhin, A.I.: Pleshanov, Yu. Ye.; Sulyayev. V. A.
PIS'MA V ZHETP, V01 11, No 9, 1970, p 440.

Anisimov, S. 1.: Imas, Ya. A.; Romanov, G. 5.: Khodyko, Yu. V. DEYSTVIYE
IZLUCHENIYA BOL'SHOY HOSHCHNOSTI NA HETALLY [Effect of High-Power Radiation
on Metals]. Moscow, Nauka, 1970.

Vilyunov, V. N.: Sidonskiy, 0. B. FCV [expansion unknown], Vol 1, No 4.
1965, p 39.

Timov, V. H.; Fadeyenko, B. I.: Timov, N. S. DAN SSSR, Vol 180, No 5, 1968,
p 1051.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
124.

125 .

127.

129 O

130.
131.
132.
135.
136.

138.

139.

1100.

141.

142 .

163.

144.

145.

11.6.

1107.

FOR OFI-‘K'IAI. ESE ONLY

Rusakov, H. M. PHIP, No 2, 1969.
[A translation of this article appears in VPR. RAKBT. 811001., No b, 1960.

Nemehinov, I. V.; Tsikulin, M. A. GEOHAGNETIZH I AERONOMIYA [Geommetin
and Aeronauy], V01 3, No lo, 1963, p 635.

Handel'sntam, S. 1.; Pashinin, P. P.; Prokhorov, A. N.; Rayzer, Yu. P.;
Sukhodrev, N. K. ZHETP, No 69, 1965, p 127.

Rayzer, Yu. P. UPN, Vol 87, No 1, 1965, p 29.

[A translation of this article appears in UN, No 72, 1960, p 521.

Ryabinin, Yu. N.; Tam, I. I. PIZIKA VARYVA [Explosion Physics], No 5, 1956.
Novikov, N. N. PM”, No 6, 1962.

Novikov, N. N. MP, No 1, 1963.

Zel'dovich, Va. 3.; Kowaneyets, A. S. TBORIYA DB‘I'WATSII [Theory of
Detonation], Moscow, 1955.

Zagumenkov, A. 8.; Tlnov, N. 8.; Psdeyenko, Yu. N.; Chistyaltov, V. P.
MP, No 2, 1909, p 79. '

lenov, 1.. V.; Khotina, L. D. FIZIKA GORBNIYA I VZRYVA [Coabustion and
Explosion Physics], No A, 1966, p 97.

Kartuzhanskiy, A. N.; Heyklyar, P. V. ZHBTP, No 21, 1951, p 532.

Zatsepin, Yu. A. ZHNIPFIK [Journal of Scientific and Applied Photography
and Cinematography], Vol 5, No 10, 1960, p 60.

Demidov, H. 1.; Ogurtsova, N. N.; Podnoshenskiy, I. V.; Shelenina, V. H.
ZHPS, No 3, 1968, p 9.

Ogurtsova, N. N.; Podmoshenskiy, I. V.; Denidov, H. I. OPIIKO-HBKBANIOIESKAYA
PRDHYSHLENNOST' [Opticonedical Indmtry], No l, 1960.

Grenishin, S. 0.; Dwovik, A. 5.; Yesin, R. A.; Ilyushin, G. P.;
Kevlishvili, P. V.; Churbakov, A. 1.; Shchepetkin, Yu. P. 7.. NAUGII. I
PRIKL. POTOGRAP‘II I KINEMATOGRAFII [Journal of Scientific and Applied
Photography and Cinematography], Vol 12, No 5, 1967, p 3610.

Dubovik, A. S. MOGRAPICHESKAYA REGISTRATSIYA BYSTNPRO‘I’BKAYUSHGHKE
PROPSESSOV [Photographic Recording of Past Processes], Moscow, Nauka, 1961..

Kuznetsov, N. M. TBRPDDINAH‘ICHBSKIYE WSII I UMRNYYE ADIABA'I'Y VOZDUK'IIA

PR1 WSOKIKH TWERATURAIO! [Thermodynamic Functions and Shock Adiabats
of the Air at High Temperatures], Moscow, Hashinostroyeniye, 1965.

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
148.

149.

150.

152.

157.

158.
159.
164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

I72.

ion OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zaydel', A. N.; Shreyder. Ye. Ya. SPBKTROSKOPIYA VAKUIFMNOG)
UL'TRAFIOLETA [Vacuum Ultraviolet Spectroscopy], Moscow, Nauka, 1967.

Sobel'man, I. I. VVEDENIYE V TEORIYU ATOMNYKH SPEKTRDV [Introduction to
the Theory of AtOmic Spectra], Moscow, 1963.

Zaydel‘, A. N.: Rayskiy, S. M.; Shreyder, Ye. Ya. TABLITSY SPEKTRAL'NYKH
LINIY [Spectral Line Tables], Moscow, 1962.

D'yakov, S. P. ZHETF, No 27, 1954, p 288.

Bibcrman, L. M.; Ul'yanov, K. N. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA, V01 16, No 3,
1964.

Kuznetsov, N. M. PMTP, No 2, 1967, p 141.
[Translation published by Mir Press, Moscow, 1967.]
Vanyukov, M. P.; Mak, A. A. In“, No 66, 1958, p 301.

Kisclcv, Yu. N.; Kristoforov, B. D. FIZIKA GORBNIYA I VARYVA, Vol 10,
No l, 1974, p 116.

Volosevich, P. P.; Kurdyunov, S. P.: Popov, Yu. P. 12V. AN SSSR. MEKH.
ZHIDK. 1 GAZA, No 1, 1968, p 67.

Voytenko, A. Ye.; Matochkin, Ye. P.; Fedulov, A. P. PTE [Experimental
Instruments and Techniques], No 2, 1970, p 201.

Nemchinov, I. V. MEKHANIKA SPLOSHNOY SREDY I RODSTVENNYYE PROBLEMY
ANALIZA [Mechanics of a Continuous Medium and Related Analysis Problems],
Moscow, Nauka, 1972, p 337.

Borgcl'son, V. 1.: Nemchinov, I. V.; Novikova, V. V. FIZIKA GORENIYA I
VARYVA, Vol II, No 5, 1975, p 730.

Selivanov, V. V.; Shlyapintokh, 1. Ya. ZRFKH, No 32, 1958, p 670.

Kay, 0.; Laby, L. SPRAVOCHNIK FIZIKA-BKSPERIMENTA‘NRA [Handbook for the
Experimental Physicist], Moscow, IL, 1949.

Guhkin, K. Ye. RASPROSTRANENIYE VZRYVNYKH VOLN. MEKHANIKA V SSSR 2A 50 LET
[Blast Wave Propagation, 50 Years of Mechanics in the USSR], V01 2, Moscow,
Nauka, 1970. p 269.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1977

10845
$80:

8144/1158 - END -
182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY