FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10035
7 OcIober 1981

USSR Report

CONSUMER GOODS AND DOMESTIC TRADE

(FOUO 4/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1003!
7 October 11

USSR REPORT
CONSUMER Goons AND DOMESTIC TRADE
(moo 4/81)

CONTENTS

CONSUMER 60013 PROWCTION AND DISTRIBUTION

Consumer Cooperative Network’s Motions Elucidated
(V. Nesterenko, I. Suslov; VOPROSY EKONCHIKI, Kay 81) .......

Regional Differences in Retail Trade
(1. V. Nikol'sldy; GENRAFIYA I PRIRODNYYE RESURSY, Apr 81)..

- a - [III - USSR - 381) I
FOR OFFICIAL USE (WIN

CONSUMER GOODS PRODUCTIOR AND DISTRIBUTION

CONSUMER COOPERATIVE NETHORK'S FUNCTIONS BLUCIDATED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 86-95

[Article by V. Nesterenko and I. Suslov: "The Consumer Cooperatives in the
Economic System of Developed Socialism")

[Text] In the extensive system of measures worked out by the 26th Party Congress
for the further enhancement of the laboring public's well-being, particular sig-
nificance is attached to the fuller satisfaction of public demand for various
goods and services. the expansion and renewal of the product assortment. the
improvement of product quality and the active development of the population's
aeshtetic tastes and reasonable demands. A sizable part in the implementation of
these plans will be played by the further development of consumer cooperatives and
the heightened effectiveness of their operation.

The consumer cooperative is one of the major economic organizations in our country.
It serves primarily the rural population and inhabitants of small cities and

rayon centers. Consumer cooperative enterprises elployed over 3 million people.
During all stages of the Soviet State's development, the consumer cooperative

has been actively involved in the execution of the communist party's socioeconomic
policy. The November 1979 decree of the CPSU Central Cosmittee and USSR Council

of Ministers "0n the Further Development and Improvement of the Activity of Con-
sumer Cooperatives" will be quite important in the development of this organization.

As an economic organization. the consumer cooperative is an element and integral
part of the mature socialist economy. This stems from socialist ownership of the
means of production, which, as the Constitution of the USSR points out, constitutes
the basis of the economic systea of the developed socialist society, taking the
form of state (or public) and knlkhoz-cooperative ownership. This statement is of
fundamental significance in the description of the entire structure of economic
relations in the developed socialist society and in the determination of the place
and role of consumer cooperatives within these relations.

Public ownership is the highest form of socialist ownership. but it does not ex—
tend to all means of production, manufacturing output. functioning fixed assets
and commodity and financial resources. Some of them are the kolkhoz-cooperative
property of socialist enterprises. organizations and associations.

Kolkhoz-cooperative ownership develops in close interaction with public ownership
on the basis of the single system of objective economic laws of socialism. The

cooperative sector, just as the entire mature socialist economy. is distinguished

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by comprehensive and massive material and technical facilities for production and
exchange, intensive expanded reproduction, a prevalence of economic methods in

the administrative mechanism, and the goal of the fuller satisfaction of the labor—
ing public's needs and interests by means of more efficient economic activity and
the intelligent use of material, financial and labor resources.

These features. which are characteristic of cooperative organizations, enterprises
and associations, develop under the influence of the same objective tendencies

that are inherent in the public form of ownership. The inclusion of kolkhoz-
cooperative ownership in the basis of the economic system of developed socialism

is justified by the great significance of cooperative forms of economic activity.
Mature socialism offers new appOitunities for the reinforcement and further develop-
ment of these forms. In this connection, it is now even more important to analyze
the effectiveness of farms, organizations and associations which function on the
basis of kolkhoz-cooperative ownership in agriculture and in other spheres of the
national economy.

The Consumer Cooperative—~A Cooperative Form of Economic Management

It is obvious that the cooperative sector of the socialist economy has a complex
internal structure. This sector includes several varieties of cooperative enter-
prises, organizations and associations, operating in various spheres of economic
activity, and encompasses, above all, kolkhozes, the consumer cooperative network,
fishing kolkhozes and the residential construction cooperative network. An im-
portant role in the cooperative sector is assigned to the kolkhoz form of produc-
tion. with its relations based on kolkhoz-cooperative ownership. 0n the one hand,
this category is the fullest reflection of the features common to all varieties of
enterprises in the cooperative sector, but on the other it singles out the basic
link of this form of economic management-othe kolkhoz.

Among other forms of cooperative organizations, the consumer cooperative occupies
an important place in terms of economic turnover, assets, number of employees and
other indicators. The statement in the Constitution of the USSR, that "socialist
property also includes the property of trade-union and other public organizations,"
sometimes leads to attempts to classify the property and the very form of economic
management of the consumer cooperative network not as kolkhoz-cooperative property,
but as part of the property of "other public organizations." In our opinion, this
interpretation is invalid. Article 12 of the Constitution of the USSR explains
that "part of the property of kolkhozes and other cooperative organizations...
consists in the means of production and other property they require for the per-
formance of their assigned duties." Therefore, it is an established fact that

the object of kolkhoz-cooperative ownership is not only the property of kolkhozes,
but also the property of other cooperative organizations.

The Constitution of the USSR also states that trade unions, the Komsomol and co-
operative and other public organizations will take part in the management of state
and public affairs and in political, economic and sociocultural decisionmaking.

In this case as well, all types of cooperatives are classified under a single

heading.

All of the different cooperative forms are related to one another to various
degrees, but they all function as a single entity in the overall economic system.
The common features uniting all types of enterprises in the cooperative sector of

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL FSF. ONLY

the socialist economy are their indivisible and shared funds as a specific eco-
nomic category of kolkhoz—cooperative property. This category is not characteris-
tic of enterprises in the state sector of the national economy or of trade unions
and other public organizations.

The kolkhoz-cooperative form of ownership is similar to the public (or state) form
of ownership in terms of its socioeconomic nature, but has a different level of
socioeconomic collectivization of labor and reproductive assets. This is clearly
reflected in the peculiarities of the economic activity of cooperative units, their
interrelations with one another and with the state budget, their mechanism for the
management of socioeconomic processes and the principles governing the distribution
of the results of their economic activity. In the last decade considerable progress
was made in equalizing the operational processes of state and cooperative socialist
enterprises and associations by instituting more progressive forms of economic
management. The differences between them still exist, however. These differences
must be taken into account in future improvements in the socioeconomic structure

of social reproduction and its material and technical base and in the process of

the fullest satisfaction of the working public's needs and the realization of their
economic interests.

Kolkhoz-cooperative economic activity plays a specific role in all spheres of
social reproduction, especially in branches of agriculture and the sphere of retail
trade and procurement, in which the kolkhoz form of production and consumer coopera-
tives function as types of cooperative ownership. Their unity is predetermined,
firstly, by the deciding role of public ownership and, secondly, by the common fun-
damental characteristics of cooperative socialist enterprises. Among these, special
mention should be made of collective economic interest and responsibility for the
results of economic activity, the collectivized circulation of reproductive assets
and working capital, their common sources of capital for simple and expanded repro-
duction, the principles governing the formation and distribution of profits and
their interrelations with state credit establishments, budget organizations and
economically independent state enterprises and associations. The principles of the
economic independence of enterprises in the kolkhoz sector and consumer coopera-
tives differ from those of state enterprises in agriculture, trade and procurement.

The property of kolkhozes and the property of consumer cooperatives are different
types of cooperative property by virtue of their different spheres of activity,
developmental conditions and functional purposes. This, in turn, predetermines
the differences in the income and material, financial and labor resources of
kolkhozes and consumer cooperatives, in the distribution of income according to
labor and the formation of profits, in the status of consumer cooperative person-
nel and the kolkhoz peasantry and in the activity of the corresponding labor col-
lectives. Most of the property in the kolkhoz sector, in the form of indivisible
assets, is owned by individual production collectives or groups of collectives in
interfarm associations. The property of consumer cooperatives is distinguished by
several levels of collectivization. The first level consists of the indivisible
and shared assets of consumer societies (or cooperatives), formed with the aid of
income from economic activity, initial fees and share costs. The initial fees and
income from economic activity serve as the basis for the formation of indivisible
assets, and the share costs are used in the formation of shared assets. Charter
capital and special funds (indivisible assets) represent the part of the property
of consumer societies that cannot be reduced, are not available for the personal

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of cooperative members and are not distributed among them. Although the
shared assets are part of the cooperative property, they are recorded in the per-
sonal accounts of cooperative members. If they should cancel their membership in
the society, these assets are returned to them in monetary form.

The next level of collectivization of the property of consumer cooperatives is
characteristic of the personal assets of unions of consumer societies-rayon,
oblast. kray, republic and central. They consist of deductions from the revenues
of affiliated cooperatives and the profits earned from the development of their
own economic units. Unions of consumer societies establish enterprises and eco-
nomic subdivisions to satisfy the general needs of affiliated cooperatives. This
is also the repository for resources which can be used to help organizations need-
ing assistance by offering them loans or contributions, The personal funds of
unions of consumer societies are part of the indivisible assets of consumer coopera-
tives. when specific links, including cooperatives, are dissolved. their indi-
visible assets are turned over to a superior cooperative organization.

The rapid growth of total indivisible assets and the reduction of the proportional
amount (with a simultaneous increase in the absolute amount) of shared capital in
the personal assets of consumer cooperatives are characteristic of the present
stage in the development of the cooperative network. At the beginning of 1980 the
total shared capital of consumer societies was 1.5 times as great as in 1965 and
amounted to around 800 million rubles; indivisible assets increased 2.5-fold during
the same period and exceeded 15 billion rubles. The proportion accounted for by
shared capital in the personal assets of consumer cooperatives dropped from 5.9
percent to 5.3 percent. The property of consumer cooperatives will resemble public
property more and more as the cooperatives develop and grow larger and as unions

of consumer societies gain economic strength.

The assets of the consumer cooperative are the property of its shareholders. The
assets of a union of consumer societies belong, depending on its zone of activity,
to the consumer cooperative members in the rayon, oblast, kray. republic or the
entire country. During the process of the use of cooperative working and produc-
tive capital. conditions are established to satisfy the needs of shareholders and
members in the marketing sphere. The members of cooperatives also exercise their
ownership rights by participating in the distribution of profits derived from the
economic activity of consumer societies. This is accomplished through the inves-
tigation of the results of affiliate enterprises' activity by cooperative control
commissions, at meetings of shareholders or their authorized representatives and
at sessions of elected collective organs-the boards of consumer societies and
unions. In turn, the board of a cooperative organization. as its executive and
managing body, directly supervises its economic activity. It forms collectives of
workers and employees and establishes an administrative staff for the completion
of current assignments.

Production collectives of the workers and employees of consumer cooperatives
exercise the right to use and manage the property of these organizations, with the
authorization of consumer societies and unions and their elected collective admin-
istrative bodies. The wages. social security and social insurance of consumer co-
operative personnel are paid out on the basis of the same principles as those of
the workers and employees of state trade, procurement and production organizations.
They exercise their right as co-owners and co-managers of the means of production

1;
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OVI.\'

process, however, is played by the use of consumer cooperative resources. To a
certain extent, these are used to ensure the constant improvement of labor condi-
tions. the growth of professional mastery and qualifications, the offer of better
wages and material and moral incentives, the improvement of personal and recrea-
tional conditions and the all-round development of consumer cooperative personnel.

The Development of the Economic Functions of the Consumer Cooperative

Shareholders. as co-owners and co—managers of the collective assets of consumer
cooperatives and unions, exercise their ownership rights not so much through the
acquisition of dividends as in the direct process of the activities of consumer co-
operative enterprises and establishments. in the process of their performance of
their economic functions: the organization of trade in consumer goods in the
neighborhoods of members of consumer cooperatives and the development of public
dining systems; the search for additional commodity resources for the optimization
of the product assortment and the fuller saturation of the commodity market; the
satisfaction of the demands of rural inhabitants and the population of workers
settlements for construction materials. household implements and the means of labor
needed for housework and private subsidiary farming; the organization of the pro-
curement of surplus agricultural products and natural resources from the population.
The more completely, proficiently and comprehensively the consumer cooperative
performs its economic functions, the more fully the co-owners of the capital of
consumer cooperatives and unions can exercise their ownership rights.

The materials of the 26th C?SU Congress stress the need for the further enhance-
ment of the role of trade in the determination of the counndity assortment and
product quality, in the improvement of economic interaction by industrial, agri-
cultural and trade enterprises and organizations, in the fulfillment of economic
agreements. in the compilation of production plans and in the sale of consumer
goods. The consumer cooperative and its organizations and enterprises must strive
to exert broader and more active influence on consumer goods production through
all of the channels of their economic activity.

The most important economic functions of the consumer cooperative consist in
thoroughly developing retail connpdity turnover in rural areas. ensuring the
rapid growth of the purchasing power of laborers, developing new types of demand
and satisfying them by the most efficient means—-by putting together the optimal
product assortment and providing the public with enough free time to purchase
material goods.

Since the time of the historic decisions of the March (1965) CPSU Central Committee
Plenum and 23d CPSU Congress, the monetary income of the rural population, particu-
larly workers in kolkhoz and sovkhoz production, have increased rapidly, and this,
combined with the rapid growth of consumer goods production, has increased the
volume of retail commodity turnover in the consumer cooperative network from year
to year. In 1965 it amounted to 30.9 billion rubles (including public dining),

and in 1979 the figure was 72.1 billion rubles. Despite the fact that the growth
rate of retail commodity turnover in urban settlements was slightly higher than

the rural rate during these years (respectively, 249 percent and 221 percent), the
growth rate of retail commodity turnover in cooperative trade was almost the same
as in the state trade network. The consumer cooperative network's share of the

5
son omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national retail commodity turnover has remained quite sizable and virtually
unchanged. It was 28.9 percent in 1965, 28.9 percent in 1970 and 27.9 percent
in 1979. What is more, it is important to note that the segment of the popula-
tion living in rural areas continued to decrease-from b7 percent in 1966 to 37
percent at the beginning of 1980.

Calculated per capita, the growth rate of retail commodity turnover has risen much
more quickly in rural areas than in urban settlements. In 1965 per capita commodi-
ty turnover was equivalent to 660 rubles in urban settlements and 222 rubles in
rural zones, but the respective figures in 1979 were 1,218 and 539 rubles. The
ratio of urban to rural turnover decreased from approximately 3:1 to 2:1. what is
more, we must remember that rural inhabitants do part of their shaping in stores in
urban settlements, some of which belong to consumer cooperatives.

According to a survey of a sample group of families, the non-grocery items pur-
chased by kolkhoz members in urban stores represent approximately 60 percent of
their total purchases of these items. There is nothing wrong with the rural in—
habitant's practice of purchasing some goods in urban stores, but an excessively
high percentage of purchases in urban stores testifies to shortcomings in the
distribution of commodity stocks between state trade and consumer cooperatives,
which leads to considerable losses of working and leisure time for rural customers,
to a higher degree of unsatisfied demand and to several other negative phenomena.

Significant possibilities for broader cooperative trade are also attested to by
the rapidly growing savings accounts of rural inhabitants. Total public deposits
in savings accounts in rural areas amounted to 6.7 billion rubles in 1965 and 12.5
billion in 1970, and in 1979 the figure had already reached 39.3 billion rubles.
The average rural account rose from 309 to 1,154 rubles during these years and
exceeded the average account in urban settlements. although per capita accounts
were approximately 1.6 times as high in cities.

It would be wrong, of course, to attribute the total increase to unsatisfied
demand, but there is no question that this was one of the prominent factors con-
tributing to the increase. The failure to completely satisfy the rural inhabitant's
demands testifies to the existence of sizable reserves for the further growth of
retail commodity turnover in the consumer cooperative network and to the need for
the more efficient distribution of available commodity stocks among urban and rural
stores.

Consumer cooperative organizations take these processes into account in their eco-
nomic activity, ensuring that the growth of overall commodity turnover is accom-
panied by the improvement of its structure in accordance with qualitative changes
in the consumption patterns of the laboring public. Whereas total retail commodity
turnover in the consumer cooperative network increased 2.6-fold in comparison to
the 1965 figure, sales of non-grocery items increased 2.5-fold during this period.
The rate of increase has been particularly high in sales of underwear and outer-
wear, electrical equipment, furniture, radio equipment, sporting goods and other
durable goods. Rural sales of construction materials have increased noticeably.

When the process of supplying rural settlements with electricity and gas lines
was completed, the demand for electrical household appliances began to rise con-
tantly and the demand for kitchenwear and many other household items changed. In

6
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OH-K’Ml. IN}? OVIJ‘

the last 10 or 15 years, rural families have rapidly acquired more and more durable
goods {or cultural and personal use, approaching the level of urban families. For
example. between 1965 and 1979 the number of television sets per 100 rural fami-
lies rose from 15 to 71 while the figure for urban families rose from 32 to 89; the
respective increases in the nder of refrigerators were from 3 to 55 and from 17
to 96; the figures for washing machines rose from 12 to 56 and from 29 to 79; and
the figures for radios and phonographs rose from 49 to 74 and from 67 to 90.

Grocery sales volumes have also increased. and the structure of their assortment,
their quality and the conditions of their storage and sale have improved. Natural-
ly, the quantity. assortment and quality of groceries sold in stores and the degree
to which the demand for them is satisfied depend on the level of agricultural pro~
duction and the reliability of the system of their storage, timely processing and
delivery to the trade network, as well as the developmental level of private sub-
sidiary farming by the rural population. The consumer cooperative network also
plays an important role in the search for additional food resources, particularly
under present conditions. The need for the maximum promotion of this facet of the
consumer coor :ative network's activity was pointed out by L. I. Brezhnev at the
16th Trade-Union Congress and the July (1978) CPSU Central Committee Plenum.

The speakers at the 10th congress of authorized representatives of consumer co—
operatives in the USSR remarked that this network is responsible for the procure-
ment of more than 60 types of products and raw materials and that it sells the
state more than half of all the potatoes procured in the nation. over one-third of
the vegetables, around 70 percent of the cucurbites and 90 percent of the wool.
Consumer cooperatives hold a prominent position in procurements of eggs, pelts and
furs, herbs and medicinal plants. Over 5 years the procurement turnover amountedto
around 38 billion rubles. Existing possibilities, however. are far from depleted.
For example. over #0 percent of the private subsidiary plots in Stavropol'skiy

Kray have been taken over by consumer cooperative organizations, but in Altayskiy
Krsy the figure is only 16 percent, whiletherespectivefiguresfoanepropetrovskaya
and Voroshilovgradskaya Oblasts are 36 percent and 20 percent.

Under present conditions, now that the 0950 Central Committee and USSR Council of
Ministers have taken additional steps. in accordance with L. I. Brezhnev's instruc-
tions, to develop private subsidiary farming and the gardening societies of urban
inhabitants, the consumer cooperative must provide more active assistance toward
this end by selling the necessary tools of labor, organizing the procurement of
agricultural surplus and including it in retail commodity turnover.

The 10th congress of consumer cooperative officials specified that by the end of
the next five-year plan, purchases of meat from the population and the output of
meat in the cooperative network's private facilities should reach 1 million tons
a year in dressed weight. Plans also call for annual purchases (with contracted
prices) of up to 1.5 billion eggs and approximately 7 million tons of potatoes.
vegetables, grapes and fruit.

The successful attainment of these objectives will necessitate the institution of
new organizational forms, the universal conclusion of long-term contracts with the
population, the creation of a permanent procurement staff and the construction of
more than 15,000 all-purpose procu‘ement centers in the next 5-7 years.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l‘SE OVLY

The organizaticn of a public dining network is an important part of the activity
of consumer cooperatives. Commodity turnover here is growing just as quickly as
in state trade. For example, it was equivalent to 1.9 billion rubles in 1965.

it rose to 2.8 billion in 1970 and by 1979 it had risen to 4.2 billion rubles.
During these years its volume increased 2.3-fold. Nonetheless, public dining's
share of total commodity turnover in the consumer cooperative network is still
negligible--slightly over 6 percent--while its share in the system of state trade
is around 11 percent. Public dining in rural areas accounts for only 2.7 billion
rubles of the total turnover of 22.9 billion, or slightly more than one-tenth of
the total.

Under the conditions of the industrialization of agriculture, the deeper specializa-
tion of kolkhozes and sovkhozes, interfarm coperation and agroindustrial integra-

tion. the demand for a developed system of public catering in rural areas is rising
sharply.

Its development can be ensured most effectively through close interaction by the
consumer cooperative network with kolkhozes and sovkhozes. The decree of the CPSU
Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers on the Further Development of Con-
sumcr Cooperatives envisages measures to expand the network of public dining enter-
prises in sovkhozes and other state agricultural enterprises so that by 1985 each
central farmstead will have dining halls meeting the latest requirements. Kolkhozes

have been advised to assist consumer cooperatives in the construction of public
dining enterprises.

The consumer cooperative's own industrial production, with a volume exceeding 5.5
billion rubles a year. also plays a noticeable role in the inclusion of commodity
resources in retail turnover and the fuller satisfaction of public demand. It is
no secret that the industrial processing of products on kolkhozes and sovkhozes

can also be measured in billions of rubles and that the processing volume increases
with each five-year plan. The need for close coordination and collaborative plan-
ning in this sphere of activity is becoming increasingly evident because separate
efforts often lead to duplication, to the dissipation of funds and resources among
numerous parallel projects with the same territory, to interdepartmental friction
and to considerable losses in the overlapping jurisdictions of various organiza~
tions and departments. The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress stipulate the need
for better economic interaction by industrial, agricultural and trade organizations.

The reinforcement of the technological, economic and socioeconomic interrelations
of partners operating within the territory of an administrative region is a common
progressive trend today, which is attested to by the experience, however slight,
accumulated in a number of oblasts in the Ukraine and the Russian Federation. This
aids in the more efficient use of existing resources, the improvement of the quali-
ty and the enhancement of the effectiveness of economic activity in all links of
the production, shipment, storage, processing and sale of consumer goods, the
better and quicker development of the production and social infrastructure and the
fuller satisfaction of rural public demand.

The creation of interfarm organizations through the joint efforts of kolkhozes,
sovkhozes and consumer cooperatives for the procurement and processing of agricul-
tural products and natural resources will promote the quicker development of the
material and technical base of this sphere of activity, which is acquiring increas-
ing importance. The reinforcement of the economic interests and financialliability

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0\l.\

of these partners, as their past activity in several parts of the nation has
demonstrated. will ensure a dramatic decrease in losses of many types of perish-
ables and non-standard products and a corresponding increase in commodity stocks.
This will bring about a significant increase in public income, derived from the
timely sale of the surplus products of subsidiary plots. wild fruits, berries and
mushrooms, and so forth.

Close interaction by consumer societies with kolkhozes and sovkhozes will produce
an economic impact in all spheres of their activity: in construction, production,
procurements and the shipment, storage and processing of products. It will provide
stores and dining halls with larger grocery stocks and will ensure the development
of the material and technical base of cooperative trade. Consumer cooperatives and
agricultural enterprises operate within the same territory and serve the interests
and needs of essentially the same segment of the population--the laborers in the
kolkhoz—sovkhoz production sphere, who are simultaneously shareholders in consumer
cooperatives and members of kolkhoz and sovkhoz production collectives. This is
why the need for closer technological, economic and socioeconomic cooperation by
these organizations is dicated by their functional purpose.

The Enhancement of the Consumer Cooperative Network's Effectiveness

The heightened effectiveness of all branches of cooperative activity is a key
matter, particularly with regard to the steady rise of such indicators as labor
productivity, the return on capital, profitability and customer service. The
present comprehensive work to heighten the efficiency of rural trade involves not
only the technical remodeling and re-equipping of trade enterprises and a transfer
to progressive forms of service and methods of labor, but also the improvement of
their organizational and technical interaction with their partners and with the
entire national economic complex. This work is aimed at maximum improvement in
the quality of their work and the effectiveness of their functioning, the institu-
tion of better working conditions for the personnel of cooperative enterprises and
establishments and the organization of quicker customer service.

in the system of measures to heighten the efficiency of trade, as speakers noted

at the 26th CPSU Congress, an important place is occupied by the concentration

of commodity stocks primarily within the wholesale trade network and the assign-

ment of greater responsibility to wholesale bases for the uninterrupted provision
of stores with the necessary product assortment and the responsibility of stores

for the constant maintenance of commodity stocks in the proper assortment.

As we know. the total number of employees of retail trade and public dining enter-
prises, just as their relative number in the total employed population, has con-
stantly risen as the socialist economy has developed. The figure was 6 percent in
1965, 7 percent in 1970 and 8 percent in 1979. The number of retail trade and
public dining employees in the nation rose from 4.4 million in 1965 to 7.2 million
in 1979, including a rise from 1.2 million to 1.9 million in the consumer coopera-
tive network, which represented 27.3 percent of all workers in this branch in 1965
and 26.4 percent in 1979. The consumer cooperative network's share of total retail
commodity turnover is now equivalent to 27.9 percent. Therefore, commodity turnover
per worker in the consumer cooperative network is approximately equivalent to this
indicator in the state trade network, despite the fact that the objective conditions
of its activity are more complex due to the territorial dispursion of the rural
p0pulation, the less favorable transport conditions and several other factors.

9
FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE(M<LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()VM'

Suffice it to say that one-third of the stores are operated by a single clerk.
Many of the public dining enterprises are small cafes, lunch rooms and cafeterias.

The level of commodity turnover profitability and operating costs is an important
indicator of the economic effectiveness of trade enterprises in general and co-
operatives in particular. Within the consumer cooperative system these indicators
have been almost stable for the last decade. For example, profits from product
sales in relation to community turnover constituted 1.9 percent in 1965, 2 percent
in 1970 and 2.1 percent in 1979, and in relation to overhead costs the respective
figures were 22.8 percent, 23.4 percent and 23.8 percent. In state retail trade
these indicators were 2.8 percent and 36.4 percent in 1979. The lower profitabili-
ty level in the consumer cooperative network in comparison to state trade is due
to several of the objective factors listed above, over which trade organizations
have no control. Some consumer cooperative organizations operate at a loss. This
applies above all to consumer unions in Siberia and the Far East, where the level
of trade discounts precludes profitability.

Profits from the sale of goods in the entire consumer cooperative system totaled
586 million rubles in 1965, 930 million in 1970 and 1.502 million in 1979. During
these years, other spheres of the cooperative network, such as procurement, trans-
port. construction and production, operated effectively. In particular, profits
from the production activity of cooperative enterprises rose from 312 million
rubles in 1965 to 560 million in 1978.

Most of the profits earned by the consumer cooperative network remain at the dis-
posal of consumer societies and unions and are used for the modernization, rein-
forcement and development of the material and technical base of trade and the
satisfaction of the cultural, personal and socioeconomic needs of cooperative
enterprise labor collectives.

The consumer cooperative network contributes part of its profits to the state
budget in the same way as the kolkhozes, by paying an income tax at a fixed rate.
The kolkhozes turn over no more than 25 percent of their total profits, with the
exact rate depending on their level of profitability. The consumer coopera;ive
network pays out 35 percent of its profits in the form of an income tax, regardless
of its profitability level.

The consumer cooperative network. just as the kolkhoz sector, relies on the use
of public property as well as its own resources in its activity. The socialist
society has an interest in the maximum reinforcement and improvement of kolkhoz-
cooperative ownership. its convergence with public ownership and their close
interaction for the fuller $atisfaction of the demands of the laboring public.

The consumer cooperative network's increasingly important role in carrying out
plans for the economic and social development of the country will require more ef-
ficient work of better quality by all of the links of this system and the further
reinforcement of this network's interrelations with other spheres of the socialist
economy within the boundaries of the nation's agroindustrial complex.

Speakers at the 26th CPSU Congress stressed the need to "provide maximum assistance
in the further development of the consumer cooperative network, the encouragement
of its economic initiative and its activity to improve trade and public dining
services in rural areas and augment raw material and food resources."

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy eknnomiki", 1981

8588 10
050: 1827/59 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSUMER GOODS PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION

REGIONAL DIFFERENCES IN RETAIL TRADE

Novosibirsk CEOGRAFIYA I PRIRODNYYE RESURSY in Russian No 2. Apr 81 (signed to
press 26 September 1980) PP 24-29

[Article by I. V. Nikol'skiy, Moscow State University: "Regional Differences in Re-
tail Trade"]

[Text] In connection with the natural, social and economic features of various USSR
territories. geographic differences in trade are manifested basically at three spa-
tial levels: I -— zone or rayon; II - local; III - developed (within a popula-
tion center or city). At each level. retail trade development is influenced by an
aggregate of certain factors -- natural, social, economic and demographic.

At the zonal level. the leading role is played by population (size. natural incre-
ment. distribution). climatic conditions. level of productive forces development,
material well-being of the people and effective demand, differences in consumption
of food and nonfood goods, and transport services in the territory. At the local
level, retail trade is influenced by (in addition to zonal factors) large urban ag-
glomerations and health resorts of national importance. At the development level.
such basic factors as population concentration. effect of central facilities. eco-
nomic and social functions of the population center. the transport-geographic situa-
tion and trade services (in addition to zonal factors) play a role.

Description of Retail Trade Development Factors.

Population is one of the primary factors influencing retail trade turnover. Popula-
tion size and distribution determine the distribution of retail trade turnover vol-
ume by rayon. Per capita trade turnover is one of the basic indicators describing
the availability of goods to the population and its material well-being in a regional
cross-section. For example, given an average per capita trade turnover of 964 rubles
in the USSR in 1979, it fluctuated from 561 rubles in TaSSR to 1,418 rubles in EsSSR.
Urbanization of a rayon influences the rise in per capita trade turnover. The Bal-
tic republics are distinguished by high per capita trade turnover for one reason be-
cause the proportion of the urban population there is higher than the national aver-
age. The lou trade turnover in the Central Asian republics is to be explained in
part by the low proportion of their urban populations. In the cities, trade turn-
over is ordinarily two—fold or more higher than in rural areas. The higher trade
turnover in the cities is determined by an aggregate of factors, but of considerable
importance is the fact that some goods are sold to people visiting from other re-
gions.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The high natural increment in the Central Asian and Transcaucasian population affects
the relatively higher rates of overall trade turnover growth. but its per capita
growth is disproportionate to the population increase. The light population density
and sparsely populated settlements resulting from the nature of the residents' pro-
duction activity (pasture stockraising in the semi-deserts and deserts of Central
Asia and hunting and reindeer herding in the North) cause difficulties in setting up
a trade network and meeting the demands of the population for goods.

Climate influences trade in the entire zone directly and indirectly. It is a neces-
sary ecological condition to developing cultivated plants. household and small-scale
stockraising. Climate causes the production of various agricultural products to be

seasonal in nature and influences the distribution of such production.

The direct influence of climate on retail trade turnover has its effect on differ-
ences in the demand both for food products and for nonfood goods. Harsh climatic
conditions increase the demand for food products. clothing. footwear and fuel,

which determines a higher trade turnover in regions with such a climate, other con-
ditions being relatively equal, than on average for the country. Here. we note a
highrr consumption of fats. primarily those of animal origin. The unionwide average
norm of fat consumption. according to data from the Academy of Medical Sciences. is
3.600 calories per day per person; in Siberia. the norm is 3.9 percent above the un-
ion average, in central regions -- 3.2 percent below it. in Central Asia -- 3.5 per-
cent below it, and in regions of the Far North -- 15 percent above it. According to
Academy of Medical Sciences norms, an adult requires an average of 70-100 grams of
fat per day. but 150-160 grams in a cold climate. Expenditures on acquiring cloth-
ing and footwear are 25-30 percent higher in northern regions than in the center (I).

The unfavorable conditions of the Far North and equivalent regions determine the ne-
cessity of delineating zones of higher wage rates, salaries and supplement percent-
ages. Regional wage coefficients in the Far North and equivalent regions are from

2 to 1.2. Moreover. wage supplements for length of employment in the North are 10
to 100 percent, but not more than 300 rubles per month. in regions of the Far North.
The average wage in Murmanskaya Oblast is 83 percent higher than the RSFSR average
(2). which is to be explained by the use of regional wage rate and salary coeffi-
cients. including Arctic supplements. Moreover. branches of industry in which wages
are higher than in other oblasts are well-developed in Hurmanskaya Oblast. Wages
also depend on the geographic location of production. Thus. given an overall re-
gional wage supplement coefficient of 1.5 at "Apatit" combine. the same coefficient
is 1.7 at the high-mountain "Tsentral'nyy" mine.

Specialization of a region for particular branches of industry and agriculture not
only determines the creation of commodity stocks. but also influences the distribu-
tion of trade turnover in the region. Industry is concentrated in the old cities or
forms new industrial settlements and then cities. which become trade centers concen-
trating a significant portion of the trade turnover in the region. Certain indus-
trial enterprises are directly associated with trade organizations. Local industry.
which first of all meets the needs of its own region. is of great importance to the
development of trade. Large sovkhozea and kolkhozes facilitate the development of
trade enterprises on their own territories, usually on the central farmsteads. Re-
gional differences in the status of subsidiary agriculture for the personal use of
kolkhoz members. workers and employees influence trade turnover volume. In regions
of the North with limited opportunities for developing private subsidiary farming,

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the demand for purchased food products is higher than in regions with fruit-vegetable-
stockraising subsidiary farming, which meets a portion of the foodstuffs demand.

The influence of the material well-being of the population on trade is determined
foremost by the particular economic profile of the region. In regions with developed
industry. especially metallurgical and chemical. the average monthly worker wage is
highest. and revenues are consequently higher for each family member.

The average monthly wage for workers and employees in 1979 differed significantly by
branch of the national economy. For example. the average monthly wage of workers in
industry nationwide was 180.4 rubles. of engineering-technical workers - 208.9 ru-
bles; sovkhoz workers received an average of 166.9 rubles; agronomists, animal hus-
bandry specialists and engineering-technical personnel -- 186.7 rubles; transport
workers -- 192.8 rubles; construction workers -- 196.7 rubles. workers in public edu-
cation -- 133.3 rubles. Workers in the RSFSR and the Baltic republics were above the
unionwide average monthly wage. and they were below it in the UkSSR. BSSR. the Trans-
caucasian and Central Asian republics. The average monthly wage level of workers
differs by branch of industry. In coal. chemical. fishing. petroleum, metallurgical
and mining—chemical industry. it is 30-35 percent higher than in light. food and wood
processing industry.

An increase in incomes causes a greater demand for consumption of high-quality food
products and durables. Families with incomes of up to 600 rubles per family member
per year spend six times less on furniture and household goods than families with
incomes of upwards of 1.500 rubles per year. Expenditures on purchases of fabric.
garments and cultural goods are four-fold less in families of the first category
than in families with the higher income (3).

The amounts of consumption of individual goods depend substantially on the level of
average per capita income in the family. As monetary incomes grow. so does the de-
mand for higher-priced goods. which increases trade turnover. The material security
of the population influences not just the amount of trade turnover. but also its
structure. For the country as a whole, as the material level of the Soviet people
has risen. average annual per capita consumption of bread and grain products has a
dropped sharply. from 200 kg in 1913 to 1&9 kg in 1970 and 139 kg in 1978.

Regional differences in the consumption of food and nonfood goods influence trade
turnover and its structure. The highest per capita level of grain products consump-
tion is observed in the Transcaucasus. as in Georgia for example. where it is 30-35
percent above the USSR average. Consumption of grain products is higher in Central
Asia and Moldavia and lowest in the Baltic republics, where the level of consumption
of meat. dairy and fish products. as well as vegetables and potatoes. is highest.
National features and traditions manifest themselves in the consumption of certain
foodstuffs. Thus. in Central Asia and the Caucasus they prefer mutton as a meat
dish, in the Ukraine -- pork, and in Central Asia, Southern Kazakhstan and Yakutia
-- horse-breeding products. A large amount of tea is consumed in Central Asia. The
higher demand for silk and cotton fabric in Central Asia is associated with national
and climatic conditions.

The importation of goods into regions distant from rail and water routes is done by
motor transport and air. causing additional transport outlays. Road conditions and
the location of airports relative to the trade network influence the amount of trade
turnover. Delays in delivering goods due to poor transport services reduce trade
turnover volume.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

Local Trade Turnover Differences.

The effect of large urban agglomerations on trade is manifested in the concentration
of per capita trade turnover in cities. especially in the primary center of the ur-
ban agglomeration. Trade turnover in the center increases due foremost to working
trips by the population. which usually involve purchases of goods. Customers from
other regions outside the urban agglomeration travel to the administrative-economic
center. The reverse flow, from the large cities of an agglomeration. is to park
zones, recreation areas and dachas on days off, and increAses trade turnover at cer-
tain points in the suburban zone. primary in foodstuffs. In several oblasts, the ur-
ban agglomeration encompasses more than 70 percent of the oblast urban population.

Thus. the Novosibirsk agglomeration concentrates more than 80 percent of the oblast
urban population and 15 percent of its rural population. The agglomeration com-
prises dacha-type villages and special recreation spots. Servicing them causes
trade turnover fluctuations and results in the creation of a seasonal small-scale
trade network in places of temporary population concentration.

Health resort areas of unionwide importance are specific regions with characteristic
trade features at the local level. They are distinguished by significant seasonal
fluctuations in trade turnover and peculiarities in its structure. to be explained
first of all by the seasonal unevenness in the size of the population. In health
resour areas. trade turnover grows not so much to meet the needs of the local popu—
lation as due to the large number of people visiting for recreation or treatment.
For example, the entire population of Krymskaya Oblast was slightly more than two
million in 1978, while the Crimea had about 10 million people visit in organized and
unorganized groups. At the Black Sea health resorts of the Northern Caucasus (Anapa,
Greater Sochi, Celendzhik). the number of organized vacationers will have increased
from 1.8 million in 1975 to 2.3 million in 1980 and unorganized -— from 1.6 to 3.1
million. according to calculations by Yu. H. Lobov (4). In the 1970's, the number
of people visiting Riga and the Riga seashore health resort zone from other repub-
lics was about 3.6 million (5).

The increase in trade turnover in health resort regions during the season is ob-
served primarily in the cities. A temporary small-scale trade network (tents or
booths) is set up right at the recreation areas (near the beaches). which also in-
fluences trade turnover growth during the health resort season.

Trade Differences At the Development Level.

The number of people in population centers is one factor determining trade turnover
at the development level. Trade turnover amounts. as has already been noted, depend
on an aggregate of factors. In the large village or city. other conditions being
equal, trade turnover increases.

Influence of central places on trade turnover amount. The well-known concept of
central places. developed by V. Kristaller, is based on a hierarchy of settlements
in which a certain number of settlements (K) is always subordinate to any point. V.
Kristaller used the best geometric shape, a hexagon, which permits filling the en-
tire territory being examined. Given K-7. six settlements are distributed about
each center (the seventh is the center). The central place serves the whole clien-
tele in each of the points gravitating towards it. The whole clientele may not be

It
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oriented towards a single central place. It may be distributed equally among two
centers, in which case K-é. that is. each place provides 2 unit for each of the six
and the central place counts for one unit. Given K-3, each place accounts for 1/3
of the clientele, and so forth (6).

V. Kristaller had in mind an idealized territory in which transport outlays would
grow pronortionally to the distance from the center. It has been established in
practice that the zones of gravitation towards the larger cities differ as a func-
tion of the features of transport networks linking them, independently of even or
uneven distribution of the settlements. Trade centers of identical size attract
more customers the better the availability of cheap transport to them. The popula-
tion is more willing to visit its administrative center than a larger, closer city
of different administrative subordination. For example. residents of Chimkentskaya
Oblast in Kazakhstan travel nore often to their own oblast center, Chimkent, than to
the larger city of Tashkent in Uzbekistan, which is right next door. The population
of a lower network gravitates foremost to its own closest trade enterprise, then (in

order) to the center of the administrative region. the oblast center and the union
republic center.

A concentration of central places can apply to trade within a large population cen-
ter or city as well. Trade turnover in the central portion of a city is higher than
on the outskirts.

Influence of economic functions of population centers on trade. The functional fea-
tures of a population center determine the size of the turnover in its trade net-
work. Thus, trade turnover increases in large centers performing industrial. health
resort and transport functions.

In rural settlements (except for administrative-economic centers), the trade net-
work is located in centers associated with trade-distribution or cultural and health-
protection functions. A convenient transport-geographic location. as for example
near a busy highway. results in the organization of trade enterprises in a popula-
tion center to serve not only its own population. but also passengers in transit.

Retail trade turnover growth also depends on the efficient territorial organization
of trade in a population center. In cities with single- and two-story develo ments.
it is most efficient to locate food stores with a minimum floorspace of 250 n and
a service radius of BOO-1,000 meters (7). Improving the forms of trade services to
the population is of great importance to trade turnover growth.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Baydanov. N. F.. Bernval'd. A. R. and Turov. A. 8.. "Problemy razneshcheniya
torgovoy seti v sel'skoy mestnosti" [Problems of Trade Network Distribution in
Rural Areas], Moscow. Izd-vo Ekononika, 1972.

2. Freydin, l. L., Shkoda, K. V. and Dobrov. V. V.. "Ways of Raising the Standard
of Living in the Kola North," PROBLEM? SEVERA. No 15. 1971.

3. Korzhenevskiy. I. I.. "Osnovnyye zakonomernosti razvitiya sprosa v SSSR" [Basic
Patterns of Demand Development in the USSR]. Moscow, Izd-vo Ekonomika. 1971.

15
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a. Lobov, Yu. H., "Organizatsiya torgovli na kurortakh" [Organizing Trade At
Health Resorts]. Moscow, Izd-vo Ekonouika. 1974.

5. Gorbachev. P. V.. "Formirovaniye tovarnykh resursov (opyt raboty torgovykh or-
ganizatsiy Latviyskoy SSR)" [Forming Commodity Resources (Experience in Operat-
ing Trade Organizations of the LaSSR], Moscow. Izdrvo Ekononika. 1976.

6. Tayn, P. and N"yubi, P., "Methods of Geographic Research," EKONOHICHBSKAYA GEO-
GRAPIYA. No l, 1977. Moscow. Izd-vo Progress.

7. Musatova. V. P.. "Optimizatsiya struktury torgovoy seti goroda" [Optimizing the
City Trade Network Structur. I, Moscow. Iad-vo Bkononika. 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Geografiya i prirodnyye resursy". 1981

11052
650: 8146/1616 END

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY