FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10078
27 October 1981

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES

[FOUO 7/81]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was suururized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGT‘ LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS M10078
27 October 198

USSR REPORT

HUMAN Resounces
(r000 7/81)

Coureurs

DEMOGRAPH!
Danographic Policy Deened necessary for Ions-Tern Social Economic
Planning
(A. Ya. Kmhn; DMRAPICEESKAYA mum V 8853, 1981) 0....

Book Discusses Manpower Shortage, Alcoholism
(RAZVITIYB NARODOIIASELBIYA: ECONOMICEBSHY ABM. 1980)

- a - [III - USSR - 38c FOUC
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nmm

DWHIC POLICY DEED NECESARY 170R WHO-TERM SOCIAL, momma PLANNING

Moscow DWGWICHESKAYA POLITIKA V 8853 in Russian 1981 (signed to press 9 Ieb
81) PP 3-9

[Tit1e. annotation. introduction. and table of contents froe the book "Deaographic
Policy in the USSR" by A. Ya. Kvasha, Izdatel'stvo "Pinansy i statistika”, 6000
copies. 198 pages]

[Text] In examining the current trends of population developeent in the USSR. the
author gives particular attention to the problem of working out an effective deno-
graphic policy in the country. population reproduction. and the relationship of
demographic policy to the aocio-econonic policy of the party. which is ainad at

the utmost inproveaent of the workers' well-being and the cowrehensive develop-ent
of the individual. This work analyzes the basic nethodological approaches to de-
tenining the volme of expenditures for inlenenting a denographic policy through-
out the country. on the whole, and in its individual regions.

The book is intended for denograhpera. economists. sociologists. and other special-
ists interested in the population problem of the USSR.

Introduction

In recent years the working out of an effective demgrapnic policy in the 088R has

becone the most important direction of research in population problem. "Environ-

mental and population prohlens, which have recently becone acute." it was noted

at the 25th Congress of the CPSU. "mat be given consideration by Soviet scholars.

Improving the socialist utilization of nature and working out an effective delogra-
phic policy represent an i-portant task for the whole cysts: of natural and social

sciences"1.

The necessity of an active influence on denograhpic phenomena on the part of socie-
ty has been noted repeatedly in the decisions of the party and the government. In
1931 the Plenm of the Central Couitee of the m [All-Union Col-uniat Party (of
Bolsheviks” adopted a decision to regulate nigration to Hoacov. Annual allowances
to families during the first 5 years of a child's life were introduced on 27 July

1936 by a resolution of the USSR SN! [Council of People's Co-issara. 1917-1916].
These were some of the first ayatelatically paid out allowances in the world for

1

mo 0mm av . Ice: nuns v
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

large fanilies. A new system of allowances for large families was introduced in
19“ and was revised in 19107.

The role of dangraphic prognoses in long-tern socio-economic planning was noted
at the 26th Congress of the CPSU. In the decisions of the congress provisions were

people working in the northern and eastern regions of the country, which had a pos-
itive effect on population migration to those regions of the country. Finally.

in the new Constitution of the 1188! (Articles 35 and 53) special nention is made
of the i-portant role of motherhood and the stability of the family in the value
system of our society. and active state assistance to the family is guaranteed.
The 25th CPSU Congress adopted a decision to grant women partially paid 1-year
maternity leaves. which will be introduced throughout the rayons of the country
beginning in 1981.

an important direction in the systasatic social effect on demographic phenosena.

In this respect measures with a purposeful effect were literally carried out from
the very first days of Soviet- power. The resolution of the CPSU Central Cousittee
and the USSR Council of Ministers on the further developnent of health care. adopt-
ed in September 1977, is also to a great degree a part of the systastic effect

of a developed socialist society on population development.

However, the 25th CPS!) Congress approached the resolution of population problems

at a qualitatively different level: it posed the question of working out an effec-
tive demographic policy. on the whole, that is. a system c ’ neasures expressly aim-
ed at achieving a definite result with a high degree of effectiveness with respect

to administrative actions. Let us also note that here we are concerned with meas-

ures of a systematic social effect on the whole systas of demographic processes

in their interdependence and not just on this or that for-- of population movement.

Such a qualitatively new approach to adsinistrative prohlens. that is. a planned
effect for the purpose of changing dasogrsphic phenomena in a direction necessary

to society, reflects the objective require-en“ of our society and is based on real-
istic opportunities.

At the present level of economic development in our country long-term oasis-economic
planning is acquiring ever greater significance; particularly long—tern when devel-
opment trends of a long duration with respect to this or that cosponent of such

a complex social system as society and the revision of undesirable tendencies ‘eppes-
ring in the course of social development play such a special role.

But any administration of the comlex system. especially such a multifunctional
system as a mature socialist society. can only be effective when specific measures
are provided for in order to new each elaent of the system along with a defi-
nite and unified social goal. Not one cowonent of such a systas. demographic pro-
cesses in this instance. should be left outside of the sphere of a purposeful ef-
fect, not even outside of a dependence on the developsent trends of this or that
process. The peculiarities of a demographic situation can only increase the urgen-
cy of carrying out an effective demographic policy.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The implementation of the basic econouic law of a socialist society and improving
the efficiency of the way in which our whole economy functions are the main criter-
ia for the effective operation of our whole social policy, including its component
-- a demographic policy. Demographic policy questions should also be resolved in
conformity with these basic criteria while taking into account the social and eco-
nomic aspects of developnent in society. The correlation between the elements of
the whole system and the measures for adninistering them is a couples. sometimes
debatable. but theoretically and practically very imports .t problemz. Thus the
necessity of working out an effective demographic policy is dictated by the long-
term interests of the development of our society.

But also important is another aspect of this problem. which is that the scientific-
theoretical prerequisites for resolving this problem have now been formed. It is
kmwn that the scientific elaboration of the population problem. which was suspend-
ed in our country on the eve of world Her II. was noticeably activated after the
publication of the article "0n ‘hvo Forgotten Areas of Sociological Research"3 in
the journal xoonmsr. In the middle of the 1960's organizational form was given
to two demographic scientific centers in Moscow (Department of Daaography in the
USSR NII TsSU [Scientific Research Institute of the Central Statistical Administra-
tion] and Center for the Study of Population Problems in the Beowmic Department
of H60 [Hoseow State University imeni H. V. Lomonosovl) and one in Kiev (Department
of Danography in the Institute of Economics of the UkSSR AN [Academy of Sciences]).
Somewhat later the Population Problems Laboratory was opened up in the University
of Tashkent. Conferences and symposium on various aspects of population studies
became a reality. the volume of demographic literature increased“ .

Research on population problems in the first years after the war was conducted.

on the whole, by political economists. Bourgeois theories on population develop-
ment were subjected to severe criticism. and attempts were also nade to formulate
a socialist law of human population. Beginning in the middle of the 1960's theo-
retical and applied research on demographic problems characteristic of the USSR.
on the whole. and the Union republics underwent very active development. After
the creation of an editorial department of demographic literature in the izdatel'-
stvo [publishing house] "Statistika" the voluae of demographic publications and
their subjects were expanded significantly.

The research conducted in the last few decades has formed a scientific-theoretical
base for working out a system of measures for the administration of population de-
velopnent. It is comprised of an overall approach to the study of the processes

of development. which is based on a conception of the system of knowledge concern-
ing population. The way for such an approach was paved by the fundamental works

of Soviet demographers on an analysis of long-term population development trends

in the USSR and also by works in the area of improving the methodology and the system
of demographic analysis and prognosis.

The informational base of demographic research has also been expanded considerably
in recent years, the 1959. 1970. and 1979 population censuses provided much valu-
able material not only for an analysis of trends in demographic processes. but also
for revealing their motivational factors. In this respect the 1979 census acquires
considerable significance. In fact. this census for the first time (since 1926)
provides us with intonation on the level of the birth rate according to cohortss.

3

COO nmru' "Cl? 0N! V
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the last few decades our country has conducted a large umber of various duo-

graphic studies. which have made it possible to obtain ‘detailed and sometimes uni-
que information.

The study of the motivational factors behind the decision of a couple to remain

childless or to have children represents an inortant direction in demographic re-
search. which is of considerable inortance in working out the prohlmas of admini-
stering demographic processes. Another isportant factor is an analysis of the me-
chanism of the interrelationship between economic and demographic processes at var-

that element of the standard of living on the intensiveness of demographic proces-
ses. An identification of trends in the dynamics of these relationships is an im-
portant condition for working out the whole structure of effective economic mess-
ures in a demographic policy. This type of demographic research underwent consi-
derable (however, still insufficient) development in the 10th Five-Year Plan in
the work of many Soviet scholars.

Finally, a detailed familiarity with theoretical research and the large amount of

practical experience accumulated in this area in the socialist countries of Europe
was an iaportant prerequisite for the success of research in the area of duogra-

phic policy in our country. A study of this experience made it possible to ident-
ify many common traits in the course of dmgraphic development and to generalize

measures for an effective demographic policy in a socialist society.

A mnber of works on problems of managing demographic development and on demogra-
phic policy have been published in recent years‘. Among them two collective mono-
graphs especially devoted to these problems should be singled out7. A number of
works by B. Is. Urlanis are devoted to the problems of demographic policy. ques-
tions of the theory of the economics and politics of human population are resear-
ched in the works by D. l. Valentey. '

The problems of managing population development and desographic policy have been
discussed at a number of seminars and conferences. Among them in recent years it
is possible to single out the All-Union School-Seminar on Questions of Hanaging
Danographic Processes, held in May 1979. and the Conference of the Council on So-
cio-Economic Problems of Population Development of the USSR AN. held in June 1979.

And still we cannot say that the same high level has been achieved in the area of
the study of demographic policy problem as, for angle. in the developaent of
methods of demographic analysis. A nusber of these questions remain poorly stud-
ied. for exasple: the determination of the effectiveness of a demographic policy,
the correlation of its "vertical" and "horizontal" levels. the opportunities of
society in the utilization of these or other measures under current conditions,
and many other aspects.

At the same time the urgency of resolving these problems increases from year to
year. Confirmation of this can be found in the most recent party documents. ‘i'hus
not only is the importance of expanding denographic research noted in the draft

of "The basic directions of economic and social development in the USSR for the
years 1980 «1985 and for the period until 1990". but concrete tasks are also es-
tablished, the accomplistment of which would require the implementation of an
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

effective demographic policy: the strengthening of the family. the creation of
more favorable conditions for combining female participation in the labor force
with the functions of motherhood, increased life empectency. and many others. 'l'hus
research on the problems of a demographic policy in our country is a vital require-
ment of theory and practice.

To a great degree present work amounts to a development of the theses contained

in the hook "Problemy economiko-demograficheskogo rarvitiya $9.83"8 [Problems of
Bconmic-Daographic Development in the 1881]. Its structure is determined by a
general approach to the management of eocio-economic processes. which includes such

elmaents as determining the state of the subject being managed at the time manage-
ment actions begin; determining the goal of such actions, that is, that state of
the system being managed which the actual state should approach; a selection of
management methods and, finally 9 a determination of a system for controlling chan-

ges in the system being managed .

In accordance with our objective the management process is made up of the follow-
ing elements: a study of the general trends of population development and their
specific traits under the conditions of the country as a whole as well as its in—
dividual regions; a determination of the present state of demographic development
as an initial base of managaent; a determination of the goal of a demographic pol-
icy - those parameters of population reproduction which from the positions of the
criteria selected are the most preferable with respect to long-term propects; an
elaboration of a comprehensive system of measures for a demographic policy; finally,
an elaboration of a system for controlling changes in the state of the system being
managed. To a great degree the latter is limited to an inrovement of the methods
of demographic analysis and. therefore. will not he examined in this work.

Such an overall nature of research predetermined its frapentary nature and. mast
likely. the far from always intensive elaboration of a umber of duographic policy
problems. Questions of demographic policy with respect to migration, in particular,
are in need of special examination because of their specificity. It is hoped that
this work will make at least a minimal contribution to working out such a coqalex

and urgent problem as an effective demographic policy in the USSR.

The reconendations of Professor D. l. Valentey and Professor 1.. L. Rybakovskiy,
and also the assistance of Ye. S. Bol'shakova were extremely valuable in the pre-
paration of this book. The author is profoundly grateful to all of them.

WES

l. "Haterialy XXV S"yerda ms" [Materials on the 25th CPSU Congress]. Hoscow,
1976. p 13.

2. We regard demographic policy as a part of population policy. which, in turn,
is a part of the socio-economic policy of society as a whole (see.: "Sistema
:naniy o narodonaselenii" [System of Knowledge on human Populationl/edited by
D. I. Valentey. Hoscow, 1976. chapter 1x). In this work we will only ermine

problems related to demographic policy.

5

mo 0mm" new nusv
3.
4.

Se

6.

7.

8.

9'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KDHIUNIS'I', 1965. No 17.

Our task includes a study of the history of demgraphic research in our coun-
try during the postwar period, this is the subject of a special work. the vri-
ting of. which is extremely urgent.

At the tine this book was released for printing there were still no detailed
publications on the results of the 1979 census. but it is possible to aesme
that the question asked by census takers concerning the nuaber of children in
a fanily in combination with a detailed description of the condition of the
fully vill provided a wealth of material for subsequent research.

According to the data of the reference book “Bibliogrefiya po problem-a naro-
donaseleniya" [Bibliography on Problems of human Population] for the years
l972--l975. (Moscow. 1977) 24 works on the problens of hulan population policy
were published during this period in the 1888. One of these publications --
the collection "Demograficheskaye politih" [Duographic Policy] - contains

22 articles by various authors, that is. the total umber of publications
amounts to 46 titles.

See.: "Demograficheskaya politihs'Vedited by V. s. Steehenko and V. P. Pisku-
nov, Moscow. 1971.; "Upravleniye resvitiyem narodonaseleniya SSSR" [Administra-
tion of Human Population Development in the {SSH/edited by A. Ya. Xvasha. Hoe-
cow, 1977.

See.: A. Ya. Kvasha, "Problemy ekonomiko-demograficheskogo razvitiya 8533".
[Problens of the Economic-Dangraphic Development of the 0883]. Moscow, 1974.

See.: 'ﬁatemstika i kibernetika v ekonoaike" [asthmatics and Cybernetics in
economics]. Dictionary-Handbook. Moscow. 1975. pp 592—597.

Table of contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Chapter 1. General Trends of Daographic Processes . . . . . . . . .

. 10
Basic state of population development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lO
Present state of population reproduction in the Soviet Union. . . . b6
Long-tern prospects for the development of demographic processes. . 78

Chapter 2. 0n the Goals of Duographic Policy. . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

Chapter 3. Problems of Demogr‘aphic Policy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135

General principles of implementing a demgraphic policy in the USSR 135
On the effectiveness of a demographic policy and the consistency of

its mumtationo 0 O O O O l O O O O O O O O I 0 O O O Q 0 0 O O 174
On an overall. long-term program of population development in the

USSR 0 C 9 O O O D O O O O 0 O Q 0 0 O O O D 9 O O 0 O O O O O 191
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aleksandr Yakovlevieh Kvaaha

Dangreficbeekaye Politika v 8888

Reviewer 1.. 1.. whekovﬂdy
ﬁnancing Editor V. P. Tonia
Editor 0. I. Chertove
Junior Editor Ye. u. Indyy
Technical Editor 1. V. Zamrodnyeya
Proof-Reade” ta. 8. Oetrovekiy. II. P. Spermkeya
Artistic Editor 8. A. m

Cover by V. s. Serseyeva
In No 1031

Released for type-setting 25 July 1980. Signed to preu 9 Pebruary 1981'. A—06235.
Format 8610.08 one-thirty second. Paper press no 1. Set ”Literaturneye". Eleve-

ted print. P. 1. 6.25. 031. p. 1. 10.5. Partial edition. 1. 11.21.. Edition of
6000 copies. Order of 5213. Price 1 ruhle 20 kopecke.

Izdatel'etvo "Pinemy i etatietike". Moscow. Chernyahevekiy Street. 7.

obleet Printing House of the mutation of Publishing Houses,
Po1ygraphy, end the Book Trade of the Ivenoveldy 0b1iepolkon.
City of 1venovo-8. Iipogrefekeye Street. 6.

COPYRIGln': "Pinensy i statistika". 1981

10576
CS): 1828/7

T

POI! mm" new nmv
FOR OF11C1AL.USEIDNLY

DEMOGRAPHY

BOOK DISCUSSBS MANPOWER SHORIAGB, ALCOHOLISH

Moscow RAZVITIYE NABODONASELBNIYA: ZIONOHICBESKIY ASPEN? in Russian 1980
(signed to press 1 Feb 80) pp 169-220. 311-333

[Sections of Chapters 2 and 3 from book "Population Growth: The Economic As-
pect” by H. Ya. Sonin. Economics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
Izdatel’atvo "Statisika". 5,000 copies, 351 peges]

[Excerpts] Chapter 2. Problems of Reproduction of Labor Resources
Problems of Distribution and Use of Labor Resources‘

In the report address of the CPSU Central Committee to the 25th party congress
and his speech at the October (1976) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee, Com-
rade L. I. Brezhnev. general secretary of the CPSU Central Committee, especially
emphasised the need to pay more attention to optimum use of labor resources.
This was prompted by exacerbation of the problem of labor resources. by the
shortage of trained workers. The shortage of workers in the most common occupa-
tions is being felt with particular acuteness in the country's major industrial
centers. The present strain on the balance of labor resources is explained by

of capital construction. In a number of cases an excessively high need for per-
sonnel was created because of low efficiency in their use (large losses of work
time, interruptions of work activity because of personnel turnover. and so on),
as well as because of the unsatisfactory state of affairs in capital construc-
tion (excessively high volume of construction and number of projects under con-
struction. unwise distribution of capital invest-ants between new construction
and reconstruction of existing enterprises).

In accordance with the decisions of the 26th and 25th CPSU congresses, emphasis
has now been placed on qualitative and intensive factors of economic growth. on
raising the efficiency of social production. More optimum distribution and use

* Printed in abridged form from the publication: SOTSIALISTTCHESKIY TRUD,
No 3. 1977; additional material taken from the article "Effective Use of Labor

Resources" (EKONOHIKA I ORGANIZATSIYA PROHYSBLENNOOO PROIZVODSTVA, No 6, 1977,
Novosibirsk) was used in this section.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIMICHHHCLAL USElDNLN

of the country's labor resources, which ultimately take the form of a rise of
labor productivity, are assuming extremely great importance among those factors.
Speeding up the rates of scientific-technical progress, developing progressive
lines of scientific research and reducing the time required to apply their re.
Sults to production are helping to reduce heavy physical labor step by step and
to replace unskilled manual labor by machine labor. Intensification of produc-
tion has put on the agenda the improvement of the system of planning and exten-
sive use of the economic mechanism for stimulation of production, and enhance-
ment of the motivation of enterprises and production associations to achieve a
growth in Output without increasing the sire of the work force. This compli-
cated task can be performed on the basis of the socialist competition. which has
been staged on a broad scale in response to the appeal of the CPSU Central com-
mittee, for ahead-of-schedule fulfillment and overfulfillment of state assign-
ments by every producer and collective at minimum material costs and labor ex-
penditures, for bringing stragglers up to the level of frontramkers, for broad
introduction of better work methods, for expansion of the movement to master re-

lated occupations, and for application of scientific management at every work
station.

On the Shortage of Manpower, Its Causes and Consequences

By contrast with the entire previous period, when the annual natural increase of
the able-bodied population (the positive difference between the number of young
people coming of working age and the number of people retiring) was the highest
over the entire postwar period. in the second half of this 5-year period we en-
ter a zone when the natural growth of labor resources will drop sharply. The
number of young people entering the able-bodied population every year will be
between one-third and one-half of what it is at the present time; the number of
people retiring will be far greater. In coming years the age-specific composi-
tion of the able-bodied population will change essentially, and in this two ten-
dencies are clearly evident-~reduction of the share of young people (the 16-26
age group) and an increase in the relative share of people in the preretirement
age groups.

In connection with these processes one must have a clear idea of the state of
the manpower supply and of the causes and consequences of a manpower shortage
even now under present conditions. At the present time the manpower shortage is
having a very substantial impact on rates of economic development.

The impact of the manpower shortage on production efficiency is indicated, for
example, by the fact that more than one-fifth of cases of downtime lasting at
least one shift in the metal manufacturing industry occurred because of under-
staffing. This has been especially manifested in the major cities-Hoscow, Len-
ingrad, Kiev, etc. Often a low level of utilization of equipment and a slowing
down of the growth rates of production are observed at enterprises.

The manpower shortage is one of the reasons of labor turnover, whose results in-
clude losses of work time during transition iron one Job to another, higher ma-
terial costs of enterprises and of society as a whole for the training and re-

training of personnel changing jobs frequently. and lower labor productivity (a

9
FZMIC”WWC1A1.USEdJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

drop of 10-20 percent during the 2 or 3 months after the move is node to another
job) as compared to permanent personnel. Labor turnover in industry and con-
struction is at present dropping very slowly. At industrial enterprises it

still remains at a substantial level, and it is particularly high in construe.
tion.

The manpower shortage is also having an adverse effect on the state of work
discipline, which is related to the organization of work and consequently to its
productivity as well. It is a necessary condition of scientific management that
all job slots be filled with qualified personnel. The turnover of personnel and
breaches of discipline are related to use of work time above all.

losses of work time because of breaches of work discipline are underestisated in
official reports of individual enterprises. work time losses of less than one
shift, which as a rule exceed by 34-fold full-day losses, are especially impor-
tant. Part-shift downtime as recorded on "downtise slips" does not reflect the
actual situation. The sane can be said of ample time studies of the workday
which enterprises conduct annually with their own resources. They are first of
all organized in the last 10 days of October, i.e., in the particularly strenu-
ous period just before the holidays, and they furnish fragmentary figures which
are too low on the average level of part-shift downtime. Sample surveys con-
ducted by scientific research organizations provide a nore accurate idea of the
actual losses of work tine. According to the data of such surveys, at a number
of industrial enterprises these losses amount to as much as 15-20 percent of all
work time, while in construction they are still higher. In branches of the ser-
vice sphere no specific records are kept on work tise. One can judge free the
table how sizable the differences are between the losses formally recorded and
actual work time losses.

Part-Shift Losses of Work Tine Relative to Tina Worked, in percentage

According to Data According to Data

of Time Studies of Annual Sta-
Enterprises Skuybyshevskaya Oblastz of Workday tistical Rearts
Sergiyevskneft' oil field adminis-
tration 5.9 None
Ninth gas refining plant 6.0 0.11
Syzran 'sel ' mash 5.1. 0.02

The reasons for full-day and part-shift losses of work time very widely. They
include equipment breakdown and the lack of parts, workpieces, attachnents, ma-
terials-handling equipnent, and shortcomings in planning, in material and tech-
nical supply, and so on. Of course. all these factors do not depend directly on
the state of work discipline in the given production section. But if we follow
the entire "chain" of these causes related to organizational and technical asl-
adjustnents in the given production, than we will soon became convinced that in

the final analysis they also result to a considerable extent from a breach of
work discipline.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The extremely rapid growth of those ”PI-Dyed: far in excess of the natural
growth of labor resources, has caused serious difficulties. He should bear in
mind in this connection that the national economy has been attaining manpower
not only from the natural growth (young people reaching working age). but also
from persons who have retired as well as from the able-bodied population previ-
ously enployed in the home. By 1970 the work force in social production (in
kolkhozes and full-time studies) had reached more than 90 percent of all persons
of working age, as against 78 percent in 1960 and 87 percent in 1965. In cer-

tain major cities and regions of the country labor force participation has risen
to 95 percent.

"hat are the main reasons for the shortage of manpower, and what are the ways of
eliminating it?

The principal cause, in our view, is the lack of equipment for retooling produc-
tion in certain sectors. For a long time a sisabls portion of resources were
committed to building new enterprises. and for that reason it was not always
possible to reequip existing enterprises and carry out mechanization more exten-
sively, and that brought about a shortage of manpower. 'Ihe principal direction.
then, as noted by the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress, is to sharply reduce
the relative share of new construction and to redistribute resources to the ad-
vantage of technical modernisation of existing enterprises. as well as to de-
velop first of all those branches of machinebuilding which build machines and
equipment that replace heavy manual labor.

Consequently, a substantial rise in the efficiency of utilization of labor re-
sources presupposes implementation of a set of technical. organizational and so-
cioeconomic measures. It is decisively important here to step up the growth
rate of labor productivity and thereby to make manpower available from existing
production, and above all to reduce the nutter of workers employed at manual and
heavy physical labor.

The potential here for making labor resources available is enormous. since the
share of manual labor is dropping slowly in all sectors of the economy. In 1965
the share of workers performing operations by hand was 69.7 percent in industry
and 72.3 percent in construction, and in 1972 these figures were 55.7 [sic] and
65.8 percent, respectively. Because of slowness in reducing the use of manual
labor, though its relative share did decrease, at the same time the absolute
mum of manual labor increased over that period. More than half of workers in
construction and installation work are performing manual operations: 55 percent
in construction organizations of USSR Hinpromstroy [Hiniatry of Industrial Con-
struction], 54 percent of USSR Hinetroy [Ministry of Construction]. and 66 per-
cent of USSR Minael'khozstroy [Ministry of Rural Construction]. In

industry manual labor is concentrated mainly in machinebuilding and metal manu-
facturing, in light industry and the food manufacturing industry, in coal min-
ing, in timbering, which account for about 80 percent of all the manual labor in

the industrial sector. Those doing heavy physical labor represent 36.5 percent
of all those doing manual labor.

n

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because of insufficient specialization and an inadequate supply of equipment,
the number of workers doing manual labor is extremely high (76 percent) in aux-
iliary production operations: in transport, freight-handling and warehouse op-
erations, in repair of equipment, in tooling management, etc. For example, the
number of workers employed in loading, unloading, lifting and moving operations
and in the transport of freight reached 7 million persons in all sectors of the
economy (except kolkhozes) in 1975, which was 900,000 persons more than in 1965.
In industry the share of this group of workers was 14 percent in 1975, including
25 percent at enterprises (mines) of Minugleprom [Ministry of Coal Industry]. 15
in Mintyazhmash [Ministry of Heavy and Transport Machinebuilding], 12 in Minse1'-
khozmash [Ministry of Tractor and Agricultural Machinebuilding], 14 in Minstroy-
dormash [Ministry of Construction, Road and Municipal Machinebuilding], 27 in
Minstroymaterialov [Ministry of Construction Materials Industry], and 17 percent
in Minpishcheprom [Ministry of Food Industry]. The relative share of auxiliary

personnel in the total work force of the industrial sector was 46 percent in
1965, while in 1975 it had risen to 49 percent.

Measures aimed at scientific management assume tremendous socioeconomic impor-
tance in the area of solving the problem of labor resources. But in drafting
proposed plans for adoption of the most important NOT [scientific management]
measures for the 10th Five-Year Plan and for 1977 ministries and departments of
the USSR and of the union republics have in a number of cases adopted figures
which are too low for the rise of labor productivity resulting from application
of NOT measures if a comparison is made to the actual results for the 1971-1975
period. For instance, at enterprises of Minsel'khozmash the rise of labor pro-
ductivity to result from application of NOT measures in the 1976-1980 period was
set at 3.5 percent, as against 4.8 percent planned in the Ninth Five-Year Plan;
at enterprises of Mintsvetmet [Ministry of Nonferrous Metallurgy] the drop was
from 7.2 to 6.3 percent, in Minbumpron [Ministry of Timber, Pulp and Paper, and
Hood Processing Industry] from 6.2 to 6.8, in Minkhimmash [Ministry of Chemical
and Petroleum Machinebuilding] from 9.1 to 8.1, in Minstroydormash from 7.4 to
6.5, and in Minpishcheprom from 7 to 6 percent.

Yet it is scientific management, which also includes the designing of work sta-
tions in the construction and reconstruction of enterprises and when new ma-
chines and equipment are being created, as we know, that is an important pre-
requisite of the rise of labor productivity, of shortening the time for attain-
ing rated capacity, and of improving other economic indicators. If the main
lines of scientific management are competently dealt with in engineering plans,
far higher labor productivity will be ensured, and the designed labor intensive-
ness of the product will be achieved more rapidly. For example, in working out
the engineering plans for the varnishes shop in connection with reconstruction
of the Cherkessk Chemical Plant, the NOT Center of Minkhimprom [Ministry of
Chemical Industry] reduced the nuaber of personnel needed by 66 percent compared
with progressive shops of the same kind in operation, by improving the organiza-
tion of work and the positioning of personnel.

According to figures of SKB-3 [Special Design Office] of Minavtoprom [Ministry
of Automotive Industry], project plans worked out for organization of labor and
management of production guarantee that labor productivity, compared to existing

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shops, will be 10-25 percent higher in the basic shops of volume production,
60-50 percent in shops with series production, and twofold higher in shops with
single-unit production and auxiliary shops.

But many project planning organizations do not attribute due importance to sci-
entific management. A check has shown that 8 out of 13 institutes prepare proj-
ect plans in which there is no separate section devoted to the organization of
work (Giprostanok [State Institute for the Planning of Machine Tool, Tool and
Abrasives Plants and Forging-and-Pressing Machinery Plants] of Minstankoprom
[Ministry of Machine Tool and Tool Building Industry], Rezinoproyekt [State In-
stitute for the Planning of Establishments of the Rubber Industry] of Minnefte-
khimprom [Ministry of Petroleum Refining and Petrochemical Industry], Giproplast
[State Institute for the Planning of Establishments Producing Pinished and Semi-
finished Plastic Products] of Minkhimprom, etc.).

On Improving the System for Releasing and Redistributing Manpower

Enhancement of the role of the intensive form of manpower utilization in connec-
tion with the progressive reorganisation of the sectoral structure of our coun-
try's economy is making it objectively possible and necessary to improve the
system for redistribution of personnel to fill job slots with people made avail-
able as the result of technical progress, reconstruction, organizational-and-
technical restructuring and other measures directly or indirectly related to in-
troduction of scientific management.

Up until now the job placement of those made available by technical progress has
mainly been effected through intraplant redistribution. The predominant form of
retraining workers has been retraining them primarily for related occupations
within the same field within the enterprise, mainly in the form of short-term
individual and team training in second or new occupations, as well as through
training in evening (shift) vocational and technical schools. This system of
retraining took shape at a time when the amount of manpower being made available
within the enterprise was still extremely negligible.

At the present time the economic and organizational-legal prerequisites have
cone about for interplant redistribution of workers made available. It seems to
us that their disengagement should be carried out in a planned way and should be
organized.

In that context the experience of Minchermet [Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy] in
giving enterprises targets for the absolute number of workers released by per-
formance of organizational and technical measures, auxiliary workers and admin-
istrative and managerial personnel above all. deserves to be studied and dis-
seminated. In the 1971-1975 period the total number of production personnel
proper related to the rise of labor productivity of enterprises of that ministry
was more than 350,000 persons. including 207,000 actually disengaged and trans-
ferred to other sections of production, 180,000 of them in turn used to staff
new projects. The entire growth of the volume of production in the Ninth Five-
Year Plan for the USSR Minchermet was achieved by virtue of the rise of labor
productivity. In the 10th Five-Year Plan 159,500 persons belonging to produc-
tion personnel proper are to be released according to the target assigned.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Timely preparations need to be made for the process of organized and large-scale
redistribution of manpower; otherwise such painful things as reduced wages, pe-
riods without work, unreasonable geographic moves, and so on, are inevitable.

It is advisable in this connection to set up a system of manpower reserves and
planned redistribution of manpower. As L. I. Brezhnev has pointed out, "a situ-

ation needs to be achieved in which the equipment does not stand idle waiting
for personnel...."*

The qualitative composition of the workers to be made available and who can be
redistributed in coming years is characterized by a high relative share of aux-
iliary workers performing unskilled labor, i.e., those groups whose subsequent
use in social production requires retraining and improvement of qualifications.
In the more remote future the workers made available will show a higher absolute
number and share of basic workers with secondary qualifications (lathe opera-
tors, milling machine operators, heat treaters, drill press operators), as well
as engineering and technical personnel and employees (because of reorganization
of the structure of administration involving extensive use of A30 [computerized

management systemsl). Accountants, bookkeepers. and so on will be released and
transferred to other work.

He should mention that in the industrial sector alone there are more than 2 mil-
lion stevedores, carriers and materials handlers and helpers who do their work
mainly by hand. There are 2.5 million persons employed in labor-intensive oper-
ations in the repair of equipment and more than 1 million persons in technical
inspection. The question is this: How is their redistribution to be organised?

Redistribution of manpower may be internal and external. The latter might in-
clude, for example, use of personnel made available at industrial enterprises,
in construction organizations, and so on, because of introduction of NOT. In
this case the workers are transferred from certain production sections (shops
and the like) to others within the enterprise. He would classify among external
forms of redistribution that portion of labor resources which is made available
as a result of technical progress, involving greater mobility than the reassign-
ment from one job to another within the enterprise, and involving redistribution
beyond the confines of a given enterprise-dwhere the need for trained personnel
arises. Higher "vertical" and "horizontal" mobility (i.e., possibility of mov-
ing from one sector to another and one place to another) is an important dis-
tinctive feature of external redistribution of manpower.

When manpower becomes a factor that sets a limit on the growth rates of produc~
tion, external release of workers in certain labor-intensive sections of produc-
tion and their redistribution from one enterprise or sector to another in the
national economy take on greater socioeconomic importance. This pattern must
satisfy the bulk of the manpower requirement of new industrial enterprises. The
reason for this is that the total work force in most branches of the industrial
sector will not increase. At the present time external redistribution is mostly
taking place haphazardly, through personnel turnover.

* L. I. brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom" [On Lenin's Course], Vol 2, Moscow, 1970,
p 502.

lb

FOR OWTWCIAI.USE()NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following can be designated as the principal directions for the planned re-
lease and external distribution of manpower: from agriculture as labor produc-
tivity rises to nonfarm branches of material production; from extractive
branches to manufacturing branches within industry; from the production to the
nonproduction sphere; from the densely populated regions of the European part of
the USSR to the sparsely settled regions of Siberia and the Far East. Improved

planning of the redistribution of manpower has great national economic impor-
tance in the present stage.

Personnel for New Enterprises

0n the whole it would be difficult to say that the situation with attainment of
rated capacity at new industrial enterprises is satisfactory. The average time
required is all of a years. Sample surveys conducted by TsSU SSSR [USSR Statis-
tical Administration] in 1976 showed that 1,296 out of 2,211 enterprises (58.5
percent; as compared to 67.2 percent in 1964) had not attained rated capacity
within the period allowed. Still longer periods are required to attain the

principal economic indicators of the design-labor productivity. production cost
and profitability.

Temporary quotas and the failure to revise the quota system probably are one of
the reasons for this. The experience of advanced enterprises (the Minsk, Gor'-
kiy and Volga motor vehicle plants, the Minsk Refrigerator Plant, the Tiraspol'
Cotton Combine) shows that when products are being put into production or when
new technology is being assimilated the adoption of technically sound design
quotas, combined with simultaneous establishment of temporary supplements to
wage rates which decrease as the design quotas are achieved and are altogether
discontinued when rated labor intensiveness is attained, helps to reduce the
time required to reach rated output and to attain the economic indicators given
in the design. Thanks to this system of quota setting and remuneration and to
organizational and technical measures rated labor intensiveness, for example. of
the CAI-24 "Volga" automobile was achieved in 13 months at the Gor’kiy Motor Ve-
hicle Plant, while that of the CAI-21 "Pobeda" automobile was attained only 7
years after it was put into production. The Rostsel'mash [agricultural ma-
chines] Plant attained rated labor intemiveness on the SK-S "Niva" combine in
3 years. whereas more than 10 years were required for the SK-b.

But this system of quota setting and organization of work has still not become
widespread. In the 1972-1974 period ministries were ordered to draft sectorwide
methods recommendations and criteria for setting work quotas for workers during
the initial period of a new production operation. But so far many ministries
and departments have still not completed preparation of these materials.

In spite of the large scale of new capacities being activated every year, a sys-
tem has not yet been created for timely targeted training of skilled workers for
new industrial enterprises. Every year several hundred new major industrial en-
terprises and installations are put into operation, requiring approximately
500,000-600,000 new workers by the time they open up.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yet planning agencies and economic authorities as a rule do not have comprehen-
sive calendar plans for the training of personnel. As a result enterprises
which are new construction are experiencing a large shortage of operating per-
sonnel. For instance, the synthetic alcohol operation in the production associ-
ation Nitron (Saratov) was short 1,400 workers when it went into operation, and
the Krasnoyarsk Chemical Fiber Plant 1,000. Staffing in the production associa-
tion Azot in Navoi when it went into operation was 90 percent of engineering and
technical personnel and 78 percent of worker personnel; the respective figures
for the Sumgait Superphosphste Plant were 92 percent and 26 percent, respec-
tively.

A disproportion thus arises: A new industrial enterprise with progressive and
sophisticated technology is put into operation, elements of haphazardness and
lack of organization (recruitment off the street) are predominant in shaping the
production staff of this facility, and this has the most adverse impact on the
pace at which rated capacity is attained at new projects. It is evident from an
analysis of balances of skilled workers of newly built industrial enterprises
that about 80 percent of the workers are recruited by the enterprises themselves.

Progress in present-day industrial technology and the extent of introduction of
full automation and mechanization of production at new enterprises necessitate
the training and formation of a new type of worker who has a high level of gen-
eral education and a high level of specialized training. Pbr instance, in ma-
chinebuilding the need for workers in the high-skill categories is 15-25 percent
of the total work force, while in the chemical industry it goes up to 50 percent.

It is advisable for targeted training to be done through the facilities of edu-
cational institutions in the system of vocational and technical education, and.
especially, as emphasized in the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress, in schools
furnishing secondary education along with skills.

There is a need for considerable expansion of the network of educational insti-
tutions for targeted training of workers for new industrial enterprises. Hays
that can be proposed: first, mandatory provision for construction of vocational
and technical schools at a faster pace than the principal project so that the
students would complete their training at the moment when the principal manufac-
turing equipment is installed. the outlays for construction of these educational
institutions to be incorporated in plans and cost estimates; second, other forms
of worker training new in effect must be retained and developed as well.

workers doing jobs requiring little skill and also those of the unsophisticated
occupations and those in narrowly specialized occupations should be trained at
enterprises, more extensive use being made of existing vocational and technical
schools and two-shift training.

The measures enumerated above, of course, require corresponding outlays. But
the benefit to the national economy from speedier attainment of rated output at

new industrial projects and from a shorter payoff period for capital investments
is immeasurably greater than those costs.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Need To Improve the Compilation and Fulfillment of Manpower Balances

The economic system of the country of advanced socialism possesses a number of
extremely important advantages over capitalistic countries. Utilizing these ad-
vantages, the Soviet state and Communist Party have in all stages of building
socialism been solving the problems of meeting the manpower needs of a growing
economy without a reserve army of labor-the unemployed, that inevitable result
of capitalism.

The principal advantage of the socialist economic system is that the planned
character of the Soviet economy affords the possibility of accurately reckoning
the economy's need for manpower, of training new personnel in the necessary num-
ber, of distributing them at the end of training in accordance with the plan (as
the reserve of the state) among the various sectors and among the country's vari-
ous regions. But these advantages are still not being sufficiently utilized.

In our opinion, attention should be turned to practical solutions of the prob-
lems, and linkages should be set up between these two parts of the manpower bal-
ance--the need for manpower and its supply.

The right to work has been achieved in the USSR, and there is no unemployment;
all manpower is fully utilized in the continuously expanding economy or in the
sectors of cultural construction and administration. Thus no surplus of person-
nel can be created in the national economy as a whole. Nor should there be a
shortage of manpower for the entire socialist economy taken as a whole. since
the production plan is realistic only when it is backed up with the supply of
personnel, and if labor resources are not sufficient for that, then the social-
ist state takes a number of steps to ensure that a portion of manpower is made
available and redistributed. But those measures are not always taken in good
time or in full measure. It is this that explains the absence of linkage (bal-
ance) between the need for personnel and possibilities for meeting that need in
the required sectoral and regional mix in the very stage of compiling plans and
to a still greater degree—-in carrying them out. This applies above all to the
balance of skilled personnel in capital construction.

As experience in achieving rated capacity when new enterprises are put into op-
eration has shown, the shortage of trained personnel is in first place among the
factors slowing down that attainment. In the current 5-year period, it seems to
us. the shortage of manpower could be entirely eliminated, above all by balanc-
ing the activation of new capacities and the supply of their personnel by redis-
tributing personnel from existing old enterprises to new ones by increasing the
efficiency of utilization of workers at existing enterprises.

Thorough and careful compilation of retrospective and planned balances of labor
resources from the macrolevel to the microlevel, i.e., for the country as a
whole and by regions, will be needed to achieve balance between employment and
optimum utilization of personnel. on the one hand, and the scale of social pro-
duction on the other. Only by means of balances of this kind is it possible to
determine the number of new jobs for each of the sectors of the econoay in the
planning period. Progressive standard amounts of specific capital investments
per job are needed to link the planned balances of labor resources to the plan-
ning of capital investments; those standards must be differentiated so as to

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFKJA1.USE(NHLY

take into account the distribution of capital investments (between new construc-
tion and reconstruction of existing enterprises) by sectors and regions of the
country. Devising standard amounts of specific capital investments (or cost)
per job is a task which scientific research institutes in the planning field are
capable of performing. Relying on these standards it would be possible to de-
termine the volume of capital investments so that it is consistent with the
scale of employment within the region and the sector.

In planning capital investments for development of the various sectors of the
economy it is important to take into account the trend and fluctuation of rela-
tionships between expenditures of past and live labor over several years. Tech-
nical progress brings about a progressive reduction in the share of inputs of
live labor (as compared to past labor) in all sectors of the economy. This sig-
nifies a faster growth of the mass of means of labor than for the size of the
work force. In this case we are talking about a potential relative reduction of
employment, since as time passes a decreasing amount of manpower will have to be
drawn into production. other conditions being equal. for one and the same amount
of fixed capital being put into operation.

It is natural that the different sectors of the economy are characterised by a
differing distribution of inputs of pest, embodied and live labor and are di-
vided into capital-intensive (for example, the chemical industry, metallurgy and
the fuel and power industry) and labor-intensive (coal mining, mining, timber
and lumber, and so on). The.level of employment depends largely on which sec-
tor-~capital-intensive or labor-intensive--capital investments are comadtted to.
Selection of the optimum variant has great importance in planning the location
of the productive forces among the country's economic regions. Location of la-
bor-intensive sectors makes economic sense in regions where there is a reserve
of labor resources, and, on the contrary, capital-intensive production operation
should above all be developed in regions with a manpower shortage, and at the
same time consideration should be given to the qualitative composition of man-
power as a function of the specific nature of the branches of the industrial
sector.

0n Certain Aspects of Studying Patterns of Movement of the Population and of
Demographic Policy*

It is particularly important to study the patterns of movement of the population,
first, because in the context of socialism the population figures not only as an
object, but also as a subject of economic policy as a whole, since the goal of
our society's development is to meet the needs of man; second, because movement
of the population and especially of labor resources, which determine possibili-
ties for the further development of the economy, possesses inertia as compared

to changes in the country's level of economic development. But it is the study
of patterns of movement of the population that is the weakest area in our demog-
raphy. This is especially manifested in forecasts of the size of the population,
not only for the various regions of the country, but even for the country as a

* Reprinted from the publication "Demograficheskaya politika" [Demographic Pol-
icy]. Moscow, 1974.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whole. He have to rely on forecasts of the size of the population in the ini-
tial stage of forecasting and planning development of the entire national econ-
omy. It is in that connection that we should examine the significance of demo-
graphic policy, to which more and more attention is being paid. And this is al-
together understandable. In recent years there have been substantial changes in
the flow of demographic processes. The birth rate in our country, especially in
the union republics with the largest population (RSFSR, UkSSk, 8883), has drop-
ped considerably. Very substantial changes are also taking place in the charac-
ter of other demographic processes. All of this is causing our society to pay
serious attention to these problems. At the same time in recent years there
have been no substantial changes at all in demographic policy itself (if indeed
we can speak of it as a shaped policy). This must also disturb us.

According to that division of the dissemination of scientific knowledge, includ-
ing its application, into time periods which has won greatest recognition, the
entire process from the initial scientific discovery to its wide dissemination
in society can be divided into four stages: l-basic scientific research; 2-
incubation period; 3--practical development; 6-dissemination.

Experience over many years has shown that it is in the third and fourth stages
that numerous and the most complicated problems are encountered, problems which
are causing great difficulties in applying scientific advances.

It would be a mistake in our view to suppose that this situation pertains exclu-
sively to those fields of science which yield a materialized result in the form
of new machines, equipment, materials and manufacturing processes. Re are re-
ferring to the broader importance of scientific research, including the social
and econoaic sciences, demography in particular. Practical application of sci-
entific developments in this field is, of course, different in nature, but the
task of increasing the effectiveness of scientific research through practical
application of scientific advances has direct relevance to demography as well.
The question. then, arises: What are the causes of insufficient practical uti-
lization of a large number of scientific recommendations on the problems of de-
mographic policy? One of the principal reasons, we are convinced, lies in the
state of the science of demography itself, and especially in the fact that it
still has been unable to discover the patterns of demographic development in our
country.

Science as a whole, as a major sector of human activity, and demography, as one
of its important branches, which have taken shape in the process of the social
division of labor, display in their further development two principal forms of
that division: specialization of labor and cooperation, or, put differently,
differentiation and integration.

These two forms of the division of labor, like two poles of a magnet, are insep-
arable from one another. And therefore, the stronger the process of division of
labor is manifested in the form of specialization, the stronger the process of
cooperation in labor must also be achieved. In science this is concretely ex-
pressed in the differentiation of branches and subbranches and, simultaneously,
in the development of integration, in the creation of interdisciplinary fields

19

IMMI(MWWC1AI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of science. In the present century-—the century of the scientific-technical
revolution—-the development of science and its practical application have expe-
rienced an unusual acceleration. And that is why new branches of science are
budding Out faster and faster from one another, striving at a fast pace to be-
come independent. But at the same time the laws of development of society and
of science itself require that connections be maintained between the old and new
fields of science and create the possibilities for that.

Development of demographic science became possible thanks to creation of a cer-
tain interrelated set of conditions which can mainly be reduced to three:

1) the gathering of facts (or what can be called creation of the nutrient me-
dium); 2) development of related sciences; 3) the economic and social need for
development of a given science (we might mention P. Engels' statement to the ef-
fect that economic need drives the development of science faster than hundreds
of university professors). The nutrient medium of the science of demography has
down thrOugh the centuries been statistics, but the gathering of facts. i.e., of

demographic data. is still inadequate for discovering the laws of movement of
the population.

Facts are the "life breath" of science. But, just in the case of development of
a living creature. it needs more than "air" alone for its development. The
birth and development of a socialist demography required a certain level of de-
velopment of philosophy, of Marxist political economy and of a number of other
"older" sciences, such as geography and history, for example. But up to a cer-
tain period,even though these conditions did exist, a number of subjective fac-
tors would not allow the economic and social needs of society, which had already
developed, to manifest themselves with sufficient persistence in the field of
demography. It is now becoming a most important task of present-day demography,
which uses specific methods of studying population as a socioeconomic phenome-

non, to study not only the general patterns of the movement of the population,
but also their quantitative expression.

Although many works have been written on the patterns of movement of the popula-
tion and on the law of population, not only have the basic quantitative depen-
dences of demographic phenomena not yet been formulated, but there is not even a
reliable qualitative assessment of the factors of movement of the population,
and therefore we are unable to fully take into account and utilize the require-
ments of the laws of demographic development. And without that it is impossible
to define the theoretical and practical tasks of demographic policy.

The proposition advanced by V. I. Lenin to the effect that reproduction of the
population is determined by material. economic factors, is now confirmed by the
results of a huge number of contemporary studies of the factors of the birth
rate, the marriage rate and other aspects of reproduction of the population.

But the principles of K. Marx quoted above on the question of the patterns of
movement of the population and those of V. I. Lenin elaborating tLem have in re-
cent years been in essence set up by many economists and demographers in opposi-
tion to various aspects of movement of the population: the first to the problem
of employment, and the second and third to reproduction of the population. Typ-
ical of such a point of view is that of T. N. Hedvedeva, who believes that "the

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F I-‘I(1AL USE ONLY

economic law of population and the laws of population growth, i.e., the laws of
reproduction, express altogether [different processes] (emphasis mine--H. 8.);
the first expresses the social form and level of utilization of the able-bodied
population in social production; the latter characterize a certain type of re-
production of the population, the rates of its growth in different socioeconomic
conditions, which depend directly not only on production relations. but also on
a broader range of factors which are not only economic, but also political. cul-
tural, and psychological, as well as factors pertaining to the family and every-
day life and even natural and biological factors. The first process is an eco-
nomic one, and the second demographic."* It seems to us that advocating the po-
sitiou presented means denying the principle that the character and level of em-
ployment of the population, i.e., the principal condition and the source of re-
sources for its (the population's) existence exert a decisive influence on the
patterns of the natural movement of the population.

Hhile denying the legitimacy of setting the economic law of population in oppo-
sition to demographic patterns and while emphasizing that changes in employment
have a decisive importance to reproduction of the population, we should not for-
get the existence, along with the basic economic law of population, of partial
laws as well that pertain to particular elements and aspects of reproduction of
the population (birth rate, death rate, marriage rate, and so on) not that the
decisive importance of economic factors to reproduction of the population by no
means signifies the exclusion of a whole number of psychological. cultural and
other factors, including family life. This is indicated, to be specific, by the
fact that sizable differences in the pattern of reproduction of population are
observed between contiguous regions of the country where the level of economic
development is approximately the same. The numerous studies, including surveys
of women and families in the context of planned parenthood, are furnishing very
contradictory data on the role of the various factors (adequacy of housing, ma-
terial prosperity. and so on). For example, there can be no doubt that there is
a profound interrelationship between demographic processes and solving the hous-
ing problem. It can moreover be said that the type of housing and housing sup-
ply are to a considerable degree determined by the laws of movement of popula-
tion and that in turn the housing supply influences to some degree the formation
of those laws. But the available data on the character and level of influence
of housing conditions on the level of the birth rate are very contradictory. In
the opinion of some scientists. the number of births decreases as housing condi-
tions improve, while other researchers come to the opposite conclusion.

Conclusions are also very contradictory concerning the role of material prosper-
ity. There are two basic points of view on this issue: some scientists feel
that the rise in material prosperity is conducive to a rise in the birth rates;
the other point of view (expressed most clearly by s. G. Strumilin, member of
the academy) is that the rise of material prosperity operates in precisely the
opposite direction. As for certain other important factors, there exist more
generally recognized conceptions, for example, in assessment of the role of the
employment of women in the sphere of social labor and the related change in
woman's social role and social status as a factor operating in the direction of

* VBSTNIK LGU, SER. BKONOHIKI, FILOSOPII I PRAVA, Vol 2, No 11, 1965, 9 1‘0.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1ﬂ(1Al.US£€DNLY

reduction of the fertility rate.

become an independent and skilled worker.

The woman,

who once had little schooling, is
now educated, once economically dependent. she has now become independent, eco-

nomically self-sufficient. and once a housewife who had a low status, she has

The result of all this is that child-

birth and the bringing up of children are playing an ever smaller role in wom-

en's lives.

Between and along the individual factors in reproduction of the

population there are interconnections which are not always obvious; that is, de-
tecting them is most problematical for those who study these phenomena. It is

apparently because of this complexity that such a fact as the birth rate. as the
family's need for children, has been studied so very little.

This factor's interrelationship with other factors can in our opinion be exam-
ined only in the context of the law of rising needs advanced by K. “hr: and

elaborated by V. I. Lenin (see the chart)

Place of the Family's Need for Children Among the Other Socioeconomic Factors in

the Various Stages of Development of the USSR

hood)
Period of Com-
pletion of Con-
struction of Ad-
vanced Socialist
Rank- 1930’s, first 1960's, second Society. third
ing stage stage stage
1 Need to work for the following reasons:
Source of sub- Source of sub- Social inter-
sistence (ne- sistence (ne- course
cessity) cessity) Source of sub-
Social inter- Social inter- sistence (ne-
course course cessity)
Comprehensive Comprehensive Comprehensive
development of development of development of
the personal- the personal- the personality
ity ity
2 Need for primary conditions of Need for child-

life, including:

Food, clothing Food. clothing

Housing Housing
Private trans- Private trans-
portation portation (au-
tomobile and
so on)
22

ren 3

Perpetuation of
the species
Source of family
joy and happi-
ness
Fulfillment of
social duty

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(in the context of planned parent-

Phriod of Com-
munist Society,

fourth stage

Comprehensive
development of
the personal-
1t?

Social inter-
course

Source of sub-
sistence

Need for educa-
tion, includ-
ing:

higher education
and scientific
activity
Secondary educa-
tion: general
and specialized
continued)

1930's, first
stage

Need for child-
ren:

Perpetuation of
the species

Material Sup-
port in old
age

Source of fan-
ily joy and
happiness

Need for non-
working time.
including free
tine, for the
following:

Doing housework

Rest and enter-
tainnent

hobby and cre-
ativity

Need for educa-
tion, includ-

ing:

Incomplete sec-
ondary, in-
cluding voca-
tional educa-
tion

Secondary educa-
tion: general
and specialized

FOR‘OFFRJAI.USIZONLY

1960's, second
stage

Period of Con-
pletion of Con-
struction of Ad-
vanced Socialist
Society, third

8 tsge

Period of Con-
Ilunist Society,

fourth stage

Need for nonworking time, including free tile. for

the following:

Doing housework

Rest and enter-
tain-ent

Hobby and cre-
ativity

Need for educa-
tion , includ-
ing:

Secondary. gen-
eral and spe-
cialized

Higher educa-
tion and sci-
entific activ-
ity

Blessntary and
incosplete
secondary edu-
cation. in-
cluding voca-
tional train-

ins

Need for child-
ren:

Perpetuation of
the species

Source of fan-
ily joy and
happiness

Materiel sup-
port in old
age

23

Rest and enter-
teinnent

Hobby

Doing housework

Need for primary
conditions of
life. includ-
ing:

Housing

Private trans-
portation (au-
tomobile and

so on)
Food . clothing

Need for educa-
tion. includ-
ing:

Higher education
and scientific

activity
Secondary: gen-
eral and spa-
cialized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bobby and cre-
ativity

Rest and enter-
tainsent

Doing housework

Need for child-
ren:

Perpetuation of
the species
Source of fasily
joy and happi-
ness
Fulfillment of
social duty

Need for primary
conditions of
life. includ-
ing:

Private trans-
portation (au-
tomobile and so
on)

Housing

Food. clothing
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The chart represents an attempt to deternine the hierarchy of the family's needs
and the place which the need for children has among them. We consider it possi-
his in principle, though as yet we are not making such an attempt, to quantita-
tively evaluate (in points on a scale) the importance of each need and the change
of this hierarchy fron one stage to the next. Since the chart is mainly nethodo-
logical in nature. it is more correct to show only those stages which are charac-
terized by substantial differences. The purpose of discovering the hierarchy of
needs, including the need for children, is to obtain an answer to the question:
What sort of needs and with what level of significance must be met before the
faaily (in the context of planned parenthood) decides to have a child? Without
prejudging the :uestion of which child in order we are referring to, we are
thinking as a rule of the "critical" case-~the birth of the third child and sub-
sequent children.

‘lhis chart is also convenient for a more thorough study of opinions in an inves-
tigation of the factors in the birth rate. In the few writings that do exist on
this question, in particular the meaningful book of V. A. Belova and L. Ye.
Darskiy,* a study of the reproductive principles in the stage of shaping the
family and of opinions and family plans for parenthood does not contain a de-
tailed analysis of the socioeconomic needs of the family for children.

This chart is in need of certain clarifications. The stages in the 0888's so-
cial and demographic development are given very provisionally. They do not co-
incide altogether with the assessment of the stages of the country's economic
development that exists in our literature, since demographic development, as
that process which has the highest inertia, as a rule lags behind social and
economic development.

Five groups of social and economic factors detersining the level of the birth
rate in the family are proposed:

1. the need to work;

ii. the need for primary conditions of life;

iii. the family's need for children;

iv. the need for nonworking time, including free time:

v. the need for education.

These groups of needs persist in all stages of social and economic develop-eat,
but in each of them the place of the family's need for children changes place
relative to the other factors. and within the various groups of needs there is a
change in the ranking of the particular subgroup as a function of its "weight"
(significance). A change in the significance of the particular factor (i.e.,
their regrouping) also presupposes a change in the level of the birth rate,

* V. A. Belova and L. Ye. Darskiy, "Statistika mneniy v iruchenii pozhdaysmosti"
[Opinion Research in Studying the Birth Rate]. lbscow, 1972.

2!:
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢JFF1C1AL.USIZCNULY

which, we believe, can be forecast assuming this system is formalized to some

extent: for example, by introducing a system of points on a scale both for each
group of needs and also for each subgroup.

We will examine the two extreme stages-the first and fourth-as an GRIDyLC.

In the thirties, just as in communist society, the need to work is regarded as a
basic condition for existence of each able-bodied member of society. But in the
thirties work is a source of means of subsistence, that is, work by necessity,
was that factor within this group that was first in significance. But in the
period of the communist mode of production the primary factor in the need to
work is comprehensive development of the personality as one, and moreover the
most important, of the conditions for transforming labor into a primary vital
need. This by no means signifies that the need to work as a source of means of
subsistence has altogether disappeared. But there is no question that this as-
pect will not be dominant over the other aspects of work.

The second group of needs in the thirties was the need for primary conditions of

life, first of all food and clothing, and then housing and private transporta-
tion.

Allowing for a certain amount of provisionality, and this indeed applies to
evaluation of all the groups and subgroups, attention is obviously drawn here to
the need for private transportation, or, more accurately. family transportation,
as one of the primary needs. The reference is above all to the need for a means
of the individual's reaching the place where he applies his labor. In subse-
quent stages the content of this need and the means of satisfying it are gradu-
ally transformed (the private means of transportation is used more and more in

time that is free of work. retaining, however, its importance as one of the pri-
mary conditions of life).

In the fourth stage the entire group of needs referred to as the primary condi-
tions of life still persist. But since satisfaction of the needs of the popula-
tion for clothing, food and housing will be achieved at optimum levels in the
previous stages, they have been put in second and third place here. Means of
transportation move into first place; it provides not only for movement to the

place where work is applied, but also the other movements which the family
needs.

we advance the family's need for children as the most complicated and debatable
group of needs. At first it might not seem altogether justified for this need
to be in the third place in the first stage, though, as we know, those years
were distinguished by the highest level of the birth rate. But we should empha-
size that this entire chart presupposes planned parenthood, which in the thir-
ties had a relatively small place in the overall birth rate. The division
within this group is particularly debatable, since what would seem to be a bio-
logical need-the need to perpetuate the species--ia put in first place. But as

we understand it, perpetuation of the species has not only biological signifi-
cance, but also social significance.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This chart reflects the author's subjective point of view concerning the charac-
ter of planning parenthood and the significance of the factors determining the
family's need for children. This point of view is based on theoretical general-
ization of the actual natural population movement. primarily in the largest re-
gions of our country with a high share of urban population (RSFSR, UkSSR, 3883).
The low birth rates in the sixties and early seventies are mainly the result of
the fact that the socioeconomic need for children has for a number of reasons
dropped to one of the last places with young families. We can suppose that the
period of completing an altogether advanced socialist society in our country

will be characterized by a sharp rise in the significance of the family's need
for children.

The need for children in comunist society, as is evident from the chart, drops
off once again, and within the group a new subgroup of factors-fulfillment of
social duty--moves forward. In regarding this factor not only as a family duty,
but also as a social duty, we have in mind the objective need and possibility of

attaining the best correspondence between the demographic tasks of society as a
whole and those of the individual family.

In the fourth stage the need for nonworking time, including free time, which as-
sumes a qualitatively new character, advances into third place. Whereas in the
thirties, when the system of public services was poorly developed, this need was
determined more than anything else by time-consuming housework, under communism

hobbies and creativity, as well as rent and entertainment move into the fore-
ground.

The greatest transformation is in the need for education. whereas in the first
stage it was provisionally put in fifth place, in the fourth it moves into sec-
ond. Moreover, in the thirties the predominant need was to obtain partial and
complete secondary education, whereas in communist society it is transformed
into the need for higher education and scientific activity.

We can take an analogous view of the change of [the other] needs in all stages.
However, it seems to us, it is important to demonstrate only the methodological
approach to the distribution of these groups of factors. This chart is only an
attempt to find one of the methodological forms of forecasting trends of the
birth rate, one that requires a comprehensive-~not just qualitative, but also
quantitative--estimation of the significance of each group and subgroup of needs
which figure as factors determining the level of the birth rate.

In moving on to the question of demographic policy, we will attempt to compare
differences among the numerous definitions available in the literature of the
content of demographic policy.

In the strict sense demographic policy is regarded as performance of measures
which can have a direct effect on the level of the birth rate, since at the
present time it is the factor determining the natural population growth (with
respect to the demographic situation in the USSR the reference is to the need to
raise the level of the birth rate in a number of the country's regions). It can
thus be said that in the strict sense of the word present-day demographic policy
is viewed as a measure to stimulate the birth rate.

26

FORioFFKJAl.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a broader sense demographic policy includes all measures which can affect all

demographic processes. not only directly. but also indirectly, in order to bring
about desirable changes in them.

Through specific economic and social measures socioeconomic policy also has an
impact on reproduction of the population (through formation of the family and so
on). But only certain specific measures aimed at a more direct impact on repro-
duction of the population-for example, laws on abortion (allowing or prohibit-
ing them), measures to stimulate the birth rate and development of a family
(both by means of supplemental benefits to the family for children, and also
with the help of taxes on those without children)--can be classified under the
head of demographic policy. And there is hardly any basis for placing all so-

cioeconomic measures that have an effect on movement of the population under the
head of demographic policy.

What are the tasks of demographic policy in the present stage and in the future?

The process of social reproduction includes the reproduction not only of mate-
rial elements, but also of man himself. His reproduction is one of the most
complicated processes and is subject to the effect of a set of factors. But
within that set of factors we must single out the economic factor as the deci-
sive one, since the material conditions of life determine the very possibility
of reproduction of the population. The birth rate is gradually and to an ever
greater degree becoming a process that is regulated and managed by the family,
one that is directly related to the character of social reproduction.

As we know, there are two types of social reproduction: extensive and inten-
sive. In extensive reproduction the basic growth of the social product is

achieved by increasing the mass of live labor. while in intensive reproduction
this is done by increasing labor productivity. Extensive reproduction objec-

tively necessitates a corresponding accelerated reproduction of manpower and
therefore of the population as well.

Intensive expanded reproduction does not require a rapid quantitative reproduc-
tion of the population, since the rise of labor productivity is related above
all to the qualitative development of manpower and the population, which is ex-
pressed in a rise in the level of general education and vocational and technical

education of the workers, in improvement of their knowledge related to occupa-
tional qualifications.

The character of social production is thus related to employment of the popula-
tion and determines its level. In a situation when there is an objective need
for a large quantity of live labor, the need also arises for a set of measures
aimed at stimulating the birth rate. Intensive development indeed requires re-
production of manpower at an increasingly high level of quality. This must in-
evitably result in larger demographic investments per "unit" of population.
i.e., larger outlays of society for the training, upbringing and in general

more prolonged support of the upcoming generation at the expense of society.

The capitalist countries. which are at a high level of economic development. are
in the present stage transferring the burden of expanded reproduction of the

27

FI"!(NNN(JAL.USEGDNLY
H"! (WHCHI. US}? ONI.\

population onto countries which are poorly developed from the economic stand-
point by exploiting not only their natural resources, but also their labor re—
sources. In essence they are plundering those countries, setting up enterprises
in them for extraction of raw materials and other labor-intensive production op-
erations and remunerating the work of the local population at the lowest level:
a fraction of the remuneration of workers in the home countries. This plunder-
ing is also accomplished by "purchasing" skilled manpower, beginning with
skilled workers, technicians and engineers and ending with the most valuable
scientists of those countries.

Under the conditions of socialism the process of expanded reproduction of man-
power differs fundamentally from its reproduction under capitalism. The authen-
tically humanistic attitude toward labor resources (since in the socialist con-
text they are not only an object, but also a subject on whose behalf the actual
reproduction of society is being accomplished) requires. and the high level of
economic development makes possible, both the extensive and also intensive types
of reproduction under the conditions of full employment of the population. It
is striking that although the present level of the birth rate in our country as
a whole ensures a rather high level of expanded reproduction of the population,
in certain major economic regions, including entire union republics (RSPSR,
BSSR. UkSSR), and especially in certain cities, this level of reproduction is
below what we would like. The conclusion therefore follows that a broad set of
socioeconomic measures needs to be worked out to promote a rise in the birth
rate in those regions of the country where it is most "unfavorable."

In the more remote future. when scientific-technical progress provides such a
high productivity of labor that the sphere of material production will not need
additional manpower, and the rise in labor productivity will depend to a greater
degree on the rise of the level of education, i.e., on the "quality" of the new
generations, the need for accelerated growth of the population will gradually
lose its importance.

Certain Problems in Intensification of Reproduction of Manpower*
The Concept "lntensification of Reproduction of Manpower"

In recent years an altogether definite and constructive conception has taken
shape in Harxist-Leninist political economy concerning the content of reproduc-
tion of manpower as a process that includes formation of manpower, its distribu-
tion (and under the conditions of capitalism, in which manpower is a commodity,
its circulation) and the use of manpower.

Expanded reproduction of manpower may be predominantly extensive or predomi-
nantly intensive in nature.

 

* Reprinted with certain changes from the publication "Bkonomicheskaya effek—
tivnost' obshchestvennogo proizvodstva v period razvitogo sotsializma" [Economic
Efficiency of Social Production in the Period of Advanced Socialism], Moscow,
1977, Chapter 10.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The formation of manpower takes place above all through the maintenance and res-
toration of the individual's ability to work. which is constantly being expended,
used, in the work process. This is simple reproduction of manpower.

Expanded reproduction of manpower occurs extensively if its size increases with
no change in its level of quality. A most important feature of the predomi-

nantly intensive formation of manpower is a rise in its level of education and
occupational qualifications, i.e., its level of quality.

Distribution of manpower (of labor resources) is the process of socioeconomic
placement of the able-bodied population by regions, spheres of activity. occupa-
tions, sectors and areas of labor, a process that may be accomplished in various
forms which are peculiar to the particular socioeconomic formation. Under so-
cialism socially organized forms of distribution of manpower arise and develop:
government distribution of young people who have graduated from VUZ's and voca-

tional and technical school; appeals to young volunteers for newly built enter-
prises, and so on.

But even in the context of the predominantly intensive type of expanded repro-
duction of manpower its extensive type is used as a supplemental factor ensuring
full employment of the able-bodied population. But at the present time the ca-
pabilities of extensive expanded reproduction of manpower are almost exhausted
in the USSR. The level of employment in an absolute majority of the economic
regions of the country has already reached the limit. and the possibilities of

attracting additional labor resources come down mainly to the natural growth of
the able-bodied population.

The rise of expenditures for reproduction of manpower, expressed in changes in
the level of living, is also an indicator of the intensiveness of reproduction
of manpower. In the extensive type of reproduction of manpower indicators of
health. average life span, the level of culture and technical education. moral
and political characteristics and labor productivity of the individual remain
unchanged. Only the size of the able-bodied population and the size of the
work force increase. In intensive reproduction expenditures for manpower (in
per capita terms) increase, which creates the basis for improvement of these
qualitative indicators of the development of manpower for a growth of the na-
tional income by virtue of investments in the "human factor" as well as other
factors.

Though in practice the two forms exist in unity, under present conditions the
intensive form is assuming predominant importance; in this form the share of in-
vestments in the "human factor" systematically increases by comparison with in-
vestments in the material factor (means of production and so on).

In discussing enhancement of the role of the 'human factor" in the rise of effi-
ciency, we must not overlook the fact that it is governed by the character of

contemporary technical progress, which involves the need for a faster rise in
the level of worker qualification. whereas this took place considerably more
slowly in the previous stage of development of technology.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR (DH-1t 1“. NSF UNI]

This is specifically indicated by the substantial differences that exist in re-
alization times of major scientific discoveries.

The relatively slow assimilation of new technology and production methods in the
previous stage of development was manifested by the absence in that period of
any substantial absolute reduction of the amount of manpower and liberation of
manpower at existing enterprises. accompanied by worker retraining. But even in
that period. when the assembly-line system began to be applied on a particularly
large scale, disqualification of manpower did not occur in our country, by con-
trast with the economically advanced capitalist countries. In the context of
the rapid growth of the number of workers on the assembly line, other types of
work requiring little skill were done by the newly arriving workers who did not
have any Qualifications at all, and there was a certain lag in the develop-ent
of the personal factor in production behind its material factors. This is ex-
plained to a considerable degree by subjective factors, specifically the factor

such as the training of qualified personnel was not sufficiently future-ori-
ented.

The importance of the qualitative factor in the growth of labor resources and of
raising the level of education of the population and the relative share of
skilled labor rises in the formation of labor resources in the period of ad-
vanced socialism.

In the present stage reproduction of labor resources is characterized by an es-
sential rise in the level of manageability of this process by comparison with
the previous stage thanks to improvement of the social mechanism of material and
moral work incentives and development of vocational guidance and the profiling
of training to fit the work to be done. Redistribution of manpower has a larger
role in furnishing skilled personnel to the national economy (above all to speed
up attainment of rated capacity at new enterprises), including redistribution of
manpower beyond the confines of enterprises. sectors and regions.

At the same time it is becoming increasingly important to intensify the repro-
duction of manpower in order to raise the efficiency of social production. As
we know, the principal means of raising the efficiency of social production is
to raise the productivity of labor, which in turn depends both on technical
progress and also on the quality of manpower, on the optimality of its distribu-
tion and on the effectiveness of its use.

Essential differences in significance and degree of treatment of the problems of
reproduction of manpower make it advisable to take a selective approach to ana-
lyzing the components of intensification of reproduction of manpower as factors
in the rise of labor productivity. Reckoning in this context on the high sig-

nificance of a rise in the education of manpower as a factor in the rise of la-
bor productivity, we will examine this aspect of reproduction of manpower first
of all. At the same time, there is great interest in the impact which the pro-
cess of the rising share of women in total employment has on the dynamic behav-

ior of labor productivity and thereby on the efficiency of social production as
well.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“W (“3“? \I IN" "V! \

of skilled personnel. to discovering natural abilities of those employed in pro-
duction, to creating conditions for productive labor. and to improve-eat of
workplace adequacy. These Iain economic reserves and inportant factors for
speeding up economic development and for raising social prosperity are interre-
lated and constitute an indivisible whole. Using that potential necessitates a
more comprehensive target-program approach to the development and use of Ian-
power resources than has been the case up to now.

In the light of the connections of all the ole-ants in this whole. the conclu-
sion is inescapable that education has the basic role in comprehensive develop-

ment of the hunan personality (education in the broad sense, including upbring-
ing and vocational training).

labor productivity in particular. Back in the thirties. when it was customary
to set education in opposition to practical experience from the standpoint of

economist to the other. For instance, according to the couputetions of the
American economist E. Dennison, who has thoroughly studied this question, the
contribution of the level of education to the growth rates of labor productivity
in the United States was 0.7 percent in the 1950-1962 period. 0.9 percent in the
1929-1957 period, this figure being an annual average. According to the

* See, for example, the book: 5. G. Strunilin. "Izbrannyye proizvedeniya" [Se-

lected Harts], Vol 3, Moscow, 1966, p 110 and elsewhere.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-1"" 1.“. "SF ONLY

estimates of another American scientist--D. Schwartaman, this indicator is one-
third as much: 0.3 percent per year over the 1929-1963 period. The American
economist E. Ralph calculated that over the period 1939-1964 labor productivity
in the United States, computed in terms of gross national product per worker,
rose an average of 2.8 percent per year, 2.1 percent of which was achieved by

organizational and technical progress and 0.7 percent by improvement of worker
qualifications.*

Two groups of factors in the growth of labor productivity are distinguished in
the literature: 1) human development and 2) development of engineering and
technology (including the organization of production). There are nany circum-
stances that make it difficult to break down each of these groups, in particular
the fact that they overlap and in their interaction duplicate one another to
some degree. It is especially complicaLed to isolate the influence of education
on the rise of labor productivity. According to Our calculations (based on the
data of the population census), the average worker's years of schooling and gen-
eral and specialized education increased from 6.1 years in 1959 to 8.8 years in
1970. According to a rough calculation, as a result of adoption of universal
lOth-grade education of young people and the further spread of secondary spe-

cialized education and higher education. the average worker's amount of school-
ing had risen to 9.8 years by 1975.

The results of the calculations of E. Dennison showed that the rise of education

resulted in a rise of 0.62 percentage point in the national income in the United

States, 0.3 percentage point in northwest Europe, and 0.56 percentage point in
Italy.“

As Ya. B. Kvash has rightly noted, these differences indicate that the signifi-
cance of 1 year of schooling varies with the total amount of schooling, but they
also indicate that the strength of education's iapact on the growth of the na-

tional income depends on the peculiarities of the economic structures of differ-
ent countries.

According to the calculation of Ya. B. Kvash, which to some extent is analogous
to the computational method used by B. Dennison, the average annual growth rate
of labor productivity in the national income resulting from the impact of educa-
tion has been at least 0.5 percent in the USSR. This contribution of education
to the growth of social productivity of labor could be considerably more weighty
if we optimize the distribution of education. Optimizing the educational system
in the present stage would in our opinion require the following first of all:

i. a change in the distribution of education, whose most important indicator is
the ratio between general education and vocational (specialized) education, and,

"within" the latter--a change in level of education in various spheres of labor
and by occupation;

* A. V. Barysheva, "Proizvoditel'nost' truda v razvitykh kapitalisticheskikh

stranakh" [Labor Productivity in the Advanced Capitalist Countries], Moscow,
1974, p 30.

** E. Dennison, "Issledovaniye razlichiy v tempakh ekononicheskogo roata"
(Study of Differences in Economic Growth Rates], Hoscow, 1970, p 217.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'0FFK1AI.USE(IVLV

ii. reduction of differences in level of education from one economic region to
another, from one sphere of labor to another and from one occupation to another.

The problem of optimizing the ratio between general education and specialized
training is a complicated one and needs the moat fixed attention of economists.

If we were to figuratively liken general education to the foundation, then spe-
cialized (vocational) education would figure as the building itself, which takes
the particular functional load. and without it general education has no access
to the practice of society's economic development.

The strategy for development of education in the context of advanced socialism
is governed by a social task--comprehensive development of the personality. But
it would be incorrect to set the performance of social tasks in opposition to
economic tasks, since in the final analysis the performance of social tasks is
based on the economic results of social production as a whole, and in this case
this relationship is even a direct one. For instance, it is necessary from both
the social aspect and also the economic aspect to set up a system of educational
training which would make it possible to attain the maximum mutual understanding
among all members of society and above all in the work process among the par-
ticipants in social production. This might be described as occupational mutual
understanding. But according to the data of engineering psychology and other
ergonomic studies, it is very important to the most optimum organisation of the
work process and consequently to raising the economic efficiency of production
as well. All members of society need to be brought closer together in their
level of education if fuller mutual understanding is to be achieved.

The second (by logic of exposition, but first in its practical importance) di-
rection for increasing the economic effectiveness of education as a factor in
raising the efficiency of social production. a direction directly related to op-
timization of the distribution of education, is attainment of a correspondence
between the level of requirements indispensable to use of the means of produc-
tion being employed and the level of knowledge possessed by the people using
those means.

Finally, the third direction for increasing the socioeconomic effectiveness of
education lies in increasing the level of man's job satisfaction, which depends
both on the level of education he has attained and also on the character of the
work and specifically on the complexity of the technique being used. He will
not touch upon this latter problem in the development of education, which has
already been studied (mainly by sociologists), nor will we dwell in detail on
other problems of increasing the economic effectiveness of education, especially
improvement of the quality of education, which are less acute, and though essen-
tially important. they have been substantially studied. I will pay principal
attention to the distribution of education, and specifically to the relationship
between general and vocational education in the training of workers for the most
common occupations, and to the problem of eliminating the socioeconomic differ-
ences among the country's economic regions related to differences in the level
of education between workers doing mental work and those doing physical work.*

 

* Actuall we are dealingf with workers whose work is predominantly ghysi a1 or
pred om inan¥l ly mental bptf the sake of brevity we w 11 hereafter e us ng the
terms “physical workers andr "mental workers."

33
FINI!)FF1C1A1.[EHECNVLY
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

An analysis of the level and dynamic development of the qualifications of work-
ers leads to the conclusion that as work at enterprises is organized at present
higher educational and vocational training of the workers often does not find
expression in a rise of their vocational skills. This diminishes the motivation
to attain a higher level of education and through feedback has an inhibitive ef-

fect on raising the economic effectiveness of education as a factor in economic
growth.

It seems extremely important. then. to achieve a faster rise in the qualifica-
tions of young people both in order to raise the general economic effectiveness

of the system of young people's education and also directly to raising the
growth rates of labor productivity.

In recent years the average values of the coefficient of fulfillment of output
quotas have been rising for workers who have a higher wage-scale rating. It is
usually said in explanation of this fact that quotas are less strict for jobs
with higher ratings. At the same time an analysis conducted by A. I. Gol'den-
berg of 20 occupational groups which were examined showed that the rise in the
percentage of fulfillment of the output quota for workers in higher ratings also
resulted from the fact that usually the worker performed work of a lower rating
than his own more productively under the same conditions than when it was per-
formed by a worker of a lower rating. For instance, it follows from the figures
of a sample survey of 21,000 workers in machinebuilding, which was conducted by
NIlTruda [Scientific Research Institute of Labor],* that the actual qualifica-
tion** of workers in Rating I was on the average one rating higher than their
wage-scale qualifications. and for workers in Rating II--0.S rating.

It is not infrequently pointed out in the literature that labor productivity of
workers who have increased their qualification by one rating rises 15-20 per-
cent, but the explanation is not given that this occurs thanks to the "effect of
the qualification." The recormnndation is made thereafter that worker ratings
be increased only so that the average rating of the job operations is higher
than the average rating of the workers. Higher-level organizations require en-
terprises to abide by this recommendation very carefully.

At the present time one of the principal tasks of the 10th Five-Year Plan is to
substantially improve the quality of products produced, and accomplishment of
technical progress requires that the pace of putting products into production
and of renewing them be stepped up considerably.

The requirement advanced by A. I. Gol'denberg, to the effect that the level of
worker qualification should correspond not to the level of work already being

i A. P. Prigarin, V. M. Ryan et al., "Napryazhennost' norm truda" [The Strenu-
ousness of Work Quotas], Moscow. 1968. pp 72, 73 and 86; L. B. Kunel'skiy, "So-
tsial'noekonomicheskiye problemy zarabotnoy platy" [Socioeconomic Problems of
Wages], Moscow. 1972.

** By the actual qualification we mean in this case the qualification reflect-
ing the ability to fulfill the output quota in work of the rating which has been
earned at the level attained by almost all representatives of that rating in the
same occupation at the given enterprise.

3h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DI-1'1”“. l'Slf ONLY

performed. but to the average rating of that work which is being prepared for
production. is sore correct in this context. In other words, the level of
worker qualifications must meet the level of complexity of that work they are to
perform in the period of putting a new product into production, which substan-
tially exceeds the conplexity of work in producing a product already assimi-
lated. This higher level of worker qualifications will promote not only success-
ful accomplishment of technical progress. but, as a consequence. a rise of labor
productivity on the scale of the entire national economy as well, and indeed
even a rise of labor productivity within each industrial enterprise. A. I.
Gol'denberg is quite right when he says that we need to dispense with the out—
dated and essentially erroneous idea that has persisted in acoustic theory and
production practice that it is sufficient to successful development of produc-
tion that the average rating of the enterprise's workers be equal to the aVerage
rating of the work done at that enterprise. To the point where the level of
worker qualifications is actually considerably lower than the average rating of
the jobs they perform the average impact of this requirement on the rise of
worker qualifications has been manifested very slightly. But at the present
time, when the nominal and real level of worker qualifications has risen consid-
erably. and technical progress is advancing high requirements concerning quali-
fications, it is indispensable that the average rating be raised further to meet
those requirements. A. l. Gol'denberg has accordingly advanced and backed up
with sound argments the proposal that worker skill ratings be raised regardless
of the relationship between the ratings of the work and the ratings of the work-
ers.*

when the average rating of the work done is higher than the average skill rating
of the workers (provided fulfillment of output quotas is no lower than the aver—
age level), this shows that there is a lag in conforning to the qualification
which has actually been attained, and this in turn threatens to hold back the
subsequent rise in the qualifications of this group of workers.

Taking into account everything that we have already said, an atmosphere needs to
be created at enterprises that is more conducive to improvement of the actual
qualifications of the workers regardless of the relationship between the rating
of the work and the skill rating of the workers. At many enterprises in a num-
ber of sectors workers spend a substantial part of their time doing work rated
lower than their wage-scale rating. however. the supplement paid to piece-rate
workers "because of a change in working conditions," in particular for work
which is two ratings or more below their wage-scale rating, is only a few tenths
of a percentage point of their wages throughout the entire industrial sector.

Consequently. carrying out these recommendations does not imply a real threat to
overexpenditure of the wage fund.”‘ The management of the enterprise. relieved

* "Methods of tbthematical Economics for Studying the Mechanics of hterial
Work Incentives. Elemsnts of Work Time and Worker Qualifications," author's ab-
stract of a candidate's dissertation, Hoscow, 1971», pp 11-15.

** This can also be confirmed by data for seven enterprises in Rostovskaya (b-
last, where the lag of wage-scale ratings averaged at least 0.7 rating and went
as high as 1.5 ratings. It is advisable to keep the tendency for the actual
qualification to exceed the wage-scale rating within the limits of a certain op-
timum close to one wage-scale rating.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
mu (WVKIAI NSF UNIX

of the need to adhere to the recommendation mentioned previously, will have a

real opportunity to encourage tutoring among piece-rate workers with material
and coral incentives.

we will examine further the problem of equalizing the level of worker education
in the country's different economic regions.

It can be stated even a priori that the significance of this problem is very
great, since along with the population's state of health. education is a deci—
sive element in the formation of labor resources-othe principal productive force
of any particular region in the country. However. if breaking down the factor
of education presents exceptional difficulties in analyzing the factors in the
growth of labor productivity even at the level of the enterprise and in a sec-
toral breakdown. these difficulties are multiplied many times over when this
factor is being broken down in the dynamic behavior of the effectiveness of the
economic development of an entire region which possesses an interrelated complex
of sectors. The difficulties lie in the fact that the role of education in

equalizing the level of economic development of particular regions has not been
studied at all so far.

Acknowledging the full complexity of the problem under study, we have renounced
an attempt at comprehensive analysis of the impact of equalizing the level of
education as a whole on raising the social productivity of labor by union repub-
lic and have confined our task solely to analyzing the degree of differences in
level of education among the union republics and to an attempt to determine di-
rections for closing those gaps.

Our initial hypothesis is that the essential differences in level of education
of the population, as already noted. are a factor holding back the rise of the
social productivity of labor. and eliminating those differences is a factor that
speeds up that growth. We relate that proposition to the fact that departing
from the extensive strategy of economic development is advancing higher require-
ments with respect to worker qualifications. This makes it necessary to raise
and equalize the level of education of the population and its level of occupa-
tional qualifications. At the same time the state interest of the entire nation
requires that an increasingly sizable share of labor resources be made available
for redistribution to the country's eastern regions. But in recent years the
role of the country's economic regions which are industrially advanced in the
settlement and economic development of the eastern regions. in particular Si-
beria and the Far East, has dropped off appreciably. Yet even under those con-
ditions migration performs an important social function of transferring to the

new regions the progressive methods of economic activity from the settled re-
gions.

Table 1 presents figures characterizing differentiation of the republics and
types of labor with respect to the level of education of the employed popula-

tion. In that table the union republics are ranked in descending order on the
basis of the level of education attained by the entire employed population.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SF ONLY

Table 1. Nuaber of Han-Years of Education Per Employed Person*

 

 

 

 

 

Entire Engaged Primarily in

Eaployed Physical Mental Difference
Union Republic Population Labor Labor 3001 6 - Col 32

1 2 3 6 5

Georgian 9.19 7.68 12.81 5.13
Armenian 8.91 7.66 12.16 6.72
Azerbaijan 8.69 7.30 12.30 5.00
Latvian 8.51 7.10 11.85 6.75
Estonian 8.69 7.11 11.66 6.55
Uzbek 8.69 7.32 11.96 6.62
Ukrainian 8.66 7.25 12.17 6.92
RSFSR 8.37 6.97 11.18 6.21
Kirghiz 8.29 7.06 12.01 6.97
Belorussian 8.02 6.70 12.06 5.36
Tajik 7.95 6.88 11.78 4.90
Turkmen 7.93 7.19 11.76 6.57
Kazakh 7.69 5.56 11.60 6.06
Lithuanian 7.66 6.01 11.86 5.85
Moldavian 7.33 6.29 12.05 5.76

Correlation coefficients: Col 2 and Col 3 - 0.853; (b1 2 and Col 6 - 0.691;
Col 3 and Col 5 - -0.832; Col 6 and Col 5 - 0.061.

* The calculations were made according to the figures of the 1970 Population
Census.

The figures in Table l distinctly show that the level of education does not take
the form of an average arithnetic quantity with snall deviations from that aver-
age, but as a quantity with large differences in level of education fron one re-

public to another and within then fro. one type of work to another and one group
of occupations to another.

Differences in level of education between physical workers and mental workers
are indicated by figures on differences in the level of education per employed
person (in man-years): RSPSR--6.21; ESSR-6.55; TuSSR-6.57; UsSSk-6.62;
ArSSR-6.72; LaSSR-~6.75; TaSSR--6.90; UkSSR-6.92; KiSSR--6.97; AaSSR-5;
CSSR--5.13; BSSR—-5.36; HSSR-5.76: LiSSR--5.8S; KaSSR-6.06.

The figures we have obtained on the relationship in education between mental and
physical workers can be analysed in relation to figures on the sphere of educa-
tion proper and also in relation to the patterns of social production as a whole,
including reproduction of socioeconomic relations. If we undertake this analy-
sis solely free the former point of view and obtain the correlation of the con-
nection between levels of education of nental and physical workers by republics,
on the one hand. and the size of the difference between these levels on the
other, the line of argument should be as follows.

37
FORiOFFﬂJAl.USEINVLY
FOR (N‘Flf‘lM. “‘1' ON”

We will adopt some notations.

UnaVerage level of education of mental workers; P—average level of education
of physical workers; R—sise of the gap (in man-years of education) between the
quantities U and P (R - U - P); Cur-coefficient of correlation between the

quantities R and U; Car-coefficient of correlation between the quantities R
and P.

Colparing the correlation coefficients Cw and C”, we can presumably resolve
the question of which type of education-higher and secondary specialised educa-
tion, which determines the level of education of workers doing primarily sentel
work, or general and vocational and technical education, which determines the
level of education of workers doing prinarily physical labor-"needs to be devel-
oped first. At the sane tine two ainplified assunptions are nade:

1) that there exists an optimal gap between D and P, which noreover is in the
end shaping up properly in the average for the country, but there my be appre-
ciable disproportions within the various republics;

2) that that indicator (U or P) which characterizes differences between the re-
publics reflects the basic pattern of formation of the level of education. The
other one, therefore, should be "adjusted" to it, and not the other way about.

Then if Cgu > Cup. the variations (differences between then) are determined pri-
marily by the variation of U. Consequently, specialised (more accurately,
higher and secondary specialized) education should prinarily be developed; but
if Cm: > CRu--then general education should prinarily be developed.

It turned out free the data of the analysis that Cw - -0.832; Cu - 0.0/01, i.e.,

Car > Cw. Consequently, for the country as a whole we need to develop general
and vocational and technical education first. -

This conclusion is a fornsl one, but it is correct in the sense that it suggests
just what level of education has a decisive influence on the size of the gap.
And since it is our initial preeise that gaps in level of education between men-
tal workers and physical workers should be as snall as possible and gradually
diainish. the level of education of physical workers proves to have the princi-
pal and decisive influence on reduction of those gaps. They obtain education
mainly in the form of general and lower-level vocational and technical training.
Consequently, it is these ferns of education that should be developed first.

In a more thorough qualitative analysis we arrive at the following result. In
those republics where the level of education of nental workers is higher, the
level of education of physical workers is also higher. Consequently, it is in
these republics that the gap between the two types of labor is snall. But in
republics with a low level of education of mental workers, the level of educa-
tion of physical workers is still lower. And here the gap is larger.

In those republics where U is high, the value of R is low, since P is also high,
and where U is low. the value of R is high, since 1" is still lower than 0.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US}: ONLY

It seems at first that instead of raising the level of education of physical
workers, the education of mental workers should rise at least equally. But, as
the figures show, when the level of education of physical workers rises rela-
tively rapidly, the sale indicator for mental workers is rising more slowly.
This is a normal phenomenon, since the level of mental workers cannot depend
solely on a continuous increase in the number of years of study. Even at the
present time it has reached a sizable value for the higher group (approaching 15
years). A further rise would mean a decrease in the actual labor employment of
workers in this sphere because of the increased time to obtain education. And
this runs counter both to individual interests and also to social interests.
This contradiction is resolved by the fact that the principle of "training to
last a lifetime" is being replaced for mental workers by the principle "training
throughout one's life" without leaving one's principal job. This principle is
being applied even now, and it will become still nore widespread in future.

Aside from that, as already noted, in those republics where the level of educa-
tion is relatively low for both mental workers and also physical workers, the
differences in the level of their education is substantially greater than in the
republics with relatively high levels of education. Given this situation, it
would be incorrect and impossible to adopt the orientation of "lowering" the
level of mental labor in order to diminish the differences. After all, this
level has already been attained. Nor, however, can one adopt the orientation
of a substantial rise in the level of education of mental workers, since then
the gap widens still further. Nor would it be sensible to lower the level of
training of physical workers in those republics where it is the highest, though,
of course, reducing it would diminish differences free one republic to another.
Thus the only logical and formal conclusion is that the most sensible thing
would be to speed up the rise of the educational level of physical workers
wherever it is lagging far behind.

The analysis made above of differences among the union republics with respect to
the level of education of those employed in the sphere of social laboraﬂoes not
furnish a full enough explanation of the causes of these differences nor of the
parameters of their optimization and strategies for achieving that optimization.

An additional analysis in that direction is required, first, to discover the de-
gree of differences in level of education among workers in the same occupations
within each republic and in those sane occupations from one republic to another.

The analysis of differences in levels of education shows that in the sphere of
physical labor workers employed in the machinebuilding and chemical industries
are in the first place (the highest group) with respect to level of education
(qualifications) in almost all republics. Metallurgical workers, miners and
workers employed using materials-handling machines are in the second group.
Workers in light industry join that group as well. In the third group are those
employed in transportation, communications, the building materials industry, and
food industry workers. The fourth group brings together construction workers,
unskilled workers (raznorabochiye), and warehouse workers. The fifth (lowest

group) consists of workers employed in agriculture, as well as workers in munic-
ipal services and utilities and consumer services.

39

FOR OFFTCJAI.USﬂi(NﬂLY
FOR (WHCIM INF ONLY

Differences in level of education from republic to republic and between the

physical and mental labor groups are evident in more summary form from the fig-
ures in Table 2.

Table 2

Between Highest Between Highest Between Highest

Group of Mental and Lowest Groups and Lowest Groups

and Lowest Group Employed at Employed at
Union Republic of Physical Labor thsical Labor Mental Labor
USSR 7.89 2.52 6.29
Uzbek 7.29 2.63 3.32
Armenian 7.36 2.61 3.80
Kazakh 7.61 1.72 6.22
Tajik 7.51 2.36 6.63
Georgian 7.56 2.68 3.32
Turkmen 7.73 2.69 6.37
Estonian 7.73 2.38 6.36
Ukrainian 7.76 2.56 6.23
Azerbaijan 7.81 2.63 6.32
RSFSR 7.96 2.55 3.55
Kirghiz 7.98 2.59 3.90
Belorussian 8.16 3.03 3.96
Lithuanian 8.32 2.56 6.61
Latvian 8.38 2.31 6.78
Moldavian 8.61 3.33 6.38

As we see from these figures, differences in level of education between the
highest group of mental labor and the lowest group of physical labor are large
(they comprise almost eight grades for the USSR). This size of the gap is close
to the average number of years of study for the entire employed population.
Among workers doing predominantly physical labor these differences (between the
top and bottom groups) amount to more than 2.5 years (which is just as substan-
tial if we take into account the average level of education of the entire
group)-

It is a very unfavorable circumstance that differences in level of education are

substantial between workers in the same occupations who are employed in differ-
ent republics.

The analysis shows that the differences under consideration in the level of edu-
cation are subject to the influence of two basic factors, which in a number of
cases operate in different directions. We are referring first of all to the
structural factor. i.e., to the dependence of the level of average education of
employed persons on the economic structure of each particular republic. This
dependence is manifested most distinctly in the case when there is a high share
in the economy of agriculture, whose workers have the lowest level of education
(with certain exceptions, for example. in Uzbek 88R). This is one of the impor-
tant reasons why the gap in level of education between the lowest and highest

60
FI”I(”ﬂﬂ(]Al.UBE2(NHLY
'Q
IWJR OFTNCJAI.USEICN§LY

groups is largest in the Kirghiz, Belorussian, Lithuanian. Latvian and Moldavian
union republics. A high level of education is achieved to a considerable extent
by virtue of an increase in the number of members of the intelligentsia and by
an increase in its relative share in the entire population. For instance, be-
cause they have the highest general level of education the Georgian, Armenian,
Uzbek and Tajik union republics have the smallest gap in level of education be-
tween the highest and lowest groups.

Experience in socialist economic activity and also comparison of the degree of
differences for analogous groups of physical workers in the most economically
advanced capitalist countries show that convergence in the level of education
and consequently in qualifications has a substantial beneficial importance to
the rise of labor productivity.

0n Certain Directions for Increasing the Effectiveness of Using Female Labor*

For a lengthy period of time the level of employment in our country was raised
to a large extent by bringing women from the household and the private farm into
the sphere of social labor. This can be evaluated from figures on the growth of
the number of workers and employees by sex over the period 1961-1975 (in per-
centage of the total growth of the work force):

 

 

Male Female
National economy 62.3 57.7
Industry 66.0 56.0
Agriculture 69.0 51.0
Construction 66.1 33.9
Communications 22.9 77.1
Trade, food service industry. material and technical
supply, sales. procurement 5.0 95.0
Health service. physical education and social security 13.1 86.9
Education and culture 6.6 93.6
Science and scientific services 69.3 50.7
Housing management, public utilities and municipal
services 61.0 59.0

The increase in the number of workers doing manual labor in the industrial sec-
tor over the period 1962-1969 (without taking into account repair work and ad-
justment of machines and mechanisms) was achieved almost entirely (95 percent)
with women. There was a substantial increase in the share of women employed at
such common types of labor with little mechanization as those performed by
stockroom clerks. issuing clerks and receiving clerks (76 percent in 1970 as
against 59 percent in 1959) and mailman (86 percent as against 73 percent, re-
spectively).

Many women previously employed in the household have been brought into the work-
place. Over the last 5 years. while the total number of workers and employees

* Material in this section was also taken from the article: "Problems of Dis-
tribution and Use of Labor Resources." SOTSIALISTICBBSKIY TRUD, No 3, 1977.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONlY
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

increased by 11.97 million, the number of women (workers and employees) in-
creased by 6.81 million. By 1975 the total number of women had reached a huge
‘igure--52.6 million. distributed as follows: 16.7 million in industry, 4.5
million in agriculture (sovkhozes), 6.8 million in trade and procurements, 4.9
million in the health care service, 6.6 million in education and culture, and
2.0 million women in science.

women workers and employees comprise more than half of all workers and employ-
ees in the national economy at the present time. By comparison with 1950, the
relative share of women among workers and employees had increased from 47 to
51.5 percent in 1975, and it rose even in the production sectors: for example.
in industry (from 46 to 49 percent) and agriculture (42-44 percent), while it
dropped only in construction (from 33 to 29 percent) and in transportation (from
28 to 24 percent). The highest relative share of women is now in such sectors
as health care (84 percent), trade and procurements (76 percent), education (73

percent), communications (64 percent), and administrative agencies in the gov-
ernment and economy (64 percent).

Much attention has been paid to working women in our country. Much is being
done to improve their working conditions; women enjoy a number of advantages and
benefits set down in legislation. At the same time the rapid growth of the num-
ber of women in social production has intensified the urgency of solving a num-
ber of problems such as a sharp reduction of heavy and manual labor, improvement
of working conditions, improvement of their qualifications, and so on.

we must note Chat the effort to free women from laborious operations is still
going extremely slowly, and the reason is the inadequate introduction of mecha-
nization. Take a sector like trade, especially the food trade in small stores.
At present there is little mechanization there, and expenditures of heavy manual
labor are substantial. Sometimes women have to lift and carry heavy articles,
they spend their entire working day on their feet, and so on.

we should also take into account that the women entering the workplace ordinarily
do not have the proper training and qualifications, since they have come di-
rectly from the household. Moreover, because of the interruption related to
giving birth and shortcomings in the sphere of services, the average woman's
qualification in industry is one wage-scale rating below the average man. In

the present wage-rate schedules this means a lag of approximately 15-17 percent
with respect to the level of qualification.

Consequently, one of the principal directions for raising the social productiv-
ity of labor and for eliminating the shortage of manpower is to improve the
qualifications of women workers and to move female labor into those sectors and
those occupations where this labor is most efficient.

Another of the reasons why the use of female labor is not effective enough is

that the growth of their employment in the economy has occurred predominantly in
occupations where labor productivity of women is lower than that of men. They

include many occupations in agriculture and construction, where the highest in-
crease in the relative share of women workers and employees has been recorded by

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1M . l'SI“. ()NI .\'

comparison with the prewar period. For example. among construction workers the
relative share of women increased 1.5-fold between 1959 and 1970, which was re-
lated to a considerable extent to the shortage of male manpower. All of this
has naturally had an inhibiting effect on the rise of labor productivity.

Consequently. one of the main directions for raising the social productivity of
labor in the coming period is to improve the qualifications of women workers and
to transfer female labor into those sectors or occupations in which that labor
is most efficient, for example. into the most promising and highly mechanized
branches of material production (electronics, radio equipment), as well as into
promising and rapidly developing new branches of the service sphere. in particu-
lar tourism, insurance. legal aid service. and so on.

He should also take into account that the faster growth of employment of women
in the sphere of social production has had an adverse effect on the pattern of
reproduction of the population. The indispensable need to adjust the increase
in the size of the employed population to reproduction and comprehensive devel-
opaent of the upcoming generations necessitates a decrease in the total work
load on women, above all by developing consumer services to meet the needs of
the family and by creating conditions so that an ever more sizable portion of
the women have a short workday. An analysis of Soviet and foreign experience
shows that in terms of hourly output the growth rates of labor productivity do
not drop when this schedule is adopted.

Apparently this brings about a certain reduction in the level of female employ-
ment, in terms of work time. in the sphere of social labor as compared to the
present level, but without reducing the actual number of physical persons. Cer-
tain scientists deem it necessary to adopt the orientation of reducing the num-
ber of women employed. since assuming adequate material support by the state the
women will bring up children to the age of 3 in the family, without working.
This orientation seems unsound to us. Sociological surveys conducted in recent
years show that further expansion of the sphere in which the work of women with
small children is applied constitutes an objective socioeconomic law. At the
same time the tasks of raising labor productivity make it an objective necessity
to equalize the level of qualifications of male and female workers. Experience
already acquired, in particular at enterprises in precision machinebuilding. has
shown that technical progress is creating broad opportunities for further expan-
sion of the use of the most highly skilled female labor, for successful mastery
of a nusber of occupations which previously were inaccessible to women.

The efficiency of female labor can be raised only in conjunction with improve-
ment of the protection of mothers and infants and improvement of the working
conditions of women, combined with a differentiated approach to the use of fe-
male labor resources. The first measures to be taken in this direction are the
following:

i. compilation of balances of labor resources by sex in sectoral and regional
breakdowns;

1&3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ii. identification in national economic plans, as well as in plans for social
development of sectors and enterprises. of measures related to priority mecha-
nization of laborious operations in which women are primarily employed. to
training of women in occupations and new specialties in accordance with the re~
quirements of technical progress and the biotechnology of female labor;

iii. improvement of the system of monitoring fulfillment of labor legislation
concerning the freeing of women workers from heavy operations and those harmful
to the female organism in all sectors of the economy in accordance with the re-
quirements of contemporary production and technical progress;

iv. not only should the counterindication concerning performance of these oper-
ations be regularly revised, but a determination should also be made of those
types of operations which are most suitable for women, as they arise as a result

of technical progress or as they cease to be heavy jobs, but are still performed
by men;

v. acceleration of the process of elimination of night shifts in branches of
the industrial sector where women are predominantly employed;

vi. the granting of women who have small children the right to one unpaid day
off per month (at their own choosing);

vii. organisation of improvement of qualifications of working women with child-
ren within working hours and retaining their average monthly wage; changing the
length of the workday and the time when women begin and and the workday (without
doing injury to the interests of production) as a function of age and family

situation (using the "Zlobin method," the short workday and the short workweek,
and so on);

viii. determination of the minimum standard biotechnological requirements in
developing and designing equipment, machines and manufacturing processes where
female labor will be used so as to take into account the anthropological and
other peculiarities of the female organism.

It is evident that we should also think about granting enterprises and organiza-
tions broader rights in improving the qualifications of women with children dur-
ing their workday, so that they can change the time when the workday begins and
ends (without doing injury to the interests of production) as a function of the
age and family situation (broader use of the schedules of the short workday and
the short workweek, and so on).

It would be advisable in the system of vocational and technical education to set
up a quota for enrollment of young women for a list of occupations which has
been worked out by scientific research organisations.

The problems of optimum use of female labor also need broader study. Research
ought to be conducted from the economic. social and legal standpoints and should

involve participation of institutes of economics. philosophy and law of the USSR
Academy of Sciences and the academies of sciences of the union republics,

bh

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'ﬂll (ll-11‘1“ I'SF “NI \

institutes of USSR Gosplan and the gosplana of the union republics. the insti-
tute of the USSR Central Statistical Administration and other interested organi-

zations and institutions.

Chapter 3. Social and Political Journalism

Alcohol-Related Losses and Combating Thsm*
Prevalence and Certain consequences

The use of alcohol can be regarded not only as one of the historical forms of
irrational consumption, but also as a squandering of human energy. Nevertheless,
we are still producing a rather large amount of vodka. It has already been re-
marked in the press that "without vodka sales a large hole would inmediately ap-
pear on the revenue side of our budget. But no one has yet gone on to calculate
those losses borne outside the budget by the economy because of the supposedly
superprofitable trade in vodka."** Vodka is for some reason put in the category
of the means of existence. "But is it possible to put any poison in the class
as a means of existence? To be sure. even snake venom, administered in micro-
doses, may be a medicine. But this cannot be applied at all to agents for
large-scale intoxication of fellow citizens such as the hard liquors which are
now manufactured in billions of liters per year and are prescribed not in so
many fingers, but in tumblers and pitchers. These revolting poisons are not im-
mediately fatal. But they carry no less a threat of a slow death and moral im-
poverishment of the pitiable people who stagger involuntarily in an alcoholic
stupor.

“Alcohol threatens to be humanity's greatest scourge. It is far more frighten-
ing than hoodlumisn, since itself it is a prior cause not only of acts of
hoodlumism, but also of the vast majority of other more serious crimes and moral
inconstancy toward all humanity's good principles. It is high time to enter
into a resolute struggle against that threat."***

0n the basis of a study of worldwide experience and many scientific studies the
conclusion can be drawn that in evaluating the level (degree) of development of
alcoholism the incidence (in absolute and relative terms) of the use of strong
alcoholic beverages has decisive importance.

0n the basis of the predominant character of the use of alcoholic beverages of
differing strength countries can be divided into ”beer" countries like England,
where beer's relative share in terms of pure alcohol is 79 percent. and also
West Germany. where it is 56 percent; "wine" countries like France, where wine's
relative share is 81 percent, and Italy where it is 91 percent; and "hard 11-
quor" countries like the USSR, the United States, Poland, Sweden--where the rel-

ative share of hard liquor is at least 50 percent.

* Reprinted from EKONOHIKA I ORGANIZATSIYA PROHYSHLENNOGO PROIZVODSTVA, No 6,
1976. Written jointly with s. G. Strunilin. member of the academy.

** "Reforms stavit problemy” [The Reform ls Posing Problems], Moscow. 1968.

p 12.

*** Ibid.

Its
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The relative share of hard liquor (bO‘-proof strength or higher) in the total
amount of alcoholic beverages (converted to liters of absolute alcohol) is ex-
tremely high in the USSR and according to figures for the 1965-1968 period was
62.3 percent. We should take into account here that these figures do not in-
clude consumption of homemade liquor.

It is extremely difficult to determine with sufficient accuracy the level of
consumption of homemade liquor. According to figures of the USSR Central Ste-
tistical Administration, state vodka production for the country as a whole was
646 million liters in 1927, and home distillers distilled 467 million, i.e.,
more homemade liquor was consuaed.* In 1928 the relative share of homemade li-
quor was still higher. According to a rough computation based on the data of a
survey conducted in Dmitrovskiy Rayon in Hoskovskaya Oblast. average consumption
per inhabitant of the rayon was 12.7 liters of vodka and 10.6 liters of homemade
liquor per year in 1960. On the whole at the present time consumption of home-

made liquor probably amounts to at least 50 percent of the alcohol represented
by vodka.

We will examine the principal consequences of alcoholism from the social and
economic standpoint, aspects which are closely related. The most serious social
consequences must include criminality and other breaches of the law; deteriora-
tion of the physical and mental state of health and ability to work of the por-
tion of the population subject to alcoholism; the birth of mentally retarded
children and children predisposed to mental illness.

Among the most serious economic consequences we must include the drag on the
rise of labor productivity. the accident rate, the decline of work discipline,

higher personnel turnover of the work force. and the creation of parasitic ele-
ments .

The direct functional relationship between the rise in per capita alcohol con-

sumption, especially the consumption of hard liquor, and the rise in criminality
has been established in a large number of studies both in our own country and
abroad.

The particularly serious social consequences of hard-liquor alcoholism in par-
ticular are confirmed by the following. In RSFSR, UkSSR, BSSR, as well as in
the Baltic Coast republics. where alcoholic beverages predominantly of high
strength are consumed, the overwhelming majority of serious crimes are related
to alcoholism. In the other union republics, where the alcoholic beverages con-
sumed are predominantly of low strength (grape wine)--in Azerbaijan, Georgia and
Armenia, crimes related to alcoholism have a negligible share (Armenia is the

only union republic which has no sobering-up room in police stations because of
the lack of "customers").

It is beyond question that our society is suffering huge unproductive losses of
time related to alcoholism (time lost in drinking bouts and hangovers. absentee-
ism during hinges; time spent in sobering-up rooms at the police station for

* D. Shumskiy, ‘ﬁhe Gap Concerning Homemade Liquor," PRAVDA, 16 July 1973.

1:6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'Sl‘f ONLY

petty hoodlumism and in prison for more serious crimes). "And to these losses
we should also add virtually all the work time of such completely sober agencies
called upon to fight crime as the police, the judicial system and the prison ad-
ministration, which are still able to do little in this matter until all the
causes creating the rise of the crime rate and of alcoholism above all have been
eradicated."*

Alcoholism is assuming ever greater importance among the factors holding back
the rise of labor productivity.** According to the data of medical research,
the intake of 120 grams of vodka decreases the ability to work 17-20 percent,
and even 30-50 grams of vodka noticeably detracts from a man's physical and men-
tal ability to work for a period free a few hours to 1-2 weeks [sic]. It re-
duces the pace of computation either in the head or on paper, and increases the
number of errors. For example, according to data of the German scientist
Aschaffenburg, after an intake of 36 grams of wine spirit (equal to approxi-
mately 1 liter of beer) a typesetter's speed drops 15 percent. After an intake
of 40 grams of absolute alcohol in the form of beer (4’), wine (16'), and cognac
(34°), the deterioration of computation, attention, accuracy and muscular
strength was 9.2. 10.6 and 12 percent, respectively. The working ability of the
fingers drops almost 30 percent. Accordiar to our calculations, a complete
"sobering up" of work processes would result in an approximately 10—percent rise
of labor productivity. But even with partial "sobering up" of work processes by
reducing the strength of the vodka and carrying out certain other proposals
which will be taken up below, we can count on a 2-2.5-percent increase in labor
productivity (on the basis of expert evaluation).

It is well known that automation, remote control, electronics, control panels

and even assembly lines and flow lines require less physical strength of the
worker, but greater attention, concentration, memory and quick reactions.

But it precisely these qualities which are lost under the influence of alcohol,
since the level of critical evaluation of one's own actions is weakened when al-
cohol is used.

In connection with the figures we have given, a survey conducted by the society
of Russian manufacturers and factory owners during 3 months of 191k (August,
September and October) in order to discover the impact on labor productivity of
the complete ban on the sale of vodka. which was adopted in connection with car-
rying out the mobilization, is of interest for reasons that are by no means only
historical. The study covered 215,000 workers at 171 enterprises. It turned
out the labor productivity (in spite of counteracting factors) rose at every en-
terprise without exception. The average increase was 9.2 percent, but it was
12.7 percent (data from Moscow) in the metal manufacturing industry where the
work force is predominantly male. According to the figures of the same survey,
in Moscow absenteeism in the 3 months of the ”sober" regime was down 66.8

* "Reforms stavit problemy," p l3.
** Unfortunately the effect of alcoholism on labor productivity, the decline of

the ability to work and the state of health are hardly reflected at all in sta-
tistical data and have been studied extremely little.

”7

FOI'OFTKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR ()Fl-‘K‘IM. USE ONLY

percent for male workers, 0.8 percent for female workers, and 27 percent on the
average by comparison with the corresponding period of 1913.

He should note that alcoholism. especially when there is a shortage of manpower.
and it is now being experienced by most sectors of the economy, manifestly holds
back improvement of work discipline. Cases of unjustified absences (because of
drunkenness) become more frequent at enterprises in the form of unpaid leave
granted by permission of the management.

Unfortunately the conducting of even sample surveys of alcoholisl not uncommonly
faces resistance on various pretexta at certain enterprises. On the basis of
conversations with management personnel at enterprises in Moscow, leningrad and
Sverdlovsk we came to the conclusion that certain management personnel of enter-
prises, beginning with the foreman of production sections. are more interested
in covering up than in exposing actual cases of alcoholism and particularly its
consequences.

0n Certain Causes of Alcoholism

It is difficult to give a brief and sufficiently correct explanation of the
causes of alcoholism. Among them it is evident that we must give first place to
the need to relieve tension, the desire to cast off the burden of obligatory
rules of behavior. The second cause, one that is related to the previous one.
might be called the inability or impossibility of sensible use of free time.

The boundaries of free time have now expanded considerably. In industry the
length of the workweek is approximately one-third shorter than before the revo-
lution. Adoption of the 5-day workweek has given the bulk of working people
about 100 days off per year. Scientific-technical progress. the increasing com-
plexity of work processes. and the increase in the share of mental efforts also
make it necessary that the workers have a full-fledged rest and also that they
regularly raise their Cultural level. But at present free time is often squan-
dered unwisely, senselessly, sometimes even in a way detrimental both to the

person himself and to society, which has more to do with hard drinking than any-
thing else.

There is also a definite interrelationship between hard drinking and remnants of
the past. Habits. prejudices, primitive needs, and stupid forms of human inter-
course that have taken shape often figure as one of the principal causes of
drunkenness.

In our opinion. the sociologist V. F. Mayer has identified the typical causes
and conditions for the development of alcoholism.* The author used the method
of a solid survey using a questionnaire in April and Hay 1971 to study a very
representative group of persons who had repeatedly committed breaches of work
discipline and breaches of the peace at one of the plants in Vladimir. The re-
spondents were divided into three groups: I--persons under age 25; II--persons
between 25 and 40; Ill--persons over 40. The principal causes serving as the
pretext for the use of alcohol which were named by respondents in all three

* V. F. Mayer has kindly put the data he has gathered at our disposition.

1:8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1.“. USE ONLY

groups were the following (in descending order of importance): public holidays,
personal holidays, to celebrate a day off, to lift one's spirits, to celebrate
payday, to celebrate the making of a purchase, a promotion, and so on, because
of a chance meeting, fatigue after work. poor housing conditions, bad relations
in the family, boredom, a bad mood, I cannot resist the temptation, life is not
going well, I do not know what I am doing.

The responses obtained on the causes of alcoholism indicate, first, the strong
influence of customs already formed. The custom of celebrating a holiday by
drinking is in the first place among all three groups of causes studied. The
responses are also a confirmation of the well-known conclusion of social medi-
cine to the effect that alcoholics as a rule state the consequence as a cause.
For example, the bad family relations referred to as a cause in the survey
turned out, when a check was made, to be a consequence of alcoholism.

The objective data concerning the material position of the respondents show that
housing conditions, wages, the family's possession of durable consumer goods and
housewares do not differ from the figures for other groups of workers in the
plant.

The offenders note that invariably they use alcoholic beverages in meeting their
need for social intercourse (meetings with friends, strolls, celebrations). For
a certain portion of the offenders with undeveloped needs abandoning the con-
sumption of alcoholic beverages would be equivalent to terminating relations
with their friends. Unfortunately the opinion also prevails that consumption of
alcoholic beverages is evidence of "strength," of a man's "toughness." This
opinion is especially widespread among young people.

The lack of self-control in consumption of alcoholic beverages has the result
that nearly 60 percent of the respondents do not abide by any standards in
drinking. For instance, the survey showed that 2.6 percent drink nearly every
day, 51.7 percent on Saturdays and Sundays, and 88.9 percent on holidays. As a
rule the offenders participate only passively in civic work and the life of the
collective.

We would like to make one digression in connection with these figures. 0n the
basis of much scientific research and worldwide experience the conclusion can be
drawn that the use of dry grape wines and also fruit and berry wines has no ad-
verse effect and can even be regarded as a sensible tonic (in moderate doses, of
course). It cannot be assumed that a man should consume only those products
which are worthwhile in virtually all circumstances. If that point of view were
taken, we might declare "war" on all tonic beverages, including Pepsi Cola, cof-
fee and strong tea. Even pepper. horseradish and mustard might fall into the
category of unwise consumption if this approach were taken....

In short, to fight only against vodka is to slacken the struggle against drunk-
enness. Treating and punishing drunkards amounts to little; it is prevention of
this social evil that is needed.

1:9
roe omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Strategies and Weapons in the Fight Against Alcoholism

In attempting to summarise the practical effort in combating alcoholism we have
come to the conclusion that although it is being carried out with sufficient
vigor, it still is far from what it should be in view of its importance. Its
effectiveness is extremely low. ﬂow can this be explained?

Administrative measures and other measures against alcoholism which have been
taken in our country are aimed primarily against those who have nearly drunk
themselves to ruin, i.e., people who are sick and involuntary, often people who
are not responsible for their behavior when inebriated, but they ought to be di-
rected toward young people who have just begun to enter the path of alcoholism.
Balance is moreover lacking between the administrative measures, the economic
measures and the training measures. Measures in the socioeconomic and medical
fields are often replaced by criminal action and administrative measures. To be
specific, this is manifested in the fact that alcoholics do not always receive
the necessary treatment, which sometimes is replaced by penalties of various
kinds and even by imprisonment, which ultimately costs the state far more and
does not achieve the requisite social and economic benefit.

The campaign against alcoholism by the public has not been persistent enough and
is very one-sided: it also comes down to penalties of various kinds. The pen-
alties are moreover pronounced on people who are already ill with alcoholism.
and as a consequence these measures do not achieve their purpose.

At the same time the beginning of the illness, which is mainly to be found in
young people, is not attracting enough attention. It was established in a sur-
vey of alcoholics receiving Outpatient treatment that 26 percent of the men made
their first acquaintance with alcoholism under age 15, 65 percent under age 18
and 80 percent under age 20.

A ukase of the Presidium of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet dated 8 May 1961, which on
the basis of Article 158 of the RSFSR Criminal Code provides for imprisonment
not to exceed 1 year or a fine not to exceed 300 rubles for manufacturing home-
made liquor without intending to sell it and imprisonment of at least 1 and no
more than 3 years along with confiscation of property if these beverages are
manufactured for the purpose of sale. is in actuality hardly enforced at all.

The situation is much the same with punishment for manufacturing stills for home
use and for purchasing a still for home use. The stealing of alcohol and liq‘
uids containing alcohol intended for technical and medical purposes is not being
eradicated with any kind of effectiveness.

In our opinion, a good part of the explanation for this situation lies in the
fact that these punitive measures appear extremely harsh in the eyes of the pub-
lic (and indeed in the opinion of many administrators) since they regard drunk-
enness as a misdemeanor and not a crime. That is why replacing criminal admin-
istrative measures by economic administrative measures (fines and the like)
seems to us a more effective direction in combating alcoholism.

50

FON.OF1WC]AL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

One of the essential difficulties of the struggle against alcoholism lies in the
fact that alcoholics rarely request treatment, and when they do, this is ordi-
narily only in the stage of chronic alcoholism. The lengthy (up to 2 years)
mandatory treatment in dispensariea where treatment is combined with work,
which is more effective in such cases, has not had the development in our coun-
try which is necessary. Those alcoholics sent to prison for crimes committed
while they were intoxicated as a rule retain their addiction to alcohol, and
they resume their drinking after being discharged. All of this compels the con-
clusion that society's principal task is prevention, i.e., averting alcoholism,

as well as active identification of incipient alcoholics at the earliest date
and organization of their treatment.

As for combating alcoholism as an antisocial phenomenon, there are two diametri-
cally opposed positions. One comes down to “nonresistance.” The gist of it is

that there is no point spending a great deal of energy in combating alcoholism,
which is a futile struggle, since:

a) put simply. vodka is necessary to the budget, and revenues from vodka can be
replaced only in the remote future, but the funds are necessary now;

b) administrative measures cannot have an essential impact on reducing alcohol-
ism;

c) any ban on the production and sale of vodka would result in more home dis-
tilling.

The conclusion is drawn from all this that the struggle should be waged only

against the clearly criminal manifestations of alcoholism in everyday life and
in the workplace.

The opposing position is demanding a "dry" law and complete cessation of the
production of vodka. since whatever training programs we carried out, so long as
we do not liquidate the production of distilled alcoholic beverages, i.e., so
long as there is something to drink. people will drink.

As in many other cases, the extreme positions are unacceptable.

Irrational forms of consumption, in this case of alcohol, cannot be liquidated
in a short period of time. But some of them may be more harmful, others less
harmful, and society should find acceptable variants. An entertaining film
(even if its quality is not very high) is better, for instance, than being
drunk. A good picture is still better. For example, when the film "Seventeen
Moments of Spring" was shown on television, the streets were empty, ticket sales
were down in movie theaters, telephones were unplugged, business and other meet-
ings were postponed, since nearly everyone, including lovers of alcohol, were
"victims" of the television set during those days. On the testimony of the per-
sonnel of medical sobering-up rooms, the universal interest in a good film also
affects the regular "clients" of those institutions.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR OFFK‘IAI. I'Sl' (NU

Drafting an elaborate program of the campaign agath alcoholism to cover a pe-
riod of several years requires first of all a thorough study of the economic
losses related to alcoholism. Unfortunately such a study is being held back by
the present statistical reporting system. which not only does not reveal alco-
holism's impact on the economic indicators of our activity, but draws a veil
over it entirely. For instance, whole-day absences from work because of drunk-
enness are frequently reported as leave with permission of the management.

It would be advisable to classify the measures of the fight against alcoholism
in two categories: actions of a tactical nature calculated for the next few
years, and a "strategic" program calculated for a lengthy period during which it
would be possible to first reduce and then eliminate the use of distilled alco-
holic beverages.

Among the former we might include the following measures, which do not require
that the state make any sort of sizable outlays of funds from the budget.

1. A substantial (25 percent) reduction of the proof strength of all the vodka
manufactured in the country, with the present price level retained.

2. A stepping up of the economic measures aimed at combating home distilling to
replace the criminal measures.

3. Expansion of the production of nonalcoholic beverages and tonics.

la. The conduct of an extensive sample survey of the socioeconomic consequences
of alcoholism.

Pear that reducing the proof strength of vodka would "automatically" result in a
corresponding increase in the production of home-distilled liquor is not well
founded. For a long time now this threatened rise of home distilling has been
an obstacle in the fight against alcoholism.

It would be economically and socially justifiable to adopt a system of money
fines for production of home-distilled liquor which would exceed its "value” by
as much as 10-fold or 15-fold, the money thus obtained to be spent on the cam-
paign against alcoholism and on issuing bonuses to persons. including law en-
forcement personnel. who have detected and informed on producers of home-dis-
tilled liquor.

The following measure seems possible to the authors of this article: to declare
that there is no room in the party and Konomol, nor in the activ of trade union
and public organizations for persons who abuse alcohol and behave so as to bring
discredit on the dignity of a Soviet citizen.

He also regard the following as advisable in stepping up the fight against alco-
holism:

i. to organize a temperance society, to enhance the responsibility of the man-
agement of enterprises and institutions for allowing persons to work in an ine-
briated condition; to deprive persons discharged for violating work discipline

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as a result of drunkenness of the right to continuity of pensionable work ser-
vice; to expand the practice of allotting workers and employees with families
plots of land to organize collective gardening, above all around industrial cen-
ters; to stimulate in every way use of space in schools (outside of class hours),
clubs and other space, as well as restaurants, including institutional dining
rooms, for hobbies according to their interest: technical creativity, handi-
crafts. building boats and the like, and also for dances and evenings of amateur
perfornances, making sure to give moral and material activation to personnel of

schools and clubs so that they offer maximal use of the space to young people
living in the neighborhood;

ii. in order to optimize the budget of young workers and to encourage the accu-
nulation of money over and above current expenditures for the purpose of obtain-
ing durable consumer goods which are in short supply. to order USSR Gosplan and
the USSR Ministry of Finance. in conjunction with the Konsomol Central Committee
and the AUCCTU, to prepare recs-“dations on mass production of the use of
credit through savings banks (under the supervision of Romsomol organizations)
in part payment for automobile and motorcycle titles and certificates pertaining
to durable consumer goods (motorboats, refrigerators, sets of furniture, and so
on), as well as for cooperative apartments for young people;

iii. to order the USSR Central Statistical Administration. jointly with the
USSR Academy of Sciences, the USSR Ministry of Health, the AUCC‘I‘U and the Romeo-
mol Central Gomittee to conduct special research in the 1976-1975 period into
the socioeconomic consequences of alcoholism, enlisting party, Komsomol and
trade union activists to take part in this work.

Legislation and Labor Resources*

In our view there is no doubt whatsoever about using the law as an instrument to
improve the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of labor resources as a
whole. But for that instrument to be effective, a correct determination must
first be made of the direction it is to take in each of the spheres under con-
sideration. The influence of the law is extremely great, beginning with the
"strategic" questions. among which we should include the problem of demographic
policy insofar as it is concerned with affecting the birth rate, and ending with

such present-day issues as reducing personnel turnover, reducing sick leave, and
so on.

we will examine here only those directions which are basic and which in our
opinion are the most realistic ones, those in which the influence of the law on
labor resources can prove to be most effective.

when To Get Married?

We should note that present-day legal standards make it very problematical to
exact support from the natural fathers of children who are not born in a legally
constituted marriage. Contined with the very low (by comparison with the wages

* Reprinted with abridgments from the publication HOZYMS'NO I PRAVO, No 2,
1978.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to material costs, though losses of a moral nature are far more considerable and
dangerous to society). These are substantial expenditures. and only the inter-
ests of the children can serVe as a justification for them. This "freedom" of
obligations to society and the family, when taken together with certain other
conditions. has the result that more than 20 percent of young nen between the
ages of 25 and 29. i.e., when they have already served in the armed forces. have
obtained their education, have acquired their occupation or profession, are not
married (according to the 1970 Population Census). By now this percentage has
risen still more according to an expert evaluation. Thus a substantial portion
of men are spending their young years as bachelors, which has adverse conse-
quences, both economic and social, for the entire society. As Professor 3. Ur-
lanis has rightly noted. "lacking a family. a young man is far more apt to slip

on life's road. to develop a weakness for alcohol, to break the law. The family
serves as a powerful stabilizer of social tension.

cal and socioeconomic standpoint the optimum age for marrige is between 22 and
24 for grooms and between 20 and 22 for brides. But it is the relative share of
the male portion of young people not marrying that is very high; among men over
age 20 the average marriage rate in our country is only 80. and the average age
of marriage, though it has been dropping rather substantially (for example,
among men the average age of marriage dropped from 29.3 in 1976 to 25.1 in 1976,

while among women the drop was from 27.2 to 23.h),** still is not reaching the
optimal.

In this connection it is worth turning attention to the fact that in the Euro-
pean socialist countries the average age of marriage is new lower than in the
USSR. For men it is 24.9 and for women 21.7. while in the capitalist countries

of western Europe the ages are 25.8 and 22.9, respectively, and in the United
States they are 23.3 and 20.6.***

Thus, while noting the drop in the average age of marriage in recent years as a
constructive fact. we need to admit that it is still not enough. we would also
like to call attention to the fact that according to the data of microsurveys of

progress.

For the sake of fairness it should be said that there are many circumstances in-
volved in delaying legal marriage. Incidentally. we might include among them
the procedure whereby the administration of educational institutions does not
furnish separate rooms to students who marry. is not building dormitories for

* "Holodaya sem'ya" [The Young Family]. Moscow, 1977, p 11.

** VESTNIK STATISTIKI, No 1, 1967, p 94; No 12, 1975, p 89.

*** M. V. Kurman. "Aktual'nyye problemy demogrefii" [Current Problems in Demog-
raphy]. Moscow, 1976, p 33.

5h
FOI:OFFK]A1.USE‘ON}Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NIX

married students, and so on. though in many educational institutions such possi-

bilities exist. A similar situation not uncommonly is observed in dormitories
for young workers.

The Law and the Birth Rate

At the 25th CPSU Congress L. I. Brezhnev, general secretary of the CPSU Central
Committee, pointed up the need to work out an effective demographic policy. One
of its tasks would be to devise a set of measures, including legal measures.
that would motivate having the second and third child in the family (from the
demographic standpoint the existence of two children is insufficient to guaran-
tee expanded reproduction of the population and consequently expanded reproduc-
tion of labor resources as well). If the necessary growth of the population is
to be ensured. there must be more than 258 children for every 100 couples (ac-
cording to the calculations of Professor 8. Urlanis).* But the law in effect

was actually aimed at extending material assistance only to families with many
children.**

Yet the law's principal function. which justified its existence not only in war-
time and in the postwar period, but also in our own time: aid to large families
in bringing up their children, has not been altogether lost by any means. Those
authors would seem to be incorrect who offer a one-sided treatment of this leg-

islation as "aimed at encouraging the maximum number of children in certain fam-
ilies (ethnic areas), whereas the demographic situation in the country dictates

that it be aimed at guaranteeing the requisite minimum of children in a majority
of families.“***

There is no question that the last part of the assertion is correct (i.e., that
the demographic situation "dictates” ... in concrete terms, that legislation
must give maximum incentive to the birth of the second and third child, and--we
ourselves add--not the fourth and fifth). but there are hardly grounds for as-
serting that the present law stimulates a higher birth rate. At the same time
its principal function-assistance in bringing up children-should not be lost.
since that would worsen the situation of families with many children. And if
there is some point in improving that law, there would obviously be justifica-
tion for reassessing the very principle of increasing the amount of aid, setting
a new and much higher rate of assistance for the second and third child as com-
pared to the rate that applies to the fourth child and subsequent children.

The Adolescent and the Workplace

Let us_examine the question of the lower limit of the working age (the minimum
working age). Some authors assert that ... "the lower limit of working age (16)
has been established in law so as to take into account the adolescent's physical

* "Molodaya sem'ya,“ p 7.
** The reference is to the ukase of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet
dated 8 July 1966.

*** G. Litvinova, "Effect of the Law on Labor Resources," KBOZYAYSTVO I PRAVO,
No 12, 1977, p 63.

55
F0R1OFF1C1AL.USE10NL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and intellectual development." And further: "It was envisaged even by the
first party program of the Bolsheviks, was set forth in the 1918 RSPSR Code of
Labor Legislation, and today. in the context of the shortage of labor resources.
sufficient grounds are lacking for legislation to increase it."*

In what direction should the change of the minimum working age take in the fu-
ture? It seems to us that as working conditions become easier on the one hand
and the acceleration of young people occurs on the other. that the minimum age
of entering the group of labor resources could be reduced to 15. To this we
night add that expanding labor resources by virtue of the adolescent generation
is important not only from the economic standpoint, but also from the standpoint
of training to prepare the citizen of socialist society for life.

The present-day technology and organisation of production in industry, agricul-
ture, and also the service sphere not only permit. but in many cases even guar-
antee the most effective use of live labor when combined use is made of man-
power: men, women and adolescents.** But we cannot but see that along with the
factors favoring a drop in the minimum working age. there are also factors oper-
ating in the opposite direction, one of which is the need to increase the length
of general-educational preparation for work. Overcoming this contradiction pre-
supposes first of all that education begin earlier. In the prewar period school
began at the age of 8 or 9. In most of the most advanced countries elementary
education now begins at age 7, and in certain countries it begins at age 6 or
even age 5. There are elements of this kind of education in our country as

well in the older groups of preschool institutions. Thus increasing the length
of education would seem to be accounted for by beginning it earlier.

At the same time earlier commencement of education comes up against a very defi-
nite and tangible limit. so that the problem cannot be altogether solved by this
method alone. It vauld seen that a different fundamental solution lies in com-
bining education with work. This can be done either through the form of actual
combination in the system of vocational education (for example. 3 days of school
and 3 days of work), or by combining work with evening school, in which case, of
course, the length of the workday would be limited. as it already is in our case
for adolescents. But this is now done only as an exception, in the form of the
workday that lasts between é hours and 6 hours. Incidentally, we are the only
country. even among the socialist countries, where the labor of lS-year-olds is
prohibited both in industrial and also nonindustrial enterprises. in agriculture
and in the service sphere.

* C. Litvinova, op. cit.. p 64.

** Given the present-day specialization in types of labor and production, in
many cases we distinguish not only "men's" and "women's," but also "young peo-
ple's" occupations within a particular group. For example, high-climbers among
men and assemblers of electronic devices among women. This identifcstion of oc-
cupation may occur within an enterprise (organization), just as it may encompass

the entire enterprise or even a group of enterprises and entire sectors of pro-
duction and labor.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

what often happens at the present time? This is what happens: During his 16th
and 17th years the child, the adolescent, the young person only takes, only re-
ceives. Hhere is he to get the habit of giving, the elementary habit of caring
for others? It is created above all by sensible work training in the family,
which unfailingly includes not only predominantly mental work, but also physical
work as well.

As our society undergoes its social development, there is also an essential
change in the social function of secondary school. As V. I. Lenin defined it,
the Soviet school must be a truly polytechnical school. a school of work. This
requirement has always been acknowledged by Soviet pedagogy. But in various
stages of development of the secondary school it has not always been interpreted
the sane way by any means.

For example, the practical arts shops were closed in the overwhelming majority
of schools in the first years after the return to 10-year schooling (1964) be-
cause of the shortage of class time and funds for production training. By the
end of 1977 only a small portion of then had been reopened. The school cur-
ricular originally gave 6 hours of class time a week to work (aside from op-
tional courses. i.e., production work training outside of class hours), and in
subsequent years the education ministries of the union republics have reduced to
one-third this form which was already small.

For this and certain other reasons work has not had the place it should have in
the life of schoolchildren.

The practice of combining the studies of schoolchildren with work has had two
essential shortcomings: it embraced only a small portion of the students and
took place primarily during vacations. and moreover was done mainly in rural
schools. In the city schoolchildren in the upper grades not uncoemonly turned
the vacations into an empty killing of time, which had a bad effect on the
children, especially on the "difficult" adolescents.

There has been a corresponding shortcoming in shaping socialist work discipline,
though a great deal has been said and written about work training. Usually
there was no discussion. say. about the proposal that children should be taught
in school to handle business correspondence, typing. driver education, to use
calculators, but only a small portion of the students have mastered these opera-
tions (for example. driver education has been adopted in only 3,000 of the
nearly 100,000 partial secondary and daytime secondary schools for general edu-
cation).

Often the point of departure in discussing and resolving the questions of actual
participation of schoolchildren in work has been the promise that since learning
itself is creative labor that introduces the schoolchild to the sphere of knowl-
edge and prepares him for subsequent occupational activity, there is supposedly
no need whatsoever for actual occupational activity during his studies in sec-
ondary school. In the absolute majority of schools such work has at best been
allowed only during vacations.

57
IKJIIOIWWCIAL US£Z(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USO-Z ONLY

But the demands of contemporary life have refuted this approach to occupational
work. and progressive know-how has made extensive inroads for itself.

Recently the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers adopted a de—
cree entitled "0n Further Improvement of the Education and Training of Students
in General Secondary Schools and Their Training for Work."

That decree emphasized that "the present organisation of work education, train-
ing and vocational guidance of secondary students does not meet the higher de-
mand of social production and scientific-technical progress. Many graduates of
secondary schools enter life without the requisite work training, do not have an
adequate idea of the principal common occupations and experience difficulties in
making the transition to work in the economy."

If a radical change of direction toward mass participation of secondary school
students in socially useful work is to be accomplished. there will have to be a
very rapid expansion of the physical plant for work training, and that training
will have to undergo a serious organisational shakcup. This was fully covered
by the decree we have mentioned. It states: "In the context of the conditions
of the urban and rural school, comprehensive use should be made for work train-
ing of the training shops of enterprises. interschool production training cen-
ters, apprentice work teams and other work associations of secondary school stu-
dents, vocational and technical schools, school shops, laboratories and display
rooms. The students shall be provided regular free transportation to the places
where they do their work exercises. New work training programs are to be com-
piled for all grades. along with the relevant manuals on teaching methods.“

It is also highly important that the time for work training be increased from 2

to 4 hours per week in grades 9 and 10 (11), in accordance with the decree. In-
terschool production training centers are an especially promising fora of bring-
ing secondary schoolchildren into contact with occupational work.

They are set up to improve work training and to improve the choice of occupation
by schoolchildren in the 9th and 10th grade. In actuality they have considera-
bly broader capabilities. Secondary school students can choose any of the spe—
cialties in which training is given. Once a week during the school year the
children learn the elements of the worker occupations under the supervision of
highly skilled instructor-craftsmen, and at the same time they earn money making
real products which are needed.

Aside from that, the knowledge and habits obtained in the shops afford the 10th-
graders the possibility of working on their own part of the summer following the
workplace practical training: for instance. as store clerks, telegraph opera-
tors, packers. carpenters. and typists. No longer is this merely vocational
guidance of young people, but it also gives them social guidance; in a year a
majority of them will be taking up jobs in the economy.

Without diminishing the fault of the family and the school, we still should not

forget about the role of labor legislation and practice as it has taken shape.
At least half a year passes on the average between graduation from a regular

58
FOR OFI-TClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

school or vocational and technical school and conscription into the armed
forces. As a consequence enterprises use various pretexts in trying not to hire
the young graduates before they have been called up, or in trying not to give
them places in accordance with the specialty they have acquired. which means
that the occupation is not reinforced before they are called up into the armed
forces. Nor is the situation any better in agriculture. On 20 April 1976
PRAVDA rightly remarked that the instruction on having students of rural voca-
tional and technical schools go through production training based on outdated
labor legislation unjustifiably delayed commencement of actual work.

As a matter of fact, when the training of machine operators lasted a year and
service in the Soviet Army began at age 19, school graduates managed to master
their occupation in practical training. ﬂow, when a sizable portion of young
people spend 3 years studying in the vocational and technical school and acquire
not only an occupation, but also complete secondary education. they do not re-
ceive even the minimum length of work service and experience (not as trainees in
the vocational and technical school, but as workers).

Kolkhozes (or sovkhozes) pay a monthly stipend (nor is it a small one), they
spend more than 2,000 rubles for every student during training, and they have a
right to expect that he will give them the help he is capable of even while he
is going to school. Those who graduate both from the vocational and technical
schools and also regular secondary schools, once they have acquired training as
machine operators, wait to be placed in jobs. but legislation does not allow
persons under age 17 to operate tractors and complicated agricultural machines.

It would seen that age restrictions of this kind. especially if we take into ac-
count acceleration of young people. are somewhat outdated. It is well known
that over the last several decades an acceleration of the morphological develop-
ment of young people has been observed.

Among rural secondary school students in UkSSR, for example. the average [an-
nual] gain in height among children between the ages of 7 and 15 was as follows
in the period between 1957 and 1967: 2.67 cm for boys and 3.23 cm for girls.
Though figures on acceleration of mental development are less accurate. they are
still sufficiently definite. In the judgment of a majority of professional psy-
chologists mental development of young people has speeded up by approximately
1.5 or 2 years.

Another reason why it is so important to take into account the possibilities of
speeding up the introduction to work of secondary school students in the upper
grades is that the economy's need for highly skilled workers, whose share has
been growing at a very rapid pace, has been growing as the problem of labor re-
sources has become more acute and as the scientific-technical revolution has un-
dergone its very rapid development. Meanwhile no radical change has yet occur-
red in people's consciousness (either in young people who have graduated from
secondary school or their parents) concerning the attitude toward work, espe-
cially toward physical work in the sphere of material production.

59
FOI:0FF"JAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISII UNIX

To some degree this is the result of labor legislation's failure to take into
account the processes of acceleration.

Unfortunately many officials in public education, referring to the fact that new
forms of work training and actual participation of secondary school students in
work, require pedagogic analysis, have delayed for years in using and dissemi-
nating the advance know-how.

Puller Use of Occupational Experience and Qualifications

Now we will move on to the question of the effect of the law on the length of
the work life of elderly persons. In the present classification all persons
between the ages of 60 and 75 fall in the postworking (retired) age group. At
the same time a substantial portion of them-about 80 percent in the first 5
years of retirement and about 30 percent in the second 5-year period of retire-
ment--retain all or part of their ability to work.

However, the present level of participation of elderly persons in social produc-
tion is still low. The reason is not so such the lack of material and noral in-
centives as the absence of the necessary legal and organisational conditions
that would make it possible for than to be attracted into social production.

(At the present time 99 percent of old-age pensioners who are working work a
full workweek and a full workday, and as a rule they have the ordinary working
conditions.)

According to our computation, based on the published data of the 1970 Phpulation
Census, approximately 28 nillion workers (mental workers prinarily) of the 115.2
million persons employed in the sphere of social production are not covered by
the legal standards now in effect concerning material encouragement of the work
of retired persons: renuneration along with the full or partial pension bene-
fit. In the context of the scientific-technical revolution it is especially in-
portant to lengthen the work life of persons employed in occupations requiring
the longest training. As a rule these are mental workers with high qualifica-
tions: scientists and educators. As we know, these occupational groups have
been increasing in our country at the highest rates. Pbr instance, over the pe-
riod from 1960 to 1976 the number of persons employed in science and scientific
services increased more than tenfold, whereas throughout the national economy
the increase was threefold. He should also note that the cost of training aci-
entists and teachers is higher than that of any other profession.

Increasing their work life in the sphere of social production is an element of
compensation for later commencement of the work life of these specialists. But
this is possible only if an appropriate enployment policy is conducted.

Science offers the most vivid example of the nain direction for increasing the
working life of the population, which is beneficial from the social standpoint
and highly efficient from the economic standpoint. As a result of the length-
ened professional work life of scientists, even now the overwhelming majority of
them do not retire not only when they reach the general retirenant age (age 55
for women and age 60 for men), but not even when they qualify for the substan-
tially higher (one-third) pension afforded at a later year to those who

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR4OFIWCIAI.IEHECNNL\

have the academic degree of doctor of sciences (5 years later).

Solving the problem of the most efficient use of the elderly population requires
a further increase in its mobility on the basis of improvement of labor legisla-
tion.

That improvement must be thoroughly thought out so that the shifting of elderly
workers does not take the form of a disguised dismissal but. on the contrary.
so that it is aimed at supporting work, which is such a complicated vital in-
pulse, so that it is seen to be an extension of their work lives.

Thus the matter consists of using the law to manage the process of formation of
the age-specific composition of vocational groups, which is altogether possible
in the context of a socialist society vhose development is planned and, in par-
ticular, on the basis of the biotechnology of age and appropriate material in-
centives.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Statistika". 1980

7045
C80: 8146/1760 END

w!"

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY