FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10260
19 January 1982

Korean Affairs Report

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
KOREAN AFFAIRS REPORT

(POUO 2/8 2)

CONTENTS

SOUTH KOREA
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

Detail; of Personal Network of Chon Regime Reported
(Haeda Yasuhiro; SEMI, Nov 81) .........................

-a- [III-ASIA-lﬂ

FOR OH-‘lClAL USE ONLY
DETAILS OF PERSONAL NETWORK 0F CHON REGIME REPORTED

Tokyo SBKAI in Japanese Nov 81 pp 156-170

[Article by Maeda Yasuhiro: "Personal Connections of the Chen Tu—hwan Regime")
[Text] The Inauguration of the Chon Regime

President Chon Tu-hwan of the Republic of Korea has implemented important domestic
and foreign programs one after another, including the presidential election, the
National Assembly elections, the U.S.-Korea summit conference, and his visit to
the five members of ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations). Moreover. he
boldly carried out wholesale personnel changes in political and government circles.
This was designed to achieve stability for his regime. In addition, during the
past year he has also tackled reform of the top leadership of the Korean military
forces, which form the nucleus of his power structure. Thus he has taken steady
steps for the perpetuation of his power.

It was 1 year and 11 months ago, on 12 December 1979, that Haj Gen Chon Tu-hwan,
commander of the Defense Force Security Command, daringly staged a "coup for mili-
tary purge" to eliminate Army Chief of Staff and Martial Law Commander Chong Sung-
hwa and other top military leaders and elders. Also, it was a little over a year
ago, on 1 September 1980, that he abruptly forced acting President Ch'oe Kyu-ha to
step down and took over the presidency. It took President Pak Chang-hui (a major
general at that time) 2 years and 7 months from the time of the military coup in
May 1961 to become president in December 1963. Compared to this, one can see how
speedily he usurped political power and has pressed forward with reforms.

The new lineups of the political, government, and military circles that support
the Chon regime will be scrutinized below.

To begin with, let us trace the steps leading to his political takeover. It all
started with the measures taken on 17 Hay 1980 to expand and strengthen the
Emergency Martial Law. Because of intensified student demonstritions the mea-
sures called for banning all political activities. The Defense Force Security
Command (CIC) arrested on the suspicion of antigovernment activities and illicit
accumulation of wealth the so-called three Rims, that is, Kim Tae-chung, former
presidential candidate of the opposition party, the New Democratic Party; Kim
Chong-p'il, former prime minister (and president of the progovernment party, the
Democratic Republican Party). and Kim Yong-sen, president of the New Democratic
Party. -

1
FOR OFFICIAL U§E2(MWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the following day, 18 Hay, protest demonstrations by students and the masses
demanding the restoration of democracy, the breakup of the Yusin system, and the
resignation of the Chon Tu-hwan military regime were started in Kwangju city.
After armed intervention with indiscriminate mass slaughter by the Airborne Spe-
cial Warfare Corps (paratroopers). the protest demonstrations were quashed by the
martial law troops on 27 May.

The schedule for General Chon to take over political power emerged in concrete
form with the "Emergency Countermeasures Committee for National Security" inaugu-
rated after the suspension of all the functions of the National Assembly at the
end of May. General Chon, as chairman of the Standing Committee for National
Security, pressed ahead with steps to let the Ch'oe Kyu-ha regime transfer its
power. This Standing Cormuttee of the Committee for National Security was comr
posed of 18 active-duty soldiers as the nucleus. It gave birth to a new constitu-
tion which was promulgated in October 1980, 1 month after Chon became president.

Furthermore, on the basis of the supplementary rules of this constitution. a
legislative organ, the Legislative Assembly for National Security (the so-called
Legislative Assembly) was established on 27 October to replace the National Assem-
bly.

This Legislative Assembly (composed of 81 members in all. with military officers
at the center) would be led to the formation of an assembly for the president to
serve as a stable political base with a progovernnent party holding a majority.
During the 156-day period until the day before the opening of the new assembly
on 10 April 1980 when it was dissolved. the Legislative Assembly held no less
than 196 sessions. including plenary sessions and subcmmnittee meetings to pass
at a stretch as many as 219 bills, including 189 legislative bills, plus the 1981
national budgetary bills. and some resolutions.

Included in them were the Political Climate Reform Law aimed at purging estab-
lished politicians, the Presidential Election Law, the National Assembly Election
Law. the Political Party Law, the Political Fund Regulation Law, the Fundamental
Press Law, and others.

The personnel changes among the top military leaders, regarded as the granting
of rewards for their service in the 12 December military purge, were tentatively
completed. The personal connections in the military were drastically changed as
a result of the replacement of the brains at the Blue House and the transfer of
military brass to administrative sectors and to the assembly.

Who has the real power within the Chon Tu-hwan regime and who exerts influence?
What kind of character do the people who form the core of the power in the regime
have? The following persons are discussed in this context based on information

available up to now.

National Assembly

In accordance with the new constitution, 15 electoral districts were added to the
previous 77 electoral districts. Thus there are 92 local electoral districts.
Two seats are elected from each district, 180 seats in total. Then 92 national

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
district seats termed the "proportional representation system" are added to the
local districts. The grand tocal is 276 assembly seats.

According to the new Election Law. the seats in the national district are not
elected by direct popular vote. Instead, the party which wins first place in the
local elections receives two-thirds (61 seats) of the national district, and the
remaining 31 seats are distributed among the second place party and Others propor-
tionately according to the number of seats they win. The progovernment party, the
Democratic Justice Party (Hingjong Party) which was hastily inaugurated toward the
end of 1980, aimed at becoming the first-place party by putting up one candidate
each in all 92 electoral districts. It won 90 seats. As was expected, it gained
151 seats after adding the proportionately distributed seats, greatly surpassing
the simple majority. The Democratic Korea Party (Hinhan Party, with Yu Ch'i-song
as its president) which was formed with persons from the right-of-center faction
of the opposition party during the Pak regime, the New Democratic Party, became
the second-place party, winning 57 seats, and after adding 24 proportionately
distributed seats the total number of its seats was 81 (82 later as an independent
joined the party). The third-place party, formed with the core coming from the
Democratic Republican Party and the Yushin Friends Party (Yujong Party), both pro-
government parties during the Pak regime, was the Korean Nationalist Party (Kang-
min Party, with Kim Chong-ch'o as its president). It won 18 seats. and its total
reached 25 after adding 7 proportionately distributed seats. In addition, the
Democratic Socialist Party which claims to be a socialist party, the People's

Rights Party, and the New Politics Party won two seats each. The Democratic
Agrarian Party and the Anmin Party won one seat each. There were 11 independents
elected (one independent later joined the Minhan Party). These minor parties re-
ceived no proportional seats.

Precisely herein lay the aim of the Chon regime in proclaiming its welcome to a
"multiparty system," designed to cause a mushrooming of minor parties. As a re-
sult, the Minjong Party with only 37 percent of the votes gained 54 percent of the
seats. The persons who make up the three top-ranking parties represent the criss-
crossing of former progovernment and opposition party members. There is no dif-
ference whatsoever in their political beliefs and ideals or in their policy. They
are, moreover, all "conservatives."

The first-place party. the Minjong Party, is expected to play only the role of a
voting machine for President Chen. 1n the new National Assembly, major bills are
expected to be automatically approved. The drafting and proposing of legislative
bills is carried out by the brains at the Blue House and the administrative bureau-
crat group. The scope of the acrivities of the National Assembly has been dras-
tically curtailed. The quintessence of the function of the National Assembly is
different from that of n Western-style parliament. Its aim is to develop goodwill
diplomacy toward the two major allies of Korea, the United States and Japan. by
using National Assembly members as a conduit. Although the National Assembly mem-
bers are ”not needed for the deliberation of bills," these newly elected assembly
members who will form a part of the power structure as the progovernment party
members for a years to come will be analyzed, beginning with the process of their
elections.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘FK'IM. USE ONLY

Composition of the New National Assembly Members

President Chon assigned his trusted lieutenants to form a progovernment party.
First of all, the makeup of the 151 members of the Hinjong Party is characterized
by the massive presence of former soldiers. with Military Academy graduates at
the center, 28 either recently retired from military service or served in the
military in the past. They are followed by 25 former ministers and high-ranking
bureaucrats. Included in them are a former assistant director of the Central In-
telligence Agency (KCIA), an attorney general. and a director of the Seoul Metro-
politan Police.

From among the Legislative Assembly members who assiSted in the formation of the
new National Assembly, 24 were selected to become new National Assembly members.
From the Democratic Republican Party, the progovernment party of the Pak regime,
11 were selected. From another former prugovernment party, the Yujong Party,
seven were selected (some of them were also Legislative Assembly members). Eight
are former assembly members from the New Democratic Party. In terms of occupa-
tional classification, there are as many as 22 well-known journalists, such as
newspaper executives, reporters, and television newscasters. They form one of
the three main forces of the party. along with the former officers group and the
politicians. In addition, 22 members were selected from financial and business
conglomerate circles. There are 12 former scholars and school administrators.

While the majority of the Hinjong Party assembly members, 83 of them, are over
40 years of age, only 3 are in their thirties. Of the total, 46 are in their
fifties, and 17 in their sixties. Although the average assembly member is some-
what younger than his counterpart under the Pak regime, it does not coincide with
the younger trend of the eligible voters, as 60 percent of them are in their
twenties and thirties.

This is the result of the appointment of old politicians who survived the Polit-
ical Climate Purification Law, and especially of the appointment of 61 members as
proportionate representatives from among noted elder politicians, financiers,

and high-ranking government officials. with the exception of some young former
soldiers dispatched by President Chon for the formation. Compared with Japan. the
average age of the leadership in every circle is younger by 10 years. Of the

five persons in their thirties, two are women (both served in the Leg151ative
Assembly) who were assigned to seats from the national district. Other members

in their forties were selected by direct vote. Therefore, the generational change
in certain quarters is not designed to reflect the diversifying political trends
of the eligible voters. Instead, it is a product of "deliberate" consideration.

As will be discussed later, the former subordinates of President Chan (50 years
of age) occupy the leading positions. With the exception of those who occupy
honorary positions and had meritorious service in the Legislative Assembly, the
actual working force is composed of persons in their mid-forties. In terms of
educational background, as many as 20 are graduates of Japanese universities and
colleges (including former ones in Manchuria, now Northeast china) such as Tokyo,
Kyoto, Tbhoku, Nihon. Waseda, Chu and Doshisha Universities. Being the Japanese-
speaking generation they are still regarded as playing a part of the role of con-
duit between Korea and Japan (ages quoted in the following are all calendar-year
ages in the Korean style).

)4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Soldiers-Turned-Politicians

The group in the Minjong Party that exercises the real power is led by former
Legislative Assembly member Kwon Chong-tal (65), who is the central figure in the
"leading reformist force." He retired from active military service as a brigadier
general in October 1980 and contributed his efforts to the inauguration of the
parzy. He has been appointed secretary general of the party. He was born in North
Kyongsatg Province and is of the 15th Class of the Military Academy. He is regard-
ed as a personal follower of Yun P'il-yong, former commander of the Capital Guard
Command. In the Defense Force Security Command (CIC) he was in control of intelli-
gence on the military. The fact that he served as director of the CIC Intelligence
Office at the time of the 12 December coup for military purge led to his excep-
tional promotion. Since he visited the United States and Japan as a confidential
emissary of the president to resolve the dispute between Japan and Korea over the
execution of Mr Kim Tae—chung, he has been busily occupied also with the behind-
the-scenes operations regarding Japanese political circles on behalf of Korea's
request for a 6-billion-dollar loan.

The number two man is a deputy secretary general of the party, Vi Chong-ch'an
(45), of the 16th Class of the Military Academy. He garnered 116,000 votes in the
celebrated electoral district which includes Chongno-ku and Chung-kn, popularly
known as number one on the political street. In May 1980 he was appointed direc-
tor of the Planning and Coordination Office of the KCIA in order to carry out a
wholesale purge of the persons connected with Kim Chae-kyu, former Director of the
KCIA who shot Pak to death. He displayed his ability in the revamping of the KCIA.
He is said to be favored with the influence of his grandfather, who was a former
vice president and an anti-Japanese fighter. He served as a councilor at the
Korean Embassy in London and is also a talented administrator. He is expected to
be active as chairman of the Steering Committee of the NatiOnal Assembly.

Yun Sok—sun (44), who was ranked third in the proportional representation (na-
tional district) list, is a deputy secretary general of the party. He is one of
the young and powerful triumvirate. He is not a Military Academy graduate, but
was selected from his former position as director of the General Affairs Bureau of
the KCIA. He is close)" connected with Ho Sam-su, chief presidential investiga-
tion secretary. who was a classmate of Yun Sok—sun at Pusan High School. Ho is
one of the powerful men at the Blue House, as will be discussed later. The names
of these young powerful men were hardly known to the Korean people until half a
year ago. This attests to the fact that this series of political changes consti-
tutes a military coup in the purest sense of the term.

Former Minister of National Defense Chong Nae-hyok (55), one of the 28 soldiers-
turned-politicians of the Minjong Party and elected speaker of the National Assem-
bly, is a graduate of the Japanese Military Academy. He is known even in Japan
for his activity to obtain the release of the hostages in the highjacking of Japan
Airlines' Yodo (1970). He has many acquaintances in defense circles in Japan. He
will serve as an important pipeline when new exchanges between Japanese and Korean
parliamentarians commence. There are 21 graduates of the Korean Military Academy.
The 8th Class is represented by four, the 13th Class by three, and other classes
generally by one or two. Only one, Chong Son-hu (63), former managing director

of the Korean Electric Wire Company, represents the 17th Class among those who

5
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

form the young core of the leading reformist force. it is characteristic of those
of the same class who enter politics after doffing their uniforms that they are
appointed only to positions in the inner circle at the Blue House or to diplomatic
posts.

Yu Kun-hann (53). a retired major general who was commander of the Army Intelli-
gence Command, of the 2—A Class of the army, is reputed to have been one of the
army supporters for the coup for military purge. Kim Yong-son (51) of the 7th
Class and former director of the Anti-Espionage Countermeasures Headquarters. is
President Chon's senior by 4 years. He is highly familiar with military intelli-
gence and military justice. As the presiding judge of the common court martial
under the martial law during Kim Chae-kyu's trial, he handed out the death sen-
tence to Kim Chae-kyu. Assembly member Kim Yong-son was selected along with in-
cumbent Minister of Home Affairs So Chong-hwa (47) as a deputy director of the
KCIA, after Yun lk-kyun and Kim Chae—tok (former minister to Japan), who had close
personal ties with Kim Chae-kyu. were discharged. Kim Yong-son is regarded as
outstanding in his service in reorganizing the KCIA to suit the Chon Tu—hwan re-
gime.

A superstar among the 8th Class is Pak Tae-chun (54), chairman of the Pohang

Steel Company. As the president of the company he was successful in its manage-
ment. and developed the company into one of the representative enterprises in
Korea. He suddenly surfaced as a leader in financial circles after the Chen re-
gime was inaugurated. He was appointed chairman of the Korea-Japan Economic Asso-
ciation inaugurated on 26 February, thus becoming a manager on the Korean side of
the pipeline that connects the economic circles in Japan and Korea. Before the
liberation he once studied at Haseds University in the Science and Engineering
Department, but he withdrew before graduation and later entered the Korean Mili-
tary Academy. He was appointed to the position of director of the Secretariat to
the Supreme National ReconstructiOn Council immediately after then Maj Gen Pak
Chong-hui started a military coup. He is currently active as chairman of the Pi-
nance Committee of the National Assembly. Other members of the 8th Class are Yi
Pomrchun (53), former assistant minister of national defense for logistics and
director of the Maritime and Port Administration: Pak Sang-kyu (50), former direc-
tor of the Housing Corporation and a retired brigadier general; and Yi Sang-1k
(53). former Yujong Party assembly member and minister to Japan. 0f the 8th Class
of the Milit1ry Academy, former Prime Minister Kim Chong-p'il and Yi Pyong—hui,
former minister without portfolio (in charge of Japan affairs), were purged from
politics for 8 years on the suspicion that they had been involved in irregulari-
ties and corruption. Thus a clear demarcation line was drawn among them.

Hhat attracts one'a attention is the llth Class, the classmates of President Chon
Tu—hwan. The three prominent ones are: Kim 81k (48), former director of the
Materiel Bureau of the Ministry of National Defense; Kwon Ik-hyon (47), former
assistant to the minister without portfolio; and An Kyo-tok (67), president of the
Chongu Development Company. As will be related later, President Chon strongly
wanted his comrades bonded in blood at the time of the 12 December coup for mili-
tary purge, Lt Gen Chong Ho-yong (69), deputy army chief of staff, and Lt Gen No
T‘ae—u (49), comander of the Defense Force Security Comand--ranks given are
those held at the time of the purge--and others who were in uniform to turn to
politics. Not all of them would doff their uniforms. Messrs Kim, Kwon, and An
were not closely connected as comrades in the coup for military purge, but they

6
ma omcut use ONLY
were classmates who pledged their cooperation from outside at the time of the in-
ception of the Chon regime. The Chongu Development Company was started as a mili-
tary supply contractor to the American forces in Korea. The company adopted a
copresident system, and former generals have filled the positions. Therefore. the
company has strong ties with the government. One president, Min Sok-von, is not
an assembly member but he was a member of the 11th Class of the Military Academy.
He came to Japan last April and seriously attempted to "make an inroad" in Japan's
political and financial circles as President Chon's highly trusted representative
from business circles. Mr An held the position of Chief of Operations of the Army
Staff and rose as high as to the rank of full colonel. Hereafter, Presidents An
and Min are expected to be in charge of the twin sectors of politics and economy
in laying the pipeline between Japan and Korea.

Then, those in the 11th Class were followed by Ch'oe ﬂak-son (A7), president of
the Koesong Paper Manufacturing Company, of the 12th Class; 0 Han-kn (b7), direc-
tor of the Pohang Steel Company, of the 13th Class; and Pae Myong-kuk (67), the
president of a construction company, and Yi Ch'un-ku (67) who was active as chair-
man of the Purification Conudttee. both of the 14th Class.

Those who directly changed their status from active duty to become members of the
Legislative Assembly include Yi U-chae (57), of the 13th Class, a brigadier gen-
eral who commanded the V Communications Corps; Chong Sun-tok (A6) of the 16th
Class, a brigadier general who served as the chief of staff of a field army; and
Ho Ch'ong—il of the 20th Class, a military police officer with the rank of lieu-
tenant colonel. Assembly member Ho also cooperated with General Chen at the time
of the 12 December coup and served with distinction.

Participating in the Chen regime from the air force and navy are: Ch'on Yong-song
(52), president of the Korea Electric Maintenance Corporation, of the 1st Class of
the Air Force Academy; Kim Yong-su (52) of the 2d Class of the Air Force Academy.
who served as commander of the Air Force Training Base; Chang Hon-min (54), former
First Deputy Chief of Naval Operations and member of the Standing Coumuttee of the
National Security Conmdttee, of the 5th Class of the Naval Academy; Kim Chang-ho.
of the 3d Class of the Naval officers' Candidate School and former Second Deputy
Chief of Naval Operations; and Yi Yang-u (69), of the 6th Class of the Naval
Academy and former Yujong Party assembly member. Besides these. Yi Chae-hwan
(43), former director of the Presidential Protective Service Office, is one of the
unique participants.

In terms of former military personnel, 12 retired generals led by Pak Kyong-

won of the 6th Class of the Military Academy. who was former governor of Kangwon
Province, joined en masse the then New Democratic Party in pursuit of their polit-
ical careers. But all of them were implicated thereafter in the Political Climate
Reform Law. Even though they were not purged, none of them has become a member
of the National Assembly. There are gigantic forces working against military men
who try to join an opposition party.

Journalists-Turned-Politicians

As journalists-turned-po]iticians. assembly members Kim Yun—hwan (49) and Nam Chae-
hui (67) are already well known. As they have an excellent command of the Japanese

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

language and also are well acquainted with all circles in Japan, they have loomed
as the central figures among Japanese and Korean parliamentarians. Mr Kim was
born in Sonsan, North Kyongsang Province. He was a special correspondent of
CHOSON ILBO in Tokyo and assistant managing editor of the same paper. He was then
appointed Yujong Party assembly member in 1979. Mr Nam was managing editor of
CHOSON ILBO, and chief editorial writer of SEOUL SINMUN. He was appointed Demo-
cratic Republican Party assembly member in 1977. Both were known as specialists
in Japanese affairs. Winning President Chon's confidence early, they joined the
progovernnant party, and they were promised cabinet posts at later dates. Pak
Kyong-sok (44), who was appointed the prngovernment party spokesman, was a former
editorial writer of TONG ILBO and also a special correspondent in Tokyo. It gives
the impression that those at the frontline level of Korean journalist circles have
"rallied" under the Chon regime. including Song Chi-yong (65), a former editorial
writer of CNOSON ILBO and a former member of the Legislative Assembly; Kim Yong-
t'ae (45), former managing editor of CNOSON ILBO; Chong Nam (40), assistant man-
aging editor of KYONGHYANG SINMUN; Sim Myong-po (46), former managing editor of
HANGUK lLBO; and Yi Yong-hui (50), a woman editorial writer of HANGUK ILBO. Pong
Tu-hwan (46), a former newscaster with TBC, a commercial television station, who
editorially argued for the Pak regime, won the largest number of votes (158,000)
throughout the nation as a representative of the television induscry.

In addition, there are active newspaper management representatives such as Nam
Chae-tu (42), president of TAEJON ILBO, and Sim Sangwu (42), president of CHONNAM
ILBO. Those antigovernment journalists charged with violating the Emergency Mar-
tial Law and various other laws during 1980 were either imprisoned or were forced
to resign from their employment positions. Thus they have disappeared from the
scene to lead the remainder of their lives in a manner contrasting with those
journalists who have penetrated the central nerve system of power.

Among those who have sideslipped into various positions from executive and judicial
circles are Kim Ki-ch'ol (64), former minister of communications, and Chong Chong-
t'aek (46), former minister of agriculture and forestry. Mr Chong has been ap-
pointed to the newly created post of first minister for political affairs. Others
are Hwang In-song (55), former minister of transportation; Kim Chong-kyong (58),
former attorney general; Yi Yong-hum (54) former director of the Legislative
Bureau; Na Kil-cho (58), former associate justice of the Supreme Court and a grad-
uate of Meiji University in Japan; Pak Tong-chin, former minister of foreign af-
fairs and a graduate of Chuo University in Japan; and Kim Chong-ho (46) former
vice minister of home affairs. Unique among those who benefitted from the influ-
ence of relatives is Pak Chae-hong (40), President Pak’s nepnew. who is chairman
of the Tongyang Steel Pipe Company.

In response to President Chon's summon for "national concordance," as many as
eight assembly members and even staff members of the former largest opposition
party. the New Democratic Party, have participated in the Chen regime. Yi Chae-
yong (66) former vice president of the New Democratic Party, who paved the way
for party President Chon to assume the presidency. has been appointed a represen-
tative member of the party. He is a graduate of Chuo University in Japan. For
his service in inaugurating the party, he was named to the first position in the
list of the national district. Other former New Democratic Party assembly mem-
bers were all accused of being "turncoats" but won elections in local districts
in a good fight. They thus acted as models of the posture for national unity.

8
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Among them, assembly members 0 Se-ung (48), Pak Kwon-hom (49), and Han Pyong-
ch'ae (48) are also known in Japan through the former Japan-Korea Parliamentari-
ans League and other organizations. Assembly member Chin I-chong (59) quickly
turned his coat under the Ch'oe regime following the shooting death of President
Pak to serve as minister of public health and social affairs for the first time
as an opposition member. Among the turncoat group are assembly member Yun Kil-
chung (65), a former member of the Legislative Assembly and a graduate of Nihon
University in Japan, and Na Sok-hu (46), who once defended Kim Tae-chung and
others who were implicated in the case of the Declaration for Democratic National
Salvation (March 1976). Assembly member Cho Chong-hu (60), a former opposition
party member who served as a secretary to former President Yun Po-son, the leader
of the anti—Pak forces, also served as an assembly member. As he was a member of
the former Legislative Assembly, it indicates the broad base of support for the
Chen regime.

0i former progovernment party assembly members, both the Democratic Republican
and Yujong Parties, the majority of bigwigs and able persons were implicated in
the Political Climate Reform Law and forced to retire from politics for the next
8 years. Consequently, almost all new assembly members are almost unknown "small
wheels." The precious few survivors among them are assembly member Kim Sak-hyon
(64), elected in a local district and a graduate of "seeds University. and assem-
bly member Sin Sang-ch'o (59). elected in the national district who once attended
Tokyo University. While with the Yujong Party he won the confidence of President
Pak and long served behind the scenes in negotiating with Japan. For this reason
he has many acquaintances in political, financial, and government circles in
Japan. He is expected to assist the Chen regime in its dealings with Japan in a
style different from that of the young group of Japan specialists.

The Most Corrupt Elections in History

The recent elections were held in accordance with the new election laws which gave
landslide victories to the progovernment party. Moreover, the whole government
and bureaucrats openly engaged in baiting with promises of benefit. All opposi-
tion parties deplored this: "These elections were the most corrupt in the his-
tory of Korea."

Large handing out of subsidies as special favors of the government to local cities,
towns, and villages. the indiscriminate issuance of campaign pledges, and the buy-
ing of votes were openly rampant. In the two cities of Taegu and Inchon, in the
presence of President Chen, progovernment party candidates petitioned for the pro-
motion of their cities to the status of special cities. Their petition was in-
stantly approved. It was obviously a case of doing "one favor every day." The
opposiLion found no ways to counter and were beaten. '

In Korea, the local sell-government system has not been implemented since the
period of the Pak regime. instead, the existing system calls for the appointment
of provincial governors by the president and also for the appointment of mayors,
county, Lown, and village chiefs by the superior government agencies. Also.
local legislative councils at all levels have been disapproved on the ground of
financial saving. Therefore, there is a complete centralized system enforced in
Korea. For this reason more than 500,000 public employees and police officers
functioned as vote-collecting machines for the incumbent regime, forced voters

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to go to polling stations, and obstructed opposition party candidates. This re-
sulted in making the recent elections more corrupt than those during the Pak
regime. The reason is clear, then, for disapproving the enforcement of the local
self-government system in the new constitution in spite of the strong demand for
it on the part of the people.

Mr lm Pang-hyon (51), a famous Blue House spokesman under the Pak regime, ran as
a candidate in Chonju-Hanju District, North Cholla Province. with the slogan that
"progovernment bureaucrats were needed for the development of North Cholla Prov-
ince." Even President Chon went there personally to endorse his candidacy and
publicly pledged scholarships to young people from the Cholla provinces and the
remolding of the Chonju railroad station. Assembly member Im was successfully
elected. The FAR EASTERN ECONOMIC REVIEW cemented: "The politically oppressed
people judged it hopeless to change the situation and sold their votes. Such a
phenomenon portends danger."

There were some incidents leading candidates who held strong views against the
incumbent regime to withdraw their candidacy. '.n Kwangju city, South Cholla
Province, where there were bloody riots in May 1980, a powerful local leader, Haj
Gen Chong Ung, ran as an independent, but he disappeared 10 days before the vot-
ing. At the time of the Kwangju incident, Major General Chong was contender of
the Slst Division stationed in the locality, and he issued a statement that he
could not obey the orders from the national government to mobilize troops for the
suppression of the "riots." He thus won fame overnight.

In the 11th National Assembly which opened on 11 April 1981, the Democratic Jus-
tice Party picked Ch'ae Mun-silt (56), a former New Democratic Party member and a
member of the Legislative Assembly, as vice speaker of the assembly, and conceded
another vice speakership to Kim tin-ha (56), vice president of the Democratic Korea
Party. But the Democratic Justice Party members monopolized the chairmanships of
all 13 standing comittees. Six former military men were among them. The party
made it clear that it would manage the National Assembly with the progovernment

party alone.

Although the second largest party. the Democratic Korea Party, was criticized for
being "an opposition party by day and a progovernment party by night" by other
opposition parties, it was successful in electing many assembly members, mainly
from among former New Democratic Party Assembly members. As somewhat distinct
from rightwing New Democratic Party members who turned to the Democratic Justice
Party, the Democratic Korea Part) includes such middle-of-road and left-leaning
assembly members as Ho Kyong-man (.63). who was a defense lawyer during Kim ‘l‘ae-
chung's trial, and Son Se-il (65). who was an assistant to Kim Yong-sam, presi-
dent of the New Democratic Party. 3130, the third largest party, the Nationalist
Party, originated from the former Democratic Republican Party. It is considered
a quasi-progovernment party by the Korean people. Conspicuous along the National-
ist Party assembly members is Cho Il—che (53), from North Kyongsang Province, a
former assembly mower from the Yujong Party. He served as deputy director for
security at the KCIA, and was appointed consul general in Osaka and then minister
at the Korean Embassy in Japan. He was active in controlling “anti—Korean organi-
zations" in Japan.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Socialist Parties

Compared to the above-mentioned three parties, the independents and socialists
were pathetic. "The only way to maintain order in the National Assembly is to
prevent the assembling of individual politicians without party.affiliation. That
is to say, the new National Assembly should keep quiet and should not undertake
any activity" (statement by Kwon Chong—tal. secretary general of the Democratic
Justice Party, as quoted in REVIEW). As expressed in this statement, independents
and socialists have become open targets for obliteration.

President Chon approved the establishment of socialist parties for the recent
elections. His foremost aim was to effectively win the support of West European
nations with strong socialist democratic forces for the Chon regime. Another
reason was that President Chon could also refute the accusations of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) that "South Korea is controlled by mili-
tary fascist groups, and socialists are oppressed."

First of all, Mr Kim Ch'ol (55), former adviser to the United Socialist Party, took
the initiative in forming the Democratic Socialist Party. During the Pak regime
Mr Kim demanded recognition of North Korea and President Pak's resignation, and he
led the labor movement. He was imprisoned altogether 26 months. Thus he was
known as a diehard fighter for democratization. In November 1980 President Chon
appointed Mr Kim Ch'ol as a member of the Legislative Assembly. Mr Kim consented
to have his name listed as a member of the Legislative Assembly in order to gain
the legitimization of the activity of socialist parties. because he aspired to

the "complete and unconditional restoration of parliamentary politics." However,
while he was out of the country attending a Socialist International conference
toward the end of 1980 and the early part of 1981. another veteran "socialist,"

K0 Chong-hun (61), took control of the Democratic Socialist Party. Thereupon, the
"orthodox" faction led by Mr Kim founded the Socialist Party and split from Mr
Ko's group. 0f 20 active socialist elders, 18 rallied to the Democratic Socialist
Party. As a result. Mr Kim's party became an extremely small party, and his long-
time comrade, An P'il-su, former chairman of the United Socialist Party, was ap-
prehended. Mr Kim himself was defeated in the election, and his party gained no
seat in the assembly. The Democratic Socialist Party elected two, including Mr
Ko. In accordance with the New Political Party Law, along with the Korean Chris-
tian Democratic Party, the Honil Party, and the United Nationalist Party, the
registration of the Socialist Party was invalidated.

There are large groups of unorganized workers who are not allowed to engage in
political activity. It is a future task to decide which political party will forge
them into a large viable political force. As the Chon regime estimates that a so-
cialist party will intrinsically lead to the denial of the military regime, even

if it adopts anticommunism as a slogan, the Chon regime has obliterated in every
way the emergence of a socialist party. Mr Kim considers the existence of the
Democratic Socialist Party as the "Trojan horse that will destroy socialism."
However, many in the democratic forces are strongly critical of Mr Kim on the
ground that "he was defeated in the election because he had been appointed a mem-
ber of the Legislative Assembly to be integrated into the Chon regime and this

alienated the voters."

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mr Ko prides himself on the fact that a socialist party won assembly seats, if only
two, for the first time; he has a colorful personal history. During the period of
the American Military Government he served as a language officer for the American
forces, and as a full colonel was active in military intelligence. But after the
student revolution of 1960 he organized a reformist group to develop a socialist
movement. He experienced a total of 56 months' imprisonment. During the past 10
years he has exclusively engaged in writing, publishing a large number of works.

At the same time, he has close relations with many former military men who make up
the Chon regime. He came to Japan last mid—April to contact the Democratic Social-
ist Party of Japan, and announced that he would attempt a substantive development
of his party after the "realistic idealist" model of the Democratic Socialist Par-
ty of Japan." They are watching him more than the major parties to see whether
under the military rule he will be able to advance the cause of democratization,
including the welfare of the poor classes, or whether he will become a Trojan
horse to take the teeth out of the socialist movement.

Exchanges Between Japanese Parliamentarians and Korean Parliamentarians

In terms of Korea's relations with Japan, the former Korea—Japan Parliamentarians
League has undergone a massive organizational change. The Korea-Japan Parliamen-
tarians Security Consultative Conference and the Korea-Japan Friendship Society
have been dissolved into a single organization, the new Korea-Japan Parliamentari-
ans League.

Exchanges between Japanese parliamentarians and their Korean counterparts which
started in 1965 under the Pak regime led to corrupt power practices called "Japan-
Korea connivances" in both countries. Arguing that such exchanges frequently re-
sulted in negative aspects whereby the interest of individual parliamentarians
became preponderant. the Chon regime switched to a parliamentary diplomacy to be
conducted under the supervision of the Blue House. On 8 May the league selected
assembly member Yi Chae-yong as chairman, assembly member Kim Yun-hwan as chief
secretary, and assembly members Pak Kyong-sok and Chong Nam as standing secre-
taries. The total number of Korean members is 52, from both the progovernment
and opposition parties.

The Korean side has no intention of limiting the pipeline between Japan and Korea
to the hawkish grOup in the Liberal Democratic Party and a faction of the Demo-
cratic Socialist Party as in the past. Instead it wants to extend the pipeline

to other forces in the Liberal Democratic Party and to the Komei Party, the New
Liberal Club, and the rightwing faction of the Socialist Party as well. The
Korean delegates who came to Japan last June for a get-together made aggressive
contacts with influential representatives of all circles. It has already achieved
substantive progress through the general meetings of the Japan-Korea Parliamentari-
uns League and the Korea-Japan Parliamentarians League held last September in

Seoul.
The Blue House

First of all, it must be mentioned that the inner circle of the Blue House (offi-
cial presidential residence) as an agency "reigns" over the three branches. legis-
lative, executive, and judicial.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the time of his election as the 11th president by the National Conference for
Unification on 27 August 1980, President Chon announced the appointment of his
Blue House staff. He abolished the positions of special assistant that existed
under President Pak. He let Special Assisrants Nam Tok-u (economic affairs) and
Ham Pyong-chun (diplomacy) go, and put the only remaining special assistant, Kim
Kyong-won (45), in charge of international politics as director of the Presiden-
tial Secretariat. He appointed Yi Ung-hui, former managing editor of TONGA two,
as the spokesman, Brig Gen Chong Tong-ho (retired as a major general) of the 13th
Class of the Military Academy as chief of the Presidential Protective Service, and
Kim Pyong-hun, former director of the Secretariat of the National Security Constit-
tee, as chief protocol secretary.

Chong Tong-ho, chief of the Presidential Protective Service, served as an assis-
tant brigade comander when President Chon was commander of the First Airborne
Special Warfare Corp. On 13 July Chief Chong was transferred back to a military
unit. In his place Brig Gen Chang Se-teng (45), of the 16th Class of the Military
Academy, former commander of the Airborne Special welfare Brigade, was appointed
new chief of the Presidential Protective Service. Brigadier General Chang served
in such inportant posts as the Army Headquarters, the Presidential Protective Ser-
vice. the Capital Guard Command, and the Airborne Special Warfare Corps. When he
was dispatched to Vietnam, he served under President Chen, who was comander of
the 29th Regiment of the White Horse Division. That was the beginning of their
relationship. As one can see, the props supporting Chen's military rule consist
of his personal connections :in the CIC, the Special warfare Corps, and Vietnam
veterans. Chief Chang is said to lead the list of the successful of the 16th
Class, along with assembly member Yi Chong-ch'an, who turned to politics. Presi-
dent Chon was also appointed commander of the Airborne Spec; .1 warfare Corps
Brigade after his return from Vietnam with the rank of full colonel, and was later
promoted to the rank of brigadier general. Within 2 years President Chen was
serving as assistant deputy chief of the Presidential Protective Service under
President Pak. Chief Chang seems to closely follow President Chon's footsteps.
The abrupt transfer of Chief Chong is causing some suspicion in connection with
the changes in the military leadership which will be described later.

The Presidential ProteCtivc Service has had the closest access to the president
since the tine of President Pnk. President Chon also served in 1973 as assistant
deputy chief 02' the Presidential Protective Service. It was not that the Presi-
dential Protective Service was simply charged with the duty of protecting the
president. Instead it has gradually grown into an office with influence over na-
tional politics in general and personnel in all areas. Mr Pak Chong-kyu, who
resigned over the attempted assassination of President Pak (August 1976), and Mr
Ch'a Chi-ch'ol, who had the same fate as President Pak in the assassination, were
known by the title of chief of the Presidential Protective Service.

it is said that with the strengthening of the Secretariat under President Chen,
the political power of the Presidential Protective Service has been held down in
a relative sense. However. to the post of deputy chief of the Protective Service,
President Chen's real brother, Chon Kyong-hwan, was appointed. He is occupying
the most important position among President Chon's close circle. The background
of Deputy Chief Chon Kyong-hwan is totally unknown. But as early as in June 1980,
innediately after the bloody Kwangju incident. he made a secret trip to Japan.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He is known as the person who gave advance warning to Japan's political circles
on the emergence of the Chon regime. Also toward the end of February 1981. he
accompanied President Chon during the latter's visit to the United States with a
large number of the Protective Service members to direct CIC staffs and members
of the KCIA, which was redesignated the National Security Planning Agency in
December 1980, stationed in the United States. He became the target of talk be-
cause of his imposing protective arrangements. Another deputy chief was said to
be Brig Gen K0 Myong-song of the 15th Class, but his position after the change of
chief is not known.

Director of the Secretariat Kim Kyong—won was born in South Pyongan Province in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea). He studied at Harvard,
and was one of former Secretary of State Kissinger's favorite students. He taught
at New York University and Koryo University, and served as special assistant in
the role of a window for important negotiations with the Nixon administration as
assigned by President Pak. He was inactive during the Carter administration. But
in view of the fact that the Republicans won and the Reagan administration was
inaugurated in the United States, he is once again in the limelight as an impor-
tant brain in terms of Korea's American policy. President Chon's "lightning"
visit to the United States would have been unthinkable without the preliminary
operations undertaken by Director Kim Kyong-won. He is mild-mannered as well as
young, 45 years of age. He is also effective in controlling the Secretariat group
comprised of persons who are only 1 or 2 years younger than he.

Chief Public Affairs Secretary Yi Ung—hui was once a special correspondent in Wash-
ington, and is one of the specialists in American affairs.

Members of the Secretariat who are known as the “inner circle" at the nerve center
of power of the Chon regime have been completely changed since September 1980.

The office of the Chief Political Affairs Secretaries was divided into two. To

the post of First Political Affairs Secretary, U Pyong-kyu (51), former secretary
general of the National Assembly, was appointed. Kim Ch'ang-sik (51), who formerly
held the post of Chief Political Affairs Secretary. was appointed to the post of
the Second Chief Political Affairs Secretary. Kim Chae-ik (AZ), former chairman
of the Economic and Scientific Affairs Committee of the National Security Commit-
tee, was appointed to the post of Chief Economic Affairs Secretary. These three
persons are civilians. Mr ﬂu is from Hasan City in South Kyongsang Province.

More than these secretaries. the following four persons appointed on 9 September
1980 are regarded as important.

They are led by Mr Ho Hwa-p'yong (43), who was appointed as an assistant in the
Secretariat, followed by Ho Sam-su (43). who holds the post of Chief Inspector
Secretary. Both are from the 17th Class of the Military Academy. Ho Hwa-p'yong
is from Pohang, North Kyongsang Province. He was singled out for appointment to
that position because of his connections with President Chon. He once served as
an aide-de-camp to Gen Chon Tu—hwan. Hr Ho Sanrsu is from Hiyrang, North Kyong-
sang Province. While serving as an officer in the Airborne Special Warfare Corps
(paratroopers) he was picked by Gen Chon Tu—hwan in the area of intelligence
gathering on military personnel. Yi Hak-pong (43), who was appointed to the post

1!:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of Chief Civil Affairs Secretary, is also of the 17th Class of the Military
Academy, and is from Pusan, South Kyongsang Province. He is a former intelligence
officer, like Mr Ho Sam-su, who was transferred from the Airborne Corps to serve
in the CIC.

Ho Mun-to (63), who was appointed to the post of Political Affairs Secretary, was
also born in Pusan, South Kyongsang Province. But, in contrast to the above
three, he graduated from Seoul National University and served as a special cor-
respondent of CHOSON ILBO. Within the Blue House, along with its spokesman Yi
Ung-hui, he is a former journalist. He was transferred to the Korean Embassy in
Japan as secretary in charge of public information. Furthermore. when General
Cho was concurrently appointed deputy director of the KCIA (April 1980), he was
picked as director of its Public Information Office as the young top Japan spe-
cialist, and he began to follow the course for elite bureaucrats. It is repovred
that it was because he was Mr Ho Sam-su's high school classmate that he was ap-
pointed to the Blue House post. In a joint conference to scrutinize the basic
policy on the eve of the Japan-Korea cabinet-level conference in September 1981.
Secretary Ho Hun-to represented the Blue House to finalize the Japan policy to-
sether with bigwigs from the cabinet, the progovernment party, and the National
Assembly. It is definite that Mr H0 is one of the important figures acting as
the brains in the formulation of the Japan policy.

The role of these three--the two Messrs Ho and Mr Yi Hak-pong--is said to be that
of a brains trust which makes domestic and foreign policy recommendations direct-
ly to President Chon. Since they exercise greater power than the members of the
cabinet and the National Assembly, the previous Blue House system under President
Pak has been further strengthened. The young inner circle, "the gang of four,"
comprised of the three of the 17th Class of the Military Academy and Mr Ho Mun-to,
has already demonstrated a powerful influence in the countermeasures to the anti-
government activity and in the Japan policy. It is widely rumored that of the

two lines, hard and soft, pursued by the Chen Tu-hwnn regime, the hard line origi-
nates from this group. After the general elections these young secretaries called
in progovernment party leaders and leading assembly members for intensive lectures
on the leadership ideals of President Chon. Because of their places of birth,
some voice the view that the regime is onesidedly leaning on those who are from
the Kyongsang provinces. It was the 8th Class of the Military Academy which car-
ried out the 16 May 1961 military coup led by Maj Gen Pak Chong-hui. They were
called the "mainstream force of the revolution." In contrast, it was the 11th
Class of the Military Academy that forced the carrying out of the 12 December
coup for military purge. Then, the "main leading reformist force,“ that is, the
young leadership group which supports the Chon regime, is exclusively composed

of the 17th Class of the Military Academy.

It is characteristic of the new members of the Blue House staff that they are
America and Japan specialists. But it is not widely known that former journalists
in their early forties are serving as windows to Korea's major friends, the United
States and Japan. However, there are also reports that an internal struggle due
to the fact that "they are all alike" has begun to erupt.

We know that those of the 17th Class of the Military Academy also have immense
power among the military personnel and administrative bureaucrats. as will be
described later. They spent hoyhoods of poverty during the Syngman Rhee regime

15
ma omcw. usr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1948-1960) and received a thoroughgoing anticommunist education after the Korean
War. Those who chose to go to civilian colleges and to civilian careers instead
of the military academy also entertain strongly nationalistic ideas. They are
called a generation of "pure culture." Even though they speak flawless English
and Japanese as foreign languages. they entertain distinctively and completely
different views on the nation, and the United States and Japan, from those of the
established generations of 50 years or older who spent their youth during the
Japanese rule and the American Military Government period.

Government Circles

Since December 1980 changes of foreign service officers have been speedily imple-
mented. During this period 22 heads of overseas missions at the ambassadorial
level have been transferred. To these posts, half, or 11, of those appointed as
new heads are former military men. Since there are as overseas missions at the
ambassadorial level, this amounts to a large-scale advance of former military men
into the diplomatic service. Ambassadors T'ak Na-hyon (to Uruguay). Ch'oe Sang-
chin (to Jamaica), and Huang Kwang-mak (to Ghana) are of the 17th Class. Others,
Ch'oe Sang-sop (to Libya), and Song Song-mo (to Bahrain) are of the 12th Class:
Kim Chae—su (to the Vatican) is of the 12th Class. Pak Tong-won (to Nigeria) is

of the 13th Class, Yi Si-yong (to Liberia) is of the 18th Class, and Sim Chang-sop
(to Sudan) is a graduate of the Air Force Academy. All of them are much younger
than the former ambassadors at average ages of 54 and 55. They were promoted from
the ranks of lieutenant colonel and full colonel to that of major general just be-
fore retirement, and they immediately took up diplomatic posts without interrup-
tion. Although such transfers of former officers of the 11th Class, that is,
President Chon's classmates, and of the 17th Class, the main leading force, into
the diplomatic field are designed to implement President Chon's positive foreign
policy at overseas posts, it is pointed out that some military men were forced to
retire in the reorganization of the military and that those who refused to be trans—
ferred to political and government positions had to be taken care of. Admiral Kim
Chong-kon, former Naval Chief of Operations, was also transferred, as ambassador
to Taiwan.

SinCe April 1981. personnel changes involving some provincial governors, mayors
and bureaucrats have been implemented. Among them, both the Military Academy
graduates and those from the Kyongsang provinces are conspicuous. To analyze the
April appointments and transfers, Kim Song-pae, governor of North Kyongsang Prov-
ince, is from Kangwon Province; others are from the Kyongsang provinces, such as
Pak Chong-mun, governor of Kangwon Province who is from Kochang, South Kyongsang
Province; Kim Hu-yon, mayor of Pusan city, who is from Andong, North Kyongsang
Province; Kwon Chung-tong, minister of labor, a newly created post, who is from
Andong, North Kyongsang Province; Chong Tong-cho'ol, vice minister of labor, of
the 12th Class of the Military Academy, who is from Taegu, North Kyongsang Prov-
ince; Kim Sang-Ru, deputy secretary general of the Advisory Council for Peaceful
Unification, and Son Chae-sik, vice minister of home affairs, who are from Miryang.
North Kyongsang Province.

It is the same with the judicial circles in that they face a period of upheaval.
By the end of April 1981 "revolutionary personnel changes," including the minister
of justice, the attorney general, the chief justice, and even low-level judges and

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
prosecutors, were carried out. Reportedly, Yi Chang-won, former chief prosecutor
of the Taegu Higher Prosecutors Office, replaced 0 T'aek-kun as minister of jus-
tice as a part of the cabinet personnel change. But of 14 justices of the Supreme
Court led by Chief Justice Yu T'ae-hung, only 3 were reappointed, and 11 new asso-
ciate justices were newly appointed. Also at the low levels, 37 judges were not
reappointed and were forced out of judgeship. It is reported that such steps were
taken in accordance with the "criteria for judicial appointments" that President
Chon directed, including whether a candidate had firm views on the state and
security, or whether he had the intention to actively participate in state reform.
Moreover, it is interpreted that such steps signify that the further process of
turning the judicial branch into the status of a "handmaiden" has taken place.
Even among prosecutors, shocking changes have been made in which 28 out of 35 at
the top level were relieved. Thus the prosecutors ranks have been changed in one
jump to the younger ranks in their forties from the older generations of prosecu-

tors who received their education during the Japanese rule in Korea.
Military

Since immediately after the bloody Kwangju incident (June 1980), large-scale
personnel changes were carried out in two stages to reorganize the military com-
pletely as a part of the Chen Tu-hwan regime. In the first stage, as Lt Gen Chon
Tu-hwan replaced President Ch'oe Kyu-ha in September 1980 and vacated the three
positions-commander of the Defense Force Security Command, acting director of the
KCIA, and chairman of the Standing Committee of the Emergency Countermeasures Com-
mittee for National Security-that he held, chain-reaction personnel changes took
place. Figure 1 shows the lineup of the military leaders as of June 1980, ﬁlms-
diately before his usurpation of power, except for some changes that had taken
place after the 12 December coup for military purge (December 1979).

Figure 2 shows the organization of the chain of command as of September 1981,
after personnel changes during about 1 year after the bloody Kwangju incident.

What draws one's attention in the first stage of personnel changes up to March
1981, when President Chen assumed the presidency as the 12th president, is that
his classmate, Lt Gen No T'ae-u (former commander of the Capital Guard Command),
replaced him as commander of the Defense Force Security Command. Then, Lt Gen
Yu ﬂak-song, commander of the Third Army, retired from the military service after
he was promoted to the rank of full general, and was appointed director of the
KCIA (redesignated the State Security Planning Agency).

By March 1981. Lt Gen Chong Ho-yong, commander of the Airborne Special Warfare
Corps, President Chan's classmate in the 11th Class, was appointed to the post
of Vice Army Chief of Staff. Maj Gen Pak Se-chik replaced him as commander of
the Capital Guard Command, and Maj Gen Pak Hui-to was picked as commander of the
Special warfare Corps. Both are of the 12th Class of the Military Academy and
are from the Kyongsang provinces.

Gen ﬂwang Yong-si of the 10th Class of the Military Academy from North Kyongsang
Province, who formerly held the post of Vice Army Chief of Staff, was appointed
commander of the Third Army, regarded as the most important among field forces.
Please refer to Figure 3.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘9 us'gl:.gk::‘. . “‘1‘
(0| 3;}:
« 'WT—J

      

 

 

..Y

. . 5

_ ______ _ __:.' ,__._.1;_ It -\~ s i.
c.4040. he“! run "smug" \_ ~~., ‘1.
w .. .,...¢¢ «he 0 n o-v-u 1 um I." ‘ ~'¢ unis 'u'eomra‘l a. .'
. -Iﬁu|(u.nlll . " ' " ..tnllcn-l-hl_ p..." s»..‘"l "'5

.._.. .I

LMJLth_ Eff]

Mu-annsenawm ~n 7.... (gin-:22”: nu

Figure 1. Chain of Command of the Korean Armed Forces (as of June 1980)

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19‘
20.
21.
22.

President of the Emergency Countermeasures Committee for National
Security--Ch'oe Kyu-ha

Chairman of the Standing Committee--Lt Gen Chon Tu-hwan
President--Ch'oe Kyu-ha

Martial Law Command--General Yi Hui-song

Prime Minister-—Pak Ch'ung-hun

Korean Central Intelligence Agency-~Acting Director Lt Gen Chon Tu-hwan
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff-~Gen Yu Pyong-hyon

Minister of National Defense--Cen Chu Yong-pot

Defense Force Security Command--Lt Gen Chou Tu-hwan

Combined U.S.-Korea Forces--conmmnder of 0.5. Forces in Korea Wickam
Deputy Commander-Gen Paek Sok-chu

Superintendent of the Military Academy--Lt Gen Ch'a Kyu—hon

Army Chief of Staff--Gen Yi Hui-song

Vice Chief-Lt Gen Huang Yong-3i

Air Chief of Staff--Cen Yun Cha-chung

Naval Chief of 0perations--Admiral Kim Chong—kon

First Army (Honju)--Gen Yun Song—min

Second Army (Iaegu)--Cen Chin Chong-ch'ae

Third Army (Seoul)--Lt Gen Yu ﬂak—song

Chief of Staff--Maj Gen Kim Pok—tong

Air Force Units

Naval Units

Capital Guard Command-Maj Gen No T'ae-u

First Airborne Special Warfare Corps--Maj Gen Chong Bo-yong

Outside the chain of command under Combined U.S.-Korea Forces Command
Figure in <D»denotes Military Academy class

*denotes that the person is from the Kyongsang provinces

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(«3

        
  
     
    
      

    
     

   
  

noun-n}: n‘fJL'k' :fl

(1 7'0 - “DIG—1'? 70ml." ‘V'uun . _' 1v)
“i51"...'"3 1...: ~311- sum-m . . n:

. . “-

057—;quv— a cam.-
?_’~'U'I_"v 3" LI! ‘
n—rs 5-491

07_ _w~:- .Dn

 
 

" '17.! I"
"I! cum;

Figure 2. Chain of Connand of the Korean Armed Forces (as of Septeuber 1981)

Key:

1. President--Chon Tu-huan

2. Prime Minister-Nan Tot—u

3. National Security Planning Agency (Redesignstion of KCIA)--Gen Yu ﬂak-

song (retired)

6. Chairuan of the Joint Chiefs of Stsff-Gen Yun Song-min

5. Minister of National Defense-Gen Chu Yong-pok

6. Defense Force Security Cornund—-Haj Gen Psk Chun-pyong

7. Combined U.S.-Korea Porces-Counsnder of 0.5. Forces in Korea Wicksu

Deputy Connender--Lt Gen Pak No-yong

8. Superintendent of the Military Acadeuy--Lt Gen Kim Pok-tong
9. Army Chief of Staff--Gen Y1 Hui-song
10. Air Chief of Staff--Gen Yi Hui-Run
11. Naval Chief of Operations-Adniral Y1 Un-su
12. First Army (Honju)--Lt Gen Kin Yun-ho

13. Second Army (Taegu)--Gen Ch'a Kyu-hon

16. Third Army (Seou1)--Gen Huang Yong-si
15. Air Force Units

16. Naval Units
17. Capital Guard Command-Haj Gen Ch'oe Se-ch'ang

18. First Airborne Special Warfare Corps--Hsj Gen Psk Hui-to

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020029-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
   
 
 

U‘MIA'II

ng: :n'_:_ ‘3 _J big-HIM!)
mlll‘F-PTJ—‘t ”mm

 
 

2! um ..
I. ‘ - “‘“9A ‘I'I
‘ - In: H — “Wm-no

' _V\“_'cK--IJ f. |

“7 22243—42 _-..__._ ea»- 2 =
L42 .2.- 2.2— : w 22:...

| -n-.‘l- l I n A," ﬂldi
' um nuns-e 1th.“.

Figure 3. Organization of the Korean Army

Key:
. 1. Army Chief of Staff

2. Field Forces

3. First Army (Eastern Front)

4. Third Army (Northwest of Seoul)
5. Reserve Forces

6. Second Aruw (Central and Southern Korea)
7. II Corps

8. III Corps

9. I Corps
10. V Corps

11. VI Corps
12. Capital Corps
l3. Seoul District South of Han River
14. Pusan Logistics Command
15. Capital Guard Connand
16. First Airborne Special warfare Corps
17. Special Warfare Services Command
18. Warfare Development Command
- l9. Pusan
20. Blue house, Seoul District North of Nan River
21. Kinpo and Northwestern District of Seoul
22. Southeastern District of Seoul
23. II Region
210 . III Region
25. V Region
26. Combat Unit Training Base
27. South Kyongsang Province
28. North and South Chungchong Provinces
29. North Kyongsang Province
30. North and South Cholla Provinces
31. Total 8 Divisions
32. Total 12 Divisions
33. Total 10 Reserve Divisions

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020029-3
Besides, Kim Pok-tong, former chief of staff of the Third Army, a comrade of
President Chon's in the coup for military purge and his classmate in the same
Military Academy class. was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general and ap—
pointed superintendent of the Military Academy. The above four generals, ho.
Chong, Huang, and Kim, together with Army Chief of Staff Yi Hui-song, are either
seniors, juniors, or contemporaries from the same province and are all related
by marriage. They are so to speak President Chon's ”hereditary vassals."

Of them. the post of Vice Army Chief of Staff is charged with personnel matters
and is a pivotal post with complete control over the distribution of power within

the military. The General Yi-Lieutenant General Chong team undertook the large-
scale second stage of personnel changes thereafter.

It is reported that President Chon's idea regarding the reorganization of the
military is aimed at retiring his seniors from the 7th Class to the 10th Class

of the Military Academy and other elder generals, and then giving their vacated
posts to his contemporaries. Although this elder class of generals may be regard-
ed as "blood relatives" who pledged their cooperation with the Chon military re-
gime rather than of siding with the enemy in the coup for military purge, with

the progress made in President Chon's takeover of power. their role is said to be
coming to an end.

In May 1981 Gen Yu Pyong-hyon, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (of
the 7th Class of the Military Academy who is from North Chungchong Province) was
transferred to the post of ambassador to the United States. He was replaced by
Gen Yun Song-min (the 9th Class), former commander of the First Army. General
Yun is one of the rare cases from South Cholla Province.

President Chen undertook the second stage of changes. On 16 July 1981 he appoint-
ed Gen No T'ae-u (who was promoted on 11 July to the rank of full general, and

retired on 15 July), as second political affairs minister in charge of national
security and diplomacy.

Political affairs ministers are said to be the "cabinet posts directly under the
president" which were newly created in March 1981. As many as three persons can
be appointed to the posts. General No is the second one. following First Polit-
ical Affairs Minister Chong Chong—t'aek. The change for General No was said to
be an "appointment in the capacity of deputy prime minister." In terms of influ-
ence, Minister No surpassed Prime Minister Nam Tok-u, and he reportedly secured
the position as the most powerful cabinet minister. Mr No has a good command of
the Japanese language that he can be proud of. There is a story that when Abe
Shintaro, director of the Policy Affairs Research Council of the Liberal Demo-
cratic Party, visited Korea in June 1981, the Korean side arranged a secret meet-
ing with Mr No. It is expected that Mr No will play an important role as the
president's brain in dealing with Japan in the future.

Also, Gen Ch'a Kyu-hon, of the 8th Class of the Military Academy, who was trans-
ferred from the post of superintendent of the Military Academy to the post of
commander of the Second Army, was promoted to the rank of full general at the

same time as Mr No. It is expected that in order to smoothly carry out the promo-
tions of officers of the 12th Class and later classes to the ranks of major

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

general, lieutenant general, and full general, the retirement of generals will
take place with the exception of President Chon's hrother-in-law, Gen Yi Hui-
song. In addition, Lt Gen Kim Yun-ho, of the 10th Class, former comander of the
First Corps, was promoted to the post of commander of the First Army. Lieutenant
General Kim is considered to be close to Gen Huang Yong-si.

Among the 11th Class, considered as the "hereditary vessels" in the Chon Tu-hwan
system, the moves of the three generals, No T'ae-u, Chong Yong-ho, and Kim Pok-
tong, have been scrutinized with interest. of them, even though at the time of
his takeover of power President Chon repeatedly entreated Mr No "to doff his
military uniform and participate in the formation of a progovernment party,“

Mr No reportedly insisted on remaining in the military service. Therefore, he
constituted the most ominous presence in the Chon regime. As Mr No joined the
cabinet, the persistent rumor of a feud between President Chen and him disappear-
ed from the surface, and the Chon regime seemed to have been further stabilized.
At the same time, many considered that Mr No had made further progress toward
his position in the "post-Chou" era.

The personnel change involving Gen No T'ae-u had hardly been settled when Maj
Gen Pak Se—chik, commander of the Capital Guard Command, one of the major units,
was taken to the Defense Force Security Command (CIC) for questioning regarding
irregularities involving his taking advantage of his position.

while vacationing in the suburbs of Taegu for the summer, Major General Pak was
summoned back to Seoul on the pretext that he was immediately wanted by President
Chon for a talk. He was interrogated for a week at the interrogation headquarters
of the CIC located at Pinggo, Yongsan-ku, popularly known as "Pinggo Hotel." The
disposition leading to his being relieved of command and his retirement from the
Army was announced. The commander of the CIC was Maj Gen Pak Chung-pyong, his
classmate, who had just taken over the post from General No. The Capital Guard
Command, together with the Airborne Special warfare Corps, is Outside the chain
of command of the United Nations forces (U.S. Forces in Korea). It consists of
guard troops directly under the president. It is an important command in charge
of the security and defense of the Seoul area. Major General Pak's dismissal was
the first downfall among military leaders since the inauguration of the Chon re-
gime. For this reason, for a while a tense air prevailed in military circles.

To replace him Maj Gen Ch'oe Se-ch'ang of the 12th Class, commander of the 20th
Division, was appointed.

Maj Gen Pak Se-chik was charged with taking bribes from his former Military
Academy classmate (a retired full colonel), who returned from the United States.
Although it is claimed that President Chon, who is forging the image of a clean
administration by purging corruption, fired even his deeply trusted close sub-
ordinate, the truth is that the criticism already beginning to emerge within the
military had to be nipped in the bud before it reached serious proportions.

NEWSWEEK, a 0.8. publication, in its 31 August issue reported that General Pak
and the young inner circle of President Chon (the Blue House brains formerly with
the military) had collided over the issue of suppressing the student demonstra-
tions in the spring of 1980. In August 1980, Major General Pak, who took over
the Capital Guard Command from General No T'ae-u, openly announced at a drinking

22
FOR OFTHCIAL USEGNNLY
party: "It will be I who will take over from Chon." He frequently met with imr
portant figures, both Korean and non-Korean, to make his "political activity"
noticeable. Major General Pak visited the United States in the fall of 1980 to
negotiate with the United States the issue regarding the trial of Kim Tae-chung.
He promptly met Secretary of State Haig (a general at that time). He was thus
regarded as a rising star among the 12th Class.

Some attach importance to the fact that three generals, No T'ae-u, Chief of the
Presidential Protective Service Chong Tong—ho, and Pak Se—chik. who are all close
to the president, have been transferred from their previous posts one after

another.

NEWSWEEK quoted an elder Korean politician: "During the first 3 years Gen Pak
Chong-hui transferred 25 to 30 generals who had cooperated with him. He believed
that once generals attempted a coup, they would want to repeat it. President Chon
will probably act in the same way."

In their places the trio from the 12th Class, Pak Chung-pyong, Pak Hui-to, and
Ch'oe Se-ch'ang, became relatively visible. They appear to form the top military
echelon in the Chon regime.

Lieutenant Generals Chong Ho-yong and Kim Pok—tong are not in an open competitive
position as General No is. They are expected to be promoted in the near future
to higher positions, such as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Army
Chief of Staff and to support the Chon military rule.

Gen Paek Sok-chu, of the 8th Class, former commander of the Combined U.S.-Korea
Forces, retired from service last August and was appointed on the recommendation
of high quarters to the post of president of the Hanyang Chemical Company. In his
place Lt Gen Pak No-yong (51), former col-lander of the Capital Corps. was appoint-
ed. Lieutenant General Pak is from North Chungchong Province. He is one of the
rare non—Military Academy graduate generals who graduated from Tongguk University
and Seoul National University. It appears that among the "hereditary vassals,"
his neutrality has been valued.

In the troop organizations (the army) in the Korean Armed Forces, politically im-
portant positions are reported to be corps and division commanders of various
corps under the Third Army and the First Army.

The then "hereditary vassal" generals who made the coup for military purge suc-
cessful were all corps and division commanders at the front line. The transfers
and moves of the military leaders since early this year have been made with the
new hereditary and blood related vassals in the Chon Tu-hwan military rule as the
key figures. That is to say. the personnel changes have been made with promo-
tions as rewards for the services of those brigadier generals, major generals.
and lieutenant generals who were selected to serve as members of the "Emergency
Countermeasures Committee for National Security," which was inaugurated on 31 May
1980 as an organ to assist President Ch'oe. As a result. Lt Gen Yi Ki-paek, com-
mander of the I Corps who is of the 11th Class and former commander of the 15th
Division; Commander of the VI Corps Lt Gen Kim Hong-han (former director of the
Personnel Bureau, army headquarters); and Commandant of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Lt Gen Kang Yong-81k (of the 10th Class and former commander of the VI Corps)
have been promoted. Lieutenant General Yi has been President Chon's close friend

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘IClAL USE ONLY

since the Military Academy days, and he will form powerful working troops in the
future as well with his background in field forces. In the group remaining in
the current status are Maj Gen ‘11 Kwang-no, commander of the East Coast Guard Com-
mand, and others. But they will be a group that will rise to the center of those

in uniform.

Similarly, Gen ‘11 Hui-kun (of the let Class of the Air Force Academy), Air Vice
Chief of Staff from the Kyongsang Province clique who served on the Committee for
National Security, was promoted to the post of Air Chief of Staff. Also, among
the "comrades in the coup for military purge," Maj Gen Pak Chung-pyong (of the
12th Class), who was active as comnder of the 20th Division at that time, made
a great jump from the post of Assistant Chief of Staff for Personnel to commander
of the Defense Force Security Command. Similarly, Maj Gen Pae Chang-to (of the
10th Class, former commander of the 26th Division) was appointed Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence. Maj Gen Kim Song-kak (of the 8th Class), a comrade
in the coup who was deputy commander of the Third Army at that time, retired with
the rank of lieutenant general last June and was appointed from above as presi-
dent of the Ulsan Petrochemical Company.

Furthermore, it has been confirmed that ‘11 Sang-huh, who is one of the llth
Class but reportedly is not in the Chon Tu-hwan faction, was appointed commander
of the III Corps of the First Army. Of the same llth Class, Kim Song-chin, who
graduated with top honors in the class. is second deputy director of the National
Security Planning Agency. He studied in the United States. With his command of
English, he is one of those who were active in setting up President Chon's visit
to the United States. He has retired from active service and is outside the cen-
tral nerve system of the military. But he is said to be the person who controls

the Security Planning Agency.

As there are some military leaders from the rival factions under Gen No T'ae-u
and others who are placed in important positions mixed with others, some observe
that although such personnel changes were ostensibly carried out with President
Chon's approval, it is premature to judge that a monolithic system has been
solidified for the Chon regime.

In the foregoing, the lineup of the top military leadership has been outlined.
But it can be pointed out that it has not settled as an ultimate lineup. Clean-
ups and purges were rapidly carried out after Pak's assassination, the coup for
military purge, and the expansion of martial law. Thus the military chain of
command was drastically disrupted, and its adjustment has not been completed yet.
There is an enormous difference in the treatment of different classes of the
Military Academy. Even the 12th Class was shaken so severely as to be divided
into two groups, the winners and the losers. Prontline generals of the 14th,
15th, and 16th Classes are smoldering with discontent as their promotions are
hitting the ceiling. When the 12th Class group makes gains in the future, the
13th Class group will be overshadowed that much.

In contrast to the fact that the 11th Class led by President Chon clearly indi-
cates a generational disruption from the senior elder generals group, the younger
officers with the rank of major and junior grades who went into the army during
the high-rate economic growth under the Pak regime show a greater discrepancy.

The level of stability of the Chon Tu-hwan military rule will change depending
on who controls the younger officers of the 18th Class and later classes.

COPYRIGHT: Iwanami Shoten 1981 END

10372 21:
cso: 4105/11 FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY