FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10556

1 June 1982

USSR Report

EARTH SCIENCES
(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infornntion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and Interial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infatuation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WN'BRSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
EARTH Scxencss

(rouo 3/82)

CONTENTS
MBTBOROLMY

Articles on Short-Range Forecasting of Meteorological
Blmmts and Marcus Weather Emma eeeeeeoe cocoa-noes

OCEANNRAPHI

Collection of Papers on Marine Hydrological Gouputations
md Forecasts .00...l.O..0....00...OOIOCOOOOOOOOIOOOIQ.....

Model of Nonstationary Turbulent Heat and Mass Exchange
in mud nth Highly Stable Stratification oooooeee ooeeeeoo

Experiment in Machine Processing of Satellite Oceanological
momuon IOOOIIOOO0.0000ICOOOOOO000.00.000.00...0.00....

Collection of Articles on Optics of Ocean and Atmosphere"...
Some Optical Methods for Investigating Have-Covered Water

Surface OOOOOOOOIOOOOIO..0...OOOCCQCIOIUOOIOOOOOOO00.00....

Propagation of Packet of Slightly Nonlinear Intemal Waves
in Med-1m mm Conatmt vii-am mquency IOOOOIDOOO.COOUOO

Some Properties of Optical Transfer Function of Have-Covered

sea smface 0.0.0.000...I...OIOODOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOCO00......

the Mechanism for Forming of Oceanic Electric Fields ........

Generation of Internal Raves by Bottom Irregularity at
Discontinuity of Two Fluids Flowing at Angle to One

Another OOOOOOOOCIIIO....0'0.IOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO....00....

Associated Internal Waves in Fluid with Exponential
mnnty membutim 0.0I....OIUOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO....00....

- a - [III - USSR - 21! SI

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Parametric Resonance in Stratified Fluid ....................

Spectra of Current Fields in Ocean Determined Along
Trajectories of Freely Drifting SOFAR System Buoys ........

TERRBSTRIAL GEOPHISICS
Radiation of Elastic Haves in [Invented Explosion ............

New Developnents in Gravimetric Methods and Instrmnentation..

Multisided Investigations of the Barth's Crust and Upper
Mantle: Results and Prospects .............................

PHYSICS 0P AMSPHERE

Articles on Structure of Auroral Substorm ...................

FOIOFIIGALWONLY
WIN!

UDC 551. 509. 32

ARTICLES ON SHORT-RANGE FORECASTING 0F METEOROLOGICAL ELEMENTS AND DANGEROUS
HEATHER PHENOHENA

Leningrad TRUD‘I ORDENA LENINA GIDRCMETBOROLOGICNESKOGO NAUCHNO-ISSLEDOVATEL'SKOGO
ISENTRA SSSR: KRATKOSROCHNYY PROGNOZ METEOROIDGICHESKIKH ELEMENTOV I OPASNYKH
YAVLENZY POGODY in Russian No 233. 1981 (signed to press 5 Jun 81) pp 129-135

[IAbstracts from collection "Short-Range Forecasting of Meteorological Elements and
Dangerous Weather Phenomena," edited by E. N. Novikova, candidate of geographical
sciences. and B. Ye. Poskov, Gidrometeoizdat, 880 copies, 135 pages]

UDC 551.577.1+551.578.7
CONDITIONS FOR FALLING 0F HEAVY SHOWERS AND HAIL

[Article by Glushkova, N. I.]

[Text] The author sets forth the conditions governing the falling of heavy show-

ers and hail. The dependences between the quantity of falling precipitation, macro-
:;ca1e vertical movements and mesoscale convective currents in a cloud are deter-in-
ed. Expressions are also derived for computing a precipitation stun greater than 50
mm and hail, which can inflict losses on agricultural crops over a great area. Ex-
pressions are given which represent the relationship between the product of the
radar parameters of the cloud Hnlgzm and the maximum velocity of the ascending flow
in the cloud, which make it possible to compute the quantity of precipitation over

.1 great area on the basis of observational data from the network of neteorological
radars. The results of the investigation can be used in the diagnosis and prediction

of precipitation and heavy hail inflicting great losses on the national econo-y and
also for evaluating the effect exerted on hail processes. Tables 5, references 8.

000 551515.10

SOHF. RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION OF SYNOPTIC-DYNANIC CONDITIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF
CONVECT IVE CLOUDS AND PHENOHENA ASSOCIAT- NIT}! THEM OBTAINED DURING HONEX

[Article by Peskov, B. Ye., Zhelnin, A. A., Shupyatskiy, A. 3., Khamarina, T. V.
and Casova, K. 1.]

[Text] The authors have found the dependence of convective activity on the con-
vergence of flows in the lower layers of the troposphere under favorable conditions

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of stratification and humidity on the basis of data for the equatorial zone of the
South China Sea. It was possible to ascertain the physical reasons for the influ-
ence of convergence. The article gives the diurnal variation of convergence, the
pressure field, precipitation, altitude of the cloud tops (on the basis of radar
data) at sea at a distance of 100-300 km from major land masses. An analysis is
given of the role of the mesoscale pressure field in determining the divergence
of surface currents in the equatorial zone and its macroscale characteristics in
a forecast of convective activity. The vertical profiles of temperature. humidity,
instability energy, divergence and vertical movements, averaged for different
classes of cases, are given, as well at the mean values of the altitudes of the
"tops" of radioechoes and the quantity of precipitation. Figures 1, tables 4. ref-
erences l7.

UDC 551.588.7

RESULTS OF ROUTINE TESTING OF METHOD FOR SHORT-RANGE FORECASTING OF METEOROLOGICAL
CONDITIONS FOR CONTAMINATION OF SURFACE AIR LAYER

[Article by Neronova, L. H. and Ponomarenko, S. 1.]

[Text] The article gives the results of the probable success of experimental
forecasts of the meteorological conditions for the accumulation and scattering of
effluents on the basis of data for 1978 in the Moscow region. It was possible to
determine the critical values of the parameters of the thermodynamic state of the
atmospheric boundary layer and the characteristic meteorological conditions recom-
mended for preparation of forecasts of the meteorological conditions for the con-
tamination of urban air. Tables 5. references 3.

UDC 551.509.323

RECOMENDATIONS ON REPINING FORECAST OF VERTICAL DISTRIBUTION OF TWERATURE IN
ATMOSPHERIC BOUNDARY LAYER

[Article by Novikova, E. N.]

[Text] Pressure pattern maps for the standard isobaric surfaces, situated at a
distance of 150-200 mbar from one another. cannot be used in a reliable analysis

and prediction of the temperature fields in thinner layers of the atmosphere. The
author gives practical recommendations on refining the forecast of the vertical
distribution of temperature in the lower SOO—m layer of the atmosphere on the basis
of empirical data obtained from high structures. in the example of use of observa-
tional data from the television tower at Ostankino (Moscow). Tables 3, references
6.

UDC SSl.509.5

HECHOD FOR EVALUATING FORECASTS 0F CONVECTIVE WEATHER PHENONENA AND PROPOSALS FOR
IT; IMPROVEMENT

[Article by Lapcheva, V. F.]

[Text] The article is an analysis of the existing method for evaluating operational
methods for predicting convective veather phenomena, especially forecasts of

2
FOR OFIICIA1.UEI‘(NNLY
precipitation,in specific examples and proposals are given on improvement of the
evaluation method. It is shown that the evaluation principle used in the Instruc-
tions (involving use of a small number of meteorological stations) applicable to
forecasts of convective weather phenomena does not agree with the nature of forms-
Lion of these phenomena and the probability of their detection using the meteoro-
logical netwnrk of observations. As a rule. the forecasts are not compared with
the real, but with some artificial weather pattern in the forecast region. The
need for using data obtained using artificial earth satellites and meteorological
radars in the evaluation of forecasts is pointed out. Tables 2, references 12.

UDC 551.501(776+777)

COMPLEX MAPS 0F CLOUD COVER AND ATMOSPHERIC PEENOMENA AND THEIR USE IN SYNOPTIC
PRACTICE

[Article by Minakova, N. Ye.]

[Text] The information content of a complex map of cloud cover and atmospheric
phenomena, compiled using data from radar and visual observations, is discussed.

An evaluation of the effectiveness of radar data, making use of the complex maps.
again confirmed the high reliability of information on thunderstorms (822) and
ruins (651). The complex maps contain a great volume of information (especially
on convective phenomena), more than ”microring" charts (by 352) or "ring" charts
(by 57%). The problem of the use of data from complex maps for determining the na-
ture of an air mass and also the degree of atmospheric instability is examined in

detail. Figures 1, tables 4, references 8.

UDC 551.509.52
QUANTITATIVE ESTIMATE 0F WIND VELOCITY WITH ALLOWANCE FOR BREEZE AIR CIRCULATION
[Article by Hasterskikh, M. A.]
[Text] A method for computing the pressure gradient governing the wind on the
shores of seas, lakes and large reservoirs in summer during weather with few clouds

is examined. The influence of breeze circulation on intensification (weakening) of
the wind in the shore zone is demonstrated. Figures 1, references h.

UDC 551.52h.31

DIURNAL VARIATION OF AIR TEMPERATURE AT MOSCOW AND ITS SUBURBS UNDER DIFFERENT
WEATHER CONDITIONS

[Article by Cerburt-Ceybovich. A. A., Bakhareva, G. M. and Remizov, G. A.]

[Text] The authors computed the diurnal variation of air temperature with dif—
ferent wind directions and during a calm with different cloud cover or precipita-
tion on the basis of data from the suburban meteorological station Nebol' sins and
meteorological station Balchug, situated at the center of the city (observations
made eight times a day during the period 1966-1975). The results can be used in

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(IVLY
FOI.0ITNCJAI.[ENE(HULY

short-range weather forecasting for Moscow, and in particular, for separate allow-
ance for the diurnal variation of air temperature in the city and in its suburbs.
Figures 3, tables 3, references 7.

UDC 551.510.522

CHANGE IN METEOROLOGICAL ELEMENTS IN LOWER LAYER 0F TROPOSPHERE DURING
TNUNDERSTORMS AND SHOWERS

[Article by Klinov, P. Ya.]

[Text] The principal characteristics of mesoscale changes in temperature, wind
velocity and direction in the lower layer of the atmosphere during thunderstorms
and showers are considered. Using samples of measurement data from the meteorolog-
ical mast at Obninsk and the television tower at Moscow, for each of the considered
elements the author gives quantitative estimates of their mesoscale changes. These
characteristics are indicative for possible deviations of the values of meteorolog-
ical elements from the diurnal variation. Tables 3, references 1.

UDC 551.524.31

COMPUTATION OF THERMAL TRANSFORMATION FOR MOSCOW DURING CONSIDERALLE ANOMALIES 0F
MEAN DAILY TEMPERATURE

[Article by Sokolova, N. 6.]

[Text] Computations of the thermal transformation were made for cases of con-
siderable anomalies and sharp day-to-day changes in mean daily temperature at Mos-
cow. The movement of pressure formations was taken into account in constructing an
air particle trajectory. The computed temperatures in the cold half-year, in compar-
ison with the actual temperatures, were exaggerated on the average by 2’6. This val-
ue can be used as an additional correction in the computations. Figures 1, tables 1,
references 2.

UDC 551.586.2

MESOSCALE REGIONALIZATION OF MOSCOW AND ITS SUBURBS UITH RESPECT TO TEMPERATURE AND
"IND

[Article by Gerburt-Geybovich, A. A.]

[Texc] 0n the basis of processing and generalization of mesometeorological ob-

servations for 1975-1978 at 50 points in Moscow and in its suburbs it was possible
to develop a mesoclimatic regionalization of the Moscow metropolitan area and also
validate the desirability of differentiation of the background temperature forecast

for Moscow for 6-8 hours for sectors of the city and suburbs. Figures 1, tables 1,
references 4.

h
INJR‘OIIICIAI.INNE(NULY
UDC 551.515.5

INTERTROPICAL CONVERGENCE 20m: ACCORDING TO DATA non THE 30th VOYAGE or me
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH SHIP "w. H. snoxAt'sxn‘

[Article by Belinskiy, O. N. and Vaselov, Ye. P.]

[Text] The authors define two intertropical convergence zones(ICZ) in the western
part of the Pacific Ocean -- in the northern and southern hemispheres —- and a zone

of divergence of wind flows. A study is made of the correlation of their migration
with pulsations of the subtropical anticyclones. It was established that Icz move-
ment occurs in the direction of the resultant pressure gradient (subtropical anti-
cyclone - equator). A scheme of the development of processes in the ICZ is propos-
ed. In the 162 regions and beyond their limit the authors computed the velocities

of ordered vertical movements, vorticity components and 52*, Richardson number,

therrodynamic temperature gradients and other parameters. t is shown that for de-
lineating the ICZ boundaries it is sufficient to use the vertical spatial-temporal

sections of the meridional wind component, ordered vertical movements and dew point
spreads. Figures 2, tables 7, references 10.

UDC 551.509.32

CORRELATION BETWEEN LOWER—LEVEL CLOUD COVER AND DEW POINT SPREAD AND AIR
TEMPERATURE

[Article by Alekseyeva-Obukhov. I. A.)

[Text] 0n the basis of statistical processing of data from aircraft ascents dur-

ing the spring and autumn seasons of 1948-1951 it was possible to obtain expres-
sions for computing the quantity of low clouds on the basis of the dew point spread
at the 850-mhar level. A checking of the results of computations on the basis of in—
dependent material indicated that the proposed method has a good probable success
(the mean error in computing the quantity of clouds is from 0.8 to 2.0 scale units
(tenths)) for all months of the transitional seasons, except for March and November
-- months of the cold half—year, for which the mean error in computations is 3.8-6.9
scale units (tenths) respectively. Tables 2, references 9.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeorologicheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy tsentr SSSR (Gidro-
mettsentr SSSR), 1981

can: [865/ 76

5
roe omcw. use on“
FOI‘OFIWCJAI.IEHE(MNLY

OCEANOORAPHI

UDC 551.66

COLLECTION OF PAPERS ON MARINE HYDROLOGICAL COMPUTATIONS AND FORECASTS

Leningrad TRUDY ORDENA LENINA GIDROMETEOROLOGICHESKOGO NAUCHNO-ISSLEDOVATEL'SKOGO
TSENTRA SSSR: MDRSKIYE GIDROLOGICNESKIYE RASCHETY I PROCNOZY in Russian No 261,

1981 (signed to press 25 May 81) pp 107-112

[Abstracts from collection of articles "Marine Hydrological Computations and Fore-
casts", edited by V. S. Krasyuk, candidate of geographical sciences, and K. M.
Sirotov, candidate of geographical sciences, Gidrometeoizdat, 510 copies, 112

Pages}

UDC-551.663.6(261)

HACROSCALE HATER SURFACE TEMPERATURE ANOMALIES IN TEE PACIFIC OCEAN

[Article by Karasev, Ye. V. and Ugryumov, A. 1.]

[Text] The article gives a statistical analysis of the field of water surface
temperature anomalies in the northern part of the Pacific Ocean (20-50'N) on the

basis of data for 5° grid squares during the period from 1949 through 1976. Using
the information content index In, the spatial correlation and autocorrelation func-
tions it was possible to discriminate four informative regions of the ocean, arbi-
trarily called: northern, central. southwestern and southeastern. It is proposed
that the use of information from the ocean areas of these regions will be most use-
ful for investigating the macroscale interaction between the ocean and atmosphere

for the purposes of long-range weather forecasting. Figures 3, references 17.

UDC 551.526.6:551.465.635
CYCLICITY 0P VARIATIONS IN HATER SURPACE TEMPERATURE ANOMALIES IN PACIFIC OCEAN

[Article by Karasev, Ye. V. and Ugryunov, A. 1.]

[Text] The authors analyze the results of computations of the spectral density
functions for water surface temperature anomalies in four informative regions of
the Pacific Ocean: northern, central and two southern (southwestern and southeast-
ern) regions. The basis for the computations was time series At" for the period
from 1949 thrOugh 1962. As a result of the analysis it was demonstrated that along

6
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USI(NWEY o
the North Pacific Ocean subtropical circulation there is a predominance of long-
pcriod variations with a period of 4.2 years, coinciding with the full period of
ultrulntlon of water masses. Variations of water temperature anomalies with lesser
periods (about 10 months) are noted in the southwestern part of the Pacific Ocean
in a zone of well-expressed currents. Also examined is an approximate scheme of
the interrelationship of ocean currents and the field of water temperature anomal-
ies in accordance with the scheme proposed by V. G. Kort (1970). Figures 3, refer-
unces 16.

UDC 551.665.41
PREDICTION OF HATER TEMPERATURE IN OCEAN

[Article by Kalatskiy, V. I. and Nesterov, Ye. 5.]

[Text] A statistical method is proposed for taking into account the advection

or heat by currents in hydrothermodynamic models of thermal structure of the ocean.
The influence of advection is characterized by the error in computing water tem-
perature in a two-layer model without advection. It is shown that the maximum errors
are concentrated in zones of strong currents and are stable in time. This served as
a basis for developing the proposed method. The use of this method in forecasts of
the mean monthly distribution of water temperature in the North Atlantic made it
possible to increase the guaranteed probability of forecasts by 5-101. Figures 1,
tables 1, references 3.

000 551.465.62

POSSIBILITY OF DETECTING FRONTAL ZONES USING DATA ON SURFACE HATER TEMPERATURE
FROM COMMERCIAL AND FISHING VESSELS

[Article by Getman, I. F.]

[Text] 0n the basis of an analysis of five-day maps of surface water temperature

in the northern part of the Atlantic Ocean it is shown that it is possible to detect
frontal zones. An evaluation of the observation errors is made. The number of

errors is A! of the number of observations. References 5.

UDC 551.526.6

EVALUATION OF 'THERHAL INERTIA' AND USE OF SHIPBOARD OBSERVATIONS 0? OCEAN WATER
'l'I-ZMI’I'ZRA'I‘UR l-'.

[Article hy Garrilyuk, R. V.]

lTuxLl The fields or water temperature anomalies. given at nine points in the
North Atlantic, are represented in the form of series of expansion in natural
romponents. For an evaluation of the thermal inertia of the fields of water temper-

uturb anomalies the author finds the correlation of each preceding monthly value
of the expansion coefficient with its value after two, three and feur months. It

FINI!)FF1CJAJ.IEHE(NNLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NNLV

is shown that there is a possibility for predicting water temperature for 3-4
months in advance. For a more complete representation of the fields of water
temperature in the North Atlantic the author also gives an analysis of maps of
the mean monthly water temperature values, averaged by 5° grid squares. Rather
high values of the correlation coefficients between the series of observations
made on the weather ship and the series of observations in the square corres-
ponding to the site of the ship (excepts for weather ships A and 3) indicated the
possibility of supplementing the weather ship data with series of observations

in 5° squares. Tables 5, references 3.

UDC 551.521
COMPUTING THE INFLUX 0? SOLAR HEAT AT THE SEA SURFACE

[Article by Krasyuk, V. 5.]

[Text] Formulas are proposed making it possible to compute the diurnal values
of the influx of total solar radiation on the water surface of the oceans on the

basis of cloud cover data, taking into account the coefficient of atmospheric
transparency, dependent on geographical latitude. A computation nomogram, con-
structed using the derived formulas, is presented. Figures 1, references a.

UDC 551.461.25

EXPERIENCE IN USING A HYDRODYNAHIC HODEL FOR COMPUTING SURGES IN THE NORTHERN
CASPIAN

[Article by Cetman, I. F.)

[Text] The computations are based on a numerical solution of hydrodynamic equa-
tions for shallow water by the fractional intervals method. A peculiarity of this

approach is the stipulation of the condition of an invariable level at the water
boundary between the Northern and Middle Caspian. Computations of the catastrophic
surge in the northwestern part of the Northern Caspian in 1952 are presented. Nomo—
grams are constructed for computing surge level changes as a function of the velo-
city, direction and duration of the wind for several points in the Northern Cas-
pian. The nomograms were checked using a 34-year series of observations. The ratio
of the mean square error to the standard deviation from the mean was equal to 0.616
and 0.648 for the different surges, which is satisfactory for the used series of
observations. Figures 2, tables 1, references 6.

UDC 551.465

TYPHOON EFFECT ON VERTICAL STRUCTURE OF OCEAN WATERS (MATERIALS FROM THE 'TAYFUN-75'
EXPEDITION)

[Article by Makarov, Sergey]

[TeXt] 0n the basis of materials from the ”Tayfun-7S" experiment, carried out
in July—October 1975 in the northwestern part of the Pacific Ocean, the author an-
alyzes the fields of hydrometeorological and hydrophysical characteristics before

FTHICHWWCJAI.USE(NVLY
and after the passage of a typhoon. 0n the basis of a classification of vertical
water temperatures it was possible to detect two oceanic formations with horizon-
Lal dimensions of some hundreds of miles. It is noted that the trajectory of move-
ment of the typhoon coincided with the zone of separation of the mentioned forma-
tions. An explanation is given for the two-level nature of the distribution of hy-
drometeorological and hydrophysical characteristics in the polygon after the pasd
sage of a typhoon. Figures 2. tables 1, references 5.

UDC 551.464.3

ORIGIN OF THE SUBSURFACE SALINITY MAXIMUM IN THE NORTH ATLANTIC
[Article by Chernyavskiy. Ye. B. and Kutalo, A A.]

[Text] A Study was made of the degree of correspondence of the localization of
waters of maximum salinity in the North Atlantic to the extrema in the fields of
wind and evaporation-precipitation difference. An evaluation is made of the rela-
tive roles of sources of advective and local origin of the subsurface salinity max—
imum in the Sargasso Sea. It was possible to define regions of advective origin of
the subsurface salinity maximum and the regions of its local formation due to con-
vection during evaporation without disruption of the above-lying waters ("convec-
tive puncture" mechanism). Use was made of survey materials from the 23d voyage of
the scientific research weather ship "Passat" (300 hydrological stations). Figures

3, references 11.

UDC 551.465.41(520)
SOME RESULTS OF COMPUTATION OF CIRCULATION OF WATERS IN WORLD OCEAN IN 1° GRID

[Article by Sarkisyan, A. 8., Demin, Yu. L., Dzhioyev, T. Z. and Brekhovskikh,
A. L.I

[Text] The article gives some results of diagnostic computations of currents in

the world ocean (that is, computations made from the observed density and wind
fields) for the summer season. The computations were made in a 1° grid at 31 depth
horizons. The basis for the computations was the fields of mean long-term tempera-
ture and salinity values obtained by Princeton University (United States). The com-
putations were made on the basis of the A. S. Sarkisyan quasigeostrophic model.

The equatorial boundary layer was smoothed in the following way. First, use was made

of the procedure of continuous calculations across the equator, and second. the as-
sumption was made that @ - const - 2.5° in the zone from 2.5°N—2.5°S. The results

quite precisely reflect the principal peculiarities inherent in circulation of the
waters of the world ocean during summer. This pertains especially to regions of

strong jet currents. for which rather high velocity values were obtained. Refer-
ences 3.

9
FOI!0F11C1AI.IEHE(NQLY
FIIRCNHHCJAI.USEGNVLN

UDC 551.465.41(520)

NUMERICAL INVESTIGATION OF CIRCULATION 0F WATERS IN ANTILLES-GUIANA COUNTERCURRENT
REGION

[Article by Dzhioyev, T. 2.]

[Text] The author gives the results of computations of currents in the region

of the Antilles—Guiana Countercurrent on the basis of data on density and atmo-
spheric pressure at sea level by means of use of a level surface and the total
flows function. The equations for the level surface and the total flows function
are solved by the directed differences method with use of a Gsuas-Seidel iteration
process. Specific computations were made for the ocean area 15-30'N, 60-80‘H using
a BESH-6 electronic computer. The horizontal interval of the grid region used was
0.5’; the vertical interval was nonuniform. The number of computation horizons was
10. The article gives a comparative characterization of the results obtained by the
two methods. The results of the computations are represented in the form of maps
of topography of the level surface and charts of the velocity vectors at the SO—m
horizon. Figures 2, references 2.

UDC 551.466.2

COMPUTATION OF SPECTRAL CHARACTERISTICS OF WAVE FIELDS OVER GREAT AREAS OF NORTR
ATLANTIC

[Article by Pokhil, A. E.]

[Text] A study was made of the possibility of use of the spectral theory of

waves for developing a practical method for predicting wave fields. The wave para-
meters are computed by a method based on solution of the balance equation for wave
energy written in spectral form. The optimum computation conditions are found for
precomputation of large fields. The possibility of using a BESH-é computer for com-
puting waves over an ocean area up to 20°106 km2 with an error not exceeding 201
was demonstrated. A nomogram is given which can be used in computing the time ex-
penditure on a BBSM—G computer when computing wave fields of any extent in comput-
ation periods of any duration. The author estimates the computation errors for
different spatial and temporal computation intervals. Figures 2, tables 2, refer-
ences 6.

UDC 551.466.2
SHELL WAVES IN NORTH SEA
[Article by Sett, L. S. and Sirotov, K. H.)

[Text] For the first time for the North See it was possible to classify the

wind fields, compute the fields of wind waves and swell for typical conditions of
their generation and give the values of the parameters of wind waves and swell for
each type of field. The errors in the computation method employed decrease with an

10
INJI‘OFFICIAI.IEHE(HULV
increase in wave height and increase with an increase in the advance time of the
computations. For wave heights of 2.5-5 m and for an advance time of 24 hours the

computation errors do not exceed 15—182. Figures 1, tables 1, references 6.

UJC 551.467.3

LONG-RANGE FORECAST 0? RATE OF WATER COOLING T0 FREEZING TEMPERATURE IN THE BARENTS,
HHITE AND BALTIC SEAS

[Article by Sheremetevskaya, 0. 1.]

[Text] A long—range forecast of the times of first appearance of ice in the
Barents, White and Baltic Seas is prepared on the basis of a forecast of the rate of

water cooling, taking into account the initial temperature and the freezing point.
The mean rates of water cooling during the autumn for the years 1944-1976 were com-
puted. The cooling rate field is represented analytically by expansion into a series
in natural components. The forecast of the cooling rate field is prepared taking in-
to account atmospheric ci""‘~'4o— water temperature in the Atlantic and position

. uuﬁ— ..... 9

of the high-altitude frontal zone. Figures 1, tables 2, references 11.

UDC 551.467.3

USE OF ZNTROPIC EXPRESSION FOR EVALUATING RELIABILITY OF PREDICTORS OF PROGNOSTIC
EQUATIONS

[Article by Kutsuruba, A. 1.]

[TeXt] A study is made of the possibility of using one of the concepts of infor—
mation theory. an entropic expression, as a criterion for choosing predictors in
writing new prognostic expressions. The entropic expression is a measure of the in-
formation which is acquired when allowance is made for the argumentative factor.
Entropic expressions are found for the predictors entering into equations employed
in predicting the clearing of ice from the Sea of Azov, Black and White Seas (for

a number of years -~ from 1945 through 1979). Preliminary conclusions are drawn
concerning the reliability of these predictors on the basis of a comparison of the
determined values of the entropic expression. Tables 1, references 8.

"DC 551.‘67.03

EXPERIMENT IN ALLOWING FOR ASTRONOMICAL AND GEOPHYSICAL DATA IN LONG-RANGE
PREDICTION 0? ICE CONDITIONS IN BALTIC SEA

lArLicle by Nikolayev, S. 6.)

[Text] Long-range (3 and 7 months in advance) prediction of position of the
edge of floating ice at the times of maximum development of the ice cover in the

"altic Sea was carried out with allowance for the cosmic and geophysical background.
The prediction errors along the "Leningrad-ice edge" track did not exceed 67 miles

with an admissible error of i90 miles. Figures 1, tables 1, references 7.

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeorologicheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy tsentr SSSR (Gidro-
mettsentr SSSR), 1981
5303
C50: 1865/77 11
FIIRCINICIA1.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFICIAI.lEﬂE(M§LY

UDC 551.465.41

MODEL OF NONSTATIORARY TURBULENT HEAT AND MASS EXCHANGE IN PLUIDVVITB HIGHLY
STABLE STRATIFICATION

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSFBRY I OKEANA in Russian V01 18.
No 3, Her 82 (manuscript received 28 Apr 81) pp 262-268

[Article by G. l. Barenblatt, Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: A two-phase model of nonstationary

turbulent heat and mass exchange in a highly
stable stratified fluid is proposed. The fluid
is represented in the form of a set of two
mutually penetrating phases: turbulent spots
and laminar layers. Two temperature fields are
accordingly introduced. The heat and mass bal-
ances are determined separately by phases. The
exchange of heat and matter between phases is
taken into account. The proposed model is ap-
plied to the temperature field and concentra-
tion in the upper thermocline of the ocean.
It is shown that the model explains, in partic-
ular, the development of a temperature jump be-
tween the upper quasihomogeneous layer and the
thermocline.

1. Introduction. The main characteristic of turbulence under conditions of a high-
ly stable stratification is that it does not affect fluid universally. Under such

conditions turbulence is concentrated in sharply defined disklike spots separated

by relatively thin layers in which mOVement is laminar and transpires in conform-

ity to the molecular mechanism. Such an "insular" structure of turbulence, to use

the graphic expression of A. V. Gaponov-Grekhov. governs the indicative character-
istics of the process of nonstationary turbulent heat and mass exchange in a high-
ly stable stratified fluid.

The two-phase model of this process proposed in this article in general is as fol-
lows. The fluid is represented in the form of a set of two mutually penetrating
phases: turbulent spots and laminar layers. At each point we therefore introduce
into consideration two temperatures (and (or) concentrations) -- temperature of
spots T8 and temperature of layers (interlayers) T1. The temperature fields of the
spots TB and layers T1 constitute the result of interpolation of the temperature

12
FOI‘DIFIJAJ.USE¢NNLY
field separately for spots and layers. The eXchange of heat (or matter) between
phusvs. that is. between spots and layers. is taken into account. The balance of

heat (matter) is determined separately by phases. that is, for spots and layers.
Here it is taken into account that the spots are isolated from one another and

that the relative volume of the layers is small. With the assumptions made the
very same equation is derived. It differs from the usual thermal conductivity
equation. but at the limit. for slow processes, undergoes transition into the

ordinary thermal conductivity equation.

The proposed two-phase scheme is tested in a model of the seasonal thermocline of
the ocean in the form of a traveling thermal (diffusional) wave in front of the
submerging lower boundary of the upper quasihomogeneOus layer. It appears that
this scheme cannot explain. in particular. the development of a temperature jump
between the quasihomogeneous layer and the thermocline with rapid subsidence of

the lower boundary of the upper quasihomogeneous layer.

2. Physical representations of the model and fundamental equations. A characteris-
tic property of turbulence under conditions of a highly stable stratification is
its high degree of intermittence. spottiness [1-3]. Within the spots the transport
of heat and (or) matter is accomplished by turbulence and therefore the conductiv-
ity in spots is much greater than the conductivity in the layers and the tempera-
ture (concentration) gradient within individual spots can be neglected. Then. as
indicated by the in situ measurements of Woods [1] and others, as well as indirect
evaluations, the relative volume of the laminar layers between spots is small; it
is about 1/100. The spots have the form of greatly flattened disks (the ratio of
height to diameter [or Lhe most part is of the order of 10'2 or less). which has a
theoretical validation [a]. We will discuss further the matters of temperature and
heat exchange. bearing in mind that everything stated is automatically applicable
to the concentration and mass exchange of diffusing matter.

 

Fig. l. Two-phase model of turbulence in case of highly Stable stratification.

in accordance with what has been stated above. we will represent the model of a
turbulent fluid under conditions of its highly stable stratification in the form
or "brickwork" (Fig. l): turbulent spots having the form of highly flattened disks
or "bricks.“ separated by "cement." relatively thin laminar layers. He will intro-
duce two temperature fields into consideration: temperature T8 of spots and temper
azure of layers T1. by these notations meaning the temperature fields interpolated
and smoothed in space separately for spots and layers. Thus. the turbulent fluid
under conditions of a highly stable stratification is represented in the form of

a set of two mutually penetrating continuous media: turbulent spots and laminar

layers.

13
IKNICHHWCJAJ.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We will write the heat balance equations separately for turbulent spots and 1am-
lnur layers. The turbulent spots are isolated from one another and within the
spOts the temperature gradient is small. Accordingly, in the heat balance equa-
tion for the spots there is no heat transfer by thermal conductivity and the rate
of change in the heat content in the spots in a unit volume of fluid atsc'l‘. is
equal to the rate of heat loss from the spots to tle layers in this volume -q:

0.8cT.——q. (2 . 1)

Here 3 is the relative volume of the spors, c is the heat capacity of the fluid, t
is time, q is the quantity of heat flowing from the spots to the layers in a unit
volume in a unit time.

On the assumption that the fields of both temperatures are horizontally uniform and
change only with time t and in depth 2, we obtain an equation for the heat balance
in laminar layers

a.(1—s)cT.-k...ai.f.+q. - (2.2)

where keff is the effective thermal conductivity coefficient in the medium of the
laminar layers; its determination will be discussed below.

We note that the parameter (1 - s) —- the relative volume of the laminar layers --
is small. The BcCTL parameter has the same order of magnitude as the parameter
accTs, which, in accordance with (2.1) is close to q since s is close to unity.
Accordingly, the rate of change of the heat content in the layers -- the left-hand
side of equation (2.2) -- is small in comparison with the intensity of heat flow

q entering into the right-hand side and equation (2.2) can be simplified:

k...a.1r,+q-o. (2.3)

Finally. it is natural to assume tha\ the intensity of heat flow q between the
phases is proportional to the temperature difference of the spots and layers:

Here A is a proportionality factor constant for a particular fluid and a particular
turbulence field in it. whose determination will also be examined below. Expres-
sions (2.1), (2.3). (2.4) make it possible to derive a closed system of equations
for the temperatures 1's and Ti. With the simplest assumption concerning constancy
nf the relative volume of turbulent spots this system has the form

(2.5)
aTdﬁfp—ﬂHr-O, -

nozm (T.-T:)/r-0. (2.6)

Excluding, we obtain one and the same equation for both temperatures Ts and T1:

124
FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
6.T.-x0.'.T.+I|3u:.T.:

a.T.-xa.'.r.+na..'.r.. (2.7)

The coefficients in equations (2.5)-(2.7) are determined in the following way:
x—k../cs. r-cslA. n-xr. (2.8)

Thus. I is some compound thermal diffusivity coefficient corresponding to the ef-
fective thermal conductivity of the layers but the heat capacity of the spots.

Then 1: is the characteristic time of thermal relaxation of the specs. The new
coefficient 77 obviously has the dimensionality of area. Equations of the type (2.5)
-(2.7) were examined earlier in relation to other physical problems [5-7].

It can be seen that equation (2.7). which satisfies both temperature fields. dif-
fers from the ordinary thermal conductivity equation. We introduce the character-
istic time 7f the process f0 and the corresponding characteristic spatial scale
I. = (xfoﬂ- 2 and we will proceed to dimensionless independent variables

O-lIm t-z/L. (2.9)

then equations (2.7) will assume the form

0.T.-d:;T.+(r/‘t.)3:u7'u
(2. 1o)

0.1.-a:‘r.+(x/r.)a.'“ra-

If we examine a slow heat exchange process for which the characteristic time to
is much greater than the characteristic time of the thermal relaxation of spots f.
then the parameter t/ to. entering into equations (2.10), is small and these equa-
tions are transformed to an ordinary thermal conductivity equation. Thus, a quali-
tative difference in turbulent thermal conductivity under conditions of a strong
stable stratification From ordinary thermal conductivity must be expected for es-

sentially nonstationary processes, whose characteristic time is comparable to the
time of thermal relaxation of the spots.

3. Boundary and initial conditions. The formulation of boundary-value problems
for system (2_.S), (2.6) is characterized by a definite singularity because this sys-
tem is degenerate: the derivative am is absent in it. Now we will return to the
unsimplified equation (2.2) in which this derivative has been retained and we will
write the full system in the form

0,T.——(T.—T,)/r. s8.T.-xa:.Tu+(T-’TI)/‘- (3,1)
Here 5 = (I - s)/s is a small parameter. For system (3.1) it is already necessary
to stipulate two initial conditions -- for T3 and for T1 . We introduce the "fast"
time 9- t/e . System (3.1) is rewritten in the form
0.T.--£(T.—T.)/T. asTn_‘I0:nra+(T-‘rl)- (3.2)
15

MWUNONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me will take t1>0 as small as desired. Then with 5-90 the value 91 - t1/E. tends
to infinity. According to the first equation (3.2), 39'1“,»0. so that Ts remains
unchanged whereas T1 instantaneously at ordinary time scales t tends to. solution
of the equation

no.2r.+(1'.—T.)-0 (3.3)

with corresponding boundary conditions. Thus, with a» 0. that is. for a degenerate
system,it is possible to stipulate arbitrarily only the function 1-,“. 0) -- the

initial distribution of temperature in the spots. The initial temperature distrib-
ution in the layers 1' (2,0) is obtained as a solution of the equation

nafmo.0)-r.(:.0)--r.(..o).

(3.10)
The solution of equation (3.6) is obviously represented in the form
._ .. 1 ' 1—:
- —c n l 'I __ —— , 3.5
T.(z.0) C.e H +C,e” +ﬁ§7i.(§.0)8h(ﬁ )‘Q ( )

The function ‘1‘},(2, 0) is continuous with its first two derivatives. Accordingly.
the constants C1. C2 are determined from the boundary conditions (with t - 0. if
the boundary conditions are dependent on time). On the other hand, the function
'rs(g , 0) can be discontinuous and have discontinuities of the derivative 3:1,
(5, , 0). Taking into account the order of the singularity of equation (2.7) and
using the known technique of generalized solutions of linear equations with par-
tial derivatives (see [8]), we can obtain

[To] -[Ta]l-I exp (—‘/‘l). [0.T.]-[0.T.] |_.up 0-4/1). (3.6)

Here HP] is the discontinuity of some ‘Pvalue at the point a at the time t: [if]
-= iP(z + 0. t) - ‘P(z - O. t), and [$0]: _ is the same discontinuity at the
same point with t 0: [9’]t - 0 = (z + 0.8) —(P(z - 0.0). Thus, in contrast to
solution of the classical thermal conductivity equation, the temperature jumps in
the spots, satisfying equation (2.7) and its depth derivative, do not disappear
instantaneously but attenuate exponentially.

1.. A traveling thermal wave is a model of the upper thermocl ine in the ocean. The
authors of [9, 10) independently proposed a model of the upper thermocline in the
form of a traveling thermal wave. 0n the assumption that the exchange processes
transpiring in the upper thermocline are stationary, uniforn and microscale, for
the distribution of excess temperature 9(2, t) we obtain the ordinary thermal
conductivity equation

a.e-xa:.e. (5.1)

where the excess temperature is the difference between the temperature and the
mean temperature for the year. The solution of equation (4.1), of the traveling
wave type. has the form 9- 9(8), g - z - ut - ho. Here u is the rate of subsid-
ence of the lower boundary of the upper quasihomogeneous layer of the upper boun-
dary of the thermocline -- a slowly changing function of time, ho is the depth of

16
M OHIO“. USE (NIX
lln- uppvl’ quasihomgencnus layer at some arbitrary moment in time t - 0. Satis-
fying the conditions 9(0) - 6 , 9(00) - 0. where 60 is the excess tempera-
ture at the upper boundary of tge thermocline (a slowly changing function of
time). we obtain a solution of tie traveling wave type '

9-8. exp (—uﬁ/x). (4.2)

This model agrees well with data from laboratory measurements and also in situ ob-
servations, averaged over an adequately great time interval. about 10 days. The
heat exchange processes in the upper thermocline under highly nonstationary condi-
tions. in accordance with the above, must be described by system (2.5), (2.6). In
particular, the temperature of the spots is described by equation (2.7); this sale
equation is correct for the excess temperature in the spots:

0.6.-x3:.6.+1|01:-9n (I. D 3)

We will examine the solution of equation (4.3), of the traveling wave type a, I
98(8), 5 - z - ut - h . Substituting this expression into (6.3). integrating
once and using the bounsary condition with 5- 00 , we obtain

 

«1'0 (10.
' _ -__ .- , .1.
an dh' x d: :16 0 (A )

with g > 0 the solution of equation (5.4) evidently has the for.
Ore-exp (—aE). a-[(X'+4u'n)"'—xl/2un- (4.5)

However. the constant 91 no longer can be determined from the continuity condition
with 5 - 0 since the temperature in the spots must not be a continuous function of
the z-coordinate. On the Other hand. the temperature in the layers is a continuous
function of the coordinate, so that am) - 6 , where 90 is the excess tempera-
ture of the upper quasihomogeneous layer. We w 11 take the first equation of sys-
tem (2.5). retaining validity for excess temperatures:

o.e.-—(e.—el)/T- (‘.6)
Substituting into this equation 98 - 03(5). 01 - 61(5). we have

—ud8./d§-—(6.—8.)lt. (4-7)
Using (10.5) and assuming i - + 0. we obtain

ua9.-—(9r—eo)/“. (‘08)

hence we find the excess temperature in the spors at the upper boundary of the
thermocl ine:

 

6 6. 2x6. _ 20.
' i+ur¢ [(x'+4u’n)*+x] i+(i+p)" ' (4-9)
' p-éu'nlx‘-4u’rlx. (b . 10)
1

FOR OFHCI I. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. with not very small 13 the 91 value is not equal to 90, so that the excess
temperature of the spots at the upper boundary of the thermocline is not equal to
the excess temperature of the quasihomogeneous layer: there is a finite tempera-
ture jump (Fig. 2). This circumstance also explains why the in situ measurements
with low-inertia instruments sometimes reveal an appreciable temperature jump. In
actuality. it is the temperature of the spots which is for the most part measured.
In the case of relatively large instantaneous u the j3parameter can have an ap-
preciable value. 0n the other hand. the rates of subsidence, averaged over a long
time interval. are small; the parameter 3 is small and in a comparison with data
from averaged measurements the jump should not appear. We note that a different
explanation of the nature of the jump was given in a study by c. I. Shapiro [12].

5. Some evaluations. Smunary. We will begin with evaluations of the coefficient
keffo Layers having the molecular thermal conductivity kmol and the relative volume
1 - s are separated by turbulent spots having the relative volume a and the ther-
mal conductivity ktur . Since the temperature gradient in the spots is neglected.
the temperature drop n a layer of a unit thickness is created by the thermal re-
sistance of layers with the relative thickness 1 - s and we obtain

k...-k.../(1-:), (5.1)

so that in order of magnitude keffnvlozkmol. Then for the characteristic time of
thermal relaxation of spots‘t we have, obviously

T~PIXsn (S o 2)

Here Q is the mean thickness of a turbulent spot for a particular flow. ﬁts is the
effective coefficient of turbulent thermal diffusivity in the spot. Bearing in mind
that turbulence is not strongly developed in the spats. for ﬁrit is possible to use
an estimate in rather wide limits $34~10'1-10 cm2/sec. The thicknesses of the tur-
bulent spOts also vary in a wide range: from ten to several hundreds of centimeters
Therefore. if for the } coefficient we obtain a relatively stable estimate of xa-IO'l
cm2/sec. the characteristic time for thermal relaxation of the spots varies in a
wide range: from 10 to 105 sec. Depending on the f value, prevailing under the con—
ditions of this flow and the characteristic time of the heat exchange process. the
effects considered in this study may be both significant or insignificant. In par-
ticular. depending on‘ﬁ the rate of subsidence u of the quasihomogeneous layer at
which the effects considered here will be significant is

u~(xlt)"'~10"+10" eta/sec.
which falls in the region of real rates of subsidence.

There do not seem to be fundamental difficulties in taking horizontal inhomogeneity.
the variability of the relative volume of spots. etc. into account in the described
scheme. However. despite all the importance of these circumstances for practical
computations. allowance for them does not change the qualitative picture of the
phenomenon.

Since the coefficients of molecular thermal diffusivity and diffusion for sea water
differ by two orders of magnitude. the rate of subsidence u of the quasihomogeneous
layer at which the effects considered above become significant is an order of

18
FOR OFFICIAI.US£1ONLY
magnitude less for the halocline than for the thermocline. Accordingly, it is en-
tirely possible to observe salinity jumps in the absence of temperature jumps.

 

Fig. 2. With high rates of subsidence of the upper boundary of the thermocline the
temperature experiences a discontinuity.

Under definite conditions the relative volume of the layers may not be small and
therefore it is quite impossible to neglect the rate of change in heat content in
the layers in system (3.1) and the equation for temperature in the spots assumes
the form

ﬁwu‘T,+ -:—0.T.-ua..'1'.+n0m1'.. (5.3)
8

A similar equation is derived in this case for the temperature of the layers.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Hoods, J.. "Have-Induced Shear Instability in the Summer Thermocline." J.
FLUID HECH., Vol 32. Pt 4, pp 791-800. {968.

2. Honin, A. 8., Kamenkovich. V. H. and Kort, V. G., IZMENCHIVOST' HIROVOGO OKBANA
(Variability of the world Ocean), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdst, 1974, 262 pages.

3. Monin. A. S. and Ozmidov. R. V.. OKEANSKAYA TURBULENTNOST' (Ocean Thrbulence),
Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat. 1981, 320 pages.

a. Barenblatt. G. 1.. "Dynamics of Turbulent Spots and Intrusions in a Stably
Stratified Fluid," IZV. AN SSSR: PAO (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences:
Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean). Vol 14, No 2, pp 195-206. 1978.

5. Barenblatt, c. 1.. Zheltov. Yu. P. and Kochina, I. N., "Main Representations of
the Theory of Filtering of Homogeneous Fluids in Fissured Rocks," an (Applied
Mathematics and Mechanics), Vol 24, No 5, pp 852-866, 1960.

1
FOICHHHC1£E.USIGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Barenblatt, 6. 1., "Some Boundary-Value Problems for the Equations for Pil-
tration of a Fluid in Pissured Rocks." PHH, Vol 27, No 2. pp 348-350, 1963.

7. Nemchinov, I. V., "Some Nonatationary Problems in Heat Transfer by Radiation,"
PHTF (Applied Mechanics and Theoretical Physics), No 1, pp 36-57, 1960.

8. Gel'fand, I. H. and Shilov, G. Ye.. OBOBSHCHENNYYE FUNKTSII I DEYSTVIYA NAD
NIH! (Generalized Functions and Operations With Then), Moscow-Leningrad, Piz-
matgiz, 1958, 660 pages.

9. Barenblatt, c. I., "Self-Similarity of Distributions of Temperature and Salin-
ity in the Upper Theraocline," IZV. AN SSSR: PAO, vol id, No 11, pp 1160-1166,

1978.

10. Turner. J. 8., "The Temperature Profile Below the Surface Hixed Layer." OCEAN
MODELLING, N0 1. PP 6-8. 1978.

11. Efimov, S. s. and Tsarenko, V. 1., "0n the Problem of Self—Similarity of the
Temperature Distribution in the Upper Thermocline," IZV. AN SSSR: PAO, Vol 16,
pp 620-627, 1980.

12. Shapiro, G. 1.. "Influence of FluctuatiOns in the Layer of Turbulent Entrain-
ment on Heat and Mass Exchange in the Upper Thermocline," IZV. AN SSSR: FAG,
Vol 16. No &, pp 433—435. 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Pizika atmosfery i okeana",
1982

5303
C30: 1865/136

20
FOIIOFFIJAI.USE¢IULY
EXPERIMENT IN MACHINE PROCESSING OF SATELLITE OCEANOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Leningrad UCNENYYE ZAPISKI LGU, SERIYA GEOGRAPICHBSKIKH NAUK: SPUTNIKOVAYA

OKEANgLOGIYA, CHAST' 2 in Russian No 27(403), 1980 (signed to press 16 Apr 80)
pp 11 -119

[Article by V. V. Vinogradov, I. V. Likhachev and D. K. Staritsyn]

[Text] The article examines the results of processing of satellite infrared in-
formation obtained from artificial earth satellites in a direct transmission
regime. In the processing use was made of data from "NCAA-2" artificial earth
satellites during their flight over the polygon of the international tropical
experiment GATE-74.

The results of the processing are presented in the form of profiles and temper-
ature maps of the ocean. He compared the results of processing of artificial
earth satellite data with synchronous data from radiation measurements from an
IL-18 aircraft of the Main Geophysical Observatory imeni A. I. Voyeykov and
subsatellite measurements from scientific research ships in the GATE-74 poly-
gon. Aboard the aircraft and on the scientific research ship "Akademik Kora-
]ev" synchronous measurements were made using identical apparatus: IR radio-

meters in the spectral range 9-12rpm.

Maps of radiation temperature were obtained which have a greater information
content than the mean long-term maps.

The temperature of the ocean surface is one of the principal physical charac-
teristics determining the intensity of dynamic processes in the ocean and ex-
erting an influence on formation of atmospheric circulation.

It is entirely obvious that there is a need for obtaining mass operational data
concerning the surface of the world ocean in order to meet a whole series of
needs and requirements on the part of the national economy and science. In con-
nection with the development of new technical means for the noncontact measure-
ment of thermal radiation in the 1R spectral region it is now possible to ob-
tain data on the temperature of the water surface from artificial earth satel-
lites. From each quasipolar orbit, depending on the flight altitude and tech-
nical specifications of the vehicle. the artificial satellite scans a part of
the ocean with a total breadth up to 3000 km II. P. Velov, 1967; K. Ya. Kon-
drat'yev and Yu. H. Timofeyev, 1970: U. Bandin. 197$].

21
F0ll(lﬂﬂ(1AI.UGI:(NdLV
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE1DNLY

Since in u direCt transmission regime an artificial earth satellite gives high-
er-quality information. it was received in the ocean under conditions of an in-
significant cloud cover aboard the scientific research ship "Akademik Korolev."
outfitted for this purpose with special receiving-recording apparatus.

The principal tasks in the reception of temperature data were the checking of
the reliability of information and study of the possibility of its use in
oceanological practice.

The work, for which about 40 scientific research ships, located in the GATE-7h
polygon,were used in a comparison of the measured parameters, was carried out
for the first time for oceanological purposes. Such a combination of subsatel-
lite support made possible a better study of the problems related to the tie-
in of the collected information, an evaluation of its reliability and planning
a measurement method and operational use.

The maps of absolute temperature of the ocean surface were plotted without tak—
ing absorption into account on the basis of synchronous reference measurements
in the IR range from the scientific research vessel “Akademik Korolev." .

In an operational analysis the great volume of satellite information requires
the use of high-capacity electronic computers. Experience in the use of digital
computers indicated that using electronic computers outfitted with appropriate
input-output devices it is possible to solve a wide range of problems related
to the collection. registry, transmission and analysis of TV and IR informa—
tion.

Now we will examine the problems involved in the preparation and input of data
obtained from artificial earth satellites using special apparatus -- two-chan-
nel scanning radiometers with the information being represented in the form of
an analog signal in the memory of an ﬂzggz_ele§tronic ggmpyter for_subsequent

analysis -- and constructing maps of temperature distribution in digital form.

The use of two-channel scanning radiometers on "NCAA" artificial earth satel-
lites, operating in the visible and IR spectral regions. on the one hand made
it possible to obtain a line image of the earth during both daytime and night-
time. and on the other hand, created the fundamental possibility of represent-
ing the information in digital form, its coding and input into an electronic
computer.

An individual scanning line for the "NCAA-2" artificial earth satellite begins
with a group of synchronizing pulses which can serve as time reference points,
this being followed by useful information from the IR radiometer; then comes
the calibration step (the step interval corresponds to a change in the observed
brightness temperature by 20°K with a temperature interval from 310°K -- black
-- to 180°K -- white); the first half of the line is closed with a signal on
the total amplitude value (indicator of system operating stability). The sec-
ond half of the line also begins with a group of synchronizing pulses, follow-
ed by useful information in the visible part of the spectrum, "calibration
wedge" and total signal (1002) (Fig. 1).

22
FOI(HHHKJA1.UBE(NWLY
(.5 m:
oﬂu

as‘m
u‘m

I I l
“90°!
I \l ~I§| o
I v I,“ .938
I l“l
III
I III

-——MWNA

" 5—: 317072;?

-- bt‘e‘on
—- as‘am

  
   

   

—---- u‘m
-—-w‘m
--——--u‘m

0:.

as

00

2‘:

-—-—---- os‘ssu '

   

 

 

Ouu
ouu

!
gas: a gas: a a g:
I

rtocs A ”E n '36

vounx ynuneng I 'DVD'-Xn E

>

Fig. 1. Positioning of information sectors on scanning line of IR radiometer
of United States artificial earth satellite "NOAA-Z."

KEY:
A) Underlying ocean surface

B) Space

C) Calibration levels (telemetric window)

D) Rear area (level 1002)

E) Reproduction synchronizing pulse (level 42)
F) Front area (level 1002)

G) Synchronizing pulse

H) IR channel

I) Visible channel

Information from the IR channel is transmitted with the corresponding synchron-
ization and calibration signals during the time of rotation of the radiometer
dish by 180° (0.625 sec). Another kind of information is transmitted during the
next 0.625 sec. Such a scanning radiometer makes it possible to scan the earth's
surface with a resolution of about 7.4 km at the subsatellite point.

In the experiment. from among the best-quality records on the magnetic tape of
the facsimile magnetic recorder we selected the record for 31 August 1974,
which was used as the object for detailed and thorough processing.

Automated machine processing of satellite information was divided into two
stages:

1) signal detection, filtering and transformation of an analog signal into a
binary code;

2) extraction of information from the computer, forming a frame, geographic
tie—in and construction of a map of radiation temperatures.

2%
FOIICIHHKIA IISIICH'LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2 is a block diagram of the system for the input and machine processing
of data. consisting of an information source (receiving station or magnetic re—
corder). analog signal amplifier, signal envelope detector, analog-discrete
converter. group of amplifiers-shapers and the input circuits of an M-222 elec-
tronic computer. The results of processing of satellite data were fed out to

the alphabetical-digital unit.

 

Fig. 2. Block diagram of apparatus for input of telemetric satellite informa-
tion into electronic computer. Explanation in text.

KEY:
A) Receiving station

B) Magnetic recorder

C) Analog signal amplifier

D) Signal envelope detector

E) Analog-discrete converter

F) Group of amplifiers-shapers

G) M-222 computer

H) "Neva" phototelegraphic apparatus
I) Master oscillator

The analog signal, filled by the carrier frequency arriving from the informa-
tion source, is amplified by a linear amplifier to the level necessary for
creating a normal operating range of the converter (about 10 V), and through
the envelope detector, discriminating the envelope of the high-frequency sig-
nal. is fed to the input of the analog-discrete converter of the type F—722I2,
whose triggering is accomplished by a special oscillator with a frequency 1
KHz. The converter transforms the analog signal into a series of eight-digit
binary-decimal numbers. The value of each number is proportional to the level
of the input signal at the time of reading. The entire continuous series of
discrete readings is fed through the group of shapers to the memory unit of
the M-222 eleCtronic computer. The discretization frequency is selected from
the condition of a minimum loss of information and is equal to 1000 readings

in the entire scanning line.

Machine processing included the selection of the type of information, its nor-
malization, geographic and temperature tie-in of satellite data and output of
the results in the form of a matrix, each of whose elements represents the
radiation temperature at a particular spatial point.

0n the basis of this entire mass of data we constructed a map of radiation tem-
peratures without the averaging of data. The map was constructed by gluing on

a blank the numerical values in arbitrary units at a stipulated scale and tie-
in of the lines to geographic coordinates. The geographic tie-in was accomplish-
ed on the basis of a precise knowledge of the time of beginning and end of the

”L
FINI(INH(1A USEGINLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

survey and the precise registry of the time of transit of the artificial earth
satellite across the equator. The number of discrete points in the line was
selected in such a way as to obtain the least distorted temperatures due to
the nadir angle. which at the scale of the photograph was abOut 1600-2000 km.
In order to exclude the influence of cloud cover on temperature we used syn-
chronous photographs of cloud cover obtained using the "Neva" phototelegraphic
apparatus.

In constructing the map of radiation temperatures atmospheric absorption was
not taken into account since the tie-in to absolute temperature values was ac-
complished on the basis of shipboard measurements in the IR spectral region;
the correction was assumed to be identical for the entire region of coverage
by the satellite radiometer.

Pa
' ,

a
wig
- (t,
5 10

    

as' 30' er

I ATAAHTVNECKMM OKEAH ma
TLANTIC OCEAN .
“liii|ili:l!! lliiiiiiiiiii

       

         

.r

   
 

h

    

‘
‘6

Fig. 3. Temperature of surface of Atlantic Ocean according to data from ship-
hoard measurements on 1 September 1974 in GATE-76 polygon.

This is correct for homogeneous atmospheric conditions. With the presence of
different air masses over the studied ocean area the absorption may be nonuni-
form and accordingly distortions will be introduced into the kinematic maps of
temperature of the ocean surface. The effect of influence on the accuracy of
measurement by different temperature profiles characteristic for different
latitudes is given in a number of studies IV. L. Smith, et al., 1970; G. A.

2
FOR I.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Maui and H. Sidran, 1973]. Due to the presence of an IR radiometer aboard the
ship and synchronous radiation measurements from an IL-18 aircraft it was pos-

sible to determine the absorption in the tropical zone of the ocean, equal to
10.5°C.

35°

 

Fig. 4. Map of radiation temperature of ocean surface obtained in a direct

transmission regime aboard the scientific research ship "Akademik Koralev" on
31 August l97b.

it should be noted that in regions with a wellsdeveloped Trades circulation
there is an increased concentration of aerosol of continental origin. For ex-
ample. the tropical zone of the Atlantic Ocean. in which the scientific re-
search ship "Akademik Korolev" was situated. was subjected to the influence of
Trade winds of a northeasterly direction with transport of aerosol of African
origin. In accordance with computations and measurements of temperature at al-
titudes 300 and 6000 m. it was possible to determine the contribution of ab-
sorption by aerosol. which was 3.3'C. According to investigations from an IL-18

FINI!)FF!C£§%.II§IZ(IQLV
aircraft-laboratory, in the composition of aerosol particles there was a pre-
dominance of metals (Fe, Al. In) with a content of aerosol particles lOPLg/m3.

If it is taken into account that the horizontal temperature gradients of the
surface change insignificantly with time, we can make a comparison of data from
artificial earth satellites and shipboard observations collected in the polygon
GATE-74 during numerous scientific and route investigations.

The experimental region was situated in the tropical zone of the Atlantic Ocean
and covered its central and eastern parts where the atmospheric ICZ is situated
most frequently.

The principal elements of water circulation in the tropical zone of the Atlan-
tic Ocean at the surface are the North and South Trade Currents, Intertrades
Countercurrent. Bengal, Brazilian, Guinea and Antilles Currents. The dynamic
aetivlty of these systems to a considerable degree favors the formation of the
surface temperature field and horizontal inhomogeneities.

Figure 3 gives the distribution of surface temperature prepared using an objec-
tive analysis scheme on the basis of data from shipboard observations for 1
September 1974.

In the region between 6 and lO°N there is a region of high temperatures, the
an—called thermal equator. Its axis runs from the southwest to the northeast.
The huge region delineated by the isotherm 27°C is occupied by water whose tem-
perature virtually does not change and falls in the range 27-27.S'C.

The horizontal gradients of this zone are exceedingly small. In the southeast-
ern part there is some increase in the horizontal gradients. evidently asso-
ciated with the exisuence of an upwelling in the region of the Guinea Current.
This Is also indicated by a decrease in temperature to 22°C in the southeast-
ern part of the region. The temperature of the water surface in the western
part is somewhat higher than the temperature of the eastern part. which is evi-
dently associated with the transport of warm shore waters and the equatorial
circulation.

The map of the radiation temperature of the Atlantic Ocean surface is repre-
sented in Fig. A. In a comparison of this map with shipboard observations it
can be noted that the temperature field construcred on the basis of data from
a space survey differs from the field constructed on the basis of shipboard
observations. For example. instead of a well-expressed zonality of isotherms
as indicated by shipboard data. the field of radiation temperature has a rath-
ur complex configuration. evidently associated with the presence of eddy form-
nlions. The complex structure of the temperature field in a region of the ocean
with strongly developed convective cloud coven variable in time and space. cre-
ates a nonuniform heating of the upper layers of the ocean. The nonuniform
heating occurs due to the screening of direct solar radiation. Prolonged anom-
aIIes in the quantity of cloud cover over any part of the ocean make a contrib-
ution to the formation of anomalies in the heat content of the upper layer in
the ocean in this ocean area. Their values are cited in a study by V. V. Vino-
gradov and N. I. Radayev [1971].

2
FOiIOFFKJ;E.U§E(IVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless, together with some differences. it is possible to note the com-
mon features in the distribution of temperature. For example, on both maps the
maximum temperatures are situated to the north of the equator (tropical equa-
tor). To the north and south of the thermal equator the temperatures decrease.

without question, the temperature maps of great expanses, constructed on the
basis of data from shipboard observations, do not.in their entirety reflect the
complex structure of the temperature field. The lowest information content is
in the atlases of mean climatic monthly maps which cannot be used for compar-
ison with satellite measurements; the climatic data can be used only for rough
evaluations of the temperature background.

Unfortunately. it is impossible to carry out a more precise checking of the re-
liability of satellite information since the sole means for this purpose is
synchronous flights of an aircraft-laboratory in the region of the polygon.

An IL-l8 aircraft operated for the most part under an international program for
investigating the I62 and under our program its flights had a purely random
character.

As an additional check on the correctness of the spatial distribution of tem-
perature we used the statistical processing of observational data in the IR
region obtained from a ship, aircraft and artificial satellite. Since the
shipboard observations characterize the temporal variability of thermal pro-
cesses at one point (the scientific research ship "Akademik Korolev" was sit-
uated at a constant point in a polygon with the coordinates 12'“, 23°3'H), as
a comparison we used a number of observations for 20 days. This series was
selected on the basis of the work of P. M. Saunders (1972) in which it is in-
dicated that for the appearance of characteristic temperature features over

a distance up to 100 km a period of 8-16 days is adequate. The computations
of the statistical inhomogeneities of surface temperature on the basis of
shipboard, aircraft and satellite measurements and employing normalized struc-
tural functions indicated a close correspondence (1.5, 2.0, l.S°C).

At the same time. comparison with data from "Meteor-18" indicated a discrepancy
in temperature variability by an order of magnitude. evidence either of gaps in
transmission through the radio channel or imperfection in machine processing.
The data which we used from the "Meteor-l7" artificial earth satellite (with
reception of IR information at Moscow), for example, for the GATE-7a polygon,
gave rather good results and are entirely comparable with the shipboard observ-
ations.

It follows from the materials presented above that for a study of the character
of variability of the temperature field on a global scale it is better to employ
space methods which can be used for both operational and scientific oceanolog.
ical purposes. The proposed and applied method for construcring maps indicated
the possibility of obtaining oceanological information directly aboard a sci-
entific research ship (weather ship or other ship outfitted with receiving ap-
paratus and an electronic computer), the possibility of constructing maps of
temperature of the ocean surface and their use for discriminating zones of
well-developed currents and temperature gradients. frontal zones, upwelling of
deep waters. eddy formations and other phenomena.

28
FOI‘OFIICIAI.IEIEIMULY
It must he remembered that satellite apparatus with scanning of the water sur-
face receives the radiation of the upperm03t (bounding the atmosphere) water
layer whose thickness in the optical measurement range is about 0.02 mm.

In connection with the presence of vertical temperature gradients in the water
in the layer 0-0.5 m from 0.2 to 3'C the tie-in of the satellite measurements
must be accomplished solely on the basis of measurements with an IR radiometer
or computed on the basis of the mentioned studies (P. H. Saunders. 1967; E. D.
McAlister. H. L. HcLeish, 1969; L. Hasae. 1971; C. A. Paulson, T. R. Parker.
1971].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Vetlov. I. P., "Meteorological Observations From Artificial Earth Satel—
lites.” METEOROLOGIYA I GTDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 6. pp
3-13. 1967.

2. Vinogradov. V. V. and Radayev, N. I., "Some Results of Use of a Noncontact
Thermometer for Measuring Surface Temperature Under Shipboard Conditions,"
KVAZIDVUKHLETNYAYA TSIKLICHNOST' I TSIRKULYATSIYA V ATMOSPERE I OKEANE
(Quasi-Two-Year Cyclicity and Circulation in the Atmosphere and Ocean).
Leningrad. LCM}. pp 168-178, 1971.

3. Kondrat'yev. K. Ya. and Timofeyev. Yu. M.. TERHICHESKOYE ZONDIROVANIYE
ATMOSFERY $0 SPUTHIKOV (Thermal Sounding of the Atmosphere From Satel-
lites). Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat. pp 117-172. 1970.

4. Yuts. G. and Bandin. U.. "Use of Remote Sounding Prom Artificial Earth Sat-
ellites for Meteorological Purposes," TRUDY IN—TA INZHENEROV P0 RADIOELEK-
TRONIKE (Transactions of the Institute of Radioelectronic Engineers). Unit-
ed States. No 12. pp 146-161. 1975.

S. Hasse. L.. "The Sea Surface Temperature Deviation and the Heat Flow at the
Sea-Air Interface." BOUNDARY-LAYER HETEOROL.. No I. pp 368-379. 197].

6. Haul. C. A. and Sidran. M.. "Atmospheric Effects on Ocean Surface Tempera-
ture Sensing From NOAA Satellite Scanning Radiometer." J. GEOPHYS. RES..
Val 78. No 19. pp 1909-1916. 1973.

7. McAJister, E. D. and McLeish, H. L.. "Heat Transfer in the Top Millimeter
of the Ocean." J. GEOPHYS. RES.. Vol 7é(l3). p 3608. 1969.

8. Paulson. C. A. and Parker. T. H.. "Cooling of a Water Surface by Evapora-
tion. Radiation and Heat Transfer." J. GEOPHYS. RES.. Vol 76, pp 691-695,
1971.

9. Saunders, P. M.. "The Temperature at the Ocean-Air Interface." J. ATHOS.
SC[.. Vol 24, pp 269-273. 1967.

22
FIHR()FFI(1A lﬁli<HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

10. Saunders. P. M.. "Space-Tine Variability of Temperature in the Upper
Ocean," DEEP SEA RESEARCH. V01 19, pp 467-1080, 1972.

11. Smith. H. I... Ran, P. K. and Curtis. H. R., "The Determination of Sea
Surface Temperature From Satellite High Resolution in Fraud Window
Radiation Measurements," MONTHLY WEATHER REVIE", Vol 98. No 8, 1970.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Leningradakogo universiteta. 1980

5303
C50: 8164/1065

30
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COLLECTION OF ARTICLES OH OPTICS 0? OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE

Moscow OPTIKA OKEANA I ATMOSPERY in Russian 1981 (signed to press 1§ Aug 81)
pp 2, 231

[Annotation and abstracts from collection "Optics of the Ocean and Atmosphere",
edited by K. S. Sh frin, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, Institut
okeanologii imeni . P. Shirshov, Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka”, 1200 copies, 232 pages]

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles deals with the most timely problems
in oceanic optics: modern concepts concerning the optical properties of sea water;
optical methods for investigating the ocean and atmosphere over the ocean, includ-
ing remote methods (satellite oceanology); also considered are the conditions for
the formation of light fields in the ocean, hydroopticai characteristics, etc. The
book is intended for physicists specializing in the field of optics and oceanolog-
ists.
Abstracts

UDC 551.66
MODERN CONCEPTS CONCERNING OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF SEA WATER
[Article by Kopelevich, O. V. and Shiftin, K. 5.]

[Text] The article gives generalized concepts concerning the optical properties

of sea water and their dependence on the governing factors. Also considered are the
principal optically active components of sea water: pure water, inorganic salts,
yellow nutter, suspended particles and phytoplankton pigments. The authors analyze
the characteristics of the spectral absorption of light by sea water and its light-
scattering properties. Information is given on the statistical characteristics of
absorption and scattering. A model with few parameters is proposed for the absorb-
ing and scattering properties which with a satisfactory accuracy describes both
these properties themselves and the characteristics of their variability. Figures
17, tables L3, references 142.

31
FOI‘OFIICLAL.UBEGMNLN
FINICIHWCJAI.USEGDNLY

’ UDC 551.46

LIGHT FIELD FROM PULSED SOURCE IN SEA WATER
[Article by Gol'din, Yu. A., Pelevin, V. N. and Shiftin, K. 8.]

[Text] The results of an experimental study of the processes of propagation of
signals of short-pulse lasers in the sea are presented. A study was made of distor-
tion of the shape of light pulses (time blurring) during their propagation in sea
water for different distances and relative orientations of the source and receiver.
The authors analyze the influence of the absorption and scattering of light by the
medium on the pulsed transfer function of the process. Also examined are the charac-
teristics of the nonstationary light field near the axis of the beam and outside

the axial region. Data are given on polarization of the nonstationary light field
in the sea and the computed Green functions for the nonstationary light field. Fig-

ures 18, references 47.

UDC 551.b6.05

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF OPTICAL MEASUREMENTS IN SEA AND SOME HYDROPROTOMETRIC
COHPUTATIONS

[Article by Kozlyaninov, H. V.)

[Text] A study was made of the principal parameters of the field of optical ra-
diation in the sea and hydrooptical characteristics, both primary and secondary, as
well as the effective characteristics. The author gives the principles of the method
for sea hydrophotometric measurements. Some approximate solutions are given for the
radiation transfer equation. primarily in its differential form. The relationships

of different hydrooptical characteristics are analyzed in detail. Some hydrophoto-
metric computations are given. In these computations an evaluation is made of the

accuracy in solving the transfer equation in a two-flow approximation and the de-

pendence of the depth of visibility of a white standard disk on the optical proper- .
ties of water and observation conditions is considered. Eigures 10, tables 3, ref-

erences 94.

UDC 551.66.06

HYDROOPTICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN PACIFIC, INDIAN AND ATLANTIC OCEANS

[Article by Voytov, V. 1.]

[TPXC] Information on Soviet and foreign expeditionary investigations in the
oceans carried out up to 1980 is examined and systematized. It is shown that there

is a correlation between hydrooptical investigations and the general development
of oceanology, and also with practical needs and the increase in the level of tech-

nology. The author defines regions of the oceans which are well covered by hydro-
optical observations and regions where observations have nqt been msde._Figures 1,
tables 3, references 5h.

32
FOIlOFFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
un'c 551.66

STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF TOTAL RADIATION FLUX OVER DIFFERENT REGIONS 0F UORLD
OCEAN

[Article by Avaste. 0. A., Karner, 0. Yu., Landen, K. S. and Shiftin, K. 5.]

[Text] This article is devoted to the theoretical computation of radiation in-
fluxes at the ocean surface in the presence of cloud cover. The basis for the study
is artificial earth satellite data on the seasonal-geographical distribution of
cloud cover over the oceans and the results of aircraft sounding for deter-ining

the optical thickness of clouds. The computations were nada for different regions
of the world ocean (from 60°N to 60‘s) for clouds of different morphology and a set

of solar altitude values. The results with solar altitudes greater than 30° agree
well with the experimental data of other authors. Possible reasons for the discrep-

ancies in the case of a low sun are discussed at the end of the article. Figures
16, tables 9, references 56.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

5303
C50: 1865/73

33
ItﬂltlﬂﬂtlAl.lﬂﬂi(l'LY
FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY

UDC 551.563.5:535.31
SOME OPTICAL METHODS FOR INVESTIGATING WAVBPCOVBRED HATER SURFACE

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEMII NAUK SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSPBRY I OKBANA in Russian val 18,
No 3, Mar 82 (manuscript received 25 Nov 80, after revision 10 Feb 81) pp 286-295

[Article by V. L. Veber, Institute of Applied Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: The authors give principles for de-

termining the statistical characteristics of
a wave-covered water surface from the images
of luminescent teat objects observed through
this surface in reflected or refracted light.

Optical methods are being used more and more extensively at the present time, to-
gether with contact. acoustic and radar methods, in solving problems in the "diag—
nosis" of the wave-covered water surface. Due to high resolution and low inertia
optical systems make it possible in principle to obtain extremely detailed informa-
tion on waves. An interesting direction within the framework of development of
optical methods for investigating waves is the development of special procedures
for the extraction of information on the spatial structure and temporal variabil-
ity of the wave-covered water surface from its optical images obtained with a cer-
tain illumination. Definite positive results have already been attained in this
direction. For example, in [l], on the basis of images of the "sun glitter," an
experimental determination was made of the distribution function for the slopes of
sea waves [1]. In [2, 3] a study was made of the possibility of determining some
"instantaneous“ and correlation characteristics of waves on the basis of images of
the sea surface in scattered skylight. A distinguishing characteristic of these
methods is that they operate with images of the wave-covered surface, obtained, as
a rule. under definite natural illumination conditions. This circumstance to a cer-
tain degree limits the field of their use.

The content of this article is a formulation of the theoretical principles for de-
termining some statistical characteristics of the wave-covered water surface by op-
tical methods with the use of luainescent test objects (artificial light sources).

1. For solving the problem we will use the model proposed in [6]. In a geometrical
approximation it describes the process of transfer of an image through the interface
of media with different refractive indices. Figure 1 is a diagram of the observa—
tions. The object of observation ~- a diffusely luminescent surface with distribut-

ed luminosity 30(r0) -- is situated in the plane 21.

FOR Offﬂigh.lﬁli(ﬂﬁly
FOR‘OFTICJA1.USE|3NLY

 

Pig. 1. Observation diagram.

The observation process essentially involves measurement (in the plane :3) of the
brightness B (r) a81(r. t o) in the direction of a unit fixed vector 20*. The object
is situated in a medium with the refractive index n;>l and the "observer" is situ-
ated in the air (no - 1). The image formation process is considered taking into ac-
count the variation in slopes of the interface, stipulated in the plane 22 of the
vector-function q(r. t) -- the projection of the unit vector of the normal to the
surface onto the plane a - 0.

As indicated in [A], the expression determining the relationship between the bright-
ness distribution 81 in the image and the brightness distribution no in the object
has the following form:

B.(r: t)-B.[r.-r+¢q(r; 1)]3 (1)

where a - h(n - l)/n. h is the distance from the object plane to the interface. This
expression is also correct in a case when the "observer" and the test object are in
the air. In this case the image is formed by light rays reflected from the wave-
covered surface; the a coefficient has the form a . -2h. We note that in the deriv-
ation of formula (1) no allowance was made for the scattering properties of water
and air and it was also assumed that the surface slopes are small, that is. q2<§1.

The author of [4]. within the framework of the already described image transfer mod-
el. derived expressions for the first (m1) and the second (H1) statistical distribu-
tion moments for brightness in the image 31(r; t) of a test object with a determined
luminosity distribution function 30(r). we will cite these expressions here:

I} F.(k) e.(ak)c"'dk;

 

In.(r)-(B.(r; t) )-

(2:0' (2)

”10:3 '13 t)-<Ba(hi ‘¢)Bc('x: 11))-
(3)

-(——2:).j:. .j P.(k.)r.(k.)o.(ak.. aka. 9. muww at .dk.

* Such an idealization is correct for image detectors with a high resolution and a
small angular field of view.

35
non omcuu. use ONLY
FORGDFFKJAL.USEIONLN

s -. 80() “'4';
m) {I re‘ (3)

where

o. (Io-ﬂ w. («n-m aq

is a single-point characteristic function of surface slopes; w1(-) is a single-
point distribution function of the probabilities of slopes;

_0,(k.: kg; 9: r)- j ”I awn: 1.: p: 1)¢“"'-*'-'r’ d9. as:

is a two-point characteristic function of slopes; w2(-) is a two-point distribution
function of the probabilities of slopes (the surface is assumed to be statistical-
ly homogeneous and stationary); ,0- r2 - r1; 1 - t2 - :1. For a normal (Gaussian)
water-air interface (the "traditional" model of well-developed wind waves [5]) the
expressions for 610) and 920) have the following form [a]:

0. (k) ”I‘M-0.5 (oi’klﬂu'ku'n: (4)
0.(k.; In; p; r) -oxp{—0.5[o.‘(k..‘+ku‘) +
+o.'(lc.,'+k.,’)+2!l.(p; r)k..k..+2M.(p, r)k.,k,,+
+zu..(p: r) (k..k..+k,.k..m. ‘5’

where Mg , Mn are the autocorrelation functions of slopes in two mutually perpen-
dicular directions: 0‘2, 0;;2 are the corresponding dispersions; Hg" is the cross-
correlation function of slopes of the wave-covered water surface.

2. The simplest test object by means of which it is possible to have direct registry
of a series of slopes of the wave-covered sea is an optical wedge. a test-object
with a linear luminosity distribution function:

B.(r)-A(1+Lt). (6)

The brightness distribution in the imge 31 contains a component proportional to
the surface slopes in the direction of the x-axis:

3.0; ¢)-A[1+u+uq.(r: 1)]. (7)

Information on the spatial structure of the random field of slopes q‘(r) can be ob-
tained, for example, by photographing the test object (6) with a small exposure and
subsequent analysis (photometric measurements) of the photograph. In actual practice
it is far simpler to measure the function qx(t). Information on the temporal vari-
ability of slopes at a fixed point in space can be obtained using a lucimeter or-
iented at the nadir (downwards). The constant component present in the signal

31(t) can be easily filtered out.

In actuality the same principle of use of a test object of the type (6) for the pur-
pose of "diagnosis" of the wave-covered surface lies at the basis of the method for
determining the slopes of the sea surface on the basis of the characteristics of

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the scattered light field under natural illumination conditions [2].

3. We will examine a test object with a brightness distribution in the form:

B.(r) -B.+B. cos(k.z+¢). (8)

Substituting the expression for the spatial spectrum of the test object (8) into
formula (2) and taking (to) into account. we will compute the first moment of the

image 81:
m1") _B.+B|e-II3 008(k02+¢)l (9)

where ﬁ- 1120’; 21:02 is a parameter characterizing the degree of image distortions.

0n the basis of the contrast of the averaged image (9)
I

Q = (“'1 max ' "1 MEMO“ max 4' IIIi min) '
Qoe‘ /2(Q0 ' 31/30)

it is possible to judge the dispersion of slopes of the wave-covered surface.

The expression for the second moment* of the image 31 can be obtained using for-

mulas (3) and (8):

.II. (n; h!) - é—B.’ {9a' (5: P; 1)coa koPs+02"(5'. P: 1) ¢°3lko(‘«+za) + (10)

+2“) +B.'+B.B.6.(B) [003(k.z.+¢)+cos(k.za+¢) ].
M) -e-"*: o.'( - ) -e-'“-' r;- M;

u.”( - )-e-"'"-m"'; m: 0" "37"“ "'

here

The expression for the second time moment of the "image" “(U is obtained from (10)

with f3 = 0: 1
M-(z; t) - 78310.15; 1) +0.”(B; ﬂoos 20w”) 1+0

(all the terms in (10) not dependent on time are denoted by C). This expression as-
sumes a part lcularly simple form when x - 0, V- 17/2:

RM") -B.'e" 3h [BRAIN-+0..
whore C0 ' 1302 I H1( t ~00) .

Hence it is already simple to express the normalized correlation function of slopes:

1 .(r)—M.(~) (11)
Rg(‘l’)- TAﬂhl—Wﬂlp].

We emphasize that all the described operations over the "image" 81(t) are technic-
ally relatively easy to carry out.

*
In this article in all cases we examine the second moments, not the correlation

functions. since the measurement of the latter in actual practice is more difficult.

FOR OFFIClKL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A somewhat different approach to the problem of studying the statistical properties
of the wave-covered surface involves an examination of the spectral characteristics

of the test object image.

We will examine the time energy spectrum of the function 31(t):

“MUM-83:45 ahlBRdrHr'" caucus). -

He will investigate this expression in two limiting cases.

a) Case of weak distortions ﬂ<l; in this case e'p sh (ﬁll; )zPR;

o. (o)~a*k.'n.*o.(«Ha-saw,
where
«(M-I M;(r)c"" dr

is the time energy spectrum of the slopes qx(t). As indicated by the derived expres-
sion. the spectrum of the "image" Bi(t) is simply proportional to the spectrum of
slopes.

b) Case of strong distortions ﬂ) 1; in this case:

an (0)==:-$— B; 1/ g:— e_ “6 +2uB.‘d(o);

where Rs" - -d2Rg (1:)Id-rqt_ )0. It follows from this expression that the image
spectrum is described by a Gaussgan function, on the basis of whose characteristic
width it is possible to determine the arameter R " and accordingly the time cor-
relation interval of slopes 1‘-./2/R;

Now we will proceed to an examination of the spatial characteristics of images of
the "sinusoid." The expression for the second space moment of the 81 (r) image can
be obtained using formula (10) with 1'- 0. Averaging expression (10) for V (in

praCtice this operation may not be so simple), we obtain the following dependence

f M R :
o 1 0n 5. ”4(9) -B.'+0,53.‘0;’(p; 9) Wk“).-

we will examine the space energy spectrum of the 31(r) image averaged for 9"[6]:

m. (k) — _ 8 {if e"""‘!"" cos Igor". dp+4n’B.'6 (k).

In the case of weak distortions (P? 1) we obtain:

0. (It) - :- B.’a'k.‘ [0g (It—k.) +0‘ (k+k.) +

where +n’B.‘(1-5) [Mk—k.) +6 (k+k.) l+4u'B.'6 (k).

«moo-J] tame-m do.

As indicated by the derived expression, the energy spectrum of the image 31(r) in
the neighborhood of the frequencies tko with an accuracy* to the factor coincides
with the space spectrum of slopes of an uneven "*nterface .

This is correct in a case when the §‘ spectra. spaced by tko. do not overlap one
another.

8
FOR cinch. USE ONLY
In the case of strong distortions (P1) the image spectrum is written in the fol-
lowing way:

0. (k) -0; (k-k.) +o.°(k+k.) +4n’B.’6 (k) ,

h
.. wm-——— ﬁpppw}
2”Ii-”Ru -R.. 2p(n."n.."—n.."') - (12)

R0. -—0.R| (')/op'ap’ ID-O (l.l~1. U) 0

The coefficients R1 " are related to the dispersions of the second space derivatives
of the rises I (r) 3f an uneven interface in the following way:

I! a‘ . I" n . ' II:-
”- "—35 (a—ﬁ)>-°7.x-= "u -;‘::<(a:§y) -‘Z—

 

I 3
R",,__1_ 0; a: .

o.‘ dz‘ «hay '0'
Accordingly, expression (12) can be transformed to the form:

118" 1 k" k"
. - _ _ — — o
0: (k) Zd'kJO-‘hs OXP [ 25"“! Us:3 + 03". )]

 

It follows from this expression that by measuring (in the case of strong distor-
tions) the width of the energy spectrum of the image of the ”sinusoid" in the form
of two sections kz - 0 and ky . 0. it is possible to compute the values of the dis-
persions of the curvature of the wave-covered surface 0’32 and 030,2.

6. The principal shortcoming of the methods for measuring the characteristics of
waves from the practical point of View is the need for fabricating, and most im-
portantly, the placement of light sources having large (2 sci at so?!) dimensions
under or over the water. This circumstance is not particularly important when carry-
ing out a model experiment; it is a different matter when making in situ measure-
ments. Here it is desirable to employ test objects of the smallest area possible.

This requirement is met by a test object with a brightness distribution of the fol-
lowing form: ‘

B.(r)-B.6(x). (13)

The task of determining the statistical characteristics of images of a test object
(13) for a random interface. not changing in time. was examined in [lo]. we will
cite an expression for the second statistical moment of an image, also taking into
account the "dynamics" of the surface [6]:

B.‘ i

z.‘+z.‘- 28.1.3. ]
2110'0‘: V 1—“:

aﬂ'ot‘U-RI')

 

(16)

 

 

”19:37:; '0- cxPl"
where R£-R§(P ; 1:).

The second time moment of the "image" 81(t) is obtained from (M) with r1 - r2 - O:

3
FOR I. USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M.(r) -B.'/2na'o.'Ii-R" (r) . (1 5)

The expression for the second space moment of the image 31(r) is obtained by assum-
ing in (11:) that 1’- 0, r1 - 0(1’2 1/3):

 

B.’
”a (P) - -——-.— xp{- (16)

2341 of 11- ”(exh’)

 

 

2a OCH-R; (9)]

It is easy to confirm that in the region of values Px (Pg‘, Py< ﬂy (ﬁx and p‘y
-- are the characteristic correlation intervals of the slopes along the x- and

y-axes respectively) with satisfaction of the inequality Pg,( 26‘s the exponential
factor in (16) is equal to approximately 1. In this case expression (16) is reduced
to a form similar to (15):

sofas: sci—"H. (p) (959.. Mm).

5. The relationship between the moments of the images of the test object (13) to
the correlation function of surface slopes is rather complex (in particular. with

,0 + 0; Nisan). A simpler relationship is observed when using a test object with a
brightness distribution of a "stepped" type:

B.(r)-B.1(.r), where 1(a) _ll-with x;o’ (17)
0 with x<0.

As follows from (3) and (5), the expression for the second statistical moment of
the image of a one-dimensional test object Bo(x) is written in the following way:

M (r.:ra;f)- (2:) j I no: )F.(k,)axp(—O 5e'a.‘[lc '+k.’+ 212493)]: k,]+1(k.z.+k.x.))dk din.

 

He will differentiate this expression for R: and, using the relationship

dB.(z)

kF.(k)-—.j— ewes.

as a result we obtain:
(1”. 8'0:
d". (2::)'

X °;P('[kl (II—1') + L':(-'-':"’”) ”de a! a“ d3"-

Hcre we will substitute the expression (17), and carrying out integration for all
the variables, we derive the differential equation

 

I 2—] a: —'(x ')—(z")cxp(— —0.o5a' ..*(k:+k +2R.k.k.)}x

 

 

d”. 8.. “VJ - 3+:‘t-2Riw; ﬂan}
(IR; 23171-3: (911') l za’oz:[I-Rt'(p;1)] " (18)

The time correlation function of the "image" 31(t) is obtained from the differential
equation (18) with r1 - r2 - 0: the expression for it has the following form:

M.(1)-(R.‘/2n) nrcsin Rm). ' . (19)

A similar solution of the differential equation (18) can be obtained for the space
correlation function of the image B1(r), if the condition f} x4286; is satisfied
(see preceding problem). The solution for this case is written in the following way:

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M.(p)-(B.‘/2n) amin Imp) (n-O: n-p; p-<pu: p.<9u)- (20)

We note that in the practical realization of this method there is no need to use a
test object of the type (17). An image of an object in the form (13) can be subject—
ed to correlation analysis if we first carry out the operation of "filling" of the
intervals between contour lines "alternately" with black and white colors (Fig. 2)
on this image. The result of the analysis of the images "processed" in this way

is described by formulas (19) and (20).

7 0‘ I
c L ..
. I

. 3J0 ua=0 “
a Fig. 2. 5 Fig. 3.

 

Fig. 2. Images: a) "linear" and b) "stepp- Fig. 3. Diagram of reflection of waves
ed" test objects obtained with observation from fixed rigid screen.
through uneven surface.

A further modification of this method involves the following. We will assume that a
light source with a distribution of luminosity in the form

Bo(')-Bo °lP(-I'l'/’o')

moves over (or under) a water surface with the velocity v relative to some observa-
tion system. He will also assume that the image of this source is integrated over a
long time interval. The brightness distribution in the image, "fixed" in such a way.
is described by the following expression:

8. (r) - I B.[r+vl+aq(r; 01¢“. (21)

We will determine the second statistical moment of this image. Substituting (21)
into formula (3) and assuming v . yov, we obtain the expression:

M.(r.; .,)- 1 j. . j nut"; -k.)r.(k..;k.)x

 

(2:!) ’

(22)
X 1‘ 0: (aka: aka: “I"; —dk,; P; T) 0‘? {‘[k..t.+kgﬁg+k. (pt-H") l) x
D

X an “3; a, at.

With a great velocity of motion of the source the time variability of the waves can
be neglected, that is, the interface can be considered "frozen-in." In this case
expression (22) (with ro-OO) is identical to expression (16).

1
FIHICHHHC%21.lEﬂ£(MWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An analysis of the conditions under which it is possible to adopt the hypothesis
of a "frozen—in" character of the surface directly on the basis of expression (22)
is difficult primarily due to a lack of knowledge concerning the precise form of

the functions H; (p :1). My; (p; 1:). MW (p :t). However, such an analysis can be
carried out by examining the expression for dispersion following from (22) with

r1 - r2 - 0. Carrying out integration for the variables klx’ kzx, l5, as a result
we obtain the expression:

on - «mo» ~ I I.(1)I-(r)l.(r)dt.

where "

Mr)-(a’-i)'-‘[a’-R;'(r)l“-'.
Mr)-(a-n'-'Ia-n.(rn-°-'.
Mt) -cxp{-Pt'/la-R.(r) l).

06- 1 + r02/2a20' 2, p - \rzlloaza'q2 (as a simplification we will assume that the
waves are isotrop c: 052 - 05,2 - a' 2). The functions fn(t). entering into this ex-
pression. have a monitonicallv decgeasing character; the integration region is de-
termined by the function fo( r). The characteristic scales of change in the func-
tions f“. determined using the formula

‘I-12III.Q '-_ 8
where f" d1, 'ldt lb"
have the following values:
t.-ra-1.r./ao.. r.-12-—;'—. r.- ﬁlm".

When there is satisfaction of the condition 10“” (the function f0 is "narrow"
in comparison with f1 and f2). the integration region ~ro/vérq and the depend-
ence of the functions kg and Rn under the integral on 1: can be neglected, which
is equivalent to the nondependence of the function 62 in expression (22) on z.
Thus. the hypothesis of a "frozen-in" character of the wave-covered surface is

correct with satisfaction of the condition:

0) 72410.!»

6. The single-point characteristics of waves are measured most simply by optical .
(as, however, by other) methods. In this section we will examine a method for de-
termining the space correlation function of rises or slopes of the wave-covered
surface on the basis of the results of measurements of the corresponding disper-
sions.

Assume that the random water-air interface is described by the function of rises
5+(r: t). This function can be represented in the form of a linear combination of
elementary monochromatic plane waves with a random complex amplitude dAk, propagat-
ing in different directions with the wave vectors it and the frequencies “’1: -a’(k)*:

go“; 1):: lie jdAa¢“""-”.
U

We will assume that a rigid screen (a wall reflecting waves) has been placed in the
water. The orientation of the screen is stipulated by the vector xo' -— the normal
to its plane (Fig. 3). The function of rises of the "disturbed" interface is repre-
sented in the form of the sum of the functions €+ and g -. describing the random

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wave fields of the "incident" and "reflected" systems of waves respectively:

“I: t) -C. (r: I) +C-(r: l): t- (r; Odie] dB.e“""-".

The condition for the reflection of an elementary plane wave fron a rigid wall is
written in the following way:

dB.-dA. with u-u(k)—k-2(kx.')!.'.

The expression for the correlation function of surface rises I

”t ('1; In: ‘1; ‘a)-(t('ﬁ ‘1)‘(h‘ 5))
has the following forn:

Md.) - .21. Bo ﬂ ((A..A.,> + (4.8.) + (snag + am.) +

(23)
+ «“4.» + (8.3;) + <A.,B.;> + mum),

where

A.‘=aa..e‘<'m-'W; Bu‘adbx‘e'W'i'N'"; 1-1. 2.

Using the assumption of a delta correlation of the spectral amplitudes of element-
ary waves. it is possible to write the following expressions:

(dﬁadAQ-(JAJBJ-(dBJBJ—O;

0.5(dA..dA..'>—0;.(k.)6(kg-k.)dk.dh:
0.5<d8..dB.')-0z.(u.)6(m~u.)du.du.
0,5(dA.ﬂB..'> -0,5(d8..dA..‘) -0;, (In) 6 [ah—u (h) ] dk.du.;
here ¢‘+ is the energy spectrum of rises of the undisturbed surface (+(r: t).

Carrying out integration in (23), we obtain:

”.05: h; ‘) "2uh (P. ‘)+Mu(PI) +ut+(Pa). (2’0)

where H; + is the correlation function of surface rises C.“
p—r.—r.; r-l.-¢.;
9' ~ {Pu-3|+31 00‘ 20+”: Bill 29;
p.,-y.—y, cos 20+z. sin 20;
OF-zs—S. cos 29—9. sin 20:

9‘ ~ p..-—y.+y. cos 20—2. sin 20.

The dispersion of rises of a random surface; is:

. ' (25)
where 0"(')-M‘('; ': 0)-u‘0 +2”‘+(PO)O
p..-2(zms6+y sin0)cos0;

9' ~ p..-2(xcos 0+y sin 0)sin 0.

FOR Ola-10k}. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As Indicated by (25 ). the space correlation function of the "undisturbed" surface
is represented in the dispersion or; 2(r) by its section along the straight line
Poy - po,‘ tg 9 . By measuring the position of the screen (angle 6) and measur-
ing the dispersion 0‘2 it is possible to obtain complete information on the form
of the correlation function H; +(P).

In most cases when reference is to optical methods for investigating waves it is
simpler to make measurements of the dispersion of slopes, not water surface rises.
The expression for the dispersion of slopes and the direction of the x-axis can be
obtained from (26) using the formula

0'
0:, 6:.

 

01' (f) - H: (n: ta; 0) hm

It has the following form:

of“) —20"*—2M" (9.) cos 20—201“. (9.) sin 29. (26)

where H£+. Hg,” are the correlation functions of slopes of the "undisturbed"
interface.

The expression for the dispersion of slopes in the direction of the y-axis is deter-
mined similarly and has the form:

o.‘(r) -20..'+2M..(p.) cos 20-2”... (p.) sin 20. (27)

It follows from expressions (26) and (27) that a "pure" measurement of the functions
313+ and H,” can be carried out only for the sections 9- 0 and 9- 31/2. whereas
"pure" measurement of the function My” can be accomplished only for the sections
9- 117/5. For measuring the dispersions of slopes a" or as, it is possible to use
the optical methods described in sections 2, 3, la of this work.

We noce in conclusion that for practical purposes this method for determining the
space correlation functions of waves can be convenient in measurements made from
aboard a ship or from stationary structures in the sea.

The author expresses appreciation to L. s. Dolin and T. G. Talipova for an extreme-
ly useful discussion of the results of this study.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Cox, C. and Hunk, H. H., "Statistics of the Sea Surface Derived From Sun
Glitter." J. MAR. RES., Vol 13. No 2. pp 198-204, 19519.

2. Stilwell, D. J., "Directional Energy Spectra of the Sea From Photographs," J.
GEOPHYS. “8.. Vol 74. No 8. pp 1974-1986, 1969.

3. Titov. V. 1., "Determination of the Spectrum of Sea waves by a Spectral Analysis
of Aerial Photographs," manuscript deposited at the All-Union Institute of Sci-
entific and Technical Information, 3 September 1981, No 4324-81 DBP.

FOR OFFIClﬂ USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Veber, V. I.., "Statistical Characteristics of Images Obtained in Observations
Through an Uneven Interface of Media with Different Refractive Indices," IZV.
VUZOV: RADIOFIZIKA (News of Higher Educational Institutions: Radiophysics),
Vol 22. No 8, pp 989-1001. 1979.

5. Longuet-Higgins, H. 8., "Statistical Analysis of a Random Moving Surface."
VETROVYYE VOLNY (Hind Haves), Moscow, IL, pp 125-218. 1962.

6. Sinitsyn, Yu. A.. Leykin. I. A. and Rosenberg. A. 1)., "Spatial-Tenporal Charac-
teristics of Ripples in the Presence of Ions Haves." IZV. AN 8588: FAQ (News of
the USSR Acadeay of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean). Vol 9. No 5,
pp 511-519, 1973.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR, Pizika atoosfery i okeana".
1982

5303
(380: 1865/134

2:5
ron omcm. use ONLY
F0I10FFIJAI.USE(MNLY

UDC 551.466.81

pgopmuon or mam or 51.1ch NONLINEAR 1mm. wars m mm: wrm coss'm'u
VAISALA FREQUENCY

Moscow IZVBSTIYA AKADDIII NAUK SSSR: FIZIKA AMSFBRY I OKEANA in Russian Vol 18.
No 3, Her 82 (manuscript received 8 Dec 80) pp 320—326

[Article by A. G. Voronwich. Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] It was demonstrated in [1] that during the propagation of a packet of
slightly nonlinear internal waves (1“) belonging to a mode with some fixed number
the evolution of the packet envelope is described by a nonlinear SchrSdinger equa-
tion. The packet generates some mean flows and corrections to density not disap-
pearing with averaging for the wave period. It is not impossible that these cor-
rections are related to the fine structure of hydrophysical fields in the ocean

[2, 3]. It is of interest to examine this problem applicable to a three-dimensional
packet of IR not having a nodal structure. A similar problem for a compressible
medium was examined in [6]. where, in particular, it was demonstrated that a packet
of powerful acoustic waves generates internal waves during its propagation (Cheren-
kov radiation).

Thus, assume that there is an unbounded fluid with a constant VSisa'la' frequency "0
- const and a packet of internal waves of a small but finite amplitude is propa-

gated in it. An examination of the corresponding slightly nonlinear effects is con-
veniently carried out using Hamiltonian formalism proposed in [5]. He will solve

the problem using the Boussinesq approximation. Applicable to a medium with a con-
stant Viisilé' frequency N0 the results in [6] give the following. In the equations
of hydrodynamics we will convert from the f, v values to the variable bk such that

v-VO+AV(po+p).
o--A"(AV(9.+9)). (1a)
(1b)
p- -_ :(znrs Ill-Z —-b.c"'dk+m. complex (1°)
conjugate
-— " —- h
i N. (2:) 127‘”. “Mu. (16)

16
F!!!()lll€1hl.llﬂl(l'LY
Herc N02 - -3(Po'. 0)" - Noll I/ikl is the frequency of a linear internal wave
with the wave vector k - (a, ,v ). where x and v are the projections of the vector
k onto the horizontal plane and vertical respectively; the prime here and in the
presentation which follows denotes 3/ a 2. Then in the new variables bl: the equa-
tions of motion are Haniltonianslik + id “/5 bk.r . 0, where

” ' I'lblbl' 4* + I'Vnaubt'bhbtﬁt-m-ndk it til: + new

i
_. u
+ 3 I mnbnbhhhnm.“ a. dh + Ito. + (2)

I
+ —2 j Wn.u...b.°b..-o..b..a.n.-n-.. at dk. a. at.

(here only the "significant" term [5] has been left from the fourth-order terms).
The bk values are simply related to the vertical displacement ; (r):

1 H T.
t-(zuH— —b that _
”0 JV 2 .e +“c. (3)

The full expressions for the coefficients V, U and u have the form

(3)...“ " *—"(21!)"'(-;—¢m..o.,)%{v[%(:_:+%Xé +

 

+ suntan—0. ]¥v.[ on. ( um. um) + tawny-oh] * (’08)

__ __+.—__
I".

«t “I. ”I ”I.

 

0|. 8;“ “13¢. *0]".I.’°h
3 V: [ ]

__ _+ )+___
“to

in, 0| 0|.

(the upper and lower signs in this formula relate to V and U respectively) and

I
Wm». - T (71)" (It.tu.+!mam.+I-t.-I.u + (4")

+ Imam-Ina.-“Fianna-h).

,......- ("--°")'“[ (him-w] ._

any». It’

where

 

k-kH-h-krth.

We will. examine the propagation of a spectrally narrow packet of I" with the char-
ac teristic wave vector k0 such that b is substantially different from zero in a
linear approximation only when lit - k (k0 (here and in the text which follows [to
- :k0:). It is convenient to make a standard canonical replacement of the vari-
ables [7. 8]. excluding third-order terms in the Hamiltonian H:

 

 

h-an “J Vunmmﬁu-m-t. “ah-r 2]. V.,....M¢._Nh
Un-on.—m.,

.Io‘UI-OI. “I “I - (S)

 

_ J- Unmﬂ‘ﬂL‘NInh
on m.+m.

“I “a + 0(a’).

MOMALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this case additional fourth-order terms appear in l! and the value of the H co-
efficient changes. The general formula for the coefficient obtained as a result,

denoted ‘1'; is also given in [7]. In the variables ah the equation of motion ak +

153/5 ak = 0 assumes the form

in + (maul Ifn.u.hu:a.,a.,o.,.,_h_h A. a, a, _ 0. (6)

The unwieldy expression for the 'r coefficient is substantially simplified if we ex-
amine the following situation. Assume that the wave is modulated only in the direc-
tion of the unit vector e (Fig. l) g (r) - ; (er). Then ak will contain the J -
functions for the k components perpendicular to e and in formula (6) in actuality
only a single integration for the k component parallel to e remains. It is easy to
confirm that in this case

1'0
03'" [ova-h) l"

r.—&.‘- (MP-h'u- (sinssin 0 oos9+tosaoos or).
T.-N.'k.’(cosa sln O-Ilna cos 0 cos 9)'.

 

(23) 'Tlma. ~ 1'. -
I (7)

where we - no sin 9 is the frequency of the IV traveling in the direction of the
e vector; C is the group velocity (the sense of the angles at , 6 and $0 is clear
from the figure). Using the approximate expression (7), it is convenient to re-
write equation (6) in a different form. He will assume that

If“. t) . (2m)'3/2_Ie1(k’k0)rﬂk dk.

With an accuracy to terms quadratic in wave amplitude V is simply related to the
complex amplitude of the wave of vertical displacements ;:

1 On.
“I T‘ "’*

In addition, the value Poa’kol’f'lz is the energy density in the packet of I".
Carrying out the Fourier transform in (6), we rewrite it. taking (7) into account,
in the following form:

. ' l
V +loov+cﬂl "' '2' O'Vui-ffol V l’§"7IW'0. (8a)
HOMO-‘0'- ] 9 P- ( 8b)

Here i, is the coordinate in the direction of the e vector: g - er, 1:; is the pro-

jection of 1: onto this same direction.

‘
z“.

Gwen-ﬁcoaumaslnuoso-dname). (9)

ho

Ds"m‘-Cs'*0’ - 4 (30°) c. I

 

." - aim/01:6 -

licks: ‘0'
j nun-m I‘ (£1) I’ d" 4*.
0m - ‘2: m

 

m
FOR omcm. use ONLY
Transforming in equations (8a), (8b) into a coordinate system related to the pack-
et: x -§ -Cet and substituting V—W’e-i‘dot, we obtain

to. + ‘;' 0"n-hmwnm-c (10‘)

C.‘Q-+0c'0- l' I ’- (10b)

The Q parameter is related to the low—frequency I" generated by the packet. In ac-
tuality, if formulae (5) and (1c) are used in transforming from the new variable
ak to the initial parameter )0, we obtain the following quadratic correction to p:

, en‘- 00
5 low frequency 9190 "- N. ;

 

(5 low frequency obviously has the sense of a vertical displacement of fluid par-
ticles in the generated low-frequency I"). If it is assumed that the packet is
finite in the 8 coordinate and it is assumed that Q - 0 with 5-H?” . from equa-
tsio: flgb) it is easy to find the Q value and accordingly ; low frequency with

I low frequency . ”P {l (gmw )} 22.21.] |§(§’)l'up{ " '%E'V} Q’ne (11)

Thus. during its propagation the packet leaves behind itself a wake of low-fre-

quency m. It is clear that an appreciable amplitude of the generated waves will
be observed only under the condition (we/cans 2n . where l. is the dimension of
the packet in the direction e. It therefore follows that generation occurs when
9$(0'/k0L)sin 201, that is, the vector e must be directed almost vertically; in

this case

 

5 low frequency “Ems. (12)

where
fo'-—:fjlt.(u|*oxp{-u%::}ae-

O

is some mean square amplitude of a wave in the packet. Assuring, for example, that
{ovs m, Zn/ko~ 100 m. cosy~l, we find £10," fr u 41 II. We note that the
total amplitude of displacement of the fluid partic em the low-frequency I“
will be 1/sin 9 times greater (and can considerably exceed the amplitude of the
initial wave since this examination is suitable only if there is no violation of
the requirements: k0§<l. L>1). It can be seen from formula (12) that if the
packet envelope has a cylin ical synetry relative to the vertical the generation
has a dipole character in the horizontal plane (relative to the direction defined
by the wave vector kg of filling of the Packet).

We also note that in contrast to the effect described in [2], the generated "flows"

do not have a rapidly oscillating character in the vertical coordinate. This cir-
cumstance is obviously related to the fact that in the considered problem it was
assumed that No - cons: and accordingly the interaction transpires only for the

1:9
ros omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

difference components of the wave vectors, and this means that a packet with a
narrow spectrum can generate only waves with small projections of the wave vector
along all the directions. Thus, with No - const in the Boussinesq approximation
the three-dimensional wave packet. like the mode [2], does not create a fine
structure. However, in comparison with the case of propagation of the mode. when
the generation of the "flows" was completely reversible [l], in this situation
there is an irreversible radiation of packet energy into low—frequency waves.
Physically this is related to the fact that in a modal case there was an almost
resonance interaction [6], whereas in this case the radiated waves are in precise
synchronism with the spectral components of the packet.

‘ m
If small 9 (QDsinzdlkoL) are not considered, then. as it can be seen. (2e2/1.2(e2
and in (10b) it can be assumed that Q -|9fI2/we2. In this case (10) is evidently
reduced to a nonlinear Schrodinger equation: 1
m + TO'WTIOI’V-Q’

where 'I' =- To - 'I‘llme2 = k02 sin2 0‘ sin2 9’>0. In a plane case (? - 0) there are
no nonlinear effects. The stationary solution of this equation

V- V0 exp(-i'r IVOIZt)

is stable relative to a harmonic perturbation with the wave number 3‘ if a)"‘1‘>0.
and unstable if «1"T<0. The maximum instability gradient

me ' ”Wop-300 sin'Oh'lbl'

is attained with ”max . |V0|(-2TI¢J")1/2. Accordingly, this type of instability
can be significant only for extremely short Ill. As a simplification we will exam-

ine the case qua/2, when

m'___N—.— [coﬂa— (1——3—:ln'2a) 008's] .
ka'sina ‘ _

In this case the instability of the packet can occur only for high-frequency waves:

0’0) (2/3)1/2N°ﬁ 0.82No, and the packet must be modulated in a direction adequately
close to the vertical: c0329> c032 09/1 — 3/4 sin2 20‘).

He will examine a packet modulated in an arbitrary way so that its spectrum no long-
er has a one-dimensional character. If the modulation effects in an almost vertical
direction. considered above, are neglected, in formula (7) we can assmne that

(21:) ’13“...- n-1, /0 '1- ko’ (“a INO') dn‘ 9.

In this case. as is easy to confirm by direct computation

 

”- I r (uo+l(C.V)-—‘-Ou'

d
2 03.03, )' r+

l on 0‘

[,1 0' a a a
+7 . 77.7]le mm. I»! ah.

FOR CERES]. USE ONLY
where A - a 2/3 x2 + a 2/9 y2 and dij" - azdla R13 kj. The equations of
motion agter transformation to a coordinate system related to the packet acquires
the form of Davey-Stewartson equations [9]

 

W 1 ' 0‘ x 00'

+ — - —_ -

. 2 0N: 68“” O *0 Ah'QQ Q
0‘0
“arm-3: ""-

For the considered problem these equations were derived in [10] by the multiscale
expansions method.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Borisenko, Yu. 0., Voronovich, A. G., Leonov, A. I. and Miropol'skiy, Yu. 2.,
"0n the Theory of Nonstationary Slightly Nonlinear Internal Waves in a Strat-
ified Fluid," IZV. AN SSSR: FAO (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics
of the Atmosphere and Ocean), V01 12, No 3, pp 293-302, 1976.

2. Voronovich, A. 6., Leonov, A. I. and Hiropol'skiy, Yu. 2., "0n the Theory of
Formation of Fine Structure of Hydrophysical Fields in the Ocean." OKEANO-
LOGIYA (Oceanology), V01 16. No 5, pp 750-759, 1976.

3. Leonov, A. I., Niropol'skiy, Yu. 2. and Tamsalu, R. 2., "Computing Pine Struc-
ture of the Density and Velocity Fields (In the Example of the Baltic Sea),"
OKEANOLOGIYA, V01 17, No 3. pp 389-394, 1977.

4. Goncharov, V. P., Krasil'nikov, V. A. and Pavlov. V. 1., “Cerenkov Radiation of
Internal Gravitational Haves," IZV. AN SSSR: FAO, Vol 12, No 12, pp 1310-1314,
1976.

S. Zakharov. V. Ye., "Hamiltonian Formalism for Waves in Nonlinear Media With Dis-
persion," IZV. VUZOV. RADIOFIZIKA (News of Schools of Higher Education. Radio-
physics), Vol 17, No 4, pp 431-453, 1976.

6. Voronovich, A. G.. "Hamiltonian Formalism for Internal Haves in the Ocean,"
IZV. AN 3553: no, Vol 15, No 1. pp 82-92, 1979.

7. Zakharov. 8. Yo. and Rubenchik. A. H., "Nonlinear Interaction of High-Frequency
and Lou-Frequency Haves." PMTF (Applied Mathematics and Technical Physics), No
5. pp 86-98, 1972.

8. Zakharov, V. Ye., L'vov, V. S. and Starobinets, S. 8., "Instability of Mono-
chrnmatic Spin Waves." FIZIKA TVERDOGO TELA (Solid-State Physics), Vol 11, No
10. pp 2972-2984, 1969.

9. Duyey, A. and Stewartson. K.. "On Three-Dimensional Packets of Surface Haves,"
PROC. ROY. SOC. LONDON, A338. PP 101-110, 1974.

FOR¢MﬂﬁCéﬁ.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Shriru. V. 1., "0n the Propagation of a Three-Dimensional Packet of Weakly
Nonlinear Internal. Gravity Haves." INT. J. O!" NONLINEAR MECHANICS. Vol 16.

No 2, pp 129-138, 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Pizika acmosfery 1 okeana".
1982

S303
080: 1865/1310

2
FOR 0mg“ USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.663.5z535.31

SOME PROPERTIES OF OPTICAL TRANSFER FUNCTION OF HAVE-COVERED SBA SURFACE

Moscow IZVBSTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: PIZIKA ATHOSPBRY I OKEANA in Russian Vol 18,
No 3. Mat 82 (manuscript received 18 Nov 80) pp 330-333

[Article by A. G. Luchinin. Institute of Applied Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] The influence of waves on the properties of an image formed by an optical
system was investigated in [1-6]. Depending on the purpose of the investigation.
the authors have neglected different factors whose importance to a considerable
degree is determined by the observation conditions. In this article it will be
demonstrated how it is possible to modify the optical transfer function (0T?) of
the wave—covered discontinuity in dependence on the difference in angles between
the radiation incident on the surface and the direction of sighting. In order to
simplify the problem we will neglect the effects of scattering in water, assuming
that the object plane is situated at a small optical depth.

If the sea surface is illuminated by an infinitely wide beam of parallel rays and
the image is formed by scanning with a narrow receiving diagram, the following ex-
pression [a] is correct for the optical transfer function in a small-angle approx-
imation:

‘U

 

F... " Free: ' SSS} F“ (5- 58. +%)0((h — k) ,L, Wth"("“("")dpdk
“" ' "ma: A(I-)-— - ’ (1)
mr " nsight; 8588 r. (0. k%-)0(—iql., 37L)|'"‘"“”dpdk

7“" ' zrec —-

where Frec(h' h(zrec + L/m)) is the frequency-contrast characteristic of the re-
ceiving system: 3 is a two-point characteristn:function of the surface slopes;
Af>- (“rad - n ight)L/”' “r d and “sight are the projections of unit vectors de-
scribing the d rection of tﬁe incident radiation and the direction of sighting
onto the horizontal plane; a is the refractive index of water; q - (m - l)/m, zrec
Is the height of the receiver above the surface.

As is well known. the function K(h) characterizes the contrast transfer coefficient
when making observations of an infinite sinusoidal mire with a period and direction
described by the vector h and represents the normalized complex spectrum for the
point scattering function. Our objective is a study of the behavior of this func-
tion (its modulus and phase) with different values of thetyvparameter. The value

l1)l‘0iii(i§i.lﬂﬂ£(ﬂﬂLY
IWDR‘OFF1CJAI.IJSEZ(NQLY

of this parameter gives some idea of how close to one another the rays incident
and sruttnred on the plane at the depth L. participating in image formation.

are refracted at the surface. Thus, reference is to that influence which is exert-
ed on the OT? by the statistical dependence of the incident radiation and the ra-
diation emanating from beneath the surface.

We will stipulate the function Free in the form Prec - epr-(hzrec + ltL/m)2/2ﬂ2].

With respect to the surface properties, we will assume that the waves are normal
and uniform and that the correlation function of the surface rises has the form

Moo-or up («99) m 1w»

Omitting below the subscript indicating the one-dimensionality of the problem,
in this case we write an expression for the OT? following from (1);

 

f ,-~..,P{ (ﬁr-undo)? } do

 

 

-. 4‘
‘0')" ' <2)
j‘-Vo“ { _ (9+APP } p
4:

where

l-c'5'(¢o'-30(D)) ”JV/2”-
I-t+W/3l|'+t-LD'/ﬂ.
Bo(p)--J'Bu/dp’. co'-Bo(0).

The denominator in (2) is proportional to 9(Af’) -- the mean power scattered by an
infinite plane with a uniform reflection coefficient. As indicated in [5]. this
parameter, depending on the observation conditions. may be greater than or less
than the corresponding value in the case of a smooth discontinuity. In essence
this means that the wave-covered surface on the average plays the role of a col-
lecting or scattering lens and our task is an investigation of its resolution.

Here we will introduce three cases differing qualitatively from one another.

I. Thctyaparaneter is much greater than the correlation radius of the waves, so
that B (Ayn) is close to zero. Then it is easy to see that in the region signif—
icant gar integration in (2) the g function can be considered constant, the GT? is
real and is described by the formula

Km ~oxp (~05b'co'r‘b‘).
derived in [1].

II. AVD- 0. In this case the OTF is also purely real (the imaginary part is rigor-
ously equal to zero). but. as will be demonstrated, its form differs substantial-
ly from case I.

h
INDI:(Hﬂﬁ(£kI.lEﬂE(NNLY
IIIuApis finite, the imaginary part, and accordingly the phase of the GT? is dif-
ferent from zero.

   

r13. 1. r13. 2.

Fig. l. Modulus of function Q(h) with AP- 0; at 2 - 3.5-10“ m2; a - 7.6 m'2; k0
- 1.8 m‘1;ﬁ - 2.5-10-5; arec - 100 m: 1) 1. - s, 2) 1o, 3) 20 m.

Fig. 2. Phase of optical transfer function withdyh/a - 1. For the remaining para-
meters see Fig. 1.

He will examine cases II and III in greater detail. In order to emphasise the ef—
fect of cross-correlation of fluctuations of incident and emerging radiation we
will compute the function '

Q(h) -K(i)lP(A9)/P(Ap-° “H 03’ (Oﬁh'm't'b').

which reveals the difference, first of all, of the mean transfer cotfficient (with
h - 0) and. second, the optical transfer function proper from case I. This function

 

has the form: -
i I -t +6 '
Q(h)- _ 5"”. exp {w ‘9.
2V: i:

The results of the computations for case II are given in Fig. l. we note the fol-
lowing significant properties of this function. In some regions (in Fig. 1 they
are bounded by curves with a dashed line) it is negative, which corresponds to a
change in the sign of contrast for the observed mire. This makes it possible to
conclude that the scattering function in this case has a multimode character. The
fact that a change in the contrast sign with an increase in the depth of the object
plane occurs with lesser values of spatial frequency seems rather natural, as the.
scattering function in this case has a general tendency to broadening. The second
peculiarity of the Q(h) function is an increase in the envelope of its extrema
with an increase in h; that is. the presence of the correlation,which was mention-
ed nbove, leads to some contrast increase in comparison with case I. The true value

FOB OFFICEfL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the determined contrast can be judged by dividing the value Q(h)/0(0) by
exp(0.5h2crezq2L2) (the dashed curves in Pig. 1 represent the value of this ex-

ponent at a logarithmic scale).

i! ll

  

um

 

Fig. 3. Fig. 6.

Fig. 3. Modulus of function Q(h) with 49/; - 1.

Fig. 4. Modulus of function Q(h) with L - 20 m: 632 - 1.1-10“2 m2; a - 0.6 m‘Z;
k0 = 0.106 r1: imp/E- o. 2) 1. 3) 2.5.

Now we will turn to case III. As already mentioned above, its nost important cri-
terion is a complexity of Q(h). Figure 2 shows the dependence of its phase value.
which is identically equal to the phase of the OTP. on the spatial frequency for
different depths with a fixed value of theApparameter. In the case of a small
depth (L - S m) the phase increases monotonically in the region of spatial fre-
quencies shown in Pig. 2. In the case of greater depths its increase is accompan-
ied by oscillations whose depth increases with an increase in the depth of the
object plane L. With respect to the modulus of this function. it also increases
with an increase in frequency; its value virtually coincides with the envelope of
the extrema Q(h) in case 11 with the exception of the region of small spatial fre-
quencies where it is close to unity (Pig. 3). With an increase in theAp parameter
this region expands and the described effects become appreciable only for large
spatial frequencies for which. however. the absolute value of the contrast is
very small (see Fig. 6. whose curves were computed for larger-scale waves).

We emphasize in conclusion that the results cited here to a certain degree are of
an illustrative character since the number of combinations of parameters exerting
an influence on the magnitude of the effects is extremely great. For a quantita-
tive description of their values under real conditions it is necessary, first of
all, to have information on the form of the correlation functions of slopes for
nonuniform waves for different wind velocities over the surface. It is also neces-
sary to clarify the role of scattering in the water and to evaluate its influence

FOI‘OFFﬂiﬁi.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with different relationships of the length of the free path of protons and the cor-
relation radii for surface waves.

The author expresses appreciation to I. H. Nefedov for assistance in carrying out
the numerical computations and L. S. Dolin for useful discussions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Mullamaa, Yu.-A. R., "Influence of Have-Covered Sea Surface on Visibility of
Underwater Objects." IZV. AN SSSR: PAO (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences:
Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 11, No 2. pp 199-206, 1975.

2. Veber, V. L., "Statistical Characteristics of Iaages Obtained in Observations
Through an Uneven Discontinuity of Media With Different Refractive Indices,"

IZV. VUZOV. RADIOFIZIKA (News of Higher Educational Institutions. Radiophys-
ics), Vol 22. No 8. p 989. 1979.

3. Veber, V. L. and Dolin, L. s., "Fluctuations of Images During Observations
Through a Randomly Uneven Nonstationary Discontinuity." IZV. AN SSSR: PAO.
V01 17. No 11. Pp 1168-1177, 1981.

4. Luchinin. A. 0.. "Some Patterns in Forming of the Image of the Shelf During
its Observation Through the Have-Covered Sea Surface," IZV. AN SSSR: FAO,
Vol 17. No 7, pp 732-736. 1981.

5. Luchinin, A. 6., "Influence of Wind Haves on the Characteristics of a Light
Field Backscattered by the Bottom and a Hater Layer," IZV. AN SSSR: PAO, Vol
15. No 7. pp 770-775. 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Piziks atmosfery i okesna".
1982

5303
C80: 1865/134

FOR 0FFK5§1.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.663.7

ONE MECHANISM FOR FORMING 0F OCEANIC ELECTRIC FIELDS

Moscow IZVBSTIYA AKADHHI NAUK 538R: FIZIKA ATMOSFERY I OKEMM in Russian V01 18,
No 3, Mar 82 (manuscript received 30 Dec 80) PP 333-335

[Article by A. L. Virovlyanskiy and A. N. Malakhov. Gor'kiy State University]

[Text] In this comunication we bring the attention of researchers to one possibil-
ity of the appearance of an electric field in a solution of electrolyte, specific-
ally. sea water. The mechanism of field development, which is under discussion, is
governed by the separation of charges due to different displacements of cations
and anions during accelerated hydrodynamic motion of the solution. This effect
applicable to the propagation of acoustic waves in an electrolyte solution was for
the first time predicted theoretically by Debye [l] and then was confined repeat-
edly experimentally [2]. For this reason the electric field developing in the solu-
tion will henceforth be called a Debye field.

Another mechanism of the development of a field during the motion of sea water.
caused by the movement of a conducting fluid in the earth's magnetic field (M).
is well known [3-S]*. It is understandable that one and the same hydrodynamic mo-
tion is responsible for both of the mentioned effects. Below we will compare the
contributions to the electric field from both effects for the simplest models of
fluid motion. In these examples we will strive to understand in what cases it makes
sense to take the Debye field into account and when it is masked by a field induced
by motion in the EMF. In the computations we will neglect the influence of electric
forces on macroscopic motion of the solution.

It was demonstrated in [7] that a Debye field develops with any accelerated motion
of the solution. In [7] a formula was derived which makes it possible to find the
strength of this field for arbitrary hydrodynamic motion:

. I
2(r.:)-p jo-W-‘dnknmdh- (1)

* In addition. there are a number of reasons for the appearance of an electric

field in the ocean associated with the presence of foreign bodies in the water,
influence of the bottom, etc. [3-6]. These will not be considered here.

I70]! 051cm. USE ONLY
Here E(r. t) is the strength of the Debye field at the point r at the time t;

c u '
u-(Ileu) Eamon p-u/u.) 2mm»:
p-I

e . mp, b are the charge, mass and mobility of an ion of the p-th species; 'VP

18 the mesh number of ions of the p-th species in a unit volume: as is the diel-
ectric constant of the solvent) N is the number of species of ions n the solu-
tion; a (r. t1) is the eddy-free component of the vector field of accelerations in
the fluid. taken at the point r at a moment in time t1<'t. In the examples consid-
ered below reference will be to the eddy-free motions of a fluid and therefore
there 08- a a 3u/3t + (uV)u is the total acceleration of the solution.

As indicated in [7]. the numerical values of d and ﬁcan be computed theoretically
only with a great error which it is difficult even to estimate. This is attributable
to the fact that in determining InP and bp it is necessary to take into account the
phenomenon of hydration of ions, the theory of which at the present time has not
been adequately developed*. Accordingly, a and ﬂ , strictly speaking, must be de-
termined experimentally.

In the evaluation we will use the values of these parameters. computed on the as-
sumption that sea water is a 0.5-molar Nacl solution. In order to determine mp we
will reckon the Na+ and Cl“ hydration numbers to be equal to 6 and 8 respectively
[8]. In determining the mobilities we will employ the values of the equivalent 6
conductivities of these ions [9]. Thus, we obtain at - 0.9-1010 l/sec. ﬂ - 0.7-10
kg/A-secz.

The principal contribution to the integral (1) is from acceleration values in the
time interval (t - 1/“ . t). Since 1Ax~ 10'10 sec, which is known to be much less
than any time scales of hydrodynamic motion, the factor 08(r, t) can be removed
from beneath the integral. Formula (1) in this case is transformed into

E(r, :)-(p/a)a,(r, t) (ya-0.840" kg/A-sec). (1a)

As we see, computation of the Debye field for any stipulated motion of sea water
presents no difficulties. The situation is different with computation of the el-
ectric field induced by motion in the EH?. However. there are also no fundamental
difficulties here: it is necessary to solve the Maxwell equations in a moving con-
ducting fluid with corresponding boundary conditions at the water-air and water-
bottom interfaces. However, it is possible to obtain a solution of such a system
of equations in partial (although linear) derivatives in analytical form only for
the simplest motions of a fluid: the corresponding formulas usually have a rather
unwieldy form [5]. Precisely for this reason as examples we selected very simple

models of hydrodynamic motions. especially since we are interested primarily in
an evaluation in order of magnitude.

*
Debye [1] proposed that the mass of a hydrate shell be determined on the basis

of measurements of the electric field arising during the propagation of an acous-
tic wave in the electrolyte solution.

F0!‘0FFNJ§3.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As the first example we will examine a monochromatic surface gravitational wave
propagating in a fluid of infinite depth. Assume that the undisturbed surface co-
incides with the xy-plane and the z-axis is directed vertically dowanward. The
wave travels along the x-axis and its amplitude is sufficiently small so that in
the computations it is possible to use the linearized equations of hydrodynamics.
Using the known formulas for the field of velocities in such a wave (see, for ex-
ample [10]) and formula (1a), we obtain an expression for the components of
strength of the Debye field

£.--m.p/a. 5,-0. £.--m.p/¢. (2)

where vx(r. t), vz(r, t) are the projections of velocity onto the x- and z-axes.
ad is the angular frequency of the wave.

The strength of the electric field of the surface wave induced by motion in the
EM? has been computed in many studies (see [5] and the citations given there).
For this case

E."I‘I‘our|'n. B.I-—"“.UJ' E"-m(l‘al'lhlla). (3)

where Ex,y'z(r, t) are the projections of the electric field onto the coordinate
axes, ppo is the permeability of sea water (usually H is very close to 1), Hx,y,z
are the projections of EMF strength onto the x-, y- and z-axes.

It is easy to show that E‘ and 31' (and in exactly the same way, E; and 52') are
shifted in phase by n/Z relative to one another.

Since vx and V; differ from one another only in phase. it follows from (2) and (3)
that:

|B./B.’|-|S./E.’I-(0ﬂ/¢)/uo|3vl- (1.)

This ratio is highly dependent on the projection of the EM? onto the y-axis, that
is. on the direction of wave propagation. In evaluating the minimum value of this
ratio we will assume Hy . 0.5 oe. Then

I8JE.I|— [5/3“ "rm-a. . (5)

where uJis measured in degrees/sec. The waves really existing in the ocean usual-
1y haveco51 degree/sec. Thus, it follows from (S) that in this case the Debye
field is greatly masked by a field caused by motion in the EMF. Formally the ratio
(4) increases to infinity with Hy-’o. that is. if the direction of wave propaga-
tion coincides with the projection of the EMF onto the xy-plane, but scarcely
never does the Debye field become "predominant," since. to be sure, there are no
plane surface waves in the ocean.

It can be seen from (2) and (3) that for the given example of fluid motion the
fields caused by the two considered mechanisms differ in directions. This circum-
stance is characteristic for many fluid motions. Its cause can be seen particular-
ly graphically from an examination of the following very simple model of a current
[3. 5]. Assume that in a fluid (the positioning of the axes is the same as in the

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
preceding example) there is a moving layer of the thickness h. The motion occurs
along the y-axis; the velocity in the layer varies in conformity to the law vy -
v0(x)e1“’t. In this case the velocity and acceleration vectors are collinear and
therefore the Debye field is also directed along the y-axis. The field induced by
motion in the EMF is perpendicular to this axis since the Lorenz force perpendic-
ular to velocity does not create separations of charges in the y-direction. Thus,
for this hydrodynamic motion the developing electrical fields are orthogonal to

one another.

In conclusion we will examine the propagation of longitudinal compressional-dila-
rational (acoustic and shock) waves in sea water. As in the preceding example,
acceleration and velocity here are directed in the same direction. Accordingly,
the Debye electric field and the electric field induced by motion in the EMT

in this case are also orthogonal to one another.

Assume that a plane acousric wave, the velocity of the fluid in which changes in
conformity to the law v(r. t) - uoe1(kr"dtl travels in the water; the vectors “0
and k are collinear. From (la) we obtain the value of strength of the Debye field

EU. t) --l(p/a)u.u oxp “(kl-100]. (6)
In the evaluation we take «1- 10s rad/sec, uo . 10'2 m/sec. In this case [EI~'10'3
V/m.

For computing the field induced by motion in the EMP, we use the general method in
[S]. Omitting the elementary computations, we innediately cite the result:

my. l)-(low'olmxlll/(k'-lou.o))exp[l(kr-ml) 1. (7)

o’is the conductivity of sea water. In the evaluations we assume 0" 6.5 cm/m. The
ratio of the amplitudes (6) and (7) is equal to (‘0 - 105 rad/sec): [E/B'I -
1.2-107. In this case | E > E' I.

Since the Debye field is proportional to the acceleration of the fluid, it can at-
tain especially high values at the front of an explosive wave. It is easy to vis-
ualize that the amplitude of this field at the shock wave front can be evaluated

using the formula

s-(p/awcom. (8)

where M is the Mach number of the wave, c0 is the speed of sound. I is front
width. In the evaluation taking the real characteristics of the explosive wave:
M . 1.0-2. c0 - 1.5-10'2. 1 .. 1.5 cm. from (a) we find that 3:1.2 ‘I/m.

0n the basis of the considered examples some conclusions can be drawn concerning
the role which the Debye effect plays in the general pattern of formation of the
electric field in the ocean. First of all, we note that the Debye field, in ac-
cordance with (la), is directly proportional to the eddy-free part of fluid ac-
celeration. For the natural movements of water in the ocean the acceleration will
rarely be more than 1 m/secz, which corresponds to an amplitude of the Debye field
of I’LVIN- The experimentally measured electric fields of natural origin in

61
FOIlOFFKJAI.USEioNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the ocean usually have a strength from tenths to tens of pIV/m [3-5]. Thus. it can
be said qualitatively that the Debye field introduces a real, although a small con-
tribution to the creation of the general pattern of the natural electromagnetic
field in the ocean. This can also be seen in the considered examples. In addition,
it can be concluded from these examples that the Debye field usually differs from
the field induced by movement in the EMF either in phase or in direction.

Hydrodynamic movements with an acceleration substantially greater than 1 m/sec2
are usually related to man's activity. As indicated by the third example, for such
movements the Debye field in its amplitude considerably exceeds the field induced
by movement in the EMP.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Debye. P. A., "A Method for the Determination of the Mass of Electrolytic
Ions." J. CHEM. PHYS.. Vol 1, p 13, 1933.

2. Styuer, Dzh. and Yeger, 5., "Propagation of Ultrasonic Haves in Electrolyte
Solutions," PIZICHESKAYA AKUSTIKA (Physical Acoustics), edited by U. H. Mason,

Mir, 1968.

3. Shuleykin, V. V., FIZIKA HORYA (Sea Physics), Moscow, Nauka, 1968.

a. Akindinov, V. V., Naryshkin, V. I. and Ryazantsev, A. H., "Electromagnetic
Fields in Sea Hater (Review),“ RADIOTEKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA (Radio Engineering
and Electronics). Vol 21, No 5, pp 913-964, 1976.

5. Sachel'nikov. V. V., OSNOVY TEORII YESTESTVENNOGO ELEKTRONAGNITNOGO POLYA V
MORE (Principles of the Theory of the Natural Electromagnetic Field in the
Sea), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

6. Leybo, A. 8., "Electrokinetic Phenomena Associated With Sea Haves." GEOHAG-
NETIZM l AERONOHIYA (Geomagnetism and Aeronomy), Vol 17, No 3. pp 502-506,
1977.

7. Virovlyanskiy. A. L.and Malakhov, A. N., "Electric Field of an Arbitrarily Mov-
ing Electrolyte." IZV. VUZOV: RADIOPIZIKA (News of Higher Educational Institu-
tions: Radiophysics), Vol 24. No 7, pp 851-8SA, 1981.

8. lzmaylov. N. A., ELEKTROKHIHIYA RASIVOROV (Electrochemistry of Solutions), Hos-
cow, Khiniyn, 1966.

9. KRATKIY SPRAVOCHNIK PIZIKO-KHINICHESKIKH VELICHIN (Concise Handbook of Phys-
icochemical Parameters), Leningrad, Goskhimizdst, 1959.

10. Uizem, Dzh., LIHEYNYYE I NELINEYNYYE VOLNY (Linear and Nonlinear Haves), Hos-
cow, Mir, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Nauka", "Izvcstiya AN SSSR, Pizika atmosfery i okeana",
1982

5303
C80: 1865/134

FI”!(HHW(1§5.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.666.6

GENERATION OF INTERNAL WAVES BY BOTTOM IRREGULARITY AI DISCONTINUITY OF TWO FLUIDS
FLOUING AT ANGLE TO ONE ANOTHER

Novosibirsk ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY HEKHANIKI I TEKHNICHESKOY PIZIKI in Russian
No 6, Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript received 12 Sep 80) pp 41-47

[Article by I. V. Sturova, Novosibirsk]

[Text]

Abscrsct: The sinplest example of three-dimen-
sional internal waves in a flow whose velocity
changes with depth both in intensity and direc-
tion are waves at the discontinuity of two fluids
flowing at an angle to one another. The investiga-
tion of the kinematic characteristics of wave nove-
ment in such a fluid under the condition that the
depth of the lower layer is infinite was made in
[1]. The asymptotic behavior of the waves at the
discontinuity arising during flow around a body
for the case of infinitely deep layers and an ob-
stacle at the bottom under the condition of an
infinite thickness of the upper layer was examin-
ed in [2]. The stability of waves arising at the
discontinuity of two unlimited flows flowing at

an angle to one another was investigated in [3].

We will examine flow around a rise described by the function f(x, a), unbounded
in horizontal directions by a flow, in whose upper layer of the thickness H1 the
density of the fluid is equal to [31, in the lower layer of the thickness Hz -

rected a}

(l +e)(s )0). The velocity of the lower flow is equal to "2 and is di-
ong the x-axis. the velocity of the upper flow is U1 and forms the angle

ct with the x-axis. The x- and z-axes are situated at the undisturbed discontin-
uity. the y-sxis is directed vertically upward, the axis of symmetry of the ob-
stacle passes through the origin of coordinates.

Assuming the motion of the fluid within each layer to be eddy-free and the disturb~
ances at the free surface and the discontinuity are small, the equations for the
velocity potentials of disturbed motion in each layer are written in the form

Aw. = 0 with o<y<ll,. A9, -0 with -ll.<v < 0 (1)

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the boundary conditions at the free surface (y - B1)

“Pt/0U "' [’1‘ - 0. L191 " 3‘3 (2)
at the discontinuity (y - 0)
avﬂay + I’I‘I :- 0. (ﬁn/a” + L!" g 0. “luv, — 91L]?! - (3)
30h - pan:

at the bottom (y u -32)
WW+L$I=OI¢II¢I—.o with£+§->G>.

"he“! L, - U “cos @810: + sin (pa/0:). L, - 0.0/02.

Here the functions £(x, z) and '20:, 2) describe the vertical displacements of
the free surface and discontinuity respectively, g is the acceleration of gravity.
In the investigation of internal waves in many cases at the free surface instead

of condition (2) use is made of the simpler "solid lid" condition, for which 391/
By . 0 with y - H1.

We introduce dimensionless variables, as the scale units for length and velocity
using the values h - f (0, 0) (height of rise) and 112 and enploying the Fourier
transforn

o.(u.v.v)-= .3, fwd: S o""w(x.v.z)dz

for real ;1 and V, from equation (1) we obtain a systen of ordinary differential
equations whose solution gives the following representations for the functions
;,(y. V) and 11,04, v). being the Fourier transform of the functions g and 7:
“”4431. (I + a)c"'("‘+"‘)
‘-'- ———_—r——'—:——-
(1+0 ’*")(1+o ””90

.
2m. (1 + ¢)o"'"‘ I .
I" = W (I‘d: — A "I Al“)-

D r.- A!)‘ - Mina

D.(k.0)-[oAtth.—(i+s)ka‘,]thkl!1—Iu£thkﬂ,:
DAM)-(m-Mmmhhkm-(How
d,—Vsln(0+¢); Q-aInO; Asa/0:; v-zum;

f, is the Fourier transforn f(x. 2) and the following substitution is made
p-ksine, v-kcoso.

with use of the "solid lid" condition at the free surface 7?, assumes the form

6h
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
Mi +s)o“"u|m '

- _ 2'4
n. (1 + ozﬁ'l 0‘

Performing inverse Fourier transforms, we obtain

. ' I as (‘)
Y] (x, z) -= $ ‘5; eiuxdp .3; g“!‘1.dv - 5‘3 Rggdojhwahum.“

where the substitution x = r cos 9’, z = r sin 3" is made. A similar expression ex-
ists for the function {(x. 2) as well.

The functions 4' a and r2 * have simple poles being roots of the equation Mk, 9)
- 0 or D1(k,6) - 0. It can be confirmed that with

A [V'Hrsin’ (e + a.) + Hl'ain‘el — V‘sin’ 0ain’(0 + c) < “ﬁt?!

the equation D(k,§) - 0 has the two positive roots :1 2(i1< :2). otherwise there
is only ' .- root k2. The equation 01(k.€) - 0 has no acre than one positive root

k and only under the condition

1
V2”, sin2 (0 + a) + (1 + 0111 ain‘ 0 <sAH1H,

In selecting the integration contour in the k-plane in (lo) we will use the Rayleigh
method for introducing small dissipative forces [1] proportional to the velocities
of fluid particles. In the initial problem (1)-(3) changes are experienced only by
the dynamic conditions at the free surface in (2) and at the discontinuity in (3),
which new will have the form

141% + 5% "‘ (Cu Fatah "' PILI‘PI + “939: "‘ 9191) "
- ((92 — Pi)'lo

where B> 0 is a dissipation coefficient which is small in value. The solution of
problem (1) with these boundary conditions shows that the poles of the integrand

in (lo) with 5+0 have the form it - k + iﬁ‘)’, where, for example, under the "solid
lid" condition

 

Accordingly. in (lo) the integration contour is selected in quadrant I or quadrant
IV as a function of the sign on sin (6 + <P); all its real poles are "bypassed"
by semicircles on which with Y< 0 In k<0. with Y<O In k>0. In [2] this circum-
stance was not taken into account and all the poles were "bypassed" from below.

As a result. the integral representations for the sought-for functions can be writ-
ten in the form of the sum of single integrals governed by the presence of the
poles and the double integrals arising as a result of integration along the imag-
inary axis. which henceforth will be discarded from consideration since they de-
scribe locnl effects in the neig'-horhood of the rise and rapidly decrease with an
increase in r.

The final expression for the function ”(r. if) (and similarly for C (r, 9) )) has

the form a

6;
110'. (P) = - 4;; 57min (1;: Sin (0 + some“. (721.0)“-

-l°1

65
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

where it is the rooc of the equation Mk, 9) - O or D (k, 9) - 0 and integration
is carried out using those intervals of the avalues n which sgn (sin(9+ 9)) -

:sgn (Y) .

With satisfaction of the specific computations the form of the axisynnetric rise
on the bottom was stipulated in two types:

d <r<00.

[(r) .-. i - r’ld‘ with 0 < '< d- ’0) " 0 with (5)
I. (k) = 4111, (mo/ha,
where J2 is a second-order Bessel function of the first kind.
- d’/ d' 2:" ’l’
[(r) ( + ) with 0 g r < co, (6)

I. (k) - ud'oxp(- dklZ)/2,

with which the volumes of both rises coincide and are equal to S - J1 d2/2. As a
comparison we also investigated the case of flow around a dipole situated at the
bottom at the point x = 0. z = 0 with the axis directed along the x—axis and a
moment equal to s. In this case f* - s. As is well known (see, for example, [4]),
such an approximation is used when investigating internal waves generated by a

moving body.

Numerical computations of the function
Y1(x, 2) were made for two V and 04 val-
ues with A: 100. a - 10-2, ill/h - 2. '
Hzlh - 5. Figures 1-6 represent isolines
of the function 110:, z)/h with V It 1,
0"- 0.45“ (Figures 1, 2) and V - 0.5,
OL- 0.55' (Figures 3. lo) for an obstacle
described by function (5) with d - 5; the
dashed lines represent the boundaries of
wave tones determined by the stationary
phase method like in [2]. The circle
with its center at the origin of coord-
inates corresponds to the boundary of
the rise. HithOl- 0 the pattern of the
current is syunetric relative to the x-
axis. In Figures 1, 2 the isolines are
defined with the following levels: 0,
110-2, 13-104, 110-1, 1340-1; in Fig-
ures 3, a -- o. 1-10'3, 13-10-3, 16-10‘3,
Fig. 1. 310-2, 1340-2.

 

It should be noted that with these values of the initial parameters the difference
between the solutions obtained with use of the full conditions at the free boundary
and the "solid lid" condition does not exceed 1:. The vertical displacements at the
free surface are several orders of magnitude less than at the discontinuity.

An Investigation of the influence of the form of an obstacle on the amplitude of

internal waves indicated that a dipole approximation gives exaggerated values.
Figure 5 represents the function Y) (x. z)/h as a function of x with z/h - 20 and
the mentioned A, 8. [11, H values for V - l(a - 0‘ - 0, b -o( - 65°). Curves l-
3 correspond to the rises stipulated by expressions (5), (6) and the dipole

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
waves developing at the discontin
at an angle to one another. The results in
easily applied to the case of flows of finite depth when the "solid
id" conditions are satisfied at th free surface. Waves with s wave umber I: will
2 stable if k <
(Wm
M .
<0 + cnvun(0+a) ~sin0l'
:- the stationary problem consid
able.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Kochina, I. N.. "Haves at the Interface of 'No Fluids Plowing at an Angle to
One Another," PHH (Applied Mathematics and Mechanics), Vol 19, No 5, 1955.

3. Gsndin, L. 8., "Stability of Haves at Interface of Flows Directed at an Angle
to One Another," IZV. AN SSSR, SER. GEOFIZICHESKAYA (News of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, Geophysical Series), No 3, 1957.

4. Miles. J. H., "Internal Haves Generated by s Horizontally Moving Source,"
GEOPHYSICAL FLUID DYNAMICS. Vol 2, p l, 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Nauka", "Zhurnsl prikladnoy nekhaniki i tekhnicheskoy
fiziki", 1981

5303
cso: 1865/129

69
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 532.593

ASSOCIATED INTERNAL WAVES IN FLUID WITH EXPONENTIAL DENSITY DISTRIBUTION

Novosibirsk ZHURRAL PRIKLADNOY HEKHANIKI I TEKHNICHBSKOY PIZIKI in Russian No 6,
Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript received 13 Oct 80) pp b7-54

[Article by s. A. Hakarov and Yu. D. Chashechkin, Moscow]

[Text] Abstract: On the basis of the modified stationary
phase method proposed in [1. 2], the authors of [3]
in a plane and a three-dimensional case determined
surfaces of a constant phase of internal waves ex-
cited by a body moving at an arbitrary angle to the
horizon, satisfactorily coinciding with the experi-
mentally observed Haves. Hith allowance for the in-
tegral transforms in [5, S]. the author of [6] used
numerical methods for examining, in a linear formul-
ation. the plane and spatial problem of wave movements
arising during flow around submerged "inflow" and
"outflow" of identical intensity by a uniform flow
of a density-stratified fluid. The asymptotic solu-
tion for the wave field excited by the ”inflow"-
"outflov" system, moving in an exponentially strat-
ified fluid, was obtained in [7, B]. These solutions
describe the wave pattern arising during the movement
of a body at high velocities. The objective of this
study is a determination of the amplitude-phase char-
acteristics of associated internal waves in a fluid
vith an exponential density distribution with a uni-
form horizontal motion of the body in a wide range
of motion regimes (including movements at low veloc-
ities) with their subsequent comparison with the re-
sults of laboratory experiments. In the solution no
allowance is made for dissipative and diffusional
effects (that is. the change in the density of par—
ticles during their motion is not taken into ac—
count) or the influence of the free surface. It is
assumed that the fluid is of infinite depth.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The system of hydrodynamic equations determining the field of velocities v has
the form

(0/0: + vv)pv - —vn + or. (0103+ 'vlp - 0. v' - m. . (1)

where t is tune;)0 is density; p is pressure; g is the acceleration of gravity:
m(x. y, z, t) is the distribution of inflows and outflows in the fluid; 9" 13/3:

+ ua/ay + na/az.

The examination is made in the laboratory coordinate system OXYZ (the x-axis is
directed along the line of movement of the body, the Z-axis is directed vertical-
ly upward) and the coordinate system 0X YZ(x* - x - Ut) is related to the body.

The problem is solved in the Boussinesq approxination. The dimensional parameters
of the problem are: [00(2) - P (0) exp [-z/Al is the density of the fluid; the

stratification scale is_A.- [d 9n (z)/dz]'1; the period T and the frequency of

free internal oscillations in the ffuid is N - JEECI; T - 211/“: d is the vertical
dimension and L is the horizontal dimension of the body and U is the velocity of

its motion; 70 is the amplitude and A is the phase of the internal wave.

The dimensionless parameters: Fr - UZINZdz is the internal Proude number: C - 11/d
is the ratio of scales; iﬂ- L/d is the lengthening of the body; x0 - x’N/AU, yo -
yN/AU, :0 - zN/AU are dimensionless coordinates.

Eddy-free flow around a body by a current of a uniform ideal fluid is equivalent
to flow around a combination of inflows and outflows [9]. This result can also
be applied to a stratified fluid in the case of small gradients when the density
of the fluid changes insignificantly at distances of the order of the dimension

of the body [6].

The motion of a dipole and a system consisting of an inflow of equal intensity sit-
uated at the distance 2a is considered.

The linearized system (1), with allowance for the correlation between the vertical

deviation of a surface of constant density from an equilibrium position 7?(x. y. z,
t) and the vertical velocity component [7],is reduced to the following equation:

[5 (g, +54-g) + Mg;+$)}[Mt)n(¢.v.t.0l-

0 0 (2)
- 1-!- I; [p.(x)m(z, V. ‘0 ”I

The values m(x, y. z. t) for the movement of plane and three—dimensional bodies
are given in [6. 7].

We will seek a solution of equation (2) with zero boundary conditions at infinity.
Steady wave nation is examined.

The internal waves forming during the uniform motion of a body in a stratified flu-

id are called "associated" because the wave pattern is stationary in the coordinate
system related to the body. '

1
FOR‘OFFNEII.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The as ptot in solution of equation (2), taking info account that with uniform hor-
lzonta notion of the body «3- -ow. has the form 1]

' «' am. . ex taa°+ 1
n(r.u.s)-;.-2——L‘}-;5ﬁ7m1w+o(ﬁ) (3)

with r*-—om along any radius-vector q; sumtion is carried out for all points It -
{01. #04 on the wave umber surface determined by the dispersion expression

0(a. 9.?) - (4.”)‘(0' + 9' + 7') - N'(¢' + h‘) - 0. (’0)
at which the normal to the surface is parallel to q and
”-9 0 a a o
—g_>°(""ﬁ+'“‘$+“1?) (5)

under the condition that the surface (’0) has a nonzero Gaussian curvature K at
each of these points [1]. The coefficient 3 is dependent on the sign of the cur-
vature and the configuration of the wave number surface (6), No! . ﬂ , 7’) is a
Fourier transform of the right-hand side of equation (2).

By analogy with [1], in a plane case (coordinates {an 3}) the asymptotic solution

(2) 18 an ) :(uo-l-r-l- " r
a? , 6.10:» T!!! 1
“"°""1/7°‘2'—'—IWIVM—H+°(W) “’

where 13400 along any radius-vector q; smation is carried out for all points It
-[O£, Y} by the curve

001. 1) -' (¢U)'(¢’ + 7') - N‘u’ - 0.

where the normal to the curve is parallel to q and (5) is satisfied.

As indicated by formulas (3). (6). the constant-phase surfaces have the fore k-r*
- A. Since the r* vector is parallel to the normal of the surface 6 - 0 at the
point k. then

A
I. - n“ v.6. . (7)

It follows from solution of system (7) with (’0) taken into account that the con-
stant-phase surfaces in a three-dimensional case are described by the equation

W- (w + (m [(4)1 — s]. (8,
which coincides with [3. 10]. In a plane case

M + w - 1. <9)

Formulas (8), (9) were derived for a point source when there is no interference of
the waves excited by its different parts. which can change the resultant patterns
of the constant-phase surface.

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The inequality (5) is the radiation condition, according to which all the waves
are generated by a source and do not arrive from infinity. It follows from this
that wave formation occurs only behind the moving body, that ia’. with x <0, where-
as in spherical coordinates [r , ,6}, related to the body,x - r* cos 9 , y I
r* cos 9 , y - r* sin9 cosq). z‘P - r* sin 6sin¢fwith 9>n/2.

The points It - int, ﬂ, Y} of the wave number surface (5);: at which the normal to
the surface coincides with the selected direction r - (x , y, z), is found from
the system

(«ms + r + r) — me + 5') - o. mow -= o. . am

The vector equation of system (10) contains two linearly independent equations.
Taking into account a, p and Y determined from (10):

:— ai '
t-g-ainocose. 5- ﬁﬁ+u°sinocosm 7=¢.D._£°';I%LL

the wavelength. is

 

2:: ur ' 01'5an
-3—11’ +9 +v an“ ' EH’ -ani.m‘e (11)
1+_ 0:411):
In the plane y - 0 the wavelength is everywhere identical and equal to )0- UT:

outside this plane 3 tends to zero with approach to the X-axis.

In the case of uniform horizontal motion of the dipole in a deep fluid with a weak
stratification the vertical displacement )7, determined from (3), coincides with

the solution in [7]. With small I] (accordingly large k) in the solution in [7]
there is a singularity in the form 1/0.

In the case of movement of the inflow-outflow system it follows from (3) that
VII—sini ‘0

M" 0 v)= R: ' —-.+—m ___#m_
sin(—‘&— sin ocos0)cos (4%.— sin 1?) + 0(7'r).

r- _.oo,nl2<o<n (niche-n, x-o).

(12)

The vertical displacement (12) does not become equal to zero when U-eo. Uith trans-
formation to a laboratory coordinate system n1(x, y, z, t) at a fixed point x, y,
z (y r- 0) does not tend to zero when t-eoo, the same as the solution in [7].

In u plane case with ﬂow around a dipole it follows from (6) that
1
1M” 0" 341/17 ”'(T '1")+0(7)' (13)
r’—>oo, 3'<0,

with flow around the inflow-outflow system

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

na(=’. 1) = V??- m:(_l.‘_) ”:7 g x - (11.)
%%)m(-”:F--"r)+°(%-)-
r‘ .. co, 2‘<0.

Both 420:, a. t) and "30:, a, t) tend to zero when t-voo, but only (16) becones
equal to zero when 0+0.

The above-mentioned singularities of the solutions for point disturbances -- of a
dipole [7], and of an inflow-outflow pair (12) - are indicative of the non-
equivalence of substitution of the notion of a three-dimensional body in a non-
viscous fluid to motion of point disturbances not only with low velocities [7], but
with high velocities, when Fr>1, and can be eliminated by substitution of the
delta functions in system (1) by a series of classical functions of the type

#1:???" ~60). 1-»0. (15’

The considered case of flow around distributed inflow and outflow at the distances

bl < r < A(b> 1) is equivalent to flow around point inflow and outflow of equal
intensity H1 - Ho erf3(b). which corresponds to flow around an ovoid, where "0 is
the intensity of the point sources [9].

Then, from (3), with (15) taken into account, it follows that in the Boussinesq
approximation ( lo - well)

3 ——
WWPL ”4-591;: ”if” ——1—L—"' “:17: °°°"°x

a 3 _ a 3
x sin (53'— sin o cos',0) cos(-N—U'- sin cp + sgn (sin @4777 #3) +

+0(%;), r'—>oo, €—<0<n.

The second exponential factor leads to a rapid attenuation of (16) with U-v- 0 and
exerts a small influence with large 0. In the case of high velocities rthvl/U
with a decrease in velocity the anplitudeln‘s [of the vertical displacement (16)
has maxima at the points 11“, determined with [00/11 from the condition

 

(16)

-$§|sinqacose|=-;-+an, n=0.i,2,... (17)

With an increase in P, the maxima of amplitude are displaced insignificantly in the
direction of greater U.

The dependence of the amplitude of internal waves on the flow—around velocity in
the case of small U, such that Fr. - U2/(N232)<l, is attributable to the interfer-
ence of waves from coherent sources (inflow and outflow), situated at the distance

7h
r0: omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2a. In the XZ-plane the marina of the amplitude are observed with U - Un, deter-
nined from

N. .“2'. i, III-0.1.2....
Whoa” 14 +) n (18)

it therefore follows that
20k“ 0I - n1. +142. 1. - U.r,

which is the interference condition. The appearance of in/Z is related to the op-
posite effect of inflow and outflow.

It follows from (18) that in the case of low velocities (Fra<l) there are several

maxima of amplitude at different 9n angles

|m0.1=-,,"7-";-(2n+1). n=o.1,2.... (19’

with an increase in velocity the maxim are displaced toward the wake axis.

internal. wave is "3' v 1 + s 2 with 17:91. which coincides with [6]; with na<1

with motion of a elongated body with the lengthening S - all! the amplitude of the
3,! 3g~f1 + 17;1 and decreases with an increase in lengthening.

With motion of distributed inflow-outflow the form of the constant-phase surface
differs somewhat from (8). since the phase "additive"

WV 1- sin’ 9cm. 0

WW ”WT--
enters into (16). whose value increases with approach to the X-axis.

Prom (16). with transformation to a laboratory coordinate systea.0XYz, it follows
that
‘3 N1" (”03"
" ‘1 — _ '
‘1 (04.1.1) °XP[W]°!P[ 40‘(l+(y +1 )]x

x a‘+n-__'L_ ,_ t' «In x
‘ Vyi-f-x! ny-x' (mf+"+;'

 

 

(20)

 

N. ‘ ”l N
an(T V: +3 I/(Ut)'+,'+,‘)°°s[_U-Vw‘):+(I +3 X

_*_‘. 1' 49L ____" .____1__(U"
‘([Vyl+xi I w I’yi-i-a. (1 0.4-8, (Ul):-I-U'+a'_)]}+

i
..o 2 _ a ,a
l ((—T_'—-Ul) I! Ni). V( 0-1 u -1 1-H», t>0.

Expression (20) becomes equal to zero for t-enowhen y - 0 due to a decrease in the

term
‘_ s (U:
L v'+-' (0!) +v +1 '

75
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
"1th y + 0 due to a decrease in the second exponential factor. The frequency
of oscillations with an increase in tine tends to

7T”ﬁ[‘+7r7‘+—n 1"”77':r

The first oscillations have a period which is somewhat greater than TU y! + 25/2.

The asymptotic solution is applicable at great (in comparison with the wavelength)
distances from the source:

r > 1.. (21)

The linearity criterion is the inequality
hol<k

If 1(nl. the linear solution (16) is correct when there is satisfaction of the
condition

rt>4_1‘TT+.-_E_laln (-i-ainqtcoaen,

 

(«0‘ (22)
which with prag1 is equivalent to . m V.*+n‘
r’ > 75.— . '
a 1—!
and with Fra>1 ,o>2£.é:—i—R-|ain9cos0|.

here e is the base of natural logarithms.

If A>JIL the linear solution (16) is correct when there is satisfaction of the
inequality

 

7““i“¢°°’°)l' (23)

which with Fr <1 is equivalent to

and with Fra>l
ZR, V slid—ti

all

1”)

 

lsinqwcoaﬁh

It follows from (22), (23) that there is a region near the x-axis where a linear
solution is incorrect.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An experimental investigation of associated internal waves was carried out in a
laboratory basin measuring 1.5 x 0.4 x 0.4 m filled with an aqueous solution of
common salt with a uniform concentration (density) gradient,,4,- 4.4 I, N - 1.5
scc'l. T - 4.2 sec. The phase patterns were registered using an Ian-451 shadow-in-
strument; amplitudes were registered with a "single-point" conductivity contact
converter [11]. The boundaries of the dark and light bands on the shadow photo-
grams are the wave crests and troughs, the blackening density is proportional to
the wave amplitude. Our experiments indicated that as a result of the entrainment
effect in the stratified fluid (blocking effect) the velocity and density pro-
files of the fluid change at distances of the order of the diameter ahead of and
behind the body. It can therefore be assumed that internal waves are generated by
the entire system consisting of the body and the fluid entrained by it. Due to the
presence of viscosity the entrained fluid has the form of an ovoid.

Figure 1 shows the wave pattern in the plane X2 arising during the horizontal motion
of an elongated body d - 1 cm, L = 8 cm with the velocity U . 1 cm/sec, T - 4.2 sec.
The bend in the wave surfaces observed on the cited kinogram is attributable to a
phase jump by :n with a change in the sign on sin((Na/U) cos 6). The 6p angles at
which the bend occurs are determined from the condition

(Na/U) Icosgp|= “RP. p " 1, 2, 3,... (24)

In this case (9p = 56°. p n 1) it follows from (24) that 2a - 7.6 cm; this approx-
imately coincides with L.

As a result of the blocking effect a similar pattern can be observed during the
motion of a sphere (Fig. 2. y - 0, d - 2 cm, U . 1.02 cmlsec, T - 4.2 sec, Fr -
0J1, 61 - 20°). The a value determined from (24) is 2.25 cm.

Fig. 3 shows the wave pattern in the plane X2 arising during horizontal motion of
a sphere d - 2 cm with a velocity U - 0.64 cm/sec. T - 4.2 sec, Fr - 0.044. With a
decrease in velocity there is an increase in the effective horizontal dimension of
the region of excitation of internal waves. 0n the shadow kinogram there is a bend
of the phase surface at the angle 9 - 39° (p - 2) and the interference maximum
of the amplitude at an angle 9". 2 ' (n - 2) to the axis of motion. The substit-
ution of the indicated an and 9P values into formulas (18), (24) gives close

values for the half-distance between the centers of the sources a1 - 3.6 cm, a2 -
3.45 cm.

The resulting solutions (13), (14). (16) are antisy-etric relative to the plane
(line) 2 = 0 in a three-dimensional (plane) case. Mathematically this is associat-
ed with a change in the sign on sin‘V or (z) with transition from the upper half-
spacc (half-plane) into the lower, and physically -— with opposite initial dis-
placements in these half-spaces (half-planes). Figures 1-3 show that the wave
crest in the upper half-plane corresponds to a trough in the lower. [Figures 1-3
are not reproduced here.]

Figure 4 is a trace showing measurement of the vertical displacement of fluid par-
ticles l1(0, y, z, t) in the case of horizontal motion of the sphere d - 2.5 cm
with the velocity U - 1.65 cm/sec, T - 4.2 sec, Fr - 0.19 at the point y - 0. z -

77
FOR,OFTWCJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OIWﬂCJAl.U§IZ(NULY

5 cm. The points 1. 3. 5 represent troughs and the points 2. lo, 6 represent wave
crests. The arrival times of the wave crests and depressions computed on the ba-
sis of (16) at the measurement points tn - 2.9, 5.5, 7.8. 10. 12.1, 14.2 sec (n -
1. 2.....6) coincide well with the experimentally observed values even for the first
waves. For this case the solution (16) agrees with the experimental data with the
choice a = 2.5 cm, [2' 1 cm; then the computed ratios of amplitudes of oscillations

'I Iﬂ+ 1'! +1
l'loEH‘i‘l‘olu
(n I 1. 2, 3, 4) are equal to 1.1:, 1.38, 1.25. 1.2. It follows from the trace that

these ratios are 0.88, 1.56, 1.24 and 1.16. With an increase in distance to the
source there is a decrease in the difference between the computed and observed

values.

   

Fig. 5. Fig. 5.

Figure 5 shows the dependence of the mximum displacement of particles in an in-
ternal wave in the case of horizontal motion of a sphere of the diameter d - 1
cm in a fluid with A - 6.2 m (points 1) and/l- 17 n (points 2) at the point y -
0, z - 12 cm. The slope of the straight line on the graph corresponds to the de~
pendence Fr’l/z. which coincides with the law of decrease in amplitude r10 ~ l/U
with FrSI; with Fr<0.8 1,: 1.3 cm.

In the case of motion of a sphere at great velocities (Fr>1)l< d/lo. a<d and de-
creases with an increase in velocity.

The resulting solution (16) agrees satisfactorily with the data from laboratory ex-
periments already at distances of the order of 210.

Since with Fr<l the wavelength is less than or of the order of the dimensions of
the body. in determining the amplitude characteristics of internal waves it is
necessary to take the influence of viscosity into account.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Lighthill. H. J.. "Studies on Magneto-hydrodynamic Waves and Their Anisotropic
Have Motions." PHIL. TRANS. ROY. SOC. 01’ LONDON. V01 252A, No 1016, 1960.

2. Lighthill, M. J., "On Have Generated in Dispersive Systems by Travelling Forc-
ing Effects With Applications to the Dynamics of Rotating Fluids." J. FLUID

MECH., Vol 27. Pt la. 1967.

78
MOWALIJSEONLY
lo.

~ll
0

l0.

ll.

COPY'

3103
(ISO:

Pent, K. S. and Stevenson, T. N., "Internal Waves Around a Body Moving in a
Compressible Density-Stratified Fluid," J. FLUID MECH.. Vol 70, Pt 4. 1975.

Wu. T. Y. T. and Hei, C. C.. "Tho-Dimensional Gravity waves in a Stratified
Ocean," PHYS. FLUIDS, Vol 10, No 3, 1967.

Mel, C. C.. "Surface Have Pattern Due to a Submerged Source Travelling in a
Stratified Ocean." REPORT HYDRODYNAN. LAB. MASS. INST. TECHNOL., No 92. 1966.

Sturova. I. V.. "Wave Movements Arising in a Stratified Fluid During Plow
Around a Submerged Body." PMTP (Applied Mathematics and Technical Physics).
No 6, 1974.

Miles, J. H.. "Internal Haves Generated by a Horizontally Moving Source,"
GEOPHYSICAL FLUID DYNAMICS, Vol 2. 1971.

Dokuchayev, V. P. and Dolina, I. 8., "Radiation of Internal Waves by Sources
in an Exponentially Stratified Fluid," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ATMOSPERY I
OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and
Ocean), Vol 13. No 6, 1977.

Kochin. N. Ye., Kibel', I. A. and Roze, N. V.. TEORETICHESKAYA GIDROMEKB—
ANIKA (Theoretical Hydromechanics), Part I, Moscow, GIPML, 1963.

Nekrasuv. V. N.. Trokhan. A. M. and Chashechkin. Yu. 0.. "Generation of In-
ternal Waves in a Plane-Stratified Medium by a Uniformly Moving Hydrodynamic
Source (Three-Dimensional Pruhlem)," KRATKIYB TEKSTY DOKLADOV VII VSBSOYUZ.
SIMPOZIUMA P0 DlFRAKTSIl I RASPROSTRANENIYU VOLN (Short Texts of Reports at

the Seventh All—Union Symposium on Have Diffraction and Propagation), Vol 3,
Moscow, 1977.

chtsov. V. 1. and Chashcchkin, Yu. D., "Highly Sensitive Converter for Con-
ductivity of Fluids.“ TEZISY DOKLADOV IV VSESOYUZ. KONF. "METROLOGIYA V
RADIUELFKTRONlKE" (Summaries of Reports at the Fourth All-Union Conference
"Mctrnlogy in Radioelectronlcs"), Moscow, VNIIFTRI. 1978.

‘IGHT: Izdatel'stvn "Naukn", "Zhurnal prikladnoy mekhaniki i tekhnicheskoy

fiziki". 1981

l865/l29

79
FOR 0FFHJAI.UGIE(NVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 532.5.51

PARAMETRIC RESONANCE IN STRAIIFIED FLUID

Novosibirsk ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY HEKHANIKI I TEKHNICHBSKOY FIZIKI in Russian No 6,
Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript received 6 Mar 81) pp 168-174

[Article by V. A. Vladimirov, Novosibirsk]

[Text] Abstract: Parametric resonance is one of the widespread
types of instability of mechanical systems. Parametric-
ally excited oscillations constitute a somewhat broader
class of phenomena. A mathematical determination of this
class of oscillations is usually given [1] for systems
whose equations of motion are reduced to ordinary dif-
ferential equations in time. The parametric oscillations
are related to the coefficients (parameters) of these
equations by a periodic dependence on time. Such oscil-
lations differ from forced oscillations, for which the
explicit dependence on time is contained in the equations
only additively, in the form of periodic forces. A stan-
dard example of the equations of parametric oscillations
is the Hathieu equation and its generalizations. The
first investigation of parametric oscillations was an ex-
perimental study by Faraday [2] in which a study was made
of the oscillations of the free surface of a fluid in a
vessel. However. later it was for the most part the ap-
plications to the mechanics of solid and elastic bodies
which were developed [1, 3, 6]. An exception is the prob-
lem of oscillations of the free surface of a fluid in a
vertically oscillating vessel. It was demonstrated in
[5-7] that the displacement of the free surface in a lin-
ear approximation is reduced to the Hathieu equation and
accordingly there are resonance frequencies at which the
surface is unstable. Allowance for viscosity in this prob-
lem was introduced in [8]. It is only during the last
decade that studies have begun on the parametric instab-
ility of more complex flows. The authors of [9, 10] made
a study of parametric resonance in convection problems.
The instability of Rossby waves was investigated in [11,
14]. Studies [15, 16] were devoted to the instability of
internal waves in a stratified fluid. Source [15] gives

80
FOR OFFKJAI.U&-‘NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a number of considerations on the possibility of an in-
crease in microscale disturbances against a background

of an internal wave. A theoretical investigation of-

the parametric instability of a plane internal wave in
the Boussinesq approximation is given in [16]. It is
shown that a wave of a finite amplitude can be unstable.
Within the range of small amplitudes parametric instabil-
ity undergoes transition into known [17] resonance inter-
actions of waves.

In this article a study is made of parametric resonance

in a stratified fluid. In the cases of vertically oscil-
lating vessels with a fluid and a horizontal plane-parallel
flow it was possible to obtain the instability conditions
and it is shown that instability of the same kind is ob-
served in internal waves. Here the idea of the similarity
of the physical conditions of the notion of a fluid in

an oscillating vessel and in a wave is important. The dif-
ferences are that the oscillations are not solid-body os-
cillations and their frequencies are not stipulated ar-
bitrarily. However, if a long internal wave is examined.
then locally (for short—wave disturbances) the conditions
are close to those of a solid oscillating fluid. The stud-
ied type of instability of internal waves was omitted from
consideration in [16]. An investigation of the mechanisms
by which the destruction of internal waves can occur is of
great interest in relation to the applications in oceanol-
ogv [15-18]. Parametric resonance possibly can compete
with the mechanism proposed in [18]. The latter essential-
ly involves the appearance of zones in a wave in which the
density increases upward. We also note the interesting hy-
pothesis [11. 12, 15, 16] that the parametric instability
of wave movements can be the mechanism of a "loss of pre-
dictability" of the current and the generation of turbu-
lence.

1. He will examine a rectangular vessel filled with an ideal incompressible fluid.
At the initial moment in time (t - 0) the fluid occupies the volume 0<x<a, 0<
y\‘ b, 0< z<c. The density of the fluid is Po - Ae'ﬁy (A>0, P are constants).
The uniform gravity field has only a y-component (0. -g, 0). The buoyancy (Brunt-
Vﬁisa'la') frequency is N2 == ﬁg = const. The vessel moves in the y-direction with
the velocity Y(t) - dY/dt; Y(t) is a periodic function (oscillations of a finite
amplitude). "Non-flowthrough" conditions are satisfied at the boundaries of the
vessel. The state of rest of the fluid relative to the vessel is a solution of
the equations of motion. Its stability must be investigated.

We will transform to a coordinate system related to the vessel:

3:1,}_y_}'(z).?=x.¢‘=¢.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIHAL USE ONLY

In these coordinates the equations of motion of the fluid have the same formuas
1n the initial coordinates; only the gravity field 3 is replaced by G- g + Y.
The linearized system of equations for the disturbances has the form

Poul = "Psn Pow: ‘5 —P,. -
pm' "Pr-'PGv pr+p$v=o, u,+v,+w_=o. (1.1)

the line over x, y, z. t has been omitted. The notations u, v, w are used to des-
ignate the x, y, 2 components of velocity disturbances; P, p are density and
pressure disturbances. The subscripts denote the partial derivatives, p'o- d pol
dy. The substitution 0'- p/P 0’ r - P/Po reduces (1.1) to a system of equations
with coefficients not dependent on x, y, z

u. = -03. w. - _0‘.

v.-—-o,+Bo-—Gr.r.—ﬁu=0.u,-l—v,+w,-0. “-2)
allowing a separation of variables. For r, the equation
0'” +M‘rax+rxx) 10: (1.3)

follows from (1.2), where D - A— palay; A is a triangular Laplace operator.
The substitution r - 9’ eﬁyl2 transforms (1.3) into

(A — mm)“: + “6"?” + ‘1’“) " 0- (1.4)
The eigenfunction of the problem is

«p =- ll(t)I.-ll:, cos kl: sin kg} cos kg. (1-5)

where k1, k2, k3 - (n1/a, n2/b, n3/c); n1, n , n are arbitrary whole numbers.
The components u, v, w, computed from (1.2), (1.5),, satisfy the boundary condi-
tions. It follows from (1.4), (1.5) that

.. .. (1.6)
R + BtN’ + W)" = 0-
B— (k: + k§)/(k’ + 51/4): k’u kt + k: + k3.

I'here

Equation (1.6), as a result of the periodicity of Y(t), is the Hill equation [19].
With Y - C cosdt it is reduced to the Mathieu equation:

k + B(N' — wc cos mm .. 0.

whose canonical form is

R"+(a-2qcos2r)R-0. (1.7)

where ‘5 - O’t/Z; a - “NZ/“)2; q - 23C. The stability of the solutions (1.7) was
studied in detail in [19. 20]. On the plane a, q (with a) 0) the unstable regions
constitute "tongues" emanating from the points a - n2, In - l, 2, 3,... With small
amplitudes C of vessel oscillations the solutions (1.7) are unstable in narrow
zones around the points:

82
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

u - 2N8'ﬂlm.
(1.8)

Such an inStability is called parametric resonance [1, 3, 6]. the number m is the
order of resonance. Since 3 1. for the existence of resonance of the order m it
is necessary that u1< 2N/m. For these dimensions of the vessel a. b. c and the
buoyancy frequency N there is a four-parameter (with respect to n1, n2, n3. m)
set of frequencies a)of oscillations of the vessel (1.8) in which there is reson-
ance. in all cases here and in the text which follows by the term "instability"
is meant an exponential increase in the solutions with t-rco.

The preceding results were obtained for equilibrium density stratification 82 3,83
> 0. At the same time it follows from (1.7) that with satisfaction of the condi-
tlons

VfB—Iﬁ'vu < cam <'1/2 + 2BIN‘V0' (1.9)

the oscillations of the vessel make stable a state with an increase in density
upward (N2< 0). If the amplitude of the oscillations c is small, the right-hand
side of (1.9) is always satisfied. The left-hand side gives the condition

00 > (2;I|p|B)‘I'. (1 . 10)

The discussed property of stabilization of a nonequilibrium state is an analogue of
the known result for a pendulum for which the upper position becomes stable with
oscillations of the suspension point [21]. Still closer analogues are stabiliza-
tion of Rayleigh-Taylor instability oscillations [22] and convection [23]. How-
ever, in contrast to these stablization cases it is impossible to achieve a non-
equilibrium stratified fluid. In (1.10) this corresponds to an impairment of the
inequality when B-oo. Small 3 values are attained either with k% + kg or when k2
$00. Due to the limited dimensions of the vessel the first case is excluded. Ac-
cordingly, waves which are short in a vertical direction are dangerous. It is pos-
sible that here the stabilization can be achieved by the introduction of viscosity.

Another interesting corollary (1.7) is the instability of a flow in the absence of
a gravity field 3 - 0. The instability condition (approximate [20]) is:

ICI > RIM)“-

Such an instability can be important for predicting the behavior of a stratified
fluid under weightlessness conditions.

Allowance for the viscosity of a fluid leads to a replacement of the operator JIat
before the velocity components in (1.1) by a/at - VA. Under the condition of a
constancy of the coefficient of kinematic viscosity \’- const in place of (1.4) we
obtain the equation

(A _- 31/019,. - v(A + 53/1. + Miami d- now... + 19..) - 0-

The solution of the problem with satisfaction of the attachment conditions at the
boundaries of the vessel is extremely complex and can be considered as a general-
ization of [8, 10]. We will examine an infinite vessel. After separation of the

variables

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9 ., R“).‘(‘l'“s\"“s’)

we obtain the equation

§+ui +a(N*+ﬁi")R-0. (2.1)

being a generalization of (1.6). This equation is the Hill equation (or Hathieu
equation with Y - C cos alt) with friction. The form of the friction coefficient
is unusual:

J. _ .ae' - aw — 1m.

For example, with N2 + ”Y - 0 from (2.1) for different It it is possible to obtain
both attenuation and growth. Such a behavior of R(t) is related to the unlimited
character of the selected solutions (1.1) with any fixed t. In the Bouaainesq ap-
proximation (see below) the solutions are limited and .K- vkz, which always cor-
responds to attenuation.

3. A direct generalization of the considered problem is the problem of the vertical
oscillations of a horizontal plane-parallel flow of an ideal incompressible strat-
ified fluid. The flow is directed along the x-axis; the velocity value is U - U(y).
Retaining the notations in section 1. we obtain a system of equations for linear
disturbances:

ML“ + U'") - "Pa- 90”” - “Pr _’ PG: Pol!” ’ -Pn (3.1)
Lp+p;v-0. u.+v,+w,-0,

where Isa/D t + Ua/ax. It follows from (3.1) that (A +ﬁ3/ 3y)sz+pG(Px,‘ +
f32z) - 201'pr)y - 0. The investigation of stability of solutions of this equa-
tion is extremely complex. However, for disturbances not dependent on the x-coor-
dinate, we again obtain an equation of the type (1.3):

(was + ai/ay' + swamp“ + $09,, — 0,

which is solved by the substitution }3- 99e'5Y/2 with subsequent separation of
variables. The results obtained are the same as in sections 1 and 2 with the sole
difference that k1 - 0.

b. In the preceding examples it was demonstrated that fluctuations of the volume
of a stratified fluid as a whole can lead to an instability in accordance with the
parametric resonance mechanism. It is natural to expect that non-solid (differen-
tial) oscillations of the medium and especially internal waves (see introduction)
also have similar properties. The principal difficulties in investigating the
stability of internal movements in a stratified fluid involve a complexity of the
initial equations even in the absence of their adequately simple partial solutions.
The solution involves a changeover to approximations either in the solutions or
directly in the equations. By "approximation" in the solutions it is understood
that the main wave movement investigated for stability is stipulated approximately
(for example, in the form of a finite number of amplitude terms in the series).
Mathematically this operation has the sense of a replacement of the coefficients
in the equations investigated for stability by their approximate (analytically

8h
son omcuu. us: ONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY '.

simpler) values. Examples of the direct simplification of the equations of motion
are the Boussinesq approximation [17] or the I3 -plane approximation [11. 13, 210].
The problem of the mathematical correctness of this sort of examination is ex-
ceedingly complex. However, the scientific and practical importance of the prob-
lem is a justification of activity at the "physical level of rigor." Below we'will
give two examples of approximations in solutions and in the equations for the
problem of stability of internal waves.

Assume that there is an ideal incompressible stratified fluid filling the entire
space. The uniform gravity field iis directed along the y-axis. The undisturbed
density of the fluid is p0 - Ac" Y; the buoyancy frequency is N2 - ﬁg - const
(the notations are the same as in section 1). We will examine the problem of the
stability of an internal wave of a special form; in its stipulation we will limit
ourselves to expressions which are linear with respect to amplitude. The form of
such a wave is stipulated by the representation

u = 0. v = Y.(z. l) = aYIOI.

where u and v are the x- and y-velocity components.

The Y(x, t) function represents a traveling or standing wave in the form cos (Rx -
Nt) or cos kx cos Nt, etc. The frequency of this wave coincides with the buoyancy
frequency N. By analogy with section 1 we will perform transformation of coordin-
ates

.;-=z.;=y—Y(z.t).;=z.-t-t,

which corresponds to transformation to coordinates "oscillating" together_with the

fluid. Thus, density in an internal wage is not dependent on time P-Po(y). For
the vertical component v we introduce v - v - Yt’ so that the main state is rest
u ' 0. v - 0. The linearized system of equations. being an analogue of (1.1), has
the form

1’0“: "" ‘Px + YsPn Pow! ‘3 "'va
000’: + Yu“) '= "Pv -' 9(9 + Y“): (4-1)

1 Pi-i- Pb“)- Y,u.) =' 0' “3" Y,u,+ v,+ "’3 '3 0°
The line over the notations has been omitted. we will examine a disturbance of the
special form:
U—‘L‘(t. t). r=r(z.l). u-w=p=0.

For r = P/Po we have'
I.” -|- (N: -:_ y“),- = 0_ ' (4.2)

This equation is an analogue of (1.6). With Y - 6(x) cos Nt (6.2) is reduced to
tho u‘lntlllou equation in which x plays the role of a parameter. Since the forcing
frequency is equal to the main frequency there is a second resonance [3. 20] and
tho wave is unstable even for small amplitudes @. For a traveling wave Y - C cos
(kx - Nt) and (4.2) is also reduced to the Hathieu equation, but only at the points

85
FOR art-1cm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sin kx - 0. Hence it follows that there is also instability in this case. We
note further that terms with Y enter differently into system (4.1). The deriva-
tives are Yx~CIA , where C is amplitude. Ais wavelength. If this ratio is as-
sumed to be small and it is neglected, then (4.1) is reduced to (1.1) with the
single difference that the Yt value is dependent on the x-coordinate. For dis-
t
turbances which are short-wave relative to at this system of equations in the
first approximation coincides with (1.1).

Now we will examine the approach through approximations in the equations. The
Boussinesq approximtion [17] is a known simplification of the equations of motion
for a stratified fluid:

dnldl - —vp/p' — Og, do/d: — p» - o, div .. .. o, (“-3)

where u is the velocity vector; 9-(P-Fﬂ/31/o is the total density, differing
little from/O - const; ﬂ -p(y) =‘p'o(Y)/F- Hith p>o the system (4.3) has pre-
cise solutions -- plane waves:

(u. v. 0. p) =' (-1/k. 1. ill/w. -0”k')c°“~ (4.1.)
where 0- tkN/sz + 12; C- const, V" kx + 23! - «Jt.

It was demonstrated in [16] that these solutions may be unstable. At the same time
it appears that some of the terms in the equations of motion discarded in the
derivation of (4.3) can also give parametric instability. For a demonstration of
this assertion it is adequate to note that in the problem of an oscillating vessel
(see section 1) the use of equations (4.3) does not lead to instability. It is
clear that such an approach is incorrect: the small discarded terms of the equa-
tions give an effect accumulating in a resonance fashion. In order to retain in
the equations the instability discussed in section 1, in the first equation (4.3)
it is necessary to return the earlier discarded term £9du/dt. This operation is
equivalent to a transformation to the Boussinesq approximation in a coordinate
system related to the vessel. After this, a linearized system of equations of the
stability problem follows from (4.3):

v. = _,.,/,7 — nu: + 1"). u. = —p./3. w. - -p./:7. 0. - av- 0. (a...)
u, + v, + w, u 0.

Comparison with system (1.1) shows that (4.4) is its simplified variant. It fol-
lows from (4.4) that

AC" + “6(aar + any: 0' ((0.5)

where Niel/3; G - g + Y. Then the problem is solved by the separation of vari—
ables (see section 1). With ,5- const equation (4.5) is a simplification of (1.4).
Allowance for viscosity leads. as already mentioned above. to the appearance in
(4.5) of a dissipative term in the simplest form

A(a“ - VAC.) + 56(a33 + “'3) a 0.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In exactly the same way, allowance for the above-mentioned term of the equations
leads to the appearance of an additional (in comparison with [16]) instability

of the solutions (4.4). He will write the equations of motion in a coordinate sys-
tea with the x-axis directed along the wave vector k and the y-axis directed along
the velocity vector in the wave. The velocity and density fields assume the form

((1. V. 6) - (0. i. iﬂlm)€o‘m'°" .

where 0’ - N cos 9’; 'f is the angle between the x-sxis and the horizontal plane;

1.2.1.2 + 22. The linearized system of equations of the problem for stability
has the form

Lu-‘Ps—KOSinVo Lil+qu= ‘Pl-0“°°99+vl)o
Lw=—p,, u,+v, +w,-0. L0+0,u—Dv-0, (“'6’

where L a 3/3 t + va/a y. we will examine disturbances of the special form:

v-v(.t. I), 0:0(2. t).p-p(z, t). u=w=0.
It follows from (4.6) that
9“ + (N. 008’ 0 + “V. cos (9)9 - 0.

Since the frequency of the change in V is equal to a) - N cos ‘P, for V - C cos
(xx - at) there is second resonance. We emphasize that the results in this sec-
tion are of an illustrative character and constitute no proofs.

In conclusion we note the following. The problem of investigation of stability in
the linear approximation of equilibrium of an ideal stratified fluid in a vertical-
1y oscillating vessel is reduced to solution of the Hathieu equation (1.7). For an
equilibrium density stratification there can be an instability of the parametric
resonance type. Stabilization by oscillations of nonequilibriun stratification is
possible only for part of the spectrum.

In a horizontal plane-parallel flow of a stratified fluid subjected to vertical
oscillations there are disturbances of a special form for which the same results
as {or an oscillating vessel are correct.

An approximate investigation for the stability of internal waves in an unbounded
stratified fluid shows that for them there is an instability in accordance with
the parametric resonance mechanism close in type to instability in an oscillating
vessel.

As a deVelopment of our general concepts concerning the mechanisms of instability
in a stratified fluid we will formulate the following. If the oscillations of the
fluid are such that the mass velocity has a normal component toward surfaces of
constant density. there can be an exponential increase in linear disturbances in
accordance with the parametric resonance mechanism.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Shmidt, 0., PARAMETRICHESKIYE KOLEBANIYA (Parametric Oscillations), Moscow.
Mir, 1978.

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

16.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Faraday, N., "On a Peculiar Class of Acoustical Figures, and on Certain Forms
Assumed by a Group of Particles Upon Vibrating Elastic Surfaces," PHIL. TRANS.
ROY. 8°C., Vol 121. p 299, 1831.

Landau, L. D. and Lifshits, Ye. N., HEKBANIKA (Mechanics), Moscow, Nauka, 1965.

Yakubovich, V. A. and Starzhinskiy, V. N., LINEYNYYE DIFFERENTSIAL'NYYE URAV-
NENIYA s PERIODICHESKINI KOEFPIISIYENTAHI I IKH PRILOZRENIYA (Linear Differ—

ential Equations With Periodic Coefficients and Their Applications), Moscow,

Nauka, 1972.

Hoiseyev. N. N. and Rumyantsev, V. V., DINAHIKA TBLA s POLOSTYAHI, SODERZH-
ASHCHIHI ZBIDKOST' (Dynamics of a Body with Cavities Containing Fluid), Hoa-
cow. Nauka, 1955.

Sretenskiy, L. N., TEORIYA VOLNOVYKH DVIZHENIY ZHIDKOSTI (Theory of Wave Move-
ments of a Fluid). Moscow, Nauka, 1977.

Benjamin. T. B. and Ursell, F.. "The Stability of the Plane Free Surface of a
Liquid in Vertical Motion," PROC. ROY. 8°C., Vol 225, p 505, 1954.

Krushinskaya, S. I.. "Oscillations of a Heavy Viscous Fluid in a Moving Vea-
sel," ZhVMMP [expansion of this Navy Ministry journal unknown], Vol 5, No 3,
1965.

Gershuni, G. 2. and Zhukhovitskiy, Ye. N., KONVBRTIVNAYA USTOYCNIVOST' NESZRIH—
AYEHOY ZHIDKOSTI (Convective Stability of an lncoapressible Fluid), Moscow,
Nauka, 1972.

Narkman, G. S. and Urintsev, A. L., "Parametric Excitation of Convective Motion
in a Fluid Heated From Above," 12V. SEV.-KAVK. KAUCH. TSBNTRA VYSSH. SHKOLY.
YESTESTV. NAUKI (News of the Northern Caucasus Scientific Center of Advanced
Educational Institutes. Natural Sciences), No 1, 1977.

Lorenz, E. N., "BarOtropic Instability of Rossby Nave Motion," J. ATHOS. SCI..
Vol 29, p 258, 1972.

Lilly, D. K., "A Note on Darotropic Instability and Predictability," J. AJHOS.
Sci., Vol 30, No 1, 1973.

Mied, R. P., "The Instabilitiea of Finite-Amplitude BarOtropic Rossby Haves."
J. FLUID “30“., Vol 86, No 2, 1978.

Dolzhanskiy, P. V., Kurganskiy, H. V. and Chernous'ko, Yu. L., "Laboratory
and Theoretical Investigation of Barotropic Rosaby Haves in a Rotating An—
nular Channel," IZV. AN SSSR: FAQ (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Phys-
ics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 15, No 6, 1979.

Hchan, A. D. and Robinson, R. N., "Parametric Instability of Internal Gravity
Haves," J. FLUID HECH., Vol 67, No 6, 1975.

88
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16. Hied. R. P., "The Occurrence of Parametric Instability of Internal Gravity
Haves." J. FLUID NECK” V01 78. No 6, 1976.

17. Phillips. 0. H., DINAHIKA VERKHNBGO SLO‘IA DREAM (Dynamics of the Upper Layer
of the Ocean). Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1980.

18. Orlanski. 1., "On the Breaking of Standing Internal Gravity Haven." J. FLUID
118011., V01 56. No 3. 1972.

19. Whittaker, E. T. and Hatson. D. N., KURS SOVRMNNOGO ANALIZA (Course in lbd-
ern Analysis). Vol 1, Moscow, M, 1963.

20. Abramvita. H. and Stigan, 1., SPRAVOCHNIK P0 SPETSIAL'NYH HIMSIYAH (Hand-
book on Special Functions). Moscow. Nauka, 1979.

21. Kapitsa, P. L.. "Dynamic Stability of a Pendulum With an Oscillating Suspen-
sion Point," ZhE‘l‘F (Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics), Vol 21.
No 5, 1951.

22. Briksman, V. A.. "Parametric Stabilization of Interface of Fluids," DAN SSSR
(Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 226, No S, 1976.

23. Zen'kovskaya, S. H. and Simnenko, I. 8., "Influence of High-Frequency Vibra-
tion on Development of Convection." IZV. AN SSSR: 11th (News of the USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences: Mechanics of Fluids and Cases), No 5, 1966.

26. Batchelor, G., WEDENIYE V DINAHIIGJ ZHIDKOSTI (Introduction to Fluid Dynamics),
Moscow, Mir, 1973.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Zhurnal prildadnoy mekhaniki i tekhnicheakoy
fiziki", 1981

5303
C80: 1865/129

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0$11C1A1.lEﬂE(NULY

“00 551.465

SPECTRA 0P CURRERT FIELDS IN OCEAN DETERMINED ALONG TRAJECTORIES 0F FREELY
DRIFTING SOFAR SYSTEM BUOYS

Moscow DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 263. No 5, Apr 82
(manuscript received 10 Jul 81) PP 993-996

[Article by K. V. Konyayev and G. 1. Herinova, Acoustics Institute imeni N. N.
Andreyev. Moscow]

[Text] Within the framework of the Soviet-American POLYHODE experiment for
studying the synoptic variability of currents in the ocean the Local Dynamic
Experiment was carried out by the American side. About £0 neutral-buoyancy
buoys of the SOFAR (Sound Fixing and Ranging) system were released in May
1978 in a square measuring 150 x 150 km with its center at about 31'“ and
69°“ and were set at equilibrium at the horizons 700 and 1300 m; their posi-
tion was registered by on-shore and self-contained acoustic stations each 8
hours for a period of 6 months. An analysis of the trajectories of these and
earlier released buoys made it possible to determine a number of characteris-
tics of synoptic movements [1. 2]. Among the spectral characteristics of the
field of currents computations were made only of the so-called time spectrum
Lagrangians -- the spectrum of a number of velocity readings without allowance
for the spatial location of these readings.

In December 1980 the data on buoy trajectories were transmitted to the Soviet
side and it became possible to carry out their complete spatial-temporal spec-
tral analysis. The potential possibility of such an analysis is quite obvious:
in physical space and time the trajectories of the buoys relatively densely
fill some volume, creating a quite full idea concerning the three-dimensional
realization of the field.

Representing the three-dimensional realization in the form of a set of time
functions. determined on the buoy trajectories. the three-dimensional ampli-
tude spectrum of the realization can be written in the form of time integrals
(written for the u-component of the velocity vector):

S,,(k, I.,’) = Efui(l)cxp | -t2n[kx,(l) + 1y,~(t) + I!” at.
I

where x, y, t are tie horizontal space coordinates and time, the x-axis is di-
rected to the east, the y-axis -- to the north; k.L. f are the space and time
frequencies; 3 is the number of the buoy; uj(t) is the u-component of the velo-
city vector; Xj(t), yj(t) are the coordinates of the j-th buoy; integration is

l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(122iﬂi£(ﬂVLY
carried out during the entire observation time only for negative time frequen-
cies. The three—dimensional spectrum of kinetic energy of horizontal movements
is equal to (0 degrees of freedom)

p(k.1.r)=(s.,s; + sus; )AIZIT.

wherczi is the mean area covered by one float (determined as the first part of
the ratio of the maximum of the space spectral window to the volume under this
window); I is the number of buoys: T is the equivalent observation time. With

change to the time spectrum the integration is carried out by areas (10 x l6)’
10-3 cycle/km separately for the western and eastern half-planes of space fre-
quencies (about 25 degrees of freedom for the background part of the spectrum).

9”}, I nultyn} 2[Imam/cyan) I
(km/day)” n'” (cycles/day)
H

   

any . 0 10V flunk!" cycles/day

Fig. 1. Western (at left) and eastern (at right) time spectra of kinetic energy
of horizontal movements at horizons 700 (1. peaks 3, C. D) and 1300 m (2, peak
A) and spectral windows on and 0H for these same horizons (3). 6 - western
spectrum at horizon 1300 m during first 60 days: vertical lines -- 802 confid-
cnce intervals for background part of spectrum.

Rossby waves can make a contribution only to the western time spectrum. The
spectral window is computed as the response to identical readings of the velo-
city components, equal to 3 km/day and arranged on the existing trajectories
(in order not to overburden the diagrams the windows on them have been dis-
placed from the zero frequency). Due to movement of the buoys together with

91
INJR‘OFINCIAI.UBiiOMﬂJV
FORGDFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

the mean flow the observed time frequencies coincide with the true frequencies
and the boundaries of the corridors of the possible parameters of Rossby waves

can be determined directly from the dispersion expressions [3].

 

Fig. 2. Space spectra corresponding to the principal peaks of the time spectra
(isolines 95, 80, 60, 60. 202 of maximum). The dashed lines correspond to the
space spectral windows 03 and OH; the horizontal and vertical dashed curves

represent the corridors of possible parameters of Rossby waves of the zero and

first modes respectively.

In the analysis we used series of coordinates following with an interval of

1 day from 12 May through 13 November 1978. For the horizons 700 and 1300 m
the normalizing values are:l§- 10.5 and 4.6-103 kmz. T a 111 and 130 days. I
- 20 and 22; the mean velocities and velocity dispersions for these horizons
are (separately for the u— and v-components) -0.6 and 0.4 km/day. 101 and 86
(km/day)2, -l.6 and o Ian/day. 25 and 30 (kn/dayﬂ.

The nature of the dropoff of the time spectra is determined to a great extent

by the shape of the side lobes of the spectral window so that the true spectrum
drops off appreciably more rapidly than the measured spectrum (Fig. l). The

2
FOI.0F11CIZI.IEHZ(M‘LY
western spectra contain narrow peaks which correspond to the most compact

space spectra peaks (Fig. 2). Peak A was formed for the most part by the os-
clllations observed during the first 60 days: the area under the peak during
the entire time was 12 (km/day)2, and during the first 60 days -- 28 (km/day)2.
Peaks A2 and 32 fall in the corridor of the parameters of barotropic Roasby
waves (frequencies for the boundaries of the corridors £10.005 cycle/day) and
the peaks Al and 81 do not fall far from this corridor and from the dispersion
surface of the baroclinic waves approaching close to this section of the spec-
trum near the point K I -6 ~10'3 cycle/km. It is more probable that these oscil-
lations are barotropic waves since their intensities differ little at the two
horizons. The 8 peak lies in the corridor of the barotropic waves and not far
from the circular corridor of the baroclinic waves. It is more probable that
these are baroclinic oscillations since they are not traced at the horizon

1300 m. The peaks {'1. F2. F3 correspond to oscillations with periods great-
er than 200 days. The group velocity of the waves (peaks A. B, C) is directed
to the southeast [4]. The space spectrum of the oscillations with frequencies
0-0.06 cycle/day at the 700-m horizon occupies a relatively broad angular spec-
trum with a maximum in the northwest quadrant, and at the horizon 1300 m almost
does not differ from the space spectrum at a frequency of 0.02 cycle/day (peaks
A]. A2). The space spectrum of oscillations with frequencies 0.10—0.16 cycle/
/day in the western sector at the 700-m horizon is virtually uniform. but at
the horizon 1300 m is close to zero around the zero space frequency (the 202
spectral isoline is (6-11)x10‘3 cycle/km distant from the zero frequency). The
elimination of low space frequencies from the spectrum is evidence of a predom-
inance of nearly immobile turbulence transported by orbital motion in the
waves.

Table 1

Parameter Al A2 31 32 3 Cl 62 63

Number of mode 0? 0 0? 0 1 0 0 0
Period. days 50 50 50 50 100 200 200 200
Length, km 210 500 270 550 310 320 270 1000
Direction. °N 300 285 290 260 315 350 200 270
Kinetic energy (apgrox- 6 a 6 b 10 4 6 6

imatE). (km/day)
The parameters of the principal waves are given in Table 1.

According to data from anchored measurement instruments operating from 6 Sep-
tember 1977 through 30 August 1978 in the region 29'N and 70’" at the horizons
700 and 1400 m (Soviet part of POLYHODE). the pattern of the space-time spec-
trum is close to that considered on the basis of total intensity. period and
length of the predominant waves; the clearest spectral peaks correspond to ca-
clllations with the observed periods 50 and 85 days (true periods 60 and 130
days); the 50-day waves are also propagated to the northwest seccor; however. in
general, in contrast to this case. there is a predominance of waves moving to
the southwest.

it follows from this analysis that about one-third of the kinetic energy of

horizontal movements in this region of the ocean was carried by narrow—band
Rosshy waves of the lower modes, moving for the most part to the west and

FOR10Ffﬂﬂai.USEIHVLY
FOR 0PM“. USE ONLY

northwest. At the 700—111 horizon the oscillations were created for the most

part by 5-6 different vaves, and at the 1300-II horizon - by two waves; most
of the kinetic energy of these two wave: was concentrated in the first third

of the observation time.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Rosoby. T, Voorhis, A. D. and Webb, 1)., J. MARINE RBS., Vol 33. No 3.
p 355, 1975.

2. Freeland, H. J., Rhinos, R. B. and Rouby, T.. 1311)., Vol 33, No 3. p 383,
1975.

3. ‘Konyayev, K. V. and Sabinin, K. 1... DAN (Reports of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences), Vol 253. No 4, p 970. 1980.

lo. Longuet-Higsins, H. 8., PROC. ROY. 8°C., Vol A-279, No 1379, p 646, 1966.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akadenii oauk SSSR". 1982

5303
cso: 1865/14:

”MUSEWX
TBERBSTBIAL GEOPHISICS

UDC 536.222.2

'RADIATION 0P ELASTIC WAVES IN UNVENTED EXPLOSION

«Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: PIZIKA ZEHLI in Russian No 2, Feb 82
.(nanuscript received 8 Jan 81) pp 23-29

xlArticle by S. 2. Dunin, 0. V. Nagornov and Ye. A. Popov. Moscow Engineering Phys—
dcs Institute] '

.[Text] Abstract: A study was nade of the radiation of
elastic waves during an explosion in a porous
medium with the dilatancy effect taken into ac-
count. The character of radiation of elastic
energy at different moments in time was inves-
tigated. The spectral composition of the radi-

° sted seismic signal. the influence of the
strength parameters of the medium. porosity and
dilatancy coefficient on the elastic energy
radiated during an explosion were analyzed.

In connection with the use of explosions there has been a great increase in inter-
est in the problem of radiation of elastic waves in ground and rocks. This is at-
tributable primarily to the problems involved in the seismic safety of shots and

seismic prospecting [1. 2].

A number of models have been proposed for computing seismic waves forming during an
explosion: a review of these was given in [3]. In these studies it is assumed that
elastic waves are radiated by some spherical source whose radius is known as the
.elastic radius. The elastic radius is assumed equal to the radius of the destruc-
tion zone. As indicated by experimental data (such as [01), the radiation of elas-
-t1c waves already begins during the movenent of the destruction save front. The
author of [5] gave an approximate estimate of the elastic energy radiated prior to
the time of stopping of the plasticity wave front. The author of [6] examined the
influence of an elastic precursor on motion in the near zone of an explosion for
solid rock on the assumption that behind the shock wave front the medium becomes
fluid. the sheer destruction condition is satisfied at the wave front and the vel-
,ocity of the wave front is linearly related to uses velocity behind it.

Source [1] gave a schematic representation of the powerful explosion phenomenon. Ac-

cording to [1]. as a result of the evaporation of rock a spherical cavity is formed
(as indicated by the experimental data in [7] and a theoretical estimate [8]. 60-100

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USI(MNLY
FOR OFTWCIAL.USEGDNLY

tons is evaporated per kiloton of charge). The vapor pressure in the cavity consid-
erably exceeds the strength parameters of the medium. Further development of the
explosion can be broken down into three principal stages. In the first, hydrody-
namic stage it is assumed that the medium behaves like a fluid, that is, the dif-
ference in radial and azimuthal stresses is neglected. This stage ends when the
mean pressurein thenndium is comparable with the theoretical strength of the crys-
talline matter. The strength properties of the medium become extremely important in
the second stage. When the velocity of the wave front is comparable to the velo-
city of propagation of longitudinal waves the radiation of an elastic wave begins.
In this third stage the elastic properties of the medium play an important role.

In [9] an estimate was made of the radiated seismic wave within the framework of
the above-mentioned scheme on the assumption that the radius R0 from which the radi-
ation of an elastic wave begins and the maximum radius of the plastic zone RP are
close. Experimental data show that in the case of both field [6] and in the case

of laboratory [10] explosions Rp/Ros'a-S.

Next we will be interested only in characteristics related to the radiation of an
elastic wave and we will drop the hydrodynamic phase of the explosion. In this ar-
ticle we will examine the problem of radiation of elastic waves in a porous medium
with the dilatancy effect taken into account. The nature of the radiation of elas-
tic energy at different moments in time is investigated. The influence of the
strength parameters of the medium, porosity and the dilatancy coefficient on the
quantity of elastic energy radiated during an explosion is analysed. The spectral
composition of the radiated seismic signal is analyzcd.

In the case of an underground shot in a homogeneous medium compressed by lithostat-
ic pressure a destruction wave is propagated from a cavity of the radius so with
the initial pressure p0. The Hises-Schleicher plasticity condition

o.-o.--k+m(a.+260).

is satisfied behind the wave front. Here ‘7, and O’Oare the radial and azimuthal
directions; k. m are constants. The flow behind the front is described by the
equations of conservation of mass and momentum and the dilatancy equation. which
are written in a spherically symmetric coordinate system in Lagrange variables (r0,
t). The equation of motion is

w.*r":-f--3§;; " (9%)] (1)

where 00- 6m/(2m+l). p(r0,t). u is mass velocity, r(ro.t) is the Eulerian coordin-
ate of the point to.

The continuity equation is
0r If a

0n f p ' (2)

where f’(ro,t) is particle density, F3 is initial density. The dilatancy equation,
with allowance for the continuity equation, is

0 0
__ __ _ 3
A a‘ln(pr’)+ min.) 0, ( )

ﬁblf) Al.USB(MVLY
INDR OFiICIAL USIICNﬁLY

where A is the dilatancy rate [ll].

Experimental data and theoretical coaputations [6, 12] show that in porous India
the principal mechanism of energy dissipation is related to shock compression 'in
the wave front, that is. to an irreversible packing of pores. He will make the fol-
lowing simplifying assumption. At the front the destructible medium attains its
limiting compression an, - l - Po/Pfr. The subscript "fr" denotes values of the
parameters at the front; the subscript "0" denotes values of the parameters in the
undisturbed medium. Henceforth we will assume that 6f, - conat I 9.

At the front of the destruction wave there is satisfaction of the conditions of
conservation of mass and nonentms

m-sRU). (6)
[¢ I front] p.-MR'(¢)+P-. (5)

where R(t) and R(t) are front radius and velocity. ph is lithostatic pressure at
the depth h.

The dilatancy rateA—for porosities 5-151 can be considered constant [1]. Then
equation (3) is integrated

p(r..c)-p. (#5)” . (6)

where n - (2-.A)/(1+A).

The integration of the continuity equation (2). with (6) taken into account. gives
the relationship

r-"(r..t)-(i—a)r:"+en"'(t). (7)
where :- falls between the radius of the cavity and the radius of the wave front:
((l-e)a.'"+eR"" (t))"'“<r<R(i).
We introduce the dimensionless parameters 1- cot/a0. x0 - ro/ao, Y(‘C) - R(t)lao,
where ‘30 is the velocity of propagation of longitudinal waves in the undestroyed

Iscd iurs.

The equation of motion (1) after integration in the range from r0 to R(t). with al-
lownnce for (6). (5). (7). with x0 - 1, assumes the form:

A(Y)YY+B(Y)Y‘+C(Y)-0. (8)

where

I
Am- [deer-4e).

HY

FOR OFFICKII. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1(9- (c+(l-c)i”‘)"”‘.

_ . ‘ .
mn-wum-m I en's-"'“(th

OI?

p(t)- k
p. k _ __i_ 3»:
CU) sac.’ 3smc.‘ {(1’) ap.c.‘ '

where M6) is the pressure on the wall of the explosion cavity, which conforms to
the adiabatic law:

p(t)-[i~a+s}""(r)] "'.
Equation (8) with the initial conditions

.. ﬂ.

no) a. no) V we (9)
was solved numerically prior to the moment in time ‘1. when the velocity of the
wave front was greater than the velocity of the longitudinal waves co. After the
velocity of the destruction wave front becomes comparable to co. the "detachnent"
of the elastic precursor (forerunner) begins. In this stage the medium in front of
the wave front is disturbed by the elastic precursor and the conditions at the de
struction wave front assune the form '

u-R-% (u-R). ' prim-«#9. (4 -{f)(v-R)'. (10)

where P . v. 0;. are density. maaa velocity. and radial stress (negative during con-
pression in the elastic wave.

The pereneters of the elastic wave are expressed through one unknown function f(£)
-- the potential of elastic displacements -- tn the following way (the medium is

 

 

 

 

 

 

considered ideally elastic): v—c [110+ “9]
'. z a" '
__ 1m '1—2v He) [(3)
°' ”“1 2 *2 M (7+T)]"’" a”
__ _v_Im_ M» 1m rm
°' ‘W i—v .: i-v 3' 3’ ”—9"
p -__&__
' wm/z'

Here 5:- ‘C- x. x - r/ao. V is the Poisson coefficient.

At the destruction wave front we assume that one of the following conditions is
satisfied:

ot‘dv-Ya (1 2)

FOIOFPICﬁeLUSEONLY
0.--o.. . (13)

He will assume that the lithoststic pressure is great and radial detach-sot fissures
do not develop.

Oeitting internediate computations. we write a system of equations for deter-ining
the unknown functions ﬁt) and MS.) with f>€12

 

“(1') Y+s(r)r+c+D-'o. (1‘)
_/__L_ 2(1-2v) f I p.
y M- 1.. [.7 F 7...?
where the letter equation is taken with x - Y(t) and
D-.—‘—"—,—+ v.‘-2Yv., (15)
3%

u.-._°'_,+3V-1L_ 2(1-2v) I

m' i-vY' i-v Y’°

 

This system of equations (written with allowance for the destruction criterion (13))
is integrated nunerically with the following initial conditions:

Y—Y(r.). Y—Y('n). "(104). "(‘0'0- _ (16)

where w(j€1) is diepeceoent in the elastic wave at the initial meant in tine.

N121). Y(1:1) are the values of the radius and wave front velocity at the time {1,
obtained from solution in the preceding stage.

It is assuned that when the velocity of the destruction wave front is compared with
the uses velocity of the particles in front of it (when t- 172) there will be no
further destruction of the mdiun but the radiation of elastic waves will continue.

From this moment (t - t2) an analytical solution is obtained for the well-known
Sherne problem [13]:

a'--°e "hen :-Y(‘K'). (17)

and as the initial conditicne for the potential of elastic displace-ants we will
take its values f and f. obtained in the preceding stage.

The elastic energy radiated during the explosion was conputed using the formula

“M
c(¢)-4ap.a.'c.' j [ [(1) I'd-r. , (18)
O

POI omcea. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I «I,
f u ‘ec-l J I __.ﬁr
. ‘( -

(IO

LII
m m

if!
an “5 m MA

10 u I! l!

a
"1“," uec/kt1/3

Pig. 1. Dependence of velocity of radia- Fig. 2. Dependence of irradiated elas-
tion of elastic energy on tine. l)A- 0. tie energy on dilatancy coefficient.
2) A- 0.05. 3)/\.- 0.11, E is the explo~
sion energy; the arrow indicates the time
[12.

It‘lm'ln‘

n3/kt1/3

“l

7143:»

 

H I"
U
u "I
a" ‘u w I! 0 I“ I”
.- "‘"M'n uses/kt“

Fig. 3. Dependence of radiated elastic en- Fig. la. Dependence of potential of elas-
ergy on dry friction coefficient. tic displacements on time.

Figure l is a graph of the dependence of the velocity of radiation of elastic ener-
gy de(t)/dt on tine vith different dilatancy coefficients. It can be seen from this
dependence that most of the elastic energy is radiated up to the nonent t2 - ‘tzso/
c0, that is, with notion of the destruction wave. It exceeds by s factor of an-
proxinately 4-10 the elastic energy radiated after the destruction wave steps. with
an increase in the dilatancy coefficient the quantity of radiated elastic energy
increases. For exanple (Fig. 2). the elastic energy radiated withA- 0 is 12%
greater than the elastic energy radiated with A- 0.1. The radius of the destruc-
tion zone in s dilatating Iediun (A - 0.1) is 10! greater than in a nondilatating
medium. The ratio RP/Ro - 3.8-6.2, depending on A . Figure 3 shows the dependence
of the radiated elastic energy on the dry friction coefficient with s porosity of

POI omcﬁwms ONLY
92. With a decrease in the dry friction coefficient froa 0.60 to 0.15 the quantity
of radiated elastic energy increases by a factor of 3.5. The radius of the plastic-
ity zone increases by 601. In this case the increase in the fraction of radiated
elastic energy is related to a decrease in energy dissipation due to plastic flow.

- . , Id .
Illsiy'rt3M’IIH-l Islktl’a ?‘—:c.' .ec_1
U 1"
i
4‘ U1
r
a. ' “I 1
u no I
ur 3‘
haul/3 an...» ' .m‘fkclls “ “53*

Pig. 5. Dependence of derivative of poten- Pig. 6. Dependence of velocity of radia-

tial of elastic displacements on frequency. tion of elastic energy on time with dif-
ferent porosity. l) 131. 2) 9x, 3) 52. E
-- energy of explosion; the arrow indi-

iﬁﬁﬁv catea the tine :2.
u
C (V
' ‘m- I»
u u
. ' .
m m a
1
1” on quhﬂv 5.,
Fig. 7. Dependence of radiated elastic Fig. 8. Dependence of quantity of radi-
energy on porosity. ated elastic energy on cohesion coef-

ficient.

If the aediun conforms to the Tresk plasticity condition

arch-1.. (19)

then equation (1) assumes the fora

0s 0 r
' -'._——— _.
NM 8‘ ar.[P+2"l" r. . (20)

For 1‘:{Q the coefficient C in equation (8) aust be assumed equal to:

. -4.
6...;5‘? up. + 21’.lnY(t)-p.[i—s+ sY”'] “'1.

IND! OlﬂﬂcgiiflﬂﬂitldLY
FOR‘NHHKJALIHNEONLY

and when 11<f<fz the system of equations (16) assumes the form:

4(Y)w+smr+c.+D.-'-6. (21)
I l‘ 1.. -.‘_'1._‘.'_..
7+3[F+ r] i—2vpm' ' <22)
1 H1! _/_ i ,_
“'77.? r val” 2”“
1-9 1. 2/ 3/

The system of equations (21). (22) with the initial conditions (16) was integrated
numerically with parameters characteristic for rock salt [lb]. As a result of the
computations it was possible to ascertain the dependence of reduced patential on
time (Fig. 4) and the frequency dependence of the derivative of the potential of
elastic displacements (Fig. 5).

A contribution to the high-frequency spectral component is made by the leading part
of the elastic precursor radiated during the notion of the destruction wave front.

He also computed the dependence of the velocity of radiation of an elastic wave on
time for different porosities (Fig. 6). We note also. as in the case of the condi-
tion of destruction at the front by leans of crushing (13), that the part of elas-
tic energy radiated after stopping of the destruction front is an order of magni-
tude less than the fraction radiated before stopping: the effective source of elas-
tic waves is seemingly situated between the cavity and the elastic boundary. Such

a character of elastic wave radiation was experimentally observed in [2]. With an
increase in porosity from S to 152 the fraction of radiated energy decreases by half
(Fig. 7). The radius of the plasticity zone decreases since the fraction of en-
ergy going to shock compression increases wit an increase in porosity.

A study was made of the dependence of the radiated energy on the cohesion coef-
ficient I; with a fixed 10: porosity (Pig. 8). It can be seen that the fraction of
radiated elastic energy increased by a factor of 5 with an increase in t; with t}
- 0.8 kbar in comparison with 1; - 0.2 that (the radius of the plasticity zone in-
creased by a factor of 1.5).

Smnnary

1. A study was made of the dynamics of radiation of elastic waves from a spherical
unvented (underground) source. It was shown that most of the elastic energy is
radiated prior to the stopping of the destruction front. which must be taken into
account in formulating a model of an effective spherical source.

2. A dependence of the fraction of radiated energy on the parameters of the medium
(porosity, strength. dilatancy coefficient) was established.

102
FOI‘OFFKJA1,USI(NNLY
3. The dependence of reduced potential on frequency and time was determined. The
leading part of the radiated elastic precursor lakes a contribution to the high-
frequency spectral coaponent.

The authors express appreciation to Ye. Ye. Lovetskiy. V. K. Sirotkin and V. 8. Pet-
isov for useful discussions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Rodionov, V. N.. et s1., MBKRANICHBSKIY BPPEKT PODZEMNOGO VZRYVA (Mechanical
Effect of an Underground Explosion). Moscow, Nedrs, 1971, 220 pages.

2. Vssil'yev. Yu. N.. et al.. "Study of Structure of an Explosion Center in Soft
Ground." 12V. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ZEMLI (News of the USSR Acadely of Sciences:
Physics of the Earth), No 12. pp 40-50. 1972.

3. Kogan. 5. Ya. and Polikarpov, A. M., "Comparison of Different Models of s Seis-
nic Source of an Underground Explosion." IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ZBMLI, No 1. pp
3243, 1976.

4. Rodin. 6.. SEISMOLOGIYA YADBRNYKH VZRYVOV (Seismology of Nuclear Explosions),
Moscow. Mir, 1976. 190 pages.

5. Lovetskiy, Ye. Ye.. “Some Probls-s of the Theory of an Explosion in Porous
Ground," IZV. AN SSSR. OTN. MEKHANIKA I MASHIMOSTROYENIYE (News of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. Department of Technical Sciences. Mechanics and Machine
Building). No 6. pp 36-63. 1959.

6. Knryavov. V. P.. "Influence of a Precursor on Motion in the Near Zone of an
Explosion," IZV. AN SSSR. PIZIKA ZEMLI, No 10. pp 76-79, 1976.

7. Butkovich. T. 8.. "Calculation of the Shock Have From an Underground Nuclear
Explosion in Granite," J. GEOPHYS. RES.. Vol 70, No 4. pp 825-892, 1965.

8. Dunin. S. 2. and Sirotkin, V. K., "Expansion of the Gas Cavity in Brittle Rock
With Allowance for the Dilatance Properties of the Ground." 28. PRIKL. HERE. I
TEKHN. FIZ. (Journal of Applied Mechanics and technical Physics). No 5. pp 106-
109. 1977.

9. Kostyuchenko, V. N. and Rodionov, V. N., "Radiation of Seismic waves During
Powerful Underground Explosions in Solid Rocks." IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ZIMLI,
No 10. pp 65-73. 1976. '

10. Tsvetkov. V. M.. et a1., "Mechanism of Fracturing of a Solid Medium by an Ex-
plosion." DOKL. AN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Acadeuy of Sciences). Vbl 231,
No 5. pp 1067-1069. 1976.

11. Nikolayevskiy, V. N.. "Correlation Between Body and Shear Plastic Deforlations
and Shock Haves in Soft Ground." DOKLADY AR SSSR. Vol 177. No 3. PP 542-545.
1967.

FOR qelﬁstlﬂﬁlY
ROI OIWICJAI.USIZ(NVLY

12. Lovetskiy. Ye. Ye., Haslennikov. A. M. and Petisov. V. 8., "Energy Dissipa-
tion During an Explosion in s Porous Elastico-Plasric Medium," 23. PRIKL. HIKE.
1 TEKHN. PIZ.. No 6, pp 134-140. 1979.

13. Sharpe. J. A.. "The Production of Elastic Haves by Explosion Pressure."
GEOPHYSICS. V01 7, No 2. pp 155-154. 1952.

16. Khrisroforov. B. D.. et 31., "Influence of Porosity on the Parameters of Dy-
namic Compression of N501," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ZEHLI. No 8, pp 31-60. 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Nsuka". "Izvestiya A! 8888. Pizika Zelli", 1982

5303
cso: 1865/136

lNJI‘OFIlClAl.lﬂ5EI(NVLY
“MANNY

nnc 528.532.2'91
qt" ozvmm'rs m mvnmmrc METHODS m mmmnrmros

Moscow TWENTY! SILY TYAZHFSTI in Russian 1981 (signed to press 16 Oct 81)
up 2. 93-96

notation. table of contents and abstracts from collection of articles "Gravity
suresent," responsible editor Yu. I). Bulanzhe. corresponding saber. USSR Acade
of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 950 copies, 96 pages]

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles is devoted to the developaent and also
an evaluation of the accuracy of graviletric instrumentation and nethods for work
with it. The authors discuss the overall accuracy of sea gravineters of the mo type

Eor 10 years. Also examined is the possibility of an effective protection of the geo-
physical instruments against nicroseisua. The collection is intended for specialists

in the field of geodesy and gravimetry.

Contents
pobrokhotov, Yu. 8M6; Highly Sensitive Levels" 3
Dobrokhotov, Yu. 3. "Level-Type Tiltneter" 22

Rukavishnlhov, R. 3. "Calibration by the Method of Tilt of 'Hordsn Haster'
Gravineters” 29

Rukavishnikov, R. 3. "Determination of Graduation of cs/xz 'Delta-Z' Gravineters
by Tilt Hettnd" 34

Boyarskiy. E. A. and Pushchina. 1.. V. "Accuracy in Observations With AUG Gravi-
neters on Expeditions of the Institute of Physics of the Earth USSR Acadeny of

Sciences During 1968-1977" 37

Boyurskiy, E. A. "Errors in Measurements With Gravineters in Standard Polygons
in Australia in 1973 and in Eastern Europe in 1976" _ 56

Svetlosanova, 2. P. "Some Problems in the Adjustment of an AHG Sea Gravi-eter
in Calibration by the Tilt Method and Determination of Skew Angles Between

Gravineter Sensing Systems" 66

Dubovskoy, V. 3., Grushinskiy, A. N., Zayonchkovsltiy, H. A. and Leont'yev. V. I.
"Antiseisnic Protection of Geophysical Instruments" 71

105
ms omtm. use my
MWICIALISEONLY

UDC 528.532.291
DETEIMINATIOR 0P GRADUATION 0P GR/RZ 'DELTA-Z’ GRAVIHBTERS BY TILT arson
[Abstract of article by Rukavishnikov, R. 3.]

[Text] A study was made of calibration by the tilt method of two quart: astaticized
narrow-range gravimeters using a HEP-l apparatus at different temperatures (+25
and +3S’C). whose constancy was maintained using a TDG thermostat. It was found
that the value of a graduation of the investigated gravimeters is dependent on tem-
perature and that the nonlinearity of the reading scale is considerably less than
indicated in the certification data for the instruments. The relative error in de-
termining the value of a graduation on the average is equal to 22.104 and the error
in determining scale corrections is 10.02 mgal. The use of the proposed method and
apparatus for calibrating instruments of the mentioned type makes it possible to
increase the reliability in determining their constants and the accuracy in gravi—
metric measurements as a whole. Figures 2, tables 1, references 5.

HBO 528.27l:Sl9.281.2

ACCURACY IN OBSERVATIONS HIT}! AHG GRAVIHETBRS 0R EXP-ITIONS OF THE INSTITUTE OF
PHYSICS OF T82 EARTH USSR ACADM OF SCIENCES DURING 1968-1977

[Abstract of article by Boyarskiy, E. A. and Pushchina, L. V.)

[Text] The article describes the method and cites estimates of the accuracy of ob-
servations with ma sea gravimeters on the basis of the results of 10 expeditions
of the Institute of Physics of the Earth, USSR Academy of Sciences. The evaluation
was made using three methods: 1) on the basis of internal convergence, that is, on
the basis of a comparison of simultaneous observations by two or three methods; 2)
on the basis of repeated observations at the points of intersection of runs: 3) on
the basis of a comparison with the results of other expeditions. Figures 3, tables
8, references 5.

00¢ 528.27l:519.281.2

ERRORS IN MEASUREMENTS WITH CRAVIHBTERS IR STANDARD POLYGONS IN AUSTRALIA IN 1973
AND IN EASTERN EUROPE IN 1974

[Abstract of article by Boyarskiy, B. A.]

[Text] The random and systematic errors in measurements with gravimeters in stan-
dard polygons are analyzed. It is shown that there is a constant error which charac-
terizes the gravimeter in all measurements in this link. This error changes f.~om
link to link and from instrument to instrument randomly: its mean square value for
the GAG—2 is 167pgal; for the Zhs-lz it is tBOPgal; for the Lacoste-Romberg —-
tl7pgal. Tables 5. references 7.

“WMMY
UDC 528.532.291

SOME PROBLEMS IN THE ADJUSTMENT OF AN AMG SEA GRAVIMETER IN CALIBRATION BY THE
TILT METHOD AND DETERMINATION OF SKEW ANGLES BETNEEN GRAVIMBTER SENSING SYSTEMSHH

[Article by Svetlosanova, Z. P.]

[Text] The author examines the possibility of increasing the quality of adjustment
of the AHG gravimeter during calibration by the tilt method. The article describes
a method for gravimeter adjustment with use of a special device for the separate
registry of sensing systems. Also given are the results of determination of the
skew angle between the sensing systems of a group of AHG gravimeters. Recommenda-
tions are given on the practical use of the UEG-ll apparatus for eliminating skews.
figures 1, tables 3, references 3.

UDC 550.310

ANTISEISMIC PROTECTION OF GEOPHYSICAL INSTRUMENTS

[Article by Dubovskoy, V. 3., Grushinskiy, A. N., Zayonchkovskiy, M. A. and
Leont'yev, V. I.]

[Text] The article sets forth a theory for a passive antiseismic platform and
gives an analysis of the possibility of creating an effective antiseismic platform
with a feedback. Evaluating the accuracy characteristics of presently existing
Standard-produced sensors of horizontal and vertical accelerations, the authors
come to the conclusion that it is more effective to have protection against micro-
seisms by means of a low-frequency passive platform. The article gives the ampli-
tude and phase-frequency characteristics and recommends the optimum parameters.
Figures 2, references 2.

UDC 529.786.2
ECONOMICAL THERMOSTATING 0F GAG-3 GEODETIC GRAVIMETER
[Article by Dubovskoy, V. 3.. Leont'yev, V. I. and Zayonchkovskiy, H. A.]

[Text] A study was made of the advantage of a proportional thermostating system. The
authors give the comparative characteristics of schemes with independent and_dependr
ent temperature sensors. There is a detailed analysis of the problem of creating a
nongradient temperature field. The authors provide an optimum design for a thermo-
stat using a Dewar vessel. The model of a thermostat constructed with an analysis
of the principal sources of errors has high accuracy parameters: the thermostating
coefficient is not less than 10“. the homogeneity of the temperature field is not
worse than (2-3)-10's °C, the influence of thermal impacts is weak. The considered
thermostating system can be used extensively in precise measurement apparatus. Fig-
ures 2. tables 1, references 6.

107
FIIIIJFllglAJ.IISEQ(NULY
FINI(INW(1AI.IEIE(MVLY

Dubovskoy, V. 3., Leont'yev. V. I. and Zayonchkovskiy. H. A. "Economical
Thermostating of GAG-3 Geodetic Gravimeter" 76

Dubovskoy, V. 3.. Zholobov. V. 14.. Zayonchkovskiy. H. A.. Leont'yev. V. 1.,
Leskov, L. V., Obydennikov, s.-s. and Savicheva. V. V. "Possibilities for
the Registry of Hicroaccelerstions Aboard Space Vehicles" 84

UDC 528.532.291

GEOHETRY 0P HIGHLY SENSITIVE LEVELS
[Abstract of article by Dobrokhotov, Yu. 8.]

[Text] A method is proposed for constructing the section profile of an entire works
ing surface of a highly sensitive level. Control computations for models formed by
circles of different radii indicated that the errors introduced by simplifications
of rigorous theory are negligible in comparison with the measurement errors in the
investigation of levels. The practical use of the proposed method is shown in the
example of three second levels. Figures 12. references b.

000 528.532.291
LEVEL-TYPE TILTHETER

[Abstract of article by Dobrokhotov, Yu. 8.]

[Text] The article describes a tiltmeter with a sensitivity of 0.1-0."2 to be used
in measurements of tilts of the earth's surface in active seismic and volcanic re-
gions. Highly sensitive astronomical levels are used as the tiltmeter measurement
elements. Methods for adjusting the instrument and determining its constants are
set forth. Figures 3, references 2.

uoc 528.532.291
CALIBRATION BY m ammo or TILT or 'mnnsn msrsn' cannon-ms

[Abstract of article by Rukavishnikov, R. 3.]

[Text] The calibration of two quartz sstaticised gravimetsrs of the "Borden Master”
type produced by the American "Texas Instruments" Company is described. Investiga-
tions of instruments carried out with the unthermostated UEGP-l apparatus and with
the T36 thermostat at a temperature close to the thermostating temperature of the
instruments are compared. It has been established that the relative error in deter-
mining the graduation value in both cases is approximately identical and equal to
(6-7)-10'5; the error in determining the scale corrections in the first case is
equal to 10.025 mgal. and in the second - 10.008 mgal. The conclusion is drawn
that the quality in determining the gravimeter constants is influenced clearly by
the constancy of temperature in the course of the investigations, the number of
repetitions and experience of the operator. Figures 1. tables 2, references 3.

108
F!HIGDFIICIAI.Il§ltCIELY
T
UDC 550.34.012
POSSIBILITIBS FOR THE REGISTRY 0F HICROACCELERATIONS ABOARD SPACE VERICLBS

[Abstract of article by Dubovskoy, V. 3., Zholobov, V. H., Zayonchkovskiy, H. A..
Leont'yev, V. I., Leskov, L. V., Obydennikov, S. S. and Savicheva, V. V.]

[Text] The article gives an analysis of the factors causing accelerations of set-
ellites and orbital stations and evaluates their possible causes. Making a conser-
ative analysis of existing methods for measuring accelerations, the authors conb
clude that on the basis of highly sensitive geophysical instrumentation it is pos-
sible to create acceleration sensors greatly exceeding in their sensitivity those
lin standard production by industry. The authors describe a nodel of an accelero-
meter, which, having good noise innunity, is superior to known instrunents and can

be used successfully in solving a nunber of problems in space research. Figures
1, references 2.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

$303
030: 1865/131

109
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USI(I‘LY
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE<DNLY

000 551.1

HULTISIDBD INVESTIGATIONS OF THE EARTH'S CRUST AﬂD UPPER HANTLB: RESULTS AND
PROSPECTS

Moscow VBSTRIK AKADEHII "AUX SSSR in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 110-116
[Article by V. V. Belousov, corresponding member;USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] The Scientific Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences on Hultisided Inves-
tigations of the Earth's Crust and Upper Mantle during the last five years has
coordinated work on study of structure and development of the earth's crust and
upper mantle. This work was carried out by about 150 organizations of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. USSR Geology Ministry and USSR Ministry of Higher and Second-
ary Specialised Education. The program for these studies belonged (and in the cur-
rent five-year program belongs) to the group of programs entering into the plane
of the USSR State Committee on Science and Technology.

The investigations have been carried out by geological, geophysical and geochemical
methods in different structural zones of the Soviet Union for the purpose of clar-
ifying the peculiarities of the tectonic, magmatic and metamorphic processes. for
developing theoretical concepts concerning their mechanism and causes. Special ef-
forts have been applied in order to integrate different methods and obtain a multi-
sided geological-geophysical interpretation of the observed characteristics of
structure of the earth's deep layers.

The studies were carried out in different directions, the scope of individual re-
search areas was different, and in addition to major problems solutions were found
for many special ones. We will attempt to summarize the principal results obtained
in this work plan and also to draw some conclusions concerning the most important
directions in further research of this type.

The most general result relates to the problem of inhomogeneities in the structure
of the earth's crust and upper santle and essentially involves a refinement of '
data on the distribution of these inhomogeneities, their nature. and the relation-
ship of surface geological structures to them.

The fact that the earth's crust and upper mantle are inhomogeneous both vertically
and horizontally and that these changes in its structure correspond to changes in
structures at the surface was also known earlier. But in the course of recent years

110
IOIKOIIICIAI.IIII(IHLN
there has been a refinement of our knowledge concerning such inhosogsnsities. As
a result it has been possible to separate the observed deep structures into a
series of "models" corresponding to definite types of geological zones. Seismic--
models of the crust and Iantle are the best developed. '

For example. the plates of ancient platforms are characterized by a stable chicks
ness of the earth's crust (approximately equal to 60 kn), an increased lean seis-
mic velocity in the crust (6.5 kn/sec) with its separation into three layers of
approximately identical thickness and a high seislic velocity at the top of the
mantle (8.2-8.3 kn/sec). The ancient crystalline shields are underlain by a still
thicker crust (up to 50 km). The plates of the young platforms have a crust with
a thickness of 35-50 kn. the mean seislic velocities in then are lower than in
the ancient platforms (about 6.4 kn/sec), and at the top of the nsntle the velo-
cities vary between 7.9 and 8.1 km/sec.

All these figures pertain to the internal regions of the continent. They change sp-
preciably toward its peripheries: there the thickness of the crust in these sane
structural conditions decreases to 28-35 km.

The deep depressions on the platform have a special structure. Aulacogens or gra-
bcns. such as the Dneprovsko-Donetskiy graben. are characterized by a decrease in
crustal thickness under a downwarp in the basement (to 35 km). as a result of which
the Hohorovicic discontinuity beneath the axis of the downwarp rises by 5-10 km
relative to the surrounding regions.

Such depressions as the Caspian depression. where the consolidated crust is at a
depth of more than 20 km and is covered by an equally thick sedinentary layer.
stand out still more clearly in structure. Under the.center of'this type of depres-
sion the thickness of the entire crust decreases to 30 kn and the thickness of its
consolidated layer decreases to 10 km. A decrease in thickness occurs due to the
consolidated crust, in which, in this connection. only the lower, lost high-velo-
city part persists, that is. the densest layer. It therefore follows that in such
depressions the granite (granite-gneiss) part disappears and the entire solid part
of the crust consists of a "basalt" (granulite-besite) layer. In some cases be-
neath such depressions there are lenses of high-velocity matter of lesser density
(7.8-7.9 kn/sec) at the top of the mantle.

Zones of modern and recent rock formation are separated, as is well known, into
epigeosynclinal and epiplatform zones. The first includes the Carpathians. Crimes
and the Caucasus. In these zones there is a thickening of the crust to 50-60 km.
The thickening takes in primarily the upper or middle layers. that is. the low-
and intermediate-velocity layers. At the top of the mantle the velocities are
close to 8 kn/sec. The boundaries between the layers are traced less clearly than
on the platforms. A circumstance of particular interest is that in the crust of
such orogenic downwarps as the Kura or Transcerpathian downwnrps there are high-
velocity. dense and large inclusions.

Zones of epipletform mountain formation, such as the Tien Shan or Pamir, in their
deep structure are similar to the preceding. but here there is a general decrease
in the velocities of seismic waves both in the crust and in the upper nantle.

111
llll¢ﬂﬂﬂ€1hl.usl(l!LY
ROI¢0FHKJAI.USE(M¥LY

Under the Aloyskiy Range there are low-velocity layers in the crust forming local
velocity inversions. The velocities at the top of the mantle are reduced to 7.5-7.9

ks/sec.

The model for rift zones. an example of which is Lake Baykal and the adjacent re—
gions. is characterized by a crust of reduced thickness (up to 35 km). convex re-
lief of the hoho beneath the graben at the surface, both at the base of the crust
(6.7 kn/sec) and at the top of the mantle (7.7 kn/sec).

Extremely important results were obtained by the deep seismic sounding method in
the zone of transition from the continent to the Pacific Ocean. Together with the
results of earlier studies. carried out in the oceans surrounding the Soviet Union.
they indicated that with increasing distance from the land, with increasing depth
of the sea, the continental crust is gradually wedged out. being replaced by an
oceanic crust. 0n the island arcs the crustal thickness again increases; the crust
either reaains oceanic or there are indicators of a continental structure, in this
case being anomalously thin. The transition of the crust to the mantle is consider-
ably less clear than in the other zones. In the shyssal trenches the crust has an
oceanic structure and is especially thin. The marginal sea - island arc system is
characterized by reduced seismic velocities at the top of the mantle.

Until now we do not have adequate information on the structure of the deep layers

of the upper mantle, and in particular. on the degree of expression of the aatheno-
sphere -- a partially molten layer lying at a depth of 100-200 km. however. it can
be considered established that in the mantle, to a depth of not less than 200 km.
there are well-expressed horizontal inhomogeneities. Seismic and nagnetotelluric in-
vestigations have shown that the distribution of the asthenoapheric layers is ex-
tremely nonuniform. One cannot speak of a continuous asthenosphere. It is most

under the crust. It is known that observations of elastic waves reflected from the
surface of the earth's core have indicated that in a more general plan the inhomo-
geneities associated with separation of the earth's surface into continents and
oceans penetrate to a depth of at least 400 km.

geneities and concerning their nature if the seismic data are supplemented by gravi-
metric and geothermal data.
possible to discriminate a pattern of distribution of densities at different
depths in the crust and upper mantle. Regional isostatic anomalies with a wave-
length of a thousand kilometers are evidence of very deep inhomogeneities pene-
trating into the subasthsnospheric layers of the mantle. Comparison of these :
anomalies with the latest endogenous geological activity indicates the presence
of a direct correspondence between density distribution in the mantle and the de-
gree of excitation of endogenous processes at the surface, that is, the degree of
intensity of tectonic and magmatic processes. The minimum densities correspond to
the greatest degree of excitation. In actuality, the least dense mantle is situ-
ated under the Pamir and Tien Shan. from whence it is propagated to the region

of most recent tectonic-activation in the southern part of Siberia and into the
Baykal rift zone. This region of the less dense mantle differs sharply from the
ancient East European Platform or the Anabarskiy shield with their quiet gravita-
tional field, close to equilibrium.

Great complications are observed in the zone of transition from the continent to
the Pacific Ocean. Here regional isostatic anomalies attain a high maximum. It is
evidently caused by some heavy masses concentrated under the asthenosphere at a
depth of several hundreds of kilometers. But if this regional background is re-
moved and we turn to local isostatic anomalies, it is found that there is a far
more complex pattern. Then positive anomalies persist on the island arcs, but in
the abyssal trenches they become negative, the marginal seas being in an equil~
ibrium state. If the influence of the crust is subtracted from the anomalies,
local anomalies revealing the distribution of densities in the upper layers of the
mantle are revealed. In this case beneath the marginal seas the anomalies become
negative. but under the abyssal trenches -- positive.

These complexities indicate a different distribution of densities at different
levels in the section of the transition zone. Such a great inhomogeneity of the
medium is evidence of extremely energetic deep processes, which also corresponds
to the geological data.

Geothermal observations are of decisive importance in understanding the nature of
deep processes. Like density inhomogeneities, heat flows are associated with the
latest endogenous activity; they are greater where the activity is greater and
less in the quiet regions. High heat flows are associated with the latest epiplat-
form mountain formation (Pamir. Tien Shan) and the epigeosynclinal uplift of the
Central Caucasus. High flows also chars Ierize the rift zone of Baykal and the
transition zone from the continent to the Pacific Ocean. 0n the platforms there

is usually a normal flow decreasing to subnormal on the crystalline shields.

It is easy to see that the seismological. gravimetric. geothermal and also magneto-
teliuric data agree well with one another. The conditions for such an agreement are
evidently determined by the thermal regime of the deep layers. In actuality, in
those regions where the heat flow and accordingly the temperatures are higher there
is a well-expressed asthenosphere. reduced velocities at the top of the mantle and
reduced densities of these same layers. Everywhere in the regions of increased

heat flows at the surface there are modern or traces of relatively recent inten-
sive tectonic, magmatic and metamorphic processes. In places where the heat flow

is normal the asthenosphere is expressed weekly or is not expressed at all; the

Itlltlﬂﬂléka|USIiﬂﬂlV
INDI‘OIWH(JA1.IJBE:(M§LY

velocities at the top of the mantle are normal. the crust is thick and recent
and very recent endogenous activity at the surface is weak.

This correlation makes it possible to surmise that endogenous regimes. that is.
combinations of tectonic. magmatic and metamorphic processes. for the most part
are determined by the thermal conditions in the earth's deep layers. Excited re-
gimes are orogenic. rift. active transitional zones; they are caused by corres-
ponding thermal excitation of the upper mantle and crust. expressed. in particular.
in intensified melting of the upper mantle. Quiet regimes - platform. passive
transition zones -- are associated with quiet thermal conditions. The circumstance
that regimes of different degree of expression appear simultaneously at the earth's
surface is a result of nonuniformity of the earth's heat field. Hence. to be sure.
it is natural to assume that also a change in regimes in time. including so-cslled
endogenous cycles. are caused by temporal evolution of thermal nonuniformities in
the mantle and crust.

Thus, the results of a multisided geological-geophysical study of the earth's crust
and upper mantle over the territory of the USSR create a basis for a generalized
overview of the development of the earth's tectonosphere. This basis is the his-
tory of the earth's thermal field with all its spatial and temporal nonuniformit-
ies. Such a generalization is of both theoretical and practical importance since a
clarification of the relationships between the upper mantle and the crust and an un-
derstanding of the character of the processes determining these relationships make
it possible to interpret the mechanism and conditions of formation of different
geological structures.

The observed inhomogeneities in the structure of the earth's crust and upper
mantle. in combination with inhomogeneities in the thermal field. are evidence that
the processes transpiring in the tectonosphere are not limited to mechanical move-
ments. but are also accompanied by physicochemicsl transformations of matter.

In deep inhomogeneities it is natural to see a reflection of the processes which
at the present time are in different stages of their development. we could recon-
struct these processes if we were able to arrange the observed states in the
sequence of their development in nature. If. for example. the mean section of the
crust of an ancient platform is adopted as the initial section. and the observed
anomalous section of the crust of the Caspian depression is adopted as the next
section. forming in connection with downwarping of the earth's crust. we will in-
terpret the absence of a granite-gneiss layer not as a primary phenomenon. but as
a result of secondary transformations. As a result of the latter this layer in its
elastic properties became indistinguishable from the basalt layer. Such a trans-
formation could be a result of metamorphic processes with an increase in the in-
itiul density of the granite-gneiss layer. To be sure, this is only a hypothesis.

Still less of a definite nature can be said now concerning the nature of processes
in this same region at the boundary of the crust and mantle, where. if conclusions
are drawn on the basis of geophysical data. this boundary has been displaced up-
ward relative to its initial position and crustal thickness was thus reduced. If
crustal dilatation is excluded (and in the case of the isometric Caspian depression
it is scarcely possible). one must think of rather radical transformations of

1114
was omaAt tee ONLY
matter (for example, phase transitions) at this boundary.

similar comparisons for other cases will enable us to speak of a decrease in the
density of the upper layers of the mantle under the influence of intensified'heat-
ing causing (or intensifying) partial melting. This occurs in regions of mountain
and rift formation. A decrease in density of the upper mantle also occurs in the
transition zone from the continent to the ocean. But at the same time in local
downwarps (and in regions of mountain formation and in abyssal trenches) dense
inclusions appear which are registered by both seismic and gravimstric methods.

It can be postulated that dense inclusions represent injections of heavy magma.

However, such hypotheses are inadequate both for the solution of theoretical prob-
lems and especially for meeting practical requirements. In order to clarify the
true nature of the correlation between depths and the surface there is need for
models based on a comparison of the geophysical indicea and embodying physicochem-
ical materials. This requires an intensified development of the geophysical as-
pects of the considered problem.

It should be noted that the geochemical direction until now has been inadequately
reflected in the program for multisided investigations of the earth's crust and
upper mantle. Now the situation is improving. But even beyond the limits of this
program, in world geochemical science. a great volume of data has been accumulated
which can be used in a comparison with geophysical and geological data. Much in-
formation has been accumulated concerning conditions of magma formation and meta-
morphism. An analysis of the distribution of isotopes, radioactive and rare earth
elements gives much for an understanding of physicochemical processes in the
earth's deep layers. Data are available indicating the stratification of the upper
mantle: beneath its upper layer. poor in alkalis and rare elements. there is evi-
dently a layer containing these elements. All this is opening up broad paths to

an understanding of evolution not only of the structure but also the matter of the
crust and upper mantle, a revelation of the patterns of distribution of matter of
different composition in the earth's deep layers in different geological zones.

Such a broader. more multisided approach to the study of the earth's deep layers
will make it possible to hope that in the course of the five-year plan which is
now beginning we will considerably advance in our understanding of the earth's deep
layers and those processes which determine the development of the earth's crust and
the distribution of matter in it. including those aspects which are of practical
interest.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". “Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1982

5303
cso: 1865/139

ﬂOl¢lﬂﬂCéﬁ§UBBiﬂilY
FOI‘OFMIJAI.USEINVLY

PHYSICS 0P ATMOSPHERE

ARTICLES 0N STRUCTURE OF AURORAL SUESTORM

Apatity STRUKTURA AVRORAL'NOY SUBBURI (EEZUL'TATY MI“) in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 23 Dec 80) pp 2. 154-159

[Annotation and abstracts from collection of articles "Structure of the Auroral
Substors (Results of Program for International Investigation of the Magnetosphere)".
edited by H. V. Uspenskiy, candidate of technical sciences (responsible editor),

A. G. Yakhnin and Ye. Ye. Tinofeyev, Polyarnyy geofizicheskiy institut, Kol'skiy
filial AN 8888, 400 copies, 159 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The collection of articles gives the results of observations
and investigations carried out at the Polar Geophysical Institute in implement—
ing the program for International Investigation of the Hagnetosphere. The authors
examine problems relating to the physics of the radioaurora and the relationship

between the radioaurora and other geophysical phenomena. A study was made of the
characteristics of auroras in different substors phases and also the dynanics of

the equivalent current system at the time of breakup. Sane characteristics of the
polar ionosphere and geomagnetic pulsations are investigated. The collection is
intended for scientific specialists, graduate students and students specializing
in the field of solar-terrestrial physics and physics of the magnetosphere and
ionosphere.

Abstracts

UDC 550.388

NEH EVIDENCE OF UNIFIED WAVE NATURE OF SYNCHRONOUS PULSAIIONS IN RADIOAURORA AND
GEOHAGNETIC FIELD

[Article by Kustov, A. V., Pudovkin, A. I., Kangas, 1., Leynonen, I. and Uepenskiy,
H. V.) '

[Text] An analysis was made of the results of observations in the general zone
of pulsations in the radioaurors and short-period pulsations of the geomagnetic
field of class 91c, registered on 28 February 1978. Earlier it was proposed that
both phenomena be interpreted as the result of the incidence of an Alfven save

from the magnetosphere. New information is given confirming this hypothesis.
Figures 6, references 6.

116
IOIIOIFIJAI.UEI(INLY
UDC 550.308

CORRELATION BBTHBBN RADIOAURORA AND PROTON AURORAS IN EVENTS 0P 3 FBDRUARX AND 16
MARCH 1978

[Article by Pedorova, N. I., Totunova. G. F. and Sukhovanenko, P. Ya.)

{Text} A study was made of the joint behavior of regions of the radioaurora and
proton auroras on the basis of simultaneous observations of radar reflections and

surface optical spectral observations in the evening sector of local geomagnetic

.time. A good correlation was discovered between the region of the maxi-um inten- '
sity of a; and the diffuse radioaurora in the evening sector. Ionization by pro-

tons gives a contribution to the electron concentration in the ionospheric 8 re-
gion comparable with the concentration of leaking electrons. Figures 2, references
16.

UDC 550.338

POLAR GEOPHYSICAL INSTITUTE PULSED DOPPLER APPARATUS FOR DRIFT MEASUREMENTS 0P
RADIOAURORA

[Article by Stepanov, G. 8.. Kuetov. A. V., Hiroshnikov, Yu. G. and Yakovlev, P. 1.]

[Texr] The article describes the new Polar Geophysical Institute pulsed Doppler
radar intended for the geophysical diagnosis of the ionosphere within the frame-
work of the international program for investigation of the magnetosphere. The radar
was developed for three-position measurements of the cosine dependence of the Dop-
pler scattering shift, together with the STARE system, and for investigation of the
spatial and Doppler structure of short-period pulsations accompanying substorns and
participation in diagnosis of artificial modification of the ionospheric 3 region
by powerful 8" radiation. The authors give the zones of radar visibility. aspect
angles and positioning of geophysical instruments. The article gives examples of
the spectra of reflected signals and a table (calendar) of available data for the
experiment "Auroral Breakup-79." Figures 7, tables 2, references 15 items.

UDC 550.388

NATURE OF EAST-NEST ASYHHETRY 0F ALTITUDBS 0P AURORAL SCATTERING

[Article by Timofeyev. Ye. Ye.)

[Text] This study is a review of data on the east-west asymmetry of radioaurora
altitudes. This author analyzes the results of measurements at frequencies from 46
to 1210 "Me. It is shown that the asymmetry of altitudes is not a result of change
in the current angle with the azimuth of observation; in order to eliminate the
contradiction between cxperiaent and the existing theory it is necessary to propose
the presence, in general, of a slight slope to the east (about 1') of the ionospher-
ic current layers. Figures 1. references 17.

ll?
FOI‘DIIKJAI.UBBIINLY
EOI‘OFIICJAI.IENECNVLY

UDC 550.388

DETAILED ANALYSIS OF ALTITUDE CHARACTERISTICS OF RADIOAURORA IN EVENT OF
11 FEBRUARY 1979

[Article by Tinofeyev, Ye. Ye.. Hiroshnikova, T. V. and Kukushkina. R. 8.]

[Text] The author gives a comparison of the behavior of the altitudes of sur-

oral scattering at a frequency of 90 has with other parameters of the ionospheric

3 region during the course of the event of 11 February 1979. It is shown that there
is a systeeatic eastward slope of the radioaurora layers in the region of the vest-
erly electrojet and there is no correlation between the altitude at which the radio
ray is orthogonal to the geomagnetic field and the altitude of scattering. There is
a correlation between the altitudes of the radioaurora and the lower edge of sur-
oral 2. layers observed in one and the same ionospheric region. Figures 4, refer-
ences 16.

UDC SSO.388.8

LONGITUDINAL ELECTRIC FIELDS AS MAIN SOURCE OF ACCELERATION OP AURORAL PARTICLE
FLUXES DURING DEVELOPMENT OF SUESTORH

[Article by Yevlashin, L. S. and Yevlashin, L. N.]

[Text] 0n the basis of a joint analysis of the optical spectra of suroras and

ionospheric data at the time of development of midnight isolated negative bays in
the H component at Huraansk station the authors give a scheme for change in the
parameters of the energy spectra of auroral protons and electrons, from which it
can be seen that in the different phases of an elementary substore there is an

anticorrelation of variations of hardness of the energy spectra. This is evidence
that the nain saurce of acceleration of auroral particles operative during devel-
opment of a substorn can be the electric field directed along the earth's magnetic

lines of force. Figures 4, references 15.

UDC 550.388.8

DIFFUSE RADIOAURORA AND LONGITUDINAL CURRENTS IN EVENING SECTOR
[Article by Gustafson, 6., Sverdlov, Yu. L. and Sergeyeva, N. 6.]

[Text] A study was made of the correlation between the radioaurora and longi-
tudinal currents. The neridional chain of radars operates at a frequency of 88
MHz. The longitudinal currents were measured by the ”Triad" satellite. It was
found that a diffuse radioaurora is associated with inflowing longitudinal cur-
rents. Figures 4, references ll.

118
ﬁOI<OUIIC1Al.lEI!(MVLV
LOCALIZATION 0? PCS AND AURORAL OVAL

[Article by Raspopov, O. M. and Afanss’yeva, L. T.]

[Text] 0n the basis of na:erials from the network of surface observatories sit-
uated in the subauroral latitudes and auroral zone the authors describe the correl-
ation between Pc5 and the auroral oval. The region of generation of PcS is related

to the equatorial boundary of the oval with different levels of magnetic activity.
It is known on the basis of satellite data that the excitation of Pc5 is associated

with the drift of plasma inhomogeneities from the nighttime sector of the magneto-
sphere to its daytime part during the time of a substorm. The azimuthal drift of
the source of oscillations is also detected on the basis of surface data. The drift

velocity isIV 0.5-1.1 degree/min. The detected patterns are compared with the
known theories of excitation of PcS pulsations. The most probable mechanism of
generation of oscillations is drift instability developing on the inner boundary
of the plasma layer in the morning sector of the magnetosphere during the time of
the restoration phase of a substorm. Figures 3, tables 2, references 25.

"DC 550.388
RELAXATION CHARACTERISTICS OF AURORAL IONOSPHBRB

[Article by Tagirov, V. 8., Vlaskov, V. A., Chernoua, S. A. and Kayla, K.]

[Text] This review gives a detailed examination of the experimental and funda-

mental theoretical data on measurement and computation of the reaction time of the
auroral ionosphere to the injection of particles. Figures 7, tables 2. references
25.

030 550.388

FREQUENCY DEPENDENCE OF ALTITUDINAL VARIATION OF CONDUCTIVITY TEﬂSOR O?
HULTICDHPONENT IONOSPHBRB

[Article by Pudovkin, A. M. and Pudovkins, Ye. V.]

[Text] The method for direct solution of a system of equations of motion is us-
ed in computing the components of the conductivity tensor of cold plasma. The
article gives the altitudinal variations of the tensor components for frequencies
10'3-105 sec-1 for the daytime mean latitudinal six-component ionosphere under
quiet conditions. Figures 6, tables 6, references 6.

030 550.338
ASYHHBTRY 0F AURORAL SCATTERING INDICATRIX

[Article by Zarnitskiy, Yu. F.]

[Text] A linear theory is used in analysis of the relative contribution of dif-
ferent factors capable of causing an asymmetry of the indicatrix or auroral US"

119
IND! OFFICIAI.USIE(HULY
MOMCIALIJSEONLY

V
scattering in the polar ionosphere. It is shown that Kadomtsev-Nedospasov instab-
ility in the longitudinal current is capable of causing swinging of long-wave
drift waves deflected from the orthogonal magnetic field by a considerable
80812. The authors also briefly examine the influence of ohmic heating of iono-

spheric plasma on the development of Buneman-Fahl instability in the B layer.
Figures 8, references 9.

UDC 550. 338

LONG-PERIOD PULSATIODIS OP SPECTRIH 01' WIBS 0P MEMO AURORAL ELECTRORS
IN MORNING HOURS

[Article by Pirs, G. P., Shumilov, O. I., Lazutin, L. L., Radkevich, V. A. and
Zhulin, I. A.)

[Text] 0n the basis of measurements of x-radiation in the stratosphere during

the SAHBO-79 experiment a study was made of long-period pulsations of the intens-
ity and spectrum of energies of auroral X-radiation in morning. The article de-
scribes the case of synchronicity of long-period pulsations of intensity with simr
ilar pulsations of the spectral parameters of auroral x-radiation, which accompan-
ied considerable activity of PcS geomagnetic pulsations. Figures 2, references 18.

UDC 550.385
DEVELOPMENT OF EQUIVALENT CURRENT SYSTEM DURING BREAKUP TIME
[Article by Yakhin, A. 0., Sergeyev, V. A., Baumyokhanm, V. and Raspopov, 0. “.1

[Text] Data from the Scandinavian network of magnetometers are used in analyz-
ing the development of an equivalent current system of a weak localised substorm.

The results make it possible to propose the existence of a Birkeland system of cur-
rents with a current flowing in at the eastern edge and flowing out at the western
edge of the auroral,honvexity. The growth of the current system occurs discrete-
ly; intensifications occur near the moments of flares of new arcs on the front of
the auroral convexity. Figures 2, references 7.

UDC 550.338.8

IONOSPBZRIC CONDUCTIVITY IN THE REGION 0? THE EASTERN BLECTROJBT AND RADIOAURORA
AMPLITUDE

[Article by Starkov, C. V., Uspenskiy, H. V., Kayla, K., Pellinen, R. 1., Grin-
val'd. R. A., Ril'sen, E. and Sofko, 0.]

[Text] Data on the radioaurora are used in investigating ionospheric condi-

tions around the equatorial arc of the auroral oval in the preliminary phase of

a storm in the evening. The basis of the work is a detailed instrumental analysis
of the local storm of 16 March 1978, selected by the Polar Geophysical Institute
(NL 78-8) for a complex investigation within the framework of the experiment "Aur-
oral Breakup-78." The authors demonstrate the existence of a stable conductivity

120
IIIICHNNCIAI.IEI!(HVLY
jlnq) related to the most equatorial arc of the auroral oval. Equatorvard from the
oval the Hall conductivity is 3-5 times greater than the conductivity within the
oval between the arcs, although the Pedersen conductivity there also differs insig-
nificantly. This phenomenon has also been confirmed by other geophysical observa-
tiOns carried out simultaneously and by data of the Chatanikovskaya incoherent scat--
tering station for other cases. It is demonstrated that the earlier experimentally
determined linear relationship between the anplitude of the radioaurora and density
of the ionospheric current is a special case of the more general case, which is

the linear relationship of the radioaurora amplitude and the mean electron density
in the scattering volume. The latter in some limits allows an anticorrelation be-
tween the electric field and anplitude of the experimentally determined radioaurora.

Figures 7, references 35.

COPYRIGHT: Kol'skiy filial AN SSSR, 1980

5303 — END _
CSO: 1865/76

121
F0. WI. US! ONLY