USSR Report

LIFE SCIENCES

AGROTECHNOLOGY AND FOOD RESOURCES

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

LIFE SCIENCES
AGROTECHNOLOGY AND FOOD Resouacss

(Pouo 1/32)

CONTENTS

ECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

Searching for Selectively Active Insect Acaricides................ 1

INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOGY

Principal Tasks Associated With Search for New Pesticides......... 10

PESTICIDES

Dinethyl Phosphite Purification by Vacuum Distillation in Film
Rotor EvaporatorOOOOOOOIUOOIOIIOOOOOIOOOOOOOOICCOOCCOOOOOOCIOUOI 22

- a - [III - USSR - Zln Sa'l‘ F

l-‘OD 09“!" U INF ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

SEARCHING FOR SELECTIVELY ACTIVE INSECT ACARICIDES

Moscow ImNSIl’IKA‘l'SIYA ssL'sxmunmrsmmoco Pnorzvossws 1 momma usmum
oxsuzmrusucmr sum in Russian 1980 (signed to press 31 Oct 80) pp 156-165

[Article by T.A. Hastryukova. Institute of Natalia-organic Compounds. USSR
Academy of Sciences: "Methods for Searching for New Selective Phosphororgenic
Insect Acaricides which be Not Leave Harmful Residues in the Environment," from
book “Intensification of Agricultural Production and the Problems of Environmental
Protection," edited by T. I. Lipatova, Isdetel'stvo "Neuke". 500]

[Text] Agricultural production during the second half of the 20th Century has
invariably been associated with the use of agents for protecting plants against
weeds, pests end agricultural plant diseases. This leads to a disruption in the
existing ecological balance in a given region and it naturally and necessarily
serves to contaminate the surroundings [I].

Since we cannot cease our efforts directed against harmful organisms, we must employ
preparations which, following the completion of their effective actibn, will
disintegrate campleteiy into non-toxic residues; on the other hand. the agents
employed must be highly selective. destroying the harmful populations but not
disrupting other ecological balances in the region.

If we look at pesticides -- the principal means for combating harmful organisms in
agriculture, then it must be stated that first generation pesticides do not meet
these reguirements. They are highly toxic with regard to warm blooded animals and
they are characterized by a broad spectrum of action, affecting both harmful and
useful organisms and they are highly persistent, that is, they remain in the
atmosphere for a long period of time.

The toxicity of such well known first generation phosphororganic insecticides as
octamethyl, thiophoa and systOx. for warm blooded animals. was 1-7 mg/kg (such as
1050), which is -at the toxicity level for potassium cyanide (1.0100 2.5 mg/kg).
Exactly the same high toxicity was possessed by the chlororganic derivatives, with
the exception of DDT; their toxicity ranged from 7 to 40 mg/kg. It turned out later
that they were especially toxic for fish (SK 0 approximately 0.01 mg/kg). Their
high persistence was extremely unpleasant; t ey cauld remain in the environment for
years. circulating among the soil-water and food chains and eventually entering the
human organism. At the present time. all of these pesticides are either completely
prohibited by law or their use is strictly limited.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SI". ONLY

As a result of intensive studies rented out by firms and scientific institutes, the
following pesticides have been obtained during the past few decades -- second and
third generation pesticides which to a considerable degree lack the above
shortcomings. Their toxicity for humans and animals has been lowered by tons and
hundreds of times. It is sufficient to state that the average toxicity of
preparations in use at the present time is on the order of 900 mg/kg. These
preparations disintegrate rather rapidly in the environment. Thus, thiophos, a first
generation preparation, disintegrates in the soil only 35 percent over a period of

2 weeks. This means that 90 percent of the thiophos decomposes roughly ever a
period of 3 months. Phosphamide decomposes in the soil two and a half times more
rapidly. Many second and third generation phosphororganic preparations decompose by
90-95 percent in just 1.2 days.

Thus, considerable success has been achieved during the past decade in improving the
chemical agents used for protecting plants. At the same time, the tasks for
protecting the environment continue to advance newer and more strict requirements,
which in turn stimulate a search for new pesticides. Here there are two principal
tasks: first of all, a pesticide must break down in the environment and not leave
harmful residues and, secondly, a pesticide must have high selective action as it
affects definite harmful organisms. It must be non-toxic for other arthropods and
certainly for humans and domestic animals.

All successes achieved up until now in searching for second and third generation
pesticides have been obtained as a result of tremendous research work, carried out
using Bhrlich's "trial and error" method. This is a very laborious and costly
path and with the passage of time it is becoming more difficult and more expensive.
It is sufficient to state that during the past few years only one substance of more
than 10,000 that have been synthesized and examined [2] has been introduced into
agricultural practice.

Another method of specialized research is based upon a thorough study of the
mechanism of the effect and metabolism of pesticides in various types of organisms.

Some results obtained from the second research method are set forth below. This
method made it possible to find new pesticides which have a high level of
selective action and which do not leave harmful residues in the environment.

Our work is based upon the following considerations. The absence of harmful residues
in the environment can best be achieved if the preparation breaks up into fragments
which are already present in abundance in the environment. The searches for
selectivity are based upon differences in the metabolic changes of substances in
various types of organisms. The substance is toxic for a given type if the metabolic
activation "exceeds“ the detoxication and conversely.

It was on this basis that we arrived at phosphororganic esters, which contain
residues of acetylated amino acids in a side chain [3-5]

X
‘\,/ o .

/ \ u /
B SCH2-C-ﬂl-ll-c
\y

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A, s . no; cn3. c337; x . s, o; y . on. on. may R . cuz. cn(cu3). cn(c3u7-1so ).
Clucbllg-iso), Cll(Cll2c6ﬂ ). ca(c COOK), cu(c c COOR), ca CH SCH and others. For
these compounds, extens ve varia ions were no ed th in the l and B substitutes in
the phosphorus part of the molecule and in the amino acid residues. A high
selective action was established for substances of this type for insects and mites
on the one hand and warm blooded animals and arthropods on the other. Considerable
importance is also attached to the fact that these compounds, upon decomposing in the
environment, give off biogenic and non-toxic residues: amino acids, glycolic or
thioslycolic acid and phosphoric acids. we studied the metabolism. toxicodynamics.
enticholinesterase propertiee and the toxicity of the substances themselves and also
their more important metabolites [6-8]. It was on this basis that we succeeded in
developing a picture of the selective toxicity of the substances of this type.

By way of an example, let us examine the data obtained for certain dithiophoaphatee
which we studied. A description of their physiological activity is furnished in
Table l.

IABLB 1

Physiological Activity of Certain Dithiophoephatcs -- Derivatives of Acetylated
Amino Acids and Their R-O Metabolites, With the General Pormula being

 

Ins-14o s 451542- goons 0,14 2000 — -
law 0 41-22012- moss qooss 250 2.340" 1.5.103'

 

our :2 migcauruoqu (1)027 90 —

Ell-156 o cam-m 9m (p058 '75 9.2-103 3.5-102

 

 

 

 

$120 5 .012- cprs (ms 750
_s-155 o .0512- - 00025 (p052 75 1.2240“ 4.13-103
I
:t-IZZ s 4.112 qpra qom rooo - —
at-
3
:31'43 o c113- cpzs cpoza 290 7,5-Io3 1.8.103
Key:
1. Aphids 3. Lethal doeeso mg/kg (mice)
2. Mites A. Acetylcholinesterase

Here 9-140 is the selective insecticide,|l-141 is the selective acaricide and “-120
13 the insecticide and scaricide of identical strength. At first glance, the data

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Ul\ Vl’I'A\oLl‘\le UDC Ul‘hl

in the table present a rather complicated picture and yet can be understood
provided one takes into account the simultaneous or consecutive £100 of several
biochemical processes, the presence of which is confirmed both by the data in this
table and by special studies of the metabolism and toxicodynamics.

Precisely what changes are taking place in these substances?

First of all, there :s the process of biochemical activation. It consists of the
oxidation of the sz groups of our insect acaricides into the P e 0. Judging by the
results of the study, it is dependent to only a slight degree upon the nature of the
amino acid.

Secondly, the inhibiting of the cholinesterase Ps0 by the metabolites. Generally
speaking, these are inhibitors of average strength. With regard to the AChB
[acetylcholinesterase] of mammals, their activity depends very little upou the nature
of the amino acid: the changes do not exceed one order. with regard to the ChE of
aphids, to the contrary, an expressed selectivity is observed. For ZhSh-S )Sh-lSS)
Sh-lS6)Bc-33, that is, the nature of the amino acid affects the inhibiting of the
ChB of the aphids and in a manner such that the introduction of the dfbranchings
lovers the activity. Here we see an example of a different specificity in the AChB
for mammals and the ChE for aphids.

Thirdly, there is carboxyesterase hydrolysis. This is the detoxication process.
According to our data, the carboxyesterases in the homogenates of mites are more
active than those in the homogenates of aphids.

With regard to the effect of the structure of an amino acid residue, it must be borne
in mind that the hydrolysis of ethyl esters of carboxy acids slows down upon the
introduction of the branchings to the cicarbon atom of the acid, especially with the
entry of the isopropyl group. Thus, our substances can be arranged in a series
according to the speed of hydrolysis: derivatives ﬁ-elenine ) glycine )alanine )
valine. Moreover, in the case-of mites the,ﬂ-analine and glycine residues change in
some areas

Pourthly, there is the inhibiting of carboxyesterase. As it turned out, the Ps0
metabolites of our substances inhibit the carhoxyesterases. The valine derivative
(Sh-156) shows the greatest inhibiting effect. It is obvious that the worse a
substance with a carbalkoxy group is as a substrate for carboxyesterases, the

stronger it will inhibit them.

Pifthly, there is carboxyamidase hydrolysis. This is also a process of detoxication
which ve did not study in particular, but judging by the metabolites revealed, it is
taking place.

Let us examine the experimental data on toxicity. The} alanine derivatives represent
the first pair of substances. Here, as already noted, 35-140 is the selective
insecticide. It hydrolyzes well in the liver of mice and in mites and thus its
detoxication takes place more rapidly than its activation: thus Sh-lbo is 8 times
less toxic for mice than its Ps0 metabolite, 15 times for mites and only twofold for
aphids. Owing to the fact that carboxyesterase activity is only weakly expressed in
aphids, a good half of the sn-lao is activated in the Ps0 metabolite, ZhSh-S is a

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

very strong anticholinesterase for aphids (105). It is precisely this which explains
the high selective action of Sh-lbO for aphids.

The second pair of substances -- valine derivatives. Sh-lbl is a selective scsricide.
Owing to the veline grouping, not only does its carbozyesterase hydrolysis take place
in a slow manner, but the P-O metabolite (Sh-156) inhibits the carboxyesterases.

Thus, oxidising activation with the formation of Sh-156 is preferred for Sh-lhl and
once the Sh-156 forms it terminates further deactivation by inhibiting

carboxyesterases. hence the P25 compounds and their Ps0 metabolite are close in
toxicity.

in a similar manner, it is possible to analyze the third pair of substances ~-
glycins derivatives. Here Sh-120 is an insecticide and scaricide of equal strength;
in this instance the detoxication processes are expressed in aphids to a greater
degree than with sn-lao and in the case of mites -- to a lesser degree.

We are obviously aware that the interpretation cited above is sufficiently

approximate and thus it can be utilized for predicting the selectivity of action for
substances of related types and for planning further experiments.

If the substances or products of their activation are very strong snticholinestersses,
then their carboxyesterase detoxication will not be very effective. This corresponds
to the gongr.1 rule of Unterstenhofer. according to which high activity is

accompanied by a low selectivity. At the same time. this rule can be disrupted by a
very high detoxication level.

Allow me to cite data for a number of thiophosphonates (see Tab‘e 2), in which the
COOR group radicals vary; X -- sulphur or Oxygen. Here the phosphoryl compounds are
strong and highly toxic acaricides which surpass the standard -- thiophos -- in terms
of their action. With regard to the 9:8 compounds and with the exception of thiophos,
they are strong insect acaricides and rather toxic for warmvblooded animals.

However, "Sh-8, an isobutyl ester, is detoxicated to a considerably stronger degree
than lower homologs: its coefficients of detoxication for mice -- 6.6, for aphids --
5.3 and for mites -- 5.7. Such strong detoxicetion is obviously associated with the
ease in alkyl-oxygen disruption or the ;3elimination. As a result. we have a rather
strong insect acaricidc which is not inferior to thiophos, but which is at least 20

times less toxic than thiophos. This is an interesting observation and an equally
interesting substance.

The effect of isobutyl protection is noted in other instances. for era-ple, in the
derivatives of the/B-alanine.in which the monothioanslogs are strong
anticholinesterases (10 ). Here the isobutyl derivative is the least toxic for mice.

The fact that in this effect we are dealing with hydrolytic detoxication based on

a carbOxyl grOup is revealed by examples in which the detoxication encounters very
strong steric hindrance with the introduction of the isopropyl group (valine

derivatives). The oxyggn analogs of these substances sre also strong
anticholinesterases (10 , but the substances themselves are not only poorly
hydrolyzed by the carboxyestersses but in addition they are also strongly suppressed
by them. Here there is no isobutyl effect whatsoever.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H'K OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 2

Physiological Activity of Certain Hethyldithiophosphonatee -- Derivatives of
Acetylated Glycine and Their lbnothioenaloge, With the General Formla Being:

 

 

 

Elf-20 021% 5 140.0 0.0005 0.“)03
3r-13 0235 0 3.3 0.001 0.0004

, 5-2 c3H7-uao ,4 22.0 0.6012 0.00015
ill-4 03517430 0 [.5 OJIJO? 0.00035
iii-8 C4H9-aso 5 370.0 0.003 0,002
|iI-9 c‘ﬂg-sao 0 5.6 0.00056 0.00035

 

Klmm (b)
11mm 9-25 0.001- 0.003-

 

 

Key:

1. Lethal doseso ng/kg, mice lo. 'Detoxicetion
2. Aphids S. Thiophos

3. Mites

The same is observed in a number of methionine derivatives. And here the d branching
(introduction of the CHZCstCﬂ3 grOup) lovers the possibility of effective
detoxication.

More complicated results ensue from the introduction--into the position alpha to the
carboxyl-of groupings capable of carboxylesterese hydrolysis, for example, the COOR
groups, such as takes place in the derivatives of aspartic acid:

A 8

\ /
/ P/ (lmzcooa
n \scuzoomwcooa
Here. on the one hand. there is en «substitute which hinders carboxylesterese

detoxication but, on the other hend, a second carb-‘Ilkoxy group appeared which
is cepeble of detOxicetion. The introduction of the second cerbelkoxy group

6

FOR OFFICIAL USIZ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lowers the toxicity for mice and leaves an overall strong insect scaricide effect.
He obtained similar results from a series of derivatives containing residues of
glutamic acid.

Subsequently, the effect of csrboxylesterese detoxication was employed for loworing
the toxicity of such well known first generation insect acaricides as timet, "-70
and Niagara 1200. The introduction of carbalkoxy groups into the aide chair

led to a reduction of 100-250 times in the toxicity of compOunds for warm blooded
animals. Several dozens of substances were synthesized and tested in these series
of compounds and it turned out that many of them were stronger than thiophos and

were considerably less toxic for warm blooded animals. A number of preparations
from this series were tested in the field.

Thus the introduction into the molecule of a well known insect acericide of
grOupings which promote selective detoxication but which do not inhibit their
interaction with the "target" among insects and mites, can serve as still another
method for searching for new and highly selective preparations.

Nor were the above methods for searching for selectivity of action the only ones
analyzed. We also studied stereochemical selectivity of action, using as an example
the derivatives of methylphosphonic acid, which contain residues of acetylated amino

acids. Examples were found in which the optical antipodes differ by one order or
mre .

Other methods are possible when there are many metabolic changes in the phosphor-

orgenic substances in live organisms, for example the use of phosphatase hydrolysis,
regroupings and a number of others.

These studies are tne result of work carried out by a large inter-departmental»
collective, organized by Academician H.I. Kabachnik. The following individuals
participated in this work: A.B. Shipov, E.B. Corbenko, M.S. Vaysberg, G.V. Zhdenova,
H.V. Markove. V.A. Sergeysv snd Ye.M. Piskunova (INEOS [Order of lenin Institute of
Metallo-organic Compounds] of the USSR Academy of Sciences); M.Kh. BorkhamOv,

2.x. Yenkuzheva and L.G. Grineva (KBGU [Kaberdino-Balkarian State University]);

A.P. Brestkin, I.L. Brik, Yu.Ye. Mandetl'shtam and A.N. Pedin (I8?! imeni

I.H. Sechenova of the USSR Academy of Sciences); H.P. fhabanova, O.V. Sundukov,

K.N. Savchenko, I.N. Sazonova, A.A. Rakitin and 8.6. Zhukovskiy (VIZR [All-Union
Institute for the Protection of Plants] of VASKhNIL [All-Union Academy of
Agricultural Sciences imeni v.1. Leninj); Yu.S. Kagsn, Ye.A. Yershova and

M.A. Klisenko (VNIIGINTOKS of the USSR Ministry of Public Health); S.A. Roslavtseva,
N.A. Guseva, T.N. Kaluzhina, N.c. Rozhkova and A.S. Sedykh (VNIIKhSZR [All-Union

Scientific Research Institute of Chemicals Used for Plant Protection]);
$.A. Zhuravskaya (lZiP of the UzSSR Academy of Sciences).

In conclusion, it should be mentioned that the developed system of views is making it
possible to carry out a purposeful synthesis nr insect acaricides. This is not

meant to imply that it is possible to write a formula for an ideal preparation in
advance (this would be utopia). However, it does mean that it is possible to select
effectively classes of substances, among which there is a higher probability of
finding preparations which satisfy the high modern requirements.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Summary

In the interest of finding selectively acting insect acaricides which are of low
toxicity with regard to warn blooded animals and do not leave harmful residues in
the environment, a basic' principle was proposed according to which the molecules of
new pesticides must form from frapents disseminated naturally in nature. A group
of esters and nethylanides of amino acids containing the residues of esters of
dithionic acids of phosphorus was synthesized. A study of anticholinesterase
properties, metabolism, toxicodynenics, toxicity for were blooded animls and
entomological properties has made it possible to uncover factors which deteroine the
selective action of synthesised compounds. It was found that in the case of the
leading snticholinesterese type of action, an important role is played by
cerboxylesteraee and carboxylanidase hydrolysis and by the ability of substances to
suppress carbonylesterases.

BIBLIWRAPH‘!

l. Mel'nikov, N.N., Volkov, A.l., Korotkova, O.A. "Pestitsidy i okrushayushcheys
srede" (Pesticides and the Environment]. Moscow, Khiniya, 1977'.

2. Hel'nikov, NJ. "Khiaiye i tekhnologiys pestitsidov" [Chemistry and the
Technology of Pesticides], Moscow, Khiniya, 1976.

3. lhstryukwa, T.A.. ShipoV. A.B., Corbenko, 3.3., and others. “ﬂew Type of
Selectively Acting Phosphororganic Insecticides Ind Acaricides." IMSTIYA AN
5858 [News of the USSR Academy of Sciences],Cheincsl Series, No 9, 1968.

lo. lustryukova. 'l'.A.. Shipov, A.B., Gorbenko. 8.3.. Regan, Yu.s., Yershova, Ye.A.,
Shsbsnove. H.P.. Savchenko, LIL, Kabachnik, NJ. "New Type of Selectively
Acting Phosphororganic Insecticides and Acaricides. Part II" IMS‘l‘l‘YA AN
SSSR. Chemical Series. No 9, 1971.

5. Hastryukova, 1'.A., Shipov. A.E., Corbenko, 3.3., Shebenove, H.P., Sevchenko, K.N..
Kagan. Yu.s., Yermova. Ye.A., Kabachnik, H.l. "New “type of Phosphororganic
Coopounda Which Selectively Act Upon Harmful Insects and Mites." ram VIZR
VASKhNIl. [Works of All-Union Institute for the Protection of Plants of the All-
Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences itseni v.1. Lenin). 1972, Issue 35.

6. Ksbechnik, ELL. Regan. Yu.s.. Klisenko, H.A., Hastryukova, T.S.. Yershova, Ye.A..
Snitkovskaya, ‘1'.H., Shipov, A.B. and Zhdanove. C.V. "Studies of the Metabolism
of Certain Phosphororgsnic Insect Acaricides Raving Peptide Bonds." In the
book: "Parnakologiys i toksikologiye” (Pharmacology and Toxicology], Moscow,
Zdorov'ye, 1973.

7. Ksbechnik, 34.1., Hastryukove, ‘r.A., Shipov, A.l., zhdanove. G.V., Kagan, Yu.s.
Yernove, Ye.A.. Klisenko, H.A.. mndel'ehtam. Yu.Ye., Brestkin, A.P., Brik, 1.1...
Pedin, A.N.. Sasonovs. 1.1L, Sevchenko, LN. "Soae Peculiarities in the
Metabolism of Phosphororgenic Insecticides which Contain Residues of Auino
Acids.” works of the All-Union Conference ”Basic Directions for Scientific-
Reseerch work in the Sphere of Creating Chemical Agents for Protecting Plants
and Cowbating Reeds." Section I. Isdetel'stvo stratum [Scientific Research
Institute of Technical and lcononic Research of the State Cousittee of the
Council of Ministers, USSR, for Chemistry], 1976.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIK, 1.1... lbndcl'shtm, Yu.Yc., Sundukov, O.V., and others, "So-

Pcculicriciu in the Mechanical of Effect on Insects of tho Durivativu of
Thiophosphoric acid, which Contain Residues of Amino Acids." m V
831381014 KHOZYZYS‘NB [Cheniotty in Agricultural, No 2, 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Izdctol'atvo "Nam" 1980.

7026
C80: 1350/5310

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOGY

PRINCIPAL TASKS ASSOCIATED WITH SEARCH FOR NEH PESTICIDES
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 5, May 81 pp ﬁlo-53

{Article by 8.14. Mel'nikov, corresponding member of USSR Academy of Sciences:
"Principal Tasks in Field of Searching for New Pesticides"]

[Text] Pesticides usually include all chemical compOunts used for combating various
harmful organisms in the environment. This includes -- substances for destroying
weeds. pests and the causative agents of diseases in useful plants, carriers of
infectious diseases of man and animals and animal ectoparasites and also for
combating biological damage to metallic and non-metallic materials and undesirable
harmful organisms in industry (for example, mucous formation in the paper industry,
algae in water cooling systems and so forth). for preventing ships fron: becoming
fouled with barnacles and for many other similar purposes. In addition, pesticides
include insect sterilizers, preparations of hormonal action and plant growth
regulators, which in low concentrations are usually growth regulators and in high
concentrations -- herbicides.

The use of pesticides in the national economy produces very great economic results.
It is sufficient to state that during the tenth five-year period the use of means
for protecting plants against pests, diseases and weeds produced more than 7
billion rubles worth of additional output annually. These measures ensured an
additional increase of approximately 12 percent in overall farming output. against
expenditures of approximately 1.2-1.3 billion rubles annually.

The use of pesticides is also promoting improved labor productivity in agriculture ~-
both in tending the plantings and in harvesting the crops, especially cotton.

It is appropriate to point out that the use of pesticides makes it possible to
reduce by almost feurfold the energy expenditures required per ton of agricultural
output (taking into account the energy expended for producing the pesticides
themselves) .

Great importance is attached to pesticides for preventing damage to metallic and non-
metallic materials and products, caused by various harmful organisms.

The data furnished below provides some insight into the scale to which pesticides
are being produced throughOut the world.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1975, the average cost for l kilogram of pesticide was approximately $3.49 and
this figure allows one to evaluate the overall tonnage of the preparations being
produced. It is noted that from a cost standpoint the world production of
pesticides at the present time is commensurate with the production of mineral
fertilisers and reflects a tendency towards further growth.

World Production of Pesticides in 1978 and Foreseat for 1984
(millions of dollars in 1978 prices)

Pesticide Groups 1978 1984
Herbicides 3716.4 4792.3
Insecticides and aceracides 3028.4 3821.7
Fungicides 1538.8 1965.1
Pumigents 168.2 228.9
Defoliants and desiccants 96.8 146.9
Pesticide; of other groups 120.5 155.9

Total 8669.1 11110.8

 

* See: FARM CHEMICALS, No. 9, 1979, pp 61-64

Data on pesticide production in the USSR testifies to the fact that over the past 20
years it has increased by a factor of more than 9 (in a computation for 100 percent

active agent). However the rapidly increasing requirements of agriculture for
these substances are still not being satisfied fully.

Pesticide Production in the USSR From 1960 To 1970
(thousands of tons)

Method of Measurement 1960 1965 1970 1975 1979
In standard units 61.4 197.8 289.7 438.3 474.7
In a computation for 1001 active 30.6 108.3 163.8 264.08 284.3

agent -

In connection with the fact that pesticides are physiologically active compounds
and the scales of their use, as evident in the data cited above, are rather high,
a problem has arisen with regard to protecting the environment and ensuring their
safe practical use. This problem is truly an urgent one, since the initial
pesticides used on a rather large scale (for example, compounds of arsenic, lead
and mercury) were stable and capable of being accumulated in surrounding objects.
The second generation pesticides are also stable preparations; they include DDT and
a number of other chloroorgauic compounds. Their accumulation is conditioned to a
considerable degree by the tremendous scales of their use, which is continuing at
the present time in a number of countries (in particular, over the past 20 years
approximately 4.5 million tons of DDT were employed thrOughout the world).

The capability of pesticides to accumulate has raised the need for increasing the
requirements for introducing new preparations into operational practice and for

studying their behavior in various surrounding objects. At the present time, the
following principal requirements can be imposed with regard to new pesticides:

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

...moderate persistence in surrounding objects within a given climatic zone;

...as low a toxicity as possible for man, animals and other useful organisms.
including hydrobionts;

...relatively rapid disintegration in soil, water, the atmosphere and in the

organisms of warm-blooded animals, with the formation of products deemed safe for
man, animals and cultivated plants;

...the absence of an accumulation of these preparations in the organism of man,
animals, birds and hydrobionts;

...a maximum high effectiveness in combating harmful organisms, with reduced
expenditures of the preparation per unit of area treated;

...sufficiently high economic effectiveness of use in agriculture and in other
-branches;

...absence of remote adverse consequences for man, animals and other living
organisms, as a result of the systematic and extended use of the preparations;

...the possibility of alternating the preparations from various classes of compounds
in order to avoid the harmful organisms from becoming accustomed to them and also
the accumulation of the preparations in surrounding objects;

...the absence of undesirable effects in the object being protected;

...adequate stability of the preparations during storage and low degree of
aggressiveness with regard to the equipment used for employing the preparations;

...accessibility of the raw materials required for producing the preparation and the
possibility of production on the scales required.

Constant increases in the requirements lowers the output from suitable preparations
when searching for them and raises the cost for developing one preparation. Based
upon the data cited here, it is apparent that over a period of 25 years the number
of compounds that had to be synthesized and studied, in order to obtain one
preparation of practical value, increased by a factor of almost 8.

Number of Compounds Subjected To Screening In Order To Find One Preparation
Suitable For Introduction Into Practice

1956 1964 1967 1970 1973 1977 1980
Number of compounds, in thousands 1.8 3.6 5.8 7.4 10.2 12 14

We have estimated that there are presently 20 large firms in economically developed
countries which are annually spending approximately 500 million dollars for
scientific-research work in the field of pesticides. Some idea as to the structure
of these expenses can be obtained from an analysis of the pertinent expenditures of
37 firms in the particular branch of the chemical industry of the U.S.A. during

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

19i7, the total amount of which was 250 million dollars. Of this amount, 41 percent
was expanded for the synthesis and screening of chemical compounds and for
developing the forms for their use and the creation of a production technology
(usual items of expense for N18 [scientific research work] in the chemical industry)
and 62 percent was spent for determining the toxicity of the preparations, for field
testing them, for studying the metabolism and determining the residues, that is, the
entire complex of ecological studies. In the process, 65 percent of all funds was

spent searching for new pesticides and 35 percent -- for work associated with
preparations created earlier.

The creation and study of pesticides involves the participation of specialists
representing various disci, ines, including chemist-synthesis specialists, analysts
and technologists, hiochemists, entomologists and phyto-toxicologists, toxicologiets.
physicists. mathematicians, biologists of variOua specialties and many others.

The principal method of search is that of "trial and error" (screening). however
with a definite direction in mind. This matter of direction is borne out by data on
the number of patents published during the 1916-1978 period for new pesticides by
classes of chemical compounds.

It is apparent from the data cited that organic compounds of phosphorus and
heterocyclic compounds of various ranks and also various derivatives of carboxylic
acids are being studied most intensively for pesticide activity. In recent years
the derivatives of cyclopropane carboxylic acid, which is close in structure to
chrysantheminic acid, have been studied intensively as insecticides.

The intensive search for pesticides in the mentioned classes of compounds derives
from the fact that recently the greatest number of active preparations have been
found among these compounds. Attempts to predict pesticide activity for substances
through the analysis of physical-chemical and other properties in the new classes
of chemical compOunds, using electronic computers, have still not produced
reassuring results. Success has been achieved in predicting the presence of
pesticide activity only in those classes of compounds in which the biological
properties of at least two of the substances are known. However, in such instances
the predictions are purely qualitative in nature. This is associated to a
considerable degree with the insufficient vo;ume of studies of the manner in which
the various classes of chemical compounds act upon the harmful and useful organisms,
the metabolism and other changes in the chemical compounds in surrounding objects.

One of the most important tasks is that of creating the scientific principles for
the directed synthesis of pesticides having a given physiological activity,
persistence and other properties which satisfy the modern requirements. Towards
this end. a requirement exists for setting up all-round fundamental studies
involving the participation of specialists representing various fields of knowledge.
Only such an overall approach will make it possible to achieve a rapid solution for
the task of directed synthesis of new pesticides having the given properties.

By way of an example of such an approach, permit me to cite studies carried out on
the metabolism of DDT and some of its analogs (particularly methoxychlor.
methylchlor and methylthiochlor) in various surrOunding objects.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Uttiuim. uob unu

BATENTS PUBLISHED DURING 1976-1978 PERIOD

Class of Compounds
or Purpose

Perms of use

Preparations based upon
mixtures of several agents

Hydrocarbons of various series

Halogen derivatives of an
aliphatic series

Halogen derivatives of an
alicyclic series

Halogen derivatives of an
aromatic series

Nitro compounds of various
series

Amines end their derivatives

Alcohols, phenols and simple
ethers

Aldehydes, ketones and quinones

Aliphatic carboxylic acids and
their derivatives

Alicyclic carbonylic acids and
their derivatives

Derivatives of cyclopropane
carboxylic acid

Aromatic carboxylic acids and
their derivatives

Aryloxyslkane carboxylic acids
and their derivatives

Derivatives of carbonic acid

Derivatives of carbamic acid

Derivatives of thio and dithio-
carbamic acid

Number of

Patents

202
126

15
24

20
21
26

165
279

114
419

208
173
158
95
31

246
158

Class of Compounds
or Purpose

Derivatives of urea and
thiourea

Herceptans, sulfides. sulfones

and related compounds

Derivatives of sulfo acids

Derivatives of hydrazine and
azo compound

Organic compounds of mercury

Organic compounds of tin,
lead, silicon, antimOny
and bismuth

Organic compOunds of
phosphorus

Organic compounds of arsenic

Pivo-membered heterocycles
with one heteroatom

Six-membered heterocycles
with one heteroatom

Five-membered heterocycles
with two heteroatome

Six-membered heterocycles
with two heterostoas

Pive-membered heterocycles
with three or more
heteroatoms

Six-membered beterocycles
with 3 or more heteroatoms

Antibiotics

Inorganic compounds

Number of
Patents

216
50

136
70

3
44
892

11
162

201
375
298

175

175

73
4

—_~—__.———————————

Total

5365

The principal directions in the metabolism of DDT are presented in Diagram 1 and

for its analog methoxychlor -- in Diagram 2.

It is apparent from Diagram 1 that the metabolism for DDT proceeds with the
formation of hydrophobic compounds which accumulate in the lipoids. When a definite
level of DDT content is reached in an organism, undesirable consequences and even a

fatal outcome may ensue.

Meanwhile, the closest DDT analogs, particularly

methoxychlor, form hydrophilic products during metabolism, products which are

easily withdrawn from vertebrate organisms, do not accumulate and hence cannot cause
undesirable cansequences. Actually, in studying the appearance of chlororgsnic
pesticides in the milk of cows. it turned out that even in the case of a large amount
of methOxychlor in the feed, considered to be impossible for actual use conditions.
its relative cantent in the milk (with regard to the feed) was less by a factor of
100 than in the case of DDT, as can be seen in Table l.

14

roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DIAGRAM l

.OLTIM \ T
C EIIU’E\=>-Cl

L-.-

0&0 ’2 ["0" “<3in

00000 001,200

The KBD's lkoeffitsiyent biodegradataiya; coefficient of biodegradation] for DDT
(first line) and its analogs in a water ecological system. expressed in relative
units, are furnished in Table 2. The KBD is a value that is proportional to the
speed of disintegration of a preparation in a definite ecological system. The data
in the table reveals that even among the closest analogs of DDT, cempounds may be

found which disintegrate in the surrounding environment 100 times more rapidly than
doas DDT.

Such an approach to solving the task of searching for new pesticides and acaricides
is already being employed in the USSR Academy of Sciences by a large group of
scientists under the direction of Academician ".1. Kabachnik. In additi0u to the
institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences, this work also involves participation by
the institutes of VASKhNIL |All~Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences imeni

v.1. Lenin], VUZ's and also by VNIIKhSZR [All-UniOn Scientific Research Institute of
Chemicals Used for Plant Protection].

The author of the present report made a suggestion regarding the high and diverse

physiological activity of organic compounds of phoaphorus having an asymmetric atom
of phosphorus:

R Y

‘xl
P—Z,

' x’
X

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUK UPPLLIRL Uhh UNLI

:r :u.'«';</:\\/+5nﬂ, " \ :t-n-lll-E
L - - - .J I . — u

STOW /_\ “0......
" \ /

i
l

Iluull

l

/

II,<~I.. W... H,"

where n is the substituted or unsubstituted hydrocarbon radical, X s S or 0 and
Y and Z -- very different chemical grOups.

As s result of having synthesized and studied a large number of such compounds,
success was achieved in finding a number of practically valuable substances such as
trichlormetaphos-3, isophos-J, heterophos, etsphos and some others. At the present
time, a number of compounds of the indicated structure have entered into practical
use both in the USSR and abroad.

The principal work concerned with the synthesis of new pesticides is being carried
out in the USSR at the following institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences: at the
Institute of Organic Chemistry imeni ".0. Zelinskiy. Institute of Hetero-Organic
Compounds imeni A.N. Nesmeyanov, Institute of Organic Chemistry of the Siberian
Branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Institute of Physiologically Active
Substances. Institute of Organic Chemistry of theUkSSRAcademy of Sciences.
Institute of Organic Synthesis of the Latvian SSR Academy of Sciences. at
VNIIKhSZR and at a number of others. Interesting work on insect feromones and
hormones is being carried out at the Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry imeni

M.H. Shenyakin of the USSR Academy of Sciences and at certain other organisations.
At the present time. a number of new preparations are undergoing field testing in
various regions of the country.

For the successful development of the production of new pesticides, special
importance is attached to developing methods for obtaining the semi-finished

products and expanding their assortment. The development of studies in this area
is of great importance to other branches of fine organic synthesis.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IABI£ l

Passage of Certain Chlorine-Containing Insecticides into the Milk of Cows

Content of Insecticide.
in milli;rsms -er kilo ram

In Peed In Milk

 
 
 
    
    

 
 
 
  

Ratio of Content
in Milk To
COntent in Peed

Insecticide

    

Aldrin 00 16.1 0.6
10 3 42 0.34
0.41
Dildrin 0.18
0.05
0.6
DDT 0.03
0.092
0.063
0.023
Methoxychlor 0.00032
' 0.00019
0.00016

Extreme importance is also attached to the development of biochemical studies which
are of primary importance not only with regard to searching for new pesticides. but
also for introducing already developed preparations into agricultural practice, since
knowledge of their behavior in surrounding objects is the basis for their correct,
safe and effective use. Microbi010gica1 studies play a very important role in this
regard.

In view of the tremendous number of harmful organisms which are causing considerable
damage to agricultural production, the efforts of researchers must be directed
mainly to studying those harmful organisms which are inflicting the greatest amount
of economic damage. Studies must be launched on the biochemistry of both useful and
harmful organisms, particularly their fermentivs systems, for the purpose of finding
the differences in their structures and creating the prerequisites for the

directed syntheses of the pesticides. Considerable importance is also attached to
studies of the cometabolism of pesticides with soil microorganisms, which determine
to a considerable degree the persistence of the pesticides in the surrounding
environment. In addition, an important problem is that of studying the "ecology of
pesticides” in agrocenosis. in conformity with the various climatic sones.

In order to accelerate thework of creating new pesticides and developing the scientific
principles for the directed synthesis of compounds having a prescribed physiological
activity, it would be advisable to examine the question of creating inter.
departmental collectives which operate not on the basis of formal coordinated plans
but rather in close creative collaboration and under a common management, similar to
the collective headed by Academician M.l. Kabachnik. This collective needs to be
expanded. When effort is concentrated on solving definite problems under a common
nmnagement, more complete and practically important results can ensue.

In conclusion, I would like to mention several problems the solutions for which would
promote improved labor productivity and energy savings in agriculture.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UA \ll'l'ausnh 09l- \Iluu

IABIE 2

Coefficients of Biodegradation ([30) for DDT and Its Analogs in a
Water Ecological System

Cannon formula for compounds:

 

 

W - l R' I K511

    

c1 _ c1 HC(CH.)N0. 3.21

First of all, it will be necessary to supply agriculture with an optimum variety of
herbicides for such crops as corn, sunflowers. sugar beets, cotton, potatoes, soybeans,
grain crops and a number of others. Despite the fact that there are satisfactory
preparations for the mentioned crops in the international assortment, each one of

than is marked by certain shortcomings.

The creation of effective and safe defoliants is required for the purpose of
mechanizing the laboriOus work of cotton harvesting and also growth regulators for
accelerating the ripening of the cotton and some other crops. The latter is of
particular importance for grain crops grown in northern regions whore the growing
season is short. Great importance is attached to creating systemic fungicides for
combating cotton wilt and other similar diseases.

An important task in the area of insecticides and acaricides is that of combating
arthropods which possess a resistance to the usual preparations.

An attempt must also be made to reduce the amount of time between the synthesis of

a preparation and its introduction into operational practice. This is associated to
a considerable degree with rationalization of the processes for studying the effect
of new preparations on various biological objects.

***

During a discussion of the scientific report by N.N. Mel'nikov, a speech was
delivered by Academician 6.x. skryabin. He directed attention to the recent
appearance of a large amount of data testifying to the fact that quite often, as a
result of the effect of microorganisms and also variOus physical-chemical
environmental factors on nan-toxic or low toxicity pesticides in the soil or water,
products of the disintegration of these substances are formed which are considerably
more dangerous to Ian and the biosphere than the initial pesticide. For example,

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

studies carried out on the herbicide 0rdran at IBFH llnstitut biokhimii i fiziologii
mikroorganizmov AN 5588; Institute of Biochemistry and the Physiology of
Microorganisms of the USSR Academy of Sciences] in Pushchino revealed that this
preparation disintegrates under natural conditions with the formation of partially

oxidized products, which are retained in water for a very long period of time and
which are highly toxic.

Another example -- an entire series of pesticides, mentioned in particular in the
above report, which contain a molecule of nitrogen in their structure. Sena of the
nitrogen-containing pesticides disintegrate in the natural environment with the

formation of nitro compounds which even in insignificant quantities are highly
carcinogenic.

Thus a requirement exists for the study of and control over the toxicity and
mutagenic and carcinogenic activity not only of the pesticides themselves but also

of the intermediate products of their disintegration directly under natural
conditions.

Subsequently, G.K. Skryabin discussed one effective variety of chemical agents for
protecting plants -- feromones. Unfortunately. up until now these compounds have
been extremely expensive and their production extremely complicated.

Recently a basically new and extremely effective and very cheap method for obtaining
reproductive feromones was developed at IBFH. At the present time, the institute
has feur expeditionary detachments operating in different regions of the country.
Without losing any time and under field conditions, these detachments are carrying
out checks on the biological activity of the feromenes obtained by this method.
Reports have already been received confirming the high quality of all of the
preparations tested.

In 1981, jointly with Glevmikrobioprom of the USSR Council of Ministers. the
institute intends to prepare a sufficient number of preparatiOns not only for
carrying out extensive field tests but also for employment as effective agents for
protecting plants in the economic work of kolkhOzes and sovkhozes.

In conclusion, 0.x. Skryabin emphasized that the DDT problem continues to be an
extremely important one. Its use is actually being continued in a large number of
countries and in those areas where its use is forbidden, its content in the soil in
many regions remains rather high since this compound disintegrates extremely slowly.
Thus a requirement exists for developing studies aimed at finding effective methods
for its disintegration.

Academician y¢.N. Hishustin emphasized in his speech the tremendous importance
attached to expanding the variety of pesticides being produced in the USSR. At the
present time, the number of types of pesticides being produced in our country is
several times less than the number in such cOuntries as the U.$.A. and Japan. It is
because of this fact that a number of preparations must be procured abroad.

Meanwhile, a situation is developing at the present time wherein, for failing to
treat the plantings with the required pesticides, the use of fertilizers is not only

just slightly effective but in tact it may even lower the cropping power of some
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UR Uri-nuns. UDL UNLI

crops, for example soybeans, since fertilizers, especially nitrogen and phosphate
fertilizers, are actively utilized by weeds which subsequently choke out the
principal crop.

In recent years, the Academy of Sciences has devoted a great amount of attention to
the problem of creating new pesticides. In particular, in the Cemmittee on
Scientific Principles of Agriculture of the Presidium of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, a great amOunt of work was carried Out in cennection with composing an
overall plan for chemical and biological studies in the area of creating pesticides.
Canputations were carried out on the capital investments required. In the absence
of capital investments being allocated, it wOuld be very difficult to ensure the
required assortment of pesticides. However, this problem has still not been solved.
It is obvious that the program must include the most important directions to be
followed in carrying out studies and such studies must be properly financed.

One of the main difficulties associated with the creation of new preparations --

the need for testing a tremendous number of chemical compounds, as mentioned by the
speaker. At the present time, Our volume of such tests is completely inadequate.
But, in addition to intensifying the screening volume, a requirement also exists for
s more intensive search for a scientific approach for directed synthesis. Special
attention should be given to this problem.

Importance is also attached to taking into account the climatic conditions under
which the pesticides are used. since the processes of pesticide disintegration in
the soil may be completely different depending upon these conditions. In a number
of instances, an unforeseen formatioa of toxic and not easily disintegrated forms
may occur.

In particular, mention should be made of the Hungarian experience, where several
years ago, having established the norms adopted in the U.S.A., simasine was employed
on an extensive scale. However, owing to the different climatic canditions, this
preparation did not disintegrate in the Rungarian soils and the following year the
grain crop yield obtained from fields treated with simasine was considerably lower.
It is obvious that in the USSR, where the differences in natural conditions by
regions are tremendous, such problems are especially urgent and thus appropriate
studies must be carried out on an extensive scale. Such studies are being carried
out at the Institute of Agrochemistry and Soil Science of the USSR Academy of
Sciences in Pushchino, under the direction of “.8. Sokolov. Valuable results have
been obtained and yet this is only the beginning.

In conclusion, Ye.N. Hishustin directed attention to the need for increasing
organizational support for work concerned with the creation and checking upon the
effectiveness of new pesticides in the USSR Academy of Sciences.

M.S. Sokolov (Institute of Agrochemistry and Soil Science of the USSR Academy of
Scienced discussed in his speech the ecological aspects of the use of pesticides
and the problems concerned with evaluating and forecasting the consequences of their
use. This is extremely important for those regions of the country where pesticides
are employed more intensively, primarily in the regions of the Azov-Black Sea and
Aral-Caspian See basins -- in the Uzbek, Tajik, Azerbaijan and Moldavian SSR's.

Here their application dosages per hectare of arable land exceed the all-union
indicators by a factor of 10-15.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Successful work is being carried out in this area jointly with the institutes of the
republic academies of science and interesting results have been obtained within a
relatively brief period of time. For example, an inspection of the territory of
Azerbaijan revealed that for a generally high level of pesticide use, their content
in the soil. even on plantings of the same crop, changes in the various regions by a
factor of 10 or more. The reason -- specific soil, hydrothermal and microbiological
conditions, as mentioned in particular during earlier speeches. Once again we are
able to take all of these factors into account to only a weak degree and, as a rule,
we pay no attention to them when planning the use of certain preparations.

If appropriate studies are not developed and if an ecological evaluation of the
consequences of using the new preparations is not furnished, then we will be
constantly forced into examining their assortment and introducing more strict
limitations upOn their use. The development of a uniform method for conducting such
an evaluatiOn is extremely necessary for our country.

In summarizing the results of the discussion, the President of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, A.P. Aleksandrov, commented upon the need far preparing recommendations
on the further development of studies concerned with the more urgent problems
touched upon in the scientific report by N.N. Mel'nikov.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo ”Nauka". "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

7026
690: 1840/533

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PEaTICIDES

UDC: 66.048.5t[6bl.7:547.261.118.3]
DIHETHYL PHOSPHITE PURIFICATION BY VACUUM DISTILLATION IN FILM ROTOR EVAPORATOR

Moscow KHIHICHESKAYA PRDHYSHLENNOST' in Russian No 9, Sep 79
pp 33—36

[Article by V. V. negtynrcv, A. H. Kukushkin, Yo. A. Vinnikov, V. V. Khlynov and
L. c. Loskutov]

[Text] Among the organic phosphorus compounds with pesticidai properties, chlorofos
and vinlfos are of great practical importance, and the output thereof is constantly
increasing. Production of these agents is based on interaction of dimethyl phosphite
with chloral and acetophenone [1]. It has been determined [2] that at least 94%
concentration of dimethyl phosphite is required to obtain high-grade products.

Most methods of producing dimethyl phosphite that are described in the literature
[3-6] are purely preparative, and the main constituent in the.synthesized product
ranges from 80-902. There are no data concerning production of dimethyl phosphite
in over 902 concentration.

Since the boiling point of impurities contained in dimethyl phosphite (mainly
monomethyl phosphite) is above its boiling point, one can remove the impurities

that subsequently contaminate chlorofos and vinifos by means of distillation. How-
ever, distillation of dimethyi phosphite under industrial conditions presents con-
siderable difficulty because of its thermolnbiiity at temperatures close to the
boiling point (loss of product and contamination of heat-transmitting surface).
Purification oidimcthyl phosphite in still-type circulating apparatus did not yield
good results when tested under industrial conditions. The proposed chemical methods
of neutralizing impurities (ammonia and soda) were found to be ineffective and

time consuming [3].

We have studied the possibility of using a thin-film rotor evaporator to purify
raw dimethyl phosphite. The diagram of the unit is illustrated in Figure 1.

The original industrial dimethyl phosphite containing up to 852 of the
main constituent was loaded into tank 1, from which it was delivered
by vacuum to the top part of the evaporator 2. A type VN-ZMG vacuum
pump was used to create vacuum in the system. Delivery of raw material
was dispensed by rotameter 3. The vapor of volatile components was
condensed in a tubular condenser cooled by brine at a temperature of
-10°C. The condensate then drained into a collecting tank and the
unvaporized part passed into apparatus 7.

22

FORGDFFKJAI.USB(MVLY
mo nrl-‘Irul IISF ONLY

A casing was placed on thcevaporstor(Figurc 2). which had an area of
0.0628 m2, for heating by the steam. The flared top part of the apparatus
served to separate splashes from the vapor phase. There was a rotor with
four hinged blades within the housing. The rotor shaft turned in two ball
bearings installed in the lid of the apparatus and a sliding bearing in
the bottom part of the evaporator. An end gasket was placed into the unit
of the top bearing to seal the place where the shaft exited into the
evaporator lid.

Vacuum in the evaporator was monitorec by a U-shaped pressure gauge, and
vapor pressure was controlled by means of valves, with monitoring by
pressure gauge 8.

Dimethyl phosphite content in products of distillation of the industrial

product was determined by potentiometric titration with an alcohol solution
of alkali.

 

Figure 1.
Diagram of experimental apparatus

 

Figure 2.
Diagram of film rotor evaporator

l) tank with initial product
2) evaporator

3) rotameter 1) housing
4) vacuum pump 2) rotor
5) condenser 3) casing [jacket]
6,7) collectors for still residue and 4) top bearing
distillate, respectively 5) bottom bearing

8) pressure gauge

Dimethyl phosphite breaks down when heated, so that we used the maximum permissible
temperature of 143°C for the heating agent. The mixture was delivered into the
evaporator starting with 19.1 kg/(m 0h), which is the minimal amount with which
uniform distribution of film on the wall was obtained. With increase in delivery
there is increase in distillate output of the apparatus (Figure 3) due to agitation
of the draining film of fluid.

As can be seen in Figure 4, maximum extraction of dimethyl phosphite constitutes
972 with a load of about 200 kg/(mz'h). With further increase in load there is

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a decrease in extraction, apparently due to an increase in share of heat-exchange
surface involved in heating the initial mixture to the boiling point.

 

I” I” 20 250 m

 

Ls MO“ ”‘0
Figure 4.
_x_—4——'——I Degree of extraction of dimethyl
5” um L” a! no *” phosphite as a function of load of
L. kn/(mz°h) initial product at residual pressure
Figure 3. of 100 an Hg and excess pressure of
Distillate yield as a function of load heating steam of 2.8 kgf/cmz

oi nitial product

The esults of the experiments revealed that, even with small loads and residual
pressure of 100-150 mm Hg one can recover distillate containing 90-9h1 dimethyl
phosphite. Let us mention that, in some of the experiments, there was an increase
in dimethyl phosphite during distillation, which could be attributed to dispropor-
tionate amounts of monomethyl phosphite in dimethyl phosphite and phosphorous acid.
The results of potentiometric titration of fractions obtained with distillation of
raw dimethyl phosphite were indicative of presence of the latter.

in the course of the studies, we noticed that if the heat-carrier temperature
exceeded laS'C the apparatus became less productive and the quality of the dis-
tilled product was poorer. These parameters are influenced by residual pressure also.
Optimum results are obtained at pressure of 100-150 mm "3.

Thus, our results are indicative of the existence of an optimum mode of distillation,
with which one can obtain a 97% yield and 95-972 level of dimethyl phosphite in the
distillate.

The statistical method of planning the experiment [7] was used to find the optimum
mode or operating the film evaporator with hinged blades. 0n the basis of data ob-
tained from a passive experiment, we took as optimization parameters the dimethyl
phosphite concentration in distillate Y; and degree of extraction of dimethyl
phosphite Y2. Working pressure in the apparatus X1, heat-carrier pressure X2 and
load X; served as independent variables.

The optimization parameters as a function of parameters of the process were deter-
mined in the form of a complete quadratic equation of relationship:

y a. "1 "~ 6 (1)
1.2 0+ 2,01% + 2,0”!‘11 +4.: but:
I I I

26

FOR‘OF1NCJAL USEIJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USII'. ()NIN

vhcru i and J are Inuiur numhvrx, n is the numburof factors taken into consideration
and bi are coefficients of regression. An orthogonal first order, type 2‘ matrix
was used to determined the coefficients of equation (1).

    
 

Main level
Variation interval
Maximum level
Minimum level

The Table lists the main level and intervals of variation of the variables selected
on the basis of the results of the passive experiment. The intervals of variation
and central point of the plane were chosen so as to have the experiment cover a
significant part of the factor space and to adhere to conditions of symmetry and
of normal operation of equipment. Estimates of bi and bgj were obtained by the
least squares method. Accuracy of approximation of response surface was evaluated
by dispersion of equivalence [adequacy]:

2(8 - - x -)2
- ...JL_____JL___
oéq ; _ ,,, ‘ (2)

where syi are estimated values, 2 i are measured values, N is the number of
measurements, In is the number of ¥ound (significant) coefficients b1: and bijl‘ Error
of reproducibility or was calculated from the results of experiments conducted in
the center of the plane. A comparison of estimates of dispersion for first order
and quadratic models revealed that there is appreciable increase in approximation
of response surface with addition of quadratic terms.

Using a previously described method [8], the following equations of regression
were obtained from the experimental data:

yI --.-au.n7 1-o.m3x. ---0.366x, -1-o.682x, 4.39M? ~1-
= 0.784X§~ 0.mx§--0.ns7xlx,---0.€mx.X, —0.52i5¢.X. (3)

,7 M.0--0.09x. - 13.1x,--2.oox,+4.ax{-— - (4)
—-12.9sx;.-2.a1x§--3.29x.x, —6.eox,x, -+ 0.4Ix,x,

A check revealed that all of the coefficients of the equations are significant.
Equivalence of obtained equationswas checked with the criterion of Fisher.

Processing of equations (3) and (4) revealed that the following parameters must be
maintained for the process in order to obtain a product with at least 96% dimethyl
phosphite: pressure of heating vapor (excess) 2.8 kgf/cm’, residual pressure

100 mm Hg, load 19o kg/(m2~h).

The obtained mathematical model can serve as the basis of an algorithm for control
of the technological process of distilling raw dimethyl phosphite in vacuum in a
film rotor evaporator.

TSubscripL y refers to yield.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gar, K. A., "Insecticides in Agriculture," Moscow, "Kolos", 1974.

Prader, 6., "New Organophosphorus Vinyl Phosphate Insecticides," Moscow, "Mir",
1965.

Tsvetkov, Ye. N. and Kabachnik. H. 1., "Reactions and Methods of Studying
0rgan1c Compounds," Moscow, "Khimiya", Collection 13, 1964.

Arbuzov, A. Ye., "Selected Works," Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1952.
Campbell, C. H., IND. ENG. CHEH., Vol 49, 1957, p 1871.
Coot, H. 6., J. CHEM. 8°C., 1956, p 879.

Ruzhnov, L. P., "Statistical Methods of Optimizing Chemical Products," Moscow,
"Khimiya", 1972.

Adler, Yu. P., Harkova, Ye. V. and Granovskiy, Yu. V., "Experiment Planning
in Search for Optimum Conditions." Moscow, ”Naukn", 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Khimlya". "Khimichcskaya promyshlennost’". 1979

10,657
CSO: 1840/502 _ - m -

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY