FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10699

29' July 1982

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE
(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPIs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
AGRICULTURE

(P000 9/82)

Coursurs
LIVES'DOCK FEKD PROCURMN’I

New lnterfsrn Organizations For Feed Production
(mmpmlzmnsm’ ”r 82) 000.00....OIOOOOOOOOQOOOOOOIOO

AGRO-BCDMKICS AND ORGANIZATION

CEI‘IA Conference Discusses Agrolndustrlsl Conlex. Food Supply
(14. Bukh; WPROSY BKDNOHIKI. Apr 82)...

AGRICULTURAL HACKNEY AND EQUIPHBNT

wide Introduction of Overall Hechsnlution in Agriculture Urged
(Ioslf Shsbsayevlch nets. et. 11.; VOPROSY WU,

Apt 82) 000.00tOnoeeesoeoeeooooooooooosoesoCOIoIsoooo‘eos

- a - [III - USSR -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIVESTOCK rm PROCUREMT

REV INTERIM}!!! ORGANIIATIG‘S FOR rm PRODUCT!“
Moscow KWROIZ‘IODSTVO in Russian No 3;, Apr 82 pp 1-3
[Krticlez "To Increase Feed Production on the Basis of Interfern Cooperationﬂ7

[text] As noted in "Basic Directions in the Economic and Social Develop-at of
the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period Ihtil 1990." e fundanental isprovenent
in the feed base. a full satisfaction of the needs of public aninal husbandry and
of livestock privately owned by citizens for feed and landing a sectorial special-
ized nature to feed production are the basis for the further developnent of animal

husbandry end increase in its productivity.

A nud>er of highly efficient. new organisational ferns based on the principles of
specialization and cooperetion for the purpose of providing large interfere coa-
plues and specialised ferns of kolkhoses and sovkhoses with feed have essrged in
the country's feed production in the last few years.

Interfere enterprises for feed production. A total of 158 such enterprises oper-
ated in the country at the beginning of 1980. This form of organization of feed
production was sost developed in the uoldavian 883. the Ukrainian 8811. the Belorus-
sian $89.. in Bryanskaya, Voroneshskaye, Rostovskaya, 'lul'slteya and Talbovskaye (b-
lasts and in Kresnodarskiy Krey in the RSFSR.

More than 1.6 million hectares of agricultural land, including 670,000 hectares of
arable land. were assigned to interfere enterprises for feed production. In 1980
they produced 217,000 tons of hay, 1.7 million tons of silage. 662,000 tons of hay-
lage, 190,000 tons of fodder root crops. 3 nillion tons of green feed and 880,000
tons of grain. A total of 2.7 million tons of fodder units were obtained. Pur-
thersore. these enterprises provided greet help to kolkhozes and sovkhozes in the
procurement and processing of feed and in its transportation from fields to ferns.

Practice has shown that under the conditions of interfern cooperation land areas
are utilized nore efficiently. In 1980 these enterprises gathered an average of
39 quintals of hay of perennial grass, 267 quintala of fodder root crops, 28 quin-
tala of grain and 253 quintals of the green ease of perennial grass per hectare.

1n the Moldavian 8811 such enterprises were established in every rayon. A total of
210,000 hectares of land areas were assigned to then. In 1980 they accounted for
nore than one-half of the total anount of hay. silage and fodder root crops pro-
cured by the republic's Remains-cooperative sector.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l‘he Yur'yevakoye lnterfarm Enterprise for Feed Production organised by kolkhores

in Chimishliyskiy Rayon in the Holdavisn $81! in 1975 attained good producrion indi-
cators. A total of 19 percent of the rayon's fodder land was assigned to this en-
terprise, which produces more than 27 percent of the feed procured in the rayon.

In 1980 a total of 52.6 quintale of fodder units per hectare were gathered there.
which was 11.1 quintals more than the average on the rayon's kolkhozes. 'lhe enter-
prise fully provides the Chisishliyskiy Interfarm Ani-l husbandry Complex with
feed. Owing to the increase in the productivity of land areas transferred to the
interfarm enterprise. animal husbandry indicators are inroving. For example, dur-
ing the 10th Five-Year Plan, as comred with the Ninth Five-Year Plan. the gross
production of milk in the rayon increased by 1.1 percent and of beef. by 71 percent.

In the Belorussian SSR interfara enterprises for feed production carried out the
entire set of amelioration operations on the land assigned to then. This enabled
them to gather an average of 25.2 quintals of fodder units per hectare in 1980.
which was almost five tines as mach as the amount obtained by kolkhozes and sov-
khozes on this land before the organization of these enterprises.

The 01s Interfara Buterprise in 2hlobinskiy Rayon. Gonel'sksya (blast. organized
by six fares in the rayon in 1975 operates efficiently. A total of 2.300 hectares
of land. of which about 2.000 hectares were peat bogs and water-logged sections.
were assigned to it. Before the establishnsnt of this enterprise this land was
hardly used. Even if a negligible amount of feed was procured there. owing to the
great expenditure of annual labor. it was very expensive for ferns. me enterprise
carried out work on the drainage and cultivation of soil on the entire area as-
signed to it. as a result of which the productivity of land increased almost six-
fold. In 1980 a total of 34.10 quintals of fodder units per hectare were gathered
there.

A total of 16 interfarm enterprises for feed production now operate in the repub-
lic. The Mydan Enterprise in Khoynikskiy Rayon and the Pripyat' mterprise in Ho-
zyrskiy Rayon. Gomel'skaya Oblast. and others have attained good economic produc-
tion indicators for a nuﬁer of years. Another lOl enterprises are to be organized
by the end of the five-year plan. which will make it possible to produce up to 2.9
million tons of fodder units. or 13 percent of the total volume of their procure-
nent in the republic. in these types of interfarm formations alone.

Hsny feed producing interfere enterprises in the RSFSR atta’in high indicators.

The Poyma lnterfarm alterprise. which lakes use of sore than 7.000 hectares of
flood plain land. has operated in Suvorovskiy Rayon. ml'skaya (blast. for 6 years.
In 1980 the enterprise procured on this land 72 percent of the silage. 67 percent
of the hay and 84 percent of the grass meal obtained in the rayon. During the pe-
riod of the anterprise's activity feed production in the rayon increased by 23 per-
cent, which had a certain effect on the growth of livestock products. Throughout
the rayon during the indicated period the production of milk increased by 32 per-
cent and of meat. by 36 percent.

1he Donskoye lnterfarm Enterprise for Feed Production was organized on the flood
plain land of nine kolkhozes in Rossoshanskiy Rayon. Voroneahskeya wlast. in 1978.
More than 6,000 hectares of land areas were assigned to this enterprise. The en-
terprise together with merber farms carried out amelioration operations on this

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

land, which nude it possible to sharply raise its productivity. In 1980 the en-
terprise procured 11,000 tons of hay, 75 percent of which was of the first and sec-
ond category . and transferred them to cooperative newer ferns. '

Interfarn enterprises for the use of flood plain land were also established in Ros-
tovskaya, Brysnskaya. Kalushskaya. Gor'kovskaya and a nuﬁer of other oblasts in
the RSPSR.

Interfarm plants and shops for the production of nixed feed and feed mixtures.
here were 555 such enterprises in the country at the beginning of 1981. They be-
came widespread in the Ukrainian $81!. the Moldavian SSR. Krasnodarskiy and Stavro-
pol'skiy Krays and Rostovskaya. Kurganskaya, Psnzenskaya and other oblasts in the
RSPSR. In 1980 they produced about 10 million tons of nixed feed and feed mixtures
and in 1981. more than ll million tons.

A whole network of interfarn enterprises for the production of nixed feed and high-
grade feed mixtures was established in the Ukrainian $83. A total of 6.000 kol-
khoaes and 550 sovkhozes took part in their organisation. In 1980 all the repub-
lic's interfarm enterprises produced 7.3 million tons of nixed feed and feed mix—
tures. In Vinnitskays Oblast alone during the 10th Pive-Kear Plan the production
capacities of interfarn nixed feed plants increased more than fourfold and the
average annual production of nixed feed totaled 359.000 tons. as compared to 77,000
tons during the Ninth Five-Year Plan. ‘ﬂle output of mixed feed at interfarm plants
is to be increased to 1 million tons in the oblast by the end of 1985. This neans
that the grain allocated for feed for livestock will be processed into mixed feed
and high-grade feed nixturea.

‘lhe Gulyaypole Interfarm Mixed Peed Plant in Zaporoshskaya Oblast built with the
contributions of IS ferns in the rayon has operated since 1972. ‘lhe plant annually
produces 20 to 25 percent more output than envisaged by the technical and econonic
substantiation. For example. in 1980 a total of 30.500 tons of mixed feed, whose
production cost was 85.4 rubles. was produced there.

In Kurganskaya (blast in 1976. having pooled their capital. 170 farms built 13 in-
terfarn nixed feed plants of a total production capacity of 550 tons of output per
shift. In addition to mixed feed. the production of additives--nest-bone and grass
seal-was organized at plants. In 5 years the oblast's interfarm plants produced
more than 800,000 tons of high-grade mixed feed. The production cost of 1 ton of
this mixed feed was 67 to 75 rubles.

The advantages of cooperation in the organization of nixed feed production are well
illustrated by the Al'menevakiy Mixed Feed Plant in Kurganskays (blast. After the
commissioning of this plant newer farms liquidated 28 centers for the grinding of
feed grain. As a result. sore than 100 kolkhoz settlers and sovkhoz workers were
freed for employment in other operations. The feeding of public livestock improved.
During the period of activity of this enterprise the expenditure of concentrated
feed on nei>er farms was reduced by 16 percent per quintal of nilk and by ll per-

cent per quintal of beef.

Kolkhozes and sovkhoses perforning production functions of interfarm enterprises
for the production of livestock products with their own feed. About 2.500 such
farms operated in the country at the beginning of 1981. This form of cooperation

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

becans noat widespread in the RSPSR. the Ukrainian SSR. the Belorussian SSR and

the Kazakh SSR. The division of labor anong cooperative neuter ferns is Intually
advantageous. The head enterprise uses the land areas assigned to it only for feed
production and neaber farms undertake the obligations for the fulfillaent in its
behalf of the state plan for the sale of plant products.

Practice shows that such a for- of cooperation in the organisation of feed produc-
tion and in the production of livestock products is highly efficient. Since 1971.
the Kolkhoz ineni Uritakiy in Gonel'akiy Rayon. Gonel'akeya (blast. has performed
production functions of an interfere enterprise for the raising and fattening of
large-horned cattle with its own feed. The fern efficiently uses every hectare of
land. from which 60 to 80 quintals of fodder units are obtained and with irrigation.
100 to no quintals of fodder units. The establishment of the interfere enterprise
for the raising and fattening of large-horned cattle with its own feed nade it pos-
sible to increase beef production in the rayon 1.5-fold in the last 7 years, at the
sane tine. lowering labor upenditures per quintsl of weight gain by 30 percent.
During the indicated period the profitability of beef production in the rayon con-
prised 31 percent, which was twice as high as the average in the oblast.

This positive experience in cooperation in the organization of the fattening of
livestock with the feed of enterprises approved by the board of the USSR Ministry
of Agriculture and by the Presidium of the Central Comittee of the Trade Union of

ing to the above-untimed principle in the Belorussian $83. The Dongualovskiy
Sovkhoz in Chelyabinskaya (blast. the Kolkhoz ineni Ol'ninskiy In Belgorodskaya
Oblast. the Progress and Sala sovkhozes in the Latvian $53. the Liguaay and Shau-
kotas kolkhozes in the Lithuanian 583 and easy others efficiently apply this prin-
ciple of cooperation.

Kolkhozes and sovkhozes specialized in feed production on a cooperative basis.
These farms (there are about 100 such ferns in the country) grow feed for large
interfarn animal husbandry complexes. Cooperative newer fsrns fulfill in their
behalf the plan for the sale of agricultural products to the state. Such special-
ized farms exist in Voroneahskaya. “radmvskaya and Rostovskaya (blasts. Stavropol'-
skiy and Krasnodarskiy Krays. the Ukrainian $811 and other republics. For exanple.
in Tanbovskaya Oblast since 1972 the Sovkhoz imni 60-1.etiya VLKSH has engaged in
feed production for the Rovolyadinskiy lnterfsrn Couple: for the Fattening of Large-
llorned Cattle. ’lhe nesber farms of this interfarn enterprise undertook the obliga-
tions for the fulfillnant in its behalf of the plane for the sale of grain. milk
and other agricultural products to the state. 'lhis enabled the aovkhoz to revise
the structure of sown areas with due regard for its specialization in the produc-
tion of fodder crops. To ensure stable harvests. agricultural reclamation work
ensuring an annual irrigation of more than 1,500 hectares of land was carried out
on the sovkhoz. All this had a positive effect on the growth of the yield of fod-
der crops. Hhereas before specialization 12 to 13 quintels of fodder units per
hectare of arable land were gathered on the sovkhoz. in 1980 a total of 105 quintala
and from irrigated plots 63 quintals were obtained, which was 23 and 36 quintals

of fodder units respectively higher than the average in the rayon. In 1980 the
production cost of l quintal of fodder units was 7.5 rubles. which was 23 percent
lower than the average rayon indicator.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Vinnitakaya Oblaat the Kolkhor imeni 21 S'yerda KPSS efficiently mnages feed
production on an interfere basis. This farn grows feed for the ml'chin Interfarm
Enterprise for the Raising and Fattening of Large-Horned Cattle. More than one-
half of the arable land is occupied by fodder crops here. In the structure of fod-
der crops perennial grass occupies 50 percent. corn for silage. 35 percent and pulse
and fodder root crops, 15 percent. Such a structure with the high output of feed
per hectare takes it possible to fully nest the need of the interfere enterprise

for feed in the necessary assortment. Changing over to specialization, the kolkhor
began to stably gather 65 to 80 quintals of fodder units per hectare. which was 1.5
times as much as the average indicator in ml'chinskiy Rayon.

The Kolkho: imeni Lenin in Annenakiy Rayon. Voronezhskaya Oblast. the Put' k [Ks-a-
nizm Kolkhoz in Htsenskiy Rayon. Orlovskaya (blast and the Erken-Yurtskiy Sovkhoz
in Adyge-Khabl'skiy Rayon, Karachayevo-Cherkesskaya Autonomous Oblast. attained
high economic production indicators in feed production on a cooperative basis.

The economic relations between newer farms and interfarm enterprises are regulated
by the contracts concluded between then. lhis document determines the amount and
assortment of feed and the dates of its delivery by specialized farms to animl

husbandry complexes. as well as the reeponeibility of the parties for the fulfill-
ment of contractual obligations by then.

At the same time. an analysis of the state of affairs shows that there are still

a nulber of significant shortcomings in the development of the process of organi-
zation of feed production on the basis of the principles of interfars cooperation.
Despite the definite advantages of specialization of feed production on the basis of
interfarn cooperation these opportunities are not utilized sufficiently in some re-
publics, krays and oblasts. For example. work on the organization of specialized
feed producing interfarn enterprises on flood plain land is carried out at slow
rates in the Russian Federation. the Ukrainian $811. the Lithuanian $88 and the Lat-
vian SSR. Individual fares are unable to develop such land. Therefore. flood
plain land is not utilized efficiently.

When feed producing interfarm enterprises are organized on flood plain land, some-
times an insufficiently clear technical and economic substantiation 1s givu, as a
result of which such enterprises develop slowly, have a weak material and technical
base and do not cope with the production program. For exanple. for this reason
during the 4 years of its activity the Vytebet' Interfere: Enterprise in Khotynets-
kiy Rayon, Orlovskaya (blast. developed only 250 out of the 3,000 hectares of flood
plain land envisaged according to the technical and economic substantiation. In
practice. the nterial base of this enterprise was not established. In 1980 it
procured only 360 tons of fodder units.

Some local agricultural bodies do not pay proper attention to the development of
feed production in interfern formations fattening livestock with their own feed.

in some cases low-fertility land and land located far away are assigned to such
farms. For exaaple. land located at a distance of 105 to 50 kn from aniaml husband-
ry conplexes was assigned to the labinak and Korenevo livestock fattening interfere
enterprises in Krasnodarskiy Kray. ‘Ihis not only hampers the organisation of feed
production, but also raises the cost of feed delivery to the cowlexes.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Economic production relations between feed producing interfere enterprises and co-
operative ned>er far-s have not been adjusted everywhere. The Podberesovskoye In-
terfere Enterprise in Htsmskiy Raym. Orlovshaya (blsst. can be cited as an ex-
asple. In 1980 it turned over 5,500 quintsls of granulated grass anal to the No-
vyy l’ut' Kolkhozna cooperative answer. me kolkhoz paid the enterprise 10.1 rut
bles per quintal of granular-this without taking into account the cost of the
green ease delivered by the kolkhoz. 111a production of l quintal of grass neal re-
quired the expenditure of 6 quintale of this sass worth (together with transport
costs) 8.2 rubles. ‘lhua. l quintal of granulated feed cost the kolkhoz 18.3 ru-
bles and l quintal of fodder units contained in this feed. 30.5 rubles. Such un—
profitable conditions cannot stimlate the development of feed production on an in-
terfere basis.

What should be done to more successfully develop feed production on the basisof the
principles of interfere cooperation and to lend a specialised industrial nature to
this sector? The agricultural bodies of republics. krays end oblasts should prin-
arily direct their efforts toward an accelerated developnmt of flood plain land
and organization of specialised feed producing interfere enterprises on it. as well
as an increase in the efficiency of utilization of land areas by fans fattening
livestock on a cooperative basis with the use of feed of their own production.
Flood plain land should be transferred to interfere enterprises for feed production
for a long-tern use and. at the sane tine. the necessary material and technical
base should be created.

It is necessary to take leawres to further improve the nechanisa of economic pro~
duction relations between feed producing interfsrn enterprises and cooperative acn-
ber fares. paying special attention to the economic substantiation of the account~
ing prices of products handed over by interfarn enterprises to “or ferns.

'Ihe experience of advanced feed producing interfere enterprises. interfere nixed
feed plants and kolkhozes and sovkhozes performing production functions of inter-
farn enterprises in the fattening of livestock and raising of heifers with the feed
of their own production should be more widely disclosed and popularized.

A creative utilization of the fares of interfere cooperation that have proved their
value will give this process an even greater scope and will make it possible to
make it a reliable means of increase in the production of feed and livestock prod-
ucts during the current five—year plan.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Kolos". 'ﬁtornoproizvodstvo". 1982

11 .109
C80: 1824/309

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who-300mm m ORGANIZATION

CM comma DISCUSSES AGEDINDUSTRIAL CODEX. P000 SUPPLY
Moscow VOPIOSY HORN!!! in Rmsian No b, Apr 82 pp 155-156
[Article by II. Mb: "The Economic Mechanism and the Food Supply of cm lations'n

[Test] Urgent problens reprding an inrovensnt in the econoaic nechanisa within the
agroindustriel sphere of the econonies of am nations were sunined in Septeﬁcr
1981 in Moscow at an international conference having the these. "the Role of the
Economic Hechmiss in Inproving the Food Supply of cm nations." Participating in
the conference, which was organised by mes [Institute of Bcononics of the Horld
Socialist Systea] of the USSR Acadeqy of Sciences, were representatives of

Bulgaria. liungsry. the Ger-an Denocratic Republic, Poland. the USSR and
Creches lovakis .

The speeches that were presented resulted in a lively discussion. the abject of
which were the scientific and applied aspects of strengthening the effectiveness of
the eccnonic aschanisn in increasing production efficiency within the agroindustrial
sphere. In his introductory speech Doctor of Bcononic Sciences K. Hikul'skiy

(19188 of the USSR Acadeay of Sciences) underscored the inortance of the econonic
nechanisn as a capitol-saving factor in achieving great final results while develop-
ing the agroindustrial sphere of the econony.

Many speakers touched on the prohleas of nethodology and planning practices of the
APR [sgroindustrial coupler]. Scientific research by the econodsts of socialist
countries and a generalization of the experience regarding the functioning of the
economic nechanisa within the agroindustrial sphere indicate that the main directions
to be taken to inrove APR planning involve a closer adherence to the principle of
deaocratic centralisa and the elinination of excessive regulations in the planning
and econoaic work of local production links (D. Vladov, Bulgaria; '4. Bukh. USSR) .
Recently can has realized or planned nessures to strengthen the econonic basis of
planning and to include agricultural enterprises and agmindustrial associations in
planning and econonic activities. Icons-1c levers, interests and stiauli are being
utilized sore actively in for-ulating and realising planning decisions and specific
sins and the econonic independence of enterprises is on the incresse (I. Benet,
Hungary). The great role of the systen of econonic agreenents in planning and
achinistrative activities within the franework of the APR was ewhasised at the
conference (P. ‘l'rifonov, Bulgaria, and others).

was 0mm" INF MIV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On a macrolevel an iaprovement in APK planning presupposes a transition from the
branch to the eagles interbrench principle of plan formulation and realization.
Only in such a way will it be possible to achieve a coordination of branch and inter-
branch questions. The development of an overall program for APR elaboration and
individual subprograms will enable us to correctly substantiate the volume of

capital investments and material, financial and labor resources (I. Karlyuk, USSR:

8. Divila, Czechoslovakia). The development of a food program in the USSR can serve
as an exasple for creating an overall complex APK program. The most inortant thing
in isproving the economic mechanism of the AP! is the orientation of all links toward
the final results and the stimulation of links according to the degree to which they
have satisfied demand and effectively used resources (V. Hoshin, B. Krylatykh. USSR).
It was noted at the conference that the most isportant factor in developing and
realizing a food program is solving the social problem of the village (I...

Nikiforov, USSR).

Several of the reports and speeches touched upon questions concerning the organiza-
tional-administrative structure of the APK. E. Divila (Czechoslovakia) noted that
in some countries an organisational-administrative unification of the second and
third spheres of the APL has been effected by creating single ministries of agri-
culture and the processing industry. he noted, however, that in Czechoslovakia for
example, the effectiveness of such a ministry was inadequate. In the USSR a
promising organisational form for the developing APK. especially in the Baltic
States, is the rayon agroindustrial association (MPO). BAPO's are being formed in
all regions of the Estonian SSR. in an organizational sense the RAPO unifies all
agricultural. agricultural service and processing enterprises. A RAPO council
serves in the administrative function (E. Khyayal, USSR).

At the conference a question was raised concerning the place of private enterprises
within the structure of the APR. It was esphasized that as far as organization was
concerned they had to become an integral part of the country's APK by means of
efficient specilisation (B. Tonpa. Hungary). The speech of the administrative chair-
man of Tsentrosoyuz [Central Union of Consumers' Societies. USSR], A. Smirnov. noted
that organizational consumr cooperation is an integral part of the country's APK.
The attention of the conference participants was also directed tovard the fact that
the organizational formulation of the APR on both a macro and a micro level cannot
be effective (or even possible) without the institutionalization of the corresponding

legal norms and statutes ([1. Kozyr', USSR).

The effective use of all economic factors (cost as well as non-cost) and the
strengthening of cost accounting on this basis are the aost important conditions for
the growth and increased effectiveness of the APK. At the conference a great deal

of attention was given to discussing the problens of price formulation. To a
significant degree because of the imperfections in prices, cost accounting within the
systems of APK's of some CEMA countries has not yet become an operable nethod of
effective production planning and management. Several proposals concerning improving
APK price formulations were made. Planning prices must reflect the influence of
objective factors on expenses and public costs (I. Kukinov, USSR). A. Xalnynysh
(USSR) discussed the necessity of raising the validity of procurement prices, of
developing a single methodology for projecting agricultural procurement prices and
industrial wholesale prices. and of establishing procurement prices on the basis

of the normative levels of profit.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem of -' reproducing natural resources provoked a great deal of discussion
(H. Lemeahev. USSR). Host of the conference's participants agreed that it is
essential to establish active economic incentives to reproduce natural resources

(paynents for the use of such resources).

In consideration of the ignortance of further improving the administrative
mechanism as vell as of the controversial nature of several of the questions raised,
the participants in the conference decided that it venld be expedient to continue
the discussion and to devote the next conference in one of the cm member nations
to the sen theme.

COPYRIGHT: Itdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1982.

8228
C80: 1826/321

mo OFFICIAL IIQF ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AGRICULTURAL HACBINBRY AND BQUIPH‘ERT

HIDE INTRODUCTIW OP OVE'ALL HECHANIZATIW IN AGRICULTURE URGED

Moscow VOPROSY BICONO‘IIKI in Russian No lo, Apr 82 pp 93-101

_/_Article by Iosif Shabsayevich Berg. chief economist of the All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Economics of Agriculture; Vladimir Hikhaylovich Logachev,
candidate of economic sciences. scientific secretary of the Scientific Council of
the State Cousittee for Science and Technology on the problem "Organisaticm and
Economics of Scientific and Technical Investigations and Developments;" and Leonid
Vasil'yevich Lozhkin, candidate of econonic sciences, manager of a sector of the
All—Union Scientific Research Institute of Econonics of Agriculture: "Efficiency

of Overall Hechenization in Agriculturefj

[text] ihe rise in the people's well-being and elimination of the differences in
the standard of living and way of life of the rural and urban population result
from the change in the nature of labor in agricultural production and its trans-
formtion into industrial-type labor. l'he accelerated development of equipment
and iaprovement in the technology and organization of production taking place under
present conditions are connected with the industrialization of agriculture and its

transfer to a modern industrial basis.

An overall mechanization of production processes and a rational utilisation of e-
quipment are important conditions for the fulfillment of the tasks of attaining a
dynamic development and increase in the efficiency of all agricultural production
sectors set in "Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the

USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period Until 1990." A successful solution of the

problems of social and economic development of agriculture is possible only through
a wide introduction of new technologies and machine systems.

A machine system implies a technological set of mchines interconnected in their
basic type sizes and productivity in succuaively performed processes and opera-
tions. A machine system as the nucleus of an overall mechanization of agricultural
production ensures a prompt high-quality performance of the necessary operations in
plant growing and animal husbandry on the basis of progressive and advanced technol-
ogy with the lowest expenditures of labor and means of production per unit of output.
At the same time, technology becomes the min connecting link in the coﬁination of
science with production. A achine system includes a miniml nutter of types and
brands of tractors and other agricultural machines and in] scents designed for their

nmximm utilization during the year.

10

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The efforts of scientific institutions and design organizations are directed toward
an increase in the power saturation of tractors. in the speed and width of cut of
units. in the carrying capacity of harvesting machines and in the loading capacity
of means of transportation. ‘nnere is a scientific search for the development of
fundamentally new mchines with active working elements and with the use of hydro-
dynamic and aerodynamic. not only mechanical, principles in designs. Hork on the
unification of mchinery and equipment is also carried out. ‘lhe development 0.
contained nchinea performing several operations per pass has great prospects.

Ihe introduction of the achievements of scientific and technical progress and the
intensification of agriculture are inseparably connected with the growing consullp-
tion of electric power in production processes. which advances the task of devel-
opment of iaproved electric appliances and electrified and autonted nchinery and

equipment, of their introduction into agricultural production and of an increase
in the reliability of electric supply for agriculture.

The development of power saturated tractors was a umjor contribution of science to
an increase in the efficiency of agricultural production. This opened up great
possibilities for the growth of labor productivity and the performnce of field
work at the best agrotechnical time. The new equipment makes it possible to in-

crease operating speeds to 10 or 15 km per hour and to raise the productivity of
units 1.5- to 2-fold.

Pluch attention is paid to the equipment of agriculture with modern agricultural
coubines. Work has begun on the modernization of the Niva and Kolos grain harvest-
ing conbines. elimination of their structural shortcomings and increase in their
carrying capacity to 6.5 and 9 kg of grain per second (in existing canines. S to

7 kg of grain per second). ‘lhe Sibiryak coﬁine has been modernized. For the pur-
pose of the development of feed production the capacities of plants manufacturing
equipmen‘ for the procurement and processing of feed are being expanded and the
production of self-propelled and trailed fodder harvesting codaines. highly effi-

cient mowers, mincers. roller pickup pressers. milking installations and other In-
chines is being increased.

The further mechanization of agriculture will be carried out through the develop-
ment and introduction of advanced. new technologies and the retooling of the sec-
tor on the basis of the use of nachine systems. The output of more productive. new
agricultural tractors with a service life of 6,000 hours until major repairs and
with improved working conditions of machine operators is envisaged. Their utili-
zation will take it possible to increase the productivity of machine and tractor
units 1.5- to 1.8-fcld as compared with existing models. For the purpose of an
overall equipment of kolkhozes and sovkhoses with modern machinery. at the same
time. work on the: development of the necessary set of agricultural mchines for
these tractors is carried out.

New technological processes of grain production with the use of highly productive
coubines with a carrying capacity of 10 to 12 kg ~‘ grain per second. as well as
mechanization equipment for the nongrain part of the harvest. are being developed.
The use of these machines will contribute to a rise in the standard of farming and
increase in the gross output of grain. while labor expenditures will decrease to
two-thirds or one-half.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Plans are nude for the development of new technological processes and technical
facilities in sugar beet and cotton growing and in potato and vegetable production.
whose introductian will hits it possible to reduce labor expenditures on the pro-
duction of products and to raise their gross output and quality.

Highly efficient technological processes. sets of machinery and equipsnent and plans
for buildings and installations envisaging an overall nechanization and sutontion
of production processes are being developed it. sninl husbandry. ‘nnis will unite it
possible to lower labor expenditures on the production of l quintal of milk to 0.8
or 1.0 Inn-hour and on 1 quintal of weight gain in beef. to 2.5 or 3.0 Inn-hours
and of pork. to 1.5 or 2.0 man-hours.

In connection with the growth of the pool of achinery and equipment the develop-
ment and introduction of highly efficient methods of utilization of the machine and
tractor pool on kolkhozes and sovlthoaes acquire great ignorance. A progran of
work on the development of an overall system of repair and technical servicing of
equipment on the basis of the further improvement and development of the repair
base, rise in the technical level and quality of repairs and use of equipmant for
the diagnosis of the technical state of mchines without distantling them has been
approved.

Modern industrial snethods of construction of waterworks raking it possible to in-
crease labor productivity and to lower the cost of construction by 25 to 30 per-
cent are being developed. Systems of mechanized and automated sprinkling installs-
tions. which will increase labor productivity 1:. irrgation 1.5- to 3-fold. as well
as systems of subsoil and drip irrigation and drainage-moistening systems with var-
ious types of drainage and noistening techniques, are being developed.

me July (1978) Plenum of the CPS!) Central Comittee set the task of "coupleting

the overall mechanization of cultivation of all the ujor agricultural crops and
raising the level of mechanization of aninl husbandry such higher" during the 11th
Five-Year Plan. At present only 80 percent of the standard need of agriculture for
tractors. two-thirds. for grain coininee. a little note than four-fifths, for pota-
to harvesting conbines. two-thirds. for general-purpose plows. one-fifth. for straw
mincers. 70 percent. for grain seeders, 60 percent. for sugar beet harvesting com-
bines, 10 percent, for achines for the picking and transportation of hay bales,

25 percent. for manure distributors and 60 percent. for mineral fertilizer spreaders
is met.

As yet the machine and tractor pool is growing slowly. because the overwhelming
part of the agricultural equipment is assigned for compensation for physical with-
drawal. This is due to the insufficient skill level of mchine operators. lack of
their interest in the preservation of equipment. poor supply of farms with spare
parts in the requirtd quantity and nomenclature and low quality of equipment re-
pairs. During the 10th Five-Year Plan the rates of increase in the tractor pool
comprised only 2.7 percent and their total capacity rose by only 34.7 million hp.
which was equal to its increase during the Ninth Five-Year Plan. and in the last
few years there has even been a reduction in the rates of increase. only 5 to 8
percent of the new grain harvesting costines are assigned for an increase in the
pool. During the 10th Five-Year Plan it comprised less than 5 percent.

12

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in his report at the 26th CPSU Cangress N. 'l‘ikhonov stressed that "during the new
five-year plan it is necessary to rectify the situation with the quality of agri-
cultural equipment. which now gives rise to unfavorable criticism. and to see to
it that it meets the highest requirements." This applies primarily to the reli-
ability. productivity. maintainability and technological effectiveness of mchines.
‘lhe frequent breakdown of agricultural equipment and the high labor intensiveness
of its repair and technical servicing are the reasons for the fact that the coef-
ficient of utilization: of net tine in a work shift is 0.45 in cosbinea and 0.56 in
tractors. At the actual level of reliability of equip-ant the expenditures on its
maintenance in agriculture during the depreciation period greatly atceed the ex-
penditures on its acquisition. For example, out of the cobined aonetary expendi-
tures on output and repair and technical servicing the mnufacture of tractors ac-
counts for 23 to 3!. percent and the remitting 66 to 77 percent (more than 5 bil-
lion rubles annually) are used for repair and technical servicing during the period
of their operation. Additional expenditures on an isprovement in the quality of
machines ensure a such greater saving of funds than on their repair and technical
servicing.

Under the conditions of transfer of agriculture to an industrial basis and drawing
of substantial raw mterial and fuel-power resources into production the most eco-
nonical and rational utilization of all types of material resources is necessary.
me decree of the CPSU Central Comittee and the USSR Council of Hinisters "On In-
tensifying the "ark on the Saving and Rational Utilization of Raw Haterial. Fuel—
Power and Other Material Resources" envisages "an enhancement of the role of sci-
ence in the solution of problems of an efficient utilization of all types of ute-
rial resources and the development and introduction of resource saving equipment
and technology." The manufactured models of tractors, coinines and other agricul-
tural mchines have a high specific natal intensiveness, which is one of the rea-
sons for the delay in their output. Lowering the specific natal intensivensss of
wheel tractors to 35 or 50 kg/hp and of caterpillar tractors. to 40 or 60 kg/hp is
a realistic task in the very near future.

Ihe increase in the expenditure of fuel per hp per hour in powerful tractors is an
undesirable tendency. Models of tractors with economical engines using no snore
than 160 to 180 g of fuel per hp per hour are needed. It is necessary to ensure
the same or mltip'ne life of all the subasselblies and units of tractors and self-
propelled mchines until the first najor repairs (increasing this period to 8.000
hours) and to establish a guaranteed repair service of basic parts and units dur-
ing depreciation periods.

For many years mobile power engineering has been insufficiently provided with the
necessary working machines (during the 1970's their ratio was lowered from 1:1.4

in 1971 to 1:1.3 in 1978). which does not make it possible to perform the work nec-
essary according to the technology of the set within agrotechnical periods, to ef-
ficiently utilize tractors and to ensure a low cost of work. According to stand-
ards this correlation should be 1:3 (including nachines for animal husbandry) and
1:2.6 only for achines in plant growing.

‘Ihe problem of providing the working machines of the K-7ol. T-lSOK and other new
high-speed energy saturated tractors with a train (plows, seeders. harrows. cut-
ters and so forth) is especially acute. For exauple, the T-lSCIK tractor needs a

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

train of 28 types of machines, but. in fact. about 20 are supplied and according
to the volume of deliveries the needs for only 11 to 12 types of equipment are met
fully. At present approximately 1.000 types of machinery and equipment necessary
for agriculture according to the technology are not produced.

‘lhe development of agricultural production urgently requires an accelerated pro-
duction and introduction of new types of machines surpassing existing Inchines in
productivity many times as a result of their utilization in advanced technological
processes. an increase in un:.t capacity. speed. carrying capacity and width of cut.
development of sets of achines for the production of products without expenditures
of manual labor, introduction of technological processes with a minimally necessary
nundner of operations. wide utilisation of active working elements in the designs of
Inmchines and coinination of technological operations. hydraulic and electric drives
and elements of automtion of control and management of technological processes.

The decree of the CPSU Central Con-ittee and the USSR Council of Ministers "On In-
tensifying the Work on the Sang and Rational Utilisation of Raw-Material, Fuel-
Pover and other mterial Resourcn. a" (1981) points out the need to ensure an "ex-
tensive introduction of scientific and technical achievements din-er ted toward an
increase in the efficiency of utilization of structural and other materials and
fuel-power and raw Interial resources and the development of the inlements of la-
bor and Inchine systems necessary for this." In agriculture the fulfillment of
these tasks is possible. in particular. as a result of an increase in the capacity
of cosbine hoppers or the production of intermediary accumulators inking it possi- ,
ble to save up to one-fourth of the transport facilities for grain deliveries; de-
velopment of improved pulverizers of chemical plant protection agents lowering their
consumption to two—thirds or one-half; increase in the uniformity of application of
mineral fertilisers on the basis of the use of improved nohine designs. which mites
it possible to greatly increase the yield of every utilised fertilizer; introduc-
tion of pneumatic seeders. which. according to the estimtes of specialists. make

it possible to obtain an annual saving of 6 million tons of valuable seed grain.

The intensification of agricultural production necessitates an increase in the
rates of its power equipment. To attain an overall mechanization of production
processes in plant growing. it is necessary to have no less than 500 hp of total
power capacity per hectare of arable land (at present no more than one-half of this
capacity is ensured).

'lhe repair and technical servicing of agricultural nehines and mechanisms needs
to be improved further. For this it is necessary to increase the degree of provi-
sion of the material base of repair and technical servicing with spare parts. In
1980. on the average, only 82 percent of the need of agriculture for repair and
technical servicing. including 77 percent. for tractor parts and 72 percent, for
agricultural sachine parts. was met. Only 308 out of 627 types of the scarcest
parts were produced in 1980. The enterprises of the USSR State Counittee for Sup-
ply of Production Equipment for Agriculture hardly restore scarce spare parts. In
1980 parts worth 382,500 rubles. or 11.6 percent of the delivery of new parts.
were restored. which is obviously insufficient. For esample. in the GDR. 25 per-
cent of the parts are restored and the task of attaining the restoration of 60 per-
cent of the spare parts is set.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To enhance the role and increase the responsibility of nchine building enterprises
for a prompt and full provision of the entire pool of uchines with spare parts it
is advisable to envisage the replacement of losses for fem caused by the downtins
of equipment owing to the lack of spare parts in the anount of the planned value of
a achine-day from the economic incentive funds of enterprises guilty of the under-
delivery of spare parts. this also applies to the enterprises of the 0888 State
Cornittee for Supply of Production Equip-sot for Agriculture that do not fulfill
the assignments for the restcrstlon of scarce parts. when a guaranteed supply of
spare parts is introduced. bonuses should be paid to workers of supply bases depend-
ing on the level of satisfaction of the denand of farm for parts. not on the vol-
uns of trade turnover. as is done now.

here are serious shortcomings in the repair and technical servicing of agricul-
ture. lhe repair base of the USSR State Conittee for sapply of Production Equip-
ment for Agriculture is largely used not according to purpose. For crawls, the
voluae of work on new output and of other operations of repair plants coqrises 60
percent and of repair shops. more than 35 percent. whereas the provision of kol-
khoses with standard repair shops cosprises only 61 percent and of sovkhoaes. 57
percent. The developmt and utilization of the nterial and technical base of
repair and technical servicing Inst be planned free the standpoint of ulnication
of the end results of agricultural production and the USSR Ministry of Agriculture
should head this work.

Investigations show that. on the average. one sovkho: or kolkhoz has more than 20
brands of achines. although it is advisable to have no nore than three to air.
Phny brands lead to a decrease in the efficiency of utilization of equipnent and

to substantial expenditures on its mintenance and operation. because the expendi-
tures on spare parts and repairs and the downtine of units increase and their oper-
ation and the training of Inchine operators becons comlicet-ed. There is an opin-
ion that. allegedly. the industry's output of tractors of different designs per-
tainixw. to the sane traction category is the Iain. if not the only. reason for this.
However. the list of tractors necessary for the national economy is substantiated
scientifically. The provisions "A Systen of Machines for an Overall Hechanisation
of Agricultural Production" have been developed. It has been established that in
the country it is necessary to mnufacture tractors of 62 type sites. including
aore than 50 for agriculture. In 1980. however. tractors of only 30 type sites
were snnufactured.

Kolkhozes and sovkhoses receive many powerful tractors and expansive cowlex --
chines. Any nlfunctions in their operation and, especially. downtiae inevitably
result in great danage for the national econony. ﬂat is why the development of
clear reco-sndations on problem of improve-mt and increase in the efficiency of
organizational forms of equipnent utilisation and introduction of advanced nethods
of technical servicing of the nachine and tractor pool is an urgent task. A suc-
cessful solution of the problems concerning the servicing of the nthine and trac-
tor pool will have a positive effect on an acceleration of the rates of intensifi-
cation of agricultural production and will units it possible to ensure a stable
growth of the gross output of grain and other types of farn products.

The introduction of an overall mechanization of grain crop harvesting can be exam-
ined. using Krasnodarskiy Kray as an example. The proportion of mmodarskiy Kray
in the Russian Federation takes up 3 percent in the area of arable land and6 percent

15

NR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the gross output of agriculture. Kore than 5 million hectares of agricultural

land. including 6.3 million hectares of arable land. are assigned to kolkhoses and
sovkhozes in the krsy. 0n the average. one kolkhoz accounts for about 10.000 hec-
tares and one sovkhoz. 5,000 hectares of arable land. One out of four people an-

ployed in the kray's agricultural production is a aachine operator.

According to the data of the Krasnodar Scientific Research Institute of Agriculture
imeni P. P. Luk'yanenko. 5 calendar days are the best scientifically substantiated
harvesting period. during which winter wheat hardly lowers the yield. A delay of

4 or 5 days in harvesting in excess of the indicated period leads to the loss of 2
quintals of grain per hectare and of 10 days. I; quintals. or 10 to 12 percent. An
obligation to harvest grain crops in 7 to 9 calendar days and without losses has
been adopted in Krasnodarskiy Kray. During the 10th Five-Year Plan it was possible
to attain a significant shortening of the time of reaping and thrashing of grain
crops. This task was accoaplished through a fundaasntsl reconstruction of the or-
ganiution and technology of harvesting operations and a large-group utilization of
equipment within specialized coqlexes. which included technological links froa the
harvesting and thrashing of grain crops to the plowing of seaifallow. In the kray
in 1980 grain crops were harvested from an area of 2.5 nillion hectares. including
cereals and pulse crops. froa an area of about 2 nillion hectares. corn. from
360.000 hectares and rice. from 220,000 hectares. A total of 15.500 grain harvest-
ing carbines. 11.000 reapere. about 60.000 tractors. 55.000 trucks and a great deal
of other equipmt operated in the harvesting of grain crops. 1he harvesting area
per codiine totaled 130 hectares. Owing to the abundant harvest. all colbines
operated at lowered speeds and were equipped with chaff collectors. As conpared
with 1979. in 1980 the average daily output per codine increased by 25 percmt.
totaling 15 hectares. and the grain yield. 55 to 60 tons.

flow was equipmt used in the 1980 harvest? On most kolkhores and sovkhozes in
Krasnodarskiy Kray equipment was concentrated in 520 harvesting and transport con-
plexes. harvesting and transport detach-tents and specialized links for the perfor-
ounce of concomitant operatitns were established on farms with sull areas and an
insufficient aeount of equipment. 'lhe help of the anchine and tractor pool of the
Kray Agricultural Equipment Association. the [ray Scientific Production Association
for Agrochenical Services to Agriculture and other enterprises was enlisted. All
the equipment in coaplexes and detachments was used no less than 20 hours per day.
Reaping and combine units were equipped with electric illunination for night oper-
ation. As a rule. complexes were formed fron the seas types of coabines. notor
vehicles and tractors. Trailers for the collection and transportation of chaff.
pushing sweeps. stack movers and other technical facilities were attached to them.

A link for the technical servicing of uchines was attached to every harvesting and
transport comic and detachaent. its duty was to control the adjustment and to
carry out the technological tuning of harvesting units. As a rule. nintenance
took place at night tine. airing the harvesting period the shops. nterial ure-
houses and exchange centers of the Kray Agricultural Equipment Association. of kel-
khozes and of sovkhozes were transferred to a 26-hour work regime. "hen the length
of operation of the Roles. Niva and Sibiryak coli>ines was up to 20 hours in a 26-
hour period. even advanced nchine operators could not ensure the fulfillment of
the envisaged output nor-a. They took measures so that two colbine operators worked
on every codaine. At the sane tine. their shift was changed in no nore than 6
hours. M achine operators also serviced every tractor and aotor vehicle.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The level of technical equipment and mechanization of production at agricultural
enterprises and associations does not yet meet the tasks of increase in output and
in the rates of labor productivity growth. For exaqle. in 1980 the level of over-
all mechanization in cattle raising comprised 39 percent. in hog breeding. 61 per-
cent aui in poultry breeding. 69 percent. Vegetacle planting was aechanized 66
percent. Cod>ines harvested only 63 percent of the areas under potatoes. 90 per-
cent of the areas under sugar beats and 53 percent of the areas under cotton.

The lack of overall mechanization of the production of individual types of agricul-
tural products leads to significant labor expenditures. For example. in 1980 the
expenditures of labor on the production of 1 quintal of grain crepe (where sowing
and harvesting are mechanized 100 percent) totaled 1.6 sun-hours on kolkhozes and
1.2 Inn-hours cn sovkhozee. of potatoes. 3.7 and 3.5 Inn-hours and of vegetables
(on open ground), 7.4 and 5.1 man-hours respectively. In potato growing the dig-
ging of tubers was mechanized 94 percent and their loading. only 60 percent.

The existing nehine system sakes it possible to mechaniae all the basic processes
in the growing and harvesting of potatoes. At present a nutter of operations (are--
paration of seeds. grading of the gathered harvest and loading-unloading operations)
are still performed manually. Calculations show that the use of flow teclmology on
the basis of an overall mechanization of potato production. as covered with the
traditional technology, will mke it possible to lower the labor expenditures on
these operations to almost one-third, reducing them to 9.6 inn-hours per hectare as
compared to 55.6 mn-houre with the existing technology.

Sugar beets are some of the most labor intensive crops. In labor expenditures they
approxiutely surpass grain crops and sunflower seeds 10-fold and fiber flex. 3 to
3.5-fold. The care of crops, harvesting and loading are the most labor intensive
technological processes for these crops. During the care of sugar beet crops the
stage of formation of the plant density requires great expenditures of annual labor
(33 to 48 man-hours per hectare). A significant saving of labor expenditures on
this operation (20 to 25 percent) is attained when the SST-12 seeder designed for
precision seeding at sull rates is used. A set of Ichines for the swath harvest-
ing of sugar beets is now being introduced. meir productivity is twice to three
times as high as the productivity of the used equipment and the design makes it pos-
sible to gather the harvest without additional annual cleaning. The introduction
of a nchine system for a mechanized cultivation and harvesting of sugar beets
could reduce the labor expenditures on this crop to less than one-sixth.

The insufficient provision of agricultural enterprises and associations with tech-
nical facilities and their unsatisfactory utilisation lead to a prolongation of the
perforeance of work and to a deterioration in its quality, as well as to sizable
losses of output. which lowers the efficiency of agricultural production. Shift
and daily output in many mechanized operations is smaller than the standard output.
the shift coefficient of the operation of machine and tractor units is low and the

downtime of snchines is considerable.

An analysis of the present utilization of machines shows that both a preuture

writing off and prolongation of the period of operation of equipunt in excess of
the standard period occur at agricultural enterprises and associations, which low-
ers the efficiency of technical facilities. The operation of old equipment raises

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the expenditures on nintaining it in an efficient state with a declining productiv-
ity. For eatenple. the expenditures on the operation of the T-76 tractor after a
standard service life per conventional standard hectare. as cowared with the first.
2 or 3 years of operation. increase 1.5- to 2-fold and annual output decreases to
40 or 50 percent. 'nnerefore. it is advisable to use old equipment only during
stepped-up periods and when there is a shortage of new nchines for leveling out
peak loads. In the current and five-year plans of enterprises and associations it
is necessary to envisage a prospt renovation of the nehine and tractor pool. avoid-
ing deviations fron the optimn periods of operation.

A universal introduction of industrial technologies of production of grain. sunflow-
er seeds. sugar beets. cotton. vegetables and other plant products will make it pos-
sible to ensure a systemtic parfornsnce of all types of agricultural operations by
achines. For maple. under the conditions of the Holdavian $511 the use of indus-
trial technology in the production of corn. sunflower seeds, sugar beets and vege-
tables increases the yield 30 or 50 percent. lower: the expenditures of labor per
unit of output 1.5- to 2-fold. improves its quality and reduces losses. In the cot-
ton growing of the Uzbek SSR industrial technology increases labor productivity
1.5- to 1.8-fold and lowers production costs 1.4- to 1.7-fold.

According to the calculations of the Ukrainian Scimtific Research Institute of Ec-
onomics and Organization of AgriCulture. the introduction of a machine system for
an overall achanization of the production of agricultural products will make it
possible to lower the expenditures on the perfornncc of mechanized operations
throughout the public sector of the Ukrainian $38 by an average of 13 to 15 percent
by 1985. The introduction of advanced forms and methods of machine utilization
will sake it possible to increase the productivity of labor on the performnce of
technological processes and operations by 10 to 20 percent and to lower operating
costs by In to 5 percent.

As a result of the systematic impleaentation of the agrarian policy of the Con-m-
nist Party of the Soviet Union. in the last 15 years the nudner of tractors in the
country's agriculture increased froa 1.613.000 to 2.580.000. of trucks. from
965.000 to 1.607.000 and of grain harvesting coinines. from 520.000 to 713.000 re-
spectively. 'lhe power available to agriculture per worker increased from 7.7 hp
to 26.2 hp. At the end of the five-year plan the total capacity of the tractor
pool exceeded 191 million hp.

The list of equipment supplied to agriculture was also expanded. In 1965 the in-
dustry mnufactured 380 types of mchines and implements for rural areas and at
present their list reaches 1.500.000. which exceeds the 1965 level elnost fourfold.
During the 10th Five-Year Plan snore than 62 billion rubles were allocated for the
retooling of agriculture. while the total capital investments of the state and 1:01-
khozes in the development of agriculture were 170 billion rubles.

The indicated assures made it possible to greatly raise the level of mechanization
of agricultural production. The technological processes of basic soil cultivation.
sowing of grain crops. cotton and sugar beets and harvesting of grain and silage
crops have already been mechanized fully. An overall mechanization of the applica-
tion of mineral fertilizers. vegetable sowing. potato planting. hay mowing. inter-
row cultivation of row crops. harvesting of corn for grain and so forth is being

convicted.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
However. the level of mechanization of a nuter of key agricultural operations is
still insufficient. For example. according to the data of 1980. cow milking is

mechanized 90 percent, water supply at large-horned cattle sections and completes,
89 percent, at hog breeding complexes, 96 percent and at poultry breeding complexes.
95 percent, fodder distribution, 45, 66 and 85 percent respectively and manure re-
moval. 75. 86 and 86 percent. Overall mechanization has been carried out only at
62 percent of the large-horned cattle sections and couplexes. at 63 percent of the
hog breeding complexes and at 72 percent of tne poultry breeding complexes.

‘lhe data presented show tne great potentials in the replacement of heavy annual la-
bor with mechanized labor. in the disengagement of acutely scarce mnpower and in
the solution of serious social problem connected with bringing the nature of labor
in rural and urban areas closer together.

A total of 1.87 million tractors with a total engine capacity of 152 million hp and
600.000 grain harvesting coabines will be delivered to rural areas during the llth
Five-Year Plan. The output of equipment worth more than 17 billion rubles was en-
visaged for plant growing and worth 16 billion rubles. for animl husbandry an; fod-
der production. The industry metered the production of the K-701. T-lSO. Ell-80
and HTZ-82 powerful high-speed tractors. The calculations performed by the workers
of the Tselinograd Scientific Research institute of Hechanization of Agriculture
have shown that. when these tractors are used. the labor intensiveness of work is
lowered sharply and the need for nchine operators is reduced considerably. how-
ever. all this will be realistic provided tractors are supplied with the necessary
set of agricultural machines (plows. seeders. harrows. spreeders and so forth).

A dynamic development of agriculture requires the implementation of a nuaber of or-
genizational and economic measures for an improvement in the quality of agricultural
equipment. he rapid rates of scientific and technical progress and the complexity
and mltiplane nature of the problem solved in its course require scientifically
substantiated planned management taking future possibilities c‘d needs into con-
sideration.

At the present stage responsible tasks are set for workers in agricultural machine
building. The July (1978) Plenum of the CPSU Central Co-Iittee considered it nec-
essary to complete during the llth Five-Year Plan the overall mechanization of cul-
tivation of all mjor agricultural crops and to serially raise the level of mecha-
nization in animal husbandry. In connection with this a vast program for the pro-
duction of machines for plant growing. animl husbandry and feed preparation was
adopted. It will be necessary to meet the needs of agriculture for highly produc-
tive tractors with a full set of saturated and trailed inlements and other modern
machines. as well as to greatly expand the output of new equipment to ensure a dyn-
amic development of agriculture.

Overall mechanization--the min factor in the growth of labor productivity and re-
lease of workers from agriculture-will make it possible to provide amnpower for
other natimal economic sectors in a planned manner and. as a result, to create
additional national intone with a aimltaneous increase in the production of agri-

cul tural produc ts.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1982

n .439
cso: 1826/336 END
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV