FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10537

24 May 1982

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES

(FOUO 5/ 82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain iniornstion priurily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
trsnsnissions and broadcasts. Heterials tron foreign-language
sources are trenslated; those tron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and esterial enclosed in brackets
[] ere suppl led by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Test]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original interaction wee
processed. Hhers no processing indicator is given, the infor-
astion was smarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nenes rendered phonetically or trsnsliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nales preceded by a ques-
tion nsrk and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of en
itee originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND 32601161018 GOVERNING WHIP OF
“TERMS REPRODUCED HERE!“ REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
HUMAN Rssouacss

(2000 5/82)

Coureu'rs
WRAP!!!
Rev Book Discusses Soviet Lu and (ﬁtment Mamie Trends

(Galina Il'inichm Litvinovn; PRAVO I WWW
WV m’1981) .CQODOOOOOOIO....OOOOOOOIOOOOOOO

- l - [III - USSR - 381

rou OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL EBB MY

nmocmm '.

NEH 300K DISCUSSES SOVIFI' MN All) cmm DWIC mam
hoacow WW) I DMMFICBESIIYE PROTSBSY V 8883 in Russian 1981 pp 137-186

hapter In. Migration and Labor Resources, from "Law and Demogra ic Processes
the 1581!.” by Galina ll'inicma Litvinova. Iadatel'stvo Rank:

[[337 The legal norms which affect migration belong to s significant degree
to the norms of direct action. It is in this regard that they differ from
the legal norms which affect the birth and death rates, where the effect of
the law is mainly indirect.

As processes which are purely social in natumnhe migratory processes depend
on the individual person: this cannot be said .‘bout the death rate. the human
life span and the natural but not the physical movement of the population. For
this reason there is with regard to the migratory processes much greater ground
for talking about their regulability than there is whcn talking about other
demographic processes.

Migration is defined as the territorial mt of the population.“ well as
social mobility, the movement from one social group into another.

The territorial relocation of individuals can take'plsce within a country
(intra-statc migration) or between countries (inter-state migration). Intra-
state naigration is regulated only by the legal norms of a given state, while
external migration is regulated by the nous of international law and of the
laws of the countries from which the emigrants depart and the migrants arrive.
In contrast with aigration within a state, external migration often brings

with it a change in citizenship; the balance of external nigration (i.e.. the
difference between the size of the arriving and departing population) influences

the changing of the magnitude and composition of the population not only of a
given rayon but also of the nation as a whole.

Higration is a complex social phenomenon. which is conditioned by political .
economic, legal, natural. psychological, denographic. etlnographic and other
factors. It influences substantially the economic, socio-cultursl and socio-

political life of the state and constitutes an important component of its
socioeconomic development.

1
PM 0??!an USE ONLY
run Uttabw was mun

Higration changes the distribution of production forces. and without it the develop-
ment of new regions of the country would be impossible. In many respects migration
predetermines the success of industrialization: it facilitates significant changes
in the social structure of societyuthe growth of the working class. for example.

is ensured to a significant degree by the flow of migration from the countryside

to the city. Higration contributes to the exchange of labor skills and production
experience, to the improvement in the welfare and cultural level of the population
and to the development of personality.

Higration influences the age and sex structure of the corresponding region and
through it the marriage and birth rates.

Higration plays a great role in bringing together the socialist nationalities. As a
result of migration there is a mixing of the national composition of the resi-
dents in the republics. and this leads to mutual cultural enrichment of the
nationalities and ethnic groups, as well as to the strengthening and development
of intemationalism.

Migration of the population from one republic to another influences the size

as well as the national and social composition of the population in a union or
autonomous republic, and it also influences the degree to which the republic

is supplied with labor resources and the turnover or stability of the personnel.

In this way the migratory processes exert a substantial influence on the economic,
political, social and danographic development of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the republics which comprise it. and on the geography of industry.

v.1. Lenin considered the novenent of the population to be a progressive phenome-
non which contributes to the economic development of the state and the individual.
he wrote: "the migration of workers not only provides 'purely economic' advantages:
to the workers themselves but it. must also be recognized as a progressive phenome-
non... Unless mobility of the population is established, there cannot be population
development. and it would be naive to think that any kind of rural school can provide
people with what they can get from actual acquaintance with different relations

and procedures both in the south and in the north, in agriculture and in industry,

in the capital and in out-of-the-way places."

Under the influence of a number of circumstances a person organizes and carries
out his migratory behavior by himself. but in turn, the act of migration, or
resettlement. exerts a substantial influence on the person. The influence of
migration on an individual is mainly positive; however, it is not certain. M 1'
well known. by no means all newcomers adapt easily to the new place; resettlement
frequently brings with it changes in life style: ties with friends and relatives
are broken and difficulties in becoming acclimatized arise. The social adaptation
of the newcomer does not always take place painlessly. Criminologists have estab-
lished the fact that there is a link between migration and crime: thezhigher

the percentage of newcomers in a region. the higher the rate of crime.

In the same way the migration processes themselves camot be viewed from one side

alone. It should be acknowledged that in the last 20 years the rate of activity
and the direction of migration both within and between republics has become

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
less and less rational in nature. Demographers have been directing attention
to the serious inadequacies of present-day migration in the asm. tn: hypertrophied
growth of population in the larger cities. the excessively large number of

people, especially young people, leaving the countryside for the city an the
extessive movement of population away from the ram to other republics.

Socialist society has at its disposal enormous potential for rationalizing

migratory processes. strengthming their positive and weakening their negative
consequences.

1n the 1558 an important influence on the migratory movement of the population.
both social as well as territorial. is exerted by the constitutional right of
citizens to labor; under developed socialism this right is interpreted

more broadly than before. specifically as a right to obtain guaranteed work

for payment in accordance with its quantity and quality. including the right to
choose a trade or type of occupation and work according to his calling, capa-
bilities, vocational training and education (Article no of the USSR Constitution).

The absence of memployment under socialism sharply differentiates migration
in the USSR from migration in the capitalist countries, where the migrants most
often move for one purpose--to find work.

The social mobility of 1.658 citizens is ensured by the followings

the abolition of all privileges and limitations as declared by the first decrees
of the Soviet state“)

the constitutional principle of equality of all citizens before the law;

the equality of citizens' labor rights regardless of sass. nationality. race or
religion:

the constitutional right to education. including free. specialized education at all
levels including the tertiary level.

widespread opportunity for improving labor qualifications and for receiving
instructions in new specialities}

the freedom, guaranteed by the constitution. of scientific. teclmical and artistic
work)

the right to elect and be elected to the mviets of people's deputies and to other
elective state organs:

the possession by citizens of all the rights «sock-economic, political and
personal rights- declared and guaranteed by the {88k Constitution and by Soviet
laws. _

All this provides the basis for the broad freedom to choose one's trade or type
of occupation and ensures that citizens have great social mobility. and this has
particular significance under conditions of the scieniific-technical revolution.

3
FOR OFFICIAL NE MY
The opportunities granted by Soviet legislation for great social mobility are
broadly realized under socialism yesterday's kolkhom member ney hens-n- huh:
a worker or a state official. a worker may become an engineer or a scholar. etc.

The territorial and social mobility of the usss population is a factor which is
fundamental to the growth of the industrial population at the expense of the
agricultural population and of the urban population at the expense of the rural.
Nearly half of the increase in the country's urban population is provided by
emigrants from the village.

A high rate of migrational nobility was characteristic of prerevolutionary Russia
although for social and religious motives tssrist legislation limited the movement
of certain categories of citizensn for example. the Pale of Settlement was estab-

lished for Jews. and they were allowed to travel outside it only under special
circumstances.

Migration to Siberia was especially intense. Its enormous expanses were the
destination first of fugitive landlord-peasants. and then after the abolition of
serfdom. of landless peasants who gathered large land allotments in the sparsely-
settled outskirts of Russia.

Historian 0.1.. hordvinov. who studied the history of peasant migration in the
last century. wrote: ”It has been noted that the Russian people. despite the
settled nature which is characteristic of an agricultural country. has a
tendency toward the wandering life and that without any apparent reasons the
Russian will abandon his Homeland and go to look for something in a foreign part.
but this lack of sociability. it seems. lies not in the nature of the people.
as many others explain. but is rather a consequence of ‘unfavorable historical
circumstances. while they note that the Russian easily abardons his native
village and the cemetery of his fathers. it should be noted that while abandoning
one. he seeks another. better one: ”Ivan. afenmkn'énm ‘snéesu-y. 11qu answers the
judge's question on the reason for his flight by saying you don't run from good'
and 'let well enough alone!"5 I). 1.. hordvinov cites examples of peasants. who
moved in whole villages and large groups beyond the Volga to Siberia. Central
Asia and even beyond the state boundary. specifically to Poland. In response to
the foreign exodus of a number of its subjects, the tsarist government organized
special detachments which secretly crossed the boundary in order to catch
fugitives and return them to Russia.

In his analysis of peasant movements to Siberia. v.1. Lenin emphasized that
peasants were moving from the densely populated agricultural provinces. where
the vestiges of serfdom were moge pronounced and that it was mainly the peasant
of average means who was moving. The new settlers included discharged soldiers.
Cossacks, representatives of persecuted religious sects, etc.

In addition to voluntary resettlement for the purpose of developing new regions.
especially in Siberia. which was encouraged by the granting of certain benefits
established by law (tax benefits. etc.). broad use was made of forced resettlement.
including administrative resettlement of state peasants. exile of penalized soldiers.
the resettlement of military units, dispatch of Cossacks on the basis of drawing
lots and the so-called criminal colonization.

FOR MIC?“ USE MY
Forced resettlenent of political and regular criminals in order to use their labor
for colonization of uninhabited regions of Siberia was widely practiced in tasrist
Russia. In the 19th century alone, 860,000 people were exiled co Siberia. In the
1897 censu, 299.000 exile, were registered, and they constituted 5.2 percent of
the population of Siberia.

After the October Revolution the very rich natural resources of Siberia and of the
northern and eastern regions of the country remained little-used and sparsely
populated. In addition. the nest backward natioml regions of Central Asia were
in need of rapid development.8 The need to develop these expanses determined the
large scale migration of the 30's. From 1926 through 1939 approximately 5 million
people migrated to Siberia, the Urals. the Far East. Kazakhstan and Central Asia.
A specific phenomenon of this period was the emergence of industrial cities in
previously uninhabited regions beyond the arctic circle and in areas of the for
East which weremt considered suitable for economic development.

Great territorial shifts by the Soviet population were presented by the 503th of
the Great Patriotic War. when more than 25 million people were evacuaged by the
Soviet government {roan regions which were under threat of occupation. This resulted
in substantial change in the demographic map of the country. in the nusber and
proportion of the population in the union and autonomous republics and in their
social and national composition. All the republics became more multinational.

At the present time the CPSU and the Soviet government are undertaking organizational
and legal measures to increase migration of the work force to regions of Siberia

and the Far East. where a substantial increase in industrial production has

been called for by the llth Five-Year Plan. The 26th OPSU Congress stipulates

for these regions a higher rate of construction of industrial-energy complexes,

the development of the infrastructure as well as the introduction of wage increases
for blue- and white-collar workers who have records of unintfb-rupted service

in the southern regions of the Far East and Eastern Siberia.

The optimization of present-day migratory processes requires improvement in the
organizational forms for the management of the territorial redistribution of
the population.

within the system of the Soviet state apparatus there are organs. which carry out
the planning. financing and management of the organizational forms of migration.
USSR Gosplan and gosplan of the union republics estallish the need for manpower
and skilled specialists according to regions and branches of the national economy.

Until 1976 all questions regarding the use of labor resources were resolved
at the republic level.

The recruitment and resettlenent of workers was managed by labor coamnittees

at the councils of ministers of the union republican these cousittees were assigned
the responsibility of working with the ministries. agencies and enterprises in
developing measures to retrain workers and to redisu'ibute them among enter-
prises. oblssts and rayons of the country. taking into account the needs of
industry. In 1976 the USSR Council of hinistere' State Couittee for Labor and
Wages was reorganized into the union-republic USSR State Conittee for Labor and
Social Questions, with the republic state committees on labor subordinate to it.

FOR orncfm. USE MY
I'VE 0!!"th We’- WLI

In this way a better organizational structure for the ”vertical" management of
labor resources was created, and it became possible to plan and implement inter-
republic distribution and redistribution of manpower and to re.ulate operationally
the fulfillment of the plans from a single uniondwide center. At a time when
certain republics have a shortage of labor resources and others have an ucess.
the strengthening of centralization and the expansion of the authority of the
national organs in the resolution of issues related to the redistribution of
labor resources is wise and economically necessary.

However, it should be said that a certain degree of decentralization is useful

in solving specific problems related to the distribution of labor resources. For
example, young specialists are placed in jobs by the union-republic hinistry

of Higher and Secondary Specialise! Education. It is one thing when questions
related to the supplying of specialists for small places like Estonia or Kirghizia
are resolved by the corresponding ministries of the republics in’l‘ellinn or Frunze.
but it is another thing when issues related to supplying an enormous region such as
Western Siberia with specialists, including graduates of the Numen' VUZ's

and tekhnikuns, are resolved in Moscow. thousands of kilometers from the region.
It goes without saying that with the second alternative the decisions are less
frequently the optimal ones. This was correctly noted by the participants in

a conference on the comprehensive development of the western Siberian region;

they proposed expanding the jurisdiction of the local soviete in the resolution

of issues such as these.12

It is essential to coordinate the activities of numerous orgsnizations which
require the influx of manpower from the village inasmuch as the individual interests
of these organizations and «enterprises do not always coincide with the interests

of agriculture.

Individual enterprises in certain'regions are granted the right to draw manpower
from other regions by means of material incentives for resettlement in order to
eliminate a deficit of manpower. Plants. factories and construction sites are
interested in obtaining from the village. not just manpower. but young people
who have secondary and specialized tectnical education. i.e.. the same manpower
that the kolhhoz's are interested in.

The ministries and agencies which are responsible for supplying manpower to

new construction projects prefer a rapid and "profitable" transfer of skilled
manpower from the regions in which labor is in short supply to the training of
specialists from regions of surplus labor. Legislation must prevent this
practice, especially the organized recruitment of' personnel in resions experi-
encing a shortage of labor resources. Important measures to resolve this
problem were set out by the 26th CPSU Congress, which decreed that there must

be more training of skilled workers from the local ppgulation of the Central
Asian republics, especially from among rural youth.

The law is called upon to centribute to the optimization of nigratory currents
while providing for subjective interest in resettlement. for example. the

£838 Council of Ministers adopted a decree m 31 Hay 1973 "Concerning Resettlement
Benefits” in order to facilitate resettlement and to give assistance to newconers.

It set out the legal, bilateral relations between the newcomer and the kolkhoz

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(an enterprise for the production of agricultural products) and established a
series of benefits for the newcomers. Families which resettle in kolkhoz s
and sovkhoz s are paid a one-time grant of 100 to 300 rubles for the head
of the family and 35 to 80 rubles for each member of tr: family, depending
on the territory in which the resettlement takes place.

Large benef its are stipulated for people who relocate to work in the regions of
the Far North, which are characterized by difficult weather conditions. The benefits
are set out in the lo February 1960 Ukase of the Presidiun of the USSR Supreme
Soviet “Concern Regulation of Benefits for Persona Horking in the Regions of
the Far North." In order to attract and keep blue- and white-collar personnel
in the northern regions of the USSR. these people are given supplements to the
monthly wage. and they are granted living space at their place of work while
retaining living space in their former place of residence for the entire period
that the labor contract is in effect. Actual expenses related to moving the
employee and a member of his family to the work area and to the former place of
residence are reimbursed. Preferential treatment in the calculation of

service length for old age or invalid penion benefits is given: one year of

work in the areas of the North is worth one year and six months: old-age pensions
are given to men at age 55 and to women at age 50 if they have worked no less than
15 calendar years in the regions of tge Far North. .The right to additional
leave of 18 working days is granted.1

Other legal acts, which provide for the organized recruitment of manpower and
its movement to specific regions are also in effect.

The legal norms. which regulate migratory processes. can be divided into two
types:

of Ministers 'toncerning Procedures for Conducting the Organized Recruitment of
Horkers”17 and the 19 September 1969 decree "Concerning the Distribution of
Persons Who Have Completed Graduate Studies While Taking Leave from Production,"18

other acts:

2) norms which regulate specific migratory streams, which establish their direction
and intensity. Norms of this kind include. for example, those established

by the 27 March 1956 decree of the USSR Council of Ministers and the CC CPSU
"Concerning the Further Improvement in the Country's Grain Production and the
Development of Virgin and Fallow Lands."2°

mediated by economic, psychological and other factors. The publication of this
kind of legal norm does not aim to regulate migration, however, it does have a

ran OPTIC?“ 138 MY
A'vu vttavw NA- \ll‘h‘

regulatory effect on the public, especially on ”unorganized” migrants, who
comprise at the present time an absolute majority of the migrants.

The effectiveness of any given legal norms which influence or regulate
migration is not characterized by a high degree of stability. While the 30's
and 40's saw large streams of migrants moved in an organized manner to the
eastern regions of the country. the 50's and especially the 60's and 70's
have seen a drop in the role of organized migration. There has been a sharp
reduction in the tendency to direct manpower throqh organized recuitmentz in
1951-1955 organized recruitment was responsible for the placement of 2,833,000
peeple throughout the country, but in 1966-1970 it was responsible for the

placement of only 573,000. During the same period ﬁricultural resettlement within
the RSFSR declined from 111,000 to 56,000 families.

As a result of the fact that the proportion of unorganized resettlements in
present-day migration is growing, organizational measures to regulate migration

are beginning to lose their significance and the significance of socio-economic
levers is increasing. For this reason direct regulation of migration must

be replaced with increasing frequency by indirect measures, and this must be

taken into account when working to improve the state and legal management of

these socio-demographic processes. These include legal norms, which create beneficial
conditions for specific union republics, regions, nationalities or social groups

in order to resolve national, economic and other problems. For example, the publi-
cation of a legal act concerning increases in purchase prices for any given
agricultural prodmts for the purpose of stimulating production growth increases
the incomes of producers and reduces the migratory outflow from rural regions

which produce the given item, even where there is an excess of manpower and
incomplete employment of the rural population.

The improvement in the standard of living of the Soviet people in the USSR as

a whole throughout all of its regions has reduced the drawing power of resettlement
benefits and influenced the acclimaization rate of the newcomers in the new

place: it has also increased the return migratory flow. As a result there has

been a slowing down of the growth of population in the country's eastern regions,
although the natural increase of the population there is relatively high.

There has also been a reduction in the scale and intensity of the migratory
streams,” and what is most upsetting is the large scale which nonrational
migration has assumed.

Streams of migrants are leaving Siberia, the Urals and the Non Black Earth

Zone, i.e., the regions, which are experiencing a stortage of labor resources,
and they are heading to a significant degree to the republics with superfluous
labor resources. The migration in the Central Asian republics is particularly
nonrational in terms of its level and direction. The high rate of natural
increase in the villages here has already resulted in superfluous manpower,

which would be sufficient not only to meet the personnel needs of all the indus-
trial facilities of these republics but also to help in the development of Siberia
the Far East and other labor-short regions of the countries. But utilizing

this surplus manpower is not so simple. In Tajikistan. for exallple, where

for every 100 people entering pension age during the 11th Five-Year Plan, there
are 322 people altering the working age bracket, the local population supplies
only 3!: percent of the industrial personnel requirements of the republic's major

8
ton OFFICIAL USE MY
facilities. The rest are newcomers, mainly from the labor-short regions of
the RSFSR, where for every 100 people leaving the working age bracket there
are only 85 entering that bracket.

In his report to the 26th CPSU Congress L.1. Breztnev said: "In Central Asia,

in a number of regions of the Caucasus ... there is a surplus of manpower
especially in the countryside. And this means that it is necessary to work

more energetically to attract the population of these places to the development
of the country's new territories. And, of course, to deve10p here the production
which is necessary for the national economy, and to expand the training of
skilled workers of the Mallow nationality, especially rural youth.” 4

All this provides evidence of the timeliness of the work to improve legislation
aimed at providing manpower for new construction projects and develoment areas.
The existing legislation establishes additional rights and benefits for those
people who move to the development regions, regardless of where they come from:
i.e., whether they come from regions which have an acute shortage of labor
resources or from regions with a labor surplus. further, the economic development
needs of the rural localities of the Non Black Earth Zone or Central Asia
require a different kind of relation to those departing the village. Legislation
must stimulate migration from the labor-surplus regions and lower the rate of
migrational activity of the population in the labor-deficit regions, i.e., it
must regulate migration with consideration for the interestsmt only of the
regions which receive the migratory streams (new construction sites, development
regions) but also of the regions from which these people are departing.

The task of the legislation is to contribute to the optimization of the migratorv
streams, i.e., to bring them into line with the requirements of the socio-economic
development of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and of each of the constituent
republics. This, in turn, presupposes the appearance of factors which influence
the intensity and direction of migration and for consideration of them in legal acts.

It should be said that there is no manimity of opinion among scholars who are
studying the reasons for migration. A multitude of reasons are given, including
some which are most unsuitable: For example, 0. Atamirzayev and A. Atakuziyev
claim: "The traditionally weak territorial mobility of the local population

is a specific feature of the demographic development of Central Asia."25 Former
nomads are described as having "traditionally weak territorial mobility?”

There is a widely held opinion that the main reason for the weak migratory
activity of the Central Asian population is the fact that the natives of the
Central Asian republics have an inadequate mastery of the Russian language.
without denying the dependence of migratory activity on the level of knowledge
of the Russian language, prism or decisive significance should not be given
to this factor. In recent years (60's--70's) the amber of scientific workers,
candidates and doctors of science in Central Asia has increased primarily among
the indigenous population. But does a scientific occupation require any
less knowledge of the Russian language than work in industry, where the
number of workas is increasing mainly as a result of newcomers?

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Uta-abut» oat URL!

The first profound analysis of the reasons and factors in migration was carried
out at the end of the last century by v.1. Lenin in the work "The Development

of Capitalism in Russia," where migratory processes were viewed against an enormous
multi-faceted body of factual material; Lenin revealed the patterns evident

in these processes. their dependence on socio-economic factors and the influence
of migration on the individual.

VJ. Lenin saw the main reason for resettlement in the various socio-economic
conditions at the place of departure and the place of settlement. "Horkers flee...
from 'semi-free' labor to free labor. It would be a mistake to think that this
flight amounts exclusively to a movement from a densely populated to a sparsely
populated p1ace....Horkers leave some places in such large numbers that a

shortage of workers results in these places, a shortage which is eased by the
arrival of workers from other places... the departure of workers expresses the
aspirations of workers to go where conditions are better. This aspiration will
become completely comprehensible to us if we recall that in the region of
emigration. a region in which people pay their debts with work, the wages of rural

workers are especially low. while in the region of innigration... wages are
incomparably higher." 6

Thus v.1. Lenin saw the reasons for migration primarily in the socio-economic
conditions of the life of the population in the various regions. V.l. Lenin came
to this conclusion while analyzing the migration of the population against the
general background of the socio-economic position of the state; he proceeded
from the premise that the migratory processes of a specific region cannot

be understood without taking into account the migration of the population. the
reasons and factors in other regions and in the state as a whole. These Leninist
tenets have not lost their theoretical and practical significance in our times.

despite the fundamental socio-econonic transformations which have taken place
in the state.

"he 26th CPSU Congress emphasized the need to even out social differences on

a territorial scale and directed attention to the fact that the cultural and

1 iving conditions of people's lives are not the same in the various regions

of the country. And it is precisely these differences which frequently complicate
the situation with regard to labor resourcgs in a number of places. The imple-
mentation of a program to develop Western Siberia. the BAH (Baykal-Amur Mainline)
zone and other places in the eastern part Of the country has increased the flow 0f
population to these areas. However, people frequently prefer to go from north

to south and from east to west. although the rationa distribution of production
forces requires movement in the opposite direction. 7

"It is sometimes claimed,” L.l. Brezhnev says in his report to the 26th CPSU

Congress, "that it is sufficient to increase wage supplements in Siberia, in the
Far East and in the northern regions and people will not leave these places.

Supplements. of course, are necessary. However, the problem cannot be solved

in this manner alone. A person leaves, let us say. Siberia, most often not
because he doesn't like the climate or the wages are too low but because it

is more difficult to find accomodation there or to put his child in a kindergarten
or because there are few cultural centers. That is why we are planning to speed

up construction of living space and of the entire socio-cultural complex in

ma OFFICRL USE ONLY
these regions during the current five-year plan, as well as improve the
supply of consumer goods to the population here.”28

In recent years a number of works have appeared which contain a seriOus analysis
of migratory processes. their causes and factors, with consideration for Leninist
ideas. The following authors have written works which should be included in

this category: T.l. Zaslavskaya, V.I. Perevedentsev and L.l.. Rybahovskiy, etc.29

A majority of scholars correctly believe that the migratory currents, their

direction and intensity are determined primarily by inter-regional differences
in the conditions of life and labor.

The passport and residence permit system is an important administrative-legal
regulator of migration. In this regard, the universal provision of passports
to the USSR population should contribute to the optimization of migratory

currents. Previously, a rural resident's desire to obtain a passport could
be satisfied. as a rule, only if he moved to a city.

Among other factors which, while influencing the level of comfort, the state of
health and the intensity of labor, affect migration, one can name natural-climatic
demographic (age-sex structure of the population in a given region). coununication
(knowledge of Russian as the language of intercourse between nationalities),

T. I. Zaslavskaya proposes dividing all the factors which inﬂuence the migration
of the rural population into three groups, taking as the basis the degree of their
governabilityn l) ungovernable natural-geographic factors-conditions: 2) directly
ungovernable, but indirectly regulable factors-conditions—demograﬂnic, social,
ethnic, social-psychological; 3) directly regulable factors-regulators, which
include regional differences in the level of prices for goods and services,

the differences in wages and other sources of income, the volume of the housing
stock, the condition and services provided to buildings, the size of capital
investment, etc. 30 It is thought that this kind of classification of migration
factors according to the degree of govemability could well be applied not

only to migration of the rural population but also to migration in general.

The law may influence most effectively the third group of factors.

However, legal norms influence the second and even the first group. Specifically,
the labor, pension and other benefits which are granted to people who work in
regions with unfavorable climatic conditions may lessen the negative effect of
climatic factors.

The measures established by law to increase the welfare of the Soviet people
(increases in wages. pension and labor benefits, etc.) are sometimes introduced

not to the entire country all at once, but rather stage by stage, beginning with

the regions having the most unfavorable climate. It would be advisable to strengthen
the effect of this principle in law for the purpose of optimizing migration.

FOR OFFICHL USE “LY
59.0 wot-v..- .H... -an...

A comparative analysis of the indicators of the population's living standards in
various areas, as well as an analysis of the direction and intensity of migratory
outflow and influx makes it possible to establish the following pattern:
territories which lose population because the number of those departing exceeds
the number of those arriving are inferior in terms of all indicators for living
standards to those territories which have a positive balance of migration. In
those union republics which have a reduced intensity of migration the average
size of deposits to savings banks, trade turnover and the volume of household
services is 25 percent greater than in republics which have a higher intensity
of population migration. Hithin the framework of the largest union republic,
the RSTSR, this pattern is easily traced on a regional scale: in Western Siberia.
which is losing population, all of the main indicators for the standard of living
are lower than in the Far East, which has a positive balance of migration.31

In comparing the income of kolkhoz members of the Non Black Earth Zone in the
postwar decade with the rate of the migratory exodus from the village. a clear
inverse relationship can be established: the lower the income, the higher the
rate of departure. The extremely high emigration rate has led in the final
analysis to the depopulation of this region. The need for effective legal and
economic measures aimed at improving conditions in the Non Black Earth Zone

became obvious. An important role in the solution of this problem we played

by the decree of the cc CPS!) and the USSR Council of Hinisters 'toncerning Measures
for the Further Development of Agriculture in the Non Black Earth Zone of the
RSFSR,” which stipulated a series of serious economic and legal measures, aimed

at ensuring a high rate of agricultural development in the Non Black Earth Zone
and its infrastructure.32

Improving conditions in the Non Black Earth Zone. and especially improving the
demographic situation, requires improvements not only in the legislation but
also in the socio-economic policies with regard to the given region. This was
given serious attention in the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. The congress
emphasized the need for the Non Black Earth Zone of the RSPSR to carry out as
rapidly as possible the construction of residential buildings, roads for cars.
social and cultural facilities and other public buildings.

The migratory activity of the pepulation differs to a significant degree along
ethno-national lines.

The Russians, Belorussians, Ukrainians and the peoples of the Soviet Baltic

republics have the highest rates of migratory activity and the peoples of
Central Asia and the Caucasus have the lowest rates. There is a five-fold

difference in the highest indicator of migratory activity (Rusgzans with 6.7 percent)
and the lowest (1.3 percent among the Turloaenims and Uzbeks).

An analysis of the 1959. 1970 and 1979 census figures shows that a certain tendency can
be detected toward a change in the national structure of the population in the

union republics, a change in the direction of strengthening "national linkage.”

In the majority of the union and autonomous republics there has been an increase

in the proportion of people of indigenous nationality. This process is explained
not only by differences in the natural increase in the indigenous and non-indigenous

population, but also to a certain degree by the nature of the migration.

12
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
the proportion of persons residing outside ”their own" republic. For example.
during the period between the two populationcensuses (1959-1970), the proporgion
of Armenians residing outside the Athenian ssn fell from $6 to 38 percent. 3

attention of the party. The composition of the pqaulation in the union republics
is multinational. ”It is natural," emphasized I... . Brezhnev, "that all the
national groups have a right to the necessary representation in their party and
state organs, given, it goes without saying, strict consideration of he ability
and the ideological-moral qualities of each person. In recent years there has
been a significant increase in the number of citizens of nonindigenous nationality

of a territory, including its social and demographic development. can be easily pro-
vided for within the framework of a union republic which is small in area and
population such as the republics of the Caucasus, Central Asia. and the Soviet Baltic
area. But as for the RSFSR and the Ukrainian SSR with their complex demographic
situation. their ample shows the need for the reorganization of territorial '
management. in order that territories which are equivalent in their demographic and

and socio-economic development. It would seem that in this regard the Western
Siberian economic region, and especially the Non Black Earth Zone. should haVe
much more, but certainly no less right than, for «ample. such union republics
as Kirghizia, Estonia and others. Incidentally, these regions do not have
their own territorial administration. This, clearly. is one of the results of

* As sociological studies have shown, when young people born of mixed marriages
choose their nationality. they prefer the indigenous one. linking this to oppor-
tunities for social growth. See 50V. WOGRAFIYA, 1969, No S, p 84.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
the fact that management of the enormous territory of the RSPSR is far from perfect.
Concentrating the management of a broad range of problems at the vary top of such

a large republic as the RSI-‘81! obviously has exhausted itself to a very significant
degree.

The 26th CPSU Congress aphasized that the organizational structures of government

will nga tolerate stagnation. They must be brought into line with changing econouic
tasks.

The optimization of migration is .the process of reducing demographic expenses

to obtain a balance of migratigg, which is in accordance with the planned require-
ments of the national econouy. The effective management of migration processes
for purposes of optimizing them depends on the comprehensive consideration of
factors which influence unigrationmot only in the legal norms. and the solution

of organizational issues. but also in the conduct of socio-economic and national
policy of the Soviet state.

In the light of what has been said, there is merit in the proposal of v.1. Pereveden-
tsev concerning the need to develop indexes for the standard of living and

indexes for the living conditions of the population.” Legal acts concerning
benefits for people working in certain regions met be applied with consideration
for these indexes. which should be calculated regularly for various territories.

The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress make it mandatory for the planning

organs to stipulate top-priority, preferential construction of living space

in regions with a shortage of labor resources. Implementation of these decisions
requires expansion of labor benefits and me‘ supplenents in places with inadequate
labor resources: determined consistency in the introduction of labor. housing.
pension and other benefits and the increasing of wages according to regions,
taking into account the local demographic situation; it also requires regional
adjustment of purchase price policy, tax and budget policy. etc. Further. the
greater the labor shortage in a rqion, the better will be the living conditions
of the people there: the greater the inadequacies of the village's labor supply,
the faster will the village approach the city in terms of standard and conditions
of life; in labor-short regions the infrastructure must be developed at an
accelerated rate, etc.

The implementation of the 26th CPS!) Congress decisions undoubtedly will
contribute to the rationalization of migratory flow.

In addition to the above-named measures aimed at regulating migration in various
regions, the congress set down a nunber of general tasks, the solution of which

will contribute to the optimization of migratory processes on a national scale
of the entire 1831!. They includen

overccaing the substantial differences between the city and the countryside,

bringing the labor payments of kolkhoz members closer to the wages of blue-
and white-collar workers:

improving the life of the population in all republics and rayons of the country;
balancing the existing and newly created jobs for workers with labor resources;

1];
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ensuring fuller satisfaction of the population's needs in the newly developed
regions with difficult natural conditions:

improving the regional regulation of wage."1
2. The effect of the law on labor resources

In his report to the 26th CPSU Congress LJ. Brezhnev says: ”In the 80's an
attitude of thrift and economy toward labor resources is acquiring particular

significance. This is a complex matter requiring the resolution of many problens
of an economic, tectnical, social and educational nature.

The problem of labor resources has a great multitude of aspects, including

legal ones. Suffice it to say that a whole branch of law, labor law, is devoted
to aspects of labor resources; they also come under legislative systems concernixg
social insurance, social maintenance, health cars, etc.

The examinatim here will consider mostly those aspects of the problem of labor
resources which are linked to one degree or another with demographic processes;
further, most of the attention will be devoted to issues for which the theoretical
and practical solution do not seem to be optimal. The link between labor resource
problems and migratory processes was studied above; for this reason primary
attention will be given to its links with other demographic characteristics of the
populations the birth rate, the age-sexstructure, etc., as well as the possible

legal effect on the optimization of quantitative and-in a lesser measure--qua1itative
characteristics of labor resources.

The primary labor rights and obligations of citizens have found their embodiment
and further development in the Constitution of the USSR, the constitutions of the
union and autonomous republics, which contain a number of articles relating

to the legal regulation of this issue. The Soviet Constitution. which is a
genuine manifesto of liberated labor, guarantees to all citizens the right to work,
rewarded in accordance with its quantity and quality, the right to chose a
trade. occupation or job in accordance with one's vocation, abilities and
vocational training and education (Article 1:0). This right is ensured by

the socialist system of economic management, by the steady growth of production
forces, by free Vocational instruction, by increases in labor skills and the
instruction for new specialists, and by the development of a system of vocational
orientation and job placement. The citizens' right to work is matched by their
corresponding obligation to labor conscientiously in their chosen area. According
to the constitution, evasion of socially useful labor is incompatible with the
principles of socialist society (Article 60).

The constitution declares that the Soviet state concerns itself with improving
the conditions and protection of labor, with reducing and eventually eliminating
heavy physical labor (Article 21); it contributes to the erasing of differences
betwem mental and physical labor (Article 19); it sets as its goal the expansion
of real opportunities for applying the creative forces, abilities and gifts of
its citizens for the all-around development of the personality (Article 20);

it carries out a policy of increasing wages and real incomes of working people
on the basis of labor productivity (Article 23).

15
mt omcw. use my
The constitution guarantees suitable working conditions and the right to rest.
which is ensured by a work week which is not to exceed 41 hours. by paid vacations
which are granted annually, etc. (Article Al). The right to rest. health care
and housing create optimal opportunities to restore the ability of citizens to
work and facilitate their active labor.

Labor legislation. in particular the Foundations of Legislation Concerning Labor
and the labor Code. exerts a legal influence on people in order to serve the
interests of production, specifically. it contributes to the growth of labor
productivity. to the growth in the effectiveness of public production. and

to the strengthening of labor discipline. It also serves the interests of the
employee by establishing a high level of working conditions. comprehensive
protection of the labor rights of blue-and white- collar workers.“3 For example,
Article 53 of the Foundations of Legislation Concerning Labor and the corresponding
articles in the labor codes place upon the administration the responsibility for
organizing correctly the labor of blue-and white-collar employees, of creating
all the conditions for the growth of labor productivity. for ensuring labor and
production discipline and for improving the conditions of labor and everyday life.

The rational use of labor resources is ensured by practically the entire systen

of labor law nor-s, which are aimed at increasing labor productivity. strengthening
labor discipline and struggling against losses of work time.

The socialist economic systsn possesses all the necessary preconditions for the
most complete and effective use of society's labor potential. In the years of
Soviet authority there has been a fundamental change in the composition and

quality of labor resources: there has been a dramatic rise in the level of their
education. both general and specialized. i.e.. the level of vocational skills.
Unenploynent was eliminated and the level of deployment, especially of women,
has increased. The conditions of labor and its legal protection have changed
unrecognizably. At present the Soviet Union is one of those countries which have a
low rate of industrial injuries. The legal position of the workim person

has become completely different-me is the naster of his own country who

possesses all rights and participates in the manages-ant of the affairs of state.
society and the labor collective.

At the same time new problems of labor resources have appeared; the 25th and 26th
CPSU congresses have pointed out that these problems have become worse.“

In the llth Five-Year Plan the growth of labor resources in the Soviet Union

is slowing down somewhat. and in the subsequent period it will even be reduced
over a large area of the country.

This can be explained nainly by the fact that beginning in the 80‘s the

working age population will receive reinforcements from young people born in
the 60's and the following years. and their generation. an 1. well known. is

characterized by a low birth rate.

However. while the birthrate in the USSR as a whole has dropped, it has increased
in a number of republics; while the increase in the population in certain republics

has been reduced. it is growing in others. intensifying the proqu of labor

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
resources. inasmuch as their natural increase is especially high in the republics
uith surplus labor resources and extremely low in the mblics with a labor
deficit. Table 2 show the dynamics of the «.birthrate for three five-year plans
(the republics are in descending order for this indicator for the period 1970-1974).

'l'ab1e 2
Average Annual indicators for Iirthrate of the Population in the Union Republics

(The level for 1955-1959 I 100)*

Republic 1960-1966 1965-1969 1970-1974
USSR as a whole 96 81 85
I'jSk SSR 126 157 185
Uzbek $58 122 132 156
Turkmenian SSR 121 126 160
Kirghiz 33!! 118 126 160
Estonian SSR 100 96 110
Latvia; SSR 102 9b 102
Azerbaijan SSR 121 113 101
Kazakh SSR 111 97 100
Georgian SSR 107 96 9S
Lithuanian 88R 103 93 93
Armenian SSR 106 89 89
Moldavian SSR 95 82 88
Ukrainian SR 91 83 87
Belorussian SSR 91 7d 73
RSFSR 88 67 71

‘Sourcen Ryabushkin. T.V.. Dsdashev, A. 2. ”l‘rudovyys resursyt effektivnost'
ispol'zovaniya" (Labor Resources: Utilization Effectiveness). Roscov, 1977. p 12.

The sane number of labor resources can have differing labor potential. depending
on the sex-age structure and vocational-skill parameters. In the republics with
a lou birthrate the proportion of people in pre-uork and working age is falling and
the proportion of pre-pension and pension .age people is rising. This is reflected
not only in the intensity of labor, but also in the loads which tne non-working

population impose on the uorking population, on the needed increases in the
social consumption funds. The differences in these indicators for the various
republics continue to grow.

The low birthrate in the large cities. especially in Uoscov and Leningrad. is the
cause of a constant shortage of labor resources. The shortage is made up by
migrants, the so-called limited ones: the growth in their numbers creates a

nunber of additional problems of housing. as well as legal problems. All this
is evidence that without careful consideration of demographic characteristics

of the population it is impossible to compile plans for the economic and social
developnent of the Soviet state. for elaboration and confirmation of the
Law Concerning the State Budget and a number of other legal acts.

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE (In!
IUB Olin-Mb UDK. 01“.!

A reduction in the rate of natural increase of labor resources and the worsening
labor shortage over most of the 0583, especially in the RSPSR. resulting from
the reduction in the birthrate. non-rational migration, the growth in the
number and proportion of pensioners and work-aged persons who are studying,

the reduction in the work week, the increases in vacatix. time" etc. require a
search for additional sources of manpower, and the development of organizational
and legal measures to reduce the shortage of labor resources.

To these measures may be added measures aimed at: 1) increasing the natural accretion
of labor resources; 2) changing legislatively the limits of the working age:

3) development of legislation which contributes to bringing into public

production pension-aged people, as well as people engaged in housework

(in republics where the proportion of such people is high); 4) optimization of

migration: 5) reduction of manpower needs and more rational utilization of
manpower.

Just as the fall of the birthrate in the 60's will be reflected in the size

of labor resources in the 80's, the birthrate of the generation which is currently
in its maturity determines the growth of population size and the labor potential
which our state will have in 15-20 years. This is one more reminder of the close
ties between various demgraphic features of the population.

The fundamental means of legal influence on the natural increase of labor

resources in the future can be found in a system of legal and economic measures
which stimlate the birthrate over most of the territory of the USSR, and espe-
cially in the republics which have an extremely low birthrate and a large

deficit of labor resources (RSI-‘83, the Ukraine. Latvia). The top-priority
implementation of such measures in regions with a low natural increase in population
will be in line with the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress concerning incentives

for railsgng the birthrate, takirg into account the demographic situation of the
region.

Expanding the rights of working anthers by granting them additional leave for
pregnancy, childbirth and care of minor children, as well as expanding the
right to work part-time, etc. undoubtedly will intensify the problem of labor

resources today, but without these measures the labor shortage of the future
cannot be eliminated.

The female work force is not merely one component of the labor resources, it is

a special part of them. This circumstance requires reflection in the law concerning
the foundations of economic and social planning. as well as in the plans for
economic and social development. At the present time the planning organs do

not compile special plans for the utilization of women's labor. It would seem
that it is essential to plan the use of women's labor in the national economy in

order to ensure the most rational possible distribution of workers within and
among economic sectors.

W

In the last 20 years the average work week in industry has been reduced by 7.8
hours: leave time has been increased by 2,6 working days. and paid maternity leave
for women has been increased by 35 calendar days. As a result of these socio-legal

measures the annual fund of working time in industry alone has been reduced by
nearly 1 minim man years. See: Ryabushkin, T.V.. Dadashev, a.z.’1nm. Boob-c” p 12.

18
P03 MIC!“ USE MY
Of course, certain difficulties arise when planning women's labor. This is
expressed primarily in the fact that one can speak only conditionally about
the need for women's labor in individual production processes. inasmuch as
production does not does not experience a specific dnand for women workers
in the majority of cases. for this reason the task of planning women's labor
consists in discovering the best opportunity for applying it at any given
production sectors and in establishing which part of the total demand for
labor resources in those sectors which permit female labor can be satisfied
by this application.

It would be useful to include in such plans issues concerning the distribution
of labor resources as well as measures related to their training and retraining
with regard to chant; requirements of the national economy for women's labor.
Sociological-economic research should help with with this planning. It is
extremely important for plans to be backed up by a program of socio-domestic

measures inasmch as they may contribute to changing the quality and quanity of
female labor.

Improving the legislation concerning women's labor consists of mug-1m the
fullest possible correspondence between the nature and conditions of labor on
the one hand and the specific and psycho-physical characteristics of women on
the other hand: it must also provide for optimization of labor conditions,
which make it possible to combine in the best way the labor in the public
sector with motherhood and other family obligations. '

There is every reason to think about compiling a list of positions and occupation.
which make preferential use of female labor. These lists can be compiled by

the soviets of people's deputies with consideration for the demographic and
economic structure of a given region. Lists of this kind, reconended to

the administration of enterprises and institutions, could ease the lack of balance
in the utilization of male and female labor, which exists in certain regions.

For example. in the mining city of Vorkuta, there is a shortage of manpower

in the mines at the same time that quite a few men are working in the service
sphere. where they could definitely be remced by women. who have difficulty
finding work here.

A large influence on the size of labor resources. as well as on their quality.
is exerted by legislation concerning labor, social insurance, pensions,
health care. education, eta. and especially by the legal norms which are
aimed at increasing the level of material well-being, and of the physical

and spiritual development of citizens. We shall consider the most important
of these norms in relation to the quantity and quality of labor resources.

The extent of labor resources is determined not by the size of the state's
population, but rather by the number of citizens of working age. which depends
on the upper and lower limits of working age. which are determined by law.

Article 76 of the Fundamental Legislation of the USSR and of the union republics
concerning labor. defines the minimum working age of Soviet citizens as 16. .
and in certain circumstances 15 years of age. The law prohibits people from

bringing into the sphere of labor activity those per-sore who have not reached

19
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
working age. The lower limit of the working age was established in law

with consideration for the physical and intellectual level of adolescent
development.

Today, in light of the process of acceleration and the labor shortage, there
have been calls in the literature, including the widely read periodic press,
and more and ears frequent references to the need to expand opportunities

to use the labor of adolescents who have reached their 15th birthday, and in
certain cases, those who have reached their 16th birthday. The authors of

these proposals argue that it would be advisable to use high school students
in their last years to work in the service sphere during school holidays and

during the year in certain circumstances. which would be strictly regulated by
law.

The question of whether to use the labor of adolescents is not so much a
matter of the worsening labor shortage as it is one of how to increase the
role of labor education for adolescents, of making them acquainted with labor.
And it is the adolescents themselves. and their parents who are concerned
tohave moderate participation by adolescents in the working world; it is
they who often appeal to the comittee on the affairs of minors to allow

a 14-year old to work but who are rejected because it is forbidden by law.

It should be remembered that adolescents. who for one reason or another have

quit school before the age of 16 and who cannot (by law) be accepted for work.
frequently swell the ranks of young offenders.

Thus. life frequently dictates the need for a reduction of the minimum
working age specified in the law.

The paradox is that this limit. which has remained in the law unchanged since
the adoption of the first Labor Code of 1918. isin-fact being raised. A larger
and larger number of young men and women are starting their working lives after
they complete specialized secondary or higher education, i.e., when they are
between the ages of 19 and 23. From year to year there is an increase in the
number and proportion of the population of working age which is in school
Suffice i to say that during the period from 1959 through 1970 the number
doubled.“ The implementation of the 20 June 1972 decree of the cc crsu

and the 0583 Council of Ministers "Concerning the Completion of the Transition
To Universal Secondary Edunsation of Youth and the Further Development of the
General Education School, which called for mandatory 10-year education,

increased the proportion of working-aged people engaged in studies; this
reduced the extent of labor resources because with the start of compulsory
schooling at age seven, it could not be completed before the age of 17

and adolescents begin working later than the age stipulated in the Foundations
of Labor Legislation as the minimise working age.

In 1970. about 20 percent of ethth grade graduates (800.000 teenagers) went into the
labor force. but in 1975 only 3 percent (less than 150,000) did. In 1975

97 percent of eighth grade graduates continued their studies in general educa-

tion schools and in other educational institutions which provide secondary

education e (.8

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
diction between the legally established nininum working age and the opportunities
to realize it can be found in amending the legal norn which establishes the

As is well known. compulsory instruction of children in the USSR began at age
eight until 1963. An 8 September 1943 decree of theUSSR Council of People's
Comissars introduced compulsory instruction of children beginning at age
seven, which continues to this da .‘9 The rapid growth of the intellectual
level of today's children, many of whose learn to read and write before they

seven to six years of age. This kind of minimal school-starting age has
been established in many foreign Countries. and in a nunber of states it has

even been reduced to five. If instruction is started at six. teenagers will
finish a 10-year education at 16.

Shifting children to universal. coupulsory schooling beginning at age 31::
was discussed at the 26th CPSU Congress. ”Create the preconditions for a

gradual transition to instruction of chi ldren beginning at age six in preparatory
classes of general education schools,”5°the Basic Directions note.

reason to be proud of the fact that Soviet legislation stipulates a pension age
which is lower than that in the capitalist countries: moreover. it is lower
for both men and women. Soviet pensioners are very young. In accordance

with Article 15 on the establishment and payuent of state penieonsSI. the

conditions, the pension is granted under preferential circumstances: then
receive it at age 50-55 years and women at 65~50 years: the Pension is also
granted on preferential terns to women who have given birth to and raised
five or More children (Article 16 of the Regulations). The pension is

B. Ts. Urlanis suggests that the pension age should be considered to be the
non-working age. without calling it the "incapable of work" age because most

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
He have in our country the means to give a job not only to all persons of
working age but also to pensioners. Pensioners can be and are a substantial
source of reinforcements for the labor force inasmuch as many of them are
capable of working, do actually work and can work. According to data from
the 1970 census, 6.5 million people (1.7 million men and 2.8 million women)
were continuing to work beyond pension age in the USSR. According to the
calculations of I. Is. Urlania. (based on tables of life expectancy) men

receive pensions for an average of 17 years at the present time and women
an average of 25 years.

Improvements in the social welfare system and the legal position of pensioners

in the USSR contribute to ever greater participation in the public production
process on the part of people who reach pension age. This isa substantial
source of labor resources for the national economy and it will facilitate the
easing of the labor shortage, since the largest proportion of pensioners live

in the republics with labor shortages. In 1965. 12.5 percent of old-age pensioners
were employed in public production, while in 1975 the figure was already 24.3 per-
cent. Of these people 90 percent received a full pension as well as their wages.
Fifty-four percent of employees who were granted a pension on general grounds
continued to woglzt. while 72 percent who were granted a pension under preferential
terms did' so.

The number of working pensioners can be significantly increased by improving
the legal norms which regulate the conditions under which pensioners are
employed: by expanding the right to retain all or part of the pension without

pensioners, taking into account their age and health status. Important incentives
for enlisting the labor of pensioners were set down in the 11 September 1979
decree of the CC CPSU. the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet and the USSR
Council of Ministers “Concerning Material Incentive ﬂeasures to Encourage Pensioners
to Hark in the National Economy."53 It stipulates that workim pensioners shall
retain all or part of their pensions, as well as the most favorable possible
working conditions for people of pension age: it will also substantially expand
pensioners' interest in continuing to work in the national economy upon reaching
pension age. In particular, the employee according to the decree. has the
opportunity. upon reaching pension age to continue working in his old position.
while supplementary work seniority, obtained after reaching pension age,

gives him the right to a larger pension when he does retire. Under this

system a person remains in his own labor collective and continues to perform
his usual work.

Specialized research has shown that the reduction in work capacity of middle-
aged people is linked not so much with a reduction in their skills so much as
with a reduction in the intensity of their work. For this reason the legislation

established that in order to use pensioners' labor more effectively enterprises
have the right to employ people in the older age groups part-time.

In addition to material incentives to recruit the labor of pensioners, it is
advisable to establish in law moral incentives as well; the practice of finding
jobs for pensioners can be improved.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A substantial source of reinforcamts for the labor force can result from
efforts to recruit other people, especially women employed at home . for
public production. This problem, like many other similar problems. requires
a regional approach to its solution. In the republics which have a low birth-
rate and, consequently, a low natural increase of labor resources, nearly all

It is obvious that here a certain reduction in the rate of employment makes
sense in order to increase the birthrate and that it would be advisable to
incorporate this into the plan for the economic and social development of
the republic (region).

In the republics of Central Asia and Trans-Caucasia, as the population census
has shown, there is a high proportion of women who work inside the Mme; moreover.
in the Central Asian republics there is a tendency for this proportion to grow.
For example, in the Turkmen $83 the number of people engaged in homemaking
amounted to 16.8 percent of the total labor resources in 1975. in comparison
with 16.4 percent in 1971. And by the end of 1976 from 16 to 26 percent of all
labor resources in Kirghizia. Turkmenia, Georgia. Armia, Tajikistan 92d
Azerbaijan were waged in domesticand personal secondary economy. The
leaders of Gosplan in certain republics, Tajikistan in particular. in order
to save themselves from the necessity of performing complex work on the
utilization of existing labor resources, excluded mothers with many children
'(and in the Central Asian republics the majority of women have many children)
from the indicators for labor resources, inggeasing in this way the level

of employment of the republic's population.

Freeing women who work inside the home and recruiting then for public production
presupposes the solution of an entire complex of socio-economic and legal
problems. including: expansion of women's right to work a reduced day or
reduced work week , the right to work at home and improvement of vocational
education. Recruiting women for public production requires the expansion

of the network of preschool institutions for children and improvements in

their operations. In his report to the 26th CPSU Comress L.I. Breztmev
specifically pointed to the need for expansion of this network and improvements
in the operat ans of preschool institutions and schools with after-school
daycare, etc. in order to improve opportunities for combining productive

work for women and motherhood. The resolution of this problem is urgent and

in those republics with high levels of female employment , the number and quality
of children's preschool facilities is far from answering the needs of all families.

Econonists have made proposals worthy of attention regarding the use of W2 and
tekhnikum students who are in school full-time, as well as older high-school
students, in the service industries, especially in busy periods. The labor
legislation in this case should be supplemented by legal norms which determine
the conditions for the use. duration and payment of such labor.

It is ttnght that the reserVes for reduction in the losses of work time due

to temporary work disability have not yet been exhausted. In this regard

it is difficult to overestimate the significance of Article 102 of the 1977

USSR Constitution. which establishes the right of citizens to health protection.

The constitution calls for the development and improvement of public health
and safety measures, the implementation of broad preventive measures.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[VA VI! LBW VOL Va‘bl

:he development of scientific investigations aimed at preventing and lowering
disease rates and at ensuring that citizens have a long, active life.

There are grounds for agreeing with V.N. Danilenko on the inadvisability of the
legislatively established procedIre for granting unpaid leave for inability to

work due to domestic trauma (five days) and abortion (10 days). A'certificate
of illness should be the only document which provides evidence of temporary

inability to work and freedom from work.

At a time when the increase of labor resources is minimal, it is essential to
reduce the labor deficit primarily through improvements in the rationality and
utilization efficiency of existing resources. For this reason the 26th CPS“
Congress set as one of the main tasks the raising of labor use effigéency and
set out an entire complex of measures aimed at achieving this end.

Saving labor is the most important aspect of the rational use of labor; this

saving may take such forms as combining codes,

employees. reducing the number of personnel while incress
rating several machines simultaneously, establishing labor norms for

hourly employees, eliminating rushes and slow downs in production and others.

All these measures are be
to increase the output of every employee, having creat

and opportunities for doing the work of several employees.

Let us examine more concretely certain of the forms of labor sayings and the
effect of the law on that. The combining of trades provides significant labor
savings: however. it has not yet become widely used. One of the reasons for this
is the inadequacy of the legal regulation. The com
object of strict legal regulation. Before 1965 the combining of trades was
permitted only by the State Comittee onLabor and the All—Union Central
Trade-Union Council; subsequently this right was passed to the enterprises.
But even now, if an organization does not enjoy the rights 0
then introducing the procedure fa: combhhg trades requires permission from
the USSR ministry or the Council of Hinisters of the union republic.
substantial limitations on combining trades exist for engineering and tectnical
personnel and other white-collar employees. Under certain circumstances, com-
bining trades may result in unfavorable consequences for the employee, for
example. it may result in loss of the right to a preferential pension for old—age.5°

All these facts provide evidence of the need to improve the legal norms which
bine trades, and further, the 26th CPSU Congress

regulate the opportunity to com
pointed directly to the fact that one of the conditions for ensuring the growth

of employees wages would involve improVing skills and combining trades.61

Legal norms aimed at stimulating labor contribute to increasing labor effective-
ness and labor savings; they include supplements and bonuses on top of wage
rates and 803185 for. combining occupations by scientific and technical
personnel and other white-collar workers, for simltaneous operation of

more than one machine, for the performance of duties of absent workers and
other incentives for increasing the efficiency of human labor and saving it.

2).;

FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
Labor effectiveness depends largely on norming the work. Labor law is called
upon to consolidate the procedure for establishing and reviewing the mm
forlabor, which would be beneficial to the enterprises, the employees and the _
state. Although the existing legislation grants to the enterprise sufficiently
broad rights to revigw labor norms, these rights are still not utilized to

the fullest extent.‘5

Freeing manpower by increasing labor productivity is one powerful way to
optimize the use of labor resources. One of the legal methods for resolving
this problem is to put into law norms which stimlate the concern of enter-
prises and institutions in freeing manpower as a result of tectnical progress
and the scientific organization of labor.

It is still not unconson for enterprises to be interested in hidden surpluses
of manpower because inadequate labor intensity on the part of employees in a
number of sectors makes it possible to produce a redestribution of manpower
within the enterprise which is insupportable from the economic as well as the
legal point of view. This is one of the reasons for the slow dissemination
of the Shchekinskiy method of operating enterprises, which has proved its
effectiveness: 326 enterprises in the USSR which operate according to the
Shchekinskiy metInd have increased the volume of output which they an produce
while lowering the total number of industrial-production personnel.

Two factors will contribute to the broader application of this metmd: the
legal establistment of the conditions for its use and the clarification

of the functions of the appropriate ministries and departments in introducing it.
On April ll 1978 the State Coalittee on Labor and Social Questions of the

USSR Council of Ministers, USSR Gosplan, the USSR Ministry of Finance and the
All-Union Central Trade Union Council approved the Procedure for the Application
of theézhchekinskiy Method of Improving Labor Organization and Material Incen-
t1ves.

However, this document does not resolve many important issues. It is inevitable
that in addition to general problems, more specific problems will arise. For
example, who should ensure job placement for citizens who have been let go?
Clearly, the resolution of this problem should come under the jurisdiction

of the local organs for the use of labor resources, who should be given

the opportunity to learn in good time about the number of employees being

laid off, their education, vocational training, age, sex, conditions for
transfer to another job, etc.

As a result of the fact that laid-off workers, both blue- and white-collar, can-
not always be placed in jobs in the same field or requiring the same skills,

it is necessary to have legal guarantees they will be provided for materially
not only while they are being placed in jobs but also during a period of
necessary retraining. It is obvious that there lust be discussion of how to
organize a centralized system for the training and skill upgrading of laid-off

workers and to determine the authority of the various state organs in resolving
this problem.

25
ton onmm. use mm
nvn VEL'AUW we. mun

It is advisable to establish more concretely in the law incentives for laying

off employees. and specifically to stimlate the material interest of the labor
collective in freeing manpower by granting greater rights to directors of
enterprises and institutions. to the heads of assembly lines and department

heads in the distribution of obtained wage savings to other members of the collec-
tive. In order to limit the growth of the number of blue- and white-caller
workers employed in oblaets which are experiencing an acute labor shortage.

the oblispolkoms should be granted the right to establish by process of
elimination the maximal limits for the number of employees for enterprises
located within the oblast.

The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress are aimed at this kind of approach to
the problem. They say: ”In the European part of the USSR and in the Urals
the further development of industry should be accomplished mainly without
increasing the number of employees.“65

Reducing the number of people employed in agriculture would help to free
agricultural enterprises from functions which are not natural for them,
including the provision of material and technical supplies, the sale of
products, construction. re pit of equipment, etc. These functions would be
transferred to the appropriate sectors of the national economy (to industry,
transport, trade, etc.).

According to data from Gosplan USSR the number of blue- and white-collar workers

in total for the plans of enterprises exceeds the estimated by 1.5-2 million
people; this creates a formal shortage of manpower and increases labor turnover“
(one of the forms of nonrational migration). The need arises not only for more
careful planning. but possibly.for introducing legal responsibility for overstating
the number of blue- and white-collar workers.

‘The problem of increasing the effectiveness of labor resource utilization is
directly linked to the rationalization of the use of working time. Many enter-
prises and organizations still have large losses of working time due to
infractions of labor discipline, and the participation of blue- and white-collar
workers in meetings, study sessions, sports competitions during working hours.

Not the least of those factors which influence the violation of labor discipline
is drunkenness. About half of the absenteeism and other infractions of working
conditions at enterprises are the result of a- predilection for alcohol. According
to the data from a number of sociological investigations, labor productivity

at enterprises is reduced by 20-30 percent on Honday after holidays and

paydays. Total elimination of drmkenness would increase labor productivity

by about 10 percent.“ A 19 June 1972 ukase of the Presidium of the RSI-‘83

Supreme Soviet 'boncerning Measures to Increase the Struggle Against Drunkenness
and Alcoholism”68 and corresponding ukases of the presidiums of the Supreme
Soviets in the other union republics grant to enterprises broad rights to

combat this evil. However, by no means do the management and public organizations
in all places use to the fullest extent possible the means granted to them

for influencing people who abuse alcoholic beverages. We way to resolve

this issue is to improve the legal norms which regulate labor conditions. as

well as the ways in which they operate.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
legal acts, adopted by management and PM Rectory-plant or local comittc£7
are aimed at reducing personnel turnover: they include, for example, a collective

Other social factors also have an important role to play in keeping personnel
at their positions. For example, one of the reasons for personnel turnover,

conditions. or public facilities. this often results from delays in implementing
plans for the development of the infrastructure. The 25th CPSU Congress

27
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fulfillment of the plans for the construction of the production unit, without
giving the necessary attention to the plans for the development of the infra-
structure. Granting the right of veto to the ispolkoms will undoubtedly
play an important role under such circumstances in ensuring the fulfillment
of the plans for socio-cultural and residential-public service construction
in a given area. This proposal is completely in accordance with the idea
expressed in the constitutionnof strengthening the role of the local soviets
and of expanding their rights.

with regard to realization of this constitutional idea. support should be

given to a proposal. mentioned in the press. to the effect that the oblast

soviet should be granted the right to include in its budget up to 10 percent

of the above-plan profits from enterprises and economic organizations which

come under union and republic jurisdiction: these funds would be used to

expand the socio-cultural construction in the oblast, including the countryside.70
0n the one hand, this right will increase the interest of the local soviets

in increasing the thrift. effectiveness. the profitability and growth of profits
made by enterprises and organizations located within the area of the soviet,

and, on the other hand, it will expand the soviets' potential to develop the

infrastructure. which. in turn, will lower the outflow of migrants and ease the
labor shortage.

A proposal by NJ. Piskotin concerning expansion of the rights of localifies to
ensure the comprehensive development of the territory deserves support.

It is necessary to relieve the top of the need to consider issues which can
be resolved locally: this is particularly applicable to the problem of
preparing and distributing personnel.

The literature contains frequent references to the fact that personnel turnover
and non-rational migration can be the result of disproportionate, unbalanced
development of cities with an overwhelming number of "male" or "female" enter-
prises. cities of textile workers. for example. who are usually women. It is
clear that that there is now a need for legislation to make it mandatory for
ministries and departments which are building enterprises of this kind to
link their construction plans to the demographic situation in the republic

01‘ the rayon 01' ¢0n$tw¢ti°nn ensuring opportunities for the optimal use of '
both male and female labor.

0n 6 October 1980 Gosplan USSR approved the methodological directives on the
development of the system for the development and distribution of production

forces, which calls for the siting of production forces with consideration
for labor resources based on demograpﬂc calculations.72

The turnover of agricultural personnel can be explained by the effect of various

economic and legal f actors, which at first glance have no relation to this
phenomenon. As an examle one can cite the norms which establish the purchase

prices for various agricultural products. If the price for a crop which is
dominant in a given area is not high enough to compensate for the expenses of

production. this is inevitably reflectedin the incomes of farms and workers.
Under certain conditions a factor of this kind may become a sufficiently strong

stimulus for the migration of working people to other regions of the country
which are more favorable in this regard.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
The need to implement measures to keep personnel in their jobs and to lower
the turnover of manpower were noted in the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.73

The non-rational distribution of labor resources throughout the national
economy constitutes a serious problem. For example, a significant portion of
the young people in the republics of Central Asia and Trans-Caucasia remains
to work in agriculture, where there are even without these people reserves

of manpower, at the same time that the shortage of industrial workers in these
areas, especially in the republics of Central Asia, is eased due to newcomers
from regions which are experiencing inadequate labor resources.

Naturally;regional problems of labor resources, like other demographic problems,
must be solved in a differentiated manner. In particular, the easing of the
shortage of labor resources requires the elaboration of economic and legal
norms, which ensure an accelerated rate of socio-economic development for

those regions, which are short of working hands, in order to ensure that

the level of wages, the opportunities to increase income as well as improve
living conditions are no worse in the labor-short regions than they are now
but are rather higher than they are ilthe labor-surplus regions. For this
reason the 26th CPSU Congress decisions called for the introductiqg of
rayon coefficients for the wages of blue- and white-collar workers 3 with
regard to the Non Black Earth Zone they pointed to the need to build at an
accelerated pace residential buildings, car roads, socio-cultural and
public service facilities.75

Among the top-priority economic-legal measures which are capable of optimizing

the demographic situation in labor-short regions. one can name the intro-

duction of preferential tariffs for transportation, everyday and public

serivces, supplements for wages depending on length of service, and forced
construction of residential accomodation. The question of higher norms for

the proportion of profits to be allotted for socio-cultural measures and the material
incentive fund in given regions must be studied. In short, the greater the

shortage of labor there is in a region or union republic, the higher must be

the rate of socio-economic development incorporated into the program.

In this regard it is difficult to agree with the scientists from the Uzbek
SSR, who suggest that the accelerated rate of socio-economic development must
not only be retained in the labor-surplus regions of Central Asia, it must
even be increased. They see the only opportunity for employing the rapidly
growing population of Central Asia in programs to increase the number of jobs,
especially in the villages of Uzbekistan, where the size of the population is

growing with particular speed, and they conclude that "the rate of economic
growth in Uzbekistan will continue to be rapid in the future.”76

In this case the authors have digressed from the constitutional provision
that the USSR economy constitutes a single national economic complex, which
encompasses all the sectors‘ of production, including labor resources within

the country (Article 16). Spending enormous amounts of capital investment
on the creation of a large number of new jobs just to employ the labor-surplus

population of certain regions while there are labor shortages in other regions
is at the very least inadvisable.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1'0“ urn-1cm U58 UGLY

The reduction in the quantitative growth of labor resources can and must be
compensated for by an improvement in their quality, by a general increase in
the level of skills, and by improved preparation for socially useful work by
young people. Improving the level of education and skills not only colpensates
for a reduction in the quantitative increase in the population, it also eases
social migration, the transition from one social group to another. Further, it

should be kept in mind that in social migration, as in territorial migration,
it is possible to have non-rational trends, for example the transition of

an engineer or research officer into blue-collar writers because of inadequacies
in the norms which regulate payments for labor.

The fomdations for the legal regulations to increase the level of education and

skills of the population, to improve the quality of labor resources are estab-
lished in the norms of constitutional law. The constitution contains a number

of articles which provide for the development of general and specialited
education of the population. The importance of these articles is indisputable
as a result of the urgency of the qualitative aspects of the development of
labor resources, aspects which have grown under conditions of the scientific-

teclmical revolution. This applies primarily to the constitional provision for
growth in the level of the general and vocational education of the population.

The constitution establishes the right of citizens to receive an education:

this is ensured by free tuition for all types of education including higher
education, as well as by the inplementation of universal, compulsory educatiOn

at the secondary level for young people, and by the broad development of
vocational-technical, specialized secondary and higher education on the basis

of an organic link between instruction and life or production. by the development of
correspondence and night-school education . by the granting of state stipends

and benefits to students; by free school textbooks, by the opportunity to receive
school instruction in one's native language and by the establith of the
conditions for self education (Article 105).

If by the term education we understand not only systematic instruction, oriented
toward mastering a certain body of knowledge, but also the upbringing of members
of society, the acquisition by them of certain skills, habits and norms of
behavior, then it should be aclmowledged that not only Article 105, but other
articles of the Constitution as well, have a direct relation to the right of
citizens to receive an education. For example, Article 100, which declares

the right of citizens to labor, indicates that this right is ensured by free
vocational education, by measures to raise labor skills and instruction

for new specialists, by the development of a system of vocational orientation.
Article 1.6 declares the right of citizens to enjoy the achievements of culture,
and emphasizes that this right is ensured by universal access to the treasures
of domestic and world culture which are held by the state and social funds: by
the development of cultural-educational institutions, television and radio,

book publishing and the periodic press, by the network of free libraries, by
the expansion of cultural exchanges with foreign countries.

The constitution guarantees to citizens the freedom of scientific, tectnical
and artistic creation; this is ensured by the widespread development of
scientific research and work to invent and improve new production methods,

)0

son MICIAL USE ONLY
as well as the development of literature and art (Article 67). These articles
testify to the constitutional guarantees of free and comprehensive spiritual
and intellectual development of the individual and people as a whole.

In addition to the constitution, the legal norms concerning educatiOn, both
general as well as vocational, are contained in legislation conerning public
education and in labor legislation. For example, Article 2 of the Fundamental
Legislation Concerning Labor declares the right of blue- and white-collar
workers to free vocational training and and skill upgrading; articles 84 and
85 call for a broad system of benefits for employed students; this contributes
to a great savings in taxman labor; articles 186-200 of the Labor Code of the
RSI-‘31! provide blue- and white-collar workers with the conditions to obtain
theoretical, specialized economic knowledge and knowledge of other types.

ﬁery year the ranks of the deployed population are increased by people

with an ever higher level of education. In 1959, the average worker had
attended six years of school, while in 1970 this indicator had increased to

8.4 years, and in a number of industrial sectors this indicator was approaching
10 years among the workers in certain some important fields.78

In his report to the 26th CPSU Congress L.I. Brezhnev emphasized that at present
three-fourths of the workers have a secondary (complete or incomplete) or

higher education, and that there has been significant impsovement in the vocational
training 0-: the younger generation of the working class.

At the present time a good system has developed for the training and upgrading of
the skills of personnel employed at many industrial enterprises, in construction
and agriculture. Schools have been established to teach advanced work methods,
and they mroll about 3 percent of the total number of industrial workers: a
significant role is also played by courses toteach workers allied trades.

The system of vocational instruction for personnel is of great interest;

it opens up for young people the prospects of growth, and it contributes to

the stabilization of personnel.

With the introduction of compulsory 10-year education the role of the school
in the labor upbringing of young people has increased. The 22 December 1977
decree of the CC CPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers ”Concerning Further
Improvement in the Instruction and Upbringing of Pupils in General Education
Schools and Their Preparation for Hork”3° points out the need for a decisive

turn around by the secondary school toward labor upbringing and education, to
the formation of an informed attitude toward the choice of a vocation by

young people and toward the mastery ofwork skills in the chosen field of work.
The strengthening of programs to train and orient young people vocationally
while they are still in school, as stipulated by this decree, has great
significance inasmch as the overwhelming majority of school graduates

go to work.

The proposal of SJ. Ivanov should meet with agreement; he refers to the need
to improve certain legal norms, which regulate the vocational training and
retraining of personnel. According to existing legislation, for example,

31

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
workers who have finished production training, including those at evening
vocational and teclnical schools. and who have attained the necessary skill level
are offered work in accordance with the qualification obtained and the rank
accorded (See 186 of the RSI-‘83 Labor Code). But for a worker who has completed
higher education or specialized secondary education while working. the
qualificationwhich was obtained can only be taken into account for advancement
within the service (Article 83 of the Fundamentals of Legislation Concerning
Labor). and this can hardly be justified.

Speeding up the process of raising the educational level of the population
presupposes a need to improve the structure of the training for specialists
by bringing this training more in line with the persomel needs of the
national economy and the region (in cases where the training is not conducted
in Russian). In particular, the literature contains references to the

fact that Soviet engineers. the total number of which is more than three-fold
greater than the nunber in the USA (while the output of engineers is five-
fold greater than in the USA)”. spend 30 to 60 percent of their working time
on duties which do not require higher or sometimes even secondary education.”
As a result, the time and resources spent on training engineers do not entirely
justify themselves. There is a similar situation with highly qualified
specialists in other fields. However, sometimes engineering functions are
brought dam to a level at which the people dealing with them do not have
engineering or .any special ‘ training at all, and this substantially holds
back the development of technical progress. Both are typical instances of
non-rational social migration. This takes place frequently because there

are many unresolved problems in wage and salary issues.

while there is a shortage of labor resources,it is not rational to spend the
resources and extended time period on training an engineer and then use him
as a technician or worker. The legal norms which regulate the use of highly-
qualified specialists must be improved by defining more clearly the conditions
under which highly-qualified specialists must perform work in all cases which
is appropriate to their education. The specialist must not only possess the
knowledge. but must apply it.* The law must establish the criteria for the
limits to be observed in applying the labor of employees in a given profession
depending on the level of their training. It is essential to increase the
legal responsibility of the managementof enterprises, institutions and
organizations for the utilization of persomel inaccordance with their
education.

Now. when illiteracy has been elimiated in our country and menmtory complete
secondary education has been introduced, the number of specialists with higher
education per capita is an important indicator of the qualitative development

of the population in the USSR and in its constituent republics. In 1970

the number of persons with higher education increased (in comparison with 1939)
5.3-fold in the USSR, including (“9-fold in the RSPSR, 5-fold in the Ukrainian 531!
F———-

As “.1. Skarzhinskiy writes: "A person who is trained as an engineer but does not
perform the duties of an engineer. inevitably loses his skills; research has
established that every year he loses approximately 10 X of his skills." See
Skarzhinksiy. u. ."Kvalifikataiya 1 ma inzheneraz' p. 80.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.2-fold in the Turkmenian ssn. 9-fold in the Uzbek $88. 9.7-fold in the
1.th ssn, and ll.7-fold in the Kirghiz :33.“ If the union republics are
arranged on a descending scale of the number of persons with a higher
education among the urban population. the picture will be as follows:

1970 for every 1,000 persons above the age of ten with higher education: 5

Republic Urban Rural
Georgian $81! 121 27
Armenian $83 89 16
Azerbaijan SS]! 70 ll.
Belorussian SS]! 66 12
holdavian SR 66 ll
Latvian SSR 65 ll:
Estonian $53 63 10
Ukrainian SS}! 63 . ll
Uzbek $58 62 18
Lithuanian SSR 61 8
RSFSR 61 14
Kirghiz $83 58 19
Kazakh SS? 51 17
Taj 1|: ssn 51 la
Turkmen $83 48 17

The RS SR. which in prerevolutionary times had one of the highest levels of
education, now has one of the lowest rates despite the fact that it has within
its area the USSR Academy of Sciences. numerous scientific-research institutes
of national significance, as well as WZ's which train specialists with
higher education for all the union republics. It is curious that the 1970
all -union census data show that the proportion of city dwellers over 60

who had higher education is high in the RSPSRt only the Georgian'and Armenian
republics exceeded the level of the RSPSR for this indicator. with each
younger generation the RSI-‘31! is giving way to a larger number of republics,
and it is in last place for the proportion of young people in the 20-29

year age bracket who have higher education, leaving behind by an insignificant
margin only the Ukrainian and Kirghiz republics.86 According to data from
the 1979 all-union census, the number of people with secondary or higher

education per capita of the employed population is lower than the union-wide
indicator in the RSFSR, the Baltic republics. the Belorussian and the Moldavian

republics, while the rewblics of TransCaucasia and Central Asia are above
the national indicator. The level of higher education is higher for the
indigenous population than it is for the non-indigenous.

The figures cited above provide evidence of the effectiveness of the benefits
and privileges established by the state and by the law to ensure a rapid rate
of socio-cultural development in previously backward peoples. But at the
same time they speak of the need which exists under present conditions to
observe very strictly the constitutional principle of equal rights of citizens
among all spheres of economic, social. political and cultural life,
regardless of nationality, as well as the oonsdmdalal provision that a

union republic is the state of all the nationalities and etmic groups that

33
' FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
populate it and that the USSR enbodies the unity of the entire Soviet people,
and brings together all the nationalities and ethnic groups for the joint
building of co-unisan. It is important to avoid the threat of the creation of a
new inequality between nationalities.

The territorial distribution among the regions and union republics of specialists
with higher education is not adequate to the developer“ requirements of

the econonic regions. Regions-such as the Hestern Siberia

and Eastern Siberia, which are important from the viewpoint of economic
potsntial,have proved to be provided with specialists possessing higher
education at a rate which is one-half that of the l‘ranacaucasian econonic

rayon .

A change in certain legal norns which regulate relations in tin sphere of public
education would contribute to the optimization of migratory currents and to

the note rational use of labor resources. In particular, attention has been
devoted frequently to the fact that the use of surplus labor fron the villages
of Central Asia is conlicated by the language barrier. the inadequate

knowledge of the Russian language. The Foundations of Legislation of the

USSR. and the union republics concerning public education. which was adopted

in 1973, contains Article 20, entitled "Language of Instruction.” which says:
"Pupils in the general education school are .' granted the opportunity to
receive instruction in their native language or in the language of another
people of the U$R. Parents or people substituting for then, have the right

to choose for the children according to their wishes a school with the cor-
responding language of instruction. In addition to the language of instruction.
909118. if t5; desire (aphasia sine-4.1..) may study the language of another
USSR people. The last part of this article (the previous legislation did

not have this) also applies to the Russian language, which the law suggests

may be studied but does not have to be. depending on the desire of the pupil.

A paradoxical situation is createdn a pupil does not receive a school leaving
certificate if he has not mastered to the necessary degree English. German or
another foreign language. because the smdy of a foreign language is mandatory
but the study of Russian is not nandatory. although it is considered conpulsory
in the schools ‘of a number of foreign countries.

‘mo different rights have obviously been nixed up heren the right of citizens
to have their children instructed in their native language—that is indisputable,
and the right to determine a progran of instruction, whether a given subject
shall be conulsory or optional. This right belongs to the state and not to
individual citizens. In contrast to the languages of the other peoples of the
0881; the Russian language has broader social functions. It is not only the
language of a nationality, but it is still the language of communication

between nationalities as well as an international language (one of the

official on languages. the languue of can. etc.)

Given the shortage of labor resources and the non-rational nature of a significant
portion of the territorial and social nigration. it has become obvious that
there is a need to strengthen the use of planning in resolving problems related

31:
ton mum. use out!
labor resources, including issues of territorial and industrial allocation of
labor. A great deal of attention was devoted to this issue at the All-Union
Scientific and Practical Conference on Labor Resources, organized in 1978 by
the USSR State Committee on Labor and the 0533 Academy of Scimces.”

Strengthening the use of planning principles in the management of labor resources
will provide a large benefit in combination with measures to monitor the use

of manpower. The monitoring functions were formerly carried out by labor

organs, but they amotmted, as a rule, to: episodic checks on individual

issues, and they were carried out by various organs without the necessary
coordination.

At present the monitoring functions have been entrusted to the USSR State
Comittee on Labor and Social Questions, the republic collittees on labor and
their local organs; the latter have been given responsibility for finding reserves
within production units, industries and the territory under their jurisdiction

to increase the effectiveness of manpower utilization, as well as to develop
proposals to put them into practice.

The organizationalprinciples. the jurisdiction and the function of the monitoring
haw.- been defined by the Temporary Regulation Concerning State monitoring of
the Use of Manpowegb which was approved by the State Collittee on Labor on

12 September 1978. According to the regulation, the labor organs check

on the activity of enterprises. organizations, ministries and agencies with
regard to the rational use of labor resources, the correspondence between

the number of blue- and white-collar workers and the number specified by the
plan, as well as the norms. The organs also check on the plans for social
development of the collectives, also on how the labor of women, pensioners and
young people is being utilized and on which measures are being taken to
reduce personnel turnover and the stabilization of labor collectives.

Thus the development of labor resources and their extent are influenced by

the norms which come from the most varied types of legislation: from labor and
kolkhoz legislation, from legislation concerning health care. pensions and

other factors. The effect of these norms is interlocking .and at times it

may have a. secondary result which is not always desirable. For example, the
legal norms which are aimed at improving the quality of labor resources, and

the level of their education and skills, can lead to a reduction in the working
age. Bringing women into public production on a broad scale, which is ensured by
the constitutional principle of the equal right of men and women to work

and its remuneration, meets social interests and contributes to the increase

in the extent of of available manpower, but it can influence the birthrate

and the level of future labor resources. For this reason, when improving legal
norms which influence the quantity or quality of labor resources, it is essential
to take into account both their direct effect and their indirect---sometimes
negative influence--keeping in mind not only the imediate goals and results, but
also the possible future consequences. At the present stage the process of
improving legislation which one way or another influences the development of

the national's economy, including its labor resources, requires ever broader
cooperation among legal experts and economists.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Faults", 1981

8543
6803 8164/1034 BUD

35
roe orncm. use own