FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10208
23 December 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 741/80

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English.language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/102l

23 Decembex

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 71/81)

Coumrs

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLNIGAL

Inside Story of Visit by PID'I! 'Arafat Evaluated
(Sm Baum, 22 wt 81) I...........'I........0.0.0.0..

Foreign Ministry Views Soviet Officiale' Visits
(MI W, 23 nov 81) 0......IO...OOOOOIOOOIOOIOOOOOOO

Suzuki Discusses Trade Friction: Hith Economists
(JIJI, 25 Nov 81) 0.0.0.0...0.00.00.00.00...OOOCOOQOOOOOOOC

'HAINICHI' Scores Suzuki Press Conference Rourke
(Editorial; WICHI m m, 3 m 81) eeeoeeoeooeeoeoo

'YGIIURI' Views Tasks for New Suzuki Cabinet
(Editor1813m DAILY Imm, 3 w 81) 0.0000000000000000

'ASAHI' on 'Forgotten' Pacific Basin Concept
(3311360 H014; ASAHI mu m, 3 M 81) aeoooeeooeeoeee

MILITARY

Defense mite Paper, Pentagon Paper Reviewed
(TOKYO mun, 30 Sep 81,. HAINICHI sum, 7 Oct 81) ....

Defense Agency's View
Defense mite Paper Criticized

Tank Reserve Reinfomensnte Planned for can?
(THE my Im, an NOV 81) .OOOOOOCOOOCOI.IOOIDOOOOOOO.

300310116
Japan To Establish Gold market in March 1982
(NIHW Kmxo m, 21 80p 81) oeeeeoooeoneeeeeeeeeeeeeee

- I - [III {ASIA - 111

me new" new MIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Concern Expressed Over U.S. Commications Import Restrictions
(“Ina mm mu", 9 Nov 81) oooceoteeeeeev'eooeeeoeeoeeo

U.S. Seeks Liberalization of Market
(“mm Elm mm’ 12 NOV 81) .OCIOOOQOIIOOOOOOOOOOOICOOO

Friction With U.S. Over Technology Expands
(mm sum, 13 Nov 81) .OOOOOOOOCIOIOOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOOO

EPA Clarifies Policy on Correction of Trade Imbalance
(“Iﬂm mm m, Buoy 81) 00......OOO‘OOOIOCCOOCO'OOO.

ADIOC Notifies Japanese on Delaying Cracking Plan
(JAP‘N mmc Jmn, 1 M 81) 0.0.0.000...OQOO‘IOIOIIIOO

SCIENCE AND TECHNO!!!”

OECD Opposes Subsidies to High Technology Projects
(Mic Tateiva; JAPAN 800110410 JOURNAL, 1 Dec 81) ...........

NTT Proposes Ways It Can Become Private Enterprise
(JAPAN ECONMC elm“, 1 me 81) DIG...0.000000000000000...

Japan National Oil Corp. Eyes Underground Stockpiling of Crude
(JAPAN F'cmmIc Jmn, 1 M 81) 0....OOOOOOOOOIQIOOOOOQOOO

French Finn Asks for Robot License of Fugitsu Fanuc
(JAPAN ECONGHC JOURNAL, 1 Dec 81

0.000006...00.00.000.00...

Nissan USA To Install 210 Robots at Pickup Factory
(JAPA’. Ecmmc Jmu, 1 he 81) 00......009.000.000.000...

Boeing Appears Likely To Be Selected as Japanese Partner in Plans
Project
(JAPAN mmIc JOURNAL, 1 D00 81) coast...eoeseaeeaeeeeeeeoe

Japan Wants Pratt & witney To Join En e Plan with UK
(JAPAN Econmc Jm“, 1M 1) 0.00.00...DIOIOIIOOOCOOOI.

JAEI To Supply U.S. Firms With Flight Control Equipment
(JAPAIV ECONMC Jam“, 1 we 81) .O...OOIOOOOOOCOOIOOOOOOOC

Semiconductor Equipment Makers Cutting Into American Share
(JAPAN ECONCHIC JOURNAL, 1 Dec 81) ..........................

Toshiba Envisages Advancing Into CAD Equipnent Market
(JAPAN scomuc JOURNAL, 1 Dec 81) ..........................

-b-

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EOLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAI.

INSIDE STORY OF VISIT BY PLO'S 'ARAPAT EVALUATED
Tokyo SHL'KAN BUNSHUN in Japanese 22 Oct 81 pp 32-36

[Text] Invite (main-an 'Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO),
a representative of the Arab radical faction, and then after a proper interval,
ask President al-Sadat. a moderate, to come to Japan. Sole say that Foreign
\unister oonoda was thinking of mediating between the two, sonething even the
United States could not do. however, al-Sadat was assassinated. The inatient
:unistry of Foreign Affairs made strenuous efforts to have 'Arafat's visit to
Japan cancelled in one way or another. But, he did coee....

The 21 rat miscalculntion by Chairman 'Arafat of the P10, who one to Japan on
12 October, was the welcone recqtion sponsored by the Japan-Palestine Friendship
Diet Members League.

"Although the host Japan-Palestine Friendship Diet Members League is a nonpartisan
organization with 95 menbers, the number of attendees that day was about 25.
According to advmce responses, over 50 embers were supposed to attend. In
addition, the absence of newspaper executives and business leaders was conspicuous"
(a journalist who covered the event). -

-\t a reception held in the Hotel New Otani, approximately 230 people besieged

the place, including Liberal Democratic Party Secretary-General Yoshio Sakurauchi,
Minister of the Administrative Management Agency Yasuhiro Nakasone, Chairman

of the Socialist Party Kazuo Asukata, Kmei Party Secretary-General Junya Yano,
and Japan Chnber of Connerce and Industry President Shigeo ngano. However,
because of the complicated interpreting process in which Arabic was first inter-
;eten into English, and English was then interpreted into Japanese or for acne
other reason, the reception proceeded without caning to a climax. To Mr 'Arafat,
the first PLO chairman invited to an advanced country, it was really a bitter
:.tart.

"riginally, Chairman 'Arafat's visit to Japan was supposed to becoee the first
top in "brilliant Japanese diplomacy" for both Prime Minister Suzuki and Foreign
‘.inister Sonoda. Naturally. it would have been a medal in terms of political
kill for the distinguished nembera of the sponsoring Japan-Palestine Friendship
bin-t Members League. They were expected to attend the reception in large nunbera.
A ~.c-n'espondent assigned to the Foreign Ministry said:

~

i
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"This 'Arafat visit to Japan, President al-Sadat's visit to Japan scheduled for
November, and a meeting with Crown Prince Fahd of Saudi Arabia at the North-
South Sun-sit in Mexico-~if Japan had succeeded in these three inportant meetings,
Japan's Middle Eastern policy would have drawn worldwide attention, freed itself
from a foreign policy of following in the footsteps of the United States, and,
if circumstances were favorable, taken the initiative in Middle Eastern
diploeacy....1t was that grand a plan."

In other words, it was a grand scheae that would have Japan introduce itself to
both the PLO, an Arab radical, and Egypt, an Arab moderate, as a nediator working
for peace in the Middle East. Japan would then have access to Saudi Arabia, which
has the support of most Arab states. It would have been a superb chance to develop
an "unidirectional peace diplonacy" that neither the United States, the USSR,

nor European countries could imitate and to remove the disgrace of having "no
diplomatic sense."

However, with President al-Sadat's death, Zenko's grand schene sadly collapsed.
Moreover, the situation turned around completely and he faund himself in a pinch.

"If Ai-Sadat could not cone, the balance would be destroyed, giving the world the
impression that Japan was one-sidedly supporting the PLO. Even if that had not
been so. the Reagan administration, which supports Israel. had been on the alert
concerning Japan's invitation to the PLO. At the nesting held between then Foreign
Minister Masayoshi Ito and Secretary of State Baig after 'Arafat's visit to Japan
became def inite, whenever the subject of conversation touched on the PLO, Ma'ig
opnely made a sry face" (the previously quoted correspondent).

Furthermore, because 'Arafat made a speech indicating that he "welcased Al-Sadat's
death," while in Beijing just prior to his visit to Japan. Foreign Ministry
officials feared tint it would stir up popular opposition. Thus, Mr 'Arsfat

was reduced to being a guest who was uninvited in the true sense by a goddess

of happiness. To Prime Minister Suzuki, it was as if a large hole had opened in
a large spread wrapping cloth.

Schening to Tie 'Arafat's Tongue

In fact, when high goverment officials received reports on "President al-Sadat's
death," it is said they were so confused as to unite other people feel sorry for
them.

"On the next morning, beginning with Foreign Minister Sonoda, all Foreign Ministry
high officials started saying: 'Since a big change is going to take place in

the Middle East, the PLO will not cone.‘ This was, you know, only wishful thinking
that 'it would be better if he did not cause."

Someone suggested calling the Japanese ﬁsbassy in Beijing and having the cheesy
contact 'Arafat. However, this idea was abandoned, since it was too swlnaard to
refuse his visit for such a reason after Japan had once invited him" (a corres-
pondent assigned to the Foreign Ministry).

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Meanwhile, whom Japan should send to President al-Sadat's funeral was also
another problem that troubled Zenko.

"After learning that the United States was going to send three former presidents-
Carter, Nixon, and Ford--the high govermaent officials thought Japan should also
send former prime ministers. So, the prime minister himself called former prime
ministers on the telephone.

liowever, Taken Pukuda refused, since he was waiting to visit China in addition

to having a slight cold. Takeo Niki declined politely. With no other alternative.
it was decided to send Foreign Hinistsr Sonoda'.’ (a correspondent assigned to the
prime minister's official residence).

There were others who requested to be sent to the funeral. Former Minister of
International Trade md Industry Masai Eeaki directly called the prime minister

on the telephone while on an overseas tour and won a position as a special envoy
of the Japanese Goverment.

of course, the pressure from below within the Liberal Dnocratic Party was heavy.
At the meeting of Policy Materials Study Association held on the 9th, approxi-
mately 70 Diet members made a statement to the effect that they "opposed the
'Arafat visit to Japan." The situation was such that there was a movement that
volunteers in the association asked the leaders of the Liberal Democratic Party
"not to meet with 'Arafat."

For these reasons and others, they treated the PhD chairman who came to Japan
with kid gloves.

When the chartered airplane arrived at Baneda Airport, Hr Toshio Kimura inediately
rushed into the airplane, and thereafter he stayed very close to 'Arafat.

Mr Kimura rods with him in a car from Baneda Airport to the hotel. According

to Mr Kimura, the conversation between the two began with a seemingly touching
exchange: "At last you have made the historic first step in Tokyo," and in
response, "I have been able to come to the most friendly of the Western countries."
In truth, however. the only thing whispered on the streets has been the view that
’Arsfat's tongue was tied.

"For high government officials. it would be annoying if 'Arafat said 'Al-Sadat's
death was good' or some such thing. Therefore. they may have sent Hr Kimra

:u persuade 'Arafat not to say such a thing before he could meet anybody.

(Mr Kinura denies this)" (a correspondent assigned to the prime minister's
official residence).

‘Arafat was not formally invited by the Japanese Goverment; instead, he was
invited by the Japan-Palestine Friendship Diet Mothers League. 80, he was a
quasi-official guest.

For Lhis reason, it is said that Mr Kimura, chairman of the Japan-Palestine Friend-
b'lip Diet Members League. was asked to attend even the meeting between Prime
t'i-uecer Suzuki and 'Arafat.

1
FOR OPT-10“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Essentially, the Japan-Palestine Friendship Diet Members League is a private
organization. Since the meeting of the prime minister and foreign minister with
'Arafst was official in nature, there was no reason for Mr Kimurs to attend.

Perhaps. the prime minister intended to shirk his responsibility by means of h-s
usual singsong manner of reading a note. Then, no matter what was said there-
after. he intended to impose further responsibility on Mr Kimura, who had invited
'Arafat" (a correspondent assigned to the prime minister's official residence).

It is as if we can see before us how dismayed Mr Suzuki and Mr Sonoda were to
unexpectedly find themselves handed a hot potato.

There are many people who say this failure was not solely due to Al-Sedat's death.
An unidentified diplomatic critic remarked:

"Basically, diplomacy is thought of as something that can cope with a fluid
situation. If the whole plan collapses with the change of one factor. it is mere
imagination and not diplomatic policy. Japanese diplomatic capabilities are not
so great as to put together a grand scheme and to deal with situations fluidly

to attain a goal. Can't a diplomatic plan based on failure to know one's place
be a source of the tragedy, as in the case before world War II?"

we do not lack episodes showing that with the capabilities of the Japanese Foreign
Ministry it is hardly possible for Japan to take an initiative in Middle Eastern
diplomacy. A good example is the Al-Sadat shooting incident.

It was 8 pm on 6 October (Japan time) when the first news that ”Al-Sadat was shot”
reached Japan by cable. At that time, the Japanese foreign Ministry still had
not received any information. Moreover, it could not get jold of the Japanese
Embassy in Cairo.

The Foreign Ministry, impatient as might be expected, tried to cell the Japanese
Embassy in Cairo many times and finally got a first report at 10 pm. It was the
following optimistic information. "As far as Ambassador Toshio Yamazaki, who

was also attending the parade, could see from approximately 30 meters away, it
appears that President al-Sedat suffered a scratch on his hand." "Ambassador
Yamazaki's chauffeur says he new President sl-Sadet get into a helicopter under
his own power." "High government officials are all saying there is no fear of his
death. "

"Information Gathering" That Depends on the United States

From around nidnight all three major American television networks began reporting
"Al-Sadst's death." They reported a cable from Tel Aviv saying that "three

bullets hit Al-Sadat on one side." In spite of all this. a telephone call from

the Japanese Embassy in Cairo at 12:30 am reported as follows: "Ambassador to
Egypt Yamazaki directly called u.s. Ambassador to Egypt Murphy on the telephone.
Ambassador Murphy said that he 'had not yet confirmed the report on Mr sl—Sadat'e
death'." "As an embassy, we called the office of the Egyptian president's official
residence for confirmation. Their answer was that he was still under treatment."
Only this kind of altogether unspeakable report came from the Japanese Embassy

in Cairo.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’n the end, the Japanese Government cauld not confirm the report of Al-Sadat's
death until the official announcement was made by the Egyptian Government on
the radio. It was 4:30 am when the Japanese Government issued Prime Minister
Suzuki's official statement.

"I felt acutely how poor the information-gathering capability of the Japanese
*oreign Ministry was. Fundamental defects of the Poreign Ministry were revealed,
such as the tendency of Japanese embassies abroad to depend on v.5. embassies in
the host country for information, the inability of Japanese embassies to acquire
unportant information from key government personnel of the host country, and so
forth. If the Japanese ambassador happened to be only 30 meters away from the
site where the shooting occurred, he should have run over there and confirmed the
safety of Mr al-Sadat. If a reporter had behaved in the same manner as the
ambassador, he would have been fired. It proves that the ambassador does not
consider information-gathering his important responsibility" (the previously
quoted reporter).

ﬁnong 3,500 employees of the Foreign Ministry, only 63, in the upper and inter-
undiate levels combined, have received Arabic-language training. Even including
those now in training, they still number only 58. In this situation, it is hardly
possible to make a good analysis of the Middle East situation.

There is an earlier example. In 1977, when then Japanese Ambassador to Iran
Ikawa returned to Japan and reported to than Prime Minister Pukuda that "the
Pahlevi regime is secure, because I went there and investigated." Only 3 months
later, the Pahlavi regime collapsed. It can be said that the Foreign Ministry's
information and analysis capability concerning Middle Eastern affairs is not much
different from that of the time when the shah fell.

Judgments made on the basis of a low capability for information analysis naturally
contain many mistakes. In regard to the grand scheme of the present, some say
that the perception was fundamentally wrong. Mr Koji Saishu (Tokyo Arabian
Consultants) says: "First of all, the perception that Al-Sadat's government was
secure was optimistic.”

"On 30 September this year, a party coememorating the inaugural issue of ARABIA,
a journal specializing in Middle Eastern affairs, was held in London. At that
party, experts on the Middle East, including Oil Minister Yemeni (Saudi Arabia)
:cre drawn into discussion on 'which government in the Middle East is the most

:;;.' Number one was Iraq. Egypt was not even mentioned in the discussion.
43, I asked about Egypt. The answer was 'Egypt is beyond question. we would
not be surprised if Al- Sadat falls tomorrow.’ Due to the strains of economic
policy, the gap between the rich and the poor has widened. Conditions may be just
Iike the night before the 26 February incident. It would be no surprise to us
.i Al-Sadat was assassinated any day. I could not help but think it was crazy
LC entrust the key word in Middle Eastern policy to such a person."

-u: the last year, information on plots to assassinate A1~Sadat have been reported

-nvc a week. As a matter of fact, the U.S. CIA is said to have had information
0- “n15 assassination plan 26 hours before the assassination took place.

5
roe omcm. use onu
FOR OFFKHAI.USElDNLY

If Al-Sadat Had Not Been Assassinated?

Furthermore, there is even the opinion that if Al-Sadat had not been assassinated
and had visited Japan safely, the result would have been the same.

"In November 1977 Al-Sadat's historic visit to Jerusalem took place.

Uh:n he arrived at Tel Aviv airport. we saw a touching scene in which diplomats
from various countries stationed in Israel came to offer greetings, hugged him

in an exaggerated manner, and held conversations with him. However, when Al-Sadat
came in front of the Japanese aabaseador to Israel, he shook hands briefly for
form's sake and immediately proceeded to the next diplomat. In other words,
Al-Sadat did not take Japan into political consideration at all 3 years ago.

It seems improbable that Al-Sadat would listen to Japanese opinions on peace

in the Middle East 3 years later merely because he was invited to Japan. President
al-Sadat's conception of Japan was not much more than that of a country which had
given Egypt economic aid. At any rate, since the Egyptians received 160 billion
yen in credits from Japan, they must be grateful to Japan. However, it is only
the economic aspect" (a correspondent stationed in Cairo).

The optimistic perception applies not only to the case concerning Egypt but also
to the case concerning the PLO. The following is a comment by an expert on the
Arab situation.

”The present PLO does not have as high an international reputation as it had
some time before. At the time of the birth of the Khomeyni government in Iran,
various European countries approached the PLO because the PLO was said to have
a channel to Iran. For that reason, the PLO wee bullish concerningra Japanese
invitation and took the attitude that it would not accept an invitation unless
it was an official in vitation from the government.

However, as a result of the Iran-Iraq war, it was revealed that the PLO did not
possess any arbitration capability. Moreover, the only nation which sponsors
the PLO is Syria. Therefore, many countries hold back on approaches to the PLO.
Because Japan suddenly offered its hand under such circumstances, 'Arafat was
naturally pleased. In the present condition of the PLO, he would have accepted

the invitation even without a nesting with the prime minister."

We get the strong impression that, when it became an actuality, Suzuki's new Middle
Eastern policy was made use of by other countries at will.

One Arab living in Japan said the following:

"The difference between Japanese and Arab diplomacy is like the difference between
a child and an adult. The Arabs have been watching the rise and fall of nations
for ages. Moreover, they have long colonial experience. Their warineas towerd
other countries and other people is entirely different from that of the Japanese."

At the time of the 'Arafat visit to Japan. the PLO requested a so-cslled "voluntary
guard."

6
FOR‘OFFKJAI.UBE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since they felt uneasy depending on the police of another country for his security.
they asked us to allow them to guard 'Arafat with the PLO's machineguns and
automatic rifles. It was no laughing matter. If someone were to bring a rifle
into the Diet when he not the prime minister, it would cause trouble. Conse-
quently, instead of acceding to their request, the result was a large guard force
of 17,000 policemen and the renting of the whole floor on which 'Arafet's room
was located and the rooms above and below his room" (a police officer who was
involved).

"Actual State" of the Japan-Palestine Friendship Diet Members League

In comparison, our elite were totally innocent. An unidentified correspondent
in the Middle East revealed the inside story of the invitation to 'Arafat.

"Generally speaking, although they call their group the Japan-Palestine Friendship
Diet Members League. most of the members do not understand the Palestinian issue.
They are grendstanaers. Last December, the delegates of the Japan-Palestine
Friendship Diet Members League visited D-ascue in order to invite 'Arefat to
visit Japan. lhe members of the delegation only talked about their own party and
would not listen to the P11). They had decided to invite 'Arafat, but could not
accomplish anything talking as a group. Therefore, a secret meeting begween
[oshio Kimura, the group leader, and 'Arefet was arranged. However, Diet member
Akira Kuroyanagi of the Konei Party stubbornly began to insist he would return to
Japan on the next day's flight if he could not participate in the secret meeting.
Lower house member Teteu Dada of the Socialist Party butted in only for the
photography session with 'Arafat. So it went, and I was fed up with such behavior."

By the way, the chief members of the Japan-Palestine Friendship Diet Members
League are: chairman, Toshio Kimra; counsellor, 'l'okuma Utsunomiya; vice
chairmen, Michiyuki Iwado and ‘l'etsu Dede; office director, Yoshiko Otaka. Other
m-bers include Akira Kuroyanagi, Koji Rakizawa, Yutaka Hate, Yukio Aoshim,
Chinatsu Nakayema, Bideo Den, Biaaburo Maejime (Rita Yashiro).. ..

As for these distinguished people, let's tell them that merely inviting 'Arafst
to Japan does not please the Arabs at all.

An Arab journalist stationed in Japan, Mr Rode Khan Yusufzai [phonetic] (an Arab
news correspondent) says:

"The Japanese may think they gave a warm reception to the PLO, but it does not
look that way to the Arabs.

"Wasn't it impolite to have arranged 'Arafat's meeting with Prime Minister Suzuki
in the Diet? In spite of the fact that he was a guest invited by Japan, to meet
him in the Diet instead of the prime ministers official residence was like saying
'you are not a formal guest,’ and meeting him in front of the toilet rather than
"he guest room.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"In Arabic there is a saying: 'It is better not to epeak 111 of the dead.‘
'Arafat also knows that much etiquette. but Japanese officials were worried about
him saying something wrong. I cannot help but think that the Japanese do not
understand the Arabs. Aren't the Japanese the polite people who meet any guest
in the guest roan?"

The Japanese lack of diplomatic sense is not likely to be corrected soon.
COPYRIGHT: Shaken Bunahun 1981

9896
CSO: 4105/ 22

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

FOREIGN mslsm vrsws sovm' onmms' vrsrrs
omoszs Tokyo Amt sum in Japanese 23 Nov 31 Homing mm 1) 2 ~

[Text] Government-level dialogues between Japan and the Soviet Union, which began
in September with a foreign ministers conference, were brought to a standstill as a
result of the cancellation of the Soviet education minister's scheduled visit to
Japan in October. However, beginning this week, high-ranking Soviet officials are
due to arrive in Japan at the invitation of the J8? and other nongovernnental organ-
izations. The Japanese Foreign Ministry thinks that the purpose of these visits any
be to "probe Japan's attitude toward the Soviet Union prior to the pending Cabinet
reshuffle," according to a niniatry source. Top toreip Hinistry officials plan to
exchange views particularly with Arbatov. director of the 0.8. and Canada Institute.
when he comes to Japan.

First. on 23 Noveater, a Soviet econoeic mission is to arrive. Originally, Deputy
Minister of Foreign Trade Grishin was to head this adssion. but due to his illness,
Kiselev, chief of the Adninistration for Trade With Asian Countries, is to replace
Grishin as head of the mission. The min purpose of the mission is to hold talks
with leaders of the five sajor business organisations in the lanaai area with a view
to revitalizing the Japan-USSR trade and scone-1c relations that have been stagnant
since the outbreak of the Afghan problem

Second. on 25 November, a Soviet co-Inist activist delegation led by Lonakin.

first secretary of the Rarities nay Party Co-ittee. is due to arrive in Japan

for a visit at the invitation of the JSP. One of the delegation meters is Kovalenko,
deputy chief of the International Departmt of the CPS!) Central Connittee, who is
believed to be playing a key role in formlating party policy toward Japan. Reval-
enko visited Japan last Decedaer to attend the talks between the CPS!) and the JCP.
During that visit. he held energetic talks with Li)? Secretary General Sakurauchi

and other political figures. During his coming stay in Japan, which will last until

2 December, he is expected to actively seek meetings with Japanese politicians and
businessaen.

Third, Arbatov. director of the 0.8. and Canada Institute, is due to arrive on

28 Novenber. Being a top Soviet specialist on 0.8. affairs. he has great influence
on Soviet foreign policy, including policy toward the United States. The Iain
purpose of his coming visit is to attend a Palne Co-ittee meeting opening in Tokyo
on Io December. Before and after this meeting. he will hold talks with officials

9
roe omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Society for the Study of Security Affairs, a private research organization,
including Hasanichi Inoki, former head of the Defense Academy. In addition, during
his stay in Japan until 15 Deceﬁer. he will nest with upper house President Tokunags
and other key politicians, as well as leaders of the Japan Federation of Economic
Organizations. Furthermore, a Japanese foreign Ministry official at the tureau
chief's level is to exchange views with hi: to assess the Soviet view of the over-
all international situation and the Soviet policy toward Japan.

As for governnent-level contacts between the two countries, the Japan-Soviet Fishery
Committee held a neeting beginning 11 hovedber. On 19 Novenber negotiations began
to extend the tenporary agreements pernitting fishing operations in each other 's
fishery zones. The Soviet Union is limiting its densnd for catch quotas within
Japan's ZOO-mile zones to the same level as last year's actual catches, apparently
desiring to reach an early compromise through businesslike negotiations. In the
Japanese Foreign Ministry's opinion. the cancellation of Education Minister
Prokofyev's visit to Japan seems to have no effect on these fishery negotiations.

From this, the Foreign Ministry concludes that the Soviet Union cancelled its educa-
tlon minister's visit with a view to undorcutting Japan's freese on personnel inter-
changes in the wake of the Soviet invasitn of Afghanistan. but the Soviet Union

made a niacalculation regarding the response Japan would nake to the cancellation.
However, the foreign Ministry thinks that the cancellation has produced no serious
after-effects and that judging fro- the scheduled successive visits to Japan by
high-ranking Soviet officials, the Soviet Union strongly desires to reopen dialogues
with Japan. In particular these visits coincide with the scheduled Cabinet reshuf-
fle in Japan, a fact indicating that the Soviet Union wants to actively probe Japan's
policy toward it. For this reason, the foreign Hinistry plans to watch what moves
the Soviet Union will lake in the caning series of Japan-Soviet exchanges and assess
the prospect of future government-level dialogue. including working-level consulta-
tions between the two countries.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Bonsha 1981

cso: 4105/30

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SUZUKI DISCUSSBS TRADE RICTIOUS um momma
0H251461 Tokyo JIJI in English 1‘13 can 25 lav 81

[Text] Tokyo, 25 Nov (JUI PRESS—Prim Hinister Zenlno Suzuki Wednesday exchanged
views over breakfast with leading Japanese intellectuels, including for-er were
of the Japan-United States econonic relations group widely known as the Wisuen's
Group"onJepan's trede frictions with the United States and Best max-ope.

Attending the meeting were Nobuhiko Ushiba. edviser to the foreign minister and
former Japanese cochsirnan of the dissolved Hisemen'e Group, Board Choirnen Akio
Morita of Sony Corp, Board Chair-en Issnu Yamashita of Hitsui Engineering and Ship-
building Co, President Takeshi Bosomi of the governmental Oversees Bcononic Coop-
eration Fund and government representative for externel econonic effsirs Ssburo
Okita. Both Morita end Yeneshite are former Japanese m-bers of the Rise-en's
Group. but Chairman Kiichi Saelti of the homers Research Institute. snother Wise-
nen's Group nenber, as not present et the meeting, held at the prise sinister's
official residence.

The Hisenen's Group has already completed its mission with the subnission of s
finsl report on Japanese-American econonic relstions in eerly October. Mk1 met
vith then to seek their opinions on internetionsl economic issues for reference in
conducting the external economic policy at s time when Japan's trade frictions with
the United Ststes and West Europe ere essuning seriws proportions.

Referring to Washington's denend for removing Japan's tariffs on 29 items, including
comma and’ peripheral equipsent, earlier made through the 0.8. Messy in Tokyo.
Ushibs. former ambassador to the United States, suggested thst Japan tsckle the

0.8. request in s positive unner. he seid thet the present tariff levels have been
set through the Tokyo round of mltileteral trade negotiations sponsored by the
Genersl Agreement on Tariffs and trade (GATT). As discussions on tariffs are con-
ducted on the basis of certain rules. it would serve to prevent trade problems fron

being treeted emotionally. he added.

At the meeting, the View as elso expressed thet a body should be created to deal
with foreign complaints ebout trade issues.

C80: 4120/82

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI’I ONLV

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'HAINICHI' SCORES SUZUKI PRESS COMM“ W
ombllou Tokyo MINICHI DAILY NEWS in 315311011 3 Dec 81 p 2
(Editorial: "Inconsistent Prine Miniater"]

[Text] Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki. upon completing the reahuffle of hie Cabinet
and lineup of the Liberal-Democratic Party executivea, reiterated hia deter-ination
to deal with the many urgent problem which our nation facea today. Ilia remarks,
made at a press conference on December 1, were noet disappointing no he failed once
again to demonetrete hie leadership.

There was nothing new about hie atateeent. He diecueeed many aubjecte at length
from a very broad standpoint but did not go into detaila. In addition, criticise
is running high becauae of his appointment of a "grey politician" as party eecre-
tary general, but Suzuki atteapted to defend hie choice of Snow likaido, saying
that he bee been working aincerely for the came of the nation and the party.

In connection with administrative and fiacal reconetruction, the prime ninieter de-
clared that the most important teak not: in to reatore the people'a truet. What

is truly needed of politiciane today in norality. We are fed up with may politice
and political corruption.

We are not at all eatiafied with hie explanation. ﬂow can he restore the people'e
confidence in politice when he hinaelf named the hon of a "plutocratic LOP faction”
as party secretary general? In the face of hie breach of faith. whatever he eaya

is hardly convincing. lie alao eophaeized that hia country will nake ita own deci-
sions on defense independently of the 0.8. requeat for increaaed military capability
after taking into account all factore. such an the war-renouncing Japaneae Consti-
tution, budgetary nattere and public opinion. Hith regard to Japan's economic co-
operation with the Republic of Korea, Suzuki eaid he would handle the issue within
the scope of contributing toward the atability of the people'e livelihood and eco-
nomic progress of the ROK.

Hie contention on these issues wee abstract, but we admit that the direction he in
purueing is correct. The problem ie that he haa often gone aatray from his intended
course, and he has betrayed our expectatione by failing to denonetrate leaderahip.
He now call on the prime ninieter not to say one thing and do another. lie ahould
renednr that lack of leaderahip and inconaiatency are fatal.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily Neva. 1981

cso: (0120/82

12
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SNIOLMICAL

'YOMIURI' VIEWS mm}! NEW SUM CABINET
cannon Tokyo rm: mm youmu in English 3 Dec 81 p 2
[YOMIURI SHIHBUN 2 December editorial: "Urgent Tasks of Cabinet"]

[Text] The urgent tasks of the reshuffled Suzuki cabinet are to comile a budget

without a tax hike, generate GNP growth through domestic dew-end and end trade fric-
tion with "esters nations.

These objectives are closely related but at the same time contradictory in some
respects. This will create problem. And these goals not be reached against the
broad framework of administrative and fiscal reform.

At his first cabinet meeting after the reshuffle, Suzuki instructed his ministers

to not press for any tax measures incompatible with the policy to compile a budget
without tax increases. However. the tax yield is affected by the growth rate of the
nominal GNP. and an increase in the yield is being checked by the delay in economic
recovery and the stability of prices.

It seems obvious that under these circumstances and Suzuki's policy the only way
out is to trim government expenditures. Also, the government should reexamine tax
privileges and end tax inequalities.

Cause for Worry

Re are uncomfortable with Suzuki's proposal to "mderately" boost taxes so that it
is in line with a "no tax hike” budget. It would seem that the premier is losing
interest in administrative and fiscal reform.

Some labor federations, as well as the Japan Comittee for Economic Development
(Keizai Doyukai), are pressing for an income tax reduction. However, they offer
no suggestions on how to find alternative revenue sources to make this possible.
The only way this can be accomplished it to trim government costs.

To overcome trade friction with the 0.8. and Hestern Europe. Suzuki proposes to
abolish nontanff barriers and advance the dates to enforce tariff reductions under
the Tokyo round. Since Hestern countries desire that Japan open its narket, the
premier is tight in proposing this.

1
FOR OFFICIAL3USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Beware of Bureaucratic Moves

However. the bureaucrats again and again have claimed that Japan's market is open,
and Suzuki, believing them. has rejected Western demands in the past. The new
cabinet nust beware of wily bureaucrats and force them to remove trade barriers to
regain the trust of the outside world.

In approaching the trade problem with the 0.8., the goveruent mat be aware that
the “.8. links Japan's trade surplus with its dissatisfaction with Japan's defense
budget. However, we must deal with these problens separately.

But one of the most difficult problem for Suzuki's new government will be to switch
from exports to domestic demand for the basis of econonic growth. And this can be
promoted by the lowering of the official discount rate by the Bank of Japan pro-
viding the yen maintains its present strength.

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yoniuri 1981

C80: 4120/82

FOR OFFIGlAli USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASAMI' 0N 'mncon'su' PACIFIC BASIN comm
0W41623 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NM in English 3 Dec 81 p 5

("Whether Vane" column by Shigeo Omori, head of ASABI SHIMBUN Analysis and Research
Center: "Forgotten Issue"]

[Text] After a period of inactivity on account of the expectation that Foreign
Minister Sunao Sonoda was bound to be removed in the reshuffle of the Suzuki cabinet
this week, the Foreign Ministry has moved into action again with the nomination of
his successor, Yoshio Sakurauchi.

The mass media are now busy soliciting Sekurauchi's views on the host of outstanding
diplomatic issues, including trade friction with the United States and Hestemiﬂurope,
the persistent 0.8. request for s substantial Japanese defense buildup. the stalling
in the proposed resumption of a dialogue between Japan and the Soviet Union, and
South Korea's request for $6 billion in economic aid.

But one thing is missing fro- tbis extensive list. The Pacific Basin cooperation
concept, which was advocated by the late Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira and left

to his successor, Zenko Suzuki, to carry on, has been forgotten by newsmen. "hat
-has become of the plan, which was made so much of as a major item in Ohira's diplo-
matic agenda?

In a word. the proposal has been virtually shelved because of circumstances at
home and abroad, and it looks likely to stay off the stage of Japanese diplomacy
for some time to come.

To give the domestic reasons, the government's attitude toward the proposal has
changed. Official enthusiasm rapidly cooled after Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ito,
who made it his avowed mission to continue Ohira's foreign policy, resigned in the
controversy over the Japan-U.S. joint communique issued in May and Sonoda took over.
And as Prime Minister Suzuki moved to leave behind off Ohira's legacy [as published]
and strike out on his own, the proposal, a synbol of the late leader's foreign
policy, was bound to lose prominence.

The lack of eagerness on the part of the ASEAN countries has worked even more deci—

sively against the proposal. An international seminar held in Canberra in September
last year advised the related governments to set up a private-level forum, a

1
FOI.0FWHC1§I.US£1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pacific cooperation conittee, to discuss ways of conducing cooperation in the
Pacific region. But the reconnendation stirred fears enong the ASEAR govern-ants
that the Pacific basin cooperation concept, if translated into reality. could weaken
the unity of the ASEAN calamity.

The Foreign Ministry was forced to change its tactics when the A53”! failed to re-
act to the scheme in the way that had been hoped in the meeting of their foreign
ministers in June this year. The ninistry gave up its attempt to create a standing
body in the for. of the Pacific cooperation co-ittee and decided to teke a patient
and roundabout approach to the question.

"Just because the timetable we had in mind has hit a snag, the proposal itself does
not evaporate," related officials say. They point out that the proposal is long-
tern scheae envisioning the 21st century. and that interdependence anong the nations
in the Pacific region will grow as time passes.

As an external liaison body on the proposal, the Foreign Ministry has set up the
special col-ittee for Pacific cooperation in the Japan Institute for International
Studies, an extra-departmental organisation, installing forssr Poreign Hinister
Seburo Okita as its chairman.

In the meantile, "core" research organs on Pacific cooperation have come to the fore
abroad in the past few years, including the Psnpacific Co-nnist Association of the
United States, Australia National University, and the Center for Strategic and Inter-
national Studiea of Indonesia.

In the view of Okita, as channels of communication are established with these for-
eign research agencies and exchanges of personnel and infornation increase, co-on
perceptions and outlooks sill emerge in time, and this will sake it possible to
hold strategy sessions to bring about the envisaged cooperation.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1981

cso: 4120/82

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HILITARY

DEFENSE “BITE PAPER. PENTAGON PAPER REVIEWED
Defense Agency's View
Tokyo TOKYO smuu in Japanese 30 Sep 81 p 1

[ﬁrticle: "Seventy-Five Nuclear Missiles Aimed at and Within Operating Range
of the Far Esst17
[Excerpt] (Washington 29th, Special Correspondent Okanoto) Beginning at 9:15

an on the 29th (10:15 pn the sane day Japan tine), 0.8. Defense Secretary
Heinberger held a news conference at the Pentagon and gave a presentation on the
subject of "Soviet Military Power." In this presentation, the Secretary stated
that since the Soviet Union's newest type of 88-20 Inter-edicts Range Ballistic
Missiles. chiefly deployed to aim at Europe, are mobile, Russia possesses
offensive power in Japan, the Korean Peninsula, and other parts of northeast Asia.

In addition, when asked approximately how many SS-20s aimed at the Far East are
in place, he did not give a clear number, but replied that the Soviet Union
possesses offensive power against Japan. Korea, etc, because the SSHZOs are
mobile. However, based on the fact that the Secretary admits that 175 of the 250
SS-20s are deployed against Europe and other targets, one can conjecture that the
re-aining 75 are deployed against Far East targets.

Contents Are Co-non Sense
The Perspective of a Defense Agency Source

The report on the Saviet Union's Military Power released by the Pentagon on the
29th had already been forwarded a few days earlier by 0.5. Defense Secretary
Heinberger to Defense Director General Onura, and the Defense Agency has finished
its analysis of the report's contents.

A Defense Agency source stated on the evening of the 29th that, "There is
nothing particularly new in its contents, and it fundamentally coincides with our
perceptions." The source made clear the perspective that the report does not

go beyond the bounds of intelligence offered by and received from the 0.8.
Defense Intelligence Agency. U.S. Connwnder in Chief Pacific Headquarters, etc,
during a series of military level discussions between Japan and the 0.5.

F031NﬂﬂCizll£ﬂ£0NLY
IIIICHWNCJAI.USEGNVLY

According to the same source, two points in this report pertained to the Far

East region: estimates of (l) the more than 45 divisions of the Soviet Union's
military land forces on the Sins-Soviet border, and (2) the 720 ships in the
Pacific fleet. The Defense white Paper published in 1981 exceeds 0.3. estimates.
with figures of 51 divisions and 800 ships, respectively. The same source
explained the reason for this: "Because 0.8. estimates do not include such things
as the five divisions in Mongolia and small scale auxiliary naval vessels,” and
emphasized that there is net a difference in perception (between the Defense Agency
and the Pentagon). The source also indicated that the Agency had already received
from the 0.5. side a far more detailed, substantive explanation regarding the said
SS-20 Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles, concerning IRBMs in the Far East
region, the particulars of the positioning of ss-zos. etc.

COPYRIGHT: Chunichi Shimbun Tokyo Honsha 1981

Defense Hhite Paper Criticized

Tokyo HAINICHI SHIHBUN in Japanese 7 Oct 81 p 2

{ﬁrticler "The Inflated 'Soviet Threat'; Defense Agency “hits Paper on 'Estimates
of Military Power in the Far East':7

[Text] Is the Soviet Union's army. which is supposed to be deploying its

nﬂlitary power on the scale of divisions (10.000 son) in northern regions, a
phantom? A report presented by 0.3. Secretary of Defense Heinberger on the
subject "Soviet Hiiitary Power" had considerably lower estimates of Soviet
military power than those in the Defense Agency's white Paper published in 1981.
Thus the Defense Agency has been taking great pains to make the figures consistent.
"I have ordered an investigation into areas where differences have occurred,"
Oeputy Director General Bars); Hera looked puzzled by the unexpectedly cool-
headed analysis of the Soviet Union by the Pentagon, the originator of [a phrase]
the “Soviet threat.”

The 1981 "hits Paper put Soviet military power at 51 divisions, and, stressing
the Soviet method of augmentation of military forces, (said) that the Soviets
are deploying land forces "on the scale of a division" in northern territories.
By contrast. the 0.5. Pentagon report lists 45 divisions. Certainly. even if
one looks at "Military Balance" recently compiled by Britain's International
Center for Strategic Studies, (one sees that) the Soviet Union's army in the Far
East consists of 66 divisions; the Japanese White Paper estimates are quite
high.

In naval power. the White Paper estimate likewise was high by a long shot.
Whereas the white Paper puts the Soviet Pacific fleet at 000 naval vessels.
the 0.5. report says 720, and "Military Balance" 527 vessels.

There is considerable fear in the Diet of being caught by the opposition on
this point: ”Does the Defense Agency not intend to try to increase the Defense
budget by exaggerated reporting of the Soviet Union's military power?" Defense
Director General Omura. who has always spoken of "the agreement between the

FOI‘OFFKjih.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0.8. and Japan on perceptions of the Soviet Union," is not shouldering the
responsibility either.

The figures in the white Paper originally were .he "latest ingelligence" received
by Director General Onura directly from Secretary Heinberger, Commander in

Chief Pacific Admiral Long. and others when Omura visited the 0.3. in June. The
figures were a seetion of the White Paper in which the Defense Agency took pride.
Since the same Heinberger has reversed (these figures), the matter is troublesome.
It is common knowledge that the Defense Agency, which says, ”The White Paper
account was done with the Defense Agency's independent intelligence," has neither
military reconnaissance satellites nor a spy network, and relies upon 0.8.
intelligence.

The Defense Agency is now explaining that the 0.8. did not include in its figures
the divisions which have a 25 percent "level of sufficiency" (effective strength
is 25 percent of nominal strength). but the divisions were counted in the
Japanese White Paper because they would become regular divisions whenever mobilised.
The Agency is also explaining that the difference in the number of naval vessels
is due to the fact that saall naval and other vessles besides warships were
included in the "hire Paper. By these explanations, the Agency appears to the
acknowledging that the "hits Paper was by design trying to make the Soviet
Union's military rower appear to be greater than it actually is. It appears

that the Defense Agency was ambushed while it was banking on the 0.8. to take a
strong anti-Soviet stand to seek full budget appropriations.

COPYRIGhT: Hainichi Shimhunsha 1981

9921
C50: 6105/17

1
FOR OFFICIZL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIL ITARY

TANK RESERVE “INFORCWTS mm FOR 680?
M51131 Tokyo THE DAILY mum in English 26 Row 81 p 1

[Text] The Ground Self-Defense Force (680!) has worked out a plan to radically
reinforce and nodernise its divisions. including the addition of 600 tanks to its
current 890 tanks and the doubling of its reserve forces, it has been revealed.
The blueprint. which was drawn up by the GS!!! chief of staff. also calls for the
deploynent of sore personnel on Hokkaido.

The progres will lay the groundwork for the next aid-tern program sstinste for fis-
cal 1985-1989 thst would set the target of defense buildup efforts during the five
years within the framework of the national defense progrsn outline. a basic policy
decided in late 1976.

In parallel with the 6801' plan. the hritine Self-Defense Totes 061)?) end Air
Self-Defense Force (ASDP) are drefting their own progress. These three progress
will be nodified into a single Defense Agency proposal to be subdtted to the la-
tionel Defense Council next spring.

0507 officials said their proposal was ained at boosting the strength of each
080? division to levels of at least 50 to 70 percent of the power of the 0.8. end
Soviet counterparts. The current divisional organisation, they pointed out, is at
least 20 years old. It places too great an aphasia on infantry and lacks in l)-
bility and firepower, they seid.

The new 680? prograe seeks to expend the nexim deploynent quota of tanks fro. the
present. 1,100 to 1.500 since the 650? possesses only 890 tenhs now, the target
will seen an increese of some 600 units, if fully attained. As the result, each
division would be equipped with 80 to 120 tanks. compared with no sore then 60

now. Under the plan, the present personnel quota of either 7,000 or 9,000 for each
of the three BSD! divisions deployed on Hokkaido would be rsised to about 10.000.
The 68!)! now nintains 30.000 reserve personnel to he called up in ensrgencies
sainly for logistics support. The new plan calls for about 80.000 reserves.

0n possible stusbling block for the GSD! buildup efforts will he enornnus costs

for the acquisition of additional weaponry. Under the Defense Agency expenditure
plan for the next fiscal year, s type-76 tent is priced at 340 nillion yen. herring
future price rises, the proposed addition of 600 tanks would require at least 200
billion yen. GSDF officiela are pessimistic shout the final approvel of their pro-
gran as it stands. particularly because the casing lid-tern progrsn estinate would
give priority to the H81)? end ASDP as requested by the 0.3.

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yosiuri 1981

(:50: 5120/82

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONCMIC

JAPAN TO ESTABLISH GOLD MARKET IN “ARCH 1982
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHMUN in Japanese 21 Sep 81 p 3

[Text] Since the government announced on the 16th that it will acknowledge
gold as an object for commodities exchange, the outlook is that gold mrkets
will be established within this year at the earliest or at the latest by
March of next year. This means that a future's market for gold will
officially start in this country. Not only trading firms. refineries. metal
merchants, and commodities merchants but also banks and security firms are
eyeing gold trading with great expectations. It is not definite as to what
concrete form it will take, but the entry of banks and security firms into
the gold market will proceed rapidly when the New Banking Law goes into effect
in April of next year. (Taku liatsuda, Editor)

Tokyo is now becoming the world's most active money market and although it
boasts that the amount of foreign investments in stocks and bonds is second

to the New York market, it is beyond belief that Japan had no futures market
for gold which is the largest international co-odity and is closely connected
with currency.

Moreover, industries dealing with electronics use a large amount of gold and

are "swayed by changes in the overseas gold price. so when the price of gold

increases, imediately profits decrease greatly and this becomes a matter of

survival for the businesses." (An associate) Even then, it could be lack of

know-how, but. the country could not create a hedge against it on the foreign
market and a great loss suffered helplessly.

Once the gold market starts functioning steadily. it cannot only be a hedge
against currency fluctuation but can also contribute in resolving the
uncertainty in the industrial world.

Green Card System Connection

It cannot be denied that the great interest shown by the banks and security
companies in the gold market is related to the "green card system" which will
be adopted in 1984.

"Where will the 1.0 billion yen of black money (tax evasion capital) go? The
gold market will be the best place to hide the money" is the consensus.
This makes sense but more importance should be attached to the fact that this
will contribute to enhancing the diversification of the nation's assets.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present. to the Japanese. land is the only real asset. "If land is the only
object for investnent there is no way to suppress the inflation of the

value of land no matter how the government manipulates the Land Tax Law. The
gold market should not be dealt as a place for putting the black nosey, only.
Rather, it is necessary to consider the gold market in connection with the land
market."

The high-powered economic growth of the nation was sustained by Japanese
enthusiasm for saving. Monetary assets of the individuals were supplied to
the industrial world through financial organs and this stimulated the growth
of industry. But that high-powered growth is gone today. It cannot be helped
that some monetary assets of individuals are headed for buying gold.

Trading firms, comodities merchants, metal merchants and refineries are already
transacting in gold and since they come under the Comedity Transaction Law.
their entry into the futures market for gold is naturally permitted. However,
as far as banks and security firms are concerned there is no offical signal
from the administration as yet.

However, as far as the banks were concerned in 1928, the then head of the
Banking division of the Finance Ministry under the Banking Law acknowledged
the transaction of gold and recognized it as their ancillary activity in a
circular. Therefore, according to theory. it is possible for the bank to do
retail selling of gold and to protect the gold on hand to participate in the
futures transaction as a natural course of events.

where the securities world is concerned, under the Securities Transaction Law,
ancillary activities are prohibited, so it is a question as to whether they can
go into futures transaction directly.

One way of looking at it is that "they can function through their subsidiaries.
Moreover, if they issue gold securities, these will become negotiable, so in
reality. transactions in gold by the securities company will be possible."

"111 the gold transactions by banks and security firms be implemmted? The
answer is yet to come.

To Plan the Diversification of the Nation's Assets

How true is the intention of Mr Reagan's "Reinstatement of the Gold Standard
System?" When Mr Reagan established the Gold Comittee last June, it was from

the United States that one heard "reinstatement of gold at $1,500 an ounce."

It is easy to laugh off such an episode. but 'hvhen we look at it in the long run,"
it is definite that "the value of gold will rise." In order to spread the gold
among the people we would like to see banks and the security firms enter the gold

market in some form.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo lionsha 1981

9509
080: lolOS/b

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

OORCERN EXPRESS- one 0.5. COWCATIONS IMPORT 238111611038
Tokyo “130“ KEIZAI semen in Japanese 9 Nov 81 page not given
[Text]

Attaching importance to the point that the US Cong‘ess is strengthening
its moves to restrict substantially the imports of Japanese-produced

Gomunications Act, the [Japanese] Government has decided to express

strong concern to the US Government, to the effect that "there is the

fear that depending on the way the Act is operated after revision, it

may constitute a violation of GATT or the Japan-US Connerce and Navigation
Treaty." A formal notification will be given in a written form,

in the near future. The US Comications Act Revision Bill provides

that "when US-manufactu‘ed products are shut out, due to the trade

barriers of the other countries concerned, restrictions can be imposed

on the imports of conununications equipment and apparatuses from those
countries," even if there are bilateral agreements concerning the procurement
of telegraph md telephone equipment and apparatuses, between the US and
Japan and other nations. It has recently been approved by the US Senate.

The Government is showing repulsion against the point that the US has
requested the opening of the door of the Japanese market, against the
background of its large-scale trade deficit with Japan, while planning

to take such import-restriction measums which have a strong protectionist
coloring. That is why it has exceptionally decided to express concern,

with the start of deliberations on the Bill at the US House of Representatives

close at hand.

In Decen'ber of last year, the Government decided to open the door
for Government procurement of materials for use by the Nippon Telegraph

and Telephone Public Corporation (NTT), also to the US and other
coun’ries. it concluded a bilateral agreement with the US Government.

At the same time, it signed also the GATT Government-Procurement Code.
However, with regard to Japan-US trade in communications equipment and
apparatuses, Japan has been continuing to show a large-scale export excess

(¥80.l billion for the January-August period of this year and ¥81.6
billion as the actual level for 1980) even after the conclusion of the

agreement. The US side is strengthening its feeling of dissatisfaction,
from the stand that "the expansion of the trade imbalance is due mainly

2
FOR OFFICE“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the Japanese side's trade barriers, including the point that the
specifications as to the procurement of materials are complicated."

The US Communications Act Revision Bill, passed recently by the
Senate, provides that even if there is a bilateral agreement based on
nutualism, imports from that country can be restricted if a situation
occurs which impedes the research and development, investments, and
sales by US manufacturers and their market strategies. In concrete terms,
the Department of Commerce and the Office of the USTR (US Special
Trade Representative) shall compile a list of nations, on which such
doubts are entertained. In regard to the products manufactured by the
countries placed on the list, the US Federal Commieations Oomission (FCC)
can take either (1.) the measure of imposing special restrictions or (2) the
measure of refusing to grant import approval.

The Revision Bill does not particularly set its aim on the restricting
of imports from Japan. However, the Government says, "It strongly
has the coloring of retaliation against our country." At .the same time,
it also thinks that ”the possibility is strong that the Revision Bill
will be approved after being passed by the US House of Representatives,
because it is being supported also by the US Government." It is said
that if the Revision Bill is passed by the Congress, then telephone

private branch exchange equipment, terminal equipment, micro-wave devices, trans-
mission ccmnmications equipment and apparatuses, and almost all other

types of Japanese products concerned will be covered with the net of

import restrictions. It is also said that there is fear of [Japan's]

losing the greater part of the US market which accounts for one-third of

the amount of its exports of comunications equipment and apparatuses.

The reason why the [Japanese] Government has decided to express
concern to the US Government, is that there is the fear that depending
on the way [the Revision Bill] is operated, it may violate (1) the
GATT Regulations, including the Government-Procurement Code, and (2)
the Japan-US Commerce and Navigation Treaty which provides that
one country cannot unilaterally restrict its inports of manufactured
products from the other country, without justifiable reason, thoud':
"the legislative measure itself will not conflict with any international
regulations, and it is a purely domestic law" (Government source).
Another reason is that the Government judged that it would be necessary
to explain Japan's position, in advance.

ITI Minister TAMARA already expressed such concern to US Secretary
of Comerce BALDRIGB who visited Japan late in October. In particular,
the US has strongly requested Japan to open the door of its market
through the expansion of its imports of manufactured products, or through
the abolition of non-trade barriers. At the same time, it is planning
to take protectionist measures as to Japanese-produced comunications
equipment and apparatuses. This will have big effects on Japan-US
trade as a whole. This is why the Government has decided to give a

2h
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

warning'in a'wi'i'tten tom. ﬂorecver. in connection with the optical
comnicetions cable project of the A1"? (American Ielehpne and Telegraph),
Fujitsu has suffered a defeat, though it made the successful best-price
bid in the bidding. mus, "injury" on the part of Japanese
enterprises has come to the fore. This also seems to be one of the
reasons. N341

COPYRIGHT: Rihon Keiui Shit-bunch: 1981
cso: 4105/28

FOB OFT-1&1. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCOMHIC

0.5. SEEKS LIBERALIZATION 01’ MARKET

Tokyo “IRON KBIZAI SHINBUN in Japanese 12 Nov 81 p 1

[Text]

. The US Government presented, on the llth. a package request for the
liberalization of the Japanese market, containing as many as 21 items, to
the Japanese Government. Japan and the US will enter into negotiations for
the liberalization of the market, holding the meetings of the Japan-US Trade
Group and the Japan-US Trade Facilitation Comittee from December 8. This
request list makes clear the US Government's position for attending the
negotiations, and against the background of the dissatisfaction in the US
Congress, accompanying the expansion of US trade deficits toward Japan, it
seeks not only Japan's expansion of imports of agricultural products, high
technology products and service industries, but also a re-studying of the
Agreement on NTT's procurement of materials, which was agreed upon one year
ago. The Government intends to incorporate items, which can be realized,
in the measures for the decreasing of its surplus balance, to be formulated
in the near future, but other than the lowering of tariffs on manufactured
products, there are many items on which concession is difficult, an it is
held certain that the negotiations will be carried over to next year.

The US requests to Japan this time were formulated by the Office of
the Special Trade Representative, after hearing not only the views of the
Department of Commerce, the Department of State and the Department of
Agriculture, but also the views of US Congressional persons concerned.

These items are expected to be discussed at the meeting of the Trade
Facilitation Committee to be held on December 8 and at the meeting of

the Japan-US Trade Group on December 9 and lo. Requests for the liberaliza-
tion of the Japanese market have been presented, individually, in the past,
too, but this is the first time to be presented in a package form.

The Japanese side is worried that, as the date for the starting of
the negotiations happens to fall on the anniversary of the outbreak of the
war between Japan and the US, the "problem of trade friction" may be taken
up on a large-scale by public opinion within the US as a showdown between
Japan and the US. The US side also took this point into consideration, and
it put off the compilation of a "list of requests for the abolition of Japan's

26
FOR 0F11C1A1.USIZ(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

non-tariff barriers," which it'had been planning at first, on the grounds
that it will give too strong an impression. Also, it incorporated the
requests to Japan this time into the' agenda items for consultat ions" at
the Japan-US Trade Group's meeting, and it attaches the condition that

co-ordination be held between Japan and the US before the starting of the
negotiations.

The items of request are grouped into six fields, namely "standards
and criteria for inspection," "agricultural products," "high technology,"
"market competition," "lowering of tariffs," and "customs procedures," and
under these headings. it further lists the items in which the US side is
especially interested. In the field of agricultural products. it includes
the improvement of standards, so as to make possible the exports of Japanese
"saka" produced in the US and exports of rice to Japan, in addition to the
advancir.g of the negotiations for the liberalization of the imports of beef
and c. trus fruit. which the US side has been requesting from before.

The US side has given up the taking up of the abolition of Japan's
non-tariff barriers itself, but in its place, it seeks the improvement of
general standards and import inspection standards for 12 items of products,
such as the automobile exhaust gas standard, processed foodstuffs and plywood.

what the US side points out as a barrier to the Japanese market,
together with standards and criteria, is its view that Japanese enterprise
groups are thought to be giving priority to the purchase of goods, manu-
factured by enterprises within the group. The Japanese side takes the
stand that this view is based on the US side's misunderstanding, and it
intends to assert that there do not exist any "agreements for the shutting
out of US product 3," among Japanese enterprises, as mentioned by the US side.

The US side also proposes the re-studying of the agreements between
the Japanese and the US Governments, in which the Japanese side emphasized
the liberalization of the market'for NTT's procurement of materials. and
the lowering of tariffs on tobacco. Both these agreements went into effect
from the start of this year. However, as exports of US products to Japan
have not increased noticeably. the US Congress and the US Government harbor
dissatisfaction. The Agreement on'NTT procurement is slated to be re-studied
in 1983, but the US Government is aiming at its early revision.

The problem of the liberalization of the market for high technology
producrs, such as computers, semi-conductors and counmnications equipment,
will also become an agenda item for negotiations between Japan and the US
for the first time. The US side views that the Japanese Government's
granting of subsidies to the industrial circles concerned is strengthening
the Japanese enterprises' competitive power, and the US side is requesting
that US enterprises, which have already advanced into Japan, be enabled to
partici 'pate in Japan‘ s Government~private joint projects.

Toward this series of US requests to Japan, Government sources are
checking into the incorporation of the lowering of tariffs on computers

27
FOR‘0F11C1Al.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFMJAI.USE(NULY

(ranging from 3.9 percent to lu.6 percent), machine—tools-(ranging"far-i:1
percent to 7.8 percent), and automobile parts (ranging from zero percent to
s.u percent) in the Government's measures for the decreasing of the surplus
trade balance. However. as for agricultural products, high technology.
service industries and expansion of the opportunity for access into the
market, to which the US side is giving priority, Government sources view
that early settlement will be difficult.

If the negotiations this time were to become protracted, there is
a strong danger of the trade imbalance between Japan and the US developing
into political friction. As a result, the Government has hastily decided
to check into the establishment of an organ for the disposing of complaints

in the trade field (trade ombudsman system), and to promote comprehensive
measures .

US Government's Items of Request to Japan for Liberalisation of the Market

1. Improvement of General Standards and Inspection Standards

(1) Agricultural products (fresh beef, chicken meat, cherries,
papaya, Japanese "sake", rice)

(2) General standards (industrial products)

(3) Automobiles (exhaust gas standard, procedures for model approval,
etc.)

(u) Processed foodstuffs

(5) Medical machinery, health instruments, cosmetics

(6) Plywood
2. Liberalization of Imports of Agricultural Products

(1) Import quota system for beef and citrus fruit
(2) Price policies regarding wheat and mixed feed

(3) Administrative guidance, such as restricting the imports of
egg products

3. Improvement of Trade in High Technology Products

(1) Government' s subsidy policy

(2) Problem of participation of US enterprises in Government-
private projects

(3) Lowering of tariffs and improvement of non-tariff barriers

u. Thoroughgoing Enforcement of Market Competition

(1) Problem of arrangements in Japanese enterprise groups for the
purchasing of materials within the groups

(2) Re-studying of the Agreement concerning the procurement of
NTT's materials and for Government procurement

28
F0!¢DFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(3) Rc-etudying of the Japan-US Tobacco Agreement and the Japan-US
Agreement on leather products

(u) Liberalization of the service industries (insurance, banking,
data communication, etc.)

(5) The code for the liberalization of investments

(6) Buy Japanese activities

(7) Problem of trademark rights

5. Lowering of Tariffs

Computers, machine tools, automobile parts, etc.

6. Simplification of Customs Procedures

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shidaunshs 1981

080: 6105/28

2
FOR OFT-10%|. USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

FRICTION WITH ".3. OVER TECHNOLOGY EXPANDS
Tokyo MIMIC!!! snmun in Japanese 13 ﬂov 81 p 9
[Text]

In connection with negotiations on the business of optical communication
cable in the US. the incident that Fujitsu was forced to lose. as a result
of pressure from a US Congressional source. although the company won the
top bid, indicates that Japan-US economic friction is spreading from in the
field of such products as automobiles and color TV sets to "friction as to
technology" in the field of most-advanced technology. The Government.
which is concerned about the US strengthening its blunt protectionist-
type posture, uhere the US exposes its national interests in the field
of most-advanced technology. has brought the incident, this time. to the
US Government's attention through the Foreign hinistry. however, because
the US is strongly alarmed by Japan's rapid advance in the moetcadvenced
fields, it is viewed that causes for friction in terns of technology will
continue to increase in the future.

The incident, this time, took place in connection with ATT's plan
for laying optical communication cable (American Telephone and Telegraph).
ATT is a US conglomerate. The company is currently laying optical cable
connecting Boston, New York and Washington, the total length of which
cable is about 1.200 kilometers, with the target completion in l98u.
Western Electric. ATT's 100$ subsidiary company, has won the order for
the first part between Washington and Boston. Fujitsu took part in the
business negotiations on the second part between Boston and New York to
make a bid. Fujitsu enjoyed "overwhelming superiority in the fields of
technology and cost" among the eight companies which ultimately remained,
comprising four Japanese companies, two US companies and two European
companies. Consequently, Fujitsu "won the top bid in the public tender
held in June." (Fujitsu)

However, at the end of last month, ATT gave a unilateral notice to
Fujitsu, without clarifying any reason, that "The order will be given
to ATT's subsidiary companywestern Electric." Consequently. Takuma
YAMAMOTO. President of Fujitsu. Ltd.. visited the US at the beginning of

8

30
FORlOFFKJA1.US£10NlY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this month in an attempt to ask the AT? side to explain to him the circum-
stances. It is said that ATT replied that "Re have made the decision by
taking into consideration not only the interests of our own company but
also the national environment and political environment."

Fujitsu is angry about the following two points: (1) POGARTY, a
member of the Federal Communications Commission, which is viewed to have
greatly affected the ATT decision, said that "The price is improperly low."
as if Fujitsu was charged with dumping, and (2) 0n the premise for placing
an order to Pujitsu, the ATT side inspected fujitsu's plant in'detail at
the end of August. Thus, AT? has had an over-all view of technology and
know-how, which are essentially kept secret from outsiders. Consequently,
ATT's rejecting the placing of an order after having done so violates morality
in commerce. fujitsu maintains that the US side charged rujitsu with dumping
despite the fact that fujitsu has striven to improve its technology in an
attempt to reduce costs greatly. and that its snatching Fujitsu's technology
is not forgivable. Fujitsu is planning to submit an open letter of inquiry
to the FCC in the near future.

According to a Government source, it is said that a US Congressional
source and the FCC applied pressure on ATT from the viewpoint that "It will
be problematical in terms of national defense, too, to use foreign technology
in the networks of communication circuits which will become the foundation.
As a matter of fact, awareness of the problem in such a way is on the
identical line with the strong assertion on the Japanese side. centering
on NTT, concerning the US demand for open bidding as to the "problem of
opening the market of NTT," which problem was settled between Japan

and the US at the end of last year. after hard sailing. The Japanese side
pointed out that "Communication systems are not compatible with open
bidding because the contents of the systems are technically complex and_
advanced, and, thcxefore. standardization is vital to the systems. Also,
there will be problems in terms of security." However, the US side was
not convinced. Under such circumstances, the Japanese side was forced

to accept an open bidding system for a fairly large part.

Thus, apart from the protest from the official viewpoint that "The
decision violates the OKITA-ASKSH agreement which stipulates the opening
of the markets on a mutual basis in the field of communications equipment,"
all the more the Government has mixed feelings about the incident this
time. thinking that "Even the us acts the same way when it must face the

real thing."

Nevertheless, it has recently become conspicuous that the 08 takes

a blunt protectionist posture by revealing the national interests of the
US in the field of most-advanced technology. For example, there is the
case where the US has approved US IBM's export of a super-large size
computer to China, while until today the US rejects approving the export
of Hitachi's super-large size computer to China, although the computer is
smaller in scale than IBh's. Also, the US International Trade Commission
has passed a provisional judgment of dumping on the export of hippon

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electric Company's communication facilities for a satellite to Coeeat.

In addition, there was a US Congreeeional move of revieing the Coununioatione
Act, which revision aims at eliminating foreign con-unicatione_equiplent.

and so on and so forth.

Japan exports very little coununicatione equip-ant. Its share in the
us market is less than 1‘. The US is intensifying a eenae of zuardedneee,
although Japan is not eating into the US market arbitrarily. The US intention
that "We will not follow the path trodden by autonobilea and color TV acts."
is clear. Because the matter is concerned with not only its national interests
but also its pride as a super-power, it will be troublesoee to settle the
friction as to technology.

KN

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shilibunaha 1981

080: (0105/28

32
FOR 0*1ﬂC1Al.USE(MVLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCOIDHIC

EPA MINES POLICY ON «IMHO! OF TRADE W8

‘rokyo MIDI! KBIZAI Slim in Japanese 8 Nov 81 p 1
[Text]

The EPA on the 7th clarified its basic policy concerning measures
for correction of the trade imbalance with the US and the BC, which
measures will be formulated, with the last ten days of this month
as the target time. According to the policy, the following three points
will become the pillars: (l) mergency iuports will be promoted in a
positive way, as a measure to reduce the surplus balance for the present;
(2) as for measures to open the door of the market,ss reqnaﬁce'd strongly
by Europe and the US. efforts will be made to carry out the easing of
non—tariff barriers, including the lowering of tariff rates and the
re-viewing of the standards for inspection; and (3) studies will be
conducted on such problems as a re-view of the export structure, which
is a basic problem concerning the arising of the suzplus balance, the
liberalization of services. and industrial co-operation. This policy was
clarified in response to the fact that Prime Minister SUZUKI, who heard a
report by the IRAYAMA Mission to Burope on that day, expressed his
intention. to the effect that he "wants to study, not only imediate
problems but also trade problem as a whole, including a future direction."

Measures for correction of the trade iwalance will be decided
at the Economic Measures Ministerial Conference which will be held
after consultations are conducted with the Foreim Ministry, the Finance
Ministry, MITI, the Agricult‘me-Porestry-Fisheries Ministry, and other
Ministries concerned, centering on the EPA. The first Conference is
scheduled to be told on the 17th, at the earliest. EPA Director General
KOMOTO says, "(The formulation of a final plan) may not be corpleted
before the end 0! this month, but the problem is of urgency. Therefore,
I want to formulntu such a plan. as quickly as possible, while considering
the future of Jayemas a country based on trade."

In regard to the measures this time, the Foreign Ministry, MITI, and
various other Ministries have submitted various plans. The EPA will
draw up a Government plan after unifying these views. As for emergency
import measures, the following plan is strong at present: (1) Use of

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the system for extending foreign-cun‘ency loans throng: the Export-Inert
Bank of Japan, and (2) promotion of the stockpiling of rare metals and
grains by the State. The object items for the application of the
foreign-currency loan system include aircraft, uranium ore, power-generation
barges. and tie-in ships. [The EPA] intends to carry out emergency imports

to the extent of about $2 billion, as against the target amount of
$5 billion or so.

Measures for the opening of the door of the market will be tackled,
from a long-tern standpoint. In concrete terns, the following points
are listed: (1) lowering of the tariffs on cookies, chocolate, whisky,
machine tools, automobile parts, etc; (2) abolition of the remaining
reStrictions on imports of agricultural products, etc.; and (3) the
improvement of specifications, the standards for inspection, and other
import procedures which tend to be regarded as non-tariff barriers.

The [problem of] liberalizing services, as requested strongly by the US,
will also probably be studied in a forward-looking way. Hith regard to
Japan's export structure which is a basic problem concerning the arising
of the surplus balance, [the EPA] intends to study also the carrying out
of guidance for securing a shift to an industrial structure, which will

change its constitution of relying on exports, and the promoting of the
international division of labor.

As regards the measures this time, the view is arising within the
Government that it is necessary to study, not only the expanding of
imports but also the curbing of experts, for emle, through the
imposition of an export surcharge. In the midst of this situation, a .
concept calling for the establishment of an interestcequalization tax
for the purpose of securing a yen appreciation has also been studied,
from the .stand that the low-yen trend due to the outflow of capital
has been stimulating exports. However, the actual situation is such
that it is difficult to realize [the concept] during the liberalization
of foreign exchange transactions. Moreover. SPA Director General KOHOTO
has expressed strong opposition to the proposed export surcharge concept,
saying as follows: "It is inconceivable to [levy] such an export surcharge
as would undermine [the foundation of] our country based on trade.

I will study measures in the direction of obtaining an expanded balance

in trade." The curbing of exports is inconsistent with a stand based on
the free trade-first principle, and it is unwelcome to Europe and the US,
especially to the US. Therefore, there seems to be hardly any possibility
that drastic steps for holding down exports will be included among the
measures, though an export surcharge and other measures for the curbing
of exports may be studied through consultations among the various
Hinistries concerned.

204i
009mm: Nihon Keisai Shiﬁuneba 1981

C50: 6105/28

3!;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECDNOHIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ADNOC NTIFIES JAPANESE 0N DELAYING CRACKING PLAN

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 983. 1 Dec 81 p 7

[Text]

Ahu Dhabi National Oil Corp.
tADNOCi has notilied tour
Japanese oil companlea oi its
intention to postpone their par-
ticlpation in its heavy fuel oil
cracking venture.

ADNOC planned locrack fuel
oil produced at its mono
barrel-a-day refinery. com
pleted in the summer near
Dhannah. by seeking
cooperation oi the Royal Dutch
Shell group and fair Japanae
companies: ldemitau Koean
Co.. "amen Oil Co. Dalkyo
Oil Co. and Nippon Mining Co
The original plan called (or
raising the relinery'a capacity
comma barrels «hilyandcon
struction ol two hydrocracltera
with daily capacity at 275.000
barrelaaday each.

The oil ﬁrms here received
word about “indeﬁnite delay"
in their invited particiption in
the hydrocrackiq project.
ADNOC is likely to build just
one system by iteell to crack
luel oil lor production oi such
desirable products as gasoline.
kerosene and diesel fuel.

Abe Dbabi and other Middle
Seat oil producing count-ice
intend to export not only crude
oil but product oils. The in-
tention led to ADNOC'a com-
pletion oi the lanai-barrel:-
ﬁy reﬁnery, but ita expamion
plan and fuel oil cradting are
being revised apparently
became oi thevoridwide trend
toward abunthnt auppliea oi
bothcrudeand protbet oih.

The refinery proceaeea the
Murban crude oil. (I the total
outputJdpercentialueloil.
demand tor lt remaining eon
anywhere in the world The
hydrocradiieg proieet'a acaling
down ia believed to have
slemmed from the toll demand
tor product. ieavim little room
(or product oil importa by
major comutning cwntriea. in
addition. Abu Dhabi is being
lorced to cut its crude oil

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the N1hon Keizai Shllibun, Inc.

CSO: 6120/ 75

35
non OFFICIAL use ONLY

production by
barrels a day col

The declined
estimated to
ADNOC to out
inveatment tor
crackle; ventm
projects will one
U100 billion

Besides Abe
Arabia. iran an
lathe peattwool
vulture into on
ior product 1
Graduation ' t

Exporting Can
that its member
to nearly double
raining oapac
million barrela a
lnnian revolutii
barrels at the el
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0860 OPPOSES SUBSIDIES 1‘0 HIG‘I TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 983, 1 Dec 81 pp 1, 19

[Article by Funio Tateiua]

[Text]

The Organization tor Eco-
nomic Cooperation and
Development tacitly criticized
Japan in a recent report that
said that governmental sub
sidies to high-technology
industries will “distort the
world's trade structure."

Otﬂciais oi the Ministry oi
International Trade It lndtatry
said "goverrlnerdal subidies"
the OECD referred to are.
threw: not speciﬁcally named.
(irected againt Japan's indu—
trial policy to subsidize the
government~private joint
development at ﬁlth-generation
computers and other ugh-tech-

neppe‘d out by its Secretariat
and contained in a report to a
session of the Subcommittee on
Positive Adjustmatt Policy
(PAP) held in Paris November
lG'l‘l.

In the report. the OECD ex~
pressed the view tint govern
mental subsidies for the
development a! technology and
industries will hinder tree
trade "in case one country
help a particular industry and
another country does not. the
IMIBW helped by the govern
ment will have a comparative
advantage over the other.
thereby increasing the com
petitive edge and enports. and
will eventually lead to a (Is.

torted trade structure wla‘cb
should be intrinsically tree and
coinL"therepoi-tsaid

it also Wed out that it
mimics engage in a race of
subsidies to particular inch:-
tries. that will generate world-
wide overinvestment and over-
capacity. and thereiore indu-
trial obveloptnent shouldbeled
by the wivate sector. not the
poet-rancid.

um otticials said the
ODCD's view is. though no
named. tireeted splint Ja-
pan's governmental subsidies.
such as the Mia-defunct Co
operative Lahorﬂoria‘ oi the
VISI Technology Research As»
sociation and the next-genera-
tion industrial lounthtion tech-
nology develrpment system.

AndtheJapanesedelegatesat
the subcommittee metered
this view by saying “it to
natural tor the pveruneil to
iiaervene in writing
and very risty rejects." They
also insisted that this OECD
view was contrary to the spirit
at the PAP wlsch holds. tint
male upholding a market
mechara‘sm. the government
shotdd create an environment
conducive to the development
ol indutrias to mamitacnire
high value-adthd W and
smoothly translorm the indu-
trial structure by phasing out
indtntries which lave tallen

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

behind the time.

meetlrg. France endot
Japanese view. but thi
State. West Germs!

meet other counblo es
their iniemlom to sup
0360 view.

The US. has repeats
govarunental subtitle
technology industrii

tinder lair competitii

Trail Representative
Brock indicated in Jul
is necelaary to seem
tiraly market oi a
tron early

developmuIt; he

industrial policy l
government-privati
developmentotlagh-ta
MB la a pub!
Japan's Mutual poi
creasing its tnternatio
petitivaneaa 'l'hb test
ported to he taken it
tuthcomingsessionol

tor Japan and as pa
the US. (to per cent :
expenditure are
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010006-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They also contacted that the
Japanese subsidies are limited
to the development of basic
technologies and do not covet
their commercialism nod
that new technologiu
developed Jointly by the
govern-neat and die nitrate
sector are all open to foreign
firms. with foreign tirmo
eligible for use at such sub-
sidies it they hove Japanese
subsidiaries and sufficient
tacorch facilities.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

CSO: 4120/75

FOR OFHC|3A7L USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010006-9
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N'I‘T PROPOSES HAYS IT CAN BECOME PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

Tokyo JAPAN EOOWHIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 983, 1 Dec 81 p 3

[Text]

Nippon Telegraph a Tele

phone Public Corp. last Wed-
nesday revealed it had worked
out on its own three 'hle
ways tor tinting itael into a
private enterprise or more like
one.
One ot N‘l'r's plan calls [or
it becoming a completely pri-
vate stocr company similar to
American Telephone 5 Tele
enphCO- _ .

Another is it other“ as a
"special caporatin" lite Ja-
pan Air Lines Co. or Kohusal
Deneta‘n Denvva On. [ta-med
with both private and govern
rnent capital. MI. is Japan's
sole international airline. while
KDD monopolize the netion‘s
avenue telecommunication
services.

We third plan envisages
retainim its management pat-
tern as a public corporation but
havim the law charged so tut
It will not he hound by the Gov-
ernment's hudpt or by other

orporatlon intends to
submit the plans “Installed

governmental can
mittee concerned \vlm math;
recommendations an admin-
istrative reiorms early next
January.

Moments reel tint N11”:
latest initiative is likely to spur
feeling now growing within the
Government that "11‘s unan-
aeerial setup should be
danced to a private attire.
partictdatly as each of in dire
alternative plans meets a
basic step in such a direction

N'l'l' President Hiaaahi Stanto
says that the operation a his
corporation M is re-
stricted in dealt in so many
ways. such est: a Govern
ment‘ahutbet. t cupca-
tion cannot actively undertake
heinees on its mend its lead-
ers catatot asstnne lull Muses
responsibility.

In other words. he intimates
that dissattslaction estate with-
in N11 itself as to its public
cormtloncharaeier.

Nﬂ'aflrstpianeyeauslm'

the swelled Au? (mule. A
completely private ﬁrm. A‘l‘h‘l‘
has a network virtually cin-
hraciu the us. There are also
abut 1000 indepentbu tele-
phone companies in the 0.3..

mtetlyreuonaLerhoeenet.
worItinnkupwithtlntol

A‘l‘h‘l‘Jncoen thaopera-
tiaialscaleotN‘l'l‘andA‘l‘h‘l'.
ltiajtnlcedtlntastoctcotn-
pany tor such a new setter
mldrequire lnltiallyatleaat

a capital at v1.01» billion.

JALorKDD meanscarryine
mthecorporation’shiebeas
asitnowis.0therttnnaotne
addihmelmnmenttnvot-
meat. it would have antral
phoneatthacrthen menace»

~pital prticipetion in a new

cornpanysuchaainthetorrnot
isntieehonatorthepartidpa-
tion.

FOR OFHCIaﬁ. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010006-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me third plan mints a
mtsioo o! the preset: law on
forming a! the cwporadon and
its operations. It suggests that
the cotponuon has to be freed
from hugetary restrictions and
that its need to receive ap
proval from the Diet and the
Posts 5 Telecommunications
Ministry must be neatly te-
laxed. It advocates a revision
also to wovbde some degree at
leeway in settim wages on a
management-anployee (Escu-
sm basis.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Keizai Shiubun, Inc.

C80: 4120/ 75

mo amt/21. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600010006-9
I‘UR UH‘ICIAL USE. ONLY

SCIENCE AND TBQiNOLOGY

JAPAN NATIONAL OIL CORP. EYES UNDERGROUND STOCKPILING 0F CRUDE

Tokyo JAPAN ECONCMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 983, 1 Dec 81 p 6

[Text]

Japan National Oil Corp.
will soon award a {gentil-
ity study contract to the
Japan Society [or the
Promotion oi Engineering
Industry to [robe the past-
hilitiea of stodpilit' cnaie
oil to rock lormatiata.

The study will he inden-
taken at (our audible
site. ineludiu Khulna
Town. - Blame Prdeettle.
where JNOC completed
demonstration stockpilirc
iacilities with storage
capacity oi 15.000 Idloiiters.
The coronation is slated to
start the lacllltlee' experi-
mental we in Fell-nary.
lat.

The stockpiling with
rocks as commonly prac-
ticed in Scandinavia. lea-
turee scooping out a part oi
a hard rock iortnation. such
as granite. Underwatnd
water is led into the space
so that its can
prevent leakage oi the
stockpiled crude oil.

Attrscted hy the method
JNOC asked m oi

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the

C80: 6120/75

International Trade 5 In-
dustry to iiod potentially
favorable sitea. For spots
were selected. Including
two in lamina Preiecv
litre.

Theieaaihilityshxhivill
eutteronroekstreuthand
avaﬂableapachiapcalol
mud. tmderu'otatd water
andinlrastmcure.1'heao-
ciety will do boring and
otherworkatoohtaintheae-
heyhia.

At Home. Taiyo Oil Co.
is ntanaginc We stock-
piling ,facilitia. following
their completion in August.
Experience with the
demonstration stockpile
plant led to uneven-in eco
nomic problems. Rock
scooping alone cost $40,000
a kiioliter. which eaceeth
the conventional mod
stockpile iacility minte-
tion by nearly no.” a
hiiotiter. JNOC is intereated

Nihon Keizai Shitiiun. Inc.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHMLOGY

FRENCH FIRM ASKS FOR ROBOT LICENSE 0F FUJITSU FANUC

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 983, 1 Dec 81 p 8

[Text]

Fujitsu Fanuc Ltd. has been
asked by France's Menuhin-
Automatic S.A. to concltide en
overall arrangement concern
in; the menuiactnre and sets
of hugh—ciﬁcicncy industrial
robots '

Under the proposed bmineee
tieup. the French macrene tool
builder hopes to obtain licersea
and know-how from the Jepe-
nese enterprise on ell models at
higheﬂiciency robots. includ»
in handling and euembltn‘
roboB.

Fujitsu Fenuc President
Seiernon ineba visited West
Germany in mid-September to
get prior mdentending trom
Siemens AG betore entering
talks with the French iirm.1'be
German electric-electrical ep
plience maker is a genre]
agency [or Fujitsu Fenuc's
robocin Europe.

lncidentali). omciais oi the

COPYRIGHT:

CSO: 6120/75

French and Jepenese Govern
ments are echeduled to confer
on how to promote bilateral co
operation in the rduot and other
tightechnoioo ﬁelds.

Njitsu Fame is also due to
sign e contract with Britain's
eoo Group Limited in widen in
December to provide the latter
with its robot menutacturine
expertise.

Moreover. the Japenece corn-
peny is now accounting with
Bendix Corp. a 0.8. auto prts
and aircraft maker. on reach-
in; e Miners liter.

Ceaa ol Jepenese robot
nunutecturen tyiu up with
Western enterprises have been
increaeiq recently. Hindi.
Ltd. and Mitsubishi Heavy In-
doatries. Ltd.. tor oomph.
hove provided Arnerice'e Gen-
eral Electric and Autrie'e
Welt-Alpine with their robot

production skills. respectively.

1981, the Nihon Ketui Shidmn, Inc.

’41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IUK utrlLana. 03‘ Ul‘LI

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

NISSAN USA TO INSTALL 210 ROBOTS AT PICKUP FACTORY

Tokyo JAPAN wouourc JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 983. 1 Dec 81 p a

[Text]

Nissan Motor Co. announced 31 will bempptiedbyoevilbiu
last Tusday that its American Co. of the 0.5. which hao a
subsidiary. Niaaan Motor m; licence! Norway'a ‘l'rallta Nth
Corp. U.S.A.. will inatall no Underhai‘AG.

Industrial robots at its pickup Installation at the robot's at
trudsfactorynoaundu'con- theSmyrna plantvin begin
struction at Smyrm in the tranaroundnmtlarcb.

suburbs ot Nashville. Tan- ltn atart~t|rb W for
neaaee. theiallolimmttianywitha

A Nissan spokesman aaidtbe monthly 13.000 vehicle
introduction 0! robot: will capacity.
enable the Smym phnt to
attain more operation automa-
tionasa ateptonialteoplor
relatively low yummy of
indigenous worker-L

'nie ‘l‘enneuee monthly line
Will that become the nut
automated anion Niaaan'a all
plants atlnnieand abroad.

The 210 mots will be Glu-
pooed at [our models. lnclndn‘
spot-welding. arc-welding and
pointinu robots. with 10 to be
supplied by Kamki Heavy
lndustrie. Lu. so by Osaka
Transformer Co. and so by
Nissan Motor. The rennin!“

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Keizai Stu-bun. Inc.
C80: 4120/ 75
IENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

tecently repoﬂed um um:
Japanese and! mm plan-
n‘ms new in civilian tampon
plans were maxing Beam
(‘0. at the U .S‘ as a ptﬂnﬂ’ aver
compehng American and Wu:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equﬂ
«merchant-u

a "peﬂed
alt “pacts

plum.
an" in Juan. and
by the soda

Wt" tn

0"
dubbed
H)“ UN‘ItIAL use. ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

JAPAN WANTS PRATT 8 WHITNEY TO JOIN ENGINE PLAN “In! UK

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOHIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 983, 1 1‘80. 81 p 9

[Text]

Japan's three aircratt engine
matters want United Tech-
nologies Corp.'s Pratt Ii
Whiney Group to join their jet
engine development project
now beirc propelled with Brit-
ain's RollrrRoyce Ltd.

The three are lstdnwajimeo
Harima Heavy Industries Co..
Kawasaki Heavy industries.
Ltd. and Mitsubishi Heavy In»
dustriee. Ltd.

They apparently iind it ad-
vrsable [or them to win the
world‘s biggest emine pro
diner to their side tomeed in
their XJB engine project sti-
mated to coeturnuchas m)
billion.

Also behind their move is the
call at noeir' Co. oi the 11.8. to
invite POW to the XJB reject.
Boeing is now regarded as the

COPYRIGH':

C50: 4120/ 75

most likely partner oi thee
Japoneee - Mill.
Klil and Fuji )1.le
Ltd. — oi Japan‘s nut WO-
tion civil aircraft vxx.

Asthenewenuneunderthe
XJB projecthachedtledtobe
equipped on the new YXX.
itisoptothedeveiopeutoaeek
miiormity inthestate-runen»
gineandaircraitprojeete.

lﬂl President Taiji Ubuhata
visited the United Statea two
weeks ago to center with Pull
exeuttiva on the matter.

The Japanese trio will prev
for their British partnu Rolls.
Royce to decide. by the year
endattheeariieetmnttnuiec»
tion oi partner: — either raw
or another us. candithte. Gen
erol Electric Co.

1981. the Nihon Kauai. Shllbun. Inc.

lih

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JAEI ’10 SUPPLY 0.8. FIRMS um FLIGHT CONTROL EQUIPMENT

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 983, 1 Doc 81 p 9

[Text]

Japan At-iation Electronics
industry. Ltd. has reached
agreement with America‘s
Honeywell. inc. and Smith
industries. Inc: to supply air-
crait navigation control equip-
ment. worth more tho no
billion. on a loncoterm basis.

it is rare for a since Japa-
nese enterprise to win such a
large quantity oi [lists control
systems irom abroad. Bio-13h
valves or other airborne prod
ucts so iar have been exported
insmaiiioia.

Under the accord with Honey-
welL JAE! will provide the 0.5.
enterprise with inertial naviga-
tion system components. in
eluding accelerometers. power
swrce and cards over a to-year
period beginning in 182.

The Japanese company will
also supply Smith lndustris
with microwave altimeters and

other components for small
and medium planes over the
next H years until tm.

JAEI's combined ala‘pments
to Honeywell and Smith indus-
tries will amount to ”.300
million in we: and peak several
years later at ”Miriam
million. The contract values in
the two ion-term ayeements

COPYRIGRT :

C50: 4120/75

are estimated to total between
voodoo million and "0.4m
million

It appears that the American
aircarﬂ equipment makers are
too busy meeting massive
orders [or deter-e emitpment
irom their cavemen to
accept more orders ior civil
aircrait equipment

1981, the Nlhon Keizei. Shit-bun. Inc.
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Tokyo JAP
[Textl
With me dun d the so Nun-new
and velaSI (very lug-3:10? hymn! ”MMPdWWW
imam citcuiu in. v: ry mun-u
it“ been inwuilyinc among “‘3‘. 3““; “mum”
mac and Ameﬂan sun; “'3‘“; 1: '51.: :Woomﬂ
“c "aims“: q“ a R u .......... NO! “WWW"...-
m?“ mantac‘ums. "°‘"‘""‘"‘ '2 :2: no :hvgm
upm's mom pro mun . .............. a . w
auction equipment maximum mm” m m" °“'."‘"'""' '1'" W
been expunding n no a W "W" W‘ M“ """“'" ""'"‘
me 0! than an per cent on
New“ 0' “W 9"“ M Tokyo u‘ «up mgu' pct-gm mum. vs.»
“WWW” "WWW?“ b! an «Mm production Ila-1o: M and! ad I»
“mum” mania-mm: ©3de viii! mm mm mum-mat. as.
“*‘wmwhmm umuam MW.W
mwﬂl‘mm‘m mot “We! WWu-w 5'
“~de “W" cm a u u mm W alum-ted (0 ma: mun
"‘9 N“ “a“ "“° 9* was! coup-w may and billion mu year. and!“ to
WM"! “PM.“ 0‘3"“ by Nina“ sumo u and mm mm. 11: «mt
“‘9 M d me" Nah-precast» Vanna Auochm a! mum. value wm column to grow at I
“WW “‘3' h.“ 9°" The» compose an who yudy um a 3mm! 3) par
W “'5‘ “ ‘° W“ "'° "W.“ m «plants on on mad-u- can in on comm mot-l
my. shares id by Amer-can plush“ ol the u “I. W.MM
W'W‘W “Wm"- m" 5 mm equip: mum mumuwsmn
Verdun-Elm" Cow and (ICA MM“ m m 3mm: ‘0, l. ‘m ‘0 W w W" ’
CW We: Mum cl Japan. has! "moon we ht
"Wm"? ““9"" , “m" we market at the km “51:. They expect Ignatiu-
3"" ”hm“ ‘° W“ “’5' 9"" tor Mun-rebut! ‘odutry the exp-mm tn demand and
durum can-paw!“ manuluclur if" ‘0 V“ When in i”. N“ “a.“ lot NM
m1! PM“ "'3‘ “"7 W‘ m" compund to an mum tot Wadi-II aqdpium.
min: «mom» . me gnaw Malayan-mm
cm“ '“c "‘d "‘PW‘ “° Industry. 11: «co Hum an woman Ind wall!
“9“" “ K" °°“‘ "M ”m “Wm!“ «mm mod! and! 10 per cent a Jupn'
‘9'" m "9" Wm“ break- am m we who semiconductor maven.
W0“ ‘f 'Wm“; “Sam” tor alumna-nor mam mm at. am
no" ° °‘ ’ cu m bu
Kokusal .Eiecmc Co. has QWL ‘10:“an z: w and“ 03. ll
sumd buryduu a plgntlo pm vi “'w'“ I I! “M I . minding m. I!
1' "new 0' mumm- w man. '4 union (or mm aid mu Japan. and Mn!
semtconduclot ptoducuon mud“: ' 0 hi Int .m. a“ M m “l“
“m" “m" m” “ K ‘ con mu}: m amen tor «mean-cm '
[L6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010006-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In an attempt to stop the.
akiddilc. Perkin-Elma and
GCA plan to mm new
products in the Japanm
market next year. ‘l'endyne.
Km. an automalad LS! testing
equipment maku. has waded
outa Japan Planto/mhucul-
mm the Japanese matkel.
Other Amedcan ptoduc'en an
now plamlng rollback pro
grams. ohaerven say.

wPYRIGB'l': 1981. the Nihon K312.“ Shiﬁun, Inc.

680: 6120/ 75

147
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500010006-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND ncrmowcr

tosruan mvrsmss Anvmcmc nrro cw murmur Ham
Tokyo JAPAN economc 30mm. in Buglioh Vol 19. no 983, 1 Dec 81 p 10

[Text]

Toshiba Corp. recently
revealed a plan to move into
the prom'udng computer-aided
desigring (CAD) eqtipment
marketnextsummer.

The Tokyo company plans to
introduce a generol-purpce
system incorporating a high
speed super mlnkornpuler.

thh Toshibn'a revelation. all
0! Japan's leading alterat-
purpoee computer builders.
Including Milsu Lid. Nippon
Electric Co. end Hitachi. Ltd.
will be handing CAD system
next summer.

As many information
processing equipment makers
and trader: already are in the
market. competition will
further intensity in the CAD
system market. lndutrymen
weave.

GDPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Ketzai Shidaun. Inc.

680: 6120/75 END

[:8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY