Hm ()l-‘I-1(‘IAI. IISF UNI \'

JPRS L/10236
5 January 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the inforo
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in content.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/l

5 Jenna:

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 1/82)

CONTENTS

tum-ARAB mums

Briefs
Iraqi Supplies Transiting Jordan
EGYPT
Changes in Power Structure Feasible in Post-Sadat Egypt
(AL-HAT“ AIP'ARABI, 9-15 03"; 81) oooo-ooooooooooo-ooooo
IRAQ
Briefs
011 Contracts Sought
QATAR

Briefs
Budget Decrease

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Circumstances Surrounding Extension of Constitution, Reelecoion

Examined
(Ahmad Hafiz; AL-HATAN AL—‘ARABI, 27 Nov-3 Dec 81) ......
FOR OFFICIAL IISF UNIX

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

IRAQI SUPPLIES TRANSITING JORDAN--Iraqi officials estimate the amount of goods
coming into Iraq through the Jordanian port of 'Aqabah this year to be around five
million tons. These officials assured the Jordanian private transport sector that
the establishment of the Iraqi-Jordanian Land Transport Company was not intended

to take on this large a role in transport. They made it clear that the company
would transport about two million tons per year, leaving the Jordanian private
transport sector three million tons, if it can handle this amount. Hr. 'Abd-al-
Sitar al-Ravi, Iraqi deputy minister of transportation and chairman of the hiﬂxer
coordination emission for transport in Iraq, stated that the company was estab-
lished to take the place of foreign transport companies that own fleets of transport
vehicles including 2500 freight carriers. Branches of the company will be opened in
Kuwait as well as in Baghdad. [Excerpt] [Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 247,

6-12 Nov 31 p 65]

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL WATAN AL ARABI

080: “06/179

1
FOR OFFIClAI. USE ONLY
CHANGES IN POWER STRUCTURE POSSIBLE IN POST-SADAI EGYPT

Paris Al-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 2 3. 9-15 Oct 81 pp 13-20

(Article: ”Whose Legacy? Two Camps. Nine Names; Military Likely to Tip Balance"]
[Text] what will follow Sadat?

The question does not anticipate the reply of the Egyptian people, holders of power.
who misled all observers by their silence, their self-control and their slow. steady
movement. Their rhythm is like the streams of the River Nile in the heart of the
valley. It stops at dams and it sometimes falters when it collides with rocks. but
it keeps on growing drop by drop until the inundation suddenly begins. surprising
everyone by its power as it floods the dams and rocks in its path.

Like a dream to some, a nightmare to others. the world watched Sadat's last moment
on television as the bullets of Egyptian soldiers struck him down, just as it had
watched on television in 1977 as he disembarked from the plane which carried him to
occupied Jerusalem and shook hands with Begin. watched in 1978 as he strolled with
Carter and Begin on the grounds of Camp David, allies linked by a common agreement.
and watched him in 1979 at the White House as he signed the peace treaty between
his regime and Israel. Television cameras accompanied all of his steps. from the
time he turned his back to the Arabs. Palestine and the Egyptian people until the
final moment of his life as he fell in his field marahal's uniform at the hands of
the Egyptian army. the comrade of the bloody battle of the 6 October crossing. in
the middle of the military review held on the eighth anniversary of the crossing.

After the shock of the assassination. it seems from observing the surface movement

of events that the "Sadat regime" is trying to cling to power and continue along
the path "without Sadat." The reply is. "Re are here." when one asks the question:
"What will follow Sadat?"

The government is coming together under the leadership of Husni Mubarak. vice-
president of the republic. who escaped the bullets. He was clearly seen on the
television screen as he emerged safely. groping his way out of the pile of chairs
at the back of the presidential reviewing stand. At the beginning of the review
he had been seated next to the president at the front of the stand.

The government, which about a month ago had arrested more than 5.000 opponents of

Sadat's policy. represents all parties and political. ideological and social trends
in the country. It decided to apply the text of the constitution and appoint Dr

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ltﬂlfﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE‘0NLN

Sufi Abu Talib. head of the People's Assembly. to take over the duties of the
presidency until a constitutional election could be held in no more than 66 days.
It also announced the nomination of Husni Mubarak to fill the office of the pres-
idency. That was accompanied by a declaration of a state of emergency and the
occupation of all major installations and streets in Cairo and the other large
cities by central security forces and special forces to counter popular demonstra-
tions. not to speak of the forces of the Republic Guard. All members of the armed

forces were confined to their barracks.

Who Is Heir?

It appears from following events that there are certain individuals who consider
themselves "Sadat's rightful heir." By rank. they are as follows:

First: Muhammad husni Mubarak. vice-president of the republic and former commander
of the air force. He is nrt supported by any political party. Egyptians. Arabs
and foreigners who know him seem to feel that his intellectual and political
abilities are extremely limited. He was no more than Sadat's shadow. or as he said
of himself: "I graduated from the Sadat political university." His activities in
effect alternated between the work of the president's secretariat and carrying his
messages to heads of state. He was present at so‘many meetings that the Egyptian

people derisively dubbed him "the meeting man."

About a year ago it was noted that his standing with the president had begun to
decline. as the rising star of a young man with a remarkable degree of intelligence
and political experience began to crowd him aside. This was Hansur Hasan. for whom
the Ministry for Presidential Affairs was created in order to place it beside the
Ministry for Culture and Information. Thus he took over most of the jurisdiction
of Husni Mubarak, who withdrew relatively to the shadows. However. it did not take
long for Mubarak to return recently after expressing extraordinary enthusiasm in

support of the widespread arrest ~ampaign launched by President Sadat against his
opponents a month before he was assassinated, while Hansur Hasan was fearful of its

effects on the regime.

Second: Hrs Jihan Sadat. wife of the president, whose official title became "First
Lady of Egypt." In fact. she shared power with her husband. She has her office
which issues resolutions and executive orders to the ministers. It is rumored that
she appointed at least a third of the current ministers. It is well'known that she
is closely linked with major businessmen who benefit from the economic "open-door"
policy. She controls more than 100 members of the People‘s Assembly who owe her
allegiance. including thirty women who were elected in special districts created

in accordance with an amendment to the election law which was drafted and passed
through her work. She also heads the local People's Assembly for al-Minufiyah
Governorate and teaches in the Department of Arab Literature in the College of Arts
at Cairo University. She has her private circles which are made up of intellectuals
college professors and journalists. Two months ago it was rumored that the female
members of the People'° Assembly. under the leadership of Dr Suhayr al—Qslamawi
(who supervised Jihan a master's thesis). had prepared draft legislation to appoint
"the First Lady“ as vice-president of the republic. No one in Egypt disagrees on
the First Lady's love of power and ambition. because she is “Egypt's Isabella" like
Argentina‘s Isabella, who took over after the death of her husband. President Peron.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Third; The well-known building contractor 'Uthman Ahmad 'Uthman. who is related

by marriage to the president; his son Mahmud is married to Sadat's youngest daughter.
He gave a wedding gift of a million pounds; he enjoyed the intimate confidence of
the president. and he administered his activities and personal finances. He held
the post of minister of h0using and then the post of deputy prime minister for what
are called popular development projects. He was removed after viclent public re-
action against his notorious book "My Experience." in which he disparaged the late
President Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir and his family. However, he declared that he was
exonerated of the accusations leveled at his book, and although he resigned from
his official post, in agreement with President Sadat he continued to carry out his
former responsibilities under the title of "Official in the Democratic National
Party in charge of Popular Development." In addition to the Arab Contractors
Company. which has become a "state within a state.“ he controls more than 150
companies and banks which form the base of the parasitic class and its links to
international capitalism. Despite his success in the field of business and commer-
cial dealings he lacks political experience. and he is widely detested by the people
because he embodies a living example of "corruption" in contemporary Egyptian
society.

Fourth: Sayyid Har'i. who represents the wealthy rural class. He enjoys wide
political expertise which he gained through his experience in public service from
tie time of King Faruq until the present. He held a number of cabinet and parlia-
mentary posts in the era of 'Abd-al-Nasir and Sadat, including minister of
agriculture and speaker of the People's Assembly. He now heads the Board of
Advisers to the President of the Republic. apost created by President Sadat about
a year before his death. it brings together about 150 experts to offer advice.
Despite all of this formal apparatus created by Sadat. in the framework of the
Struggle for power he can play a relatively important role with this gathering of
experts. Besides. Har'i is President Sadat's second Sun-in-law [as published].

Fifth: Lt Gen Muhammad Abu Ghazalah, minister of defense. who was near President
Sadat on the reviewing stand at the time of the attack. He participated in the
October War and then. after the cementing of relations with the United States. was
chosen to fill the post of military attache to Washington. He remained at that
post for almost 5 years. until he was appointed chief of general staff of the armed
forces and minister of defense as successor to the late Lt Gen Ahmad Badawi, who
lost his life with a number of his senior aides in a heliocopter crash at Hahat
Suyuh. near the Libyan-Egyptian border, in a mysterious fashion which still raises
a number of question marks. Lt Gen Abu Ghazalah is considered the engineer of the
relations of the American-Egyptian military alliance. It was rumored that
Nashington was displeased when President Sadat entrusted him with open posts on the
surface. as it wanted him to remain in the shadows as long as possible.

Sixth: Maj Gen Muhammad Nabawi Isma'il, who occupies the post of deputy prime
minister and minister of the interior. He is a "policeman" in every sense of the
word. He revealed his fascist tendencies in his dealings with the masses. on the

One hand. and his nature as a compliant tool for oppression in the hands of the
ruler, whoever that may be. He set about to form a new police apparatus on the

West German model. numbering more than 350.000. It is closer to an army in view
of the heavy armored weapons it possesses.

1:
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Seventh: Dr Sufi Aha Tallb. current head of the People's Assembly. who has taken
over as temporary president according to the provisions of the constitution until

a constitutional presidential election is held. He was professor of law and rector
of the University of Cairo. and he played the role of "legal tailor," fashioning
all of President Sadat's desires into law. The most famous of these was the vice
law. He is a lightweight personality. but he has a Machiavellian character.

Eighth: Dr Hustafa Khalil. former prime minister and vice-president in charge of
foreign affairs for the National Democratic Party. He was well-known for his
liberalism. but he lost it after his fate was linked with Camp David and all of
the repressive measures taken by President Sadat against his opponents. Today he
occupies the position of chairman of the board of the Arab International Bank.
which is considered one of the chief bases of the economic open-door policy and

the main channel of communication with international capitalism. In Egyptian and
Arab society he is considered a politician on the American roster.

Ninth: Mansur Hasan, who last month lost his ma.n posts as minister for presi-
dential affairs and minister of culture and information. as a result of his
reservations about the recent campaign of arrests. However. he still retains his
membership in the political office of the ruling party. He enjoys an open political
mentality. and he has formed political circles linked to him in the state and
information apparatus and among university professors. Also. by his contacts with
the intelligence apparatus as minister for presidential affairs. he has accumulated
dangerous secrets about the regime and its senior people. Egyptian society lists
him. as well as Dr Hustafa Khalil. on the American roster.

Are They in Agreement?

These are the nine main characters left on the stage by President Sadat after his
death. These outside this circle remain largely on the sidelines.

The question is: If granted the conditions. canthesepeople agree among themselves
on dividing the legacy and the responsibilities?

It appears that they are trying to give this outward appearance. in spite of the
sharp differences among them.

It seems that they “alone" are unable personally and objectively to hold power for
long. even if they agreed.

From the personal standpoint. their share of power in Sadat'a era did not go beyond
performing the work of the secretariat or carrying out the orders of the "father of
the family." Host of them have only a minimum of political experience and popular
base.

From the objective standpoint. their commitment to Sadat's domestic. Arab and

foreign policy. which they always directly confirmed and which won them their posts
during Sadat's lifetime. has become an obstacle and a burden encumbering them after
he is gone. so that in order to win popular support the new era is forced to present
a picture completely different from Sadat and his policies.

Host observers expect to see two main camps sparring within the circle of these
nine people.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the first camp consists of Jihan Sadat, Sayyid Mar'i, Hustafa Khalil. Mansur Hasan
and It Gen Abu Ghazalah.

The first camp aims at Installing Sayyid Har'i as president and Mustafa Khalil as
Han

prime minister. sur Hasan and Lt Gen Abu Ghazalah would remain as prominent
stars in Sadat's regime without Sadat. Jihan Sadat would retain the title and
importance of First Lady. unchanged.

The second camp wants to entrust the presidency to Husni Mubarak and install Sufi
Abu Talib as prime minister. Al-Nabawi Isma'il would continue as deputy prime
minister and minister of the interior. This camp is attempting to win Lt Gen Abu

Military Card

Both camps depend on the "strength of the army" to impose their desired form.
Therefore.thearmed forces are the trump card to tip the balance in favor of either

more than 5 years ago. This led to an intense struggle between Mubarak and Lt Gen
Muhammad 'Abd-aI-Ghani al-Jamasi which ended with the latter's retirement. This

forces, on one hand. and on the other the existence of a number of secret organiza-
tions within the army. which published a number of anti-Sadat and anti—Camp David
pamphlets. These are organizations divided among themselves by all of the political
trends and currents of society. They have not yet achieved any degree of unity,

Sadat last September against his opponents. It is not yet known with which group
those who assassinated President Sadat are associated. Are they affiliated with
FOR OFHCIM. USE ONLY

ul Ihv political forces. especially the religious ones, against her, and also most
of the men of the first camp. It will try to concentrate on enabling the second
camp to seize power, if only for a relatively long transition period. This will
grant the United States the opportunity to rearrange the region in the absence of
Sadat, who personally was one of the mainstays of American strategic policy in
Egypt and the region, meanwhile searching for personalities with political weight
to support the new regime. For example there is Zakariya Huhyi-al-Din. former
member of the Revolutionary Command Council, who opposed Sadat but did not trans-
late this opposition into action, as did his other colleagues.

However. this "scenario" on the surface of events is not the only one possible.
More than one other "scenario" exists.

Alternate "Scenario"

The alternate "scenario“ is that of the Egyptian nationalist movement in all of its
directions coming together within the framework of a national coalition front.
President Sadat arrested a large number of its symbolic figures. leaders and cadres.
It appears that in the heart of society there are still leaders and cadres of the
national coalition front who are distinguished by their political expertise. organ-
izational abilities and experience in government administration. They include

such people as 'Abd-al-Latif Baghdadi and Kamal-al-Din Husayn. two members of the
Command Council of the July Revolution; 'Aziz Sidqi and Sidqi Sulayman, former prime
ministers; Dr Hurad Ghalib, former foreign minister; Humtaz Nasser. chief justice
and representative of the liberal forces; Ibrahim Shukri. head of the Socialist
Labor Party. and his comrades; Khalid Muhyi-al-Din. head of the National Progressive
Unionist Coalition Party, and his colleagues; the leaders of the Hafd Party; repre-
sentatives of the religious movement, the most prominent of whom are Muhammad
'Atiyah Khamis, head of the Muhammad's Youth Society; Dr Ahmad Sayf-al-Islam Hasan
al-Banna. son of Rasan al-Banna. who feunded the Muslin Brotherhood group; and
Shaykh Abu Isma'il, member of the People's Assembly. The national coalition has
presented a comprehensive policy alternative to Sadat's policy. embodied in the
establishment of a national federation regime representing all of the forces of the
coalition. It would call for a constituent assembly to draw up a constitution for
a democratic. partliamentary republican regime working to return to Egypt to the
Arab ranks; freeze the Camp David agreements and the peace with Israel. and submit
the whole matter for discussion with the Arabs to build a new united strategic
position; end the economic open-door policy; and enter a path of complete economic-
social development within the framework of cooperation and integration with the
Arab economy.

It is not unlikely. and observers think it most likely, that the.national coalition
which succeeded in arriving at common programs among its diverse forces (including
the fundamentalist forces of the Muslim Brotherhood. the Islamic groupings. and

the Egyptian Coptic Church) might attract the secret nationalist organizations in
the armed forces to its programs. This explains President Sadat's initiative in
concentrating his arrest campaign on this coalition. Observers note in this regard
that Maj Gen Salah Abu Sa'dah, former commander of the Republican Guard. was among
those who signed the coalition's statements.

However, in its quest for power the national coalition will meet resistance from
the rest of Sadat's regime, tae Americans and Israel. The outcome of the struggle

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in favor of either side depends on the abilities of the popular movement and which
way the armed forces throw their weight.

The third possible "scenario" is what could be called the mongrel regime. This
would rely on the United States and some of the Arab powers to form a new political
coalition bringing together elements from the remaining regime and elements from
the national coalition, receiving a minimum of popular support and the support of
the armed forces. assuming power in a transitional stage and following a moderate
reform policy in harmony with some Arab powers. with the provision that this coali-

tion form would be reconsidered later.

In any case. the "phenomenon of violence" has begun to crystallize for the first
time as a major factor in the political movement in Egyptian sceiety. Sadat was
the one who introduced this factor with his strong repressive measures against his
opponents in the political and military field, and in the end he became its victim.

recorded as the first assassinated president of the republic in Egypt's history.

It seems that there is a likelihood that the movement of violence and counter-
violence within Egyptian society will increase before control is attained. This
must continue, because Egypt is cleansing itself of Sadat's Camp David policies
with all of their domestic, Arab and international dimensions.

Ten Stations--Deviations

One can summarize the course of Sadat's deviation in the major stations. They are:

On 15 Hay 1971, he delivered the coup de grace to the Nasirist forces in the
regime, headed by 'Ali Sabri and his group, in what was called the "15 May Revo-
lution," with the intention of reducing the importance of the “23 July Revolution"

led by Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir.

Between 15 May and 6 October, Sadat laid the foundation for his new position as
Washington's first ally in the region. His dispute with Moscow escalated. and he

expelled more than 20,000 Soviet experts. He began to plan to convert the Nasirist
successes to "mistakes," making use of the religious movement.

After the battle of the crossing. direct negotiations began with the Israeli enemy
(the lOl-kilometer tent) in 1973. which ended with the severing of the first and

second commitments in preparation for Egypt's withdrawal from the struggle.

After these talks the Lebanese war broke out with all of its ramifications and
complications, as one of the direct results of Sadat's Arab policy and Egypt's

turning its back to the Arabs.

In 1977 he put down the upheaval of 18 and 19 January. calling it an "unlawful
uprising." It had broken out as a spontaneous expression over deteriorating
economic and social conditions.

On 19 November of the same year, 2 days before 'Id al-Adha. he took off for Israel
on a civilian airplane, inaugurating the most dangerous stage in the history of
the Arab-Israeli struggle. the "Camp David" phase.

8
Iron OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 17 September 1978 he signed the unfortunate "Camp David" agreements in view of
the whole world and under the auspices of the American "Arabs."

In the subsequent stage he tried to cover up widespread Palestinian and Arab
resentment by beginning a "scenario" of "home rule" talks which are still going
around in a circle of hollow bargaining.

At the beginning of September 1981 he ordered the largest arrest campaign in the
history of modern Egypt. including more than 5.000 Egyptians whose views differed
from his. All of this was done in the name of "democracy" and in the guise of

plebiscites.

He had intended to hold joint meetings between Egyptian People's Assembly and the
Israeli Knesset as of next December—January, to give the stamp of popular impetus,
but he fell, as a lesson to consider.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

7587
C50: 4504/50

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-'I-‘K'IM. INF ()Nl.\

IRAQ

BRIEFS

OIL CONTRACTS SOUGHT-4h: primary oil consuming countries and oil companies have
shown great interest in Iraqi oil in preparation for the period which will follow
the end of the Iran-Iraq var. Nov. governments are trying to secure long-range con-
tracts for the acquisition of Iraqi oil. while cospanies are showing a special in-
terest in oil exploration projects in this Arab country. Many companies have moved
their regional headquarters from other Gulf countries to Baghdad. Iraq was the
second largest oil exporting country in 1979 (3.45 million barrels/day) after Saudi
Arabia. Although its proven reserves amount to 30 billion barrels, which places
Iraq sixth in the world in energy reserves, the probability is still very high that
other oil fields will he discovered. [Text] [Paris AL-HA’IAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic

No 250. 27 Nov-3 Dec 81 p 68]

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL UATAN AL ARAB]:

050: “04/177

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

BUDGET DECREASE--‘lhere has been a 6.6 percent decrease in the new Qatari budget
which covers a year and a half. The cutback is aimed at decreasing expenditures
while improving the quality of production. The budget figure is 8,362 Iillion
Qatari riyals. The budget includes appropriations for financing the needs of na-
tional industry. Among the most important growth and service proejcts are the con-
pletion of radio and television inprovenents and the construction of schools and
hospitals. [Text] [Paris AL-WATAN AL—hRABI in Arabic No 250, 27 Nov-3 Dec 81 p 66]

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AI. UAW A1. ARAB!

cso: MOM/177

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED ARAB MM’I’BS

CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING EXTENSION OF CONSTIWTION, REELPXITION EXAMINED
Paris AL-HWTAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 250, 27 Nov-3 Dec 81 pp 33, 34

[Article by Ahmad Hafiz: "The Emirates in the Season of Surprises. What Govern-
ment After Renewal, Extension?"]

[Text] The domestic political arena in the United Arab Emirates is witnessing, these
days. intense political activity within the framework of "reorganizing in-house
affairs", from forming a new governnent to reorganizing the National Council (the
parliament). The questions of the hour are many, including: who Hill be the next
prime minister? Who will be the new National Council chairman? why did the Supreme
Council of Rulers agree at the last moment to extend the provisional constitution,
instead of deciding on a new constitution?

rulers of the seven emirates, agreed to extend the provisional constitution for
another 5 years, whereas all of the citizens of the emirates hoped and expected that
the provisional constitution would not be extended for a new term.

One view, or opinion, advocates not extending the provisional constitution for
another term. insisting on the necessity of implementing a new permanent constitu-

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second view does not see the necessity of changing the provisional constitution.
Rather, it advocates maintaining the status quo by extending the presidency of
Shaykh Zayid to a third term since his extensive political qualification and
sophistication have been established in handling affairs of state and successfully
solving disputes between the emirates. This view is led by the emirate of Dubai.

It is worth indicating here that the call for a permanent constitution means an
increase in measures aimed at achieving complete unity among the emirates, since
this unity is still lacking in various aspects. Each emirate still enjoys independ-
ence in many matters including defense, finance, petroleum, etc.

The issue of a permanent constitution has inspired debate and argument which. at times,
has taken the form of popular marches calling for complete unity among the seven
emirates.

This. then. was the situation as the expiration of the provisional constitution
approached (for the second time) as well as the expiration of the second term of
Shaykh Zayid's presidency. Both were to expire on 2 December.

Since the highest political authority in the country is the Supreme Council of Rulers
headed by Shaykh Zayid, the rulers of the emirates began a series of discussions

and consultations about 2 months ago which culminated with a meeting during the

first week of November. Before the meeting, news spread throughout the entire coun-
try that the rulers of the emirates had arrived at a compromise between extending the
provisional constitution and the presidency of Shaykh Zayid for another 5 years,

and letting the provisional constitution expire and forming a new constitution.

The compromise which everyone expected was to extend the constitution for only

2 years and. likewise, Zayid's presidency. During this term the new permanent con-
stitution for the country would be decided upon and the steps toward federation

which have been taken during the last 10 years would be evaluated. News of this
compromise spread an atmosphere of relief through various quarters here, relief

which delayed or blocked the differences which had been spreading and which gave

shape to a judicious call to discuss the aspects of the problem in a calm and deliber-
ate fashion. Furthermore. insiders in the United Arab Emirates saw this compromise as
a preferable and reasonable solution. consistent with the nature of affairs in this
country where the officials avoid serious decisions.

Despite these expectation, the results produced by the Supreme Council meeting were
to the contrary. A high official who had been following the Council's meetings and
discussions from close proximity stated to AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI that the members of
the Council entered the decisive meeting completely satisfied that it would not take
longer than a few minutes only to put their signatures on the compromise, the con-
tents of which were actually prepared. However, the meeting lasted a long time and
the members emerged with the following solution which took everyone by surprise:
Extension of the provisional constitution for a second term (5 years) and renewal

of Shaykh Zayid's presidency for the same term.

There is no argument about the fact that the reelection of Shaykh Zayid was naturally
expected. The man had established his great capabilities and qualifications in
handling the country's affairs and besides, there was no alternative in light of

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z (WIN

present local, Arab and international circumstances. Rather. it was the extension
of the provisional constitution for another term that surprised local political ob-

servers here.

In accordance with the text of the provisional constitution. the decision of the
Supreme Council of Rulers would undoubtedly be given over to the National Consul-
tative Council (parliament) for deliberation and the requisite people's stamp of
approval which must appear on the resolutions of the emirates' rulers. And so it
was. The National Council met in an extraordinary session to debate and discuss

the resolutions of the Council of Rulers. It was one of the strangest sessions ever
witnessed by the Natonal Council whose members are accustomed to debating legisla-
tive matters, issues and problems presented to thanindetsiled form. Many times the
council's hall has known serious clashes in opinion, differences in points of view
and tenacity on the part of each member in presenting his opinion so forcefully at
times as to approach violence. After Chairman Turayim 'Umran Turayim (of al-
Shariqah) announced that the session was open to discussion. representative Sultan
al-Habtur (of Dubai) requested that the council chairman begin a voice vote on the
draft resolution of the Supreme CounciJ.ofRulers. It was strange that no one ob-
jected, except a very small minority, to the Dubai representative's proposal to be-
gin the vote and not open the door to discussion as is normally the case.

After the representative's proposal was discussed for a few minutes, 34 members out
of 40 (6 were absent) cast their votes. The results of the vote were as follows:

31 members agreed on the draft resolution of the Supreme Council of Rulers to ex-
tend the validity of the provisional constitution for another 5 years and, likewise,
the term of Shaykh Zayid's presidency. Three members dissented including the chair-
man of the council himself, Turayim 'Umran Turayim. The other two members were
Rashid ibn Dimes, also from al-Shariqah, and Salih al-Shalah from Ra's al-Khaymah.

with this result came the agreement to postpone formation of a permanent constitu-
tion for the country simultaneously from the government and the people.

So the previous stage, with its positive and negative aspects. will continue as

it has since the establishment of the United Arab Emirates. This has been the first
experiment in Arab unity to succeed in maintaining its identity. as it has for the
past 10 years.

The President of the New Covernment..."ho Hill It Be?

The National Council will remain as one of the constitutional institutions in the
country. The council, according to the (provisional) constitution, conducts the
appointment of new members every & years. The current 4-year term end in December
of this year and, therefore. discussions are currently underway concerning the
formation of a new council. The method to be followed in choosing members is
that the ruler of each emirate selects the representatives of his emirate to the
council based on the size and number of residents of the emirate. As for the council
chairman, the members elect him from among themselves once every 2 years. Poli-
tical circles in the emirates are now busy with two matters since the matters of
the highest leadership in the country have been settled: formation of an new
National Council; formation ofa new government. Up to this point there are
three candidates for the presidency. They are: Shaykh Sultan ibn Muhammad

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKIAI. USE ONLY

al-Qasimi, the ruler of al-Shariqah; Shaykh Khalifah ibn Zayid, crown prince of
Abu Dhabi and sons of the president, Shaykh Zayid; Shaykh Maktun ibn Rashid, the
crown prince of Dubai.

The formation of a new cabinet comes for two reasons: because of the new phase
the country is entering after renewal of the president's term and extension of the

validity of the provisional constitution; because of the ill health of the present
prime minister.

Political predictions and rumors fill the air of the emirates concerning the new

candidate to head the government and each potential candidate has his supporters
and protagonists.

However, in light of the surprises which have occurred up until now, entering

into conjecture and analysis on this natter would prove as groundless as the shift-
ing sands of the desert, especially since the post of president of the emirates is
one of such importance that whoever possesses it enjoys extensive executive powers,
to the point of being able to change the political course set by his predecessor.
This is not the case (a position of executive authority at the disposal of the

president) in most Arab countries.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL HATAN AL ARABI

CSO: 6606/17? END

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY