APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000200020083-0
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2049

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily frOm foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is reconnended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government Printing Office, Hashington, 0.6.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell & Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe load, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
It. Mu! (Unit no MI)

 
  
    
  
  
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
     
    
   
 

I). cum W a. m

Sclonccs) LAlgeria
Ethnology __Bahrain
Geography __Egypt
chhological _a_t_Iran
Military Sciences ___Iraq

L Israel
_3_:_ Jordan
____Kuuait
_Lebenon

t. HMIM-M Um

commute/om. 50, 5C. 5K. 15

if; " in. '_"

Un in'i't'ud' Xv'anabnicy
Sold by ms
Springfield, Virginia 22161

“Ml.

 

 

Political Science _Inter-Arab Afhire
Sociology __North African
Econoni cs Af hi rs

Culture (Soc ial __Afghanisten

law-lam»

This serial report contains intonation on socioeconomic. government. political.
and technical developmnte in the countries of the Near Beat and North Africa.

__l.ibya _Su1tannre
__Heuritania of Oman
LNorocco ___Syria
_Peop1e'a Demo- __‘l‘unisia
cratic Republic _§_ United Arab
of Yemen Salutes
_Persian Gulf _x_Hestern Sahara
Area _Yelen Arab
Qatar Republic

:Saudi Arabia
_Spanioh North
Africa

_Sudan

 
 
   
 

 
   
   

uncussmgn

an ”chum mu
UNCLASSIFIED

    

 

_—
m D". an u—n-
uuoouy 0mm
W a! mu
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2049

Coureurs
RIA

Briefs
Moroccan Kidnapings, Murderers

Could Iran Become s Second iebanon?
(Editorial; NAME-YB RUZ, 27 Sep 79) .................

Swedish Paper Cites PLO's Tehran Aide on Rejection of Hediat
(Ake Ringberg; DAGENS NYHETBR, 10 Nov 79) ...........

Fonner Corrupt Elements Attempt To whitewash Their Past
(wimrul;mm&vakw,l.m:79).u.u.u.u.u.n

Revolutionary Council Member Cites Political, Social Plans
(KEYHAN, 27 Oct 79) .................................

Militant Islsuic Group Scotches Anti-Government Rumors
(KEYHAN, 29 Oct 79) .................................

Possible Prosecution of Nassau Nssih Discussed
(NAME-YE R02, 28 Sep 79) ............................

Details of Ayatollah Qszi Tabstsbs'i's Assassination in

Tabriz Given
(BAHDAD, 3 Nov 79) ..................................

Tudeh Party Issues Statement Regarding Kordestan
(NAME-YB RUZ, 28 Sep 79) ............................

Government Describes Plan To Settle Kurdish Crisis
(BAHDAD, 28 Oct 79) ................................u
CONT ENTS (Continued)

Central Bank General Director Declares Government llard
Currency Policy
(BAHDAD, 6 Nov 79)

Inflation, Unemployment Threaten Iran's Future
(Editorial; NAME-YE RUZ, 28 Sep 79) ....................

Steel Mill Production Capacity Increased by 2 Million Ions
a Year

(KWN, 29 Oct 79) ....................................

Briefs

Joint Publications Connittee Formed
Stabilization in the Universities
Cooperation With Military Urged
Execution of Hanosexuals
Bomb Explosion
Conflicting Reports
Oil Output Drop Possible
Democratic Party Dasonstrations Banned
Hassan Kazih
Electric Power Plants
Iranian Students Criticize Regime

ISRAEL

Begin's claim To Be Student of Jabotinski Refuted
(Editorial; AL-QUDS, 9 Oct 79) ...

Editorial Deplores 'Heroic‘ Statements about Sale of Land
(Editorial; AL-QUDS, 1 Oct 79)..

Comentary on Appointment of Hurvitz as El Al Head
(Ze'ev Schul; THE JERUSALE‘ POST, 14 Nov 79) ..........

JORDAN

American Dollar Mentality Seen No nareat to Jordan
(Editorial; AL-ths, 7 Oct 79) ........................

LEW“
lebanese Army Couraander Views Scope of Current Tasks

(Victor Khuri Interview; AN-NAHAR All-ARAB! HA
ALrDlHALI, 29 Oct-lo Nov 79) ...........................

Briefs
Sma'un Dialog Hith P10

-b-
CONTENTS (Continued)

MOROCCO

Editorial Criticizes Undemocratic Government Policy
(Editorial; LIBERATION. 19—23 Oct 79) ...............

Foreign Minister Discusses Sahara Problem, Egyptian Aid
Offer. Purchase of 0.5. Heapons
(H’Hamed Boocetta Interview; ALPHUSTAQBAL. 13 Oct 79)

USFP Opposition Leader Discusses Sahara Problem, Socio-
economic Problems

(Abdeluahad Interview; LIBERATION. 19-25 Oct 79) ....

nriefs
1980 Finance Bill

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Figures on Industrial Firms, Horkera Released
(AL-NANAR, 28 Sep 79)

UAE Oil Revenues Reach 18 Billion Dirhams
(AL-MR, 28 Sep 79) aaooosoooaaooaaa-oooao..oao-uoo

Briefs
Foreign Investments
Education Budget

HESTERN SAHARA

Algiers Cites SDAR Statement on Fighting in Sahara
(Algiers Domestic Service. 15 Nov 79) ...............

'L'HUMANITB' Interviev's Poliaario's Abdelaziz on Sahara

Issue
(Mohamed Abdelaziz Interview; L'HUHANITB. 3 Nov 79)..

Algiers Cites SDAR Statement on Military Victories
(Algiers Domestic Service, 9 Nov 79) ................

'L'UNITA‘ Carries Cos-unique on Visit to H. Sahara by PCI.

PCB, PCP Delegation
(L'UNITA. 5 Nov 79) .................................
BRIEFS

MOROCCAN KIDNAPINGS, HURDERBRS--The nasses inside Morocco live in an atmosphere
of fear because of the kidnapings and assassinations, and also because of
the unjust trials and verdicts passed by the royal courts against the
revolutionar) and progressive elenents in the country. The secret police
watch all citizens-~the trade unionists or those who are suspected of

being sympathetic to the Saharan revolution. They are sent for trials by
order of the Royal Palace; they are sent for trials to appear before the
courts which are to a certain extent similar to the military tribunals which
the regime set up following the Sukhayrat uprising and the attenpt to
assassinate the king. As for the kidnapings and assassinations. they have
become the Iain task of the nonarchical regine. This regime planned and
carried out the assassination of 'Unar bin Jallun in Decelber 1975. and

'Abd sl-Taif (larval) and Husayn [nale indistinct] as well as hundreds

of progressive citizens during January and February in Casablanca. Rabat.
Tangier. Pea and Tetouan; nost of them were university and secondary

school students. [Excerpt] [L0152336 Oran Donestic Service in Arabic

2300 GMT 13 Nov 79 L0]

C50: 6402
COULD IRAN BECOME A 38m LEBANON?
Paris NAME-YE RUZ in Persian 27 Sep 19 p I
[Editorialz "Ethnic Minorities"]

[Tut] During an interview in the publication 'Toreign Policy" with George
Ball, a former official in the Andean State Department, and chairman of
the Canission to Study Conditions in Iran at the Tine of the Revolution,
the third and last phase of which is studied in today's issue, this Anerican
expert has said that there is danger of framtation in Iran, especially

if this country develops conditions similar to those in Lebanon today.

In such conditions, there would be danger of framentation in Iran because
of ethnic minorities.

The issue of ethnic groups raised by George Ball is not peculiar to Iran.
It exists in many Asian, European, and even African countries. More
politically advanced countries, such as England, have solved this problem
by decentralising and delegating some civil and financial setters to the
local level. Underdcveloped countries refrain from doing this, fearing
that if this authority is delegated to ethnic ninorities they will then
become independent due to the weakness or ineffectuality of the central
regine.

Historically, Iran has always contained ethnic and religious linorities.
What has unified these nationalities and tribes asking up the Iranian
nation is a canon history, geography, and economy, not their oneness of
language and religion.

Insofar as the leaders of the religious regime have had a share in our
history and politics, until now, with no constitution, they have tried to
solve this, our nest prominent issue, through the use of force, or they
have postponed solving it. With reason and the utilisation of the superi-
ence of others, they could find a solution. Instead of s parliamnt with
one house they could establish one with two houses, a legislative assenbly
and a house of representatives fro. the provinces or states, and they could
delegate civil and limited financial authority to the different provinces.
This is a Index-n solution that would settle the issue forever, and if it
is not oolved there vill be in: in Kurdioton, Mluchiotln, Khuliotnn. and
perhaps Azerbnijan. This iuue cm be pootponod only it the control
covenant rennin: authoritarian and undo-octane.

9310
080: 6906
SWEDISH PAPER CITES Pw'S 1mm AIDE 0N REJECTION 0P PEDIATION
[31311447 Stockholm DAGENS man in Swedish 10 Nov 79 p 9 LD
[Dispatch by correspondent Ake Ringberg: "Pm Shuns Mediation")

[Text] Beirut, 9 November—"The Americans have let us suffer for 30 years
so let them now taste some of their own medicine. The Pm is on Iran's
side so we cannot undertake the role of mediator." That reasrk was made
Friday by the PLo's representative in Tehran before boarding an aircraft
back to Iran following talks in Beirut with PLO leader Yssair 'Arefat.

with that reaark the chances of an active contribution by the PLO to help the
prisoners in the 0.3. mbasey in Tehran seen: to have lessened considerably.

At the sane time the Iranian ambassador in Bahrain said that the talks under
way between the Pm and the Iranian leaders will be about the hostages, "but

there can be no question of any aediation."

It seem that it is precisely the world "mediation" which the PLO is striv-
ing wholeheartedly to repudiate in its official renrks in order to refute
reports that the PLO is best placed to act as interaediary for averting a
Inseacre in Tehran.

The United States is regarded as the Palestinians' fore-oat eneuy since
Israel uses 0.8. boobs and ms. aircraft to terrorize helpless Palestinian

refugees .

"We do not expect much free the United States," Bani al-Hasan, the PLO's
representative in Tehran, said. "We helped American citizens get out of
Lebanon during the civil war in the suI-er 1976. but what has the United
States done for us since then"?

The remark was directed at the wholehearted u.s. support for the state of
Israel and also at Israel's attack against south Lebanon hrch of last year
with the express purpose of "crushing the PLO." But since that action the
PLO has won new positions in the world.
Notwithstanding these Opinions, which reflect years of bitterness against
a superpower, it eeeu apparent that the no really wants to play I part
in the drama but alao that it nuat proceed with great caution.

Through its new general secretary 'Ioaa al-Qadi (whose predeceeoor Zuhayr
Muhain no mdered last sun-er in Cannes) the Syria-backed ao-Sa'iqeh organ-
ization has criticized any decision which could benefit 0.8. inperialien in
return for recognition by the United States. There has been oinJar cri-
ticien from the Duocratic Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine

led by Nayif lhvatineh.

050. 3109
FORMER mRRUI’I' ELMN'IS AM To "HIMASH THEIR PAST
Paris NAME-YE RUZ in Persian 1 Oct 79 p 1
“Editorial: "Those Rho Put the Country Where It Is Today"]

[Text] One of the basic reasons for the Iranian national revolution last
January was corruption, which was dominant in the previous regime. Some
because of their associates, some under the influence of friends, another
because of his neighborhood and another because of his special access to
an important official in the government or the military occupied themselves
with plundering the country‘s wealth. In the midst of all this there were
many in foreign service, meaning representatives of the nation, who went to
foreign countries when they were not really representatives of our country
but were instead manifestations of the corruption that got then their jobs.

Host of these "diplomats" have kept quiet and continued living exactly as
before in some corner with their share of the plunder from the treasury in
a country where they once held a high title, now recognized only by waiters
in cabarets and sellers of poker chips in casinos. Functionally, these
people had been removed from the staff of the Foreign Ministry even before
the revolution.

Some of them, however, who, like the Bourbons, have not acquired anything
and have not forgotten, have been busy changing clothes and are gradually
trying to claim, when their very appointment to their posts is the most
obvious manifestation of the worst corruption, that they were opposed to
that corruption and that system.

Several days ago, one of these diplomats, who suddenly rose from the rank
of secretary to the rat. of ambassador of a European country because of
personal services he rendered, and who greased the palms of his former boss
and of a colleague in the Washington edaassy through various nanipulations,
according to the current fashion wrote an article for the HERALD TRIBUNE
which, were it no so shameful, would be laughable.
This gentleman, whose appointment from secretary to the prime minister to
the otiice of albassador raised a lot of hackles in the Foreign Ministry,
and uhose appointment was taken as an insult and a sign of deteriorating
relations by the country to which he was sent, tried throughout the ghost-
written article to clear himelt, and, by attacking circa-stances in which
he was a principal actor, to smooth a path for his future, little knowing
that for such persons as himself there is no place, either in the present
or in any future regime.

It is better that the persons who have angered the nation with their deeds
and helped lead it to its current state should get out of the country
before the nation takes revenge against them. In order to have their bad
names forgotten, they should at least be ashamed of themselves and ask for
a share in the Iranian national movement.

9310
(:50: (0906
REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL MEMBER CITES POLITICAL, SOCIAL PLANS
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 27 Oct 79 p 10

lzrticle: "The Revolutionary Council's Economic and Political Plan for
Running the Countryﬂ/

lﬁxcerpt] After the pe0p1e had paraded and gathered at the

University of Tehran and the surrounding area, Ayatollah Dr Beheehti, vice
chairman of the Council of Experts and member of the Revolutionary Council,
made a statement. In his statement, he, as a member of the Revolutionary
Council, described the country's economic and political policy.

Referring to Moslem revolutionaries' past efforts to break free from the
fetters of imperialism, exploitation and tyranny, Dr Beheahti said "Our
young generation has risen up with the glorious martyrdom of martyrs, the
forward thrust and movement of universities, educational centers and men
of the street and the market, and the creative participation of women, and
has realized the dreams of decades with valor and heroism through this suc-
cessful uprising. We have now put the weighty and terrible stages behind
us, to the point where I think the stages of the past few years at least
remain in your minds. what troubles, what tortures, what vexations and
what strikes our people put behind themselves during the uprising standing
in the face of difficulties until it threw the basic enemy out of Iran in
February! In the past few days, America, our unyielding enemy, has taken
him into its arms; I really do not know if he has become ill or is pretend-
ing to be ill. God willing, it will be an illness before which he can no
longer resist; of course were it to happen that we could bring him alive

to Iran, it would be better."

The Revolutionary Council's Economic Plan

"People have asked us, 'Uhat is your economic thesis? what is the economic
plan of the Revolutionary Council and the leadership of the revolution for
combatting deprivation and poverty?’ He would prefer that a summary of
this plan emerged in the form of principles and the constitution and that
we then discussed it with you. Now, however, that we are before the Iran-
ian nation on this historic day and this beloved opportunity, we will give
a brief explanation:
"l. The Islamic government has the duty of providing capital and tools to
every person who wants to perform productive work and to place those at

his disposal. Our farmers in the Islamic Republic must work on land which
belongs to them. Our laborers in the Islamic Republic must work with tools
and capital which belong to them.

"Therefore the economic plan of the Islamic Republic is this: the govern-
ment of the Islamic Republic is to provide tools, capital and work from
the public treasury, from oil revenues, from other revenues and from taxes
on individuals for every Hoslem, for every Iranian even if he is not a
Hoslem, for everyone who is a citizen of this republic, so that no one will
be obliged to sell his labor for the trivial wages which others give him.
Now I ask whether we will be able to save the workers of this country from
becoming the hirelings of brutal, vexing wages by this solution. I an oak-
ing everyone who is well-read in the field of economics to work on this and
to give us an answer.

The Revolutionary Council's Political Thesis

"People ask us, what is your political thesis for administering the country?
we have to a large extent reflected our political plan for administering
the country in the principles of the constitution.

"There we have stated the following: Ours is an Islamic society. It is a
society which wants to be administered through Islam. It wants to stay on
the Islamic road. The true Islam, the Islam which pious and clear-thinking
jurists specialized in understanding Islam who are informed about the is-
sues of the day-~these people will explain this Islam to these people. To
this end we have stated that our Islamic society will be administered in
this manner. The supreme leader is at the peak of the country's adminis-
trative power, a pious, comitted, combative, aware jurist, e jurist who
does not want to dominate, who is not worldly, who is not a tyrant, who is
not a dictator, a jurist who loves the people, a jurist who, like the lead-
er of this revolution, says 'I have done nothing-~it is these people who
are doing it'--a jurist with these characteristics will arise at the head
of the power administering the country, but will not appear at the head in
such a way that he will be a chief. It is a mistake for anyone to imagine
that we say that the religious jurists are at the head, that is, that they
oust throw in people’s faces the claim 'we are your chiefs' through twist-
and poop, political wheeling and aelf-aggrandiseaent. As the seam has con-
manded, if a religious jurist is seized with this sickness he will have no
further guardianship over the people. What kind of jurist, then? An aware,
just, god-fearing, people-loving meek, modest jurist, a jurist who is humble
before the people. You know that one of the designations or eppelations of
the Cormander of the Faithful (on who. be peace) is Abu Tawab. Hhat does
abu I‘svvab mean? It means that Ali sits on the ground, is hudle and lives
with the people, that a modest, meek. popular, people-loving jurist cones
and is placed in the leadership of the nation. Is this jurist iaposing
himself upon the people?
The Role of the Councils

"Does it mean that you tell the people, 'Come and accept this religious
jurist as leader!

"in the constitution, provision has been made for the fact that the people
must accept this religious jurist. A religious jurist whom the absOLute
majority of the nation accepts as leader is the one who becomes the leader.
All right, if a well-known jurist who can be accepted by the majority of
the people is not to be found, then what? A council of jurists, same of
the best, choicest, purest and best-informed of jurists will constitute a
council, and the well-informed, elected representatives of you, the people,
will appoint this council and nominate and present it. Such a leader or
such a council will become the leadership and will occupy the position of
leader. Then you, the people, will choose a president from among the
people who meet the conditions. You will note that the government which
comes to power will be under the supervision of you, the people, in three
ways:

"1. Through the leadership of the well-informed, just, elected religiOus
jurist.

"2. Through the elected president.
"3. Through the elected representatives.

"These people can control the prime minister, ministers and others. Who
will control the government employee in a given village or a given corner
of a remote town? Who must control the government employee, the head of

a given department, the commander of a given garrison which is in a remote
corner 1,000 kilometers away from the representatives, the president and
the leader? This is the duty of the councils. Our friends the students
have asked, 'Hhat is your opinion on the councils?‘ Our opinion is that
the councils which have arisen from the people must be the administrators
and the supervisors of their actions, while you, the people, do the elect-
ing.

"Unfortunately, in these elections to town councils, the number of votes
for persons elected is generally so low that we cannot say that they are
the representatives of the majority of the people.

“The councils, which are composed of the representatives of the majority
of the people, must be the overseers of proper day-to-day operations
throughout the country. What about the factories? What about the offices?
Do these also need coucils or not? In our opinion they do. We have re-
psatsdly said that where these investigations are made one must place a
new investigator in the place of the old one, one must place a senior in-
vestigator in the place of the old one, one must place a senior investi-
gator over this second one and than placeagenaral investigative office

10
over them. Cone let us create a system of oversight and guidance every-
where out of the body of the masses, so that we will have less need of
these investigations from above. The factory councils, the department

councils and the company organizations, in our opinion, are among the
necessary elements of a popular, Islamic revolution. Therefore, from our

standpoint, the mode of political administration of the country, the
country's domestic policy, is one where the people, the very masses of the
people, must take part in administering the country in which they are
influential so soon as possible."

11887
080: 10906

11
HILITANT ISLAMIC 63G]? SCOTCHRS ANTI-GOVERNMENT RWS
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 29 Oct 79 p 12

llrticle: "In Presenting a Bay ‘l‘o Confront Rte-ore, Organization of the
Combatants of the Islamic Revolution Presents an Announcement on Counter-
revolutionary Rmmrmongeringﬂl

liens] The Organization of the Combatants of the Islamic Revolution has
published a statement regarding the spreading of rumors throughout society
and has requested conpatriots to disgrace "rumormongers."

In its statement, the Organisation of the Combatants of the Islamic Revo-
lution pointed out "The Islamic Revolution of Iran, because of its quest,
which results from the profound culture of Islam, has more enemies than
any other revolution. To this end, Best and last, together with inter-
national Zionism, are assailing this revolution from every direction, hop-
ing to nip it in the bud."

In the statement, subjects which have been the target of the propaganda
attack of rumormongers of the revolution were mentioned: these were listed
as the person of Emem mlomeyni and revolutionary organs and personalities.

Regarding the spreading of rumors on imam Kltuneyni, it was not asserted
lgigl: "Since the emam enjoys the strongest base and mass protection, the
conniving counterrevolution, out of fear of the people‘s violent anger, in
its meetings and speeches, is alv'aya indirectly making utterances about
the emam's estrangement from the people under the mask of following the
emam's path and enthusiasm for the people and the em, stating that a
number of people have blockadad him and are not allowing words and news
to reach him. All people, groups and organisations must freely contact
the emam and speak to him.

"By raising the emam's remoteness from the realities of society, they are

trying to create an atmosphere of lack of confidence and despair regarding
the emam so that they can later easily eradicate the revolution.

12
"Regarding revolutionary organs and personalities, the enemy is finding
weak spots in the Revolutionary Council, the Army of the Guards, the com-
mittees and influential persons, making them seem much, much more serious
than they are, and spreading rumors that such-an~such a minister kissed
the Shah's hand, such~and-such a member of the Revolutionary Council is
living in a very aristocratic fashion, the government is the satellite of
America, and so on and so forth.

"Thus news devoid of reality spreads about in the society.

"The rumormongers consist of foreign and domestic elements. The foreign
elements (imperialists and Zionists) are examining the issues of Iran,
finding weak points, cosmnicsting with [ran through channeln and influ-
encing everything.

"The domestic elements (opponents of the revolution and opportunists) who
see their interests disappearing, intend to destroy the revolution with
the cooperation of domestic and foreign elements.

"In order to confront the rumors we first must not be the pr-.soners of the
atmosphere of rumor but, by investigation must give a categorical answer
to the rumormongers and by recognizing the sources of the rumors and de-
manding evidence from them, disgrace them utterly."

In its statement, the Organisation of the Combatants of the (slamic Revo-
lution also pointed out, "He are not claiming that weak poin:s do not ex-
ist, but criticism is one thing and destruction is something else, and the
enemies want to destroy this revolution."

in the statement, people who have a role in the revolutionary staff were
requested "Isnediately to bring their lives in line with that of the emam
so that they can inpart continuity to the progression toward perfection
in their lives and give no pretexts to the counterrevolution.

"He must also be aware that everyone has a wealv~ .pot in some way or anoth-

er and only within an Islamic process will we be able to overcome our
weaknesses."

11887
(280: 6906

13
POSSIBLE PROSECUTION 0F HASSAN M21}! DISG’SSED
Paris NAME-YE R112 in Persian 28 Sep 79 p 1

(Article: "Haxiaana Penalty for Nazih Could Be Death Sentence"]

[Text] Tehran“ (UPI)--Prime Minister Mehdi Basargan discharged llassan
Nazih, chairman of the National Petroleum Department of Iran, who had
instigated disturbances around himself, on Friday. In his place he
introduced a minister of petroletra who will supervise all operations
related to the oil, gas, and petrochuical industries. Hassan Nazih

has been under attack by the mollahs manning Iran for not purging the
40,000 workers in the Petroleum Department. without referring to the
stepdown of Hassan Nazih, Hehdi Bazargan announced that the new minister
of petroleum, 'Ali Akbar Moinfar will also continue to fulfill his
responsibilitives in the Cabinet as chair-an of the Board of Directors
and personnel anger of the depart-ants of petroleum, gas, and petrochea-
icals, which have been cabined.

Hassan Razih was appointed in March on the basis of his qualifications.
Until that time, oil industry workers had been on an extended strike in
opposition to the Shah which had stopped oil production. ﬂaaaan hasih,

a French-educated lawyer, was called in for investigation on the authority
of the revolutionary public prosecutor to answer existing charges against
the workers of the department.

In one of Ayatollah Kholaeyni's directives to Basargan he ordered that
assurances be obtained that Nasih would be present for an interrogation
on Saturday. At the sane tine the Ayatollah gave notice that if there
should be enough evidence against him, Naaih would be prosecuted. The
nature of the "innumerable charges" said to be in the hands of the public
prosecutor against Nazih has not been clear.

The Islamic groups in the Petroleum Department have duanded that lazih
be tried as an may of Islam. The maxi-1m penalty for this cries is death.

14
Holnfnr's appointnent has cleared the way for a "purging" of worker's
leaders in the Petroleum Department, to which Nazih was opposed. Neath
maintained that this purge would create difficulties in the production
of oil. It is still not known how may people will become "purgeea."

The attacks against Hanan Nazih concerning the ad-iniatration of the
Petroleum Department are due to Ayatollah Khoneyni's son-in-law and
Rojatoleslu shahabeldin Eahraqi, his representative in mtters related
to petroleu.

9310
(:80: 6906

15
DETAILS OF AYATOLLAH QAZI TABAIABA'I'S ASSASSINATION IN TABRIZ GIVEN
‘l‘ehran MHDAD in Persian 3 Nov 79 pp 1, 8
Izrticle: "Details of Ayatollah Qasi 'l‘sbatabs'i's Assassination in Tabrizf'7

lint-l- His Eminence Ayatollah Haj Seyyed Mohamed Ali Qazi Tabetaba'i,
the emam's representative in 'l‘abriz, was martyred at about 1900 hours
Thursday evening by gunshots from an assassin's pistol.

KBYHAN's correspondent in Tabriz, who was the only reporter immediately to
betalte himself to the bedside of the dying ayatollah at the hospital, gave
the following report concerning the incident, from his conpanions' account:

His Eminence Ayatollah Qasi Tabatsba'i, who was leading extensive programs
of demonstrations by the people of 'l'abris on Hednesday and Thursday, went
home to rest around noon after participating in the Syd-e Qorban prayer
ceremonies and the popular parade. Because of the extensive religious and
national programs, the effects of fatigue in him were apparent, but his com-
panions' counsels did not cause him to refrain from participating in the
evening prayer, and he set out for the Sha'ban Mosque.

The ayatollah, on coupleting the evening prayer, set out for his home by
car in the coupsny of four bodyguards, a driver and his conpanions. As the
car transporting him reached the Haqsudieh Avenue curve, after crossing
Artesh Avenue, it slowly turned toward an alley in order to pass a Peugeot
which was going over the culvert into the alley. Suddenly a young man of
25 or 26 who was wearing a green rainth and a hat came out from behind a
bench in the alleyway and appeared before the car bearing the ayatollah and
the companions. The assailant, holding his firearm in both hands, took aim
at the ayatollah, uho was sitting in the back seat, and fired three shots
in succession; the first hit the ayatollah in the head, the second hit him
in the shoulder and the third went wild. The assailant, taking advantage
of the darkness, immediately mounted a motorcycle and vanished in the al-
ley across from Haj Rees Square. The Ayatollah's bodyguards, who had been
taken unauares, flung themselves confusedly out of the car and a shot was
fired into the air. At that moment the ayatollah uttered the following
sentence "It seems my head has been hit." The driver inasdistsly took the

16
ayatollah to the Red Lion and Sun Hospital and .he doctors got to work and
operated on him. The bullet which had hit him in the shoulder was removed
but the doctors' efforts to remove the bullet from the skull were futile
and the ayatollah passed away a moment later.

A Threatening Phone Call

According to one combatant, a telephone call from an unknown woman to the
head of the Sha'ban Conanittee in Tabriz a few days before lifted the cur-
tain from this conspiracy. This women said "In 3 days' time you (that is,
the conmittee head) and Ayatollah Qazi Tabataba'i will be killed." The
counit tee head informed the ayatollah of this; re response, he said "God
will take care of it." One of the Ayatollah's coapanions had visited him
a few days before and said "From the rumors in the city one may conclude
that some danger is threatening you. Please permit us to equip your car
with bulletproof glass." When the ayatollah was informed of the high cost
of this he said "Pay this money to the Fund for the Downtrodden."

One of the ayatollah's bodyguards told KBYHAN's correspondent, "Yesterday
an announcement signed by the Forqan Group was distributed in Tabris'a
Bagh-e Shemal while the Syd-e Qorban prayer was being held. The contents
of this declaration have not yet been determined and one copy of it was to
have been given to the ayatollah. One person visited the ayatollah on
that day and said that a capy of the Porqan Group's announcement had been
discovered, but the ayatollah said "This isn't the place for it here, bring
it to the house." Byewitnesses state, "Two days ago three auspicious per
sons took part in the ayatollah's evening prayer in the Sha'ban Hosque and
performed the afternoon prayer. The ayatollah's bodyguards became auspici-
ous of them but did not take the matter seriously." It was said that the
weapon used to kill the ayatollah was a handgun which left no cartridges
at the site.

On this matter, one of the ayatollah's bodyguards said "On the day of
Syd-e Qorban, as he was setting out to take part in the prayers Ayatollah
Qazi Tabataba'i told his followers on the steps 'See how quickly they are
assassinating me."‘

The inportant point concerning the inlementation of this conspiracy was
the dexterity of the assailant, who aimed accurately at the ayatollah in
the midst of the five people sitting in the car, in the dark of evening.
Although he had big responsibilities in terms of security and the affairs
of the ostan, especially Tabriz, Ayatollah Qaai Tabataba'i was the only
person who did not like weapons; whenever an armed person appeared, he
disarmd him.

A Synopsis of Ayatollah Qasi Tabataba'i's Life

Ayatollah 'rabataba'i was a combatant spiritual leader who fought with the
satan courageously and without fear, in an open manner during the years

17
the Pshlavi regime was in power, and he did not let up on the struggle for
a moment. At the apex of the Islamic resurgence, in the 5 June [963 events,
when the regime sunrnoned the Azarbayjan clerical coulnunity to the Chamber
of Counerce of 'l‘sbriz for discussions and a so-called search for a solution
to the political crisis, Ayatollah Qazi 'l‘abatsba'i was the only person who
stood up, fearlessly and without the least anxiety over a reaction from the
regime, and cried out in the face of the regime's agents "What do you went
from our souls? We just want respect for the law from you."

This severe attack by the ayatollah jolted the military commander at the
time harshly, and an intense verbal quarrel erupted between them. The re-
gime banished the brave free man of 'l‘abriz, tied him up and put him on an
airplane, but 2 years later, when he returned home Victoriously, his fellow
townspeople feted the son of Azarbayjan in a manner that was befitting only
to him. The regime was terrified by this great reception by the people,
and the seed of the struggle with the devil was sowed right there. At the
peak of the regime's power, Ayatollah Qazi Tabataba'i sent tremors through
the spirits of the regime's agents with his devastating declarations, when-
ever he ascended the pulpit, and his words intensified the people's
struggle.

when the revolution attained victory, he with firmness and expertise pre-
vented the needless tumult and bloodshed which was very likely to occur.

For this reason, he grappled with narrowminded people who could not carry
out their designs in his presence, and he sunlnoned everyone to unity,
solidarity and service of the Islamic republic. His home was the refuge of
the suffering, and he repelled every kind of aggression by all powers
against the people with a rare courage. He carried out the responsibility
he had received from Sun Khomeyni to be the leader of the Islamic revolution
of Iran in Azarbayjan for the prosperity and benefit of the people and. was
weary of every kind of spite or animosity.

The newspaper KBYHAN offers condolences for this great loss to all the
fighting people of Azarbayjan, in particular the heroic people of ‘l‘abriz,
the fighting community of spiritualists, and the families of this brave
martyr.

Funeral Ceremonies

Starting at 1000 hours yesterday morning, ceremonies were held for the
funeral of His Eminence Ayatollah Seyyed Mohamed Ali Qazi Tabataba'i be-
ginning in Name: Square and heading toward the qubareh Mosque in the
Tabriz Marketplace.

Participating in these ceremonies, were Eng Gharavi, the governor general
of East Azarbayjan, Sadeq Qotbsadeh, the guardian of the Radio and Tele-
vision Organisation of the Islamic Repgblic gf Iran, Reja'i, the acting
minister of education, the great Ayat/gllshgl, scholars and spiritual man,
and a large number of people. After the holding of the prayer in the
Maqbareh Mosque, he was buried.

18
His Eminence Ayatollah Qazi Tabataha'i began his religious science studies
in Tabriz and Qom and acquired grace over a period of many years in the
holy town of Najaf, in the presence of the great combatant and learned
scholar Kashef ol-Qatta'. Then he returmd to Iran and engaged in the guid
ance of Hosiena. Starting in 1962, with the beginning of the Islamic re-
surgence of Iran, he embarked on the struggle with other religious scholars
and was imprisoned and banished for periods of time. In the years after
1962-63, he continued his struggle, starting in the Qesel Qal'eh Prison and
then in banishment in the towns of Baft, Kerman and Zanjan.

Later, as a consequence of his unremitting struggle against the satanic re-
gime, he was forcibly confined to bed in a Tehran hospital for 3 months
and on emerging was banished again to Iraq. He was in exile for 1 year
then returned to Iran to continue his struggles against the satanic regime.

Three Days of Public Mourning

Following the martyrdom of His Eminence Ayatollah Qazi statsba'i, Eng
Charavi, the governor general of Best Aurbsyjan, gave a declaration pre-
senting his condolences to the people of Azerbayjah and proclaiming 3 days
of public mourning.

The funeral ceremonies for the martyred Eminence Ayatollah Qasi Tabetaba'i

were held yesterday morning starting at 1000 hours in the Rams: Square of
Tabriz.

[1637
C50: #906

19
'l‘UDEIl PARTY ISSUES STATEMENT REGARDING KORDESTAN
Paris NAME-YE RUZ in Persian 28 Sep 79 p 1

[Text] ‘I‘ehran (Various press sources)-‘rhe Central Connittee of the Iranian
'l‘udeh party, in a detailed statement published in connection with the affairs
of Kordesten, put forward some suggestions to the govermnent and the people
of Kordestan for coping with the crisis situation in Knrdestan.

A portion of this statement said that the existence of plots and anti-Islamic
activities cannot be and should not be used as an excuse for not attending
to the fundamental reality, meaning the conditions of the suffering Kurds,
and their desire for and need of human rights and justice, or for rejecting
their demands and needs in the name of a war against counterrevolutionaries.

Host regrettably, we must say that a knot that could have been easily untied
with the fingernails has been pulled apart with the teeth, and for ninimal
results we have seen some unwholesome processes set into motion: Barricades
against brothers, brother spilling the blood of brother, and the poisoning
of the country's political environment, an environment which, in the words
of Emam Klwmeyni, has the greatest need for tranquillity and mutual under-
standing. The Tudeh of the people of Kordeetan say: "He are Iranians and
we are opposed with all our being to the secession of one foot of Iranian
soil or the reduction of this land by so much as a clod. We are only demand-
ing our true and national rights. He are waiting for the great revolution
of Iran, to which we have given many partisans, to neet our legitimate and
just demands. He demand an end to poverty, privation and backwardness.

it is clear that despite the importunity of some political administrators

of the military occupation, there exists in the Iinds and hearts of everyone
a spirit of humanity and reasonableness concerning the issues of Kordestan.
Accordingly we propose to the govern-ant that it i—ediately end all military
activities, recall the army, put an end to trials and publication of opinions
in the revolutionary courts, and annomce its readiness for peaceful polit-
ical negotiations concerning solutions for Kordestan. In sum, we propose
two things: An illnediate and prompt and to military activities, and govern-
ment readiness to discuss and search in a peaceful way for a political
solution to the probluss of Kordestan."

9310
cso: (0906

20
covnmm- orscants mm 10 same rumsa cusxs
‘l‘ehran W!) in Persian 28 Oct 79 pp 1, 3
IZrticle: "Plan To Eliminate 1mm: cum 1a Approved by M17

Igexy Yesterday afternoon a four-nan counittee consisting of Hashes:
Sabbaghien, minister of the interior, Deryush Foruhar, minister without
portfolio, Dr Chsnren, minister of national defense, and Yadolleh Sahabi,
minister without portfolio and guerdien of the Plan and Budget Organise.-
tion, when the government had assigned to investigate the Kordestan crisis,
was received by Essen Khoneyni in Qon in_the coupeny of Gen Shaker, joint
chief of staff of the military, and the coomenders of the National Gendarm-
erie and the Army of Guards.

According to the report by W's correspondent in Qon, following this
session and the visit which lasted 2 hours, Heshem Sebbeghian, the minist-
er of the interior, stated, with regard to the results of the comittee's
discussions with the em:

"The conversation revolved around the axis of problems end issues of
Kordestan end the plans which must be brought to the inlenentation stage
in that osten, which were accurately conveyed to the ease: by the four-men
comittee of ainisters and the comenders of the army end the Army of
Guards, were ratified by hin, end will soon be carried out in the region."

In answer to W's question on how the matter of Kirdesten's problems
will be resolved with the entry of Deryush Poruhsr into the ainisterial
council charged with investigating the issue of Kordestan, Hashan Sabbaghien
said,

"Our staff hes been supplemented end the government conuittee has approved
having Mr Foruhar also joining the tripartite ministerial group."

Regarding the issue of the connrlttee's travel to Kordestan, Sebbeghien

said "The issues of this conittee are political, military and develop-
mental." Regarding a rumor on the reorganisation of the cabinet, Sebbeghian
said. "I have no information on this subject. These matters are the style

21
of correspondents." In response to a question whether the committee would
be going to Kordeetan following the discussions with the emem, Sahbeghisn
said "Naturally the committee will go to Kordesten."

It has been learned that Daryush Foruher'e recommendations and views on
eliminating the Kordestan crisis, which were published in yesterday's is-
eue of BAHDAD, including the departure of the Army of Guards fr. Kordestan,
the transfer of their duties to the gendermerie and police, and investiga-
tion of the conditions of the revolutionary courts in this ostan, were ap-
proved et yesterday's meeting.

Condition of the Region

At the conclusion of meetings with the emem on the current situation of
Kordestan, Abu Sherif, operations commander of the Army of Guards, told
PARS News Agency's reporter "In general the region is quiet now except for
the towns of Buken, Hehebed and Baneh, where scattered shooting is taking
place."

Government Announcement

with Daryush Poruher's inclusion in the tripartite committee, the ministers
charged with investigating the Kordesten crisis end the government's meas-
ures for eliminating the dispute in Kordestan and creating mutual under-
standing in this region have esSumed broader dimensions.

Last week, following one meeting, the government presented Heshem Sabhsghien,
the minister of the interior, Dr Chamran, the minister of national defense,
and Sahebi, the minister without portfolio and guardian of the Plan and
Budget Organization, es plenipotentiery government representatives to in-
vestigate the Kordesten crisis and delegated its powers to them.

Hhen this committee was presented, Daryush Poruhar went to Qom, had an
audience with the emsm, and conveyed a report on the results of his second

trip and his discussions in Kordestan to the emam. Following his visit to
the emem, the country's National Security council examined Poruhar's recom-
mendations concerning Kordesten at an important meeting, the upshot of
which was the announcement which was published in the following form by the
government yesterday afternoon:

"in view of the concern which the lofty leader of the revolution and the
government cabinet have always had for the deprived ostans of the country,
including the border areas of Kordestan, hoping to resolve the issues and
problems of these regions as easily and quickly as possible, the council
of ministers has approved delegation of its powers conderning the develop-
mental, cultural, military, welfere, and budget affairs bearing on Kurdish-
inhabited ostans to a four-men committee composed of Eng Hashem Sabbaghian,
minister of the interior, Deryush Poruhar, minister without portfolio,

22
Hostefa Chamran, minister of defense, and Zn; Buatollah Sahabi. minister
without portfolio and guardian of the Plan and Budget Organization. For
their part and that of the other ministera, this cmittae and its plani-
potentiary representatives are charged with proceeding to take decisions

and proclaim the necessary orders in solving the administrative matters
and various problem of the region."

“.837
080: 6906

23
CENTRAL BANK GENIRAL DIRECTOR DBCLARBS GOVBRNHBNT HARD CURRENCY POLICY
Tehran BAHDAD in Persian 6 Nov 79 pp 1, 9

[Zrticlgz "Central Bank General Director Declares Government Hard Currency
Policyﬂ/

lgexsl Dr Mohammad Ali Howlavi, director general of the Central Bank of
Iran, explained the Central Bank of Iran's views on severing the link be-
tween the rial and the dollar and the country's economic, fiscal, hard cur-
rency, monetary and credit policies in an exclusive interview with BAHDAD.

At the start of his interview, Dr Howlavi, referring to the link between
the rial and the dollar, stated "From the start of my work in the Central
Bank, 1, together with my colleagues, have been intending to conaunmate
the severance of the link between the rial and the dollar, which has been
a national Iranian demand. However, it goes without saying that in order
that this great-action may be carried out, studies nuet be made and all
aspects of it must be examined.

"Since a basic portion of our payments, as well as our deposits, is in dol-
lars, we must be careful lest by taking a hasty decision we be harmed in
cutting off the link between the dollar and the rial. for this reason I
have carried out preliminary studies; this matter will be acted upon in
the very near future without any kind oi damage or loss and the link be-
tween the dollar and the rial will be severed."

Dr Howlavi then referred to the issue of the country's hard currency policy
and added, "One of the current problems of the Central Bank is handling the
country's hard currency policy. In the past, since foreign currency was
free, the Central Bank did not interfere in hard currency transfer matters
except in special situations. This nonintervention caused the previous
regime to adopt unreasonable hard currency policies and lead the country
toward bankruptcy. However, following the triumph of the revolution, by
orders of the leader of the revolution, confirmed by Eng Batargan, the
prime minister, to the effect that the nation's hard currency and the
national capital must not be plundered without cause or reason, we have
taken the categorical decision to create a specific foreign currency

2‘
policy although the Central Bank has not been ready and prepared to carry
out a new foreign curregcy policy. Of course a limited group of people

who cannot export the lip] enormous volume of hard currency as a consequence
of this policy are dissatisfied but the absolute majority of the Iranian
people, who believe in the revolution. have endorsed our decisions."

Differing Views

Howlavi pointed out, "In general, there are two differing views regarding
hard currency. Some people expect all the income derived from oil revenues
to be spent on capital investment in the country and even wonder what need
there is for the country to allow people to travel, believing that the
transfer of foreign currency must be avoided by all means. Others believe
that the hard currency obtained from oil exports must be spent on the es-
sentiel expenditures of all the people in the country and that often in

the past the government made commitments which we cannot ignore, among them
to our students, who are this country's capital, and whom we cannot put
into difficult straits or render homeless by not offering hard currency

for their foreign expenses. Here the government's policy is to adopt a
moderate policy between the two views, both carrying out its commitments
and invigorating the country's economy through capital investment on the
one hand and preventing the smuggling of hard currency, which has increased,
in any way possible, on the other. It is to be taken for granted, though,
that the government must pay the necessary expenses of certain classes of
people, including students and sick people, and certain necessary expenses.
0n the other hand one must note the important point that we cannot store

up foreign currency and not spend it, since the main portion of the country's
income comes from the sale of foreign currency. If we do not sell hard
currency for rials, we will not be able to meet our rial costs. In any
case the government has adopted a moderate policy in this matter, on the
one hand spending the country's hard currency reserves on necessary ex-
penses and on the other erecting a barrier before smuggling and embezzle-
ment." '

New Regulations '

Hovlavi then said. "At the present time we are in the process of preparing
new regulations. These will involve iuports in the first stage. In this
regard our policy will be to carry this process out in the short term,

with fluctuations in the foreign currency rate, and the government's policy
depends on being able to stabilize the foreign currency rate related to in»
ports and not allow inflation to spread throughout the country through im-
ports. Regarding students, although contrary and contradictory educational
certificates reach us and forged educational certificates are even sent
from certain countries, there is nonetheless no thought for immediate
change as regards real students and no change will be made in their foreign
currency allotments. In this regard we are also engaged in drawing up
special regulations and will determine their expenses through the Ministry
of higher Education and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that students'

25
expenses in all countries will be determined. After the conclusion of the
coming academic year, we will accordingly set out new regulations so that
foreign currency will really be sent to students. Very many times people
exploit this situation, and we have obtained some certificates for certain
individuals who are 65 or 50 end are still engaged in studying. In any
event until the end of the coming academic year no changes will be made in
students' herd currency situation and all rumors which have been or are
being spread about in any way are to be strictly disavowed."

Retired Persons

Regarding the sending of hard currency for retired persons, Mohammad Ali
Howlavi said. "Some people believe that there is no reason for us to sell
hard currency at the official rate to a group of retired persona; if any-
one wants to live abroad he should provide his means of livelihood himself
or at least get hard currency from the government at the unofficial price.
All in all, we are in the process of drawing up new regulations for retired
persons and other groups which must use foreign currency, and these regula-
tions will soon be implemented following ratification by the Economic
Council and the Honey and Credit Council."

Regarding foreign currency paid to sick persons, Howlavi said “The view is
that sick persons should travel abroad only if no possible means of
treatment for them exist inside the country. The Central Bank has had no
means for determining this; as a result of talks which have been held, the
Medical System has agreed to take the responsibility for this, and from now
on persons who are sick must refer to the Medical System to receive a cer-
tificate and receive the necessary certificate for obtaining foreign cur-
rency.’ ‘

Concerning foreign currency for travelers, Howlavi said "Until the ratifi-
cation of the new regulations, no kind of change will in fact be made in
disbursing foreign currency to travelers."

Mowlavi was asked when the new regulations would be announced and he said
"Maybe in 15 days' time."

Mowlavi then pointed out, "A group of people have conplsined that the
Central Bank is changing hard currency regulations every day. This group,
and other protestors. must realize that we are obligated to devote atten-
tion to the income derived from oil, which fluctuates, and in the short
range make hard currency policy comply with hard currency revenue policy
and look into the future lest we become burdened with foreign currency re-
serve deficits and not be able to import the goods the nation requires into
the country."

Hard Currency Acquired from Exports

In response to a question on how much hard currency is received from ex-
ports. he said "At the present time Iran has no major exports. Our exports

26
are restricted to some traditional goods such as rugs, tragacanthl cumin
and dried fruits and nuts, and all the foreign currency obtained from them
does not exceed about $400 or $500 million. He cannot rely on the hard
currency obtained from non-oil exports, but we do believe that urgent
thought must be given to non-oil exports so that we will not only be de-
pendent on oil; this will require a careful export program and other ele-
ments although the aid provided by the Central Bank will be unstinting."

Howlavi said, "Unfortunately, the volume of fraudulent invoices related to
certain importers 2rd exporters has risen, and close attention is not given
to the quality of goods in some cases either. As has been reported, people
present invoices on the purchase of some goods where the per-unit cost price
is higher than the international per-unit price; thus these people are try-
ing to keep some of the foreign currency for which they have opened credit
outside the country. Conversely, in some cases concerning some exported
goods, the real price of the exported goods has not been determined and

the foreign currency which the Central Bank receives for revenues from ex-
ports is less than the real price of the goods, and here too there is em-
bezzlement. People are trying to keep the herd currency acquired from the
sale of goods outside the country. To be sure, a one-time forgery by an
importer or exporter is equivalent in volume to the foreign currency sold
to 2,000 students and 2,000 travelers. Of course the Central Bank has be-
come aware of this matter on some occasions, and we have even taken some
individuals to the competent courts and prosecuted them, but the Central
Bank unfortunately has no control over imports and exports and these prob-
lems are not in the Central Bank's area of competence."

The head of the Central Bank then referred to the list of persons sending
hard currency out in the days prior to the triunph of the revolution, and
added "We have prepared a 33~volume list of persons exporting hard currency,
sending one copy of this to the Office of the Prime Minister and one copy
to the Ministry of Justice," persons who want to receive certificates must
refer to these two authorities."

Foreign Currency Reserves

In another portion of his interview, regarding the country's foreign ex-
change reserves, we said "The country's foreign exchange reserves increased
from 22 September 1979, when they were $10,936,000,000, to $12 billion on
19 October 1979. Of this, the sum of $11 billion is obtained from oil ex-
ports."

Howlavi added, "The important thing is that our foreign currency is now in
highly-regarded international banks and that we are drawing $1 billion a
year in interest from the foreign currency. however, my personal view is
that we must not keep our oil revenues in the form of deposits in the
world's banks-~we must turn them into capital investments, since a loss of
money is always harmful to the country and we can obtain a greater benefit
from the interest we receive with capital investment."

27
In answer to s question on why oil money is cosputed in dollars, Howlavi
said "This will have no effect on the country's foreign exchange income,
since the dollars we receive for oil money today we can exchange for other
money which we ourselves want on the sam day. It makes no difference to
oil producing countries if they receive their money in dollars or some
other highly regarded currency."

The president of the Central Bank of Iran then referred to the status of
the nationalized banks and added, "I wanted to say that so far there has
perhaps been no more unfortunate Central Bank president than me, since the
Central Bank has never had such problem. On the one hand economic prob-
lems and on the other hand the problems of the nationalized banks, foreign
currency regulations, credit and money have taken all my time, night and
day. We have to provide liquidity for the nationalized banks. We trust
pay off their foreign hard currency debts. He wet alleviate their intern-
al problem and draw up their euployment regulations. We are busy arrang-
ing regulations and rules day and night and we hope that we will finally
be able to alleviate these problems in a short period. It is clear that
the nationalized banks must be active, for the economic development of the
country, and managers who are appointed by the government must furnish the
necessary facilities for providing credit to merchants. The specialized
banks, which consist of the Industrial Development Bank, the Agricultural
Development Bank, the Agricultural Cooperative Bank, the Bank Sepah, the
Snort Bank, the National Bank and the Welfare Bank, which are continuing
their activities independently in accordance with rules and regulations,
have not been merged into any bank, conversely, we also have decided that
the other banks, in order to be able to compete in a practical sense,
should meanwhile be broken down into two groups, and we will soon determine
their functions-so that they may continue their activity."

Howlavi then said "Hhst is inportant is to create regional economic de-
velopment banks; that is, we should create one economic development bank
in each ostan to avoid concentration of activities in the capital and con-
centrate the activities related to that ostan in that bank, which will
have the independence to give industrial, connercial and agricultural cred-
its so that people need not refer to the capital for detailed activities."

The Volume of Currency

The president of the Central Bank then referred to the volume of currency
in circulation, stating "The volume of currency in circulation in February
1979 was 912 billion rials and this has now been reduced to 858 billion
rials. One of the Central Bank's problems is to keep the volume of cur-
rency out of circulation by whatever means possible, and the bank will
gradually try to keep the volume of currency in circulation within the de-
sired limits of economic requirements so that it is not greater than com-
msrcial transactions. Of course, if the volume of goods is greater than
the volume of currency in the market, this will be counter-inflationary

28
and result in a drop in prices. In any event, the effort is to have the
volume of currency in circulation within the economic orbit conform to the
volume of comercial transactions and respond to the volume of economic
yields."

Hovlavi, concluding the first portion of his interview, stressed that any
decision made by the Central Bank of Iran regarding its functions will be
presented to the nation with total frankness, that any kind of publication,
ruler or statement which is uttered or published by bodies without author-
ity regarding the functions of this bank, including herd currency, hard
currency reserves, money, credit, the printing and circulation of currency,
deposits or savings, must not be heeded by the Iranian people, and that
those who mislead people's thinking on these matters are wittingly or un-
wittingly giving aid to the counterrevolution.

Taking part in Mohamed Ali Howlavi's interview with MAD newspaper were
Dr Qasimi, manager of Economic investigation and studies, Dr Abu ﬂoaeyn,
chief of the foreign bureau, Khoshtinat, head of the currency circulation
department, Khalil Azsr, deputy credit director, and Liqva'i, director gen-
eral of public relations of the Central Bank of Iran.

11837
080: 10906

29
INFLATION, UNEMPLOYMENT THREATEN IRAN'S FUTURE
Paris NAME-YE RUZ in Persian 28 Sep 79 p 1
“Editorial: "0n the Road to Collapse"]

[Text] “me economic situation in Iran has beco-e so deplorable since the
installation of the "Islamic" regile that Hehdi Bazargan himself admits
that only 50 percent of the industries are in Operation and those at half
capacity. He adds that uneaploynent has reached 20 percent. Of course
Bazargan intentionally forgot to say that this 20 percent unuployuent
figure is in relation to teoynent lo nonthe ago and according to a study
by the International Bank this figure has now reached 31 percent (2-3
million people) and inflation is above 100 percent. ‘lhe temporary prise
minister has not wanted to say that if the situation continues this way
throughout the winter Iran will break the world record for inflation and
that actual unenploynent, now the highest in the world, will transform

a wave of discontent into a revolutionary wave.

One of our country's leaders in a recent interview cowared Ayatollah
nemeyni to saaeone who hi jacks an airplane, but due to a lack of under-
standing of navigation is unable to guide the airplane and can do nothing
but crash. Khoneyni, who is not even the most knowledgeable of our
theologians, has no knowledge of political science, and at 79 he is too
old to learn. The noble Iranian revolution took hill out of the pulpit
and placed him in the seat of power. and now, seated there, he still con-
tinues to seraonize as he did in the nosque. Ilia sermnizing has an
audience of millions but in running the country, whether the regime be
dictatorial or de-ocratic, sernonizing cannot implement any plan.

In the final aonths of the Shah's regine we ourselves said that the shah
had set the country back several decades politically. we met now add that
this retrogression, theirs to the regine of the shah-lullah, has also begun
economically and socially.

At a tine when the world is preparing itself for thousands of years in the
future, it would be regrettable if we were to fall behind thousands of years.

It is a national duty of noble Iran to put a stop to the current decline of
our dear country.

9310
(:80 : 10906 30
STEEL MILL PRODUCTION CAPACITY INCREASED BY 2 MILLION TONS A YBAR
Tehran KKYHAN in Persian 29 Oct 79 p 10

article: "Steel Mill Production Capacity Increased by 2 Million Tom a
Yesrﬂ/

IIaxsl with the promlgation of the steel mill expansion plan, which is
being carried out at a cost of $600 million, this industrial facility's
productive capacity will be increased to 1.9 or 2 million tons in 18
months' time.

In announcing the matter, Jalaloddin Ashtiani, managing director of the
steel mill, stated "Following the revolution, steal output was very low,

as a consequence of strikes and unesployment as well as a lack of coal and
the slsgging-up of the furnaces; fortunately, all these problems have been
eliminated and it is the only industrial facility at the present time whose
production has been above capacity since the revolution."

Regarding the project to expand the steel mill, the steel mill managing
director stated, "Seventy-five percent of the operations on the second
stage have not been coupleted; this will be completed in another 18 months,
and full production will start on the second stage of the project 1 year
after the date of the expansion of capacity at the level under discussion."

Ashtiani added, "The cost of this stage has been estimated at 530 million
rubles, or $600 million, which is one-third the cost of similar direct re-
duction plants. Five hundred Russian specialists are working to this end."

In another portion of his statement, Ashtiani said "At the present time,
30 billion rials are being placed annually at the disposal of the steel
mill by the Plan and Budget Organisation, and steel sales are 26 billion
rials annually; however, since the steel mill is procuring all rev mater-
ials directly and expansion and exploitation operations are taking place
simultaneously, steel is being produced at a cost higher than prices on
the European and Japanese markets. However, with proper management and a
decrease in surplus workers, one can avoid factory losses and make output
competitive with foreign output."

31
The managiny, director of the steel mill also said, "If we can raise pro-
duction to 2 million tons per year in the second stage, steel sales will
rise to 30 billion rials; under these conditions, the current costs of
this industrial facility will be no more than 50 billion rials."

Concerning steel and coal reserves, he said "Our annual consumption is

l million tons, while the reserves of the Chanarat Bafq coal mines being
exploited have been estimated at 200 million tons and those of the Chador-
amlu mines 100 kilometers from Bafq, Zarand and Col Gowhar at 1000 million
tons.

Describing welfare measures for workers, the managing director of the steel
mill stated "We will need £0,000 people in the first and second stages but
there are 80,000 people employed in jobs in the steel mills at the present
time; the workers surplus to the steel mills' requirements will be used in
steel and branch industries." In connection with the housing; problem,
Ashtiani said, "Measures are actually underway in the area of workers'
housing and we will allocate l.2 billion rials to workers' housing each
year, which is provided by 600 million rials from Plan and Budget Organi-
zation credits and 600 million rials from steel mill credits. Each year
these credits will be placed at the disposal of workers who have no hous-
ing so they may build homes in the villages surrounding the factory and
the mines, and not be remote from their job environment. Regarding white
collar workers, we will give loans of up to 60 times wages and a minimum
of 200,000 and a maximum of 400,000 tomans."

In conclusion, Ashtisni said: "Ha intend to establish a purification com-

mittee so that we can take steps in this field. of course a number of em-

ployees who cooperated with Savak in the past have been expelled. Accord-

ing to a bill which has been approved, we will transfer a number of workers
to other organizations and redeem others and will retire the official group
on a basis of employment history plus 5 years' coupsssionate bonus."

In conclusion, the managing director of the steel mill added "Contrary to

some peoples' statements. the steel mill was not imposed on us but was one
of the desires of the Iranian people, and we met defend and expand it."

11307
C80: 4906

32
BRIEFS

JOINT PUBLII‘A‘IIONS (DMTTEB FORHED--Tehran (PARS)--‘l'he director of
Domestic Publications of the Ministry of National Guidance said that
the formation of a Joint Publications (Jo-sittee with representatives
fro. the offices of the Inaa, the Publications Office, the Revolutionary
Conittee and the Ministry of National Guidance would guarantee indepen-
dence of the press. One of the important issues he raised was the
difficulty encountered by publishers in confrontations with the many
centers of authority and in nsking of decisions in the last few months.
The proposal for forming a joint cos-ittee is intended to coordinate
these authorities and is thereby a protection against the dangers threaten-
ing the independence and freedon of the press sought by the revolution.
[Text] [Paris NAME-YB auz in Persian 27 Sep 79 p 11 9310

STABILIZATION IN THE UNIVERSITIBSnTehrsn (Voice of the Islandc Republic)»
Dr Tnvasoli, president of the University of Isfahan, amounced yesterday
that as of Septuaber 29 the University of Isfahan will be open. Referring
to the stabilization of the University area and the prevention of probable
battles and confrontations he said that sons tine ago nsasures had been
taken and responsible officials alerted. He added that ﬂojatoleslsn
Bahraqi, who had cone to Esfahan, during a nesting he held with professors
and students, along with his assurances that the universities are being
purged of sons of the entrenist individuals and groups, cautioned then to
reconsider their nodes of behavior. [Tut] [Paris NAME-YB RUZ in Persian

27 Sep 79 p 1] 9310

COOPERATION HIT}! MILITARY UkGBDuTehran (Voice of the Islamic Republic)"
The Public Service Office, with the sin of nesting nanpower needs, called
for volunteers fron those rho served in the nilitary prior to the Islanic
Revolution fro. 1974-1979 to voluntarily re-enlist in any reginents or
units of the gender-ea to assist their brothers in the nilitary services.
Volunteers for service in the any, air force or navy of the Islamic Republic
should return to the Iilitary unit nearest their hone. Volunteers for
service in the gender-ea or police should return to the gender-es unit or
asgistrate nearest their hone. [Text] [Paris NAB-YB m in Persian

27 Sep 79 p 1] 9310

33
I;.\‘l-:(.1l'l'lt)N 0F IlUMSI-ZXUALSH'l'chrnn (Various press suurces)--'l‘hc lslamic
Revolutionary Court of Kurdistan convicted two homosexuals for repeated
homosexual crimes and of corruption on earth, sentenced them both to death
and made arrangements to carry out the sentence. Meanwhile the lslamic
Revolutionary Court of Tabriz also sentenced an individual to death for
the crime of subversion. in the [slalic Court of Kermanshah, Ali Pasha
lleydari, formrly a sergeant in the army, received a comtation to life
imprisonment for the crimes of murder and suppression of revolutionaries.
[Text] [Paris NAME-YE. RUZ in Persian 27 Sep 79 p i] 9310

BOMB EXPLOSIONuTehran (Various press sources)--A bomb exploded at a gather-
ing on the occasion of the National Day of Saudi Arabia at the home of that
country's aubassador. Responsibility was claimed by the Organization to
Avenge Martyrs. The explosion did not injure any of the officials or
foreign diplomats attending the gathering. [Text] [Paris mus-vs RUZ in
Persian 27 Sep 79 p l] 9310

CONFLICTING REPORTS--Paris (AFP)--lt was amounted yesterday that all of
the Islamic Committees of Tehran excepting those established in police
stations have been dissolved. An official of the Central Oomittee, in

an interview with the newspaper BAHDAD, announced this and specified that
this measure was taken after efforts to purge these comittees had failed.
After limiting the mower of comittees, the recruitment of new people will
be undertaken. (NAME-YE “Zn-Though the Central Connittee issued a state-
ment to the effect that the news of canittee dissolution was incorrect and
came out of the inarticulateness of the Central Couttee's representative,
the same stats-eat mentioned a basic intention of reducing the number of
comittees from five to two or three and also of purging the menbership ut‘
unsound individuals and reducing the number of counitteenen, which was in
fact confirmed by the earlier stataent.) [Text] [Paris NAME-YE RUZ in
Persian 28 Sep 79 p l] 9310

Oil. OUTPUT DROP POSSIBLE-~1‘ehran (FIMCIAL TIMES )--The announcement of
the trial of liaaaan Nazih, chairman of the Iranian National Petroleum
Department, which took place thanks to Ayatollah Khomeyni, unofficial
president of the country of Iran, increased the possibility of a sudden
reduction of Iran's oil output. [Text] [Paris KANE-YE 802 in Persian
28 Sep 79 p 1] 9310

DEHOCRATIC PARTY DEWNSTRATIONS BANNED-ﬂehran (Various press sources)--
This announcement of the night before last was issued by religious magis-
trate Sadiq Khalkhali to the inhabitants of the country's western cities:
The respected inhabitants of the cities of Hehabad, Saqes, Bukan, Baneh
and Sardash are hereby advised that all forms of demonstration and claiming
of refuge by the Danocratic Party are banned by the Islamic Republic of
Iran. Anyone who engages in this type of anti-Islamic activity will be
prosecuted. [Text] [Paris ram-Yr m in Persian 28 Sep 79 p 1] 9310
!'J\:.:2:\.‘J t.:\7...'l--‘l'chran (Various press sources)--Snturday the first meeting
since the restoration of Prime Minister Bazargan to the chairmanship was
held by the government administration. During the meeting, which lasted

3 hours, the proposed Ministry of Petroleum and the outcomes of the meeting
of the Revolutionary Council were propounded and studied. All organizations
belonging to the Department of Petroleum will come under the mantle of the
new Petroleum Ministry. the minister of civil service, in connection with
the fact that the revolutionary public prosecutor has sumncd Hassan Nazih
by way of the prime minister, and according to whose knowledge Nazih has
not. presented hinself within the allotted time period, said, "According to
information he has given us, which may not be reliable since Nazih had not
come to the prosecutor's office as of 5 pm, it has been arranged that he
will be interviewed at another location." As of the end of the day Sunday
there had been no news published concerning the interrogation of llassan
Nazih. [Text] [Paris “Aim-YE RUZ in Persian 28 Sep 79 p l] 9310

ELECTRIC POWER PLAN'l‘S--Eng Taj, minister of power, announced the ministry's
future plans for meeting the country's electricity consuuption. Regarding
the Ahvaz power plant, he said that 40 percent of construction activities
on this power plant have been completed. This plant, which will be con-
structed with the cooperation of the Soviet Union, will comprise four 315-
megawatt units, one of which is operating now; work on two others has been
started, and one is half completed. This plant will be in use in 2 years,
according to the plan set forth, and more than 1,250 megawatts will thus

be added to the country's nationwide electricity grid. Russian and Iranian
experts are now engaged in completing this plant. Ta) added, "Prior to the
revolution, an agreement for the construction of four ZOO-megawatt units in
stahan was signed with the Soviet Union, and, in the course of discussions
held recently, the decision was reached for the Soviet Union to operate in
accordance with the substance of this agreement and to begin transporting
the equipment and machinery for this power plant." Another power plant be-
ing coupleted is the Naka coupler, which is to be considered one of the
biggest fuel-operated power plants in the world. One also-megawatt unit in
this couple: is operating now and, if this trial operation is successful,
it will be hooked up to the nationwide grid and put to use in another month.
In conclusion, Taf conplainsd about excessive electricity consumption by
the people of Tehran and said "When we fly over ‘l‘shran we see that this
city is many times brighter than Moscow or Budapest; although the electric-
ity output of these two cities is greater than that of Tehran, the_peop_la's
eggtravagance makes Tehran several times brighter than thzy are." llexgl
llehran MAD in Persian 30 Oct 79 p 19/ 11887

IRANIAN STUDENTS CRITICIZE RBGIHB-«d‘he occupation of the U.S. Embassy in Teh-
ran and Ayatollah lanmeyni's demand for the extradition of the shah from the
United States is not in fact directed against the United States but a acre
or 1ess desperate attempt by Khomeyni to regain his failing popularity. This
is stressed by representatives of the Iranian Students' Union in Sleden.
They think that the occupation damages Iran's prestige abroad. (Sture
Johansaon) reports from Goeteborgi' (Nadia Hanuchabr), a representative of
the Iranian Students' Union in Heat Sweden, thinks that the support enjoyed

35
by Kluoneyni among the people of Tehran is greatly declining as a result of
great unemployment. nonappearance of promised reforms and the persecution of
national minorities in Iran. [Begin (Manuchehr) recording] Khomeyni'a re—
gime has not fulfilled the (2pmises) given when he cane to power. He has
declared war against different minorities in Iran, for example, the Kurds,
and he has not been able to manage this war either politically or militar-
ily. He wants in some way to nake the people forget all this and to whip
up another wave of revolution among the people and regain the support of

the people as well as regain his lost popularity. [end recording] [Text]
LD121952 Stockholn Donestic Service in Swedish 1700 GMT 12 Nov 79 Lb]

CSO: 3109

36
BEGIN'S cum TO BE STUDENT 0F JABOI‘IIBKI mum)

Jeruselee “pains in Arebic 9 Oct 79 P l
[mitormlx "the Student of Jebotinski"]

[Text] Inst Sundsy evening. on the progre- “The ﬂesh in en hour." lsreeli tele-
vision broedcest e sequent in which sees Iereeli lenders reviewed the histori-
cel ettenpts end various contects to echieve pence iron 19% to the present.

Our ettention wee ettrected by Current lsreeli Prine Minister hennches Besin's
oft-repented steteeent to the effect thet he comiders hinulf e student of
Jebotinski, thet the letter is his toecher whose footsteps he follows end so-
cording to whose teechius he conducts his policy, end thst he hes edopted new
of his teachings.

lle know that the Herut Perty. led by Begin. is en extension of Jebotinski's
leederehip. end et the one tine is en extensim of the refor- novesent founded
by Jebotinski. which historians of the Zionist sovesent consider the etmcest.
eost redicel. soot ohstinsnt Zionist soveeent adhering to the letter of the
Zionist doctrine.

Pros looking ..t selections tron e book written in 1950 by Jebotinski. celled
"The Jewish Us: Front." one sees thet in the ebove-nentioned book Jebotinski
dreeeed thet world Zionis- hed succeeded in esteblishing e Jewish stete in Pel-
estine having 1 Jewish enjority end e coneiderebls Arch Iinority. The author's
insinetion expended. end with his novenent's executive bmeu he drew up his
conceptions of the rights which «ant to be mated to the Arab ninority.

He looked up these proposed rights end bean cowering then with the stends

of the Herut Petty em its lender Begin. end we drew the following conclusion:
either Begin is not e etuient oi Jebotinski. or he is en unsuccessful one.
Jebotinski end his eoveeent's executive conittee hed breed horisons. end
according to their concepts they would give the in!) Iinority conplste euton-
ow including land. end the right to ensct lews. inpoee texee, fully supervise
education. and £111 stete pcsitims eccomdin; to nueericsl percentege. Arebic
would be considered e conpletely officisl Indulge.

37
Us resind Begin of Article 5 of the resolutions of his professor Jsbotinslti,
[attaining to "lend." end we ask his. ss long so he still considers hinsel!
s successful stuient. to rereed thst mph and cospue his present behav-
ior with the contents of thet psregreph.

Our eminetion of Jebotimki's book is used at pointing out Zionist contro-
dictions end mining thet Zionist upiretions ere becosing sore extrevesent
ma redial by the day.

He sent to stress thet Jebotinski. even with his ndicsliss sud exoessiveness.
was thinking of building e bridge between Areh end Jew while creeting the pc-
tentiel for "peecei’ul coexistence” between the two peoples. His current stu-
dent is working to destroy not Just one bridge but all bridges. and to bury
the theory of peeceful coexistence in the depths of the grove before it even
sees the light.

An unsuccessful stuient-onat Just in relstion to his professor Jebotinski. but
with respect to ell the pesos wants in the Areb eut.

Us sill return to discuss Jebotinski's book in deteil, since it is our right

end the right of casing generations to stuiy those peoples' sethod and venue:-
of thinking.

8559
($03 «ea:

38
EDITORIAL nervous 'moxc' s'mms nour sea or win
Jeruslen AL-QUDS in Arebic 1 Oct 79 p l
[smog-m: 'Veheeent cm- of Seriomness end Frentic clenor"]

[rm] Iereel m permitted Isnelis to m lend in the occupied territories.
thereby per-sitting en act which was not originellq forbidden. Most people
light not know that th. Qeren Qayyemet established a branch

mder the nose "Mute." in eccordence with Best Bonk lsw. end eede e west
Bonk city its Medquerters. es en Areb conpeny it bought Areb lend. eosth
with dubious deeds end through persons eseusmg the chorecter of soeeone else.
The ﬂewsen village m1 estete issue is but one overt eenifestetion of this
coepeny's ectivities.

Ssdly end unfortumtely. this Israeli step stirred up en outcry st hose end
ebroed. within the country, people sterted telking. deytise heros end night-
ties bets. end held secret. serious esetings in the asset of Jesse Bord.
Their seetings resulted in the intense of heroic. visionsry ststeeents to
cleerly prove that they didn't know wlut wee lappening in their country. They
didn't heve enough tine for such lmtive ectivitiee. end they were preoccupied
sore with stetesents then with era other protiteble sctivity. These steteeents
will not ssve e single one of our country's stones tron being lost. nor will
they protect e single ask tree of our country's forests. These people dishend-
ed after deeonstreting their ignounce end eroueing the hughter end derision
of their eneeies. The verse "0 notion st whose ignorence en the notions

laughed” is eppliceble to thee.

Do these heros know how the lend is looking ewey to non-hubs? Do those

heros know thet 'Adess. Pond inBeytHenine. enithe lends of m:- 'Aqeb. end
the lends of el-Bsqi’eh. end the property of the Qstineh feeily in Jerusslee
were sold with forged deeds? Do these heroe know thst sons of those who sign-
ed the deeds es sellers died scores of yeere ego? no they know thet the Is-
reeli security euthorities ere not inking lepl steps easinet the torgers.
lien end swindlere? If they know on this. end still issued those heroic
steteeents. then thet is s eels-it}. If they don't know. then the ceheity

is greeter. The eels of lead «not be deelt with by obsolete eethods. but

by other eethods which those who clsie to preside over petriotio ection audit

39
to know Otherwise. let the. be silent. and be content with whet they Are
fuiliu with.

The feverish outcry hu emu! to the ml: world uni it he; fallen into the

acne tnp. le find thet this world hes the exam of being very ignorant
shout ue.

Recently, AL-QUDS reprinted the Kmiti peper AL-UATAN'e editor-hi about the
purchase at land tro- vhoeever nuts to sell. It m e eeriom editorisl

calling to sin! the tragedy of the "Netioml had." He don't want the land to
be eold. neithu to Iemlie new: to Anb cepitel. The obvious. trunk answer
is chaL even if Israel would not resort to appropriation. confiscation and

declaration of closed military zones. then we still would not want tn svll.
we will adhere to this stand.

Thehndiethenntionmuweloeethehndvelouthmtion. lhoever
he no had he: no netion.

8559
C30: #802

40
CMNTARY 0N APPOINTMENT OF llURVITZ AS BL AL HEAD

Jerusalem 'l‘liE JERUSALEM POST in English 16 Nov 79 p 3

[Article by Ze'ev Schul]

Is El Al headed for brighter skies or for a
crash landing asks The Post's ZE'EV
SGIUL in this viewpoint story following the

surprise appointment of Avraham Shavit as‘
the airline's new board chairman yesterday.

[Text]

The nomination oi industrial
wonderland Avrahaln "luma"
Inuit as board chairman oi ll Al
will probably be remembered in the
airline as the day lightning stuck.
Mavit may not be much oi an avia-
tion expert -- his specialisation ls
hitchenstoees—buthehasanm:
tion as a man who gets this. .
And he usually lives up to this

"Station.
Al will thus have the distinction
oi becoming the tint ecotlomlo bolt,
to exoerleaee the unteooer mercies
oi the new ﬁnance minister mast
l-hu-vits.

lhavit is Malta's choice. This
doublequ combination bodes
no good to: conservative dished
who may at! be held“

41

Unu'otltablescheouiesvtilaleol
dlaoootinued. fuel-null" 'l-
minnow-nun;
ereve.aboveali.vtilbemaoetot
theliaeanotahepayouts—orlo:
iorgneaer pastures ebe'here.

itisailthecomoanymaoaceme
hasenr'aatedtodotoltsataiiel
The one remaining question is: 1-
these measures save the compa-
aad are all oi them real

m m were M
and reels travellers sad th:
agesh m melts. under

imeaet ei the Comet (BOA
‘ 5mg? 22% 3% as:
§§53§§§§§§§§§§éggiéiz
”“35? 3%: 2‘2st
Egig avg-g F5 ﬁ'gzgij
5? ii?§s§ .EEagﬁ g:
#3355; Egagég:
:i'5 o a: atggé.r‘§j
Saigié‘zif; Esagazéig
AMERICAN DOLIAB HEM‘ALITY 888]! R0 THREAT 1‘0 JGIDAN
Jomsalsn AIrQlDS in Anbic ? Oct 79 p l

[Editorialn "Aux-icon Arroganco'f]

[Toxt] Kim awn has noturnod fro- tho Unitod Statos aftor staying thoro
about 2 wooks. during which tins ho doliwuod his opooch to tho UN Gonoral
Assoahly. Tho kins “tux-nod without having at Prooidont Jim carter. which
is taro whonovor o hood of atato visits tho Unitod Statoo own on an unofficial
Vui‘o

It is no somt that King Husayn wantod and dooind this aootix. But Pus-
idont Gartor. osmosis; his disploasuro with Judan'o Arab policy. rotuod

to loot hia. atoning hioooli‘ by saying that ho didn't havo shown tip. as

npottod by mam in its last isouo.

This Alorican arroganoo all! ahnocnl hohavior will not ml Kim awn. nor
will it attoct his standing with his pooplo and tho Anho. But it «for: now
woof that tho Unitod Statoo will not ho a ouitahls aodistor to! tho Palatin-
ianisouo.andtut ithaaassmodapooitionmthohaoisotonoaspootasd
has cloaod its oyos to all othor aspoots.

This conduct also often now proof that tho Unitod Sutoo continua to opouto
ocean-ding to tho Dollar hontality. loaning that it boliovoo that it can buy
tho will at pooplss and taho on: tho rains of thoit policy by paying dollars.

It is no oocrot that Judah :oooivos om. aid all loan tron tho Unitod
Statoo. and it is nosoorotthat Jada «not oaoilygivo npthis aid. But
in no way dooo aoooptin aid aoan smondorin‘ ono's plitioal will and sand
national lino. Judah worm adhuonoo to tho huh tiart. and going alas
with tho Anh oonnnity as diotatod hy nah intuoots. to tho nilliono of
urgontly noodod dollars it rocoivos fro. Aurioa.

Imothor Aoorioa lilnos it or not. Judah has a m. tundanntal rolo in
tho promo- ofom'Az-abwod'ld ingonoulaulthohlootinianmo inpatie-
ulax'. “than who adviood tho Aurioan msidoat to hotnvo ao ho did woro cloo-
n to uttor iamco tun thoy won to tho wiso political courso.

103
In the put the United Stu“ hn bohnvod uinihrly teams so. of our Hid-
dlo mt states. 80 night untion Turbo: u an ample; they ompondod am

to it beam of its stud on tho Ont-m iuu. than can back to bow boron
the Turkish scum-tut. akin; “cm for their hasty. thoughtlnu M.

This will not has Jozdan or tho Juliana pooplo. In fact. its cocoon light

flourish hum. of Anb Old. Uhlt will ho “fact“ will be the hind “or.
icun role in tho Pnlutinian am.

8559
(30: “8‘2

46
LBWSB ARMY mm VIBHS SCOPE 0? com TASKS

1.0051521 Paris AN-NAHAR AL'-ARABI HA AL-DUHALI in Arabic 29 Oct-lo Nov 79
pp 10. ll, 12, 13 Lb

[Interview with Lebanese Arny Cos-lander Gen Victor Khuri by Nihad al-Hashnuq
--place and date not given]

[Excerpt] mestion: Should the army cox-and decide to deploy the any in
the south, what steps could be taken and what would be the obstacles?

Answer: The arny's priority task has been and still is to see that the
state's authority is established over all Lebanese territory, particularly
in the south where it is nostly lacking. however. the fact that the question
of the south is linked to a great extent with numerous local, Arab and inter-
national factors could impede the deployment of the army. At present, we
can strengthen our role by standing alongside the III! forces to insure the
implementation of the UN Security Council resolutions. This requires the
Palestinian resistance not to obstruct our task. It also requires inter-
national pressure on Israeli to eske it respect Lebanon's sovereignty and
adhere to the armistice agreement concluded with it in 1968.

Despite this, we can enter the south, to change the bitter situation it is
experiencing, provided that political work continues to bolster our presence
there. We do not wish to cause the situation to explode there, but the re-
verse.

Question: Hbat is the nature of the relationship between the Lebanese Army
and the Palestinian resistance? that is the position regarding the silitary
agree-ents between the am and the resistance?

Answer: There are no sgreeesnts between the any and the resistance, but
there are agree-ants between the state and the resistance. These agreements
because obsolete because they were stillborn. lad those who signed the Cairo
sgreenent been able to inplsnsnt its provisions in advance, they would not

have signed it [sentence as published].

105
The current relations between the army and the resistance are going through
the process of eliminating convulsions and strengthening mutual confidence.
This requires efforts by the Palestinian resistance, so that its dealings
with the Lebanese Army can be similar to its dealings with the other Arab
arnies.

The Palestinian resistance took over the south on the disintegration of the
army. The resistance ought to return the south to the army, now that the
army has been rebuilt. Moreover, a military interpretation of the political
Cairo agreement necessitates the presence of two parties; and so far, I have
no presence in the south.

Question: Historically, strong relations exist between the Lebanese mili-
tary establishment and its Syrian counterpart. It is observed that this
policy has not been adhered to for quite some time. What is the reality of
Lebanese-Syrian military relations, discounting the question of the "deter-
rent forces"?

Answer: The relationship between the military personnel is now strong. It

is also strong in the territory where the two anies are present. The exist-
ence of sane gaps is not worth mentioning when considering the ultimate
target, namely, the cannon enemy. Israel occupies the Golan and is cor-it-
ting aggression against Lebanese territory. Any dispute would be a dispute
anong brothers, despite the difficult circumstances in which we are working
and which could be casued by the presence of an army other than the national
any even though a fraternal one. Relations of mtual confidence and coopera-
tion were resorted when the rebuilding of the army started.

Question: How do you view the Lebanese military position in the event of
war between Syria and Israel?

Answer: What threatens; Syria naturally threatens Lebanon. Every time
there was a threat. Lebanon honored, and it continues to honor, its obliga-
tions within the framework of the joint Arab Defense Council. It has not
withheld, nor will it withold its capabilities from Syria. If a war breaks
out between Syria and Israel, the Lebanese military position should not be
viewed in isolation from the Arab nilitary position as a whole but within
our capabilities to date. The joint Arab Defense Council is aware of these
capabilities becasue we send it periodical detailed reports on the phases
we have completed in rebuilding the army.

Question: Those who oppose the army express their opposition only to cer-
tain personnel, whereas nobody is saying anything about the any's policy.
What is the context of this policy, and on what political basis is the pres-
ent buildup being carried out?

Answer: within our present capabilities we pay attention to the situation
inside the borders and not outside. we refuse to side with one group against

46
another. We also refuse to allow one group to overpower another. Our goals
are modest. We are against anyone who carries arms in place of the army, be—
cause according to ailitary regulations only the army has the right to carry
arms. Our cause is legitimacy and its defense. Our enemy is whoever
threatens security from inside or outside our borders.

Question: what is the army comand's view of the question of relations with
Israel in the light of accusations that certain political parties have such
relations, and what are the army's relations with Israel within the joint
armistice commissions?

Answer: It is wrong to call the armistice couission meetings relations with
Israel. The armistice connission meets under UN supervision and in the
presence of UN officers. We try continuously to revive the work of this
commission because it implies Israeli recognition of the international bor-
ders provided for in the 1948 agreeaent. Lebanon adheres to this agreement
in order to preserve the security of its borders, despite the attempts by the
Israeli ailitary to evade the agreenant. Regarding the accusation that
certain political quarters have relations with Israel, that question must

be put to then.

Question: The parties that are calling for all security matters in Lebanon
to be entrusted to the army are the very same parties that clash with the
army. what is the nature of relations between the army and these forces
and hOw do you view their future?

Answer: The question, of course, refers to "the Lebanese front." In fact,
the front believes that the deployment of the army has always been carried
out in areas under its influence and at its expense, while the army is not
deployed in the influence areas of other organisations. The relations be-
tween the army and these parties is the same as between the army and other
parties. Briefly, the idea is to cake the army the only force capable of
doing away with excuses for any party, regardless of its characters, to car-
ry arms and to defend the citizens against whatever threatens them or is be-
lieved to be threatening them.

The army does not want to be deployed in the tea of a particular group to
the advantage of another. The army's plan is to be deployed in the interest
of the Lebanese people as a whole. I believe that the political conflict,
which has turned into armed conflict, must be taken back to its right place
in the democratic institutions.

Question: Some people say that, had the Lebanese Army fought Israel, it
would not have disintegrated, and no one would have dared to stand against
it. Evidence for this can be seen in the Arab countries that fought Israel
as well as in the instances when attack on a Lebanese unit in the south
generated unanimous Lebanese support [for the army].

(47
Answer: Those who have said these things could be right. But the Jordanian
Army that fought against Israel used this as a legal excuse to strike at the
resistance. 1 do not wish to do the sane. However, I would like to recall
the battles that the Lebanese Army fought against Israel in September 1972
despite the imbalance of strength. The army files contain names of scores
of martyrs who fell as a result of Israeli bombing or operations between
1969 and 1975. l was posted in the south for 11 years, during which I saw
100 clashes between the Lebanese Army and the Israeli forces. In 1974 one
single bomb killed 5 officers with one blow in Tyre barracks, and in 1967 we
set up a Palestinian battalion in Tyre and were tensely waiting for the any
comnd's order to fight. But 'Abd ai-N--'ir's 9 June surrender sent every-
one back to his work.

Question: It is being said that you are in constant contact with Sa'd Had-—
dad in the border strip and that his salary and the salaries of his troops
are sent to him by the army comand. It this true?

Answer: There is no contact with Haddad, not even indirectly. The salaries
have been stopped, and Haddad has been referred to a disciplinary board. He
has been dismissed from the army and is no longer a member of the military.
As for those who are with him, we will look into their cases in the light of
Lebanese law when we are able to contact them and free th- from the pres-
sures being brought on them. I believe that Sa'd Haddad completely lost
control when the Kawkaba battalion was dispatched [no further details] and
decision-making became entirely Israeli. Despite the fact that there is no
contact. I would like to ask: why is the Jordanian regime allowed to be in
contact with the inhabitants of the occupied Heat Bank and the Syrian regiac
to be in contact with its own people in the occupied Golan, under the slogan
of seeking to liberate the land and the people from Israeli occupation, while
lebanon is asked to liberate its land and people by cutting off relation with
those living in the border strip?

Question: Is the Lebanese Army ready or getting ready to take over its
tasks in all Lebanese cities in the event of a security vacuum?

Answer: we hope that no security vacuum will occur but rather an organized
deployment of the army. A security vacuum would require rapid political
action by all the parties. The Lebanese Army is now capable of taking addi-
tional security tasks in a number of Lebanese cities, particularly in Beirut.
but it is still in need of close and strong support from the "Arab deterrent
forces" so that. gradually and in coordination with these forces, it can car-
ry out such tasks once a political decision on this is made.

I would like to point out there that the rebuilding of the Lebanese Army
should not be interpreted as ending the Arab deterrent forces' task.

(280: 6802

48
BRI BPS

SHAM'UN DIALOG WITH PLO—[Unnamed radio correspondent'a 2 November interview
in Beirut with former Lebanese President Camille Shsn'un—recordsd] [Bx-
cerpt] [Question] Your excellency, in a statement today Abu Iyad [Fatah
Central (Jo-ittee member] called for a dialog with the Lebanese front. Do
you think that this statement was in response to your repeated calls for a
dialog, and do you agree to meet with him? [Answer] I have not seen the
statement asde by Abu Iyad. However, since I have called for a dialog, I am
ready in principle to enter into one. I have no objection, providing the
dialog is based on one principle: That Lebanon has absolute sovereignty
over all its territory and that the question of settling Palestinians in
Lebanon and their acquiring of Lebanese citizenship should not be discussed
in any way. [110022006 Voice of Lebanon (Clandestine) in Arabic to Lebanon
1715 CHI 2 Nov 79 NC]

CSO: 10802

69
EDITORIAL CRITICIZES UNDENOCRATIC COVERNHENT POLICY
Casablanca LlBBMT'lON in French 19-25 Oct 79‘

[Editor in 1]

[Text] The unconstitutional actions of the Moroccan administrative apparatus
no longer need be demonstrated. After the rigging of the results of the
communal elections in 1976 and the legislative elections in 1977. after

the flagrant violation of the clauses of the constitution on the right to
strike and the dismissal of 1500 teachers and health officials, this is an
administration which no longer wears kid gloves to prove that texts. laws,
and legality no longer have intangible value.

The affair of the Municipal Council of Ifni is already testimony to the
manifest lack of constitutionality in the action of the administration.

From that time the question has been: who is responsible for what in this
country? Are we really within the framework of a normal operation of the
constitutional system or is this the more or less whitewashed exception?
Since 3 years after the comunal elections, the adninistration still finds
the means to intervene to mould the political configuration of the Municipal
Council of the city of Ifni, the moves were not so complete on 12 Novewer.
To designate a president in the place of the legitimate president opens the
enigma to two possibilities:

1. Whether this was only one action among so many others to thwart the
opposition in our country particularly since the president of the Municipal
Council of the city of Ifni is an active militant of the USP? [Socialist
Union of People's Forces] and the CDT [Democratic Labor Federation]. He
served a 4-month prison sentence as a result of the strike of teachers last
April. It is as much as saying that nothing but declarations remain of the
Opposition Statute in the Moroccan constitutional system. Furthermore
Morocco is in a fair way to gain itself international renown in the art and
style of concocting texts and speeches on democracy and of ignoring them in
the interests of everything except democracy. But this two-faced policy is
far from insuring our country the international support necessary to it

in such crucial circumstances as those in which it finds itself. Just as
it only erodes a so precious internal front for national mobilisation aroand

50
the defense of our national integrity. If one therefore passes over in
silence these two aspects of the immediate political viability of the
democratic functioning of Moroccan political life, the other key question
still remains: what mode of power do the Moroccan government leaders
intend to exercise?

2. if the affair of the Municipal Council of lfni does not forcibly raise
this question. it still raises another just as important question--namely.
the reality of the centers of political decision in our country. in this
affair are we facing an initiative which is strictly attributable to local
zeal, an intervention of occult forces in unsvowed but very significant
designs, or simply a declared, deliberate, and considered choice of the
government? There are as many question marks as there are indications of
the serious process which our country has been adapting in recent times with
regard to the relationship of those who govern with the governed.

Actually in its smallest machinery, the state reflects this dilution of
responsibilities. And perhaps the explanation of the paradox of the govern-
mental action may be found here: the total absence in serving the masses
but omnipresence to oppress or even domesticate them. One cannot even speak
any more of a tentative aborting of democratic experience, since the truth
is that it is complete reality.

80? is it necessary to search for the more plausible of the two possibilities
or can one anticipate a reply from the circles concerned anyway? Both
certainly place the constitutionality of the administrative action and its
power at the center of the national preoccupations. For after all it is a
question of knowing if the individual as well as the collect!"e possess

even a modicum of legal protection against the "supra-constitutional
administration." It goes without saying that it is not a statement 0. the
texts which is demanded here. For a long time now the texts have had only

a formal significance. After all. does the government not permit itself

to interpret them unilaterally, independently of the imperative legal
procedure for such action? The affair of the dismissal of the teachers

and the health officers is in a fair way of becoming a milestone in distortion
of the law.

Concretely, the government is called upon to break the silence it has
adopted on the subject of Ifni. But not for the pleasure of the Chamber of
Representatives. It is with regard to the credibility of the Moroccan
constitutional system that the attitude of the government is the determining
factor. Through its position the government will prove what exists and
what no longer exists of the "democratic ex;erience" as intrinsic value.

Let us point out, however, that for us the time or illusions is long since
past. 0n the contrary, the time for frankness is still with us. Prankness
in action and frankness in intentions are still the two fundamental terms of
all frank and above all durable and beneficial relations for the future of
Morocco.

51
In any case. this affair shows. if there is any need to, that democracy is
still to be built in our country. And that those who believe that they are

able to change the popular will no longer have illusions. The struggle
will be continued at Ifni as everyuhere else for an ideal which goes beyond

the francwork of political principles because of its historic significance
in our country: democracy.

6108
C80: 4600

52
FOREIGN MINISTER DISCUSSES SAHARA PROBLEM, EGYPTIAN AID OFFER, PURCHASE
OF U.S. HEAPONS

Paris AL-MIJSTAQBAL in Arabic 13 Oct 79 pp 26-25

[Interview With M'Haned Boucetta, Moroccan Minister of Foreign Affairs, by
Basin al-Mu'allin; "No Egyptian Amy in Morocco; He Hill Purchase weapons
From United States and From Others; Morocco Abides by Its Position Toward
Canp David Accords and Egyptian Regine; Plan Ained at Providing African
Countries With Outlet on Atlantic Ocean“]

[Text] New York--Since the OAU [Organization of African Unity] suit that
was held in Monrovia last August and the resolution of the Conittee of
Africa's Sages to conduct a referendum in the Uestern Sahara, the conflict
over the Sahara has been assuning two forns: A military for: reflected in
Morocco's annexation of (Hadi al-Dhahab) province and in the quick attacks
staged by the POLISARIO forces and a diplomatic fora reflected in the
mediation initiatives trade by Tunisian President Habib Bourguiba and PLO
Chair-nan Yaair 'Arafat, and recently by King Khalid of Saudi Arabia.

M'Haned Boucetta, the Moroccan Iinister of foreign affairs, has cone to
the United Nations to declare to its General Assesbly his country's posi-
tion vis-a-vis the Sahara conflict and to reveal the contents of the sea-
sage which the Moroccan mnarch had sent to the President of Liberia who
is the current OAU chairnan.

On this inportsnt nessage, on the Arab nediation initiatives and on Egyp-
tian President Anwar al-Sadat's declaration that he is prepared to send
Egyptian troops and war eaterial to Morocco, AL-KJS‘I’AQBAL has conducted
the following interview with the Moroch ninister of foreign affairs:

[Question] How do you assess the Arab initiatives to settle the dispute
between you and Algeria over the Sahara, especially the latest endeavor
node by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and King Khalid's visit to the Libyan
Jauhiriyah for this purpose?

[Answer] lhe fact is that this so-called Sahara issue was presented to
the Arab group in the first smit held in Rabat in October 1976 and at-
tended by all the Arab heads of state at the tine. They asked questions,
requested explanations and faniliarised themselves with the dossier of

53
the issue and ended up with a united view toward the issue, including Al-
geria. Everybody knows that this area, i.e. the Hestern Sahara area, is
a part of Morocco that was under Spanish colonialism. There was absolute
Arab support at the time for supplying Morocco with all the material and
moral aid to liberate this part of its soil. A change then took place

in Algeria's position, thus turning this part of the Arab world into a
point of tension and conflict.

[Question] “hat is the position of the Moroccan opposition toward this
issue?

[Answer] We can be sure that all the Moroccans are unanimous that this
issue is a national issue and that this spot must be restored to Morocco.
There is opposition insofar as the other economic or cultural issues are
concerned but there is absolute consensus over the Sahara issue. I would
like to add that an initial mediation was made by the Arab countries in
1975 and was followed by other mediations whenever tension occurred in the
area for fear that the conflict might turn into a comprehensive and destruc-
tive war. One of the latest mediations was made by President Habib Bour-
guiba who asked King Hassan 11 and the Algerian President to hold a meeting
between then so that they may study whatever may bring the two countries
closer to one another. Morocco's response to the convocation of the meet-
ing was positive and immediate. But regrettably, the other side did not
agree. saying that the matter does not concern it but rather concerns the
so-called POLISARIO. I have learned while in New York that after his
visit to the Libyan Jamahiriyah, His Majesty King Khalid may be in contact
with Habib Bourguiba on the issue of the mediation. I have nothing so far
to indicate that there is agreement on a meeting to-take place for this
issue. But there are signs that demonstrate a sincere desire for His
Majesty King Khalid and President Bourguiba to bring the views of Morocco
and Algeria closer to each other, or at least to try to get King Hassan
and President Chadli Bendjedid to meet with one another. This is all I
have on this issue at present.

[Question] Do you welcome these efforts?

[Answer] Yes, and this was our attitude toward President Bourguiba‘s re-
quest. There is no change in our position that welcomes any mediation that
may contribute toward settling this issue.

[Question] when President Chadli Bendjedid assumed power, it was said
that one of his concerns was to settle the Sahara issue. Have contacts
taken place between the two governments on this issue?

[Answer] No contact has been made. Re have heard what you just mentioned
about the presence of the desire to settle this issue which in fact is an
issue between Morocco and Algeria. You know that large parts of Morocco
were annexed to the Algerian administration when the French ruled the area.
The French believed that Morocco was on its way to independence some day

54
whereas they considered Algeria a part of the French soil. This is wny
they stripped away parts of Morocco and anncxed them to Algeria, as I have
already said. These are the areas of (Tanduf. Bishar) and others. Some
explanation can be found for the pressure currently exerted over the Heat-
ern Sahara issue in Algeria's fear that Morocco nay renew its demand for
these areas whereas Morocco has always tried to surpass this issue of
borders.

[Question] what are Morocco's conditions for settling the Sahara issue?

[Answer] Morocco has no conditions whatsoever. The Sahara issue is the
issue of completing the unity of the Moroccan soil and of regaining what
was usurped by the European colonist. A very important initiative has
found its way to the light in the past few weeks and I will announce it
officially in the name of Morocco in the speech that I will deliver to the
UN General Assembly. King Hassan sent last month a message to the Presi-
dent of Liberia, who is also the current OAU chairman, asking him to con-
sider the Sahara as a number of areas, some of which fall under the Moroc-
can control and some under the control of other countries adjacent to the
Sahara, and stating that this area should be an area of cooperation and
peace for the area's peoples. This initiative seeks to realize numerous
goals, some of which are linked to the OAU charter's provision that seeks
to turn the area into a means of cooperation among the members who belong
to it. The initiative also seeks to realize one of the goals desired by
both the Arab group and the African group, namely cooperation between the
Arab and African countries. This is in addition to the endeavor to estab-
lish an Arab-African-Buropean dialogue. All this can produce positive re-
sults for the Hestern Sahara that borders numerous Arab and African coun-
tries. This initiative also seeks to realize another important goal.
namely to enable some countries that have no sea outlet. such as Mali.
Chad and the Niger, to get such an outlet through the said cooperation.

[Question] Is this goal different from the trans-Sahara railroad?

[Answer] No. The railroad project seeks to link the north with the south.
The cooperation I am talking about seeks to link the north with the south
and the east with the west.

[Question] As long as the discussion is on the Arab countries' relations
with the African countries. than why don't we talk about Morocco's rela—

tions with an Arab African country, namely Egypt? President al-Sadat has
expressed his country's readiness to advance military aid to Morocco. He
also said recently that 700 Egyptian troops were martyred in the battle-

field with the Moroccans. Do you have any comment to make on this state-
ment?

[Answer] Several statements have been carried by the wire services and
the press. "hat I know is that the Moroccans are extremely sensitive to
whoever supplies them with aid to defend their territories. This initia-
tive by President aI-Sadat has been received by the Moroccans with under-
standing and acceptance. However, as far as I know. President al-Sadat

55
declared that he will supply Morocco with war materials and not troops.
There is no Egyptian army in the area. however, this does not mean that
in its relationship with Egypt, Morocco has changed or will change its
position toward the commitments that it has undertaken, be they the reso-
lutions adopted by the 1974 Rabat summit or those adopted by the Baghdad
summit. Morocco is still committed to these resolutions and will con-
tinue to be committed to them as long as the issue continues to be as it
is at present.

[Question] Does this mean that you have accepted weapons and war material
from Egypt?

[Answer] A statement has been made, as I have said, and the natural reac—
tion of any people defending the unity of their soil must be one of under—
standing.

[Question] Does Morocco deny that it has received weapons from Egypt?

[Answer] I cannot deny or confirm. There is a statement and there is a
Moroccan reaction to this statement.

[Question] Will you purchase weapons from the United States and what is
the position of United States vis-a-vis the request that Morocco has sub-
mitted to purchase weapons from it?

[Answer] Yes, we intend to purchase weapons, as long as we need them, from
the United States and from others. A few months ago, there was procrasti-
nation in the U.S. position on this issue but when the Americans understood
the situation and understood that we are defending our sovereignty and our
land, this procrastination disappeared. Our relations with the Americans
are good at present.

[Question] So, has the United States agreed to sell you weapons and what
types of weapons?

[Answer] There is presently no reservation by the United States on sell-
ing us weapons. I am no military expert to tell you what types of weapons
they are.

[Question] Has the United States exerted any pressures on Morocco to
change its position toward the Camp David accords and the Egyptian-Israeli
peace?

[Answer] No. there is no pressure. After the Camp David accords, we ex-
plained to the United States the position that we adopted, that we have
abided by and that we will continue to follow. This happened on the occa-

sion of the visit that His Majesty King ﬂassan 11 paid to the United States
last November.

[Question] Is there a plan for a visit by His Majesty King ﬂassan to the
United States this year?

56
[Answer] Not now.

[Question] How do you assess the Moroccan—French relations generally and
the French Government's policy on the Sahara issue?

[Answer] France has always expressed its view that it wants to remain
neutral toward the Sahara issue. France being nore aware of the truth than
Others, we ask it to make its testimony that this area is an indivlsible
part of Morocco. France, as well as Spain, knows this but wants to remain
neutral. We leave it to this position of hers. Insofar as other issues
are concerned, our relations with France are good relations.

[Question] Do you think that the ongoing mediations concerning the Sahara
will be positive and that a settlement will be found?

[Answer] I believe that this issue, i.e. the so-called Sahara issue, is
a fabricated issue intended to create tension in the climate of the area.
Morocco is serious in its efforts to turn this area into an area of coop-
eration and solidarity. I hope that the latest initiatives will be posi-
tive in turning this area into an area of security and cooperation.

[Question] Do you hope [sic] this latest Moroccan initiative will have an
impact on building the Greater Maghreb unity?

[Answer] I very nuch hope so because we have all grown up with the hope
of unity of the Arab Maghreb. He will work with all our strength to
achieve this goal.

[Question] Do you have an opinion on how to overcome the Lebanese situa-
tion of which you are aware?

[Answer] Lebanon's issue is one of the major issues preoccupying Morocco
and an issue that grieves all the Moroccans. I say this because the
Lebanon that we used to see as the gem of the Arab world has reached this
degree of destruction and evil. Us are doing all we can so that the Leba-
nese issue may return to three principles:

Respect for Lebanon's unity, respect for its sovereignty and respect for
its independence.

Morocco's reaction to Lebanon's request for the convocation of an Arab sum-
mit to deal with the situation in the south--a request conveyed by Presi-
dent Sarkis' eaissary--has been that it accepts and welcones the convoca-
tion of this nut-it as soon as possible. He will exert efforts to lake
this unit come through. I hope that Lebanon will return as it used to
be, the gem of the Arab world, as I have already said.

8494
C50: 6602

57
USFP OPPOSITION LEADER DISCUSSBS SAHARA mama. SOCIOECOWIC PROBLEMS

Casablanca LlBKRATlON in French 19-25 Oct 79

[Interview with USFP [Socialist Union of People's Forces] leader Abdelwahad--
date and place unknown]

[Text] It is, as has become suitable to call it, a social
and political beginning. It is also the beginning of
parliament. He met the president of the opposition USPP
[Socialist Union of People's Forces] to examine with him
various questions facing our country.

Question No l is that of safeguarding our territorial
integrity in the face of the escalation of aggressions
carried out against our country. The undeclared war
carried on against the Moroccan people by opponents of
our territorial unity requires a sobilization of all
energy, but also a desire, and the political courage

on the part of the government and its majority to

take a certain nuder of political, econosic, and social
steps capable of really consolidating the domestic
front.

“hat is the role which parliament could play in all this?
Abdelwahad replied to this question.

[Question] The opening of the parliamentary session coincides with what
they call a social and political beginning, of which it is a part. What
are the main problems facing the Chamber of Representatives?

[Answer] Actually the Chatter of Representatives has no specific problus.
If it were really the mirror of the nation, these problems would be its
own also. But the problems which the country is debating are many and varied

and have found no solution up to now.
ln the first place there is the problen of our territorial integrity, which
has been the subject of two extraordinary sessions. but without the chaaber
having the opportunity to engage in a debate in depth on the question with
the government.

in the second place we have been witnessing an increasingly worrisome
deterioration of the economic and social situation which has been apparent
all throughout what they call the 3-year plan. And then there is especially
the problem of education, which is mortgaging the future of many generations.

Finally there is the problem of individual, collective, trade union and
political liberties which is urgent, particularly since the wave of
dismissals and arrests of teachers, health officers and workers in the private
sector unleashed since last April.

[Question] Let us begin with question No 1, which is that of our territorial
integrity. what will be the role of parliasent in working out a national
defense policy capable of safeguarding our national gains?

[Answer] Up till now the contribution of parliament has consisted of voting
credits destined for national defense, supplying moral and material support

to our fighting forces and to all the initiatives in the direction of the
completion and consolidation of our territorial unity, and missions of
explanation and information designed to thwart the wystification propaganda

of the opponents of our territorial integrity on the level of interparlialnentary
organizations, international agencies like the UN, and nongovernmental
international organizations.

The USP? opposition has taken several initiatives in this context. It was
the first to raise an oral question on the Sahara. It asked for a meeting
of the conﬁnes of the interior and those of foreign affairs and defense
following the attack against Tan-Tan, as well as holding an extraordinary
session devoted to the Sahara affair.

The USP? opposition noreover effectively contributed to the explanation of
the leaning and extent of national unanimity concerning the defense of our
territorial integrity, which actually involves the destiny of our people,
within several international organisations, governmental and nongovernmental,
with friendly political and trade union organisations, and occasionally

even to declared opponents to our national cause.

But all these activities in no way justify the fact that the Chamber of
Representatives does not assume its constitutional responsibilities by
controlling the action of the government and by outlining the strategy to
follow.

59
[Question] Do the parliamentary delegations which go abroad and which are
composed of members of the majority and the opposition adopt canon positions
concerning the different questions raised with the people with whom you speak?

[Answer] The fact of being part of a parliamentary delegation does not at

all lean for the opposition that it sline itself with the position of the
government majority. Each time we have affirmed the unanimity of the Moroccan
people concerning our national cause and have expressed our agreement with
the other national political groups on this basic question.

Nevertheless that does not prevent us from explaining, each time that it is
necessary to do so, our specific positions deriving from the line and decisions
of our party and concerning the different social, economic, cultural, political
and foreign policy spheres.

For example. at the time of our recent visit to Belgium and Luxemburg at

the invitation of the Belgian Parliament, we developed the theses of the
USP? throughout our contacts with local and European officials concerning
the economic and political relations which the Third World should have with
the industrialized countries, and in particular these of Horocco with the
EEC. Relations which should be based on the abolition of links of dependence
and on mutual respect and the safeguarding of the reciprocal interests of

the peOples.

Thus we have publicly explained our own view of the conditions of our emigrant
workers who contribute to the development of those countries but who are
relegated to the status of a subproleteriat subject to shameful exploitation
and who are victims of a scarcely concealed discrimination in all fields.

Our relations with these countries should have the goal not only of

improving the living conditions of the emigrant workers. but of working

over the long tern to eliminate the very causes of the emigration, which
constitutes one of the results of the colonial period and a consequence of
underdevelopment which is itself only the result of unequal relationships
between developed countries and their former colonies. On this point we
have affirmed that our economic and trade relations with the industrialized
countries should take account not only of an improvement in the terms of
exchange, which in any case will maintain the links of dependence of our
economy with the countries of the center, but of the vital necessity for our
country to insure, by undertaking structural reforms, a development oriented
mainly toward the satisfaction of the basic needs of our people and capable
of making our country a valid participant on the international scene. .. . In
the same spirit we have brought up the situation of our students in Europe
and the cultural relations of our country with those of the BBC.

[Question] The attitude of the Chamber of Representatives toward the socio-
economic crisis and the deterioration of the conditions of life of the poor

and aiddle classes resulting from the rise in prices and the freeze on
wages. . .

60
[Answer] Actually the economic and social crisis which covers the country
.qu which continues to no! worse, Is a secret to no one. The governmental
m.||urll.y itself, after long denying the existence of this crisis, yielded
tn the evidence after the royal speech of lo June 1978. It then tried to
minimize the seriousness of this crisis by attributing its main causes to
the international business situation. Until the moment when the former
finance minister recognized the structural character of the crisis on the
occasion of the discussion of the recent law on finance.

But what has the Chamber of Representatives done to face up to this situation?
It confronted it by enthusiastically approving the 3-year plan, a plan of
stagnation, of disinvestment, and of continued pauperization of the masses
disinherited by the worsening of unemployment. He said all this at the time.

The majority also approved the so-called austerity policy, which again
favored the well-to—do classes at the expense of the poor and middle classes.

In addition, it approved in committee, between sessions, a law rectifying
the finances which increased indirect taxes the main victims of which are
the strata with the lowest incomes. It is true that there was a solidarity
tax affecting the rich classes, but it is about time there was such a tax.
and in short it is symbolic when one takes into consideration the enormous
privileges which these classes enjoy.

Furthermore. despite the repeated promises of the prime minister and the
finance minister not to raise the prices of basic conodites, the government
has just decided to raise the prices of certain products of primary necessity,
such as milk, sugar. and oil. without taking account of the daily increases
which occur for other products. In approving the law on finances, the majority
even delegated part of its legislative power to enable it to proceed as it
likes in raising prices.

All this shows that the majority ratifies the government decisions which, far
from resolving the crisis or mitigating its effects, only increases it and
aggravates its: consequences.

As a consequence, the Chamber of Representatives, with a majority within
it which systaatically supports the class policy of the government, cannot

face up to the crisis, the sole beneficiary of which is the class which it
represents.

[Question] Public and trade union freedoms have been gravely infringed by

the collective disaiesals, arrests. and arbitrary sentences, etc..., especially
after the wage demand action conducted by the CDT [expansion unknown] since
last April. There are even elected representatives of the people who have

been imprisoned. Can parliament intervene to stop this situation?

61
[Answer] in effect we have been witnessing since early last spring a marked
violation of the political and trade union liberties guaranteed by the
constitution. And the most flagrant measures taken by the government

following the exercise by the workers of different sectors of their constitutional
right to strike, were the collective dismissals of teachers. health officers.

and workers of the private sector, as well as the arrests and sentencing

of trade union and political officials.

The USP? opposition first condemned all these illegal measures. Then it
demanded a meeting of the committees concerned. those of interior and education,
in order to make the majority and the government face their responsibilities.
Until now our demand has had no result because the procedure requires a

majority resolved to convoke the committees. And you know that we do not

have a numerical majority. 80 we think that in the face of the inertia

of the bureau of committees and the indifference of the deputies of the

majority either the governmental majority has no interest in the fate reserved
to more than 1000 citizens or it purely and simply approves the arbitrary
measures which have been inflicted upon them.

Furthermore the USP? opposition continues to demand the cancellation of
these measures, especially during the extraordinary session held after the
recovery of Rio De Oro.

[Question] How can the Chamber of Representatives contribute to the consolidation
of the domestic front particularly in the face of the growing threats which
weigh on our country?

[Answer] Since the recovery of the province of Rio De Oro the aggressions
perpetrated against our country have multiplied while expanding increasingly
in scope. We are therefore confronted with an undeclared war. Such a
situation actually requires the mobilization of all energies, and more
particularly those of the privileged classes, which should contribute
financially to the national effort to the same extent as the poor classes
which, until the present time have been the only ones to agree to all sorts
of sacrifices since the unleashing of the process of liberation of our Sahara
provinces.

The enthusiastic mobilization of the people's masses can be achieved only
in a climate of confidence, of liberty. and social justice. The political,
social, and economic measures necessary to bringing about such a climate
are among the constitutional perrogatives of the Chamber of Representatives
and the government. The obstacles to the commencement of this process are

juridical or constitutional. It is above all a question of will and political
courage.

6108
CSO: 6400

62
BRI BPS

1980 FINANCE BILL--Rabat, Nov 13 (HAP)-"Despite the international economic
conjuncture marked by the serious recession of 1974-1975. our country could
record encouraging results in the recovery of our basic balances. thanks

to the financial and economic policy adopted by the current three—year
plan." stated the Moroccan finance minister, Abdelkanel Raghaye. here
Monday. Presenting to the Horoccan House of Representative the 1980 finance

which affected the industrialized countries during the last years. After

fiscal pressure and finally, the intensification of the effort of national
solidarity by the recovery of the ":akat” and its assignment to the
developnent of poor regions. [Text] [1.0131626 Rabat MAP in English

63
FIGURES 0N INDUSTRIAL FIRMS, WORKERS RELEASED
Beirut AL-NAHAR in Arabic 28 Sep 79 p 7
liwtinlo: "'lhe Emirates: 20,000 Workers in Conversion Industries"!

[Text] The number or workers in the UAE's conversion industries sector has
reached 20,000, and investments in this sector now total 2,278,900,000
ulirhans. The conversion industries include foods, beverages, tobacco,
lumber, furniture, paper, printing, publishing, chemicals, petroleum prod-
ut-m, mineral ores, machines and mining.

'Fncsc statistics include all 597 establishments which employ 10 or more
workers. Some & percent of all establislments in the conversion indus~
tries sector are located in Abu Dhabi, Dubai and Sharjah.

The results or the industrial survey conducted by the Ministry of Planning
in cooperation with the UN Industrial Devolopment Organization revealed
that the manufactured metal products, machines and equipment industry
occupies first place in the frmnework of the conversion industries with
respect to both value added and number of workers. Firms in this category
account for 1475 million dirhams, or about 1&5 percent of total value added,
and employ 28.1; percent of all conversion industry workers. Second place
is occupied by the mineral ores products industry (excluding petroleum
products), and coming in third are the lumber industries.

The information in the industrial survey indicates that the 597 establish-
ments counted, which all have 10 or more employees and of which 501 firms
responded, represent 18.8 percent of all establishments in the state's con-
version industry sector. Finns with fewer than 10 workers represent the
remaining 81.2 percent of the establishments in this sector.

The survey results also indicate that the heaviest concentration of indus-
trial production production in the state is in Abu Dhabi, Dubai and SharJah,
where &.8 percent of all conversion industry firms are located.

'me cmirate of Dubai is first with 199 industrial establishments employing
10 or more workers, followed by Abu Dhabi with 125, SharJah with 91, 'Admn
with 1:3, Ra's al-Khaymh with 30, Um al-Qayvasn with 8 and Mayra}: with 5.

8591
cso: haoe 6‘
UAE OIL REVENUES REACH 18 BILLION DIRHAMS
Beirut AL-NAHAR in Arabic 28 Sep 79 p 7

[Article: "Trade Balance Surplus in Emirates Rises to 18 Billion This Year;
Abu Dhabi Takes Control and Tips the Surplus Scale"]

[Text] The UAE's trade surplus at the end of the current year is expected
to climb to 18.06 billion dirhams, as compared with last year's surplus of
17.897 billion. This fact was confirmed by a Ministry of Planning report
on foreign trade and the trade balance for the state from 1975 to 1979.
'lhis surplus was achieved despite a large increase in imports, which
amounted to 20.023 billion dirhams last year. This surplus provides impor-
tant indicators of the strength of the state's economies, as well as the
occurrence of building and industrial development and a renewal of mnds
set aside for invesuents. This is reflected in the steady growth in the
volume of imports, inasmuch as intermediate goods and investment goods
gained a large share of the imports.

Ministry statistics confirm that a substantial drop occurred in the impor-
tation of consumer goods during the last 3 years, countered by an increase
in the rates of importation of machines, implements and equipment pertain-
ing to industry, building activities and development plans. The statistics
and information provide favorable indicators for the state's mture progress.

The increase in imports, which amounted to 9.12 billion dirhams up to 1978,
yielded returns in the area of industrial development and investments. In
other words, it was not a parasitic increase or a burden on the state's
economies. In this connection, the ministry's report states: 'Vhile con-
sumer goods represented 27.1 percent of total imports in 1975, we find that
they represented only 215.8 percent of total imports in 1977. Intermediate
goods, on the other hand, represented 213.1 percent of total imports in 1975
but grew to 27.6 percent in 1977. Similarly, investment goods represented
16.1: percent of the total in 1975 and I$7.6 percent in 1977. In other words,
the percentage of imports for investments rose 31.2 percent in only 2 years.
This is an encouraging figure and suggests some things with regard to indus-
trial development and the quality of consumption. If we couple these results,
which led us to a decrease in the percentage of consumer imports from year to

65
year. with the increase in the percentage of the population and new arrivals
constituting a consumer force, this means that the rate at which imported
consumer goods decreased was reasonable during the last few years--especia11y
since the world experienced a substantial increase in the prices of these
goods. The record increase in prices from 1975 to 1978 was 132.1: percent. a
rise which applied not just to consumer goods but to all goods imported from
abroad.

011 Exports

'i'he UAl-i's oil exports for 1978 had a value of 23.1129 billion [sic] dirmu
representing the exports of Abu Dhabi, Dubai and SharJahnwhile oil exports
for 1975 were valued at 26.612 billion dirhams. In other words, oil exports
showed an increase of 6.787 billion dirhans, or 25.5 percent. Abu Dhabi
represents the bulk of the UAE's exports, since under normal circumstances
it accounts for not less than 83 percent of the total value of the state's
exports. An exception to this was the year 1978, in which Abu Dhabi sought
to decrease its production and contributed only 79.7 percent of total oil
exports. Dubai accounts for 18.8 percent of the state's oil exports, while
the euirate of Sharjah contributes 1.5 percent.

The amount realized from the reexportation of a number of goods arriving at
UAE ports was 1.776 billion dirhams in 1978, as opposed to only 591: million
dirhams in 1975. 'Ihus, the value of reexports is up by 299 percent--a large
increase which goes a long way to illustrate how far trade activity has
advanced within the state, as well as confirming the fact that some cities
in the UAR have acquired a commercial character that is attracting the
attention of neighboring states.

From a look at the trade balance of the UAE it is evident that Abu Dhabi,
whose oil exports represent 83 percent of the state's total oil exports,
bears the deficit which some emirates contribute to the overall trade baL-
ance. breover, it is Abu Dhabi which singlehandedly righted the trade
balance and by stages made the trade surplus exceed the deficit for the UAE.

Thus, by means of the foregoing statistics concerning the trade balance of
the state as a whole, we arrive at the fact that the deficit in the trade
balance attributable to some emirates means nothing in relation to the over-
all trade balance of the state. As was stated before, the UAB's trade
balance showed a surplus of 17.897 billion dirhams last year. Moreover, the
surplus is expected to increase by the end of this year to 18.056 billion
dirhams. This is attributable, of course, to the balancing operation
brought under control by Abu Dhabi, as well as the steady increase in the
UAB's oil exports.

8593.
C80: 148(2

66
BRIEFS

FOREIGN IMMTS-Jme UAE has allocated 7103 million dirhams (approxi-
mately $190 million) in this year's budget for foreign invesments in a
total of 26 Arab, regional and international institutions. This year the
UAE will participate with approximately 66 million dirhams ($17 million)
in the Arab Development Bank in Africa, as compared with last year's 26
million dirhams (about $17 million). It will also increase its partici-
pation in the Islamic Bank to 107 million dirhams (about $27 million), as

year. The state's total participation in international fimnce institu-
tions, namely, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
the International lbnetary Fund, the Agency for Developnent and the Inter-
national Finance Corporation, amounted to 61 million dirhams (about $16
million) this year. [Text] [Beirut AL—NAHAR in Arabic 28 Sep 79 P 7] 8591

NATION WET-June graduated budget of the UAE's Ministry of Education
and Instruction for this year is l,212,L30,000 dirhams, in contrast to last
year's budget of 982,630,000 dirhams. In this regard, the state recently
celebrated the lhth International Day for the Elimination of Illiteracy.

Fbr this occasion it prepared a report on the educational situation in the
state. This report said that the UAE has made great and rapid progress in
regular education program, having been able in 7 years to establish kinder-
gartens, elementary schools, preparatory schools, secondary acmols, voca-
tional schools and teachers institutes in all parts of the state. Then in
1977-78 the University of the mirates opened its doors, thereby completing
the stages of education. The report also revealed that the UAE's population
had reached 862,000 as of the beginning of 1978. Of these, 635,000 persons
had passed the age of 10, that is, the age of literacy. Some 191,000 of the
latter were illiterate, consisting of 129,000 Isles and 62,000 resales.
There were 98 Centers for the Elimination of Illiteracy in existence last
year, with 523 classes and a total of 12,258 male and female students. [Text]
[Beirut AL-HAHAR in Arabic 28 8e]: 79 p 7] 8591

67
ALGIERS CITES SDAR STATDIENT 0N FIGHTING IN SAHARA
w152138 Algiers Domestic Service in Arabic 2000 GMT 15 Nov 79 [D

[Text] The Saharan cause has been gaining ground with the passage of time
on both the political and military levels. The Rnyalist Moroccan invasion
forces have suffered heavy defeats at the hands of the Saharan fighters.
Purthernore, vorld solidarity with the fin: right of the Saharan people to
independence and self-determination continues to gain momentum. Only the
hbat regime and the imperialist forces refuse to recognize this right.

Following the recent military gains made by the Saharan fighters and the
defeats they have inflicted on the invading Royalist Moroccan forces both

in the Western Sahara and inside Moroccan territory, the Saharan Defense
Ministry has issued a statement about new attacks made by the Saharan fight-
ers against the invading Royalist forces. with in the framework of the Beuari
Bounediene offensive. '

The statement said that these attacks took place on lo, 5 and 7 November
against the positions and garrisons of the invading force in Bojsdor, Ea-
gunia and Semsra. The Saharan fighters used heavy weapons in these attacks
which resulted in nsny losses among the invading forces including 15 Royalist
Moroccan soldiers killed and a similar number wmrnded, in addition to the
destruction of installations and large quantities of nilitary hardware.

The Saharan Defense Ministry statement added that the Saharan revolutionary
fighters planted nines in various roads leading to the fortified positions
of the Royalist forces. Sons of the mines went off, destroying military
vehicles of the invading forces. This happened on 31 October on the road
between 81 Aaiun and Samara when four transport vehicles were destroyed,
too of then loaded with troops.

080: 6602

68
'L'HUHANITE' INTERVIEWS POLISARIO'S ABDBLAZIZ ON SAHARA ISSUE
1.0081163 Paris L'BUMANITB in French 3 Nov 79 p 7 LI)

[L'HUHANITE interview with POLISARIO l'ront Secretary General lbhaned Abdel-
exit: "The French Goveth Should Reconsider Its Position"-date and
place not specified]

[Text] [Question] what conclusions do you draw free the visit which the
delegation fron the three ﬁuropean comiet parties has just made to the
west Sahara?

[Answer] He welcone this important initiative. It is part of the great
campaign of solidarity which is constantly developing anong the denocratic
forces. It shows us that the position of those parties and of the French.
Italian and Spanish peoples is conpletely different than the position adopted
by sons of the goveruents in those countries. Therefore, we value this
initiative and hope it night be consolidated by other democratic forces in
those countries and throughout the world.

[Question] The French Government claims to be neutral. Do you see any change
in the French position?

[Answer] So far our people have not noticed any change on the French Govern-
nent's part. He legitinetely hope that that goverusnt will learn from the
over 6 years of that war in which it has blindly supported the aggressor
countries-a position which not only challenges the 0A]! position and hence
Africa's position. but runs counter to the peace process started by the
POLISARIO Front and consolidated by the signing of the 5 August 1979 agree—
nent with Heuritania, and runs counter to the legitinate aspirations of the
peoples of the region to peace and progress. “that attitude is bound to be
regarded as aggressive toward Atria. the international organizations and the
region's peoples, including the Saharan people.

There have recently been attenpte to nediate between Algeria and Morocco
in addition to the Carter Mninistrstion 'e dangerous decision. Those

69
various maneuvers are aimed at strengthening Horocco's intransigence in its
war of aggression against the Saharan people and at countering the inter-
national organizations' decisions in favor of a just and lasting settlement.

He have said and will repeat that any solution to the problem of Saharan
decolonization and any mediation must take account of the main factor,

namely the Saharan people and their sole legitimate representative, the
POLISARIO Front. we regard the attempts you mention as maneuvers if they
are not sound attempts and are aimed at bilaterslizing the conflict by making
it an Algerian-Moroccan problem whereas it is purely and simply a decoloniza-
tion problem between the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic's people and the
foreign forces of aggression.

[Question] During the French delegation's visit to the Heat Sahara many
Saharan citizens showed their concern over President Carter's decision to
step up his military aid to lbrocco. Many said that if that decision were
implemented they would feel they were at war not only with Morocco but with
the United States itself. What is your view on this subject and do you en-
visage direct contacts with the U.S. Administration?

[Answer] It is only natural that we should express our disapproval and con-
cern in face of those decisions. Our people are not only facing the Moroc-
can forces of aggression. There is a new threat in this decision by the
United States which has hitherto declared itself to be neutral. Faced with
this situation, we justifiably feel not only at war with Morocco but with
all forces which support Morocco militarily and diplomatically.

For our part we see no reason not to establish contacts with any party in—
volved in the war for the purpose of mutual explanations. He no longer need

to prove our good will; our meeting with the Moroccan king's representatives
at Bamako bear witness to it.

C80: 4400

70
ALGIBRS CITES SDAR sum 0N MILITARY VICTORIBS
1.0092256 Algiers Donestic Service in Arabic 2000 GMT 9 Nov 79 1.0

[Excerpts] Over 100 loyalist Moroccan soldiers killed. hundreds injured,
scores taken prisoner and large losses of equipmnt and munitionuthese
are the results of the successful ailitery operations carried out by the
Saharan People's Liberation Any [ALPS] during the past few weeks against
the loyalist, expansionist Moroccan invasion forces in the area south of
Dad bras and other occupied Saharan towns.

A statement issued by the Saharan Deeocrstic Arab Republic [SDAl] Defense
Ministry said that the ALPS on 20, 23, 25 and 27 October attached Snare,

Zar and Tan-tan. During the first week of love-bet, the Saharan Arley at-
tached the invasion forces at Lenoueb, Lenseied and Touzqui. south of Uad

Dras. During these victorion attacks. huge losses of life and eaterial

were inflicted on the loyalist Horoccan invasion forces.

The stateeent added that the Saharan fighters' attack against lanqueb re-
sulted in the destruction of the garrison post and that over 60 loyalist men
and officers were killed and aany others wounded. Pour Moroccan soldiers
were taken prisoner. The fighters also seized a mortar. lo automatic rifles.
16 sub-achinegms and a radio.

After stating that the positions of theonuy forces in Bir Ensaran. lojador
and Hagunia were exposed on 6 and 5 lbveeber to concentrated fire fro- the
Saharan fighters, the stateeent points out that an ALPS unit carried out a
bold attack against the Bu Crsa garrison. The attack was priasrily directed
against station 2 and 3 of the phosphate conveyer belt near ll-Aaiun, the
capital of the occupied Sahara.

The statement said that the Saharan unit succeeded, in the first few nin-
utes of the attack, in destroying the two stations together with six pylons.
causing severe daaage to the phosphate conveyer belt.

During this bold attack, the statusent said, over 60 loyalist liorrocan of-
ficers and nan were killed and a similar amber injured. A large number of

71
enemy vehicles were also destroyed together with their occupants. These
included land rovers and [word indistinct], a large quantity of nilitsry
hardware was also destroyed and a number of cars seized. Nine Horoccan
soldiers were captured, including a captain.

Because of the successful military operations and triumphant attacks of
the ALPS units, the Rabat regime's forces have waged a feverish offensive
against the unarmd Saharan masses in the occupied towns.

The statement said that since 6 Novunber, the Royalist occupation forces
have been conducting terror campaigns and linking arrests among the Saharan

citizens in Bl—Aaiun. A large number of them are imprisoned in the jails of
Nassau II.

(:50: 4602

72
'L'UNITA' CARRIBS CWIQUE 0N VISIT 1'0 H. SAHARA BY PCI, PCB, PCP DELEGATION

1.0081045 Hilan L'UNITA in Italian 5 Nov 79 p 5 LD

[Unattrihuted report: "Three—Party Delegation Conunique: PCP, PCB and
PCI Solidarity With POLISARIO Front”

[Text] The delegation of the French, Italian and Spanish communist parties
which visited the Western Sahara early last week has released the following
commique at the end of its visit:

As agreed in Madrid, a joint delegation of the French, Italian and Spanish
columnist parties, composed of PCP Politburo nenher Maxine Grenetz, PCI
Directorate nether Gian Carlo Pajetta and PCB Executive Connittee neeher
Jaine Ballesteros, has visited the Western Sahara at the invitation of the
POLISARIO Front.

The delegation had in—depth conversations with Secretary General of the
POLISARIO Front Hohaeed Abdslaaiz on the situation and the prospects for the

struggle.

Accconpenied by the interior minister of the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic
[SDAR] and several other POLISARIO Front political leaders, the delegation
travelled several hundred kilometers across the country. It had talks on
the politico-nilitary situation with the SDAR defense minister, visited sev-
eral refugee calms, a school. a hospital, a nilitary college and a school
for female cadres.

Thus the delegation acquainted itself with the situation of the Saharan
people. its living conditions and its administrative organization under the
direction of its unquestionable representative, the POLISARIO Front.

Everywhere it noted great popular activity and participation, a real esnsge-

nent of their own affairs by the people and their determination in the strug-
gle for their national independence and freedoe, which is expressed in esjor

ailitary and diploeatic successes.

73
An examination of the military equipment captured by the POLISARIO Front
fighters from the aggressora enabled the delegation to verify the aid given
to Morocco by several governments. including in particular the United States,
France and Spain.

Everywhere it went the delegation received a warm welcome for the solidarity
it conveyed. It returns convinced that the only solution is an end to the
Horoccan aggression and the initiation of negotiations with the POLISARIO
Front, which will enable the Saharan people to live freely and independently
in their own territory.

The representatives of the three parties assert the desire to further de-
velop their political and material solidarity with the struggle of the Saharan
people and the POLISARIO Front. They pledge to do their utmost to insure
that it develops in each of their countries and that the governments of

their respective countries contribute to a positive solution to this conflict

in this area of the world.
This solidarity. the communique continues, will also be expressed in demon-
strations of solidarity, which will be held in Paris, Madrid and Rose, which

will be attended by PC? Secretary General Georges Marchais. PCB Secretary
General Santiago Carrillo and PCI Secretary General Enrico Berlinguer.

C50: 4406

710