FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10494

5 May 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 10/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLIMIDE REPORT
TELEcomONIOATIONs POLICY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(2000 10/82)

CONTENTS

WORLDWIDE AFFAIRS

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Briefs
Telecon 1 Operational in 1981: 1
ASIA
JAPAN
Laws on Citizens 'Band, Computer Connections Revised
(NIKON KEIZAI SHIEUH, 19 m 82) ooee-eoeeoeOe-oeoocnaoco-oo 2
MI'I'I , Postal Service Head for ’ Second Round' Over Communications
(MNICHI SW, 20 M” 82) RIOOOOCOOOOII.0.000.000.0000... 8
Industry Starts Preparations for Data Commications Role
(NIKON KEIZAI SHIMBUI, 20 Mar 81) ........................... 11
Further Discuss ions on Data Commications Urged
(YOMIURI SHIMBUI, 2h Mar 82) ................................ 1h
LATIN AMERICA
NICARAGUA
Briefs
Radio, TV Agrealent With Cuba 17
SUB-SAHARA]! AFRICA
SEYCHELLES
Briefs
Expanded Radio Programing 18

- a - [III - ww - 140 2000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WEST MCI-’3
INI‘ERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

BCS Satellite To Provide Regional TV Transmission
(mmcosm. 30.181182) ..OIOOOOOOIOOOO......OOIOOIIIIOOOO

Briefs
Astrometry Satellite by MATRA
Canadian, Arianespace Agreement

FRAJ'CE

New Report Compares Automation, Productivity, Unuployment
(Claude Salman; ZERO UN INFORMATIQUE, Mar 82) .........

ITALY

Lauuching of 'ItaJsat' Planned for Late 1987
(Pierre Langereux; AIR m 008108. 27 Sep 81) ................

UNITED KINGDOM

Home Secretary Whitelaar Announces Satellite TV Plans
(THE Tm, 21 Apr 82) ....I000...........IIOUI0000090IOOO...

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL LEE ONLY

19

30

33
BRIEFS

Tchucon l OVEKATIUNAL 1N 1984--The first national network for satellite
tional in March 1984. This 15 million

telecommunications, Telcon 1 should be opera
francs program covers the construction of three satellites. two of which should be

launched in mid- or end-I983 (see article p #0). These satellites will have a
triple payload, including four “-6 CH: repeaters for domestic connections with
Dom-Tom (Antilles—Guyana, Reunion. and so on). six 12—14 6H2 repeaters for
intro-enterprise connections in France and Europe. and two 7-8 CH: repeaters for

military and governments 1R ET COSMOS
No 879). The ground network devoted to intra-enterprise connections could include

about 300 stations (with 3-5 m-dianeter antennas), which wi

(Hail, Telegraph, and Te
Telecom I program. PTT has
stations to about 8000 terminals.
anticipates 150-200 stations in France.
will be intended for Europe. Agreement
Genuany, and others are being negotiate
The Telecon l systea. PTT admits, could
States through Intelsat satellites or Eu
Telecon l satellites are designed for a

i990. But PTT is already studying their successor.
Tejccom 2, or a European Eutelsat i. In any case. it is expected that these future

satellites will operate simultaneously at frequencies of [2-16 GHz and 20-30 GHz,

with reutilization of frequencies and shaped-bean antennas. {Text} [Paris AI“ ET
A. a C. 1982] 11,023

COSMOS in French b Mar 82 p #3] lCOPYRIGHT:

serving some 3000 users in France and Europe. PTT

Frau its inception. the Telecom 1 network

s have in fact already been reached with

d with the European organization Butelsat.
eventually even be connected to the United

ture optical fiber underwater cables. The
lifetime of seven years. which leans until
which could he either a national

050: 5500/2157

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE GEL!
LAHS 0N CITIZENS'BAID.COMPUTER CONNECTIONS REVISED
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 19 Her 82 pp 1, 3

[Text]

The Government, at a Cabinet meeting held on the 19th, decided on a
penmission and approval one-package readjustment bill (administrative tasks
simplification and rationalization bill). The purpose of the bill is to
materialize the second recommendation formulated by the Second Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council (Chairman: Toshio DOKO). This
is the second package bill concerning the Research Council's reconnnndation,
after the Administrative Reform-Connected Special Exceptions Law. It
includes the permission and approval readjustment bill, drawn up
separately from the Research Council's recommendation, and also the
laws and ordinances readjustment bills shelved at the previous Diet session.

it calls for dealing with the revising or abolishing of a total of 355
laws on a one-package basis.

The second recommendation calls for the readjustment of 2“ items
which require permission or approval. In order to carry it out, it is
necessary to revise l7 laws. The Road Vehicle and Transporation Law
revision bill for the purpose of extending the period between regular
intervals for the inspection of automobiles and the Radio Waves Law
revision bill calling for abolition of the license [system] for the
establishment of citizens'bands (a kind of transceiver) have become single,
independent legislation, in view of the purports of the respective Laws
and because of the problem of legislative techniques. Thereﬁore, the
package bill covers 15 laws, including a Passport Law revision [bill]
calling for expansion of the scope of applications by proxy for the
issuance of passports and a Public Tele-Communications Law revision bill
which will generally liberalize the use of data communications circuits.

In regard to the readjustment of permission and approval, the
l,lu7-case readjustment plan, on which the AdministratiVe Hanagement
Agency. from its own standpoint, has been carrying out co-ordination with
various other Ministries, has been formulated, besides another plan
based on the Research Council's recommendation. Eight laws, including a

Monopoly Law revision [bill] calling for extending the period for the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

designation of tobacco and salt retailers, have been added to it.
Moreover, the laws and ordinances readjustment bills for the purpose of
abolishing laws, which exist in form only, and which have become
unnecessary, have been unified, too. In this connection, there are 332
laws excluding those which are overlapped. Therefore, the revising or
abolishing of a total of 355 laws uill be handled on a one-package basis.

At the very beginning, the Administrative Management Agency had planned to
have [the package bill] decided by the Cabinet by the l2th. But co-ordination
between the Postal Services Ministry and HITI on the liberalizing of
data communications had hard sailing, and [the reaching of a decision]
slided into the 19th. The bill will be submitted to the Diet even on
the 23rd. Deliberations will be conducted at the Cabinet Committee,
because the Administrative Reform Special Committee has not been set up,
as in the case of the previous Diet session.

Gist of Permission and Approval Readjustment Bill

following is the gist of the permission and approval one-package
readjustment bill decided at the Cabinet meeting on the 19th:

Fair Trade Commission: Paragraph 2, Article 6 of the Anti-Monopoly
Law: In regard to the kinds of agreements or contracts (such as contracts
for borrowing of money and loaning of money), which, it is thought,
will hardly raise any problems, from the standpoint of the Anti-honopoly
Dan, the submitting of reports shall be made unnecessary.

National Public Security Commission: Paragraph 3, Article 2 of the
Law Concerning Control over Business which May Affect Public horality:
The period of renewal as to the licenses for the operation of game centers.
such as pin-ball houses and mah-jong parlors, shall be extended from
the present six months to one year.

Administrative Management Agency: Paragraph 2, Article 10 of the
Statistics Law: With regard to statistics superintendents, a part

(stationing of statistics superintendents in cities, towns, and villages) of the
established restrictions shall be abolished.

Foreign Ministry: Article 3 of the Passport Law: In applying for
the issuance of a passport, when the application is submitted through
the spouse of the applicant or through a relative within the second
degree of consanguinity, the application shall be accepted in case

the submitting of an application is not regarded as being difficult,
for unavoidable reasons.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finance Ministry: (1) Paragraph 1, Article 32 of the Tobacco
honopoly Law: The period of designation as to retailers of manufactured
tobacco shall be extended from the present within three years to within
five years.

(2) Paragraph, Article 65 of the same Law: With regard to appliances
in the appliances and machinery for the production of manufactured
tobacco, there shall be no need to obtain approval, for example.
in the case of their being manufactured.

(3) Paragraph 1, Article 26 of the Salt Monopolv Law: The period of
designation as to salt sellers shall be extended from the present within
three years to within five years.

(u) Article 17 of the Sugar Consumption Tax Law: As regards the clar—

ification of tax exemption as to the transfer of sugar, etc., without
;aying taxes, it shall be clarified only when this is deemed particularly
necessary, from the standpoint of securing taxes.

(5) Paragraph 3, Article 8 of the Playing-Card Tax, Etc., Law:
In ccnncction with playing-cards, etc., to be used as samples, [the system
for obtaining] the tax office superintendent's or the customs—house

superintendent's approval for exemption from the application of the Law
shall be abolished.

(6) Article lu of the Petroleum Gas Tax Law: The tax-exemption
clarification system shall be abolished, in regard to the imposition of a
tax on petroleum gas concerning the tax-free transfer thereof.

(7) Article ion of the National Tax-Collection Law: In connection
with the public sales of real estate, etc., persons, who make the second
highest-priced bid, after the highest-priced bid, shall be designated
as "applicants for buying it at the second highest price." and when the
decision on sales to the highest-price bidder is withdrawn, sale to
the "applicant for buying it at the second highest price" can be decided,
instead of carrying out re-sales, and necessary procedures can continue
to be taken as they are, after that.

Education Ministry: (1) Paragraph 3, Article us of the School
Education Law: In regard to the granting of permission by prefectural
boards of education for the establishment or abolition of senior high

schools which have curricula based on a wide-area correspondence system.
the obtaining of the.Edueation Minister's approval shall read the
submitting of reports.

(2) Article 9-? of the Social Education Law: As regards assistant
superintendents concerning social education, the established restrictions
shall be abolished.

h
FOR OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

welfare Ministry: (1) Article 20 of the Helfare Ministry
Establishment Law: Quarantine stations can be forced to carry out
inspection or guidance in regard to the imports of foodstuffs, additives,

appliances, containers and packing materials, etc., which are put on
sale, or which are used for business.

(2) Article 8 of the Public Health Center Law: The welfare Minister's
approval shall be abolished in the case of using such words as to mean

public health centers, in the name of facilities other than public
health centers.

(3) Paragraph 2, Article 1 of the "Trachoma" Prevention Law:
The system shall be abolished under which doctors will submit reports

to the public health center directors concerned when they conduct check-ups
on cases of trachoma.

(u) Article 5 of the same Law: The established restrictions shall

be abolished as to facilities concerning the prevention of trachoma
and medical treatment.

(5) Article u of the Helminthiasis Prevention Law: The established
restrictions shall be abolished with regard to facilities concerning the
prevention of and medical treatment for helminthiasis.

(6) Paragraphs 1 and 2, Article 16 of the Venereal Disease Prevention
Law: The established restrictions shall be abolished in regard to
hospitals or clinics for conducting checkups on venereal disease.

(7) Paragraph 5, Article 2 of the Law Concerning Masseurs,
Chiropractors, Acupuncturists, Hoxa-cauterists, and Others: Examiners
for the license to become massager-chiropractors, acupuncturists, or
moxa-cauterists shall be unified with those for the license to become
judo adjusters.

(8) Article 3-3 of the same Law: In connection with massager-
chiropractors, acupuncturists, and moxa-cauteriste, the system of
reporting on (changes) in their addresses shall be abolished.

(9) Paragraph 3, Article 6 of the Physicians Law: The annual report
system shall be reformed. and reports shall be submitted once every
two years .

(10) Article in of the Law Concerning Medical Radiation-Rays
Technicians and Medical X-Ray Technicians: In regard to medical X-ray

technicians, the system of reporting on changes in their addresses shall
be abolished.

(ll) Article 7 of the Judo Adjusters Law: With regard to judo

adjusters. the system of reporting on (changes) in their addresses
shall be abolished.

5
FOR OFFICE“. USE ONLY
(1?) Paragraph 1, Article 11 of the same Law: Examiners for the
license to become judo adjusters shall be unified with those for the
license massager-chiropractors, acupuncturists, or moxa-cauterists.

(l3) Paragraph 3, Article 6 of the Dentists Law: The annual report

system shall be changed. and reports shall be submitted once every
two years.

(1“) Paragraph 3, Article 7 of the Dental Hygienists Law:
The annual report system shall be changed, and reports shall be submitted
once every two years.

(15) Paragraph 3. Article 7 of the Dental Technicians Law: The annual
report system shall be changed, and reports shall be submitted once
every two years.

(16) Article 33 of the Law Concerning Health Nurses, Midwives. and

Nurses: The annual report system shall be changed, and reports shall
be submitted once every two years.

(17) Article 9 of the Pharmaceutists Law: The anndal report system
shall be changed, and reports should be submitted once every two years.

Agriculture-Forestry-Fisheries Ministry: (1) Fertilizer Control
Law: The established restrictions shall be abolished as to fertilizer
inspectors.

(2) Article 21 of the Veterinarians Law: The annual report system
shall be changed, and reports shall be submitted once every two years.

MITI: (1) Paragraph 1. Article lb of the high-Pressure Gas Control
Law: In connection with changes in the manufacturing facilities of the
Group A manufacturers, approval shall be shifted to reporting, with regard
to small-scale changes which will raise no particular problem, from the standpoint
of safety.

(2) Paragraph 3, Article lu of the same Law: In connection with
changes in the manufacturing facilities of the Group B manufacturers,
there shall be no need to submit reports, with regard to small-scale
changes which will pose no particular problem, from the standpoint of
safety.

(3) Article 181-8 of the Measuring Law: The validity term of
designation as to special-container manufacturers shall be extended from
the present three years to five years.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(k) Article 6 of the Electric Repair work Personnel Law: The established
restrictions shall be abolished, with regard to examiners for the license
to become electric repair work personnel.

Transportation Ministry: Article 99 of the Road Transportation Law:
The scope of trucks for private use, to be reported to the Transportation
Minister in connection with the use thereof, shall be limited to trucks

the maximum loading capacity of which exceeds the tonnage prescribed by
the Transportation Ministry Ordinance.

Postal Services Ministry: Article 55 of the Public Tale-Communications
Law: The connection of computers to computers. which connection has
not been approved so far, shall be approved under certain fixed conditions,
and the establishment of diversified data communications shall be made
possible through the mutual connection of computers. The connection of
public communications circuits and specific communications circuits,
Which connection will only be approved under an individual approval system,
shall be liberalized. The public-specific-public connection. which has

nOt been approved up until now, shall also be made possible under an
individual approval system.

Construction Ministry: Regulations Attached to the Architects Law:
The selection system shall be abolished under which one can obtain an

architect's license even if one does not undergo examinations for becoming an
architect.

Autonomy Ministry: Article l3-u of the Fire Defense Law: The established
restrictions shall be abolished, with regard to examiners for the license
to become personnel who handle dangerous objects.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

C50: 5500/2168

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

MITI, POSTAL SERVICE HEAD FOR 'SECOND ROUND' OVER COWICATIONS
Tokyo MAINICHI SHIMBUN in Japanese 20 Mar 82 p 9
[Text]

A Public Tale-Communications Law revision bill for the purpose of
"liberalizing data communications,“ over which confusion ad been
continuing between MITI and the Postal Services Ministry since the
autumn of last year, was drawn up through the mediation of the LDP, and
it was decided at a Cabinet meeting held on the 19th. It is expected
to be submitted to the current Diet session.

Data communications mean networks for tele—communications to be
established thnough the use of circuits of the Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Public Corporation (NTT). At present, they are being used
for on-line systems, including banks' cash cards and the National
Railways' "Green (TN: First Class Ticket) windows." There are many
restrictions on the use of such communications circuits; therefore,
industrial circles have from before been requesting the liberalization
thereof. Moreover, the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research
Council also called for the liberalization of data communications.
That is why the Postal Services Ministry finally started to take action
and drew up its Public Tele-Communications Law Revision Bill, including
the liberalization of the processing of on-line information.

However, in regard to the proposed liberalization, how far the
communications circuits should be liberalized, is a major problem.
On that point, controversy has been continued between the Postal Services
Ministry and MITI, during a long period of more than six months.

From the viewpoint of outsiders, the contents of the controversy
between the two Ministries are very difficult to understand, partly
because they contain technical terminology. In the final analysis, however,
the problem can be boiled down to the point of whether [the Government]
should approve the free use of circuits by private circles through the
liberalization thereof to the greatest possible extent, as called for
by MITI, in order to cope with the development of information-processing
services, or whether the contents should have a strong restrictive
coloring, with importance attached to the public-utility nature. as proposed
by the Postal Services Ministry.

8
FOR OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FORCWTKJAL.USE(NVLY

In other words, the stand of HITI is as follows: "The Postal Services
Ministry's plan envisages too many restrictions and limitations, even
while calling for liberalization. It is very far removed also from the
Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council's recommendation
calling for the adoption of a negative-list formula (under which liberalization
will be carried out as a general principle, while the scope of restrictions
will be clarified to the minimum necessary extent)."

The contents of the Revision Bill, agreed upon between the two
Ministries this time, use such expressions as "it shall be based on the
spirit of administrative refonm.“ When viewed as a whole. the direction
of liberalization has been clarified. Also, in regard to use by others
(which means that for the sake of enterprises which cannot have their
own computers, information-processing enterprisers will lease circuits
from NTT and sub-lease them to such medium and small enterprises through
the establishment of an on-line system) who are medium and small
enterprisers, which use was regarded as a problem pending between the two
ﬂiuistrics, it will be apprchd under certain fixed conditions. Thus,
the direction of liberalizing communications circuits has been generally
clarified. A anl leader also emphasized the "general achievement,"
saying as follows: "This marks one step ﬁorward." "I myself will rate
it at 70 [Oiutu or so."

however, when one carefully views the contents of the agreement,
on: will find that they are "ambiguous." For example, in connection
with use by others, they call for the imposition of.such restrictions as
"it shall be limited to use by medium and small enterprisers who have
close business connections," or "under certain fixed conditions." The
contents of these restrictions are vague, and it will also become
possible to strengthen the restrictive coloring through the establishment
of a Ministry ordinance. Moreover, the expression "it shall be based
on the spirit of administrative reform" shows the direction of permitting
liberalization, but the degree will depend largely on the completely

subjective judgment to be formed. As regards use by others. the
agreement between the two Hinistries this time only takes the form of a
provisional step, to the last.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When the agreement this time is likened taa meal. this can also be
said to be a situation whereby the kinds and size of tableware have been
decided, but whereby it is still no: clear what kind of food will be
served. Therefore, in regard to the revising of the Postal Services
MiniStry Ordinance for the purpose of deciding on the detailed contents
of the agreement, a vigorous exchange of words is expected to be carried out
between the Postal Services Ministry, which wants to carry it out, from
its own basic standpoint, and HITI, which wants to promote the proposed
liberalization, as far as possible, even during the current Diet session.
Also, in regard to the final settlement of the problem of liberalizing
data communications, which settlement, it is said, will be secured
within the next one year, the second round of fierce offensive and defensive
battles willprobably be continued between the Postal Services Ministry,
which thinks it necessary to enact a new law which will recognize the
State's right to grant approval and permission, and HITI which regards
such a new law as unnecessary.

(By reporter Shigeki NOR!)

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shimbunsha 1982

680: 5500/2168

Goa

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

JAPAN

INDUSTRY STARTS PREPARATIONS FOR DATA COMMUNICATIONS ROLE'
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 20 Mar 82 p 1

[Text]

The Government, at a Cabinet meeting held on the 19th, decided on a
“permission and approval one-package readjustment bill" which incorporates a
reVision of the Public Tele-Communications Law for the purpose of
liberalizing data communications. The bill will be submitted to the current
Diet session. Big users and suppliers as to the data comunications system
have already started to move simultaneously to provide for the proposed
liberalization. The "Mitsubishi CC Research Council," composed of
in major companies which are affiliated with the Mitsubishi group. has
inaugurated two experts committees concerning communications technology and
estimation of demand. Fujitsu EIP (with its Head Office in Tokyo [President:
Heiji KIDA; capital: ¥2u0 million), a big information-processing services
company, has also inaugurated a "Data Communications Circuits Project Team"
within that company. Moves for connecting the effective use of data
communications with a new business chance will probably be accelerated.

The "Technological Experts Committee" and "Demand Experts Committee,"
set up by the Hitsuibishi group. for the first time, will he participated in
by Department Vice Chief- or Section Chief-level experts from the
information-processing and communications sectors of the various companies
concerned.

To begin with, "joint use," in which data communications circuits will be
leased and used jointly by a plural number of enterprises, is expected
to be shifted from the present "banned in principle" to "liberalization
in principle." Therefore, the Technological Experts Committee is scheduled
to study what kinds of technology will become necessary when joint use
is carried out after the liberalization. It is also scheduled to
carry out also the work of establishing a circuits network which will
become a model. Furthermore, it will check into such problems as
whether a joint company will be necessary to exercise control over the
circuits to be thus leased, and in what form such a company should be
established if it is to be done.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moreover. the Technological Experts Committee will conduct studies
on VAN (added-value communications), in parallel, from the stand that
in order to enhance the functions of the joint circuits networks, VAN
services will hold the important key.

0n the other hand, the Demand Experts Committee will conduct research
as to what new demand for data communications will arise among industrial
circles, with which various enterprises are affiliated, and among the
enterprises concerned, after the liberalization of circuits. In other
words, studies will be conducted as to what kinds of new communications
will become possible between the participating enterprises. including
enterprises which are not affiliated with the Mitsubishi group, and other
enterprises with which they have business transactions connections, and
what change this will cause in regard to the handling of business.

In the midst of the moves for securing the liberalization of circuits.
such enterprise groups as Mitsubishi, Mitsui, Sanwa. and Ito-Chu have
already started to hold study meetings on data communications. Among them,
the "Mitsubishi CC Research Council" is running out front.

Fujitsu FTP to Tie Up Also with European and US Enterprises

Fujitsu Ef Ai Pi (abbreviated to Fujitsu F1?) is carrying out the
work of establishing a new information-processing services set-up
on the premise of data communications, through its Project Team. It will
also carry out the following tasks with the co-operation of Fujitsu, its
parent company: (1) Research on the market and commodities on the basis of

the new data-communications system after revision of the Law, and (2)

development of a software operation system for on-line services which will
use the new data communications system. The said Company says that

it "wants to make efforts. so as to enable the start of new services,"

at the same time as the start of the new system. . ’

The same Company also says that the following lines of business
are conceivable: "Business in which information will be transmitted to
many customers through the use of circuits to be leased from the Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation (NTT.)" "Acting as an intermediary
in case communications circuits are used jointly by a plural number
of enterprises." "Business of connecting enterprises with customers
through the establishment of a new system."

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For that purpose, the Company, centering on its Project Team, intends
to conduct surveys on the situation concerning the use of communications
circuits in the US and various European countries,.with the co-operation
of Fujitsu. At the same time, if there are systems and software. which
may be able to be introduced into Japan, the Company intends to accumulate
know-how and software throth the conclusion of tie-ups with the local
enterprises concerned. he Company further says that it wants to make
efforts, so that it may realize the "profits of the original enterpriser.'.'

to the fullest extent, dread of other information-processing services
companies. '

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

C80: 5500/2168

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’ FURTHER DISCUSSIONS ON DATA COMMUNICATIONS URGED
Tokyo YOMIURI SHIMBUN in Japanese 2‘ Mat 82 p 4

[Text]

The problem of liberalizing the use of data communications circuits
has been generally settled, with the Public Tele-Communications Law
revision bill incorporated in the administrative tasks simplification
and rationalization bill which was decided at a recent Cabinet meeting.

Data communications mean a system for connecting communications with
the processing of information through the use of computers, as in the
case of the National Railways' "Green (TN: First Class Ticket) Windows
and the banks' on-line systems. The establishment of networks for the
processing and distributing of information is rapidly progressing
among enterprises.

Under the present system, however, the use of data communications
circuits is restricted strictly. In industrial circles, voices calling
for liberalization were strong.

The use of circuits for data-processing purposes, between enterprises
will be liberalized, due to the revision this time. Thus, the restrictions
will be eased to a considerable extent. However, this is still nothing but

the first step toward liberalizing data communications. Rather, it should
be said to be a stop-gap. provisional measure.

From the standpoint of improving the conditions for developing
data communications, there are still many problems.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, in regard to "message exchange" for transmitting
information, without changing the contents thereof, the recommendation,
submitted earlier by the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research
Council, points out as follows: "The use of circuits should be liberalized,
with the exception of [enterprisers] who carry out message exchange,
with an unspecified large number of persons as the objects." However,

as far as the revision this time is concerned, restrictions will be
left behind to a considerable extent.

The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation (NT?) is
performing data communications services by itself, while offering
communications circuits. However, it holds the position of a privileged
organization, as a report on the results of its inspection, which report
was released by the Administrative Management Agency laSt year, points
out as follows: "[NTT] is carrying out message exchange, which is banned
toward private circles. It has also made up the deficit of as much as
#50 million in its data-communications seetor through the use of earnings
from its telephone services, etc."

Even if NT? is to extend data communications services, it should
establish a set-up for carrying out fair competition with private circles.

Data communications are a system which will form the foundation of an
informationized society in the future. In regard to the discussions
conducted up until now, MITI emphasized its views, from an industrial
standpoint. However, [data communications] will fulfill an important role,
not only in the industrial field but also in various other fields, including
education, medical service, administration, and science. Efforts should
be made to establish a desirable data-communications sysrem through
wide-range discussions.

At this time, therefore, it will probably be necessary to clarify
what were the substantially problematical points of the data-communications
problem discussions conducted up until now.

The characteristic of the informationization of today is the point
of connection between communications and the processing of information
through the use of computers. Despite the fact that the field of
information-processing is growing in importance, the Postal Services Ministry
regards the long—established communications system as the premise, and
it is trying to take informationization on an extension line thereof
and to impose restricrione on it. Is there no problem in regard to this
posture?

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Apart from the data comunications. the realization of picture
communications, in which necessary pictures will appear on the television
through the use of comunications circuits. is also close at hand.
Technology for satellite comunications and optical comunications, too. has
already been put to practical use. It is certain that informationization
in Japan will marked-y progress within the next 10 or 20 years. thus
causing a revolutionary change in economic society.

It is important for Japan to promote such informationization smoothly.
A communications policy should be formulated, from the viewpoint of
what should a necessary communications system for that purpose be like.
that is, from the standpoint of the informationization policy.

At this time, we want to propose the establishment of a deliberation
organization under the direct control of the'Prime Minister, in order
to conduct cotmnunications-policy discussions comprehensively.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shinbunsha 1982

CSO: 5500/ 21 68

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

RADIO, TV AGREEMENT WITH CUBA-Hanagua, Apr 7 (PL)-—Cuba and Nicaragua signed
here collaboration agreements in the fields of radio and television. The
agreements were signed by the president of the Cuban Radio and Television
Institute. Nivaldo Herrera, and the managing directors of the People's Radio
Broadcasting Corporation and the Sandinista Television Network, Edwin Zablah

and Ivan Garcia, respectively. The exchange of programs, facilities for
journalistic and technical delegations and a broadening of mutual collabora-

tion are mentioned in the documents. Herrera returned to Cuba accompanied
by the delegation that accompanied him in the discussion of the agreements.

[Text] [PA061952 Havana PRELA in English 1939 GMT 6 Apr 82]

080: 5500/2190

17
FOR 0FF1CD\LIISEIJNLN
BRIEFS

EXPANDED RADIO PROGWING-Victoria, 16 Apr (SAP)-As from this mnth,

Radio Seychelles is starting a new programme, "Indian Ocean: From One Island
to Another," with the aim of giving more coverage on regional events. The
weekly programme intends to provide the Seychellois listeners with more info:b
nation on the political, economic, social and cultural life of Mauritius,
Madagascar, Reunion and the Comoros. The new program is meant to make

up for some of the deficiencies left by the international news media which

give less importance to regional events. [Pool item] [Text] [P8140427
Havana PRELA in English 2369 GMT 13 Apr 82]

cso: 5500/5761

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

938 SATELLITE '10 PWIDE REGIONAL TV TRANSMISSION
Paris All! 31' 0082408 in French 30 Jan 82 p 36

[Text] Under the terms of a contract between Eutelsat Interimaire, the European
satellite telecommunications organization—which has its headquarters in Paris
and includes the telecommunications administrations of 20 European countries“-
and the 330 [European Broadcasting Union]«which includes 40 broadcasting organ-
isations--Burope will have a regional satellite TV transmission system serving
the members of the £30.

The contract was signed on 20 January 1982 by Mr Louis Hexandeau, minister of
Posts, Telecomunications and Television Broadcasting, acting for Butelsat In-
terimaire, and Messrs Jean Auton and Vandenbussche, president and vice president,
respectively. of the 380, in the presence of Mr Andrea Caruso, secretary general
of Butelsat Interimaire.

The contract provides for the full-time lease for a period of 10 years and on an
exclusive basis, to the 280, of two transponders in the space sector of Butel-
sat's European SOs-satellite telecommunications system, to be used for the trans-
mission of (Burovision) TV signals among the members of the 330 via the earth
stations of the Butelsat signatories.

In exchange for the services provided by Butelsat, the no will pay an annual
lease fee which during the first 2 years of operation of the satellite system
will be based on the number of earth stations put into service. Thereafter. the
annual fee will be fixed for 5 years.

Service to the 230 will start as soon as the two lacs satellites (one in operation
and one in reserve) are in place in operating condition and at least five earth
stations are in operation. The first BCS satellite is scheduled to be launched
by Ariane this summer, and the second in 1983.

 

* PRG, Austria, Belgium. Cyprus, Denmark, Spain, Finland, Trance, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Luxeubourg, Norway, Netherlands, Portugal, United Kingdom, Sweden, Switz-
erland, Turkey, Yugoslavia.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

9238
C80: 5500/2132

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

BRIE”

Asrmmr snmrrs a! “Aruu‘i‘he can [European Space Agency] has just, by
unanimous choice, awarded the contract for a definitional study (Phase 8) of the
European astrometry satellite Hipparcos to the French firm MATRA [Mechanics,
Aviation and Traction Company]. leader of the European industrial consortium MESH
which includes also the firms Aeritalia, British Aerospace. BRNO [Brno Raunfahrt-
technik], Fokker, SAAB Swedish airline ] and INTA [National Institute :or Aero-
space Research (Spain) . Other industrialists will be joining this group.
notably Dornier. This 20-million-franc contract terminating in October 1982 is
to be followed by the contract to build the satellite, estimated at 600 million
francs. mm has also been chosen by the BSA as the prime contractor for the
scientific work of the program. The ESA's choice of HATRA over AEROSPATIALB
[National Industrial Aerospace Conpany (Prance)] (Cosmos Consortium) confirns
MATRA's role as the European leader in space scientific instrunentation. The
nipparcoe satellite (875 kg) is to be launched in 1986 by Ariane, with a rated
life of 2 and 1/2 years. This European astronetry satellite will be the first to
draw up a map ofthe skies based on observation of over 100,000 stars. with a pre-
cision of 0.002 seconds of arc. [By Pierre Langareux [Text] [Paris AIR ET
cosms in French 30 Jan 82] (comm: A. a c. 1902 9238

CANADIAN, AMANBSPACE AGREEMENT-Jolene: Canada has signed an agreement with
Arianespace to reserve a launching slot at the end of 1985. for placing into
geostationary orbit with Ariane 3. a Canadian telecommunications satellite of the
Anik series. Arianeapace has thus nade 10 reservations, and 32 firm launches have
been planned with Ariana. Three IG-channel Anik C satellites are built by Spar
(Canada), and two 26-channel Anik D satellites will be built by Hughes

Aircraft (USA) for ‘i'alasat Canada. [Text] [Paris AIR E‘l' COSHOS in French 6 Mar 82
p 43] [COPYRIGHh A. e C. 1982] 11.023

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

NEW REPORT COHPARES AUTOMATION, PRODUCTIVITI, UNEMPLOYMENT
Paris ZERO UN INPORMATIQUE in French No 158 Mar 82 pp 66-71

[Xrticle by Claude Salsman, chief e ineer at CEGOS [General Commis-
sion on Scientific Organizatio§7z ' he Computer and Unemployment, a
Controversial Duality_7

[Text7 It is now admitted the computer is a pro-
ductive tool or more generally, it is considered
clear that additional automation increases the
enterprise's productivity. But who has proved it?

There is also a tendency to regard the computer
as partly responsible for current unemployment.
Vhat should we think about this old myth of the

machine which destroys people?

Unemployment is one of the plagues of the modern world. It is a de-
pressing topic and it is hard to speak objectively about a subject
where emotions dominate. After having enjoyed strong economic growth
without unemployment for 30 years, the developed world has experi-
enced the opposite situation for 6 years: insignificant growth and
mass unemployment. The rate of unemployment increases inexorably
every month. Almost 10 percent of the working population will soon
be unemployed. This is shocking and many ask who is responsible for
this horror. The computer has been on trial for several years.

The Best of Worlds

It is striking to confirm that the computer is pictured simultaneously
as a miracle machine which will make the world better tomorrow and as

a diabolic machine which will enslave humanity, sooner or later. On
one hand the dream, on the other, the nightmare.

This shows surprisingly that the computer is a completely ambivalent
myth, as all machines have been since the 18th century, even the .
simplest ones: the loom, the steam engine, the train, the automobile
have aroused, in turn, this same type of fear. The more the factory
is filled with machines, the more people fear for their own future.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of automation for 50 years has not ceased to con—
vince people of the danger of these machines. The arrival of the
computer at the beginning of the fifties and of robots more recently
has only revived these already old fears.

The Three Theses

Employment and the computer, what a beautiful subject for a disserta-
tion, what a successful topic! But opinions are divided. Most
opinions are pessimistic. They are summarized in a sentence: "If
the computer makes gains in productivity possible, it consequently
reduces employment." 0n the other hand, opinions differ on the rates
of unemployment caused by the computer. The most pessimistic, such
as Bruno Lussato,foresee a rate of 50 percent; Michel Bosquet thinks
of 20 percent; Ulrich Briefs: 15 to 20 percent; Olivier Pastre pre-
dicts 210,000 additional unemployed in 1985. The range between the
predictions is very significant: from 200,000 to 10,000,000, the
rough estimate is for the smallest! It is observed that the pessi-
mists are recruited especially among research workers, academicians
and journalists. Pew professionals in computer science are found

among them.

On the contrary, the optimists affirm that: "The computer makes

gains in productivity possible, consequently it creates 'jobs'.” In
fact, very few authors dare to defend this point of view. It actu-
ally requires a certain courage to declare that the computer not

only does not eliminate jobs, but creates them, when there are 2 mil-
lion unemployed. To our knowledge, only Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber
has vigorously defended this thesis in "Le Defi Nondial" [The Vorld
Chulleng§7g we observe also that it is preferably the one our leaders
support, in particular, the prime ministers, whether they are of the

left or the right.

Between the two, we find the vacillating, the cautious and the neu-
tralists. Perplexed, many professionals in computer science are fal-
ling in with this tendency. For that indeed is the basis of the
problem. A great deal is written on this subject, but paradoxically,
few objective facts are available. It is always the same figures
which go from onevof these three studies to the other, namely! the
Siemens report (Buro 1990), which a peared in 1976, that of Sussex
University (Barrow and Curnov, 1978 or the study of the Prognos
Institute (FRG), which are pessimistic extrapolations of technologi-

cal predictions.
From One Prime Minister to Another
(Raymond Barre, 9 May 1980, at Honeywell Bull Company)

"Research in productivity can go hand in hand with the creation of
jobs in the same society. By resorting to sizeable investments, by

22
FOR<MHHC1AL.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

introducing innovative methods and by having a high quality staff,
the tertiary sector can obtain gains in productivity Which have
nothing to begrudge with the strictly industrial sectors."

(Pierre Maurot, 15 September 1981 to the National Assembly).

”Vs must master the new technological revolution. Per let us not be
mistaken about it, one of the causes of unemployment is the inability
to adapt our production apparatus, its methods of Operation, esti-
mating and training to this change imposed...

"It is not a question of rejecting robotics or data-technology. It
is a question of controlling this change with respect to man. Gains
in productivity allowed by technical progress must benefit all of the
national community."

A Promising Report

That is where we were until the recent appearance of a very interest-
ing report: "Computer Processing and Emgloyment, Threat or Change?"
(which appeared in DOCUMENTATION PRANCAI E) attributed to a group of
young economists in Paris 13, directed by Olivier Pastre and financed
by the Computer Science Mission.

One went on the field for the first time, figures were sorted, analy-
ses were made on the basis of which a middle term forecast was out-
lined. It is a work of quality, a treasure of ideas and information
difficult to find elsewhere. This report resorts especially to an
empirical approach by broad fields of applications, in particular:

-- automation of operations;

-- the machine tool with numerical control;
-- computer assisted programming;

-- word processing machines, etc.

Eight exciting papers to read which end up each time with a 5 year
forecast of job elimination: 82,000 for word processing, 50,000 for
automation, 50,000 for robotics, 13,000 for document reading and

11,000 for facsimilies. A total of 210,000 jobs will be eliminated

between now and 1985.
The Facts are Stubborn

To understand well how Olivier Pastre arrived there, let us analyze,
for example, the conclusion of the section devoted to word processing
(pp 145 and 147). "We have observed that gains in productivity are
about 50 percent. We have seen, moreover, that the number of secre-
tarial jobs will be particularly affected. The 'secretarial staff' is
traced again in item 610 of the study, 'Job Structure': We confirm

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that in 1974 this item involved 394,614 persons. In view of what
has been said, if the utilization of word processing becat general,
we could assume that 116,000 jobs would be eliminated. In fact,
taking into account market forecasts, gob elimination could involve
82,000 positions between now and 1985.

There is the essence of the example developed by Olivier Pastre. Let
us summarize the process: in 1985, 50 percent of secretaries will
have a word processing machine. These machines will achieve gains in
productivity of 50 percent. I multiply one by the other, I apply
that to the number of secretaries and now then! I find 82,000 addi-
tional unemployed.

This example is at least questionable. Actually, gains in productiv-
ity have been made in all fields for years. Thus in the last 15
years, according to INSEE [National Institute of Statistics and Boo-
nomic Studies7, overall gains in productivity have been + 89.4 per-
cent, or a little more than 4.3 percent per year. Now in 1965, the
employed working population rose to 20,379,000 persons. According to
Olivier Pastre's example, one should have confirmed the appearance

of mass unemployment between 1965 and 1980, amounting to 9.6 million
unemployed.

In fact, with the gains in productivity of + 89.4 percent, it would
have been possible to produce with only 10.7 million persons, what
was produced in 1965 With the work of 20.4 millions. The rest would

have had to join the unemployed.

Now, the number of jobs not only did not drop, but it increased:
There were 21,755,000 employed persons at the end of 1980, or an in-
crease of the working population of more than 1.3 million persons,
compared with 1965, in spite of the crisis, petroleum, the dollar
and computers.

With all due respect for Olivier Pastre, during those 15 years, em-
ployment has not dropped, but, on the contrary, it increased at a
rate of 0.4 percent per year. Consequently, this example is false
and Olivier Pastre's predictions, which, moreover, are moderate, are
not very credible.

An Explanation

In fact, no precise figure would make it possible to demonstrate
today that computers have eliminated jobs in the past. Perhaps,
data processing will be a factor in unemployment in the future, but
as for the past, observation shows that the economic sectors or the
plant operations which have benefited fully from data processing
have not experienced a drop in their employment level. This has not
prevented the number of unemployed from rising in 15 years from
269,000 in 1965 to 1,455,000 in 1980.

2“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To explain this serious phenomenon, Alfred Sauvy, in his remarkable
book "The Machine and Unemployment," Dunod 1980, attempts to develop
a general model explaining the effects on unemployment of all techni-
cal progress and in particular of data processing. The center of

the model is a mechanism which he calls projection. Every gain in
productivity,of whatever nature it is, is expressed by a certain num-
ber of disturbances in the labor cycle, some are negative such as
elimination of jobs, others are positive: creation of additional
wealth, drop of relative prices, shifting of demand...which in turn
causes other disturbances.

According to the organization of the economy, this phenomenon of
propagation, which he calls projection, is more or less effective.
There are many rigidities in the operation of the economy. Some are
strangely due to unfortunate policies of ”job protection which
rapidly backfire on the very ones which they aim to protect. The
most serious error was the very fashionable idea of sharing employ-
ment by lowering the retirement age or by reducing the working week.
Citing as an example, getting out of the economic crisis of 1929-
1934, Alfred Sauvy shows that these policies had the opposite effect
of what was intended.

he cannot summarize in a few lines Alfred Sauvy's main work. However
let us mention the conclusion which is not lacking in interest: It
is the predominance of dogmas, postulates and obliging images which
frustrates society and prevents it from making up for its consider-
able arrears with its own technology and its social ideal. It be-
hooves the economists to give up their abstractions somewhat, without
fearing for their reputations.”

The Outline of a Model

Encouraged with this advice, we have taken up the problem again and
looked for a clear explanation of the processes which create unem-
ployment. Thus we have tested tens of hypotheses such as:

-- the amount of investments;
-- the reduction of working hours;
-- the migratory wage

A single fact has become clear from all these analyses. Everything
would take place,as if the variations in the number of unemployed
from one year to the other,were due to a retardation of economic
growth with respect to an objective value. Below this threshold,

the number of unemployed increases, beyond this threshold, it drops.

According to our calculations, 1 percent of growth more or less
represents 38,000 unemployed more or less and a zero rate of growth

25
FOR(WTHJALL$E(”HN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

represents an additional 250,000 unemployed in the year. The co-
efficient of correlation between the rates of economic growth and
the annual variation on the number of unemployed is high: R: — 0.84.

Table 1: Growth and Unemployment

Rate of ovth of Number of applications Annual varia-

thc PIB bros: foremployment not tion in num-

1965 + 4.8% 142,100 --

1966 + 5.2% 147,700 + 5,600
1967 + 5.0% 196,000 + 48,300
1968 + 4.3% 253,800 + 57,800
1969 + 7.7% 223,000 - 30,800
1970 + 6.1% 262,100 + 39,100
1971 + 5.5% 338,200 + 76,100
1972 + 6.1% 380,300 + 42,100
1973 + 5.6% 394,100 + 13,800
1974 + 2.8% 497,800 + 103,700
1975 + 0.3% 839,700 + 341,900
1976 + 4.9% 933,500 + 93,800
1977 + 3.1% 1,072,800 + 139,300
1973 4 3.5% 1,166,900 + 94,100
1979 + 3.1% 1,349,900 + 183,000
1980 + 1.3% 1,450,600 + 100,700

of-

26
Table 2.

Key:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

The Relation Betueen Growth and Unemploynent

 

Annual variation in number of unemployed
Growth

Variation in number of unemployed
Rate of growth PIB
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE10NLY

To better understand the phenomenon, let us take an example. If in
1982, growth is + 3 percent, that means that we will have 137,000 more
unemployed than in 1981. If instead of 3 percent, the rate of growth
increases to 4 percent, the number of additional unemployed will not
be more than 137,000, but 99,000. In order for there not to be addi-
tional unemployed, an annual rate of growth of 6.6 percent is neces-
sary! This figure is particularly high and has only been reached

once in the period studied,as table 1 indicates: in 1969 with + 7.7
percent. Moreover, it is the only year in the last 15 in which the
number of unemployed has dropped.

Naturally, as table 2 shows, different phenomena can disturb the re-
lationship. In particular, certain measures of certain types: early
retirement system, 90 percent for economic dismissals, youth employ-
ment agreement,...influence the annual number of new unemployed. But
the tendency remains what it is. Generally, in the 15 years studied,
the average rate of growth has been 4.3 percent per year and the
annual increase in the number of unemployed has been 87,200 persons
per year. In short, in each year, we have had a retardation of
growth compared with the normal tendency of 2.3 percent per year.

A Remedy for Unemployment, Growth

It is the retardation of growth which explains about 70 percent of

the unemployment ascertained. Vithout it, we would not have 2 million
unemployed today. And the only way to reduce it is to catch up with
our retardation of growth which is about 40 to 45 percent of our
country's normal condition of economic development. But is it pos-
sible? Is the production apparatus capable of such an effort? What
are the structural economic measures which it is necessary to take to
release growth and guarantee employment for all? There are the real
problems and it does no good to complain interminably about the com-

puter's threat to employment.

The only question, in fact, is to what extent, the computer, and more
generally the new electronically based technologies, contribute to
economic growth. If the answer is favorable, that means that we will
find the lost full employment by accelerating the process of the de-
velopment of these technologies. If, on the other hand, technology
does not have or only has slight effects on growth, than we must in—
vest its means and efforts else\here. All the rest is only empty
talk and waste of time.

Data Processing, A Factor in Growth

The study of the figures supplied by population censuses and those
furnished by the investigation I'Job Structure" shows that the fol-

lowing are the sectors where the most data processing has been used
and the increase of employment has been the greatest:

28
F0l10FFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

-- Accounting: + 27 percent between 1968 and 1974
- Banking and Insurance: + 45 percent between 1968 and 1974
-- Skilled administrative personnel: + 38 percent

Consequently data processing is one of the privileged methods of re-
gaining full employment. But to reach it, we well know, a tremendous
effort will be necessary. Only a mobilization of everybody will make
it possible to regain the 40 percent of growth lost and our conviction
is that data processing will make a major contribution, either di-
rectly through the development of the data processing industry, serv-
ices,...or indirectly, by improving the ability of enterprises to

create more added value per wage earner. The whole problem of growth
is indeed there!

Let us remember that P13 is made up of the sum of all the added values
of all French enterprises. For one confirms precisely that the level
of added value per wage earner varies by 22 percent between the enter-

prises spending the most and those spending the least on data process—
ing!

COPYRIGHT: Ol Informatique, Paris March 1982

8490
030: 5500/2182

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

LAUNCHING OP 'ITALSAT' WED FOR LATE 1987
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 27 Sep 01 pp 37-38

[Article by Pierre Langereux]

[Text] The Italian project for "Italsat,' a domestic telecommunications satel-
lite, was presented at the In! [International Astronautical Federation] Aeronautics
Congress by the representatives of the CNS [National Space Council]. Telespazio.

and Selenia, the three of whom were retained by the ORR [National Research Council]
to draw up the proJect.

The preliminary study (Phase A), which was completed this summer. made it possi-
ble to define the configuration of the future pre-operational telecommunications
satellite Italsat. the launching of which is corrently planned for the fourth
quarter of 1987 using an Ariane rocket or the Shuttle with a PAH-D upper stage.
The satellite is to be placed in geostationary orbit at 13 degrees 3, for a use-
ful life of 5 years and is designed to provide the qualification in space of all
the technologies that will be needed to build the future operational domestic
telecommunications satellite which the Italian PTT [Posts, Telephones and Tele-
graph] administration is planning to put into service during the 1990's.

The decision to build the Italsat satellite should, in principle, be in place by
the end of 1981. A Phase 3 of 16 months duration is planned, to be followed. in
the third quarter of 1983, by a 0/0 Phase extending over a 4-year period.

The Italsat pre-operational satellite was dimensioned as a function of the weight
and electrical power of the payload, and by the required antenna-pointing pre-
cision.

The final choice was a triaxially stabilized platform of intermediate size (180-
200‘kg)abetween-the platform of the European 3C5 satellites and that of the
L-SAT. yet of a sufficiently advanced design to offer the Italian space industry
a challenge capable of bringing it up to international stature while suiting it
to carrying out the missions of the future operational satellite.

The total launch weight of the satellite will be 1,131 kg with Ariana (in a
double launching using the SYLDA [Ariane Double Launch Systenj) or 1,247 kg with

30
I!”I(Nﬁﬂ(1Al.UGl§0bﬂJV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the shuttle PAH-D, requiring. respectively, 441 or 557 kg of propellants for
injection into geostationary orbit and attitude control by means of a combined
propulsion system (bipropellants) .

This system comprises a loo-Newton jet (ISP [specific impulse]: 310 see) as its
apogee engine and 16 small jets whose thrust has yet to be specified (15?: 285
sec). The weight of the satellite in orbit will thus be 690 kg at the start and
around 600 kg at the end of its operational life (5 years), consisting of 012 kg
for the service module and 192 kg for the payload. At launching, the satellite
will occupy a volume of 2.0x 2.21: 2.6 m, and in orbit it will have a span of
13.8 m with its solar panels deployed. Its solar generator, with a power output
of 1.370 w at the end of its operational life, will consist of eight 2.1: l.l-m
panels covered with photovoltaic cells of low yield (4) but sufficient to power
the payload and charge two nickel-hydrogen (25 amp-hr) batteries with a capacity
of 760 w during eclipse. Heat control will be passive (without heat pipes),
using finned-surface heaters and radiators (on north-south facings). The struc-
ture (92 kg) will use mainly conventional and composite materials for supports
and antennas. The satellite will be pointed within 20.05 degrees about the
north-south axis and within $0.04 degrees about the east-west axis by means of
radio beacons associated with each telecomunications antenna.

High Frequencies

The Italsat pre-operational satellite's payload will enable the carrying out of
four missions:

--Telephone service at 20-30 cm by means of two antennas (1.95 m in diameter)
covering all of Italy with six 'spots' (0.5 degrees) fed by six active transpon-
ders (20 W) providing digital links (SS-TOMA). The planned rate will be

120 Mbits/sec, with possibly a 360-Mbits/sec channel for point-to-point and
multiple-access links. This configuration will weigh 145 kg and will consume
640 H;

--Specialized services at 20-30 GHz (data transmission, electronic mail, video-
conference, etc) with a horn antenna (2x1 degree) covering all of Italy and
three active transponders (30 W) for multiple-access links at 25-32 "bits/sec
(Pu-TUNA) . This equipment weighs 35 kg and consumes 320 H;

"A propagation experiment at 40-50 6H2 (attenuation, depolarization, distortion.
etc) with two horn antennas (3x 3 degrees) covering Western Europe and possibly
Greece, Ireland and Spain. These antennas will operate with circular polariza-
tion at 40 CH: and linear polarization at 50 GHz. This equipment weighs 12 kg
and consumes 90 at. Its instrumentation will be compatible with that designed for
the propagation experiments using the future European L-SAT satellite:

--A wideband (l Obits/sec) data transmission experiment with point-to-point
links, although this mission does not appear to be fully confirmed.

31
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Italsat will thus be the first satellite to test propagation conditions in the
40-50 Gas frequency band, which is very well beyond the 20-30 cs: band in which
experimentation is just now beginning. Italy, however. ails to specialize in
high-frequency telecomunications. Following the tests at 11-18.: carried out
with the Italian satellite 81:10 1, Italy is participating in the 20-30 cs: tests

planned with the European satellite L-SAT. and is preparing the operational use
of these frequencies and the tests at eo-so Gar with Italsat. If these new oper-

ations are successful, Italy will then be one of the world's leading specialists
in high-frequency telecOI-unications, enabling its industry to take a dcninant

position in this narket during the 1990's.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1981

9238
C80: 5500/213‘

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KINGNH

HOME SECRETARY WITHIN ANNOUNCES SATELLITE TV PLANS J
P14211441 London THE TIMES in English 21 Apr 82 p 4

llhattributed report of 20 April UK House of Cal-Ions session: "Sateuite
Channels by 1986"]

[Excerpt] The BBC will operate the first two direct broadcasting by satellite
channels likely to be available by 1986 but three further channels could be
made effective and when there was the demand, Mr Willis: Hhitelaw, the bone
secretary, said in opening a debate on satellite and cable broadcasting.

'lhe gavernnent believed it vital, he went on, that industry should be in a
position to reap the benefits of new technology on which the future economic
health of the country depended in part. For that reason there was need to
press ahead with proposals as quickly as possible so as not to miss the
opportunity.

It would be possible with the right equipment to receive foreig: services,
and there was concern throudlout Europe on the effect this night have on
the arrangements of individual countries. Discussions were in progress
within the Council of Europe and the government was represented on a working
group examining the scope for international agreement on program standards
and advertising.

Programing costs could be between 1011 pounds a year for a channel reliant
on existing material to 100“ pomds for one conparsble in content to BBC 1
or ITV. The BBC believed its subscription service could be entirely self
financing within about lo years after which it would make a profit which would
eventually benefit the licence fee payer. Cash night have to be borrowed

to cover start up costs.

Various services such as teleshopping and telebsnking became possible once
the cable was there.

No one had yet suggested that it would be possible to reach anything like the
99 percent of the population who could now receive television. He believed
they had a duty to the majority of people in the comtry who could continue
to rely on BBC and IDA services for the foreseeable future. They were

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

entitled to expect that the range and quality of those services should not

be diminished by cable services syphoning off. the best sport, best film
and best entertain-set.

With the BBc's satellite subscription service he was confident the general
interests of the licence fee payer would remain paras-amt. With cable, there

were as yet no natural safeguards and no natural uchanism of accomtability,
and the government would need to consider in the light of the Hunt inquiry's

report what safeguards and nechaniens of supervision and acoomtability there
should be.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982
cso: ssoo/zzoa BID

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY