FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10452

13 Apﬁ|1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

(FOUO No.768)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

(POUO NO. 768)

CONTENTS

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Deficiency of African Economies Ascribed to Colonial
Dismembering
(Siradiuu Diallo; JEINE AFRIQUE, 27 Jan 82). . . . . . . . . . . . . .

GIAD
Pessimisn in Njanena Said To Continue
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET DEDI'ERRANBENS, 22 Jan 82).........
Got on French Objectives
(HARCHE TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANEENS, 22 Jan 82).........
E‘DIIOPIA
Sriet'n
Guerrillas Reportedly Take Town
Guerrillas Anbush Army Convoy
GABai

SMIG Increase, Cabinet Decisions Annomced
(MARGiES TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANEENS, 22 Jan 82). . . . . . . . .

OC’I'RA Increases Rates
(mam TROPIPAUX ET EDITERRANEENS. 22 Jan 82).........

Briefs
Any) Ian Cooperation Agreements
IVORY (DAST

Problem of Successor to Houphouet-Boigny Discussed
(Siradiou Diallo; JEUNB AFBIQUE, 27 Jan 82)................

Situation Grows lbre Precsrious; Successor Still Not Naled
(Abdelsziz nah-mi; JBINE APRIQUB, 27 Jan 82)..............

HADAGAS CAR

President Feshuffles Cabinet. Discusses Economy
(HARGIBS TROPICAUX 31' EDI'ERRANBENS, 22 Jan 82)...........

HAURITIIS

FBIRI Bxperinnt Backed by British
(L'Bnmss, 31 Jan, 6 Rb 82)ssseossoossoosssooosoooosooooo

Drip Irrigation Study
Drip Irrigation Results

NIGR
Briefs
Thirteen CCCE-Hnanced Projects
Civil Service Salary Increases
soum AFRICA

Government Said '1!) Use Biological Methods Against Blacks
(Mitts 38168; PR2”. 17 mt 82)soc-000.successes-00000000000

ZAIRE

Economy Department Reviews 1980—1981 Economic Situation
(MARCIIBS TROPICAUX BT HEDI'ERRANEENS. 15, 22 Jan 82)........

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
DEFICIENCY OP AFRICAN ECONOMIES ASCRIBED T0 COLONIAL DISMEHBERING

Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1099, 27 Jan 82 p 31

[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Did the Whites Leave Too Soon?"]

[Text] Commenting on the return to power of Flight Lieutenant Rawlings in Ghana
on 31 December 1981, the British DAILY TELEGRAPH has asked the question whether.
after all. decolonization was not premature. Of course, this should be understood
to mean that the whites should have stayed in Africa longer to teach Africans to

govern themselves . . . .

This belief is rather cannon, and not only in colonialist circles, but even among
the Africans. It derives from the worsening economic and social situation that
most of our independent states are facing. Indeed, under colonial empires the
various economies, though less prosperous, allowed the people to feed themselves,
while also serving as a basis for the implementation of a number of operations re-
lated to the establishment of infrastructures. Twenty years after the advent of
independence, most of these countries cannot feed themselves, to such an extent-
that one may well ask if, rather than call them developing countries. one should
not actually place squarely on them the appellation of failing countries! The
few hastily established industries seldom work at full capacity, while agriculture

is in decline.

This situation is, first of all, due to the fact that the governments have been
unable to correctly restructure the economies inherited from the colonial era,
since they were founded on the export of cash crops involving, naturally, the im-
portation of manufactured products. Ever since that time, not only has it been
impossible to set them up again—that is. to base development on vital needs (food
crops), but the purchasing power represented by the industrial crops themselves
has been increasingly declining. Under the twin blows of the deterioration of the
terms of exchange and world inflation, African countries are becoming poorer year

by year.

Consequently. if it is true that there are instances where the inefficiency of
those in power is partly to blame for Africa's difficult si tuation, one is duty-
bound to acknowledge that most of the responsibility should be ascribed to the
former colcnial powers, both because of the developmental models they had imposed
on us in years past and also because of the ignoble speculation which they prac-
tice today on the price of our raw materials: coffee, coca. copper, bauxite.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
manganese, phosphates, etc. The question. therefore, is not vhether the decolo-
nizstion of Africa was. or was not, prenature. But rather why. after having been
compelled to put an end to the colonial pact, western countries continue to ex-
ploit our continent in other ways.

Are they seeking new justifications to recolonize the third-world countries? So
much contempt, so many injustices end such exploitation, else. can only be explain-
ed through our own weakness. How could it be otherwise, considering that Europe,
by dismembering Africa in the 19th century, prevented it (for a long time) to ec-
quire strong states? Precisely because the African empires were nurdered before
completing their gestation.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982.
C80: l97191692

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PESSIHISH IN NJAMENA SAID TO CONTINUE
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANEENS in French 22 Jan 82 p 205

[Text] Radio Tripoli announced on 14 January that the city of Paya-Largeau, in the
prefecture of BET (Borkou-Ennedi—Tibesti), had fallen to Hissein Habre's FAN (Northern

Armed Forces). This news was confirmed on 18 January in Yaounde by a "reliable
source" of the ATP.

The FAN has thus chosen not to attack Ati, where soldiers of the inter-African force
are stationed, and rather than move toward Njamena. to instead return to the north

of Chad, from which that guerrilla force initially act out and. with Libyan military
aid, has managed to establish men from Tibesti in Njamena. at the cost of a continual

struggle for power .

The seizure of Faye by Hisssin liabre's forces is significant in that it cuts President
Goukouni off from his ethnic base, the "Toubous" or the Teda Tu of .Tihesti. Hissein
Hebre, himself a Teda of the plains, a member of the Anakaza group. is "at home"

in Pays, as are a number of his followers.

This new aspect of the Chadian political situation has ended the government euphoria
which followed President Goukouni's visit to Khartoum (HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEBNS of 15 January 1981, p 134). It was in fact believed that the result
of that visit included the Sudan's "total support" for Chad's current government.
with Khartom pledging. according to a joint communique of 12 January. not to pro-
vide any aid to "any force acting against the legitimate government of Chad. in
particular the Northern Armed Forces."

Both parties had also decided to immediately restore diplomatic relations between
Njamena and Khartoum, as well as to resume flights of the Sudanese Air Company

between the two capitals and to reopen the (Radian-Sudanese school in Njamena. Chad
also requested that the Sudan use its good offices for national reconciliation and
some observers anticipated a reconciliation between Hissein Habre and Coukouni Oueddei.

Is such a reconciliation still possible? And is the FAN seeking only to negotiate
with the greatest number of winning cards in its hands? This is not inconceivable,
but there is still pessimism in Njamena. particularly as a result of the stagnation

' of the economic reconstruction process. the continuing rivalry bewaen the various
factions comprising the government and the government's decision to reduce the salaries

of civil servants by one-ha f. _ The UN High Cot-miss feeletgﬁeeuammsiee .
1!. January that 15,000 Chadian refugees in Cameroon ve refuse to be repatriated"
and are being moved to the P011 area. This is not a good sign either.

COPYRIGHT: Rene horeux et Cie Paris 1982
1191.5 3

(:50: [4719/5333
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.a... .....-..._ -__ —.--.

COT 0N FRENCH OBJECTIVES
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRARBBNS in French 22 Jan 82 pp 205-206

[Text] The French minister for cooperation and development, Hr Jean-Pierre Cot,
told the Foreign Affairs Commission of the National Assembly in Paris on 14 January
that France can have only limited goals in Chad.

According to a communique published by the commission on the following day. the
main features of French policy, as Mr Cot reiterated, are "absolute support for
the decisions of the Organization of African Unity. no military intervention,
approval of any effort to achieve a political solution and continued civilian
cooperation" with the Njamena government.

The minister pointed out that France is also trying to make its principal EEC partners
and the United States aware of the problems of the Chadian people.

The communique added that Mr Cot had noted that the Chadian situation is characterized
by three main features: the withdrawal of Libyan troops. the installation of the
inter-African force and the problems of the Chadian Transitional National Union
G)vernment (CONT) in establishing its authority throughout the country.

Mr Cot added that the ambiguity concerning the role of the inter-African force has
not been completely eliminated, since the GAO considers it merely a police force
whereas the CUNT wants it to be a spearhead against Hissein Habre'a troops.

Mr Cot recalled that France helped to establish this inter-African force through

the total absorption of the Senegalese contingent (materiel, transportation. logistic
support), by supplying munitions to the Nigerian contingent and by rotating means

of transportation for the benefit of the Zairian contingent.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11915
CEO: 6719/533

lo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ETHIOPIA

BRI BPS

GUERRILLAS REPORTEDLY TAKE Town-moms, 22 Mar (mm—Guerrilla fighting
for the independence of Ethiopia's Tigray Province have killed 600 government
troops and taken the "0110 Province town of Battie, ths Tigray Peoples Liber-
ation Front [TPLP] said here today. A communique from the TPLP's foreign rela-
tions bureau said its forces seized the town, which lies on the Addis Ababa- -
Ascb highway, after heavy fighting on March 19. The highway to the coastal
town from the capital was still blocked, the TPLP said, adding that it cap-
tured 36 prisoners, 33 trucks and large quantities of arms and munitions.

[Text I [JN221912 London REUTER in English 1850 an: 22 Mar 82]

UUERRILIAS AMBUSH ARMY CONVOYnKhartOum, 19 Mar (REUTBR)--Guerrillas fighting
for the independence of Ethiopia's northern province of Tigrny said today

they had killed or wounded 300 Ethiopian soldiers in a battle on Wednesday.

A spokesman for the 'l‘igray Peoples Liberation Front (TPLF) here said guerril-
las ambushed a government supply convoy as it was travelling to Addie Absba
from the Eritrean port of Assab. The convoy, carrying large stocks of fuel,
grain and cooking oil, was hit 50 Inn (30 miles) east of Dessie, the capital
of H0110 Province, and some 200 km (130 miles) south of Tigre, said. spokesman
Yemeni Kidane. The TPLP captured 19 government trucks, destroyed 14 others
and captured over 300 tonnes of grain, 6,000 gallons of cooking oil, and large
quantities of arms and ammunition, he said. The Afar people of "0110 Province
helped by acting as guides to the guerrillas, he said. [Text] [JN192201
London REUTER in English 2159 GMT 19 Mar 82

030: 4700/9910

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SHIG INCREASE. CABINET DECISIONS ANNOUNCED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French 22 Jan 82 p 206

[Text] The Gabonese Council of Ministers met for the first time this year in
Libreville on 15 January with President Bongo presiding.

In an address delivered during the meeting. Mr Bongo referred to his year-end message
and to the importance of the resolutions of the PDG (Gabonese Democratic Party)
Special Congress in 1979, while also announcing that "concerned with promoting the
welfare of Gabonese and improving their living conditions, the chief of state and

the government have decided to increase wages as of 1 January 1982. Thus the inter-
occupational guaranteed minimum wage (SMIG) is raised from 30,000 to 35,000 CPA francs.
Compensation for national service is also raised from 10,000 to 15,000 CPA francs."

The chief of state also expressed his concern over people not providing proof of
gainful. regular employment. In its report of 15 January, the daily L'UNION stated
that a decree has therefore been issued. requiring 1nyone free of educational obliga-
tions to provide proof of gainful employment. A monthly check will therefore be

made throughout the country by local and national police to determine the number,

identity and addresses of unemployed persons and to subsequently orient them toward
economic sectors needing their services.

The council approved the draft law and proposed guidelines concerning water and
forest resources, which adapts and updates the decree of 20 Hay 1966 and'its prin-
cipal implementing regulations, which still constitute Gabon's Forestry Code.

With regard to housing, which the government intends to promote. the minister of
state for public domain announced that the Gabon Land Bank (CREPOGA) will resume
operations. Beginning 1 March. CREFOGA will grant loans to Gabonese wishing to

purchase property for the first time and whose monthly income is between 150,000
and 600.000 CFA francs.

The council recalled that citizens whose monthly income is between 40,000 and 80.000
francs are eligible for the Self-Construction Assistance Program, which can provide

for a portion of the work of building a house. up to the maximum amount of 2.5
million CPA francs. '

Persons whose monthly incomes are between 80,000 and 150.000 CPA francs can purchase

low-cost housing built by the National Building Society (SNI) through the lease-
purchase program.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

6
33335 «719/533
ma omcm. use ONLY
I on Us a swans. val. VI‘LI

GABON

OCTRA INCREASES RATES
Paris HARCEBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French 22 Jan 82 p 206

[Text] The board of directors of the Trens-Gabonese Railroad Office (OCTRA) met
in Owendo on 9 January with Mr Emanuel Hefane presiding. '

The question of rates. in particular. was discussed. The directors agreed that it
was necessary to increase passenger and freight rates by 15 percent. instead of by
30 percent, as of 1 February 1982. First-class passengers on the Owendo-Ntoum line
will now pay about 1.230 CPA francs instead of 1,075 francs.

With regard to timber shipments, the OCTRA board of directors pointed out that the
new rates will be applicable only when the railroad will be operating beyond PK

[point kilometrique: kilometer point] 200. The prices set in January 1981 shall
be maintained until then.

The directors also granted the office free rein in setting leasing rates for land
within railroad territory. A rate of 480 to 900 francs per square meter is therefore

proposed, depending on the transaction concluded between the office and the company
wishing to establish itself along the railroad.

The 1982 operating budget was also set at 3.8 billion CPA francs (+15 percent over
1981); the government's subsidy will be 2.6 billion francs (+4 percent over 1981).

The board of directors noted that six General Electric switch engines were put into
service in 1981. Average monthly passenger revenues rose from 16.1 million CPA francs
in 1980 to 19.3 million in 1981 for a cuulative total of 11 months. representing
85,475 passengers or a nonthly average of 7.770 passengers.

The railroad will reach Booue (PX 361) by December 1982. but it will be necessary
to wait 6 months after reaching Boone before freight shipments can be made. However.
the Gwendo-Ayem line will be open to freight traffic by September 1982.

It is also reported that the loading platform between the Pranceville station and
the Lebombi river (20 km) is entirely finished. Studies planned for 1982 concern
the conclusion of contracts for completing the second section in early 1982 and the
call for bids on pipes for the Booue-Pranceville section.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux at Cis Paris 1982

11915
C80: 4719/5213

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

BRIEFS

ANGOLAN COOPERATION AGREEMENTS--The first economic talks between Gabon and Angola
ended on 15 January in Libreville with the establishment of cooperation agreements
and a legal framework for supervising the implementation of those agreements. The
talks were held in the Gaboneae capital from 12 to 15 January and were conducted

by Mrs Honorine Dosaou Naki, Gabonese secretary of state for the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation, and Mr Paolino Pinto Joao, Angolan secretary of state for
cooperation. According to the final communique. the proceedings took place "in an
atmosphere of understanding" and both sides initialed a general cooperation agreement
and two other agreements on commercial and merchant marine affairs. These agreements
will be signed in Angola by June 1982. Internationally, Gabon and Angola reaffirmed
"their adherence to the principles of sovereignty and nonintervention in the affairs
of other nations.“ They also pledged to continue to provide "their moral and material
support to the Namibian people" in their struggle for independence. Concerning the
situation in the south of Angola. the communique finally noted that Gabon "expresses

its deep concern and requests the racist government of Pretoria to end all aggression."

[Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX 81' HEDITERRANEENS in French 22 Jan 82 p 206]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11915

C80: 4719/533

8
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GHANA

BRIEFS

MASSIES T0 CLOSE—Accra, 30 Mar (mum-m has decided to close

several African elbsssies and open mission in Libya and Cuba, the Ghana

News Agency reported today. Quoting Foreign Secretary Obed Asamoah. the
agency said 25 anbassadors named by the deposed president would be recalled,
and the mission in Kenya downgraded to consular status. The embassies

to be closed included those in Senegal, Zaire, Zambia. Uganda, Mali and

Egypt. The fate of the missions in Sierra Leone and Liberia were still being
considered, the agency quoted Dr Asamoah as saying. Ten of 43 existing
embassies would be closed in all, in a drive to reduce government expenditure.
ll-lxcerpts] “3301836 London RBUTER in English 1732 (an 30 Her 82]

cso: 4700/1021

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PROBLEM OF SUCCESSOR T0 HOUPHOUET-BOIGNY DISCUSSED
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 27 Jan 82 pp 20-22
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "The Empty Chair"l

[Text] The fever pitch continues to rise among Ivorian politicians. Despite
the wave of renewal following the Seventh Congress of the PDCI (Democratic
Party of the Ivory Coast) and confirmed by the legislative elections of October
and November 1980, temperatures have not returned to normal; quite the contrary.
As we have seen at recent meetings of the National Council (November 1981), the
people are asking questions, growing impatient and more and more irritated with
every passing day. They cannot resign themselves to seeing the chair of the
constitutional successor to the chief of state remaining empty, even for an
instant, much less 14 months!

It is true that this is the first time since independence that the Ivory Coast
has experienced such a constitutional vacuum. The constitution adopted in
1960 provided (in Article 11) that if the Office of President should be vacated
by the death, resignation or absolute incapacitation of the chief of state,
then his duties would be temporarily entrusted to a person chosen from within
the National Assembly by its president. Consequently, the latter is invested
with a power that seems not only excessive, but inherently uncertain. The
power to appoint, even temporarily, the successor to the chief of state was
judged too ambiguous and Article 11 was therefore modified.

By virtue of the law of 31 Hay 1975, the president of the National Assembly
became, in the case of a vacancy in the office of President, "the legal presi-
dent of the republic, with all the rank, powers and prerogatives attached to

the office." The text, which had the advantage of clarity, removed all ambi-
guities regarding the succession. However, in politics, clarity is not neces-
sarily a synonym for agreement! By naming the successor intuitu personae and
presenting him as the future president of the republic, he was thereby desig-
nated as the sacrificial lamb. In addition to his duties as president of the
National Assembly and secretary general of the PDCI, Philippe Yace, who held the
office at the time, was overnight viewed as the successor to ?resident Felix
Houphouet-Boigny, a formidable position that immediately turned him into a
target around whom all discontent crystallized. At any rate, depending on
whether one loved or hated the No 2 man, one deputy at the time recalls that
"one assumed the attitude_needed to support, exalt or fight him." The result was

FOIIOIIWCIAJ.USE(NHLY
a totally vitiated atmosphere. Accusations, intrigues and slander flourished
to such a point that all low blows were permitted.

In order to put an end to the clan battle and restore unity and understanding
within the party and the government, President Nouphouet-Boigny once again had
to undertake a revision of the constitution, of the famour Article 11, to be
more precise. On 26 November 1980, the National Assembly adopted the follow-
ing wording: "In case of vacancy of the Office of the President as a result
of his death, resignation or absolute incapacitation, as confirmed by the
Supreme Court at the request of the government, the vice president becomes the
legal president of the republic."

At the same time, Article 9, which provides for the election of the chief of
state for 5 years and by direct, universal suffrage, had to be modified. In

its new provisions, it now stipulates that "he (the president of the republic)
chooses a vice president, who is elected along with him."

Since that time, it has been the status quo. Not only does President Nouphouet-
Boigny remain stubbornly silent about the name of his successor, but he does

not say when or how he intends to designate him. Will he wait for 1985, the
date his term ends, to appear with the vice president he names? Will he resign
before 1985 in order to appear with his "candidate," as some suggest? Or will
he appoint the vice president he wants, without any popular backing, as Richard
Nixon did in the United States when he named Gerald Ford to replace the resign-
ing Spiro Agnew? Or as Ford himself did when, at the time of his sudden acces-

sion to the Presidency of the United States and lasing his own choice, he
invested Nelson Rockefeller with the office of vice president?

Privately, at least, it is not rare to hear President Bouphouet-Boigny refer to
American constitutional provisions, unless he is tempted by the Maoist experi-
ment. It will be recalled that the father of the Chinese Revolution gradually

gave up the reins of power to the No 2 man he had chosen, while continuing,
from his apartments in the Forbidden City, to inspire and guide the political
life of his country. Once the vice president is chosen, in one way or another,

the Ivorian chief of state may well think about that role as guide and symbol
of unity for the Ivorian nation.

"hat is certain is that Houphouet wants neither a prime minister nor coordina-
tor. He remains viscerally hostile to any idea of,a diarchy at the head of
state. He believes, in fact, that any mechanism suggesting or, what is worse,
organizing shared power is not only monstrous, insofar as it breaks the unity
of command, but also dangerous for young nations. He is deeply convinced that
authority cannot be divided, even if it can, if need be, be delegated.

The problem is that, given his advanced age (77), the burden becomes overwhelm-
ing for the chief of state, who is, as Article 12 of the constitution states,

the ”exclusive holder of executive power." And, except for the vice president,
the constitution provides for no other person in the order of succession. In

the United States or France, for example, the mechanism is perfectly set up.
and even more graduated. Even in Africa, most of the nations have finally
settled the problem constitutionally, in one way or another.

11

momaaussomv
FINI¢HWHCJAI.USE(NVLY

Howexer, Algeria remained some 15 years without a constitution. If Boumediene
had died during that period, no one would have known who was to call together
the Revolutionary Council, which had fallen into disuse to boot. Nor would
anyone have known who was to succeed him. In Tunisia, there has always been
an appointed successor, even if the person has changed four times since inde-

pendence -- that is, practically once every 5 years. In Morocco, where there
is a monarchy, the problem has been settled. In Senegal, Cameroon and many

other African countries, clear and stable choices have been made for the succes-
sion.

In view of these examples and aware that, since the constitutional revision of
26 November 1980, President Houphouet-Boigny no longer has any successor or
real second-in-comnand or even any scapegoat, officials and intellectuals are
worried and restless. They quite rightly fear that in the case of an accident,
the Ivory Coast would plunge into the unknown, if not adventure and chaos.

But in the 40 years that he has been in the political arena, Felix Houphouet-
Boigny has had to meet many challenges. Knowing the concerns and way of think-
ing of his fellow citizens perfectly well, he refuses to be in any hurry about
choosing a successor, for far from wanting to make him a "poisoned offering,"
he intends, on the contrary, to clear the way for him before stepping down.

The "Old Man" has to be trusted. Provided that he has the time, he will be
able to complete his work without any need to touch the foundations or even
upret the architecture of the Ivory Coast house.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique CRMPJIA 1982

11,464
680: 4719/683

12

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢IVLY
SITUATION GROWS MORE PRECARIOUS; SUCCESSOR STILL NOT NAMED

Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 27 Jan 82 pp 22-25
[Article by Abdelaziz Dahmani: "The Wait"]

[Text] Long known as an island of prosperity in the region, the Ivory Coast

is now going through a fallow period. Difficulties of every stripe have piled
up, month after month. to such a point that the commentaries of certain members
of the government and the writings in the official press now sometimes resemble
the tracts of a still fictitious opposition germinating within the system.
Nearly everywhere, one can feel the discontent and unrest building up, with
outbreaks of fever caused by unemployment and banditry.

Nevertheless and with all things being equal, one can still live better today
in Abidjan than in Bamako, Ouagadougou, Lone or even Dakar, even if fear,

frustration and hope are just as great. Furthermore, the country is standing
up well to dangerous temptations, which is not without merit when one realizes
that over the past 2 years, the Ivory Coast has simply had half of its export
receipts cut off in absolute value (JBUNB APRIQUE, No 1092), without counting
inflation, when it was precisely on the sales of agricultural products that a
flourishing industry, prosperous commerce and very dynamic construction sector

once developed.

The effects of the world situation were added on to this brutal drop in prices
of export commodities, penalizing especially those countries that dared to
plunge into the whirlwind of development without many safeguards. This is
what the Ivory Coast did, with large oil purchases, waiting to become a pro-
Jucer (planned for 1984).

Nor does this take into account the appetites of the bankers and the unsettled
conditions on international financial markets. Many government, semi-public

or private companies of all sizes are thrashing about with wrenching money
problems, aggravated by the high salaries of expatriate cadres and scourgea
which President ﬂouphouet-Boigny enumerated in his speech on 7 December 1981 on
the occasion of the 21st anniversary of independence: absenteeism. favoritism,
professional negligence, misappropriation of funds, poor management, and so on,

These evils have always existed to some extent, but are infinitely more bearable
in times of the "fatted calf" and increasingly intolerable for the unemployed

13
IN)!‘0III(1A1.IEHE(HNLY
I'VE Ura'snena- you unease

today, unemployed now numbering some 1,100 to 1,200 among higher-level and
management personnel, plus some 5,000 intermediate-level employees and fore-en.
On 11 December 1981, several hundred of these intermediate-level employees
organized a march on the presidency, in downtown Abidjan. They did not stop
until they were only 200 met;rs short of their goal. After bitter negotiations
with the mayor of the city, Emmanuel Dioulo, a delegation of 12 unemployed
workers was received by President Felix Houphouet-Boigny. He assured them of
his understanding and promised that a National Solidarity Fund would soon be
set up, supplied by a l-percent deduction from all wages for 2 years.

A few days previously, Abidjan nearly experienced a much more dangerous match.
In the low-income section of Abobo-care, a policeman killed a taxi driver.
Spontaneously, thousands of persons, engaged by other excesses, set out for
downtown Abidjan, but Abobo-Gare is a distant suburb and the army had time to
intervene. "Fortunately, the killing did not take place in Treichville. The
consequences would have been much more serious," officials told me.

In Treichville today, the rich neighboring sections (Plateau, Cocody, Deux-
Plateaum) are no longer looked upon with the same pride -— or indifference -
as in the past. The many famous glowing towers of over 30 floors in Plateau
are deemed at least partially responsible for the poverty of the rest of
Abidjan. And whenever anyone speaks about the buildings in Plateau or the
houses in Cocody thinks first of all about the 50,000 expatriates, most of them
enjoying every luxury while the upper-level national personnel are unemployed
and while those below them cannot even make both ends meet. Here again, the
problems are more acute and viewed more emotionally than before. People are

not afraid to speak openly about two resounding failures: those of the univer—
city and Ivorianization.

The university (about 12,000 students in 1981, compared with 13,000 the pre-
vious year) has become "a factory turning out unemployed." Presidentﬁouphouet-
Boigny himself does not hesitate to say that the country has "servilely inher-
ited the French educational system," which “does not correspond to the coun-
try's real needs." We are very far here from the euphoria manifested in Janu-
ary 1978, at the time of the visit of then French Chief of State Valery Giscard
d'Estaing. At that time, in fact, Houphouet-Boigny rendered homage "to the
his“ sense of duty, the admirable development, the fervor, courage and excel-
lent human and professional quality demonstrated by French technical assistants,
particularly the teachers."

As for lvorianization, this governmental campaign, officially begun in 1971,
has not attained its goals. Former Minister of Agriculture Charles Donwahi,
member of the Political Bureau of the PDCI, president of the party's Ivorian-
lzntion committee and the association of Ivorian cadres in the private sector,
explained at length in the 4 December issue of the government daily PRATBRNITE-

MATIN. "The problem of our way of thinking still seems to me to be the most
important thing," Donwahi writes. "It is not certain that after 10 years, we

have yet succeeded in making certain expatriates admit that Ivorianization is
first of all a legitimate political act, one of the attributes of our sover-

eignty. Token Ivorianization still exists because certain enterprises engage
in it only in order to provide a response to a political demand.”

11.

FOR OPINCJAI.lﬂﬂ£(NVLY
But there are other obstacles. For example, having come in principle for a
limited stay, certain expatriates later do everything to remain. In the com-
panies, this can result in the creation of needs requiring their presence and
the implementation of a tactic aimed at preventing Ivorian management personnel
from understanding the operation of the enterprise. In the face of the reti-
cence of certain boards of directors often meeting in Paris or elsewhere, the
Ivorians have tried to circumvent the difficulty by acquiring a greater share
of the capital. The movement did accelerate, especially in the banking sector
(at the government level as well as with respect to private capital), but it
has slowed down the past 2 years because of the circumstances.

Undeniably, the Whites have lost a great deal of their magic and the cult that
surrounded them is dying, the victim of their own egotism. It is a positive
consequence, mingled with concern and disappointment over education and Ivor-
ionization and the desire to conserve the national languages. which have been
totally neglected because of the use of French. It remains to be seen which
ones to choose out of at least 60 ethnic groups, which are often rivals. It
would appear nevertheless that a consensus is emerging in favor of the Dioula,
Baoule and Bete.

Another consequences -- this one more dramatic - of the swing from prosperity
to stagnation: a resurgence of banditry and armed ittacks. Abidjan (with its
suburbs) is beginning to resemble Chicago in the 30‘s. Security measures have
been stepped up. It is no longer a rare sight in the evening to see armed
police patrols walking the streets in Indian files in groups of four. Raids,
arrests, inspections of suspicious sites have increased in number. And yet,
there is a definite lack of security, as well as an escalation of means used in
attacks. In particular, more and more weapons are being stolen from police
stations.

A year ago, the names of Sirike Konate, known as "Zerbo," an Upper Voltan,
Lawson Trusty, "Prince Tony" or "the Aviator," a Togolese, and Issiaka Traore

were constantly in Abidjan headlines. The attacks they pulled off with their
rings before being arrested now seem old-fashioned. Other bolder gangs have
now appeared and have gone after the banks, heretofore off limits, particu-
larly the BIAO (International Bank for "est Africa) in Cocody, the SIB (Ivorian
Banking Company) in Marcory, and the 56301 (General Banking Company of the
ivory Coast) in Treichville and Vridi.

The holdups are generally attributed to foreigners, mainly the Upper Voltans,
some of whom have been arrested. But for the SIB, one of the authors of the
robbery (which involved some 50 million CPA francs) shouted, as he left: "Tell
your authorities that we are not Upper Voltans, but Ivorians...unemployedl"

He then sprayed the ceiling with a machine-gun burst.

Emotions were even higher when an arms cache (eight cases containing about

60 automatic pistols) was seized "by accident" at the Port-Bouet airport in
Abidjan. The cases were reportedly sent from Switzerland in mid-December by

8 Lebanese who, when he arrived, did not find his accomplices who were to take

delivery without inspection. "I have already gotten others through!" he re-
portedly said upon being arrested.

15

POI OIIHClAl.lEﬂE(IVLY
a was vase—un— --~ u..--

Precisely who was to have received the weapons? lie-hers of the underworld or
other such circles? Ivorian officials are extremely reserved on the subject
and hide behind "the investigation underway." They obviously do not wish to
add to the reigning malaise, or to the political uneasiness maintained by

the ignorance in which helix Houphouat-Boigny has kept the country regarding
his succession. At the age of 76, the "01d Han" remains the main bulwark
against any mishaps that night assail the country on the pretext of the crisis
it is now going through.

But for the very reason of the difficulties, people are beginning to ask
whether houphouet still has the energy needed to head the nation's affairs
alone, as he has always done. lie is urged to name a vice president, as the
constitution provides, or at least a "coordinator," as suggested by close aides
aware of the Old Man's reservations on this delicate problem.

A few days before the now famous statement by dissident Deputy Camille Adam,
"Resign and have yourself represented by your appointed vice president!"
Houphouet declared that his successor would be named -in a will, which declara-
tion was various interpreted. Consequently. in order to cut short any errone-
ous interpretation, he said on the day of the closure of the National Council:
"Speaking of my will, I have said that this is not a fanily matter. There is
not a single member of my family who has political responsibilities in this
country.... I do not want any son, nephew or cousin to enter the political
arena to compete against anyone." '

He then whispered: "You are speaking about the vice presidency! Do you know
how many candidates there are?" Silence in the room. He then resumed: "In
the difficult struggle in which we are engaged, I do not want to add any more
divisions at this time...." The Old Man even allowed a glimpse of a certain
skepticism about the results of the free elections last year because many of
those defeated "have not accepted the choice of the ballot boxes."

Felix Houphouet—Boigny's reticence is also explained by the fear of renewed
tribalism, even at the highest levels: "There must not be a Dsoule president,
a Bete president or a Dioula presidert, but a president of the Ivory Coast."

The fact remains that. despite certain rmora, the good health of the chief

on state should quiet team, even if each of his stays in Yamoussoukro, his
native village, does feed -Radio-Trottoir [Sidewalk Radio]. Some speak of
fatigue; others of siclmesa. At any rate, late in 1981, houphouet made several
trips abroad, particularly to France. on the occasion of the French-African
Conference (3-4 November) and Dakar for the CBAO (West African Economic Com-
munity), ANAD (Nonaggression and Defense Agreement) and UNOA (West African
Monetary Union) sunnit conferences at the end of November.

Finally, ﬂouphouet missed only one meeting: the Cancun sumait conference
(22-23 October). But it is said in Abidjan that the illness invoked on that
occasion was diplomatic! During preparations, the Ivorian chief of state had'
learned that his speech was being limited to 10 minutes and that he should not

speak of raw materials. Furthermore, there could be no question of discussing
the prices of these same raw materials, even though they are one of the under-

lying reasons for the inequality in international trade, especially between
the North and the South.

16

MOMMUSEONLV
On this subject, Houphouet's bitterness grows and he speaks more than ever
about the "looting of our raw materials by the West," condo-ins the "egotisn

of the rich, vho do not care about our situation." This observation he illus-

trates by the colorful saying, "You do not offer a chair to s frog crunching
for the spring." -

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

11,166,.
CSO: 4719/6823

17

FOROFI'ICIALUSIWLY
PRESIDENT RBSHUFFLES CABINET, DISCUSSES scam
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 22 Jan 82 pp 210-211

[Text] As President Didier Ratsiraka announced in his important speech of 10 January,
in which he explained his "development strategy" (see below), the government of the
Democratic Republic of Madagascar was considerably reorganized on 15 January, as

was the Supreme Revolutionary Council. This reshuffling. the fourth since 1975 and
one of the announced measures for rational implementation of the new "strategy,"

is characterized by the following principal actions:

National Police Colonel Desire Rakotoarijaona. who has been prime minister since
1977, will be retained as such.

Two ministers who are considered "liberals" and who occupy key posts will be dis-
missed: Hr Rakotovao Razakaboana (Finance and Planning) and Mr Justin Rarivoson
(Economy and Commerce). They are respectively repleted by Mr Pascal Rakotomavo,
former general manager of the ARO [Insurance, Reinsurance, Omnibrsnch] insurance
company, who has been named minister of finance (Planning will be directly reassigned
to the Office of the President of the Republic). and Mr Georges Solofoson, former
director of President Ratsiraka's civilian staff. who becomes minister of industry

and comerce .

Transportation and Agriculture will be assigned to men close to the president and

who are considered "loyal": Mr Joseph Beds, former general secretary to the president
of the republic, will become minister of transportation, food and tourism, replacing
Mr Jean Bemananjars, while Mr Nirina Andriamanerasoa, former assistant general manager
of ARO. will be appointed minister of agricultural production. fishing, livestock
breeding and agrarian reform. replacing Hr Pierre Simon.

Transfers of posts should also be noted: Mr Georges Ruphin, former minister of in-
formation and ideological orientation, will become minister of public administration,
labor and civil service; he will be replaced by Mr Bruno Rakotomavo. former minister
of public works. A military engineer, Maj Victor Ramshatra, will become minister

of public works.

Among the six ministers who have not been reassigned to their posts, four will be
appointed supreme revolutionary councilors: Messrs Rakotovao Razaksboana. Pierre

Simon. Celestin Radio and Georges-Thomas Indrianjafy, respectively the former ministers
of finance and planning. rural development and agrarian reform, labor and justice.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ UPI'ILDAI. use URL!

Finally, the departure of Messrs Charles Rsvoajanahary, Gilbert Sanbson, who has
been appointed minister of justice. keeper of the seals, and Robert Koto from the
Supreme Revolutionary Council should be noted.

The previous government dated from August 1977 and included the same number of
ministers.

The reshuffling of 15 January appears to be a political-technical arrangement re-
quired both by the country's current very serious economic problems, of which
President Ratsiraha has made no secret in his most recent speeches, and by the up-
coming presidential elections in late 1982, for which Mr Didier Ratsiraka, elected
president on 27 December 1975. has announced his intention to request a new 7-year
term.

The government's socialist choice is obviously not being called into question; much
to the contrary, as confirmed by the retention of the present prime minister and
the elimination of "liberals," Mr Rakotovao Rszakaboana and Mr Rsrivoson, who had
obtained the confidence of international financial circles. in particular the IMF
and World Bank group. at a time when the Malagasy economy needs foreign aid more
than ever.

In his New Year’s message to the nation. President Didier Ratsiraka discussed the
country's economic problems and announced that he would himself soon disclose the
measures which he intended to take (see MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS of

15 January 1982, p 156). On 10 January, the Malagasy chief of state elaborated
on the topics already discussed in two long speeches (one in French and one in
Malagasy) delivered to members of the diplomatic and consular corps, the Malagasy
Government and the Supreme Revolutionary Council in Ambohitsorohitra Palace. we
have excerpted statements from those speeches concerning the "consistent and har-

monious overall strategy" which the Revolutionary Government intends to implement.

1) Agricultural Development: 'Pood self-sufficiency is still the priority of priori-
ties. We must therefore increase productivity in the agricultural sector in order
to eliminate food dependency. Such a development is possible only through a radical

transformation of social structures in rural areas. And in this area. we need the
means of our policy."

2) Industrial Development: "Increasing agricultural productivity requires the use

of industrial products (fertilizer. insecticides, equipment. construction and energy)
But the installation of the respective industries is also the first stage in establid
ing the autonomous basis for domestic accumulation (industrializing industry)."

3) Reorganization of Public Finances, the Economy and Government: "To achieve these
goals. we must complete the very hard but absolutely necessary effort to stabilise
our finances and our economy, without which Madagascar would undergo a ridiculous
and absurd disaster, but thanks to which it will see the road to prosperity open

for all men and women. as well as the road to a socialist paradise."

President Ratsiraka proposes the following means for achieving these goals.

19

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
a) Concerning the economy, finance and government, an overall macroeconomic model
for the Malagasy economy is being prepared with the aid of staffs of national and
international experts. The management of public finances is also in the process
of being totally computerized (operating and investment budgets, debt monitoring,
supervision and control of expenditures ...). An economic model.will also be
established for better selection of investment projects and for verifying their
consistency and profitability.

Finally, government officials will tackle the problem of profound tax reform to
prevent budget revenues from becoming too dependent on import taxes.

b) Concerning agricultural and industrial investments in general: "With agriculture
as the basis of development and industry as its driving force, we will orient in-
dustrialization toward the satisfaction of agricultural development needs."

It is on this basis that investments have been made for the purchase of tractors,
the production of farm implements (plows) and spare parts (Toly, Ecam plants ...).
the construction of cement plants (Ibity. Amboanio. Soalala) and an electrical steel
plant for the production of reinforced concrete in particular.

It is also on this basis that nitrogen (2e Ren) and vegetable (Zema) fertilizer
plants have been built.

Finally, it is on this basis that efforts are being made to achieve energy self-
sufficiency: Electric power: Namorona, Andekaleka; unconventional petroleum at
Bemolanga (bituminous sandstone), whose exploitation will begin this year; fuel
oil at Tsimororo; uranium at Tolagnaro and alcohol plant at Ambilobe; conventional
petroleum in the Horondava region with Mobil Oil and in the Sakaraha region with
Occidental Oil Company.

c) Concerning agriculture, the main effort is oriented toward satisfying national
rice and cooking oil needs. In the case of cooking oil, the palm oil operation

at Toamasina and soybean oil (HAHISOA [expansion unknown] at Antsirabe) operations
are underway and there is optimism concerning their results.

With regard to rice, whose importation currently accounts for nearly one-half of

the trade balance deficit. a major policy for stimulating production and productivity
has been launched. It consists mainly of making the most of the important existing
potential in this area. Aid priority should therefore be given to the farming sector,
which is the basis of this production. whether it is large farms managed by develop-
ment companies or other areas under government supervision (state farms. OHIPRA
[Agricultural Production Military Operation]. cooperatives).

Such an agricultural policy implies a revitalization of basic resources (organiza-
tions for training and popularization) and the achievement of better organization
at the national level for better coordination of the various programs.

An initial priority phase for implementing this policy has already begun. which
consists of rectifying the situation of development companies. A study is now being

conducted to obtain a detailed diagnosis of their internal situation and to analyze
their place in their overall environment. in order to lay out reorganization programs

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a use we . cu"... u-.. sous..-

and to revive those enterprises. A maximal period of 6 months has been set for
doing so and this operation is already mderway with the aid of the Bache Company.
the World Bank and national technicians (Lake Alaotrs, Samangoky, etc.).

It is also known that German cooperation is financing the measures for the recovery
and intensification of the Harovoay farm. and for making it more profitable, follow-
ing the PIPABB [expansion unknown] improvement.

A second priority is naturally the expansion or improvement of new arable areas
by OHIPRA. state farms and cooperatives.

Finally, applied research agencies in agriculture will be reassigned to the Ministry
of Rural Development.

To implenent this policy, President Ratsiraka has announced: --a govermlent reshuff-
ling for better cohesion and better efficiency; --his intention to request a new
7-year term at the end of his present term in office; --the floating of a large
national loan (whose details will be specified later) to reduce public spending

(HIDE [National Development and Equip-ant Fxmdl) and subsidies, to reduce the total
amount of noney in circulation and to finance the accelerated development of rice
production to halt the heavy drain of foreign exchange caused by the importation

of approximately 200,000 tons of rice annually.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie 1982

11915
CSO: 4719/535

21

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HSIRI EXPERIMENT BACKED BY BRITISH
Drip Irrigation Study
Port Louis L'BXPRESS in French 31 Jan 82 p 1
[Article: "Drip Irrigation Study Will Benefit From British Aid"]

[Text] The Mauritius Sugar Industry Research Institute (HSIRI). which had

requested British assistance in setting up a comprehensive study project
concerning drip irrigation in the sugarcane fields, has obtained highly
interested support from the British Institute of Pvdrology.

As a matter of fact, the latter has gotten the go-ahead from the British
government to set up a comprehensive study. According to a press release
issued yesterday the the British high commission, the project, which will
require 200,000 pounds (4 million repees) will be financed by British technical
cooperation funds.

According to the high commission's press release, however Great Britain will
put at MSIRI's disposal an agricultural expert specializing in irrigation
research. The expert will work in conjunction with the institute for a 3 to
5 year period in order to study the various aspects of irrigation and its

effects on the harvest.

In addition to the scientist's services, the British Government will lend the
entire experience of the British Institute of Hydrology, including equipment
for irrigation programming and analyses of the data of computer studies.

Some of the latest equipment of the British Institute of Hydrology, such as

the neutron sound for detecting the water content of the soil and the automatic
scanning devices for microclimate data, will be utilized in Mauritius during
the execution of the project.

Two scientists of the Institute of Hydrology (Bell and Batchlor) are expected
in Mauritius today for preliminary discussions with MSIRI concerning the

project. MSIRI has set up an entire program of visits to sugar plants and
irrigation projects.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J. Goldson, the natural resources advisor to the Office of the British
Overseas Development Administration in Nairobi, will accompany the two
scientists and will visit other projects in the country which have received
British aid.

Drip Irrigation Results
Port Louis L'BXPRESS in French 4 Feb 82 pp 1, 6

[Article: "Average 50 Percent Increase in Tonnage in Medina Thanks to Drip
System"]

[Text] An experiment performed in Medina on a 40 acre area planted in cane
using the Agriplaa drip system yielded results considered very satisfactory
for the 1981 sugar campaign. Roger Fayd'herbe 5 Co, Ltd officials, who
represent Agriplas (Pty) Ltd in Mauritius, told L'EXPRBSS that the tonnage of
cane harvested per acre had increased by an average of 50 percent, up from 33
tons to 49.

As is known, there has been much talk about drip irrigation in Mauritius over
the past few years, and several experiments have been attempted, based on
different systems, but as far as the Agriplas system is concerned, only the
Medina experiment, instituted in 1979, was set up with truly modern standards.

Since drip irrigation appears to be assuming prime importance in the develop—
ment of agriculture and of sugar production in particular, the Mauritius
Sugar Industry Research Institute furthermore solicited (and obtained)
assistance from the British Institute of Hydrology (see Sunday's L'BXPRESS)
in order for a careful study spread over a 3 to 5 year period to be done in
this field.

In another connection, it is interesting to note that in a recently published
interview (L'EXPRESS, 21 January 82) Herve Koenig, the new director and
president of the Mauritius Sugar Producers' Association, expressed the opinion
that drip irrigation will result in increasing production and that if this
growth were about 50 percent, that would represent an appreciable gain.

This increase is precisely what has been achieved in Medina, and the Roger
Payd'herbe officials have disclosed to L'BXPRBSS that three new plans for
sugar businesses (20, 60 and 90 acres respectively) are presently under study.

The Roger Fayd'herbe firm has been representing Agriplas (Pty) Ltd in
Mauritius for 8 years. This system was initially set up in Israel, before
being Americanized.

As with most systems, the water passes through a control station equipped
principally with filters and a small computer which makes daily or weekly
programming of irrigation possible. Fertilizers, and in certain cases a
herbicide are also supplied to the main pipes conveying the water to the
fields to be irrigated.

23

NOR OIT1C1A1.USEIMVLY
These main pipes, as well as the lateral pipes, are all made of PVC-which
makes them particularly strong-~while the smallest pipes crossing the fields
(the dripper lines) are polyethylene.

These small pipes, which are generally placed between 6 and 10 inches under
the ground's surface, are equipped with very solid emitters at the rate of l
per meter. These emit exactly the amount of water programmed, thus making
possible the most efficient irrigation with a minimum of the precious (and
costly) liquid.

Before the Medina project, Agriplas had equipped several other smaller
experiments, not exceeding 15 acres, for MSIRI, St Antoine, Hon Desert Hon
Tresor, Case Noyale and Bel Ombre, among others, but all these projects had
to cope with major drawbacks, such as the necessity of laying the pipes on
the surface or that of connecting them over old installations.

The lands chosen in Medina for the experiment were not the best. This fact
gives the 50 percent increase in yield its full significance. An Agriplas
technician who recently came to determine the results of the Mauritian
experiments on site said he was otherwise satisfied with these results.

The injection of fertilizers in small, continuous doses also makes possible
maximum yield and savings in this field as well. If herbicide is used, it
makes a zone immediately next to the emitter sterile; this prevents any roots
from growing across and obstructing it. It should also be stressed that
depending on the space between two rows of canes, a cover crop is possible
with the addition of a surface pipe.

For the major projects, the preliminary studies are performed by local
technicians, and plans are proposed to A~riplas' South African agents.

In order to avoid the problems of financa ; new projects (the initial cost is
proving quite high), the Roger Fayd'herbe firm has also made arrangements to
set up a financing system spread over periods varying between 2 and 5 years
of credit, at relatively low interest rates.

Even though the Agriplas system was still at the experimental stage in
Mauritius and even though very encouraging results are only now being

obtained, the system had already proved itself, especially in Hawaii,

Australia and South Africa.

Drip irrigation has the following advantages, among others: substantial
savings in use of available water; reduction in electrical energy consumption;
reduction of labor employed; better distribution of fertilizers and savings
in fertilizers; the virtual disappearance of weeds; and, of course, increased
production.

We note, finally, that the Agriplas system could be adapted to individual
needs--orchards, kitchen gardens, and other agricultural activities. Pipes

and other equipment are available for that purpose with money, and the
investments involved are quite low. One-thirtieth of the projects have been

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILIAL vet. URL!

carried out at this level and as nany more look as though they will be carried
out.

Advances to Sugar Producers

On Wednesday 10 February 1982 the Sugar Association will give a new advance
to sugar producers on sugar from the 1981 harvest on the following basis:

Category of Producers Advance Per Metric
Producing for Export Ton Rupees

0 - 20 tons 250

20 - 75 tons 17S

75 - 1,000 tons 160
1.000-3,000 tons 125
More than 3,000 ' 60
Manufacturers and

manufacturers/planters 60

This advance is granted after taking into account differential pay-eats made
by the association for each category of producer

1. For the export tax

2. To HSIRI

3. To SIFB [expansion unknown]

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groupe Express

9380
CSO: 6719/592

25

FtHIIJFF1C1A1.llSE OWHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

THIRTEEN CCCE—FINANCED PROJECTS-The Central Fund for Economic Cooperation (CCCE)
granted 13.755 billion CPA francs to Niger in 1981 to finance 13 development projects
in the sectors of rural development (2.665 billion). emery (6.120 billion), tele-
vision and telecomunications (2.740 billion) and transportation (2.220 billion),
according to a CCCE communique released in Niamey on 7 January. The biggest single
grant is earmarked to finance the construction of 2 SONICHAR (Nigerien Coal Company
of Anou-Araren) thermal power plants in the desert, in the department of Agadez.
Other CCCE financial aid is earmarked for areas as diverse as the development of
aquiculture, the spread of cooperative farming. agricultural projects at Haradi and
nnsso. expansion of the passenger airport and the establishment of a freight airport
at Niamey, the installation of telecommunications ground stations and establishment
of a transit depot in the port of Lone. [Text] [Paris HABCHBS IROPICAUX ET
HEDITERRANEENS in French 22 Jan 82 p 200] [COPYRIGH'h Rene Koren: et Cie Paris 1982]
11915

CIVIL SERVICE SALARY INCREASESnThe Nigerien Council of Ministers. under the chair-
manship of Col Seyni Kountche, adopted lo decrees on 7 January, increasing the mini-m
wages of employees and officials of the government and related establishments by

an average of 10 percent as of 1 January. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
HHITERRANS in French 22 Jan 82 p 200] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982]
11915

CSO: 4719/5333

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GOVERNMENT SAID '10 USE BIOLOGICAL ME'DIODS AGAIMT BLMXS

PA172200 Havana PRELA in English 1920 GMT 17 Mar 82
[Report by Mirta Balea]

[Text] Havana, 18 [as received] Mar (PL)-—The Pretoria regime appears to
entrust its future in part to biological and chemical methods used to
reduce the African majority population.

The South African authorities, report the wire services, have contaminated
the waters supplying the regions inhabited mostly by black people with
chemical and genetic substances that effect the rate of growth and increase
infant mortality among other damage.

For due ruling class in South Africa with its uwrld View that has nothing
in common with normal nations or ethics, any method is valid so long as
it eliminates the national liberation struggle against apartheid.‘

Disdain for public opinion, a characteristic symptom of the regime per-
formance seems to be present in its plans to develop bacteriological weapons
which can be used against its neighbors as well.

The South African press admits that genetic warfare is broadly used in the
black townships and in the Bantusians where the African majority population
is confined.

The practices are applied by the Bureau of African Affairs, allegedly
created to take care of the "needs" of the black people, but which the
ruling Nationalist Party assigns funds mainly for that macabre program.

The aim of the plan is aggressively immoral, with a vengeance. It is the
conception of a ruling minority group that utterly ignores elementary
human rights in favor of the insane idea of "white supremacy."

At the end of last year news media reported the creation of a special base
for training troops in the methods of nuclear, chemical and bacteriological

warfare on Red Hill near the Simonstown Base at the Cape.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OVA Us'rausna. you. UI‘LI

That work began, however, back in 1960 in violation of the convention
banning the development. production and storage of bacteriological or
toxic weapons of which south Africa is a signer.

The South African virology institute which has the cooperation of the.
biological research center of Porton Down, Great Britain. has been-o a
center for the development of those weapons. It has a laboratory where
the nost dangerous viruses are studied that are capable of killing as
much as 90 percent of the persons effected.

But really, should it come as a surprise that the apartheid regime is using
a new form of extermination against the Africans? Its defenders can be
relied upon to make every effort to cover up those practices.

Nonetheless, the truth cannot be kept from public opinion. Condennations

can be expected of these most recent violations by "public enemy number one"
of all Africa, including. of course, the people of South Africa. -

CSO: 6700/961

28

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

ECONOMY DEPARTMENT REVIEHS 1980-1981 ECONOMIC SITUATION

Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French Nos 1888, 1889, 15, 22
Jan 82

[15 Jan 82 pp 151, 152]

[Text] The Zaire Department of National Economy, Industry
and Commerce has released issue No 20 of its annual report
(December 1981 edition) on the economic situation during
fiscal 1980-1981, and Mr Leonard, adviser to that department,
is described by Commissioner of State Pay Pay Ha Kasige in the
preamble as having been the "driving force" behind that re-
port for many years.

The report comes out at a time when, in accordance with the
commitments made when a "rescue" loan was granted by the In-
ternational Monetary Fund in June 1981, the government is
engaged in the difficult task of implementing austerity mea-
sures and of stringent management in an effort to reestablish
a balanced budget, rehabilitate the public finances, restore
foreign credit, realign the economy and reorganize the state
apparatus to correct serious inadequacies which have been
perpetuated over the years and which are at the root of a
profound deterioration of the country's position.

This important document covers the various sectors of Zairian
activity in 1980 and the early months of 1981, and contains
many statistical tables (production, foreign trade, budget,
balance of payments and others).

In June 1981, the very serious financial situation and the burden of its for-
eign debt forced the Zairian Government to carry out a further 40 percent
currency devaluation which, added to a previous 30 percent readjustment made
in February 1980, has reduced the parity of the zaire to 0.1575 SDR [special
drawing rights] (that parity had been set at 1 son in March 1976 when the

exchange rate of l zaire for S2 was abandoned).

On 22 June 1981, the IMF provided extended facilities for Zaire by opening a
credit line of 912 million SDR or $1.2 billion (the largest amount of aid

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'V“ U. I'IVOI‘M HUI. VI‘DI

given by the IN?) to be disbursed over a 3-year period to finance the 1981-
1983 recovery plan which hinges on modernizing the means of production and
the infrastructure.

Also, on 9 July 1981, 16 creditor countries (Abu Dhabi, the PRC, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, the United States, France, Italy, Japan, Norway, the Nether-
lands, the United Kingdom, Sweden and Switzerland) and the World Bank agreed
to ease the burden of their outstanding debts by rescheduling the still pend-
ing annual payments for the 1976 to 1980 period (funded debt). 0n 1 January
1980, outstanding debt (financial, governmental and commercial) totaled

$3.2 billion and pending arrears on the funded debt amounted to $600 million.

The gross domestic product which had dropped in real terms by a yearly average
of 3.7 percent between 1975 and 1978 registered a positive growth estimated at
1.8 percent in 1980, and figures for the first 6 months of 1981 indicate a 1.6
percent growth. The rate of inflation, which in 1979 was still above 100 per-
cent, was brought down to 50 percent in 1980.

The budget deficit, which climbed to 1.9 billion zaires in 1979 and to 2.1
billion in 1980, has been reduced in the 1981 budget in which a deficit of
500 million zaires is anticipated.

Trade and Finances
Foreign Trade-To measure the growth in foreign trade one must take into

account the changes in the par value of the zaire over the past 3 years. The
following figures in millions of zaires show the growth in today's terms:

1977 1978 1979 1980
Imports 1,629 850.7 1,673.7 3,768.9
Exports 986.3 1,311.6 3,130.6 5,306.6
Balance - 662.7 + 660.7 + 656.9 +1,555.5

In 1980, mining production accounted for 83.6 percent of all export receipts
and agricultural products for 12.8 percent. In spite of a substantial in-
crease in copper exports in 1980, Zaire's earnings from these exports did not
increase because the prices for copper and cobalt dropped and have continued
to drop during the first 6 months of 1981.

Balance of Payments-—After large deficits between 1977 and 1979, the general
balance of payments showed a surplus of 68.5 million zaires in 1980 due to a
surplusin the trade balance and despite the deficit in the category of serv-
ices (1.6 billion), the payment of commercial arrears (1 billion) and the
servicing of the debt.

Budget——The budget for fiscal 1981 projected revenues of 5.6 billion raires

(up by 2.3 billion compared to 1980) and outlays of 6.1 billion (up by 2.9
billion).

30
FOR‘OFFKJALIﬁsﬁiﬂﬂLY
Under the heading of expected resources, revenues from direct taxes will in-
vrouse by 1.3 billion and receipts from indirect taxes by 0.9 billion. Under
eXpenditures, economic operations account for 1 billion and credits for equip-
ment for 0.4 billion.

Energy and Mines

Energy—~The amount of electricity generated increased by 3.2 percent in 1980;
the Sheba industrial region greatly increased its consumption of high voltage
electricity. The Inga II hydroelectric plant is scheduled to carry out trial
tests in January 1982 with actual operations due to start in July 1982. Two
Belgian groups (for civil engineering and for the power plant) have been en-
trusted with the building of the Hobaye Dam on the Oubangui River, at the
border with the Central African Republic, and this project will take 4 years
to complete.

In the development sphere, the creation of the Inga free industrial zone
should attract renewed interest on the part of foreign investors; the
ordinance-law of 2 April 1981 granted various tax advantages and a guaranteeOf
transfer to enterprises set in that zone.

Compared to 1979, petroleum production declined, wv.th 6.7 million barrels
pumped in 1980 (down by 12.58 percent). During th: first 6 months of 1981,
3.4 million barrels were pumped. Only 14.5 percent of the crude extracted
was delivered to the Zairian-Italian Refining Company (SOZIR, a joint com-
pany) which had to import the rest of the crude it required and which produced
405,600 tons of refined products in 1980 while operating at only 54 percent

of its capacity.

In addition to its exploitation of and search for hydrocarbons in the coastal
zone, toward the end of 1980 the Zaire-Amoco-Shell partnership began a series
of drilling operations in the asphalt sand beds in the region of Havuma.

Mining 0utput--The country's chief mining operations, concentrated in the South
Sheba region, underwent a marked recovery in 1980 and during the first half of
1981. Copper production was estimated to be 495,000 tons for 1981 (compared
to 462,200 tons in 1980). In 1980, GBCAMINES [General Quarries and Mines
Company] extracted 425,700 tons and in 1981 it is approaching its full produc-
tion capacity of 470,000 tons. But low market prices and the ensuing lack of
funds have forced CECAMINES to postpone plans to increase its copper production
by 100,000 tons and upgrade its metal concentration and refining plants.

Cobalt production amounted to 14,500 tons in 1980 (a 3.2 percent increase) and
to 7,500 tons during the first 6 months of 1981. Zinc production remained at
the 43.800-ton level and pewter production continued to drop. Production of
concentrated manganese ore was not resumed because the Dilolo-Lobito railroad
line, which is the only cost effective route over which to haul the output,
remains closed.

In Eastern Kasai, there was a decline in the mining of industrial diamonds
which dropped to 8 million carats. In 1981, barely 6 million will be mined.
In 1980, 1,834 kg of gold were mined, a 19.8 percent decline.

31

FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(M§LY
I VII vs 0 avast“ yum. v. rue

Total earnings from mining exports amounted to 5.3 billion zaires in 1980
(compared to 3.1 billion in 1928); the higher figure is partly due to the de-
valuations of the national currency.

CECAHINES (a state company) and the Industrial Development and Mining Company
of Zaire (SODIHIZA, in which the state holds a 20 percent interest) are the
two big mining companies operating in the South Sheba region. In the Kivu re-
gion, the Mining and Industrial Company of Kivu (SOHINKI, a joint company),
which extracted 2,600 tons of caseiterite in 1980, has discovered a gold
deposit in the southern zone but big investments are required to mine it.

The existence of an important deposit of pyrochlorite has been established

in North Kivu.

Lake Kivu is estimated to contain 50 billion tons of exploitable reserves of

methane gas. A study conducted by a German firm in 1980 sets out methods to

extract, treat and transform this gas into products which can be utilized by

countries which are members of the Economic Community of the Countries of the
Great Lake, by directly burning the gas, by transforming it into methanol or

by making fertilizers.

The International Finance Corporation is expected to provide financing to
diamondiferous mine rocks and alluvial deposits in Eastern Kasai ($80 million}
In Western Kasai. there are iron ore deposits in the Luebo region. The Lower
Zaire region contains bauxite deposits with estimated reserves of 65 million
tons with an average aluminum content of 35 percent, but for the time being
these deposits do not seem to be profitable to mine.

Agricultural Production

Agriculture has a low priority in the 1981-1983 investment program because
the head of state has decided to get that sector back into private ownership
in order to boost production.

Food production remains inadequate and some 120.000 tons of corn and 161,000
tons of wheat will have to be imported in 1981. The coffee crop remains at
80,000 tons. The output of palm oil has continued to decline because palm
groves are too old; in 1980, it amounted to 93,200 tone (down by 5.5 percent).
the same problem is facing a gradually declining rubber production amounting
to 19,500 tone (down by 5.7 percent). On the other hand, cotton crops have
improved, yielding 29,200 tons ofcottonseed in 1980 (up by 55.5 percent).
Efforts have been made to increase the soya harvest and at the beginning of
1982 cash crops to produce tomato juice will be started on an experimental
basis.

Ln January 1981, the International Development Corporation and the Central
Fund for Economic Cooperation agreed to finance a project to rehabilitate and
expand sugarcane plantations in Lower Zaire (687,300 tons of cans in 1980).
Two sugar companies produced 64,500 tons of sugar in 1980 (up by 26.9 percentL

Tobacco growing continues to increase given the short supplies of imported
tobacco; the crop for 1981 will amount to approximately 2,600 tons (an 80
percent increase).

32

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The harvest of hard fibers (mostly punga) was brought up to 900 tons in 1980;
that fiber is used locally.

Industrial Production

For several years, the activity of the manufacturing industries had been
hampered by the shortage and irregularity of supplies and obsolete equipment.
At the end of the first half of 1981, a quota of $50 million was allocated to
the manufacturing sector for supplies. Also, prices were decontrolled but the
profit margins allowed were kept under control.

In the food industry, 132,900 tons of wheat flour were milled in 1980 (an in-
crease of 3.8 percent) and 57,900 tons during the first 6 months of 1981 from
grain imported from the United States. Production of cornmeal from corn im-
ported mostly from southern Africa amounted to 180,800 tons in 1980 (down by
2.7 percent) and to 96.000 tons for the first 6 months of 1981. The amount
of beer brewed dropped by 5.1 percent to 2.6 million hectoliters. The pro-
duction of carbonated beverages is increasing and 600,000 hectoliters were
produced in 1980. The cigarette industry produced 2.7 billion cigarettes in
1980 (a 5.1 percent drop) but increased its output in the earlier months of
1981.

The cotton textile industry registered an increase of 8.1 percent in 1980,
producing 60.8 million square meters of cloth. That cloth, woven from local
cotton fibers, was used to make 28.2 million square meters of printed fabrics.
For 1981, the textile industry required 21,300 tons of cotton. The Kinshasa
Textile Cotton Factory (UTEXCO), which is the biggest textile enterprise in
the country, is operating at only 55 percent capacity; the same applies to
the rest of the textile spinning, weaving and printing mills.

The synthetic textile industry is also working below full capacity as a result
of short supplies of imported yarn. In 1980, the manufacture of synthetic
fabrics registered a 17.2 percent drop.

The same problems have affected the footwear industry. In 1980, Beta-Zaire,
the main manufacturer, operated at only 20.8 percent of its capacity and
during the first semester of 1981 that level dropped even further to 21 per-
cent (2.5 million pairs of shoes were made in 1980).

I22 Jan 82 p 207]

[Text] Since 44 percent of the country is covered with forests and these
forests represent 67 percent of all the thick forests of tropical Africa.
Zaire's second most important resource after copper is timber. The felled
timber is used mainly to make veneer by SIFORZAL [expansion unknown], a
subsidiary of the DANZBR [expansion unknown] group which exported 8.6 million
square meters in 1980 (compared to 6.1 million in 1979). Production contin-
ued to climb during the first 3 months of 1981 when 2.8 million square meters
were eXported. The management of the state-owned Forestry and Commercial
Company (FORESCOM) has been entrusted to cooperating Canadians as part of a
loan agreement which will make it possible to replace the equipment and to
resume exploitation.

33

IND! OFTﬁCJAL USI§CNVLY
I’UI VI'I'ILIAI. \JJI‘. VIVLI

Several enterprises are manufacturing light packaging from recycled paper and
cardboard boxes. In 1980, Goodyear-Zaire produced 2,600 tons of tires for
light and heavy vehicles (down by 18 percent).

In 1980, some 2,600 tons of margarine and fats and 3,900 tons of cooking oil
were produced, mostly by the Margarine, Soap and Cosmetics Company of Zaire
(HARSAVCO) which is currently expanding its production capacity. One of two
sugar mills also produces alcohol (2,750 hectoliters).

The Zairian Match Factory (HAZAL), owned by the SIFA [expansion unknown]
group, made 100,700 cartons, each containing 1,500 boxes of matches, in 1980
(down by 8.7 percent); production went up in the first quarter of 1981.

Plants manufacturing plastic packaging which are entirely dependent on imported
supplies had to stop production many times and their output was only 46 per-
cent of the 1972 production.

The completion of repair work on the furnace of the Kinshasa Bottle Manufactur-
ing Company (BOUKIN) in February 1981 will make it possible to boost production
(15.4 million bottles were made in 1980).

The Steel Manufacturing Company (SISIDER) plant has been operating at less than
10 percent of its capacity since it was built in 1972 due to a shortage of
supplies. A project is under study to build a copper refinery in Halaku using
cathodes from GECAHINES.

In the metal manufacture branch, the CHANIHETAL [expansion unknown] complex
in Kinshasa consists of a naval shipyard (river material), a foundry and
different kinds of metal manufacturing works; it did 90 million zaires worth
of business in 1980. Several enterprises are manufacturing, among other
things, sheet metal, frames, pipes, farming tools, metal furniture, household
utensils and metal containers for the local market.

The manufacture of bicycles registered another big drop in 1980 (9,800 units
compared to 16,100 in 1979) due to lack of supplies. During the past 3 years,
nlants where vehicles are assembled and mounted have operated at a very re-
uuced rate: 121 cars, 300 pickups and 230 trucks in 1980. Three subsidiaries
of worldwide automotive companies (General Hotozs, Fiat and Hagirus) are
established in Zaire.

A local branch of a 0.8. company producing electric batteries needs to be
protected against imports of similar goods.

in the sphere of construction materials, five cement plants produced 402,000
tons of cement in 1980 (down 3.1 percent). There was a recovery during the
first semester of 1981 (a 20.9 percent increase), mostly the result of exports,
since the domestic market remains depressed. The overall production capacity
of these five plants is 1 million tons a year with the Zaire Cement Company
(CIZA), located in Lukala, able to produce 550,000 tons. Starting in the
second half of 1982, tiles and marble slabs to cover walls will be exported

to the Congo and to Cameroon, and granite to the United States.

30

FOR10FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Transportation and Communications

In 1980, the volume of traffic for the big rail and river transportation net-

works went up by 6.6 percent over 1979 but transportation of the mining output
of GECAHINES accounted for most of this increase. The upward trend continued

in 1981 and, in August, more than 20,000 tons of copper had accumulated in the
transit river port of Ilebo.

The question of building a national railroad system, without abrupt changes in
fees charged, is becoming a priority.

The Zairian National Railroad Company (SNCZ), a state-owned company, operates
three different networks with a total of 4,752 km of track of different width.
Zaire's National Transportation Office (ONATRA) operates 502 km of railroad
lines, 12,176 km of river transportation services, the ports of Hatadi, Boma
and Banana and river ports on the Zaire and Kasai and their tributaries.

Big investments are required to repair and standardize the railroad tracks, to
eiectrify the railroad, to replace the engines and rolling stock and increase
their volume, to improve the river ports and modernize the river fleet.

In addition to the national airline Air Zaire, many small companies operate
domestic air routes. In 1980, the volume of Air-Zaire traffic increased by
2.5 percent compared to 1979.

The year 1980 and the first half of 1981 were, for the Zairian economy, the
lowest point in a period of gradual deterioration. As a condition for the
rescue aid granted by the IMF and for the rescheduling of the debt arrears
over a 9-year period, the Zairian Government has had to make a commitment

to follow a strict financial discipline, to boost the manufacturing sector by
assigning to it quotas of foreign exchange to purchase vital supplies of raw
materials and spare parts and, in the domestic sphere, to correct its manage-
ment defects.

So far, the effects of the Mobutu recovery plan are hardly noticeable. A
study of the overall economic situation in Zaire at the end of 1982 will make
it possible to judge the determination, tenacity and austerity of the present
government team. A permanent increase in copper prices would greatly help.
COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

8796
680: 6719/562 END

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY