Hm (It‘l-‘N'IAI, “SI-I ONLY

JPRS L/10168

8 December 1981

USSR Report

CONSUMER GOODS AND DOMESTIC TRADE
(FOUO 6/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
F09 nmrtu IN!" (\N..\

JPRSL

8Dece

USSR REPORT‘
CONSUMER Goons AND Donestxc TRADE

(P000 6/ 81 )

CONTENTS

CONSUMER GOODS PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION
Soap Industry Tasks in 11th Five-Year Plan
(B. N. Chubinidze; HASLO°ZNIROVAYA PROHYSNLBNNOST',

Aug 81) OI.-ICOOOIOIIt.OOICO...IIIIIOUOOIOOOOOOIOOOIOO

PERSONAL INCOME AND SAVINGS

Prediction of Population'n Monetary Savings Examined
(VOPROSY zxouomxt. Aug 81)

- a - [m - USSR

wan !‘mh- . v o-o-I‘ A." \'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSUMER GOODS FRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION

SOAP INDUSTRY TASKS IN 11TH FIVE-YEAR PLAN

Moscow HASLO-ZHIROVAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' in Russian No 8. Aug 81 pp 2-5

[Article by B.N. Chubinidze. chief of the Uprraszhirmaslo [expansion unknown] of Z
the USSR Ministry of the Food Industry, candidate in technical sciences: "The
Basic Tasks of the Soap Industry in the llth Five-Year Plan"]

[Text] In the "Basic Directions of the Economic and Social Development of the
USSR For the Years 1981-1985 and to the Period up to 1990" the chief task of the
11th Five-Year Plan is defined as ensuring a further improve-ant of the well-being
of Soviet people by means of stable economic development, the transfer of the econ-
omy to an intensive path of development, and a more efficient use of the country's
production potential.

The workers of the country's soap industry are faced with large tasks in the new
five-year plan. As was stated at the 26th CPSU Congress, production in the branch-
es of the food industry has to increase by 23-26 percent. In recent years the
population's demand for various detergents has not been fully met. This was noted
in the speech by the General Secretary of the cc CPSU comrade L.I. Brezhnev at the
November (1979) Plenum of the CC CPSU.

The production of detergents in the country during the 10th Five—Year Plan is
shown in Table I by years (in thousands of tons).

Table l
1976 1977
710 695 610

226 223,3 224,8

   

Household soap in nature 684

    

Toilet soap 180

Synthetic detergents 671 122.3

hwluding n-the USSR Ministry

of Food Industry 190.4 215 297,7 78,0

1
FOI.0FFKJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The decrease in the production of synthetic detergents in the USSR Ministry of Food
Industry is the result of the transfer of a number of enterprises to the USSR Min-
istry of the Chemical industry.

At the present time in the system of the USSR Ministry of Food Industry household

soap is produced at 37 enterprises, toilet soap at 26, and synthetic detergents
at 7.

Household and toilet soap is brewed basically by the boiler method. Our basic
household soap is manufactured at domestic vacuum-dryers, and toilet soap is man-
ufactured primarily at domestic ELM lines with a productivity of two tons per hour.

There are in operation 118 VSU [expansion unknown] and 28 ELM [expansion unknown]
on which more than 80 percent of the toilet soap is produced.

In 1980 two highly productive units for the production of toilet soap with a pro-
ductlvity of four tons per hour were purchased abroad and put into operation at
the Gor'kiy Oils and Pats Combine. They are now being mastered. In addition,
three simular units have been purchased for the Kazan' Chemical Combine imeni M.N.
Vakhitov. the Vinnitss Oil and Fat Combine, and the Moscow "Svoboda" Production
Association of the chemical industry which will go into operation this year.

The following assortment of soap is produced: 60, 70, and 72 percent household
solid soap, household liquid soap, 40 percent olein textile soap, 72 percent with
special additives, five types of solid toilet soap-J1ﬂwtra? groups I, II, III and
a children's group, liquid toilet soap, soap shavings, and powdered soap.

The assortment of toilet soap is too diverse. Despite the work to narrow and regu-
late it, at the present time 130 brands of toilet soap are being produced.

The proportion of the children's group and the 'Ekstrs' group in the total produc-
tion of toilet soap comes to 25 percent, of group I-15 percent, II-—20 percent,
ll[--40 percent.

Work was performed during the 10th Five—Year Plan to improve the quality of the
soap being produced. More than 20 automatic soap packagers have been purchased
abroad and installed, with the result that the production of closed soaps has been
brought to 90,000 tons a year (in l976—-65,000 tons). Before 1985 it is planned

- to substantially increase the production of detergents (Table 2, in thousands of
tons).

The production of household soap will increase in the 11th Five-Year Plan in the
country as a whole by 25.5 percent without an expansion of existing capacities.

Work will continue at soap-making enterprises to increase labor productivity,
mechanize production processes, introduce new equipment, and improve the quality
of the output being produced and protect the environment.

2
FOR1OFFMJA1.USE(MULV
ms (WI-10" In; 0N8."

Table 2

 

  
 

llousehold soap 128,0
‘l‘oilet soap 151,9
Synthetic washing agents 148,2
Including in the USSR Ministry of

Food Industry 107,3

Despite the substantial increase in the production of synthetic detergents in the
country as a whole, no increase in capacities for the production of this output is
planned at the synthetic detergent enterprises of the USSR Ministry of Food Indust-

ry.

With the increased production of toilet soap there will be a substantial increase
in its per capita consumption in the Union as a whole and the republics and econom-
ic regions (Table 3).

   

Table 3
Republics ‘ > , ' = m- Mmpita mtput,
and .. sumpdo- thousand millions mmptim, thoumnds

Rayons thouunds Biograms of tons
USSR 265,9 318,0 1,2 283,0 277,8 630,0 1,55 1030.0
RSFSR 138,9 199,2 1,103 179,1 142,7 232,3 1,63 258,1
Ukrainian S 50,0 50,5 1,01 103,8 50,9 77,3 1,52 66,6
Baltic area 8,26 8,3 1,0 8,8 8,5 12,8 1,51 12,8
hens-Cams

1m ares 14.6 12,6 0,88 13,0 15,7 23,4 1,49 21,0
Chntral Asia

area 26,5 15,8 0,6 18,5 30,10 39,2 1,29 31,0
Kazakh SSR 15,0 16,2 1,08 6,6 16,2 25,0 1,54 16,0
Belorussian

SSR 9,7 12,6 1,3 12,0 10,0 15,3 1,52 14,5
#bldavinn

SSR 4,0 2,8 0,7 1,2 6,2 6,0 1,103 12,0

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1980 the oonmmption of toilet soap in the Union as a whole was higher than its
production. This occured by decreasing its remainders in wholesale and retail
trade. and also through purchases abroad.

The production of toilet soap by regions has been entered by production not only
at the enterprises of republic ministries, but also at enterprises of union sub-
ordination located on the territory of these republics.

From Table 3 it can be seen that the largest per capita consumption of toilet soap
in 1980 occured in the RSPSR and Belorussia, and the smallest in Moldavia, the
central Asian and Trans—Caucasian areas, and also in the Ukraine and in the Baltic
area.

Despite the low per capita consumption of toilet soap in the Ukraine, the Ministry
of Food Industry Ukrainian SSR and the Nikohuev'TUyye Paruaa" Perfume and Cosmetic
Combine did not succeed in providing the population with toilet soap and it was
necessary to import 6,700 tons of it into the republic from other areas and from
abroad.

Toilet soap. which contains 80-88 percent active substances and 17-18 percent mois-
ture, tolerates transportation over substantial distances. However, during the 11th
Five-Year Plan it is planned to bring the production of toilet soap as close as
possible to its consumption areas.

In 1981-1985 it is planned to organize the production of toilet soap in three add-
itional republics: Georgia, Moldavia, and Tajikistan.

The growth of toilet soap production capacities in the llth Five-Year Plan is
shown in Table 4.

[See chart on following page]

I.
FOR OFFICIAl,lEIE(”'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
    
     
   

1981-1985 mp- 1/1/86cap- 1 of total
Ministry of acityincrease, capacity
Food Industry thousands of
tons

USSR 100,0
RSFSR 43,9
Ukrainian SSR 14,3
Uzbek ssu 7,8
Kazakh 358 9,0 3,0 6,0 15,0 3,1
Georgian SSR - - 7,5 7,5 1,5
Azerbaijan SSR 7,4 2,4 7,6 15,0 3,1
Lithuania SSR 7,4 2,4 - 7,4 1,6
Moldavian SSR ~ - 15,0 15,0 3,1
Latvian SSR 2,7 0,9 4,8 7,5 1,6
Armenian SSR 7,8 2,6 7,2 15,0 3,1
Estonian SSR 2,0 0,6 - 2,0 0,4
Tajik SSR - - 7,5 7,5 1,6
Union Margarine lndustr 15,0 4,9 15,0 30,0 6,3
Union Perfume Industry 48,9 16,1 7,1 56,0 11,7

The increase in the toilet sosp production capacites will be achieved basically
through an expansion, reconstruction, and reequipping of operating enterprises
(Table 5).

Table 5

        
   

Capacity increase distribution 1981 - 1985

1
100,0

Thousands of tons

      

Total increase

Through reconstruction and expansion of operating planta 65,7
Through organization of toilet snap prodmtionatnew
enterprises

34,3
Through construntion of new plants -

5
FOR*0FFHJAI.USE(N¥LY
FOR 0F1WCJAL.USEGDNLY

In all, in 1990 32 enterprises will be producing toilet soap. The expansion of
capacities will be accompanied by a further concentration of production.

At a number of enterprises (the Gor'kiy Oil and Fat Combine, Shakhtinsk Synthetic
Detergents Plant, the Riga "Dzintars" Production Association of the Perfume and
Cosmetic Industry. the Irkutsk Oil and Pat Combine, and others) the capacities of
the boiling sections and the fat splitting shops have to be brought into corres-
pondence with the basic toilet soap production equipment.

The program which has been worked out for increasing the production of detergents
and, first of all. toilet soap is connected with the realization of a complex of
engineering and technical and construction and installation operations. In addit-
ion to soap-making production itself, it is necessary to increase the capacities
of the hydrogenation production and of the toilet soap boiling section, and to
expand the separation-glycerin shops, warehouses. and cleaning equipment. There
will have to be a substantial increase in the processing of soap stocks:their de—
composition, distillation. and the hydrogenation of the distilled fatty acids.

In order to increase the capacities of the soap-making productions and to replace
worn out and obsolete equipment, a substantial amount of domestic and imported
equipment will have to be installed during the 11th Five-Year Plan. There will
be an allocation of 180 million rubles for this work.

The domestic Al-HLT toilet soap production line which has a productivity of four
tons per hour and which is accommodated practically on the same area as the oper-
ating ELM line will play a large role in the reequipping of enterprises. In 1981
the Al-MLT line will come to the Rostov Oil and Pat Combine and, after final tests,
will be put into series production.

In order to increase the capacities for a reactive-free separation of the fate the
operating 10-cubic meter autoclaves will continue to be replaced by 20-ton units.

A number of enterprises (the Kazsn' Chemical Combine imeni H.N. Vakhitov and others)
have already gained experience in using these autoclaves.

An improvement of the production of washing agents and an increase in their pro-
duction cannot be looked at in isolation from an efficient use of raw materials
and materials.

The party and the government are constantly calling the attention of the workers
of the food industry and other branches to the necessity for strengthening work

to decrease the expenditure of food oils and fats for technical purposes, which is
one of the aspects of accomplishing the food program.

In recent years soap industry workers have improved the use of soap stocks some-
what and have decreased the expenditure of food fats. Hheress in 1979 136,000 tons
of soap stocks were used for the needs of soap-making, in 1980 this figure in-
creased to 147,000 tons. The expenditure of food fats in 1978 came to 169,000
tons, while in 1980 it had decreased to 152,000 tons, or by 17,000 tons.

The USSR Ministry of Food Industry has planned a broad program for the use of
fatty waste products in the 11th Five-Year Plan. The following assignments for

6
FOR OFITCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR(MHHCJA1.USIZONLX

the creation oi capacities have been established: decomposition of soap stocks--
87,500 tons; distillation of the fatty acids 166,500 tons; and hydrogenation
of the distilled fatty acids-~84,000 tons.

Planning organizations have the responsibility of providing for the creation of
units for the hydrogenation of distilled fatty acids at hydrogenation plants which
are being constructed and built.

During the current five—year plan it is planned to completely halt the importation
of raw unrefined soap stocks from the cotton processing republics.

Soap-making enterprises are now experiencing serious difficulties with packing
supplies, but, despite this, many plants have still not shifted over to the use

of multiple-use packing within the cities where they are located. It is necessary
in the near future to change over everywhere to putting soap in packing containers
and trays which operate plant-store scheme.

In 1981-1985 work has to be done at soap-making enterprises to mechanize labor in-
tensive operations and, first of all, the packing, warehousing, and loading of
finished output in containers and railroad cars.

A large amount of work is being done in this direction by the collective of the
Leningrad Synthetic Detergents Combine imeni Karpov where the mechanization of the
packing of open and chxmd toilet soap is being completed. A substantial number of
workers were made free in this section. An automatic unit for packing household
soap is being developed.

The most serious attention has to be directed toward preventing environmental pol-
lution. During the llth Five-Year Plan there should be a universal introduction
of the system for the perezhirivaniye of caustics and their subsequent treatment
by calcium chloride which was developed by the "Haslozhirprom" scientific produc-
tion association. The calcium salts which are obtained should be given to com-
bined feed enterprises and enterprises for the production of lubrication greases.
it is necessary to universally introduce the experience of the Gor'kiy Oil and Fat
Combine in giving caustics to construction enterprises as plasticdnns for the pro-
duction of solutions and concrete.

The "Maslozhirprom" Scientific Production Association and the ”Gipropishcheprom-3"

institute, which are supposed to develop regulations and planning estimates and to

give concrete assistance to enterprises. have a large role to play in supplying the
country's population with washing agents.

There is no doubt that the workers of the soap-making industry will perform the
tasks which were advanced by the party at the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Legkaya i pishchevaya promyshlennost'," "Maslo-zhirovaya

promyshlennost , 1981

2959
(:30: 1827/14

7
F0!.0FITC1AI.1HHE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PERSONAL INCOME AND SAVINGS

PREDICTION OF POPULATION'S MONETARY SAVIMS EXAMINBD

Moscow VOPROSY EKOMHIKl in Russian No 8. Aug 81

[Text] Savings is one of the most important components in the scheme of balancing
the money incomes and expenditures of the population. Effective methods for making
plan estimates of savings have not yet been devised. In the instructions concern-
ing the methods to be used in the development of state plans for the economic and
social development of the USSR, general reco-andations are made to the effect that
in the determination of the sum total of the increase in deposits for the plan
period "it is necessary to analyze the data on the absolute sins of surpluses and
the increase in deposits, their correlation with the money incomes of the popula-
tion and their increases for a number of preceding years, as well gs to calculate
the economic and organisational factors involved in their growth." ﬂoreover, the
answers to a number of questions are missing: how must an analysis of savings be
conducted, what must be the correlation between savings snd money incomes, what is
signified by organisational and economic factors involved in the growth of savings?

All of this impedes the scientifically-based planning of the rapidly-growing money
savings of the population.

Let us examine some of the approaches to the analysis and projection of money
savings that may find practical application in the work dealing with the composi-
tion of the plan balance of money incomes and expenditures of the population. He
must keep in mind that the concept of “money savings" encompasses both organized
forms of depositing and accumulating money and money kept directly by the popula-
tion. The organized money savings of the population, in addition to deposits in
savings banks. include deposits in the State Bank, accumulations in the system of
Gosstrakh [Main Administration of State Insurance] and also in the form of obli-
gations of state loans.

Most readily available for analysis are the money deposits in savings banks, which
constitute the most significant part of the accumulations. The mechanism for the
formation of this type of savings emanates from the economic nature of money
savings, svhich--irrespective of the forms of deposit, are determined by the demands
for future large expenditures.

The basic question which must be solved in the plan estimate of the savings of the

population lies in the determination of the level of objectively necessary
savings.2 Their magnitude reflects the conditions of the realization of the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! "VHF“! VS? 0Vl.\

money incomes of the population that have actually come into being during the
given period--conditions which are called forth by the volume and structure of
personal demands and the development of the forms and conditions of their satis-
faction. One of the main goals of the composition of the plan balance of money
incomes and expenditures of the population is to secure complete balance between
the effective demand and the supply of goods and services requiring payment. How-
ever, in certain stages of the composition of the plan balance of money incomes and
etpenditures, deviations in the estimate of the increases of the savings of the
population from the objectively necessary level are possible. If the growth of
savings is less than the objectively necessary growth, this is evidence of the fact
that the plan projects insufficient growth of the money income of the population;
if it is greater, a part of the increase of savings being planned will be redundant
with respect to the actual conditions of the realization of money incomes.

The process of the formation of savings is complex; for this reason, no sufficiently
reliable methods for estimating their objectively necessary level have been worked
out to date. At the same time, the correct estimate of these processes is exceed-
ingly important. The appearance of surplus savings in one or another stage of the
work on the composition of the balance requires a reconsideration of the whole
system of money expenditures of the population for goods and services requiring psy-
ment,and frequently also of the conditions of the formation of money incomes of the
population. An increase in incomes not in agreement with money expenditures, which
calls forth the appearance of surplus savings of the population, is an important
factor in the destruction of the entire system of conditions making for balanced
economic growth. '

Providing an increase of savings in the plan period serves as a criterion of the
quality of the composition of the balance of money incomes and expenditures of the
population. Therefore, it is important to find such methods of planning savings
as will allow the revelation of definite tendencies in the formation of money
accumulations depending on the objectively conditioned demands of the population
for future money expenditures.

The urgency of the solution of these problems is determined by the fact that at the
26th CPSU Congress it was acknowledged “to consider the fuller satisfaction of the
dcmand of the population for various types of goods and services as the most im-
portant task."

In the economic literature some approaches to the investigation of savings are
known. One of them consists in the study of the functional structure of savings

on the basis of an analysis of their goal structure. The general idea of such an
approach may be realized by two methods. In the first, the goals of the formation
of savings are established in conformity with the primary motives which induce the
population to save up money. These motives are revealed through direct questioning
of individual families which differ among themselves with regard to income level,
socio-demographic characteristics, living conditions, etc. On the basis of the
information received the nature of the formation of savings is studiedandthe quan-
titative interrelations are established which take shape in this process.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such research is widely disseminated abroad. Thus, according to the data of an in-
vestigation of “Vets in the PRC in 1969, "families encompassed in the sampling
most frequently named the following goals: timely savings for any cases of
calamity (as percent of all responses), old age security (27.1 percent), vacation
travel (23.7 percent), acquisition of various kinds of household articles and
decorations (20.7 percent), purchase of housing (16.7 percent), securing the
future of children (14.3 percent), and others."

In our country, too. population surveys with regard to the study of the goals of
saving money have been conducted. For example, in the LaSSR it was determined that
in the mid-1970's, out of the total savings accumulated for the purchase of non-
food items, 75 percent were designated for the acquisition of automobiles and motor-
cycles, 12 percent for ready-made clothing, 6 percent for furniture, 5 percent for
footwear, 3 percent for street clothes and carpets, and 2 percent for cultural
goods.

Such research helps in gaining a deeper understanding of the nature of this pro-
cess and in developing general hypotheses concerning the distribution of savings in
accordance with the goals of their acciaaulation. However, for the practice of
planning such data turn out to be of little use since such information is determined
through experts and its representstiveness depends in many respects on the sampling
of the families surveyed, as well as their desire (or lack of desire) to give a cor-
rect answer. The shortcoming that has been noted is manifested in the fact that, as
a rule, estimates received as a result of surveys, do not agree with the factual
data about the level of savings.

A number of authors propose that the analysis of the goal structure of savings be
guided, not by the results of surveys of the population, but by factual data that
characterize the expenditures of the population for the acquisition of those kinds
of goods whose purchase requires the preliminary accumulation of money. At the
basis of such an approach lies the proposition that the economic nature of money
savings is mainly determined by the demand for future large expenditures. For
this purpose they distinguish the following elements of objectively conditioned
savings: For the purchase of consumer durables; for the payment of primary
shares for cooperative housing constructionand in the organizatioa of associations
for gardening; for a personal retirement fund; for a holiday; and other objectively
necessary savings.

The quantitative estimate of the individual elements of the goal structure is made
on the basis of the data of trade statistics, the statistics of savings banks, the
character of the distribution of the families by level of income, and information
of budget investigation". Then the dimensions of surplus savings are determined
by means of the comparison of the obtained estimate of the objectively necessary
level of savings with the factual indicators of the total quantity of savings.

Such an approach to the study of savings is distinguished by great practical
direction since it is not only not isolated from real economic conditions deter-
m: ....; the formation of the whole structure of the money expenditures of the popu-
lation, but also makes it possible to regard savings as one of the directions of
the use of money incomes. In the same way, it turns out to be possible to corre-

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

late the process of the formation of savings with the factual conditions of the de-
velopment of the market for goods and services. However, it is rather difficult to
apply the method of estimating the objectively necessary savings through the
analysis of the factual expenditures of consmers in practical planning work. This
is connected both with the complexity of the calculations themselves and with the
limited possibilities of the information base for the determination of the individ-
ual elements of the goal structure of savings.

Overcoming the shortcomings inherent in both methods of determining the functional
structure of savings on the basis of an analysis of their goal structure is pos-
sible, it seems to us, only with the aid of economically significant models based
on the processing of real statistical intonation on the savings of the population.
The broadest development of this method is found in the works of N. Rimashevskaya
and 0. Rogova.6 The most important premise of the model proposed by them was based
on the hypothesis that in conditions of the conformity of demand and supply the cor-
relations of the growth of money incomes and the supply of goods and services be-
come mutually balanced. The dissemination of the tendency of the formation of
savings, characteristic for equilibrim canditions in a given period. makes it pos-
sible, in the opinion of the authors, to obtain estimates of the objectively in-
evitsble and forced savings for all the remaining years of the time interval being
investigated. At the basis of such an approach lies the--in our view, on the whole
correct--idea of the necessity of isolating the equilibrium period for the construc-
tion of a corresponding model of savings. However, it is difficult to agree with
the hypothesis concerning the normality of the conditions of the formation of money
savings. Indeed, if we are to be guided by the conception that surplus savings are
formed in the case of the excess of the rate of growth of incomes over consumer ex-
penditures, we by the same token artificially underestimate the level of the ob-
jectively necessary growth of savings. As is well known, the money incomes of the
population are distributed among the following basic channels: Purchase of goods,
payment of services, growth of savings, obligatory payments and voluntary payments.
In conditions of the systematic growth of money incomes, the relative share of the
so-cnlled obligatory payments and voluntary payments regularly increases. If we
assume that the expenditures of the population for goods and services increase at
the same rate as incomes, the share of increase in savings in the total sum of ex-
penditures must fall.8 Such a dynamic of the change of savings, it seems to us,
does not reflect contemporary conditions of the formation of consumer demand.

During recent years some advance of the growth rate of money savings compared to
the rate of growth of incomes has been characteristic. This is explained by the
objective demands of the population for the acquisition of housing, automobiles,
furniture and other consumer durebles, which require the preliminary accumulation
of money. More correct, in our view, therefore, is the hypothesis according to
which in a given phase the normal tendency is characterized by the conformity

of the rate of growth of savings to the rate of growth of money incomes of the
population for "expensive goods."9 this signifies that the forced savings are
formed when the growth rates of savings exceed the growth rates of expenditures
for large purchases. The utilization of the period of relative convergence of
the growth rates of savings and incomes as the base for calculation leads to the
OVerstating of the magnitude of surplus savings. The economic literature contains
references to this negative feature of the extrapolation models being employed.10

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SF ON!)

There exists another cirCumstance which hampers the application of the proposed
models for the determination of the functiOnal structure of savings. It has to do
with the oversimplified reflection of the real process of the formation of
savings. The basic premise of the models being recosIended proceeds from the im-
mutability of the very parameters of the model, which, in essence, signifies the
immutability of the relations between the dynamic of savings and the factors de-
termining it. At the same time, experience shows that the actual relation between
these indicators is modified with time (for example, under the influence of struc-
tural changes in the composition of asney expenditures).

To take this peculiarity into account, a model may be proposed at the basis of
which lies the comparison of the average per capita data on the savings of the
population and the factors determining their formation in the individual union re-
publics. Principally new in this model is the fact that, in contrast to the
existing models of savings which are based on the processing of time series data,

it discloses regional peculiarities which arise in the process of the formation of
savings by the population of the various union republics. By the same token it
turns out to be possible to enlist new information for the estimation of the condi-
tions of the formation of savings in every concrete year of the period under review.

The possibility of applying inter-republic information for the analysis of the pro-.
cesses of the formation of savings throughOut the country as a whole is conditioned
by the generality of the mechanism of their formation in the various regions. At
the same time, depending on the structure of the purchasing demand of the popula-
tion, a distinctive correlation between savings and expenditures for goods and ser-
vices takes shape in every union republic. Since modifications in this correlation
are viewed as depending in the main on changes in the purchasing demand, this pro-
vides the possibility of estimating the objectively necessary level of savings, the
change of which reflects regular processes in the development of demand. The ex-
perimental calculations we have carried out, which make it possible to establish
the correlation between the growth of savings in deposits and the expenditures of
the population for expensive commodities, serve as an example of the practical

use of this model.

Annual savings bank deposits of the population of the USSR from 1959-1977 increased
ten-fold. ‘lhe average annual growth rate of per capita deposits for this period
came to 14 percent. It is clear that such high rates of accumulation of money
savings reflect contemporary peculiarities of the development of the purchasing
demand of the population, one of which is the increase in the proportion of expen-
sive comoditiea. Thus, with a growth of the volune of retail connodity turnover
in the USSR for 1959-1977 amounting to 3.2 times the previous figure, the expen-
ditures of the population for large purchases increased 6.3-fold. At the same
time, the change in the structure of purchasing demand of the population is not the
only reason for such rapid growth of money deposits in savings banks. In recent
times there has been an increase in the influence of the correlations taking shape
between purchasing demand and the supply of goods and services requiring payment
on these processes. A definite idea about the changes in these correlations is
provided by the average annual growth rates that have actually developed in the
comodity turnover and savings bank deposits on the average per capita of the po-
pulation. Such a comparison was carried out in three phases: first phase“

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

1959-1964; second phase-~1965-l970; and third phase--l97l-l977.

The first and third phases are characterized by average annual growth rates in
savings and commodities turnover on the average per capita of the population that
are comparatively similar and not very high. In the first phase, these rates came
to 7.5 and 5.2 respectively, in the third phase-~8.4 and 4.8. Of greatest interest
is the second phase, which is characterized by the highest average annual growth
rate for the entire period of comparison with respect to deposits in savings banks
calculated per capita of the population (24 percent); the average annual rate of
growth of commodities turnover for this period amounted to only 7.2 percent.

The primary growth of money savings of the population by comparison with the in-
crease of retail commodities turnover is explained by some economists by the rapid
expansion of unsatisfied demand on the part of the population during this phase.12
We agree with their view that at the basis of this phenomenon lies the lag between
the supply of goods and services requiring payment and the mass and wide-scale in-
crease of the money incomes of the population.

The at the time fully justified aspiration to secure increased stimulation of the
development of material production by means of accelerating the growth of money in-
comes found expression in the rather sharp change in the correlations in the growth
of wages and labor productivity. Thus, according to our calculations,the correla-
tion between the wages in material production and the productivity of national
labor increased by no less than 15 points in the 8th as compared to the 7th Five-
Year-Plan. Such a change in the proportion of the growth of wages and labor pro-
ductivity demanded for the preServation of the balance of demand and supply either
corresponding changes in the utilization of the national income in favor of the
consumption fund or a relative deceleration of the growth rates of money payments
from public consumption funds. However, in actual fact the proportion of the
national income used for consumption contracted from 73.7 percent in 1965 to 70.5
percent in 1970.13 As far as money payments from public consumption funds are con-
cerned, their rates of growth for 1965-1970, according to our estimates, turned out
to be 20 points higher than during the preceding five-year-plan. All of this in
the final analysis determined the peculiarities of the comparative dynamic of money
incomes and expenditures of the population during this period, which have found ex-
pression in the phenomena of unsatisfied demand and an increase in the dimensions
of surplus savings.

The correctness of such an explanation is supported by the comparisons we made of
the growth rates of savings deposits and expenditures of the population for so~
called large purchases.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Correlation of Average Annual Growth Rates of Per Capita Savings in
Savings Bank Deposits and Expenditures for Large Purchases during
1959-1977 (in Percent)

Growth rates 1959-64 1965-70 1971-77
Average annual growth rate of per capita annual

savings in savings bank deposits 7.5 24.2 8.0
Average annual growth rate of large deliveries

on the average per capita of the population 11.4 9.9 7.6
Coefficient of correlation between average annual

growth rates of savings and large purchases (1:2) 0.7 2.4 1.1

The correlation of the growth rates of savings and expenditures for large pur-
chases is influenced by a number of factors: Change of the goal structure of
savings, the predominance of a concrete goal for the accumulation of money in
every phase; change of the average time periods of the accumulation of savings for
securing certain kinds of expenditures; the development of consumer and money
credits of the population. If these conditions remain unchanged, the correlation
must be close to 1.

In principle one can construct a model which allows for the influence of all the
enumerated factors on the dynamic of the correlation of the growth rates of expen-
ditures for large purchases and savings. Precisely in this case the possibility
wOuld present itself to estimate the volume of surplus savings in the plan period
more objectively.

Of significant interest is the estimation of every factor influencing the above-
cited correlation taken separately. If the goal structure of savings in the plan
period does not change and the average time periodsof accumulation remain constant,
an approximate estimate of objectively necessary savings may be obtained which may
be used in the phase of the preliminary substantiation of the largest elements of
the plan balance of money incomes and expenditures of the population for the five-
year-plan. Such a possibility appears in connection with the fact that for the
extent of the five-year-plan period the goal structure of savings and the average
time periods of accumulation cannot change sharply. Moreover, the natural basis
for the determination of the dimensions of the objectively necessary growth of
savings in the plan period is the study of the statistical regularities which char-
acterize the process of the formation of savings in the pre-plan period.

In order to present in what way the necessary growth of savings in the plan period
can be calculated, we will cite the example of the use of the corresponding model
for estimating the dynamic of savings in the past periods. let us suppose that it
is necessary to estimate the character of the movement of objectively necessary
savings by the periods 1965-1970 and 1971-1977. In 1971-1977 the correlation of
the growth rates of savings and large purchases was close to 1, but in 1965-1970
savings increased at a significantly faster rate. If we consider that the pro-
cesses relative to the movement of savings and expenditures in the first case were
close to “normal", then, going in reverse manner, we can determine the extent of
the breakdown of the indicated proportions in 1965-1970. From this we can obtain

ll.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um mm 1 u t M. "NH

an estimate of the surplus growth of the savings of the population (with respect to
the increase of large expenditures).

Utilizing the hypothesis concerning the "normal" relative movement of expenditures
and savings in 1971-1977, we can construct a model for estimating surplus savings in
1965-1970 with the aid of the method of inter-republic comparisons. The general
scheme for the formation of such a model may look as follows.

The first stage of the calculations, connected with the processing of data about the
savings in a regional cut, consists in a regression analysis of the influence of a
number of variables on change in the growth of savings for every year of the period
1971-1977. Here the average per capita volume of growth in savings bank deposits
in the cut of the union republics appeared as the independent variable. Their
change was fixed depending on the level of the accumulation of personal property of
the papulation, the number of pensioners (calculated per 100 inhabitants), the
average per capita magnitude of commodities turnover and its growth. In the final
calculation the equation of the regressions proved to be sufficiently acceptable,
reflecting the change of the average per capita growth of savings as a function of
the magnitude of commodities turnover (x1) or its growth (x2) also on the average
per capita of the p0pu1ntion. A collection of equations was obtained, characteriz-
ing the change in the growth of savings as a function of the indicated factors.
Further, the parameters of the equations of regression were equated as a function
of time. characterizing the dynamic of savings as a function of the growth of com-
modities turnover.

Using the relations obtained, we can construct an equation of regression which re-
flects the change in the level of the objectively inevitable savings for the period
under review as a function of the growth of commodities turnover:

S,—l9.93+0.885l+(0.065!+0.00H)1.0), . '(n

where St is the objectively necessary level of annual increases of savings per
capita of the population in t year; x1 is the commodities turnover per capita of
the population in t year.

Substituting in the given equation the corresponding value and x1(t). we can
estimate the savings that have been formed as the result of the disturbance of the
conformity of demand to supply from 1965 to 1970. Their magnitude can be obtained
as the sum of the differences between actually developed magnitudes of annual
savings and objectively inevitable increases in deposits.

however, in calculations of that type we separated ourselves from the fact that
disturbances in the conformity of demand and supply also occurred beyond the limits
of the period under review (1965-1970). Undoubtedly, equilibrium periods, too, are
characterized by the disturbance of the conformity of demand and supply and the
formation of surplus savings. In particular, the fact is evident that the absolute
average annual sums of the growth of surplus savings in 1971-1977 were not smaller
than in 1965-1970 and were called forth to a significant extent by the disturbance
in the proportions of the growth of savings and expenditures precisely in 1965-1970.
Consequently, the establishment of normal analogous proportions in 1971-1977
testifies only to the stabilization of the intensity of the formation of surplus

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

savings during these years. The exposure of the indicated savings also represents

an important task in connection with which it was required to estimate the upper
limit of the aggregate unsatisfied demand as a whole for the years 1959-1977. The
goal of these calculations is the estimate of the magnitude of the unsatisfied

demand which could arise in the "equilibrium" period of l97l-l977.1“ 0n the basis of
data characterizing the dynamic of annual increases in the deposits of the populatiOn
and money expenditures for large purchases during 1971-1977, it was established that
in 1972 the greatest growth of large purchases in the course of this period occurred
at l ruble of growth in savings:

Table 2. Growth in Large Purchases, 1971-1977

Item 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977

 

Absolute growth of large purchases
per ruble of growth in dep0sits 0.12 0.15 0.03 0.10 0.11 0.13 0.13

The fact that in l972--from the standpoint of the correlation of increases in de-
posits and expenditures for large purchases--most favorable conditions developed
for the formation of savings of the population for the entire "equilibrium period"
of 1971-1977 is evidenced by the analysis of the growth rates of savings as a func-
tion of the distribution of large purchases by union republics. Precisely because
of this the equation of regression fixing the level of the formation of savings in
1972 was put at the basis of further calculations. Here we must proceed from the
fact that the conditions in 1972 best of all correspond to the hypothesis of the
formation of the objectively necessary level of savings for the entire period.

The selection of functions which describe the change in the level of deposits in
1972 as a function of selected factors was carried out proceeding from standard
criteria. Host acceptable proved to be the linear form of regression equation

(y = ao+ am + am):
5191) 1' —-20.07 + 0,0485X1'I' 0.395013, (2)

where S is the growth of deposits in savings banks per capita of the population;
x1 is the retail commodities turnover per capita of the population; and :2 is the
growth of retail counwditiea turnover per capita of the population.

This equation has statistical meaning in the presence of K determination--0.818; d
Durbin-Hatson statistic--l.9. According to the coefficient of determination the
variables being used--the average per capita volume of coammdities turnover and

its growth for the year--make it possible to explain more than 80 percent of all
changes in the growth of savings. Moreover, the accounting values of the growth
of savings,obtained with the aid of the indicated equations. differ insignificantly
from those which actually developed in 1972. The deviation amounts to approximate-
ly 10 percent of the actual magnitude of the growth of savings in this year. For
further calculations it was required to correct the regression equation obtained so
as to eliminate this inevitable difference in the calculations as well. Such a
correction was made with the aid of a more precise definition of the parameter <10,
which, in our View, catches the influence of all other factors not taken into

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill "H“ I“ In}; ()Nl.‘

account. As a result of the indicated correction, new characteristics of the re-
gression equation for the selected year were obtained:

5’19" = —22.3l + 0.0485.“ +0.39SOX2. (3)
Further, substituting in the equation obtained the value of the annual commodities
turnover and its growth for the individual years of the period under review, we can
obtain the value of the level of the objectively necessary savings, with respect to
the conditions of the supply of goods, for 1971-1977. By means of comparing the
entire sum of the growth of savings and its objectively necessary level, the esti-
mate of surplus savings is determined.

The method of calculations being proposed makes it possible to estimate the limits
of those parts of money accumulations which are formed as the consequence of the
rise of unsatisfied demand. The indicated methods can be employed for the substan-
tiation of plans of retail commodities turnover in the elaboration of the balances
of money incomes and expenditures of the population. with its aid we can determine
with sufficient precision what savings the population must possess so as to secure
the normal process of the acquisition of large purchases, and also estimate surplus
savings. This creates the basis for the elaboration of the corresponding plan
measures that prevent the formation of savings of that type and opens up the pos-
sibility of plan, more precisely a prognosis, estimate of both the normal tenden-
cies in the change of savings and the undesirable phenomena in their formation.

The problem of the prediction of the objectively necessary level of money savings
in the plan period, especially in the long-term perspective, in the final analysis
comes down to the elucidation of the reasons determining the rates of their growth.
As is well known, in recent years we have observed an important advance of the
growth rates of money savings of the population as compared to the growth rates of
its incomes and also commodities turnover and services requiring payment. Some re-
searchers explain such a phenomenon basically by the changes in the diet ibution of
the population with respect to the level of average per capita incomes.l To leave
the influence of this factor out of one's consideration is impossible,but to reduce
the reasons for the rapid growth of savings only to the impact of this factor is
not entirely correct. Such a rapid growth of savings is also linked with the opera-
tion of a number of other reasons, calling forth, in particular, the appearance of
unsatisfied demand and, as a consequence, surplus savings. We are in agreement
with Yu. Kashin, who proposes that the accelerated growth of money savings has its
explanation above all in the fact that "in groups with higher incomes a large gap
simply develops between the effective demand of the population and the possibili-
ties for its satisfaction."16 This conclusion agrees with the data of surveys con-
ducted in the Estonian branch of the VNIIKS [All-Union Scientific Research Insti-
tute for the Study of the Demand of the Population for Consumer Goods and the
Market Conditions of Trade], which showed that large deposits are growing most
rapidly. In our view, this phenomenon is linked with the circumstance that in the
contemporary period of economic development the production of consumer goods is,
-first of all, oriented towards the satisfection of the demands of the mass consumer
with average incomes. Therefore, the creation of conditions for the most effective
realization of money means with respect to the more well-to-do groups of the popu-
lation may serve as an important factor limiting the growth of forced savings.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NW 0"! "1 \l I\l ”\l \

it must be underscored that the growth of forced savings in groups with relatively
high incomes takes place in conditions of the general imbalance between the growth
of money incomes of the population and the supply of goods and services. There-
fore, most important for the elimination of the reasons for the increase in forced
savings is the securing, in the next five-year-plans, of the more rapid growth of
commodities turnover and services requiring payment by comparison with money in-
comes. Hithin the framework of improving the total proportions of demand and
supply, a more flexible policy with respect to product assortment is necessary in
regard to the supply of goods, a policy oriented toward the demands of individual
groups of the population. Besides this, a more active role in the establishment of
the proportions of demand and supply must be set aside for the system of retail
prices.

The overcoming of the phenomena which are conducive to the rise of unsatisfied
demand will secure the completion of the formation of a living standard, in the
presence of which the growth rates of the incomes of the population and the in-
creases in commodities turnover must inevitably come closet.

Using the function of the determination of normal savings obtained above and pro-
ceeding from the assumptions that the share of the expenditures of the population
for articles in the personal consumption fund does not change in the long term,

the growth rate of the money incomes of the population (personal consumption fund)
remains constant in the period being predicted. For the determination of the prog-
nostic magnitude of retail commodities turnover we can deduce the formula;

XKU=umﬂ+Mﬂ (0'

where a is the share of commodities turnover in the personal consumption fund;
1b is the personal consumption fund in the base year per capita of the population;

B is the average annual growth rate of the personal consumption fund.

Having substituted expression (4) in the formula (2), we can calculate prognostic
estimates of the growth of savings in the long-term period. They are characterized
by the fact that with the reduction of the average annual growth rates of savings
their share in the total money incomes of the population will grow, although at a
slower pace than in recent times. The results obtained agree with the conclusions
of other authors to the effect that the process of the formation of a balanced
structure of money incomes is not completed. Apparently, for a rather long time

to come, the development of the demand of the population of the USSR will call
forth such structural changes in the growing money expenditures as inevitably cause
in them an increase in the share of annual increases in savings. The method pre-
sented for the estimation of objectively inevitable and forced (surplus) savings
may be used in the substantiation of the hypothesis of the formation of the struc-
ture of the money incomes of the population in a long-term period.

The increase in the preciseness of analytical and prognostic calculations will be
enhanced, above all, by the log point in the dynamic of savings and large purchases.
Indeed, the growth of savings in a concrete year is linked to the increase in the
volume of expensive purchases in the future, removed from the given year by a
period which is equal to the average length of the accumulation of savings. The

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

correlation of the increases in the savings of the population in deposits and ex-
penditures for large purchases with the calculation of the log point, being esti-
mated for 1965-1970 as 2 years and for 1971-1977 as 3 years, are shown in Table lo.
Moreover, it is possible to take into account the change in the structure of the
growth of savings with respect to the goals of accumulation and the estimation of
the average period of accumulation for large expenditures in the accounting and the
plan periods. It is expedient to take into account other expenditures of the popu-
lation requiring the formation of savings, first of all investment expenditures.

table 4. Correlation of Average Annual Growth Rates of Average Per Capita Savings

in Savings Bank Deposits and Expenditures for Large Purchases in 1959-1977
with Calculation of the Log

Item 1959-64 1961-66 1965-70 1967-72 1971-77 197k-80

 

Average annual growth rate of average
per capita annual savings in savings
bank deposits 7.5 24.2 8.4

Average annual growth rate of large
purchases on the average per capita
of the population 7.2 11.2 7.3

Coefficient of correlation of average
annual growth rates of savings and
large purchases 1.0 2.2 1.2

Possibilities for the further increase in the preciseness of prognostic calculations
of the growth in savings of the population, corresponding to a balanced state of the
proportions of demand and supply, are seen in the combination of the study of the
statistical regularities of the process of the movement of savings on the basis of
regional data with the regularities of measurement in time and in cross-section of
individual income groups of the population. The latter may be realized with the aid
of models of the type of a differentiated balance of incomes and demand. Through
such a model, the movement of savings unuld be estimated not only in correlation
with expenditures for which they are formed, but also, proceeding from a change in
the distribution of the population, with respect to the level of incomes and specif-

ic regularities of the consumer demand behavior of groups with different levels of
income.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Netodichcskiyc ukazaniya k razrabotke gosudarstvennykh planov ekonomicheskogo
i sotsial'nogo razvitiya SSSR“ [Method Instructions for the Elaboration of

State Plans for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR], Izdatel'stvo
"Ekonomika", 1980, p 653.

2. The classification of savings according to a functional and goal structure was

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

developed by a number of authors. In its most complete form, it is presented

in the articles of V. Orlov and A. Shokhin, "Nekotorye metodologicheskiye vo-
prosy issledovaniya denezhnykh dokhodov naseleniya" [Some Methodological Ques-
tions of Research Into the Honey Incomes of the Population], IZVESTIYA AN SSSR.
SERIYA EKONWICHESKAYA", No S, 1976, B. Rakitaltiy, V. Orlov, A. Shokhin. .mi 0.
Oleynikova, "Napravleniya i formy sovershenstvovaniya pereraspredelitel'nykh
otnosheniy" [Directions and Forms of the Perfection of Redistributing Relations],
(sb. [Collection] "Problemy povysheniya narodnogo blagosostoyaniya i sotsial'nogo
razvitiya" [Problems of Increasing the National welfare and Social Development],
Hoscov, 1978.

"Haterialy XXVI s"ezda KPSS“ [Materials on the 26th CPSU Congress], Politizdat,
1981, p 176.

See V. P. Pedorov, "Lichnoye potrebleniye v PRC: sotsialfnays differentsiatsiya,
dinamika, struktura" [Personal Demand in the PRC: Social Differentiation,
Dynamic and Structure], Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1974, p 168.

See "Tezisy dokladov Hezhrepublikanskoy nauchnoy konferentaii po 'Problemam
povysheniya blagosostsysniya narods i izucheniya potrebitel'skogo sproca
naseleniya" [Theses of Papers Delivered at the Inter-Republic Scientific Con-
ference on 'Problems of Increasing the Hell-Being of the People and the Study of
Consumer Demand of the Population], Riga, 1975, p 34.

See N. H. Rimashevskaya and 0. L. Rogovs, "Hetologicheskiye voprosy issledo-
vaniya sberezheniy naseleniya" [Methodological questions of Research on the
Savings of the Population], EKONOHIKA I HATEMATICHESKIYE METODY, 1974, Vol X,
vyp. 5; O. L. Rogova. "Denezhnoye obrashcheniye i kratkosrochnyy kredit"
[Honey Circulation and Short-Term Credit]. Izdatel'stvo "Pinansy", 1978.

In developed form, this idea presupposes not simply the finding of the equi-
librium period, but the determination of the objective conditions for the
formation of necessary dimensions of savings in various periods.

In the economic literature there exists another point of viev,which is close to
this one. on the objectivity of the tendencies of the formation of savings.
Here, for example, is what A. N. Vbronov writes apropos of this: "One can
suppose that in conditions of complete correspondence between demand and supply
the growth of savings must proceed at the rate of the growth of the money income
of the population.If the growth of savings outstrips the growth of money income,
this excess must be considered the result of unsatisfied demand." (A. N.
Voronov, "Hetedy opredeleniys obshchego ob"ema sprosa naseleniya na tovary"
[Methods of the Determination of the Total Volume of Demand by the Population
for Goods], Moscow, Zaochnyy institut sovetskoy torgovli, 1975, p 56.

"Expensive commodities" or "large purchases" are articles, the acquisition of
which requires the preliminary accumulation of money for a number of years.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

ll.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL liSl-Z ONLY

See, for example, the above-mentioned work by B. Rakitskiy and others.

All calculations in this article were made on the basis of data found in the
statistical yearbooks "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR" [The National Economy of the
USSR] for 1961-1977. Here and in what follows we are speaking of the annual
increases in deposits, which were determined as the differences between the
average annual levels of the deposits.

See V. A. Volkonskiy, Yu. P. Solov'ev, I. V. Senenova, "Voprosy modeliro-
vaniya denezhnykh sberezheniy naseleniya" [Questions of the Modelling of
the Honey Savings of the Population], EKOWIKA I HAMTICHESKIYE HETODY,
Vol XII. vyp. 3, 1976.

The data are taken from "Statisticheskiy Yeshegodnik stran-chlenov Soveta
Ekonomicheskogo Vzaimoponoshchi, 1979" [Statistical Yearbook of the Member
Countries of the Council on Mutual Economic Assistance], Moscow, 1979, p 48.

Excluded from the examination was the first "equilibrium" period (1959-1966).
since during these years the formation of surplus savings was insignificant.

See 6. V. Kaganov, "Nekotoryye voprosy snalisa denezhnykh sberezheniy" [Some
Questions of the Analysis of Honev Savings]. DEN'GI I KREDIT. No 7. 1973.

Yu. I. Kashin. "Sberezheniva naseleniva v SSSR" [Savings of the Population of
the USSR]. Izdatel'stvo "Finansv". 1979. n 58.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosv ekonomiki". 1981.

8970
CSO:

1827/11 END

21

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY