FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10575
10 June 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 11/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the criginal phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGlT W8 AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUEICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT

SCIENCE AND TecnuoLoev
(POUO 11/ 82)

Comeurs

ELECTRONICS

Philips Optical Storage Disc: Continuing 8&1)
(mmﬂ, 26 m 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOIUOOO00.00.0000...

ENERGY

'Haute-Deule' Deep Underground Coal Gaeification hoject
(Jacques 319811; N m L'mn, Jm’p’b 82) 00090....

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOWY

Plane Take Shape for Revival of Machine Tool Industry
(Nicole Beaucleir; A138: 003103, 17 Feb 82) .............

TRANSPORTATION

Tntervieu With President of Aerospatiale
(Jacques Mitterrand Interview; PARIS HAM, 19 Feb 82) ..

Government Makes Funds Available for New Fokker Strategy
(mum, 27 Feb 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOIOO'O...00.0.0.0...

A 310-300: Heavier, Longer-ﬂange Airbus Planned
(m ET m, 27 Feb 2) .00..000...OCOCCOOOOO'OOOOOOOO

Franco-Italian Am 1:2 Project Receives First Orders
(m& m, 17 Am 82) O........C...Q...C.0.0.00.0..00

-a- [III-WB-ISJ
a'l’lCIALUSl-ZONI.Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRON ICS

PHILIPS OPTICAL STORAGE DISC: WINDING REID
Munich common: in German 26 Mar 82 pp 26-27
[Article: "Optical Storage Discs Bold Homtains of Data"]

[Text] German EDP specialists consider the storage media currently on the
market to be overtaxed in terms of their capacityneven though they have not
been in use all that long. Technicians are, therefore. once again looking
for new storage media which can handle an even higher density than, for
example, today's magnetic disc systems. Philips Data Systens took a giant
step into the ”memory future" when some time ago it cams out with the first
optical disc storage unit with a diode laser. Research and development
experts from the laboratories in Siegen report below about their experiences.

It is not secret that people in offices suffer under the growing flood of
information and the constant pressure to have to stay up to date in their
field of knowledge. Also they are concerned whether the correct decisions
are made at the right time if information is not always complete. Integrated
information and conunications systus shall and can be an important support
for this creative potential in our business and administrative offices in

the 1980's. Without intending to introduce a new definitionnby such
comunication systans we mean here the totality of all elements and functions
which come about through the merging of data and text processing (to date
separate comnunication functions) and the service functions. which are to be
understood as office service, as well as classical telecoununications. In
this connection-to a very much greater degree than in the past—information
storage and management assume increasing importance. The storage media
currently on the market are overtued.

Thus, the following requirements are placed on the new storage media:
“higher storage capacity than today’s magnetic disc systems;

«clearly improved cost-effectiveness ratio as compared with today's mass
storage units;

--recording capability of the new medium

--fast and random access.

Some time ago Philips presented the prototype of the world's first optical

disc storage with a diode laser. The extr-ely compact storage device can
record and read out data with a high density. As a storage medium there is a

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN UI'I'ILIAI. USI. URL!

rotating two-sided plastic disc, 30 cm in diameter, with grooves. The disc
stores 10 0 bits of intonation which corresponds to the contents of about
one-half million typewritten pages of text. Thus, it is far superior to the

largest storage units with magnetic discs which are in use today in computer
systems.

Research was started in 1972. Since that time work has been in progress at
Philips on optical recording methods. The first result was the video long
play (VLP) disc which was introduced as a product in the 0.8. market in
December 1978 and whose market introduction in Europe is imminent.

Some 2.5 Tons of Paper on a Disc

Using this basic technological research as a basis, development work was
continued with the goal of utilizing this storage technology in the intonation
processing systems sector, too. The result is the optical storage disc on
which 1.25 billion bytes can now be stored per 12 inch unit. This is roughly
the equivalent of 500.000 written pages of DIN [German industrial standard]

A-lo paper—circa 2.5 tons of paper. It is possible to integrate several of
these discs in a so-called megadoc system and to keep them in direct access

so that approximately 60 billion characters can be stored in such an
exchangeable disc unit. Even smaller versions of the optical storage disc

are planned which will then have lower storage capacities.

Overwriting Still on the Drawing Board

The optical storage disc consists of a transparent and unbreakable core to
which a thin storage layer has been applied. The information to be stored
is burned into this storage layer with a laser beam and can be read as often
as desired or else be declared invalid. Overwriting the informatio --
comparable to today's magnetic disc storageucannor. be implemented yet for
technological reasons. Efficient data bank systems will, however, make it
possible once again to write altered, that is, updated or further developed
intonation at another place on this disc which can be relocated again.

In a certain context. today's data processing methods could be realized with
it.

The following example makes the accomplishment of the researchers and developer
developers at Philips especially clear:

From a gas laser apparatus, which some 10 years ago was 20 meters long. a
semiconductor laser was meanwhile developed. the size of a matchbox. That was

the real breakthrough for the application of this new technology in connection
with future information processing systems.

The theme is "lo-Year Plan." ‘l'hus, mention is made here of several milestones
in the overall scheduling:

-At present five preproduction models are in practical use in various
research and application projects.

-—In 1982 and 1983 in the PRC five pilot projects will be realized in order

to outain, in the context of user testing of the overall system, additional

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ideas for possibilities for improvement in the user interfaces and peripheral
equipment. A high level of IP know-how and the readiness to invest. which
is necessary for such technology. must be assmed among the partners for the
pilot projects.

“Operational installations of closed co-unication systems with the optiml
storage disc as various kinds of information storage systems are planned
starting in 1984. including a comprehensive data bank system.

Now some conercial data which should not be omitted in any short report of
this type:

--Up to starting the preproduction series far more than moo million will
have been invested in this research and develsment project.

COPYRIGHT: Computerwoche 1982

12124
C30: 3102/251

FOR Ola-18A]. USE ONLY
FOR OI‘HLML U50; ONLY

ENERGY

'HMJTE-DEULB' DEEP UNDERGROUND COAL GASIPICATION PROJECT
Paris RBVUE DE L'ENERGIB in French Jan-Feb 82 pp.227-234

[Article by Jacques Bieau, director of technical services at
the French Coal Company, member of the steering committee of
61368]

[Excerpts] since 1978, France has been actively studying the
feasibility of a new mining process, which consists of coal
gasification at very great depths. For this purpose, four or-
ganizations-~the BRGM [Bureau of Geological and Mining Explora-
tion], the French Coal Company, the French Gas Company, and the
French Petroleum Institute--have formed the GEGS [Underground
Gasification Study Group].

Future experiments call for:

a. Pursuing research for a linkage between drillings, and
improving these by the process of retro-combustion. This
will be the goal of the experiments planned at 'Haute-
Deule,” starting from ground level downward.

b. Testing other methods of linkage, such as electrocarboni-
zation (limited experiments are currently underway in the
Loire region).

c. Exploring new ways and means, such as linkage testing by
guided drillings, derived from oil drilling techniques.

The "Haute-Deule' Program

I Objective

The objective assigned to the Bruay site has been reached, and
in order to enable the 6868 to continue testing in the field,

a new site was made available by the French Coal Company and
by the Bassin du Nord Pas-de-Calais Coal Mines.

1;
FOR(NWKJALIBE(NHN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This site, known as 'Haute-Deule,‘ because it is located on
both sides of the Haute-Ueule canal, is located between Lens
and Carvin (Pas-de-Calais department). .

The objective assigned to this new site means taking a step
forward in research since:

a. In order to reach the veins of coal located at depths

of over 800 meters, the drilling will originate from the
surface, and not from underground levels.

b. The coal veins contain coal with different characteristics
from the coal found at Bruay (dry-burning coal instead
of rich coal). This will provide some information on
the 'qualities' of various types of coal in relation to
the underground gasification process.

c. The experiments, which will last for about 5 years,
should include the development at this site of a gasi-
ffcation demonstration pilot, which would include all
the information acquired. It would essentially serve
to demonstrate the process in conditions close to those
to he found during its future industrial development.
The various phases will be the following:

1. selection of the demonstration field;
2. creation of shafts and interconnections;

3. ignition of the coal and enlargement of
linkages by retrocombustion;

4. retrocombustion of the coal.

Concerning the first objective, the selection of the demonstration
field, this will include the definition of a precise site recon-
naissance methodology for the purposes of an underground gasi-
fication operation.

Among the site selection criteria, the criterion concerning

the continuity of the vein over a sufficient area may call for
the use of geophysical methods. The need to indicate the loca-
tion of throw faults larger than or equal to the thickness of
the vein requires the use of the latest refinements of seismic
reflection methods, such as: high resolution seismics and

F0!(HﬂﬁCéﬂ.USl(MVLY
FUR UI‘I'ILIAI. 03!. URL!

a vertical seismic profile made from a drilling hole in which
a receiver is placed to pick up waves from shots at the sur-
face.

II Scheduled Phases of the Project

The geological studies done by the 6368 using mining documents
suggest the possibility, during the first phase, of working
from two surface areas, located directly above a series of
veins with openings between 1.3 and 3 meters, located at depths
between 800 and 1,200 meters.

There are plans to undertake a test program consisting of
several phases for these two areas:

a. A reconnaissance and preparation phase for the end of
1981 and the beginning of 1982.

In each of these areas, an initial vertical drilling will

go through all the coal veins for reconnaissance purposes. The
analyses will be made by means of core samples, diagraphy,

and physical measurements.

The diameter Of these shafts will be 200 mm: heavy drills will
be used for this purpose. These shafts will then be used for
the placement of experimental equipment after completion.

b. A limited objective experimental phase during 1982
and 1983.

The placement of the first experimental device will include
the following operations:

1. creation of a second drilling. completion of shaft:

2. Conducting of a limited hydraulic fracturing opera-
tion, called 'minifrac," designed to reveal the
orientation of the fracture by a seismic-acoustical
study;

3. Possible creation of a third drilling if the
direction of the fracture is clearly different
from the one found in the first two shafts;

4. Hydraulic fracturing after preparation by water
injection;

6
F0!(NWKJALI£NEONUY
FOR<WTKJAI.USECWHN

5. Evaluation of the transmission qualities of the
linkage;

6. Beginning of localized combustion by ignition;

7. Conducting of retrocombustion in the air (possibly
oxygen-depleted);

8. Start of the retrocombustion phase.

Upon completion of this phase, a survey of the results might
be done by mining methods.

c. The pilot phase during 1983 and 1984.

With a time delay after the preceding operations, so that the
results may be put to use, a pilot program will be conducted in
the same area or in the other area explored, until the oxygen
gasification operation, which could begin sometime in 1984.

For this purpose, the shafts will be designed to withstand high
temperatures and the equipment will include a recovery device
to ignite or incinerate the gases produced.

III Conclusion

With the support of both French and European governments, the
6868 has begun a 125-million franc program covering the 1978-
1984 period. This program includes all aspects of the problem,
and between now and 1984, a technical feasibility operation for
the production of primary gas is to be conducted.

After the first promising results obtained at Bruay, there are
still many problems remaining.

At the instigation of the government officials, who asked that
we move ahead as rapidly as possible, the 6868 now plans to ac-
celerate the present program beginning in 1982, by moving very
quickly into the second operation (the demonstration pilot) at
the 'Haute-Deule” site.

Furthermore, a supplemental 40-million franc program for 1982
and 1982 has been proposed. Its execution will depend on the
provision of major financial support by the government.

After 1984, the development of the process will require an
applied research program and at the same time, many pilot

FOIIHTKJhLlEI(nﬂN
I’UI UFO-Link 09‘ ”IV”.

operations on the linkage technique and mastering the combustion
process. This phase will last for about 10 years, starting in
1985. It will provide a more precise evaluation of France's
coal reserves suitable for underground gasification, based on
the criteria for application of this process.

The first large-scale industrial operation might be done between
1995 and 2000. The cost of the gas produced will depend on its
quality and on the quantity of coal that can he need through a
pair of shafts, for the total cost is highly dependent on the
drilling phase of the program. Nonetheless, it seems possible
given the present status of economic estimates, and making all
due reservations, that we may obtain a gas which can be used

as a replacement for natural gas, at a cost under 15 cP/kWh.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 REVUE DE L'ENERGIE

7679
C80: 3102/248

FIHIOFFKJA1.U§E(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL momma!

PLANS TAKE SHAPE FOR REVIVAL OF MACHINE MI. INDIE?!“
Paris AIR a COSHOS in French 17 Apr 82 pp 29-30
[Article by Nicole Beauclair: "Plan for a French Machine Tool Industry']

[Text] More than 4 months have gone by since the government
adopted a development plan for the machine tool industry.
Talk about it has run at a fast clip and not a week goes by
without an announcement of a regrouping of this or that group
of companies. what is really the situation? Jean Chauvet.
head of the scmo [French Machine Tool Builders Association].
has kindly provided some clarifications in this regard.

The machine tool industry development program, generally referred to silply as
the "Machine-Tool Plan.“ is based on the outcome of talks between the public
authorities and the heads of enterprises. "The plan's objectives are ambitious
and realizable only within an economic situation characterised by robust
growth.‘ Jean Chauvet disclosed to AIR 3T cosmos, and as everyone knows. the
machine tool industry is presently in the throes of a serious crisis from the
standpoint of international competitiveness.

Announced at the Council of Ministers of 2 December 1981. the machine-tool
industry development plan. we recall. involves three lines of action that were
reaffirmed by. the minister of industry at the General Assembly of 5 April. The
first action is the one addressed in this article. .The French machine tool in-
dustry must be reorganized, as must also that of components; the action being
undertaken is aimed at forming industrial units capable of competing on an inter-
national level. These units must be of adequate sire and must be headed by
dynamic and efficient management teams; concurrently, the French cosponents
industry must also be developed, inasmuch as its weakness fosters purchases
abroad which in turn lead to increased production costs.

officially, nothing has been announced as yet regarding the regroupments of
enterprises. If we consider only the technological side of the enterprises (we
will come to the human side later), regroupment plans are actually in the pro-
cess of being put together. There is much discussion at this point in terms of
a heavy-machine-tool industry 'pool" that would consist of two entities: one for
milling, with TM]: [expansion unknown}Porest at Capdenac and Line 8.11. (Albert

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I‘ILIAI. UDI'. UNIJ

plant), and the other for turning, with Berthiez at Givors (a subsidiary of
sum [National Aircraft ine Study and Manufacturing Oalpanyj) and sum
[Saint-Etienne Machine Tools (currently one of the Line-P53! [expansion unknown]
grou ). This heavy-machine-toos industry I'pool" would have as its overseer the
IDI Industrial Development Institute], which is moreover already a partaker in
‘I'HI-Porest through as [expansion unknown], of which it is one of the subsidiar-
ies. But these groupings pose financial problems, it being unnecessary to dwell
on the problems that have confronted the Line group for more than 1 year now.
and the latter despite the financial backing it receives from the state (which
does not come under the current funding plan). If new one considers also the
5330 and Berthiez grouping, which lost more than 30 million francs in 1981 on

a turnover of 120 million francs, and on the other hand the Line s.n. and THI-
Porest grouping. bearing in mind the well-known disappointments of the latter

in its regrouping with Ratier-i'igeac and GSP [expansion unknown], it is fairly
clear that these plans are still a long way from materializing.

With regard still to the milling domain (excluding the 'heavy" sector). and in
view of the difficulties encountered by Dufour (which became part of the PROFBL
[expansion unknowrg/PRDMM‘ [expansion unkmwn] group over 1 year ago) , it appears
that a solution could he found involving the Nice-based Vernier firm. although
the latter (automatically designated a partner) does not seem inclined to merge.
As regards machining centers, it would seem logical to associate ﬂute and Graf-
fenstaden (CIT-ALCA'I'BL [International Telephone Compan -Alsatian Company for
Ato'mic, Telecommunications and Electronic Construction group) to form an entity
capable of being prime contractors in the actualization of flexible workshops;
H. Brnault Sauna could be a part of this entity, but its agreement with myoda,
which resulted last year in the creation of BS [expansioa unknown}'ibyoda in
France (fabrication under license of machining centers), is proving a handicap.
Has however has a major asset: Its lathe technology, witn the new line brought
out last year, is tempting, since it lends itself so well to the actualization
if not of flexible workshops then of production hubs, thanks to the automation
of its lathes from the standpoint of the feeding of parts as well as that of
automated tool-changes.

Gambin, still from the milling standpoint (it too joined the Line-98M group sev-
eral years ago after having ceased operations for almost 1 year), could also

be grouped with ALGERIA [expansion unknown]; the regroupment of these two
provincially-based companies (the first at Vuiz-en-Sallas, Baute Savoie,

the second at Dole, near Belfort) should not be too ticklish a matter. This

is the case also of a possible Rama-Caseneuve-hes Innovations Hecaniques re-
groupment--three companies specializing in lathes, which. although their
regroupment has been encouraged by the Ministry of Industry rather than imosed,

presents a problem under a different aspect, in that it brings together private
partners.

As we seen so far, technological affinities render it easy... to come up with

plans: but then there are the financial problems. Bach plan must be evaluated
from two standpoints: The industrial 'one (six companies with industrial know-
how have been designated by the Hinistry of Industry), and the financial one.

Each of these evaluations produces findings that lead to reconsideration of

FOR OFFICE]. USE ONLY
TYPes of N/C
Machines

 

Drilling sachines

Drilling and boring machines
Boring machines

Boring and milling machines
Milling machines

Multiple-function machining
centers

Parallel lathes
Frontal lathes
Vertical lathes
Grinding nachines

Horizontal-spindle turning
centers

vertical-spindle turning
centers

N/C special-purpose
removing nachines
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070021-6

run mum“. var. unu

[Continuation of table on preceding page]

 

Aeronau-
tical Gon-
struction
_ Types of N/C (Number/
__J_m°h1 9 M)—
16
Other C/N removal machines 7 2
8
m“ 0.9
Bending presses 6
0.6
32
Deep drawing presses 7 9
Forging presses
Cuttin machines ‘
9 0.5
6
Punching machines 0 9
Cutting and punching machines 3 3
25
Other forming machines 6 6
'notal uocu [N/c machine 1,247
tools] 7.9

 

Partial results of survey conducted by BIPB [Boon
tion and Forecasting Bureau] for DIME Directora

- Metallurgical and Electrical Industries and sent
that these results must be modified on the basis
criteria and that the total HOCN's will be no nor
(SCH/D Document).

FOR OFFIC‘iiL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070021-6
certain points in the plan. This explains in part the slowness with which final
decisions are being taken. Then. if one adds the human problems inherent in the
taking of such decisions, it becomes immediately clear that the heads of enter-
prises. the Ministry of Industry and the government find themselves confronting
an almost insoluble problem: that of regrouping enterprises according to pivotal
interests while preserving jobs. It has been definitely established, for exam-
ple, that a Berthiez-SEMO regrouping would necessitate, if not the laying off of
personnel (much dependence would be placed, it seems. upon early retirements).
then certainly the moving of personnel from the Givors plant to Saint-Etienne.
involving in this case some 150 persons. hence 150 families! Obviously, this
gives rise to multiple union controversies.

Be that as it may, the cost to the state of these restructurings has been esti-
mated at 4 billion francs. It would appear, according to Jean Chauvet. that
while the Ministry of Industry has decided the extent of the aid it will provide
to the enterprises (in the different forms stipulated in the Plan), the Ministry
of the Budget and Finance has not yet agreed as to the extent to which it will
share in this cost.

The only thing one can urge at this pointin time seems to be the following: Let
us not repeat the errors of the past, distributing subventions that serve hardly
any purpose other than to keep failing enterprises afloat.

Three courses of action must be undertaken forthwith by governnent authorities:
Maintain or increase credit levels (transfer credits), beef up the MEGA Ad-
vanced-Design Machines and Equipment] procedure designed to help the 9MB 3
[Small- and Medium-size Businesses] acquire MOCN's [N/C machine tools], and last-
ly accelerate buying by the public authorities. hence by the national educational
system which at this time represents 1/20th of the market. In sum, demand first
and foremost must be stimulated, since in the present situation it is hardly
likely that a "Plan“ in and of itself will be crowned with success.

COPYRIGHT: a. a c. 1292

9399
C80: 3102/252

FOI‘OFFﬂjih.USE(NVLY
EVA URELDLM var. van...

TRANSPOKLATION

INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT OF AEROSPATIALB
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 19 Feb 82 p 107

[Interview with Jacques Hitterand, president of Aerospatiale, by Laurence
Masurel; date and place not specifieg

@cerptg @uestiog? How does it affect you to learn that Concorde will no
longer fly between Paris and Rio de Janeiro owing to unprofitibility?

[Answej I am not indifferent. I note that its use is shrinking, but that hap-
pily it continues on the north American route and will do so for a long time.

@uestioy- At present the financial situation of airlines is hardly bright.
But despite that, the Airbus is selling well?

linens? For 18 months almost all airlines have experienced grave difficulties.
Sc they are not thinking of renewing their fleets. He also observe a general
compression of orders. Yet in this gloomy content 1981 was a much better year
than for others. As of now, 159 aircraft have been delivered to 28 companies,
and 3‘46 will be, which brings the figure to 505 planes.

[Question-l Where does the Airbus 320 project stand?

[Answeg/ He are negotiating with several airlines, including Air France, to
give that program a solid launching base. We know that in 1987-88 all airlines
will have to replace the present generation of 150-passenger aircraft, barring
severe economic accident. The A 320 will correspond to that type of aircraft.
But before asking the final decision we want firm commitments from companies:
to build such a plane entails an investment of Pr 6 billion.

@uestiog? To face such expenditures, do you not think it will some day be
necessary to regroup the aeronautical sector, as was done in England or Germaa-
ny?

[Answes/ Actually, we can ask whether it would not be in the interest of France
to conduct a gradual restructuration of the aeronautical sector. For the mo-
ment, there is nothing like that in the government's program: the exposed por-
tion of the iceberg makes no mention of it. But is there a hidden face? In
my View, that would be in the logic of things. As far as I am concerned, I

11;
m onxcm. us: on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

would favor a policy of rapprochement, case by case and sector by sector. I
am thinkirg particularly of firms like Dassault, Hatra, Thomson, or SEP‘Zer:
pension unknowg/, which is an important affiliate of CUB ngpansion unknow5/.
I think such rapprochements by branches would be useful for a better distribu-
tion of research funds, and also for avoiding perpetuation of the domestic

fight for foreign markets. It would be a long-term task which should be con-
ducted with a solid dose of pragmatism.

[ﬁuestioé7 0n 5 December your tenure as president of Aerospatiale was renewed,
although certain trade unions of the group were calling for a "change" of men

at the top. The government has not, then, given satisfaction to the trade
unions?

ZEnsweﬁ? I am not the one who decided that I-would be kept on. I will not say
that there were people happy with me, but that those who wanted me to be re-

placed did not represent the majority, and that they did not have very clear
motivations.

[ﬁuestioﬁ7 Is it an advantage to be the president's brother when one directs
an enterprise such as Aerospatiale?

[Answeg/ The effects are complex. Hhat I notice is that I am listened to more
easilyo-which does not mean that I am understood! Some people would like to
make use of me as their spokesman to the president. I have no trouble resist-
ing. I have never been an intimate in the corridors of power. During my forty
f0ur and a half years of professional life I have always been very independent
of those in government, and I am not about to be changed now!

COPYRIGHT: 1982 par Cogedipresse S. A.

61#5
CSO: 3102/181

15
you orncm. use ONLY
BUR VERLULM Ut’b Vﬂhl

TRANSPORTATION

GCVERNHENT MES WNW AVAILABLE FOR m m STRAMY
Paris AIR 31' (1381408 in French 27 Feb 82 p 8

[my Netherlands Economic Affairs Minister Jan Terlouw last week addressed a
letter to the permanent economic affairs comittee of the Chamber in which he
pointed out that Fokker will not have to pay back the 160 million florins pro-
vided by the state for study of short/medium range aircraft. That sum is in

fact being applied to preliminary studies in which there is an element of risk
which cannot be borne by the builder.

From 1975 to 1982 an estimated 196 million florins were spent on studies for
the F 28 Super, F 29, and HDF-1OC, of which approximately 20 percent was fi-
nanced directly by Fokker and 80 percent by the state. Of that total, Fokker
has spent over 110 million florins provided by the Economic Affairs Ministry
through the intermediary_of the NIVR @etherlands Institute for Aeronautics and
Astronautics Developmeny. The balance was spent by the "LR (ﬁatimal Aeronau-
tics and Astronautics Laboratori, which also receives funds through the NIVR.

A comparable situation has already been experienced by the Netherlands authori-
ties in connection with the VIM 611+. For that program. which failed, 25 million
florins had to be written off.

For the future, the Netherlands Government remains disposed to make 1.? billion
florins available to Fokker in the form of guarantees and bank loans for execu~
tion of a project in anticipation of which Fokker has set up a study group with
the mission of defining in the coming weeks a new strategy for the firm. Mr
Terlouw declared that prospects will have to be quickly brought out so as to
determine under what conditions Fokker will be able to contiuL-e working in the
90's on complete aircraft projects.

For the moment, the halting of the [01" 100 program is not causing unemployment
problems at Fokker, but only at the MR. At Fokker the F 2? and F 28 programs
continue under more favorable conditions than were initially foreseen. The
Netherlands authorities consider that the decision to put an end to cooperation
between McDonnell Douglas and Fokker was the correct one from the time when it
appeared impossible to arrive at a rapid launching of the MD!" 100 project.
Fokker will have to resume conversations with Airbus Industries, Boeing, and
even McDonnell Douglas.

61115

2 8
6803 310/11 16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

A 310-”: HEAVER, WEB-WE Ams PLANNED
Paris AIR ET (”8&8 in French 2? Feb 82 p 11

[Article signed R. N_.7

lexg As the first A 310 emerged from the building shed (cf. AIR 31‘ 003106 no.
95), Airbus Industries made public a number of technical details on future
versions of the aircraft, and particularly on the long-range or A 310-300 ver-
sion.

He recall first of all that the A 310, though directly derived from the A 300
and having the same fuselage cross section, is nevertheless characterized by
the following modifications:

A shorter fuselage (106.66 1:: compared to 53.62 m for the A 300);
A new airfoil with less wing surface (219 m2 compared to 260 me;

New engines to be chosen by option from the same builders: General Electric
(CF6-80A1/A3‘) and Pratt and Whitney (JT9D—7RIOD1/E1). We note that Airbus In-
dustries is currently studying a new supplementary option constituted by Rolls-
Royce 123211-5398“ engines; -

A new forward-facing crew cockpit characterized by digital avionics and instru-
mentation with cathodic visualization;

A new quieter and more economical Garrett GTO? 331 APU [Expansion unknow57.

In its present basic version, called the 200, the A 300's "little brother" can
transport from 195 to 265 passengers (the typical layout is for 210 seats) up
to 5,000 km at a speed of Each 0.78 at 35,0CC ft altitude. Its minum weight
at takeoff is 132 tons, of which 1+3 tons is fuel. Also proposed at present
are a convertible A 510 0 version offering a 36.8 ton cargo capacity, and an
all cargo A 310 F "Freighter" version, already ordered by Hertinair, offering
a 210 m3 volume and a 39.4 ton capacity. These two versions are equipped with
a large cargo door 5.6 m wide by 2.6 In high. While keeping to the same lift
capacities, but in order to meet specific requirements of certain client com-
panies, Airbus Industries has decided to develop two other versions of the

A 310 to be characterized by greater takeoff weight, which would permit greater

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UV“ VbAbULM 09“ VAC“.

fuel capacity, with a consequent increase in range. Thus the so-called "ZOC
option" will soon appear, which will be actually proposed as such starting with
the 17th aircraft, and will be available to be taken up as chosen by the air-
lines. Its takeoff weight is increased to 138.6 tons, including 43 tons of
fuel, and its range could reach 5,900 km with 218 passengers. No structural
modification of the aircraft is necessary in view of the excellent optimiza-
tion of airfoil achieved for the A 310.

With the goal of further increasing the A 310's flexibility, Airbus Industries
is also studying a long-range 300 version. If sufficient interest is shown by
carriers in this new version, the decision to launch it could be taken during
the summer, which would permit first deliveries early in 1986. The A 310-300
this time will have a takeoff weight of 1119 tons, including 108 tons of fuel, an
increase of 5 tons over the standard version. Its range will be increased to
7,130 km with 218 passengers, which will make the A 310 particularly advantao
geous on southeast Asian routes.

Here again, the increase in characteristic masses would require no structural
modification, for the European builders are this time considering placement of
the additional fuel in the horizontal empennage, with a transfer system similar
to that adopted for Concorde, which would permit in-flight adjustment of the
aircraft's trim toward the stern. In addition to a substantial decrease in
wing load, this would also permit reduction of drag at cruising speed, which
would result in a 5 to 10 percent decrease in fuel consumption according to
Airbus Industries.

Payload-Range Curves of Different A 310 Versions: Left, With Pratt 8: Whitney
Engines; Right, With General Electric Engines:

MOMM

 

COPYRIGHT: A. a c. 1982

6th
080: 3102/181

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MSPOMA‘I'IW

FRANCO-ITALIAN ”PR ‘2 PM m '1”? 0m
Paris AIR (- cossos in French 11 Apr 32 p 13
[Article by J.ll.: "Ransose and Osmand Airways lave Chosen the A11! 42"]

[Text] 'No top Aserican counter airlines have just confined the options they
already held on the twin-turboprop AIR 42. Acting for the 618 [manque Interest
Group] 'Avions de rransport Regional“ (formed recentl by ABROBPATIALB (French)
National Industrial Aerospace Coupon?) and ARRI‘rALIA expansion unknown ). ABRO-
SPA‘rIALa announced successively on a and 12 April:

--A firn order from Ransom Airlines for six A'rR 42's. mese planes. which it is
known will be equipped to transport 46 passengers. will be delivered beginning

in Novesber 1985 and operated by this major U. 5. east coast carrier on a network
that presently serves ll large cities with no flights daily. Ransom Airlines.
formed ls years ago and based in Philadelphia. possesses currently a fleet of

six 4-engine turboprop DEC-1's built in Canada by De liavilland Aircraft. and nine
twin-turboprop u 262's built by ARMSPATIALB and in operation at Ransom since
1972. In its release, ABROSPA‘l'IALB deens that "this first order from Ransoaie
Airlines represents a major success for the An 02 over its cospetitors. The
interest being shown in this plane by Ransoee opens the way to the development of
the A11! family to include larger capacities."

The value of the Ransosle order is placed at 330 nillion.

--A firs order fros Comand Airways for three an 62's to be delivered beginning
in 1986, to which are added options on another two planes. Based in Poughkeep-
see (New York State), Comand Airways currently has six Shorts so 300's in ser-
vice on its New York-Boston-white Plains and Albany routes. We note with inter-
est, in passing, that the president of this cospany. Hr Kingsley Hora, is also
president of the newly-forsed RAAA Regional Airlines Association of America].
The an 42 has thus found in the On ted states a backer of woe weightl...

While the detailed design study of the plane continues (the target dates, which
remain unchanged. are: initial flights respectively August and October l9“:
European and American certification flights in accordance with Part 25 standards
during the third quarter of 1985; and deliveries to begin in the fourth quarter.
that is--in the case of Ransom-within 43 nonths), it is interesting to note

1
FOR OFFICIA9I. USE ONLY
me ("I'll IAI. “St. UNIX

we published on this plane in October 198l (see AIR ET 008108. No 878, then

881 and 882), wim respect to both its weight ratings and performance rat-
ings, and both for the better. The AEROSPATIM Aircraft Division's Design
Bureau in ‘ibulouse, which is carrying prime responsibility for the general archi-
tecture of the plane and of its airfoil, has been assigned the dual mission of
intensifying its efforts to raise the ATR 42's performance to the maximum and to
lower its cost of productioa to the minimum: In the severe cometitive struggle that
pits the two European builders against De Havilland Canada, Bnbraer, and the Saab-
Pnirchild and CASA [Aeronautical Construction Companyl-Nurtanio combines (without
forgetting Fokker. whi :h is studying a much-improved F 27), ABROSPATIALE and AERI-
TALIA nust absolutely come up with a product that offers the best possible price-
performance ratio at a fabrication cost that will ensure profitability within

a reasonable tine period. The design bureaus of both companies are actively en-
gaged in this mission.2

he cabin measures 13.87 m in length by 2.57 m at its maximum interior width by
1.91 m in height. It is pressurized at 6 psi [pounds per square inch] (420 g/cmz),
providing at an altitude of 13,500 feet a cabin atmospheric pressure equal to
that outside the cabin at ground level, and at 25,000 feet a cabin pressure equal
to that at 6,500 feet: Passengers will thus experience the same comfort they do
in the nest modern jets. This cabin will accoruodate ‘2 passengers seated in
rows of four (2+ 2) at 32-inch row spacings, or 46 passengers by reducing this
spacing to 30 inches, or 49 passengers by reducing slightly the volume (5.8 m3)
of the forward baggage compartment. In all cases, the ATR 42 will have, located
aft, a galley facility, a lavatory and a second baggage compartment measuring
2.7 m3; the latter is in addition to, let us recall, the hand-luggage racks
ranged above the seats and having a total volume of 1.6 m3.

Its weight ratings are sun-arized in the accompanying table. Two standard
versions are currently being offered: the ATR 42-100, capable of taking off at
14,175 kg and of transporting 42 passengers over a distance of 1,300 or four
185-km hops without refueling. and the ATR 42-200 (maxim weight: 15,500 kg),
capable of tranporting 49 passengers over a single hop of 1,450 km or five
lBS-km hops. Maximum takeoff weights have been increased substantially, pro-
viding greater flexibility of operation. Incidentally, we point out that the
Km 42-200 will have a range of around 1,550 nautical miles (2,070 km) with a
payload reduced to 3,000 kg and 2,200 nautical miles (4,075 km) with a payload
of 2,000 kg.

Information will be forthcoming on the characteristics and performance ratings
of the stretched NPR 42 (ATR xx), capable of transporting, in one of the versions
being considered, 5‘ passengers at seat-row spacings of 32 inches, and 58 passen-
gers at 30-inch spacings.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Other noteworthy points are:

--The retapering of the fuselage aft, slenderizing it to reduce form drag (its
overall length thus totals 22.70 m);

--The definitive choice of the propellers that will equip the two PW 100/2
turbomotors, each of which develops 1,800 shaft hp on takeoff at ISA+ 13 de-
grees C (2,000 hp in 'emergency'). These will be 4-bladed, 3.96-m diameter,
Hamilton Standard Type 14 SP'a.

Height and gypicgl Perforggnce Ratings of ATR 42's

 

Item 42- ATE ‘2-200

Maximum takeoff weight (kg) 14,715 15,550
Maximum landing weight (kg) 1d,715 15,300
maximum weight less fuel (kg) 14,105 14,465
Operational empty weight (kg) 9,295 9,335
Maximum payload (kg) 4,810 5,130
Maximum fuel (kg) 4,500 4,500
Maximum cruising speed1 (km/hr) 513 509
Cruising altitude (ft) 25,000 25,000
Cruising altitude on 1 engine2 (ft) 4,005 3,475
Takeoff runway length3:

at 2' 0 (m) 950 1,070

at 3,000 ft, 1834’10 (I) 1,150 1,280
Landing runway length 3 (m) 895 950

_____________________________________________________._________.
1) At 20,000 ft, ISA atmosphere.

2) At 97 percent of maximum weight, ISAﬁ-lo.

3) At maximum rated weight.
._______________________________________________________________

COPYRIGHT: A. s c. 1982

9399
C50: 3102/252 END

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY