FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10191
15 December 1981

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 18/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trsnsliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10191
15 December 1981

HORLMDE REPORT
Temcommcmous Poucv. RESEARCH AND 05waqu
(rouo 18/81)

Couteurs
SUB-SAHARA! AFRICA

IVORY COAST

Briefs
Television Programs 1

VEST EUROPE

ITALY

Present, Future Research in Telmtics Described
(Basilio Catania; WOMCA B WWICAZIOII. Jul-Aug 81; .. .. 2

- a - [III - WW - 140 2000]

FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

BRIEFS

TELEVISION PROGRAMS—Ivorian television began in 1963 and presently reception
extends to 90 percent of the land, totsl reception is planned for next year.
There are reportedly 250,000 TV sets in service and according to a survey the
most popular programs are the newscast (51 percent), movies and serinls (39 per-
cent). sports (25 percent) and s progrs- celled "Co-eat cs vs?" (18 percent)
which gives humorous solutions to everyday problels. [Excerpt] [Paris MARCHBS
TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1880. 20 Nov 81 p 2947] (comm:
Rene Dbl-em: et Cie Paris 1981]

C80: 5500/5633

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICIHHCJAI.US£(HULY

ITALY

PRESENT. FUTURE RESEARCH lN TELEHATICS DESCRIBED
Turin ELETTRONICA E TELECOHUNICAZIONI in Italian Jul-Aug 81 pp 142-148*

{Article by Dr Engr Basilio Catania. general manager of CSELT [Telecommunications
Research and Study Center]. Turin: "Status of Research on Telematics Technolo-
glek"; “Summary“ is as published in English]

[Text] Summary--Research activity on telematics in Italy.

In this article it is illustrated the state of the art of
research carried out in Italy in the field of telemetics,
with particular emphasis on CSELT studies. Expected
evolutions are taken into account with reference to dif-
ferent time situations. typical of the successive devel-
opments oi the telecommunication network. It follows a
description of the research in progress related to systems
and protocols for services such as videotex. fac-simile,
teletex, electronic mail. frozen-picture, recorded mes-

sages and other kinds of audioservices. In particular. the
use of the so-called INFOHIRE technique allows to supply

many of these services contemporaneously with the usual
telephone service. Finally. mention is made of both the
research concerning the future variable bandwidth network
(lSDN oi second generation) and the possible solution offered
by n hybrid structure (satellite/optical fibres), which could
anticipate and [or accelerate the supply of the above men-
tioned services with respect to a situation based on a

lully-terrestrial network.

Research in telematics is being carried out in Italy under programs defined by
the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications together with the SIP [Italian Tele-
phone Company]. with technical and scientific support being provided by the lSPT

[Post and Telecommunications Research Center], the CSBLT and the lordoui Founda-
tion. This article will refer essentially to the research being done at the

* Editor's notes : Frnm lhv "Telomntics '81" presentation held at the Milan
Exhibition [5 April 1981.

Typescript received 2 June 1981.

2
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
F0!‘OFFK]AI.USE(NNLY

CSELT, coemiaaioned for the most part by the SIP, ITALTBL and recently

by the SEAT. This research is directed toward satisfying the service require-
ments relative to three different situations, not phased as of now with respect
to each other and dependent upon future development of the telecommunications
network. These situations (diagramed in Fig 1) may be characterized as follows:

--Phase 1: Services capable of being provided by the existing telephone network
when supplemented by the packet- and circuit-switching data network, actualiza-
tion of which is to be completed in the near future;

--Phase 2: Services capable of being provided in fully digitalized form after
digitalization at 80 kilobits/sec (6a .16) of the existing distribution network,
which is to follow the nationwide expansion of the necessary switching exchanges
and digital transmission systems that will aCtualize the first generation of the
so-called lSDN [Integrated Services Digital Network];

--Phase 3: Services capable of being provided in the future by a network able to
adjust its performance characteristics to fit the bandwidth, extensive though it
may be, required by the user; that is, by a second-generation ISDN.

The telematics services described in this article deal essentially with the first
two of these phases, with emphasis on the desired objective of rendering viable
the change from Phase 1 to Phase 2. specifically as contemplated by the system
known as FILOINFORHAZIONE. The latter system, a practical demonstration of which
was given during the presentation, makes it possible to provide telematics ser-
vices with the present telephone and data network structure (Phase 1), supplemen-
ted by a few accessories but substantially unchanged as regards terminals, ser-
vice exchanges and access procedures from the moment in which the network becomes
iully digitalized and integrated into the services (Phase 2).

in particular, this article will discuss the research in progress on the equin-
meut and procedures contemplated for Phases 1 and 2 mentioned above, in
relation to the known services they can make available, namely, videotex (known
in Italy as VIDEOTEL), facsimile, teletex, electronic mail. slow-scan video,
recorded messages and various audio services, etc, defined as telematics services,
although a very precise definition of these services has not been arrived at
internationally as yet.

Lastly. nwnticn will be made of some research relative to a variable-bandwidth
network (second-generation ISDN) and to a possible solution by way of a hybrid
satellite—optical liner structure. which (nuld antecede and/or accelerate an
entirely terrestrial solution to Phase 3.

"Filninlormnzione" (which has been named "lnfowire" in English) is a method
developed by the CSELT to provide interactive data services by means of two 16-
kilobit/sec channels. in simultaneity with telephone service. In particular,
videotex service can be provided in accordance with the British Prestel system
without any changes except insofar as concerns the methoo of insertion at the
exchange and at the subscriber terminal.

3
Fill(lﬁﬂ(JAl.US£(3NlN
FOItOFFHJAl.US£(NVLY

Figure 2 illustrates the operating principle with respect to the short-term
situation (Phase I). At the subscriber end, the telephone signal, which occupies
the 0-th2 portion of the band. is mixed with the data signal (as well as. in the
overall case. the chargeable-time indicator at 12 kHz and the broadcast program
signal carried above 163 kHz) by means of a signal insertion set. The data sig-
nal modulates digitally (using FSK [frequency-shift keying] modulation) the two
carriers. positioned respectively at 27.5 and 52.5 kHz. In this manner. the
various signals do not disturb each other and the subscriber can simultaneously
use his telephone. his broadcast service and teletex service, as well as videotex
or other telematits service requiring a bidirectional lb-kilobit/sec channel.

At the exchange. a similar device extracts the telematica signals. which are then
channeled into the local services exchange or. via a leased-facilities network,
to the distant services exchange, while the telephone signals are channeled into
the normal switched network.

The simultaneity of telephone and data services made possible by the Filowire sys-
tem must not be underestimated. above all because of the availability requirements
in LJSOS oi emergency that have always contradistinguished telephone service
throughout the world. Far from secondary also is the advantage of the simultan-
eous availability oi both types of service under normal conditions as well to the
various members oi the family of a normal subscriber.

Figure 3 shows a typical videOtex subscr.ber terminal consisting of a color
television set (prewired for this service) that provides, for example. weather
iniormation at the same time that the telephone is being used for a conversation.
At the lower right of the photograph is shown a prototype card for the insertion/
modem set that is installed at the subscriber end.

During the Telematits '81 presentation a practical demonstration was given of the
use of iilowire service. obtained from a services exchange installed in the CSELT
in Turin and consisting of a PDPll/60 computer containing the data bank with
seVeral videotex tiles prepared purely for demonstration purposes. The services
exchange was connected to the exhibition hall by a dedicated SIP hBOO-bits/sec
line terminating in a suitable interface circuit which, under normal conditions
would have been installed in an exchange.

1he desired file is selected by using the television set's normal remote control
keyboard.

By way 0! example. we will go through the steps necessary to obtain the desired
inlurmation display.

Initially, the television set displays the words:

THE SYSTEM 18 READY
SELECT A FILE

h
FII!(HWﬂ(1AI.lEﬂE(MULY
FOIIOFtﬂJAI.U§EiJNLY

Pressing key f (request tor main file index) displays the index; then selecting,
for example, and pressing key 1 displays the file:

HEATHER AND ROAD CONDITIONS

Of course. should it be desired at this moment to initiate a telephone call
simultaneously it can be done, and, during that call. exact-time service. for
example. can also be obtained by dialing the 161 code on another telephone instru-
ment connected to the same "bight" as the television set, and, as was demonstrated
at the presentation. the two services can be provided without interfering with
each other.

Coming back to iniowire. key 2 may be selected:
MAX AND MIN TEMPERATURES

thus displaying a geographic map of Italy showing maximum temperatures, after
which key 6 (continuation) may be pressed to display a map like the previous one
but showing minimum temperatures.

Pressing key I again will bring back the main index and other files may be selec-
ted. and so on.

Canada. the United States and France are currently experimenting with network
solutions similar to infowire. while other European nations (Germany, Holland and
Japan [as publishedl) are experimenting with solutions of the British type, that
is. with switching that will provide telephone or videotex services but only on
an alternate basis.

It is emphasized that the infcwire system is structured for assured compatibility
with the future network to be integrated into the services (Phase 2). In fact,
the solution based on the present network (Fig 6‘, as has been said. makes it
possible to transmit the a-kﬂz telephone-band signals as well as the telematics
services (videotex. facsimile. teletex or other data services) via the normal
telephone "bight" to a conventional telephone exchange, equipped, however. with

a suitable interluce device, toward services exchanges and the data network.

As soon as the distribution network is digitalized (Pig 5), the telephone signal
will be coded at 66 kilobits/sec and multiplexed with the telematics services

by means oi a component called a CT! (Circuit Terminating Equipment or subscriber
terminating set) enabling a bidirectional 6h +16 = 80-kilobits/sec digital stream.

At the exchange. the stream will be subdivided into its two components, which
will be channeled respectively into the digital telephone network and. through a
suitable set of equipment (called an at [Data Processing Computer]). into ser-
vices centers or the data leased-facilities network. Thus. no change will be
required as regards terminals on subscriber premises (an important consideration,
since new services can be phased in beginning now without impediment from this

5

FOIIOFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
INJRlOFFTCJAl.lEﬂE(MNLY

sidndpuinl). the ﬂuid networks and the services centers, and--again a not negli-
gible consideration--us regards the subscriber distribution network. which will
however be interfaced on both sides by new modems, to which we will refer later.

Figure 6 shows a prototype of a CTE designed and built by the CSELT, photo-
graphed near a vidcodata terminal with keyboard. As regards the modems, three
different types are currently being evaluated, as is being done moreover in other
international laboratories:

--A time-division (ping pong) type (Fig 7). presently being tested on live traffic
facilities in the SIP network. with satisfactory results;

--A frequency-division type (Fig 8), currently being tested under laboratory
Conditions. also with satisfactory results;

--An echo-suppressor type. operation of which has been fully computer-simulated.
enabling the executnry process to begin.

As we have thus seen, research aimed at making available telematics services under
solutions relative to the above-cited Phases 1 and 2 is at a well-advanced stage.
It nust be pointed out. however, that both solutions are dependent upon actuali-
zution of the packet- and circuit-switching data network, which, however. as

was stated at the beginning of this article. should be completed within a few
years, according to the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications and the 5!?

(Fig 9).

The CSELT has contributed to this actualization with--besides detailed system
studies and support provided to the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications and
SIP in the drawing up of specifications—-the design and building of the so-called
ACP lPacket Adapter-Concentrator], which provides the interface between the
packet-switching data network and the so-cailed "access network.“ that is, from
the normal telephone. telex and leased-facilities networks by "packet" subscri-
bers. The importance of this equipment is evident if one considers the number

of such sets of equipment that will have to be used in the network: Each of these
sets can handle a maximum 66 active terminals simultaneously.

The AC? has many lunctlons. Besides collecting the traffic from the access net-
work. if adapts the language of the subscriber terminals to that of packet trans-
mission and switching. or, "X25 Procedure." and concentrates the traffic at high-
capnrily junctures. enabling facility-utilization factors l0 to 100 times greater
than those obtainable with circuit-switching systems. Moreover. the ACP being

a stri component equipped with memory, it can function as a "flow control,“ that
is. carry out all the functions necessary to avoid overloads (hence potential
losses of data) both in the network and at subscriber terminals.

The "X28 Procedure" has been developed to enable connecting up to the AC? 85 per-
cent of the asynchronous character terminals presently on the Italian market and
the synchronous ones (that is. with x25 Procedure) that are becoming increasingly
widely available.

6
FOR OIITCJAI.US£10NLY
PtIIUUlﬂJAl.Ual1MVLI

Figure in shows the prototype designed and built by the CSELT in collaboration
with ITALTEL. and already delivered to ITALTBL. on the basis of which it will be
further engineered after the requisite positive results have been obtained in

the field tests it is rurrently undergoing between Turin (CSELT) and Castelletto
(lTALTEL).

In ad ‘ion to the types of equipment described thus far. which are essentially
systt onents related to successive Phases 1 and 2. the CSBLT is actively
engage. 'esearch on terminals and on exchange equipment specifically intended
to enabling the oilering of certain telematics services.

One of these services is the so-called slowhscan video service (Fig ll). which
can transmit fixed or slowly-updatable images. useful for supervisory monitoring
(e.g.. traffic. intrusion. telemedicine. banking applications. etc). as well as
for visual aid to audio or videoconference proceedings (transmission of slides).
The equipment currently being tested by the CSBLT permits the transmission of
froaen-images over an analog telephone line at speeds of 4.2 or 9.6 kilobits/sec
and over digital lines at 66 kilobits/sec. Update times can be varied from 32
seconds with no reduction of redundancy. hence with very high quality. down to
1/2 second with heavy reduction of redundancy, requiring toleration however of a
consequent reduction in quality of the received image.

Lastly. with reference to message recording service. this is presently in study
stage with respect solely to telephony. In this regard. it should be noted that
many telematics services could be provided simply via audio facilities to those
subscribers who might wish to have only a telephone terminal. and no other kind.
connected into the network; this will be possible as soon .5 the techniques of
voice synthesis and recognition. in which the CSELT has already obtained inter-
esting results. are sufficiently perfected and become economically viable.

Message recording service (Fig 12) provides-~besides delayed transmission of mes-
sages--telephonic secretarial service. the recording of calls and intercept ser-

Vice.

The subscriber accesses the system either by dialing a special number for de-
layed message service. or automatically for all the other services.

The system furnishes instructions to the subscriber by way of telephoned proce-
dural announcements, and receives information by way of the keyboard or the disk
(or. if the system does not accommodate use of the disk. by way of numbers pro-
nounced by the subscriber and recognized by the word-recognizing equipment).

Analog or digital telephony undergoes a 6 to 1 compression (16 kilobits/sec) and
is recorded in digital form in magnetic disk equipment.

The system control coordinates the blocks and handles the index-filing of the
reCnrding.

Retrieval of the recorded message may be accomplished by subscriber interrogation
oi the system ("Have you any messages for me ") or by automatic followup by the
system ("1 have a message .0 repeat to you.").

7
FOI:0FFKJAL.USB(NVLY
FOI‘DFFKJAl.USE(NVLY

The mass-memory requirement tor a large urban network. and brsed on duplicating
every message (thet is. recording it on two separate disks for greater security),
is estimated at around 5,”)0 megabytes, if recording is done at 16 kilobits/sec.

Experimental development oi this system has already started for the account of
SIP. an' all concerned. except the government, have been made ready for it. The
system is to be field tested together with many of the devices planned for the
actualization of Phase 2 (CTE, digital modems and infowire) in conjunction with
the digital exchange (UTlO/3) that is now in the pilot production stage by
ITALTEL. Following this test, other tests will be carried out in conjunction
with traditional electromechanical exchanges.

what has been said until now relates to the status of networks cc:responding to
Phases 1 and 2. and from what has been said it is clear that studies are present-
ly at a very advanced stage. solutions sufficiently defined, and moreover that
the transition iron Phase I to Phase 2 is planned in such a way as to produce

the least possible waste 0! resources.

The same cannot be said ol the transit'on from Phase 2 to Phase 3; that is, from
operation substantially at 80 kilobits/sec to operation based on variable-within-
very-wide bandwidth service requirements (up to bandwidths of several tens of
megabits/sec). The tact is that in this case copper-wire distribution network
can no longer be used and resort will have to be made to optical fibers; further-
more. optical fibers will probably have to be used in the premises of business
subscribers as well. with time-division ring structures, for example. and with
CTE equipment of newer design and in general smarter; there will be no reason,
however, to replace existing terminal equipment, but merely to increase its
numbers and types in accordance with the further new service requirements.

As regards switching exchanges. it is clear that even :he mod-tn digital ex-
changes being planned by the first-generation ISDN will be unsuited to the hand-
ling oi the wideband and at the same time variable bandwidth traffic, and that
switching centrals oi a new conception will have to be resorted to.

Lastly. the medium- and long-distance networks will also find themselves in
trouble. having as they will to handle substantially increased traffic loads
with variable bandwidth choraCteristiCs and a rate of evolution with time that
will depend heavily upon the growth in demand for such types of services, con—
sisting initially with that on the part of "business subscribers."

[I is highly probable therefore that regenerative satellites with on-board switch-
lng will play a determinative role. as much from the standpoint of more favor-
able access techniques as from that of flexibility of interconnection with
subscribers as a whole (irregularly dispersed. from a topographical standpoint).
and lrom that ol laster deVelopment and placement in service.

Several long-term trailic lorecasts compiled recently estimate traffic in Phase 3
at a little less than one order of magnitude greater than in Phase 2 (even though
the luture involved is rather distant). Based on this. it appears inevitable

8
FOIfHHﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
Ful¢lﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NNLY

that the network required lor Phase 3 must grow out of and be piggy-backed on
that oi Phase 2. perhaps using only its available civil works infrastructure
(buildings. underground ducts, etc).

Investment requirements relative to Phase 3 are estimated to be very high and
the managers of telecommunications networks will therefore be confronted by
far lrom easy planning problems in trying to satisfy these future demands,
which are being placed at somewhere beyond the 1990's.

Advanced studies are in progress at the CSELT with respect to all the components
of this future wideband network. and specific studies are in progress on methods
of ring interconnections at different topological hierarchies; on distributed.
variable-within-wideband bandwith exchanges; on interconnection of second-genera-
tion terminals with vide0tonference and videoservice systems in general; and on
integration between terrestrial and satellite networks. In this sector, the CSBLT
is currently participating. from the national standpoint, in the Campus NET [ex-
pansion unknown] program sponsored by the CNR [National Research Council],

and. lrom the European standpoint. in the 836's COST [expansion unknown] 202

pragrnm.

An idea can be had lrom what has been presented in this article of the research
eiiort presently being deployed in the field of telematics. It appears from this,
moreover. that this national effort is very much in line. as regards quantity as
well as quality. with that of other international laboratories of high standing.

9
IND! OFFICIAL USI:(HVLY
FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEINVLY

.uouucauu ouuo ooonunzmma
.oocououcoooova>

.zamn :ouuauocomlucoovu

6533303;

.n wanna

.ooo«> aﬂoaIIOAm

.2352 “338 3338 03.33:: 28”
.uou ocosncaou H00u0mo

.omoa caucus. N ooosm

.xuoauoc sumo

.uwucoo moou>uom

.connnunocouu can oeuzouu3o aquamuo.uuam
.Ouuaoucu

.uuao

.uuﬂﬂ— O‘COHUOOHH

.u00u>uum moauaaoaoa

.UOm swuuﬂwCH

422 332.38%: ~ 32:

.aacaauou sumo

.xuoaum: uconmoauu ocuocc

.uum ozonaoauu mauocz
.Aucououa. 0 0.02m

.NN
.Hw
.o~
.oa
.ou
.ha
.OA
.ma
.va
.na
.NA
.AA
.oa
.a
.m
.r
.0
.m
.v
.m
.N
am

”>0:

thug-’31 ‘
:3 SI}. 7 .

 

10

FOR 0FF1C1AI.USE(MNLY
'0“ OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

$3.58 (3003 0:60.95
.33

. Jay-62:3 3339310328

$8.338.
onusso ﬂauanOl-oz

. 3.3.52. «33:03:00.1!»

.6093“... so:
nan deem-no» hoot—0033

2—05-33 33>
2—05.33 030088
.ocunuuouuso - 6.»

.3330: 00203.6
50:20.6

Jo- c3335

.nd
.Nd
1:
.0.—
.a
.9

.5
.o
.n
.v
.n
.N
in

”an:

  

          

        

33:83 :13
7.... In 3:35 c 8

. saga
in! :5 13.3.: oil-2.

.2. 33m» .3

and.)
_ Wm

I ‘I'll

           

all“. m INN!)

4.3:...«3 . as

A

A:

_ 33...)..3

O:-
sight-1N.

 

11

FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080045-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig 3-view of subscriber terminal f
videotex service using infant

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080045-0
PW UPIILIAL ”I. URL!

:narucco O’UVINTI AINUMIOO
-CENNIO SIIVRt
:CiﬂﬂlALI 1IIMIIL£
:lﬂ‘lﬂlﬂFun‘o‘ﬂﬂﬂhluﬂlllﬂl
:MYEMI’I
:" mum

It?! a CONNISSKII A

 

Key:

1. Data terminal.

2. AU- Subscriber analog ternination.

3. C88 Services center.

;. C‘r- Terminal exchange.

5. ID- Out-of-band 16-kilobita/aec bit atrean insertion set.
6. 80- Data network.

7. R‘r-Transit network.

8. Space-division connecting network.

9. «RR: analog- plus- 16 kilobite/aec.

10. Interface coeponent.

Pig 4-Conpatibility of infovire system with the
future first-generation 1508 (Phase 2).

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
     
    
     
   

- inacoo comm
(3)cs : cum seam:
(new : cumuu um

(5) cu : - ° nan-«2m woman
(6)" : rueonton u tunumno om
(1)» - um om

-- oc numno

-- on cmmauvm no unto

1. Data terminal.

2. A!)- Subscriber termination.

3. CS- Serviceo center.

4. CT- Terminal. exchange.

5. m: Subscriber terninatione exchange.
6. er- Data processing cal-pater.

7. ROI-Data network.

8. RT-‘l‘raneit network.

9. Tine-division connecting network.

Pig 5-Schenatic of access network into first-
generation ISBN ambit (Phase 2).

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
...253- niacul
142- co Basal-:0: no. .008
S—n.>:v|>ocoa7t; no R—xuouOun Ir OT—
POI OMCIAI. USE ONLY

.3323: 08.0!“- aﬂoaanvlzog I29 .
3.3533 98.02. wick—non}: n39 .
.3255.» nouocucsonua .

.02.: 030398 .

30:: 00:03.5 .

3.332.. 9.39:: .

3.330... 33323.3 .

. 32.: 9.383%

.xuaou .aconagou. xuozuoc 0&002 .

unvmov~oo

v-I

53:00 coca—.3503 93 2.80023: leg .2
33:00 0068.358. .5 .

.32. ocmnuuutouuoxoam I82 .
.uOuauucoocOOIuouaa—i 09.03 :54 .

“>0:

2.22823... 0 23:30 .9 9:50 102

2.220ch .9 2.50 so.

9:288 a. 2.335.538 o one: 8.:

5283 08.2.5980 .2883: 81
.3335... 3.3 8.282. 0 32.6.0... «2.
7:23:25 38.: 0:238 a 3258....»

23.23. a agftp o:

3383 mu? illle.
3:318 3:: [/13

lawn 0&2:
.xuawb
.(UiOuuuuL
88004

3.39..

gNiEhma
Ud¢03Wh08 .OA Nuwuc

.mOuucoo luuaam

$3.0! can: Rahal—03
$03.58: 9.03
.8350: 5300580235
.8380... 330508.

£030.69.
:63 9:. 8233333

.000». 050303 coon-0:
.u-aaooluoooouoonau So...
.2: 0222

.0: 5533.: 0:0 :35
09.2.0.3 02.95003
320:0 33550303003

.ad
.AA
.0»
.0
.o

.5
.0
.m
.0
.n
.N
.A

“>02

.63“!
.N‘prawﬂ A 0v

as who. U
(8104.” Wu 2.

 

19710 by ERI-EDIZIONE RAI RADIUI'ELEVISIONB ITALIAIA

COPYRIGHT:

END

9399

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5500/2025

C80: