FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10305
5 February 1982

East Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL U$E ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
neripapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
POLAND

EAST EUROPE REPORI

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(F000 2/82)

CONTENTS

'THE TIMES' Reports on Halese's 'State of Mind'
(TF3 Tm, 17 we 81) OOOOOOOOOOOOOCOQOIOOOCIOOICOOOOCIII

UK Correspondent's Letter on Polish Arrests Noted
(Roger BoyeS; THE TIMES, 18 Dec 81) ooooeeoooooooeoooooeoe

UK Correspondent's Letter on Whrsav Situation Noted
(Roger Boyes; THE TIMES, 18 Dec 81) ......................

UK Correspondent Reports on Polish Strikes, thesa
(Roger Boyes; THE Tm, 18 me 81) OOOOOOOOOOICCOOIOOIIOOI

UK Correspondent Reports on Conditions in Whrsaw
(Roger Boyce; THE TM, 22% 81) OCOOOIOCOCIOOOOOOOOOOO
'THE TIMES' REPORTS ON HALESA'S 'STATE OF HIND'
PH1712k5 London THE TIMES in English 17 Dec 81 p 6
[Unsttributed report: "The Strain on Lech Halesa"]

[Text] Hr Lech Haless, the Solidarity leader, is said by church sources who

have seen him to be in good health and still held in isolation in a Government
villa outside Warsaw. according to one of the messages reaching THE TIMES yester-
day from its correspondent in Warsaw. Roger Boyes.

The Church sources said Mr Halesa had told the military he could not take any
decisions without the rest of the Solidarity Praesidium.

There were conflicting accounts of Mr Halesa's state of mind. Solidarity offi-
cials were describing his as ”psychologically strong." But Polish officials
declared that he was "broken psychologically and weeping, but refusing to sign
any documents." Hr Brian Mooney, Reuter correspondent. quoted sources saying
that he was suffering greatly from the political and psychological pressure
being brought to beer.

The sources said that Mr Unless, taken to Harssw from Gdansk to negotiate with
Poland's new military rulers. was suffering greatly froa the political and
psychological pressures being brought to bear.

According to these sources. the Solidarity leader had conceded that his movement,
which he had once boasted was "here to stay," was all but finished. There was
no hard information about Mr Halesa's present whereabouts or whether he was
formally under detention like the great majority of other union leaders.

Mr Eugeniusz Szleper. the Polish Ambassador in Lisbon, denied yesterday that
Mr Halesa was under arrest. "But at the disposal of the authorities to partici-
pate in serious negotiations."

There were conflicting accounts of Mr Walesa's state of mind. Polish officials
were declaring that he was "broken psychologically and weeping, but refusing to
sign any documents." Solidarity officials, however, were describing him as
"psychologically strong."

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’UK UI'IILIAI. Dbl. URL!

Although Solidarity leaders would not be tried, the source went on, this did not
apply to former political figures who would be tried for having led the country
to ruin.

Polish diplomats in the Best were saying that the detained Solidarity leaders
sould not be tried.

"They have been placed under house arrest." the source told the news agency, "in
order to stop telporarily their activities which were directly leading to a
clash."

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Lilited. 1981

C80: 2020/20

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UK CORRESPONDENT'S LETTER 0N POLISH ARRESTS NOTED
PH181243 London THE TIMES in English 18 Dec 81 pp 1, 25
[Roger Boyes 'Letter to Editor': "Cold Cells for the Thousands Who Brr"]

[Text] Harsaw--The following letter to the editor from Roger Boyes, THE TIMES
correspondent in Warsaw, was received in London yesterday:

Poland's new military leadership is rounding up several thousand dissident
intellectuals. writers, and union activists in an effort to stamp out any

potential opposition. Western diplomats talk of 15,000 arrests but other sources
have estimated the total to be at least three times that.

Church sources say that there is a move to concentrate as many of the internees
as possible in the Bialeleka [Bialoleka] jail outside Warsaw. Conditions are
said to be extremely bad with most cells having no water or heating. The
prisoners are technically "interned under the statutes of the state of war"

and most have not been charged.

It is sufficient grounds for arrest, to be suspected of future involvement in
opposition activities. That has created a particularly wide net and secret

police. often backed by troops, have been extremely active after the 10 o'clock
curfew over the past four days.

Almost all the Solidarity leadership has been arrested—-98 union activists are
held in Gdansk--though there are mixed reports about the fate of Mr Lech Helena,
still technically the chairman of Solidarity. Sane sources, within the Church,
say he is being held virtually inconnunicado in a Government villa outside
warsaw--in a snuggled message he is understood to have said: "I see only trees
and tanks"-while other reports suggest he has since been saved to prison.

Long-Standing Ambition

The pattern underpinning the arrests is to deny the nascent opposition any kind
of base. either within the Church or intellectuals. Journalists and writers

who could have written critical panphlets have been arrested, including the
deputy chairman of the Polish Pen Club. PAX, the Catholic intellectual organiza-

tion. has been dissolved. and other Catholics outside the organization have been
arrested.

~
3 \\

IIIICNﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
TUK Ul‘l‘ll IAL UDI. UI‘LI

Host members of XOR, the Horkcrs' Self-Defence Committee--effectively Solidarity's
think tank--are being held, a long-standing ambition of the Polish Government

eVen in its most reformist mood. Historians, sociologists, and philosophers

from the Academy of Sciences have been detained after trying to stage a sit-in,
and organizers of the dissident seminar, "Flying University," active in the
mid-1970's have also been arrested. although it has not been active for some time.

Students active in the 1976 riots-now frequently young professional people
without any strong political 1eanings—-have also been picked up. However, it
is significant that the security forces have not arrested any deputies from the
Sejm, the Polish Parliament.

The Military Council of National Salvation, as the new leadership has named
itself, rules with and through the Council of Ministers. That isto say. most
ministers have kept their portfolios. But under normal circulstances govern-
mental decisions would have to be submitted to the critical scrutiny of the
Sejm, which has developed considerable independence over the past year and
indeed has shown sympathy with Solidarity.

The military leadership has eliminated this problem by cancelling the scheduled
sessions of the Sejm and this in turn allows it to preserve a semblance of
respect for constitutional niceties and removes the need to arrest deputies.
The big problem lies with the reformist wing of the Party.

General Jaruzelaki had represented, until about two weeks ago, a source of
qualified optimism; here at least was a Party chief who swore by dialogue with
Solidarity and the Church. Now the reformers are an embarrassment for the
regime. Economic reform, in the sense of decentralization, will almost cer-
tainly be abandoned and political reform is almost inconceivable in a situation
where the ruling party has a minimal say in the running of the country.

Reformists in the Party fear the worst and reformists close to but outside the
Party--such as Mr Stefan Bratkovsky [Bratkowski], the President [chairman] of

the Union of Journolists--are understood to be in hiding. A full scale confronta-
tion will mean a continuation of the internment prograame.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1981

C80: 2020/20

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UK CORRESPONDENT'S LETTER 0“ WARSAW SITUATION NOTED
PHl8126l London THE TIMES in English 18 Dec 81 p 8
[Roger Boyes 'Letter to Editor': "At Least the Tank is Polish-Outside Hy Vindow"]

[Excerpt] Warsaw~-The following letter to the editor from Roger Boyes, THE TIMES
correspondent in warsaw. was received in London yesterday:

I'm afraid I'm having to send you this in rather unconventional form. It's one
of a series and I only hope you're getting my other letters. Mainly colour.
Tucked into a discreet corner of Harsaw where the world seems an infinity of
overpopulated tower blocks and under-used factories. there is a snowbound 155
tank. one of the few in the Polish capital. "At least it's Polish," a Pole tells
me. the meaning distinct enough.

There is a curious air of strained normality about the town; the military have
not become a simple fact of life as in Belfast, but neither have they seriously
interrupted the daily ebb and flow of existence. Shops and banks admittedly
find it hard to operate but this is because of the telex and telephone blachwmut
rather than any intrusive military presence.

The queues are still there--longer if anything-ofor food and almost every product
apart from petrol, private sales of which are now banned. The first instinct
has been to stock-pile for the winter and worse.

But the troops. most of them from out of town. have moulded themselves surpris-
ingly quickly to the contours of city life. Steel-helmeted police direct
traffic, check identity cards, search the backs of vans for Solidarity leaflets.
Red-bereted paratroops--who took over the State radio station on Saturday
night-~guard key institutions such as the Sejm (Parliament).

Troops with batons and naked bayonets patrol the streets to enforce the 10 pm
to 6 an curfew. Officers read the news on television, soldiers in plain clothes
run the bus and tram system. -

There are signs. though. that all these functions are over-straining the Army;
it has an active force of only 210,000 or so and yet has to perform a dual role:
Prove itself to be a competent governing force capable of giving the population

what it wants while at the same time acting as a forceful guarantor of law and
order.

5
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IV“ Us a swan.- Uuu Vusua

The conflict of interest that this produces can be seen in the countryside. The

aruy seens to be planning to bring plentiful or at least sufficient food into
the shops by Christmas, yet can only do this by putting pressure on the far-ere.

If it fails to produce the goods, the populace say well end up blaming the Army

for the shortages and the uneasy truce between townships and their protectors
will wither away. This dileusa has been posed by the Party.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Lilited, 1981

C80: 2020/20

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UK CORRESPONDENT REPORTS ON POLISH STRIKES, "ALESA
PH181239 London TBE TIMES in English 18 Dec 81 p 8
[Report by Roger Boyes: ”Spontaneous Strikes Defy Military Solution"]

[Text] Poland is still wracked by spontaneous labour unrest despite the efforts
of the new military leadership to cordon off and at times forcefully break up
sit-ins and strikes at factories throughout the country. This situation has
been at least partially admitted by the official media which have reported con-
tinuing "irresponsible acts" by workers.

The inundiate difficulty in judging the scope of the strike wave is the country's
shift system. The authorities will often report that they have cleared a strike
but within hours there is a change of shift. The new workers then enter the
factory and a substantial part of the old shift are persuaded to stay.

This confusion goes some way towards explaining the conflicting reports emerging
from the Lenin Shipyards in Gdansk about the strike, which has either been
successfully ending (according to the officials) or is sporadically continuing
(according to Solidarity sources).

But it is clear that there is considerable unrest not only in the traditionally
maverick factories-~Nowa Huts in Crakow [Krakow], Huts Warssawa in Harsaw--but
also in the coal mines in Silesia and in Poznan, Lodz, Hroclsw, Radon. and
Katowice.

The pattern of breaking the strikes is that troops. usually backed by armoured
personnel carriers, surround the factories, the factory management relays an
ultimatum to the strikers and without any delay for negotiations, the soldiers
then go in.

There have been no reports of serious injuries and. apart from conflicting
reports from Crakow, shooting seems to have been avoided.

At the ﬂows Huts Steel Dorks. some travellers report as many as six people shot.
while other reports state that there was shooting but only above the heads of
the crowd. Foreign correspondents, who apart from a telex and telephone black-
out. have been banned from leaving Warsaw, have been unable to confirm the
stories one way or another.

7
IN)! OFIICJAL UBEZ(MVLY
01!“ \II s u ans. nus. ensue

The only lasting solution is the closing down of the factories concerned. The
military have done this at the Ursus Tractor Factory. e traditional source of
worker militancy.

But this only creates more problems than it solves. The Army clearly cannot
close down every factory in the country!

This [is] particularly evident in the coal mines of Silesia, where some 20 pits
are out of action.

All of this points to a role of some sort for Solidarity, the trade union, which
is facing serious inhibitions on its activities.

Hr Lech Halesa, the leader of Solidarity, although in Government hands, is
insisting that he will only make a decision on the union's attitude to martial
law, with the full Prsesidium of the union. which implies that a number of the
interned activists would have to be released.

The Roman Catholic Church too. though careful not to attack the new leadership.
has called for the release of the interned, for the freedom of the union to
operate within its legsl bounds, and for the continuation of the process of
democratic renewal.

There are thus clear bounds on the military--economic. religious. and the simple
inability to cope with all of its various tasks. But the military is seeking
in the first instance a military solution.

The Communist Party seems to have disappeared,'st least temporarily. from the
political landscape and the Army seems to be content to solve the national
problems by simple military means.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited. 1981

C80: 2020/20

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UK CORRESPONDENT REPORTS ON CONDITIONS IN WARSAH
PH221561 London THE TIMES in English 22 Dec 81 pp 1, 22
[Roger Boyes dispatch: "Poles Adjust to the Pace of change"!

[Excerpts] Warsaw, 21 Dec (censored)-Life. never easy in Poland. has taken
on new complexity in the past few days. Officially, the country has entered a
period of normalization and the Poles are adjusting to the new ground rules of
everyday existence.

There is still a degree of confusion about the present, anxiety and some fear
about the future. and the past is no longer a suitable subject for discussion.

Soldiers and armoured vehicles are seen in the streets but it is not possible

to discuss them in any detail. Soldiers too can be seen on the only functioning
television channel--not only as programme announcers but also as heroes in the
patriotic war films that have been showing every night since Sunday, December 13.
These depict Polish soldiers defending the motherland. often from invasion by
German soldiers during the Second World "at.

State television has also been relating the biographies of some of the interned
Solidarity leadership. The television. for example. raised questions about the
wartime activity of the family of Mr Jan Rulewski, once on the extremist wing
of the union. The overall effect was not flattering to Mr Rulewski, especially
for an audience particularly sensitive to patriotic values.

A recent article in TRYBUNA LUDU. the Party organ, however, gave a far more
charitable view of Mr Lech Walesa. the chairman of the former union. Despite
Hr Halesa's absence from the political stage. he is still by no means a "non-
person" in the official media.

Martial law has both simplified and complicated everyday life in Poland. 0n
the one hand. it has relieved the Poles of having to worry about the daily
Punch and Judy show between Party and Solidarity.

For all the obvious unstated reasons. this is now a thing of the past.

0n the other hand, the Army's drive to restore law and order has meant, as the
official press admits. a degree of diacomfiture.

9
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE‘ONLV
o v.» vo..-..... _-- an“...

Life in Poland has become more private over the past week. Families withdraw
into their shells. Christmas trees are on sale in the capital's main thorough-
fares but as usual the Poles are waiting until the last possible moment before
buying.

Contacting relatives has become nearly impossible, however, because of the
cutting of telephone lines. A senior Foreign Ministry official told me last

Friday that this was the unfortunate by-product of the campaign to restore law
and order in the country.

When opposition elements have been brought under control conuaications willlbe
restored to normal.

The queues are still there. Indeed, some hardy shoppers are ready to break
curfew to start their queueing at 6 am, as usual. before going to work. The
Army usually tolerates these infringements. Eyewitnesses report isolated cases
of fraternization between soldiers and workers in the North and elsewhere but
as correspondents are confined to the capital it is difficult to gauge how
typical this response is.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspape's Limited, 1981

C50: 2020/20 END

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY