FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10192
16 December 1981

mm: This cover should be eubetituted for
cover on M L/10192 of 16 Decade: 1981 USS!
Report manna AND EQUIPMENT (F000 12/81).

USSR Report

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

(FOUO 12/81)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily froa foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ELEcmomcs AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
(1000 12/81)

CONTENTS
CERTAIN ASPEC‘IS 0P PHOTOGRAPHY, MOTION PICTURES All!) TELEVISIOII

Experinental Three-Matrix Color Television Camera Doing
Charge-Coupled Devices Pith 5801532 Elements.............. ........... 1

COWICATIONS. COMMUNICATION EQUINE“, RECEIVERS AND
TRANSMITTERS. NE‘NORKS, RADIO PHYSICS. DATA TRANSMISSION
AND PROCESSIHG, INPORHATIO“ THEORY

Improving Noise Inunity of Pulse-Tine Aircraft
Imtmnt “Ming sy.tm....00......000000OI.OOOOOOOOOOCCOOOOOOOO.Q 16

Parameter Subatantiation Technique for Elactroungnetic
Interference Sinulatora.............................................. 22

Applying Poainouial Estimate to Efficiency Deter-intion
of Equipment With nigh Electronagnetic Coupatability

leator'oaoooovoaaeooooooooaooooooooooooeoooooooeoaooocoeooeoeouoao 27

HICROELECTRONICS

Magnetically Tuned Suiconductor ﬂicrmve Devicec. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
PUBLICATIORS , INCLUDING COLLECTIONS 01' ABSTRACTS

Analog Integrated Circuits............................................. 38

Annotation and Abatracta Fron the Journal 'alGa-VOLTAGB
mmom'oooa0.000.000.0000.Uoato.000..OOOOOOOOOOQOOIOOODOOOD00.... ‘3

Annotation and Abstracta frou Collection 'Ilproving
“Fractional Electric-Drive and Power Supply Syatm'.................. £8

- a - [III - USSR - 213 881‘ P000]

FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Annotation and Abstracts m- Journal 'Hmlons AND Deuces
FOR PRODUCING AND PROCESSING RADIO SIGNALS'..........................

Annotation and Abstracts Fro- Collection 'Methoda and Means
for Optimization of Electronachanical Elements and 8ystana'..........

Annotation and Abstracts Prom Collection 'Physico of
Seniconductor Materials and Devices'.................................

Cryogenic Electronics in Marine Radio Bouipnant........................

Design and Production Technology for Microelectronic Digital
m.ur108 Instmtl.....o.u......o......o...o.u.....u......o....

Digital Infornstion Transmission Via Lov~$peed
Con-unication Channels...............................................

Electric‘l Engineerim uﬁmkooosoesoooesesoeeooeaoooeeeoeeeeeeooesso
Impurities And Point Defects in Semiconductora.........................
Meuristor And Other Functional Circuits Pith Volume Coupling...........

Ron-Destructive Test Methods To Detect Faulty Radio

Bquimntooosoeooooooooooooooooacocoa-90.0000.-eaooaooooaeoeeoeoaooe-

Nonlinear Mydroscouatice...............................................
Operation of Radio Systems.............................................
Precision Standard Tine Services.......................................
Problens of Radio Signal Processing....................................
Radiocounnnication Channels for A30 1?.................................
Reflector Scanning Antennas............................................
Secondary Power Supplies for Radio Electronic Bquipnent................
Semiconductor Multiplier Diodes...................................{....

Square;ﬂave Generators on MOS Blenents.................................

FIHI(HﬂﬂCLA1.USE(HMLY

57

63

70
76

80

82

100
10‘

109
113
118
122
127
129
132
136
160
163
POINFICIMJJSEONLY

CKRTAIN ASPECTS 01’ Film,
WTION PICTURES All!) TELEVISION

UDC 621.397.61:621.397.l32

EXPERIMENTAL WAIKIKI! @103 TELEVISIW CAMERA USING GAME-(”11PM XVIOBS um!
580x532 ELEMENTS

Moscow TKHNIKA KING I TELEVIBNIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 30-38

[Article by Ye. V. Kostyukov. A. N. Markov, II. It. Hilsnin, 8. Ya. Nepomyashchiy,
Ye. A. Polonakiy and A. D. Tiahchenlto. All-Union Scientific Research Institute of
Television and Radio Broadcasting]

[Text] Much progress has been made here and abroad recently in developing large-
format matrices of charge-coupled devices (COD), making it possible to

use them for building models of ell-semiconductor one-. two- and three-matrix color
TV cameras [1, 4-83.

In the USSR we have developed both p— end n-channel large-format CCD matrices with
franc transfer of charges and 5803532 elements [3]. 1'hese matrices are capable of
operation at the 625-line standard and contain a storage section, memory section
and output register (Figure l) with three-phase electrode systems in the form of a
three-layer, partly overlapped polysilicon structure in which the electrodes of a
single phase match up with each layer of polyguicon , which makes it possible
to improve the technological effectiveness of COD fabrication [2, 3]. The area of
the storage section is 9.5le.8 Ill, and that of the memory section 6. 7x12.8 III.
The overall size of the crystal is l7.8x14.7 -.

Figure 1. Diagram of Large-Format COD
Matrix Hith SMSBZ Elements

Key:
1. Storage section
2. tat)" 2. 3

3. Memory section

5. Output register
6. Pregl’ 2, 3

7. Shutter
8. Becky-cunt! charge input
9. Output

 

MWLUSIMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The image elements in the storage section measure 33x21. pa, in the memory section
26:21. pm, and in the output register 26x80 ‘n. Surface channels are used for

charge transfer in the matrices. The CCD matrices which have been developed are
assembled in a cermet case with 32 leads.

Saturation exposure with respect to light response mounts to about 0.03 lux-sec
for the large-format matrices. The typical spectral response curve of the COD
matrices is shown in Figure 2. The sharp drop in the blue region of the spectrum
is caused by the absorption of light in the polysilicon electrodes, the 0.5-\Is
thickness of which is in accordance with the specified value of their resistance.
The rate of charge transfer from storage section to memory section is governed by
the time constant of the RC electrode system. A high rate of charge transfer can
lead to a darkening of the image in the center of the scanning pattern if the elec-
trode system has bilateral power supply. Hence, RC is predetermined, and when
C.(12-16)103pl-‘ the thickness of the electrodes, practically, can not be less than
0.5 pm.

Figure 2. Spectral Response Curve of
a 580x532-Element mbliatrix
Key:

1' 8 relative
2. 7\, m

 

 

55‘] w W "N All! (2)

The inefficiency of charge transfer in the output register at an operating frequen-
cy of 10 MHz amounts to 8 a 6010'“, which leads to a difference of the frequency
contrast characteristics (FCC) of the matrices at the left and right edges of the
scanning pattern. 0n the left edge of the scanning pattern, where inefficiency of
charge transfer can be ignored, a decline is observed .in the FCC due to finite
geometrical size of the elements, diffusion of charge carriers, an irregularity in
the matrix output apparatus and so on (Figure 3).

The output apparatus of the large format 000 matrices has two outputsuprimary and
compensating. The output apparatus ha. a floating diffusion regionin the primary
channel and also integrated HOS-transistors for charge clearing, and integrated
outflow repeaters in both the primary and compensating channels. The caspansating
channel is used for suppressing the interference from the operating pulses in the

primary channel.
The functional diagram of a developed and fabricated experimental model color TV

camera using three native large format matrices (with 580x532 elements) is shown
in Figure lo. Signals from the output transistors of the matrices 5 are read by

-2-

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preamplifiers 9 and fed to the inputs of balancing amplifiers 10, in which occur
video signal coupling, black level regulation, supplnenul amplification and com-
pensation of light diffusion. The amplified signal goes to regulated maplifiere
11. which effect operation of the white level automatic balance systms; thereafter,
the signals pass through game correction units 15, limiters and bladting circuits
16. in the R and 8 channels the signals are handled in a 1.5491: band whereas, in
the 0 channel, including the balancing amplifiers, the full bandwidth--S mac-is

"I! Figure 3. rcc of a con Large Format Ha-
“ trix at an Operating Preqeuncy
“’ of 10 HR:
' Key:
”0 1. Left edge of image

2. Center
0.25 3. Right edge

lo. f, Hi:

  

avzso:6f-u(’o)

maintained, and just ahead of the buffer nplifier 14 the signal goes through a
low pass filter 12 with a pass band of 1.5 “la. The 6 signal is used to form the
high frequency part of the signal, and the aperture correction signal is also
formed from it in aperture corrector 13. The high frequency part of the 6 signal
and the aperture correction signal are added to the R, G and 3 low frequency sig-
nals in sunning amplifiers 17.

A premplifier schematic is shown in Figure 5. The purpose of the preanlifiere
is amplification of the useful signal and suppression of switching interference.
The CCD outputs are the outputs of FET's, one of them carrying a signal and switch-
ing noise and the other switching noise only. The signals from the matrix outputs
proceed across decoupling repeaters W1 and VTZ to the inputs of differential am-
plifier A1 which suppresses synphase switching noise. Molifier Al is an opera-
tional amplifier (200 Vlysec, amplification factor 3000). This amplifier is lead-
ed on a fifth order Cauer low pass filter, from the output of which the signal
proceeds across emitter repeater VT3 to the video processing board. To reduce
stray currents the preanpl if iers are enclosed in shields and positioned next to
the CCD matrices. The output signal from the preamplifiers has an msplitude of
200-300 ml].

The balancing amplifiers (Figure 6) perform a lumber of functions including ampli-
f ication and coupling of the signal to the black reference level. It is usually
not possible to isolate information on the black level during a horizontal quench-
ing pulse because of the differential reading of the signal from the COD matrices
and the dependence of the blanks' level on the control system for the matrices.
Hence, coupling of the signal is performed at the black level derived from blacked
out elements. Several elements on each line are covered up for the purpose. This
method of coupling does hava one defect however. Between the crystal face and the

-3-

PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 4. Functional May-am of the Three-Hatrix Color TV Owe

Key:
1. 350PF7-1A lens 11. Regulating amplifiers for automatic
2. Infrared filter white balance system
3. Color-separating prism 12. Low pass filter
lo. Neutral light filters 13. High frequency signal shaper and
5. CCD large format matrices aperture cot-rector
6. Output pulse amplifiers-switches 1/0. Buffer amplifier

(drivers) 15. Gama correction units
7. Apparatus for CC!) matrix control 16. Limiters and blanking circuits
8. Master oscillator and oynchroni- 17. Swing amplifiers

zation system 18. Color monitor
9. Preampl ifiers 19. Automatics t vstsms
10. Balancing amplifiers 20. Diaphregs drive

protective glass of the matrix case is a gap through vhich light comes in part way
under the darkening strip, leading to a distortion of the "black" level. An illu-
mination compensating circuit is used to reduce these distortions. From here on
it is proposed to apply a darkening coating directly to the 001) matrix crystal.

Besides coupling and amplifying, the balancing amplifiers also perform gain switch-
ing from field to field. The switching is necessary because the levels of the sig-
nals in adjacent fields are unequal. In the first field the signal buildup takes
place at the electrodes of only the first phase, but in the second field it occurs
simltaneously at the electrodes of the second and third phases.

The foundation of the balancing amplifier (Figure 6) is a broad band operational
amplifier A1 in 6 channel; a 57mm can be used in R and 3 channels. Gain snitch-
ing from field to field is done by a divider R2, 118 controlled by a switch on m
VTZ, to which the field frequency pulses go. The coupling circuit is made from

MWLUSEONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

igure 5. The Prmlificr Circuit

Inbcr at VII and W2 is 0303!.
ive feedback, identified in tcxt

 

Figure 6. The Balancing Alplifier Circuit

lo. 103033 7.
any pulse: 5. 0303!:
lacs 6. Output

- 5 -

MWWMY
F0310FFKJAL.USE(NNLY

operational amplifier A2. a type 153006. A switch on FET VT3 is opened by a shift-
ed clamping pulse at the beginning of an active line. The signal level correspond-
ing to the black strip is stored at capacitor C“. This signal is compared with
zero potential and amplified by operational amplifier A2. The amplified error sig-
nal goes to the inverting input of amplifier A1. The operational amplifier A3, a
type 153006, performs the functions of illumination compensation and black level
regulation. Regulation of the black level R18 is accomplished by means of a dis-
placement applied to the inverting input, and the compensation signal is formed via
integration at capacitor CS. The degree of compensation is regulated by resistor
R20. Amplifier A3 produces an error signal which is applied to the input of ampli-
fier A1, and PET VT1 cuts off the compensation signal for the time of the coupling
operation.

Signals having an amplitude of 2 V and coupled to the black level from the balanc-
ing amplifier outputs go to amplifiers with a regulated amplification factor (Fig-
ure 7). The regulating element in the amplifiers is a 525P31 four-square multi-
plier. The signal from collector loads RIO, R11 is picked up by broadband opera-
tional amplifier A2 and then passed to the automatics system. This system com-
pares R, G, and B signals and produces error signals. The error signals proceed
across a divider R9, R12, inputting into a feedback circuit, to the amplifier's
controlling input. Resistor R8 establishes the nominal gain and the range of auto-
matic balance. At the circuit output the signal output is S V, which is ample for
normal operatiOn of the very simple gamma correction unit employing resistive di-
viders and diodes. ‘he signal, processed by the gamma correction unit, proceeds
across the black-and-white-levels-limiters circuit (Figure 4). The hybrid integrat-
ed circuit of the limiters provides white level limitation of 2 V, black level of
60 mV, and also performs the blanking operation. After these operations, the high
frequency part of the signal and the aperture correction signal are introduced in-
to the R , (5t and 3" low frequency signals. The summing is performed in broadband
operational amplifiers with powerful output stages.

The fonmation of the high frequency portion of the R, G and B signals and the aper-
ture correction signal takes place in the aperture correction unit (Figure 8).

The G signal (5 Mil: band) gOes to the input of this cascade from the output of the
balancing amplifier. The broadband signal passes across a delay line and a low
pass filter with a pass band of 1.5 "is. The high frequency portion of the signal
is formed by operational amplifier A1 as the difference between the broadband and
narrow hand signals. For noise reduction purposes this signal is processed by a
minimum limiter made up of transistors VTl and VTZ. The aperture correction signal
is generated by operational amplifier A2 and is likewise limited with respect to
minimum (VT3 and VTA). The correction unit includes provision for regulating the
degree of correction by means of resistive dividers. The high frequency and aper-
ture correction signals are added to the R',GY and 3' low frequency signals in sum-
ming amplifiers.

The drop in the FCC of the CCD matrices is caused by aperture distortions which
crop up due to the ultimate geometrical dimensions of the image elements, by the
integrating properties of the Output apparatus, by inefficiency of charge transfer
[9] and so on. The circuits in Figure 8 are not sufficient for total FCC correc-
tion. The model therefore includes riditional correction circuits. Since an equi-
valent circuit of the output apparatus can be represented, accurately enough, as an
integrating RC circuit, an FCC drop attributable to output apparatus deficiency can

- 5 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAI. [SE ONLY

 

Figure 7. Circuit of Anplifier with Regulated Aaplification Factor

 

Key:
1. Video input 3. Output to auto-atice onto-
2. Output lo. Balance voltage input
Figure 8. Circuit of the Aperture Correction Unit
Key:
1. Input, f 5 Hi: 3. High frequency output
2. Input, f 1.5 HI: lo. Aperture correction output

can be corrected by a capacitive feedback (6*) in operational amplifier A1 of the
preamplifier (Figure 5). The circuite for correctione of the F00 drop attributable
to inefficiency of charge transfer are mined in detail in [9, 10]. In theee

circuits the amplitude of the correction eignal added to the pri-ary eignal ie
automatically regulated according to the eawtooth (or a sore coupler) lav, depend-
ing on the nmber of charge tranefera fro. a given image eluent to the output

apparatus .

To form puleo traine with a variable PRP, uae ie nade of circuite dividing one
cocoon reference frequency £0.29. 75 max. A functional diagram of the logic cir-
cuits for the control of the con netricee and part of the eynchroniring generator

mmmmv
FIIICHﬂﬂCJAI.lEﬂ£(M'LY

.. ....... (.3 .1._-.._--

(urinal-v0 tuunpomuouuu

      
 
  
      
 
 
  
     
      
   

    
  
   

   

.7125

.2-
IIIEmQIIIIH
II (:) mm (19) -

Fl_l‘w

  
     
        

 
   

 

    
  
 

mlfh
I ml+l
E. g It." I,
a $5
1% an
e ii
*3.
«z
“'51, 3: om lmlL
mam l-l-l [-1-]
5 venues annaucm a
llllllll llllllll II III]!
.2- “(In

  
    

I...

(18)

Figure 9. Functional Diagram of the Logic Circuits for CC!) Matrix Control

Key:

1. Crystal master oscillator (f0 -29. 75 m2)

2. Frequency dividers (0:7, fag-6.25 Hllz)

3. Synchronization system (prahorizontal frequency, f 0- field frequency.

f “-frame frequency)

a. Pulse train ahaper

5. Frame quenching pulses

6. ﬂorizontal quenching pulses

7. Connutator

8. Three-phase generator for vertical charge transfer
9. Distributor
10. 290-counter

11. Reset
12. Automatic centering gates

13. Three-phase generator for horizontal charge transfer
14. shaper of pulses for matrix memory section control
15. shaper of pulses for matrix storage section control
16. Buffer apparatus
17. Pulse amplifiers
18. OCD's (R, G and B)
19. Outputs: a. to SEGA" coder; b, to eutomatics eyetels; c, to video processor

.3.

FOR OFl-TCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is presented in Figure 9. A crystal stabilized master oscillator built on a
K1L8313 microcircuit operates at the frequency £0.29.” Ills, equal to triple the
frequency of charge transfer from the horizontal registers (ff-fol” and the
seventh harmonic of the subcarrier frequency fw-folhlsJS m: of the SEGA)! color
TV system. The frequency fov, which is the easter frequency for the synchronizing
generator and is used in the SECAH coder, is formed by a division of the reference

frequegcy by seven, performed by j-k fl ip-flops K5311'V9P (a 111. with SchOttky
diodes .

The three-phase generator of pulses for control of the horizontal registers is a
circular shift register using )4: flip-flops KS31TV9P and is controlled by opera-
tional frequencies of fo.‘rhe phase is set at the start of each line by horizontal
quenching pulses. At the output of this generator are formed three 120°~offset
pulse trains for control of the phases of the horizontal registers; the PRP is
fT-fol3. By a conjunction of the second and third phase pulses, performed by a
159LK1 microcircuit, the generator also forms a sequence of short pulses intended
for control of the reset key of the output apparatus 01.).

A background charge ("bold-face" zero) is introduced in order to lower the ineffi-
ciency of charge transfer in the output registers. For this purpose constant
opening potentials are applied to the input going to the input gates of the hori-
zontal registers. To avoid nonuniformity of background charge input from line to
line, which shows up on the image in the for: of periodic horizontal bands, there
is provision for horizontal phasing of the three phase generator for control of
the output registers.

The number of horizontal elements chosen for the CCD matrices was 532. However,
at the operating frequency ft-fol3, the charges from only 516 elunents get into
the output apparatus from the horizontal registers during the 52-wec active part
of a line. The charges of the other 16 elements are taken out at the time of the
horizontal quenching pulses. This was done in order to check the operation of the
system for automatic image centering and to evaluate the advisability of using it
in three-matrix color TV cameras. It is proposed later to shield part of these
16 elements on each line from light by means of a protective mask right on the
crystal for the purpose of ensuring stable coupling to the black level.

From the output of the three phase generator for control of the horizontal regis-
ters, each of the pulse trains which have been formed proceeds to the inputs of
three parallel distributing 159ml microcircuits where they are gated and then
applied across a one-input pulse switch to the appropriate contact of the CCD ma-
trix in channels R, c or B.

The synchronization system combines the actual synchronizing generator, the pulse
section of the SECAH coding apparatus, a shaper of signals for controlling the
pulse-digital automatics systems and also a shaper of auxiliary pulse sequences
for apparatus controlling the storage and memory sections of the CCD

matrices. The synchronization system generates pulse trains in accordance with
COST 7845-72 (for the parameters of the synchronization signals) and WST 19432-74
(for the parameters of the color TV signals), including the signals for receiver
synchronization, the mixture of quenching pulses, horizontal quenching pulses,

-9-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

franc quenching pulses. horizontal driving pulses, frame driving pulses. horizontal
clamping pulses, and the pulse trains needed to operate the SECAH coder and the
automatics systems.

The frequency fev'272‘fetr'4°25 le goes to the input of the synchronizing genera-
tor. Double the horizontal frequency, 2fgtr,is produced by a [136 divider consist-
ing of series-connected [17 and [8 dividers. By dividing the frequency 2f“r by
625 via four series-connected IS dividers, the field frequency f ~50 II: is produced.
The horizontal line frequency f." and the fruse frequency fl: erg obtained by di-
viding Zfstr and fp, respectively, by 2.

The horizontal frequency pulse trains (horizontal quenching, driving, clnping etc.)
are formed by means of flip-flops to whose counter inputs is applied a meander of
frequency f3", and to whose regulating inputs are applied various combinations of
signals out of the pattern of frequencies generated by the [136 divider. The ﬁne
driving pulse and frame quenching pulse are generated by flip-flops to whose count-
er inputs is applied a meander of the field frequency f , and to whose regulating.
inputs are. applied signals from the pattern of frequencies generated by the [625
divider. The other pulse trains are formed in a similar manner. The complex sig-
nals needed to control the SBCAH coding apparatus are produced by means of addi-
tional scaling circuits. ‘

m-logic microcircuits (lSSIYe, KlTKS82 and the like) are used in the high fre-
quency input stages of the synchronization system, whereas at lower frequencies,
starting from Ste“. CliOS-logic microcircuits (series 1614 and 176) are used.‘
Type 158LA8 TTL circuits with open collector are used as level translators.

The timing diagrams of the pulses for control of the storage and memory sections
of CCD matrices with frame transfer of charges are well known [11, 12] and are not
included here. Charges in the first field are accumulated at the electrodes of
the first phase and, in the second field, at the second and third phase (or second
phase only) electrodes. The electrodes of phases not used for charge storage in

a given field have a voltage applied to than and the surface layer of the semicon-
ductor then has a concentration of base carriers, which reduces the rate of charge
spreading (image blurring) under local exposure to light. During fly-back there
are 290 charge transfers from storage section to nemry section. A charge in the
memory section during forward horizontal scan is stored at the second phase elec-
trodes. For the line-by-line output of the infomtion from the meanry section
to the output register during fly-back, the pulses of one of the three-phase
trains (PRF fov/Zlo or fOVIloB) are applied to the electrodes of the phases of the
memory section.

The three-phase generator of pulses for vertical transfer of charges is a circular
register using j-k flip-flops (m). Via a countator, the generator is controlled
during frame quenching pulses by pulses with a PR? of f°V/2; in the active part of
the field during horizontal quenching pulses it is controlled by pulses with a PR!
of fOV/8. The three-phase generator converts each of the two pulse trains just

mentioned into three offset 120° in phase and with a PR? reduced threefold (fay/6,

fey/24) .

-10-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The transfer of charges from storage section to memory section during franc quench-
ing pulses is controlled by pulses with a PR? of fay/6e There have to be 290 such
pulses in each field. A counter working in start-stop mode and a pulse distributor
are used to count and separate the necessary nuber of pulses. The counter is re-
set by the 290th pulse and started by the frame quenching pulse wavefront. The"
distributor separates the counted pulses and directs then simltaneously for con-
trol of the phases of the storage and memory sections of the GOD matrices. A
three-phase train of the two expanded pulses is sent by the distributor tospulse
shaper for control of the memory sections of the GOD matrices where, by meme of
logic circuits and gating, a triplet of pulses is shaped which controls the line-
by-line transfer of charges from the storage section to the output register during
the horizontal quenching pulses.

All the pulse trains generated are sent to the cc» matrices across a buffer appara-
tus and keyed balancing pulse amplifiers. These amplifiers regulate, within O-ZO-V
limits, the amplitude of the control pulses and shape their front. In order to
provide for separate regulation of the GOD mtrix operating modes, 10 individual
keyed amplifiers are used for each matrix; they are mounted on a separate board and
are made up of discrete elements. On this board are four one-input amplifiers
which control the output register and six two-input (or three-input) amplifiers
which control the storage and memory sections. Each uplifier has independent
regulation of pulse amplitudes. The two-input (and three-input) keyed amplifiers
are assembled as a parallel sunning circuit (Figure 10). The output elusnts of
all the amplifiers are twin complementary critter repeaters which provide the
necessary wavefront length for pulses on a large capacitive load, which the system
of electrodes of the matrices is.

 

Figure 10. Schelatic of a Two-Input Pulse Amplifier (Driver)

Key:
1. +5 V 4. -20 V
2. Input I ‘ 5. Output
3. input II

In connection with the camera model's incorporation of an sutoeutic centering sys-
tem which operates on the principle of non-simultaneous tapping of information
from the storage sections and output registers of the CCD matrices, different gates
are used to form the beginning and end of the pulse trains. The gating is per-
formed in a buffer apparatus.

-11-

FOROFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The experimental color TV camera contains four auxiliary automatics systems: bal-
ance, luminance regulation, light-diffusion compensation and centering. The first
three systems are practically no different from homologous systems used in tube
cameras. The sutanatic centering system is original.

The centering methods employed in tube cameras depend on variation of the con-
stant component of the deflection current in the focussing and deflection system,
due to which the scanning pattern is shifted on the target of the transmitting
tube. OCD matrices, being devices with a rigid geometry, do not allow the spa-
tial movement of the image by electrical means. Hence, the 000 color TV camera
employs an automatic centering system based on non-coincidence, with respect to
time, of signals from the various CCD matrices.

The frequency of charge transfer in the output registers of the CCD matrices is
f‘r'fo/3'7/3fov- In a horizontal blank, then, there are 16 elements which contain
information about the image. This enables shifting in time the start of informa-
tion readout from the R and 3 matrix output registers by an interval of plus or
minus eight elements relative to the G matrix (Figure 11). The shifting is con-
trolled by gating pulses: reference pulse (Figure 11, c), pulse fixing the cen-
ter of the zone of regulation and the regulating pulses (Figure 11, d). The
position of the trailing edges of the regulating pulses, depending on the sign
and magnitude of non-coincidence, is varied according to camands issuing from an
analyzer. Automatic centering with respect to vertical is achieved by means of
non-coincidence, timevise, of the wants of the start of line-by-line transfer
from the memory section to the output register.

“In (1)
Figure 11. Time Diagrams Illustrating
the Principle of Automatic
, Horizontal Centering of
”HI-Hz“ ”“ I Images
: | l I : I (2) (3) ' -
”I l I Key:
" i I my I. ' 1. 64 psec
' I m» 5 I ‘ 2. ”8 elements
__,.H1_{‘:L__. 3. 52 ”cc
(6) On I I I : I In 532 elcaents
I ' : 5. 516 elements
' | | 6. 8 elements
' | ' 7. 2316 elements
— 8. Zone for shifting the regulated
l : LJ (7) front
:IH
Elli! l' ‘1'
I - ' L-

-12..

5'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLMONLY

 

Figure 12. Structural Diagrau of Regulating-Puke Shaper

Key:
1. Starting lo. Converter for non-coincidence codea
2. Triplet meander 5. [1(3)
3. Regulating inpute 6. G

The etructural diagram of a regulating-puke ehaper ie preeented in Figure 12. The
comparison of optical-type video eignale in the baeic 6 channel and the regulated
R and B channels, and eleo the convereion of the non-coincidence eignel to digital
form are acconpl iehed in a non-coincidence analyzer. The converted tum-coincidence
signal goes to the regulating inputs of a eubtracting counter. At the meat of
termination of the auxiliary starting pulee, which ie eitueted within a horizontal
or frame quenching pulee depending on which axie ie being centered, the puleee of
one of the charge trenafer phaeee begin to go to the counter’e eubtrecting input,
and the counter'e eignal returna to 0000 etatue. The regulating pulee, which con-
eiete of a conetent pert (etarting pulee) end the varying pert developed by the
counter, is eheped by meane of logical emulation and eervee ae a gate for the
three-phaae charge transfer puleee. Due to variation in the duration of the gat-
ing pulee, tine-coincidence of video eignalo of the regulated and baeic natricee
is achieved with a precieion of one-half an image elenent.

The experimental three-Intrix 000 color TV calera ie of nonoblock conetructionwith
built-in caeeette holder (l’iguree 13 a and b [photoe not reproduced]). The boarde
for all the eyeteue and epparatue, except thoee for the keyed anplifiere, are in-
stalled in individual guidee. The camera weighe abOut 8 kg and drawe about 60 R.

The canera'e reeolving power with reepect to horizontal at the center of the ecan-
ning pattern ie about 1000 TV]. (over the height of the ecanning pattern). Defecte
in the CCD matrices and fixed interterencee ceueed by dark current irregularity
are the main flew in color-eepereted inagee.

with the experimental model of the color TV cuter-a we obtained the color inagee of
varioue eubjecte and color etripe. Due to the low eeneitivity of the COD natricee
in the blue region of the epectrua, eetiefactory inegee were obtained only with an
illuination inteneity oi“ 10,000.20,000 lux on the eubject at "2.8 eince it wee
neceeeary, in order to adjuet the light fluxee in the G and R chennele, to uee, re-
apactively, 3x and lo: light reduction with neutral denaity filtere.

-13-

mnornaALusronu
l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the required resolving power in the blue channel is several times less than
in the G channel, the sensitivity of a solid state color TV camera with respect to
fluctuating interference could be improved by way of staining the charges from in-
dividual elements in the 8 channel, both horizontal and vertical, with the help of
delay lines, for instance, or by using 001) matrices with enlarged cells [13, 110].
Moreover, in the horizontal direction the amusing of charges from adjacent elements
is rather easily-done in the floating diffusion region of the output apparatus if
charge transfer to that region is accomplished at a frequency fr-fol3, subtraction

also-et a rate less by a factor of n if short pulses at the frequency f In are
applied to the reset transistor (11,). However, in the camera here considered this

method of improving sensitivity proved unsuitable because of large dark current
irregularity which is markedly dependent on the level of illusination. The cam-
era's sensitivity is therefore limited principally by fixed interference caused

by dark current irregularity in the 8 channel whereas fluctuating interference is
practically imperceptible in the image, which is related, too, to the characteris-
tics of its spectral makeup and the peculiarities of visual perception [15]. One
possible way to improve the sensitivity of volor TV cameras using charge-coupled
devices is to reduce the dark current irregularity.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Milenin, N. K., "Color Television Cameras Using Matrix huge-Signal Shapers,"
TEKHNIKA KINO I TELEVIDENIYA, No A, 1981, pp 57-64.

2. Dokuchayev, Yu. P., Kuznetsov, Yu. A. and Press, P. P., "Large Format Matrix
Video-Signal Shapcr," ELEKTRGINAYA PRWYSiEENNOST', No 7(67), 1978, pp 54-57.

3. Dokuchayev, Yu. P., Kuznetsov, Yu. A. and Press, P. P., "A Matrix Video-Sig-
nal Shaper with 580x532 Elements," Ibid., No 10(82). 1979, pp 33-34.

4. "Brief Communications on Color in] Cameras Using CCD's," ELBCTRONIKA, No 2,
1978, p 92; No 7, 1978, pp 13-16; No 11., 1979, p 102; No 3, 1980, pp 17-18;
No 4, 1980, pp’15-16; No 16, 1980, pp 10-11; No 21, 1980, p 124.

S. Rodgers, R. 1... "Development and Application of a Prototype CCD TV Camera,"
RCA ENG, Vol 25, No 1, 1979, pp 62-104.

6. Embrey, B. 0., "Shuttle Orbiter's Solid-State TV Cameras," 7th Nat. Teleconnun.
Conf., Birmingham, 1978, Conf. rec., p lO.2.1-10.2.lo.

7. Macmann, R. 1|. et al., "Hicrocam-l; A New Concept in the Design of Portable
Cameras for Broadcasting Application," 10th Annual SHIPS Hinter ‘N Conf., 1976.

8. BRQ‘WSTINC Ems, N0 9 1980, pp 59-930
9. Hilenin, N. K., Nepomnysshchiy, Yu. Ya. and Rozvel, Ta. 3. "Correction of

Linear Distortions in CC!) '11! Cmeres," TEKHNIKA KIND I TELEVI‘DENIYA, No 10,
1978, pp 47-55.

-11...

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hilenin, N. K., Nepownyashchiy, Yu. Ya. and Rozvsl, A. 3., "A Corrector for
‘N Camera Transient Characteristics," 0881! Certificate of Authorship
N0 7189(03, Bull. ROWMQOQ, N0 8, 1980.

Berezin, V. Yu., Kotov, B. A., Lszovskiy, 1.. Yu., Levin, S. A., Press, '3. P.
and Rubinshteyn, D. N., "CCD P'atrix Television Camera," 7mm KIND I
TELEVIDBNIYA, No 6, 1977, pp $6.59.

"Charge-Coupled Devices. Technology and Application," Edited by R. Helen
and D. Buss, N.Y., EBB Eress, 1976.

Hilenin, N. K., Polonakiy, Ye. A. and Rozval, Ya. B. "A Color Transmitting
Television Camera," USSR Certificate of Authorship No 720817, Bull. mom-
'l'l-INIYA..., No 9, 1980.

Hilenin, N. K., Polonskiy, Ye. A. and Rozval, Is. 3., "Use of Comb-Type Fil-
ters in Color TV Cameras," TEIUINIKA KING I TELEVIDENIYA, No 6, 1979, pp 31-37.

Hilenin, N. K., "Noise in CCD Image-Signal Shapers," 11:16., No 6, 1980,
pp 51-57.

COPYRIGHT: "Tekhnika kino i televideniya", 1981

5656
C80:

1860/363

-15-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CWICATIONS, COWlCATION EQUIPMENT, RECEIVERS AND
TRANSMITTERS. NB'NORKS, RADIO PHYSICS,
DATA TRANSMISSION AND PROCESSING, INFORMATION 11120”

UDC 621.391.2:621.396.985
IMPROVING NOISE mm 017 PULSE-TIM! AIRCRAFT INSTRUMENT LANDING SYSTEIB

Moscow RADIOTBKHNIKA in Russian Vol 36, No 6, Jun 81 (nanuacript received 3 Jun 80)
pp 28-31

[Article by A.l(. Bernyukov]

[Text] Pulse-tine aircraft instrument landing systole (11.8) with bea- scanning
and tine readout, which have advantages in terns of precisionandcarrying capacity
over existing systems, are undergoing intense develop-eat at the present tine both
in the USSR and abroad. The signal from the radio beacon and the input to the
on-board system receiver. x(t). because of nultipath propagation, contains the
components:

.. ._. ...—-—§

x m - . m + «no? mm + Hum. 46 r... (1)

where s(t) - U(t) cos(wo + an)t is the signal pulse received when the aircraft
is irradiated by a scanning, narrow directional bean at a frequency of
96K - 2r/‘l‘cx (no and on are the carrier and the doppler frequency respectively);

L
s.. (c) - 2 int! 0 — m) can «u» f '11)! + m

I:-

are the internal and sidelobe interference. re-reflected from L doninant
re-reflectors with local reflection factors of {,1 and delays of t3 ; Nn.n(t) is
interference re-reflected from the rough subjacent surface; “me“; is the additive
noise of the receiver and the antenna; U(t) is the law governing the change in the
directional pattern of the radio beacon antenna.

A problem of paramount iaportance in 11.8 design is cowating the influence of nul-
tipath interference caused by the bending of the line of position, which makes it

difficult to determine the heading (and glide slope) from measurenents of the tine
interval t- r between the pulses s (t) and s '(t) obtained at the receiver output

in the case of "back and forth" scanning in a sector on r'

-15-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcm. use ONLY

Statistical models are known [2 - 51 for the components of the additive mixture
(1). The antenna and receiver noise lln,a(t) and the multipath interference from
the subjscent surface Nn,n(t) are close in their statistical nature (as a rule,
they are noraal) , while the “ml-,(t) noise is usually a sore narrow band [6 - 61.
when flying along a curved flight path, the signal s(t) fluctuates. One can as-
suae, without taking into account the scanning and the impact of the dominant re-
reflectors, that the amplitude of the envelope of the signal and interference mix-
ture has a Rayleigh distribution:

“W” " “1Pl-t’l?(| +e')lI(| +e'). x>°. (2)
where 4- ,/fi/ 0” is the signal/interference ratio.

Under actual operational conditions of on-board and ground ILs equipment, returns
from ground clutter (hangars, control towers. etc.) and periodic evolutions of the
power spectrun of the interference ﬁnd-Kt) (at the scanning frequency) which are
due to the notion of the beam [5], make the process x(t) a nonstaady-state one.
Moreover, the nobility of certain re—reflsctors. the specific features of airports
and nonlinear processing in the on-board receiver introduce a apriori unbiguity
into x(t), which makes it difficult to detect the signal and estimate the infor-
mation parameters by traditional techniques (for example, by means of nsximua

likelihood processing) .

Considering the periodic nature of the scanning in the sectors with respect to

the heading and glide slope with a bean of sax-1(a)“ to 60‘) with a directional
pattern width of a - l to 2°. it is expedient to set up multichannel signal proces-
sing in H - ppm/u a 100 spatial channels (microsectors) (Figure 1). To resolve
the contradiction due to the limited speed of the on-board coaputers and the con-
siderable volune of computational procedures, it proposed that the processing of
x(t) on board be organized in three steps:

1) Spatial selection (primary gating) of the dominant re-reflectors llx (including
the radio beacons) in l. channels;

2) Adaptive compensation for the interference in the selected channels (secondary
gating) to restore the "form" of the useful signal s(t);

3) Measurement of the information paraeter (heading and glide slope).

The basis of the on-bosrd instruentation com-
puter complex (Figure 2) is a microcomputer
(HEW!) which realizes prograI-ed signal proces-
sing. For the quantization of the heading and
glide slope sectors e.”- into M aicrosectors
(channel intervals of turn itchanJ - tum/M).
the synchroniser s generates a reference pulse
train at a frequency which is a multiple of
the digitization frequency of the channel
interval: Pref. - ref - Wtchan. - MITKJ',
where N is the number of discrete steps in
the channel interval Ichan.' THJ/H -

- emf/neg human. The video nixture of the

 

Figure 1 .

-17-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

ulguml mul lutvrfm-mu-n- x"(l) from the output of the on-honrd rem-Ivor (hl') In
cnvudcd by means 01 a high speed analog-digital converter (ATsP). The digital
signal xe,u(t) is fed through the coupler (US) to the microcomputer, which is syn-
chronized with the scanning system.

Figure 2.

Key: 1. BP - On-board receiver;
2. A13? - Analog to digital converter;
. US - Coupler;
. HBVH - microcomputer;
. CPS - Primary gating generator;
. 6V8 - Secondary gating generator;
. s - Synchronizer.

 

HOMO“

The spatial gating algorithm for the doninant re-reflectors should be invariant with
respect to the interference statistic under the a priori ambiguity conditions. Among
the known nonparametric detection algorithms [2. 7], the most efficient in this case
is a dual sample ranking algorithm-of Uilcoxson, based on a sequential coeparison

of the sample being studied {a , .... 3“} of the video process xa.u(t) with the ele-
aents of the reference sample y1, ..., Ya} and than testing the statistic for the
threshold C:

N N a ll.
8 - 2'1- 2 3 Nn- YMEC. Nit-)0) -
l-l Jul/all . _ e .
_ kWh" m. (3)
0. Xl<m-

A drawback to (3) is the difficulty of obtaining a reference sanple of "pure" inter-
ference under the conditions of ILs radio beacon operation. For this reason, the
following variant (without the reference interference) is proposed:

~ .
"-2.(‘|-’ulh iii-8,; [+1
I" '
0, ’0’"... ﬁx: 2. A:
V)! o. u yt‘ 1. :5 rs- 2-h("T-"I)' "1"7- l+2 (‘)
........... l .
’MI- Inn-u. 0. J” ’-

 

 

.................. . (6)

M

’1!” :‘(IM— Mu). Vac/"XI: 19‘”
[-I

where j - l. 2, ... H are the numbers of the spatial microsectors (channels).
The priority of an element Xj in the nicrosector of number 5 relative to the ele-

ments yjl, yjz, ... y M is determined in accordance with (4); yj} . 0 is all ad-

jacent microsectors w th the subsequent testing of the ranks réonor the threshold
c (blocks 1 -- 3 in Figure 3). In channels where r3 > C. the inant signals are
gated by instructions from the microcomputer using the primary gating generator

- 18 -

FOI¢0FFKJA1.USE(N§LY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(GPS) pulses. Since algorithn (6) is a variant of (3), idierent in it is i-nnity
to various kinds of interference [71 (including chaotic pulse noise) as well as a
considerable dynnic range. Since false slates are not so dangerous in the prieary
gating stage (the nmber of channels being analyzed in the subsequent step. is in-
creased sonewhat), it is expedient to set the slara probabilities in a range of"

a - 10'2 - 10‘3. The calculation of the detection characteristics of the doeinant
pulses in the video aixture having the distribution of (2) against a background of
Rayleigh interference using the procedure of [7] demonstrated the possibility of
obtaining a radio beacon detection probability of D -0 l (so-ething which is inport-
ant when casing in for a landing free a side direction) for the case of suller

(as conpared to the case of radar observation) threshold signal/interference ratios

(3 to 5 d3).

 

Figure 3 .

Key: 1. Data input;
2. [see figure]
3. r5 :C;
lo. Primary gating, Fig, I! L < K;
5. [see figure];
6. slag] - Ilsa];
7. Secondary gating, s(t); ,
8. Heasuraaent of tdelay - (Is (0].

The spatial selection step takes up an insignificant portion of the landing tine.
Thus, to service an aircraft descending at a speed of up to 160 h/hr, a radio
beacon with a directional pattern scanning frequency of 13.5 lie at a range of 40 he
expends more than 105 scan periods. In the primary gating step, according to (6),
about 100 periods will be used when Ii I 100.

-19-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the secondary gating step (blocks 5, 6 and 7 in Figure 3), the "form" of the
signal s(t) is restored, which was dmged by the interference Viz-(t) - Nn,n(t) +

+ Nn.a(t) 4- time“) and the channel with the radio beacon is gated in accordance
with llu' secondary mum: muwrnlnr signal. [Sc-muse of the uonatcndy-etnlc mum-
of N;(t), the technique of digital adaptive interference compensation is promising,
in which the mean square error (5K0) is mininised in the discrete real time

t - nTo. n - 0,1, .... N - 1 (using “empty" channel intervals ascertained during
the primary gating stage) between the process x(n) and the signal y(n) - 14““)-
°{vl, .... an}, generated by an adaptive filter (AD?) with tunable coefficients
{In} from the reference interference Néeﬂn). The minisus of the mean square

error in the channel with the radio beacon is:

tnln [at [cm - mm (aux. - mm - ramps [(3, + 1v“_,.y",..,,[,:]; (5)

in channels occupied only by interference, ainlnItgll + 0. The presence of intra-
path interference sm(n), which distorts a(n) and makes it difficult to cmensate
for Nn.n(n) + Nn.a(n), in "a(n) impedes the efficient utilisation of the well known
algorithm for seeking a minimum of the mean square error of [8]. The influence of
sn.°(n) can be eliminated and the cosponsation processes apeeded up by segregating
the pulse response (10) h(n) of the nediun from the aixture a(n). generating the
interference by the technique of homosorphoua filtering [9. 10]. In this case,

the mixture of the signal and interference

m) --sm+~=(n)-s(n)-Iun)-Emma—a) (6)
(I)

is converted to the frequency region u- km», 1: - 0,1, ..., ll «- 1,

N-I
x m -‘ 2. x (n) w“ .. sm’um, v - ssp(—l2s/N). (1)

use

Then the inverse transform of the logarithmic spectre. is found:

N-I N—l

3(a) - Q- 2; nnxu)|w*"'=7v'— 2‘, lusm + lnH(k)l-;(s)+;(n). (s)
=| 0-!

The localized capsters a(n) and h(n) are segregated, in which case huh), which
defines the noise Nnm and "n.5, is inserted in the adaptive filter for the oper-
ational correction of the coefficients (U1). i.e., to boost the speed of the
adaptive compensator. As an analysis of the mixture on a Yes-1020 cosputer has
shown:
, “MUSEONLY

.- (I) .- U..|sln 9...! w“: + pslle" «Mama. “-1.”

where u - l, p - 0.5 to 1, t3 - 0 to ulna and PC! - 13.5 R8, the capstar 5(t) is a
a decaylng pulse train with a period of t3. is separated Iron the "continuous”
capster s(t).

1.

3.

5.

3131.106!”

"HLS Hultipath Studies", V. 1., Lincoln Laboratory, m, Lexington, Haasachusets,
1976.

Levin B.R., "‘l'eoretichsskiye osnovy statisticheskoy radiotekhniki" ["‘l’heoretical
Principles of Statistical Radio Engineering”, look 3, lbscw, Sovetakoye Radio
Publishers, 1976.

Kuz'nin 5.2., "Osnovy teorii tsifravoy ohrahotki intonatsii" [”Principlea of
Digital Intonation Processing Theory"], Moscow, Sovatskoys Radio Publishers,
1971..

Tartakovskiy G.P., at al., "Voprosy statisticheskoy taorii radiolokatsii”
["Problens in Statistical Radar Theory”], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers,
1963.

Chechetkin V.D., "Tea. Dokl. XXXIII Vsesoyur. llauc‘n. sessii, posvyashchennoy
Dnyu radio" ("Abstracts of Reports to the 33rd All-Union scientific Conference
Devoted to 'Radio Day'"], Moscow, Sovetakoye Radio Publishers, 1978.

Brown, Gary 8., I- TRANS., 1977, Vol. 25, lo. 1.

Akinov P.S., mlo'rmmm [RADIO MM], 1977. Vol. 32, lo. 11.

Hidrov 3., Glover D., et a1, run trace. m (Translated into Russian”,
1975, Vol. 63, ho. 12.

Rabiner I... Could 3., '“l'eoriya i prinensniys taifrovoy obrabotki signalov"
[”‘l'heory and Applications of Digital Sinai Processin"), Roam. Mir Publishers,
1978.

10. Oppethein A., INFWATIGI AND mm, 1967, Vol. 11, Nov-Dec.

COPYING“: Radiotekhnika, 1981

8225
CSO: 1860/ 361

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.391.82
PARAMETER SUBSTANTIATION TBGINIWB FOR ELECTRWIC WC! snwwroes

Kosczw72ADIOTEKBNIKA in Russian Vol 36. No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received 16 Apr 80)
PP7"

[Paper by V.V. Kuznetsov, A.A. Lyubomudrov and L.F. Stefanovich]

[Text] Redioelectronic equipment (REA) is frequently subjected to various kinds
of electromagnetic interference (2P) (lightning. industrial interference. etc.).
which leads to operational dropouts or irreversible failures [1]. when protecting
radioelectronic equipment against such interference. tests of noise immunity oc-
cupy a special place, which are being conducted with increasing frequency by means
of specially designed interference simulators [2]. The problem of selecting the
optimal interference simular pulse parameters for the tests has not been solved at
the present time. The difficulties involved in its solution are due to the random
nature of electromagnetic interference, the complexity of generating pulses with
parameters close to the actual ones as well as the diversity of the radioelectronic
equipment to be tested. He shall find the optimal parameters of the test pulses
based on a probabilistic statistical approach to the tests.

The most complete criterion of radioelectronic equipment efficiency operating in
the presence of noise is the successful operation probability, P.u¢., which should
be somewhat greater than a certain probability specified in the technical specifi-
cations, Pspec.o with a confidence level of Pcon.o i.e. [3, 6]:

NPsuc. > Pspec.) - Pcon. (1)

For this reason, it is expedient to simulate the impact of interference on radio
electronic equipment, taking into account the final goal of the test, expressed
mathematically by means of (1).

Let on(n) be the distribution density of the random characteristic P of an
interference field at the radioelectronic equipment input. Depending on the situ-
ation, such a characteristic can be the maximum electrical or magnetic field
intensity, or the current or voltage induced by the electromagnetic field in
cables or interassembly connections [5, 6]. The distribution density O,(ﬂ)
depends on the interference source power and its distance from the rsdioelectronic
equipment. which are. as a rule, of a random nature. The distributions of the

- 22 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristic of n for the case of lightning interference have been found experi-
mentally and theoretically in a nuber of papers [7, 8].

we shall assuae that the timewise characteristics of the interence are either
determinate or averaged. In the case where this condition is not net, to avoid
omissions of frequency resonance, the tiaewise characteristics of the test field
should run through the entire range of variation in the tine characteristics of

the interference which are possible in the given situation during the testing
process.

The parameters of electroaagnetic interference simulators can be substantiated

by means of the following method. we first find the sinimu per-issible level of
system i-unity to interference, corresponding to the successful operation proba-
bility Papec: Then, taking into account the statistical scatter in the interfer-
ence generated by the sinulator, its level is determined for the test. Thus, the
essence of the method consists in determining the mini-‘- interference level which
confirms the minimum persissible successful operation probability PM.

By way of example, we shall consider the case where the transforaation of the
electromagnetic field of the interference in the shields and circuits of radio
electronic equipment and the failures which occur are linear processes. In the
case of linear conversion of the randus quantity ll, there is a change in the
scale of the curve 0,01), while the overall shape of the distribution curve does
not change. The distribution density of the random quantity ll reduced by a factor
of at times is:

MM!) - 9- (8541):. ' (2)

where H1 - III): is the anplitude induced in the i-th radioelectronic casponent.

Let the equipment have a "weak" link, the inunity of which to electrical overloads
is substantially less than the ismunity of the others. The i-unity level M3

[14.] of the "weak" link component to electrical overloads has a statistical scatter
which can be described by the probability density 0.019) . From the equation [9]

Pspec ' Pm"- ; ”(M-W“ 5 ’0 (30 “li’v‘nl- ' (3)

taking (2) into account, we shall find the mini-n permissible attenuation factor
x. of the amplitude of the interference II, at which the specified probability of
successful operation of the equipment Pam is just achieved.

Let the laws governing the scatter sum”) of the interference .plitude from the
simulator be known relative to any nuinal value I“ specified beforehand. We find
the desired interference level 3“,“, for the tests from the following equation:

-23-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(4)

”a

P1. , -5 $9 In.) (M. 31. (1'. M1,)“ (Mu,

where 19‘

For normal distributions of 9'01), kale) and 0.401”) with mean values and mean
square deviations of n, and 0,. me and d, and n“ and a“, we obtain the following
from (3) and (4) respectively following transfornations:

nun-mm)
}- (5)

P1. -0 I
'- {F slim-Ito?

end-loll.) ] '

_P'..-° {m .

(6)

where ﬂy} is the probability integral; am. is the mean square deviation from
the noninal value of amo. An analysis of equations (5) and (6) shows that with
an increase in Papec, x. and Iu,¢ also increase.

For normal distribution of the load and isnmity, the proposed technique can

also be used in the case of an unknown imnity of the components to electrical
overloads. In this case. it is essential to known only the coefficient of vari-
aeion Ue/Ile. the value of which depends on the perfection of the production tech-
nology for the radioelectronic equipment caponents. By dividing the nueretor
and denominator of the expressions inside the curly braces in equation (5) and (6)
by at? [me] and writing xélle - x9, we obtain:

p o 7===%:""". ] p o‘ "a”: }
M- I ‘ulmeu/a)‘ ' ” FMIMr‘l-(g7a' ' (7)

In the case of unknown coefficients of variation tie/ne and calm" we find the
quantity lln.0 from (7). As we see, an increase in the ratio Gel-e. 'H.¢ decreases.
Consequently, for an unknown inunity of the system caponents to electrical over-
loads, the customer designating the interference level for the tests should use

as the basis the smallest possible coefficient of variation of component inunity.
It is expedient to determine the latter in laboratory tests. Moreover, one can
make use of the data for similar components.

-21.-

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the case of a sophisticated production technology for the conponents, equations
(3) and (b) are simplified:

~. ' . ~.- . if" . (8)
Pt. s - 5 ’s (X. "4) 4’. ‘“h Pr.s"_ S 9.. (’01-‘ng (Nb.

With sufficiently good repeatability of the interference anplitude fro. the
sinulator. equation (8) assunes the forn: am. - 11,19.

The nunber of samples for the tests is deter-ined fron Pearson's and Klopper's
formula [’0].

The transformation of the electronagnetic field in radioelectronic equipaent can,
in the soot general case, be the consequence of nonlinear processes. The i-unity
of nonlinear conponente to electrical overloads is no longer described by the
uplitude of the induced voltage (as in the case of linear systels), but rather
by the induced energy or power. men interference flows through nonlinear systeas,
the distributions governing the interference characteristics change their fora.
For this reason, even if the distribution of the i-unity of the individual
systes coaponents to electrical overloads is known. the lav governing the distrib-
ution of the nonlinear syste- i-unity ecrUlc-r) is toast often unknown. We approx-
ilate the distribution of nonlinear system inunity to interference with a norIel
distribution, by specifying a sufficiently low coefficient of variation oer Incl-

He find a certain boundary distribution density fra (3), Oct. 0 (Ear) having.“ a

 

 

mean value of ac-r O and a mean square deviation of My” . , correspond-
ing to the successful operation probability: '64- g” .
' I . (”n-9.5.." '
as ’ .55.. II ‘
P - p 3 ' e “a «n 5"“th
. ac 7.3- '— a . _
P 'nM.0 if: . ‘

 

We determine the desired interference level for the tests, n.0, the scatter in
which is characterized by the distribution density 951.001»), from an equation

 

analogous to (’0' (n ".1";
up; can“. {5 e ‘cv - .40.. e..(n.)¢_n..
3..

-25-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Moreover, when testing nonlinear syetas to find the possible nplitude resonances,
it is necessary to act on one of the samples with s stepped changing load in a
range of variation of n from zero to "mm

1.

3131.108 MY

Nat-0v Yu.Ye. . Avayev ILA. , Bedrelwvskiy H.A., 'TweHIoustoychivost' ustroystv
ns integrsl'nykh logicheskikh skhenskh" ("The Interference Illnnity of Devices
Usim Logic IC's"], Hoscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers. 1975.

Galkin A.P. , Lapin AJL, Snoylav A.G., 'Modelirovsniye kanalov sistsn svyasi"

"Modeling the Channels of Comnicationa Syst-e”], Moscow, Svyss' Publishers.
1979.

Gurvich 1.8.. "lashchita m1 at vneshnikh ponekh" ["Protecting Couputers agath ,
External Interference”, Moscow, lnergiya Publishers, 1975.

Pupkov K.A.: Kostyuk G.A., "Otaenka i plenirovsniye eksperinents" ["l'he Evalua-
tion and Planning of an Experiment”, Moscow, Heshinostroyeniye Publishers,
1977.

Alizady A.A., Khydyrov v.1... BLMICHES‘NO [ELECTRICITY], 1978, No 9.

Bazutkin V.V., Zaporozhchenko 5.1., WIGBS'NO, 1975, No 1.

Bronfnan A.I., "Rezhiny raboty ventil'nykh rezryednikov pri grosovykh peremp-
ryazheniyakh" ("Operational Diodes of Diode Diechergere in the Case of Lightning
Induced mewoltages"}, Moscow, Energiye P‘blishers, 19771

Alizade A.A., Huslinov HJL, Khydyrov LI... WICEBSTVO, 1976, lo 11.

Kapur L., Lanberson L., "Nadezhnost' i proyektirovaniye eisten" ["8ystm Design
and Reliability"]. Moscow Mir Publishers. 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Rad iotekhnika, 1981

8225
C80: 1860/36].

-26-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1100 621.396.669

APPLYING POSINOHIAL ESTIMATE 1'0 EFFICIENCY 0mm OF
EQUIPMENT um! IIIGH ELECTRWHIC MATABILI‘IY INDICATCRS

Moscow RADIOTEIGINIKA in Russian Vol 36, No 6. Jun 81 (nsnuscript received 2 Jan 80)
pp 76-77

[Article by,A.D. Kalushskiy]

[Text] The electromagnetic coepstability (EMS) indicators of equip-ant can be
isproved in the general case by neans of incorporating additional devices '(w)

and by changing the characteristics of the equip-ent itself, for ax-pls, the
lineariration of operational nodes of .plifiers and additional shielding of
assenhlies. This entails a change in a umber of equipeent indicators, and conse-
quently, in equipent efficiency.

The prohlen of obtaining a function for the change in equip-ant efficiency when
inproving its electronagnetic coepstahility indicators is a particularly acute

one new, since an inprovenent in electronagnetic cenpatahility indicators of equip-
sent is accoepsnied by an increase in «uipnent coupluity. size, weight as well

as a degradation of a nuaber of other charscteristics, sonethin wich at a
certain point leads to a reduction of equip-est efficiency es a whole [1]. when
deriving such a function. it is necessary to choose an optima design variant for
the equipent for each value of the electro-sgnetic conpetability indicator and
correspondingly detersine the weighting factors for each of its indicators. The
specific features of this task are those situations where an inprovaent in' electro-
esgnetic coepatibility indicators leads to a slight change in acne of the equip-
nent indicators, vhile others are constant. In this case, a nonlinear estinate

of the efficiency is needed which sakes it possible to ascertain and not lose these
changes. It is expedient to use poeinonials as such estinstes: a nonlinear esti—
nate proposed by R. Deffine, et al. [2}, and used to estinate the efficiency of
cousunicstiona systens by Yum. Vosdvishenskiy [3] . A special case expression for

such an estimate has the forn: .
. LI- [1 at '
, (1)

where I: is the nunber of draft designs of the equipent, each of which has its
own electroeagnetic conpstibility indicator; 1.); is the efficiency of the k-th

-27-

”NEWLY
MR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

design; n“ is the coefficient of success of the i-th indicator of the k-th equip-
nent design; :1 is a coefficient which is defined as the weighting factor of the
i-th equipment indicator. In (1), the quantity Mk can be defined by the relation-
ships of [lo]: na'uh.-'§as-M-h4euu. where on is the value of the i-th indica-
tor of the k-th draft design of the equipment; o1 nin and (:1 m are the best values
of the i-th indicator fro. along the 1: designs considered for the equipment.

To determine the value of 51. we plot the family of
curves n5 for various values of t (see the figure).
Since snall deviations of a fro. n1 m and a: .1“
are seamed, and consequently, also call deviations
of n fro- l, and a significant change in n5, then E
should vary fron l to -, i.e., l g E 3.. At the ease
tine it is apparent that the greater the weighting
factor, the smaller the value of I. should be; lore-
over, the value of the weighting factors 81 usually
falls in a range of 0 to 1. All three conditions
will be net if we set {1 . 1/3 .

The effectiveness of the k-th design in this case
will be defined as:

\1‘

g“
‘ ll
f‘!\‘l‘|
L V.“

:5
r1

 

- (2)
. hgq‘g'l.

By utilizing (2), one can plot the value of the equip-ant effectiveness as a
function of its electronagnetic compatibility indicators for the case of suffic-
inetly small variations in the effectiveness and find the value of the electro-
nagnetic compatibility indicator for which the equip-ant will have the maxim.
efficiency, i.e., determine the optimal design variant of the equipment.

ﬁxmple. We shall consider the design variants of equipnent for two values of

the electromagnetic compatibility indicator (k - 2), in which the case the amber
of indicators is i - 2 and one of the indicators does not change. Let n11 - n12 -
I 0.8; n21 - 0.93; n22 . 0.95; 811 - 812 - 0.7; 821 ' 822 u 0.3. By substituting
the indicated quantities in (2) and using the curves depicted in the figure, we
attain values of the effectiveness of L1 - 0.506 and L2 - 0.576.

The example cited here shows that a difference in the values of only one indicator
by two percent in all leads to a difference in efficiency values by more than ll.
percent, something which makes it possible to sore precisely select the optinl
equipment design variant.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Kaluzhsltiy A.D., RADIOTEIOINIKA, 1981, Vol 36, No 5.

2. Daffin R.. et al., "Geometricheskoye programirovaniye” ["ceosetric Program-
ning"], Hoacow, Hit Publishers. 1972.

-23-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. Vozdvizhenakiy Yu.l.‘., TRUDY ucunm INSTITUTOV SVYAZI [PROCEEDINGS 0? m
CWICATIMS TRAINING INSTITUTES], 1974. No 69.

lo. Okunev Yu.B., Plotnikov V.G., "Printaipy atatanogo podkhoda k proyaktiravaniyu
v tekhnike svyazi" ("The Principles of 13 Sync“ Approach to Design in Canoni-
cations Engineering"], Moscow, Svyu', 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Radiotckhnﬂta, 198]

8225
CSO: 1860/361

-29-

MWLUSEONLY
FORiﬂﬂHCJAl.USE(NVLY

MICROELECTRONICS

UDC 621.37/39.029.64
HAGNETICALLY TUNED SEMICONDUCTOR MICROWAVE DEVICES

Moscow RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian Vol 36, No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
28 Aug 80) PP 23-27

0

[Paper by V.P. Gololobov, v.1. Tsynbal and 6.“. Shelamov]

[Text] The results of a study of various magnetically tuned
microwave devices are given (oscillators, filters, frequency
multipliers, selective mixers, frequency discriminators and
heterodyne frequency converters). The necessity of designing
multifunction complex microwave devices is noted; these include
superheterodyne magnetically magnetically tuned modules.

An urgent question in microwave electronics is the design of combined devices

using solid state resonators (TTR), where these devices take the form of a combina-
tion of ferrite (FR) or dielectric (DR) resonators with semiconductor devices

(Gunn diodes, transistors, varactors, mixer and p-i-n diodes). Such devices include
oscillators, filters, frequency converters and superheterodyne nodules.

In the process of studying semiconductor magnetically tuned microwave devices, in
which ferrite resonators are incorporated by means of one or more coupling turns,
the interaction of ferrite resonators with n turns was analyzed [1], as well as
selective matching networks based on ferrite resonators [2, 3] and ferrite varsctor
networks which provide for fine tuning the ferrite resonator frequency independently
of the level of the magnetizing field [6]; selective circuits based on ferrite res-
onators have been designed for a specified circuit function (input inpedance, trans-
mission factor); microwave devices have been designed in a linear approximation
[3a-8] based on the inpedance and wave parameters of the major conponents which
were measured or calculated beforehand (ferrite resonators and semiconductor de-
vices).

Transistors are used as the active elements in solid state microwave oscillators
for the decimeter hand and Gunn diodes (us) are used for the centimeter and milli-
meter bands. The most promising are dual resonator oscillators [6, 7], which as
compared to single resonator oscillators [9-11] provide for an expansion of the
tuning range, simplification of the tuning and increased frequency stability. Some
three main variants for the design of transistorized oscillators are known using
two solid state resonators [3]: a simple three-point circuit (Figure la, c, d).

a circuit with transformer feedback (Figure lb) and a ”modified" three-point cir-
cuit with a matching transformer. The most widespread circuit for diode microwave

- 3o -

FORIMHWCLALIEE:0NIY
- dielectric
resonstor

 

The authors have proposed the use of veractors [3] for "fast" frequency tuning of
semiconductor uicrowsve Isgnetically tuned oecillstors. eonethiug which is neces-
sary in the realization of phase locked loop frequency tuning systole. Various

Figures lb, f, h and j. Nore suitable are the circuits in which the verector is
connected to s suppleeental turn, which is coupled to one of the ferrite resonators
of the oscillator. A characteristic feature of these circuits is the absence of
additional eleeents for decoupling the power apply for the active suiconductor
device and the versctor control circuit. Moreover. the influence of the verector
in such oscilletors is nastiest only at frequencies close to the ferro-gnetic
resonance frequency (M), while for other methods of verector insertion, self-
excitation of the oscillator is observed at frequencies other than the m
frequency. sonething which is undesirable.

diodes. In the oscillator design in the configuration incted in Figure 111 [12].
the p-i-n diode Dz is connected to one the metric“ leads of the power tep
turn, while the load is connected to the center tsp of this turn. The output
power is reduced with an increase in the current through the diode, i.e., when
its resistance decreases. The constant output power in the frequency ramelie
achieved by the use of an sutastic control eyeteu (mo. the realisation of which
involves the use of detector 03: a heterodyne power level sensor (Figure Ii).

-31-

FOIOFI'IGALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The tuning range of semiconductor oscilla-
tors based on solid state resonators can be
expanded by using the second harmonic of the
generated signal. For this, a waveguide
section is inserted between the oscillator
and the load, a section which blocks the
first harmonic and regularly passes the
second (Figure 1c, g). In this case, the
expansion of the frequency band is not tied
to an increase in the resonator magnetiza-
tion field, and consequently, an increase in
the size and weight of the magnet system.
something which is especially important for
millimeter band oscillators.

The basis for the structural design of
magnetically tuned devices is the microwave
assembly which is placed between the poles
of a magnet system. A radial cylindrical
structural configuration for the microwave
assembly of a dual resonator transistorized
oscillator is shown in Figure 1h. Resonator
holders 2. feed-through capacitors 3 and
coaxial cable sections 6 are installed in
cylindrical housing 1 radially with respect
Figure-2. to the holes in which the set of ferrite
resonator turns are positioned. Such an
arrangement provides for convenience in
assembly, tuning and the replacement of
individual device components.

 

Key: 1. Control voltage, volts;
2. Control current;
3. Output dielectric
resonator;

k' Lo" noise a'pl1f1er' Solid state microwave filters based on

ferrite and dielectric resonators have

been described in numerous papers, for
example, in [4, 13-15]. The utilization of semiconductor devices makes it possible
to adjust and improve the parameters of the filters. Thus, in ferrite filters
with loop coupling elements, the use of a vsractor (Figure 2a) expands the pass-
band by several times [8], while the insertion of a p-i-n diode in the filter
circuitry provides for adjusting the forewsrd loss level by 20 dB for a dual-
resonator bandpass filter (Figure 2b) and by 15 dB for a single resonator stop-
band filter (Figure 2c). The transistor in "active" microwave filters (Figures
2d, e) is inserted between two selective matching four-pole networks, designed
around solid state resontators. Ferrite filters (FR1 and Pkg) having a transfer
gain which can be electrically controlled by means of p-i-n diode D1, are used in
the input device (Figure 2f) as well as a low-noise amplifier HShU and a selective
detector (FR3, oz and D3), designed in a balanced circuit configuration; the
filter and the detector are structurally combined in a single microwave assembly.

- 32 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

figure 3.

Key: 1. Power input;
2. Beat frequency oscillator;
3. Input 1;
. Internsdiate frequency 1 output;
. Input 11;
Interaediate frequency 11 output;
. I! output: -
. Input;
9. p-i-n diode;
10. Autonatic power control;
11. Low frequency output.

ONO“.

 

Frequency nultipliers in which ferrite resonators are used as the selective
systens effectively supplenent and expand the capabilities of seniconductor aicro-
wave oscillators. Multipliers designed in a dual tuned circuit configuration
(figure 2g) possess the best characteristics, in which the nonlinear ale-ant is
inserted between two gang tuned filters, which are tuned to the first and the n-th
harmonic of the oscillator frequency. In a doubler which was studied. the effici-
ency varied free 60 percent to 25 percent in 60 percent of the passband, while
the efficiency of a doubler with a single ferrite filter did not exceed 15 percent

[16].

In the frequency converters described below, the nonlinear elenents are seni-
conductor devices, while the ferrite resonator operates in a linear node.

Selective nixers are designed in various circuit configuration [8, 17], the
major ones of which are shown in figures 3a, b and c. The nixer resonators

are tuned to the input signal frequency or the heterodyne frequency, while in
nixers with a "high" internediate frequency (Figures 3d and e), they are tuned
to the output signal frequency. In the aixer depicted in Figure 3e, the wave-
guide is a regular waveguide for the internediate frequency signal and a blochin
waveguide for the input signals.

A heterodyne frequency converter (Figure 3g) takes the fore of the conbination of
a beat frequency oscillator and a selective nixer. The choice of a balanced
mixer configuration and the tuning of the nixer ferrite resonator to the hetero-
dyne frequency reduces the level of parasitic frequency conponents both at the
input and at the output of the aixer; the attenuation of the back radiation of
the no amounts to -20 dB. A sch-atic of a heterodyne converter designed around
a ferrite mixer is shown in Figure 3h. The ferrite resonator with two orthogonal
windings, one of which (the I! signal power tap coil) is perpendicular to the
direction of the magnetizing field, is placed inside the waveguide, in particular,

-33-

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in a asy-etrical stripline. Such an orientation provides for decoupling between
all of the inputs of the converter on the order of 25 (13. One of the most prefer-
able asynchronous detector circuits from the viewpoint of suppression of hetero-
dyne noise is the converter with an inter-.ediate frequency of zero, which is
shown in Figure 31. In it, the tuned frequencies of the ferrite resonators are
equal, something which facilitates their gang tuning and makes it possible to use
a ferrite filter at the input which is tuned- to the same frequency. the use of
which is not essential, but is desirable fru the viapoint of attenuatim the
impact of "high power" signals on the normal operation of the mixer diodes.

I .I I’m/ll/Il.’ll/I/I/////////

. - ;~ I ,\\\\\\\\x\

_n=il

' v: I I ll mlllll/I/ I I l - III/III

 

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
7
I
/
I
I
/
I
5
//

. ' 7;; 2'5}. :3» E27 'ESBEFEihr-

L------————--——----——.-—

Figure 6 .

Microwave input;

Autonatic intermediate frequency control;
Automatic gain control;

Autonatic intermediate frequency control winding;
Mixer filter;

Coupling winding;

Tuning winding;

. "Level" [control]:

. Autonotic power control:

. Intermediate frequency output;

Cunn diode.

X
t":

H
Owale‘ubuNI-ﬁ
.

e n e e

e

a...
g.-
e

A filter designed around a solid state resonator and semiconductor diodes
which are connected to a winding coupled to one of the resonators are used to-
gether in selective detectors (Figures Zg and 31).

-31.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI “MCI“. [BE ONLY

The sensitivity to a change in the input signal frequency with respect to the
ferronagnetic resonance frequency in nicrowave frequency diacrininators is
achieved by using a system of two mutually nistuned resonators (Figure 3f) .or
one ferrite resonator positioned in a position of orthogonal turns with the
appropriate co-utation of the leads of these turns.

Superheterodyne nicrowave nodules [18] which take the forn of copies: codination
devices perforn the functions of spectra filtering and transposition. Included
in the nodules (Figure 5) are a filter F, beat frequency oscillator c, a
selective nixer 38, an internediate frequency preamplifier MCI: and an A!!! syst-
[autonatic power control]. The filter, beat frequency oscillator and nixer in
the nodule (Figure 4a) are placed inside a single nagnet systen [19, 20], which
contains windings for tuning, coupling and antenatic tuning of the heterodyne
frequency, AFCh: a p-i-n diode is connected to the ferrite filter, to which the
automatic gain control signal is fed. the A]!!! signal, with the appropriate delay.

The tuning of the nodules in a wide frequency range is sccoqlished by changing
the current in the winding; tuning in a narrow range (in the case of a broadband
filter) is accmlished by changing only the heterodyne frequency. The frequency
tuning range of the nodule is governed by the working range of the heterodyne
stage and the degree of natching of the tuning characteristics of the nodule
components. The sensitivity of the nodule depends on the sensitivity of the
selective nixer and the forward losses of the filter; the passband and the inage
rejection are governed by the nud>ers of resonators in the filter. An increase
in the selectivity is achieved by inserting resonator 031 [dielectric resonator l]
at the input to the nodule (Figure 6b) as a stopband filter, the tuned frequency
of which is equal to the image channel frequency. The output signal internediate
frequency, i.e., the difference between the tuned frequencies of the filter and
the beat frequency oscillator, can be set in a range of fru tens to several
hundreds of negaherta by varying the current in the couplim winding.

313]..le

l. Bokrinakaya A.A., Tsydaal v.1. Shelaov 6.8., mmrmnm [RADIO HIGINBERING],
1979, Vol 34. No lo.

2. Toy-be]. v.1., Shela-0V G.N., RADIWIKA, 1978, Vol 33, No 10.

3. Kovbasa A.F.. Shelanov G.N., Gololobov V.F., ‘l'syﬂasl V.I., "Magnitno-upravlys-
yenyye ustroystva SVCh s lineynoy perestroykoy chastoty" ["Hagnetically Control-

led Hicrowave Devices with Linear Frequency Tuning"], Part 1.. "Foluprovodnikov-
yye generatory“ ["8eniconductor Oscillators"), "Rub" Central Scientific Research

Institute, 1977 .

a. Gololobov V.F., Tsynbal V.I.. Shelanov 6.1L. 'Territwyye SVCh resonatory i ikh
prineneniye" ["Ferrite Microwave Resonators and Their Applications"]. Kiev.
"Znaniye" ["Knowledge"l Society of the ukrSSR, 1979.

-35-

MWUSEONLY
5.

6.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

1’0.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tureyeva O.V., Isyubal V.I., Shelaaaorv 6.“. , vasnux KIYEVSIOGO POLITBIHNICBBS-
K060 INSTIWTA. SERRA RADIOTEKHNIKA (BULLETIN: 0? mm POLMICAI. INSTITUTE.
RADIO ENGINEERING SERIES], 1977, No. 110.

Gololobov V.P., Taylbal V.I., Shela-0v 6.1L, IZVBS‘IIYA WZOV SSSR, SBRIYA
RADIOMKTRONIKA [PROCEEDINGS OF THE HIGH! EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES OF THE USSR,
RADIOELECTRONICS SERIES]. 1977, V01 20, No 10.

Toy-bal v.1. , Shelallov G.N., VBSTNIK KIYEVSKOW POLITEKINICEBSIDGO INSTITUTA
SERIYA RADIOTMNIKA, 1978, I10 15.

Cololobov V.P.. Ishchenko M.G., Tureyeva 0.V., Tsydnl V.I., Shela-av, G.N.,
IZVESTIYA VUZOV SSSR, SERRA RADIOEEKTRMKA, 1979, V01 22, Mo 5.

Olluier P. I!!! J. SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, 1972, V01 7, No 1.

Shelanov G.N., IZVESTIYA VUZOV SSSR. SRIYA RADIOSLZKIROI‘IKA, 197‘, Vol 27,
No 8.

Vyz'ninova H.D., et 81., MIRA SEEDSI'V SVYAZI, SERIYA RADIOIZIERITBL'NAYA
TEKHNIKA [CWHIATIONS EQUIPMENT ENGINEERING, RADIO HEASURMI’ m
SERIES], 1976, No 5.

USSR Patent No. 725195, "Generator SVCh“ (”A Microvave Oscillator"], Gololobov,
V.P., Ishchenko M.G. , Miaevich V.I., She1anov G.N., Toy-bal V.I..

Lebed' 8.11., Nikolayeva K.S., SIOI'kov V.I., Paper in the book, "Ferritovyye
SVCh pribory i naterialy" [”Microvave Parrita Device: and Materials"), Moscow,
"Elektronika" All-Union Scientific Research Institute. 1970, Mo 1 (17).

Il'chenko M.Ye., Melkov (LA. , Mirekikh G.A., "Nerdotel'nyye SVCh til'try"
["Solid-State Microwave Filtero”], Kiev, Tekhnika Publishers, 1977.

Kovbasa A.P. , Shelanov 6.1L, Cololobov V.P., Taylbnl V.I., "Magnitno-uprav1ya-
ycnyye ustroystva SVCh s lineynoy pereetroykoy chastoty." ("Magnetically Con-
trolled Microwave Devices vith Linear Frequency Tuning"] , Part 2, "Preobrazo-
voteli uhastoty i fil'try" ["l-‘requency Converters and Filters"), "Ru-b" Cen-
tral Scientific Research Institute, 1978.

Shltov A.M. , Ktreyev V.S., VOPROSY RADIOELEKTRONIKI, SERIYA RADIOIZMERITEL'NAYA
TIJKHNIKA [QUESTIONS 1" RADIOELECTRONICS. RADIO MEASURED?!“ EQUIPm SHIBS],
1974, No 2.

. Cololobov V.P., Ishchenko M.G., Teynbal v.1. Shelnov 6.11., mm 81130811?

SVYAZI, SERIYA RADIOIZMERITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA, 1978, No 6.
Bokrlnskaya A.A.. Tsynbal V.I., Shelanov 6.8., "Analiz i inchernaya realizato-
iya sistem funktsional'noy elektroniki SVCBh diapazona" ["The Ana1ysie and

Engineering Realizations of Microwave Band Functional Electronics System"),
Kiev, "Knoul‘edgc" Society of the UkrSSR, 1979.

-36-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL (SE ONLY

19. 0.5. Patent no. 3839677, c1. 325/646 (noun/261).

20. USSR Patent No. 677018, "Hagnitnaya Slate-a” ("A Magnet Sync-"l. Bobinslulya,
A.A., Gololobov V.P., Hisevich V.I., Tuylbal V.I., Shela-0v 6.3.

COPYRIGHT: Radiotekhnika, 1981

8225
C80: 1860/ 361

-37-

FOIOFI'IGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS, INCLUDING COLLECTIONS OP ABSTRACTS

UDC 621.3.0‘9."

ANALOG INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

Moscow ANALOGOVYYE INTEGEAL'NYYE mom: STEAVOM in Russian 1981
(signed to press 11 May 81) PP 2-3, 160

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Analog Integrated
Circuits", by Boris Petrovich Kudryashov, Yuriy Vssilyevich Nasarov, Boris
Vladiairovich Tarabrin and Viktor Alekseyevich Ushibyshev, reviewer Candidate of
Technical Sciences N. N. Goryunov, Isdatel'stvo "Radio 1 max”, 300,000 copies,
160 pages]

[Text] General intonation is given (classification, designations), along with
electrical parameters and schematics, of serially produced analog 10s in general
use. which are of greatest interest for radio amateurs.

It is intended for a wide range of radio amateurs.

YORWORD

Microelectronics is intensively penetrating all spheres of the national econoay
and radio anateur practice. Specialists and radio amateurs alike are convinced
that radio electronic equipment and very simple devices based on integrated cir-
cuits (1C) combine excellent reliability with small size and weight.

The use of Ic's also makes it easier to calculate and design the functional units
and blocks of radio electronic equipment. By viawing‘ the to as a "black box"
having certain properties, the equipnent designer or radio amateur is freed of
the necessity of calculating the IC component conditions; he need only supply the
electrical conditions for it stated in the technical specifications to obtain the
Ic's guaranteed parameters. For this reason. interest in IC's is steadily
growing.

The task of this book is to familiarize radio amateurs with the technical data
of the most popular classes of analog Ic's. In the authors' opinion, these
include differential and operational amplifiers, which are very widely used. and
high, intermediate and low frequency amplifiers and voltage stabilizers.

As a rule, for each m in this reference book are given the chassis design,
schematic diagram, standard connection circuit. maxiaum and standard operating

conditions, electrical paraneters, and graphs of the parameter dependences on
nodes and conditions of use.

-33-

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The external elements required for aerial 1c operation are given with the
standard connection circuits, which are one of the variations of the 10's use
(generally the main one for differential, BY. 1? and LP awlifiers and voltage
stabilizers and not the main one for operational amplifiers, since their use
without negative feedback is a special case). The electrical parentere of 10‘s
are measured with their connection in a standard circuit according to All-Union
State Standard l9799-7‘ "Integrated Circuits. Hethods of Measuring Electrical
Parameters and Determining Characteristics."

The naximun operating conditions usually exceed the 1c conditions at which its
parameters are measured. Irreversible physical changes do not occur given the
10's operation in the aaxim conditions, but its electrical parameters in such
a case are not standardized by the delivery docuent. Exceeding the maximum
conditions can result in the circuit's failure, accelerated degradation of its
parameters or disruption of operation.

with the exception of specified cases, the tables provide for each 10 model the
worst values of the electrical parameters for the indicated envirogmental tapere-
ture and electrical measurement conditions. For example, ‘all ‘ 10 [sq means
that all aaplifiers of the given model will have a voltage gain greater than or
equal to 50.000.

For nost Ic's, this book gives the standard dependence of electrical parameters
on the use conditions and enviromental temperature. Except for specified cases.
the dependences of electrical parameters on use conditions are given for a normal
(25°C) environmental temperature. The 10 conditions free which the graphs are
taken correspond to those indicated in the electrical parameter tables for the

corresponding parameter. When designing functional radio electronic equipment
units using lc’s, one nust use not the standard electrical parameter values,

but those guaranteed from the electrical parameter tables.

The use of lc's in an actual device is determined by the degree to which their
paraneters (electrical and operational) meet the requirements which the equipment
places on them.

The authors request that all cm“ and suggestions for inproving this work
be sent to: 101000, Moscow. Chistoprudnyy llvd., Isdatel'stvo ”Radio 1 svyas'",
Popular Radio Library Department.

TABLE 0? com

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. General Information on Integrated Hicrocircuits ‘
l .l . Terminology ‘
1.2. Technology and Design 5

- 39 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 2. Differential Alplifiere
Hicrocitcuit K118UD1
Hicrocircuit K17SUV2
Hicrocircuit K17SUV6
Hicrocircuit 198011

Hicrocircuit K198UN1

Chapter 3. Operational Amplifiers
Hicrocircuit Klaouol
Hierocircuit K140005
Microcircuit x1aoune
Hicrocircuit K160007
Hicrocircuit KIAOUDS
Nicrocircuit K1600D9
Hicrocircuit K1400011
Hicrocircuit KlbOUDIZ
Hicrocircuit K286001
Hicrocircuit K285UD2
Hicrocircuit KSbéUDl
Hicrocircuit KSééUDZ
Hicrocircuit K553UD1

Hicrocircuit K553UDZ
:uononnnocwn nwuunr>p
zhnuonnnncun xuuunr>u
:uonoounncun xuowczu
xuononunnc»n Kuqaczu
sunnonunogun ”pagczu
:unnoo»nocun swuaaz~
:uonoonnocnn xpuaczm
:uouonuun=»n upuaazo
:unnoounoenn uku5=np

:unuonunncwn nwuaqwn
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080046-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hicrocircuit K205373
Hicrocircuit K211337S

Hicrocircuit MZMNI
Hicrocircuit K22hA372

Hierocircuit KZZhA373
Microcircuit KZZIIA375

Hicrocircuit K22M3'I6

Chapter 5. Voltage Stabilizers

5.1. Principle of Operation and mic Electrical
Pare-eters

5.2. IC'B KllozYeNI and K162Yellz
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio i met”, 1981.

9875
(:80: 1860/17

-42-

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080046-9
MMLWONLY

ANIMATION All) AIM non m JON TICK-MM WW

Moscow I{RUDY msmvsmco 0mm team I ornm MAN'S!!! WQMII
monsoon msrmm. mum m: m vrsorm MI!
in Russian No 510. 1981 (signed to press ll Pub 81) pp 2. 139-1“

[Text] This collection reflects the results of investigations and studies regarding
the anger scientific schools of thought in the depart-ant of high-voltage technology:
electrical discharges in gases. lightning protection, ineulation of high-voltage
equip-ant, overloads in electrical systens. tasting and electrophysical equip-Int.
electrostatic technology. state electricity. environmtal protection.

This collection is dedicated to the departssnt's 50th anniversary and. therefore,
sons of the articles are surveys.

The inforntion in this collection can be of interest to a broad circle of readers:
scientific workers. engineers and ndergrsduate snd postgraduate students working
and specialising in the field of high-voltage technology.

one 621.3.01
was STAGES m 1'!!! am 01' m berm 0P HIGH-VOLT“?! m

[Abstract of article in Lsrionov. V. P.]

[Text] The nejor schools of thought in educational and scientific research work
are exsnined at various stages of the depart-nt's developmt. This article cher-
scterises the current content of the "High-Voltage Technoloy" departnent. The
major achieve-ants of the departnsnt's scientific divisials and the problem-solving
and specialised lshoratories are described.

UDC 621.315.618
All INVESTIGATIGU OF ELECTRICAL nrscms D! an GAPS
[Abstract of article by Sergeysv. Yu. 6.. Sokolovs. H. V.. and Teresa's. '1'. IL]

[Text] This article provides s hrief overvieu of the basic results of investiga-
tions into electrical discharges conducted at the depart-mt of nigh-Voltage Engi-

neering of the Moscow Power hgineering Institute using pulse and high-frequency
voltages. It presents the principle of the engineering nethod for calculating ini-

tial voltages.
- ‘3 -

”Will“?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.59bz629.735.33
LIGHTNING PARAMETERS AND LIGHTNING PROTECTION

[Abstract of article by Agapov, V. 6., Brekhov, V. 14., Larionov. V. P. and
Sergiyevskaya, I. 11.]

The vulnerability of ground objects and aircraft is engined. A nethod is given
for evaluating the reliability of the lightning protection on aircraft and for
determining the calculated and test paraneters of lightning.

UDC 21.315.62
CALCULATION OF THE ELECTRIC FIELDS 0P INSULATION DESIGNS
[Abstract of article by Kolechitskiy, Ye. 5., end Hoiseyev, V. IL]

[Text] Electric fields of calculated nodels of insulation designs are ua-ined.
A connection is established between the for- of the dielectric interface and the
distortion of the field calculated in a hoeogeneous nediu. The feasibility of
a purposeful selection of the dielectric'a fern in order to reduce field nonuni-
fornity both in dielectrics as well as on their interface is ds-onstrated.

UDC 537 .533 .6 .621 .315 .611 .002. 25

PWER CHARACTERISTICS OF PARTIAL SURFACE DISGAMES AND THEIR APPLICATION FOR
ESTIMATING THE SERVICE LIFE 01’ POLYMER INSULATION

[Abstract of article by Aronov, H. A., Ivanov, A. V., and Rokurkin, H. P.]

[Text] The stages and fares of danage to solid poly-er insulation due to the
effects of partial surface discharges are studied. A criterion is established for
the transsition from erosion dauge to other types of deterioration. The
practicability of utilizing the power characteristics of partial suface discharges
to estimate the service life of polyner insulation is denonstrated. A method for
speeding up the testing of dielectrics is developed.

000 621.313.12:621.315.61.001.5

THE STUDY AND DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRICAL INSULATION POR WERFUL GENERATORS NITN
NOMINAL VOLTAGES OF 110 T0 220 RV

[Abstract of article by Kulikov. I. P.. Ninyayeva. O. V., Hikleyeva. n. V.,
Pintal'. Yu. 5., and Plotnikov. Ye. A.]

[Text] This article cites the basic results regarding the creation of electrical
insulation for stator windings of high-voltage hydrogenerators with noeinal voltages
of 110 to 220 kv These studies were conducted free 1965 to 1980 in the Depart-eat
of High-Voltage Engineering of the Moscow Pover Engineering Institute and at the
"Uralelektrotyazl'naash" [Ural Electrical Heavy Machinery Plant] ileni V. I. Lenin.

-45-

NR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
”MMMY

UM 621.315.2.016.2:621.315.6l‘.62.001.5

A STUDY OF ELECTRICAL INSULATION OP roan CABLES

[Abstract of article by Pintsl', Yu. 5., and shabhgedanova, 8. 11.]

[Text] This article presents the results of an «perinatal study of the charac-
teristics of initial partial discharges in papar-and-oil insulation of oil-filled
cables. It is show that in the paper-and-oil insulatial of oil-filled cables for

110-500 RV networks. initial partial discharges appear at intensities of about
10 kV/.. For this reason. they can detenine the service life of oil-filled cables.
particularly the new cables created for networks with a greatly restricted overload

level.
one 621.372.21

1'!!! mm 01' lLECTRIC-MSMISSIW snuc'ruu um m SEMI“ 0? A m
P03 CALCULATE“: OVERLOADS

[Abstract of article by Basutkin. V. 9., and Dlohhovskaya. 1.. 1'.]

{Text} This article presents a conparison of various aethode of calculation and
shows that standing-wave aethods and integral transfer-tines mks it possible to
detect the effects of various factors upon the anitudaa and (one of ovarloads.

one 621 .316 .935

All MSTIGATM 0P 1.1!! PULSE CHARACTERISTICS OF momma-mm momma
RODS

[Abstract of article by Ryabkova. Ya. Ya.)

[Text] Hethods of calculating the pulse resistance of individual grounding elec-
trodes are pointed out. In order to deteraine the pulse resistance of coqlex
grounding devices. it is proposed that physical aodela be anoyed. Characteris-
tics are cited for a node]. developed in the depath of nigh-Voltage Engineering

of the Moscow Power mgineering Institute.
006 629.735:621.316.98

M AND STUDY OF nan-vanes TEST-PULSE EQUIPMENT

[Abstract of article by bisyayev. A. 8.. Koshekin. I. P.. Minyayev. To. 6., llaynrk.
6. V. and Prokhorov, Ye. 11.]

[Text] This article briefly presents inforntion regarding the para-etera of cur-
rent and voltage test pulses. Relations are derived which associate the pulse para-

neters with para-eters of an equivalent circuit for voltage-pulse gueratora. De-
scriptions are given of circuits, deeima and parameters of voltage and curer
pulse generators intended to investigate a discharge channel up to l n in length

and to conduct tests of lightning i-nity.

-45..

"MANNY
MMLIBSONLY

UDC 621.3.016.33.002.6lb
APPLICATIM 0F PULSE CW5 IN INDUSTRIAL All) WHYSICAL mum

[Abstract of article by Avrutskiy. V. A., Borisov. R. K.. Budovich, V. l...
Kalenikov. A. V.. Kisslev, V. Ye.. loahchiyenko. V. 11.. end lushekin. I. P.]

[Text] This article presents an overview of the work done by the Depart-ant of
high-Voltage Engineering of the Moscow Poser hagineering Institute in the area of
the theory and technique of utilizing powerful current pulses and nagnetic fields
under laboratory conditions end in industry. tor-glee are given for calculating
the operating conditions of high-voltage pulse equipmt.

UDC 621.3.015.001.2A

METHODS OF CALCULATING 1113 FIELD AND BEHAVIOR 01’ PARTICLES name A WA
DISCHARGE

[Abstract of article by Vereshchegin. I. P.. and Horosov. V. 8.]

[Text] This article examines the analytical end nu-ericel nethods of calculating
the field of a unipolar corona discharge. widely used in electrical equip-mt.

Approximated analytical netth of calculation are developed for tvo-din-iaional
fields. The article examines features of the field calculation for corona-forning
electrodes with a varying radius of curve. It presents a neth for calculating

the orientation and covenant of particles in the electrical field of e corms dis-
charge based on the actual for: of the particles.

UDC 62l.359.‘8.662.96
PROCESSES I“ BLEC‘I'ROFILTBRS USED 1‘0 PIIRIIY DUSI'Y GASES

[Abstract of article by hireabekysn. G. 2., and lbkal'skiy, 1.. 1‘.)

[Text] This article presents the results of research into the processes that occur
in the active portion of an electrofilter. Methods of calculation are suggested
which make it possible to deternine the degree of purification of the gas in electro-
filters with small and large input concmtrations of a disperse phase. Relation-
ships are cited which deternine the values of the concentration. starting with which
it is necessary to consider the effect of the disperse phase on the process of par-
ticle capture. The calculated methods give results that agree well with the exper-

inent. Reco-Iendations are given for intensifying the purification process which
can be carried out on industrial equipment.

-66-

MW.MWLY
mammal“

unc 621.359.? s15/s7s.oﬁl.s
MEAL P30038838 DURING m museum 0? A CHARGED Am

[Abstract of article by Vereshchagin. I. P.. lakel'skiy, L. I” and lliraaliékyan.
Ge 2a]

[Text] An analysis is presented of the possible processes of particle charging
during the forntion of a charged aerosol, chief along which are the charging in a
corona-discharge field and induction charging during the break-up of drops in an
electrical field. It is established that sith the condensation foraetion of an
aerosol in the presence of charged ions of steal. there takes place the diffuaim
charging of aerosol particles outside of the discharge gap.

An analysis is conducted of the phsnonana at the output of the charged-aerosol gen-
erator. It is established that with a 40-50 M aerosol charge transfer each second.
discharge phenonsna appear in the initial portion of the charged strsan. It is
shown that the condensation and evaporation of drops of liquid in the charged straan
influence the processes of charge transfer.

000 667.6“ .3:621.3l9.7

PHYSICAL ”(£28888 AND mum POI APPLYING A POLM COATING I! A! ELECTRICAL
PIILD

[Abstract of article by Pashin, H. ".1

[Text] This article exaaines the processes of charging particles of powdered poly-
ner naterials in electropnematic sprayers and in a fluidised layer with the appli-
cation of an electrical field. In the latter case. charging takes place in the field
of a corona discharge. The considerable role of the field of the bulk charge of the
particles of the netsriel in the deposition process is show. A uthod is presented
for netching the characteristics of the high-voltage pover source which insures the
easinua safety of servicing.

unc 537.222.2.001.5
STATIC WHICA‘I'IGI AND WHAT!“ 0P CHARGES Ill LIQUIDS mm B! PMS
[Abstract of article by lbksinov, B. 1., (bukh, A. A.. and Tikhonov, A. v.)

[Text] This article cites the results of research into the electrification of white
oils during their charging in pipelines and railroad tank cars.

A nethod is developed for deternining safe conditions for filling tank cars and the
aerial:- permissible speed for puqing petroleun products at an auto-ted pming sta-
tion is established. An arrange-eat is suggested for the auto-tic control of the

operational nods based on a sensor to nonitor charge density which was developed for
this purpose.

OOPYRIGBT: Hoscovsltiy enargeticheskiy inatitut. 1981
9512

cso: 1860/25
- ‘7 -

mementos“
MWLNONLY

ANNUIATION AND ABSTRACTS FRO)! COLLECTION 'IMPROVING TRACTIONAI. ELECTRIC-DRIVE All)
MSUH’LY SYSTEMS'

Moscow TRUDY mSKOVSKOGO ORDENA LENINA I 01mm OKTYABR'SIOY REVOLTUTSII
BNERGETICHBSKOGO INSTITUTA. TEHATICHBSKIY MIR: SOVESHENS‘NOVANIYB SIS‘I’D‘
TYAGOVOGO ELEKTROPRIVODA I ELEKTROSNABZHBNIYA in Russian No ‘93. 1980 (signed to
press 11 Dec 80) pp 2. 169-179

[Text] This topical collection includes articles vritten by staff asters and grad-
uate students in the department of electrical transport using the results of a scien-
tific ennination of tractional electric-drive and power-supply system for various
types of rolling stock for trunkline and urban electric transport.

This collection is of interest to scientific workers and engineers engaged in letters
relating to tractional electric drive and power supply.

UN 621.336.001
EXAMINATION OF THE RELIABILITY AND STABILITY OF FIBERGLASS TROLL“ sows

[Abstract of article by Yefrenov. I. 8., Isayev, I. P., Savina. ‘l’. I.. Hatveyevich,
A. P., Pusankov. A. D., and Kozlov, L. 6.]

[Text] Criteria are established for evaluating the fatigue strength of fiberglass
boo-us of a trolley bus current collector. A description is given of a vibration
test bench based on the electronagnetic principle and results of fatigue-strength
tests of booms are presented.

The article suggests expressions for deteraining the service life of the boons
based on results of the tests.

000 621.335:658.562.001.5
AN EXPERIMENTAL TESTING UNIT FOR TROLLEY BUS DIAGNOSTICS

[Abstract of article by Aksenov. N. 0.. Ozhigin. V. P., Sevost'yanov. A. M" and
Strenovskaya, G. P.]

[Text] This article describes the design of an experinental testing unit for con-
prehensive trolley bus diagnostics. The construction and operational principles
of the testing unit's individual asselbliss and hardware are examined.

-43-

”WNW“?
MWLISEMLY

UDC 629.113.6.629.ll9

AN APPARATUS M rm cannon OF A m 308 (II All mm DIAMSTIC
WIT

[Abstract of article by Ozhigin. V. P.. Kalashnikov. B. 6.. Arshinov. 8. A.. and
Prokudin. V. P.]

[Text] This article substantiates the necessity of creating an apparatus for renote
control of a trolley bue on an experinantal testing unit. Specifications for the
apparatus are dreun up. A description is presented of the apparetna's design and
electrical circuitry.

000 629.113.62:658.56

A mm» M RAPID DETECTION OF FAULTS mmcmcmcons OIA 210-93 1301.1."
808

[Abstract of article by Arshinov. s. A.)

[Test] This article exanines and analyses the sethods for rapid detection of faults
in the control circuits of a 210-93 trolley bus. A nethod is suggested for rapid
detection of faults in the trolley bus's control circuits using a logic circuit.

UDC 629.113.8629.!”

PRINCIPLES OF CNSTRWTING DIAGNOSTIC m roe TE! can-3.01. SYSTDl 01' A m
BUS'S WRISTOR PULSE VOLTAGE nncuumc

[Abstract of article by Glushenkov. V. A.]

[Text] This article examines the principles of constructing diagnostic equip-ant
for the control systen of a trolley bue's thyristor pulse voltage regulator. These
principles lake it possible to quickly detect a nlfmctioning aseedly at the re-
placeable circuit board level. a: the basis of the analysis of the flow sheet of
the systes, s ache-tic is developed for an autonsted control systen.

UDC 629.113.6:629.ll9

A PULSE SELECTOR M DIAGNOSIS 0? m W10 comm UNIT 0? A lVZ-‘I mu!
CAR

[Abstract of article by Nikolayev, V. IL]
[Text] This article exanines the circuit for a pulse-duration selector constructed
on the basis of integrated nicrocircuits. Tina diners-e are presented for the cir-

cuits nejor points. The application of the selector in diagnostic systeas is re-
conended. _

-‘9-

lawman“
MMLWEONLY

UDC 621.335.421.311.

AN ANALYSIS 01’ 111E DYNAMIC PROCESSES IN CLOSED SISTERS 0? “13181303 PULSE-WIDTH
REGULATION

[Abstract of article by lonerov. V. 6.]

[Text] This article exanines a syste- of thyristor pulse-width regulation and its
characteristics as a nonlinear pulse system. Based on the actual structure of a

pulse-width nodulator. an analytical expression is derived which describes the dy-
nanic process of modulation and which establishes the physical essence of dynamic

distortion in pulse-width modulators. The influence of these dynanic distortions
in open and closed systens is analyzed.

UDC 621.382.2.072:629.113.016

A STABILIZED LOU-VOLTAGE POWER SOURCE FOR A M CAR ELECTRONIC mow. UNIT WITH
A THYRIS‘I‘OR-PULSE SYSTEM OF REGULATION

[Abstract of article by Kos'kin. 0. A., and Suslov. B. Ye.)

[Text] This article examines a stabilized low-voltage power source consisting of

a pulse voltage stabilizer. a control circuit for the stabilizer's power transis-
tor made tron a unijmction transistor, a fixed-voltage converter with an autonatic-
start circuit and a unit for protecting the transistor of the current regulator.

UDC 621.382.2.072:629.113.014
A DEVICE FOR DEFINING THE cunm'r SETTING IN A TRACTIONAL ELWIC DRIVE

[Abstract of article by Sualov. B. Ye.. and Kryuchkov, A. A.]

[Text] This article examines a contactless device for defining current setting
which consists of a voltage sensor. a rotating transformer and two operational am-

plifiers turned on through a circuit of a cowarator with positive feedback and
an integrator.

UDC 621.337.5.2:621.382.8
A TIME-TO-PULSE ammo-Pom SENSOR

[Abstract of article by Kiryukhin. Yu. 5., and Guyber. 0.]

[Text] This article examines a nicroelectronic-based computer for calculating
braking power. The computer has enhanced stability of its characteristics due to
the introduction of negative feedback into the circuit. The conputer is intended
for use in auto-atic electric-braking control systems for electric drives.
[-0. OFFICIAL US! MY

.4

unc 621.3lb.57:621.335.‘2
A STATIC coumm FOR SUBWAYS
[Abstract of article by Krasnov. V. L. Herchenko,v. A. P., and Lisin. A. V.)

[Text] This article enmines a static converter for supplying the excitation
windings of sunny car traction actors.

The static converter is designed to supply the excitation windings of «buy car
traction motors vith regulated direct-current voltage and is configured with an
independent parallel inverter to shoes output are connected regulated thyristor
rectifiers. The article examines the operational characteristics of the static
converter under sway conditions. These characteristics determine the selection
of the schesatic and the parameters of individual ele-ents. A test model of the
static converter proved reliable during test has on a YeZh-type car. Experiaantal
load characteristics and diagrams of the static converter's working process are
presented.

UDC 621.337-52.001.5

[Abstract of article by Tralthtman, L. 14., larpov. Yu. A., and Staroduov, V. 8.]

[Text] This article presents specifications for a systen intended to generate con-
trol pulses for a thyristor rectifier-inverter converter with enhanced power charac-
teristics. Control of the converter requires four pulses during each half-cycle

of the circuit voltage. The phase angle of these pulses depends upon the mode of
operation (tractive or braking) and the aspitude of the load current (writing or
pulse). A block disgraa is presented and the operation of the control systen is
described. This systea is based on a digital principle of tins-interval snip-ant
which insures the towerature stability of the phase angles of pulse delivery alder
the indicated operational nodes.

000 629.‘23.3l:621.316.6

A ROTOR-POSITION AND kOTATIONAL-PRBQUBNCY VARIABLE-MUCH)!“ PICKUP POI A m
m

[Abstract of article by mlupov. V. 1).. and Kovslev. Yu. 1.]

[Text] Results are presented fron the developnent of a rotor-position variable-
reluctance pickup based on a self-oscillator with sequential shift of position and
negative feedback vith respect to alternating current.

A block diagran is presented for a digital rotational-frequency sensor for thyratron

notors. This sensor utilizes intonation obtained tron the output of the rotor-
position pickup.

-51-

”WWMY
FOIOFFICIALLSEONLY

UDC 621.337-52.001.5

A COITROL-SICNAL CWATOR FOR AN AUTOMTIC CONTROL SYSTEM 0? All AC ELECTRIC TRAIN
WITH SEPARATE EXCITATION OF THE TRACTION MOTORS

[Abstract of article by Panov, V. P.]

[Text] This article proposes a system of automatic tractive-free control for an
Ac electric train with separate excitation of the traction motors. It mmines

a method of switching from voltage to current regulation of traction-motor excita-
tion. It describes a block diagram that provides for this transition (a control-
signal comtator) and the processes that arise in this case.

UDc 621.3.017.8
POUER INDICATORS 0P PULSE-FREQUENCY REGULATION ON AN ELECTRIC TRAIN
[Abstract of article by Sure. I. 6.. Khevsuriany. I. H” and Shevchsnko, V. V.]

[Text] This article presents the results of tractivs power testing of an electric
train at a voltage of 6 kV Dc with pulse-frequency voltage regulation of the tree-
tion motors and with the train's internal needs being supplied from a static thy-
ristor converter. A comparison is made of the experimental and calculated power
indicators of electric rolling stock in traditional and regenerative-braking modes.

UDC 621.335:62l.3l‘.6.57

SUITABILITY OI" APPLICATION O!" A STATIC TEYRISTOR CONVERTER PM SUPPLYING TEE INTER-
NAL NEEDS OF AN ER-Z ELECTRIC TRAIN

[Abstract of article by Bayryyeva. L. 8., and Shevchenlto, V. V.]

[Text] This article exanines the suitability of using static thyristor converters
to replace electromechanical converters to supply the internal needs of an Ell-2
electric train. A converter layout is suggested based on an inverter-with two
commutator circuits. The article examines the operation of this converter under
various types of operation and compares the converters with respect to power and
dimensional indicators.

UDC 621.316.72

TRANSIENT CHARACTERISTICS 0? DC ELECTRIC TRACTION MORS SUPPLED BY A PULSE-
FREQUENCY CONVERTER

[Abstract of article by Bayryyeva. L. 8.]
[Text] As a result of calculations applied to UPI-110A and DPB-bOO traction motors

and the parameters of pulse-frequency converters installed on rolling stock, it

is shown that there is a reduction in current surges which arise during supply-
voltage differences. These surges are reduced by more than a factor of two in com-
parison with the standard supply system. Results of experimental testing are cited.

-52-

FOR OFFICIAL I.“ ONLY
mmrmmv

t

UDC 621.316.6
A STUDY OF RECTIFIERS m A nun-nun 3mm) RIDGE-TYPE sacrum ABM!

._|.-:

[Abstract of article by Arsenastsev, N. V.)

[Text] This article exanines the operational characteristics of diodes sndthyris-
tors in a heavy-duty regulated bridge-type rectifier connected at the output of

a static converter. It presents a aethod of determining losses in the rectifiers
of a bridge-type rectifier aaseﬁly end provides reco-udations for reducing these
losses. It also gives the results of experimtal testing of e ISO-W static con-
verter on a VL-II-OOI electric train.

UDC 621.316:681.335.7

A STUDY OF AN INTEGRATED HICROCIICUIT calm SYSTE! FOR AN nature TRAIN 9m
PULSE REGULATION -

[Abstract of article by Bederova, A. It, and Knkushkin, 8. P.]

[Text] This article presents results fron the construction of an integrated eicro-
circuit control systen for thyristor converters on electric rolling stock with pulse
regulation. It provides the foundation for selecting the eleeentary basis for the
develop-ant of integrated nicrocircuit control systole and an evaluatim of their
reliability.

000 621.335.“
A POUR-CIRCUIT LAYOUT FOR SUBWAY CABS WITH WWW-838m name
[Abstract of article by Tulupov, V. 0., Herchenkov. A. P., and Lyapunova. II. 1).]

[Text] This article exasines the feasibility of re-equipping lass-produced subway
care with a separate autonatic systee of regulated excitation of the traction actors.
The primary advantage of this systee is the energy saving (about 30 parent) due

to the application of regenerative braking despite the presence of ballistic resis-
tors in the arnature circuits. included for ninteining a high braking effect.
Purely resistive braking resuins as substitute braking at low speeds end in case

of accident. The article presents an arrange-ant of subway-car power circuits which
realizes the tractional node of operation as well as the regenerative and rheostatic
braking.

UDC 621.313.339

FEATURES OF SELECTING m CAPACITANCE VALUB 01’ A FILTER IN A mm mm arm
AMONOUS m'rons AND U111] PARALLEL email 0? W mums

[Abstract of article by Stepanov. A. 1)., Anders, V. 1.. Bogstin, A. A., Kolobov,
H. 6.. and Ivanov. V. 1.]

[Text] ‘lasic relationships are presented for the selection of capacitance for e
frequency-converter filter. In selecting the filter capacitance, the parallel oper-
ation of several frequency converters upon it is taken into consideration.

-53...

”WNW!”
MWMONLY

UDC 621.3356

PRINCIPLES OF CONTROLLING WES WITH SEPARATE EXCITATION FOR INDIVIDUAL DRIVE-
WEEL TRACTIONAL EQUIPMENT '

[Abstract of article by Ustinov, A. V.. thov, Tu. A.. and Shadrin. V. A.]

[Text] Examined are questions of control of DC motors with separate excitation
in the presence of individual excitation regulators and series connection of motors
when there are a great many drive wheels. Recouendations are provided for con-

structing a systen of automatic excitation regulation during tractional and braking
operation. An alternative for the schematic of such a systen is suggested which
is configured using integrated microcircuits.

unc 625.282-681.325.6

A METHOD OF SYNTHESIZINC LOGIC DEVICES HITN REPEATED CYCLICAL VARIATIM OP TEE INPUT
VARIABLES

[Abstract of article by Nabebin, A. A., and Prechisskiy, V. A.]

[Text] This article examines a nethod of synthesizing logic circuits whose graph-
scheme is represented by nany identical cycles of variables. based on the enqle

of a device for switching poles in the AC electric transnission of s self-cmtained
locomotive.

UN 621.335.2

TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC ASPECTS OF TEE APPLICATION 01" AC ELECTRIC TRANSMISSINS
NITROUT INTERMEDIATE (XJNVERTERS IN SELF-“TAM LOCMTIVES

[Abstract of article by Prechisskiy. V. A.. Novikov, V. A., Chernyahov, V. A..
Trofimenko. V. I.. and Barten'yev, 0. V.]

[Text] This article cites the results of technical and econonic calculations which
point out the suitability of utilizing an electrical transmission with commutator-

less Ac motors without internediateconvarters in self-contained loconotives. par-
ticularly in those with multishaft gas-turbine engines.

U'DC 629.6lk.l:62l.636-61.00£. 18

ENERGETICS OF SHUNTING OPERATIONS AND THE PROSPECT OP MENTION FOR DIESEL SHUNT
LOCOKH‘IVES

[Abstract of article by Boldov. N. A.. and Bkhatt. D. P.]

[Text] This article shows the suitability and practicability of utilising regener-
ative braking on diesel ahmt locomotives and presents the basic circuit arrange-
ments for and characteristics of regeneration. It evaluates the efficiency of re-

generative layouts which result in improved shunting operation with a simultaneous

reduction in fuel losses and brake-block replace-cut, as well as a reduction in
pollution of the environment.

-51...

WWWONLV
“WISEONLY

UDC 621.313.13

on I'll: SELECTION OF LIGHT-DUTY TRACTION moss k

[Abstract of article by Stepanov. A. 1).. Anders. V. 1., boldov, A. IL, and
Safronov. A. V.]

[Text] An analysis is ends of existing notor design fron the standpoint of their
utilization as traction aotora in transportation squipnsnt. The notors are conpared
with respect to the active-surface utilisation factor.

UDC 621.316z632.001.5

EFFECT OF TIACTIW IDA!) ON THE SEBVIQ LIFE OF RECTIFIERS OPERATING IN IBCTIFTING
ACTION SUBSTATIMS OF STREET CARS AND W 30888

[Abstract of article by Yefrenov. l. 8.. and Kalaalnikov. B. 6.]

[Text] This article presents a nethod for evaluating the effect of a cyclical trac-
tion load on fatigue deterioration of seniconductor power rectifisrs operating in
converter substations of street cars and trolley buses. Benita are cited for the
deterioration of silicon power rectifiers in street car and trolley bus substations.

onc 621.33l:621.3ll.03l

A STUDY 0? THE POWER CHARACTERISTICS OF A MIG-DRIVE SYSTEM FOR NICE-SPEED SUI-
PACB TRANSPORTATION

[Abstract of article by Dolabsridse, G. P., and Stroyev. V. P.)

[Text] This article exanines an algoritl. for designing a power-supply systen for
high-speed surface transportation on unetic suspension with linear synchronous
traction notors. Values for the supply voltage. the power factor and the etficincy
of the system are fend for the various lengths of the winding sections in the active
active structure depending upon the notor's excitation current.

000 621.331.021.516.93:621.3l§.5
A STANDARDIZED coumm UNIT FOR STAT! MIC“. TRUST SUBSTATIWS

[Abstract of article by Zagaynov, II. A.. Chibieov, A. 11., Osipov, V. Te., and
Haksinova. L. A.]

[Text] This article emines a unit desiped to supply a State Blectrical Ttust
contact systea in decentralised as well as centralised supply systens. Systsns

are described for the control and protection of the unit under ensrgency conditions.
An analysis is nade of the electroaemetic processes arising during external shorting
of the rectifier with respect to the zero supply circuit. A calculation is ends

of the dependence of short-circuit current peaks upon the lngth of the supply cable.

-55-

summon“
F0! “MAI. [8! ONLY

1100 621.314.5-716:621.382.026

AN INVESTIGATION 0? TI]! mm 0? DBSIGNS FOR A mum cow/um WITH NATURAL
All COOLING UPON THE THERMAL CHARACTERISTICS 0? mm MIS‘NRS

[Abstract of article by Nikol'ekiy. I. K.)

[Text] Reenlto are cited of experimtcl studios of the effect of the design for
a rectifier cue upon the steady-cute booting of e ‘1'630 thyristor body with an

0A-032 cooler when a single power unit and three 8“". [power eeniconductor device]
are situated in the coapartnent.

,COPYRIGRT: Hoekovekiy energetichukiy inetitut, 1980

.9512
cso: 1860/23

-55-

“WNW?
summon“

NOTATION AND ABSTRACTS nae JOURNAL 'mmws AND DEVICES FOR PRODUCING AND PRO-
CESSING RADIO SIGMLS'

Moscow TRUDY KISKOVSKOGO ORDINA LENINA I ORDENA OKTYABR'SXUY RNOIJ'UISII
ENERGBTICHBSKOGO INSTITUTA. TEHATICHBSKIY 8m: MBTODY l USTIOYSTVA WAIT“
I OBRA30TKI RADIOSIGNALOV in Russian No 663. 1930 (signed to press 22 Jan 80) PP 2.
101-107

[Text] The articles in this collection are devoted to the pressing theoretical

and practical questions of the production and processing of signals in various types
of radio equipaent. A nuﬁer of articles analyse the principles of construction

of precision phase-locking co-lnication cysts-a. They also amine prohleas of
increasing the quality of signals with phase and frequency aodulation. Considerable
attention is devoted to the study of netth for i-proving the quality characteris-
tics of sisal-processing equip-ant. Questions are emined regarding the determi-
nation of the structure and paraneters of the optima analog and digital filters
for extracting a legitimte signal. The results of research into the perforaence
of data systems in tense of error probability are cited. The articles exasine ee-
thods for isproving the quality of equip-mt intended for the reception and pro-
cessing of optical signals as well as of transistor enlifiars and active filters.

This collection can be useful for specialists working in the area of radio-receiver
and radio-transaitter technology.

we 621.391.535
m STRUCTURE OF RADIO SIGIIALS MATCHED RITE LINE FILTERS
[Abstract of article by Sudakov. 8. 8.]
[Text] A random linear radio circuit is exanined as a latched filter for specific
radio signals. A structure is fond for radio aimls which are latched with:
1) a parallel oscillatory circuit; 2) a balancing aixer loaded on an oscillatory

circuit; 3) a euperheterodyue receiver with s radio-frequency elplifier; 4) a super-
heterodyne receiver with double frequency conversion.

-57-

MWMMY
mmtmmv

UDC 621.391.82
SIA'I‘ISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF A DATA SYSTEM wrm FEEDBACK
[Abstract of article by Bystrov. s. T.)

[Text] This article describes a data systen with feedback in which. during the data-
trananission process. a change in the aqlification factor of the transceiving sec-
tion is achieved by means of the introduction into the systen of a parametric multi-
plier with dependent pumping. It is shown that the introduction of this elenent

into the systen makes it possible to achieve a given probability of error and accu-
rate data transnissicn with lower gains in the data channel than in a systen without

dependent pumping.
UDC 621.398.505
DIGITAL KALHAN PILTER FOR A SIGNAL IN THE PORK 01' A QUADEATIC Pommm.

[Abstract of article by Denisov, S. A.. and Rakov, V. [.1

[Text] This article exaaines the construction of a transient digital filter which,
in an optimal fashion. separates a legitimate signal in the for. of a quadratic
polynomial with random coefficients from a blend of the signal with noise. The
method of construction consists of synthesizing an analog filter prototype which
solves a given problem in continuous time and of making a subsequent transition
using one of the known methods to a digital filter. The feasibility of constructing
such a filter using nicroproceseors of various word length is evaluated.

000 621.391.82
SENSITIVITY OF A DATA SYSTEM wrm P-BACK
[Abstract of article by Botnev. V. N., and Omaha. 8. A.)

[Text] This article exanines a data system with feedback in which the trenuaitter.
oscillation-propagation mediun. receiver and non-noisy feecbaclr channel fora a
closed dynamic system, since it is possible to establish either a self-excitation
or a damped-oscillation node in it. It is shown that the sensitivity of the systen
under investigation is close to the sensitivity of a system with phase nodulation
but. in contrast to the latter, does not require phase locking.

UDC 62l.396.962.2
EVALUATING THE EFFECTIVENESS 0F PASSIVE-NOISE SUPPRESSION
[Abstract of article by Razgonyayev. Yu. V.]
[Text] This article analyzes the effectiveness of application of loving-target
selection using continuous-radiation Doppler radar with coherent analog accmlation.
It is shown that the introduction of such an indication in the presence of intense

passive interference with a symetrical power spectrum gives a 3 dB gain in the
threahhold signal in comparison with a receiver without selection.

-53-

momaatmaowu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ho;-

UDC 62l.383:535.2‘l:778.35.03

ON THE WUIVALBICY OP FREQUENCY AND SPATIAL-FREQUENCY mamas II WOO-WC
AIALYZBRS

[Abstract of article by Blagorodov. A. 11.. Vsnetsian. B. A., Danilov. B. V..
Shsrw, Yu. V. and Shtykhno, V. V.]

[Text] A noncoherent optical correlator (nor) is stained fro. the standpoint of
the phenonenon of spatial resonance. It is shown that with the help of filtration
of the output power signal of the ROI, an equivalent transforastion of the spectrua
of spatial frequencies of the output inage can be carried out. The article cites
the results of a conputer calculation of the weighted spectral heronic co-
efficients of the output signal.

 

 

 

UDC 621.391 £22.01:621.396.621.2:621.396.232

on THE “0188 FACTOR OF THE LINEAR SBCTIN OP A RADIO mm "m A WW!-
DIODB DETECTOR

[Abstract of article by Osipov. Ya. Ya.)

[Text] 0n the basis of an analysis of the coherence of high-frequency noise at

the p-n junction of a aeniconductor diode operating as an HP detector in a radio
receiver, high-frequency noise reflected free the input of the detector and high-
frequency noise arriving at the input of the radio receiver, an expression is derived
for the noise factor in the In? section of the radio receiver with reQect to the
output passed to the p-n junction of the detector diode. Conditions are deter-lined
mder which this noise factor can be replaced with a known noise factor with reqect

to the output reflected fron the input of the I? detector.
"DC 621.356.76

TRANSFORMATIOR OF T-SYSTEH NOISE PARAMETERS USING LINEAR UHF 0mm

[Abstract of article by Kurushin, A. A.. and Teltahev, v. 3.]

[Text] Relationships are presented for calculating the primary noise paranaters
in a T-systen of various connections for two noisy quadripoles: parallel. series
and cascade. This article exanines the influence of external feedback on the trans-

sitting and noise characteristics of Iicroweve transistors.

UDC 621.375.6(088.8) (520)

HINIMIZING “ovum DIS‘IOR‘IIO" IN MSISTOR AMPLIFIERS
[Abstract of article by Bogatyrev. Ye. A.. and Grebenko. Tu. A.)

[Text] This article exaaines the question of reducing nonlinear distortion in tran-

sistor alplifiers. In order to describe the nonlinear properties of aqlifiers.
an apparatus of functional Volterra series is used. The following procedure is

suggested for synthesizing a highly linear asplifiar: l) the develop-ant of base
- 59 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOFFICIALISSONLV

saplifier nodules which describe a fractional Volterra series with a zero kernel
of the second order; 2) the synthesis of a block diagrsn for connecting aqlifier
nodules which describes a functional Volterra series with s zero kernel of the
third order.

008 621.372.“
NOISE CHARACTERISTICS OF ACTIVE RESISTm-CAPACITIVB PILTBRS OF 1113 ssoonn ORDER
[Abstract of article by Kapustyan, v. 1.]

[Text] This article cowares the noise characteristics of certain second-order
circuits which have received the broadest practical application. The calculated
relationships derived are presumed in a forn convenient for engineering calcula-
tions. Methods are determined for expanding the dynanic range of the circuits
exanined.

UDC 621.373.52.001

INFLUENCE OF DUTY LOAD ON THE SYNCHRONIZATION BAND 0? SELF-EXCITED TRANSISTOR
OSCILLATORS

[Abstract of article by Artenenkov. S. I... Sanoylenko, 0. 1., and Snol’skiy. 8. IL]

[Text] With the help of calculations node on a digital canister, the influence-

of a transistor'a duty load on the size of a self-excited oecilletor's synchronisa-
tion band is analyzed. The analysis was carried out for a piecewise nodal of an
active elenent. This article examines the behavior of resonance characteristics
and the local stability of steady-state synchronous nodes of self-excited oscil-
lators. It exanines the influence of certain paraneters of synchronised self-ex-
cited oscillatore on their synchronous band.

006 621.373.121.11; 621.376.32

PARASITIC AMPLITUDE MODULATION "1TB FREQUENCY msmnou 0F OSCILLATIONS 0]? SINGLE-
CIRCUIT OSCILLATORS .

[Abstract of article by Laut, 1.. 1].]

[Text] The 'abbreviated" differential equations derived earlier for single-circuit
generators of frequency-modulated oscillations are solved together with the equation
for the bias circuit. The active element is treated as inertialess. Using the
expressions derived for the variable cowonants of the amplitude of the oscillations,
the article examines the influence of the bias circuit paraneters on the parasitic
amplitude modulation.

~60-

POIOFI‘ICIALUSEONLY
“WMMV

use 621.37‘.‘
BAND CHARACTERISTICS OF SINGLE-CIRCUIT VARAC‘IOR FREQUENCY DIVERS

[Abstract of article by ®"yedkov. A. P., and ‘Durkin. A. A.]

[Test] This article presents an accurate usth for deter-ining the separation
band of varactor frequency dividers with a piecewise characteristic.

The article canines circuits with external and autoaatic bias. The dependence
of the separation bandwidth upon the nautituds of the bias and the resistance of
the sutohias with various dalpings in the circuit are derived.

000 621.397
ON CALCULATING 11m WLINGS IN m SW ACTIVE PHASE!) m ARIAYS

[Abstract of article by Bikmrsin. R. 8.. Dvornikov. A. A., and Nov, A. 3.]

[Text] This article examines the influence of intercouplinga on the operation of
an active two-elenant phased antenna array in which self-exciting oscillators or
regenerative mlifiers are used as active nodules. It daunstrates the feasibility
of narrowing the band of external synchronization of active self-exciting oscillator
modules. The article also points out the occurrence of instability in the operation
of active regenerative-amplifier nodules.

unc 621.373.8
CHARACTERISTICS OF DDDBLING TRANSIENTS IN LASERS USING mm mm monks
[Abstract of article by Il'in. Yu. 3.. and Konstantinov. V. 3.]

[Text] This article examines the types of and reasons for instability in the opera-
tion of a laser nodal coeposed of a HIV-18 analog coQuter using Stats-Mrs equa-
tions in accordance with the standard nethodology. Dy leans of a qualitative analy-
sis of the nodel's phase plane, the article densestratss the deciding role of fluc-
tuations in the aachine variables and the error in the polygonal approximation of

the integration operation of the mltiplication block in the ioraation of instabil-
ity effects.

UDC 621.317.?

HILTIDWSIMAL INTERCOM. PEAS! AU'I‘OALIGNIRG srsrms um nan-neonate! M-
was

[Abstract of article by Kapranov. H. V.]
[Text] Matrix differential equations are derived for multidimensional intercon-
nected phase autoaligning systens of rando- atructure with frequncy conversion

of many external signals. This article also exanines frequency-conversion natrices
for various nethods of organizing the partial rings into an interacting collective.

-51-

mammals“
MWLISEWLY

UDC 621.373.078.6.001
TRACKING PHASE AU’IOALIGNHENT wrm INTEGRATED CONTROL

[Abstract of article by Kurochkina. ‘1'. 1.]

[Text] This article examines the feasibility of utilizing a system of phase auto-
alignment of frequency with integrated control based on frequency-phase sutoelipment
in order to track the linearly varying frequency of a signal. This article deter-
mines the dependence of the critical rate of tracking and the noise bend upon the
parameters of such a system. It also uses these indicators to camera a phase auto-
aligning system having integrated control with a phase autotming system having

an ideal proportional integrating filter.

000 621.3%.2

AN ANALYSIS OF THE STABILITY OF A HUTUAL-SYNCMIZATION SYSTEM RITE mo SPAIIAILY
SEPARATBD SELF-EXCITING OSCILLATORS

[Abstract of article by Getta. r. 6.]

[Text] The phase-plane method is used to investigate the stability of a large mtual
synchronization system of two spatially separated self-exciting generators. Cut-
off points are determined for the occurrence of synchronous, quasi-synchronous and
asynchronous operation depending upon time delays in the co-unication channel.

UDC 621.396.96

SYNTHESIS OF A FILTER IN A SYSTEM FOR AUTOMATIC CORRECTION OF REGULAR DIS‘NRTIOR
OF A LINEAR-FREQUENCY WOULATRD SIGNAL

[Abstract of article by Belov, L. A.]

[Text] This article presents a synthesis of several filter variants in a feedback
circuit of a system for autoalignment of regular distortion in s linear-frequency
modulated signal formed after the feedback circuit. A calculation is made of the
errors between cadence points and their dispersion with various system para-stars.

UDC 621.396.96

DISTORTION OF WIDEBAND SIGNALS WITH LINEAR FREQUENCY WOULATION IN PHASE!) ANTENNA
ARRAYS

[Abstract of article by Tomskiy, A. PL]

[Text] This article examines the reasons for distortion of wideband signals with
linear frequency modulation when passing through a phased antenna array. An expres-
sion is presented which describes the form of the signal's linear-frequency modulation
envelope after passage through a phased antenna array, and results are cited for

the calculation of the signal's linear-frequency modulation envelope with various
angles of reception of the signal by the phased antenna array.

COPYRIGHT: Moskovskiy energeticheskiy institut, 1980

9512 - 62 -
CSO: 1860/22

FOIOFI'ICIALUSEWLY
“WWWLY

ANNOTATIGI All) ABSTRACTS PKG! COLLECTION 'umms AND HEARS P03 opulent-1m OF
ELECTRWICAL WIS AND SYSTDIS'

Hoscow mum EDSKOVSKOGO mm m I om WWW! WWII
ENERGETICHESKOGO msurun. mncunsrn sum: m I WA OPIMZATSII
umormmrcnrsrrxn m I 8181’!!! in lussian lo 500. 1980 (sigmd to press
29 Jan 81) pp 2. 129-136

[Text] This collection reflects the new directions in research on electric drives,
electrical machinery and electrical devices. The articles present new nthods for
the study and optinization of electronschenicel elemts and systems.

A greet any of the articles are devoted to discrete drives which hsve received
broad spplicstion in the USSR end abroad in vsrious auto-ted systsns. this collec-
tion presents the results of studies which have considerable sconosic significance.

Questions are emined regarding the construction of optinl systsae for robots
and mnipulstors as well as regarding the opti-l design of electrical sschinery.
Also studied are features of the dialog sethod of solving design prohlne which
rates it possible to effectively carry out the design of electronechenicsl devices
end equipnent so well as s nude: of pressing questions regarding the building of
such spparatus.

This collection is intended for engineers engaged in the development and operation
of auto-sted electric drives. their slenents and the auto-tic systsea in which

the given drives are emloyed. The collection can also he useful for undergradnete
and postgraduate students in the corresponding specialities.

UDC 621.313.334.33.”

A some P0031. 0P SINGLE-PHASE STEP MRS AND A STUDY 0? QUASI-SIAI'IC mass 01’ om-
anon

[Abstract of article by Kulevoksys. Ye. L]

[Text] Quasi-static step nodes are snelyticslly euninsd on e power nodel of s
single-phase step sotor. As s result of en msination of the operationel control
over excess-energy end metered pulses, it is shown that the best notivs perfornsnce

and highest efficiency with control of excess-Clergy pulses is had by motors with
e greet ssny working hernonics which insure s high coefficient of nonsy-srry for

-53-

mammal“
5'0. Ol-‘ﬁCIAl. USE ONLY

the angular momentum characteristics. ﬂith control of the metered pulses. the best
indicators are had by motors with two working harmonics.

UN 621.313-133.22

METHODS FOR MWING THE norm PWCB PM QUASI-S‘IA‘I'IC STEP OPRA‘IIGI 0?
SINGLE-PHASE STEP MORS

[Abstract of article by Knanetsova. 0. 11.]

[Text] This article examines certain questions regarding the elimination of speed

fluctuations in single-phase step motors whose fixing moment has the same periodi-

city aa an electromagnetic motor. A mathematical expression is presented for de-

termining the time of movement of the rotor in such a motor with start-stop control.
UDC 6243:621.313.13-i33.k

A STUDY 01’ 1'32 OPERATION OF A SINGLE-PHASE STEP m WITH SINGLE-POL! 61111301. I!
THE AU’I’OSWI‘NHING none. BASED ON A HATHDWHCAL MODEL

[Abstract of article by (bukhov. N. A.]
[Text] This article exanines the high-frequency operating conditions for a single-
phase step motor with single-pole control and which is closed with respect to tin
rotor position. Step-motor characteristics are presented in polynomial fore.

UDC 621.313.13-133.3.001.33
A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF INDUCTIVB AND CAPACITIVB STEP ms um GAS SUPPORTS
[Abstract of article by Kopylov. A. 1.]
[Text] This article compares the maximum specific forces developed by inductive
and capacitive step motors having two versions of geonetrical configuration for
the toothed area. It demonstrates the feasibility of utilizing capacitive plane
step motors with gas supports in precision-positioning systens.

UDC 621.313.323-133.22

ELECTROMAGNETIC FORCE OF A LINEAR PERMANENT-HAM mm
[Abstract of article by Hoshchinskiy. Yu. A.. and Kiryakin. A. A.]
[Text] This article derives an expression for the force of a linear step-type per-

manent-magnet electric motor based on the magnetic resistance of the permanent ug-
nets. An expression is derived for the mximm force.

-61...

FOIOFFICIALISEONLY
nos 09510“. US! ONLY

one 62l.3l3.323-l33.32
DYNAHIC EQUATIONS OF A m-COORDINAIE STEP m
[Abstract of article by Hoshchinskiy. Yu. A., and Kopylov, A. 1.]

[Text] This article derives general dynanic equations for a two-coordinate step
sotor based on dynamic equations for a free rigid body.

~ :-

UN 621.313.17

NOEL 01'" AN AUNHA‘I'IC PM RDGULA‘IOR FOR (INSULATING m CWISTICS OF AN
ASYNCHRG'OUS m‘roa IN THE [)1ch MODE

[Abstract of article by Dnitriyev, K. H.. and lumetsov. N. L.]

[Text] A model is suggested for an sutonstic power regulator which makes it pos-
sible to study the characteristics of asynchronous notors under transient and
steady-state operating conditions. It also ashes it possible to derive polynonial
relationships between the parameters of asynchronous notors using nethods of planned
experiment and to obtain series 6A scale-less drawings.

“00 621.313.323-133.22

WODS OP IMPROVING THE )DTIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF SINGLE-PEA“ mm 81!? minus
Ill SHADY-STATE OPERATION

[Abstract of article by Popovich. Ye. A.. and Kusnetsova. 0. a.)

[Text] It is shown that a directed selection of the nuter and nagnituds of pulsing
and stationary fields can be used to conplstsly eliminate speed fluctuations in
single-phase step notors in the two most characteristic nodes of operation for these

actors: in synchronous rotation when fed a sinusoidal current and when operated
as a contectless DC notor supplied with squarewmve pulsed current.

UDC 621.313.3

A METHOD OF DETERMINING THE ZERO-P081110“ DWI“ 01’ ROTATING mums m
m TEMPERATURE OF THE ENVIRONMENT VARIBS

[Abstract of article by Shnayder-n, L. M., and Vinson, '1'. 11.]
[rest] An indirect method is suggested for determining the zero~position deflection

of rotating transforners which is associated with the detersination of e.n.£. fluc-
tuations in a square winding.

-55-

mmmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.313.065.57.072.9;621.316.57/001.5

RBACTIVE FACTOR OI" EDDY CURRENTS IN THE ROTOR CORE 0? SYNCHRMOUS ALTERNATE“;-
CURRENT MACHINERY

[Abstract of article by Shapiro. L. Ye.. and Isetergsnov, N. T.]

[Text] An expression is derin for the reactive factor of eddy currents in the
rotor core of synchronous alternating-current machinery when the core is constructed
from sheets of relatively great thickness. Curves are presented which show the
dependence of the eddy-current reactive factor upon the ratio of the plates' thick-

ness to the depth of electromagnetic-wave penetration.

unc 621.313.2301.

EFFECT OF LIQUID-INSULATOR VISCOSITY W T!!! EFFICImCY AND om PARAMETERS 0?
DIRECT-CURRENT MOTORS

[Abstract of article by Tokarev, B. F., Kholod, Yu. D., and Sadykov, s. P.]

[Text] Results are presented from “BBSH” electronic computer calculations for
an optima-efficiency submersible Dc motor based on the effect of the viscosity
of the liquid insulator. The calculated data can be used to select a liquid dielec-

tric for submersible motors.
UDC 621.313

SBLECTIGI OF THE OPTIMUM WEI! 0F TURNS FOR BXCITBR names 01’ mm HITR
SHIELDED ROLES

[Abstract of articl- by Sentyurikhin, N. 1.]

[Text] This article examines the problen of specific optiaization of the length
and winding data for motors with shielded poles. when a series of motors is de-
simed, it often becomes necessary to utilize this or that transverse configuration

for motors of various outputs. This dictates the necessity of optimizing the wind-
ing data for the given configuration of stator plates. The maxim possible effi-

ciency of the notor when restrictions have been placed upon the ratios of the start-
ing and mxinua torques and the magnitude of the net output is used as the criterion

for the optimizing operation.
UDC 62143.001A

0N SELECTING A CRITERION FOR OP‘I‘D‘IIZING MOTORS IN ELECTRIC DIRECT DRIVES

[Abstract of article by Tsatsenkin, V. K.]

[Text] In the majority of cases in practice. an electric motor must provide a given
rate of acceleration to a mechanism. It is shown that in a direct drive there

exists a simple connection between the optima diameter of the rotor in an electric
motor and the given acceleration and machine constants. This article examines con-

-66-

F'OROFI'ICIALUSEMLY
MWWONLY

ditions for the physical realization of a motor with optimum dimnsions or the utili-
zation of other optimization criteria—for crawls. a mini-1m of losses in the cop-
per of the armature.

UDC 621433.001
A SEALED STEP ELECTRIC DRIVE H111! 5mm» STEP FOR HANIPULAMS
[Abstract of article by Rothanskiy, Yu. 2.] M

[Text] It is shown that the application of a step electric drive for sealed step-
type metalworking equipment has a nudaer of adavantagea in comerison with the app-
lication of a Dc drive and makes it possible to increase the drive's nominal torque.

UDC 621.316.8

DIALOG METHOD OF OPTIMIZATIm--AN 3mm MEANS OF 80!.va 1113 mm 0? DESIGNING
ELECTROHECRANICAL DEVICES AND murmur

[Abstract of article by Vysotkiy, A. P., Kolmakova. L. A., and Zaytaev, Yu. v.1

[Text] This article examines and analyses questions regarding the use of the dialog
method of optimization in order to solve the problem of designing electrmchanical
devices and equipment.

The article cites the characteristics of the dialog method of solving the problem
of design and shows its advantages over the usual methods of calculation and deeiu
which are used at present by desimers of instruments and devices.

Likewise analysed are features of the dialog method of solving design problems-
features which make it possible to effectively design electromechanical instruments

and devices.
unc 621.316.8

SEMICWDUCTOR WSISTORS FOR sum-cm DEVICES 0P ELECTRIC DRIVES

[Abstract of article by Zayteev, Yu. V., Zharnovskiy. V. A.. Iron, 1’. 8., and
Kolmekova, L. A.)

[Text] This article examines questions regarding the use of ssaiconductor power
thernoresistors based on oxides and monocrystsls of semiconducting materials for
start-control devices of electric drives and cites the characteristics of semi-
conductor power thernoresistors. hawlas are given of the application of semi-
conductor thermoresistors for electric-motor start-control devices.

-57..

“MIN“?
ruminant»!

000 621.318

WMTIWOFMPWBOPMWWHAMMMW
RELAY

[Abstract of article by Shoffe. V. II, and Davydov. 8. V.)

[Text] This article denonstretes the feasibility of deternining the perneance of
the naming rleerance in a ay-etrical sealed reed relay by loans of neeeuring the
auxin-m negnetic flu in the contact cores and the e.n.f. betuen thee. An qiri-
cal fomla is derived for calculating the pernnce of the naming clearance. The
results of the calculation are centered vith'data obtained using know formulas.

unc 621.313.3251
mm WEALIX SEAL- DC mas
[Abstract of article by Gertaov. s. lb. and Inyaeev, V. IL]

[Text] A description is presented of a nee type of nc notor which has a fixed ene-
ture winding with a collector and a rotating inductor and brush assetly.

The hernetic sealing from the output aide of the shaft is accoeplished by intro-
ducing a nonnagnetic screen into the bore of the stator. The rotation fro. the

rotor (inductor) of the electric actor is transmitted to the brush easedply through
the screen by neens of a aagnetic clutch.

A description is presented of the possible design alternatives; operational and

dynanic characteristics are given (under transient conditions); a conperiaon is
node with the traditional types of ac notora.

unc 621.318.5(088.8)
CALCULATION OF THE “ANNIE FORCE NEEDED TO TRIGGER A DIAPHRAGM-m3 RELAY
[Abstract of article by Pushkov, A. 8., and Novikov. A. 6.]
[Text] This article examines a neth for calculating the nmtonotive force
needed to trigger a diaphrap-type relay using an equivalent negnetic circuit de-
rived fron an analysis of aagnstic flux distribution under experinental conditions.

Specific design features are indicated and analytical expressions are cited for
the calculation of the perneence. The calculated error does not exceed 14 percent.

UDC 621.313
PREDICTING SPARKLBSS COHHJ'IATIW FOR DC MTORS AT m DESIGN STAGE

[Abstract of article by Volkov, V. 8.]

[Text] This article examines the influence of nature-winding paraneters on the
range of the sparklees—operation zone. lhe range of the sperkleaa-operetion zone

-68..

mmuaemv
ms MAI. USE ONLY

is inversely proportional to the upitude of the reactive e.a.£. A aethod of eye-
teaatised experimt is teoyed to establish the influence of each of the para-
meters and their fluctuations upon the nagnitnde of the DD? [expansion not provided].

one 621.313.323-m.b:621.313.'s

A MATHEMATICAL [ODE]. OF A summons mum HIM M WING VARIATIWS
IR RUIA‘I'IG'

[Abstract of article by Kumeteov. V. V.]
[Text] This article presents a method of quantitative analysis of the rotational
instability of synchronous reluctance nicronotors based on the narration of the
core and the discreteness of the windings. The nethod is based upon a systen of
differential equations cowoeed by the nethod of conductance of toothed contours.
UDC 621.313
FRASIBLE METHODS FOR REDUCING TEMPERATURE ms IN lOIATIlG TRANSFORMERS
[Abstract of article by Shnaydernan, L. 11., and Vlasova, T. 14.]

[Text] This article exaaines the reasons for the appearance of temerature errors
in rotating transforners. Design and experinsntal nethods are presented for re-
ducing these errors.

UDC 621.-52.001.2
A UNIVERSAL POWER AMPLIFIER M A DISCRETE MIC DRIVE
[Abstract of article by Balkovoy. A. P., Pishnov, A. 6.. and hyorov. V. V.)
[Text] This article exanines a sealed-data current-control acheutic of a power
asplifier for a discrete electric drive. The conclusion is reached that the given
circuit insures high power indicators thanks to the feasibility of regnerating the

kinetic-energy of the drive's moving ease and the electro-gnetic energy of the
actor's windings.

UDC 621.313.323
METHODS OF DESIGNING ELECTRIC 317.9 ms

(Abstract of article by Novakovskaya. 2. D.. Popovich, Ye. A.. Kusnetsov, V. V..
and Pimkina. H. V.]

[Text] Methods are exaained for designing electric step notors using physical
nodels. active experinent and calculations on digital coquters.

COPYRIGHT: Hoskovskiy energeticheskiy institut. 1980

9512
080: 1860/210

-59-

mammalian!
M WHOM. USE ONLY

ANNOTATIM AND ABSTRACTS non COLLECTION 'PHYSICS 01’ SEMICONDUCTOR HAW AID
DZVICBS'

Moscow TRUDY MSKOVSKOGO mm mm I 01mm “TYADI'SKOY WWII
MWTICIIESKOGO INSTITUTA. TDIATICHBSKIY SW11: FIZIIA 1’“.me
MATERIALOV I PRIBOROV in Russian No 512. 1981 (sighed to press 9 Feb 81) pp 2. 75-80

[Text] This collection includes articles devoted to the investigation of the
electrophysical. optical, galvano-gnetic and acoustoelectronic properties of a.
broad class of I-VI, IIeVI and III-V ssniconductor cowomds and solid solutions. as
well as silicon and oxides of zirconium. madiun. yttriu- and scandiul. A War
of studies examine the physical processes taking place in nonocrystalline p-type
semiconductor structures. photovoltaic cells end inclination-power asters.

This colLection will be useful to a wide circle of readers—scientific workers
and engineers working in the areas of deriving, investigating and applying various
ssniconductor materials as well as for undergraduate and graduate students in the
upper classes ofothe corresponding specialities.

UDC 621.383.“:566.28.001.5

ERICIWCY OF MSIGV OP “WHO RADIATION DY C(IWENTIMAI. AND rum
PHOTOVO‘LTAIC CELLS

[Abstract of article by Vasil'yev, A. PL, Yemkov, B. V.. and Rosintsova, H. 3.]
[Text] This study col-pares the efficiency of conventional and planer photovoltaic

cells. Results are cited for calculations of optional values of efficiency and
irradiance for the two types with various values of the relative base thickness.

L3"; 535.231.6:537 .326

TEMP .;:;‘\‘l’i'2': DEPENDENCE OF THE .QE"'S:'.‘;VITY OF SEEN-BASED DEVICES FOR MEASURING
THE '31?" o!" OPTICAL RADIATION

[Abstract of article by Aleksandr-0v. Yu. V., and Sharikin. V. 17.]

[Text] This article examines the telperature depmdence of the sensitivity of
ideal devices for eeasuring the pouer of optical radiation using silicon thermo-
piles. It is denonstrated that the nature of the telperature dependence of the

-70-

“WMMY
“WWW?

eenaitivity is determined by the neter'a denial. The value for the temperature
variation in the thermal conductivity of silicon is pointed out.

UM 539.120.14335‘6J7
PBOTOSHUSITIVB mow PARAMETER “MANOR 0P (2r+ IONS IN ZINC mum

[Abstract of article by Corn, 1. A.. and Chernyy, v. 1).]

[Text] This article experimentally exaninee the spectrum of optical excitation
of photosensitive electron para-amatic resonance of (2r+ ions in a nonocryatel of

zinc aelenide. a power model ie suggested for the level of Cr“ and Cr" in. in
zinc aalenide.

UDC 53931166855232

CALCULATION OF 1'!!! ELECTROPHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 01’ PIN! PARTICLES Ill msuua
FILES

[Abstract of article by Podlubin, L. 1., Avilova, I. V., and Chuchlkina, 1.. 1a.]

[Text] The density-Emotional method ie enployed for fine netsllic particles with
a considerable eurface curve. A calculation is ads of the profile of electron

deneity. the electric potential distribution. the eurface energy and the operation
of the output. The contributions of the kinetic. exchange. correlation. nonmiforn

and Coulodl'a comonenta are taken into eccomt. It is show that none of the in-
teracting nechanislae can be ignored.

UN 5373”.”

DETERMINING m OPTIDIIH ALLOY LEVEL 0! 811.1001 Am M mnmlc DEVICBS 088!)
1'0 MEASURE m PM 0? OPTICAL RADIATIG'

[Abstract of article by Berta. H. P.. and lbchelova, 1.. Yu.)

[Text] This article exaninea the teqlersture dependence of the differential ther-l
e.s.f. of silicon with various alloy levels. and. on the heaie of the results ob-
tained, provides reco-endationa regarding the euitability of utilization of low-
resiatance silicon whoee differential thernel e.n.f. is in the region of euper-
heeting determined by the instrunent's dynsnic range and. for all practical pur-
poeea. ia not tewerature dependent.

UDC 561.133

Ian-mt or sum. ADDITIONS or ALLOYS on m nac'mlcu. catwcnnrr or A muo-
CRY S‘i'.\L 0.92:03—0 . “203

[Abatract of article by Gruzdev. A. 1., and Ryaesntsev, A. 1).]

[Text] within a broad range of teweratures. measurements are ends of the mtual
and electron conduction of nonocryatala of solid solutions of 0.9 Roz-0.09 1,0,-

-71-

”WNW?
MOFI’ICIALIJSBONLY

0.01 ano, and 0.9 Roz-0.097 Y20,-0.003 nexoy. where Ln is the rare earth ele-
sent and He is an elenent of the iron group. A reduction is detected in the acti-
vation energy of the mutual and electron conductance with an increase in the atolic
nuaber of the rare-earth elenent.

UDC 536.29.001.5
MANIFESTA‘HON OF THE QUANTUM DIMENSIGIAI. EFFECT n1 acwsmuscromc INTERACTION
[Abstract of article by Gsvrilin. V. 1., Gulyayev. A. H.. and Bashkirov. A. H.]

[Text] This article exssines the effect of the thickness of e eesiconductor fil-
on the interaction of an electrical field of a surface acoustic wave with free
carriers in the file. It is pointed out that the effect of dinensianal quantiza-
tion leads to oscillations of the ecoustoelectrical current in a structure with
a film of variable thickness.

unc 535.37:566.lo7

FLUCTUATIWS IN CMOSITION AND THE NATURE OF “WWI” IN LOU-RESISTANCE
MNOCRYSTALS 0P ZINC SULFIDB ALLOYED WITH ALWUH

[Abstract of article by Horozova, N. K., Galstyan, V. 6.. wratove. V. I. and
Filipova, V. A.]

[Text] Using the spectra of nicrocathode luminescence. a study nus conducted of
the nonuniform distribution of aluminum and oxygen in nonocrystale of sphalerite
grown f ran a melt.

' unc 621.315.5s3:621.3ns.s92

THE APPLICATIOR 0F ELECTROACOUS‘I'IC METHODS roe STUDYING INTERNAL ELBC‘RICAL rmns
IN DISORDBRED MATERIALS

[Abstract of article by Borovov, G. 1.. and Voronkov. E. It]

[Text] It is shown that acoustic oscillations appear in a nudner of vitreous
chalcogenide semiconductors under the application of an alternating electrical
field. Cooling to 150 to llO’K brings the natsrial to a ferroelectric state. In
silicon-based nonocrystal p-type seniconductor structures. the aqlitude of the
acoustic signal depends upon the magnitude and the sign of the fixed bias. This
article points out the feasibility of studying the processes of captured-charge
relaxation.

UDC 906.167.21.535

EFFECT OF HEAT TREATMENT ON THE RESIDUAL MDIIITIVITY OP ZINC OXIDE moments
GROW BY THE HYDROTHERHAL SYNTHESIS METHOD

[Abstract of article by Malov. H. 11., and Mendakov. H. [1.]

[Text] This article exasines the kinetics of attenuation, the quasi-static volt-
asnpere characteristics and the teqersture dependence of the residual conductivity

-72-

“WNW?
I703 MAL USE ONLY

factor of sawlea out along the (0001). (0001). (1010) and (1011) faces of hydro-
thernal mocrystals of zinc oxide. depending upon the conditions under which they
were gram and heat-treated. The best angles for an optical unory systen prove
to be those crystals which are out along the (0001) and (1010) crystal faces and
which mdergo treatnent in air in a suspension of lithiun carbonate.

"DC S37.3ll.33:621.382.323
81.80130“ “3311.117 1'“ THIN LAYERS 0? 811.1“ 0!! SAPPHIRE

[Abstract of article by Snotraltov, A. A.. Soldatoy, V. 8.. Varlashov, 1. 3., and
Kalinin. A. v.]

[Text] This article eqloys the f ield-effect and Ball-effect nethods to amine
ailicon-on-aapphire p-type f illae with a silicon layer 0.6 un think. It is estab-
lished that the concentration and nobility of electrons decreases along a line away
from the jmction with the silicon oxide. A calculatim is nade of the nobility
profile in a proposal which suggests that the najor dispersion nechaniana are dis-
persion on charged dislocations and on the surface. Good correlations are obtained
between the calculated and experilental data.

UN 621.315.592

INVESTIGATION 01’ THE nmmsomm AND W108 snow 0? 2130
3mm WIYSTALS

[Abstract of article by Khirin. V. IL. and Virchenko. 8. Ye.]

[Text] This article exaainea the electroreflection and electroahaorption spectra
of ZnSe mocrystals at 77.3‘K depending upon the Iagnitude of the nodulating
voltage at a frequency of 36S Ila. A hound-exciton band is detected on the neutral
acceptor in the electroreflection apectrun, while impurity-absorption bands are
found in the electroahsorption spectra.

000 539.216:5L6.£2.28:543
INFRARED TRANSMISSION SPECTRUH 0P YScO
[Abstract of article by [Ii-ova, 3. IL. Uskova. z. A.. and Polyekova. 1. K.)

[text] The transmission spectra of oxides of yttriun. scandiu and yttrium acandiate
are exanined. The infrared band of the yttriu acandiate trensniasion spectrum
18 identified.

000 $46.681.l71.1.5‘6.681.682

OPTICAL AND ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES OF EPITAXIAL LAYERS 0! GALLIUH NITRIDB IMIATBD
BY ELECTIONS VIII! ENERGIES 0F 0.1-1.0 HOV

[Abstract of article by Karentnikov, 1. A., Hironenko, L. 8., Buronov, A. 6., and
Kuznetaov, A. V.)

[Text] Through the use of optical and electrical neasurenents, a determination
is made of the "threshold" energy of for-nation of donor-type radiation defects

-73-

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in galliun nitride. Results are presented of a theoretical calculation of the
possible concentration of defects in szblattices of gslliun end nitrogen which
appear as a result of radiation. A proposal is aede regarding the presence of
inurity defects in the layers in considerable quantity due to hydrogai.

UN 621.315.592

USE OF THE REACTIVB SPU'I'TERING METHOD TO OBTAIN VARADIUH DIOXIDE FILMS 0N METALLIC
SUBSTRATES

[Abstract of article by Hokrousov. V. V.. Kotnetov, V. 11.. Dmitriyev. V. A.,
Borodin. A. 8., Khanin. V. A., and Belyabov, V. 1.]

[Text] This article examines the properties of vanadium dioxide films on metallic
substrates of Al. Cr, V. Ni. Re and Pt. It is shom that the greatest light con-
trast between phases.with a phase shift of Al-substrats reflectors is echiaved with

an oxide layer 1650 A thick. Examination of the other substances requires further
development of methods for deposition of oxide layers as well as measures directed

at improving the adhesion of V02 to metallic substrates.
UDC “8.55:535

OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF CuCl POWERS OBTAINED BY VARIOUS METHODS

[Abstract of article by Boroshneva. T. V.]

[Text] An investigation is made of the diffuse-reflection and cathode-luminescence
spectra in the low-temperature range for analytically pure CuCl powders and for
powders obtained by pulverizing nonocrystals. The spectral position, intensity
and half-thickness of the reflection and cathode-luminescence bands are analysed.

unc 5108:55

GROUT" AND OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF CuCl HONGIRYSTALS

[Abstract of article by shalimova, K. V.. Boroshnevs. T. V., and Dobrshchanakiy,
c. F.]

[Text] Monocrystals of CuCl are grown using the Bridgman method with the intro-
duction of various fluxes into the initial mixture. Reflection spectra are obtained
as well as photoluminescence and excitation spectra for the monocrystsls grown.
Analysis and identification of the spectral bands is carried out.

UDC 546.47 21.535.376

LUHINBSCENCE OP BOUND EXCITONS IN ZINC OXIDE
[Abstract of article by Kutepova, V. P.. and Halov, H. H.]

[Text] This article identifies for the first tine the ultraviolet luminescence
bands of zinc oxide caused by the radiation annihilation of excitons localized on

-74-

”WISE“?
MWWONLY

singly and doubly ionized interstitial atone of zinc oxide, lithium and eodim and
on ions of lithiu and eodiu which create acceptor defects when replaced with zinc.

UDC S“.67.21.$35
OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF ZINC 03mm mus
[Abstract of article by Agafontoev. V. 1.]

[Text] This article exaninee the low-teqerature spectra of lunineacence. excita-
tion and reflection for zinc orthotitenate povdere obtained by the ozolate method

and subjected to cheeical treatment to renove free zinc oxide. An identification
of the spectrum obtained is node.

COPYRIGHT: Hoekovekiy energeticheekiy inetitut, 1981

9512
(:80: 1860/21

-75-

mammomv
F0lr0F11C1Al.USE(MNLY

UDC [62l.59:621.37.39] :629.12
CRYOGENIC ELECTRONICS IN MARINE RADIO BQUIPHINT

Leningrad KRIOGBNNAYA ELEKTRONIKA V HORSKOH RADIOOUORUDOVAIII in Russian 1980
(signed to press 8 Jul 80) pp 2-3, 222-223

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Cryogenic llectronics in
Marine Radio Equipment", by Yevgeniy Germanovich Pashchenko. Anatoliy Hikhaylovich
Pozherov and Viktor Vasil'yevich Tikhonov, Isdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 753
copies. 226 pages]

[Text] An analysis is provided of the effectiveness of using cooled and super-
conducting electronic units in marine radio equipment. New types of devices
based on the phenomenon of superconductivity are studied. Their physical nature.
operating principle and possibilities of production are reviewed. The book
contains a survey of domestic and foreign works published at various times in the
periodical literature, as well as results of the authors' research.

It is intended for engineering and technical personnel, marine radio equipment
designers, VUZ students, and a wide range of specialists working on developing
low-noise radio equipment.

Illustrations: 118. Tables: 12. Bibliography: 133 titles.
Foreword

Developers and designers of radio equipment for maritime uses are currently
devoting increasing attention to cryogenic electronics as a means of raising the
quality of marine radio equipment. For example, by using extensive cooling it is
theoretically possible to lower the dimensions of certain types of antennas, raise
the frequency selectivity and total noise of immunity of radio electronic equip-
ment while raising its sensitivity. increase the directional properties of
electrically small serials, etc. However, the conditions under which cryogenic
radio electronic equipment is used at sea are very specific, which determines
both the maximum allowable characteristics of cryogenic radio electronic equip-
ment and its effectiveness. and the advisability of using intense cooling under
sea conditions.

This book examines the possibilities of raising the basic electrical parameters
of radio electronic equipment in the use of cryogenic temperatures, with con-
sideration of certain specific features characteristic of such equipment's use
at sea.

- 75 -

FOR 051NC1AI.USEi0NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first chapter briefly explains the basics of cryogenic radio electronics.

The second and third chapters are devoted to the theory and technology of scanner
assemblies. The limit characteristics of superconducting antennas. the effect

of the deck. superstructure and sea water on then, and their design features are
examined. The question is investigated of the possibility of reducing the size
and increasing the sensitivity and spatial selectivity of scanners.

The fourth chaper examines cooled latching devices and preselectors.

The fifth and sixth chapters are devoted to anplifying and heterodyne devices,
built both on transistors and on specific components based on superconductivity
physics effects.

The last chapter is devoted to technological and operational features of cryo-
electronic sea radio equipment. including cryogenic provision of cooled units of
radio electronic equipment of narine facilities.

All the chapters were written jointly by the authors. V. V. Oshiyko and
E. T. Krylov participated in writing sections b.2 and 4.3.; section 3.3 was
written by 0. C. Vendik.

Certain questions discussed in the book sight be controversial. The authors
will be grateful for comments and suggestions on the book‘s contents.

The authors wish to express their gratitude to Professor V. I. Vinokurov and
Candidate of Technical Sciences A. N. Patrov. whose eminents and suggestions
helped to inprove the book.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Conventional Symbols 5
Chapter 1. The Foundations of Cryogenic Radio Electronics 5
1.1. Some information from low teaperature physics 5
1.2. Hyperconductors and superconductors in a variable
electronagnetic field 15
1.3. Josephson effects and quantua interference 20
l.b. The properties of superconductors at low temperatures 32
Chapter 2. Foundations of Theory and Design of Superconducting
Marine Antennas 39
2.1. Function of superconducting antennas and their general
characteristics 39

- 17 -

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.2.

2.3.
2.6.

2.5.

Chapter 3 .

3.1.

3.2.
3.3.
Chapter lo.

6.1.

10.2.
‘03.
Chapter 5.

5.1.

5.2.

.3.

5.1..
Chapter 6.
6.1.
6.2.
6.3.

FOR OFHGAI. USE ONLY

Basic paraneters of superconducting antennas and nethods
of determining than

Maxi-u characteristics of superconducting antennas

Effect of the deck and superstructure of a ship on the
parameters of superconducting antennas

Energy characteristics of superconducting antennas in
sea vatdr '

Design features of superconducting antenna devices

Superconducting antenna devices for underwater
research

Shortwave superconducting antenna devices
Superdirective antennas
Cooled matching devices and preselectors

Superconducting antenna latching principles and
devices

Certain features of superconducting preselectors
Hyperconductor preselectors and their effectiveness
Cooled anplifying and heterodyne transistorised devices

Static characteristics of field effect transistors ‘
given cooling to Ice tenperatures '.

Noise paraneters of cooled anplifiers uith m

Ezra-plea of naking cooled levunoisa transistoriud
anplifiers

Cooled heterodyne devices
Superconducting amplifiers
Cryotror.;c anplifiers
Superconducting parametric anplifiers

Amplifiers and nixere based on Josephson effects

-73-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7. Technical and operating features of cryogenic electronic
urine radio equipment

7.1. nethoda of leaauring and monitoring noise para-euro

7.2. Design features of cryogenic electronic radio
equip-em: units

7.3. Cryogenic provision of cooled unita of radio electronic
equip-out on ships

Conclusion
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Sudoetroyeniye", 1980

9875
C80: 1860/10

-79-

FOR OFFICIAL UFF‘. ONLY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DDC: 681.586.72
DESIGN AND PRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY FOR MICROMCTRONIC DIGITAL mum's INSTRUMENTS

Fbscow KONSTRUIBOVANIYE I WWA PROIZVODS'NA 111mm TSIm
IMRITEL'W PRIBOROV in Russian 1981 (signed to press 3 Apr 81) pp 24. 176-175

[Ax-notation, foreword and table of contents from book- "Design and Production
Technology for Microelectronic Digital Measuring Instruments", by Yuriy Sergeyevich
Mal'tsev, Energoitdat, 15,000 copies, 176 pages]

Annotation

[Text] The circuit engineering, design methods end production technology of
microelectronic digital neasuring instruments based on integrated nicrocircuits
(IC) are examined. The problem touched upon include using design and technological
methods to ensure noise tolerance, reliability end stability of instrtnaents,
matching of me with indicators end other external devices, effective cooling,

etc. Features of installing, aseeialing, adjusting and powering microelectronic
digital instrusents are described. Descriptions are given for the circuits and
construction of the best domestic and foreign models.

The book is intended for engineering-technical design bureau workers and tech-
nologists involved in the construction and production of inetruaents.

Foreword

The development of microelectronics involves the requirement for improving
electronic equipnent, increasing its reliability, reducing its cost, increasing
its speed and reducing power consumption.

The aicrominieturizetion of measurement devices, particularly digital measuring
instrunents, has brought about a qualitative change in the characteristics of
neasureaent facilities. The use of the principles of nicroelectronics in the
creation of measurement modules in digital instruments has made it possible to
improve seasurenent accuracy through the fabrication of a umber of elements
within a single technological cycle. It has become possible to create measurement
facilities which are new in principle and whose implementation without integrated
circuits would be senseless because of the increased number of elements and compli-
cation of instrument circuitry. Instruments have been created which conbine the

.30.

FOR 0W1“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

functions of measurement facilities and devices which process measurement results.
This has nade it possible to process the results of a series of measurements
simltaneousl) with the taking of those measurements, to linearise the
characteristics of nonlinear sensors. to introduce scaling factors needed to
reflect infor-tion on natural scales, to calculate the results of indirect
measurements. etc.

The design principles of digital measuring instrt-enta have also changed
significantly. The appearance in large-scale production of a number of special
nicrocircuits which replace entire functional blocks in measurement instruments
(analog-digital and digital-analog converters. logic units, etc.) has contributed
to accelerating the design of not instruments. It has become possible for the
developer to concentrate his efforts on solving such problems as proper arrange-
ment of nicrocircuits, optimal lay-out of printed circuits, prevention of
parasitic coupling and induction, ensuring effective heat removal from instrument
housings, etc.

The easy availability of inexpensive microelectronic operational amplifiers with
guaranteed characteristics has made it possible to change the principles of
designing the circuits of measurement modules in instruments, which have begun

to be based primarily on the multifunctional utilisation of operational amplifiers,
which has led to standardization of circuit treatments. Significant shifts have
also occurred in the area of digital instrument production techology. Practically
all instruments are now built using printed circuitry, which has resulted in a
thorough change in the technological processes of wiring and assembling them.

The sharp reduction in the size and weight of instruments has made it possible to
fabricate their housings using efficient technological processes (using formed
plastic, etc.).

The change in the design and production technology of instruments has brought
about a change in the nature of the production and an increase in the amount of

of electrical wiring and assembly operations at the cost of reducing the proportion
of preparatory and other ancillary operations. The amount and complexity of ad-
justment and checking operations has increased because of the more complicated
functioning elgorithee used in the instruments. This has resulted in the intro-
duction of automated computer-based testing and technological devices.

The book attespts to generalize the scattered material published here and abroad
which reflects the aain problems of the design and production technology of micro-
electronic digital instruments. The author is deeply grateful to book reviewer

1. Ya. Kaverkin and editor I. D. Belikov for their helpful advice and remarks,
which helped to improve the book. Understanding clearly that the book is not
without shortcomings. the author will be pleased to receive critical co-Ients.
which should be sent to 113115, Moscow, Shlyuroveye Neberezhnaya. 10. Bnergoindat.

-31-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Foreword

Chapter 1.
1.1.
l .2.
l . 3 .

Chapter 2.

2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

MI! OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Table of Contents

basic types of integrated nicrocircuits

Design and technological features

Linear IC

Logical IC

Circuit construction nethods for eicroelectronic digital
neasuring instrunents

IC-digitsl indicator nstching

2)

b)
c)
d)
e)
f)

Methods for outputing coded information to digital
indicators

Gas-discharge indicators
Luninescent indicators

Liquid crystal indicators
Seaiconducting indicators

Improving reliability of information display
devices

Circuit engineering of nicroelectronic analog-digital
and digital-analog converters

a)
b)
c)

Monolithic digital-analog converters
Microelectronic integrating DC

Circuit engineering nethods for inproving DAC
characteristics

Planning circuits for nsssurensnt nodules of instrunsnts

s)
b)
c)

Current and voltage scaling converters
AC nessurenent converters

Standard design schenes for neasursuent converters
based on operational uplifiers

.32..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 3.

3.1.
3.2.
3.3.

Chapter lo .

4.1.

4.2.

“.3.

Chap te: S .

5.1.

5.2.

5.3.

Design of nicroelectronic nodules in digital
inatrunents

Design of analog nodules
Design of logic nodules

Design methods for ensuring stability and reliability
of instruaents

Fabrication technology for aicroelectronic digital
inatruents

Hiring and asseably features

Technological aethods for ensuring stability and
operating reliability

Aligmsnt, adjustnent and testing of digital
instrunents

Circuit, design and technological features of
digital measure-cut instn-snts

Digital neasuring instrunsnts in panel-type
inpleaentation

Multifunctional digital instrusnta

General-purpose digital. usasuring instrments

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT :

6900

Energoizdat , 1981

CS“ 1860/11
MWLIJSEONLY

UDC 621.39‘
DIGITAL INPORHATIOR MMSSIOI VIA W-SPEED MONITOR CHANNELS

lbscov 9mm msnmm mun N mm W SWAZI in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 23 Jul 80) pp 2-3, 126-127

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents fron book "Traneniesion of Digital
Infornation Via Low-Speed Co-unication Channels”. by Hadshidulla Nigeatovich
Aripov. lsdatel'stvo "Svyas'". 6700 copies. 128 pages]

[Text] Questions are discussed of noise-proof trensaission of digital infornetion
vie low-speed couunication channels. Existing nethods of evaluating such

channels' quality and questions of distortion of unit elenents and their grouping
into packets are exanined: the effectiveness of aethods of raising channel quality

is evaluated.

For engineering and technical personnel in the field of digital infatuation trans-
mission.

Foreword

Our country is currently setting up the nationwide Autonatic Infometion Collection
and Processing Systes (OGAS), required for keeping records on, planning and
eanaging the national econony based on a state netwrk of counter centers and the
country's unified Autonatic Co—nnicatione Network "088). The 25th CPSU Congress
laid down the tasks of organising the nationwide Date Transniseion Systea (06m).
The first stage in creating the YeASS is being accoqlished based on low-speed
co-unication channels (50-200 baud), seating the requirenents of 60-80! of the
autoaetic systens of control of technological processes forned using 11-48,

TT-12 and other systole.

Information theory specialists in recent years have turned away iron idealised
aodcls of channels. and are studying aodels approxineting actual channels. A
correct solution to the problea of reducing errors during digital intonation
transniesion depends on studying error statistics and constructing a nathenatical
aodel of the errors' source. The evolution of data trensnission systems shows
that a tendency can be noted towards coeplicetion of error protection devices,
which ashes it necessary to accumulate larger amounts of error statistics since

-34-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the effectiveness of using one or another error protection method basically
depends on the nusber of increasingly infrequent errors, not detected by the given
method. In connection with this, special error flow analysers have been developed,
algorithms for computer processing of these data are being created, and error flev
initation devices are being designed. '

Solving the problem of optimizing data transmission systems only on the basis of

an error source model results in an increase in code redundancy, with a corresponding
rise in transmission speed loss, while the coding and decoding devices gain in
complexity as the unit length gross. Selection of the coding nethod must therefore
he done not only on the basis of error statistics. but also with allowance for
possibilities of using signal quality detectors vhich enable simplification of the
coder and decoder and reduction of their cost.

This book is devoted to questions of generalization and further development of
research on methods to annlvre and monitor various para-stern of code signal
distortion in actual low-speed communication channels. and to the search for
effective techniques for raising reception fidelity by parametric nethods.

The author expresses his sincere gratitude to Professor V. O. Shvertsnan, and to
the reviewer. Candidate of Technical Sciences L. I. Zubovekiy, for their helpful
discussions of the book.

Comments regarding the book should be sent to the "Svyaz‘", Publishing Rouse,
101000, Hoscov, Chistoprudniy Blvd.. Bldg. 2.

Table of Contents
Porewrd 3

introduction b

Chapter 1. Methods of Evaluating the Quality of Low-Speed Data

Transmission Channels 7
1.1. Evaluating unit elesent distortion parameters 7
1.2. Quality characteristics of channels in distortion

packeting 8
1.3. Evaluating channel quality using indirect error

detection nethods 11
1.0. Evaluating error statistics parameters 1‘

1.5. Investigation of the effects of communication distance
and transmission speed on information reception fidelity
via ChVT (Tine-frequency telegraphy) systes channels 17

- 35 -

NB OFFICIAL USE ONLY
chapter 2.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.

2.6.

2.5.

2.6.

Chapter 3 .
3.1.
3.2.
3.3.

3.6.

3.5.

Chapter 6 .

6.1.

6.2.

6.3.

6.6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Distortion Facketing 1heory
Formlation of the problem
Stochastic estimation of unit element distortion

liethods for revealing packets of distorted unit
elements

Algorithms for recognizing the beginnings of distortion
packets

Correlation function of unit element distortion within
the distortion packet .

liethods of predicting distortion sites within the
distortion packet

Statistical Methods of Analyzing Distortion Facketing
Formulation of the problem
Technique for estinating distortion packet parameters

Technique for machine analysis of distortion packet
structure

Technique for estinating parameters and analysing the
structure of splitting pulse packets

Technique for evaluating error pschets in voice-frequency
carrier telegraphy channels and their connection with
distortion packet parameters

Parametric Methods of Raising Reception Fidelity

Methods of monitoring digital information reception
quality

Correlation analysis of the connection between erasure
packet parameters and error packet parameters

Effectiveness of using methods with reception quelity
monitoring by component

Effectiveness of using methods with nultipsrametric
reception quality nonitoring by element

-86-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(IVLY

6.5. Effectiveness of using netbods vitb reception quelity
nonitoring by sin

4.6. Effectiveness of using methods with reception quelity
nonitoring by unit

Appendix. Hininiution of loss in trsneniesion epeed in eyeten
with request for repetition with distortion end error
pscketing

Bibliography

Subject index

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Svyu'", 1980

9875
' CSO: 1860/5
”I WHOM. use WY

000 621.3.01(03)

MIC“. MINBBRIM HAW

Moscow anmmmmcnsnr SESAME!!! (V rm M), It! 2: means.
K!!! USTROYSNA in Ruesien 1981 (signed to press 3 Her 81) pp 2-3, excerpts pp 5,
59, 103, 168-169, 243, 266, 298, 373, 618-619. 683, $60, 615

[Annotatiom table of contents, note fro- the editorel board, end sectionsl contents
fro- book ”Electrical Engineering Hendbook (in 3 values), Volune 2: Electrical 0e-
vices". 6th edition, revised and enlarged, edited by professors of the lioscov Pour
2118111002108 lutttuC. v. Ge 60“.”, P. G. cmtﬂlu’, Lo ‘0 W. V. A. “but.
eov, I. N. Orlov (editor in chief), ll. ll. Sokolov, A. ll. Pedoce . A. Ye. Shikhin,
end engineer 1. V. Antik, Snergoisdat, 80,000 copies, 660 pages

[Text] This book contains infornstion on resistors, capacitors, reectorl. trensfor-
ners end eutotrsnsforners, electric nechines (including nechinss for auto-etic de-
vices), high end low voltege electric devices, high-voltage equipnent sere, valve
converters of electric energy, end chemical sources of current. The previous, 5th,
edition of this handbook ves published in 1975.

The book is intended for electrical engineers.

Contents Psge
Section 16. Resistors, Cepecitors, Reactors 5
Section 17. Transform-ere and Autotrensforlers 59
Section 18. General Problens of Electric Hechines 103
Section 19. Alternating Current Electric Machines 168
Section 20. Direct Current Machines end Co—ntetor liotors 263
Section 21. Electric hechines of Auto-stic Devices 266
Section 22. high Voltage Switching and Protective Bquipnent 290
Section 23. Current end Voltsge Trsnsforners 373
Section 26. Lou Voltage Devices 618
Section 25 High Voltege Equip-ant Sets 683
Section 26. Velvc Converters of Electric Bnergy 560
Section 27. Chemical Sources of Current and Their Uses 615
Subject Index 638

Note from the Editorial Board

Heteriels of the second volues were prepared by:

-88-

WWWMY
M OHIO“. use ONLY

Section 16 -- Candidate of Technical Sciences Ye. G. Akinov (16-1 and 16-2); Candi-
date of Technical Sciences, Docent H. A. Zhavoronkov; and Candidate
of Technical Sciences, Docent A. A. Chunikhin (16-3).

Section 17 -- Doctor of Technical Sciences, Professor P. 11. Tikhonirov.

Section 18-20 -- Doctor of Technical Sciences, Professor A. V. Ivanov-Snolenskiy;
Doctor of Technical Sciences, Docent F. )1. Yuferov (19-16, 19-17,
19-39, 19-60 and 20-15); Engineer 11. A. Avanesov (19-10 -- 19-15,
19-33 -- 19-37 and 20-11 -- 20-13).

Section 21 -- Doctor of Technical Sciences, Docent F. ii. Tuferov.

Section 22 and 23 -- Candidate of Technical Sciences, Docent A. A. Chunikbin (22-1
-- 22-6, 22-6, 23-1 -- 23-0, 23-10 and 23-11); Candidate of Technical
Sciences, Docent ll. A. Zhavoronkov (22-5, 22-7 -- 22-9, 23-9 and 23-12).

Section 26 -- Doctor of Technical Sciences, Professor 1. S. Tayev (26-1 -- 26-7): .
Candidate of Technical Sciences, Docent G. G. Nesterov (26-8 -- 26-10).

Section 25 -- Engineer G. Ya. Kazanovich (25-1 -- 25-5;; Candidate of Technical
Sciences, Docent V. s. Zbdanov (25-6).

Section 26 -- Candidate of Technical Sciences, Docent N. N. Bogdanov; Candidate of
Technical Sciences, Docent 0. G. Dulatov and Senior Lecturer ii. 1..
Fratkina.

Section 27 -- Doctor of Chemical Sciences, Professor II. V. Korovin.

The materials of the sections of this volt-Is were emitted by depart-ant heads of

the Moscow Power Engineering Institute: Doctor of Technical Sciences, Professor I.
P. Kopylov; Doctor of Technical Sciences, Professor V. A. 'abunteov; Candidate of

Technical Sciences, Professor 8. ll. Heklepayev; and Doctor of Technical Sciences,

Professor I. S. Tsyev.

The materials of this volume were edited by Professor V. A. Labuntsov and Professor
A. Ya. Shikhin.

Section 16. Resistors, Capacitors, and Reactors

Contents Page

16-1. Resistors 5
General Information (5). Design Features of Resistive
Blenents (7). Resistor Units (11). Starting Rheostats
and Starter-Regulator Rheostats (15). Excitation Rheostats
(17). Load Resistors and Rheostats (18). Design Fundamen-
tal of Resistors and Rheostats (19).
16-2. Capacitors 21
General Intonation About Power Capacitors (21). Capacitors
for Alternating-Current Industrial-Frequency Electrical Units
(23). Higher Frequency Capacitors (26). Capacitors for
Capacitive Coupling, Power Take-Off and Voltage Measurenent
(27). Filter Capacitors (28). Pulse Capacitors (30).
Capacitors of Semiconductor Power Converters (32).
16-3. Reactors 36
Purposes and classification (36). Conversion Reactors (36).
Designs of Reactors (35). Calculation and Selection of the
Main Parameters of Alternating Current Reactors (39). Selection

-39..

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

of the Main Dimensions and Calculation of Concrete
Current-Limiting Reactors (65). Doubled Reactors (SO).
Reactors Produced in the 15811 (51).

Bibliography

Section 17. Transformers and Autotranaformsrs

Contents

17-1. Basic Definitions and Designations
Basic Definitions (59). Basic Designations (60).

l7-Z. Main Parts of a Transformer

17-3. classification of Transformers

17%. Operation of a Transformer Under Load

17-5. No-Load Conditions of a Transformer. Mo-load Test

17-6. Short Circuit of a Transformer. Short-Circuit Test

17-7. Approximate Calculation of the Parameters of the Equivalent
Circuit of a Double-Hound Transformer

17-8. Changes in the Secondary Voltage of a Transformer. Losses a .
Efficiency

17-9. Parallel Work of Transformers and Groups of Winding Connec-
tions

17-10. Unbalanced load of Three-Phase Transformers

17-11. Basic Equations and Equivalent Circuit of a Three-Winding
Transformer

17-12. Transformers with Split windings

17-13. Autotransformers

17-14. Adjustment and Stabilization of Transformer Voltage

17-15. Transformer Calculation Scheme

17-16. Determination of the Basic Electrical Parameters of a
Transformer

17-17. Determination of the Main Dimensions of a Transformer

17-18. Insulation in Transformers

17-19. Major Insulation of windings. Minimum Permissible Insulation
Distances

17-20. Longitudinal Insulation of windings

17-21. Design Selection and Calculation of Bindings

17-22. Calculation of Lou-Voltage Hindings

17-23. Calculation of High-Voltage Hindings

17-24. Determination of Short-Circuit Parenters

17-25. Short-Circuit Currents and Mechanical Porces in Windings

17-26. Calculation of the Magnetic System

17-27. Approximate Determination of the Masses of Active Materials
in Transformers

17-28. Load-Carrying Capacity of a Transformer

17-29. Transformers and Autotransformers for Networks of 10, 35, 110,
220, 330, and 500 W

17-30. Lou-Power Transformers

17-31. Standardization in the Manufacturing of Transformers

Bibliography

0.
”WISEONLY

Section 18. General Prohlees of Electric Machines

Contents

A. Basic Definitions and Specifications

18-1.

18-2.
18-3 e
18-“.

18-5.
18-6.
18-7 0
18-8.
18-9.
18-10.
18-11.
18-12.

18-13.
18-16.

Basic Designations. Rated Modes and Rated Parameters of
Electric Machines (According to 6061! 183-76)

Basic Designations (1010). Rated Modes and Rated Parameters
(106).

General Definitions (According to 608‘! 183-76 and GOG! 17156-71)
Specifications for Electric Machines (According to cost 183-76)
Maximum Permissible Temperature Excesses of Electric Machine
Parts (According to 00$: 183-76)

Electric Strength and Insulation Resistance of the Bindings

of Electric Machines (According to 0091' 183-76)

Power bosses and Efficiency of Electric Machines

Designations of winding Terminals (According to 0081 183-75)
Rated Rotation Frequencies of Electric Machines (According to
COST 10683-73)

Heights of Rotation Axes of Electric Machines (According to
00$! 13267-73)

Cylindrical Ends of Shafts (According to G081: 12080-66)
Conical Ends of Shafts (According to 0081' 12081-72)

Tests of Electric Machines (According to 6081' 183-”; and 008'!
11828-75)

Classification of Electric Machines

Principal Standards for Electric Machines

8. General Theoretical Prohlens

18-15.

18-16.
18.17 s
18-18.
18-19.

18-20.
18-21.
18-22.
18-23e

Main Dimensions, Machine Constant, and Electromagnetic Loads
of Electric Machines

Armature windings of Alternating-Current Machines
Circuits of Field Hindings

Short-Circuited Squirrel-Cage Windings

Electronotive Porce, Magneto-otive Porce, and Pield of
Polyphase windings

Magnetonotive Force and Pield of Exciting Hindings
Resistance of Windings

Inductive Resistance of Windings

Uses of Computers in Designing Electric Machines

Bib liography

Section 19. Alternating-Current Electric Machines

Contents

A . Asynchronous Machines

-91-

summons
19-10
19'2.

19-3.
19-h.
19-5.
19-6.
19-7.
19-8.
19-9.
19-10.
19-11.
19-12.
19-13.
19-16.

19-15.
19-16.

19-17.

FOIIOIVNCJAI.IEIE(MVLY

Basic Types of Asynchronous Machines

Structure and Operating Principles of a Three-Phase
Asynchronous Machine

Active and Inductive Resistances of Hindings

Calculation of the Magnetic Circuit of an Asynchronous Machine
Basic Equations, Equivalent Circuits and a Vector Diagram of
an Asynchronous Machine

Basic Energy Relations, Rotational Moments, and Mechanical
Characteristics of an Asynchronous Machine

Circle Diagram of an Asynchronous Machine. Performance Character-
istics of an Asynchronous Motor

Asynchronous Short-Circuited Motors with Improved Starting
Properties

Special Operation Modes and Special Versions of Asynchronous
Machines

Main Requirements for Asynchronous Motors. Standards for
Asynchronous Machines

General Information on the Series of Asynchronous Motors
Produced in the USSR

Three-Phase Asynchronous Motors of unified Series AN-Z and
AIR-2 with a Power over 1000 ha

Three-Phase Asynchronous Motors of Series 0A with a Power of
0.06-600 kw

Special Versions of Motors of Series 4A

Crane and Metallurgical Asynchronous Motors

Asynchronous Micronotors

General Information (181). Three-Phase Asynchronous Microsotors
(181).

Single-Phase Asynchronous Micronotors

General Information (183). Single-Phase Asynchronous Micronotors
with Shielded Poles (185).

B. Synchronous Machines

19-18.
19-19.

19-20.
19-21.
19-22.
19-23.
19-24.
19-25.
19-26 a

19-27.

Main Types of Synchronous Machines

Structure and Operating Principle of a Three-Phase Synchronous
Machine

Structure of a Three-Phase Synchronous Machine (187). Operating
Principle of a Three-Phase Synchronous Machine (189).

Magnetic Field in the Gap Between the Stator and Rotor. Magneto-
notive Forces. Field Coefficients.

Substitution of the Damping winding of a Machine by Equivalent
Circuits. Field Coefficients of the Danping Vinding.

Reduction Coefficients for the Exciting Winding and Equivalent
Damping Circuits

Per-Unit Systen of a Synchronous Machine

Inductive Reactance of Hindings

Effective Resistance of windings

Calculation of the Magnetic Circrit of a Synchronous Machine
During Idling

Perfornance of a Synchronous Machine under Load (Basic Equations
and Vector Diagrams)

- 92 -

F0I40FFMJA1.USIIINLY
P0! 0M“. [.88 ONLY

19-28. Short-Circuit Currents of a Synchronous Machine.
Symtric (Three-Phase) Short Circuit on the Machine Terminals.
Nonsynnetric Short Circuit on the Machine Terninals (204).

19-29. Parameters and Time Constants of a Synchronous Machine

19-30. External and Adjustment Characteristics of a Synchronous Generator.
charging Power

19-31. Parallel Operation of Synchronous Machines.
Methods of Switching Synchronous Machines to Parallel Operation
(Synchronization Methods) (207). Operation of a Synchronous
Machine in Parallel with a Powerful Electric Network (208).
Oscillations of Synchronous Machines (210).

19-32. Synchronous Motors

19-33. Excitation Systems of Synchronous Machines

19-36. Main Requirements for Synchronous Machines. Standards for
Synchronous Machines

19-35. Turbogenerators and Synchronous Conpensators with Indirect
Hydrogen Cooling

19-36. Synchronous Machines with Direct Cooling
Turhogenerators (217). Rydrogenerntors (223).

19-37. Information about Medium and High Power Synchronous Machines
Produced in the USSR
General Information (220). Turhogenerators (221s). Hydrogen-
erators (227). Synchronous Conpensetors (227). Synchronous
Generators, and General-Purpose Motors (231).

19-38. Prospects for Increasing the Power of Large Electric Machines

19-39. Synchronous Micromotors with Permanent Magnets, hysteresis and
Reaction Motors.
Main Characteristics. Classification (236). Synchronous Motors
with Permanent Magnets (236). Synchronous Hysteresis Motors
(237). Synchronous Reaction Motors (239). Single-Phase Syn-
chronous Motors of the D60 and DSDR Types (239).

19-40. Slow-Speed Synchronous Motors with Electromagnetic Reduction of
Rotation Frequency

Bibliography

Section 20. Direct-Current Machines and Comtator Motors

20-1.
20-2.
20-3.
20-4.
20-5.

20-6.
20-7.
20-8.
20-9.
20-10.

Contents

Basic Designations

Structure and Operating Principle of a Direct-Current Machine
Types of Direct-Current Machines

Diagrams of Armature Windings of Direct-Current Machines
Blectromotive Force and Magnetolnotive Force of Hindings. Winding
Resistance

Calculation of the Magnetic Circuit During Idling

Calculation of the Magnetic Circuit Under Load

Voltage Equation. Characteristic Triangle. Rotational Monent
Characteristics of Direct-Current Generators

Characteristics of Direct-Current Motors

-93..

”WWW!”
20-11.
20-12.

'20-13.

20-14.
20-15.

20-16.

FIJI1OFF1CLAL US£:(HVLY

Main Requirements for Normal Direct-Currant Machines

General Information about the Series of Direct Current Machines
Produced in the USSR

Direct-Current Motors of the Unified Series 2P with a Power of
Up to 200 kw

Metallurgical and Crane Direct-Currant Motors of Series D
Direct-Current, Alternating-Current and Universal Commutator

Micromotors.

General Information about Direct-Current Micromotors (259).
Direct-Current Motors of Parallel (Independent) Excitation (260).
Direct-Current Motors with Permanent Magnets (260). Direct-
Current Series-Excitation Motors (261). Alternating-Current
Connotator Micromotors (262). Universal Connutstor Motors (263).
Three-Phase Commutator Motors

Bibliography

Section 21. Electric Machines of Automatic Devices

21-1.

21.2.

21-3.

21-6.

21-5.

Contents

Actuating Motors.

General Information (266). Asynchronous Actuating Motors (267).
Direct-Current Actuating Motors (271). Stsp-by-Stsp Actuating
Motors (277).

Amplidynes (EMU). .

Classification. General Information (281). Transverse-Field
Amplidyne (281).

Tachogenerators

General Information (283). Synchronous Tachogenerators (283).
Asynchronous Tachogenerstors (28b). Direct-Current Tachogsnsrators
(285).

Electric Machines in Synchronous Communication Circuits (Sslsyns)
General Information (286). Single-Phase Contact Selsyns (287).
Magslips (288). Selsyn Operation in the Indicator Mode (289).
Selsyn Operation in the Transformer Mode (290). Synchronous
Communication Circuits vith Differential Selsyns (290). Magne-
syns (293).

Rotary Transformers

Bibliography

Section 22. high Voltage Switching and Protective Equipment.

22-1.

22-2.

Contents

General Information on Switches.

Definitions (298). Oil Circuit Breakers (302). Air Circuit
Breakers (306). Elegas Circuit Breakers (313). Electromagnetic
Switches (31h). Vacuum Switches (315).

Calculation of the Elements of Switches.

Calculation of a Current-Conducting Circuit (316). Calculation
and Selection of Contacts (316). Calculation of Electrodynamic

254
254

255
258

259

26k
266

266

281

283

286

298

Pa:

298

316

Forces (319). Elements of the Calculation of Air Circuit Breakers (321).

- 95 -

FCIICHWWCIAI.IEHE(NULY
22-3.

22-6.
22-5.

22-6.

22-7.

22-8.

22.9 a
22-10.

FOItOFFICLALIJSEiﬂﬂlv

Elements of the Calculation of Oil Circuit Breakers (326).
Voltage Restoration on a Switch.

Basic Designations(328). Recovery Voltage for Circuits with
Luaped and Distributed Parameters (328). Calculation of Constants
and Simplified Equivalent Circuits (331). Methods of Determining
the Equivalent Capacitance when Changing from a Circuit vith Distri-
buted Parameters to a Circuit with Bumped Parameters (331). Normal-
ization of the Parameters of the Recovery Voltage (332).

Purposes and Selection of Bridging Elements.

Alternating-Current Switches Produced in the USSR.

Oil Switches (336). Load Switches (360). Air Circuit Breakers
(362). Electromagnetic Switches (365). Vacuum Switches (366).
Drives for Alternating-Current nigh-Voltage Circuit Breakers.
Electromagnetic Drives (366). Spring Drives (369). Pneumatic
Drives (350). Pneumohydraulic Drives (351).

Parameters of Drives Produced in the USSR.

Disconnectors, Shorting Devices, and Separators.

General Information About Disconnectors (353). Disconnectors of
Indoor Units (353). Disconnectors of External Units (357).
Shorting Devices and Separators (358). Drives for Disconnectors
(361).

High-Voltage Fuses.

Dischargers and Overvoltage Limiters.

Bibliography

Section 23. Current and Voltage Transformers

23-1.

23-2.

23-3.

23-6.
23-5.
23-6.
23'70
23-8.
23-9.
23'10e

23-11.

Contents

Selection of Basic Parameters in Calculating Current Transformers.
Basic Designations (373). Basic Information (376). Error Reducing
Methods (377). Selection of the Parameters of Current Transformers
of Standard Designs for Measurements (377).

Compensation of Current Transformer Errors.

Compensation of Errors by the Scattering Pield (382). Cowensstion
of Errors by Countermagnetising (382). '
Operation of Current Transformers Under Steady Conditions at a
Deep Saturation of the Magnetic Circuit.

Operation of Current Transformers in a Transient Mode.

Selection of a Current Transformer.

Cascade Current Transformers.

Induction-Type Magnetic Current Transformers.

Opticoelectronic Current Transformers.

Current Transformers Produced in the USSR.

Selection of Basic Parameters and Calculation of Errors of

Voltage Transformers.

Basic Designations (606). General Information (605). Selection

of the Basic Parameters of Standard Voltage Transformers (606).
Cascade, Capacitor, and Opticoelectronic Voltage Transformers.
Selection of the Basic Parameters of an NIP-Type Voltage Trans-
former (608). Capacitor Voltage Transformers (609). Opticoelec-
tronic Voltage Transformers (609).

- 95 -

FOIIOIFKJAI.USB(NULY
23-120

FOI‘OIFICJAI.USE(MNLY

Voltage Transformers Produced in the USSR.
Dry Voltage Transformers (611). Oil Voltage Transformers (611).

Bibliography

Section 26. Low Voltage Devices

26-1.

26-2.

26-3.

26-6..

26-5.

26-6.

26-7.

26-8.

26-9.

26-10.

Contents

Electromagnets and Methods of Their Calculation.

Initial Relations and Methods of Calculating Electromagnets (619).
Calculation of Magnetic Circuits (621). Per-sauce of Monnagnetic
Gaps (621). Reluctance of Magnetic Circuits (625). Equivalent
Circuit of a Magnetic Circuit (626). Analytical Relations (627).
Calculation of windings (629). Basic Characteristics of Electro-

magnets (630). Electromagnetic Clutches and Electromagnets for
Machines (633).

Electrical Contacts.

Basic Information (636). Calculation of Contacts (Rated Conditions)
(636). Calculation of Contacts (Excess Current Plan Mode) (639).
Mass Transfer in Contacts and Evaluation of Their Durability (660).
Current-Carrying Parts of Devices and Methods of Their Calculations.
Basic Information (661). Equations of Heating and Cooling (661).
Calculations in the Case of a Long-Tern and Short-Tern Current Plow
Through the Conductor (661). Equivalent Currents of Long Duration
(663).

Lou-Voltage Switching Devices and Relations for Their Calculation.
General Information (663). Relations for Calculating Direct-Current
Arc Arresters (666). Relations for Calculating Alternating-Current
Arc Arresters (665). Hybrid and Synchronous Svitching Devices (667).
Contactors and Starters.

Approximate Order of Calculating Contactors and Starters (669).
Direct-Current Contactors (650). Alternating-Current Contactors
(650). Alternating-Current Starters (652).

Automatic Circuit Breakers and Safety Devices.

Eimetallic Elements (6S6). Sone Varieties of Automatic Circuit
Breakers (657). Safety Fuses (660).

Connand Apparatus, Knife Switches, and Changeover Switches.

Control and Protection Relays.

Control and Automation Relays (666). Eercons (Barnetically

Sealed Magnet-Controlled Contacts) and Relays Using Them (666).
Protection Relays (671).

Noncontact Control Devices.

Magnetic Amplifiers (672). Seniconductor Amplifiers and Relays
(676). Moncontact Devices for Controlling Electric Drives (677).
Stabilizers (678).

Transducers.

Inductive Transducers (679). Transforner Sensors (680). Resistance
Transducers (681). Capacitance-Type Sensors (682).

Bibliography

-95..

FIIIGDIIICIAI.IEI!(NULY

610
618

Page
619

636

661

663

667

663
666

672

679

682
mamauuscomv

Section 25. High Voltage Equipment Sets.

25"» s

25.2.

25-3.

25.4.

25-5.

25-6.

Contents

General Information.

Terms and Definitions (683). Classification of Electrical
Equipment Sets (685). Main Advantages of Equipment Sets (‘85).
Distribution Sets for Indoor Installations (KRU) of 6-10 kV.
Cabinets of KRU2-10-20 and KR-10/31.5 Series (487). Cabinets

of K-XII Series (695). Cabinets of the K-XXVI and R-XXUII Series
(497). Cabinets of the K-XXVIII Series (506). Cabinets of the
RH-lo Series (505). Cabinets of the lRlODlO Series (506). Cabinets
of the x-x and K-xxI Series (507). Cabinets of the K-XXV Series
(512). Cabinets of the K-XXIV Series (514). Cabinets of the lE-lo
and KE-6 Series (515). Main Directions in the Development of Rev
Designs of Distribution Sets (522).

Distribution Sets for Outdoor units (IRUN) of 6-10 RV.

Cabinets of the K-VIU and K-IX Series (523). Cabinets of the

K-37 Series (525). Cabinets of the K-33H Series (528). Cabinets
of the KRN-lOUl Series (529). Cabinets of the KRI-III-lo Series
(530). Cabinets of the RRN-6 (10) L Series (531). Main direc-
tions in the Development of New Designs of Distribution Sets for
Outdoor Units (532).

Indoor Transformer Substation Sets (RIP) of 6(10)/0.4-0.23 RV.

RT? of 1000, 1600 and 2500 kVoA of the Chirchik Transformer

Plant (535). KTP of 600, 630 and 1000 vaA of the Khnel'nitskiy
Transformer Substation Plant (539). RIP of 250, 400, and 630 kVoA
of the Armelektrozavod (542). RTP of 160, 250,and 1000 kV-A of

the Birobidzhan Plant of Pover Transformers (565). RTP for the
On-Plant Uses of Thermal and Atomic Electric Power Stations of the
KTP-SN-0.5 Series (545). Main Directions in the Development of
New Designs of RIP of 6(10)/0.4 RV (552).

External Transformer Substation Sets (ITPN) of 6(10)/0.b-0.23 RV.
External Transformer Substation Sets IIP25/6(10)-IIP250/6(10) ($25).
Transformer Substation Sets ITP-bOOUl, RIP-63001 and KIP-lOOOUl
(554). Transformer Substation Sets KTPN-72H (556).

Special Features of Using Distribution Sets in Educational Designing.

Bibliography

Section 26. Valve Converters of Electric Energy

26-1.
26-2.
26-3.
26-4.

Contents

Types of Electric Energy Conversion.

Types of Electric Valves.

Conventional Symbols Used in Calculating Circuits of Converters.
Receifiers vith Ideal Valves and Transformers.

General Information (563). Single-Phase Half-Have Rectifier
Circuit (563). Circuits of Single-Phase Pull-Have Rectifiers
(S64). Circuits of Three-Phase Current Rectifiers (56S).

- 97 -

IND! OIIH(1Al.tEli(IUlY

‘83

485

523

536

562

556
559

Page

560
561
562
563
FIMIIINNCIA1.IEI3(HVL¥

26-5. Pulsations in the Curves of Rectified Voltage and Current
Smoothing Pilters.

26-6. Calculation of Filters.

26-7. Calculation of the Number of Valves of a Rectifier.

26-8. Voltage-Multiplication Rectifiers.

26-9. Circuits of Rectifiers of Three-Phase Current of Mediua and
high Power.

Uncontrolled Rectifiers (568). Relationship of Voltages During
Phase Regulation of Rectified Voltage (571). Calculated Dela-
tions for n-Phaae Rectifier Circuits (S72). Counter e.n.£. Oper-
ation of Rectifiers (572).

26-10. Multiphase Composite Rectifier Circuits.

26-11. Power Factor of a Rectifying Unit.

26-12. network-Guided (Dependent) Inverters.

26-13. Methods of Improving the Power Factor of Valve Converters.
Control algorithmsfor Valve Converters (577). Cascade Con-
nection of Converters with Various Control Algorithms (579).

26-16. Circuits of Converters with Combined Control of Valve Units
Ensuring Changes in the Direction of the Energy Plow.

26-15. Circulating Current.

26-16. Separate Control of Valve Sets.

26-17. Direct Prequency Converters.

26-18. Control Systems of Valve Converters.

26-19. Thyristor Forced Turn-Off Methods.

26-20. Forced Switching Units.

26-21. Direct-Current Voltage Pulse Converters.

26-22. Circuits of ShIP [Pulse-Duration Converters] with Series Connec-
tion of a Key Instrument.

26-23. ShIP Circuit with an lC-Pilter and Active Load.

26-24. Parallel ShIP Circuit.

26-25. ShIP Circuit with the Output Voltage Adjusted higher and Lower
Than the Input Voltage.

26-26. Direct-Current Voltage Converters with the Capacitor Discharge
into the Load (Converters with Measured Out Trans-lesion of
Energy).

26-27. Alternating-Voltage Regulated Converters.

26-28. Self-Contained Inverters.

26-29. Current Inverters.

26-30. Voltage Inverters. ,

26-31. Series Inverter.

26-32. Protection of Semiconductor Valves Against Overvoltage.

26-33. Cooling Valves of Converters.

26-34. Some Types of Converters Produced in the USSR.

Bibliography

Section 27. Chemical Sources of Current and Their Uses

27-1.

Contents

General Concepts.

~98 -

ItHICINﬂK1A1.USl(lVLY
FOI‘OFFN3A1.USE(H‘LY

Definitions and Classification of Chemical Sources of Current (615).
Parameters of Chemical Sources of Current (616).

27-2. Primary Chemical Sources of Current.
Classification of Primary Sources of Current (618). Primary Chemical
Sources of Current with Aqueous Electrolytes (618). Prinsry Cheni-
cal Sources of Current with Nonaqueous Electrolytes (625).

27-3. Fuel Cells and Electrochenical Generators.

27-4. Secondary Chemical Sources of Current.
Acid (Lead) Accumulators and Batteries (627). Alkaline
Accumulators and Batteries (631). Accumulators with Solid
and Melted Electrolytes (636).

27-5. Devices for Charging Accumulators and Batteries.

27-6. Uses of Accumulators at Electric Power Stations end Substations.

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

10233

C80: 1860/62

- 99 -

FOI1OIFIJAI.U§E(NNLY

6l8

626
627

636
635
637
FOR OMGAL USE ONLY

006: 621.315.592

MURITIBS All) POINT DEFECTS III SMOO‘NDUCMS

Moscow PRIHESI I TOCBECHMYE 03mm V POLUPROVODNIKADI in Russian 1981
(signed to press 26 Her 81) pp 2-5. 2‘7-268

[Annotation. foreword (excerpts) and table of contents fro- book "lnpurities and
Point Defects in Semiconductors", by Vadin Valentinovich Yentsev and

Tat'yana Vadinovna Hashovets, Isdatel'stvo "Radio 1 swat'". 0,000 copies.

268 pages]

- Annotation

[Excerpts] The findings from investigating inpurities and point defects in
diamond-like semiconductors are presented. Sons sections of the book are written
in condensed fashion, and new aspects of the problen of defect fornation and
nigrstion are considered in more detail. Il'he book is intended for scientific
workers and engineers in corresponding specialties.

[The book was reviewed by Doctor of Technical Sciences Yu. A. Kontsevoy and
Professor P. V. Pavlov.)

Foreword

It is well Imown that the most iaportant properties of semiconductors, tron the
practical viewpoint, are determined by the nature and concentrations of crystal
lattice defects, which any include inpurity atom.

The extensive use of seniconductor devices in nuclear and space technology is now
stimulating intensive study of defects occurring in aeniconductors under the
influence of radiation. however, problens concerning the properties of inpurities
on the one hand, and radiation defects on the other, are generally discussed
separately in the scientific literature. One feature of the present nonograph

is the fact that it examines inpurities in close association with other crystal
lattice point defects; in the real world this connection is dictated by their
interaction.

-100-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0i?1(1Al.USEIDNLY

The primary attention in the book is devoted to diamond-like semiconductors. The
first section discusses the power spectra and microstructure of point defects.
while the second is concerned with processes of generation, migration and inter—
action of various types of defects. and annealing processes. The properties of
elongated defects and disordered regions are not discussed: these questions have
been considered in detail, e.g., in G. Matare's monographs Elektronika defektov v
pgguprovodnika (The Electronics of Defects in Semiconductors) (Moscow, Hir Press.

1974). R. F. Konopleva, V. . Litvinov and N. A. Ukhin's Osobennosti radiotsionnogo
aggrezhdeniya poluprovodnikov chastitsami gzsokikh energiy (Singularities of
Radiation Damage to Semiconductors by Eigh-Bnergy Particles) (Hoscow. Atomisdat
Press, 1971) and R. P. Konoplsva and V. N. Ostroumov s Vzaimodgystvize
zaryazhennykh chastits gysokikh energiy s germanizem i kremmiea (Interaction of
High-Energy Charged Particles With Germanium and Silicon) (Moscow, Atolizdat

Press, 1975).

The book presents some of the results obtained in the Laboratory of Nonequilibrium
Processes in Semiconductors of the USSR Academy of Sciences Physics-Technical
Institute imeni A. P. Ioffe under the supervision of Professor 5. H. Ryvkin. who

is one of the initiators of research on radiation defects in semiconductors in
this country.

Physical and Mathematical Sciences H. I. Klinger and Candidate of Physico-

Mathematical Sciences N. A. Vitovskiy for their frequent useful discussions on
the problems touched upon in this monograph.

The authors are deeply indebted to N. H. Yemtseva. Yu. N. Daluda, and N. A. and

. V. Bagryanakiy, who rendered a great deal of assistance in preparing the
manuscript.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3

PART I. POINT DEFECTS IN SEMICONDUCTORS. THEIR ENERGY SPECTRUM
AND MICROSTRUCTURE.

Chapter 1. Inherent crystal lattice defects in semiconductors 7

1.1. Frenkel pairs 8

1.2. Theoretical investigation of electron structure of
vacancies and internal interstitial atoms 15

1.3. Experimental investigation of internal point defects
in semiconductors 29

Chapter 2. Impurities. impurity centers and systems of ispurity

atoms with internal defects in diamond-like seni-
conductors 55

- 101 -

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080046-9

2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.6.
2.5.
' 2.6.
2.7.
2.8.

PART II.

Chapter 3.

3.1.
3.2.

3.3.

_ Chapter 6 .

10.1.
4.2.
‘03.

5.3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Group-l impurities

Group-II impurities
Group-III inpuritias
Group-IV impurities
Group-V impurities

Group-VI impurities
Group-VII impurities

Transition netal inpuri ties

WMTIOR OF INTERNAL POINT DEFECTS IN SMCORDUCTORS
AND THEIR INTERACTION WITH MURITY Am

Defect formation in semiconductors during
excitation of electron crystal subsystem

Types of possible sub-threshold nechanisms

Experimental investigations of defect formation
in see.‘ :onductors during subthreshold irradiation

Occurrence of impurity ionization defect formation
mechanisa during super-threshold irradiation

Defect foreation in semiconductors during elastic
scattering of electrons

Interaction of sans-quanta vith matter

Defect formation under influence of fast electrons
Threshold energy and cross-section of primary
defect fornation as function of saterial para-stars
and irradiation conditions

Hovenent of internal defects in crystal
Self—diffusion in germanium and silicon

Migration of vacancies and interstitial atoms in
silicon and germanium

Radiation—accelerated nigration in seaiconductore

- 102-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400080046-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Kinetics of defect formation during irradiation
6.1. Basic regularities of secondary-defect formation
process
6.2. Kinetics of formation of primary internal structural
defects
6.3. Kinetics of defect formation when defects are created
only near impurity atoms
6.1.. Kinetics of defect forntion during interaction of
one frenkel pair conponent with one type of inpurity
atone
6.5. Kinetics of defect formation when impurity atom are
annihilation centers of vacancies and interstitial atoms
6.6. Kinetics of defect formation when impurity aton enconpaeses
sequentially several primary defects of the ease type
6.7. Defect formation rate as function of intensity of
irradiation
Chapter 7. Interaction bemen internal defects and impurities
during irradiation and annilins
7.1. Diamond and silicon carbide
7.2. Silicon
7.3. Germaniu-
7.1.. AHIBV compounds
7.5. An!" compounds
7.6. Tellurium
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyar'", 1981
6900
cso: 1860/12

-103-

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1100 621 . 382

1130111st AID omen FUNCTIONAL CIRCUITS um VOW!!! COUPLING

Hoscov NEYRISTOWB I DRIIGIYE WIM'NYYB 5mm 8 03m SWAZ'W in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 9 Apr 81) pp 24, 110-111

(Annotation, introduction and table of contents fron book "Neuristor and Other
functional Circuits with Volt-e Coupling", by Vitaliy Ivenovich Stefeyev,
Konstantin Pedorovich Koserovskikh and Grigoriy Ivenovich brain. Isdatel'stvo
"Radio 1 svyaz'", 10.000 copies, 112 pages]

Annotation

[Text] This book exaninea the operating principle of the neuristor -- a ulti-
functionel elenent which executes various logic operations and stores intonation.
Various designs of ne‘uristor and other functional circuits are described: those
based on semiconducting devices with negative resistance. laser-active nedia,
superconducting devices and tunnel diodes. end injection-fed integrated circuits.
Technological, circuit engineering and applications features of these functional
circuits are given.

The book is intended for a broad class of engineers working in the area of nicro-
electronics and electronic technology. [Book reviued by Doctor of Technical
Sciences D. I. Yuditskiy end Candidate of Technical Sciences 3. A. Kelsbekov.)

Introduction

The extensive introduction of conputer technology into all branches of the econowy
and the rapid developnant of integrated autonation of production processes require
the creation of inexpensive. econonical cosputing devices. The search for new

ways of creating such nicroelectronic devices in order to expand their functione1

capabilities and isprove reliability sharply is extrenely inportant.
The prinary difficulties of Iodern nicroelectronics involve the problan of the
"tyranny of nunbers" of integrated-circuit coeponenta. which results in a reduction

in the reliability and a reduction in the output of good circuits. The appearance
of this problen is caused. on the one hand. by the sharp cosplication in the

-104-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

functions executed by electronic equipment, and on the other. by the traditional
circuit engineering approach used in planning, where expanded functional
capabilities of equipment is provided only by increasing the number of components,
primarily transistors. rather than making fuller use of solid-body physical
phenomena.

One of the methods of overcoming the "tyranny of numbers" is to use negative-
resistance devices as active elements: because of the presence of positive
internal feedback, these are very simple functional devices [1.2.12]. The
S-devices which have been known for over 20 years [11.17.18.191 are now used
extensively in widely varying equipsent. In particular. high-efficiency light
sources and photodetectors based on S-diodes were developed a few years ago. as
were high-speed memory elements for static and dynamic LSI memories, shift
registers and logic circuits based on plasma-coupled s-dsvices [2.11.12]. The

ssorage density of these devices 1000 bits/mm which exceeds the density of the
I L-circuits based on p-n-p-n type multilayer structures operating in the in-

jection state. which are undergoing intensive development, etc.

The creation and application of neuristore is of particular interest. As solid-
statc analogs of neural fibers. neuristors have a number of remarkable properties
which make them highly reliable multifunctional elements which execute any logic
operations as well as store information. The appearance of the first neuristors
coincided with the birth of integrated transistor electronics. which delayed their
extensive application in computing devices. However, major successes in tech-
nology and circuit engineering plus the use of L51. as well as the newly awakened
interest in neuristors on the part of radioelectronic equip-ant developers. allow
us to hope that neuristors will soon provide the basis for the creation of
efficient, reliable conputing devices with associative and parallel information
processing which will implement the many principles of neural networks and
homogeneous media with adaptive and variable logic structure.

The present book generalizes the results of research on neuristors and certain
other types of functional circuits which has been undertaken in the USSR and
abroad over the past 15 years. A great deal of information on different neuristor
designs, the physics of their operation and fundamental circuit engineering
principles are systematized: various types of negative-resistance devices used to
inplement neuristors and other volume-coupled circuits are described. Features of
constructing functional circuits using S-d ces are examined, and the latter are
compared with 1c using IGPETS and TTL- and 1 L- 10s. A considerable portion of
the material presented is based on original research done by the authors.

Table of Contents

Introduction - 3
l. Semiconductor devices with negative resistance 5
1.1. Two-electrode structures with negative resistance 6
1.2. Three-electrode structures with negative resistance 10

- 105 -

INDR OFFICJAI.l£SEi(MVLY
2.

3.

Se

F0R10FFﬂJAl.USE(N‘LY

1.3. Adjustable S-structure vith volume-coupled circuits

1.6. Basic properties of s-elenents with volume—coupled circuits
ﬂeuristors

2.1. Neuristors - neural fiber analogs

2.2. neuristors based on nultilayered structures

2.3. leuristors based on S-diodes using compensated semiconductors
2.6. Neuristors based on gernanium S-diodes

2.5. Relationship between neuristor pulse and para-store of
external circuit

2.6. Neuristors based on silicon S-diodes

2.7. Neuristors based on modulation transistors

2.8. Neuristors based on single-junction transistors

2.9. Neuristors based on tunnel diodes

2.10. Neuristors based on superconducting devices

2.11. "Quantum" neuristors - usuristors based on laser-active media
Neurocons and certain other nsuristor applications

3.1. Neurocons

3.2. Plat television screens

3.3. Other neuristor applications

Implementation of elementary logic operations using S-devices
6.1. Selection of optimal active coupling between S-elenents
6.2. Inhibiting coupling

6.3. Transmission line

6.6. Elementary logic operations

Functional logic modules based on S-elements

5.1. Some problems of designing and fabricating integrated

circuits uniug s-elements

- 106 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.US£(MNLY
6.

8.

10.

5.2. lbdule implementing 0! M function

5.3. Dynamic shift register

5J0. Dynamic integrated circuits

Large-scale integrated circuits

6.1. Standard nodules

6.2. Basic features of integrated circuits using S-elenents
6.3. 1.81 input elenents

6.6. Logic nodules

6.5. Large-scale integrated circuits

Features of designing functional circuits using various types
of s-elements

7.1. Functional circuits using unijunction transistors
7.2. Integrated circuits using modulation transistors
7.3. Integrated circuits based on p-n-p-n-atructures
7.4. Functional circuits using current filament effect
Principles of organizing computers using S-elenenta

8.1. Promising areas of application of conputer devices
using s-elenents

8.2. Functional diagram of computer

8.3. Experinental research on 1c and arithaetic unit
of conputer

Circuit engineering and technological singularities of
volume-couped integrated circuits based on bipolar
transistors and charge-coupled devices

9.1. Injection-fed logic circuits

9.2. Collector-controlled logic circuits

9.3. Charge coupled devices

Comparison of actively coupled integrated circuits using
s-devices with transistoriaed integrated circuits

-107-
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080045-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10.1. Basic parameters of integrated circuita

10.2 Adaptability to manufacture and percentage output of
good 169

10.3. Reliability
10.4. Level of integration
Conclusion
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Radio 1 max”, 1981

6900
050: 1860/ 16

-108-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080046-9
FOIlOFFﬂﬂAl.UGlZONLV

NON-DESTRUCTIVE TEST METHODS TO DETBCT FAULTY RADIO EQUIPMENT

Kiev NERAZRUSHAYUSHCHIYE HETODY OBESPECRENIYA NADBZBNOSTI RADIOELBKTRONNOY
APPARATURY in Russian 1980 (signed to press 3 Mar 80) pp 6-8, 198-199

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents fron book "Non-destructive Methods
for Guaranteeing Reliability of Radio-Electronic Equipment". by Mikhail Hakerovich
ﬂekrasov, doctor of technical sciences, Vitaliy Vasil'ysvich Platonov and

Lyudmila lvanovns Dadeko, candidates of technical sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika",
3700 copies, 200 pages]

[Text] In the book, methods for detection and elimination of potentially unreliable
items are set out. Data from new methods for detecting hidden flaws in components
at the designing and operations stages are presented. Modern equip-ant for
operational inspection of radio-electronic equipment under production conditions

is described.

The book is intended for engineering and technical workers studying the operation
and development of radio-electronic equipment. and it may also be useful to students
at VUZs for the appropriate specialties.

IRTRODUCTION

Reliability is the property of an object to perform its prescribed functions,
preserving in time the value of established operating indicators within given
limits which correspond to given modes and conditions for the employment of
maintenance, repair. storage and transportation.

The reliability of electronic its-a is determined by external influencing factors
or modes of operation or internal influencing factors, among which are aging, wear
and processes leading to flaws and nonhoaogenietiea in component structure. Indi-
cators of the object's reliability are a function of the para-eters of the elements
and the rate of change of these para-stars, given exposure to various factors.
Among the basic external influencing factors are nechanical, temperature, climatic,
electrical radiation and other stresses. A breakdown in the functioning of an
object in the process of its operation is conditioned by a change in the object's
structure and it results in its failure. The structure of an object is formed
during design in accordance with its manufacturing technology. However. deviations
from the optimal structure of the object in the course of its creation which are

- 109 -

FIMICHNWCJAL USElﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditioned by flaws in the original materials and by undetectable and uncontrollable
fluctuations of the manufacturing process are unavoidable. If identical objects
were to be obtained at the end of the production cycle, questions of reliability
would be solved. In actuality, for any lot, objects which are manufactured from

the same materials according to the same technology and on the same equipment are
not identical. Even if the differences in the objects are functionally insig-
nificant, they could result in the fact that indicators of individual reliability

of the objects will be distinguished within rather broad boundaries.

The problem of nondestructive monitoring of object reliability is in essence the
sorting of objects according to the traits of a standard. It is sufficient to
divide the group of elements being tested into two groups: more reliable and less
reliable. Sorting is done using measurements of informative parameters (those
which characterize the ability to perform the basic function), the detection of
which is frequently cvmplex for a specific type of object since a study of the
object's breakdown processes during operation is required. The informative para-
meters are usually selected from their possibility to depict load distribution
within the object.

An important moment in the development of questions of reliability is the rela-
tionship to the phenomenon of failure. If one assumes that failure is a random
event unassocisted with the structure of an object, then probability and statistical
methods are used in order to determine the parameters which characterize it. here
it is necessary to consider that requirements imposed on reliability of modern
components are so high that the process itself of obtaining information about

their reliability indicators poses significant difficulties. For example, the
application of statistical methods to determine the reliability of components

which are characterized by a failure of 10'7 per part [ch'1], given a sampling of
103 items will require testing, the duration of which will be about 10 years.
Moreover, a qualitative determination of the reliability indicators does not yet
resolve questions of increasing the reliability for the objects being studied.

Labor intensiveness, the low level of information content in regard to increasing
the objects, the impossibility of operative control of the manufacturing process
with this goal in mind and the high cost of statistical tests in order to deter-
mine the reliability of objects all result in the need for development of operative
nondestructive methods for predicting reliability. In particular, an attempt is
made in this work to generalize materials on the basis of nondestructive inspection
for reliability of certain radio-electronic components based on the use of their
informative parameters. If one is to consider that failures are caused by processes
of breakdown of the objects and are determined by magnitudes of influencing factors
in the weakest link in the structure of the object, then predicting failures re-
quires the detection of physical-chemical processes of aging which cause it. In
practice, a dialectical unity of probability-snd-statistical and physical tendencies
(an overall approach) takes place. Such an approach is in complete accord with

the principle of complementarity [13, 24]. .

Frequently physical methods are constructed on the principle of measuring parameters
of non-unifirmity, i.e. areas in the working body of the object where the stress is
greater than rated stress. Determining the actual magnitude of stress in the
weakest link of the working body of the object with the aid of informative para-
meters permits us to improve the reliability of the probability-and-statistical
appraisals and the accuracy of the predictions. .

- 110 -

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.lEﬂi(ﬂULY
roe Oman use ONLY

CONTENTS

Introduction
Chapter 1. Methods for inspection of radio-electronics components
1. Fundamental tasks of the quality and reliability
service at enterprises
2. Peculiarities of monitoring radio-electronics equipment
components using statistical methods
3. Possibilities for predicting reliability of radio-
electronics components based on accelerated testing
results
5. Application of physical methods to predict radio-
electronics component reliability
5. Prospects for nondestructive radio-electronics component
quality and reliability control
Chapter'z. Hechanisms of electronic equipment breakdown
1. Electrical dielectric and semiconductor breakdown
2. Breakdovn of semiconductor materials and components
3. Mechanical and corrosion breakdown
4. Breakdown of resistance components
5. Breakdown of nonhomogeneous stressed elements
Chapter 3. Recommendations on the development and application of
nondestructive radio-electronics component control
methods
1. Classification and characteristics of nondestructive
electronics equipment control methods
2. Nondestructive methods for reliability control of
resistance and capacitance components
3. Use of nonlinear statistical characteristics of radio-

electronics components for nondestructive control methods

- 111 -

FOI(NNHCJAI.USE(NNLY
S.

6.

Chapter 4.

1.
2.
3.

‘0

5.

7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Methods for neasuring nonhonogenieties in electrical
insulation designs and thin-filo cosponents

Deter-instion of the infornative parameters of nonlinear
statistical characteristics of objects

A method of form discrinination for predicting service
life of capacitors

Hethods for evaluation of the reliability of semiconductor
devices and integrated circuits

Analysis of the space and surface currents of 2:3 junctions
Control of flaws in seniconductor devices

Study of the surface of solid bodies using exoelsctronic
eaission

Measure-ant of the thermal resistivity and thermal fields
of seaiconductor devices

Methods for quality control of aicrocircuits and printed
boards

Nondestructive control of objects using holography
Application of liquid crystal preparations in the

study of thermal fields and in flaw detection of radio-
electronics couponents

List of Literature

COPYRI 81sz

9194
080:

1860/3

Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika". 1980

~ 112 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.883.6:534.222.2
NONLINEAR HYDROAWUSTICS

Leningrad NELINBYNAYA GIDROAKUSTIIA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 27 Her 81)
pp 2-4. 262-264

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents fro. book "Nonlinear Bydroacoustics".
by Boris Konstantinovich Novikov, Oleg Vladinirovich Rudenko and Vladimir Ivanovich
Timoshenko; Editorial board: A. P. Yevtyutov, A. Ye. Koleanikov, Ye. A. Korepin.

V. V. Ol'shevskiy. L. V. Orlov. A. 1.. Prostakov, G. H. Svardlin and Yu. P. 'raraayuk
(editor-in-chief); Reviewers: A. Ye. Kolasnikov, doctor of technical sciences,

and V. G. Prokhorov. candidate of technical sciences; Scientific editor: V. B.
Zhukov. candidate of teclmical sciences; Isdatel'stvo "Sudoetroyaniye", 3,100
copies. 266 pages]

[Text] 'ihis book examines the basic aspects of nonlinear wave theory as applied

to solving the problem of wideband directional radiation and reception in hydro-
acoustics. It presents the current status of questions regarding the study, desigi.
testing and application of hydroacoustic apparatus with parametric and optotherno-
acoustic arrays.

This book is intended for researchers and engineers engaged in the develop-ent.
testing and operation of hydroacoustic apparatus as well as for undergraduate and
postgraduate students in the corresponding fields.

Foreword

Nonlinear phenomena, the study of which is of interest for the solution to applied
problems of modern hydroacoustics, are by their physical nature very diverse. In-
cluded among these are cavitation. sound generation. acoustic currents and a order
of other phenomena. the description of which requires a consideration of the non-
linear terns in the hydrodynamic equations. Problems relating to nonlinear acous-
tics hnve attracted great attention in recent years. A typical nonlinear acoustic
effect--the distortion of the profile and spectral con-position of signalsnstens
from the violation of the principle of wave superposition. a principle cor-on for
all linear problems.

Nonlinear wave effects are observed during the propagation of blast waves in the
ocean. There is. however. a certain difference between the blast itself and the
signals which excite the electromechanical transducers. If the acoustic signals

-113-

KIWI-[BRONX
M OHIO“. USE ONLY

possess well-controlled paraneters and neke it possible to carry out exact spectral
measure-eats. the blast ispulse signals. as a rule. are not reproduced in experi-
ments. Measurements using blast impulse signals give low accuracy. For this reason.
an increase in the intensity of waves for-ed by acoustic methods is a pressing

prob en.

The utilization of coherent acoustic signals of great intensity nakes it possible
not only to increase the operational range of sonar devices but also to inrove

the accuracy of determining the target coordinates and to enhance a nuﬁer of other
parameters of hydroacoustic apparatus. There appear at high radiation levels essen-
tially new effects which did not exist in linear acoustics. Certain of these phe-
nomena (as. for example. nonlinear attenuation and clipping of the signal level

in water) are mdesirsble in the majority of cases; nany of then. on the other

hand. can be useful and can be esployed in the construction of hydroacoustic de-
vices of an essentially new type.

The results of theoretical and experimental studies of the interactions of nonlinear
waves are presented in nu-erous articles and are sullleriaed in the nonographs of

R. T. neyer [110]. L. K. Zarewo and V. a. Krasil'nikov [26]. G. A. Ostrounov [76]
and 0. V. Rudenko and s. I. Soluyan [80]. These studies aake it possible to create
a reliable base for applied research. The nuﬁer of annual piblications on ques-
tions associated with this subject enceedad 250 in 1977. A considerable portion

of the publications is devoted to the utilisation of paranetric arrays and instru-
ments in hydroacoustics.

It is all the more difficult to decipher the rising tide of information. since
the researchers use various nodels and nethods for calculation and publish the
results of experiments conducted under very diverse conditions with diffeer
ranges for varying the parameters. This. to a considerable degree. stens fro.
the conplexity of the processes under investigation.

This book presents to the reader an attelpt to exanine fro. unique positions the
basic aspects of nonlinear wave theory as applied to solving the problen of the
widsband directional radiation and reception of hydroacoustic signals. This book
also presents the current status of questions regarding the design. testing and
application of a new type of hydroacoustic apparatus-nonlinear paranstric devices.

This book smarizes the scientific achievenents and results of studies of nonlinear
paraneteric receiving and radiating arrays as well as of the hydroacoustic instru-
ments in which these arrays are «played. It presents the necessary information
regarding the interactions of one-dinensional waves and the basic results of a
quasi-optical approximation of the linear theory of diffraction. It gives a uni-
versal theory for parametric arrays which lakes it possible to study their charac-
teristics with a high degreee of accuracy. Analytical relationships are obtained
by the authors on the basis of the solution of nonlinear equations describing the
behavior of acoustic beans in approxinetion of quasi-optics. In certain cases.
results are obtained from these solutions which are calculated within the franewrk
of the well-known models of Hestervelt and Berktay. at. al.. possessing a linited
area of application.

A large part of the book is allocated to questions of long-distance contactless
acoustic excitation using the theme-optic deeodulation effect of powerful light
radiation in the surface layer of the water.

-115-

FORMALUSEONLY
”MUSE“?

Chapter 4. Parabolic Equation Method and the Basic Results of the

Linear Diffraction Theory . . . - . . . . - . . . . .

10.1. Diffraction of circular Gaussian beans. . . . .

6.2. Calculation of the directional diagrans in parabolic approxi-
tim O D O O O O O I O O O O I

6.3. Diffraction of a circular beam with equal distribution of ampli-
tudsonthesource................

4.1.. Diffraction of focused and unfocused Gaussian beans . . . . .

4.5. Diffraction of plane (slit) waves . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 5. Parametric Acoustic Sources Hith Nondiffracting Deans of Pulp
waves. 0 O O O O O t O O O O O O l O O O O O D D O
5.1. Overall scheme of calculation and solution for randon propagations

of amplitudes and phases on a pulp transducer. . . . . . .

5 2. Directional diagram . . . . . . . . .

5.3. Process of producing paranetric radiation in a field of non-

diffracting pulp waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 6. Calculations of Various Operating Conditions for Para-attic

Sources......................
6.1. Effect of diffraction of nonattenuating pun waves on the forma-
tion of a differential wave. . . . . .
6.2. Calculation of parametric sources in media with diffusion . . .
6.3. Effect of dispersion on the characteristics of a paranetric source
6.10. Parametric radiator with focused and unfocused pulp beans . . .
6.5. Parametric sources of low-frequency broacband signals. . . . .
6.6. Area of application for the source model emined . . . . . .
Chapter 7. Parametric Receiving Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.1. Noncolinear interaction of plane acoustic waves. . . . . . .
7.2. On the operation of a parametric receiving array . . . . . .
7.3. Quasi-optical approximation in problels of calculating the non-

linear parametric acoustic receiver. Influences of nonlinear,
dissipative and diffractive effects. . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 8. 0n the Operation of Parametric Sources with nigh Pulp-Wave
Intensities. . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.1. Calculation of the generation of low-frequency harIonics and

features of the structure of the directional diagram . . .
8.2. Porn of the low-frequency signal in the far zone. saturation node.

8.3. Numerical results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chapter 9. Therml Optoacoustic Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.1. Excitation of plane waves. transfer functions . .

9.2. Acoustic signals excited by single light pulses in honog-ous and
optically nonhonogenous media . . . . . . . . . . . .
Staged approach and diffraction distortion of optoacoustic pulses.

9.3
9.1.. Moving optoacoustic arrays. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

-115-

“OFFICIAL LBEONLY
MOMLUSEMLV

An analysis of the various operational conditions of nonlinear hydroacoustic de-
vices is conducted on the basis of the actual properties of the environment. A
cowarlson is given of the theoretical and experimental data regarding spatial
propagation and the frequency, asplitude and phase characteristics of parametric
sources and receivers. For ease in making the engineering calculations. noo-
grams have been constructed which mks it possible to sisplify considerably the
selection of the parameters for nonlinear arrays. A series of conscl idcted nono-
grams for the near, far and intermediate zones of a parametric array has been put
into the appendix. Bere also are given reco-mdations for using the nomograma
as well as an exaqne of the numerical calculation of the characteristics of a
specific parametric instrueent.

The book presents design features and cites the basic characteristics of domestic
and foreign parasetric instruments: small-scale wideband measuring radiators and
receivers for tanks and test stations. precision echo somders. parametric fish
detectors. sonar devices for shelf zones. parametric devices for the transmission

of broadband information on a hydroacoustic channel, para-atric Doppler sonar de-
vices and acoustic recorders. parametric geolocation devices, parametric instruments
for acoustic upping through a water layer. etc.

The foreword, conclusion and Chapter 1 were written by 0. V. Rudenko and V. I.
Timoshenko; Chapters 2, lo, 5, 8 and 9 by 0. V. Rodents; Chapters 3, 6. 7 and the
appendix by B. K. Novikov; Chapters 10. 11 and 12 by V. I. Timoshenko.

The authors use this opportunity to thank V. A. Poyerkov. 1'. ll. luteenko and
1.. H. Timoshanko for their help in shaping the book's manuscript.

Co-ents and remarks regarding the contents of this book will be gratefully re-
ceived by the authors.

Contents Page

Symbolsandebbreviations.......................... 3
Formrd 0 O O O O O O O O O O I 0 O O I I O O O O O 0 O O I O O O I O O O 5
Chapter 1. 0n Parametric Acoustic Sources and Receivers . . . . . . . . . 7

Chapter 2. Hethods of Calculating Interactions in Acoustic Beams . . . . . 13
2.1. On minor parameters used in the calculation of wave interactions. . 13
2.2. Solving hydrodynamic equations by the method of successive

approximations.......................... 15
2.3. Calculating a secondary field by the Green function method

Vestervel'tl'ormula....................... 17
2.6. Evaluations of the basic characteristics of paranstric sources

usingnomograns......................... 23
2.5. Slowly varying profile method and simplified equations for

nonlinearacoustics....................... 26
Chapter 3. Nonlinear Interaction of Plane Waves. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.1. Burger's equation. Propagation of a harmonic signal. . . . . . . . 30
3.2. Have interaction with a slight manifestation of nonlinearity. . . . 36
3.3. Interaction of strong acoustic waves. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61

-116-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWWMV

Chapter 10. beam Features of Paranetric Hydroaconstic Devices. . . .
10.1. Schenea for signal generation. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10.2. Design features of parametric-array eleaents . . . . . .
10.3. Effect of nonlinear active asterials on the characteristics of

parametric arrays. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 11. Bxperiaental Research and Testing of Pare-attic Arrays. . .

11.1. Features of hydroacoustic neasnrenents of the characteristics of

_ nonlineerarrays. . . .. .. . .. ....

11.2. ‘l‘est stand for paranetric devices . . .
11.3. Propagation of the primry and secondary fields on the axis of

the parsaetric array. . . . . . .

11.4. Directional diagran. . . . . . . .. .‘

11.5. Phase characteristics . . . .

11.6. Amplitude-frequency characteristics. . . . . . . .

11.7. Asplitude and phase-saplitude characteristics. ”Saturation" of a
paranatricsource................

11.8. Basic characteristics of paraaetric receivers . . . . .

11.9. Effect of nedia properties on the characteristics of parametric
arrays. . .

11.10. Feasibility of controlling the basic characteristics of nonlinear

attlyﬂ s s e e e e e s e e e s e e s e e e s 0

Chapter 12. Parenetric Devices and Areas for Their Application . . . .
12.1. Measuring sources of the nonlinear acoustic-source type. . . .
12.2. Measuring para-etric receiver of the nonlinear paraastric

acoustic receivertype. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12.3. Receiving parametric arrays . . . .
12.4. Paranetric devices for the transaission of videband intonation .
12.5. Nonlinear hydroacoustic devices for active detection. . . . .
12.6. Paranetric echo sanders for recording the land profile. . . .
12.7. Paranetric sonar devices and instructs for naritine geolocation

mluim. O O O O D l O O b O I O O I O O O O O O 0
”Panda 0 O O O O 0 O O 9 I O O O 0 O O O O O O O 0
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COPYRIGHT: ledatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1981

9512
CSO: 1860/ 16

-117.-

mementos”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

uoc 621.396.6
OPERATION OF RADIO SYSTDIS

Moscow EKSFLUA‘IATSIYA mxomnmmstm 818m in Russian 1980 (signed to press
19 liar 80) pp 2-3, 222-223

“mutation. introduction and table of contents free book ”Operation of Radio
Systens", by Aleksey Yakovlevich Alekseyedto and Ivan Vlad-imich Merikhin.
Voyenirdat, 15,000 copies, 226 pages]

[Text] The bases for safe operation of couple: radio systens and sets are ens-inst!
in the book. and practical race-endations are node for 15'. organisation in the
nilitary, taking into consideration the require-ants of ergonoeics. The mtsrial
is illustrated using emples of radio system in use during aircraft testing and
control.

The book is designed for nilitary specialists engaged in the operation of radio
systeas and sets, and it will be useful to students of We for the appropriate
specialties.

INTRODUCTION

The nodern-dsy developnent of the USSR arnsd forces is characterised by uninter-
rupted inproveaent in their technical equipeent. Scientific and technical progress
has pronpted the appearance along the nilitary of new equipnent for infatuation
processing transnission, extraction and storage. .ong which are couple: intonation-
neasurenent radio syste-s and complexes (IS and RC).

To keep equip-ant in a high state of readiness. it is necessary not only to know it
and to have nastered it conpletely, but also to know how to organise and carry out
its use on a scientific basis. Co-anders and engineers studying question of
operation should clearly inagine on what conditions and factors the successful
conpletion of a given mission depends. and they should know how to control the
change in operating conditions and in the technical state. Only strict scientific
organisation and execution of the entire set of neasures associated with the opera-
tion of equipment will permit the tasks inpending'hefore 3868 to be perforned with
the prescribed efficiency.

-118-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific bases for organization of operation and ways to insure a high
degree of readiness of complex RS and RC in the military are offered to the reader.
Prom unified methodological positions, typical measures associated with preparation
of the equipment for use, maintenance. repair and storage are examined. methods
for evaluating the influence of various operational characteristics and indexes of
the quality of operation are given. with the requirements taken into considera-
tion. and fundamental regulations for the organisation of safe 38 and RC operation
are presented. The exposition is made using a mathematical apparatus which is
accessible to contenders and engineers operating complex 3588.

The book was written based on materials from open domestic and foreign literature,
taking into consideration requiruenta of state standards for equipment and
terminology.

comm
Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Upkeep of military operation 5
1.1 General nature of radio systems and sets _ b
1.2. Principles of organization of radio system operation
in the military 6
1.3. Stages of military operation and their upkeep 11
Chapter 2. Calculation of ergonomic factors while using radio
systens and sets 17
2.1. Fundamental provisions of ergonomics 17
2.2. Peculiarities of operator activity from the positions
of ergonomics 20
2.3. Professional selection and training of operators 30
2.6. Formation of collectives 33
Chapter 3. Operational-technical characteristics of radio systems 38
3.1. Operational properties of radio systens and composition
of operational-technical characteristics 38
3.2. Classification of systems and characteristics of failure 66
3.3. Radio system reliability indicators 5‘

-119-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.6.
3.5.
Chapter 6.
6.1.
6.2.

6.3.

6.6.

Chapter 5.
5.1.

5.2.

5.3.

Chapter 6.
6.1.

6.2.

6.3.

Chapter 7.

7.1.

7.2.
7.3.

7.6.

7.5.

"Han-machine" system reliability indicators
Reliability indicators of reserved systems and sets
Readiness of radio systems

Fundamental provisions

Readiness indicators

Readiness of radio systems taking into consideration
operating dynamics

Basis of the instant of the start of radio system
preparation for planned time

Readiness of doubled radio systems

Readiness of doubled radio systems with diversely
reliable sets

Readiness of doubled radio systems with restricted
control of capacity to work

Readiness of doubled radio systems with auxiliary
preparation of the equipment

Readiness of radio sets
Readiness of radio sets with radial-nodal circuit

Readiness of radio sets, taking into consideration the
dynamics of operating

Basic ways of maintaining and improving readiness of
RS and RC

Maintenance, repair and storage of radio systems

Upkeep of maintenance and principles for its
organization

Planning maintenance
Maintenance quality indicators
Inspection of the technical status of radio systems

Radio system repair
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.6. Radio system storage
7.7. Hetrological insurance of radio system operation

Chapter 8. Collection and ways of using information on the
reliability of radio system

8.1. Requirements for statistical data on radio systen
reliability

8.2. Organization of the collection and sequence of statistical
data processing

8.3. Use of information on radio system reliability by operations
services

Chapter 9. Protection of servicing personnel from microwave radiation
effects

9.1. Effect of electronagnetic licrouave fields on nan

9.2. Protection fro- electronagnetic nicrovave fields

List of Literature Used
COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1980

9196
C80: 1860/2

-lZl-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”MUSEMV

“DC 529 . 781

PRECISION STANDARD TIME SERVICES
Moscow SLUZHBA TOCIINOGO VREHENI in Russian 1977 (signed to press 9 Dec 77) pp 2-6

[Annotatiom table of contents and foreword from the book ”Precision Tine Service"
by Pavel Ivanovich Bakulin and Nikolay Sergeyevich llinov. Isdatel'stvo "Hunks".
2,950 copies. 352 pages]

[Text] A systematic presentation of methods of precise tine detenination, storage
and transmission is given in the book. Questions related to the deteninstion of
precise tine fras astronosical observations. astronomical instruments and observa-
tional aethods using then are treated in the nest detail.

A detailed description of the instruents is given: precise tine storage devices,
starting with sstrononical pendulul clocks and going to atonic frequency standards

of various types. Modern nethods of precise tine signal trsnuission and recep-
tion are described.

me main task of the book is to acquaint the reader with the principles of chrono-
netry. The scientific probless related to tins determination are presented more
briefly, such as the study of nonunifornity in the earth's rotation, the notion of
continents, tides. etc. One chapter of the book is devoted to new nethods of

tile services: radio interferometry and lidars.

The book is intended for readers familiar with the fundanentals of astronon and
radio electronics.

Some 23 tables, 161 illustrations and 12 bibliographic citations.

Table of Contents

Foreword to the Second Edition 6

Introduction 7

Chapter I. Measurement Units and Time Reckoning Systems 10

l. Sidereal days; sidereal time 10

2. Uniform (mean). true and quasi-true sidereal tine ll
- 122 -

MWLWONLY
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
lb.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.
21.

Chapter II.

22.
23.
26.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
36.
V 35.
36.

37.
38.
39.
60.
41.

62.
43.
44.
45.
b6.
43.

BOI‘OIIICJAI.USIIMVLY

True solar days; true solar time

The mean ecliptic and mean equatorial sun

Mean solar days; mean solar time

The relationship of true solar time to mean solar time (the time

equation)

The relative length of mean solar and sidereal days
The relationship of mean solar time to sidereal time

Time reckoning systems

Length of the tropical year. Fictitious year.
Julian and Gregorian calendars

Date lines

Astronomical and historical time reckoning

Julian days

Nonuniformity in the earth's rotation
The impact of pole oscillations on time measurements

Quasi-uniform time
Ephemeris time

The determination of the difference between ephemeris time and

universal time
Ephemeris second

The relationship of ephemeris time to atomic time

General remarks

Time Measurement Instruments

Clock operation and corrections
Systematic and random changes in the running of a clock; estimating

clock quality

The astronomical clock pendulum

Pendulum suspension

The Shortt pendult- clock

The Fedchenko clock
Crystal clocks. Vacuum
Crystal resonators

tube oscillators

Crystal controlled oscillators
Block diagram of crystal clocks
Flip-flop frequency dividers

Phase shifters

The precision of crystal clocks
Atomic and molecular clocks. The occurrence of atomic and molecular

spectra
Alkaline metal spectra.

Atomic beams

The atomic beam rddiospectroscope

Atomic beam clocks
Molecular oscillators

The use of molecular oscillators to design high precision time storage

devices

The hydrogen oscillator
The precision of atomic
Measurement equipment.
Electronic counters and
Chronographe. The loop
Summing chronographs

clocks

The chronoscope
frequency meters
oscillograph

- 123 -

IIII(IHHCIAI.USIINNLY

16
16
18

18
21
23
26
31
32

37

39
61
46
66

SO
57
57

61

62
65
69
71
75
77
81
85
87
91
9A
98

99
102

105
107

112

115
117
119
121
122
126
129
roeomcutusaomv

Chapter 111. Astronomical Inatruments for Precise Time Determination 135
48. The principles of determining a clock correction 135
69. The transit. General description 136
50. The transit at the meridian. Its main errors 151
51. The basic formula of a transit at the meridian 143
52. The determination of the numerical values of the errors i, c and k 147
53. The inequality and errors of bearing pins 150
56. Visual recording of star transits; the contact micrometer 151
55. Computing clock corrections. Observational programs 155
56. A conclusion concerning visual observations with a transit 158
S7. Photoelectric recording of star transits 159
S8. Photomultipliers and photoelectric cells 162
S9. A photoelectric unit with an alternating current amplifier 166
60. The photoelectric unit of N.N. Pavlov with a mirror sighting grating 169
61. Photoelectric cell delay 171
62. Determining the delay for trapezoidal waveform signals with sinu-

soidal sides 178
63. Determining photoelectric cell delay during observations 182
66. Determining the diameter of stellar images 183
65. New methods of recording stars photoelectrically 185
66. The advantages of photoelectric transits over visual ones 190
67. Photographic zenith telescope 191
68. Determining the times-of star culminations with a photographic

zenith telescope 196
69. The measurement of the photographic plates of a zenith telescope 197
70. Recording points in time with a photographic zenith telescope 202
71. The rotor of a zenith telescope 205
72. The tube of the telescope. The mercury horizon 208
73. Automatic programmed devices for observations with a photographic

zenith telescope 210
76. The influence of instrument errors of a photographic zenith tele-

scope on the determination of clock corrections 212
75. The major merits and drawbacks of a photographic zenith telescope 216
76. The prism astrolabe 218
77. The Hollaston prism 221
78. The operational principle of A. Danjean's impersons1 micrometer 223
79. A. Dsnjcan's prismatic astrolsbe 225
80. The derivation of the working formulas for processing obervations

made with A. Danjean's astrolabe 231
81. The major features of an sstrolabe 23b
82. Instruments for determining ephemeris time 236
83. Measurement of photographic plates and the calculation of the cor-

rection of AT 238
8b. Pavilions for astronomical instrI-ents. The influence of the

environment on the accuracy of observations 262
Chapter IV. New Astronomical Observation Methods in Time Services 2‘9
85. The use of radio interferometers for the purposes of time service 269

86. The use of laser satellite and lunar ranging for the determination
of universal time and more precisely specifying the coordinates of
observation points 262

- 126 -

FOI10FFKJA1.USIIIVLY
Newman“

87. The laser gyroscope and the possibility of its application in time

services 268
Chapter V. The Time Service 212
88. The International Time Service 272
89. The USSR Time Service 276
90. The determination and storage of precise time 276
91. Atomic time 278
92. The dissemination of precise time 281
93. The reception of precise time signals 290
9b. The determination of delay 298
95. The calculation of the composite times of precise time signal

reception 301
96. Bulletins of the International Time Bureau (BIB) 308
97. The derivation of the TA! atomic time scale in the DIE system 310
98. Geophysical problems being solved by time services 313
99. The determination of longitudes 317

100. The variability of longitudes as a result of continental drift 321
Chapter VI. Improving the Right Ascensions of Stars Used for Time
Determination 326
101. General considerations 326
102. The determination of random errors of the source catalog 327
103. The determination of type Ana systematic errors in the source
catalog 328
104. The determination of type Aug systematic errors in the source
catalog 335
10). The determination of type An. systematic errors in the source
catalog 338
106. A summary catalog of Soviet Union time service 339
Appendices 363

Table 1. The Conversion of Mean Time Intervals to Sidereal Time Intervals 353
Table 2. The Conversion of Sidereal Time Intervals to Mean Time Intervals 344

Table 3. The Starting Points in Time of the Tropical Year 365
Table a. Sidereal Time Corrections for Various Longitudss 356
Table 5. The Julian Period 347
Bilhliography 352

Foreword to the Second Edition

The second edition offered to readers is a systematic presentation of the modern
fundamentals of the theory and practice of precise time determination.

The basis for the book is the special course on "The Time Service" which has
been offered for many years in the astronomy branch of the physics department

- 12$ -

FOI‘OFIWC1A1.lEﬂi(HULY
l-‘OIOFFICIALIBEONLY

of Hoscow State University. The majority of the book is devoted to astronaicsl
techniques of time determination and other problems related to this question.

A chapter has been added to the second edition in which tecImiques of time
determination by seans of radiointerferometers and lasers are treated. Sections
devoted to time storage and the transmission and reception of precise time signals,
as well as a number of other sections have been revised taking modern achievaents
into account.

The basic goal of the book is to acquaint the reader with the procedures for precise
time determination, storage and transmission and with the problems of a practical
and scientific nature which arise in this case.

The book is intended for readers failiar with the fundamentals of astrometry and
radioelectronics. It will be useful to astronuers beginning to specialise in the
field of time service (especially students and graduate students), as well as
geodesicts, geophysicists as well as to everyone interested in questions of precise
time determination.

The introduction and sections 1 - 28, 48 - 56 and 88 - 89 were written by P.I.
Bakulin and all the raaining sections were written by 11.3. Blinov.

COPYRIGHT: Glavnaya redaktsiya fizikomtmticbeskoy literatury izdatel'stva
"Nauka", s ismeneniyami, 1977

8225
(:80: 1860/6

-126-

l-‘OIOFI’IOALLBEWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROBLR‘S 0F RADIO SIGNAL PROCBSSING

Hoacou TRUDY RADIOTEK'HIHCHESKOGO INSTITUTA AKADEHII NAUK 3883, no. 33:
VOPROSY OBRABOTKI RADIOTMNICHBSKIU sxcmwv in Band.“ 1978 (signed to press
11 Jan 79) PP 150-51

[Table of Contenta from collection Works of the USSR Academy of Sciences Eadie
Technical Institute, No. 33: Prom-a of nadio Signal Processing", edited by
V. K. Sloka, Radiotekhnicheskiy institut AN SSSR, 250 copies, 151 pages]

[Text] Table of Contents

V. N. Lesnyak. A. A. Vasil'yev. Use of Interferoaetry Methods in 3
Radio Syatetas -

A. N. Blinkov. A. A. Vasil'yev, Ye. V. Grokhol'skiy, I. ll. Preanyakov.
Algorithn for Localizing Group of Gaussian Noise Sources 17

Ye. V. Grokhol'skiy, A.-A. A. Gilis, L. L. Viehnyauskas. ,
ﬂeasureaent of Phase-Frequency Responses of mutation
Links with Spatially Separated Input and Output 28

A. I. Pendrikov, S. H. Hayevskiy. Ye. V. Grokholakiy. Hays-to
Improve Accuracy of Phase Hater with Low Signal Acceaa Tine 37

Ye. V. Grokhol'akiy. A. N. Blinkov. Correlation Characteriatics
of Microwave Amplitude-Phase Discriminator Based on
Three-dB Directional Couplere ‘2

I. N. Presnyakov. Ye. V. Grokhol'akiy, H. I. Kochkin. Cross-
Correlation Estimation Using Intermediate Spectral Dance 51

V. I. Artanonov. A. A. Vasil'yev. A. A. Koralev, A. A. Prolov-
Bagreyev. Phase Method of Measuring Integral Electron

Concentration in Ionosphere 60
5. Yu. Korshunkov, V. s. Losev. Calculation of Array
Directivity Pattern Considering Relief lrregularity 66
- 127 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080048-9

S. H.

G. “O

G. S.

- A. A.

"I L.

H. A.

H. A.

S. V.

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

Zhurav, V. S. Losev. Effect of thin natal Cross-Pieces on
Dipole Hatching in Array

Kolobrodov. Reflection of Wave l'ields During Holographic
Recording of Electrical Signals

Alekaeyev. Multichannel Phased Splitter in Ro-load Mode

Epehteyn. Synthesis of Non-mltiple Frequency Conversion
Circuits Using Special Numerical Sequences

Shunan. Comparison of Direct-Ma l'requsncy Synthesizing
Structures -

Pekelis. Algoritln and Progral for Finding Eigenirequencies
of Radio Coaponents

Pekelis. High Speed Algoritlla and Progress for Analyzing
Radio Component Stability

Biryukov. Design of Surface-wave Converters With rev
Electrodes

COPYRIGHT: RADIUIEKIINICHESKIY IllS‘l'I'i'U'l' AN 8883 (Rm 5888), 1978

6900
080:

1860/ 352

-128-

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDP82-00050R000400080046-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.391.1.233
RADIOCMNICATION CHANNELS FOR A30 1.?

Moscow W13 RADIOSVYAZI A80 ‘1'? in Russian 1980 (signed to press 15 Jul 80)
pp 2-3, 106

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents fron book "Badioco-unication Channels
for A50 '1? [Autonsted System of Control of Technological Processes]", by
Anatoliy Aleksandrovich Goryachev, Isdatsl'stvo "8vysr'". 7000 copies, 106 pages]

[Text] The peculiarities in designing tran-ission and receiving equipment for
snall streans of telenetric intonation equal to several baud units from resets
non-serviced nonitored sites for ACS [autasted control system] for industrial
processes of diverse designation are emined. as are design principles. basic
engineering decisions, characteristics. the results of tests on the nsin lines of
the lO-meter band (RP), the carrying capacity of which is latched to the infer-a-
tion content of ACS infornation sources. The efficiency of codemes and the con-
ditions for transmission and reception of remote neasuring renote signaling and
ruaote control signals with eininum losses of power and frequency band of
co-unications channels for diverse purposes are deternined.

For engineering and technical workers specializing in the design of ACS and
information transnission systems.

Foreword

Effective control of the national econony is impossible without using modern
infornation transmission systens. In nsny branches of the national economy they
are striving to make broad use of inexpensive radio con-unicetion technology for
the transmission of infomtion for diverse purposes. With the increase in the
nunher of users transmitting information by radio channels. the load of the radio
frequency spectrun grows. This results in the growth of interference. complica-
tion of radio channel equipment, increase in cost, difficulties with the electro-
magnetic conpatibility of individual comnications systeus, etc.

The constantly growing denand for col-unication transaission over co-unications
lines advances the task of creating radio channels with a more effective use of
transnission tine, frequency spectrum and radio signal pover by latching the
infornation transmission speed with the carrying capacity of the co-Iunications
systen.

-129-

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lhe basic results of the research conducted by the author are set out briefly in
the book, and, based on the example of the designing of equipment for trensnission
and reception of snall streans of technical information equal to several baud
units. design principles, basic engineering decisions, characteristics and test
results on a radio channel in the 10-matsr bandwidth (RP). the carrying capacity
of which has been natched to the infatuation content of co-nnication sources are
emined.

The author acknowledges the assistance given him during the process of preparing
and writing the nanuacript by Professor Doctor of Technical Science A. A. Pirogov,
whose useful and well-wishing advice facilitated an improvement in the contents
of the book, with deep thankfulnesa and sincere gratitude.

Questions on the design of low capacity radio channels are essentially dealt with
for the first time in the book. Obviously not everything in it will be self-
evident to the readers. and therefore the author will receive comma and
suggestions, which should be sent to the following address, with gratitude:
101000. Moscow, Chistoprudnyy Blvd., 2, lad-v0 "Svyss‘".

Author
Contents

Page
Foreword 3
Introduction It
Chapter 1. Technical characteristics of a radio channel 6
1.1. Information streams 6
1.2. Frequency instability 8
1. 3 . Module tion 17
1.6. Frequency band 19
1.5. Power characteristics 20
Chapter 2. Transnission equipment 31
2.1. Stabilization of operating frequencies 31

2.2. Pornation of operating frequencies and control of
oscillations 38
2.3. Amplification and radiation of radio signals 56

-130-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NULY

Chapter 3. Receiving equipnent
3.1. Optima signal reception
3.2. Interference reeietance quality of ultiphau detection
3.3. Radio reception technology
3.6. Synchronization and intonation recovery
Chapter lo. hperinental research
6.1. Laboratory teete
10.2. Line teats
Chapter 5. Inproving the accuracy of conunication reception
5.1. Corrective coding
5.2. Code
Conclusion
Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Svyaz'". 1980

9194
080: 1860/1

-131-

FOIOFI‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 538
REFLECTOR SCANNING ANTENNAS

Moscow m’NYYE SWIWUSBCBIY! m: WA 1 m1 mm in Dalian
1981 pp 2. 300-302

[Annotation and table of contente free book "Reflector Scanning Antennae: My
and Design Hethode". by L. D. Bakrakh and G. K. Galina, Iedatal'etvo "lake".
303 pagee]

[Text] Thie book exninee general queetione of theory and preeente raaearch and
design nethode for varioue typee of reflector antennae. Strict and approxinata
nethode of calculating the directional pattern are analyud. A large portion is
devoted to deeign end etudy of euch videly ueed antennae ae parabolic and
Ceaeegrainien antennae. However. the book'e prilary attention ie devoted to
advanced antennae: varioue noditicatione of aplanatic and epbericel antennae.
The dynaaic programing aethod ie ueed to develop nethode and algorid- for
ayntheaieing optical acanning antennae vboea propertiee are euprior to thoae of
known aplanatic antermae. Certain quaationa are ear-ind of the conetruction o!
Caeeegrainian antennae, widely need in practice. Illuatratione: 252. Tablee 7.
Bibliography: 122 titlee.

Table of Contente

Page
Foreword 3
Introduction 7
Chapter 1. Methode of Calculating Reflector Antenna Surfacee 12
1.1. Have-front convereion nethod 16
1.2. Reflector antenna deaign by the differential equation
nethod 15
1.3. Approxinete nethod of deeigning Caeeagrainian antennae:
the method of tangente 18

-132-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.5.

1.5.

1.6.

1.7.
1.8.
Chapter 2.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.

2.6.

2.5.

2.6.

2.7.

2.8.

2.9.

2.10.

2.11.

2.12.

2.13.

HOIINHRCIAL.USE(N‘LY

Approximation sethod by second order curves

Design of a broadside Cassegrainian antenna using an
integral equation of the energy balance

Design of a reflector antenna feed assuring the naxi-un
directive gain

Design of a reflector antenna feed

Diffraction nethods of designing Cassegrainian antennas
Calculation of Reflector Antenna Parameters

Have-front nethod

Deternination of antenna radiation center with scanning
Deternination of saxinun radiation direction vith scanning

Graphic method of determining wave-front shape vith
scanning

Reflector antenna directional pattern calculation nethods

Distribution of currents on parabolic reflector surface
and of fields in its aperture

Calculation of directivity pattern and field of parabolic
antenna by currents on the reflector surface

Calculation of directivity pattern of parabolic antenna
by distribution of field in aperture

Use of geoaetric diffraction theory to deaign reflector
antennas and feeds

Analysis of side radiation of single reflector antennas
by the 610 [expansion unknown] lethod

Calculation of Cassegrainian antenna side lobes by the
GTD sethod

Analysis of reflector antenna radiation by the equivalent
edge current nethod

Use of the aoaent aethod to design large reflector antennas

- 133 -

FOI‘OFFICJAI.UGIZ(H‘LY
Chapter 3.

3.1.
3.2.
3.3.
3.6.

Chapter 6.

4.1.

6.2.

6.3.
6.6.
6.5.
6.6.
6.7.
6.8.
6.9.

6.10.
Chapter 5.

5.1.

5.2.
5.3.

5.6.

5.5.

FINICHWNC]AI.USE|DNLV

Aberrations of Reflector Antennas and Methods of
Blininating Then

The concept of reflector antenna aberrations
Abbe sine condition

Isoaplanatisn condition

Cosine condition

Reflector Antennas without Special Correction of
Distortion During Scanning (Nonaplanatic Antennas)

Parabolic antennas

Parabolic cylindrical antenna (scanning in the
generator plane)

Antenna built on a Cassegrainian circuit design
Cassegrainian antenna built on a Gregory circuit design
Astigeatic antenna

"Sand glass" type antenna

Spherical single-reflector antennas

Spheroparabolic toroidal antennas

Caseegrainian spherical antennas with a correcting
reflector

Cassegrainian concentric antennas
Aplanatic Reflector Antennas

Ceasegrainian aplanatic antenna built on a Cassegreinian
circuit design

Astigmatic aplanatic antenna

Cassegrainian aplanatic antenna built on e Gregory
circuit design

Nonaxisyunetric aplanatic antennas

Three-reflector aplanatic antenna with a spherical nain
reflector

- 134 -

FIIR‘0F1HCJAL.UGIZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.6. Bifocal aplanatic antennas (sy-etric)

5.7. Zoned reflector antennas

5.8. Caaaegrainian antenna built on a Moreen telescope circuit
design

5.9. On designing aplanatic axisyletric antennas vith a
small-diameter auxiliary reflector

5.10. Scanning reflector antennas with a cosecant bean

5.ll. Certain questions on constructing a wide-angle scanning
antenna

Chapter 6. Certain Questions of Synthesiaing Optima Casaegrainian

Antennas with a Scanning Directivity Pattern

6.1. Formulation of the problu

6.2. Use of the dynamic programing method to synthesize
reflector antennas

6.3. Synthesis by the "grid diagru" method

6.6. Synthesis by the controlling function variation
nethod

6.5. Features of the synthesis algorithm of a nonofocal
Cassegreinisn antenna

6.6. Synthesis algorithm of a aonofocal Casaegrainian antenna
with a fixed scanning sector

6.7. Synthesis algorithms of sfocal antennas

6.8. Research on an antenna with aininal distortion given
deviation of the directivity pattern by a fixed angle

6.9. Caseegrainian cylindrical antenna with "constant"
distortion in the scanning . -~.tor

Bibliography

Subject Index

COPYRICIIT:

9875

Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks", Glavnaya redaktsiya fieiko-
natenaticheskoy literatury, 1981

C50: 1860/20

-135-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.311.6:621.396.6
SECONDARY POWER SUPPLIES FOR RADIO ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT

Moscow ISTOCIINIKI VTORICHNOGO WPITAN‘IYA RADIOZLBKW APPARATURY in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 20 Hay Bl) pp 2-1:. 223-226

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents fron book "Secondary Power Supplies
for Radio Electronic Equipment" by Eduard Hikhaylovich Bomash, Isdatel'stvo "Radio
1 svyaz'", 60,000 copies, 22b pages]

[Excerpts] Annotation

Information on planning and designing secondary power supplies for aodern radio
electronic equip-ant is provided. Eaanined is s broad class of such devices
intended for powering radio electronic equipaent fron priaary so or dc lines.
Features of the operation of semiconductor devices in nodern power supplies, as
well as the features of the operation of the letter at high conversion frequencies,
are investigated. The book is intended for a broad class of radio asateurs.

Foreword

Developments in this country and abroad have resulted in the creation of a broad
class of semiconducting converters which are unprecedented sung those which have
been known to present. The present book contains basic intonation on secondary
power supplies for radio electronic equipnent. as well as nethods for their design
and planning. The book uses the terns and definition established by 0081‘ 23413-79
"Secondary Power Supplies for Radio Electronic Equipment. Ter- and Definitions".

According to 0081‘ 23613-79, a secondary power supply device is that functional
section of radio electronic equip-ant which utilizes electrical energy obtained
from an electric power system or electric power source and is used to for- the
secondary power supply of the radio electronic equipment.

The secondary power supply source of radio electronic equipment (BPS) is a secondary
power supply device of a radio electronic equipment which provides secondary power

supply for sutononous devices or individual circuits in a syatea of radio electronic
equipment.

-136-

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFK3AI.USE(NNLY

Secondary power supply sources consist of the functional nodules of the
secondary power supply of radio electronic equipment which execute one or
several functions. for example, rectification, stabilisation, amplification,
regulation. etc.

The electrical parameters of the power transistors and diodes used in BPS and
their literal designations correspond to COST 20003-7b "Transistors, Bipolar.
Electrical Parameters. Terms. Definitions and Literal Designations" and

COST 20006-74 "Diodes, Semiconducting. Electrical Parameters, General. Terms.

Definitions and Literal Designations".

The author expresses his thanks and sincere recognition to book reviewer Candi-

date of Technical Sciences L. A. Irene and scientific editor, Candidate of

Technical Sciences 3. N. Ivanchuk for the large amount of work they did in re-

viewing and editing the book. and for a number of valuable suggestions which

contributed to its improve-ant.

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Secondary power supplies for radio electronic equipment 5
1.1. Classification and parameters of secondary power supplies 5
1.2. Secondary power supplies using electricity obtained from
electric power system 8
1.3. Secondary power supplies using electricity from
autonomous dc source 13
Chapter 2. Semiconductor power elements for secondary power
supplies 20
2.1. Sesiconductor diodes 20
2.2. Transistors 25
2.3. Thyristors 35
Chapter 3. Ac voltage regulators and stabilizers 39
3.1. Operating principle of basic single—phase regulator
circuits 39
3.2. Basic circuits of three-phase regulators (stabilizers) 55
Chapter 4. Rectifiers 60-
6.1. Basic circuits and characteristics of single-phase
rectifiers 60

Table of Contents

- 137 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘02.
4.3.

b.6.

6.5.

Chapter 5.
5.1.
5.2.
Chapter 6.
6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
Chapter 7.
7.1.
7.2.
Chapter 8.
8.1.
8.2.
8.3.
8.4.
8.5.
Chapter 9.
9.1.
9.2.
9.3.

FOR(HHWCJAI.USE(MNLY

Three-phase rectifiers
Transistor saoothing filters

Operating features and design of rectifiers supplied
froa increased-frequency rectangular alternating voltage

Operating features and design of rectifiers supplied with
rectangular alternating voltage with fluctuating relative
pulse duration

Adjustable rectifiers

Basic circuits of adjustable rectifiers

Practical circuits of adjustable rectifiers

Continuous stabilizers for dc voltage

Basic types of stabilizers and their paraneters
Paranatric stabilizers

Compensation stabilizers for dc current

Pulsed dc voltage stabilizers

Operating principle of basic pulsed stabilizer circuits
Practical circuits for pulsed stabilizers

Voltage converters (inverters)

Single-phase inverters (general reaarks)

Feedback oscillators vith saturated poser transformer
Feedback oscillators with unsaturated power transfer-er
Independently excited inverters

Special transistor inverters

Dc converters

Basic circuits for dc converters

Dc charging converters

Fundamentals of designing dc converters

- 138 -

FOR OFFICIAL UEIZCMULY
Chapter 10.

10.1.

10.2.

10.3.

10.5.

1005.

FOR OFFICIAL l5! ONLY

miniaturization of secondary power supplies for radio
electronic squipnent

Significance and means for integrated niniaturisation
of secondary power supplies

Problem of increasing conversion frequency in secondary
power supplies

miniaturization of secondary power supplies using
e1. ricity obtained fro. electric syste-

uiniaturisation of hardware base of secondary power
supplies for radio electronic equipnent

Problems of efficient cooling in secondary power
supplies of radio electronic equip-ent

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT :

6900

ladstel'stvo "Radio i svyaz'", 1981

C50: 1860/10
FOR OFI-‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

000 621.382-181.48.66

SMCOIDUC‘I‘OR KILTIPLIER DIODES

Moscow POLUPROVODIIIKOWYB mmlm'mn DION in hissian 1981 (signed to press
20 Peb 81) pp 2, 6-8, 135

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents fron book "Seaiconductor Mtiplin
Diodes", by Vladimir Iosifovicb Pil'don, Isdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyss'", 5000 copies.
136 pages]

[Excerpts] Annotation

Features of the nechsnian of frequency nultiplication based on a nonlinear seni-
conducting capacitance are presented. Physical processes occurring in a diode

in the presence of large sinusoidal signals are analysed, and the analytical
relationships between the diode para-stars and the electrophysiosl characteristics
of the seniconducting nsterial are examined.

The systes of parameters and technical construction features of various sub-
classes of nultiplier diodes are examined.

The book is intended for specialists involved in the develop-ant and application
of seniconductor devices.

The book was reviewed by Candidates of Technical Sciences A. A. Visel' and
V. K. Trepakov.

Introduction

The probleas put forth by the nodern-dsy development of radio electronics include
the creation of solid-state nicrowsve oscillation sources with niniaus sire and
weight, low power consumption and high reliability. Such sources are needed for
the transsitters in airborne and ground Doppler radar installations. radio relay
links for tropoecatter and space cmnicstion. radio astronomical research,
spectroscopy. etc. Depending upon their function. the oscillators nust provide
steady-state output power free a few nilliwstts to tens of watts in the centiastar
and nillineter wavebsnds. and the long-tern frequency instability caused by
fluctuation of the supply conditions or external ““0" In" 0“ exceed 10-8 ‘ 10-7
for periods of tens of hours.

-160-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFFKJAi.USE(NVLY

One possible way to obtain microwave oscillations is to convert the power generated
at a frequency of in a relatively low-frequency range to electrical oscillation
power at the harmon.c “‘1 of the fundamental frequency. This is done in para-
metric frequency multipliers, in which the nonlinear elements are semiconducting
multiplier diodes (MD). These can be used to obtain oscillations at frequencies
significantly higher than that of a crystal-stabilised transistor master
oscillator. Recent years have been marked by significant successes in the

development of semiconducting multiplier microwave diodes and a variety of radio
technical devices based upon them.

Improvement of MD power characteristics and reliability is determined to a
significant extent by reducing internal losses in the nonlinear elements. There-
fore, the creation of multiplier diodes capable of developing high power levels

efficiently at various harmonics determines the developmental trend of this class
of semiconducting devices. ‘

Thanks to the increased power of transistorized master oscillators, the improve-
ment of diode fabrication technology and the improvement of the design of
frequency multipliers themselves, transistor-multiplier network output power has
now reached several watts in the 3-cm band with low long-term instability; there
is a trend toward improving the latter still further.

The development of millimeter-band MD will make it possible to create solid-state
power sources in the submillimeter waveband (300-b50 GB: and higher), i.e., in
the frequency region in which it is difficult to generate electrical oscillations
with Gunn diodes or avalanche transit time diodes because of a number of physical
limitations.

Thus, the requirement for creating stable, powerful sources of electrical
oscillations in the shorter-wave portion of the microwave band puts forth the
problem of the further development and perfection of semiconductor MD.

The present book examines these problems, which comprise the foundation of the
design and construction of semiconductor multiplier diodes.

The goal of the book is to assist device and equipment developers with practical
recommendations on selecting design methods and ways of using multiplier diodes

of various subclasses. The main attention of the book is devoted to the physical
processes which occur during frequency nultiplication, and engineering methods

for calculating the parameters of multiplier diodes based on the nonlinear
capacitance of p-n junctions (varactors, fast-recovery diodes and diodes using the
junction fusing effect). Engineering calculation methods and technical methods
examined can be used in planning other classes of semiconductor devices such as
limiters. pulsed. etc.

The author is indebted to book reviewers, Candidates of Technical Sciences
V. K. Trepakov and A. A. Vizel' for the helpful critical remarks they made while
reading the manuscript.

- 161 -

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂiE(ﬂULY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents

List of notation used

Introduction

Chapter 1.

1.1.
1.2.

1.3.

Chapter 2.

2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

Chapter 3.
3.1.
3.2.

3.3.
3.4.

Chapter b.

5.1.
‘02.

4.3.

Peatures of frequency multiplication on nonlinear
reactive element. System of diode electrical parameters

Basic types of nonlinear semiconducting capacitance

Frequency multiplication on model of nonlinear
capacitor

Frequency multiplication in rapid recovery mode

Electrical parameters of multiplier diodes as a
function of semiconductor structural characteristics

Optimization of structure of varsctor operating in
nominal excitation state

Dynamic series impedance of varactors with fusing
effect

Analysis of transient characteristics of 0N2

(diode with charge storage) in presence of large
sinusoidal currents

Technical design features of multiplier diodes
Engineering design methodology for multiplier diodes

Analysis of technological methods of creating
semiconductor structures with design parameters

Basic technological diode fabrication schemes
basic types of diode construction

System of electrical parameters and application
features of multiplier diodes

Typical MD characteristics
Physical limitations influencing output power

Prospects for application of nultiplier diodes

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: lrdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyas'". 1981

6900

CSO: 1860/13 - 162 -

FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.373
SQUARE-HAVE GENERATORS 0N nos 3mm:

Hosea-v GENERA‘NRY PRYAMOUGOL'W MUL'SOV NA BIN-WA”! in Russian 1981
(signed to press 28 Apr 81) pp 2. 5-6. 229-230

[Annotation, excerpts from foreword and table of contents from book "Square-wave
Generators on nos Blenents", by Stefan Volkov, abridged translation fron Bulgarian
by s. H. Smolskiy. Bnergoisdat, 15,000 copies, 232 pages]

[Excerpts] In this book a Bulgarian author amines pulse devices based on nos
elements. Equivalent circuits, eathanatical models and very simple logic elements
are described; threshold devices, univibrators and multivibrators are analysed;
and an apparatus is developed for calculating sensitivity and optimizing circuits
on HOS elements. Compared to the Bulgarian edition. the author has substantially
reduced the intermediate fornulae and described nee circuitry technology solutions.

For engineering technical personnel in the field of radio electronics, autosatics
and measurement technology.

Forevord

Data on the parameters and capabilities of pulse generators on ms elements are
practically absent in current literature. Circuitry solutions specific for ms
technology are few and incomplete and, in contrast to circuits with bipolar
elesents. their design technique has not been developed.

Pulse generators on was elements can be used not only in computer technology, but
also in many other sectors of the economy. Their developeent will thus enable a
rise in effectiveness of scientific research. Besides the usual advantages of nos
circuits. discussed in detail below, the necessity of developing pulse generators
on them is also related to considerations of conpatibility with other devices on
HOS elenenta in order to raise the degree of their integration. The introduction
of plastic chassis is resulting in a sharp reduction in the cost of general
purpose HOS Ic's. Besides the currently predominant technique of producing a
p-type channel kid: a metal gate, new technologies are being used with a self-
centering gate. ion implantation, silicon gates, etc. They enable a sharp increase

-163-

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
INDR OFINCIAl.lEﬂE(MULY

The obstacles listed above must be overcome if pulse generators on H08 elements
are to be widely introduced in practice. Such is the basic objective of this
monograph.

This book is a systematic presentation of the main areas of pulse technology based
on HOS elements. It gives practically all the known diagrams of pulse generators
based on HDS eleaents and results of research on them. which can be used in the
design and rating of generators. In all the chapters, new, more current circuitry
technological solutions are proposed. for which the author has received some 30
inventor'a certificates. The question is comprehensively resolved of stability of
pulse generators with preservation of maximum efficiency. simplicity and a high
degree of integration. New. effective stabilization methods are offered. including
a simple and effective circuitry design method for obtaining HOS 16's with stable
transmission characteristics. These aethods can be used to create universal H08
Ic’s which are substantially superior to all existing series in stability and
recurrence of parameters. Algorithms and programs are given to deternine the
sensitivity of pulse generators and optiaize them, which in turn results in an
increase in stability and technological reliability of the circuits.

A large part of the circuits and nethods of stabilizing them described in the book
can he used not only in HOS technology. The algorithms and programs for optimizing
circuits and calculating their sensitivity are universal. and can be used in any
field of technology.

As far as the author is aware. there is no book in the world's literature devoted
to a systematic presentation of questions of pulse technology based on NBS
elements. It is the task of this book to fill in gap. It also attempts to pro-
vide several new definitions and develop a new classification of pulse generators,
which is a generalization of preceding experience and should promote the further
development of pulse technology.

The author thanks all his colleagues for their help in performing research and
writing the manuscript.

Sofia. October 1978

The book manuscript presented for translation into Russian was substantially
revised compared with the Bulgarian edition. In particular. intermediate computa-
tions were 'eft out and material dealing with nachine analysis and optimisation

of integral inverters was shortened. The book also included new circuitry
technological solutions and the results of the author's research performed recently.

Sofia, August 1980

- 154 -

FOR OFIWCJAI.1EHE(NULY
Foreword

Chapter 1.

1.1.

1.2.

Chapter 2.
2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

2.6.
2.5.
Chapter 3.
3.1.
3.2.
3.3.
3.6.
3.5.
3.6.

FIN!(INH(JAI.USE¢MNLY

Table of Contenta

Para-etere and Characteriatica of Integrated
Hos-Transietore and Logic Ila-ante

Equivalent circuit and nathalatical nodal of an
HOS-traneiator

Paranetere and characteriatica of MOS integrated
logic elenente

Threahold Devicea
claaeification

HOS integrated threahold devicea with poeitive
hysteresis

2.2.1. Schnitt triggare

2.2.2. Threshold devicae haaed on a "differential"
amplifier

2.2.3. Threshold devicea baaed on a noninvarting
anplifier

2.2.6. Threshold devices baaed on an RS-flip-flop

M08 integrated thraahold davicea with zero and
negative hyetereaie

Interval detectora

HOS integrated threshold devices with low reaponae levela
Univihratore

Classification

Univibratore on HOS-trenaiatora

Univihratora on logic elananta

Univibratore with Rs-flip-flope

Pulae ahapera .

Pulae stretchere
- 165 -

INIIGIHHKIAI.USIINVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080046-9

Chapter 6.
6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
6.6.
6.5.
6.6.
6.7.
Chapter 5.
5.1.
5.2.

MWMWLY

haltivibratora

Classification

Sy-atric aultivibratora baud on invattora
Sy—atric mltivibratora baaad on Rs-flip-flopa
Any-attic Inltivibratora baud on mS-muutora
nay-attic lultivibratora baaad on invartora
Aay-atric lultivibratora baaad on IS-flip-flopa
mltivibratora based on thraahold davicaa
sanitivity and Optmution of Pulae Genaratora
Smitiviry detaraination natboda

Optimization Iathoda

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT:

Dota.. kand. takhn. nauk. inzh. Stafan A. V"lkov. 1979

Sokraahchannyy parevod na mukiy yazyk. Bnargoiadat, 1981

987 5

(:80: 1860/15

-166-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000400080046-9