FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10367

4 March 1982

West Europe Report

[FOUO 14/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MhTBRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEFINATION
OP TRIS PUBLICATION RB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' JPRS L/10367
i March 1982

WEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 14/92)

Couraurs

ENERGY wmmcs
ITALY

ENE. Loosen for Reducing Electricity Rates
(Pr‘nco “rm”; IL SOLE-2’0 ORB, 23 Jan 82)....ooooocooooo-oooo 1

ECONOMIC
FRANCE

(bunny Set Up for Marketing. Distribution of Satellite mca
(Pierre Langeraux; AIR E‘i' OOSFDS, 7 Nov 81).................... 3

Financial Circles React to Couponsations Under lbw Lav
(Philippe Durupt; VALBURS ACMLLES. 25-31 Jan 82)............. 6

ﬁne Banks Added to Nationalization List
(Alain lbrgaron; VALBURS ACTUBLLES, 25-31 Jan 82).............. 10

ITALY

Partiea' Economic mink-Tank Organizations
(IL SOLE-24 ORB, Various dams)...............-uu..u........ 12

PSI'a CESEC. by Riccardo Gliaberp
PCI'a CBSPE, Silvano Andriani Interview

Dc's ABEL. Franco Grasoini Interview
m's GRIP. by Riccardo aziaberp

- a - [III - WE - 150 3000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL
SPAIN

Poll Shows Pbsitive Attitude lbward Entry Into BC
(Jose Manuel Adja; cmm 16, 25 Jan 82).......................

MILITARY
FRANCE

Defense Budget Approved, 7th sm 1» Appear in 1994
I (AIR ET msms, 12 kc 81)....oc-ecoooeooeuoo-eoeooo-eeceectaeo

ENEML
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

French, British lbview Possible Future Space (boperation
(AIR ET msms. 24 Oct 81)ooeeev-oeoeoaoeoeeoo-oeoocoooeoeoooco

FRANCE

Gem Radiation Project "1th Soviets To Begin in 1986
(Pierre Lengereux; AIR 2'! msms, 14 Nov 81)...................

-b-

m OFFICIAL 03! MY
3181. 105888 FOR REDUCING ELECTRICITY MES

Milan ll. SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 23 Jan 82 pp 1, 2

[Article by Franco Vergnano: 'ster 'Discounts' Put ENE]. into the Red")

[Text] Two trillion 1m in 1981 a... to rate reductions; month)-
bills reduced for 90 percent of families.

Hilan...ldithout the numerous rate reductions for users under various headings, the
ENEL [National Electric Power Agency] would practically have closed the year with

a balanced record. Although the final audit has not yet been completed, the electric
power agency in 1981 lost about 2 trillion, the shortfall due to the thousands of -
"discounts" granted on monthly utility bills by the CIP [Interministerial Price
Comittee] to various groups of users. 0n the basis of actual consumption and com-
paring the situation to full-rate schedules, we find that the BNEL last year lost

a total of 1.96 trillion. including 1.12 trillion due to various reductions in

rate levels and 840 billion because of discounts on the heat surcharge.

The biggest increment (1.162 billion) is due to the now famous reductions granted
for domestic uses through the mechanism of the social slices—s phenomenon which
involves almost all Italian families; as a matter of fact, because of the reduction
in monthly fixed rates, the "discount" for the first 75 kilowatt-Muss consumed.
plus other reductions on the heat surcharge, the social group assisted by the am.
one to add up to as much as 90 percent of the domestic users.

The State Railways for various reasons got a discount of a little less than 200
billion per year while the aluminum industry was able to "save" 150 and the steel
industry about 160. The Terni Company by itself managed to obtain a reduction of
about 50 billion. Next we have the various reductions for the South. for craftsmen,
for farmers, etc.

As we said earlier, these figures were obtained by working out the differences
between the prices actually charged to the privileged users (based on the laws and
the CIP directives) and those of the "normal" consumers.

All of these reductions together. adding up to 1.12 trillions for 1981, generally
are granted without any provision for a compensatory counterpart and can be con-
sidered one of the main causes of the fact that the BNEL’s accounts are not balanced.

n’l'his revenue shortfall, added on top of the 840 billion that can be charged to a
reduction in the heat surcharge, in substance are responsible for the deficit in the
entire ENE], balance sheet and this is not even in part compensated for by the rate-
schedule yield coming from users who did not get any reductions.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a situation of this kind one can say that all of the categories are getting re-
ductions in the sense that, overall. through the monthly bills. we are paying less
for electricity than what it costs the ENEL to produce.

If these deficits are somehow made up, we would only enormously increase the finan-
cial costs of the Em which is forced to go into debt way out of proportion.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editrice Il Sole-21o Ore s.r.l.

5053
cso: 3104/115

2
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
COMPANY SET UP FOR MARKETING, DISTRIBUTION OF SATELLITE DATA
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 7 Nov 81 pp 52-53

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Establishment of 'Spot-Image' Conpany on 1 Janu-
ary 1982"]

ary 1982. Its president will be Gerard Brachet, head of the applications division
of the cans. who delivered a report on the subject on 12 October 1981. at a Space
Club dinner presided over by Michel Bigniar of the BSA [expansion unknown].

manufacturers involved in the building and operation of the Spot system: Hatra
(satellites) and SEP [European Propellant Coapsny] (stations), companies in

which the government is the majority shareholder. Spot-Image will therefore be
mainly under the control of the French Government. The only foreign shareholder
now accepted is the Swedish Space Corporation (Sweden), which will have 4 percent
of the Spot-Image stock. Like the Belgian industry, this Swedish conpany will
have minority participation in the construction of the first Spot 1 satellite,
which will be launched in mid 1984. Spot 1 will be the first civilian satellite’
to take both visible and infrared photographs with high resolution (20'and lO
neters) and in stereoscope.

Spot-Image will have a vast commercial network for the distribution of Spot

inages on a world scale because 80 percent of the market for data fro. the French
observation satellites is abroad.

Depending on the case. Brachet says. Spar-Image will set up either: distribution
subsidiaries, nainly in the United States, given the large share of the American
market; or franchising agreements with certain foreign receiver stations that will
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not be able to have all the means needed to define the products (images, tapes,
and so on), manufacture them and market them; or distribution agreements with
representatives of local agents, relying on the facilities of shareholders abroad.

The Spot-Image Company will take over the system of earth stations that receive
and process images from Spot satellites. The central French station will be set
up at Aussaguel, near Toulouse, to receive data in real and deferred (recorded)
time. The direct reception stations located in several countries will receive
images from regions included in a circle with a radius of 2,500 kilometers, cen-
tered on the statibn. This network will make it possible to receive a large part
of the data obtained by the satellites: 25 percent at Toulouse and the rest at
direct reception stations. The amount of data directly accessible to French auth-
orities can even go as high as 50 percent if negotiations underway are successful
in integrating the Swedish station at Kiruna into the French system.

Already, several countries equipped with Landsat receiving stations have mani-
fested their intention of also receiving Spot data: Sweden, Canada, Australia,
Brazil, the Regional Center of Ouagadougou in Heat Africa, and recently, Kenya,
where the CNBS is making a feasibility study. By 1985-1986, there should be some
20 Spot stations in service in the world.

Spot-Image will begin promotion operations and the negotiation of data distribution
agreements with foreign stations able to provide direct data_reception, in 1982.

It will enter into negotiations with national or regional distributors as well.
Both 1982 and 1983 will be,used to set up the commercial network so as to have

an experienced, effective organization by mid 1984, when the first satellite will
be in orbit. ' l

The company will have a monopoly over the dissemination and marketing of Spot data
received by French stations or stations controlled by France, Brachet says. Stan-
dard products will be manufactured by the C818 image preprocesaing center in Tou-
louse, based on the demands of Spot-Image, which will ensure their reproduction
and adapt them to the demands of customers, making "special" products (special
processing) itself. Spot-Image will set up a file of original photographic pro-
ducts and a file of products on tape, based on commercial needs. Spot-Image will
pay the CNBS directly for the supplying of data received at Toulouse and filed
with CRIS, so as to gradually make it possible to finance the construction of the
successive operational satellites (starting with the second satellite, Spot 2),

as well as their launching and operation. For the CNES, the additional receipts
will come from contracts signed with foreign stations.

Estimating the portion of the world market that might belong to the Spot system
was already part of a series of studies made at the request of the CUES in 1979
and 1980: a market study of cartographic applications by Eurosat (Switzerland),
studies of applications on the American market by Barthsat (United States), overall
evaluation of the world market in over 100 countries for each field of application,
with the aid of the ministries of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Commerce. The stu-
dies were also compared with those done in the United States by the Federal Govern-
ment or by American professional organizations such as Geosat, whose members are
the major American oil and mining companies.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Results are in agreement in the main and especially encouraging, Brachet thinks,
because they give an estimate of the overall market potential for the Spot system
of 60,000 to 100,000 scenes a year. The distribution by sector of applitation is
spread out over oil and mining exploration (35 percent), cartography (20 percent),
agriculture and forests (18 percent), development of the territory and hydrology
(12 percent) and research (15 percent).

This market actually appears to be dominated by the very important weight of the
American market (nearly 50 percent), either directly or indirectly (local subsi-
diaries of the big American companies). Use in developing countries -- potentially
very great - essentially depends on bilateral or multilateral aid and is there-
fore under the indirect control of the ruling countries.-

The sensitivity of the market to the data sales price appears to be very low, howb
ever, with the exception of customers in research sectors and universities. Ac-
cording to Brschet, this appears to be due to the still minimal share represented
by the cost of the images compared with processing and interpretation efforts. In
this connection, American and French intentions of practicing a price policy re-
flecting the real cost of the data would therefore not tend to substantially reduce
prospects of developing uses of space teledetection images, the future president

of Spot-Image concludes.

In addition, market estimates must take into account the market created for French
industry by the sale of equipment and services relating to the Spot system. A
survey done in 1980 by the minister of industry shows that the figure for turnover
corresponding to materials for using observation satellite images would quadruple
in 10 years, from 1980 to 1990. An induced effect of about the same dimension is
also foreseeable for the service industry (photo processing, interpretation aids,
and so on).

The establishment of the Spot-Image Company is destined to ensure French penetra-
tion of a market that is diffuse, both sectorially and geographically, G. Brachet
believes. ‘

However, the success of the operation also depends on two other factors: opera-
tional pursuit of the Spot program beyond the first satellite in order to assure
users of continuous service for at least 10 years. In this connection, the recent
decision by the French Government (see AIR ET COSMOS, No 878) to finance the con-

struction of a second satellite, Spot 2, for 1986 is an important phase that al-
ready manifests the French determination to ensure continuity of service.

Second, development of the market by training and promotion activities aimed at
preparing users to take data available beginning in 1986 into account is important.
In 1982, the launching of the American Landsat D satellite, which will supply
images with a resolution of 30 meters on the ground. will play an important role
in this development. At the same time, the CNES launched a Spot data simulation
program based on air photos made by the Group for Development of Aerospace Tele-

detection. This simulation program, for which a campaign is now underway in "est
Africa (AIR ET COSMOS, No 877), makes it possible to give users images close to

those that will be provided by the satellite, enabling them to evaluate precisely
what they can expect.

COPYRIGHT: A. G C. 1982 5

11,454
650: 3100/30? roe omcw. use our
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

economc rams:

FINANCIAL CIRCLES REACT T0 OWENSATIWS UNIER NW MU
Paris VALEURS- ACNELLES in French 25-31 Jan 82 pp 108-119

[Article by Philippe Durupt: "The'covernnent's Prices"]

[Text] Financial circles could scarcely believe it. At most, they expected a
restoration of the 1981 dividend, as provided by the initial bill on nationaliza-

tions, although absent from the final version.

The Constitutional Council went such further. It suggests pay-eat of that dividend
or an equivalent counterpart and it subjects the bases for calculation of the ex-

change price to double criticise.

First of all, it believes that the technique of the 3-year average (1978-1980) used
to figure Stock Exchange prices (50 percent of the nulticriteria base) and profits
(25 percent), does not take the direction of the trend (up or down) into account.
"It leads to considerable distortions."

To be convinced of this. one has but to coapare the prices of sewrities on
31 March 1981 (first column of table below) with the exchange prices offered

(second colmn) .

Shareholders in the as! [Co-ercial Credit of France] were to receive a 30-percent
lower indemnification at that price, while those in llhone-Poulenc would receive
compaction over 50 percent higher.

.... _—.—. -—

Conpanics whose strengthl(rising results) was recognized by the Stock Exchange
(highest prices) were penalized, as in the case of the 00?, the 068 [General Elec-

tric (Equiplent) Company] or the Paribas Financial Conpany.

0n the other hand, companies in difficulty, such as Rhone-Paula“ and Rothschild,
received better treatment. The effects of the crisis reflected by the 1980 results
and their latest quotations were partially wiped away thanks to tni 1-year average.

The second basic criticism of the Council had to do with the underestination of
assets, which represented 25 percent in the mlticriteria basis serving to figure
the indemnification.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Rate an Orig. Exchange New Exchange Race on

 

31 11.: 81 Price Price 011:. 15 Jan 82
cc: 400 334.15 492 + 47: 333.60
Puk 102 104.65 124 + 19: 101.70
Rhone-Poulenc 88 136 121 - 111 123.60
Saint-Cobain 141 156.18 175 + 122 152.50
menses-Brandt 280 255.71 307 + 202 252
Paribas 261 218.70 3032 + 392 210

Suez 334 327.35 423 + 29: :31

cos 210 163.76 254 + 551 163
Rothschild Bank 175 240.97 197 - 18: 218.60

1 Best average monthly rate, increased by 14 percent, plus the 1980 dividend, it-
self increased by 14 percent (to represent the 1981 dividend).

2 Former coupon of 13.50 francs (installment).

Actually, the government went by the net accounting situation of the companies
quoted. The operating companies, which have no subsidiaries, watched as all their
assets were taken into account. 0n the other hand, the financial holding companies,
which control numerous subsidiaries, were at a disadvantage because the assets of
the latter entered into the calculations only to the extent of their stocktaking
value.

Depending on whether an activity was developed within a company by a department or
by a subsidiary specially set up for the purpose, the shareholders were or were not

compensated for assets.

However legitimate the practical considerations of speed and simplicity evoked
by the government may have been, they could not justify such serious inequalities
in treatment.

From the very beginning of the parliamentary discussion, VALBURS ACTUELLES brought
up each of the points that led the Constitutional Council to reject the articles
of the law concerning compensation, a coincidence stemming only from the obvious-
ness of the rules in use.

The president of C03 [expansion unknown], Bernard Tricot, had also presented them
at the time of his hearing before the special committee. And yet, in a letter

sent to Jacques Delors a week late;, he added: "0n the whole, despite these
reservations...1 believe that, contrary to what has sometimes been said, the com-

pensation provisions are in no way spoliatory...."

His position, confirmed by the State Council, strengthened the intransigence of the
government in the face of the criticism. It consisted or judging the compensation

provisions to be spoliatory in specific areas but generous on the whole.

For its part, the Constitutional Council deemed that the spoliatory details formed
a whole that was unacceptable in view of Article 17 of the Declaration of Human
Rights (on the just nature of compensation).

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
n was surname. Von URL!

The government was able to present a new text, after “mobilizing all its brains,"
starting on Sunday. The nationalization of the unregistered companies, which will
be the subject of a case-by-case examination. is postponed until 1983.

For the registered companies, the new exchange price will be established by refer-
ence to the prices of the Stock Exehange alone, between 1 October 1980 and 31 March
1981. From the six monthly ave ages obtained, the best will be retained for each
company. Finally, this average will be increased by 14 percent, a rate representing
the monetary depreciation for the past year.

Furthermore, shareholders will receive an additional sun as a dividend for 1981,
equal to the dividend collected for the 1980 fiscal year, increased by 16 percent.

The formula chosen, which is extremely simple, is not open to any question on tech-
nical grounds.

But is this true with respect to substance?
The government followed the Constitutional Council for the 1981 remuneration.

It was also sensitive to the criticism on the arbitrary and unjust nature of the
average prices and profits. Reference to recent prices does more justice to the
diversity of actual situations.

Nevertheless, by failing to take into account the value of the assets, which is far
higher than the Stock Exchange rate, the government leaves itself open to the sec-

ond major criticism of the Constitutional Council: the excessive underestimation
of the real value of shares.

It is as if it was not able to decide between the two possible options: either a
multicriteria basis, which would respect the methods of calculation in use - and
therefore, the taking into account of consolidated assets - or reference to Stock
Exchange rates alone, but in this case, agreeing to follow rules in use for the OPE
(public exchange bids).

The practice of the last 5 years in France shows that these public bids have been
an average of 56 percent higher than the latest quote. But the average price used

in the new proposal is (with only a few minor variations) identical to the last
price quoted on 31 March 1981.

Therefore, no purchase bonus.

The government intends to use its power of coercion in a case where any moral
person, whether private or public, should have aeted by persuasion. The lb-percent
increase in value because of the monetary depreciation can scarcely be compared
with a bonus. It is justified by the length of a procedure (9 months have already
gone by) that does not exceed 2 months in the case of an OPA [takeover bid].

The response of the shareholders will vary, depending on the case. Those receiving

a readjustment upward, the largest group, will be relieved. The others will be
greatly disappointed, but these two reactions are not symmetrical.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The former had serious reasons to be dissatisfied because the original exchange

prices, lower than the latest prices quoted in March 1981. made the injustice suf-
fered flagrant.

The latter benefited from a sometimes unexpected treatment. The most typical case
is that of personnel of the Credit Lyonnais, who had received shares from the bank:
Were they not given 765 francs for shares qucted at 287? The net situation and the
average profits of 1978-1980 only had been used, excluding the quotes: They were
representative of the value of the assets and the operation because the subsidiar-
ies of the Credit Lyonnais are of insignificant weight.

The Rothschild Bank shareholders were not mistreated either. The unintegrated sub-

sidiaries had a deficit and, lacking an adequate reference period, the prices were
not used. '

The price of their shares leaped immediately in the wake of these offers, but with
a small aftereffect manifested by a Stock Exchange deduction of some 10 percent

(that is not found in the other cases).

These shareholders were right to be cautious. They would have been well advised
to sell because the new rates will mark the end of their dreams: They are down
56 percent for the Credit Lyonnais and 18 percent for the Rothschild Bank.

Disappointment on one side; relief on the other, but the nationalization will not
leave a good taste in anyone's mouth. Unless it be in the mouths of speculators.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "Valeurs Actuelles"

11,464
cso: 3100/294

9

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE‘ONLY
M OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

ECMCMIC _ FRANCE

THREE BANKS ADDED TO NATIGMLIZATIW LIST
Paris VALBURS AGI'UEILBS in French 25-31 Jan 82 p 50
[Article by Alain Margaron: "The Surprise of the Mutual Insurance Companies"]

[Text] Three new eases are on the list of banks to be nationalized, three estab-
lishments nest of whose capital belongs directly to mutual or cooperative conpanies:
the Pederative mtua'l Credit Bank for Alsace and Lorraine, the Central Cooperative
and Mutual Insurance Bank and the French Cooperative Credit Bank. 'l'heir total
deposits (2.9, 1.65 and 1.1 billion francs respectively) are over the threshold of
1 billion france'naking nationalization applicable.

As in the case of the other unclassified banks, their nationalization does not be-
come effective until January 1983, allowing time to set their indumification. The

only renaining hope, albeit fragile, is to be able to use that time to modify their
status-so as to escape the nationalization.

Despite its repeated promises of not touching the cooperative sector, Elysee has

confirmed the ruling of the Constitutional Council, which deems that the three
banks cannot be treated differently from the other nationalisable establistments.

"This derogation cannot be justified by the specific nature of their status or by
the nature of their activities ," the Constitutional Council writes.

In fact, they fit into the same category as the other netionalizable companies:
that of the so-called "registered" firns, those subject to the National Credit

Council and the banking control conciasion.

.On the other hand, the other cooperative banks such as the uricultural Loan Bank,
the People's Banks and, what is even more curious, the other regional Mutual Credit
banks, escape the nationalization because they have remained establishments with
"special legal status."

This rather formal distinction is emplained by the partitioning of the banking
system. A whole series of parallel establish-cuts of a cooperative nature have
special operating rules, often with tax privileges to offset limitations of
jurisdiction.

However, the three "registered" banks in the cooperative sector have no more
traditional banking activity than the other establishments in the sector that were
spared. For example, the regional Agriwltural Loan banks, .vhose standardization
if :ell underway, have jurisdictions at least as broad as the Pederative Mutual
Cre it Bank. '

10
POI 0m USEONLY
The only one of the 19 regional Mutual Credit banks to be registered, the latter
handles 900 million in deposits of enterprises in which it sometimes holds shares.
But two-thirds of its activities are those of the other regional Mutual Credit
banks: management of the funds of local banks, loans to local collectives. Its
capital belongs to the local banks (over 1,000) and, like all the cooperative estab-
lishments, it can distribute dfvidends of over 6 percent of the corporate shares.

The French Cooperative Credit Bank has the legal status of a cooperative. Its
capital is divided between the Central Cooperative Credit Fund (55 percent) and its

company members (65 percent). which give it 95 percent of its deposits and to whom
it grants short-term credits.

Practically nothing in its activities distinguishes it from the Central Fund, which
grants long-tern loans to the same company members. It assumed the status of a
"registered" bank in 1969 after the absorption of another cooperative bank at the
request of the monetary authorities, but without anyone foreseeing major conse-
quences at the time.

The Central Cooperative and Mutual Insurance Bank has as its customers the sup-
porters of its two shareholders: civil servants belonging to the Civil Servants
Mutual Guarantee (GM?) and cooperatives in the Coop group. It thus has a network
of 25 agencies and outlets in the GM? agencies.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "Valeurs Actualles"

11.464
CSO: 3100/290

11

FOI‘OFIWCJAI.lEH£(NNLY
PARTIES' ECONOMIC THINK-TANK ORGANIZATIONS

PSI'a CESEC
Milan 1L SOLE-24 ORB in Italian 23 Jan 82 p 3

[Article by Riccardo Chisberge: "Where the Italian Socialist Party's New Deal Is
Being Manufacture "]

[Text] Franco Beviglio: "He must change the entire economic system
in depth, aiming at the advanced tertiary sector and promoting
job nobility. But the indispensable premise for attaining these
objectives is to have a government machinery that really works."

Turin...The windows face toward one of the most suggestive corners of the Baroque
Turin of Filippo Juvarrs, just a couple of steps from the very centrally located
San Carlo Square. Franco Reviglio paces up and down through the big bare rooms,

on the as yet unwaxcd floors, followed by a retina: of aides. "Now, here we can
have our meeting room and over there the library. And the telephones--where are we
going to put them when we get them?" All the janitor knows is that the CESBC '
[Economic Study Center]--the Economic Study Center of which Reviglio is president--
has opened an office in Turin. In the same building, but in a different wing, is
the CIPES [expansion unknown].the'Tarlo Rosselli" Center, the headquarters of
Giuseppe La Gangs, the socialist deputy and Craxi's lieutenant in Piedmont. Walls
covered with huge csrnations, telephones that jingle, and superefficient secretaries.

"But the CESEC is something else. It is an area center, not a party center,"
Reviglio notes.

But it is to this "area center," to this gathering of intellectuals who are to work
. in a climate of Franciscan austerity, that Bettina Craxi in person wanted to assign
a task of the utmost importance: drafting the economic portion of the 1982 socialist
program, a kind of Mason Charts which the PSI [Italian Socialist Party] leader pro-
posed to present to the country during the next elections (early or not) to make
clear what he intends to do the day he manages (assuming that he does) to plant

the red carnation on the roof of Chigi Palace.

This is why we decided to start from this point here, from this old portal at 101
Roms Street in Turin to begin our survey of the economic activities of the party.

12
FOI'OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This trip will not take us far because, although there are many parties in Italy,
the economic centers directly or indirectly tied to the parties can be counted,

so to speak, on the fingers of one hand: apart from the CESBC (and the CEPEC [ox-
Pansion unknown], founded at the time by Pabrizio Cicchitto but currently almost
deactivated) for the PSI, there is the ABEL [Research and Legislative Agency] cf the
DC [Christian Democratic Party], the CESPB [Center for Studies in Economic Polzcy]
of the PCI [Italian Communist Party], the CBS? [Economic Policy Studies Center] of
the Republicans, and the Torre Argentina Center for the independent left.

The rather liberal Einaudi Foundation does have an economic section but covers a
broader range of cultural interests. That in practice is the end of the list.
Scores of other abbreviations can be found in the Yellow Pages of the Rome Telephone
Directory; but many of them will only lead to a telephone answering service. They
are for the most part just window dressing, little cubicles opened for one or the
other politician, where there is no research going on and where there never has been
any, except research for easy money and just passing the time of day.

But, getting back to the real economic centers: how did they spring up, how do they
exist, whom do they serve, and what are their relations with the respective political
employers and bosses? Are they only little flowers that will simply die in the
course of the big events of the day (such as elections), to wither away once the
party is in power? Do they serve as springboards for technicians in search of fame

or power or, viceversa, are they rest homes for pOliticians in disgrace? Are they
simple branch offices of the economic sections of the various parties or do they
have an autonomous status of their own in terms of research and in making proposals
of their own?

In the case of the CESBC, the autonomy aspect is beyond discussion because it is
written into its charter. When it was baptized in a little room in the Turati
Club in Milan in July 1978, none of the big shots from Corso Street were present.
At that time Franco Reviglio was only a professor of finance at the Univeristy of
Turin and he was not even remotely thinking of becoming a minister. (”It was a
tough job convincing him to take over the job of president," one of his students
tells us. "By family tradition, he had never even joined a social club.") The
other founding partners (Carlo Mario Guerci, Franco Honiglisno, Bruno Colle, and
Franco Morganti) certainly cannot call themselves "apparatchiks."

"This is a group of persons with a socialist and lay orientation,? explains Aldo
Vannini. the center's secretary. "They felt the need for providing a place where
they can get together and think. It is half-way between a French-style club and the
Fabian Society, capable of blending diverse experiences and professional backgrounds
(economists. urban affairs experts, sociologists, labor unionists, entrepreneurs)

to draft a reformist economic policy."

In a little more than 3 years of existence--and with limited funds (a budget of 100
million, just one part-tine secretary)-the CESEC has made good headway; it has
promoted important research undertakings. such as the one on workers in small and
medium industry, coordinated by the historian Valerio Castronovo, the study on
society balance sheets, and the Pourth EEC Directive (later on compiled in a volume
put out by Franco Angeli), in addition to conferences and study groups on industrial
and labor policy; it added new and famous names to its roster; it opened offices

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in Genoa, Florence, Venice, and Bologna. But above all it has become a kind of
cultural lobby (with a heavily "northern-oriented" connotation) which has growing
Influence among the party's top leadership which puts its own men on the governing
boards and among the brain trust of the socialist ministers, from De Hichelis to
Signorile, from Hence to Formica (Forte himself-~the PSI's economic affairs chief
at this time—-is a member of the CESEC). And now, as we said before, the lobby has
managed to get a good piece of the Craxian government program for the eighties
allocated to itself.

What are the ingredients and what are the proposals that will go into this effort?
For the time being, Reviglio does not have much to say about that. "We are working
fast," he says, “and the general thrust has been outlined but we do not as yet have
any details." The CBSBC study group (in addition to Reviglio himself, it consists
of Gastronovo. Colle, and Antonio Pedone) operates in close conjunction with the
centers to which program coordinator Luigi Covatta has assigned the other sections
(international, institutions, society, party); the document will have to be ready
during March to be submitted to review by a national conference of P81 cadres.

"In addition to discussing the situationamongstaurselvesﬂ'adds Castronovo, "we
are looking into the experiences of other countries. He began with the Germans of
the SPD [German Socialist Party] and it was said that we wound up quarreling over
Poland. But in committee we also took an in-depth look at economic issues. Soon
it will be the turn of the French socialists and then of the Greek socialists.

Like the PCI, the PSI is also looking for its own road to socialism or to social
democracy. Where does this road lead? To the Paris of Hitterrand, to Bonn, to
Stockholm (the one of Olaf Palme, of course)? Reviglio shakes his head:
"None of those models can be imported to Italy just as they are. we have two types
of democratic systems in the West: the neocorporative ones, such as in Germany or
Austria,and the conflict-oriented ones. He belong to the second type, such as in
France. But in France, the institutional reform has provided the instrument for

a change in administration. In Italy, this is not yet possible and this is why we
continue to switch back and forth between periods of conflict and tendencies toward
association. No, here we are not dealing with the idea of borrowing somebody else's
experience. Here we must find a more solid anchorage in the grand harbor of Western
reformisn."

But Western reformism, as launched by Keynes and by the Rooseveltian New Deal and as
completed by the European sOcinl democracies,has never before been so deep in crisis.
This will not be the catastropic crisis of the societies of the East; the welfare
state is also under accusation. "There is no doubt," replies Reviglio."But we want
to do away with it. The sirens of Remnomics and of Thatcher-style moaetarism do
not entice us. You cannot shift the entire cost of the crisis to the weakest seg-
ments. He cannot get along without government intervention in the economy because
the market does not by Itself solve all problems. In a society such as Italian
society, where 12 percent of the families hold more than half of all the wealth,
trusting in the market would only mean accentuating the injustices."

To get out of the deadend street of inflation and stagnation, the economists at the
CBSEC are thinking of a big production conversion effort: “anloyment in industry
is shrinking," explains Reviglio, "and to continue to grow and maintain current

14

FOR OFTICJAI.US£INNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

levels of prosperity, we must develop the advanced services and the public adminis-
tration. Re need great social mobility and for that we are thinking of a kind of
employment agency. We have had enough of the unuployment service. The industrial
machinery must remain competitive, obsolete sectors must yield to new sectors such
as energy, biotechnology, and data processing. But above all we need a government
machine that will work." That will take 10 or 20 years, Professor Reviglio. "That
is not a good reason for not beginning to think of what we are going to do right now.
By the way, what we are writing now is an administration program and that adminis-
tration is going to have to last a long time."

PCI'B CESPE
Milan IL SOLE-21o ORE in Italian 27 Jan 82 p 3

[Article on interview with Silvano Andriani by Riccardo Chiabarge: “And the Brains of
the Italian Communist Party Are Thinking about Stockholm"]

[Text] Andriani: "We cannot nationalize the enterprises as they
did in France. The alternative is Swedish-style worker control."

Rome..-The orthodox men on Botteghe Oscure Street always viewed him with a mixture
of repugnance and diffidence. Just 2 years ago, they brought down upm themselves
the anathema of half of the PCI and the entire labor union vanguard when, in col-
laboration with the Piedmont Gramci Institute, they came up with that famous survey
on Fiat workers that shattered the traditional stereotype of the Gramscian worker.
"Those fellows at the CBS"; was the consent of the more obtuse communist cadres,
"have betrayed Marx and have become the bedfallows of American sociology." There is
reason to think that the stumbling block, the man in charge of research, was Aria
Accornero himself whom all of the comrades in Turin recall very well: a man per-
secuted since the fifties, a man who had earned his spurs in action in the "penal
detachments . "

After that, as we know, the facts proved Accornero's "Americans" to have been cor-
rect. If the party and the labor union had in time understood the message that came
out of the questionnaires, perhaps they could have spared themselves some ugly
moments and a searing defeat.

But that is not the only item on the agenda for the CBS?! activity review. Between
1977 and 1979, in the midst of a climate of national solidarity. while Franco
Rodano himself, Berlinguer's closest adviser, preached austerity as a revolutionary
sackcloth against the temptations of consumerism, and while the entire general staff
of the PCI was in a body fighting for 675, the sector plans, and the new law for the
South. the researchers at the center of Eugenio Feggio (although quite a bit 1“”
as compared to other studies) discovered that the situation in Italy was changing
due to the crisis, that industry was spontaneously reorganizing itself and that
finally the deep South was experimenting with its own road to development in spite
of unequal odds'.

While the party's bureaucrats insisted on looking at the country through the reversed
field glasses of ideology, the "Americans" in the CBSPE, due to their more sensitive
instruments of investigation, managed to see the situation more clearly. One can

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
however reprove than for a certain timidity in defending their own viewpoints. But

it is true that the recent, belated and partial course corrections by Berlinguer are
to some extent also to be credited to them. And that encouraged them to demand ever
greater autonomy from the leadership on Botteghe Oscure Street.

"we are not an appendix of the party,” said 0351’! Secretary Silvano Andriani.a
48'er who came up in the COIL [Italy General Confederation of Labor] along with
Accornero and Brno Trentin. "It is true that our research has a political purpose

but the method is strictly scientific. This is a guarantee which we do not intend
to renounce.“

Founded in 1966 by Giorgio Amendola, when the PCI was isolated in the opposition and
when the cream of the Italian economists. from Saraceno to Sylos Labini, was
gravitating around the parties of the center-left (PSI and DC in particular), the
Economic Policy Study Center really took off only around the middle of the seventies,
when the time seemed to be right also for the comnists also to get into the control
room. Today it has an annual budget of around 30'.‘ million (partly with in-house
financing); it has about a score of collaborators, subdivided among the two sections
-econonics and social research (the latter under the direction of Accomero) and it
publishes the mthly magazine POLITICA BCONGIIA.

In addition to President Eugenio Peggio, the umbilical cord with the party is taken
care of by the presence on the board of directors of such men as Gerardo Chiaromonte.
the PCI' s economic chief, and Gianfranco Borghini. This body recently (for the time
being only consultative but soon to become deliberative) was enlarged to include
"area" personalities such as the left-wing independents Luigi Spaventa and Claudio
Napoleoni, the economists Augusto Graziani, Vincenzo Visco, and Salvatore Biasco,

the constitutionalist Sabin Cassese. and finally an outstanding exponent of social-
ist culture, such as Giorgio Ruffolo.

In spite of this overcoat of pluralism, as it were, the preferential relationship
between the CBSPE and the Commist party is beyond discussion. This is so true
that, when the time came to draft a new economic policy manifesto for the PCI,
Berlinguer asked help from the experts at the center on Vite SHEER f0“? Of the.

(Andriani, Peggio, Accornero, and Laura Pcnnacchi) worked in the drafting group to-
gether with Chiaromonte and the other "technicians" of the party.

"Our imprint can be seen right away," says Andriani. "In this doclment there is no
longer any trace of the old stagnation-oriented interr stations of the crisis. The
point of departure, on the contrary, is the recognitio. of a noteworthy dynaisn

in Italian society, the fact that the economic structure has changed profoundly and
that the class makeup is changing with it: less workers, more technicians, less
employees in industry, more employees in the tertiary sector. A series of trans-
formations, now accelerated by the microelectronic revolution, upsetting some of the
basic postulates of the traditional Harxist concept."

[Question] All of this is true, Andriana. but it is a shame that, in moving on
from diagnosis to therapy, you slipped back again into some of the old schema such

as statism. planning from the bottom up. labor union control over investments. Does
that not seem somewhat contradictory to you?

16

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Not at all. Recognizing the vitality of the market does not mean marrying
up with neoliberalism or underestimating the central nature of the role of the
state in the economy. 0n the contrary. The other side of the coin of this crisis,
which involves just about all of the Western democracies, is the inability of the
governments to regulate economic processes, to reconcile the conflicting interests
involved. This is the zero sum society of Thurow, the block of decision-making

processes analyzed by Offe, O'Connor, and the other political science experts and
economists . "

[Question] All of them are Americans.

[Answer] But all of them, more or less, have a Marxist background. The central
problem for all and also for us is how to give the welfare state to make sure that
a satisfactory social setup will develop parallel to teclmological progress.

[Question] what is your prescription?

[Answer] There are two alternatives today: French-style nationalisation or socializa-
tion, Swedish-style worker control. In a country such as Italy, where the decline

in government credibility has reached a humiliating point, talking about nationaliza-
tion is pure folly; hence, the Hitterrandian way must be discarded. That leaves

us with the Swedish way.

[Question] Would that be that famous third way'!. Are you turning your back on
Moscow and has the PCI decided to look to Stockholm?

[Answer] It is too early to tell. The discussion among u. has just begun. But it
is true that the Italian communists are not alone in this search and that confronta-
tion with the experiences of other left—wing forces in Europe its-decisive.

[Question] In Sweden, social democracy was defeated on a specific bill, the Heidner
plan, which was designed to turn the labor unions into the stockholders of the enter-
prises. In Italy we have not yet arrived at that point but the powers of the worker
organizations in the enterprises are very penetrating. Does it seen to you that

they are spreading further, with the risk of paralyzing the decisions on investment?

[Answer] We believe that it is necessary to think of new forms of industrial demo- ,
cracy. During the seventies we perhaps looked too much to participation, to the
betterment of management and the responsibility of management. The limit of labor
union culture was precisely this: it did not address itself to the problem of enter-
prise management which must remain an autonomous, technical, and specialized fraction
which cannot be drowned in participationism. The idea of the enterprise plan,
drafted by the IRES [expansion unknownl-CGIL, which the PCI has now adopted as its
own. is supposed to overcome that limitation. restoring to the manager responsibility
for market decisions, provided they are within the outlines of economic planning.

[Question] The Italian enterprises must be reorganized and, when necessary. they must
lay people off. The unemployment fund cannot go on forever. What do you propose?

[Answer] A national enloyment agency. A public agency which should register and
find jobs for workers who lost their jobs due to reorganization. In this way the

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
enterprises would be freer. But at the same time, the management of the labor
nmrkct would be in the hands of the political authorities. For us. employment is
a political problem and you cannot leave it to the private sector.

00': ABEL
Milan IL SOLE-24 ORB in Italian 29 Jan 82 p 3

[Article on interview with Franco Grassini by Riccardo Chiaberge: "In Adreatta's
Nursery")

[Text] Grassini: "we managed to transmit the agency's spirit to
the entire DC."

Hilan..-And what about the AREL [Research and Legislation Agency]? what has the
AREL accomplished so far? Ever since its founding father, Nine Andreatta, took over
the treasury, setting himself up behind a group of prestigious collaborators, the
Christian Democratic intelligentsia seems to have fallen into disrepair. There is
less and less conversation and a kind of organizational lethargy seems to have taken
hold. The new president, Hino Hartinazzoli. a bigshot from Brescia in the Zaccagnini
area, is a politician who knows nothing about economics and who, although having

played a by no means secondary part in the so—called reorganization meeting of last
November. has rather little in common with the association's original spirit.

When it was born in 1976, as a result of an initiative by a group of Dc senators

(in addition to Andreatte. there were Umberto Agnelli, Urbano Aletti. Franco Grassini,
Siro Lombardini, Raffaele Girotti, Gaetano Stammati), the AREL (Research and Legis-
lation Agency) had a specific objective and that was to supply the independent
technicians, elected on the slates of the Crossed Shield, with an instrument of

union and pressure so that they would not wind up being swept away by the various
currents or being caught in the gears of the various pressure groups and to inject
into the majority party a good dose of "liberal" ideas of Anglo-Saxon pragmatism.
"In other words, a service outfit to restore contact between members of parliament
and the country's active forces and to end the monopoly of the flow of economic
information to the government lobby organizations, the IRI [Industrial Reconstruction
Institute] and the ENI [National Hydrocarbons Agencyl" explains Professor Scogna-
migliu. an AREL staff member.

Half-way along, it turned out the basic design was much more ambitious: the idea was
to turn the DC into the party of the bourgeoisie. of the more modern production
segments, those strata which in the 1975 and 1976 elections, especially in the big
cities, had noticeably shifted toward the PCI (and partly also toward the PSI),
attracted by the image of efficiency of local left-wing administrations.

"When the ABEL was born. the objective seemed within reach," continued Scognamiglio.
"It was the magic moment of men such as Prodi and men such as Pendolfi and the
technicians were riding the crest of the wave. Zac's [Zaccagnini's] DC seemed to
want to adopt a more credible image. an image of competence and moral cleanliness.
But then came the delusions of 1979: Andreotti decided that the technical ministries
were discoloring the single-party administration and abruptly showed the. the door;
Grassini, Girotti, and Agnelli retired while Aletti lost his senate seat. The only

18

FI”!(HHHC1A1.U8£1DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one to rennin in place and to get ahead was Andreatta but the A281. as such slipped
into a state of lethargy also Because many of us are now consultants of the minister
and no longer have any time to concern themselves with the association.

But is it true that the ABEL no longer has a future? Franco Grassini. for example.
does not think that this is so. He went to meet him at Ponte San Pietro, a little
town near Bergamo, where he has been running the legler textile group for a year
(before that he was deputy manager of Fiat Brazil for 2 years). “It is not the
AREL which was undermined by the DC; instead, the DC developed in harmony with the
spirit of the ABEL," he told us. "And this in a certain way makes our original
function as a pressure group superfluous. Hence the decision by a president, such
as Hartinazzoli who is an officer of the party and therefore can perfora the graft
much better. As for the rest, the DC today has an economic affairs officer such
as Riccardo Hisaai who represents a considerable quality improvement compared to -
his predecessor Ferrari Aggradi; our group has a very close cooperative relation-
ship with him. Just recently, together with Pandolfi, who is a member of the AREL,
they have been launching a big initiative?"

[Question] And what is that?

[Answer] A big economic conference which should cone before or coincide with the
party congress. In 1972, 10 years ago, a similar conference was held in Perugia
which marked a turn in DC economic policy. He thought of conmeaorating this anni-
versary in a worthy fashion with a kind of "Perugia II." ‘

[Question] This is an official party initiative. But what is the ABEL doing as such
and what does it have on its program?

[Answer] We are not just standing around with our hands in our pockets. Research
on "the state and industry in Europe" will soon be enhanced with new chapters.

11 Hulino Publishers have just finished printing a study we did; it was coordinated
by Professor Cesarini of Catholic [University] on the recapitalization of the banks,
an extremely timely topic. Senator Romei and others submitted a bill of ours on
investments funds for workers. As you can see, we are still in existence. We no
longer have that continuing presence we had once upon a time but we are conducting
vast studies and we take action when necessary.

[Question] But you have not produced any echo in parliament. The group as such broke
up after you and the others abandoned active politics.

[Answer] By way of compensation we gained a minister of the treasury. And I assure
you that Andreatta can do more from his current job than we can do together.

[Question] You say that the DC has developed in the sense you want it. But where do
you see that development? The new levies are integralist, the establishment remains
tied to the welfare concept and to the logic of the pressure groups. There is very
little "liberal" here.

[Answer] The DC has many spirits and it would be unrealistic to think that a single

one could be made to prevail over all the others. As for the rest. just look around.
Are the "liberal" parties of the West, froa the Anerican Democrats to the German

19
FOR4OFFKJA1.USE‘0NLY
SPO, so different? They too have coexisting but conflicting tendencies and inter-
ests. They are also up to their necks in the welfare state and they have made it
their standard. .

[Question] Apart. from the treasury ministry. what else has ARE]. accomplished in these
past years? What battles have you won?

[Answer] I would say that our biggest victory was the way in which the RCA]! [Agency
for the Manage-ant of liners]. and Metallurgical Concerns] case ended. Francesco
herloni, in the (number, and I, in the Senate. nanaged to get a resolution passed
which heavily penalized banks that had exposed themelves too such in dealing with
the dissolved government agency. From then on. the EGAN effect changed the at-
tidues of the credit institutes and has made then much lore cautious. Then we had
[resolution] 675. the law on industrial conversion.

[Question] This is a tough law. the result of a coqroaise between you and the
communists.

[Answer] That is true but the balance of power during that phase did not permit a
better result. But we at_ the am nevertheless did manage to get something out of
all this; for examie. the introduction of standards which make the grant of public
financing dependent upon a situation where the differences as compared to the ini-
tial budget would not be excessive. This has put an end to the bad habit of sub-
mitting bogus projects and bills to get government funds. The criterion—which has
now been introduced for participations to the effect that they must now sake re-
ference to the gross operating margin rather than to the profit-loss ration to get
an increase in fund allocations—was not invented by Minister De Hichelis but
rather by us at the AREL.

PRI ' s CEEP

Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 5 Feb 82 p 3
[Article by Riccardo Chiaberge: "The Engineers of the Ivy"]

[Text] La Halfa: "The Western denocracies cannot afford a two-
digit menploynent rate."

Rona—Jeep down. the Republicans feel that they are engineers. to some extent.
Although not all of then are graduates of the Polytechnical School and although not
all of then run around with the slide rule in their pockets and although their leader
and current board president is a historian, all of the net: of the Ivy more or less
are engineering-minded; they look down upon abstract theorizing, they pursue prag-
matism, the cult of efficiency, and careful as well as sometines even pedantic atten-
tion to technical problems.

It is therefore quite natural that the study centers, directly or indirectly linked
to the PR1 [Italian Republican Party] should adopt this mentality. Let us take the
6381’, the Economic Policy Studies Center created by Giorgio La Malfa; during 8 years
of operation (its birthday goes back to December 1973). it has not come out with
any high theology, no major program for social transformation. No "Not Deal."

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAJ.USEZONL¥

no review or reorganization, no third way. On the other hand however it has turned
out stacks of documents and research projects on petroleum, on nonferrous metals,
on the chemical industry, on the GEPI [Industrial Participations and Management
Company], on inflation, and on urban development.

Today, the CEEP secretary is an ENEL [National Electric Power Agency] engineer by
the name of Pasquale Pappacoda, a man whose eyes shine happily when he talks about
nuclear energy. Engineer Pappacoda is also Minister La Halfa'a private secretary
and has almost become his shadow, especially now that Spadolini has thrown him the
hot potato of the Piedmont case and he therefore must continually shuttle back and
forth between Rome and Turin. -

This superposition of roles arouses the suspicion that the 033? has become a kind
of branch of the Ministry of the Budget which has lost all scientific and cultural
autonomy.

But La Nalfa assures us that this is not so. "Ever since I took over there," he

says, “the autonomy of the CBEP has grown; it did not decline. I have sort of
stepped into the background because as president I had become a little bit burdensome.
But the center has not failed to function properly. In 1981 alone, it organized at
least three conferences on planning with reporters such as Francesco Forte,

Onorato Castellino, and Bruno Trentin."

If there is one thing which La Halfa is particularly concerned with it is the in-
dependence of "his" center from the party. "This is not just another one of the
agencies of the PRI," he says. The CEEP sprang up and grew as a point of reference
for a very broad political-cultural area. This is proved by the fact that the
technical-scientific committee includes personalities such as Marcello de Cecco

and Felice Ippolito who certainly are not Republicans.

If it has been and still is a transmission belt with the party, it has if anything
revolved in the opposite direction; it is not the PR1 which orders the research
projects from the CEEP, in keeping with its own objectives, but instead the CEEP
develops certain topics in depth, elaborates certain ideas which the party can take
into account in its political action. if it can."

As a matter of fact. the issues which for many years have been the main concerns of
young La Halfa (the EGAN case, the GKPI. the encrgy plan, public finance) were forged
in the furnace of the CEEP. The main idea behind the medium—range plan (control of
public deficit, soft recovery from inflation) came out of the brain trust which

every year, until 1979, worked on the CEEP report dealing with the Italian economy:
Paolo Savona, now planning secretary, Marcello de Cecco, Bruno Trezza, Giuseppe
Basevi. and that Michele Fratianni who then flew across the Atlantic to enter the
Gotha of Reagan's consultants.

But to understand what the CBS? meant during the political and economic debate of
these years, we must go back to the beginnings, to 1974-1975. when the center took
its first steps.

This was the moment of the great change: austerity, no driving on Sundays had abrupt-
ly brought the energy program to the fore again; inflation had crossed the magic

21

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
two-digit line; the center-left no longer looked like a formula for putting together
an administration capable of handling the emergency. The red boards and Berlinguer's
historical compromise came up on the political horizonv

In that climate, the quiet little room at 17 San Francesco da Poalo Street in Turin,
where the (:33? held its debates. soon became a mandatory nesting point for all

lay and democratic culture. During those evenings, the eggheads of the new con-
munist course—Napoleone Oolajanni, Luciano Bares. Claudio Napoleoni, and Eugenio
Peggio-came to confront Republican, Socialist, and Christian Democratic politicians
and economists (from Forte to Armani. from Prodi to Ruffolo), with public managers
and private business operators; they discussed, they just about came to blows but

they gradually found a cannon language, a more realistic and less factions approach
to the country's specific problems.

Then, along with the advancement of its fomder, the cm gradually broadened its
horizons and its ambitions. Big conferences on foreign trade, on the South. on
industrial policy, on the labor market, on inflation, with ever more famous names.
both Italian and foreign, sometimes cut of too much snobbism. and finally the topic

of the debate in English ("Papers on the Italian Econoay," "Workshop of Oil Pros-
pects Today").

The office in Turin was joined by another one in Rome, on Tritone Street, and recent-
ly another office in Verona. The biweekly CEBP-NOTIZIB, always full of facts on the

Italian and international economy, has become a valuable instrument for the staff
members.

In a pertinent series. editor Angeli published 25 volumes containing the results of
as many research projects conducted by the CBEP (on topics ranging from the GEPI
and the state participations to problems of energy and monetary policy).

And now? What are the engineers of La Halfa working on for 19822 The first gather-
ing will be a big conference on planning and on the government budget; this will

be followed by another two on more specific topics such as air transportation (it
will probably be held in Turin where the minister has his voter base and where the
bitter debate is still raging on the new Caselle runway) as well as health spending
in Italy.

But the main point involves a research project on new professional figures connected
with technological development and this is being worked on by Luisa Calogero La
Malfa, Giorgio's sister, and Professor Bruno Contini, of the University of Turin.

The choice of the topic is not an accident because the problem of esployment some
time ago became the main thread of the speeches by the minister of the budget: "The
process of deindustrialization is radically and very rapidly changing the panorama
of the western economies," says La Halfa. "This is a phenomenon which has extremely
serious repercussions on employment. We must absolutely find a way to cope with
this. while 60 or 50 years ago. the social systens were able to tolerate conditions
of collective malaise without causing any insurrectional stirrings, this is no longer
true today; the margins of tolerance are considerably narrower. Under the conditions

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Western denocracies, a two—digit unemployment rate of 10 percent is something
we cannot allow. In Italy we therefore are dangerously close to..."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editrice Il Sole-2!. Ore 9.1:.1.

5058
C50: 3104/115

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLL snows POSITIVE ATTITUDE TWARD ENTRY INTO BC
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 25 Jan 82 pp 32-33
[Article by Jose Manuel Arija]

[Text] Inhabitants of the 01d Continent are looking at the future seriously, but
undranatically. Europeans are slightly more optimistic than last year about pros-
pects for 1982. In spite of the events in Poland, they believe that the danger of
another world war has decreased considerably. In 1980. 36 percent of the Europeans
polled considered war likely; at the end of 1981 the percentage of pessiaists had
decreased to 210 percent.

Every year the European Economic Comunity (EEC),uaing a barometer of questions ad
percentages, measures public opinion in its respective countries concerning the
most pressing problans. Now, for the first tine, it has included the two new

. candidates for entry into the (Jo-on Market: Spain and_Portugal.

The comnityi is interested in sounding out the attitude of the Spanish and Por-
tuguese people toward their upcoming'entry. And the first conclusion to be drawn
from the results of the survey proved that the Spanish view entry into the Canon
Market more favorably than the Portuguese and, particularly, that we are Inch
more interested in the EuroPean Economic Commity than our neighbors. Only 24
percent of the Spanish people responded "don't know, no answer," while 62 percent
of the Portuguese people did not respond.

Sixty-one percent of the Spaniards expressed interest in questions of the European
Comnity, and 52 percent believe that our joining it is "a good thing," while 6
percent feel it is "a bad thing."

And why do they think it is right to join the con-unity? The pollsters showed the
interviewee a card with 10 questions written on it, so that they night express
their-opinions about the positive or negative effects of joining. It was thought
thus to aeasure the advantages and disadvantages as seen by the citizens of this
ComtrYo '

The most positive replies were for exports (51 percent), agriculture'(50 percent)
and products which are available in the stores (68 percent). But the Spanish
people also emphasized another point: entry into the European Comnity will have
positive effects on the functioning of our deaocracy. Forty-six percent believed
this, while only 6 percent, the lowest figure of all the replies, did not.

24

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The least unanimity was registered concerning the question of our entry as a posi-
tive advantage for reducing the risk of war. Only 27 percent believe it is, while
19 percent see negative effects.

On this point the interviewees must have felt that this business of everybody being
in the same European boat also has its disadvantages. They are the same fears
which are always caused by our coming out of isolation.

Similar Concerns

Perhaps for that reason, Spain is one of the countries which reveals more fear

of the possibility of another world war. Thirty percent believe such a conflagra-
tion is possible within the next 10 years. Only the Belgians and Germans (both
with 32 percent) surpass us in pessimism. And it is just as well that this per-
centage be pessimistic rather than imprudent.

In general, Spanish concerns are very much in tone with those of other European
countries. Only the Greeks display an optimism bordering on euphoria. The new
socialist government must have given then a big dose of confidence. At the other
extreme, the Belgians see the blackest picture for the next few months, which
agrees with another recent survey spublished by this magazine. (See CAHBIO 16,
number 527).

Among the larger European countries—Italy, Germany, France and the United Kingdom--
France is the most optimistic with regard to our domestic problems. Our neighbor
to the north sees fewer indications of increased unemployment and of social con-
fl-icts. 0n the other hand, the Italians are fearful about the future.

The survey reveals that increased unemployment is the chief fear of all the
countries: 64 percent of the European Connunity interviewees are sure that unem-

ployment will increase even more.

After studying in detail the favorable response of the Spanish people to the
conunity, European experts made the following comentary: "The comunity appears
to the Spanish people as a means of safeguarding democracy, of developing the
country economically and of ensuring Spain's greater participation in world
affairs."

However, in the rest of the European countries, attitudes toward the comunity
advantages are very different.

In the United Kingdom those opposed to the COII'IOI'I Market are in the majority; the
Germans unphasized that thanks to the Comon Market, the European consumer has
more products to choose from.

The French, who never forget their "grandeur," see the comunity as an organization
which enlarges the role their country can play in the world. The Greeks, respond
much like the Spanish, mixing economic benefits, agriculture and democracy.

Nearly 10,000 persons were interviewed at their homes to obtain reliable results
in the survey, which was carried out by national institutes associated with the
"European 0mibus Survey."

7.5

a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Interest in Problems of the European Community

Spgin' Portu All Cannon Market Countries
(percent)
31 13 22
30 19 53
20 16 22
19 56 3

1n favor of or Against Unification of Western

Europe
Spgin Portugal All Con-on Market Countrn
(percent)
36 20 31
23 9 63
6 '2 4
5 2 9
32 67 13

Spain's Entry into European Con-unity

Spgin Portugal
1982 will not be
as good

Number of unen-
ployed will in-
crease

There will be more
strikes and social
conflicts

1982 will be a
year of econonic
difficulties

A year marked by
many international
wars

World war probable
within next 10

years
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02l09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040013-8

5.
Advantages and Disadvantage of Spain‘
Entry into the European Calamity
Positive Negetivc
Effects Effects
(percent)
To diminish the threat of war 27 19
To have a choice of products 68 7
in shops and stores
For Spain's future role in 63 8
the world
To be better able to confront 63 6
the world econonic crisis
For a better energy supply 60 9
For the better functioning 66 6
of democracy in our country
For our exports 51 11
For better prices of pro- 61 ll
ducts in shops and stores
For our agriculture 50 13
For the labor market and en- 65 10
ploynent
Average 63 10

COPYRIGHT: 1982, luforncion y Revistsn, S.A.

8735
080: 3110/ 73

28

FOR WI. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040013-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

DWSEBUMETAPPROVBD, 7m8NIBTOAPPﬂR IN 199‘!
Paris AIR Er cmnos in French 12 Dec 81 p 12

ﬁery At the close of its second session of 1+ December 1981, the Senate

unanimously approved the proposed 1982 defense budget. He sumarize below
the essential portions of the defense minister's preliminary statement:

Program authorizations planned for the PCBT ﬁtmtegic Oceanic Nuclear Forc_e7
come to Fr 3.6 billion, a 30 percent increase over 1981. The increase re-
flects ongoing construction of the 6th 8111.!) [nuclear missile launching sub-
unrin_e7 L'nmmm, which will become operational in 1985 equipped with

the new multiple warhead M missile. PCBT is also to prepare for refitting
of SNIE's- to receive new Hit missiles starting in 198?;

The'SNL‘E to be commissioned in 199'}, the 7th in the series, will be a new
generation vessel equipped with an optimized weapons system. Fr 100 million
in program authorizations are planned for this purpose in the 1982 budget;

For the initial phase of the new strategic weapons systen program consist-
ing of mobile ground to ground ballistic missiles of the 8X type, Fr 170
million is included in the budget. This system will succeed the Mirage IV
equipped with medium range air to ground missiles;

F r 50 million in program authorisations will be devoted in 1982 to the first
studies to be carried out on Hades, the successor to Pluto. Thanks to its
increased range, this missile will offer greater flexibility in employment
decisions;

The communications net linking the various components or the F113 [gtrategic
Nuclear Pores? will be hardened to cope with what specialists call electro-
magnetic impulsion arising from explosions of nuclear weapons;

The Air Force will order 25 Mirage 2000 in 1982, and in 1983 at least 30
orders for that aircraft will be budgeted;

Tactical nuclear weapons program have reached maturity. The five regiments
equipped with Pluto are operational. "I would be lying, however," the min-

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lute-r pointed out, "if I denied that a number of problems present themselves,
in connection with the tactical weapons program, which are linked to politi-
cal choices. He must study very closely the theory of the toward battle--
forward of the Rhine, that is, on the soil of the Federal Republic of Ger-
msny--before emitting ourselves politically." The two aircraft carriers
are now equipped to receive the ANT [expulsion unknowg;

Purchase of the Mirage l+000 is not now contemplated by the Air Force. If
foreign markets opened for this aircraft, "I do not uclude the possibility
that the government might study, with possible buyers, ways in which a Hi-
rage #000 program might be successfully carried out, providing everyone pays
his share and France alone does not bear all expenses."

In the discussion, M Yvon Bourges emphasized that "the 7th SNLE would be the
successor and replacement for the mm. but that the impression should
not be given that HST will have a seventh submarine." He obtained no ans-
wer to his question as to adherence to or rejection of the policy decision
made in September 1980 to provide a successor to each of the two aircraft
carriers P061! and mu.

M Albert Voilquin insisted on the principle that the neutron bomb "lust be
perfected and built."

COPYRIGHT: A. a. c. 1980

6116
080: 3100/25?)

3)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm, BRITISH um POSSIBLE FUTURE SPACE manna!
Paris AIR 31‘ 06108 in French 26 Oct 81 p 61
[Pierre Langereus: ”New Prospects of French-British Space Gooperation"]

{Text} The strengthening of French-British space cooperation was on the agenda
of an inportant nesting of high officials fron the two countries held this week in
PCr130

In particular, France wants Great Britain to participate in the developnsnt of the
new Ariane lo launcher, whose construction the govern-eat of Francois Hitterrsnd has
just launched. Great Britain is in fact already involved in the progran to develop
the current Ariane 1 launcher, through a bilateral agree-ant with France. But above
all, France hopes to interest its British partner in participation in prelininary

develop-ant of the new technologies needed for the future heavy European launcher.
Ariane 5 (or the equivalent).

For its part, Great Britain is interested in improving the ‘l'elecon l telecoI-unica-
tions satellite platform in order to lake it nore conpetitive on the international
earket, as well as access to infatuation fron the French teledetection satellite
known as Spot. France is also willing to negotiate British industry's participation
in the building of future French teledetection satellites based on the Spot 3.‘

Another meeting of high French and British officials is to take place soon on
prospects of cooperating on Telecon l and Spot.

The French and British positions disagree. however, on the European experimental

satellite telecommunications project and on the b-SAT direct television. This
satellite would in fact use a heavy platform co-peting with the one now being

developed through French-Gena cooperation by the Burosatellite group for the
future French (‘11)? l) and German (TV-SAT) direct television satellites. France,

which is not involved in the L-SAT project (nor is Gernany), hopes to be able to
reconcile French and British interests , while avoiding a futile and costly dupli-
cation of developlents with respect to the European heavy platforn. For enceple,
France proposes to review the L-SAT project with a view to planning for the plat-
forn for the future Ariane 6 launcher.

French-British negotiations will continue in the hope of reaching an agree-eat by

the end of the year, an agreenent ratified by a neeting of ninisters fro- both
countries.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1981

11,464

cs“ 31°” 3‘” roe omcw. use on“
cm RADIATIM PROJECT WITH SOVIETS T0 BEGIN Ill 1986
Paris A18 21' WSHOS in French 16 Nov 81 p 107
[Article by Pierre Langereux: "French-Soviet 'Galma 1' Experiment"]

[Text] The French-Soviet "Ga-a 1" experimt, designed to study ga-a rays, will
be launched at the beginning of 1986, 4 years behind schedule (see All. 31' COSMOS,
No 894). The Cams 1 Iachine, which weighs about 1.5 tons, will be the main experi-
aent of the future big Soviet guns aetronouy satellite that will follow a circular
orbit at an altitude of 350 kilometers, with an upected life span of 1 year. This
experiment was conducted with the participation of six French and Soviet laborator-
ies: the Hoscow Space Research Institute, the Moscow Physicists Training Institute,
the PN Lebedev Physics Institute in Hoscow, the AP Ioffs Physical-Technical Insti-
tute in uningrad, the ABC Physical Electronics Departunt at Saclay and the Space
Radiation Study Center in Toulouse.

The Gama 1 experiment will serve to observe high-energy game photons at several
dozen Kev, of galactic and extragalectic origin, explains J.-P. Leray, of the Saclay
Physical Electronics Deparment, in the latest CHIS [National Center for Scientific
Research] intonation bulletin.

The guns photons detected are visualized in broad-gap spark chambers, waking better
neasureeent of the direction of arrival of the game photon possible. The paths,
observed in spark chambers. are recorded by two Vidicon cameras. The inages ob-
tained are digitalizcd, then ttanseitted to the ground by the satellite's telemetry.
An analysis of these images and of data from the satellites themselves (altitude,
dating, and so on) will make it possible to learn the direction of arrival of the
photon with a precision of 2‘ and its time of arrival with a precision of l as.
Thanks to the addition of a passive collimating lens over the spark chambers, it
will be possible to locate the sources detected with a precision of .l'.

Gal-a 1 will mark important progress in gar. astronay, particularly for the iden-
tification of detected sources. 'To date, some 30 sources have been observed (nearly
all by the COS-B satellite), but only three or four have been clearly identified,
the others not yet possible because of the low precision of localization (about 1’).
And yet, all knowledge of the evolution of the stars, and therefore of the universe,
can only be based on a study of all observations in all wave length domains. It is
therefore funduental for observed sources to be identified — that is, associated '
with objects studied and known elsewhere (x-ray, radio, optics). He say then better
determine the ways in which stars emit radiation and consequently, the birth and
evolution of these still lysterious objects that form the universe.

comucnr: A. a c. 1981 END
32

11,464 .
m: ”00/301 roe uncut In on“