Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as {Text}
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIb PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1030

3 February

WORLDWIDE REPORT
TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(FOUO 2/82)

CONTENTS

WRLDJI DE AFFAIRS

Pan-European Satellite Broadcasting Planned
(Kenneth Golsing; THE TIME, 18 Jan 82) .....................

ASIA
J APAN

LDP Plans To Launch 'Security Satellite'
(Saneyuki Kodachi; SANKEI ShIHBUN, 1 Jan 82) ...............

Foreign Ministry Calls for Revision of Radio Waves Law
(NIHON KEIZAI Simon, 1; mo 81) 0.00.00.00.00...00.0000...

Use or Optic Fiber in Telecommunication Network Under Study
(NIKKEI ELECTRONICS, 9 Nov 81) .

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
SUDAN

Bri t -1':;
Program Postponed

-a- [III-W-l‘OFOU'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PAN-EUROPEAN SATELLITE BROADCASTING PLANNED
PH181607 London THE TIME in English 18 Jan 82 p 3
[Report by Kenneth Golsing: "European Satellite TV Trial To Start in Spring"]

[Text] The first Pan-European experiment to prepare for direct broadcasting by
satellite is likely to begin this spring, when Britain, Aust'la, West Germany and
Italy, will in turn present a week's programmes, the best of their output, on
closed-circuit television.

An assessment of the experiment will follow; but experts believe that there is an
extremely strong chance of success. Many difficulties have to be solved but a full
service could be possible by the end of the decade.

Representatives of the four countries will meet in Geneva on Thursday and Friday
to make arrangements. The first week of the experiment will probably be in the
spring, the second in the summer and the others in the autumn and winter.

Five other countries are interested in providing programmes for the service:
Holland, the Irish Republic, Portugal, Switzerland and Belgium (Flemish). Those
interested in receiving the service are Malta, Tunisia. Spain, Algeria and Belgium
(French).

The first of many conferences on broadcasting by satellite was held in Dublin five
years ago. In 1980 European broadcasting union representatives met in Venice

to discuss an offer from the European Space Agency of free use for television
experiments of the two broadcasting channels planned for their L-SAT (large
satellite) project.

The meetlng resulted in the formation of a group of experts from the broadcasting
organizations of Britain (IndependenL Broadcasting Authority/Independent Tele-
vision Companies Association), France (TF1), Germany (ARD), Italy, Austria, Holland,
Portugal and Sweden.

The L-SAT project is planned to begin in 1986. The British Government has an-
nounced that it will subscribe one-third of the cost (77m pounds); the other big
partner is Italy, also one-third, and participants include Canada, Holland, Swit-
zerland, Austria, Belgium. Spain and Denmark. This year's experiment will attempt
to cometoterms with such difficulties as copyright, and the provision of a multi-
sound signal allowing viewers in different countries to tune to their own language.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

C80: 5500/2087
1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LDP PLANS TO LAUNCH 'SECURITY SATELLITE'
0U051131 Tokyo SANKEI SHIMBUN in Japanese 1 Jan 82 morning edition p 1
[Article by Saneyuki Kodachi]

[Excerpts] Now that the mounting international tension in connection with the
Polish and other developments has made it necessary for Japan to build up its
defense potential. the LDP. in cooperation with the Defense Agency's uniformed
officers, has decided to begin working out plans from the outset of the new
year to launch a Japanese security satellite.

The decision was born from the nation that Japan. whose national policy is to
defend itself exclusively for the purpose of self-defense. must have a satellite
to promptly monitor military developments in the far eastern region of the
Soviet Union, a potential threat to Japan, by taking photographs and to have

at its disposal the "rabbit's long ears" to monitor world developments without

a moment's delay.

The L0? Security Affairs Research Council. headed by Chairman Asao Mihara, is
soon to begin a study on the plan and in February. Taro Nakayama. former director
general of the prime minister's office and chairman-designate of the LDP special
committee on space development. is scheduled to visit Washington to feel out the
United States about its cooperation.

if this plan mnterializes. Japan will become the third country to have a security
satellite. after the United States and the Soviet Union, and hence it any
create an international stir.

Presently. whenever Japan wants to know something about Soviet military develop~
ments such as the deployment of troops on the four northern islands. Japan asks
the United States for informatiun. However. as a Defense Agency official said.
"The United States makes information available to us only when it thinks that
doing so is all right: it seldom provides us with photographs."

A civilian official of the Defense Agency said. "Although no commitment has been

made between Japan and the United States on providing information to each other.

we believe that. in case of an emergency directly affecting Japan'. security.

the U.S. side will provide us with information." However, uniformed members

of the agency believe that "now that the situation changes from moment to moment.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
we cannot meet our objectives by only relying on the United States for informa-
tion." Against this background, the talk of launching a Japanese security
satellite has gained momentum.

In connection with these moves. Hakoto Genda. chairman of the LDP Defense Affairs
Council, is eager to promote the satellite launching plan in earnest. He said:
"To possess a security satellite means to prevent war. With its science and
technology. Japan can develop by itself both the satellite and the rocket neces-
sary for its launching. This is a matter of political decision."

Asao Mihara. chairman of the Security Affairs Research Council, made it clear
that his council should begin studying the plan immediately. He said: "Since
other members of the research council have made similar recommendations and
since i believe that this is an important idea, I would like to put the matter
to a study. with the Foreign Ministry also participating in it.“

Whether Japan should develop the security satellite domestically, ask the United
States for technical cooperation or purchase the necessary rocket and even the
satellite itself from the United States remains a question.

Regarding the rocket necessary for the launching. this requirement can be met
by using the N-Il type recket used by the National Space Development Agency to
launch the meteorological satellite "Himawari-Il" to an altitude of 36,000 km
last August. however. this rocket contains only 56 percent of domestically
produced parts; the balance is either purchased from the United States or pro-
duced under a licensed production system.

As a result, it appears to be the quickest and simplest way to seek technical
cooperation from the United States; this will also be a way of reducing Japan's
trade surplus vis-a-vis the United States.

Former prime minister's office Director General Nakayama plans to visit the
United States in mid-February and meet congressional leaders in the scientific.
foreign relations and defense areas--including his friend. Don Puqua, chairman
of the House Science and Technology Committee-~and officials of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration. He will try to find out what the U.S.
side thinks about the plan and also seek the understanding of the ".8. side in
the interpretation of the notes exchanged (in 1969) on cooperation between Japan
and the United States in space development.

After seeing the U.S. reaction. the Defense Agency, the Science and Technology
Agency and other pertinent government agencies will establish a committee for
the study of the security satellite to formally start the necessary survey and
research work. Thus. the LDP ants to make the security satellite one of the
pillars of Japan's security in the period of the post-1981 mid-term defense
estimate.

Stressing the significance of the satellite. Nakayama said: "The AHAc's which
the Defense Agency purchases cent 12 billion yen a piece but a security satellite
can he launched at a cost of 20 billion yen. So. it will lessen the defense
hurdon of the nation. Besides, if and when Japan possesses a satellite. the
Soviet Union will not easily cnnry out any rash actions."

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keizai Shimbun Tokyo Honsha 1982

cso: 5500/ 2073

FOR OFHdAL USE ONLY
FOREIGN HINISTRY CALLS FOR REVISION 0? RADIO HAVBS LAW
Tokyo NIHON KRIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 15 Dec 81 p 2

[Test] In the midst of a situation whereby the Polish situation is becoming
tenser, the problem of revising Article 5 of the Radio Haves Law, which article
prohibits the governments of foreign countries from establishing radio-telegraph
stations within Japan, has come to the surface, once again. The reason for this is
that after the issuance of a state-of-eaergency declaration in Poland this time.
coalunication with that area has been interrupted temporarily, because the Poreign
Ministry was unable to install radio-telegraph equipment in the embassy in that coun-
try, from the standpoint of diplomatic mutualisn. The sudden change in the Polish
situation seems to have disclosed the problematical points in regard to overseas
information-gathering networks of Japan.

In accordance with article 5 of the Radio Waves Law, no licenses concerning radio-
telegraph stations will be granted to the "governments of foreign countries or
representatives thereof" or the "corporations or organizations of foreign coun-
tries." Therefore, foreign embassies' requests for the establishment of radio-
telegraph stations have so far been rejected, apart from the United States. special
exception measures toward which are approved partly on the basis of the Japan-

U.S. Security Treaty. At the same time, the Japanese side has also not installed
radio-telegraph equipment intheeabaasies in other countries, from the viewpoint of
the principles of mutualism.

The communications contact networks as to Poland were suspended due to the issuance
of a state—of-euergency declaration in that country, and the Foreign Ministry was
unable to contact the Japanese Embassy in Harsaw for about 9 hours. For this rea-
son, the ministry says. "In order to provide against any unforeseen situation, it
is necessary to revise the Radio Haves Law." Thus, it intends to work upon the
Postal Services Ministry to revise the Radio Haves Law, from now. From the stand-
point of radio-wave control, however, the Postal Services Ministry has even from
before been expressing disapproval toward the proposed revision of the law. There-
fore, it will probably take time to carry out coordination.

In this connection, a Foreign Ministry leader revealed on the afternoon of the 16th
that the ministry communicates with the embassy in Poland as occasion demands,
through third countries. though it is still impossible to establish telephone or
telex contacts with the embassy.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha I981
cso: 5500/6532

FOR OFFICI‘iAI. USE ONLY
USE OF OPTIC FIBER IN TELECOMMUNICATION NETUORK UNDER STUDY
Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 9 Nov 81 pp 255-252

(Text) Abstract: The Telegraph and Telephone Public Corpora-
tion (TTPC) has begun investigation of the technical feasibil-
ity of introducing optic fiber to the subscriber system. It is
conceivable that in the future. in addition to nontelephone
services such as data. facsimile and captain. the subscriber
system will be able to have other services such as ultra-high-
speed data, ultra-high-speed facsimile, ITV. TV conference.
image information. TV lecture. and TV telephone. Technolog-
ical preparations have been started to meet these challenges.
The first onsitc experiment has been completed in the Yokosuka
area in Kanagavn Prefecture. Horeover. as a link in the drive
to popularize the information network system. a model experi-
ment is soon to be carried out in the Hussshino and Hiteke
areas of the city of Tokyo. This experiment will be centered
staund digital communications technology. but optic fiber is
expected to be involved also.

Investigation into the application of optic fiber communication to the subscriber
line has begun. The Yokosuka Electric Communications Research Center of the TTPC
has already completed the first onsite experiment. On the other hand. under the
powerful leadership of Vice President Yasusada Kitahara. investigation of the in-
formation network system (INS) has also begun. A model experiment using optic
fiber scheduled to begin in 1983 is to be carried out in the Husashino and Hiteka
areas of the city of Tokyo. For this project and the construction cost of the
fourth electric communications research center which is under consideration. the
TTPC has decided to increase its 1982 investigation and research expenditures by
12 percent over the previous year, to 90 billion yen (approximate figure request-
ed). This amounts to approxirmtely 2.2 percent of the business income. exceeding
the 2-percent level which is considered a standard for investigation and research
expenditure.

Figure 1 shows those services that are expected to be introduced to the subscriber
system in the future. There are a number of nontelephone services having an in-
formation volume comparable to that of telephone service, such as data. facsimile.
and captain. Moreover. broad band services in the range of 1-0 Hm: such as ultra-
high-speed data, ultra-high-apeed facsimile. ITV [industrial TV]. TV conference,

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
iumgc inlornutlun. 1V lecture and TV telephone. or high grade TV service in the
range of 3 MHz may also be centemplated.

Introduction of optic fiber has special significance for the economics of broad
sand transmission routes.2 Furthermore, flexibility and expansibility are neces-
sary in order to be able to cope with the movement of new services. For this
purpose, investigation of wavelength-splitting multiplex bilateral transmission
has been carried out. It is highly desirable that the subscriber system be of a
nonrclay type from the viewpoint of economy and maintainability. At present. the
nationwide average distance of the subscriber lines is 2 km, with 95 percent of
the lines loss than 5 km in length. "hen nonrelay transmission distance can be
extended to 5-7 km through the use of optic fiber. almost all subscribers will be
able to be connected without relay.

An outline of the experiments carried out in the Yokosuka area is swmmarized in
Table l. The trial syStem can be divided roughly into four groups. The primary
grOup transmission system is one in which the application of PBX multiplex office
lines and high-speed data to the subscriber line is investigated. The broad band
subscriber system is suitable for big subscribers such as business offices con-
taining PBX multiplex office lines, ultra-high-speed facsimile. ultra-high—speed
data, and TV conference. The general subscriber system is aimed at the household
application of a HR: TV in addition to providing services of the digital primary
including facsimile, captain and data. The CATV system was introduced to ascer-
tain the basic technology related to multiplex transmission of VHF band TV and
high-grade TV transmission. The longest experiment section is 8.5 km long with a
turn, and the shortest is 1.2 km. The experiment sections consist of various types
of subsections, including pipe line section. overhead section and tunnel section.

Multiplexing is accomplished by means of wavelength splitting using two waves in
the primary group transmission system as shown in Figure 2(a); four waves in the
broad band subscriber system as shown in Figure 2(b); five waves (with one wave
for either high grade TV or UHF TV) for the general Subscriber system as shown in
Figure 3(a); and two waves in the CATV systems as shown in Figure 3(b).

Taking into consideration the initial deviation, thermal variation. and changes
due to aging of the elements. the wavelength intervals chosen were 30 nm (semi-
conductor laser) for the short wavelength band and 150 nm (light emitting diode)
for the long wavelength hand. Three types of wave mixers and separators were
prepared in accordance with the number of multiplexing. The insertion loss was
3.5-4.3 dB for the two wavelengths multiplexing (interference film filter). It
was less than 10 dB for the four wavelengths multiplexing (concave diffraction
grid), and it was less than 11.7 dB for the five wavelengths multiplexing (a com-
bination between interference film filter and plain diffraction grid).

When direct analog modulation format involving semiconductor laser was used, the
interference between the propagation modes was found to take place within the
fiber due to the nature of laser. and speckle noise (modal noise) was generated.
As a result. deterioration of the wave form and a reduction in SIN were experi-
enced. The high frequency superposed modulation method6 was used as the main
measure for solving this problem. The opticalsfeedback method was also experi-
mented with in the high grade TV transmission.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The station equipment was all accommodated in subracks. Equipment for the general
subscriber system and the broad band subscriber system was packed two subscribers
per subrack. The CATV system was packed with four high grade TV systems or four
VHF TV systems per subrack, while the primary group transmission system was packed
with an active system and a standby system per subrack. Each rack contained three
subracks (four subracks in case of the primary group transmission system).

Taking into consideration its application in the subscriber system, a new type of
optical connector consisting of an all-ceramic plug core was developed with a
view to economy and simplicity. The average connection loss (of 180 terminals)
assembled onsite was found to be 0.74 dB. with a standard deviation of 0.16 dB. 0

Table 2 summarizes the major experimental results obtained from the tests carried
out on the optic fiber transmission system. The minimum light reception power of
the 7 km analog channel was -36 dBm when the SIN was 42 dB. The differential
gain was 4.l percent for the 860 nm band and 3.5 percent (the standard is less
than 5 percent) for the 890 nm band. The differential phases were. respectiVely,
2.4 degrees and 1 degree (ditto, less than 3 degrees); the frame slopes were,
respectivuly, less than i 2 percent and less than t 2 percent (ditto, less than
10 percent); and the line slopes were, respectively, less than t 1 percent and
less than t 1 percent (ditto. less than 5 percent). The standard for the image
transmission was also satisfied. and no significant deterioration in the image
quality was detected even after it was transmitted by an overhead cable over a
distance of 5.6 km.

The average light reception power corresponding to a signal error rate of 10-9
was found to be -45 dBm in the case of digital transmission. It was found through
this experiment that the actual loss due to optic fiber was less than the design
standard. Therefore, nonrelay transmission over a distance of 7 km could be ac-
complished even when system margins of 2 dB for the analog channel and 3 dB for
the digital channel were used. The themes for future study should include prac-
tical application of the power supply method. supervisory control method using
optical transmission line. and testing method for the wavelength multiplexing
system. Apart from the general household applications. the broad band services
for the big subscribers such as business offices can be expected to be realized
fairly soon.

The lNS model experiment will be carried out in 1982 in the Husashino and Hitaka
areas of the city of Tokyo.

The INS idea concerns digitization of the conventional analog telephone network
(including digitalization of subscriber lines) and then utilizing this digital
network for various services.11 In addition, the transmission charge for all
services is said to be computed on the basis of the bit number (quantity of in-
formation) (a charging format based on the quantity of information). In this
way there will be no contradictions as far as charges are concerned even if dif-
ferent types of services are intermixed. For example, the telephone service
charge will be computed on the basis of 64 kbits/second multiplied by the dura-
tion of conversation. Telephone services using a compressed band of 32 kbits/
second can also be contemplated.

7
FOR omc‘ut use ONLY
The TTPC has firmly drawn up a plan to carry out a series of model experiments

in the Nusashino and Mitaka areas of the city of Tokyo starting in 1982. Approxi-
mately 10.000 general subscriber telephones, approximately 250 digital telephone
terminals and approximately 750 nontelephone terminals will be installed free of
charge in homes and offices in the designated area in order to carry out the ex-
periments. Figure a shows the block diagram of this model system.

The services that will be provided include: 1) those services in which the digit-
al effects are most significant (such as digital facsimile, digital still picture.
compound PBX, document communication and processing. and multimedia services);

2) these services introduced mainly for the purpose of confirming the technolog-
ical feasibility of digitization (such as digital telephone and digital scanned
image communication service); 3) those services introduced for the purpose of con-
firming the effectiveness of optic fiber utilization (such as ultra-high-speed
facsimile and image circuit service); and 4) those services introduced mainly for
the purpose of confirming the technology related to the unification of the digital
networks (such as digital data exchange and facsimile communications network).

however, matters related to budgeting are not yet quite settled. The estimated
request for the 1982 budget includes 90 billion yen for investigation and research
expenditures, which amounts to an increase of 12 percent over the previous year.
This significant increase in the budget is considered to be due in part to a de-
sire to realize the 1N5 idea. However, on the other hand. President Tsune Shindo
declared that he would apply A brake to the annual 1.7 trillion equipment invest-
ment (construction investment) at present because of uneasiness over a trend of
declining buSiness income. It appears. therefore, that some operational adjust-
ment will have to be made even on such items as investment in new business activi-

ties.

8
FOR omcut use ONLY
‘ \4) ’_“‘"_"

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
 

 
 

9 5-2
(24) D
a 1429)
g It.
. 32"
ﬁ near-: 3 (26 E;
L.. r neoeu x
(g3 (11 .4377! .1 ( q-rxua E;
a L!
I f 0i,
q T ct I a
E ' (3) w-cv 3
. I “‘4- iv!" a
(1) . . . 0J)\ (20) E25)
a (I) ‘\:-:/ Karl) "Vc'(2) mine (27)
g (22)TV:III.II nt') ’IMUQ-gx
(8) enu- 5221-. (23-. :_21 £22m (28)
(1.) (9) L (30
um. pom: mm: mm loMHr mun. Ion. Thrill
,. ““15” ”um (m was ”*1sz Tiff-‘4' )
PE:uﬂuaﬂ ‘ Hit-7n 1"7-7hlkllu
- a (36) (32)
g-E'ﬂ‘uoxm': (35) ten. (31.) (M

_— _._._._.—- —_.___—___—____ __

.l “I. Ilkﬁﬁtxﬂkn realms—ex"

Figure 1. Services expected to be introduced to the subscriber system in the
future.

Key: (1) Service network (2) More (3) User number (4) Less (5) Service
format (6) Public network (7) Broadcast type (8) Nonpublic network
(9) Special line (10) Data. facsimile (11) Telemetering (12) Captain.
still image service (13) Radio (16) Data, facsimile (15) Ultra-high-
speed data, ultra-high-speed facsimile (16) TV telephone (17) TV con-
ference (18) TV lecture (19) VSR (video response service) (20) Pay TV
(21) TV conference (22) ITV (industrial TV) (23) Ultra-high-speed data,
ultra-high-speed facsimile (20) High grade TV service (25) High grade
TV broadcast (26) Objects of the public corporation' 3 conventional ser-
vices (27) High grade TV special line service (28)- (26) (29) Those
services already implemented or growing smoothly (30) Analog band
(31) Digital bit rate (32) Transmission medium (33) Optic fiber cable
(34) Physica1 network (35) Coaxial cable (36) Pair line

9
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
(1 )uaanuuuwm

on 039‘! L0

L0 i-ﬂﬂv-“r- LED‘ I

(1 Bum. mus [E .

(2 ) tlmﬂtuauuli)

   

D2 (3)! iklﬂmy/ 1 il-Vlllllt, INEZHFDA 5/ “*1.th

Figure 2. (a) Construction of primary group transmission system.
(b) Construction of broad band subscriber system.

Key: (1) Yokosuka controlled telephone relay station
munications Research Center (3) Station
facsimile (6) Multiplexer (7) To LS
(9) To telephone (10) Lb: Semiconductor laser,
—: Optic cable, E: Optic transmitter, optic receiver,

mixer, optic separator

 
  
 
  

Ingmar“ 0/,
5CATV~rD’-L> P)

 

 
 

 

-n-.97v 7'

'Z} I': 3:33—12 :7;

vv J‘

 

     

 

  

('6 ("(1): ‘z I!

(12}ozt‘uv-v-- LED;u,rn—r —v-

 
  
 

I) (a) “Cum?” 1'? Lﬂﬂﬁt. (NCATV blfLﬂli.

g. 53(8) (ML-$39756)

(lo) Subscriber

(2) Yokosuka Electric Com-

(5) High-speed

(8) To TV conference network

   
 

  

.xasn. gens E ms. nu

   
 

LED: Light emitting diode,

[E : Optic

  

(9)

VHF 9 v El!

saw»: (1
nvncxrv
‘1 I' ~ 1" F)

   
 
  
  
 
 

Figure 3. (a) Construction of general subscriber system.
(b) Construction of CATV system.

Key: (1) lligh grade TV camera (CATV headend)

(1.) Relay distribute: board (5) Subscriber

(2) High grade TV

(3) Hul tiplexer

(6) TV telephone (7) Fac-

simile (8) Telephone (9) VHF TV broadcast (10) TV (11) Station

()2) LI): Semiconductor laser, LED: Light emitting diode,
: Optic mixer, optic separator

E]: Optic transmitter, optic receiver,

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

—: Optic cable,
Table 1. Outline of optic fiber transmission experimental system in Yokosuka area.

I! Imﬁli' 10!.71 4 "h'.c§'£ﬂ> 1.? th‘

—_‘ mu (A) ——mﬂ'—‘ )— '

CI’IZ’L EIIIA'i’l’L *IXILIZ l- CATV’lefL

1) f‘ _ :0 0’... . i ”’m .
. «~17» rum 714/!»
Eth l-ﬂll 2*“ 1vt09 101 Ht" ferQ-ulch
IN]! ---- let: on.” ----- lab

at: (5) came LD cum LU

" no .t') 1"» in M 1:» 1") 1:0 7-)
‘5‘"“(6’ o_:u on “our. ~ovo on us M6 E

32".? T7) s-APD snwu sum» mm

   
  

 

 

       

 

 

, mx . 7179M max-rue
IUX on": in;

la—eag (8) . _ amtv' 271-: ”71-, (anon-e
man? I .Adr", (ivream» r-; a.)

n) w ram -~r— LED: Rtrlrm I“ AM) claw: I flat-- r

(9) rs. pm w v r n t— r cm. mm mm 1mm}... i

Key: (A) Primary group transmission group (8) Broad band subscriber system
(C) General subscriber system (0) CATV system (i) Transmitted signal
(2) Applicable distance (target value) (3) Applicable optic cable
(a) Transmitted code (signal) (5) Light source (6) Wavelength (pm)
(7) Light receiving element (8) Example of service (9) Note: LD: Semi-
conductor laser. LED: Light emitting diode. APD: Avalanche photodiode
PD: pin-typephotodiode (Al) Digital primary group (A3) Graded index
type multimode optic fiber (A6) Down 0.83, Up 0.89 (A8) PBX. ultra—high-
speed data (El) Digital secondary group (33)-(A3) (E6) Down 0.8.
Up 0.83 (38) PBX, ultra-high-speed facsimile, ultra-high-speed data
(Fl) Color TV signal...1 ch. Audio signal...1 ch (F3)-(A3) (F4) Analog
base band (F6) Down 0.86. Up 0.89 (F8) 6 MHz TV (TV conference) (81)
Digital primary group (G3)-(A3) (66) Down 0.89. Up 1.15 (68) Facsimile,
Captain, Data (H1) Color TV signal...1 ch, Audio signal...1 ch (H3)‘(A3)
(H4) Analog base band ("6) Down 0.86, Up 1.3 (H8) 4 MHz TV (image infor-
matiOn service) (ll) High grade color TV signal (I3)-(A3) (16) Analog
bnac hand (18) High grade TV (J1) VHF band color TV signal (J4) Analog
direct brightness modulation (1M) (J8) VHF TV broadcast

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2. Major test results of trial facilities for optical transmission system.

. 2 [ﬁllﬂﬂiilttllﬂl

 

~5-
\-
E
.,|
6

swamp «mun—-

 

 

(1:9) "rum .
nm— '

(p at: cum own-on- . l

(E #4:]. _ 709nm Mm m “mu

(1:- ”Mann death -'I5dlIm m

   

 

  
 

  

(ammuurlnna—r sat-mnnuar-r
-d6.0dBm «swam —nsaam

macaw mane: nosaagg)

 

 

2|)de 35qu man man

| 3 loll/1m ZSdBIIun zsan/m :
I

00— mm man me
(u) Ion-vial- nun '

(0):!) 9': 17'5“}. mam-mun '
_ 1+0?“ ‘ff‘lhii SININB

 

 

Key: (A) Channel (8) Transmitted signal (c) Modulation format (D) Light
source (E)'Centra1 wavelength (P) Light output power inside fiber
(G) Light receiving element (H) Min-mun light reception power (see note)
(I) Mixing/separation loss (including bandpass filter) (J) Connector loss
(K) Allowable line loss (L) Optic cable loss (including splice) (H) Margin
(N) Nonrelay transmission distance (0) Note: Digital channel error rate
10-9, Analog channel SIN - (.2 an (lb) 6.3" bit/sec (down) (10) cans
semiconductor laser (10) Si pin-type photodiode (28) 6.3“ bit/sec (up)
(2D)=(lb) (2c)-(1c) (38) h HM: color TV (down) (SC) Direct 1H (36)
Avalanche photodiode (63) 6 MHz color TV (up) (6C)-(3C) (bG)=(3G)

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Human 953033 :0 >03”—

.0305 came 25 cauunuwaaaa non: 0.3.3 95 couuunaawuuwavlnﬁouuhw Haves man no 99536 Jun:

 

. e 853»

 

V|$.c"~\VLPQne.¢\.\_ v.8 .35 \.ok-CJ$K\~ .i‘mva— I.

 

    
          

  

u
I 2.13 3L3 3. r. E. :E.
a I .J' A - I
Tviuc‘gel I ”J-
??uﬁwﬂnnxun .
I ism... IHHNAS
.~
_ m In. 2
use M33. no
.I anus”
. . .. - F E
c-
.u 3t
.u »
N w
w. I I I
3.. an...“ a”... 3.
.. or
_ :I.2.3_.I
III: 5...? A8

5

AKD§V.Q\ ..\\

uuul4$3 . .5: .U

Ids-It... uEu .
52:731ng A v
I53: .8: union

.‘ II.L\..MMR4NV

TJ. :31 m3

| lexkib v
‘ «3|in
.

Eire—J

\

i. .—. m \..h

ﬁfttkN .L.
Inn-.SQ

g
“Iliaix. .L.

A3

‘

8'
a It It!
‘

fl'lf
. llﬂm o+r

a A5 _

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

(1) Analog telephone (2) Metallic (analog) (3) Existing analog exchange
(a)-(3) (5) Digital telephone (6) Metallic (digital) (7) Circuit
terminal at station (8) Nontelephone terminals (digital facsimile. still
image terminals, data terminal) (9) Circuit terminal, terminal control
(10) Wavelength multiplexing optic transceiver equipment (11) Image
terminal (12) Optic fiber (13) Digital exchange (14) Exchange, com-
munication processing mode interface (15) Facsimile communicatiOu process--
ing equipment (16) To other network (17) Communication processing

(18) Data terminal (19) Facsimile terminal (20) Station—contro11ed
processing equipment (21) Compound PBX or CBS (22) Optic terminal ata-
tion equipment (23) Image terminal (24) Ultra-high-speed facsimile
terminal (25) Remote junction equipment (26) Broad band exchange

(27) DDX—CS: DDX cirCuit exchange, PHX: Packet multiplex equipment,

CES: Group telephone for business offices. [:::3: Equipment related to

the model system

FOOTNOTES

Asaya, Nose. Matsumoto: "Construction and Characteristics of Optic Subscriber
System in Yokosuka Area," Technical Report (Communication Format) of Electronic
Communications Society. CS81-62. July 1981.

Nikei. Yamaguchi. Kajima, Batano: "Construction and Characteristics of Optic
Subscriber Experimental line," ibid. C881-63, July 1981.

Hiki: "Optic Fiber Multiplex Transmission Using Wavelength Splitting." NIKKEI
ELECTRONICS. 28 May 1979 issue, No 213. pp 118-151.

Hatanabe, Asaya, Onishi, Sato, Nosu. Fujiyama, Nishimura: "The Characteristics
of Experimental Broad Band Subscriber Optic Transmission Facilities in Yokosuka
Area," ibid, CSSl-lll, August 1981.

Asnya, Onishi, Watanabe. Sato. Nochida. Futoda: "Investigation of Optic Suh-
scribcr Transmission System Hith Consideration to Include Broadcast Image Ser—
vice," ibid, CSBl—109, August 1981.

Sato, Asaya, Hatanabe, Hayashida. Suzuki, Hamano. Fukugawara: "Overhead Optic
Cable Transmission Experiment of High Grade TV and VHF Band TV Signals,“ ibid,
CS81-1lO, August 1981.

Asayn. Sato. Haynshida: "Characteristics of High Grade TV Transmission Equip-
ment Using Direct 1M Modulation of LD." ibid, 6581-81. July 1981.

Arai: "High Grade TV System Having A Variety of Practical Applications,"
NIKKEI ELECTRONICS. 28 September 1981 issue, No 274, pp 226—232.

Suzuki, Matsumoto, Sugauara, Masuko: “Trial Construction of Simple Optical
Connectors." ibid, C581-107. August 1981.

'lh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iv“ u. . -~ 0-... .

10. Suzuki. Hatsunoto. Atogawa, Sugauurn: "High Density Mounted Optics] Con-
nectors." ibid, 270, October 1981.

11. Kitahara: "A Road To INS," Proceedings of Advanced Information Communica
tions System Lecture Series. TTYC of Japan, August 1981.

comment: Nikkei-necraw-mn. Inc 1981

9113
C50: 6106/22

15
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
BRIEFS

PROGRAM POSTPONED--The Sudanese Governm

ent has informed the companies concerned of
itR decision to postpone for a

year implementation of the Sudanese telecommunica-
tions development program. This year will be used to launch a crash program aimed

at rehabilitating various existing equipment and at setting up an adequate technical
infrastructure within the telecommunications corporation. [Excerpts] [Paris

HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1882, 4 Dec 81 p 32] [COPYRICHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981]

C50: 5500/5004 END

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY