FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10606
22 JUNE 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain infatuation primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

'ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAI USE ONLY.
LATIN AMERICA REPORT

(#000 9/82)

CONTENTS

006m semen

ARGENTINA

Military Indus tty. Armed Forces Cepebilities Detsiled
(Alberto Csrbone; DBMSA. Jen 82) ..

Economy Minister Denies Resignetion
(on. 20 my 82) UOCOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIIOIO

Briefs
Czechoslovekie to Increase Trade
(3le Increasing Rode

BOLIVIA

Drivers' Union Say b.S.. UK Envoys Not Rented
(sncnn,'7 Jun 82) ................

CUBA
Soviet 05ficiel Criticizes 0.8. Policy in Ceribbeen. Centrel

Anetice
(Jun Nth; Pm. 13 my 82) 0.00.0.4‘OOOOOOOOOOIOOIOOO

'PRBLA' Reports "unaligned ﬂeeting Omnique
(Pun. 6J0“ 82) ............U.OCOO...................I.

NICARAGUA

SELA Co-ittee Chctges 0.5. Economic 'liostility'
(Puu’ Ismy 82) 00......COCCOCUOOOCOD...00.0.0.0....0.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION ARGENTINA

MILITARY INDUSTRY, ARMED FORCES CAPABILITIES DETAILED

Madrid DEFENSA in Spanish Jan 82 pp 76-78
[Article by Alberto Carbone: 'ﬁhe Armed Forces of Argentina“]

[Text] Argentina is the third-ranking military power in Latin America, from the
standpoint of personnel strength, after Brazil and Cuba. Its Armed Forces are
responsible for seeing to the security of a country with an area of 2.7 million
square kilometers, excluding the claimed Halvinas Islands which have been a British
possession to date, and the Argentine Antarctic sector, with a border on Chile '
measuring over 4,000 kilometers, borders with Bolivia, Paraguay and Brazil, and

an Atlantic coast over 2,000 kilometers long. Argentina has a key position in

the South Atlantic. a vital route to the heat. In addition to the dispute over
the possession of the Halvinas, Argentina has an issue pending with Chile over

the setting of the southern boundaries in the Beagle Canal zone, which took the
two countries to the brink of war in 1978. Also, at the beginning of the century,
Chile and Argentina almost reached the point of armed conflict over the setting

of the Patagonian border.

The Argentine Armed Forces came into existence with that South American country's
independence, at the beginning of the 19th century; and, after the liberation
war against Spain, they fought Brazil in 1825-27, the Peruvian-Bolivian Confe-
deration in 1837-39, France (1838-60) and Great Britain in 1851-50. The last
war in which Argentina participated was that of the Triple Alliance in 1865-70,
wherein it fought together with Brazil and Uruguay against Paraguay.

The end of the war of the Triple Alliance represented the start of the profession-
alization of the Argentine Armed Forces. It was in 1869 that the Military Academy
of the Nation was founded (see DEPENSA. No 22), in which the officers of the
Argentine Army (EA) were trained. At the same time, the Military Naval School

was organized. which also meant the end of the improvised training of commanders
for the Navy of the Argentine Republic (ABA). Thiry years later, at the beginning
of the 20th century, compulsory military service was established, both to cope
with the increasing needs of national defense, in view of the danger of war with
Chile, and so as to have a suitable instrument for integrating the children of

the thousands of immigrants who arrived in Argentina starting in 1870.

The RA was formed according to the German model which lasted until World War 11,
having been partly replaced as a result of North American influence, and was
finally replaced by the French school. The Navy followed the British tradition.

1
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the presidency of Gen Agustin F. Juato. the EA began to be modernized and
mechanized; and, in 1937. it created its first light tank company, with 15
Vickers VI A of British rake. It was also during the Justo presidency that the
Army was equipped with the Swiss model steel helmet.

The EA began its adulthood following the Europe Plan, implemented in 1967, the
goal of which was to reequip its units with modern materiel and to consolidate

a weapons industry of its own. In 1967. a study had disclosed that "our infantry
(according to Gen Eduardo J. Uriburi) could not enter combat over 1,500 meters

from the enemy, our cavalry still had a large number of horse—drawn units and
the few armored units had obsolete materiel over 20 years old.“

Fourteen years after the execution of the Europe Plan. the Argentine military
industry is capable of mass-producing a 30-ton combat tank, the TAM, with which

it is replacing the old Sherman 14-1. in its armored units. Moreover, the arms
industry, of long duration in Argentina. supplies pistols, rifles, subriflea,
machine guns, grenades and amnition. Also manufactured are mortars, recoilleaa
guns, antitank and antiaircraft weapons,artillery pieces, and ammmition and
missiles. The very same industrialization process was also undertaken by the ARA
and the Air Force (FAA). The former is building four units of the German Hake-360
frigate, two of which are in its shipyards and two in the FRG, as well as six Meko—
lloO missile-launching corvettes. The ARA bad its first experience in assembling
submarines with two 209-type units, and is planning. with Thyssen, the construction
of six new class, 1,700-ton Til—1700 submarines. As for the FAA, like all the air
forces in the world, it came into being from the Army, and was separated from the
latter to form an independent branch at the end of World War II. The FAA manufac-
tures some of its own apparatus, and the Hilitary Aircraft Factory (FHA) is building
the COIN IA-SSB Pucari airplane and is planning, with Dornier of the FRO, a jet
aircraft for instruction and tactical support, the IA—63.

During the 1970's, the Argentine FAS fought an antisubversive wa'. on two levels,
the rural and urban, which ended with the elimination of the guerrilla organiza-
tions. To wage this type of battle. the FAS were forced into a process of adjust-
ment, in order to combat the enemy with its own weapons, and "not try to crush a
mosquito with a tank," as a high-ranking chief remarked. The tragic crisis with

Chile in 1978 enabled the Armed Forces to become reinstated in their traditional
structures, which had been abandoned for a time to fight the guerrillas.

General Information

Population: 26,390,000 inhabitants.

Military service: compulsory. Army and Air Force, 1 year; Navy, 110 months.
Total Armed Forces: 139,500

Army:

Personnel: 85,000 men.

Io Army Corps CG [General Comanda).

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL 08! ONLY

2 arnored brigades for 2 armored regiments.
1 mechanized brigade.

6 motorized infantry brigades.

1 jungle infantry brigade.

1 airborne brigade.

3 mountain brigades.

1 independent armored reginent.

6 air defense groups.

1 EA aviation battalion.

Coabat tanks: 100 modernized Sherman H, 130 TAH, 120 Alix-13.

Arnored vehicles, for reconnaissance: Panhard Alb-90. For personnel transport:
250 14-113, 25 VCR, 60 Novag Roland, 300 m-n/vrr, 75 H-3A1.

Artillery, hauled: 150 0.105/22 millimeter 11-101, 54 back hovitzera of 105/15 “-56,
90 0.155/23 III "-114. Self-propelled: 20 0.105/22 lillileter H-7, 24 0.155 AH! F-3,
6 0.155/23 III 11-109, 107 cc 105 millimeter K-lon! 6PA Kurassier. Antiaircraft:

CAA.30 In, 18 35/90 millimeter, 32 14-1 of 40/56 us, 36 14-117 of 90 an, SAM Tigercat.

Mortars of 81 and 120 In.

CSR: 14-20 of 75 m, III-60M of 106 -. Missiles cc 88-11, 85-12, Bantam, Cobra,
Mamba.

Army Aviation: 5 690A Turbo-Comander, 3 PC-6 Turbo Porter, 2 Dell-6, 3 Aeritalia
0-222, lo Merlin IIIA, 4 Queen Air, 1 Sabreliner, 5 Cessna 207, 15 Cessna 182, 1
Citation, 20 V-17. Helicopters: 9 A-109, 7 Bell-206, lo Eli-1100, 18 Ull-lll, lo Bell
476, 2 Bell-212, 12 SA-315 Lane, 12 SA-330 Puma.

Navy:
Personnel: 38,000 men, including the Air Branch and the Marine Corps.

1 aircraft carrier,"25 ds Hayo"(former British Colossus class), with 16 A-lo Sky-
hauk, 6 8-2 Tracker, lo 8-61. The A-lo's will be replaced by 16 Super Btendard.

1 cruiser "Belgrano" (former U.S. Navy Brooklyn class, with Seacat missiles and 2
helicopters) .

9 missile-launcher destroyers: 2 type 62 with SAM Sea Dart and 1 Lynx, 3 former
‘ u.s. Navy Sumner class, 1 foruer 0.8. Navy Gearing class, all with SSH oncet.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 type Ar69 corvettes. with Exocet.
6 submarines: 2 Type 209, 2 former 0.8. Navy Guppy class.

7 patrol hosts: 2 former 0.5. Navy Cherokee class, 3 Sotoyoma class 2 King class
(1 for instruction).

6 coastal ninesveepers,former British Ton class.

2 coastal gunboats. Ila-45 class.

4 speedboats, Dabur class.

2 light torpedo boats, former U.S. Navy Higgins class.

2 surveillance boats.

l LSD landing boat, 2 LS! tank landing boats, 27 LCVP (all former 9.8. Navy).
Naval air: 1 fighter-bomber squadron with 11 A960.

1 reconnaissance bomber with 9 S-ZA/B Tracker, 3 SP-Zﬂ.

1 transport squadron with 3 Electra, 1 55-125, 3 1-28, 8 King Air, 4 Queen Air,
3 PC-6 Turbo Porter.

Helicopters: 5 S-6ln/NR, 9 Alouette-III, 2 WG-13 Lynx, 3 SA-330 Puna.
Instruction: 7 EMB-326 GB Xavante, 15 T—34C, 12 T-‘lZB, 2 0-65.
Marine Corps:

S rifleman battalions.

1 ccnnando battalion.

1 amphibious battalion.

1 artillery group.

1 antiaircraft group.

1 transmission battalion.

6 independent companies.

2 security battalions.

Materiel: 22 LVTP-7 and LVTB-7, 15 LARC-S, 6 Mowag Inland, 12 0.105/1b nm M-SG,

6 0.155/23 M—llé, CSR M-ZO of 75 nm, M-bOAl of 106 In. Mortars of 81 and 120 mm.
CC Bantam missiles. Armored BIC-90 Lynx.

b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Air Force:

Personnel: 19,500 nan.

Bomb squadron with 9 Canberra 3-2, 2 T-64.

6 fighter bomber squadrons with 60 A-69 Skyhawk.

l fighter bomber squadron with 18 2-86! Sabre.

2 tactical squadrons with 21 Kosher.

3 tactical squadrons with 08 Horane-Saulnier HS-760A Paris.

1 tactical squadron with 17 Mirage-5.

l intercept squadron with 22 Mirage-1113A and 2 Mirage-1110A.

2 COIN squadrons with 37 IAPSB Pucara.

5 transport squadrons with 1 Seeing 707-3203, 7 C-l3OE/ﬂ, 2 KC-30, l Sabreliner,
2 Learjet-3S, 3 6-222, 13 6-47, 10 P-27, 6 F-28, 5 DCB-6, 22 IA-SO Guarani II,
2 Merlin-IVA.

l Antarctic squadron with 2 000-2, 3 DCHP3, l Lc-67, 1 5-61 helicopter.

1 liaison squadron with 6 Commander, 16 Strike Commander, us-760 Paris, T-3bc,
IA-3S Huanquero.

SAR squadron with helicopters: 12 SA-315 Lana, 2 8-581, 2 s-61NR.
Helicopters: 6 UR-lD, 3 UB-l9, 3 Bell 570.

Instruction aircraft: 3S T—34C, 12 "5-760 Paris, 37 Cessna-182.
Paranilitary Forces:

Personnel: 42,000 men.

National Guard, 11,000 men with Shorland “-113 and helicopters.

National Maritime Prefecture, 9,000 men with b coastal patrol boats, 25 surveillance
launches, 30 surveillance hosts, 5 helicopters.

Federal Police, 22,000 men with Howe; Island and 4 helicopters.

2909
080: 3010/1539

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EmNOHY MINISTER DHIE “SIMIW
PY201362 Buenos Aires m in Spanish 1110 GMT 20 May 82

[Text] Buenos Aires, 20 Hay (DRIP-For the second consecutive day Economy
Minister Roberto Alemann denied rumors of his alleged exit from the Economy
Ministry and reiterated that the ptblic servants will receive a salary
increase as of 1 July.

In steteaents to journalists accredited before the Economy Ministry, Alemann
stated that the decision to "freeze" British assets, ordered by the govern-
aent last night, was a "sy-etrical step" to that taken against Argentine
assets in Greet Britain.

The minister denied rulers of his alleged resignation by stating that "there
are no chances of leaving the Economy Ministry."

He added that these rumors have been circulating ever since he assured the
post, but that the causes and candidates for this substitution could have
changed by now.

He acknowledged that "there are people who wish to change ministers and
have the sufficient means to reach the media with this purpose."

During a television interviw on Tuesday, Alemann stated that the runors
on his resignation were groundless.

The minister admitted the existence of an internal documnt of the economic
team in which disagreements with the presidency of the nation are pointed
out, but he stated: "I do not make any comments on internal work.” lie
regretted that that note had been published by a local daily.

The minister explained the scope of the law regarding the "freezing" of
assets belonging to nonresident British subjects and pointed out that it
is a measure taken in response to other similar ones ordered by the British
Government against Argentina.

lie then minimized rumors on the alleged lack of liquidity of the Bank of
London, a situation which he denied.

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Regarding the salary increases promised by the government as of 1 July,
he stated that they will be inlemented as of the second half of the year
but did not reveal any figures.

Regarding other increases during the second semester of the year he stated
that "there will be increases if the current emrgency situation changes."
but he was reluctant to term the current situation as encouraging.

When the journalists asked him his opinion on the conflict with Great
Britain. from the economic point of view, after his visit to Europe and the
united States. Alenann stated that there are clear signs that there is a
lack of untual solidarity between Great Britain aid its European partners.

Pointing out that 6 weeks ago Great Britain had a such stronger international
support than it has now. especially in the European bloc, the minister said
that "time is naming in our favor."

He was then asked whether the Argentine foreign trade plan would be reorgmized

at the end of the conflict with Great Britain. His answer was: "Ihdoubtedly"
since there will be greater priorities for Latin America.

CSO: 3010/15 76

MOMMUSEONLY
BRIEFS

CZECHOSIDVAKIA TO INCREASE TRADE-Cordoba, Argentina, 26 May (SAPORITI)--
Czechoslovakia wants to buy from 150,000 to 250,000 tons of wheat. This
announcement was ads in this city by the comercial advisors to the
Czechoslovak Eutassy in Argentina, Ludex Porkorny. The diplonat also said
that his government's decision should be interpreted as a gesture of solidarity
with the attitude taken by the Republic of Argentina against colonialism.
Referring to the current state of trade between Argentina and Czechoslovakia,
Porkorny said that this is approximately $130 aillion, that 60 percent are
Argentine sales, therefore the trade favors Argentina. Regarding the
products sold by Argentina to Czechoslovakia, he mentioned leather, vegetable
oils, grains, neat, fish, tobacco and citrus fruit. lie also said that his
country does not want the surplus favoring Argentina to increase. He added
that therefore Czechoslovakia could sell Argentina tractors, airplanes,
machinery, tools and energy plants in operation. The diplomat also said
that the two econoaiea complacent each other and that despite the "ideolo-
gical) differences he had no doubt that trade could be increased particularly
at this time when Argentina needs support to sell its products to cover

its needs in raw naterials and technology. [Text] [PY261259 Buenos Aires
SAPORITI in Spanish 1148 GMT 21; May 82]

GDR INCREASING 1'RADB-Buenos Airea, 20 Hay (UYN)--(Kalsu Hsertiz). director
of the Latin American Departmt of the GDR Foreign Trade Ministry, said
today that his comtry hopes to increase soon its trxde with Argentina which
presently momts to $100 million a year. The official arrived in Buenos
Aires today to take part in one of the usual meetings of the joint Argentine-
GDR Trade Comission. lie was interviewed at Ezeiza Airport and said that
Berlin hopes to continue trading normally with Buenos Aires, despite the
situation caused by the crisis in the Halvinas Islands. (Haertig) said that
the GDR is interested "in all products which Argentina traditionally exports,
especially agricultural ones," and that it intends to increase its sales

of equipment for agriculture and industry to Argentina. [Text] [”221556
Buenos Aires DYN in Spanish 1510 GMT 20 May 82]

080: 3010/15 74 ,

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION ”LIVIA

DRIVERS' UNION SAY 0.8., UK ENOYS MI WANTED
PY080655 Busnos Aires SAFORI’II in Spanish 2308 GMT 7 Jun 82

[Text] La Fee, 7 Jun (Saporiti)--1'he Bolivian Drivers Union Confederation
(6803), the most powerful organization at the labor union level in the country,
today decided to declare British Ambassador Stanley Duncan and 0.8. Ambassador
Edwin Corr personae non grata for the working class.

The declaration was released in view of the events taking place on the
Halvinas Islands, targets of aggression by Great Britain with U.S. support.

The dooment says that 0.8. imperialism is attempting to oppress the Latin
American people who in actions of strict justice and righteousness are trying
to recover their territory and dignity.

The declaration labeled the Argentine action as one of. an historic nature and
without parallel in current times, emulating the glorious days of 25 May 1810.

The docuaent says that it is the duty of the working class to speak up and
reject the Anglo-Saxon interference in order to put an end to their nefarious
influence on the Latin American people, especially our people because their
cunning hand has always been present in the great national tragedies such as
the loss of our seacosst.

Under those considerations, the drivers of Bolivia, who are working hard against
the DIP and its economic policies in the country, made the decision to support
the sister Republic of Argentina and particularly its working class against the
Anglo-0.8. imperialism for the recovery of lands which are historically part of
Argentine territory and which were stolen by the masters of international
piracy; this [is] why this war is the cause of all the Latin American people.

I.) another point. the CSCB decided to demand that the government, through dip-
lomatic means, convey to the ambassadors of the mentioned countries that the
people and the working class will not permit or tolerate acts of colonialism
or practices violating principles of hunan rights such as the brutal massacre
of peasants brothers under the pretext of wanting to solve the problem of that
decadent society of users of hallucinogens. The union leaders announced that
they are going to deliver a copy of the resolution to the Argentine ambassador
to Bolivia during a special ceremony.

080: 3010/ 1680

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

COWRY SECTION CUBA

SOVIET OFFICIAL CRITICIZBS U.S. POLICY IN CARIBBEAN, CENTRAL “ERICA
PA1317S7 Havana PRELA in English 1232 GMT 13 May 82
[Report by Juan Burial

[Text] Ravens, 13 Hay (PL)-‘rhe secretary general of the Soviet Foreign
Office, Yuriy Pokin, indicated that his country calls for "the cease of
all subversive activities against Cuba and Nicaragua and other countries
of the Caribbean and Central Antics."

Fokin gave an interview to PRENSA LATINA, in which he spoke about his visit
to Cuba and analyzed ('Iaspects) of the international political situation.

He expressed the condemation of the USSR to the U.S. attitude "of stepping
u) the tension around Cuba, Nicaragua and in general in antral America and
the Caribbean."

"That policy," he said, "does not favor the cause of peace. It bothers
the peoples of the region and undermines their efforts aimed at a quiet
[word indistinct] way."

He also referred to the conflict of the South Atlantic, in which Argentina,
while defending its sovereignty over the Halvinas Islands, is facing an
aggression of the war fleet of the British Government.

"Those British actima," he stated, "are ained at the reestablishment of
the colonial situation in the Malvinas, which contradicts the resolutions
of the United Nations."

In his declarations. the secretary general of the Soviet Foreign Office also
spoke of aspects regarding the neting of the Soviet leader, Leonid Brezhnev,
and of U.S. President Ronald Reagan.

The Soviets estimate that a dialogue of such a level requires a special
preparation and a previous examination of all the topics to be analyzed by
both presidents.

"The Soviet Union is in favor of preparing well the meeting and of holding
it next spring in one of the neutral capitals of Europe." expressed Pokin.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"we would like the United States to have a (7constructive) point of view.
for on this depends the results of such an important nesting."

Fokin has just ended s 6-day visit to Cuba, heading a delegation which held
talks with the Cuban Foreign Ministry.

His visit to Havana, he said. was related to the next holding of the special
session of the General Asselialy of the United Nations on disanuant.

The Soviet diplomat stated that the socialist countries ad the nonaligned
ones will work together, in order to help this UN mating, which begins in

June, "to be carried out in a constructive atmosphere and to reach positive
and true results."

(:50: 1120/ 126

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

'PRELA' REPORTS NONALIGNED MEETING COHHUNIQUE
PA061910 Havana PRELA in English 1850 GMT 6 Jun 82

[Text] Havana. 7 Jun (PL)-With a declaration which ratifies the principles of
rejection to aggressions, support to the struggle of the peeple for their inde-
pendence and a negotiated solution to the problems which are threatening peace,
was resumed here a nesting of the coordination bureau of the nonaligned
countries.

The declaration. for the first time, nakes reference to the Salvadoran issue,
expressing its support and warning on that the "ilperialist intervention
threatens peace and security in the region."

The document, also for the first time included the situation of Guatemala,
rating it as "another point of tension where the imperialist repression and
intervention has not ceased."

It also expresses concern for the step-up of the threats of intervention and
destabilizing nanoeuvers against Cuba, pronoted and carried out by the United
States.

The final declaration of the meeting of foreign ministers of the non aligned
countries expresses support to the full right of Argentina to exert sovereignty
over the Halvinas Islands, underlining that the British aggression, backed by
the United States. is affecting all the region.

It also expresses its support to the Surinanese people in corstructing their
future according to their own interests. to Bolivia for the recovery of its
exit to the Pacific Ocean. to Puerto Rico in its inalienable right to indepen-
dence as well as to Panama, for its nost absolute right to sovereignty over

the canal.

Referring to Chile, it calls on to intensify the solidarity to the struggle
of that people and expresses concern for the increase of dependency to the
United States in the econonic. political and military fields.

In another part it expresses concern for certain events regarding the Venezuelan
territorial claim against Guyana and rates the use of the force for the solution
of the territorial conflict. as unacceptable.

12
FOI.OIIICIA1.USEGDNLY
s also use-vane... an n a. I...

The declaration recouends the next suIIIit of heads of states and goverments.
the holding of an extraordinary ministerial meeting in Nicaragua. due to the
serious situation of Central America and the Caribbean, and in general, in
Latin America.

Within the same context is expressed the concern of the member states for the
military, political, and economic pressures exerted on Grenada.

While Analyzing the international issues, the resolution states that the arms
race is incompatible with the search for a social and economic development and
the establishment of a new international economic order.

Regarding this it expresses the movement's support to the second special session
of the United Nations on disarmament to take place next week, recalling that the

first session of this type which took place 6 years ago, was held at the in-
iative of the non aligned movement.

0n the Madrid conference on security and cooperation in Europe. it calls for
positive results, expressing the concern of the nataligned for the step-up of
the tensions in the old world.

Regarding the conflicts or tension points in Asia. the document exhorts to find
global political solutions which would include the south east and south west
Asiatic states and ratifies that the Indian Ocean should be converted into a
peace zone.

Regarding the conflicts between member countries, like the Iran-Iraq case, it
calls for the finding of political solutions based on the strict respect to
the principles of the non aligned.

The resolution expresses its recognition to the special commission which has
mediated in the Iran-Iraq conflict. and exhorts it to continue making all
efforts to reach a just. peaceful and honorable solution.

Further ahead it underlined that the seventh summit to take place in Bagdad

next September, will constitute an important and historic moment of the movement
in which its principles and objectives will be reaffirmed.

In another part, on mentioning the Middle East situation, it points out that

the 0.8. help to Israel, is the determining factor of the aggressive and expan-
sionist policy of the Zionist state.

The United States was interested in maintaining and broadening its strategic
alliance with Israel, encouraging the Zionist state to go on with its military
actions against the Arab states and to ignore the rights of the Palestine
people, states the resolution.

Regarding Africa, the document stresses that the main problem is the existence
of colonialism, neo colonialism, racism and apartheid in the southern par. of

Africa. Regarding this, it condemns the South African aggressions against
Angola, Mozambique and the other front line countries.

C80: 3020/133

l3
FOI‘OFFICIA1.USE!0NIN
I’Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(”MRI SECI'IGI NICARAGUA

SELA conﬁrm MOSS 0.8. SMOKE 'HOSTILITY'
PA190138 llama PREA in English 2326 GMT 18 Hay 82

[Text] Managua. 19 Hay (PD—Nicaragua has charged that the developed
capitalist countries, especially the lbited States, are mlosding upon the
underdeveloped nations the burcbn of the international. econonic crisis.

At the opening of the third ueting of the Action Connittee for the Recovery
of Nicaragua of SELA (Latin Amrican Economic Systen), Nicaraguan Deputy
Minister Bdnmdo Jarquin said that the "anti-crisis policies" applied

shift the costs to the poor countries.

The abrupt drop in the prices of our export products, the extremely high _
interest rates, mmting protectionisn aid the drastic cutback in the
official flows of capital are draining the developnent efforts of all our
countries, he warned.

Nicaragua, he said, is hit especially hard by the situation which has mder-
mined a good part of its notable effort at reactivation and reconstruction.

After indicating that the regional econonic crisis moses additional costs
upon Nicaragua, Jarquin, president of the Action Comittee, warned that an
"attitude of generalized hostility on the part of the United States...
provides an additional setting of difficulties for our reconstruction."

He stressed that Washington carries its aggression into the econonic [field]
and government and [is] putting pressure on the nultilatersl agencies.

Jarquin said that the "situation of economic aggression challenges each and
every one of the principles that link in in SBLA, jut as those principles
are challenged by the sanctions against our sister nation Argentine."

Representatives of the comtriea belonging to the committee, set up 3 years
ago to cooperate with Nicaraguan recovery, are analysing an agenda that
includes the naming of three vice presidents for the 82-83 period and this
year's annual report.

16
summon“
They will also debate the alternatives of reorganizing the conittee and
discussion of the work program and budget for 15-82.

It was reported that the conittee has channelled donations to Nicaragua
of $10 million worth, $51 million in bilateral loans, credit lines of
$176 million and technical assistance in fisheries, tourism, crafts lid
housing.

At the nesting, the secretary of the Action Comittee, Francisco Cordero,
denounced the military aggression by Great Britain against Argentina in
stating that the "crucial situation of Latin America is aggravated vith new
aggressions on sister countries from Europe."

The committee is made up of Argentina, Cuba, Mexico, Peru, Ecuador, Panama,

Brazil, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Uruguay, Guatemala, Venezuela and 31 Salvador.
The last four were not present at the opening session.

(‘30: 3020/12 7

15
MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SBCT ION URUGUAY

BRIEFS

FALKLANDS CONFLICT—Montevideo, 5 Jun (SAl’ORITI)-Uruguayan President Lt Gen
Gregorio Alvarez has asserted that the third world war is closer than ever due
to the Halvinas conflict between Argentina and Great Britain. The chief of
state, repeating previous rmrks, expressed his concern over the fact that
the efforts to achieve a peaceful solution have not been successful. Alvarez
reiterated that the Uruguayan Government has not changed its position on the
topic: "It recognizes Argentina's legitimate sovereignty over the islands;
it considers that the presence of the British fleet in the southern Atlantic
is unjustified; and it condone the attacks against the archipelago by the
expeditionary fleet." The Uruguayan president expressed his concern over
the current situation and he also expressed his anguish and pain over the
blood that has been let. Finally, he indicated, refering to the overall
situation in Latin Anerica. that his idea regarding a seating of American
presidents must be achieved in the short tern. This continent nust not
continue to exist in its knees, feeding raw materials to the industrialized
countries at the prices they set. While our countries cannot achieve their
development. [Text] [PYOSlMl Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spanish 1258 GMT

5 Jun 82]

C30: 3010/1683 END

16
FOR 0m USE ONLY