FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10095

4 November 1981

Translation
MICROPROCESSORS

By

M.A. Bedrekovskiy. N.S. .Kruchinkin and V.A. Podolyan

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10095
4 November 1981

MICROPROCESSORS

MosgogoMIKROPROTSESSORY in Russian 1981 (signed to press 24 Mar 81)
PP '

[Text of brochure "Microprocessors" by Mikhail Alekseyevich Bedrekovskiy,
Nikolay Serafimovich Kruchinkin and Vladimir Andreyevich Podolyan,
Izdatel'stvo ”Radio 1 svyazt', 60,000 copies, 71 pages]

I

CONTENTS
Annotation and Forward 1
Introduction 2
Chapter 1. General Principles of the Organization of Microprocessors and
Microprocessor Systems 7
1. Basic Elements of the Structure of a Microprocessor 7
2. Organization of Memory; Structure and Operating Principles of a Micro-
processor System 13
3. Bus Principle 20
4. Interrupts 21
5. Direct Access to Memory 23
6. Microprogram Control 2‘
7. Software 28
Chapter 2. Characteristics of Microprocessors Determining the Diversity
of Their Areas of Application and Application Features 36
8. Technological and Circuitry Methods of Pabricating Large-Scale Integrated
Circuits 36
9. Characteristics of Microprocessors as Large-Scale Integrated Circuits 39
10. Speed of Response 40
11. Power Requirement; Overall Size and Weight 62
12. Compatibility with Transistor-Transistor Logic; Number of Power Supply
Levels #2
l3. Hord Length #2
14. Capacity of Addressable Memory #3
15. Reliability and Performance Stability 66
16. Classification of Microprocessors; Key Characteristics of Foreign
Microprocessor Sets 44
Chapter 3. Domestic Microprocessor Sets 48
17. Series K580 68
18. Series K587 54
19. Series K589 56

Chapter 4. General Questions Relating to the Application of Microprocessors 58

- a - [I - USSR - F P000]

IW3R‘0FFICIA1.IJSE2(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

20. Methods of Applying Microprocessors; Classification of Microprocessor
Systems

21. General Recommendations on Selecting and Using Microprocessors

Chapter 5. Examples of Concrete Implementation of Microprocessor Systems

22. Areas of Application of Microprocessor Systems

23. Microprocessors in Systems for Controlling and Monitoring Production
Processes

24. Microprocessor Systems for Expanding the Functions and Improving the
Key Characteristics of Communications Equipment

25. Microprocessor Systems for Improving the Accuracy of and for Automating
Measurements

26. Microprocessor Systems in Household Appliances and Electronic Games
Bibliography

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

58
62
66
66

67
78
79

81
85
FI”!(HHWC1AL.US£1DNLY

Annotation

Based on a systematic discussion of data reflecting the key properties of

and experience gained in using domestic and foreign microprocessors, a demonstra-
tion is given of their capabilities and design structure, as well as of aspects
of their use in specific equipment.

For a wide range of readers.

Foreword

The attention of specialists in various fields of technology has been attracted
more and sore by promising microelectronic products-large-scale integrated cir-
cuits with progran-controlled digital data processing functions.

Of course, any inforastion problen can be solved in principle by breaking it down
into individual data processing functions and by performing these functions in a
specific order specified by a program. A fundamentally universal integrated micro-
circuitry elenent which implenents a solution process specified by a progran is

the microprocessor. which has appeared as the result of the evolutionary development
of microelectronic technology and of the aspiration of making possible by leans of

this technology naxisun completeness of the functional properties of computer hard-
ware elements.

The introduction of nicroprocessors into various kinds of industrial. household and
even amateur radio equipment can undoubtedly be furthered by a description of their
capabilities, advantages and know-how gained in using them in a publication in-
tended for a broad reading audience. In the extensive existing literature on mi-
croprocessors these questions are discussed on a professional level. which as a
rule exceeds the cosprehension abilities of nonspecialists.

The purpose of this brochure is to attract to nicroprocesaors the attention of the
popular resder whose field of specialization or interests involve in one way or

another the use or development of electronic equipment for a broad range of appli-
cations--fron computers to electronic home appliances. The key elements of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structure of microprocessors are discussed in this brochure. A description is
given of the organization of storage devices, the operating principles of micro-
processor systems and properties of them, such as the bus line principle, the
possibility of interrupts, and direct access to the memory. as well as the essence
of microprogram control, programming languages, etc.

The system of technical parameters and the key characteristics of the most widely
used types of domestic and foreign microprocessors are presented. An analysis is
given of aspects of their application and examples are given of the specific im-
plementation of equipment based on them.

The aspiration of maximum simplification and of a popular mode of presentation,

in a number of instances to the detriment of depth and rigor, can probably be
justified by the above-stated goal.

It is requested that comments regarding this book be sent to the following address:
101000. Moscow, General Post Office, Box 693, Izdstel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'",
Popular Radio Library Editorial Board.

Introduction

To the questionnaire question "Hhat is your personal opinion on a microprocessor?"
presented by the American journal INSTRUMENTATION TECHNOLOGY to its readers-users
and developers of industrial automation equipment-the answers were distributed in
the following manner: 53 percent answered "Incredible, fantasticl", 27 percent
"Microprocessors will find application as control elements" and 20 percent "Opinion
not definitely formed, but it will be difficult to work with them the first time"
[1].

A brief analysis of these responses makes it possible to draw one conclusion which
is important and interesting to us. The first group of responses is just as emo-
tional and unspecific as the second and third are reserved and businesslike. The
lack of unanimity in this question becomes understandable if allowance is made for
the fact that to the questionnaire question "Hhere do you use microprocessors at
the present time?" half of the readers responded "Nowhere!" it is quite likely that
it is precisely this half which made the enthusiastic comment.

It will obviously be proper to assume that the effective application of micropro-
cessors (MP'a) in reality is more complex than is assumed before the acquisition
of experience in working with them and the reason is primarily the lack of this
experience. At the same time the idea of implementing a programmable digital
device with the properties of a computer processor using a minimum number of large-

scale integrated circuits (LSIC's). on which microprocessors are based, is indis-
putably highly promising.

In giving an evaluation of the state of the art of the development and introduction
of microprocessors, as well as of the prospects of the ialmediate future, abroad
they not infrequently speak of the "second computer revolution," "the explosion in
data processing technology," "the microcomputer invasion," and the like, stressing

the explosive nature and great significance of the penetration of microprocessors
into all areas of life.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FF1CLAl.US£1DNLN

According to forecasts of the West German firm Siemens an, the number of large-
scale integrated circuits with programmable operating logic produced in western
Europe in 1980 will equal 20 percent and in 1985 about 40 percent of the total
annual output of integrated circuits (IC's) [2]. In the USA sales of microprocessor
chips alone have doubled every two years, and saturation of their market is not
foreseen at least in the foreseeable future, since the need and ability of micro-
processors to master new areas of application are growing still more rapidly.

what are the reasons for this such swift invasion of microprocessors into everday
life? The main reason resides in a microprocessor's uniting the universal capa-
bilities of a programmable computing facility with the advantages of large-scale
integrated circuit technology-relatively low cost, high reliability and economy.
The consequence of this is the remarkable ability to create both exceptionally
"flexible" microprocessor LSIC's (MP LSIC's) aimed at solving a very wide range of
problems with greater or less effectiveness and narrowly specialized HP LSIC's
which most effectively solve one or more problems specific to certain applitations.

Able to be offered as an example is the LSIC of the domestic series K587 micro-
processor-~sn arithmetic unit (AD) performing the functions of a universal proces-
sor, and an arithmetic expander (AR)--a processor oriented toward fast multiplica-
tion and several other operations.

Thus, the specialization of H? LSIC's or, on the other hand, their universality
must be considered primarily in determining their effective area of application.
Here it must be kept in mind that a large group of problems can be solved most
effectively by uniting the functions of a universal microprocessor and special-
purpose HP LSIC's, by distributing parts of the general solution algorithm among
individual special-purpose HP LSIC's and processing their results by means of a
universal HP. This idea forms the basis of a number of the best domestic and
foreign microprocessor sets (HPK's) in which the structure of the LSIC’s. in addi-
tion to data-logic electrical and design compatibility, to one extent or another
also satisfies the requirement of functional completeness, the degree of which
obviously also determines the universality of the application of an HPK.

Dialectical unity of the general and particular, of the universal and special,
realized in a number of HPK's has served as a scientific basis for creating the
ideology of the domestic Unified System of Microprocessor Sets (Yes HPK)-a unified
series of NPK's distinguished by speed and their fabrication technology [3].

The functional completeness of sets is made possible by a combination of 15 to 30
LSIC's having the structure of a universal or special processor and oriented
toward the effective solution of various problems.

The number of types of HPK’s produced abroad has recently exceeded 100, and there
are many sets of approximately equal execution rate and functional structure,
differing only formally, but incompatible in terms of key characteristics of the
structure and software. In this connection precisely at the first stages of mas-
tery special importance is taken on by the development of unified design principles
for HPK's aimed at eliminating redundancy and an excessive increase in their nomen-
clature. It is gratifying to mention the well—timed approach to solving this
problem by Soviet specialists and their leading role in the creation of a unified

FOI.OF11(JAL.USE(NVLY
FORioFFKJALlHHEONlN

system making possible in addition to real universality the fulfillment of re—
quirements for the unification of HIK's.

The general appearance of some Yes NPR LSIC's is shown in fig 1 [photograph not
reproduced].

Meanwhile it is necessary to mention the existence of restrictions making it im-
possible or unfeasible to design and use systems based on HPK‘s in a number of
cases. ~

Microprocessor systems lose to systems implemented with nonprogrammable ("hard")
logic in the case when it is necessary to ensure high data processing speed (one
million operations per second and more). It is also considered inadvisable to use
MP LSIC's for designing systems of low complexity, i.e., those which can be de-
signed by using a few dozen "hard" logic integrated circuits with a low degree of
integration. In this case designing turns out to be simpler, takes less time and
can be performed by traditional methods.

It must be mentioned that methods of designing systems based on HPK's differ radi-
cally from the traditional methods of logic design which are used by developers of
systems employing integrated circuits.

At the disposal of the developer of a system employing integrated circuits are
various logic elements, each of which performs, as a rule, one or a small but
unchanged set of logic functions, such as AND, OR and NOT in various combinations,
etc. Logic design in this case consists in finding the specific physical relation-
ships between these elements as the result of the establishment of which a struc-
ture with the required logic functions is obtained.

In designing systems utilizing HP LSIC's this method cannot be used, since the de-
veloper has to deal with elements whose functions are of many types and are deter-
mined by the instruction set characteristic of each specific MP LSIC. i.e., are
software determined. Therefore the problem of designing a microprocessor system
reduces basically to programming its functional properties. and there can be a
limited number of strictly physical structures based on a single set of HP LSIC's,
and their development can be carried out by developers of HPK's simultaneously with
the creation of HP LSIc's themselves. Pros this it follows that the effective de-
sign of microprocessor systems requires special training and special hardware fur-
nished with special operating programs.

Only such an approach to designing makes it possible to realize the capabilities of
HP LSIC's with respect to reducing the time required for and the cost of developing
MP systems, to their "flexibility," i.e., their adaptability to a wide range of
problems. and to optimization in terms of speed for a given problem, and in the de-
velopment of complicated systems this approach is the only one possible.

The properties and characteristics of HP's are discussed below from the viewpoint of
the ability to use an M? with maximum effectiveness in various HP systems. The
terminology generally accepted in computing technology and microelectronics, applied
to microprocessors almost completely without changes, is used. Additional concepts
are as a rule defined in detail in the text. Presented below in alphabetical order

FOR‘OFF“JAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[in Russian] are brief definitions of terms encountered in the text and compiled
on the basis of analyzing and generalizing a great amount of published data.

Address-indication of the location of a storage location in a storage unit.

Accumulator, accumulator register-a register which stores the results of previous
operations for the purpose of using them in subsequent operations.

Algorithm-a set of instructions uniquely determining the content and sequence of
the performance of operations for solving a specific problem in the form of a
step-by—step procedure.

Assembler, assembly program--a service routine which converts symbolic instructions
in the assembly language into machine language instructions and which also performs
certain auxiliary functions.

Large-scale integrated circuit (LSIC)-an integrated circuit containing from 100
to 10,000 logic elements.

Binary code--a code for the representation of data, written in the form of a series
of 0's and 1's. The existence of many physical analogues (on/off, plus/minus, etc.)
makes its use convenient in digital technology.

Display--a unit for converting binary information into a visual image and/or vice-
versa (a digital display, a cathode ray tube display, graphic terminal).

Integrated circuit (IC)-an electronic circuit fabricated on the surface or in the
body of a semiconductor chip and containing two or more components (transistors,
resistors).

lnterface--a combination of equipment for unified coupling between the component
parts (subsystems) of a data processing system, including hardware and a protocol,
i.e., a set of rules establishing unified principles for the interaction of sub-
systems.

Command. instruction-a single step in the operation of an operating unit, repre-
sented in the form of an instruction in machine language. The command determines
the operation to be performed and its attributes.

Compiler--a service routine for converting an operating routine represented in
a high-level language into a form at the machine language level while preserving the
logical structure of the routine.

Cross aoftware-a set of routines for creating and debugging the software of a com-
puter different from that on which this software is prepared.

Logic element (gate)-an elementary circuit which implements a switching function
and has two logical states.

Bus-a general-purpose line for the exchange of information between various elements
of the structure of an HP or HP systen and peripherals.

5
lili‘OlIlClAl.ll§li€ﬂNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hicroprogram control MID—a method of control whereby each instruction is re-
presented in the form of a set of microinstructions, i._e., hardware-implemented
elementary machine operations.

Microprocessor (HP)-a central processor implemented by means of integrated tech-
nology utilizing one or more large—scale integrated circuits.

Microprocessor set. HP LSIC set--a set of compatible LSIC's for constructing micro-
processors and microprocessor systems.

Microprocessor system (HP system)-a set of microprocessor processing, storage and
input/output units used for implementing a single data conversion process. Also

includes special software for arranging for combined operation and for controlling
these units.

Minicomputer-a small computer having a broad application because of its small size
and low cost. Its word length is from eight to 18 bits and most often 16.

Operand--input data element on which an operation is performed.

Debugging-process of detecting. localizing and eliminating software errors and
hardware errors.

Peripheral equipment--equipment used for inputing data or outputing it from a com-
puter, for arranging for the intermediate storage of data, and as an external
storage.

User--in relation to an MP, the developer of an HP system; in relation to an HP
system. the person involved in using it.

Program--a sequence of instructions determining the procedure for performing opera-
tions in the implementation of a specified algorithm.

Processor--unit for programmed processing of data in a computer.

Register--a storage employing switching elements (e.g., flip-flops). whose capacity
usually equals one machine word. Designed for storing information in the process
of processing data in a computer.

General-purpose register (RON)--the program-accessible operating register of a
processor which can be used for on-line storage of various program elements.

Resident software--set of routines for creating and debugging the software of the
computer on which this software is prepared.

Instruction set-~the complete set of all instructions accessible in machine language
of a given HP system or part of its structure.

Timer, clock--a clock pulse generator making possible the synchronous operation
of all parts of the structure of an HP system.

Terminal-an external keyboard console for exchanging data with an HP system.

6

FOR 0F11C1A1.USEGDNLN
FORi0FFKJAI.llﬂE(HVLY

Flip-flop-an electronic logic circuit which assume: one of two possible stable
states corresponding to 0 and 1.

Central processor--the central unit of a computer or computing system including an
arithmetic unit. a control unit and operating registers. In addition to data pro-
cessing, it also controls other units of a computer or system (e.g., peripheral
equipment).

Line (data, address. control)--a line for coupling one or more sources with one or
more receivers of information.

Assesbly 1anguage--low~level programming language the structure of whose elements
corresponds to instruction and machine language data formats.

Programming language-a formalized language designed for writing programs in a form
recognizable by a computer.

Storage register-~a register in a computer's storage to which access is possible
through a specific address.

Chapter 1.
General Principles of the Organization of Microprocessors and Microprocessor Systems
1. Basic Elements of the Structure of a Microprocessor

The general structure of a microprocessor differs little from the structure of a
computer processor of not too great capacity. of the class of the so-called mini-
computers to which belong. e.g., the domestic M6000, SMBZ and SM-3 computers. Thus,
knowing how a computer is built, it is quite uncomplicated to form an idea of the
operation of a microprocessor. But knowledge of this kind, the ability to handle
microprocessors freely, and in the end to use them effectively, are already now
necessary for a much broader range of people than that of computer technology spe-
cialists. Obviously in the not too distant future there will not be a field of
specialization involved in using electronic equipment which will not require know-
ledge of microprocessors.

Therefore, for the majority of readers of this brochure a first acquaintance with
microprocessors can serve as the occasion for a deeper study of microprocessor
equipment, which will help to become familiarized with their use.

The ability to program a sequence of functions to be performed, i.e., the ability

to operate according to a specific program is the main difference of microprocessors
from "hard" logic elements such as integrated circuits with a low and medium degree
of integration, and this imposes certain conditions on their organization. First

of all, in addition to the physical structure. called the hardware and forming the
:body""of the microprocessor. there is software, personifying, so to speak, its
soul.

Of course there is a very close interrelationship between this "soul" and this
"body" and only extreme simplification and sketchiness of the discussion make it
possible to discuss them separately here.

7

FtHICNﬂﬂ(JAI.lEﬂ£(MNLY
FOR!0FFNJA1.USE(NNLY

And so. in the most general form the hardware of a microprocessor, imitating the
structure of the central processor of a minicomputer, includes an arithmetic-
logic unit (ALU). a control unit (U0) and several operating registers (R's).

A microprocessor can contain from one to several chips, over which its structure
is spread according to the criterion of functions performed (e.g.. the AL” and
R's on one chip and the UU on another) and/or according to the word length cri-
terion (e.g.. two ALU and R bits each on each of four chips and eight 00 bits on
a fifth chip form a five-chip eight-bit microprocessor).

Hence follows the definition, which has withstood fairly well up to the present
time. of a microprocessor as a central processor implemented by means of integrated
technology utilizing one or more large-scale integrated circuits.

This definition contains several important key points which require co—entary.
Firstly, it represents the hardware properties of a microprocessor as those of a
processor and its element properties as those of an integrated circuit. Actually
the appearance of the first microprocessors was the result of extreme simplifica-
tion of the structure of the central processor of a computer to the level which
could be realized by means of microelectronics with the level of integration reached
up to that time.

Secondly. this definition makes it possible to consider a microprocessor only as a
potentially universal data processing element, i.e.. an element whose set of pro-
gram-controlled functions makes it possible to implement basically any specific
algorithm, since this is one of the main requirements for the central processor

of a computer.

Thirdly, the definition gives the required composition of elements of the structure
of a microprocessor, which according to the definition of a central processor in-
cludes an AL”, 0“ and R's.

In addition, the structure of an HP, i.e., in physical union with it, can include
an input/output unit (UVV) for exchanging information between the microprocessor
and other equipment, and also a clock (timer) and several other elements of the
structure (fig 2) .

Signals of three kinds--information, address and control-can be transmitted by one,
two or three lines. A line represents a group of communication lines whose number
determines the word length of binary information which can be transmitted through

a line from one or more sources to one or more receivers. Lines are as a rule
bidirectional, i.e., can transfer information in both directions.

Carrying through our analogy with a living organism, the system of lines in a
microprocessor can be compared with the nervous system, whereby if processes in the
information and address lines are similar to reflex activity. then processes in

the control line are rather like activity of a higher level——like psychic activity.

The arithmetic-logic unit (ALU) performs various arithmetic and logic operations
on numbers and addresses represented in binary code. Actually, the structure of
these operations is determined by a list of instructions (instruction set) of the

ALU, which comprise the "building material"-the basis of software for the HP as
a whole .

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

{— " ui-BéJoéocoE“ 17 - '7

 

Figure 2. Generalized Structural Diagram of an M’ with Three Separate Lines
for Intonation (I), Address (A) and Control (11) Signals:
ALU--arithletic—logic unit; lulu-control unit; UW-uinput/output
unit; T—tiner: R--operating registers: 0—for operands, Kufor
instructions, Antor addresses. Pnflag, S--state, SK--instruction
counter, 0N--general-purpose, STYeK-mstack

Key:
1 . Microprocessor 6 . DU
2. I 7. R's: 0, K, A, P. 8, SK, 0N, STYeK
3. A 8. WV
10. U 9. T
5. AU]

The instruction set of_ an All! includes. as a rule. aritlnetic and logical addition
and mltiplication. shifts, conparisons and the like. Aritlnetic operations are
perforned according to the rules of .binary aritlmetic, which in principle differ in
no way from the ordinary rules for addition. multiplication, carry, and other rules
in the decimal system. Logic operations take place according to the rules of
Boolean algebra (logic algebra). with which the reader can become acquainted, if
desired. in [lo]. for example.

The structure of an ALU is fairly complicated but it does not contain any unique

or specific elenents; on the contrary, it uses a nodule-two adder, shifters. re-
gisters and other elements widely used in "hard" logic. The control unit controls

the operation of the ALU and all other elenents of the structure of the aicropro-
cessor.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the control unit (UU) instructions arriving from the storage are converted

into binary signals which directly act on all elements of. the structure and
stimulate execution of a given instruction. In addition, the W. synchronized

by the timer. distributes over time the process of the execution of an instruction.
An instruction represents a binary word of eight. 16, 24 and more bits (up to 610),
part of which represent the operation code and the remainder of which are dis-
tributed between the addresses of operands in the storage. In fig 3 is shown a
26-bit instruction word with a seven—bit operation code and two eight—bit addresses.

1) nos 2) no ‘2 ‘1
23 :7 15 a 7 0

Figure 3. Twenty-Pour-Bit Instruction word
Bits: 17-23--operation code (KOP); l6—-operand tag (P0);
8-lS--address of second operand (A2); 0-7-address of first
operand (A1)

1. K0? 2. Y0

An instruction with a 16-bit address portion makes it possible to access 216- l -

= 65.635 storage locations (it was necessary to subtract a unit since a mathematical
address consisting of 16 zeros does not correspond to a physical location), and this
number is as a rule completely sufficient for problems solved by a microprocessor

in the structure of a microprocessor system. Such access to the memory is called
direct addressing and is used less frequently than indirect addressing, which is
necessary when the word length of. the address portion is less than required. In
this case addressing is performed in two steps: In the first step according to the
address contained in the instruction a location is selected which contains the
a-ldress of another location from which the operand is selected in the second step.
With the indirect method of addressing an instruction must contain one operand tag
bit, whose state determines what is selected in this step: the address of the
operand or the operand itself. 01‘ course the indirect method of addressing is
slower than the direct. On account of thenincrease in the capacity of the address
storage it makes it possible to access a 2 -fold greater nunber of operands than

with the direct method (n is the word length of the address section of the in-
struction).

The control unit distributes any operation according to the code specified by the
instruction word into a sequence of. phases-addressing phases and execution phases—
called a cycle. Because of the limited word length of. a microprocessor operations
on operands of great word length can be performed in two cycles and more. Obviously
this reduces the speed of the microprocessor twofold and more. From this can be
drawn an interesting and important conclusion from the practical viewpoint: The
speed of a microprocessor is inversely proportional to its accuracy, which is
uniquely determined by the word length of operands (cf. sec 9).

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINItNﬂﬂCJAI.USE(NVLY

The addressing phase begins with accessing. according to the address contained

in the address register, A , the data storage, which is performed, as already men«
tioned, by the direct or indirect method, and ends with loading of the registers
of two operands. 0 (cf. fig 2).

In the course of the execution phase in the ALU, according to the operation code,
is completed an operation on operands read out from registers O , after which

the result is entered in one of registers 0 called the accumulator. The contents
of the accumulator, representing an intermediate result, are either used directly
in the operation in keeping with the next instruction or are sent according to this
instruction to the general-purpose register, ON , where they are stored until it is
necessary to use them in the course of executing the routine.

All operations relating to the distribution of information, address and control
signals between elements of the HP's structure, memory and peripheral equipment

are accomplished by means of an input/output unit, UVV . The input/output unit
represents a special-purpose microprocessor also called an input/output controller
or an interface unit, and can be combined on a single chip with the HP per se or
occupy a separate chip or several chips. The UVV has its own instruction set, i.e.,
is also program controlled and performs the functions of a unique "sense organ"

of the microprocessor, enabling its communication with the outside world.

The aspiration of reducing the number of leads and increasing the useful area of

a chip has resulted in the necessity of reducing the number of internal communi-
cation lines and contact areas. which occupy a considerable portion of the surface
of a chip. This is made possible by transforming the parallel, i.e., existing

and transmitted simultaneously, multibit binary code into a serial one, i.e., into
a time sequence of signals, each of which corresponds to one bit of the original
code, which makes it possible to transmit this sequence through a single line.

The transmitted signals load the group of input registers of the data receiver in
such a manner that with the arrival of the last they form the original parallel
code, i.e., a reverse transformation takes place. This method of transmission of
multibit information is called multiplexing. .

Multiplexing is a forced measure caused by the need to reduce communications lines
and limits the speed for the execution of input/output information instructions,
and the more severely the greater the word length of the data transferred.

The operating registers of an HP physically represent identical storage locations
serving the purpose of high-speed storage of running information (often they are
united under a single name-a high-speed memory unit-an SOZU), but in terms of
functions performed they are divided into groups associated with definite elements
of the structure of the microprocessor.

The operand registers, o , during the time of the execution of an operation in the
ALU store two binary numbers, one of which is replaced by the result upon termina-
tion of the operation, i.e., is accumulated, as it were; hence the register's name-
an accumulator or accumulator register. The content of the second operand register
is replaced by another operand in the next operation, while the content of the
accumulator can be stored according to a number of special instructions.

11

IN)! (IﬂﬂKlAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
INDR OFTWCIAL USEiCNNLY

The instruction register, K , stores several hits of the instruction word, uhich
represent the code of the operation to be performed, during the time of its
execution. The address portion of an instruction word is contained in the address
register, A . After the execution of any operation the word length of the result
can prove to be greater than the word length of each operand, which is registered
by the state of a special flag register, sometimes called an overflow flip-flop.

Very important in the instruction set of a microprocessor are instructions for
transfer to the execution of a specific section of a program in keeping with
certain tags and conditions-so-called conditional transfer instructions. The
presence of these instructions determines the level of "intellectuality" of a
microprocessor. since it characterizes its ability to make alternative decisions
and to choose various paths depending on conditions originating in the course of

a solution. A special state register, S , serves the purpose of determining these
conditions, which fixes the state of the HP at each moment of the execution of a
routine and which sends to the control unit a signal for transfer to an instruction
whose address is contained in a special register, not quite successfully called

an instruction counter, SK . The point is that instructions are entered in the
memory in a program—determined sequence according to addresses forming a natural
series, i.e., the address of the next instruction differs from the address of the
previous one by a single unit. Therefore, in the execution of a continuous sequence
of instructions the address of the next instruction is gotten by adding one to the

as can be inferred from its name, as much as in finding the necessary instruction
addresses, whereby with the presence in the routine of transfer instructions the

next instruction may not have an address next in order. In this case the address
section of the transfer instruction is entered into the SK.

The ON [general-purpose] registers are used for the purpose of storing intermediate
results, addresses and instructions originating in the course of executing a

litien of an MP. A programmer can use these registers, accessing them through
addresses, for the purpose of entering or recovering and transferring information
to elements of the structure of the HP and to the nemory.

bracket has precedence over multiplication, multiplication has precedence over
addition, and the like).

The organization of a stack is similar to the structure of a rifle magazine: The
cartridge placed in the magazine first is shot last. An operand or other informa—
tion can be sent to the stack without an indication of the address, since each

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

word placed in the stack first occupies the first register and is then "pushed
down" by subsequent words a register deeper each time. Information is read out in
reverse order beginning with the first register in which was stored the word last
sent to the stack. whereby the last registers are cleared.

The stack is loaded until the appearance in the first bit of an instruction which
is of a lower order than or equal to the instructions in the stack. The appearance
of this instruction serves as a signal for the ability to execute the entire se-
quence. The number of registers or levels ("depth") of a stack is an important
characteristic of the structure of a microprocessor.

The depth of a stack can be increased considerably by organizing it not in the
microprocessor itself, as is done in the description presented above, but in the
memory. In this case in the registers (R's) is located a stack pointer register
whose contents determine the address of individual storage locations in the working

storage. The maximum number of levels of the depth of the stack depends on the
word length of this address.

The structure of a microprocessor can include a timer, T , utilizing a mounted
timing capacitor or a quartz-crystal resonator. The timer is the heart of the
microprocessor, since its operation determines the dynamics of all information,
address and control signals and synchronizes the operation of the OD, and by means
of it of other elements of the structure also. The synchronization frequency,
called the clock rate, is chosen to he maximum and is limited only by delays in

the travel of signals, which are determined basically by the fabrication technology
of the large-scale integrated circuit. The speed of execution of a routine by a
microprocessor is directly proportional to the clock rate.

2. Organization of Memory; Structure and Operating Principles of a Microprocessor
System

In sec 1 a brief description was given of the key elements of the structure of a
microprocessor, of its hardware. From this description it is quite obvious that

a microprocessor cannot operate without access to the memory for instruction words
or to a stack organized there. However, the functions of the memory, which deter-
mine the structure and organization of storage units, 20's, are not limited to

sending to the microprocessor instructions and the contents of stack registers,
but are much broader.

Storage units can be classified according to the characteristics and nature of
functions performed. A diagram of such a classification is presented in fig 6.

All ZU's can be divided into two basic classes-external ZU's, having as a rule
great capacity and not too high speed, and internal, i.e., structurally combined

with the computing unit, of relatively not too great capacity. fairly fast acting
and executed according to semiconductor technology.

External 20's are power independent, i.e., the ability to store information in them
resides in the structure of the medium. These media can be punched cards, punched
tapes, magnetic drums, tapes and disks. Information is entered into them by a
programmer and can be stored, forming libraries of various programs in the form of

13
INJR‘OFFICIAI.IEHE(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

physical entities. The existence and completeness 01 these libraries is an impor-
tant factor determining the possibility of the extensive use of computing systems.

 

Figure lo. Classification Chart of Storage Units

Key:
1. 20's [storage units] 11. Repeated reprogramming possible
2. Internal seliconductor 20's 12. Dynamic 020 s
3. External ZU's l3. Static OZU's

lo. Punched cards, punched tapes 14. PZU's [W's]
5. Magnetic drums, tapes, disks 15. "20's [programme Ron's]

6. Yes 16. RePZU's [reprogramble [1091's]

7. Rewrite possible in course 17. Bipolar and nos transistors
of running routine 18. mos transistors

8. No

9. 020 [MM]

10. Programing by user possible

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

internal ZU's occupy a bottom rung in the multilevel structure of a computer
memory. This type of organization is very similar to the memory or a human being,
in hhich it is also possible to distinguish two levels-nthe "permanent" memory,
which is almost unerasable during one's life and is relatively slow because of its
great capacity (recall the expression "rooted in one's memory") and the "short-
term memory." whose contents are used in functioning and are replaced, and whose
capacity is not too great. This analogy can be drawn even further, illustrating
the evolution of the organization of 20's as a deliberate but most often heuristic
approximation to principles developed by nature.

Semiconductor ZU's are subdivided into working and permanent.

The group of working storage units (RAH's) makes it possible to enter information
and read it out in the process of the execution of a routine. One and the same
location can be used at various times for storing various information. The other
group of semiconductor ZU's operates only for reading out, and in the course of

a routine the contents of all locations remain unchanged. These 20's are either
programmed once and for all time by the manufacturer and come under the heading of
permanent storage units (Ron's) or allow the possibility of entering information
into them by means of special equipment. by the user, and come under the heading of
programable permanent ZU's (PPZU's).

The entry of information in a PPZU is based on irreversible processes and is accom-
plished by burning out the resistive links in bipolar or MOS transistor cells or,
on the other hand. by shorting the cells by the masked spraying of conductors (the
technologies for fabricating LSIC's are discussed in sec 6). A PPZU can also be
executed on the basis of a special HOS structure. In this case the entry of in-
formation is accomplished by an electrical method on account of the storage of a
static charge in a silicon inclusion isolated on all sides by an oxide and playing
the role of an insulated gate with a trigger potential. The structure of such a
cell is illustrated in fig 5.

 

Figure 5. Structure of an n-HOS PPZU Cell with Static Charge Storage

Key:
1. Source 3. n-type silicon
2. Drain

The negative charge formed in the isolated silicon section forms on account of in-
duction a positive region in an n-type channel, enabling gating of the H08

15
FOR‘0FF"JAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transistor. The charge drains for a very long time since the conductivity of the
insulating oxide is vanishingly low. Bristing PPZU's of this type store one-time-
entered information about 10 years.

In the other case programming of the PPZU is ecccomplished by burning out the
links in the emitter circuits of bipolar transistors (fig 6a). Both nethods
require the use of special equipment.

     
 

   
 
 
 
 

2 4)
1) ) Jones] .70qu
IIuIau "any!!!“ "IN/’0'"
autumn I". I I“. 0
Mpuuld ‘a‘ 3
I!” m §
«33 3 6
E}. All“ All“
; $3 ”"1"" :1:qu
3) x. e 7
8)
”perm! In!
'u
Jamm/ Jsuu/
camellia]: cumin"
101.0 In. I
c)

Mn: "was r

cumulus:

was
Jena 7) 9 )
urn I
:a. t,”

—l L 10)

8) M)“ c.9441 l d)

Figure 6. Circuit Diagrams of Storage Cells of Semiconductor Storage Units:
e--cell of PZU [RON] employing bipolar transistors with the entry
of information by burning out fusible links; b--static bipolar 0le
[RAM] cell; c--static OZU cell employing HOS transistors; d-dynamic
020 cell employing nos transistors

[Key on following page]

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN3R10FVICIAL.USIZ(ﬂNLY

Key:
1. Address input 7 . Number readin
2. Pusible link 8. Address of line x
3. Readout of n-bit data 9. Number readout
4. Logical l readin/readout 10. c
5. [supply voltage] akv. [equivalent]

U
6. Addfess of column x

Reprogralmnble PZU's (RePZU's) make it possible to erase and rewrite information
several times by means of ultraviolet irradiation of the cells shown in fig 5,
directly, i.e., by methods of projection lithography or through a specially pre-
pared mask. Among the disadvantages of these RePZU‘s must be named the consider-
able technological difficulties and the complexity of equipment for rewriting in-
formation. In addition the number of rewrites is limited as the result of a change
in the electrical parameters of cells.

Working storage units are of the static and dynamic types. In the first the

storage of binary information is caused by one of two stable states of a flip-flop
executed with bipolar or HOS transistors (fig 6b and c). In dynamic 020's in-
formation is stored on account of charging of the stray capacitance of an HOS trans-
istor (C , fig 6d), approximately equal to 1 pr, during the time of its dis-
chargingefhrough a leakage resistance equal to hundreds of megohms.

For the purpose of regenerating information it is read out and rewritten into the
same cell from which it was read out over a period less than the discharge time.
A special regeneration circuit makes this process possible. The use of a dynamic
OZU somewhat reduces the overall speed since the operation of the microprocessor
stops for the regeneration period.

It was mentioned in sec 1 that the cycle time of an HP system, on which speed de-
pends to a considerable extent, can be determined both by the HP and by the memory,
and more precisely by its key characteristic--the access time. In the overwhelming
majority of instances it is precisely the access time which makes the greatest con-
tribution to the length of the cycle; therefore, increasing the speed of the stor-
age unit is regarded at the present time as one of the main ways of increasing the
speed of the performance of operations.

In addition to access time, information capacity. power requirement and cost must be
considered important characteristics of a 20.

The values of these characteristics for various 20's are presented in table 1.

Table 1. Characteristics of Semiconductor Storage Units

Fabrication Type of 20 Access time, Information Power gelative
technology as capacity. re 1 t cgst
bltglchip t
Bipolar Static RAH 30-100 64-1K 5-0.5 High
ROM 50-150 i 16K 0.5-0.05 Low
PPZU 50-150 g_£K 0.5-0.05 Low

[Continued on following page]

17
FORIOFFICJAI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ms Static w 200-500 256—1K 0.01-0.3 Radium
Dynamic m1 500 1 4x 0.2-0.3 Medium
ROM 350-1800 1 16K 0.01-0.21 Low
PPZU and
mzu 300 1 16K < 0.1 high

The highest speed, as seen in table 1, is provided by bipolar static nan's;
however they have the lowest capacity and surpass all remaining kinds of 20's

in terms of the power required by a single cell. This has occasioned their use
for the working storage of data, addresses-and control signals in small HP systems
processing relatively small amounts of information according to short routines.

Dynamic RAH's are slower than static, since they are executed on the basis of H08
technology. which generally loses to the bipolar technology with respect to

speed. A feature of dynamic RAH's is the fundamental impossibility of working in
the asynchronous mode, which is required when debugging programs by running them
step by step. However, the advantages of great information capacity and low power
requirement make it possible to make extensive use of dynamic RAH's in large HP
systems.

Bipolar and H05 nou's are used for storing constants, routines, subroutines of
standards manipulations (such as sin . 1n , multiplication table, code conversion,
etc.), decoding instruction codes into a sequence of microinstructions, and micro-
instructions into a sequence of microoperations, as well as for setting up on the
basis of semiconductor cells various combination circuits, such as a timer, buffer
circuits and the like.

Bipolar son's differ from HOS by higher speed and a greater power requirement.

PPZU's and RePZU's are necessary where the modification or correction of routines
are required.

The typical distribution of information depending on its nature between the external
memory, ROM and RAM is presented in table 2.

Table 2. Typical Distribution of Information Depending on Its Nature Between
External Storage, ROM and RAM

Type of storage Contents of information stored
External storage Routines entered by the operator, consisting of a sequence

of addresses for the RON

ROM, PPZU, RePZU Constants, instruction (microinstruction set), standard
manipulations, interrupt organizer

RAH Sequences of addresses of instructions of a given program

for the ROM entered from the external storage, intermediate

data, stack, buffers for communication and exchange with
external equipment

18

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FCIICMHHCJAI.IENE(HVLV

All'inforsation stored in the storage units comprises the surtuntu ut the av
system. which is discussed in sec 7; here we dwell on the structure of an HP
system and we also describe certain principles on which its organization is
based.

Unlike a microprocessor per se, a microprocessor system already "knows how” to
process information, i.e., to obtain the required result as the result of the
computing process according to a specific routine performed on input data.
Obligatory elements of an HP system are therefore a ROM, RAM and interface circuits.
In addition, the structure of an HP system can include an external storage unit,

as well as various peripheral equipment (fig 7).

  
  

      
 

3’ '11: 111 m 111 —"i‘
a) all? M

Figure 7. Generalized Structural Diagram of Microprocessor System: HP-
microprocessor; UVV-input/output unit; 020. P20 and VZU-working
storage, permanent storage and external storage, respectively;
PU--peripheral equipment

Key:
1. HP system 6. UVV
2. Information 7. 020 [RAM]
3. Address 8. P20 [ROE]
6. Control 9. V20
5. HP 10. PU

Coupling of the elements of the structure of s microprocessor with one another,
as well as their coupling with the RAM. ROM and peripheral equipment, is accom-
plished by means of an interface.

From the general definition of an interface presented in the introduction it follows
that this concept includes the hardware for swapping data between parts of the

system and a protocol describing the principles of the interaction of parts of the
system in the process of swapping data.

19

Ffﬂl(ﬂﬁﬂ(JAl.USElﬂﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the case of an HP system the hardware of an interface is a large-scale inte-
grated circuit with controllable functions such as, for example, a multimode
buffer register (M38). included in the structure of the K589 series, or an in-
formation exchange unit (01 unit) from the K587 series.

The principles of the organization of HP systems are described in greater detail
in sec 21.

3. Bus Principle

The interface of an HP system has a bus organization. The bus principle is an
almost necessary design principle for the structure of an HP system, since only
thus is it possible to set up the exchange of information under conditions of the
restrictions imposed by integrated technology.

"hat is the meaning of bus organization?

The exchange of information in a microprocessor and HP system whose structural dia-
grams are shown in figs 2 and 7 is organized in such a manner that there is a total
of three multibit lines which implement all the required connections within the

HP, as well as the input/output of data. addresses and control signals beyond its
limits and beyond the limits of the MP system.

These lines replace an entire variety of necessary connections, since at each in-
stant of time they connect only those elements of the structure for which the ex-
change of information is required at that instant.

The spatial distribution of interconnections in this case is replaced by a time dis-
tribution of connections of various sources and receivers of information through one
and the same. in this case through three, communication lines. Telephone communi-
cations. for example, are organized similarly, where a great number of users can be
connected through one and the same line, but not simultaneously.

Signals enabling exchange between specific elements of the structure

of an HP or HP system are generated upon termination of the loading with informa-
tion of the individual output registers and upon the clearing of individual input
registers and last all the time until the line is occupied by other connections be-
gun earlier or having priority over the one in question. This fact has a negative
effect on the system's speed, but it is necessary to accept it, since bus organi-
zation is a strong means of making efficient use of the useful area of a chip on
account of utilizing its surface. which, when the spatial separation of connec-

tions is employed, would be occupied by connecting wires and contact areas be-
neath a much greater number of external leads.

The connection of required elements of the structure to the bus line is accomplished
by means of so-called circuits with three states. Two states are the usual logical
O and l and the third--the high-output-impedance state-essentially means a cutoff
as the result of which the circuit is disconnected from the line. The signal for

controlling the third state is in fact the signal for permitting the reception and
transfer of information through the bus line.

20

FOI10FFﬂﬂAl.USEiDNLY
Ftﬂl()FF1CJAI.IJSEI(NVLY

4. Interrupts

Microprocessor systems can swap information with a great number and varied com-
bination of peripheral equipment. This includes displays utilizing cathode ray
tubes for the graphic representation of data, printers, control switch panels,
digital displays, magnetic tape, disk and drum storage units, relay switches.

step motors, digital-analog (for output) and analog—digital (for input) converters
and the like.

For the purpose of coupling with this equipment it is necessary to interrupt the
operation of an HP system for the time required for exchange and to organize its
operation according to a program making such exchange possible, after which it is
necessary to again proceed to execute the working routine from the place where it
was interrupted. In addition to enabling communication with peripheral equipment,
interrupts serve the purpose of stopping the microprocessor at the end of a routine
or upon a signal from the operator. as well as when executing an error instruction,
and with overflow of internal registers or the RAM.

The executive program is interrupted upon a.signal enabling an interrupt, which is
generated either by an external unit directly. if it has been prepared to enter
inforsstion into the microprocessor system, or in response to an interrogation sig-
nal sent from the microprocessor system if in the course of the execution of a
routine the input or output of information is necessary. A subroutine for taking
care of or organizing interrupts (a so-called input/output routine) is stored in
the ROM and there can be more than one. The number of such subroutines determines
the variety of equipment and of methods of swapping information with them. In

this case one speaks of a vector interrupt. i.e., of an interrupt selected from a
certain set of possible interrupts with an indication of the equipment attended to.

In the course of the execution of a subroutine servicing an interrupt the necessity
can also arise of interrupting it for exchanging information with another peripheral
unit having higher priority, after which it is necessary to return to the preceding
interrupt and then to the executive program. The number of priorities or levels
and also the presence of vector interrupts characterize the "cosmmnicability" of

a microprocessor. The servicing of interrupts can be accomplished by means of a
stack (cf. sec 1).

Some, especially the first. models of microprocessors did not have ready subroutines
for servicing interrupts "protected" in the ROM, which forced the programmer each

time, when the necessity for this became apparent, to arrange in the executive pro-
gram for a halt and the exchange of information with input/output units. Hulti-
level vector interrupts make it possible to simplify programming and to improve sub-
stantially the utilization of work time by the microprocessor, excluding subjectiv-
ism in evaluating the need for an interrupt at a given step in the executive pro-
gram. However. in a number of cases of using a microprocessor in a system there
can also not be a need for interrupts.

A time diagram for the execution of three interrupts with various Priorities and
the change in the contents of stack registers when they are serviced are illustrated
in fig 8.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!NI(JFFICLAL lEﬂE¢MVLV

1 I .
) 9"" 1'0 :1 :2 r, r. ’s ’6
2) worm (p) -----

  
  
 

3) 23339.0 (In)

I

s) anon-mm (ll!)

6) Psracnw

Figure 8. Tile Diagran of Priority Interrupts "hen Using a Two-Register
Stack: R--instruction word of executive program; n1-instruction
word of first interrupt routine

Key:
1. Tine 5. Second interrupt (P2)
2. Executive program (a) 5. Third interrupt (P3)
3. First interrupt (Pl) 6. Stack registers

In interval T - T the basic routine is executed, and as of instant I , corre-
sponding to an interrupt signal with a certain priority, the upper register of the

terrupt routine until the arrival at noasnt T of the next interrupt, which also
has higher priority. Upon termination of servicing of this interrupt at nonant

T the execution of the first again continues. after which at assent T a trans-
iéion is aade to execution of the Iain routine beginning with the instrugtion word
written into the stack tirst. The stack is then conpletely cleared.

Thus, the longest first interrupt, having the lowest priority, was executed
"piecemeal" in intervals T1 — 12 . 13 - I“ and T5 - T6 .

22

FOI.OFI1C1AI.IEHE(HVLY
FOR ONO“. USE ONLY

5. Direct Access to Memory

In the course of the execution of the executive prograa by a microprocessor
system not infrequently -the need arises to mp information between peripheral
units and the RAM. This swap can be accomplished with the mediation of the micro—
processor which. having interrupted execution of the executive program. in the
course of a single cycle receives information from the peripheral unit (from the
RAH) and during the next cycle transfers infatuation to the MH (to the peripheral
unit).

The internal instruction, address and data registers of the MP in this case per-
form the role of an intermediate link for exchange with which an amount of time is
spent equal at least to two cycles for each word transferred. In the transfer of
great amounts of information this time considerably retards execution of the main
routine. The ability to eliminate participation of the HP from the process of

exchange between peripheral units and the RAM makes it possible to shorten the ex-
change time.

This possibility is afforded by a special unit-a memory-direct-access controller
(POP), which can be implemented both in the same chip as the HP and outside the

HP by means of additional integrated circuits, a nuwer of special instructions and
a small number of additional RAH cells. The principle of a PD? is explained in
simplified form in fig 9a and b.

 

Figure 9. The PD? controller upon an interrupt enabling signal from the
peripheral unit (PU) stops the operation of the microprocessor
(UP) (a), after which the PU upon an exchange enabling signal
(R0 signal) is directly coupled with the RAM (b) and upon a write

enable signal (2) enters date (D) into the MM according to
address A .

Key:
1. MP 6. 21’ [interrupt enable]
2. HaIt 7. P0
3. PI)? controller 8. no [exchange enable]
6. D 9. Z
5. RAM
23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The peripheral unit (PU), ready to readout information (this can be an external
magnetic storage unit. for example), sends an interrupt enabling signal (I?)

to the PDP controller, which upon this signal selects the subroutine for servicing
interrupts and, halting the operation of the 19 (051' signal) connects the informa-
tion (D) and address (A) buses to the input of the RAM and the output of the PU,
enabling exchange between the PU and RAM (signal :0). During each cycle the RAM
is addressed by an information word with a word length equal to the word length

of the data bus of the HP. The write mode. corresponding to the transfer of data
from the PU to the RAH, is determined by the write signal, 2 .

The PI)? controller can as a rule service the swapping of infatuation between the
RAM and several PU's whose 2P signals have been assigned different priorities.

The following must thus be regarded as the main functions of the PDP controller:
determination of the priority of the interrupt enable signal; interruption of the
executive program executed by the HP; interruption of the subroutine for servicing
the swapping of information of a P0 with lower priority; generation of an exchange
enabling signal and addressing of the peripheral unit; determination of the write]

read mode; restoration of the course of execution of the executive program upon
the termination of exchange.

The advantages of a PDP are especially important in the execution of routines in-
volving the processing of large amounts of information according to relatively
short algorithms, when the time spent on exchange between the PU and RAM is long
as compared with the time for processing of data by the microprocessor. Meanwhile
in a number of instances there is practically no need for a PDP; however, the
aspiration of developers to satisfy the requirement of universality of use has re-

sulted in the implementation of PDP's in the majority of second- and third-genera-
tion microprocessors.

6. Microprogram Control

In sec 1 in describing the structure of an HP it was noted that the control unit
(UU) converts the operation code included in the instruction word into a combina-
tion of signals which act on all elements of the structure of the microprocessor
and are necessary for the execution of this instruction. The W thus accomplishes
communication between the instruction storage and the processor section of an MP
system by appropriate decoding of the operation code. The rules for this decoding

are established by the developer of the HP and detemine the internal structure and
method of designing the W.

No approaches exist to organizing the control of microprocessors. The first.
called software control. assumes the establishment in the design process of a
unique correspondence bewteen a given code and a combination of actuating signals
by the creation of improvised permanent connections between definite logic elements
of the microprocessor. This approach is characterised by lack of a systems approach
or by disorderliness of these connections and essentially means the lack of any
structural principle in their design, which is traditional in the development of
computing facilities of premicroprocessor generations.

The other approach. defined as microprogramming or microprogram control (WU),
assumes ordering of the design procedure and makes possible a definite system in

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

designing the structure of the control unit (UV). The term "nlcroprogrﬂl

control" was introduced in 1951 by H. Hilts, who suggested this idea for the

first time, and was defined by his as “a systematic and orderly approach to the
design of a control unit for any computing system." This definition does not
totally reveal all aspects of this method of control and rather indicates the aspi-
ration of producing a theoretically substantiated principle as a historically
created prerequisite for the origin of “PU.

In practice HPU has become a method of inlementing a control unit whereby hardware
control has been replaced by control based on the non programed in a definite
tanner. Information is "protected" in the ROI! in such a manner that in each operat-
ing cycle of the HP. corresponding to a single access to the son, a combination of
logic signals is generated which controls one functional unit of the HP. Prom

this it immediately follows that HPU assumes serial control distributed over time,
which drastically increases the time for the execution of an instruction as com-
pared with hardware control. This is perhaps the most important disadvantage of
HPU which for a long time did not make it possible to gain broad acceptance because
of the lack of a high-speed element base whose use could compensate the reduction
in system speed.

From the viewpoint of the user of an HP system the presence of HPU in it means that
each instruction perceived by the program-er as the expression of some single and
completed action is broken down in the system into a series of microinstructions
executed in turn and written in advance. The number and functional structure of the
microinstructions of a microprocessor are determined by its internal structure and
cannot be changed, but there is no need for this. It is much more important that
on the basis of a strict microinstruction structure it is possible to create dif-
ferent instruction sets most adapted for the effective solution of specific prob-
lems in the sense both of the speed of solving them and of programing convenience,
right up to the direct implementation by each instruction of the statements of a
high-level language. Hith the employment of reprogramble Ron's this property
becomes the most important advantage of “PU, characteristic of ilplementation pre-
cisely in microprocessor systems. The user's capabilities are expanded in this
case on account of the creation and addi.;ion to the microprocessor system of opti-
mum instruction sets by the erasure from the reprogramble ROM of previous informa-
tion and the entering of new. The flexibility which can be acquired by a micro-
processor system with KPU based on raprogramble son's fundamentally makes it
possible to realize in it any properties, such as software compatibility with
another HP system, the employment of an arbitrary programing language, specializa—
tion in terms of speed, i.e., the ability to solve most quickly a specific range of
problems, and the like.

Let us briefly discuss the principle of the organization of WU in an MP system.

In fig 10 is shown a general diagram of NW which at first glance appears trivial.
Actually, the address of the first microinstruction from the sequence implementing
a single instruction is written in the microinstruction counter (Silk-analogous

to the instruction counter in the HP structure). According to this address from
the microprogram storage unit (HPZU) a microinstruction word is accessed, the word
length, m , of which obviously determines the nutter of binary signals the combina-
tion of which via a microprogram decoder (DH?) directly controls the state of all
elements of the HP's structure. In the DH? according to a tag contained in the
microinstruction word a determination is made of the need to go to the following

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

microinstruction of this instruction or to the first microinatruction of the next
instruction if the last microinstruction has been executed. The address of the
next microinstruction is famed in the counter by adding one to the address of
the previous, or in the case of going to a new instruction upon a signal from the
DH? by accessing the instruction storage unit with subsequent repetition of the
entire sequence of operations described above.

  

1)
Ion
loam-a

2)

 

Joma aspa-
roaa I cae-
ulmol Io—

Imus

  
     

1 m- 1
npaulnle

0
6),
carsuu

Figure 10. General Diagram of Hicroprogram Control: SHK--mdcroinstruction
counter; HPZU-microprogram storage unit; DHP-dmicroprogram

decoder
Key:
1. Instruction code 6. HPZU
2. Logic for going to next in- 5. DH?
struction 6. Control signals
3. SHK

Control according to this organization is carried out in two phases--the phase of
accessing the HPZU and the phase of accessing the microprogram from the decoder's
register. Hhen using an MPZU. the access time to which is equal to the time for
the execution of one microprogram, the execution phase can be combined with the

phase of accessing the next microprogram. In this case control words are accessed
from the decoder in each phase, which increases the speed of HPU.

In the simplest case an HPZU represents a logic array formed by a system of hori-
zontal and vertical lines interconnected at points of certain intersections (fig 11).
Each horizontal line corresponds to a single microinstruction and the number of
vertical lines determines the word length of the control word. The number of hori-
zontal lines (i.e., microinstructions) is limited by the word length of the micro-
instruction addressed. n . and cannot be greater than 2n - l . ror each address

a single horizontal line corresponding to this address is brought into the state

of logical l and this line in turn aetuates all vertical lines haying contact

26
FOR¢MHHC1AL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vith it. The other horizontal and vertical lines are in the state of logical 0.
The combination of 1's and 0‘s in the vertical lines forms the control word.

2)

 

Juno-mulootaoDO'

Figure 11. Hicroprogran Storage Array: n—arord length of nicroinstruction
address: n—word length of control word

Key:
1. Address of nicroinstruction 3. Hicroinstruction address decoder
2. Hicroinstruction address 4. Control word
register

This array inplsnents a logical on function in the vertical lines. since for putting
a vertical line into the 1 state contact only with a single horizontal line is
necessary. Contacts with other horizontal lines in the state of logical 0 at this
instant are of no significance.

A rather long word length (32 bits and note) is characteristic of a control word
and the nulber of nicroinstructions can reach a rev hundred. This results in the
need of an HPZU of great capacity and compels developers to seek ways or using the
nicroprogran storage economically.

The most interesting and effective method of econonizing on storage capacity in
producing nicroprograns is considered the use of a programsd logic array (run.
without going into the details oi this rather complicated device, let us state that
a Pm contains two arrays, the first of which inplenents an OR function in output
lines and is similar to the one described above, and the second implements an AND
function. The output of the first array is connected to the input of the second.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FCﬂl()FIl(JAl.l£5E2(MVLY

This design possesses broader capabilities than that presented in fig 11, and
especially when implementing control in complicated systems. The high level of
order in the structure of a PLM makes it possible to employ machine methods in
designing it. In addition, on the basis of a PLH it is possible to create various
structures similar in functions to the elements of "hard" logic, such as, for

example, code converters, decoders and other elements widely used in micropro-
cessor equipment.

7. Software

For s computer the term "software? unites the entire combination of information
necessary for the effective functioning of the computer, as well as for formulat-
ing and solving specific problems on it.

In microprocessor technology this term has a somewhat broader meaning, since it
also designates the facilities for designing the software and hardware of a micro-
processor system based on microprocessor sets.

The information comprising the software can be stored in storage units or be
represented in written form by means of specific formalizations representing pro-
gramming languages, which will be treated below.

The software of an MP system (fig 12) makes possible the following: organization

of the combined functioning of all elements of the structure of an HP system
(operating system); the creation by the user of executive programs (programming,
editing and debugging system); the utilization of the very programs accumulated

in the process of their creation (library of applied programs); a check of the
correctness of the functioning of an HP system and diagnosis of errors in its opera-
tion (check and diagnosis system); the designing of the software and hardware of

an HP system based on HP sets by means of an external general- or special-purpose
computing system (design automation system).

It is necessary to distinguish between the software of the HP per se and 6f the
MP system. For the HP it is the instruction set of the MP, subroutines of stand-
ard manipulations and the like. Under this heading can be placed one or more
executive programs if the HP functions as a controller and there is no need to
change this group of programs. Access of the programmer-to this software is

limited and is occasioned only by the possibility of using a PPZU [programmable
ROM] and an RePZU [reprogrammable RON].

From the list of software functions given it is obvious that it includes programs

both supplied by the manufacturer and developer of an HP system and programs
written by its user.

Under the heading of the first comes a group of programs making possible functioning
of the MP system, the combination of which is called the operating system, the
programming, editing and debugging system which assists a programmer in writing
executive programs. a system for checking and diagnosing the operation of an MP
system and a design automation system making it possible to select for a given

class of problems to be solved the optimum composition and structure of hardware
and software of the MP system.

28

FOR OFFﬂﬂA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1)—

2) cam-nos
memos-s 13) D...“
Gear
3) 3333"” I 1‘) spot-phonon-
‘é'ﬁ-m 15)
‘0 FEW—m 10) rm:-

    

ICTOII I90”.--

pounn. passm- 11) out!”
5) poll"! I «new
9) Iammusperop

j; 12) 2mm” '
8) Clones am
9) 16) ﬁ'ﬂn‘ﬁﬂ‘m”
10)
11)

12) $3.134?” "

Figure 12. Simplified Structure of Software of an HP System

Key:
1. Software of HP system 10. Debugging routine
2. Resident software 11. Editor program
3. Operating system 12. Check and diagnosis system
lo. Library of applied programs 13. Cross software
5. Programing, editing and de- 14. Programing system
bugging system 15. Interpreter
6. Assembly language 16. HP system design automation system
7. Assenbler '
8. Compiler

9 . Hscrogenerator

The second group is formed by a library of program accumulated so the result of
using the HP system in question as well as other eonputing systems.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibility of using progrems written for other computing equipment is
realized by means of special translator routines which convert the codes of the
programming language of this equipment into the codes of the HP system in ques-
tion.

Programming languages stand out as intermediaries between humm language (by means
of the words and mathematical symbols of which it is possible to describe the
combination and sequence of operations for performing any combination of computa-
tions) and a combination of binary codes directly recognizable by a computing
system.

Programming languages are subdivided into levels by the degree of proximity to
human language, i.e., by the ability to use them with minimum special training.

without taking into account here the language of microprograms (microprogramming
is discussed separately in the preceding section), the language of the lowest
level must be considered binary codes, whose coﬁinations form instructions re-
cognizable by an MP system. Also able to be placed under the heading of low-level
languages is the assembly language, which reflects features of the instruction set
of a given HP system and is formed by a set of individual mnemonic codes.

We often encounter mommies, e.g., in the conventional symbols on the face panels
of measuring instruments; the majority of road signs can be called mnemonic. The
purpose of memonics is to facilitate the memorizing of a great number of symbols
(for example, such as assembly language codes) by giving them forms associated
with the content of the actions to be performed in relation to them.

Low-level languages are not general-purpose, since they can be used for writing
programs only for the HP system for which they are developed. This creates serious
difficulties, since a specialist working with different HP systems has to overcome
the "language barrier" each time and software in binary codes or assembly language
is not suited to various systems.

High-level languages are relatively general-purpose. Programs written in them do
nor depend on the structure of the instructions of the MP system in which they

will be used. They also consist of a set of mnemonic codes, so—called statements,
each of which can be implemented by a group of instructions in assembly language.

The most widespread high-level languages used for programing MP systems are
FORTRAN-IV, BASIC and the specially created PL/H (Programming Language for Micro-

processors—s programming language for microprocessors).

A program written in binary codes and in assembly language as compared with the
same program in PL/H is illustrated in table 3 as an example of programing in
different languages. According to the program the HP determines the lower of two
numbers stored in memory locations 1: and Y, subtracts it from the larger, adds

5 to the result and sends the sum to location 2.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3.

Binarz codes

00
00
00

01

10

11
00
00

11
00

00

01

11

ABS: procedure;

100

111

100

010

110
001
000

101

111

000

100

110

001

001
010
111

110

011

110

010
011
011

111

100

110

101

011

111

001

liliCﬂﬂﬂClAl.USEtﬂNlY

Mnemonic notation

o; instructions

Example of Program in Different Languages

Egglanation

in assemblz

language

ABS LXI“ 27 Accessing RAH according to address 102 - 210
and 1112 - 7 contained in instruction
counter for Ege purpose of reading the con-
tents of cell X

"OVA, M Writing contents of cell x into accumulator

INXH Addition of one to address of cell x for ob-
taining address of cell Y

SUBM Subtraction of contents of cell Y from contents
of accumulator (i.e.. obtaining difference
X - Y in accumulator)

JP LDC If x - Y 1 0 , a junp takes place according
to address 10112 - 1110 and 00112 - 310 to
instruction LDC _

CHA If x - Y < 0 , the sign of the contents of
the accumulator is changed, which in binary
arithmetic is achieved by substitution of all
0's and 1's and...

INRA ...adding one to the contents of the accumu-
lator

Inc ADIS Addition of 5 - 101 to contents of accumu-

10 2
lator

INXH Addition of l to address of cell Y stored in
instruction counter for obtaining address of
2

HOVH, A Hritein of contents or accumulator into cell
2

RE? Routine completed. Return to executive pro-
gran

PLlH High-Level Language

z-X-Y;IP z<o mm z--z;z-z+5
mm
snows;

31

F0R10FFKJAI.USElMULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The instruction words in the first column are represented by an sight-bit
binary code, and, as we see, several instruction words can correspond to a
single code in the assembly language (second column). The content of the
operations performed is explained in the third column.

In this example it is assumed that x. Y and Z are stored in the memory according
to sequential addresses. i.e., the address of Y is obtained by adding one to the
address of x and the address of Z by adding one to the address of Y. In the
example with PL/H it is assumed that the addresses of locations x, Y and 2 have
been determined previously in the program.

Programming in a high-level language considerably shortens the time for writing
and debugging programs (two- to fivefold for a program consisting of 200 in-
structions as compared with binary coding) and in many cases is the only accept-
able method of programming. However, the advantages of programming of this sort
must be paid for by an increase in the time for the solution of problems by the
MP system (1.5- to threefold as compared with binary coding) and by the greater
capacity of the memory required for this.

Software written in a low-level language which is continually tied to a given HP
system and designed for use only with it forms so-called resident software. In
addition to resident software there exists a large group of programs in the
assembly language of the external computer or in a high-level language, called
cross software. Cross software is intended for use in another computer and
carries the same functions as resident software, with the exception of functions
of the operating system, whose programs are "protected" in the ROM and external
storage unit of the MP system. In addition, cross software includes the software
of the design automation system, which makes it possible on the basis of a high-
capacity external computer, using its software, to develop HP systems with pro-
perties closest to the class of problems to be solved.

The presence of a design system is the most important feature characteristic of
HP equipment and makes possible the realization of the potential flexibility of
ar MP system, i.e., its adaptability to various problems on account of rearrange-
ment of the structure and selection of the optimum composition of software on the
basis of one and the same HP set. However, examples of the effective changing

of the potential flexibility of an HP system into actual flexibility are still iso—
lated.

Communication of cross software with resident, i.e., the translation of programs
from high-level languages into binary codes of the instructions of the HP system,
as well as the communication of the assembly language of the MP system with its
binary codes. as already mentioned, is made possible by routines—-translator rou-
tines included in the composition of the resident software.

One of the two kinds of resident translator routines-the so-cslled compiler-
translates a program written in a high-level language into a program in the binary
codes of the HP system, which in turn can be entered into the MP system for the
purpose of obtaining the result of computations and can be used repeatedly without
repeated compilation. Changing from the assembly language into binary codes is
accomplished by the assembly routine-another kind of resident translator routine.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
51DR10I1WCJAI.USEICHVLY

In cross software translation from a high-level language takes place by means of

an interpreter and, if the assembly routine and compiler translate a program

into a program, then the interpreter makes it possible immediately after its pro-
cessing in the processor to obtain a result by means of an external computer.

In other words, the interpreter, analyzing statements of the high-level language,
directly performs the operations indicated in them by means of previously written
subroutines included in the interpreter's structure; therefore secondary processing
of the routine is not required, as is necessary for a compiler and assembly rou-
tine.

For the purpose of illustrating the functions entrusted to the components mentioned
above and other components of the software of an MP system, let us discuss the
programming process and its key steps which must be performed by a programmer on
the way from the mathematical notation of the problem to its entry into the HP
system for solution (fig 13).

The first of these steps is the writing of an algorithm, which can he considered
the writing by means of mathematical symbols and necessary explanations of the
entire sequence of conditions and operations corresponding_to completion of the
problem. Then a determination is made of the values or ranges of values of input
data and of the structure of output data and an estimate is made of the time re-
quired by the HP system for solution.

The next step is the creation of a so-called flowchart. It represents a graphic
representation of the logical relationships between certain conditions and the
operations to be performed in keeping with them, the visualizsbility of which
facilitates the further work of the programmer. Operations are usually designated
by a rectangle and conditions by a diamond. A flowchart of the program presented
in the example in table 3 is presented in fig 14.

Then a determination is made of the programming language, whereby the complexity
of the problem, the required speed of solution and the capabilities of the storage
are taken into account. The initial program is written in the language selected
and is entered onto cards, by punching, for example, and is entered into the ex-
ternal storage.

Hriting in the assembly language is facilitated considerably as the result of the
use of so-called macrocodes. Bach macrocode unites a group of serial codes in
assembly language often encountered in the program, which makes it possible each
time to replace the group of codes by a single macrocode. This makes it possible
to reduce the probability of formal, i.e., associated with the form of writing,
errors and speeds up the programming process. A special routine-the macrogenera-
tor—«processes macrocodes.

At the stage of processing of the original program by the HP system, after it is
entered onto the medium, translation from the programming language into binary
codes of the instruction set takes place. For this purpose an assembly routine or
compiler is entered into the HP system as an executive routine and the codes of

the original program are recognized by the system as input information. The result
of translation is printed out with an indication of the formal errors committed in
writing the original program. Errors are corrected by changing the punching of

the individual cards and by repeated translation.

33

FI”!CNWH(JA1.USE‘ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

 

  

so; a Ill
onerous I
mucus-n 7)

 
 

Ion-Imp g)

     
 
 
 

14)

 
 

”I I .l 0.0-

m s so: .-
m’puyng”)

      
  

  

16

  
 

no: I In cuc-
nn, I poul-
noon-no

    
  
  

     

17) aunts mote! own-I

as loan“ use an 31

    
 

Figure 13. Hain Steps in Programing by Hesns of the Internal Hardware
and Software of an )9 System

1. Formulation of problem 5. Writing of initial program on med

2. Writing of algorithm external storage

3. Creation of flowchart 6. Assembly routine plus mcrogenera

1., Selection of programming 7. Entry into )9 ante: and translal
language 8. Coupiler

Itinued on following page]

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. Correction of original lb. Debugging routine

program 15. Editor
10. Entry on forms and revelation 16. Entry into HP system and editing

of 17. Vriting of finished program on media
11. Formal errors of external storage

12. Nonfoml errors
13. Entry into II? system and
obtaining of results

 

Figure 14. Flowchart of Program Presented in Table 3

1. Start 3. No
2. Yes 6. End

In addition. at this stage. if an assembly language is used, the processing of
macrocodes takes place. The mcrogensrator is entered into the HP system together
with the assesbly routine as an executive routine. After this by means of a spe-
cial routine called the debugger the HP system makes it possible for the programsr
to find and analyze errors of a nonformal nature, i.e.. those which do not lead to
those results which are expected from the completion of the problem posed. which
can be the result, for example, of an incorrectly selected algorithm or of an in-
properly constructed flowchart. ffhe debugger sakes possible the printing out of
instructions executed and the contents of necessary sections of the RM! at specific
moments of execution of the program.

The required corrections are also entered onto punched cards vtth the original
program, which following this again undergoes translation and debugging. This
cycle is repeated until a completely debugged program is obtained. which can be
only part of the total original program, since it, as a rule, for the purpose of
the simplification of writing and debugging, has to be broken down into several
relatively independent parts which can be translated and debugged by turns.

35

MWUSBONLY
FOR OIIWCIAl.lEﬂE(HVLY

means of an editor--a program which puts into order the links between them

according to the general flowchart. The editor sees to logical links and their
sequence and their distribution in the memory.

The program produced in this way, written on the media of the external storage

unit. is ready for work and can be stored in the library of applied programs for
future use.

Chapter 2.

Characteristics of Hicroprocessors Determining the Diversity of Their Areas of
Application and Application Features

8. Technological and Circuitry Hethods of rsbricating Large-Scale Integrated
Circuits

of its development.

At the present time the main material for integrated microcircuits is monocrystal-
line semiconductor silicon. whose quality. i.e., the minimum presence of impuri-
ties and the flawless nature of its structure, have to a considerable degree de-
termined the ability to increase the integration of integrated circuits fabricated.

The technological process of fabricating LSIC's includes a complicated combination
of Operations whose composition and conditions of execution are basically differ-
ent for the two kinds of technology. The first-the bipolar technology-is based

on the use of bipolar transistors, and the second--HOS (metal-oxide-semiconductor)
technology--on the use of transistors with a field effect.

Large-scale integrated circuits fabricated by the bipolar technology differ in
turn by the circuitry methods of implementing them, of which there are chiefly
three. They include transistor-trengiator logic with Schottky diodes (TTLSh).
integrated injection logic (IIL or I L) and emitter-coupled logic (BCL). In the
H08 technology it is possible to distinguish between four circuitry methods of
implementing LSIC's: an HOS device with p-type- or n-type-channel conduction
(p-HOS or n-HOS). and also a complementary HOS device (CHDS device) and a modifi-

cation of it utilizing semiconductor silicon on a sapphire substrate (CHOS/SOS
(silicon-on-sapphire) device).

By p-HOS circuitry it was possible for the first time to arrange on a silicon chip
with an area of 10 mm 2000 to 3000 logic elements required for organizing a com-
plete program-controlled structure-—the very simple type 400‘ processor manufac-
tured for the first time by the Intel firm (USA) in 1971. Then n-Hos circuitry

reached the required level of integration, sonewhat surpassing p-HOS in terms of
speed with the same power requirement.

A basic logic element simultaneously employing p- and n-channel HOS transistors
served as the basis for creating an HP [microprocessor] LSIC employing CHOS
circuitry, whose characteristics in combination are already considerably better

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

than in previous types of circuitry. The use of a sapphire substrate in ODS/SOS-
type circuitry has made it possible to reduce approximately twofold delays in the

switching of logic elements, i.e.. to improve their speed.

Representing s considerable advance in the pursuit of speed is the achievement of
the integration required for creating LSIC's by means of the bipolar semiconductor
tschnology; whereas 111% and ECL have been known for a comparatively long time,

I I. was invented in 1972 simultaneously in the USA and m and inediately (and
application in the fabrication of LSIC's.

The basic logic elements of cms. Mb, 121. and 36!. devices are shown in fig 15a

to 15d.

       

   

' 2)
Biol
“assess-Is 5)
. 23.2““ ”22:32-
lam
I"!

onl

C) d) ' I.||.

Figure 15. Diagrams of Basic Logic Elements of cans (a), T113!) (b). 121. (c)
and ROI. (d) Devices

[Key on following page]

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. Supply voltage lo. Injection
2. Input 5. Inverse output
3. Output 6. Direct output

The characteristics of circuitry methods of fabricating HP LSIC's are discussed
in their relationship to HP characteristics in sec 9; here we make a comparison of

their capabilities in terms of the switching delay time of a single logic element
and of the power required by it.

The product of the delay by the power consumption is called the switching work and
characterizes the degree of ideslity of the circuitry and the process of its im-
provement in terms of approaching the theoreticallgimit, which for silicon inte-
grated circuits is estimated approximately at 10 J. Dependences of the speed
of response of logic elements executed by various circuitry methodszon the power
requirement are presented in fig 16. Let us note that for p-nos, I L, T‘l'LSh and
BCL the switching work depends but slightly on the speed of response and power and
can be considered constant over a small range. On. the other hand, for n-HOS and
CHOS devices the switching work depends wholly on the power requirement and the
speed of response is constant. Figure 16 also illustrates the limits of the caps-
bilities of a specific circuitry approach. Prom it it is obvious that CMOS cir-
cuitry is closer than others to the theoretical switching work limit, however it
does not make 15 possible to achieve a switching delay of less than a few dozen
nanoseconds. I I. circuitry has the broadest range of variation of delay and re-
quired power. but its speed of response is not better than that f cans circuitry.
p-MOS and n-HOS logic elements make possible the same delay as I 1., but with a
higher power requirement, i.e., have a higher value of the switching work.

The fastest responding, as follows from fig 16, are elements designed according to
man and EC]. circuitry and they are the most powerful. As we see, each kind of
circuitry has a preferred area of its utilization with regard to speed of response
which is overlapped by other, with the exception of p- and n-HOS devices, which
are gradually displaced by I L, which have lower switching work.

In considering the entire combination of significant characteristics of HP [.510
technologies, including, in addition to speed of response and power requirement,
level of integration, noise imunity. number of supply voltage levels, adaptability
to streamlined manufacture, cost. and the like, it can be said that each of them

has the right to exist and to further improvement of the advantages inherent in
it.

In addition to the improvement of existing methods, an intense search is under way
for new teclmological and circuitry methods of implementing LSIC‘s which will
enable greater integration and less switching work of logic elements. Logic ele-
ments whose operation is based on the use of the Gunn effect, as well as on the
Josephson effect, are considered promising at the present time. A new modifica-
tion of the NOS technology has already found an application—the so-called V-HOS
technology-“making it possible to increase integration considerably by increasing
the useful area of a chip by using in it a surface with V-type recesses. The

possibility of using gallium arsenide as a suiconductor material for fabricating
LSIC's is considered promising. '

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

3) In

I”

run
4)
IN

 
 
 
 

Inn ”hum

l)

I:
5) In

6):":

W I I! W I I 0 I”
7 ) on "03) 2) mm 9‘” f6) ur
uncut/m nonnhuu

Figure 16. Comparison of Ranges of Variation of the Speed of Response and
Power Requirement of Logic Elements Designed by Various Circuitry

Methods
Key:

1. Delay time 9. w
2. Power requirement 10. I!
3. ms 11. I 1.
«'0. us 12. CHOS

, 5. ns 13. p-HOS
6. ps 14. TTLSh
7. p" 15. 301.
8. n"

9. Characteristics of Microprocessors as Large-Scale Integrated Circuits

The presence in microprocessors of element and apparatus properties deternines
the composition of the parameters characterizing them. The system of paraseters
or characteristics of a microprocessor. the conbination of which determines the
most effective area of application and the aspects of the development of systems
based on it, should obviously include characteristics inherent in both digital
electronic computing facilities and in integrated circuits. The key characteris-
tics of a microprocessor and their relationships to the internal and external
structure (architecture) and the integrated technology of a microprocessor are
presented below. Some of these characteristics were already discussed in ch 1 in
describing the general principles of the organization of microprocessors and others
are considered from the viewpoint of estimating them in selecting the area of the
most effective application of a microprocessor.

39

FIN!(HWNC1AI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The following are the key characteristics of a microprocessor inherent in elec-
tronic digital computing facilities and determined by the internal and external
structure: word length, capacity of addressable memory, number of internal re-
gisters, bus principle and microprogram control, possibility of interruption and
number of interruption levels, presence of stack organization and number of stack

registers, presence and composition of resident and cross software, universality
(specialization).

The key characteristics of microprocessors inherent in integrated circuits and
determined by the integrated technology are the following: speed of response,
power requirement, overall size and weight, compatibility with TTL and number of
power supply levels, reliability, stability of performance and cost.

10. Speed of Response

In the most general sense the speed of response of microprocessors, as of any
digital piece of computing hardware also, is defined as the mean speed of the
execution of a certain algorithm, whose instruction makeup represents a mixture
reflecting the specifics of the class of problems to be solved. Mixtures for
various classes of problems are put together on the basis of a statistical general-
ization of the instructions of all algorithms characteristic of a given class. A

Gibson mixture, by means of which it is possible to compare the speed of response
of various pieces of computing hardware when scientific and technical problems are
solved by them, and other mixtures exist, for example. However, it is necessary
to take into account the fact that the value obtained in this manner is of an
averaged nature and can differ from the value obtained for a specific problem.

Because of the difficulty of a quantitative determination of speed of response in
the sense cited above, in practice a less general but more intelligible simplified

concept is used. The concepts of cycle time and clock rate, indirectly related
to speed of response, are also used.

Most often the speed of response of a microprocessor is characterized by the time
for or speed of execution of the brief operation of adding the contents of a re-
gister, R , to the contents of an accumulator with the subsequent copying of the
result into a register, R (an operation of the RR type), although other definitions
are also encountered in the literature. However, the comparison of microprocessors
in terms of speed of response in the sense cited cannot be considered correct in

a random case and, moreover, not infrequently results in errors. The point is that
algorithms for tasks to be performed reflecting the specifics of the tasks them-
selves can contain a various amount of operations of the RR type, the time for

the execution of which is used as the speed of response in a given case. In addi-
tion, the microprocessor itself can be oriented, as already mentioned, to the
execution of various algorithms in which the density of the addition operation can
be practically any.

Thus. from the speed of execution of the RR operation it is possible to make a
judgement only on the speed of response of universal microprocessors, and it is

possible to compare according to this characteristic only functionally identical
microprocessors when the same problem is solved by them.

60

FOI.0FFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The cycle time or access time is the term customarily used for the period of
time spent by a microprocessor for accessing a single word in the memory.

This time can be determined by the speed of response both of the microprocessor
itself and of the storage unit.

The clock rate is the frequency of the clock pulse generator, either external or
included in the structure of the microprocessor set, which the time delays of

the microprocessor's signals synchronized by the generator make possible to assign.
A different number of microoperations, the time for the execution of each of which
can be different, is executed during a single cycle in various microprocessors;
therefore, it is possible to use the clock rate, and the cycle time, too. only for
a qualitative estimate of the speed of response, paying attention to the facts in-
dicated above.

The speed of response can be judged in part from the circuitry and fabrication
technology of a microprocessor, since they determine the time delays of logic
elements forming the structure of a microprocessor. As was already indicated, the
speed of response increases in the order of logic circuits implemented on the b sis
of employing the following types of circuitry: p-HOS, n-ﬂDS, CHDS, CHDS/SOS, I ,
TTLSh and BCL, i.e., each type of circuitry in line provides greater speed of re-
sponse than the preceding. Rough values of speed of response characteristics of
microprocessors are presented in table 4.

Table 4. Rough Values of Speed of Response Characteristics, Power Requirement
and Degree of Integration of Various Microprocessor LSIc's

HP characteristics HP LSIC circuitry
2-1405 n-nos was was sos ﬁ rrnsu BCL

 

 

Time for execution

of an operation of
the RR type, us 4-10 4-6 2.5-6 2-2.6 1-1.S 1-0.5 0.1 and less

Speed of execution
of operations of
the RR type, mill-

ion operations/s 0.1- 0.25- 0.18- 0.38- 0.7- 1-2 10 and more
0.25 0.18 0.4 0.5 0.1

Cycle tine. us 0.7- 0.5- 0.12- 0.01- 0.2- 0.1-
5 4 l 0.1 1 0.2 0.01-0.1

Clock rate, MM: 0.2- 1-2 1-3 10-100 1-5 5-10 10-100
1.5

Power requirement,

H/chip 0.6- 0.75 0.01- 0.1- 0.8 2-3 Up to 5
1.0 0.2 0.3 '

Degree of integra-

tion achieved,

gates/mm 90 110 45 100 150 25 25

41

FOI10FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
portion of the space and weight of a large class of devices implemented with

integrated microcircuits. The changeover from low» and medium-degree-integration
integrated circuits to LSlc's for microprocessors will make it possible. having

ment, overall dimensions and weight, which will considerably expand possibilities
for the application of computer hardware. In simple HP systems with a low speed
of response, where the power requirement is not high and the overall dimensions
and weight of the power supply are less substantial as compared with the overall

tics in changing over from low- and medium-degree-integration integrated circuits
is from five- to 20-fold. As mentioned in sec 8

logic element and its speed of rezgonse is an approximately constant value for in-
tegrated circuits of the p-HOS. I

fact is illustrated by the two bottom lines of table 4, in which are indicated

rough values of the power requirement and degree of integration of microprocessors
for various technologies.

12. Compatibility with Transistor-Transistor Logic; Number of Power Supply Levels

Mention must be made of such properties of a microprocessor determined by the
technology as the required number of supply voltage levels and the compatibility
of logic levels with the most widespread TTL levels. A single-level power supply

13. Word Length

The word length of a microprocessor, or the length of one of its information words,

which is the same thing, indicates what number of binary digits (bits) of informa-
tion can be processed simultaneously by the processor.

62

FOR OFIICJAI,USE(NVLY
FINIC”WNCJAI.USE(NVLY

Table 5. Values of Supply Voltage Levels and Data on the Compatibility of
Logic Levels for Various HP's

HP characteristics Circuitry of M!
24105 was ems cmslsos L22 msu g2;

 

 

 

Supply voltage +5 +5 3-15 3-15 1-5 +5 -2
levels. V -12 -S -6 to 5.2
-12 or
just +5
Compatibility
with TTL No Yes Yes Yes No Yes No

The accuracy of computations obviously depends on the word length. Por example,
a word length of four bits makes possible a maximum error of 12.5 percent, of
eight bits 0.8 percent, of 12 bits 0.05 percent and of 16 bits 0.003 percent.

In addition to accuracy, the word length in a number of cases determines the speed
of response. since with a word length of the processor less than the length of an
information word stored in the storage unit the processing of information is

carried out in serial portions with the expenditure of time for two or more ac-
cesses to the memory.

Greater word length of a microprocessor requires a greater number of leads and
increased integration of LSIC's. At the same time the useful area of a chip used
for accommodating elements is reduced considerably with an increase in the number
of contact areas under leads; therefore. the creation of an H! with a great word
length is limited by the capabilities of integrated technology.

A way out has been found by creating so-callsd processor sections with an expand-
able word length, whose leads make it possible to unite them for the parallel
processing of data and to obtain thereby a word length which is a multiple of the
word length of a single processor section. Optimization of the word length is
thereby achieved. i.e.. the elimination of redundancy which is possible in using
microprocessors with a fixed word length, and the ability to obtain a great word
length (2b, 32 bits and more) is also made possible.

In addition. the greater number of external leads of a combination of processor
sections makes it possible to organize for them a greater number of connections
with storage units and external units, to eliminate multiplexing which reduces
speed of response. and to increase the number of interrupt levels for internal
and external signals. i.e.. to organize a more ideal and faster responding inter-

face, which is especially important for the operation of a microprocessor as part
of a system.

1a. Capacity of Addressable Memory

The capacity of the addressable memory characterizes the ability to utilize the
microprocessor in a system from the viewpoint of the greatest volume of informa-
tion which can be processed and is determined by the word length of the address
line, making it possible to accomplish the copying of the address of information

#3

Ft“!(ﬂﬂ1(1Al.USEiNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or a necessary instruction. For example, when using a 16-bit address line the
addressing of up to 65,535 storage cells (2‘6-1) or almost 66 Kbits of informa-
tion (1 m: - 21° - 102:. bits) is possible.

15. Reliability and Performance Stability

Reliability, i.e., the ability to operate for an extended period under specific
conditions without failures, is almost the same in a microprocessor as in an
integrated circuit with a low and medium degree of integration and is considerably
higher than in equipment of functional complexity similar to that of a micropro-
cessor and uniting in its structure hundreds of integrated circuits.

Generally speaking, the reliability of semiconductor (monolithic) integrated cir-
cuits does not depend directly on the number of elements making them up, and the
elements themselves can be isolated only hypothetically. The circuit diagram of
an integrated circuit reflects the features of the topology of a single chip and
does not testify to the presence in it of individual transistors, individual re-
sistors and individual connections between them. Therefore, the probability of
failure is determined chiefly by the useful area of a chip, i.e., is proportional
to the probability of the occurrence of a defect in the structure of the chip.

The high degree of integration making possible the creation of LSIC's for micro-
processors is achieved chiefly on account of reducing the dimensions of unit cells
of the integrated structure and of improving the quality of silicon, which a
made it possible to bring the area of a chip from five to 10 to 25 to 50 mm with-
out considerable worsening of the reliability of LSIC's.

The reliability of equipment employing integrated circuits is determined to a con-
siderable degree by the quality and number of internal interconnections. In sys-

tens employing microprocessor LSIc's the number of connections has been reduced to
a minimum, which has chiefly been responsible for their higher reliability.

As with reliability, the stability of microprocessor LSIC'a under the influence of
utilization factors is not worse than in integrated circuits with a low degree of

infegration, and with regard to many kinds of influences is greater than in equip-
ment employing integrated circuits.

Especially important is the lack of the need for the servicing of HP systems for
an entire series of applications (in addition to high reliability this is also the
consequence of relatively low cost). This makes it possible to use HP's widely
over an entire range of permissible utilization influences, i.e., under conditions
in which their work cannot be replaced directly or checked by a human being.
Microprocessor systems have undisputed advantages over any other control, diagnosis
and data gathering systems for working in chemically active media and under condi-
tions of abnormal temperature, humidity, pressure, vibration. acceleration and
ionizing radiation, i.e., everywhere where the presence of a human being is ex-
cluded or the taking of protective measures is required.

16. Classification of Microprocessors; Key Characteristics of Foreign Micro-
processor Sets

The characteristics discussed in chs l and 2 make it possible to classify micro-

processors in terms of the most important of them for the purpose of selecting the

44
FOR 0FFNJAI.USEIJNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

effective area of application. One possible variant of such a classification is

presented in fig 17.

 

10) Egg- - 5m» I

1. Expandable

2. Nonexpandable

3. 8, ms. ODS. cubs/sos,
I , TTLSh, BCL

4. Universal

5. Special-purpose

6. Is s PDP [memory direct
access] channel

7. Access via ALU

8. Are interrupts

9. No interrupts

0. First, second, third

WEE ”Eo-

   

/

| :::::'..':"'ﬁslms°.w; I

Figure 17. Classification of Microprocessors

11.
12.
13.
16.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

Hicroprogranmable
Hacroprogramnable

By word length, bits

By technology

By purpose

By possiblity of interrupts

By sethod of implementing instruc-
tions

By generation

By presence of direct access to nem-
0’7

By possibility of expansion

Microprocessors can be divided into two groups in terms 0! purpose: universal,
i.e., making it possible together with other LSIC microprocessor sets to create
microcomputers for a wide range of applications. Able to serve as the clearest
example is the domestic series K580, as well as the HES-80 HPK [microprocessor set]
of the Intel firm, which has become the world standard for systems of this type;

65

FOR OFFICLAl.USE<0NlJ
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

special-purpose, the important difference of which from universal microprocessors
consists in the lack of a need for developed software. A typical example of a
special-purpose HP is calculator LSIC's.

The specialization of “P's in the sense proposed here in no way contradicts the
definition of an M? as a potentially universal data processing element. The in-
struction set of a special-purpose HP includes all instructions required for im-
plementing any prescribed algorithm; however, for certain special problems its
abilities with regard to speed of response are greater.

Microprocessors are divided into micro- and macroprogrammable in terms of method
of implementing instructions or method of control.

Microprogram control. as already mentioned in ch 1, makes it possible for the

user to establish his own set of instructions (commands) which are optimum for

the implementation of certain specific tasks. This makes a microprocessor the
most "flexible," i.e., makes it possible to adapt it to the maximum to solving a
wide range of problems and, in addition, makes it possible to interpret the archi-
tecture of various computers by employing their software.

Macroprogram (strict hardware) control in principle does not permit this possibili-
ty, but is more economical and as a rule enables higher speed of response.

Hicroprogramming is thus especially necessary for universal microprocessors de-
signed for a wide range of applications; however. it is necessary to mention again
that the realization of the potential advantages of the microprogram principle of
control requires changing the microinstruction set, involving the fabrication of

a new microprogram memory LSIC, which requires considerable input of time and
money and is not always convenient for the user. In recent times the trend has been
noted of the more effective utilization of the possibilities of microprogramming
by using a reprogramnable ROM inside the HP, which makes it possible to rewrite
information by the electrical method or to erase by means of ultraviolet rays with
subsequent writing by means of electrical signals, as, for example, provided for
in the model 8748 microprocessor from the Intel firm.

The increasing needs of users with regard to ensuring maximum universality have
exerted the main influence on selection of the method of controlling a micropro-
cessor. For example, early models of microprocessors, even such popular ones as
the Intel 4004, 4060, 8008 and 8080, the Motorola (USA) H56800, the RCA COSHAC
(USA), do not have microprogramming, which is typical of later models of micropro-
cessor sections with an expandable word length, such as the Intel 3002, the Texas
Instruments (USA) SBPOAOO and the domestic series K589, K587 and K586.

The possibility of interrupts is an inherent property of a universal computer and
is lacking in a number of microprocessor models. chiefly on account of the aspira-
tion of simplifying the external structure, which has been dictated by the inad-
equate capebilities of integrated technology.

The presence of direct access to the memory (PDP) makes it possible to increase
the speed of response of an H? system by direct rapid exchange (bypassing the ALU)
between the storage unit and external units and is made possible by the structure
of the LSIc's of the majority of existing microprocessor sets.

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICNWNCJAL.USE(NVLY

0n the basis of requirements for the accuracy of computations and taking into
account the above-mentioned influence of the word length on speed of response,

the optimum length of an information word of an H! for a specific area of applica-
tion is selected or its physical variation is provided for by employing micropro-
cessor sections. A relationship exists between the word length of a microprocessor
and real applications [2, 6].

The relationship between the characteristics of a microprocessor, including speed
of response, and the possibility of a specific application is illustrated in
greater detail in sec 23. Table 6 illustrates an example of this relationship.

Table 6. Example of Relationship Between Word Length of HP and Real Applications

Word length of Preferred area of application

HP, bits

6 Arithmetic units of measuring instruments (multimeters, oscillo-
graphs, etc.)
Simple controllers, technological and household automatic ma-
chines. games

8 "Intellectual" terminals
Control of technological processes
Controllers
Testing equipment
Transportation control
Service, business, trade and household equipment

16 Communications systems
Data gathering systems
Analog-digital converters
Monitoring and distribution systems (water, gas, fuel, electric
power)
Navigation systems
Broad-application microcomputers

20-32 Communications systems
Digital filters
Fourier transformers
Autocorrelators
Broad-application micro- and minicomputers

By analogy with generations of computers, three of which occupied about 30 years
and the fourth is considered the generation of computers whose element base is
LSIC's, including microprocessor LSIC's. in many publications the evolution of
microprocessor technology fro. the period since 1971 through the present time is
associated with three generations of microprocessors [7-10]. Membership in each
of them is determined by a combination of traits. including fabrication technology,

speed of response, word length, features of structure and architecture and develop-
ment of software.

67

l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ€lal.USE1HVLY
F0R10511C1Al.lﬂﬂE(NVLY

The first generation of microprocessors (1971-1973) is characterized by the most
simple p-MDS technology, a four— to eight-bit word length and low speed of re-
sponse (the time for executing an operation of the RR addition type is about 10
us). They have the simplest structural organization and the least large instruc-
tion set, numbering 45 to 60. The addressable memory capacity is as a rule not
great and software is limited. Typical representatives of first-generation micro-
processors--microprocessors of the Intel 600b, 60b0 and 8008 type--are produced up
to this time, since because of their low cost and their technical characteristics
they meet the needs of many areas of application.

To the second generation (1973-1975) belong microprocessors manufactured according
to the n-HOS technology, which has made it possible to increase speed of response
considerably (the time for executing an operation of the RR type is about 2 us).
These microprocessors have a word length of 8 to 16 bits. a more developed instruc-
tion set and an improved structure and software. Among the disadvantages of second-
generation MP's must be named the need for the majority of HP types for a three-
level supply voltage. whereas two levels are sufficient for first-generation “P's.
The most popular second-generation models have become the Intel 8080. the Fairchild
Semiconductor F—B and the Motorola (USA) "c6800.

Third-gegeration microprocessors have been fabricated according to CMDS, CHOS/SOS,
TTLSh, l L and ECL circuitry. They have a fixed word length of 8 to 16 bits or

an expandable word length which is a multiple of 2, h or 8 bits, medium or high
speed of response and an improved structural organization and instruction set.
Microprogram control. the presence of a built-in channel for direct access to the
memory and developed software are characteristic of them. Their technical charac-
teristics, owing to the various technologies, vary considerably and lie within the
following ranges: The time for executing an addition operation of the RR type is
0.1 to 1 us, and the dissipated power is 10 to 2000 m". They have a single supply
voltage level. Typical representatives of third-generation microprocessors are the
Intel 3002, the Intersil (USA) 1116100, the Monolithic Memory (USA) 516701, the
Texas Instruments $8P0400, and the Intel 8748/8068, 8085 and 8086.

The key characteristics of some of the most popular foreign HPK's [microprocessor
sets] are given in table 7.

Chapter 3.
Domestic Microprocessor Sets

Let us discuss here the key characteristics of three HPK's developed and mastered
in production by domestic industry--the series K580, K587 and K589.

The composition of the sets and their technical characteristics are summarized in
table 8.

17. Series K580

The K580 series includes six large-scale integrated circuits fabricated according
to n-MOS circuitry, which make it possible to construct 8-bit general-purpose and
special-purpose HP systems with a very broad range of application. Universality
of the set is due to a considerable extent to the functional completeness

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the large-scale integrated circuits asking it up, ubich include: a KSBOIKBO
8-bit microprocessor 00’); a 1680165 program-controlled interface for peripherals
(PPI); a ILSSOIKSl progran-controlled interface for communications channels (PSI);
a K5801K57 memory direct-access controller ('KPDP); s 16801163 program-controlled
interval timer (WI); and a KSBOIKS9 priority interrupt controller OCPP).

Table 7a. Key Characteristics of First-Generation (p-nos) nicroprocessors

  
    

     

          

    
   

      

          

       

. 5:. - ‘ : ii 5
8 :5
(Mose-b um“! : a g; g £5; E; g g 9. is i
Ola-rumours»- cmm g g: 3:: u §§ :5 .5 § §§ I a:
. o ‘3' h = I: I .5 I:
a ﬁg: g! =§ it 23 3 g. £3 £5
1. :re a 0-3 1-- >- I:- 0-3: :38 £-

     

    

 

 

—
0

    

M17300 1973 2 4 l
(American Microsyslem.

CUM)

«Auepmtm Mnxpocamu:

PPS-25 [973 4 a, 0.4 0,6
(Fslrthlld, CHM)

«Mpuaap

4004 l9?! 1 l0, 0,7 1
(Intel. CHM)

dds-rub

4040 1974 l [0.80. I
(lnlcl.ClllA)

«Hams

8008 1m 1 20 0,6 I
(lnteI.ClﬂA)

«Murals

IMP-16 [913 5 4, 0.7 l.‘
(National. CHM)

«Hanna.»

PPS-4 1973 l 6 0.2 0.
(RockveII,Cl.IM)

«Possum:

Key:

1. Model of microprocessor 9. Word length of information word, bits
(manufacturing fir- and 10. Capacity of addressable net-cry, K
country) 11. Stack (nu-bar of stack registers)

2. Year of Isnufacture 12. Possibility of interrupts (nullber of

3. Nutter of microprocessor levels)
chips 13. Direct access to mory

6. Time for executing an 14. Hicroprogran control
addition operation. us 15. Resident software

5. Clock rate. m: 16. Cross software

6. Power requirement, H 17. Translator frol high-level language

7. Operating temperature range. 18. Editing and debugging systn
’C 19. Simulation program

8. Supply voltage levels, V 20. Technical characteristics 21. Features

of structure 22. Software

’09

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
.3 . - -:
W «9...... 3g . 5" 3 it: 8' 3 ES
non-"3:: Ithaca-gm #32 E: s . SE cg is g:
man) it; :5 35 g 3" s: .: $1
'a'fi i3 '3' 5‘ gg- :- 5 ~;
gt:- ai ii. a; 0 £3! 33 in
._..___._____.___.__. _______ __
I 3 I.
P-a F3850 I97 2
(memo. cum ( ) . + + + -+ +
comma”.
CP-IGOO CP-IGOO I97 3 5 O. -' +l116 a l O
(General Instrument. CUM) + +5. (0 U + + + + + +
antenna Hunpyueun 4
MCSﬁD I30 197 2 2 l l G 84 RAND .—
(Inlel. CHM) + 15. + + + + + + +
«ﬂute.» .5 .
MC cawo 19" 2 l 0.~ 5 8 RA“) _ .. _
(new; cum I“ + + a + + + + +
(Moropoau
TMS~9900 9901 197 1,3 3 1,2 — 1' l6 6! ~ 1
(Texas Instrument. CUM) Is, ( 5) + + + + + + +
«Tmac Hun-mum» ‘5
2650 2650 1974 4,8 1.2 0.5 5 o 32 l - - ~ _
(Signeﬂc. cum + + (5) ( ) + + +
«Cm-1min

1. Model of microprocessor set 3. Year of manufacture

(manufacturing firm and 4-22. [cf . table 7.]
country)

2. Designation of microprocessor

per se (central processing
element) in set

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.5; I
. ‘55 3 g
Menu. “Imam“: 3 ' g '
tonne-m (own-amnu- =5 ,, 33
to». awn) :3 5 . s
:33 .55
g i I g D'
Z I g:
\

 

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 

$312900
(American Micro De-
wice. CHM)

«Auepunu .‘lunpo {le-
unc-

3000

.( Intel. C UM)
«Hutu:
MCS~48
(Intel. CHM)
«Mme!»

MCSJO
(Intel. CUM)
«Hum»
M 6100
Haters“. CUM)
«Harem-u.»
.m‘tﬂfo “
a. milk. 9 .
CUM) M
«Mouoamx Menopm
MC 10800
.(Moloroh. C013)
«Motopoan
COSMAC
(RCA, CHM)
'~ Cu 3R0

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 8.

Characteristics of HPK

Composition of set

Circuitry

Word length (expandable),
bits

Time for execution of
addition operation. us
Clock rate, MM:

Power requirement, m"
Operating temperature
range, ’0

Capacity of addressable
memory, Kbits

Stack

Possibility of interrupts
(number of levels)
Direct access to memory
Hicroprogram control

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Series
K580

 

 

K5801K80--HP
[microprocessor]
K5801K55--PPI
[program-con-
trolled inter-
face for peri-
pherals]
K5801K51--PSI
[program-con-
trolled inter-
face for communi-
cations channels]
K5801K57-KPDP
[memory direct
access control-

ler]
K5801K53--DVI
[interval timer]
K5801K59--KPP
[priority in-
terrupt con-
troller]

n-HOS
8

2
2

1000 (HP)
-10 to +70

64
RAM

(8)
Yes
No

K587

K587IK2-AD
[arithmetic
unit]
K587RP1-UP
[control
memory]
K587IK1--0I
[information
swapping unit]
K587IK3--AR
[arithmetic
expander]

CHOS

(6)

2
0.5
10 (AD)

-60 to +80

64
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

K589

K589IKOl-BHU
[microprogrsm
control unit]
K589IK02--T9PE
[central processor
element]
K589IK03-SU?
[fast carry cir-
cuit]
K589IK12-HBR
[multimode buffer
register]
K589IK16-BPP
[priority inter-
rupt unit]
K589AP16-—ShP
[line driver]
K589A226--ShPI
[inverting line
driver]

TTLSh

(2)

0.1
8
750 (T9?!)

-10 to +70

0.5
No

(8)
Yes
Yes

In addition, together with the LSIC's listed it is possible to use without any
kind of interfaces four microcircuits from the series K589 HPK--K589IR12, K589IK10,

K589AP16 and K589AP26.

The K580IK80 LSIC is an 8-bit central processor unit designed for use as an infor-

mation processing element in HP data processing and control systems.

The in-

struction set is fixed. the total number of instructions is 78 and the levels of

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

input and output signals are cmstibls with the most widespread 1T1. levels.
A chip measuring 4.2 X 4.8 nun contains about 5000 transistors and is enclosed in

a AB-terainal case.

The structure of the K5801K80 LSIc matches almost totally the structure presented
in the generalized structural diagran of an HP (cf. fig 2) and described in sec 1.
The only difference is that this LSIC does not contain stack reusters but makes
it possible to organize a stack memory in the MK. For this purpose among the
LSIC's registers there is a special 16-bit stack pointer which makes it possible
to arrange a magazine-type storage in any area of the RM and makes it possible
to service an unlimited nunber of subroutines.

The arithmetic-logic unit is a parallel 8-bit unit which performs key data pro-
cessing operations.

The control unit (W) generates control signals required for the execution of in-
structions in the HP. The basis of the structure of the W is the principle of a
programd logic array.

The LSIC's registers include: two 8-bit operand registers (0); an 8-bit instruc-
tion register (K); a 16-bit addrus register (A); an overflow flag register (P):
four single-bit state registers for indicating sign. carry, parity and zero (S);
six 8-bit general-purpose registers (on); a 16-bit stsclt pointer; and a 16-bit
instruction counter (SK).

Interfacing is made possible by three separate bus lines for transmitting data
(1). addresses (A) and control signals (0). Line I is 8-bit. Line A is 16-bit
and makes it possible to address 64 Kbits of memory, as well as 256 inputs and
256 outputs of external units. The control line makes possible synchronization
of the operation of the HP, external storage and input/output units, as well as
control of servicing of interrupts and of direct access to the memory and the
output of informtion on the state of the HP.

In addition to the elmnts of the structure listed, in the 1.816 are concentrated
30 1'11. buffers for operation with external circuits.

The K58OIK80 LSIC is characterized by high adaptability to streamlined manufacture,
relatively low cost and a sufficiently universal structure suiting it possible to
use it widely for constructing MP system both together with other LSIc's of the
K580 HPK series and independently.

The K58OIKSS LSIC is designed for organizing the parallel exchange of information
between an HP system and peripheral units. It includes an 8-bit buffer register
for connection to the data line of the )9 system. three 8-bit registers for con-
munication with the inputs/outputs of peripheral units, and a control unit con-
nected to the control and address lines of the R system. Control signals specify
the operating mode (write or read) and a 2-bit address determines the peripheral
unit with which exchange will take place.

The structure of the mm is based on the use of circuits with three stable
states (cf. sec 3). Employment of the [5801165 LSIC eliminates the need for

53

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

additional logic circuits. which takes it possible to consider it a complete and

sufficiently universal external interface element permitting the possibility of
independent application.

The 16801161 LSIC can also serve as an example of an interface element, but this
LSIC, unlike the foregoing. receives and transfers information not in parallel
(i.e., all bits of an information word simultaneously), but serially, bit- by bit.

This need exists in the transmission of data over great distances, when it is not
possible to use multiwire communications lines, e.g., in distributed control at an
industrial enterprise, in transmitting digital information through a telephone
line, etc. The 16801161 LSIC converts a parallel binary code into a serial one

in transaission and completes reverse conversion in reception. The length of a
word of data is 8 bits.

The 16801163 LSIC serves the purpose of producing time delays of programmable du-
ration. It contains three independent 16—bit counters whose scaling factor is

deterained by a program, as well as a circuit for controlling the operating mode
and buffer registers for storing 8-bit data.

The problem of generating precise time delay signals for a specific number of
operating cycles is often encountered when an HP system perform an operating
routine. Such a delay can be implemented through software, having organized in
the operating routine the execution of a so-called "time loop." i.e., a cyclically
repeated "idling." The use of the 16801163 LSIC makes it possible to free the
programmer of the necessity of encunbering a program with these cycles by means of
access to one of three program-controlled counters through a special instruction.

If the delay made possible by the 16 bits of one counter is insufficient, it can
be increased by adding the bits of the other two counters.

In addition, the 16801163 LSIC can be used as: a clock pulse counter; a binary
multiplier; a real-tine pulse generator (hours, minutes, seconds, etc.); and an
electronic motor rotational velocity regulator.

The 16801167 LSIC is designed for organizing in an HP system the exchange of in-
formation between the storage and peripheral units, bypassing the 141’. This ex-
change procedure is described in sec 5; here it is necessary to add that this
LSIC organizes exchange through four channels having different priorities, and
data are entered and read out in parallel.

The 16801169 1.810 is an B—level priority interrupt controller. The functions of
this controller are described in sec 4, and the distinctive features of this LSIC
lie in the ability to increase the nutter of priority interrupt levels to 610 by
uniting it with LSIC's of the same type.

18. Series K587

The series 1687 microprocessor set contains four LSIC's fabricated according to
the C1108 technology and is designed for constructing on their basis various pieces
of computer hardware with a speed of response on the order of 100,000 to 200,000
operations per second and with an ultralov power requirement.

56
FOR 01-1-10“. USE ONLY
FOR10FEKJAl.USE(MVLY

The software developed specially for this HPK includes both resident and cross
software making it possible to design microcomputers with broad functional capa-
bilities-—universal and oriented to a specific range of special problems. In
addition. there is the ability to use the set's LSIc's independently in terms of
their functional purpose as independent digital infatuation processing nodules or
ones built into the equipment. Important features of this HPK are the microprogram

principle of control and the ability to expand the word length by uniting several
4-bit processor sections.

The set's hardware includes the following LSIc's: a K587IK2 arithmetic unit (AU);
a K587RP1 control memory (UP); a K587IK1 information exchange (OI) unit; and a
K587IK3 arithmetic expander (AR).

Strictly speaking, it is impossible to call a lM‘oprocessm‘ any one of the LSIC's
listed above taken individually. An HP can be It. ‘d here as the result of uniting
by means of an 01 interface LSIC two components-AU and UP LSIC's containing in
combination all the elements of the structure of an HP.

Characteristic features of AU, UP and OI LSIc's are the microprogram principle of
control, as well as the ability to operate (including the AR LSIC, too) in the
asynchronous mode, which makes possible, for example, implementation of the step-
by-step execution of microinstructions or stopping at any point in a routine.

The type K587IK2 Au LSIC is a 4-bit universal digital information processing nodule
uniting in its structure mainly elements with the functions of an ALU‘and internal
registers of an SOZU [high-speed memory]. The word length of an MP with an AU

LSIC can be increased to 32, i.e., it is possible to unite in a single HP eight

AU LSIC's. A chip is placed in a AZ-terminal case and contains 2500 transistors.
Various combinations of 168 types of microinstructions executed by the AU make it
possible to create various and at the same time compatible at the microprogram
level instruction sets. ,

The main purpose of the AU LSIC is to construct the operating units of digital
hardware of various word lengths which are multiples of four.

The type K587RP1 UP LSIC is an independent driver of sequences of 16-bit parallel
codes and can be used as a microinstruction generator, as well as as a very simple
controller. The U? LSIC chip contains about 6000 transistors and is placed in a
hZ-terminal case. In the HPK the UP LSIC serves as a microprogram control unit
based on a programmed logic array (PLH). Information in the PIN is determined by
the customer (the user of the NPR) and is firmly entered there in the course of
the technological process of the fabrication of the LSIC. The information capacity
of the PLH is 64 logical products. Arbitrary programming of the PIN in keeping
with the user's requirements determines the diversity of possibilities of using
the UP LSIC in the independent mode as a converter and generator of various codes
(functions), as a very simple digital control element and the like.

The type K5871Kl OI LSIC is an independent 8-bit digital information processing
and switching module serving the purpose of organizing the intra- and extraproces-
sor parallel exchange of data, of organizing an interface for microprocessors,

of constructing interrupt units, and for use in controllers of peripheral equipment
for controlling the RAH. The following are the basic operations performed by

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the 01 LSIC: switching of the information signals of three 8-bit channels by
means of eight possible methods; arithmetic-logic operations; format conversion
operations (from a 16-bit code to an 8-bit and vice-versa. as well as from a
serial code into s parallel).

The total number of microinstructions which can be executed by the 01 LSIC is
60. The case is a 42-terminsl one and the chip unites 3500 transistors. It is
possible to expand the word length to 32 by joining four OI LSIC's.

The type K587IK3 AR LSIC is a special-purpose digital independent data processing
module. The specialization of the AR LSIC is reflected in its system of 64 micro-
instructions, oriented toward the rapid execution of the operation of multiplying
two operands, which is implemented by hardware, of shifting and of retrieving the
bit codes for 8-bit operands.

The basis of the AR LSIC is an array of 8 X 8 single-bit adders by means of which
partial sums obtained in multiplying each bit of one multiplier by the bits of
another are obtained and shifted. The AR LSIC is controlled by a 7-bit micro-
instruction. The possibility is provided of increasing the word length to 6‘ by
joining 8 AR LSIC's.

The possible areas of application of computing hardware constructed on the basis
of the series K587 HPK are: systems for monitoring and controlling technological
processes: systems for program control of machine tools; testing and checking and
measuring systems; built-in primary information processing equipment in monitoring
and control systems; controllers for controlling peripheral equipment; calculators
for very simple engineering and economics calculations; and microprocessor comput-
ing systems.

An example of a microcomputer implemented on the basis of the series K587 HPK is
the "Elektronika NTs-OJ" microcomputer, designed for use in systems for controlling
technological processes and measuring and checking and testing equipment, for

the gathering and preliminary processing of data in information search complexes,
for solving computing problems, as well as for use in computing complexes as peri-
phcral processors with special-purpose functions. The "Blektroniks “Ts-03" micro-
computer has the following key characteristics: length of information word--l6
bits; rate of execution of operations of the RR type--100,000 operations/s; ca-
pacity of memory--32 K; software--cross system for programming on a 328“ 6 com-
puter; power requirement--30 H; overall dimensions--680 x 360 x 220 mm; weight--
28 kg.

19. Series K589

The series K589 microprocessor set contains seven LSIc's fabricated according to
the TTLSh technology and is designed for constructing high-speed HP systems with
various kinds of organization and a speed of response on the order of one million
operations per second. As does the foregoing one, this set has a microprogram
principle of control. modular organization and the ability to expand word lengths
of the microprocessor which are multiples of two.

The set includes the following LSIC's: a K589IK01 microprogram control unit (EMU);
a K589IK02 central processor element (TsPE); a K589IK03 fast carry circuit (SUP);

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR‘OFTICJAI.IJSE:(MULY

a K589IRlZ multimode buffer register (HER); a K589IK16 priority interrupt unit
(BPP); a K589AP16 line driver (8hr); and a R589a226 inverting line driver (snrr).

The microprocessor per as can be forned in this case by a combination of TsPB,
luv and HBR LSIC's.

The type K589IK01 EMU LSIC is a unit for controlling accessing of a sequence of
9-bit microinstructions from a microprogram memory according to an 8-bit address
contained in the instruction word. The difference between the EMU LSIC and the
UP LSIC of the K587 series consists in the fact that the first LSIC does not con-
tain microprogram information in itself. but only organizes their readout from the
microprogram storage according to assigned rules for the correspondence to each
instruction of a sequence of microinstructions, whereas the UP LSIC generates
these sequences. In addition, the BM” in conjunction with a 8?? priority inter-
rupt unit makes it possible to organize interrupts. The total number of micro-
instructions which can be accessed by the EMU is 512. The BUM LSIC case is a
60-termina1 one.

The type K589IK02 TsPE LSIC includes in its structure an ALB, SOZU [high-speed
memory] registers, and a microinstruction decoder and is designed for performing
arithmetic and logic operations on 2-bit operands. The Ta?! is controlled by a
7~bit microinstruction and the total number of microinstructions is #0. The
TsPE LSIC chip is placed in a case with 28 terminals. For the purpose of con-
structing a microprocessor with a word length of N , it is necessary to join
N/Z TsPE LSlC's.

The type K589IK03 fast carry circuit (SUP) is designed for the simultaneous carry
of the information of groups of registers to higher-order bits. This need origin-
ates in an MP formed by uniting several TsPE's in performing an operation the
word length of whose result is greater than the word length of each of the oper-
ands. The accomplishment of carry by the sequential shifting of information in
each bit would considerably reduce the speed of execution of operations. One

SUP makes it possible to organize a carry operation for eight TsPB's. i.e., serves
a 16-bit HP. The SUP is controlled from a carry enabling signal from the EMU.

The case of the SUP is a 28-terminal one.

The type K589IR12 HER LSIC is a universal 8-bit register with outputs having

three states (logical 0, logical l and the state of high output impedance, equiva-
lent to cutting off of the output) and is designed for organizing the bus line
exchange of information between various units. Tor the purpose'of controlling

the states of the outputs, the HER has built-in logic. An interrupt enabling
signal is also formed in the MIR. The "IR LSIc can be used in the independent
mode for the implementation of many types of interface units such as multiplexers,
bidirectional line drivers, input/output channels and the like. A chip is placed
in a 26-terminal case.

The type K589IK14 BPP LSIC makes it possible by means of external signals-inter-
rupt enabling signals-to halt execution of the current routine. to store the

state of the HP and to proceed to servicing an interrupt. The BPP is interrogated
at the end of the execution of each instruction and if it receives an interrupt

interrogation the BUM proceeds to process this operation. The number of interrupt

57
F0R40511CLAI.USB¢DN1M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

levels is eight but can be increased by joining several 8?? LSIC's. Just as the
MIR, the RP? LSIC chip has a case with 26 terminals.

The K589APl6 and K589APZ6 line driver and inverting line driver, respectively,
are lo-channel comtators and are designed for increasing the load capacity of
an HOS LSIc when connecting it to the system line. The outputs of the Sh? and
8h?! have three states. Input signals are inverted in the ShFI. The cases of
both circuits are lG-terminal.

The software of the series K589 HPK includes a microprogram design system imple-
mented by means of a so-called basic technology machine-a high-capacity external
computer. The high speed of response and the ability to create various instruc-
tion sets on the basis of an HPK microinstruction set, as well as the ability to
vary the structure of the HP system, make possible the diversity of applications
of the K589 series. The following are considered the main areas of application of
HPK's of this series: high-speed controllers with a control signal output fre-
quency of up to 10 MHz; systems for numerical program control of machine tools:
high-output data processing systems; and microprocessor computing systems.

Chapter 4.
General Questions Relating to the Application of Microprocessors
20. Methods of Applying Microprocessors; Classification of Microprocessor Systems

A microprocessor itself in the definition which we use here is still not able to
process information as a computer, for example, does. However important a micro-
processor is. it is all the same a "building block"-one of several necessary
elements comprising the basis of various computing units.

The main method of using a microprocessor is the creation on the basis of it and
other LSIC's of the HPK of HP computing systems, by which is meant any computing,
control or other system in which the processing of information is performed by one
or more HP's (fig 18). This concept of an HP system includes calculators and very
simple controllers (short-routine control systems in which the operating routine
is fixed in the ROM), micro- and minicomputers and multimicroprocessor systems
which functionally imitate the capabilities of medium and large computers.

A structurally complete HP system having its own power supply, interfaces with
peripheral units, control console and software combination can be called a micro-
or minicomputer depending on its word length, speed of response, size and cost.

In addition. a distinctive feature of minicomputers is usually considered the
presence of diverse peripheral equipment-information display units, an external
storage and special-purpose units. There is no clear boundary dividing computers
into classes according to the totality of values of these characteristics. This
is associated with the constant tendency toward reducing size and cost while sim-
ultaneously increasing the word length and speed of response of computers based on
microprocessors.

58

FORTOFFKJAI.USE10NLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
    
   
 
  
 
 
   
       
    

Coons-salvo-

we
I

 
   

  

meyma
so-spcsus-
assume
us sono-
concuss-
soro JCIM
saunas

9)

ass-mus usu-
«ysnoss. soa-

Cscvl 12)
wanna-ow summonses!

Designed for the building block
approach

Structurally designed for direct
application

Special-purpose (calculators. control-
lers and the like)

With a programmable structure

Area of untrsditional application

Figure 18. Classification of HP Systems
Key:

1. HP systems 8.

2. Inhomogeneous

3. Homogeneous. multiprocessor. 9.
concentrated or distributed

6. Concentrated micro- and 10.
ninicomputers

5. Distributed micro- and 11.
minicomputers including 12.
built-in

6. With a fixed structure

7. General-purpose

For example, during the period 1972-1976 the cost of microcowuters was lowered

by an order of magnitude and their speed of response increased threefold. The
level of integration of HP LSIc'a forming the basis of microcomputers was increased
20-fold during this same period (I). which made it possible for Intel. the leader
in the world in the production of microprocessors. to create complicated high-
output microcomputer systems and the model 87108, 8048. 8085 and 8086 micropro-

cessors on a single chip [111.

These facts convincingly demonstrate the possibili-

ty of creating a functionally complete computing system in a single microcircuit.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0F11C1AL USE!DNLN

It can be said roughly that as of the present a typical microcomputer has a
word length of up to 16 bits and a speed of response of up to 200,000 addition
operations per second. For minicomputers these characteristics have values of
32 bits and 500,000 to 800,000 addition operations per second, respectively.

In addition, characteristic of microcomputers is the presence of a poorly de-
veloped interface for the exchange of information with the outside, the absence
of or a small number of peripheral units and a selector mode (spaced over time)
of exchange with them. These indicators, respectively, are better in minicom-
puters.

With regard to degree of specialization or, on the other hand. universality, micro-
computers can be divided into "ultrasimple" special-purpose, designed for solving
narrow problems (e.g., arithmetic operations in calculators, the simplest control
in controllers, substitution of hardware logic by program control of the functions
of one and the same microprocessor), and general-purpose. A general-purpose micro-
computer must possess a sufficiently universal instruction set and, unlike "ultra-
simple," aspire in its development to the perfection of its characteristics,
bringing them close in value to those of minicomputers.

General-purpose microcomputers can be structurally readied for the work of an
operator, i.e., having a chassis, frame, control console and other required equip-
ment, and can be designed for the building block approach, i.e., for operation in
a structurally and functionally unified combination of equipment and therefore

not have the components required for independent operation.

Hitherto we have been talking about concentrated computing systems, i.e., about
those in which the computing process takes place entirely within the framework

of the logical structure of a computer with a microprocessor as the processing

and control element. This structure is traditional and practically imitates the
functional organization of computers of the premicroprocessor period. The micro-
processor made it possible, and this is very important, to realize a fundamentally
new approach to organizing computations by creating distributed information pro-
cessing facilities. Distribution here means primarily the breaking down of the
total algorithm for solving a problem into a number of algorithms implemented in
parallel and not connected. inasmuch as this is possible, with one another in time
and. in addition, the most optimum spatial distribution of the computing process
by building special-purpose microprocessor systems directly into source data sen-
801‘8 .

Built-in computing systems are a nontraditional qualitatively new method of apply-
ing microprocessors which makes it possible to solve in a new manner problems
relating to providing for speed of response, reliability and stability and to
reducing the size and weight of equipment for the automatic control, checking and
gathering of data. The characteristic features of an HP make possible the built-
in control of each individual unit of apparatus or equipment, which makes it
possible to create totally automated equipment and processes.

Another nontraditional feature of microprocessors is the substitution of hardware
logic, and together with this the designing of the physical structure of a com-
puting system, by programming its structural properties. For example, the

60

FOR OWIWCJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

functions of various logic e1ementa-s gate, flip-flop, counter, decoder, etc.-
can be implemented by the appropriate programming of the same microprocessor
with the presence of the required number of storage cells. The functional equi-
valent of a single logic element, according to estimate data, requires 8 to 16
bits of memory [9]. In the not too distant future the cost of HP LSIc’a will be
reduced to the extent that the substitution of "hard" logic by programmable
structurally identical elements will be economically justified. In individual
cases this is taking place already today.

A method of applying microprocessors which deserves attention and is aimed mainly

at increasing the speed of response, reliability and adaptability to various

classes of problems is the creation of homogeneous multimicroprocessor systems.
Unlike the inhomogeneous multiprocessor systems discussed above, homogeneity here
means a regular method of uniting a great number of microprocessors of the same
type. This in a number of cases makes it possible to increase practically without
limitation the speed of response of microprocessor systems by the multiprocessing

of computations. In terms of space these systems can obviously be both concentrated
and distributed, however both must be constructed according to the principles of

the parallel processing of information and of structural homogeneity.

Host promising must be considered multimicroprocessor systems with a programmable
structure, uniting the traditional advantages of multiprocessor systems with a
nontraditional method of using microprocessors as a logic element with program-
controlled functions.

In summing up our discussion of the basic methods of applying microprocessors, we
again note the existence of traditional and nontraditional methods of constructing
HP systems. The former assumes the creation of microprocessor computing equipment
with a fixed logical structure which is spatially centralized. within the frame-
work of which the entire computing process takes place. The second method is
characterized by the distribution of computations in space and by multiprocessing
in time (inhomogeneous built-in and homogeneous distributed multiprocessor systems),
as well as by the substitution of hardware logic by the programming of functional
properties.

Both methods open up extensive possibilities for the application of microprocessors
in various areas; however it is precisely the nontraditional method which makes it
possible to count on the penetration in the not too distant future of micropro-
cessors into all areas of life, making an HP system just as ordinary and irreplace-
able a phenomenon as the telephone or toothbrush.

The comparison of general-purpose minicomputers designed uith various elements
presented in table 9 clearly demonstrates the advantages of traditional HP systems
over systems with hard logic.

It is obvious from this table that the product of the speed of response by the
pouer requirement for minicomputers employing series K583 microprocessor LSIC's

is twofold lower than in minicomputers using K136 integrated circuits and is five-
fold lower than in ninicomputers using series K155 integrated circuits.

As demonstrated by an analysis of the effectiveness of using systems employing
HP LSIC's as compared with systems employing integrated circuits, the majority

61

FOR‘0FFNJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFIWCIAI.IEHE(MVLY

of problems not requiring especially high speed of response can be solved success-
fully on the basis of microprocessor systems designed by traditional methods.

Table 9. Comparison of Characteristics of Different Variants of Hinicomputers

Characteristic Value of parameter for minicggputer variant
Variant l Variant 2 gariant 3

using series using series using series
K134 Ic s 155 10 s K583 HP LSIC's
gYeS [Unified Series] HPK'sz

Time for perform—
ance of a brief

operation. us 4 l 1

Power requirement,

W 6 60 12

Number of IC's 1000 1000 20 LSIc's + 30 IC's

21. General Recommendations on Selecting and Using Microprocessors

Before proceeding to the question of selecting a microprocessor, let us investigate
in what cases an MP is generally more effective than hard (nonprogrammable) logic.

In fig 19 an original algorithm is presented for finding the most appropriate
element base for a computing system reflecting considerations of the user, who

is choosing between integrated circuits and HP LSlc's. It is obvious from this
figure that the use of hard logic is justified in two cases-~when it is necessary
to obtain ultrahigh speed of response in the implementation of complicated algo-
rithms and, on the other hand, in very simple systems with a small number of in-
tegrated circuits with a low and medium degree of integration-special-purpoae
digital automata. If flexibility is required, i.e., a frequent changing of func-
tions by means of software, or the expansion of the range of problems which can be
solved is anticipated in the future and the system is fairly complicated, then a
microprocessor is used.

Thus, the flexibility of a microprocessor, as well as the distinctive feature of
the development of HP systems expressed in the substitution of logical design by
programming of the required functions, associated with this flexibility. prove to
represent a decisive difference from nonprogrammable logic.

Having decided to use an MP, the developer of a computing system must select the
microprocessor most appropriate for his task on the basis of a comparative analysis
of the combination of its characteristics and the combination of specified require-
ments. of course, influencing this choice. as also the choice of other elements

of equipment, is a set of factors which are difficult to take into account which
each have a broad range of significance-~from the ability to acquire a specific
type to the personal liking of the developer. However, without pretending to
completeness in explicating this problem, let us dwell on the relationship between
certain properties of microprocessors and of systems based on them.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Riga: mﬁ‘d cum

noun -
not It a

Icmuyarcl 'aocraal
Ion-I 13)

 

Figure 19. HP LSIC's or lc'a?

Key:
1. Analysis of requirements for 3. Complicated algorithms
computing system to be de- 6. Yea
signed 5. Necessary to change functions in process

2. No of use?
[Continued on following page]

63

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Is speed of response of micro- 12. Hill number of 10‘s in system be equal

processor satisfactory? to or greater than 30?
7. Expansion of functions anti- 13. "Hard" logic used

cipated later?

8. Hill speed of response of
a system with several HP's
be satisfactory?

9. Are large arrays of informa-
tion to be processed?

10. Microprocessor used

11. Frequent access to memory
envisioned?

How is a microprocessor to be selected? Partly the answer to this question has
already been given in chs l and 2 in describing the characteristics of micropro-
cessors and their classification. Here we will indicate how these characteristics
are related to such features of microprocessor systems as their architecture, com-

puting capacity, flexibility, complexity of design, overall dimensions, weight and
economic efficiency.

By the architecture of an HP system is meant the structure, design and principles
of organization of hardware and software, considered not “from within"--from the

viewpoint of the developer--but "from without"-from the viewpoint of the user of
an HP system.

One and the same characteristic, e.g., the word length of a microprocessor, can
belong to the internal structure if it is a question of the internal structure of
a microprocessor, or to the architecture if it is a question of the precision which

must be guaranteed as the result of using in a system an HP with a specific word
length.

Table 10 gives an idea of the relationships between the above-named characteristics
of an HP system and the characteristics of a microprocessor.

The minus sign indicates the absence and the plus sign the presence of an influence
of the relationship on the characteristics of an HP system,.with the double plus
indicating a decisive influence. It is obvious from this table that microprogram-
ming, for example, being an important feature of the architecture, determines flex-
ibility and considerably complicates designing, which indicates the need to use
special design systems. Intel, for example, produces a system of the “05800 type,
which makes it possible to design completely the hardware and software of HP sys-
tems based on multiprocessor sets of the HES-80 and 3000 types.

The data presented in tables 8 and 10 make it possible to select an H? for a
system satisfying specific requirements.

Let it be required to design a simple controller for controlling a technological
process according to a single or small number of predetermined algorithms (i.e.,
relatively inflexible), with low speed of response and with an error of about one
percent, without special requirements for utilization factors, overall size, and

weight, which replaces 20 to 30 integrated circuits with a low degree of integra-
tion.

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Table 10. Relationship Between Characteristics of an HP and HP System

HP characteristics HP system characteristics
Archi- Cauting Plexi- Caplex- Utilization fac-

tecture cageitz bilitz it: of torsI overall
_2d°81 M
c

 

 

eon—0'2
Hord length 4- +0- + - +
Nuaber of internal
registers +9- -H- + - -
Presence of stack
organization +1- + - - -
Speed of response 4» -H- - - 4+
Hicroprograuming H + H- -H- -
Interruption _ + + H- + -
Separate data. address
and control lines + H + + +
Flag + +' +9- - -
Electrical features,
mechanics - - - + H
Presence in m of
interface and aemory
circuits 4- - - 4+ -
Cost - H - +£- 4H-

The requirment of simplicity of design according to table 10 assumes, primarily,
the absence of microprograsming, which agrees with the lack of a requirement for
flexibility, as well as the presence in the “PR of interface and memory circuits.
The low speed of response indicates the ability to use one of the IDS micropro-
cessor technologies and the error of one percent requires the use of an 8-bit
information word length.

In addition, the HP can have a small number of internal registers and be relatively
inexpensive.

According to table 8 these requirements are met by the series [580 m (n-ms.
8 bits, time for execution of an addition operation—-2 us. strict macroprogram
control, presence of interface circuits).

A flexible high-speed 16- to 24-bit II! system to replace up to 1000 integrated cir-
cuits with a low degree of integration must obviously contain several processor
sections with a shori word length (two, four or eight) and must employ the bipolar
technology (TTLSh, I I. or BCL) with nicroprogran control.

In table 8 these requirements are met by a series K589 microprocessor-«m micro-
programmable 2-bit processor section employing msn circuitry. The unification
of eight to 12 of these sections gives the required word length for the syst- and
the time for executing an addition operation, equal to 100 ns, lakes it possible
to obtain high speed of response. The presence of 10 RON's [general-purpose re-
gisters] (more than in a series K580 aicroprocessor), the possibility of

65
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interrupts, and separation of data, address and control lines are conducive to the
realization of high computing capacity, flexibility and economy.

The "Elektronika M's-03" model, built with a series K587 multiprocessor set, can
serve as an example of the construction of a 32-bit universal microcomter with
a speed of response of 100,000 operations per second.

A high-speed, economical, long-wrd-length. flexible and relatively coqlex HP
system for operating over a wide range of u ilization factors can be constructed
on the basis of the series K583 NPR. The I circuitry according to which it is
fabricated ensures the highest speed of response with a low power requirement.
Eight—bit processor sections make it possible to increase the word length and
microprograning creates flexibility. However, the relative complexity of design-
ing such a system and its cost will be, as is obvious from table 10. very high.

These examples in no way exhaust the possibilities of the application of series
K580, K583, K587 and K589 microprocessor sets; in them are discussed only the most
typical cases, helping one to understand what features must be taken into account
in selecting a model of a microprocessor for a specific application.

Chapter 5.
Examples of Concrete Implementation of Microprocessor Systems
22. Areas of Application of Microprocessor Systems

As already mentioned more than once. the special properties of microprocessors make
it possible to make exceptionally extensive use of systems based on then, and the
variety of applications is limited rather by the imagination of developers than by
the capabilities of microprocessors themselves. Up to the present time an entire
series of trends has been noted in the application of these systems and reports on
their further development or extension to new areas of human activity are appearing
. ever more often.

Already at the present microprocessor systems have been used effectively for the
following purposes: for controlling and monitoring production processes in data
gathering systems, automated technological lines and machine tools with numerical
program control; in systems for processing and displaying information in solving
scientific and technical, engineering, economic and other problems, as general-
purpose or special—purpose micro- and minicomputers; in communications engineering
for accomplishing switching. multiplexing and expansion of the functional capabili-
ties of communications equipment, and in coding equipment; in measuring technology
for increasing the accuracy of measurements, automating the measuring process,
expanding functional capabilities by the implementation of methods of automatic
correction of errors, self-calibration. self-diagnosis and the digital processing
of measuring information; in physics experiment equipment for increasing the flex-
ibility and universality of the application of experimental equipment and for auto-
mating the research process: for automating the control of transportation traffic
and transport vehicles and the operating conditions of engines, for checking ob-
servance of road traffic rules and for providing other measures for improving
traffic safety; in household appliances and electronic games for automating control
and expanding functional capabilities; in comercial and service equipment for the

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFFRJA1.USB(NVEY

automatic performance of financial operations and in emergency and protection
systems; in medical technology in systems for gathering and recording information
on the condition of patients and for automation of the investigation and diagnosis
of diseases.

This list is not to be regarded as specific for the application of microprocessors.
It is simply that the need to use microprocessors came to a head earlier in these
areas than in others or other not always objective reasons played a role. he that
as it may, in part following this division which has sufficiently taken form abroad,
let us indicate how a microprocessor takes part in information processes taking '
place in monitoring or control systems.

In the final analysis it is possible to reduce any information conversion system
to these two categories. This somewhat unanticipated thesis is not hard to accept
if the membership of a system in a specific category is determined by the degree
of the participation of man in the information process.

Here we will call a monitoring system a system having an input for a prepared array
of data or for information from sensors of the monitored process or entity, and an
output whose signals are designed for reception by a human operator. Making de-
cisions in keeping with the information obtained from the system's output, the op-

erator corrects the process, thus closing the feedback loop: entity - monitoring
system - man - entity.

A control system is distinguished from a monitoring system by the fact that the
decision regarding the need for a specific correction is made by the system it-
self and the correction (control) signals are also generated in it; therefore.
the entity - control system - emtity feedback loop is closed without the partici-
pation of man in the information process.

Systems which control processes continuous over time with a sufficiently high

degree of analog-digital conversion, defined as the ratio between the rate of change
of parameters of the controlled entity and the speed of response of the system it-
self, are said to be operating in real time. This is perhaps the most important

and interesting class of systems, the capabilities of which are realized even more
effectively with the application of microprocessors.

23. Microprocessors in Systems for Controlling and Monitoring Production Processes

Able to serve as an interesting example of the use of an HP system for monitoring
a technological process is the system for sorting lumber, developed at Washington
University, which measures the parameters of wood by nondestructive methods and
presents complete information on a sample in digital form [12]. The system makes
it possible to determine effectively the suitability of wood for a specific method
of further processing, taking into account the dimensions, weight and density of
the sample. According to the authors' statement, a complete analysis of the pro-
perties of a single sample takes less than 2 s, which is especially important for
using the system in a production line. The efforts of four people over the course
of a month were spent on the development of hardware and software, and special
attachments were not required for measuring equipment.

67

FOI1OFHKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the operation or this ayaten.

I”

Dummy.“ 009ml

  

. mm
; I I I I I D
'” m I on
I III I , goon
Cam-u

- ' 5’ '
Impetus
group": 3)

Ann
Icon 5)

9) Income

“'33.;

oo

18) Locum-nu
unreco-
pon urol-
qu um:

mm
mm-
mm:-

.W'ﬁsf”

Ila-anon au-

u-u own 16

3'?.2..'8.”"

19)

6) Ian-Iowan

”1:" apo-

In.
{23:33)

i
r

I”
g;
H

1)

Functional Diagram of Lumber Sorting Syaten

being checked

of shock wave
tion rate meter

ater
line

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

1 following page]

68

Interface timer

Height measuring element
Height

Control of shock nechania
Gate-type data transnitte

I-‘Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FYIR‘OIFICJAI.lh5EI(MVLY

10. Length 18. Panel of 7-segment decimal output
11. Input of data data indicators
12. width 19. Length-average value
13. Thickness 20. Processor '
15. Preparation and output of 21. Position (instantaneous)
data onto display 22. Clock
15. Instantaneous density 23. Density
16. Lowest value of elastic
modulus

17. Control panel

The key factor making it possible to judge the quality of wood is the elastic
modulus. uniquely determined by the product of the density by the square of the
rate of propagation of a shock wave in the sample. The density is computed by the
processor from continuously registered values of the length, width. thickness and
weight of the sample. and the shock wave propagation rate from the delay time of
its front at fixed distances along the sample. Information is read out onto the
display panel on the instantaneous and length-average value of the elastic modulus,
the position of the section of the sample with the lowest modulus, the minimum
permissible value of the modulus, the density of the sample and the time.

The mechanical part of the system includes a shock mechanism synchronized by
pulses generated by the processor. sensors of the shock wave front for measuring
the instantaneous value of its propagation time, and sensors of size and weight.
The processor section is constructed on the basis of a Motorola model HC6800
microprocessor.

The microprocessor system is entrusted with the following tasks: starting and
stopping the time meter at the start and termination of testing of each sample;
reading out onto the indicator panel the number of the sample and monitoring values
of weight, size, density and elastic modulus; control of the shock mechanism;
fixing values of the delay time of the shock wave front and switching off the in-
dividual sensor before the start of a new wave in order to avoid a reaction to
reflected waves (improvement of noise immunity); receiving data on the length,
width, thickness, weight and delay time; computation of density; computation of
minimum elastic modulus relative to maximum delay time; computation of averaged
value of elastic modulus; finding samples with the lowest elastic modulus (re-
jection) and determination of the coordinates of the section of the sample with
the lowest modulus; and readout of results onto the indicator panel.

Information from analog size and weight sensors is converted by means of analog-
digital converters into a digital binary code which is entered through the system
line into the microprocessor as input data. The pulses of the time meter also

arrive there, whose number is proportional to the delay times of the shock wave
front in various sections of the sample.

The processor section of the system can be used without modification for other
applications, since at the design stage broader capabilities were given to it than

this problem requires. This relates in particular to the memory direct access
channel, whose use is not required here. but which makes the system more universal.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“III OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The microprocessor system is assembled on three boards-the HP per se. a control
board and a memory board, united by-the system line (SH).

The HP board includes. in addition to the central processor itself, line ampli-

fiers (HU's) and a small number of logic circuits with a low degree of integra-
tion (fig 21).

OR saenIJIpsummsa :3

Figure 21. Structure of HP Board
Key:
1. From control board 10.
2. Logic for setting initial state 11.
3. Synchronizing generator logic 12.
a. Step-by-step control logic l3.
5. Power line failure inter- 16.
rupt 15.
6. Setting initial state 16.
7. Power failure 17.
8. Synchronization lines 18.
9. Address lines

 

Write/read control

halt

Interrupt enable

Data lines

Bus line control

Line amplifiers

Bus line control signal
Interrupt enabling signal
System line

The board communicates with the system line by means of address lines (AD to A15),

data lines (D0 to D7) and control lines.

The latter includes a line for setting

the initial state (UIS), an interrupt enabling line (52?), a halt line (OST),
synchronization lines (F1 and P2) and an address write/read control line (OZ/S).
In addition, the HP board is connected directly to a board for controlling 018

lines. interruption upon failure of the power line (SAP). bus line control (UH)
and step-by-step control (?U).

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ftﬂl(”ﬂﬁ(JAl.USE(NNLY

The signal for setting the initial state is generated at the moment the power is
turned on and retrieves from the ROM a special routine which sets to zero all
counters and registers of the HP. The same signal can be sent from the control
panel at any moment of the execution of the routine. After setting the initial
state, the first instruction initiating the operating routine is automatically
accessed from the ROM.

Interrupts can be carried out in two cases-after response to an interrupt enabling
signal periodically generated by the control board, and also with inperaissible
deviation of the value of the supply voltage from the nominal.

In the first method an interrupt enabling signal (82?) is used and in the second
a power line failure signal (SAP).

The synchronizing generator with driving logic, located on the microprocessor
board, generates two phases of pulses with a clock rate of 500 kHz, which deter-
mine the dynamics of the operation of the entire processor section. The clock
rate for the "66800 microprocessor can be increased to 1 NH: (cf. table 8), but
in this case this does not result in a noticeable increase in speed of response
of the system as a whole, since here it is determined by the aechanical section.

The halt input makes it possible to stop the execution of the operating routine
by means of a signal fro: the control panel, as well as to implement its step-by-
step execution, which is especially important in debugging and finding errors in
a newly entered routine.

All output signals of the HP enter the system line via a line amplifier making it
possible to increase the load capacity, which in the HB6800 HP corresponds to a
total of one input of an ordinary TTL integrated circuit.

Commutation of all lines of the microprocessor with the system line, with the ex-
ception of lines Pl, F2 and UIS, is acconplished by means of the sun signal geneé
rated in the microprocessor. A write/read control signal is also generated in the'
microprocessor and serves the purpose of implementing the natural sequence of these
operations in the execution of an instruction.

The control board, just as the microprocessor board, is designed as a universal
element of the structure, permitting various applications without any kind of
modification. '

It contains an address decoder (DA), a data register (an), a register for signals
from the control panel (RP). interrupt servicing logic (1?) and generators of
signals for the control panel (GP), for controlling states of the processor (60),
for halting and step-by-step control (00 and PD), and emergency interrupt (AP)
(fig 22).

The address decoder (DA) converts the 16-bit binary address code into signals
directly controlling the operation of the entire processor section with data
presented to this address.

71

FI”!(NHNCJAL.USE¢NVLY
Key:

Figure 22. Structure of Control Board
1. Control panel 13.
2. System bus line 14.
3. Address lines 15.
4. Driving lines 16.
5. Write/read signal 17.
6. Address decoder (DA) 18.
7. Data lines 19.
8. Data register (RD)
9. Control panel signal genera- 20.
tor (GP)
10. Control panel signal register 21.
(RP) 22.
11. Processor state control sig-
nal generator (GU) 23.
12. Interrupt servicing logic (LP) 24.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

72

Processor state control signal (031’)
Initial state setting signal (DIS)
Interrupt enabling signal (SIP)
Response signal (80?)

Halt (OST)

Step-by-step control signal (SPO)
Halt signal generator and step-by-step
control signal generator (60 and PU)
Emergency interrupt signal generator
(GA)

Emergency interrupt signal (SAP)
Microprocessor systen control signal
(UHS)

To poser supply

To HP board

FIHR!)FF1CJAI.LE§E(N‘LY
F0R40FFNJAI.USEINULV

Control signals are generated by generators 60, GP, GA, GO and P0. An interrupt
is organized by the generation of an interrupt enabling signal (2?), which perio—
dically interrogates all units requiring it and in the case of a response (an
SOP signal) halts the process for the output or entry of information through the
system line (SH). The signal for controlling the state of the processor (03?)
determines the state of the processor during the course of each cycle, as well as
its beginning and end.

In the step-by-step execution of a routine, set from the control panel. the con-
tents of the data register (ID) are indicated on the panel by leans of signals
generated by the 6? generator.

The halt and step-hy-step control signal generator (60 and PD) generates the appro-
priate signals upon an instruction from the control panel.

An interrupt ensuing as the result of a power failure and made possible by the

AP generator is distinguished fron a stop by the fact that after setting of the
required value of the supply voltage the systen is automatically set to the initial
state and continues functioning from the first instruction of the operating rou-
tine. After a stop, as also after an interrupt. for the purpose of exchanging in-
fornation with a peripheral unit the routine continues to be executed fron the
step at which it was interrupted.

3?", SAP and 018 signals enter the nicroprocessor board by bypassing the SH line,
and all other signals of the control board are transmitted through it.

The processor's menory is also located on an individual board and permits both an
arbitrary increase in its volume and alteration of its structure. In this case
the total menory capacity is 32 (hits, 2068 bytes or 8-bit words (16 Kbits) of
which are diverted for storage of the operating routine. In the process of the
execution of a routine this information can only be read, and in a single sequence
determined by the routine itself. The remaining 16 Kbits form the RAN. i.e., can
be read and written arbitrarily, whereby 1 [bit serves the purpose of on-line
storage of information from the input/output of peripheral units.

An example of the unification of the three boards of this processor with two peri-
pheral units is given in fig 23. All inputs/outputs of the boards are united by

a parallel line, with the exception of the SOP signal lead, which passes through
the peripheral units sequentially, which determines the time priority of the inter-
rupts performed through it. This example differs from the processor section of

the lumber sorting system described-only by a lower number of peripheral units con-
nected to the systen line.

In the lumber sorting system an interrupt can be caused for three reasons. The
first reason is checking of the correctness of functioning of the system by the
operator by scans of switches on the control panel. The second is a start signal
initiated from the control panel and the third is a signal for termination of
measurement of the shock wave propagation rate and the start of the processing of
data obtained as the result of measuring.

73

FIMI(INWCJAI.USEINVLY
F‘HICHWNJAL.USE(HVLY

       
     

E:crssnss 1)

       

       

W 12)
-
II II Iilllll 13)
A. -
”2:5 ii-i-i-
lo) :3": ==—=-=- i
33., IIIIIIIIIII-IIIIII-II .
331 -Is-l_-—
nan -II-I-II-
8 a IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
ac --—l_
9’ ===== 1»
5..'::.‘:'.'.. J -I_I— momma.
10) [ ----—
n
) __.,_, m 16)
33535917) ’m

Figure 23. Variant of Unification Into a System of a Processor, Helory and
Two Peripheral Units

1. System line 10. To control panel

2. Address lines 11. Interrogation response signal
3. Date lines 12. Step-by-step control signal
4. Write/read control 13. Emergency interrupt signal

5. Synchronization lines 16. Memory board

6. Halt 15. Hicroprocessor board

7. _Line control signal 16. Control board

8. Interrupt enabling signal 17. Peripheral units

9. Initial state setting

74

FOR 0FFKJAI.USB(NVLY
FfNICMﬂﬂf1Al.USE(HULY

The sonitoring systen described serves as an example of the ailplest utilization
of a microprocessor iron the viewpoint of the algorithm executed by it and the
speed of response thereby required. Much more widespread in practice is the prob.
lem of controlling production techological processes in real time. which is solved

at the present time by analog and digital automation equipment based on centralised
computing systems of relatively high capacity.

Preferred for this kind of control has been and remains the proportional-plus-
integral-plus-derivative control (P10) method. whose essence is illustrated by
fig 25. The method consists in introducing multiloop feedback. the main loop of

which accomplishes only integral (I) regulation and encompasses the proportional
(P) and derivative (D) regulation loops [13].

Boa-male )

P
2) 353:: z.) 4332”“

 
    
   

Peruapyousn
-— 7 ) ope-um
v.1

  
 
  

 

. r
Jcrasosnoo
Janene no-
”I"?!

1)

8)

Figure 24. Functional Diagram of Controller Implementing the Method of
Proportionsl-Plus-Integral-Plus-Derivative (PID) Control

Key:
1. Control value of parameter 6. Entity
2. Error signal 7. Controlled variable
3. l 8. (Entity output)
a. Controlling variable 9. P
5. Perturbation 10. D

The error signal is generated as the result of the comparison of the output signal
(controlled variable) with some parameter assigned outside (control value). The

value itself of the controlling variable depends on the magnitude and tins of the
effect (i.e., the result of integration) of the error signal, as well as on the

rate of variation and instantaneous value. i.e., the result of differentiation and
linear transformation, of the output signal.

The PID method of control has already for alnost a half century been the main one
in systems for the auto-atic control of production processes and with proper use

75
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it gives very good results. With the transition from analog controllers to digital
controllers, routines simulating analog laws of control were written for digital
controllers. l'hus, a digital PID control algorithm originated which possesses
greater flexibility than the analog.

A digital computer for controlling a technological process was installed for the
first time at a chemical plant in the USA in 1959. Accomplishing centralized
digital control, it occupied the upper rung in the hierarchy of the control system
and assigned control values to distributed analog controllers.

Control minicomputers, and after them microprocessor systems, initiated the next
stage in the development of equipment for the automatic control of processes.

The changeover from centralized computers to distributed made it possible to solve
control problems on a qualitatively new basis, including with the employment of the
PID method.

Distributed control was the only method used before the appearance of coquters;
however, the microprocessor variant of distributed control has considerable dif-
ferences which determine its advantages both over the analog and over the central-
ized digital method. This difference consists primarily in the use of a ‘data line,
i.e.. a single- or multiwire line connecting all "controlled process (00) - control
processor (UP)" circuits with the central processor (TsP), which organizes the
operation of the entire system and reads out operating information on its opera-
tion onto displays (fig 25a and b).

It is believed that comlexes of this sort codeine the reliability of analog sys-
tems with the universality, diversity of algorithms and centralized storage of
information which is characteristic of digital system.

An important feature of distributed control systems is their high stability, which
means that the failure of each independent low-level control circuit does not
result in loss of working capacity of the entire system, i.e., has less serious
consequences than failure of the processor in a centralized system.

The following are considered the main problems which must be solved in desiping
and introducing distributed systems for controlling production processes:

The ensurance of high reliability in the transmission of digital data through lines
of considerable length (on the order of dozens and hundreds of meters) under con-
ditions of the intense influence of industrial electromagnetic interference.

Improving the noise i-unity of digital buffer units operating on the bus line.

The creation of a special interface for the exchange of information between peri-
pheral control circuits and the central processor.

At the present time several foreign firms produce HP systems for the distributed
control of production. For example. Honeywell (USA) offers users a system able to
control 126 circuits for each of several remote terminal units, whose nmr can be
increased. Thirty-two circuits are controlled by a single remote terminal in the

HP system of the Yokogawa firm (Japan). Both systems use coaxial cables for trans-
ferring data.

76
F0! OFT-10A]. USE ONLY
I‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 25. Bus Line Method of Uniting “Controlled Process (00) - Control
Processor (UP)" Circuits into s Control System with s Branched
Bus (s) and the Independent Connection of "00 - U?" Circuits (b)

Key:
1. Control processor (UP) 3. rs? [central processor]
2. DUI [controlled process No l] 4. 00p [added controlled process]

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the introduction of HP systems characterized by small size and low cost,

the number of production processes the digital control of which is economically
justified has been increased. This increase is due to the ability to control at
low levels right down to individual technological operations. For example, in
addition to Honeywell and Yokogawa. who supply their remote terminals individually
as small built-in multicircuit systems, Bristol (USA) produces a control system
employing a microprocessor having eight circuits, and Measurex a system controlling
six circuits. These HP systems are examples of small low-level independent sys-
tems for controlling production processes.

25. Microprocessor Systems for Expanding the Functions and Improving the Key
Characteristics of Communications Equipment

Communications equipment has been and remains the most important entity for the
application of digital computer technology, and the use of microprocessors in
communications equipment has opened up new prospects here. As early as 1976
according to the data of the journal ELECTRONICS EQUIPMENT “IRS 16 percent (in
terms of cost) of all microprctessors produced in the world were used for communi-
cations needs. This figure is shown to be especially significant if it is taken
into account that during this year 15 percent of microprocessors found an appli-
cation in industrial technology, 10 percent in measuring equipment and 4 percent
in transportation [16].

Telephony was one of the first areas of application of microprocessors. As early
as 1976 Chester Corporation created the BCS-SO individual automatic telephone
exchange designed on the basis of a model 8008 microprocessor [15]. The micro-
processor here serves the multiplex mode of operation, distributing information
over time intervals (regarding multiplexing cf. sec 1). and also controls the
connection, disconnection and other states of user stations. Special features or
restrictions for each user are stored in the ROM. The same firm later developed
an auxiliary HP system designed for operating together with the DOS-50. called
the SHDAS. It is based on a model HC6800 microprocessor. The SHDAS serves the
purpose of making connections and maintaining communications according to any
predetermined time schedule.

In 1977 a report was published on the creation of an independent radio telephone
system, the model GLZOOO. joined to the telephone network of the USA and Canada
[16]. This system employs an IH6100 microprocessor and accomplishes the following:
scanning and the establishment of coummnicstions through any free channel of a
subscriber's telephone network; automatic two-tone ringing; reference dialing
(makes it possible by pressing one or 10 buttons to call any of 10 subscribers
with 10—digit numbers programmed in advance); repeated calling of a busy number;
and indication of the current time and connection at a given moment of time.

The terminal is of small size and weight and can be installed in an automobile,
for example.

In the not too distant future the use of HP's in telephone systems will obviously
make it possible to solve the problem of converting audio signals into digital

code and vice-versa for the purpose of transmitting only digital information through
communications lines.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [5! ONLY

Generally speaking, the use of microprocessors will make it possible to expect

of the telephone of the future the implementation of such features as: button
dialing with conversion of the signal into disk dialing pulses; the transmission
of tone-type call signals with control of their amplitude and frequency; the re-
presentation on a digital indicator of the tine of day, the length of a connection,
the nusber dialed, the last number dialed, a number to be transmitted repeatedly
from the memory of the automatic dialing unit and the number of any subscriber
taking part in a connection; internal holding of a line with an indication of its
retention; automatic dialing according to nuﬁers stored in‘the memory with the
possibility of their re-entry; repeated dialing of the last number dialed by
pressing a "Repeat Call" button; programing of nudaers for urgent connections by
pressing a single button; indication of functions performed at a given moment;
connection to internal cousmications lines; mloyment of a co-mications unit
with a system for transmitting data and msic through a line in the hold state [17].

In addition to telephone co-unications, the use of microprocessors has opened up
broad prospects in radio communications equipment. Able to serve as an example

is a report on the use of an P166800 microprocessor in two stationary 100- and 400-“
radio stations serving the purpose of establishing two-way comnications for a
great number of radio sets of the backpack type, served by operators at forward
positions with a command station which can be at a considerable distance both from
the positions themselves and from a stationary radio station serving the purpose

of a radio relay unit, [18].

Automatic tuning to a fixed frequency in steps of 100 Hz in 1.5 s is accomplished
by means of a microprocessor in the 2 to 30 MB: band. In addition, the micropro-
cessor controls the operation of a high-speed vacuum relay switch which alters the
reactance of the high-frequency section, at the same time cowenssting the varia-
tion in the impedance of the antenna at various operating frequencies and totally
automating adjustment of the antenna.

The high performance of the relay transmitter, obtained on account of using a
built-in HP system in it, has made it possible to reduce considerably the weight
and size of backpack transceivers.3 With a transmitter power of 10 H a set of this
sort weighs 7 kg and is about 3 dm in size.

25. Microprocessor Systems for Improving the Accuracy of and for Automating
Measurements

The use of microprocessors in IeLf'Jl'il‘ls instruments makes it possible to achieve

a whole number of positive result:- which cannot be achieved by other means, The
most characteristic requirements for measuring equipment are the requirements for
accuracy and for preserving it for an extended period over a wide range of the
influence of destabilizing factors. For the purpose of compensating time and use
instability causing a change in the function for the conversion of a measured value
into that observed, it is almost always necessary to calibrate instruments directly
before measurement or at certain intervals representing test intervals. This as a
rule is a relatively labor intensive operation and is often insufficiently effec-
tive since the parameters of an instrument can change rather quickly during the
time of a measurement. For the purpose of reducing the error caused by these
changes it is recounended that the measuring instrument be prewarmed or that it be
kept in the switched-on state before beginning measurement, which, of course,

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US“. ONLY

reduces the capacity for on-line use or simply makes the instrument inconvenient
to handle.

One important function entrusted to a microprocessor used as part of measuring
equipment is therefore the function of automatic self-calibration, carried out

not only before measuring, but also in the process of the effect of the signal of
the measured quantity on the input of the meter. The frequency of this calibra-
tion can be fairly great for the purpose of carrying out a great number of calibra-
tions during the period of a single measurement.

Another important capability afforded by the use of a microprocessor in a measuring
instrument is the possibility of preprocessing of the output information of the
meter itself for the purpose of expanding the functional capabilities and improv-
ing the characteristics of the measuring instrument as a whole. As the result of
this processing it is possible to average automatically the results of measuring,
to reduce quantities to a specific dimensionality, to select the optima measuring
range. to compute assigned functions, and the like, in other words, to obtain from
the measurement precisely the information which is required in each specific case.

And finally the third important advantage realized by using a microprocessor is the
possibility of a self-check and diagnosis of the measuring instrument, i.e., the
detection and indication of the location of a discovered malfunction, and, if this
is possible, the elimination of it by the connection of standby equipment or the
selection of the proper operating mode. This property is especially important for
independent measuring systems with high reliability, such as, for example, systems
for testing and diagnosing spacecraft.

0f no small importance also is the reduction in the size, weight and power con-

sumption of measuring equipment in which the above-listed properties are realized
by using a microprocessor.

One of the first digital measuring instruments realizing the advantages of using
a microprocessor is the Systron Donner (USA) 5.5-bit model 7115 multimeter with a
built-in model 4001. microprocessor [19].

It measures d.c. voltage, the effective value of alternating current, resistance
and ratios of these quantities. The multiprocessor accomplishes programsed coupl-
ing of the real conversion function of the meter with constants stored in its
memory, i.e., automatic self-calibration, as well as the statistical averaging of

readings, linearization of measured quantities and the preprocessing of measurement
results according to a specific program.

These functions have made it possible to increase approximately fivefold the
accuracy of the instrument: Its error is 0.002 percent of the value of the mea-
sured quantity and 0.001 percent of the measurement limit, whereas the error of

the majority of 5.5-bit mltimeters without a microprocessor is not less than 0.01
percent of the value of the measured quantity.

The increase in accuracy is achieved on account of eliminating the influence on
measurement results of the ambient temperature, the "aging" of elements (before

the automatic zero setting the instrument measures the drift, stores it and then
subtracts it from the value of the measured quantity), as well as of random spikes

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI!0FFHJAI.USE(NULY

of the measured quantity (by averaging a sufficently-great number of measure-
ments).

To a no smaller extent the accuracy of the instrument is increased on account of
reducing errors associated with instability of the internal reference voltage
source (standard). In the process of self-calibration the instrument compares
the instantaneous value of the voltage of the reference source with its digital
equivalent stored in the memory in the form of a corresponding digital code. The
result of the comparison is stored and is used for corresponding correction of
the measured value of the input quantity.

Essentially in this instrument the standard is the digital code, in relation to
which in each measuring cycle the reference voltage source is checked, performing
essentially the function of a second standard. Errors associated with instability
of the standard are totally eliminated in this case and the accuracy of this check
is determined exclusively by the word length of the digital code and the error of
digital-analog or analog-digital (as a function of comparison in analog or digital
form) conversion.

Able to serve as another interesting example of the application of a microprocessor
in leasuring equipment is the Hewlitt Packard (USA) model 1722A oscillograph [20].
The so-called double-trace delayed presentation method is used in it for the pur-
pose of measuring time intervals. The advantage of this method is extreme mea-
surement precision, as well as the additional functional capability of the con-
venient, fast and accurate measurement of typical parameters of pulsed signals--
rise and fall time. duration of a pulse at a given level and the like. However,
this method is distinguished by complexity and only the use of a built-in con-
troller based on a type 8008 microprocessor made it possible to implement it.

For the purpose of measuring it is sufficient for the operator to match an addi-
tionally illuminated display section with the necessary signal pattern section.
The result of measuring duration, frequency or the signal, selected by pressing
the appropriate button. lights up automatically on a digital display. The micro-
processor makes it possible to set the measuring range, to compute duration and
frequency and also to convert and read information out onto the display. The time
interval measuring error of 0.7 percent is the lowest achieved in visual registra-
tion.

26. Microprocessor Systems in Household Appliances and Electronic Games

Haas consumption goods potentially represent the most popular area of application
of HP systems. The high reliability and steadily declining cost of microprocessors
are factors deciding in their favor the question of the choice of element and tech—
nological base for systems for automating the control of home appliances to replace
analog, discrete digital. electromechanical and other kinds of equipment. No less
attractive is the ability to gain new functions in home appliances along with tra-
ditional ones with an insignificant increase in cost. which has also determined the
advantages of microprocessor systems over any others.

Any enumeration of mass consumption goods containing microprocessors will be in-
complete and inadequate, since reports of new developments in this area are being
published constantly. Having first appeared in pocket calculators and electronic

81

FOIlOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

timepieces with added functions. microprocessors have been swiftly gaining ground
in mass consumption goods. increasing their diversity in the process. Today
microprocessors have been firmly established in refrigerators and microwave ovens,
in sewing and washing machines. in air conditioners and heating systems, in tele-
vision and electronic games. and even in coffee makers the need for and possibili—
ty of effectively using a microprocessor has been established.

Universal microprocessors produced in large quantities for a wide range of appli-
cations are often used for these purposes, but it must be mentioned that no less
often it proves to be economically advantageous to develop special-purpose LSIC's,
since their manufacturing volume can also be fairly great, and precisely this con-
dition has been and remains decisive for ensuring the economy of microelectronic
products.

First-priority taking into account of the economic factor and the problem associ-
ated with it of selecting between standard microprocessors and those fabricated
on a special-order basis represent perhaps the main feature of the development of
microprocessor systems for mass consumption products.

An example of the effective replacement of electromechanical control by digital

is the high-quality Accutrak 6000 record changer with wireless remote control [21].
It has a built-in microcomputer making it possible to play records in any sequence
according to a program entered in advance by means of a keyboard, to change records,
and to turn the changer on and off. The cost of a unit with these capabilities
implemented by other methods would have been prohibitive.

Able to be considered another example of this kind is the use of a microprocessor
for controlling the operating cycle of a washing machine [2]. A program specified
before washing by means of several keys contains information on the required water
temperature and washing time and particularities. The microprocessor interrogates
a temperature sensor and according to its value controls a built-in heater, and
also determines the instant for switching the motor on and off. At the end of
washing. the dirty water is drained and the motor is turned on for the squeeze-
dry cycle. If tht program calls for washing woolens, the squeeze-dry cycle is
omitted. In addition, the microprocessor cuts off the power in case of the origin
of an electric shock hazard. A simplified flowchart of the algorithm for function-
ing of the HP system is presented in fig 26.

The application of microprocessors has served as a factor providing an incentive
for the appearance of a great number of various electronic games characterized
primarily by a high degree of "intellectuality." The most widespread have become
games designed as attachments to a television set, which are connected to its
antenna input. The television screen acts as the playing field, on which an image
of moving and stationary objects is formed, which are controlled by the players
from special entry consoles. The conditions of the game and the configuration of
objects on the screen can be specified by means of replaceable modules based on
ROH's.

Thus, use of these games has taken on the character of the use of a record playing
system--the basic system is purchased at a relatively high price but playing capa-
bilities are expanded by the acquisition of inexpensive replaceable modules.

82

FOR OF11C1A1.USEGJNLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

 

run ”(on

Algal-1th. for Functioning
a Washing Machine

6'

mar 7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

tempera—

83

Heater

Start motor
Measure the
No

ﬂash conplet
Hashing

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Stop motor 19. Measure time
13. Sensor of water level in 20. Squeeze-dry cycle
drum 21. Is squeeze dry finished?
14. Is there water in drum? 22. Stop motor
15. Drain water 23. End of operation

16. Drain pump
17. Are there woolens?
18. Start Hotor

For example. the first programmable game system. the Pairchild vss, which has been
manufactured since 1976. is organised in this manner [21]. The basic unit contains
two games-”Tennis" and ”Hockey"--and in addition replacement modules can be added
for quite different games--from “Tic-Tsc-Toe" to "Star Wars." The Pairchild P-B
microprocessor is the basis of the game system. Control of the moving objects on

the screen is accomplished in this system by means of two remote units furnished
with control knobs.

The RCA Studio 11 game system, unlike the above, is controlled from keyboard can-
soles and has more developed "intellectual" capabilities. The keys are used for
setting conditions and for the game itself. A cable connecting the system to the
antenna input of a television set serves at the same time for delivering supply
voltage to the unit.

The system makes it possible by means of a keyboard to select programs for five
different games. One program makes it possible to draw on the television screen
any kind of picture and to erase and correct drawings. A second program simulates
automobile races, creating dangerous situations which must be avoided, whereby the
moment of the occurrence and the nature of the danger are not foreseeable in ad-
vance. A third program sets up a bowling alley and two others games for speed of
reaction and the development of skills in calculating and handling a graphic in-
formation input unit.

The structure of games can be altered by replacing special cassettes which are sold
widely. The game system is constructed on the basis of an RCA COSHAC micropro-
cessor and contains in addition to it a total of four LSIC's.

In addition to the creation of programmable television games, the use of micro-
processors hss made it possible to expand the capabilities of non-television active
games. Able to be placed under this heading, for example, is the Fidelity chess
trainer. utilizing an RIC (Japan) 8080A microprocessor and substituting for a
partner of average skill [22]. The game system is combined with a chessboard.

A move is entered into the system by means of a keyboard console. to which the
system reacts by displaying the counterxsove on a digital display.

In concluding this description of the specific applications of HP systems it is
necessary to stress again how important a role for popular introduction is played
by their cost, which is reduced in proportion to the mastery of microprocessors in
large-lot production. Actually the use of microprocessor systems becomes feasible

almost everywhere where their cost proves to be approximately an order of magnitude
lower than the cost of the product itself, which does provide grounds for hoping
for the general use of microprocessors in the not too distant future.

8‘

Filltlﬂﬂ(lkl.lﬂﬂitﬂ'LY .
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

INJR¢0FF1CJAI.IHHE(NNLY

Bibliography

Herrit Rich. "Hicroprocessor User Survey Results," NWATION TECHNOLOGY,
Vol 23, No 4. 1976. pp 36—40.

Bloneyer-Bsrtenstein. NJ’. "Microprocessors Key of the Equipnent Generation
Tomorrow," COHPONENTS REPORT, Vol 11, No 2. 1976, pp 33-36.

Grinkevich, V.A. "Principles of the Structural Orgsnization of a Unified
Element Base and Data Processing Facilities Bssed on LSIC's," PRIBORY I SISTEHY
UPRAVLENIYA, No 6, 1978, pp 3-7.

lChilburn, Dzh. and Dzhulich. P. "Hikro-EVH i niltroprotsessory" [Hicrocowuters
and Microprocessors). translated from English. edited by S.D. Pashkeyev,
Moscow, Hir, 1979.

Pullagar, D. "Getting Microprocessors into Perspective," ELECTRONIC ENGINEER-
ING, Vol 48. No 580, 1976. pp 61-63.

”Hicropocesadores y nicroconputadores," 1976, Barcelona.

clazov, G.Ya., Drizovskiy. Inn. and Korennov, YeJ’. "Know-lion Gained in
Development and Application of Microprocessors. a Review," PRIMY I SISTEHY
UPRAVLENIYA, No 8. 1977, pp 18-21 and No 9. pp 15-18.

Harruson, P. "The Inpact of the Microprocessor," DATA PROCESSING, Vol 17,
No 3, 1975. PP 214-216.

Prangishvili, I.V. "State of the Art and Development Trends of Microprocessors
and Microcomputers," IZHBRENIYE, KONTRDL', AWTIZATsIYA, No 1 (9). 2 (10),
1977.

Khvostsntsev, H.A. "Microprocessors and Data Processing System, a Review."
ZARUBEZHNA‘; RADIOELEKTRONIKA, No 9, 1975, pp 31-60.

Kornstein, H. "Third-Generation Microcomputers." HICROELBCTRONICS AND
RELIABILITY, Vol 16. No 4, 1977.

Logan. J. and Kresger, P. "Using a Microprocessor: s Real—Life Application,"
COMPUTER DESIGN. Vol 14. No 9. 1975, pp 69-77.

Auslender. 0.11., Takakhasi, Ya. and Tonidzuks. )1. "Use of Microprocessors
for Direct Control of Processes and Algorithm for Controllers Utilizing
Microprocessors," TIIER, Vol 66, No 2, 1978, pp 113-124.

Banks. H. ”HPU's--a Present and s Puture," ELECTRONIC EQJIPHENT NBHS, No 12,
1976, pp 20-21.

Kaye, David N. "Microprocessors Help to Communicate by Voice and Bit Stream."
ELECTRONIC DESIGN, No 8. 1976, pp 58-61.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

John. R. "Francis Microprocessor Boosts Mdiotelephone Service,"
WICATION NEWS, August 1977.

Melvin. D.K. "Use of Microcolputera in Telephony." TIIER, Vol 66, No 2,
1978, pp 91-103.

"Microprocessors in the Latest Military Comnicatione Equipment," KLEK-
rmurn. No 22, 1977, p 15.

"Digital Voltneter with Microprocessor," mmoquA, No 16, 1977, p 17.
"First Oscillograph with Microprocessor." BLEKTRONIKA, No 2, 1975, p 85.

Russo. P.M. Microprocessors in Mass Consmption Goods," TIIBR, Vol 66,
No 2. 1978. pp 25-37.

"Chess Sparring Partner," Emmott“, No 5. 1976, p 11.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyez'". 1981

8831
(:50:

8166/0100

-END-

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY