l-‘OIOFI'IGALUSEONLY

JPRS L/10522

17 May 1982

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 10/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

MWMWONLY
Jl’ls publications contain infer-tion pri-rily fro- foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Ibterials tron foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- Bnglish-langnage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and neterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPIIS. Processing indicators such as [Tut]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or follouing the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information ins
procassed. were no processing indicator is given. the infor-
ntion «as sr-asrized or extracted.

Unfaniliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. ﬂords or uses preceded by a ques-
tion earl: and enclosed in parentheses vere not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. tines within irons are as
given by source.

ﬁle contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of die 0.8. Coven-eat.

comrm MUS All) WJTIOKS GOVERIIIUG WI? 0?
serum: “PRODUCED HERE!“ “WIRE rm DISSEHDIA‘IIOII
0P nus PUBLICATION IE RESTRICTED roe OFFICIAL WI WY.
USSR REPORT
Cmmencs. Commas mo Automnou Tammy

W0 10/ 82)

Contents

mm:
Floppy Disk Storage Controller for Hark Place Autmtion

W O....0...0..D...0......0.0......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Connection of Infomtim Scum“ to Unified-Series
mars w M8 0: Im mt 0....OOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO

Aspects of Use in Fest Pom-1w Won Procesm of lie-or:
Utilizing tyne-1c letel-Inmletor Moondnctor large-
kal. hwmm emu“ OOIIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOO...

Mical mucmw Structures and Architecture of their

m OOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00000000COOOOOOO...
Microproc- Controller for Floppy niek Statuses ...............
m- m mummr W O...0..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

ﬁnalization of Sizes of net mac Mine in Designing
Storage Devices ilith Increased Intention Density ...........

State of Art for ﬁber mtio Appncetime in Mentions ....
Mathematical Procedures for Evaluating Mater Syeta

Reliability O...0".O0.00.00.0.00000000000COOOOOOOOOOOO0.00...

Design Technique for Digital Saying Filter no: Find
”mt md M We me...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0......

Analog-Digital Automtic J-ing 815ml Spend-ﬁne
messing we“ 0....OCO...O...OO...OOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOO...

- I - [III - USSR - 210 551'

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M “PM mm:

mm 31m
Configuration of Multiprocessor Couputer Systeu .............
Structure of Hultiprocessor Computer Hardware ................
Control multiprocessor With Distributed Operating Systel n...
30M

Approach to Describing Function of Branching to Next
Hieroinstruction in a Micron-ogre! .........................

Teclmiqne for Design and Debugging of Software for
”wen” mugs .0....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOCOOO

Selected Itas ha: Journal mammals AID mu
m” 1981 .000...OOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOO00000000009900.90000900

APPLICATIGS

Basic Principles for Developent of nigital Caputer
Couplexes for mtiehmel Ptoceseim of Pull-Scale

rest h“ O...00......00000'.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOODOOOOOIOOOOO

Probleu-m-ienud Couple: for Processing General 811p
Inter-tier: Based on Hiniconpnter (Tesla and Algoriths)....

Interaction of Computing Processes in Antmted Research

vea‘els CU...OOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

mums
Pom 0! Counter network Organizatim .......................
PUBLICATIms

Table of Contents From Jom'nal ummou AND W
mmr', Juan-rem lwa 0......0000000000.000....

Cjbernetice and Computer Emblem-ins: Discrete Control

W 0.0.0.0....0......OOOQOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOO.

Problems of Control in humerus, Beonolics and Biology..."

mammal“
new mm WA m- tuna-m in m 1981(eisned to prese
19 Aug 81) pp 3-10 ‘

[Article by nus. Yekovlev. Ye.‘l’. W, LA. Toventukh, A4. Yurssov, ear.
lbkovenko end H.A. Geyvoronskiy iron collection of erticlss Numb and Microcomputer
Hardcore". edited by Ukrainian SS! Ludo-y of Sciencee Corresponding be: 3.1!.
Holinovskiy, Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian SS! Acsdqy of Sciences, 500
copies, 80 pages]

[Text] The effectivnese of the epplicetion of Iini- end nitrocoquteto. es veil as
of system hosed on then, is deter-ind to e coneiderehle extent by the cherecter-
istics of external aunties. ﬂoppy disk etoreges have been widely need no exteruel
neeorieo in tecent yesre.

In eotonsted work places floppy disk storegee ere widely used for storing coupilete
fro. high—level We or needle". operating oyetas, input/output utilities,
owl-tors of exchange protocols end pechaee of epplied props”. A greet Ila-her of
eutouted work places which use floppy disk etorues ere low-a, such es the “Event
2000' device fro. the ”plied Date muons lh‘. the 1201-250
”nyurokoq'ynter" [Office Oonputet] produced' in the People’s kepuhlic of Edwin.
the Zentec ”ac-so". etc.
IV- VOOIVOIOOo was“ Vl.hb

is reduced slang with the possihility of the adaptation of softnnre, and in the
second the low speed does not note it possible to solve an entire series of prob.-
less having strict tine linitations (e.g., osulators of systens enchange protocols).
Cassette senories are also inconvenient for storing coqilers in connection with the
overlay structure of coapilers.

For using floppy disk storages in Iicroprocessor system as, besides, any other ex-
ternal ae-nries. also, it is advisable to develop and create controllers asking it
possible to relieve the processor to the axin- fron the functions of controlling
these units. since they mine it possible to construct operating systena without
reference to a specific type of storage.

At the present tine in can countries several types of floppy disk storages are
being developed which have to a considerable extent a unified interface and similar
teclnical characteristics. The international standard for recording on an ISO
track is usually used in these storages [l].

The exchange of information between the central processor (To?) and the controller
can be accoqlished in the progra- control node, interrupt node. or innthe direct-
access channel (RFD?) node. The relatively high speed of lagnetic disk storages
requires the use of the me node. In this case the controller ﬁrst obtain fron the
central processor informtion on the address of the location fro- which readout be-
gins or into which writing of the data field of a sector begins.

The conpletion and correctness of the execution of an operation can be checked
through an interrupt line and/or by interrogation by the central processor of the
controller's state.

Analysis of the infomtion required for controlling a floppy disk storage sakes it
possible to single out the following key functions of a controller:

1) Matching central processor and floppy disk storage interfaces.
2) Receiving and decoding instruction inforaotion and sending out state signals.

3) Controlling positionining of the head and seaming the state of readiness of
storages.

A) Synchronizing with the asgnetic nodiun in executing operations.

5) Controlling the operating node of the storage (read/write).

6) Converting a parallel code into a serial and vice-versa. toning write signals
in the execution of operations involving writing, as well as separating data and
synchronizing pulses in reading infer-don out fron a disk.

7) Generating and verifying the cyclic check code.

8) Coordinating the performnce of all functions.

son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
or course, the hardware and soitunre isplenentatien of the functions listed above
can be quite different:

Using ”hard” logic .

By neans of nicroprogra-ble controllers executed with integrated circuits with
a nediun degree of integration, general-purpose nicroprocessors and special-purpose
nicroprocessors.

The use of ”hard" logic Cakes it possible to construct controllers for high-speed
disk units. In addition, an analysis of the operating algorithns of controllers
for floppy disk storages has shown that such a controller not execute long control
sequences, which requires the storage of a great under of states. In addition,
the inplenentation of these control sequences with ”hard" logic results in consider-
able functional redundancy because of the cowleeity of the mltifunctional use of
elensnts and units. for the creation of s controller e-ploying “hard" logic 300 to
1000 integrated circuits with a nedit- degree of integration are now required [3].

The feasibility of the nicroprogran principle of iqlenenting controllers for floppy
disk storages is obvious fro. the above. In this case seqnences of the states of
the controller are assigned in the for: of chains of nicroinstructions and the nu-.
her of functional units can be all, since (if the speed nkes this possible) their
multifunctional use is possible. tor angle, the najority of functions minted
with positioning, as well as with deter-lining the position of the head instantaneous-
ly, can be perforned by nicroprogran.

A controller for a floppy disk storage can be i-ple-ented on the basis of single-
chip sectionalized large-scale integrated circuits (1316's) of nicroprocessors,
as well as by using special-purpose interface LSIC's.

A controller eqloying a single-chip nicroprocessor can have a high logical and con-
puting capacity. This takes it possible to hand over to these controllers a nunber
of functions of the operating systen relating to the organization of input/output
and controlling the distribution of the external nasty. however. the use of these
nicropnocessors for constructing controllers is hanpered at the present tins because
of the insufficient speed of a nicroprocessor for the functions of processing and
converting data. the necessity of including in the controller's structure additional
units not only for perforning control functions, but also for processing informtion,
the require-sent of analyzing a great nuﬁer of conditions and state signals, the
need to produce a great We: of control signals (20 to 30 Just for directly con-
trolling the storage), and the conplaxity of natching the nicroprocessor's interface
with the remaining equip-est of the controller.

Controllers for floppy disk storagen based on sectionalized nicroprocessors have
found eetensive animation (e.g.. the SIC—201 controller based on the haul-3000
[10]).

Special-purpose LSIC's for interfacing with floppy disk storages have appeared in
recent years abroad 03.3., the Intel 8271. Hotsrola 6843 and Roch-ell 10936 [3]).
However. the cowolexity of the fornstion of write signals, difficultiu in separat-
ing data and the diversity of floppy disk storages have been responsible for the

roe OFﬂcaAl. USE ONLY
CUR UI’IILsnh 09G U|‘LI

fact that a masher of functions relating to interfacing with a central processor
interface, to the recognition of data, to controlling the storage and certain
others must he inplenented with additional integrated circuits.

It can he concluded fron the above that for the purpose of constructing a controller
fron floppy disk storages it is advisable to use the series 589 nicroprocessor set.
A controller which is being introduced, developed on the basis of this series for
controlling storages using type mass floppy disks and includal in the nenory syste-
of an autonated work place. contains the following units: a systen instruction unit,
a unit for interfacing with the couon has. a central processor elenent unit, a
nicroprogran control unit, a direct-access channel ('01)?) unit. a data processing
unit and a disk drive control unit.

The system instruction unit recopizes the controller's address and receives and de-
codes instructions iron the central processor. '

Interfacing of the controller with the central processor and cowuter's working
storage is accoqlished by scans of the unit for interfacing with the canon bus.

The nicroprogran control unit receives and decodes instructions of the central pro-
cessor (three out of seven instructions) and also organizes the accessing fron the
senory of the controller's control infornation required for perforning disk opera-
tions. It sakes possible the interpretation of three instructions of the central
processor and seven instructions of the controller and controls the operation of all
units of the controller. A KSB9IKOl me is used for controlling the accessing of
sicroinstructions. The capacity of the nicroprogras senory is 512 32-bit words.

The nicroprograa neaory is inlanented with a K5563?“ 1.310.

The central processor elenent unit is executed with type [5891302 nicrocircuits.
Besides this it contains mltiplerers for inputing infer-tion through data lines

and masks. Output of the results of the execution of logic operations and cowarison
operations, as well as the input of conditions from the nicroprogran control unit,
are acconplished through control character lines. The results of processing are
transferred either to the central processor or to the data processing unit.

The KPDP unit organizes the exchange of infomtion with the central processor's
sensory through a direct-access channel.

The data processing unit perforns the recognitim of address labels and receives
sequences of hits read out iron the disk and organizes then into bytes. During
write-in it converts bytes of infatuation into a sequence of bits for recording on
tracks. In addition. it generates two bytes of a cyclic check code by dividing each
heading field and sector data field by a generating polynomial of the x“ + x‘ +

+ x’ + 1 type. In recording the heading field on a track the two bytes of the cyclic
check field are recorded at the end of the heading field. and in recording the data
field at the end of the data field.

In readout a cyclic check is patterned by wring the two bytes of the cyclic
check code recorded on the track and the bytes generated in the readout process.

roe omcllht use ONLY
The data processing unit is interfaced with the caisson bus through the central
processor elenent unit. During readout the unit's circuits are synchronized by
synchronizing pulses received frm the disk drive, and during write-in by a quartz-
stabilized write signal generator.

The unit for controlling the disk drive generates the necessary sipals for controll-
ing the floppy disk storage and also receives state signals from the storage.

All of the controller's operations are initiated by the nicroctnputer's central pro-
cessor. For specifying each operation of the floppy disk storage. the central pro-
cessor fem in the Iicroconputer's In! a control data block (out) containing 10
bytes, which are presented in table 1.

Table l.
E type of byte ﬁg 312 of Me
1. Channel word 6. Address of data buffer (lover-
2. Operation vord order byte)
3. Number of entries 7. Address of data buffer (higher-
6. Address of track order byte)
5. Address of sector 8. Met of operations in chain
9. Address of next 301 (loser-order
byte)
10. Address of next w: (higher-order
byte)

The channel word byte contains the infarction necessary for organizing control of
the operating nodes of the controller together with the nicrocoquter (control of
interrupt, execution of chain or individual operations, control of order of per-
fomnce of operations, assign-out of length of informtion word, etc.).

The nicrocosputer's central processor is linked with the controller by input/output
ports hy execution of the following seven instructions. which are given in table 2.

Table 2.

Hicrocgguter central processor instructions
E Desimation Instruction

1. 2M "rite lover-order hits of W address

2. zsa write higher-order bits of not address and start operation of
disk

3. 0130 Stop chain of operations

la. SKN Reset controller

5. ChSK Read state of controller

6. mm: Read type of result

7. Ch]!!! Read byte of result

[Continued on following page]

F08 Ofﬂcal. USE ONLY
run van-nun. not. mess

Controller's °2$55Q3£3

52 new
1. Retrieval

2. Tor-sting

3. lecalibration

S. [as published] Verification of cyclic check
6. "rite data

7. write erased data

The initial address of the control data unit is mined and the operation of the
controller is started by neans of the an and 28A instructions of the central pro-
cessor. After startnp, the controller perfor' all operations without the partici-
pation of the nicrocoeputer's central processor. The controller accesses bytes of

the control data unit for the periorlance of operations independently through the
nenory direct access channel.

The SIN instruction sets all of the controller's circuits to the inital state. The
Ul'sO instruction is used for stopping execution of the chain of operations of the
controller.

By scans of the 61:8! instruction the central processor receives infer-tin on the
attendance of the controller, the state of readiness of drives and the presence of
an interrupt enabling signal.

Through the (:th instruction the controller reads out the code for the type of re-
sult, by scans of which the central processor deter-ines the nature of the infer-a-
tion contained in a byte of the result and the III-her of incoqleted operations in a
chain.

Through the cum instruction the controller reads out the byte of the result in
which, depending on the code for the type of result, iniornstim is contained on the
readiness of drives or on the nature of errors.

The controller perform seven operations assigned by the control data unit's opera-
tion word. The list of controller operations is presented in table 2.

After the execution of a single operation or chain of operations (depending on the
code for controlling interrupts, which is assigned in the control data unit's channel
word) the controller puts out an interrupt enabling signal. An interrupt enabling
signal is put out also after the detection or an error in the process of the execu-
tion of the current operation and with a change in the state of readiness of the
drive selected. The central proccaeor receives the interrupt enabling sisal fro-
the controller either through an interrupt enahling line or through cyclic eaecution
of the ChSK instruction. After receiving the interrupt naming signal the central
processor deternines the reason for the interruption by sequential execution of

Chm and cum instructions. In addition, by scans of the sans instructions the

central processor picks up the interrupt enablm; signal iron the controller, after
which it can assign new operations.

momcfuusroutv
The controller has definite univernellty and with eliﬂlt 011111“th of Hiero-
progra- end hardware facilities can he need for controlling mime type. of
floppy disk otouges.

The controller which has been developed can he vldely need not only in constructing
lie-cry sync-o oriented toward use in «touted work places, but also in other
microprocessor cyst.” in particular in systems for debugﬂng deroproceuor factu-
tles. in nemrtng and data processing ante-o, etc.

Bibliography

1. Bogachev, A.V.. Kola-lye“. 6.8. and fedotov, VJ. "ﬂoppy Disk Storngu.”
UPIAVLYAWSBCBIYB 3131:!!! I m. Io 3, 1979, pp 62-68.

2. Davis, S. "CRT terninolo—ngrnmhlllty'e the Key to IQ." EDI. June 5, 1978,
pp 75-81.

3. 0331a, Carol A. "A l’loppy Disk Interface lo lore Than a Chip." EDI, Vol 23,
No 15, 1978, pp 115-1.9.

4. "Intel note Catalog, 1977," pp lO/ZZBclO/23l.
COPYRIGHT: Institut hibernetikl. 1981.

8831
CSO: 1863/ 116

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- UDC 621.39].

Wimwmmmmmmmnmmus-wzz
UNIT

Kiev MIMI?! SIDS‘NA m- I M in Russian 1981 (signed to press
19 Aug 81) pp 36-61

[Excerpts fron article by V.Ye. Ieutskiy and DJ. Seirnov fron collection of
articles "Hini- and microconputer lardusre". edited by Ukrainian SS! Acadeny of

Sciences Corresponding “er 3.3. Halinovsliy, Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian
SSR Acsde-y of Sciences, 500 copies, 80 pages]

[Excerpts] In carrying out scientific research and aperinsnts the necessity often
arises of connecting to a Yes [Unified Series] coIputer various devices which do
not have an output for the input/output interface of this coquter.

The isplenentation of a unit for nting with a Yes conputsr input/output interface
requires considerable herd-are costs (cf. description of s Yes conputer interface
in [1]). In addition, the situation often arises when sone input/output units
included in the structure of the caplex to be used are ardentilised. Therefore,
it is of interest to consider the possibility of using the equipnent of poorly ,
utilized input/output units included in the structure of Yes counters for the pur-
pose of connecting new external sources of infatuation.

In [2] the possibility is discussed of using the equippent of the Yes-5517 unit
for controlling tape storages for the purpose of connecting ninicoquters to Yes
conputers. In this study the possibility is discussed of connecting infornstion

sources to Yes conputers by scans of the Yes-6022 unit for inputing data fro-
punched tape.

This mit is as s rule poorly utilized in the structure of a Yes conputer, since
the loading of uorking progress into the Yes coquter's working storage is per-
forned fro- the YeS-GOIZ input unit (by some of marched cards). Punched cards are
basically used as the infomtiou nediun, since the correction of data entered a:
punched tape involves certain difficulties.

The Yes-6022 unit is designed for reading data entered unto punched tape in the
for- of perforations. It notches the intonation and physical characteristics of
signals of a type rs-1501 photoelectric reader and signals used by a as conputer

interface (a description and the characteristics of the Yes-6022 and !S-lSOl are
given in [3]).

8
MWWMY
In certain cases it is necessary to connect to a Yes conputcr intonation sources
the characteristics of whose sipals do not fully- agree with the characteristics
of 13-1501 signals. The require-mt of the couplete smhtion of the interaction
and physical characteristics of the T's-1501‘s signals on the part of the connected
infatuation source is responsible for added hardware costs and does not eats
possible full utilisation of the sped capabilities of the Yes-6022 unit and the
Yes conputer’s processor.

Matching of Signal Levels

The logic section of the Yes-6022 unit is constructed with series 155 logic ole-eats.
The PS-lSOl unit has ”Stop“ and ”Start" signal levels in the following ranges:

level of logical "0"—B t 2 percent v; level of logical "l"--not less than 0.6 V;

and of output signals (intonation-Jul to m. the synchronizing signal and "Tape
Loaded" signal): level of logical "0"—-in the range of B 1 20 percent 7, and level
of logical "l"-not less than —1 9. where B is the supply voltage. which, depend-
ing on the type of PS-lSOl, can be -6.3 or -12.6 V.

Converters of the levels of 15-1501 signals into the logical levels of series 155
elenents and vice-versa are distributed in the Yes-6022 in individual m's [ex-

pansion unknown]. The replacement of these TBZ's by those developed for the in-
formation source to be connected lakes it possible to connect various informtion
sources to the Yes-6022.

If the levels of the input/output signals of the infomtim source to be connected
latch series 155 levels and the distance between unit lakes it possible to Isnsge
without the amplification of signals. it is sufficient in place of these m's to
put in plugs with jumpers between the input contacts and output contacts correspond-
ing to then.

Conclusion

The use of the Yes-6022 unit for connecting nev icons to a Yes comuter nkes it
possible on the one hand to utilize this unit note effectively and on the other

elininates the need to develop a unit for mting with a Yes co-puter input/output
interface.

There are certain restrictions on the class of units vhich can be connected at the
Yes-6022 end. The initiative for the input of data into the processor via the
Yes-6022 unit belongs to the processor. As the result of this, it is advisable to
connect to the Yes-6022 passive sources the transfer of data fro- uhich is per-
forsed after the processor issues a request for the transfer of data. In addition,
as was indicated above, the mforsstion source connected to a res computer by scans
of the Yes-6022 lust itself for. the the paraneters of output signals. If the
unit connected is oriented toward the transfer of data in the request-response node,
additional hardware costs are required to inlenent the response signal.

A television canera for the input of video titer-scion at a speed of 23“ bytes,

a controlled systen interface—the “Sektor' USO—for inputing informtion at a
speed on the order of 20!! bytes, and a unit for the trans-testes of data through a
telephone co-lunications channel at an input speed on the order of 1K to 3! hytes

FOR AI. USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL um. UNLY

have been connected to A “8 counter by the nethod wage-ted. With that untta
connected to it. the utilization of the not“: or the res-6022 unit 01ml.
approximately 80 percent.

comm: Institut Main. 1981.

8831
cso: 1863/111.

POIOI-‘I'IﬂlfllJSEONLV
UDC 681.327.28

mmmusrmrmmmnmmmwmmmmmc
rum-matures SDEWCNI W mama-rs CIRCUITS

Kiev mull“!!! SIDS'NA m- I W in ‘ussian 1981 (stated to press
19 Aug 81) pp 50-53

[Article by V.V. hyagintsev. 3.1. ravlus’. AJ’. Ionentsov. 7.1. Pie‘neh and
8.6. nogdanov iron collection of articles "uni- an: lucrocowuter Hardware”.
edited by Ukrainian 88! Modes! of Sciences Corresponding Her 3.1!. iblinonkiy,
Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian SS! Acadeny of Sciences, 500 copies. 80 pages]

[Text] The advantage of nsnory elements of the dynsnic type annoying Ills [netal-
insulator seniconductor] structures. consisting in a lon power requirsnent as con-
pared vith nenory elenents of the static type. often turns out to be a prinry fac-
tor in solving the problen of the choice of type of many for coquter hardware
under developnent. However. when using a neaory eqloying HIS elusnts of the dy-
nanic type (a 0020) it is necessary to take into accomt the need of such a nenory
for the periodic regeneration of stored intonation [1].

This fact touches upon two aspects of develop-nt—the tine characteristics of the
unit to be created and its hardware inlenentation. Expenditures of tine for the
regeneration of iniorution in a m inevitably result in a loss in efficiency.
This loss is evidenced to a greater extent in high-capacity units with a tendon
distribution of intonation in the Inory's address space.

Usually nenory elenents in now nicrocircuits are arranged by lines and colt-1s,
forning an array of l-bit nenory elasnts with a built-in control circuit. The
regeneration of intonation takes place aimltanemly over the attire line of
nenory elenents anong which the accessed nenory elenent resides. Sequential checking

or the Dow's lines nukes possible regeneration of the entire array of nenory ele-
nents.

The operation of a 0020 without regeneration is possible upon the condition that the
tine spent on accessing all lines o! the M0 does not exceed the tine for storing
intornation in the nsnory elenentsa

I a T’s]! ,

.vhere '1' is the tine for storing intonation in the nenory elenents. r is the tins
spent on accessing nenory elencnts at a single line and n is the order of lines.

11
FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
I'UI UI‘I'DLIAI. U34: 031.!

Thus. iron the speed of response or hardware for Mia-eating a fast l'ourier trans-
forn (I?!) algorithn and frm an analysis of addressing of the my 1t is possible
to provide an esti‘te of the possibility of the operation of s 0021! without regen-
eration.

If the regeneration of information is regarded as a process of the senory's internal
control unit's accessing the array of stored intonation, then in operation of the
unit. generally speaking, conflict situations are inevitable because of simltan-
eons accessing of data on the part of the operating unit and the internal control
unit. These situations can be resolved by detersining the priority of access to the
nenory, which can be based on certain flow control algoritlsss, in particular, atten-
dance to requests in the order of their arrival and priority servicing. The specific
algorithm will be detersined by a nuﬁer of factors. such as the purpose of the
conputing unit, its instruction set and the characteristics of sets of data (con-
trol infomtisn or data, their for-at. length, etc.).

For the above reasons, when using a m stages in the developnent of operating and
senory units are characterized by lore intense interaction than in the case of using
nenory units which do not require the regeneration of information. in the latter
instance for accessing the nasty it is necessary to indicate a standard set of
signals—read or write, accessing signal, the address for the allocation of data;
and in writing, the code of the infornation to he written. In the case of a 0020
these signals not be supplanted by inforlation on the state of the scary--
"free" or "occupied" in perforsing regeneration—as well as by signals for the con-
trol of regeneration on the part of the operating unit, along which it is generally
possible to include the following: a signal for enabling regeneration in the in-
formation storage node. a signal for enabling regeneration in the infornation ex-
change node, a signal for halting regeneration with its subsequent resmtion fro-
an advanced address or free the beginning of an address space, and a signal for
forcing the salary into the "free" state. The nasty. in turn. not be able to

recognize the above-indicated informtion and to react to it in an appropriate
manner.

In detersining the specifics of the operation of a 0020 as a component of a fast
Fourier transform processor and the required set of control signals. two possible
operating nodes of the processor were prilsrily used—the calculation node and the
node of the exchange of inforlstion with a cosputer of the Yes [Unified Series)

type through a selector channel. In the calculation node the processor sequentially
accesses elements of the array of nulbers fro. the Ienory and records the. after
processing. Here there is no need to halt cowutations for carrying out regenera-
tion, since regeneration is perforned in readin/readout of the array on account of
sequential accessing of the lines of the 0020 in keeping with the graph of the

fast lourier trmtorl's algorithm. ad the tiae for checking all lines turns out

to be less than the pernissibla tine tor the storage of intention in salary ele—
aents without its regeneration. In the information exchange node. in reading out an
array Eros the nasty of the fast tourier transform processor and in its subsequent
transfer to the coaputer the situation is similar to that described above. As far
as the write-in of an array oi Mention iron the computer into the may of the
fast Fourier trmtorl processor is concerned. the need to perion the binary in-
version of addresses results in a considerable increase in the tine for checking

12
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
the 0020's lines and nines it necessary to halt exchange for the purpose of restor-
ing the infomtivn previously found in the nenory of the fast m transfor-
processor.

to: the purpose oi sccowlishing proper interaction the operating unit generates

the followmg alpals for controlling the nenory- in addition to the standard signals
usually used:

Enabling regeneration in the storage node. This signal nsans that the fast rourier
transfon processor does not perfon any actions associated with coqntations or
exchange and the MU can perforn regeneration independently.

Enabling regeneration in the eschange node. ‘l'his sipal leans that the priority

of the request for access to the nasty on the part of regeneration circuits is
higher than the priority of the operating unit’s request. Through this signal the
processor halts the reception of inforntion fron the conpnter and the my begins
to carry out regeneration. After the conpletion of regeneration the processor renews
the write-in of intonation into the nenory of the fast ronrier transforn processor
fro. the address vhich was fixed at the nonent of the start of regeneration. This
signal is generated cyclically with the tine resolution necessary for transferring

a single byte of intonation.

A signal for blocking regeneration is generated when it is necessary to inhibit re-

generation or stop it if it has alresdy begun. Through this signal the nenory goes
into the "free" state and the fast Iourier transform processor begins to exchange
infatuation with the conputer.

The inplenentation of the above-described interaction between the nenory and operat-
ing unit will note it possible to organize the effective operation of a fast tastier
transfora processor and to nininize losses in efficiency resulting iron the need to

carry out the regeneration of inforntion in a anory elploying dynamic HIS large-
scale integrated circuits.

Bibliography

1. Keylbotta. 8. "Aspects of Desng Systens with Dyna-1c maria,”
mourn, lie 3, 1978, p 73.

COPYRIGH: Institut kibernetlki. 1981.

8831
C80: 1863/1110

morncnlﬁuscomv
run arr-neon. we 05“.]

UDC 681.31
TYPICAL mm morons AID mmcrm 0? mm m

Kiev MIMI!!! SIMA m— I M in has!” 1981 (signed to press
19 Aug 81) pp 58-63

[Article by V.Ye. Gorskiy, v.r. Pavlov ad v.1. Shyendhulis tron collection of
articles ”Hini- and moroconpnter Hardware”. edited by Ukrainian $88 dead-y of
Sciences Corresponding under 3.3. llalinovskiy. lnsitnte of Cybernetics, Ukrainian
SSR Acade-y of Sciences, 500 copies, 80 pages]

[Test] mlticonpnter conplexes created on the basis of various kinds of hardware
and software. e.g.. Sh [International Systen of Snell Counters] and Yes [Unified
Series] cuputers, are desiped to inrove the efficiency of the entire conplex of
equipnent in conplicsted conputing and data processing systens and integrated

ASU's [autoneted control systens]. An analysis of hardware and software capabili-
ties has d-onstrated that such an imovenent in efficiency is possible by creating
on the basis of nicro- and niniconpnters group input/output units, out stations
and intelligent prone-able mltiplemere and concentrators.

It is possible to single out the following typical structures on the basis of the
capabilities of existing hardware and software which can he used in nulticoquter
conplenes and the prospects for its develop-at:

Local mltiterninel conplexes in which nihi- and nicrocoquters of the 8314 and
Sit-1800 class are used as prop-an nultiplems asking possible the inplenentation
of various procedures received in packages of the software of the upper-level cen-
tral counter.

Distributed Inlticonputer cowlenes in diich nini- and nicrocoquters are used as
terninsl stations. «itching processors, etc.; these coqleaee have a net organisa-
tion.

The uniting of various kinds of counters for organising the typical "structures
nentioned requires the solution of a nunber of first-priority problens. enong which
can be included:

Enabling the hardware interfacing of counters.

Develop-mt of the structure and nethode of inplenenting software nesting the re-
quire-eats or the joint operation of canisters.

11;
”WWW?
the unification of intonation ants-a, including the data banks of various con-
puters.

hatching of data representation foruts.

Questions relating to the hardvare interfacing of colputers are solved, as a rule,
by elploying the sequential (synchronous or asynchronous) trans-Lesion of data
through co-micstion lines nesting standards v.24. 38-232 or 2.21. The utilization
of sinilar standards in co-mications equip-mt produced by donestic industry takes
it possible to solve this problem and is discussed in [1. 2].

In solving the problem of organizing a software interface for various kinds of con-
puters. the requirenent of the nearin- utilization of the software existing in th-
is used as the basis. The approach nost intelligent in this sense Inst asks it
possible for the interface software to grow and batons nore coqlicstad as the sys-
ten develops.

Let us consider the require-eats for software for interaction between conputers in
lulticowuter cowlexes using four variants as an exauple (figs 1 to d).

 

'10). _ _ _ _-
12Wa~naolawﬂw

Figure 1. Iqalenentation of User Station Based on 554

Key:
1. Yes conputer 7. Printout.
2. Processor/data transaisaion 8. ADS“[auto~tic switching systsn]
ultiplexer 9. sad.
3. Hodea l0. Disk
6. Ternhnal ll. Terminals
5. User station 12. User station based on 84-4

6. floppy disks

ma OfﬂC‘llfl. USE ONLY
0'” Vlfncl‘u we. \h‘h‘

 

Figure 2. Division of Unique toriphsrsl Equip-sat letvaon M 344's

Kay:
1. Graph plotter 6. Many
2. Grsphic display 7. Color asphic display
3. Russian slphshst printer 8. ”some cool with progra-
b. Disk 9. Rolling I111
50 w

 

vigor: 3. Catalina Control mod on on a-uoo of Kictoproaussor
Contronsrs to: mound cyst. Interim”

[Kay on following pop]

MMLUSIMX
Figure lo. Intelligent 5H4 Terninsle lessd on 991800 lucrocoqnters

Key:
1. Henry 7. Tet-inns
2. 9H 8. floppy disks
3. Disk 9. Centrel servicing counter
4. A08 10. lsqnests
5. Printer ll. Responses
6. Ski-1800

Co-nnicstion hetwen lsrgs coqnters end connters of suller cepscity is necesssry
in order to offer low-level users the counting resources of the syst-s's nucleus
(central processor, extemsl storeges. unique peripherel equip-ant such es tepid
printers, color grsphic displays. grsph plotters, etc.). Although in this can the
svspping of dots is two-my, the low-level counter is elveys the initietor of
co-nnicstion. Mtherlore. es s rule. there is no strict reel-tine node requiring
high priority in sngsging the co-Inicetions chennel. The require-eats of the con-
umicstions network can he fomleted en (allow:

ushling the achenge of files between peripheral nits of e shell counter and
the host coqnter.

Offering tecilities tor initieting on the host counter tests trensterred tron e
shell coqnter.

POROI‘I‘KJZLIEONLY
'UI “Clittﬂh v.33. ‘II‘LI

Enabling access to the host «master‘s data bank. etc.

As denonstrated by malysis, these requirentnts are in accord with the requirenents
for user stations based on ninicoaputers.

In eating colputers (fig 2) whose cowuting resources can be conpared, the nsin
problen is to nake possible the mutual utilisation of unique peripheral equip-est,
as well as the specific capabilities of operating systems. The nest interesting
results can be gotten in the case vhen any unit in a mlticoqauter systel has access
to any processor. Thus. it is necessary to mke possible in the network the access
of any processor to any peripheral unit of the systen regardless of their point of
connection. the transfer of files (both character and binary) between peripheral
units. and the interaction of processes taking place in various conputers.

The cmuting capabilities of Sit-1800 nicroconputers sake it possible to use then
for very different purposes. Let us consider two cases:

1) An Ski-1800 as an intelligent control unit for controlled system interfaces and
connected to an 914 (fig 3).

2) An Std-1800 as the intelligent terninal of an SDI-lo (fig ’0).

These are the nost typical applications of a nicrocoeputer connected to a greater-
capacity cowlex. The requirenents are for-slated as follows in the first variant:

Enabling the exchange of Ski-lo - 80—1800 files (transparent node).
The ability to initialize an assign-eat for an Sli-lSOO nicrocoqmter.

Offering facilities for remote loading of the 811-1800 operating syste- frou 8H4
files.

In the second case. when the Sit-lo is used in the passive servicing node, it is
necessary to provide for the following:

Control of assign-eats upon the initiative of the Sit-1800.
The exchange of character files between peripheral units.

Facilities for renote loading of the sa-iaoo'. operating systen fron Sit-6 files.

An analysis of the requirements presented for the interaction of coquters singles
out as the Iain networks the ”sail co-puter - large coaputer" and "nicrocowuter -
stall conputer" (second variant). In both cases the requirenents for enchsnge be-
tween levels agree and its inlenantation is based on the principle of the aimle-
tion of terninals (user stations). In both cases it is necessary to mite possible
the preparation of data at the lower level ad the upper-level cowuter is con-
nected only to process than. Thus. the prom. reduces to creating appropriate
software simulating the sort of a hunen being at a console. Obviously, this proble-
is fairly coqlicsted but it is necessary here to choose a reasonable division of
labor between a bum being and the simulation program It is lost inportsnt to

18
MWUSEONLY
tree the prop” tr. Mme operations in trusterring tilee to the upper
level. while queetione relating to controlling taehe ad atnrting my“ net he
controlled by the m. In thie eenae it in appropriate to provide a neer
tree a terdnal a traneparent interface. uttering hie teetiitiee tor directing

to peripheral equip-mt eeeeagee to he received or true-itted (fig 5).

 

Pigure S. Principle of bulge of Software of ﬂeet Station leeed on
ﬂinicoqnter Quorum-pater)

Key:
1. Heeeagee to he tron-litted 5. Traneparent interface
tron 8H4 peripheral unite 6. Received neeaoae are transferred
2. Yes cowoter to 914 peripherale
3. sud. peripheral unite 7. Sill-6 operating ayat-

6. Simulation eottwere

The advantage of this approach ie the lack of any nodificationa of the large cu-
puter'e eoftwere (e.g., that of a Yes counter), which nine poeeihla rapid in-
plemntation of the eyeten. The dieadvantagee are as fallen:

The co-unicetione channel ie nonopolized; therefore, the nominee of the heat
cmter are acceeeihle to $14 ueere only by turns.

Algorithe for checking the correctneae of treneierred data are lacking it they
are not nintained in the terlinela which are eimlated.

It is fairly coqliceted to einlate ell the nedee of tereinale of a large counter
on an 8!! dieplay (e.g.. verioua inteneitiee of charactera. eereened eonee. etc.).
ae the reeult of which working with eone lerge-coqnter progr. eyete. oriented
toward theee nodea ie mutated.

The eolntion or prohlena of the interectien of conpntere of the ease claae depende
on which coqnter ie the leader. i.e.. the cautrol counter relative to the other.

1
roam1monu
eves vssse ..... e...“ v-sua

In case of the equality oi conputers the solutions suggested here will not satitsy
the requirenente set and their iqlenentatim is Possible within the framework or

a net architecture .

when it is necessary to provide access of the processes of one counter to the
peripheral equip-eat of another. simulation software is inlenented in the first
conputer and at the other's end facilities are eqsloyed which can be accessed from
terminals. This lakes it possible to activate standard programs Iaking it possible
to swap data between a terminal and any peripheral unit. The reverse is also true,
since all resources of the crate. are accessible to terllinals of the first colputer.
In the case when access is necessary both upon the initiative of the first conputer
and on the initiative of the second, the silplest solution can he the cross 81.118-
tion of terlinals with the use of two independent co-xnication lines. This can be
used with a short distance between conputers when «pensive data trans-ission equip-
nent is lacking (sodas, coaxial cables, etc.); otherwise the mtual simulation
systen does not withstand criticiu {roll the economic viewpoint. The structure of
the software of a co-unications network for equivalent co-puters is shown in fig 6.
using an 91-4 and Sienna-330 as an mule.

 

Figure 6. Structure of Software for Sit-lo - Siemens-330 Interaction
Key:
1. Control of communication iron 8. Initiative
terninal 9. Driver identical

2 . Std-é—controlling counter

to terminal driver

3. Skit—controlled conputer 10. Sinus-330 operating system
4. heal-tine operating ayaton ll. Progr- tor servicing requests tron
S. Progran for controlling requests Sienna-330 terninals
fro- !” terninals 12. Sienens-3N-controlled coqmter
6. Co-Inications line driver 13. Sienens-330ucontrolling cowpuoer
7. Simulating progra- llo. Sienna-330 peripherals
20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Of interest is e systan in which an 819‘ uses nicroconputers as intellig-t con-
trollers of units for amounting with a controlled system (mgu a group of
nchine tools, so autonatic line. etc.). It is obvious that in the case of the
coupling of controlled processes in the controlled syste- a decision for interde-
pendent paranetera not be nade at the W'level. This nsana that the nitrates-

puter aust function in the node of mbordination to the 814-4». unlike the variant
in fig 4.

Thus. sulasrizing the above. it is possible to draw the following basic conclusions:

1. The presence in the structure of the operating systens of nodern computers of
developed facilities for interaction between users and terninals notes it possible

to construct multicomuter systems with a radial architecture by simulating the-
by neans of a couples of hardware and software.

2. In constructing systens according to this principle, special-purpose software
least be inplemented only for the cowuter controlling the exchange. The subordinate
cowuter operates in the node of passive servicing of the requests of the control
conputer.

3. The capabilities of the system produced are wholly determined by the capabili-
ties of the dialogue systens whose teradnal is sinulated on another coaputar.

These principles for the design of nulticonputer systens have been used in creating
interaction software for the following coqlaxes (cf. table).

 

Table l. .
32 Me of cmter Mating syste- m of muter mm of inter-
szstem face
1 Sit-3.6 Real-time Yes-1060 Yes 08V! [toquter
interface]
2 Sit-3,4 Real-time _ V-2000 ABS
3 Sit-3,6- Real-tine Ski-3,4 . Baalotins Duplex register

The results of experimental operation have demonstrated that the approach suggested
lakes it possible to ilplenent fairly rapidly the required special-purpose soft-
ware making possible the total utilisation of existing software system. 'In sys-
tens No 1 and 2 minicoquters operate in the node of an intelligent terninal of

upper-level machines and in system No 3 the mutual simulation of tersinals is nade
possible (a synetric systen). -

Bibliography-

1. Nam-ow, 3.11.. editor. "Kalyye m i ikh prineneniye” [Snell Conpnters and
Their Application]. ﬂoscow, Statistita, 1980, 230 pages.

2. Glushkov. VJL. editor. “Seti Nit" [Cowuter Networks]. Macaw, Svyea',
1977. 279 pages.

COPYRIGHT: lnstitut kibemetiki, 1981.

8831
(:80: 1863/11‘ 21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 681.327
mceomcun m ”I 1101’?! pm W

Kiev 1mm sansrve mar- ]: mom in Russian 1981 (signed to press
19 Aug 81) PP 63-70

[Excerpt tron article by V.A. Cherepanov fro collection oi articles "Hini- and
Hicroconputer Hard-are”, edited by Ukrainian sse Acadeny of Sciences Corresponding

Haber 3.1!. Halinovskiy, hstitute o! Cybernetics, Ukrainian 883 Made-y of Sciences.
500 copies, 80 pages]

[Excerpt] In this article a descriptim is give: of the principles of designing
nicroprogran controllers for floppy disk storagea for mini- and nicrocoquters
used in the develop-mt of such a controller for the 814-3 and 914 M's [process
control cc-puter coqlexes]. .

The following requirements were put forth in designing the nicroprogran floppy disk
nenory:

l. The possibility of using it in other systens by replacing the unit for linking
with a syste- interface.

2. Potential possibility for use in other applications in which controllers of the
serial transfer of data are required (e.g.. for controlling tape cassette nenories).

3. Mini-icing utilization of the central processor and of syste- resources.

lo. The possibility of organizing the asynchronous transfer of the data of syn-
chronous storages.

Taking the above-listed requirenents into account. in designing. work must be per-
for-ed in the tolloving sequence:

1. Analysis or the specuicationa tor the syste- intertace and oi par-asters of the
floppy disk storage.

2. Develop-cut ot the operating algoritta for the unit for linking with the systsn
interface.

3. Develop-eat oi the algoritl- tor functioning of the nicroprogran controller.

“WISCONLY
Io. Develop-eat of the unit's skeleton disgru.

5. Choice at the deconstruction torut and develop-cut or the structure of the
nicroprogras controller»

6. Hicroprogran mic-nation of the algoritl- fer functioning of the controller.
7. Simulation of the unit's operation and debugging of Iicroprogrens in real tine.

I‘vo fundamentally different nethods exist for organizing systus based on nini- and
sicrocosputersuthe centralized and the decentralized.

The distinctive feature of the first is the effective «dining of the equip-eat of
various functional units in the general equip-eat of the processor and the assign-
sent of logic control functions to the central processor. and the input/output con-
trollers perforl variou uncowlicated functions.

The second uethod presunes an architecture for the conuter of which the distributed
processing of information is characteristic. when logical control is distributed

over the entire systel for the purpose of the simultaneous non-overlapping execution
of various functions.

The floppy disk storage controller which has been developed for a M with a "co-on
bus" interface, in terns of the structure of equipment and functions periornsd,
nests the organization require-nuts of the distributed data processing principle.

COPYRIGIﬂ‘: Institut kibernetiki. 1981.

8831
680: 1863/ 116

FOR 0511C“. USE ONLY
FUR OIWICIAI. Ubr; ONLY

”DC 681.3:61

UNI-WWW

Kiev mm MSWA m- l M in Melon 1981 (signed to press
19 Aug 81) pp 2. 7S

[Annotation and table of contents fro- collection of articles ”Hini- and nitrocoqu-
ter Hardware". edited by Ukrainian 88! Anode-y of Sciences Corresponding nether

LR. unlinoyskiy. Institute of Cybernetics. Ukrainian 88! M of Sciences,

500 copies, 80 pages]

[Text] Questions are discussed. relating to the design of controllere for controll-
ing floppy disk storages and for displaying and proceesing infatuation, which are
effective in ninth and nitrocouputers, as well as aspects of the deaign of lini-
coqmters and of testing tinieonputers. and to the hardware inlet-nation of a
fast Fourier transfer. algoritu.

outrun-rs Pate

Yakovlev, Yu.s.. liakovenko. Ye.1‘.. ‘l'sventukh. LA” Yurasav, A.A., Who, Ad“.
and Cayvoronekiy, ILA. "Floppy Disk Storage Controller for Work Place Autonation
Systm" 3

Krichevekiy, 3.3. ”we method of Organizing Continuous Processing ofDats
in a Hicroprogra-ahle Counter” 10

Bryuhhovich. YeJ. ”No [one for kpreaaing )latural Redundancy of Poeitional
Rotation Syetene' 18

Korytnaye, L.A., Popavich, AN. and Tihir‘kov. 8.1!. "mum Digital Mal
of Co-puter Memory Blessnts" 21

Korytnaya. I..A. and lmnrmn. 3.1-. "acne Questions ﬁghting to Choice at
Stac-entl o: nigh-bevel Language in Antenatal Syste- for resting Ilettronic

Equip-eat laced on Hui“ and Hummus" 2‘
Solov'yev. V.P.. Skim. V.B.. Satonyuk. Ade. and We, LS. “So-t
Principles of blah-nation oi untiprogren Matter” 29

momazaliweouu
Routskiy. V.Ye. and Snimov. EN. “Connection of Intention Source. to
Unified-Sade. Contact: toy-m of YES-6022 Dntt"

Bobcnko. ILL, Irivich. 6.1:. and Rhoda. 5A. Mattie Evaluation of
Nothodo and Circuit: for Synchronizing Vertical Scan of '1'? Displays with
Frequency of Power Line“

2mgintaov. v.v.. hvlun', 3.1.. Rountsov. A.P.. Pin'nk. v.1. ond loydnnov,
"Aspects of the in root rourior honour: rmoooor of my Utilizing
Dynanic Hctnl-lhonlator Soniconductor largo-Scale mtogrotod Circuits“

5.6.

Novikov, DJ.

Employing Dyna-1c Hetol-Inaulntor Soniconductor Large-Scale negated Circuit
Hencries" .

”One Approach to having ”liability of 11-017 Syotou

Gorakiy. V.Ye.. Pavlov. V.P. and Shynuclltulio, v.1. “lipicnl mute-yum
Structures and Architecture of Their Software"

Cherepanov, V.A. ”ﬂicroprogrn- Controller for Floppy Disk Storage."

Pan, VAL. Rudenko, 2.)!” Litvinonko. Yc.l.. Revitkovcts. LP. and Shntcrnik.

"Features of Volt-Ampere Characteristics of Niobim-Inoulntor-Lud
Lou-Resistance Tunnel Contacts"

V.Yc.

COPYING“! :

8831
(:80:

1863/1“

Inntitut kibernetiki, 1981.

FOR OFI'ICIZEL USE ONLY

41

S8
63

70
DUI “FILM 03!. URL!

UDC 62-50

HINIHIZATION 0? 81238 017 FLAT WETIC macs Ill DESIGNER} STORIES DEVICES um
WED INFORMATION 0mm

lbscow PROBLEM? UPMVLBIIYA V mm, alumna, BIOWII in bacilli 1981
(signed to press 13 bag 31) pp 209-216

[Article by S. I. Kasatkin and V. 8. Suenov]

[Excerpts] A storage device with flat nagnetic domains (no) is a Iagnetic fill:
deposited on a glass base. low-coercive channels and a high-coercive array are
forned in the fill. Magnetic dnains that are the information carrriers are
generated, iapelled and erased in the channels. In some versions of donain
storage, additional Iagautic layers are deposited on the base, which allows inprov-
ing a nuber of characteristics, but in turn couplicates the aanufacturing tech-
nology. The wetic fill is cabinet! with one or two layers of conductors,

either for-nod with foil dielectric or deposited on the fill itself. In scale
storage versions, coils are needed to create an external aagnstic field. All this
is bonded together, screened and placed in a standard case.

Developent of negnetic domain storage is currently split in several directions.
Host proaiaing are the devices that asks use of Isgnetically hard bands, the ten-
sion effect of the do-ain side wall and the nthod of advance-ant suggested by
Broadbent [1]. Used for forward notion in the proposed device is a .odified
Broadbent method that allows danin notion in both directions. The ahortcaing of
this nethod co-pared to the others is the need for two layers of conductors. The
advantage is the si-pler topology of the low-coercive channels.

A Isain proqu to be solved in developing any storage unit is that of increasing
intonation density. In donain storage devices, increasing infer-etion density
runs into both technological difficulties and physical lilitations. At this stage
of storage devlopent, the technological probloa are not letters of principle,
though they do present definite difficulties. 1herefore, uni-\- intonation
density is now governed by physical factors. the nain par-eters governing infor-
aetion density can be considered, first. the ainiaal width of a stable donein
which specifies the aininsl width of a low-coercive channel, and second, the lini-
asi length of the flat aagnetic domain for a given channel width that governs the
minimal width of the conductors. The following theory has been suggested for
calculating these values.

26
summon“
Generel Deecrtptton of Storage Ietrlx

A etorege eetrtx 1e e emetic eectlon bonded with two-ruled foil. on which tvo
leyere of cooductore ere depoetted. All tlue te covered by e ecreea end pleced in
e etenderd ceee.

Hetrtx cepectty 32! bite
legietere b

Length of amend rcﬂetere 8K bite
Next-\- clock frequency 50 k3:
Next-u. dete trenuleelou rete 200K bite/e
Hut-n power conenptton (f - 50 Inns) 5 H
Hull-n current 600 IA
Reed “and (bipoler) 1-2 IV 2
Ceee dinnetone 30 x 68 -
Contacts 20 2
Inc dhenetone 30 x 65 -

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Route", 1981

8565
680: 1863/77

“NEWLY
”WISE”?

Inc 681.3“

sun 0? m m m OPTIC ”FLIGHT” I! MIMI”

up avmmm I mnm'nu mm in Inaaien lo 1, Jan-Feb 82
(nannecript received 28 Oct 80) pp 3442

[Article by Ya. I). luletov. to. V. Griaor'yev. I. V. Inlnykov. V. c. Lo-nov.
Ye. A. Otlivanchik. A. ll. Prokhorov, l. D. Sinachev and I. I. Shakym: ”The
the of fiber Optic Co-Inicationa Linea and Integral Optic Ilenenta in Coqnter
Cowlene and letmrka"]

[Text] A characteristic of counter techmlogy today in that an overﬂowing
volue of data ia being transnitted over great dintancea vith hid: epeed ud
reliability. In nany caaea the nae of vire and coetul linea ea co-nicatiou
channala no longer meta all the ragnitenenta of trananiaaion linen and reenlto
in an increaae in equip-ant to mnitor errora and relay the tron-titted data.

In recent yeara coneidarable attention ha been devoted to the nae of fiber
optic co-nicationa linea at all levela of data trenanieeiona in counter
eyatue. Thiaielinhed to eisnificantadvanceethathavebeen-dainthe
field of deaigning loo-lone fiber optic cablea. and ea-icondoctor e-ittera and
photoreceivare [1-3].

Fiber optic co-unicationa linea have a under of mneotioned advantages over
vire liner: hilh noise auppreaeion; ideal galvanic ioolation: abaence of
electronapetic inductance; reaiatanoe to radiation; enall dinanaiona ad night;
high heat reaiatance; end. aecnrity of trananitted data. The large paee banda
of fiber optic co-Inicationa lines nke it poaeible to nae mltiplexin; and
tine or spectra cowaction. Data tranuiaoion awedainthin caee reach tone
of gigabito per aecond.

Leading ooqenieo in the United Statea, Japan. Beat Ger-any. and France have de-
veloped and are producing, in oddition to poverful equip-ant for ultichennel
telephone and televiaion co-nicationa. feirly coqect fiber optic oo-nica-
tione linee to replace vire linee. They are deaigned for diatancea of w to

1-5 kilo-etera and data tramieaion apeeda of q) to 50 nubite per eecond

(aee Table l [0).

The preaent article conaidere the atrnctnre of cnrrent fiber optic co-nnicationa
linee and proepecte for their nee in coqmtere, eyetene for data collectionmd
control of uperinente and indnatrial proceeeee. It aleo evaluatee pooeible

moor-autumn
. a:
3. “2 . 87.3 J: 8

‘30:
.g nuns-2.5nnaoo

a: 2 . 2 .2 «82.:
8»; a. .2. a:

2n :3 . 2 12....
98:333.”: .3
8o 2.3.31.8.»2

o: «nun—no tn
§.qnn-n..-3~ ‘0:

n0. 3-2-3 in:-

t e: on. v
i on o. 2

1.3..“
2..

1.2.:
.3
1.3.:

i 8. .> «o

p a:
i 8» {no

5?:
i .8 .5

00°:

:08

. 13

0-60-

0 Lu
0 00¢
000‘

a 73
:03

28¢

33
to: 0-

into

.3 0—00
3 076

o; 076
a} Gun.
.3 8-0

in;

09.... 301°

30‘

.38.
"WWW?

nodificationa of the architecture of coqnter eoqleaea that we high-oped
connicationa netvorha vith fiber optic eo—nicationa linee.

liret let on conaider the capabilitiae of fiber optic eo-nicationa linea and
their elunta (aee figure 1 belon). syate. vith fiber optic eo-alicationa

, GE]

rignre 1. fiber Optic Co-nicationa Line and lte llenanta.

Key: (1) hitter;

(2) Coupler: .
(3) Optical Traneuieaion Hedi- (Fiber Cable);

(6) Receiver.

 

lines can nae cablea with one or eeveral fiber atrande and cable with a hurdle
of fibere an the optical trana-itting .diu. The propertiee of the cablea are
detenined by the type of fiber. table 2 belov givea averaged epecificationa of
the not widely need typea of fibere created in laboretoriee and by indnetry.

Table 2
Dianeter of hoeeea in
Light Guide Baternal Decibele Diaperaion in
Strand nineter per Ianoeeconda
HE of Fiber in Hicrona in Hicrona Kiloneter m Iiloneter

Single-Node 5-10 125-150 0.2-3 0.01-0.l
Haiti-ode 50-60 125-150 0. 3-3 1-20
with Large Core 200-600 to 1,000 5-20 30-100

 

Became of their aignificant loeeea (mo-1.000 decibela per kilo-tn). Plastic
fihera and bmdlee of fibera are not given. ‘l'hey nanally find application 10
ahort fiber optic co-Inicationa linee (Q to 50-100 netera) and are gradually
being ewplanted by glaea fibere vith large coree. Ira the atandpoint of dir
tnce, apeed. and reliability of data trananiaeion. loeaea per unit of length.
dieperaion, and dianeter of the fiber are the deternining factore in eelecting
and designing the cable (if we do not conaider coat). For aonrcee of eniaeion
and photoreceivere the 0.6-0.9 nicron range can be eoneidered inductrially
adopted at the preeent tine. lonetheleaa. nee of the 1.3-1.6 nicron range.
which haa been intenaively studied in recent yearn. offere eignificent advantagea

for true-itting data at high epeed and over large diatancea [S]. In this
range loeeee in the fiber nay be 0.2-0.3 decibela per kilo-tar. which in ain-

nificantly lover than loeaea in the 0.8-0.9 nicron field. llaterial and

mammal“
mgnida diapereinn in the 1.3-1.7 nicm field hen oppoaite nine. The
paranetera of the light guideare thneoptixized to havea lottotal diaper
nice for the required lugth of theme. A tranaaianmn distance of 62.3
kilo-terewithnutrelayeataneedof SZﬁiteper-cend 1‘] andlS
kilo-eteraataepeedoflJGhitaperncond Inhalnadyhenohtainedon
the 1.3 nicnon wavelength. m greater advantagae are expected with nee of
the 1.5nicronweve, “attenuationintheffheriecleeeto the-ink.“
0.2 decihela per mouter [8].

The principal aourcee of eliaeiona for optical fiher co-nicatione lines are
ae-iconductor light diodea that air fro- the eurface and the end, euper—
lrninaacent light diodee. and injection laeera. In the 0.8-0.9! Iicrnn range
they are fabricated on the haaia of Genie. ‘ihe eerwice life of eeriee-
produced light diodee and enperluineecent light diodee haa Been rained to
5-10" and are hnura, a! laboratory nodele have heen increaeed to 10‘ honre.
The min advantage of light diodee with large e-itting eurfacea it Better
linearity of the characterietic of .ieeiVe power fro- the m cnrralt.
But they are inferior to other typee of elittere with respect to the inortant
indicator of the pane hand. At high traneniaaion epeede in eyet-e with code-
pulee modulation of eignala, eupesluineecent light diodee and eeninondnctor
laeera fabricated hy a einilar tecunology on the haaie of donhle heteroetruc—
turea are need. In ter- of e-ieaive poeer. connection to the fiher, efficiency.
coat. reliability. and epeed, enperlunmeecent light diodea have fairly good
propertiee for neat application. he an mle the following indicatora can
be given: e-iaeive pover- fron the end of the anperluineecent light diode in
the 0.0—0.9 nicron range with a wing current of 100—300 nA ie a fevit,
while the adulation frequenciee can he hdrede of negahertt. Overall. with
reapect to level of introduced power and epeed enperluineecent light diodee
are inferior only to injection laeera whoee nodulation frequency can he aeveral
gigeherta and have an output power of are than 10 it at the ease ming
currenta. 'l'heir min ahortcningn are a .aller emicelife (103.10" henna)
and a eignificant dependence of characterietice on teqerature. lut theae
ahortconinge refer to the preeent day and we can upect iqrmt in their
propertiaa. -

The narrow epectral width of the chain: of ejection laeera mine it poeeihle
to rmive the leaat widening of the tran-itted puleee owing to diepereion in
the fiber. Aa a reeult, eeniconductor laeer diodea are need for high-epeed
data trananiaeion over great distances. At the eue tine. in the 1.3-1.6 licrnn

field with very low diapcraion in the light guide. it in aleo poeeihle to me
light diode eourcaa for aiuificant tran-iee'ion distances.

There are reporta that a light diode haa heen jade haaed on ml'aAaP/lnl’ with a
nicrolena that awporte an output on the order of 0.2 in fed to the fiber at

a current of 100 IA and a wavelength of 1.3 licrone. It it expected to he
poaaihle with each an .itter to trannit data at a apeed of 30 thite pea: eecond
over a diatance of 30 kilo-eter'e [9].

Miniature neodyliu laeere with pqihg free a light di‘ode can he coneidered a
pruniaing eonrce of enieeiona for the 1.06 and 1.35 wavelengthe [10] But each

31
mammary
memenseouu

Insets require en externel noduletor. Gee losers cen else he used as enitters
beceuse they provide e ieirly siqle connection uith. integreted opticel noduo
leters. In this cue the frequency of noduletion of the continuous mission of
e leser is sewerel gigeherts.

In generel the transition to high-speed dete trenuission system- is linked to
the developmt of elenents of integreted optics.

Solid state photoreceivers used in opticel fiher co-nicetions sytens should
heve high sensitivity on the wevelength of the euission source. high speed. end
e low noise level. Silice pin photo diodes with e sensitivity up to 0.6 elperes
per wett of optical enission power striking the photo diode have heen used no“
widely in the renge up to 1.1 nicrons. A significent increese in sensitivity,
by roughly on order. is echiewed in svelenche photo diodes thet conhine detec-
tion of opticel signels with internal sqliticetion of tin photocurrut. In-
ternel splificetion occurs hy ewslenche ultiplicetion of nedie in the donsin
of s strong electricsl field. At the sens tine,svelenche photo diodes require

cowerstively high supply voltegee. stehiliretion of voltege. end tupereture
stebilizetion of the enplificstion fector.

At the present tine. photo diodes of both types have heen developed with speeds
of less then one nanosecond [1-3]. Thinks to their nell dinsnsions they
notch well with fiber light guides end electronic units. In the 1.0 nicron end
higher renge where silice instruents do not operete. mlsnche end pin photo
diodes node of gerneniun ere used. end in recent tines semiconductor coitus-
tions of groups III end V hewe been used. They heve quite high speed (rise
tine on the order of severel dozens of picoeeconds) end hetter noise cherec-
teristics then geranium

The connectors which interlink the emitters end receiVere with the fiber end
the connection of individuel segnents of fiber ere inorunt closure of e
fiber optic co-unicetions line. For lergevdisneter iiher (50-600 nicrons)
end for fiber bundles such connectors ere nenuiectnred in series ehroed. They
are plentic or netsl end insure interlinhing with losses of 1—3 decibels [11.
12]. Hultichennel connecters here eleo been built. Connecting fihens with e
cord dieneter of 5-15 nicrons is nuch nore couple: end requires precision
febricstion of the connecter elenents. Ilonetheless, there are reports of con-
necters with insertion losses thet do not exceed 0.5 decibels [13].

The coeponente of opticel fiber co-micetions lines we heve considered ere the
prinery ones heceuee they out he used in reley syste-s thet eqloy inter-
nediete conversion of opticel signels into electrical signels end heck so well
so in system where only opticel signals ere used for dete trsnseission. In
reley systens the verious mite Iey he connected to the co-nicetions grid
electricelly or opticelly through the releys tbs-selves with internediete
processing end restoretion of the signel. For dets input end output et eny

point of purely opticel systene there not he elenents thet distrihute the op-
ticel energy over different chennels (ﬁbers) or. conversely, consolidete
several chennels. including those with different wavelengths, into one. These
elenents ere usuelly celled "splitters” [ramtviteli]. directed hrsnchers
[otvetviteli]. end so on. hung the vsrious splitter designs ere the "ear”

32
anemones“
type uhich dintribute the input dual equally to all outpute. and the 1'.
ahaped brancber. Depending on the design the atar-type eplitter can work in
apaaaeode. inubichcaae it laeninpute andnoutpute. ora reﬂection

node, in nuclease it baellequal inpute. cacao! vhichcen eerveaeaninput
and an output. The for-er (pace node) in eeaantial uban aeeoctaring unite
interconnected by two light guidegone for trancieeian and the other (or rear-
tion (see Pigure 2). The retlectiVe aplitter nakee it poeeible to mt each

rigure 2. The as - Counter Syatee
ale-ant (Processor. Storm. Special
Proceeaor. Intellignt ‘l’ereinel. and
Peripherala)

Key: (1) To IVS;
(2) Trannnitter;
(3) Rs:
(6) Splitter;
(5) hitter.

 

 

unit with a aingle light guide that both receives and tren-ite data (nee
Figure 3 belov). In thin case data input and output to the light guide fro- the

Figure 3. 1-D! - Coquter Syeten 81e-
nante.A ~ Directed Splitter-Dupleur.
and Sterome Splitter with I Inputa.

Key: (1) Tran-itter;
(2) hitter:
( 3) Splitter.

 

 

unit being connected nuet be accoqlinhed through the duplexer (D in Figure 3) or
by scene of a eenicooductor etructure that coebinee the function of enitter and
receiver for different biaaee [1‘].

33
roe WI. 083 on“
”WNWLY

The dinected 'l'otype hrancher nakea it possible to take a certain part of the
power off the nain line and to feed eignale- iron different aourcee to the line.
The hrancher, nhich ia toned hy tuning a single-node fiber with a nultinode
fiber. iceda eniaeiona iron the tingle-node fih‘er to the pipeline with loaeea
at a level of 0.5 decihela [15]. Iith thin Rancher-duplex“ a duplex data
tranawieaion line can he constructed on one right wire 11‘].

Directed ‘i-type hranchere that hoth input and output aiaeione iron the pipeline
are obtained by fueing fibera of einilar corn-action: and hy varione other

neane. ‘l'heae hranchere nake it poeeihle to connect peripheral equip-alt to the
optical line manning iron the central proceeeor (eee Pignre 4). The proportion

 

Figure lo. "Star" ”pa Connection

Key: (1) Proceeeor; (5) To Next Unit;
(2) Trannitter; (6) To Peripherals;
(3) hitter: (7) Peripherale.

(e) Splitter;

of power that in taken off can he varied iron one hrancher to another in order
to even out the aipale caning to difierent elenente of the ayetea. In thoee
caaea where peripheral unite nuet exchange data .ong thenaelvee. and eleo
when eleeente of dietrihuted counting coqlaee are interconnected. a eye—
netrical directed hrancher with tour inpute can he need [17]. The ay-etrical
brancher and the etaretype l! x F. hrancher nake it poaeihle to eaaociate mite
both by type of two-nay co-on line (ace l'igure 5 Below) and in a circle (one
Figure 6 below). In the latter ceee it nay he necaeaary to take neaauree to
prevent infornation iron circulating eroqad the circle.

Uhe selecting the final variation of co-nnicatione - with. a two-eay line.

circle. or etarbtype eplitter. the total loeeee introduced into the channels.
including eleo loeeee in the connectione of the light line with the eplittere.
should be evaluated. For any aeeociated unite the radial eyeten with a etar

3h
"WWONLY
‘37: (l) 3'3;
(2) Deceiver;
(3) hitter;
(6) Splitter;
(5) To llext Unit

 

for. baa e-ller Ion-ea. but it requitee a greater length of fiber cable to
connect all the units. In the actual syste- ot a distritnted counter coqlex
it any prove adviaable to nee a codination of different typee of eplittere.
and where eignificant dietencea are involved inter-adieu relaye nay alan be

deaired.

 

Figure 6. The 2V8 - Coqntex Syste- nenent (Proceeenr.
Storage, Special Proceaeor. Intelligent Tereinal. and
Peripherala)

Key: (1) zvs;
(2) Splitter;
(3) Trenenitter;
(0 hitter.

mammals
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the best nodels of splitters huilt today for mltiaode fiber with a core
dianeter of 60-600 nitrous, tin induced (excess) optical losses for con-
necting 3.20 channels do not nosed 0.5-6 decihels IllJ. Prospects for
building splitters for single-node filter system are based chiefly on the
advances of integral optics. At the present tine. integral optic waveguide
structures are Being effectively developed. They perforn various functions,
including the functions of splitters. channel switchers, nodulatore, and anti--
plexer. Laboratories have built and are studying integral optical nodulators;
netrixes of electrooptical switch-splitters with up to 4 X 6 channel; multiv-
plexer optical integral circuits which mine, in a col-on waveguide output,
the enission of several laser diodes with different wave lengths and independent
modulation: enission input-output units for integral-optical structures and for
connecting the- to a single-code fiber I3. 18]. It is the integral optical
instrunents that uke it possible to achieve satin data transnission speed
for fiber optic co-unications lines with single-node fiber and to switch
channels rapidly in fiber co-unlcations networks to transmit data along the
required routes.

Evaluating the state of the current and prospective hasic eleaents of fiber
optic co-snications lines, we nay identify the following three types:

1. fiber optic conunications lines with data transmission
speeds to the level of negah'its per second. Depending
on their length. these lines can use fiber bundles (up
to 100-200 asters), cahles with large-disaster fiher
(for distances up to a few kilo-eters), and also series-
produced light and photo diodes and phototransistors:

2. fiber optic co-unicetions lines for data transnission
speeds up to dozens of negahits per second, Based on
nultinode fibers of different dianeters. superluninescent
light diodes. pins, or avalanche photodiodes. These
lines can be up to several kiloneters long;

3. fiber optic co-unications lines with speeds free 100
negabits per second to tens of gigabits per second and
up to dozens of kiloneters long. They are Based on
single-node fiber, injection lasers, and avalanche photo-
diodee, and in any cases use integral optical nodulators.

The use of laser diodes in lines of the first and second type can increase
their length to 10 and sore kiloneters. But this causes a suhstatial rise
in cost and couplexity of design Because of the need for autontic nonitoring
of the level of laser eaissione. The classification given shove is arbitrary
because during selection of the systen coqonent one must take account

(If the type of capaction, nodulation. coding. and synchronization, and then
look at the sources and receivers of aission. aodulators. and branchers.
type of fiber, and latching units. lork [l9] proposes that this problem be
solved beginning froa data trananiasion speed, the hand occupied By the channel,
the nunher of channels, the reliability of date transaitted, the reliability
and coaplexity of the hardware, cost. and power consqtion.

memoszmv
Other factors in addition to these that must be. considered in deeming system
are flexibility of the systen, the possibility of increasing carrying capacity,
and connecting in hardvare that is in the design stage. in other words- further
developnent of the systole.

The aoet ohvious use for fiher optic co-unications- lines is as co-unications
channels in systens for collection of data and control of expert-ante or indus-
trial processes. In this case they are used to solve prob'le. related to the
renoteness of different units free one another. large differences in potentials
anong these units, and high noise levels [2045]. The Iain advantages of using
fiber optic cos-mications lines in these systens are: galvanic isolation of
their elenents and high noise suppression in co-unications lines running great
distances. An exawle of a successful application is development of the sequen-
tial CAHAC branch on fiber optic co-unicatiom lines [20]. This makes it pos-

sible to use a single-strand optical cable instead of a lO—strand electrical
cable to naintain data transnission speeds of up to five negabytes per second

and coqlete electrical isolation of all crates included in the Branch. It is

entirely feasible to realize this systea at the present tine using elenents pro-
duced by industry.

Another exasple of effective use of a fiber optics col-unications line is trans.
ferring the parallel input-output interface of Yes coaputers, which has 36
physical lines, to an optical fiber sequential interface realized with two light
guides. The application of fiber optic co-unications lines in this case gives
high transnission speed (60 negahits per second) and noise suppression and al-
love a significant increase in distances Between coquters and peripheral units
and sinplification of comications in the system

There is considerable interest in using fiber optic co-unications lines in the
min channels of cmuter netvorlts and to organise local networks on the se-

quential couaon line principle. In those cases the speed of data transniseion
any reach several negabits per second.

In all these cases. naturally, significant difficulties arise during developsent
of the necessary "freeing" (high-speed code converters, various types of switch-
ing and logical ale-eats, and the like).

In conclusion, the authors would like to stress that advances in the fields of
physics and technology have led to the develop-est of optical fibers and integral
optical elenents that not only have a significant effect on the character and
quality of couunications lines. But can also result in a suhstantial change in
the architecture of cosputer systems.

KI‘ILIOGRAPH!

l. s. Miller, and A. Chynoueth, ”Optical Piher Teleco-mications," Ru York,
"Acad. Press." 1979, 720 pages.

2. ll. Kressel. "Semiconductor Devices for Optical Co-mications," Berlin,
"Springer-Verlag." 1980, 280 pages.

37
MOWUSEONLY
‘0

5.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13‘

lb.

15.

16.

17.

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1'. G. Dzhallorenzi, "Studies and Technology of Optical (in-unitattona syetea.
Fiber Optica.‘ um, 1978, Vol 66, lo 7, pp 29—72.

6. main. "lint Developer: Should KnotAEnnt Readﬂodlee 1'iher Optic
Linen.” mm. 1978. Vol 51, up 26, pp 3542.

Ye. ll. Dianov. "Proepectn for the the of the 1.1.6 Hieron [eve [and for

Fiber Optical co-miucim." “mum mm. 1980. Vol 7.
no 3. pp #534“.

1'. Ito. K. any“, X. Inhihara. Y. Obori. and K. Sugiyena. ”Transmission
Expert-ante in the 1.2-1.6 n Wavelength Region Using Graded-Jude: Optical
Fiber Cables.” in "Tech. Dig. Topical Beet. Optical Met (Jo-mication,
OSA.(Heehington. 0.0.). Paper M1." March 1979. pp 6-8.

1'. Ki-ura. and ﬂ. Kanbe. "Long Havelength Singleolbde Piber Transnieeion
Systen," in "Topical Meeting on Integreted and Guided m Optice," Nevada.
Incline Village. January 28-30, 1980.

1‘. Hiya. Y. “rennet-e. 1'. Boeah. and '1'. Hiyashitn. "Ultimate We: Single-
node Fiber at 1.55 n." mm 1.311.. February 1979. Vol 15, pp 106-108.

R. C. Goodfellot. A. C. Carter. 1. Griffith. and R. R. Bradley. ”GthABP/m
Pant. Bigh-ladiance. 1.05¢1.3 I Iave Length LED'e with Efficient Lent
Coupling to Snell limerical Aperture Silica Optical ﬁber," 1. mm.
mm. DEVICES, August 1979. Vol 36.46. pp 12.15.1220.

J. P. Boudln. H. Whaler. and H. Rnndot. "On the Design of Neodynitn Minia-
ture Lasers.” 1m 3. QUART“)! mm.. Rove-Ber 1978, Vol 03.16, pp 831-839.

P. Orland. "Fiber Optic Cowman," m MAGAZINE. 1979. Vol 26. No 6.
pp 37-96.

"The PR}! Connector," nmonm. 1979. Vol 52. no 16, pp 84.

N. Shimu. and II. Touchiya, "Single-node Fiber Connectors.” mu. 1.311..
September 1978, V01 lb, 19, pp 611-613.

”Diode 33955. Thomson-081'." prelininary date sheet.

B. Kovenaki. and R. Hill. ”Efficient Per-er Convolver for Hultiplexing Multiple
Sources to Single riser Optical mm," 1.221.. ms. 11:11.. 19.71. 101 31,
740 pages.

3. S. Kmeeki. K. 0. Hill. I). c. Johnson, and A. A. Tenne~8ene. ”Pull Duplex

Trencnieeion Link over Sing1e-8trend Optical fibers." 0". 1.311.. Septe-ber
1977, Vol 1, No 3. pp 107-108.

"Specially—Huh Directed Brencher," mm, 1978, Vol 51. No 22. pp 4-6.

”WISEONIX
18.

19.

21.

22.

23.

24.

B. Konvell, “Integral Optics." um, 1978, 101 126. lb 6. pp 639-656.

I. V. Kallykov. A. II. Prokhorov, II. D. Sinchev, and II. D. Sisskysn, ”7m
Preprint,' No 158, sex. KVANTOVAYA mmm, Moscow, 1979, 26 pages.

Ye. D. Bolstov. A. A. Denilenko, I. V. Isl-ykov, V. c. Locum, Is. A.
Otlivenchik, and I. ll. Sisskysn, "Auto-tics of Physics Bxperinent Based

on s Fiber Light Diode CANAC Sequential Branch,” 132. non. IA m. P0
AVTOHATIZATSII mm'm 18mm, mybyshev. 1978, p 86.

H. I. Belowlov, H. H. Bubnov. A. ll. Gur'ysoov, c. G. Dewetykh. Ye. ll.
Dienov. V. I. Pelipenko, A. u. Prokhorov, sad I. ll. Sisskyen. ”Study of
Fiber Optic Systems for Co-unicstion non; Blocks of the Counter,"
IVANTOVAYA 31mm, 1977, Vol 4. No 11, pp 2,656-2Jos9.

Ye. D. Bulatav, Ye. D. Zhilin, G. I. Zetsepin. I. V. KAI-yin, V. 8.
Korzinkin, V. c. Lonenov, Ye. A. Otlivenchik. A. u. Prokhorov, end I. II.
Sssskysn. "Optical Comnicstions ﬂannel for (Jo-pater Systm,” TEX. DOXL.
NA m. P0 AWIZA‘I‘SII... op. cit.. p 85.

Ye. D. Bulstov. I. V. mlylwv. V. 6. unnov, Ye. A. Otlivsnchik. A. ll.
Prokhorov, and I. ll. Sisskysn, "Universal Fiber Optic Oonmiutions Line

Channel between Co-puters Based on the CAHAC System," PW HAN,
No 160, lbscov, 1977, 6 pages.

1.. Tometts, "68A: Optical Electronic Devices for Signal Processing Ap-
plications," Pace. 0? THE SOC. 01’ mom-0mm INS'i'R. ENG” 1979. Vol 176,
pp 111-116.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Zinstne". "Avtonstiks i vychislitel'neys tekhniks". 1982

11,176

080:

1863/ 120

39
MWIBEONLY
”MUSEONLY

one 681. 326-192

MHDIATICAL m roe “MAM mm m RELIABILITY

Riga Immm I "mm'mu mm in [mm lo 1, Jan-Feb 82
(nonuacript received lo Jan 80. after revision 6 Jun 80) VP 67-71

[Article L. I. lul'bak, D. I. larahan' and 8. s. Prokhorenko: "Indicators for
Evaluating the Reliability of mltiproceeaor Ooqmtina Syete-e"]

[Text] 1. Require-onto of indicatore for evaluating the reliability of anti-
proceaeor counting ayateno (mesh). The basic featuree of ms'. are nodular
construction and acceeaibility of any proceeaor nodule to any anory ”dale.

an a reeult of which the eyetea haa greater vitality. thin in eapreaoed in the
ability of the tics, when particular canon-ate fail (nith the exception oi the
functionally eaeential equipnent. the ”nucleue"). to continue working at lovered
productivity, not loeing the ability to work entirely. Another inortant chr-
acteriatic of ucs'o ie that the productivity of the eyetea dependa on the number
of proceaeor nodulee, atorage nodulee, and channela for co-unication with per—
ipheral unite.

The indicator for evaluating the reliability of ms’. ahould take into accomt
their ennerated featurea and not coincide in the particular caae (when a lover-
in; of productivity is not acceptable) with the indicator for evaluating the re-
liability of a standard counter eyeten no that it vill he poeeihle to nake a

cooperative evaluation of the reliability of different ”'3 and etandard con-
puter eyeteno.

2. Hathenatical nodele of the quality of functioning of the res. Suppoee an ms
consists of n ole-ante. ‘l'he etate of each eleaent 1 (1-1, 2, .... n) in
deacribed by the function

x (t) _ 1. if eleeent i at nonent t in operable;
i 0, if elenent i at nonent t in not operable.

The etate of the ucs in the general caee can he deecribed hy the vector:
_ Mt)
2(0- 1 .
- X4!)

lie will deaipate the productivity of the ms at uncut t ea 1,“): then 3;“) -
mm.

”W153“?
Iacauae atate 'i(t) of the ayetea chance randoaly in tine. proceae [ﬁt] of the
change in productivity in randon. It an be conaidered an the aggregate of
tendon fnnctiom {X;(t)}. vhich chat the change in productivity of the no: for
all poeeible changee in ita etate 2(t) during the entire period of uae. or an
the aggregate of tendon quantitiee dependent on para-eta t.

‘lhe rando- proceaa Jrl'im] ia a general aathanatical mdel of the quality of
functioning of the ms.

3. lndicatore of the quality of functioning of the 11:8. It in adviaable to
adopt the aiqleat function that characterizes the rando- proceae of change in
ms productivity an the indicator of quality of functioning of the we at accent
t. Thie function ie the aatheaatical espectation of undo; faction lr(t) an

the average for a net of obeervatione of rando- proceae [2(t)] at accent t,
nu) - a plat)”.

The average value of the quality of functioning of the ucs in interacting. It
can be expreaaed in the for- “0-5.115 . vhere 135 ie the productivity of the

in the productivity of the ass in atate j: l’ ia the probability of atate j of
the tics; ad. N ia the nuaber of lacs atatea faring productivity.

The atate of the ideal (in the acne of failure-free) ms in deacribed by the
vector I
'2'0(t)- I * I
1

Therefore, for the ideal as M°(‘)'M(ﬂ[tf(1)l)-nau . vhere 1-3 in
the lad-:- productivity of the DIS.

It ie convenient to note a cowarative evaluation of the otatea of one no ueing
a reactive indicator of ms productivity in the fore o(l) -a(l)[u-s]".¢op-ﬂcp(lan)"o

lo. Indicatore for evaluating the reliability of the has. The folloving indi-
catora beet act the require-onto for-dated in eection 1 above for evaluating
ucs reliability: working tine until productivity drope belov level a"(analogom
to working tine until failure). deaignated 1""; coefficient of readineee for
work at a productivity level not lover than “(analogue to readineae coeffi-
cient). deainated no la"; probability of aaintaining productivity not love:
than level a. during period of tine t (analogous to probability of trouble-free
operation), designated a P... (t): average‘tiaa of reetoration to a level not
lover than a, (analogoua to average reetoration tine). dcaignnted aa 1“,." ; and,
average level of productivity (no analog) 0.“.

5. Hatheaetical nodel of the proceee of change in ncs etatee. The etndard m8

conaiate of four typea of elemta: nucleue. proceoeor nodulea. internal ne-ory
andulae. and channels for co-unication vith peripheral mite.

Suppoae that the atatea of the ncs differ fro. one another by level of produc-
tivity 1. Then the under of ass etatea ie deter-ined by the older of

MWWMY
M “FILM Dal. ONLY

coﬁlnations of failure—free ms elenents that support the different levels
of productivity.

Let us aka the following muons: the failures of ms elenents are inde-
pendent; the flows of failures and restorations of ncs elenents are elenentary;
the aonitoring of the state of ucs ale-ants is continuous and reliable; restor-
ation of the ms is restricted. and the first elenent to he restored is the one
that supports restoration of the greatest ms productivity; and. the initial
state of the us is a state that assures productivity 6 - 100 percent without

redundancy.

On these assuwtions the process of change in the states of the PICS will he a

discrete narlrovian process with continuous tine described by a systen of linear
differential equations.

6. Calculated ratios for evaluating the relishility of the ass. He will adopt
the following designations: B.,,(a, h) is the aathantical expectation of nun-
her of tines um productivity drops below level n" in tine interval a s t s b;

u." (t) is the para-eter of the flow of drops in productivity below level a...

It is apparent that Ia"(a. h) - H.,,(to, h) - I... (to. a). where to is an
arbitrsry start of the coat.

By analogy with working tiae util failure, working tiae until productivity drops

below level unis defined as follows [1]: b
-o

To" (a. b) -———-—————”‘" (l. b) _”." (Is. 0).

Using property ”'54" b)-‘;u."(l)d! . we receive
T.,,(¢. b) - (b-o)[é‘u." (1)4! 73"" mall".

with the Tssntions in section 5 above, u.,,(t) - um- const. than ‘1‘."(a. b) .
Tqv' ' (I."'o

Pro- the set of states of the ucs ch single out the sweet of states cor-
responding to a level of productivity not lower than a... and deaipate it 6-,.
In the subset Benn single out the subset of ms states iron which it is pos-
sible to sake a direct transition to scs states with lower levels of produc-
tivity, and we designate it 6"".

Considering the designations we have adopted. 0a.," z.“%‘ “n' . where u.";
‘.’g'

is the intensity of output fro. state i of subset 3*." to was states with.

productivity sq"; qa"; is the hypothetical probability of finding the Its

in state i of suhset 85,, on the condition of finding the nets in the states of

subset 8.".

hz
mammal“
”WISE“?

It iollooa no. the definition of «3...; am ‘5! “'51"? "wr'kw'
.0

°P%'(P""")-' , where h"; in tho etationary value of the probability of
finding the as in otate i of onboet 3.". i. 8.”,

After a order of ouhotitntiona oe obtain
’5' [ 2 *.¢«..«( 2. had-T : (I)
‘..;v I“... .

The coefficient of ms roadineao to work with the level of productivity not
lower than a" can be defined ao the probability of finding the as at an arbi-
trary noeant in tine (without conaiderin; planned ohntdoono) in a otate oith
productivity not lover than on. tollovin; the definition and mtiono of

oection 5 above, Inn-h.“ 8 hens. .

cot
C»
It follow iron the condition of nomliaatim “2.951-! that P—M-(‘§."o"l)"-

Conaiderin; that letter.

K.,,- 2, h.,,.()'_‘,h.,,;) (2)

With the mtinne in aection 5 above “5.73,, (754435)" . iron
If Pu": (t) ia the probability of finding the ucs in etate i of oﬁoet Bewat

nooant i on tho condition of zero intenoitiea of return to onboet B... after
leaving it. the folloving ia ohoiono: P“ (0-. :5 9;”. (I).
C

“no

In neerin; practice the are convenient tor-31a [2] ie Pa" (t) - up
[-i(‘l‘ .n )"l. chore 1"." io the average nothing ti. until the firot drop in
runs productivity heloo level an.

Iron the well-known expreooion in reliability theory it follow:
‘ O
T“ ‘ui‘IP~',(t)dl
. ﬁe on]. deeignate
.
65:1ng (cm-um up(-sl)xP:_,¢ (out.
then

P." (l) map [-l( 2 C.,,a)-|]. (3)

«a.
W

2.3
mammal“
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

The average level of productivity is

”-2, tun—2, .m.( 2 In)" . ‘ (4)

it. ‘C‘ I"

7. The algoritf- for calculating indicators for evaluating ncs reliability.
It is reed-ended that indicators for evaluating Hts relimlity calculated by
the following algorithn.

7.1. One of the possible sethoda (analytic. by sodeling. and the like) deter-
sines the states of the was by coﬂinations of ale-ant failures that nintain
productivity ‘3 ‘w( Be"). and those states to which a direct transfer can be
aede frow subset 5.... that is. the set of states a. The states of the subset
8“,, are singled out fro. the subset 8.".

7.2. A netted graph of the ass states is coqiled, with the nunber of the state
and productivity of the has in this state (cu) put at the nodes and the in-
tensities of transitions fro- one state to another aarked on the arcs.

7.3. Using the generally accepted technique [2], a systss of differential equa-
tions is coqiled free the graph.

7.4. To deter-line aqua“), “uh“ .49.,(1) -o

d! is adopted in the initial
systes of equations; then all the equations are divided ter-ise by mm“.
The result is a systes of N algebraic equations relative to b." . whose roots
are used in for-nae (l). (2), and (b) to deter-ins the indicators Ta“. h",
and o".

7.5. The indicator To" is coquted according to forsula (1). while K." is
coquted by fornula (2) and why formula (6).

7.6. To deter-nine Cg": in the initial syste- of differential equations. we
take the intensities of the return to the states of subset 8",, to be equal
to zero and elininate equations for states where «a».

In the resulting systes we go free the originals to representations of .Laplsce
transfor- for an initial state of 17......”I (0) - 1, 153(0) - (Karl 1001, ii 9-
He turn 3 toward zero. He obtain a systen of algebraic equations relative to
(3",; . Pros this resulting systss of equations C1”; (ii 8.7,) are detersined
and used in for-ula (3) to deter-nine the indicator P."(t).

Emle of calculating indicators to evaluate ms reliability. The possibility
of evaluating the reliability of an not which is a functionally distributed
systes of wicroprocsssors is of sons interest. The heightened attention given
to these system can be explained by the swift develop-ant of technology and
the growing coqlesity of software. Sons of the sicroprocessor nodules of a
distributed syste- are functionally oriented to process control. which was
fornerly done by software. This sakes it possible to raise the overall

”WWMY
productivity of the nos. Suppoee that in tin ms the tactically identified
aicroproceeeor nodule- are included in the nucleon of the arena, which nin-
taine a parameter for the etreaa of failuree of A; '- 26.l7-10‘5 hr". and sup-
poee that the ente- inclodee aeven nicroproceaeor udnlee in the execution field
with a par-eater for the etrean of failure of each nodule of 1; . 1.81.10’5
hr' . nine internal eeeory nodulee with a paranetet for the urea- of failures
of each of A; - 2.51-10'5 hr”, and two channel nodules with a para-eter for
the etrean of failures of each of la. - 2.90-10‘5 hr". the intensities of
reatoration of all eleeente are v - 2 hr“. The table Below gives the mm
of the II: and the productivitiea corresponding to than for calculating the
reliability iodicatore of the ms vhere en- 93 percent.

Table. Staten of the ass (en- 93!)

 

e z : z I '21..
2 6 9 2 I am
3 1 a 2 I am
I 1 9 I I 0.00
5 1 a 2 0 0.00
6 s a 2 I £0.21
1 1 1 2 I 93.32
a 7- a l I 11.60
9 1 1 2 o 3.00
lo 6 1 2 I 82.03
In 1 6 2 I was
I2 _1 1 I I “mo
Key: (a) Nulber of State; (e) Channela;
(b) III-her of Operable ale-ante; (0 State of nucleus: of ms;
(c) Proceeeor Hodulea; (3) Relative Productivity a. 2.

(d) Internal llenory Ibdolee;

 

He co-pile the initial eyetee of differential equation according to the graph
shove in the figure below.

figure.

 

us
mammal“
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Following aection 6 above, the for-nu for calculating the reliability
indicatora of the ass under conaideration are no follow: 1' - 932 -
(1 + h; + h7)X[M + 7x; + zxu.)(1 + 1:3 + by) + 713ml". (”ms (1 + h; + h,)
n
[1 ‘9 £21], I...” . '- ,Pw‘ (t) ' expl-dCO + C3 4’ c7)-l]-
.-
Pollovin; aection 7 above we obtain the for-11a for hc:1cu1atin§1 hﬁe and Ci:
m - 1m; 1 .hz - nut 32 n3 - 913v“', uh - 21w" 3-9111”
631213W2, h7 - 72132v he - 24,181?“ - 7211132v:3 , hm ISOblzlgv‘a
nu - 501.13%“, an - im32 xw' ,c, - ”slim“ n, + 3x, + v]- mvrl
co - (1 4- your . c7 - she,“ - 213 + v) where A - 113+ 7x, + 9x, + 21...

As the reenlt of the calculation the follovin: indicator. are obtained for
the reliability of the ms: T..M- 1,687 houra; K...“ - 0.99966;
Tau”; - 0.5 hours; I‘m - 2, 018 houra; Kg,“ II 0.99975;

T”IQI%' 0.5 hours; PM“) - exp (-t/1,487); 15m“) - exp (-1/2, 2‘0);
C;.' 99. 97 2

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. "Nadezhnoat' v tekhnike. Taniny i Opredeleniya. 6081' 13377-75," [Reli-
ability in Engineering. term and Definitions. State All-Union Standard
l'o 13377-75], 21 payee.

2. 0vcharov, 1.. A., ”Prikladnyye Zadachi ‘l'eorii Haasovogo Obaluzhivaniya"
[Applied Problem of Ila” Service Theory], Meow. "Haahinontroyeniye",
1969, 32‘ pagea.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'atvo "Zimtne", ”Avtonatika i vychialitel'naya tekhnika”,
1982

11,176
680: 1863/120

mammal“
llDC 681.3.01:621.372.S

DESIGN WIQUE FOR DIGITAL 31mm: FILTER um! PI!!!) POINTAID mum. DMIC
RAISE

Kiev KIBWIKA I WCHISLI‘I'IIL'IIAYA 1mm: DIM SISTER “PIAVLBIIYA in

Russian lip 53, 1981 (signed to press 16 Jun 81. Ianuscript received 20 Feb 80)
pp 10-17

[Article by A. A. Petrovshiy and A. Ye. lausenko, liinsh Iadioengineering Institute]

[Text] mch attention is now being paid to the design of auto-ated vibration test
control syste-a (ASUV) on digital principles [1. 2], which in contrast to analog
systeas for this purpose allow with high accuracy forecasting the spectral charac-
teristics of vibration processes and efficiently iapl-enting control and full
auto-ation of the process of tests according to a specified program including
according to several.

Digital shaping filters are being used extensively in these A3!" to obtain rando-
vibrstion processes with specified spectral properties. In doing so, they are
i-plelented as specialized devices with progr- control [2]. In the Iajority of
cases, simple specialized devices. including digital filters in particular, are
built on the basis of representation of binary nubers with fixed point. Inherent
to then is overflow of the word length when addition is perforled because of the
liaited dynaaic range of the filter [3]. That is why the proble- of designing
the factors of a progr-ocontrolled digital shaping filter in which overflow is
eliminated is iaportant.

Discussed below is a technique for designing a shaping filter that allows prevent.
ing overflow. In doing so, the urinal absolute value of the input signal nay be
equal to the upper bound of the filter's dyn-ic range.

Filter 1ransfer Function. Inplanentation of the digital filter by cascade or
parallel connection of the sections of the first and second orders provides a
higher precision of the position of the poles than the direct and canonical ferns.
Hith that. the cascade forl yields the least nean noise power at output [’0].
Therefore. the digital shaping filter is implanted by series connection of the
elementary filters of the first and second orders.

It should be noted that to prevent overflow in the first place, the variation
range of the filter factors has to be deter-ined so that they can be represented
with a fixed point with the liaits of the digital filter's dyn-ic range, if it is
asst-ed that each register with fixed point represents a fraction with a sign,

the aodulus of which is less than one.

monlé‘hmmv
M WORN use. UNLI

Aa a rule. in problem of ayntheaie operationa are perforled with the rational
function [5]

_ _ _ g+c.-r‘+ +m"
H'(a) m (0)1100) .‘+“e+m+ ,. . (I)
with 0‘4.

It is known [6] that the apectral denaity at output of a linear ayata equala the
product of the apectral denaity at input by the aquare of the nodulue of the ayat-
tranofer function. ‘1th reetricting the generality of the diacuaaiona. let ua
auue a aim! with a apectral denaity of one (white noiae). Ihen

5,4.) - 1m.) -H(-lu) ”(18).
For the function 5.1“) to neet the hounda of the tranafer characteriatic, the
conditions [5] uuat he net. Pirat. that 5.69) he an even fractional-rational
function (a with real factora: $,(D).-C(3VK(O)-
Second. that the degreea of the polynoniala C(89) and K (o) neet the relationahip
. n {m- And third. that the polyno-ialo C(O). and KT.) be non-negative on the
entire real eeaiaxia a. i.e. C(o)>0.o€[0.co) and R(o)>.0.o'€|0.m°5).-

After defining a function 8, (a). that neeto the linita preaented, one can find the
transfer function of the shaping filter ”(10). i.e. the problen of factorization
must he aolved. The factorization algoritlna are preaented in detail in [5, 7].
(imputation of Hii») by method [5] ia eaaier. According to [S]. we have

H'(»)|..._.-- 3,17?” -H'(p). (2)

where - -
-c.. .... 03-h. a+'--Ou+n. -..:

k.’ iI-ﬁkle "0a ﬁ-ha itﬂ-_b'+h o.-

Then, following the factorization algoritll and conaiderins that the ahapin; filter
ia in the for- of a cascade connection of ela-entary filtera of the firat and
second ordera. we finally derive the filter tranafer function in the for. of

El Ki+‘l.l'+"’ ﬁU‘l'Wl
H m - -;'— ':: '2 . (3)
' nidm-i-duD-i-I’D "(redo
hi '-I

 

118
”WWONLY
chi-P. 4(0. if the roots of the nueretor of (2) a+l|5 end a—[p

 

y..- ere coupler-conjugue;
7,1,. ?.<°. Y,<°- if the roote of the nueretor of (2) 7. end 7- ere reel;
_2.. “<0. if the roote of the nueretor of (2) ere complex-conjugete;
h. - ‘
I—(y‘ +1.). yt<0. 1.<0. if the roote of the nueretor of (2) ere reel; _
834.33, 5(0, if the roote of the denoeinetor of (2) E-HI end 5—13
6. _ ere coupler-conjugete;
6.6,.6.<0. 6,<0. if the roote of the denouinetor of (2) 6. end &. ere

 

reel

-2a. a<0. if the roote of the denoninetor of (2) ere
d. - connlex-conjugete; end
_(a,+6.). 6.<0. 6,<0, if the roots of the denoninetor of (2) ere reel.

11.. treneition to the trenefer function of the digitel eheping filter ie effected
by eeene of the bilineer Z-trenefon [lo]

a - Rm -z"')/(I + 2")1. (4)
where R -2/A!. A: ie the qunetixetion period.

Subetituting (lo) in (3) reeulte in the trenefer function of the elenentery filter
of the firet order being treneforned to the for.

5“,. Lk'lhi-l-jd-t-JJ-ﬂt“ :W- ~:R+ L"...
W+M+u+2u.- an +m- “n+0!"
_a~+n,k+a n+3: 4.2-: (5)
+4. + I "+ex'

+5.!

Alec, el end bl ere leee then two. end e2 end b2 ere leee then one. Thie follove
fro- ell fectore ho. hl, do end d1 being greeter then zero beeed on expreeeion (3)
end the inequelitiee

2(R'+"-+’hR)>2(h.-R‘).

2(R°+d.+d.m>2(d.-R‘).
awn-pm >R‘+h.—h.R.
R'+d.+d.R >R'+d.—d.R-

Then to inplenent the digitel filter beeed on repreeentetion of binery nubere with
fixed point, the fectore of the nueretor end denouinetor of (5) not be divided by
' two. One cen show thet in thie cue, the equetione describing the operetion of the
digitel filter teke the form:

for the direct forte
\‘ big“. (6)

N
n _ V
“9”“ ram“ z.

mMmony
"I. MAI. ”at; URL!

and for the canonical

N
0/1)". " ‘a ‘- ﬁfth-u U,
N
y. .- 2 Glue-4.

“—0

Here x“ is the input signal and y" is the output signal of the filter.

halysis of the dyn-ic rams of the factors of the digital filter of the first
order

- _ (R+v_t(v__—_m!:__ n+7 I+cr
”(2) (R+6)+(6-R)8" 75+! n-wr'

shows that the paraneters q and l are less than one. This follows from (3) and the
inequalities y+R>~g—R.8+R>6-R.

Finally, the transfer function of the digital shaping filter inpluented in cascade
form takes the for. '

.. -- I’
=. 0o; + out" +42!" ) ( n + qr‘
”m “NW D. wt»)- ‘8)

In this expression, all factors in absolute value are less than one (so and b0 for

all cascades equal 0.5). Thus. they can be represented by binary digits in the
forn with fixed point in the digital filter.

Selection of Scaling Factors. If x.“ is the next-III absolute value of the input

signal, and ’n and hk are the output signal and pulse characteristic of the filter,
then [8]

Iy.l<x..,£ IM.
H
since ly..l< I. then

x...< Ham (9)

is the upper bound of the input signal, within which there is no overflow in the
digital filter.

Selection of scaling factors by fornula (9) is conplicated and is not always war-
ranted since it yields overstated results and suing the series in (9) is rather
difficult. In the process, the dyn-ic range of the input signal is reduced.

“WWW!”
A more convenient nethod of scaling the digital filter inplenented in cascade form
can be found. after requiring the fulfill-ent of the following conditions:

 

L

. L-I
KL: -WP| gun») - l.

. o
e s

X, .
l'l anal - l. (10)

 

“-509

see

° 5
K; -sup|£ﬂ?(u)|=- I.
K?=suplliu‘(w):- l. -a<o<s.

where :1; is the minu- factor of transfer of N cascades.

L
liere formula (8) is written in the form ”(1) -Cs‘n' ”am.
where L n K e P is the masher of cascades, Co is a constant that for simplicity

may be assmed equal to one. 31(2) lo the unnamed transfer function of the

e lenentsry f i l ter , and

.L -I l.‘ .2
mm- "“ ‘ "-" (”-3 .
‘t'+.0.l’- 1—0;,3"

 

is the transfer function of the eluentary filter with which there is no overflow.

Fulfillnent of the conditions (10) leads to the fact that the response of the
digital filter when fed {sinusoidal signal of unit amplitude on resonant fre-
quencies 9i. 3},“ 9,.“ ”J a! will not exceed one, i.e. the restriction

lynl <1 is net when ”max is as close to one as desired.

Hith regard to conditions (10), the technique for scaling the factors of the filter
(8) is net the following way.

He find the nsximn factor of transfer of the first eleuentary filter

K1 ‘wPiH. (toll and deterline the paraneters of the transfer function

i *
lit (2): qu - ‘OJIKI' 31,1 - 'l,l/Kl‘ 32.1 - az‘llxl, with K1 . l on frequency

e

0.. Then we compute the maxim- value

K.-sup:H-'f¢olﬂ,(0)l.

and find the factors of the second cascade I; (z): g0 2 - ao ZIKZ’ gl 2: al 2IKZ.
' 9 O ’

MOFFKISAILUSEONLY
[VI WIN,“ bull'— \h‘l—I

g2.2 = a2.2ll2, with K; s l for the resonant frequency on . It should be noted

that it is possible that K; - mp|H§-(;)-I>l for 0:. but in this case too

overflow will not occur since the input signal on frequency will be
attenuated by the first filter cascade. Similarly, we‘deterline

/ ' ' L»:
lad-sup 11 I171») ”L—N") .

1-!

g“.-. - ago—u/Kklo (up: - “LL-I’KL-n lit-I " “zL-I/KL-I

L—I
KL - sup {imam-4.
l“- " “ill/KL- ULL - “LUKL. (it. - 0‘;de

In considering this technique for scaling filter factors, we should single out the
cases when one of the nexinu transfer factors KN< l. Hith that, go N' gl N and
I l

82 N nay become greater then one end the dynamic range of representation of the

digital filter factors will be exceeded. To prevent overflow of the word length in
this case, it is necessary to select K“ fro. the condition

' I l

which is derived with regard to the fact that al II is the nearin- factor of the
9

numerator of the transfer function of the Nth cascade, and the absolute value of
the digital filter factors is less than one. In the process, to ensure the nearin-
possible transfer factor of the filter cascades, obviously, it is necessary to
take K" - '1,"' Then

aw - den/aw. gm - aux/0:." - I. (aw - nan/aw-

Selection of the scaling factors of the digital filter inplaented in cascade form
by (10) and (11) shows that the direct for. of building the ele-entary filter is
better than the canonical. It has one st—ing unit (6), the output of which is
the filter output. The canonical for: of inpleoentation of the filter has two
sunning units (7), and with that the values of u, may be greater than one, since
the factors bt are not nor-ed, which leads to overflow. To prevent it, fulfilleent

of condition (9) is required, if we put yn equal to the output value of the first
unit 0... and h.l to the pulse characteristic of this unit. Thus, it is necessary
to introduce additional scel ing of the input signal of each cascade.

In leplenenting the cascade fore of the digital filter, where the output values of
the preceding section are inputs to the following, and the ele-entary filters are
in direct fora, we can avoid the shortconing of increased storage costs co-pered to
the canonical inplenentetion. In this case, ll 9 2 storage cells are required,

where l is the amber of storage cells with the canonical inplnentetion of the
filter (fig. 1).

MMMMY

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Progra- for Filter Design and Engineering Inpla-sntation. The DIS!" (digital
shaping filter) progran, nitten in MIMI-IV. has been repeatedly tested and vas
developed fro. the technique described above for conputing the factors of digital
shaping filters. ‘lhe fornal procedure for deternining the scaling factors, put into
the progrla, is as follows.

1. ‘lhe carin- transfer factors i1, 72, ..., Ti“. ..., ilpl’ KL of one, tvo, ...,
1. filter cascades are found.

2. he factors of the transfer function Ilia) ere detenined:

30,1 ' 'o,1"1' 81,1 ' ‘1.1"‘1' 82,1 ' '2,1’“1' "1 ' I‘1

(anxious transfer factor of first two cascades now equals K2 . iz’iv and K; . 1).
3. The factors of the nuerator of the second cascade are divided by [2, i.e.
go 2. g1 2 and g2 2 are found (taxi- transfer factor of first three

0 O I _ _ _ _
elenentary filters, connected in series, is now K3 - K3I(K2K1) - I315, and I; - 1).
4. he factors of the nt-srator of the third cascade are divided by 13. i.a.
g°3,gl3andgz3are foundandsoontotha lastcascede, the

9 l 9 - —
nuerator factors of which are Iultiplied by Kbllxl.’ In the process, condition
(11) has to be checked at each stage of the computation.
Function (1) is determined by using natha-atical programing. In the DISH” pro-

gral. the method of fractional-rational approximation is used. and the for-a1
procedure for it is presented in detail in [5].

Shown in figs. 2 and 3 are the nplitude-frequency charecteristics of digital
shaping filters synthesized by using this procedure. The factors for these filters
are given in tables 1 and 2 respectively.

Table 1. Factors of Bilinear Z-h‘ansforu Table 2. factors of Bilinear Z-I‘ransforl

 

 

 

 

 

for Cascade Digital Shaping for Cascade Digital Snping

Filter of 10th Order Hhen Filter of 14th We: ”hen

b - 005 b - 0.5

0 0

Cescad' l I I
. “M lo (9 ‘1 ‘v | i

1 mum om mum —o.mal mam
2 lama om 0.5533 93):»: :40»;
3 0.2074 —0.l0|5 0.057 0243.» "585‘ l 0.2m 4.0723 0.!70‘.’ -0.¢26‘l 0.2735
4 0mm ‘ osm 0,130 0,0350 —0.ux'5,¢ 2 0.|000 0.16!” 0.0600 4.20“ 03765
5 owel om 0.4m um? um: I

 

 

It should he noted that this procedure is very effective vhen constructing progra-
controllable digital shaping filters as part of digital ASlN [automated vibration

test control syste-s] [2], vhen the filter factors change at each stage of control
and the danger of overflov occurs. In this case, the digital filter is a ~

I;
POIOFIIOSALUSEONLY
epecielieed caputing device. Binery nuhere ere repreeented with fixed point in
two'e couple-eat. EleIentery filtere of the eecond end firet ordere ere inple-
nented in e forI correeponding to direct progr-ing.

Key: '
1. code fra coquter (lbw (2)
2. WP! [WOW-e code getee unit] ‘76”
3. STA [eddreee counter 1, 2]

lo. 05!: [decoder 1, 2, 3, 4]

S. 020 [etorege unit 1, 2, 3, 6]
6. P0 [control coneole] , _
7. r [trigger] " (13)
8. control fro. conputer .
9. BU [control unit] " >‘ ’ I " (11)
10. 0381: [white noiee generetor] M #05)
11. I; [regieter 1, 2, 3, lo]
12. IQ [eodulo 2 eddere unit]
13. SH [expeneion unknown]
16. BA [enelyeie unit]

15. DU [expeneion unknown]
16. IR [buffer regieter]

17. output

   
 

’1‘. ‘0

Fig. 4 ehowe e etructurel diegre- of e digitel eheping filter with progre- control
by e control computer. thet by the procedure preeented ehove co-putee the fectore

of the trenefer function u'm for e epecified epectrel deneity s’(0). llere the
filter fectore 80,i‘ g1,“ g2.1 end b1, 1, b2, ‘ ere etored in etorege unite om

end 0202 respectively. All etorege unite ere nede with nssm integreted nicro-
circuite. Inpute veluee an end output ’n ere written to 020 3 end OZIJ lo. Ueing

thie type of etorege requiree repreeentetion of informetion to be written in pere-
pheee code. Therefore, the perepheee code getee unit (3V?!) ie deeigned to nite
to 0201 end 0202 the veluee of the filter fectore treneferred fro. the cuputer
thet ere eheped by ueing e white noiee generetor (GBSh).

The buffer regieter (33) with the circuit for forming the perepheee code ie
deeigned for ehort-ter- etorege of the veluee of the input end output codee for
their euheequent writing to etorege unite 3 end lo. The circuit for genereting the
addreeeee of etorege unite 1 end 2 coneiete of the hinery eddreee counter 8141,
the trigger (T) end the two decodere DShl end DShZ. The circuit for genereting
the eddreeeee of etorege unite 3 end 6 hee e einiler etructure. It coneiete of
STAZ, T. DShl end DShZ. Arithmetic unit operetion ie heeed on the nethod of
mltiplicetion fro. the high-order bite in two'e couple-eat [9]. The herdwere ie
inplenented with the KlSSIkl end KISSDB eicrocircuite. Here lQ ie the unit of
modulo two eddere, end BA ie the unit for enelyeie of the next hit of the culti-
plier. In the proceee, operetion of the ceecedee ie effected eequcntielly in tile
in one eritI-etic unit end eynchronized hy the control unit (30). The output velue
7“ ie etored for the period of quentiution in regieter 364, the output of which

ie connected to e digitelcto-enelog converter.

POIOFHCISASLUSEONLY
IV. VII-tone. has; uni-s

Manual entry of the factors of the transfer function li'(z) is provided for in this
specialized processor fro. the control console (P0) to storage units 1 and 2; it
is also used for snaking a test check of the specialised processor. In auto-atic
node, the device operates under control of signals fro. the BI! [control unit].

In conclusion, it should be noted that this specialized processor can operate in a
"pair" with a progru controlled digital nonrecursive filter with an arbitrary
transfer characteristic [10]. Achieved in doing so is a wide range of retuning by
frequency and high precision in generating the spectra. This procedure for design-
ing a digital shaping filter can be used extensively in digital simlstion of nor-
Isl stationary rando- processes on mini and micro conputers, when fixed-point
operation is required to achieve a high rate of inforlstion processing.

B 131.1%“!!!

1. Chegolin, P. “.3 Kuntsevich, V. H.; ‘l‘unik, A. A.; lonchak, V. 8.; Poyda, V. N.
and Borisov, V. 3., "Anatousted Syste- for Control of Vibration Tests on a
(he-Component Vibration Stand," US i H, No 2, 1978, pp 115-118.

2. Leusenko, A. Ye. and Petrovskiy, A. A., ”Caputational System for Generation
and Control of Hatrix of Spectral Densities of Three-Dinensional lando-
Process," in "'l‘r. VII Vsesoyuz. soveshch. po probl. upr" [Transactions of the
7th All-lhion Conference on Control Problems in lbscov], Minsk, Vol 3, 1977,
p 106.

3. "Introduction to Digital Filtration," edited by R. Dogner, A. ll. Konstantinidis,
Hoscov, Hir, 1976, 216 pages.

6. Gold, 3. and Reider, 6., "Digital hocessing of Signals," lbscov, Sov. radio,
1973, 336 pages.

5. Lanne. A. A., "Optimal'nyy sintez lineynykh elektricheskikh tsepey” [Optinal
Synthesis of Linear Electrical Circuits], lbscov, Svyaz', 1969, 292 pages.

6. Pugachev, V. S., "Teoriya sluchaynykh funhtsiy i yeye prineneniye k sadacha-
avtouaticheskogo upravleniya" [Theory of Ban“. Functions and Its Application
to Problems of Autonatic Control], lbscov, Fimtgis, 1960, 883 pages.

7. Rozanov, Yu. A., "Statsionarnyya sluchaynyye protsessy" [Stationary Rando-
Processes], Moscow, finatgiz, 1963, 284 pages.

8. Oppenhein, A. and Helnstein, D., "Effect of Final Register Length in Digital
filtration and Fast Fourier Transform” TIER "DOC. 1533], lb 8, 1972,
pp “1’6“.

9. Kartsev, H. A., "Arifnetika tsifrovykh Iashin" [Arithnetic of Digital Machines].
Hoscov, "suite, 1969, 575 pages.

10. Petrovskiy. A. A., "So-e Problens of Building a Stationary Rando- Process
Generator Dased on Digital Filter." in 'Materialy se-inara 'Vopr. vibroispy-
taniys, netody vibroispytaniy, for-irovaniye i analis sluchaynykh vibratsiy'"

MIMI-0880M]
[lhtartala frm the 3.1m "Prom-a of Vibration Tasting, lhthoda of
Vibration Tutu. Generation and Inalysu of lando- thrauona]. lbacov,
mun 1 III [axpanatnn unknovn], 1979, pp 32-36.

009nm: Idaul'atvo "hukova data", 1981

8555
C50: 1863/ 73

7
FOIOI‘HCgALUSEONIJ
M moms. Lot URL!

UDC 6813.62.52
aim-menu. AUTOWHC am 3mm. SPATIAL-Tm P30058136 813m

Kiev Kmemm I WCIISLI‘I'EL'NAYA mum: DWI sum WWIYA in
Euseisn lb 53, 1981 (signed to press 16 Jun 81. nenuscript received ll !eb 00)
pp 6548

[Article by A. V. Denil'chenko, G. F. Zsytsev end I. A. Isotov, Kiev Higher
Engineering Isdio Technical School Production-Technical Associstion]

[Text] In suto-etic system for spstisl-ti-e processing of js-ing signels (fig. 1)
is discussed in [3]. It consists of en uncontrolleble nsin end II controllsble
co-penssting receiving chennele, s cm sdder end device for sutustic reguletion
of veights. Spetisl resolution of je-ing signel sources is enebled by using s
tsultielelent entenne systen in the capenseting chennels end by using s closed sys-
tu for correletion-tine processing. the sdded j-ing signsl is suppressed end
the useful signel isolsted.

The effectiveness of suppression of
joining eignels depends on the quelity of
their spetisl resolution (one jening
signsl [2, 6] lust be processed in eech
coepenseting chennel) end on the nt-ber
of coepenseting chennele. Spstisl reso-
lution cen be enhenced by increseing the
number of chennels. The corrslstion-tiee
processing systen is s nultichsnnel suto-
netic control system Iultiply connected
on output. ‘lherefore, es the number of
chennels increesee. its dynenic proper-
ties deteriorste [l]. Ind consequently, Fig. l.

the quslity of suppression of je-iu

signels by esch chennel is reduced. ‘Ihus. the conditions for high resolution end
high opersting effectiveness of the correletion-tine processing syste- ere
contrsdictory.

 

Thus, the problee occurs of providing high epetiel resolution of j-ing signal
sources with en sccepteble nuber of chennels end the specified effectiveness of
j-sing signel suppression.

One vey of solving this probl- is investigeted in this srticle. It consists in
the optinsl (priority rsletive to intensity of input signels) control of connectiu

58
meomanusaomx
H > N elenents of the antenna of the capensating channels. the number of which
allows obtaining high spatial resolution of the j-ing signal sources. to II con-

pensating channels (the am of channels provides a specified level of j-ing
signal suppression).

‘l'o inpl-ent optical control of connecting antenna elanents to the channels in the
syste- discussed in [I], it is necessary to add I! - II elenents of the antenna for

the compensating channels. a channel switch and an opti-ieer for connecting the
co-pensating channels that controls the allocation of channels between the antenna

ele-ents.

let us assue that the tine constant 1‘0 of the channel connection control syste-
is much less than the tine constant 3““ of the ja-ing signal correlation-tine
processing systen. This restriction allows taking the control vector 14-(11, ...,
I") in the correlation-tine processing systen as a constant independent of tine
and ignoring the correlation-tine processing processes in describing the process of
optimizing the spatial filtration process.

with this restriction. the problem of optinal control of connecting the calpensat-
ing channels is the prohlen of aininizing the quality functional of the spatial-
tine processing system of the for-

Qoptxu' n:nQ(x. {,1 . const). (1)
where: - (x1, ..., x“) is the vector of the input ja-ing signals and K is a

rectangular natrix of co-ands for connecting the conpensating channels with the
dimension N x H.

In the systen in question, the control quality functional has the for.

Q - «V; _ MW). ' - (-2)

‘i

where "T is the transposed con-n vector of weight factors of j-ing signals of
the Iain receiving channel with the dimension H x 1, 9' is the Ietrix of weight

factors of 1-ing signals in the antenna for the conpensating channels with the
dimension H 3 ll, and

e «r
UT 1: is the nean value for tine ‘7“ of the cuposite j-lling signal in the Iain

channel:

 

'f'? a: _' \' f'Ium (3).
‘AK “.5“.
1r 9

ln expression (2), the product of LTKH'r is also the nean value for tine?“ since

the devices for correlation-tine processing of jming signals are narrow-hand
filters with a bandpass proportional to 1/? AK'

5'0. (ﬁnal. USE ONLY
M W'ILMI. var. WI"

To echieve the ninim- of the functional (2), it is necessery to maxi-ire the
second ter- in the right part. Habitation of this teen is achieved by selecting

the opti-al vslues of the vector .1? in the systen for correlation-tine processing
and of the natrix K for connecting the conpensating channels in the spatial
processing systu.

The algoritl- for optinization of connecting the compensating channels, which lakes
use of probability iteration procedures with search optimisation, has the for-

“PI + II - KInIII -si:n(AQInI-Q'In— ll)-SIgn(AP|M -Q'ln—- um +
+ 25m: 5anle --Q'(n— II) +signuP|ru -Q°In — :l).. (I)

The following designations are used in expression (6):

mm - 05w. K m. E - catsu— oGIn — u. Kin — n. E - consl).
APlnl - Kln — ”will: — ll —K|n|\V'}|n|.

where n . l. 2, ... is the nubers of iterations of the optinieation algoritl.
that are perforned with the interval T“.

The series {E Isl} is s series of neasuring lattices with the dinension I! x I!
of the for-

l. 1: a=i.B=-i+sN.i=l.2. ...'.h

5"] =1‘10l5'l-‘mglsl- 0

. u 1-i.ﬂsﬁi+sﬂ. ‘5’

where N is the nuber of cnpensating channels and s s 0, 1, ..., S is the nubsrs
of iterations of the process of taeasuring the jaming' signals that are perforled
with the interval 1'. and the who: of the measuring matrix in the corresponding

iteration. The nulher of leasuring natrices (S e l) - ll/IU, if II is s nultiple of
I! or is equel to the next larger integer to lllli if ii is not a Iultiple of II.
The intervals Tn and T. are associated by the relation In - (S o l)'l'..

The current threshold value of j-ing signal intensity is denoted by 0*[no1] in
[lo] end the function

I. if x>u.
"‘"""o. if x<0.

The functional diagr- of the signal spatial-tine processing systa in question is
shown in fig. 2. lbs optimizer for connecting the conpensating channels consists
of the j-ing signal analysis unit (BAPS), the neasuring natrix generation unit
(Elli) and the channel switch control unit (sun). The j-ing signal analysis

unit inplelents algoritl- (Is) and is used to detect changes in the j—ing signal

vector ‘1: . (x1, .... x“) that require searching for a new optinal connection of

the conpensating channels to the antenne elenents. The unit for genereting
neasuring natrices E [s] is used to leasure the intensities of all ja-ing signals

60
MWWONLY
'18. 2.

affecting the system by using the neaeuring natricee B [a]. 'Ihe channel avicth
control unit is used to isolate I! of H etrnngeet ja-ing signals and generate
optimal matrices for co-ands to connect cupenaating channels K [n].

In accordance with expressions (6) and (5), the. search for the optimal connection
of conpeneating channels begins Uhen sign (Aanl — Q‘ in - ll) - l
or den (APlnl -Q‘ In — H) -l and consists of the following operations:

neasuraaent of all M ja-ing signals in series of N signals in parallel by using
the measuring Iatrices E [s].

ordering of H ja-ing signals by their intensity and rejecting of PI - ll signals of
low intensity, and

generation of the netrix K [n] of canals for connecting the coupeneating channels.
“mus. the process of optimizing the connection of co-penaating channels reduces to
finding the aerial projection of an Hodinensional vector of j-ing signals on

N-dinensional space. The couand aatrix generated in the optimization process
has the for. ...‘. - .. n n

m. I 1" if “at. ﬂ-I‘;
Klnl- l‘nﬁlnt halal-‘0. 1t. a-i. 5"."

where i . l. 2. .... N and 11 - l, 2. ..., N ia the nuber of the antenna element
selected for connection to the i-th conpensating channel.

let us consider the operation of algoritl- (b). In the initial state n - 0, the
conpensating channels are disconnected fro. the antenna, and in the process

AQIOI 5:31": a Q‘ln—"Il-o and sign(AQl0l-Q'l—ll)=l.

hence K [1] - is {all} . i.e. the search for the opti-al connection of the
coapeneating channels begins.

61
“WISCONLY
0'0. Us s‘snuuee- 54a. Unease

If between the iterations n-ltandln, there began to operate a 1-ing signal with
an intensit eater than n-l then .- - ‘
ygr Q. ' Aanl>Q‘ln—-ll. .lPlnI< Q-‘ln—Il,

and in the process X [n o l] - {E Isl} .

If between the iterations n-1 and n, one or note j-ing signals being processed
by the coepensating channels ceased affecting the systel. then

Aanl<Q' xn—‘u. aim-70- I. ."n‘... r [n . n . {a {.1} .

All possible alternatives of variation with the course of tine of the ja-Iing
situation are reduced to the situations discussed above and cause similar
responses in the ante. for opti-isation of spatial processing.

‘Ihus, this systel allows achieving in each cnpensating channel the processing of
one ja-ing signal. i.e. spatially resolving the j-ing signal sources, when the
Ill-b“ 0‘ ja-ing signals N“ \<N; when M) an > l. the system not only resolves

the ja-aing signals, but also optimizes the process of their suppression by
priority processing of l j‘ing signals naxinal in intensity; and the engineering
inplenentation of the ante. is relatively simple. The .ount of apparatus
increases largely by adding additional elelents of the antenna for the
compensating channels.

31%!me
1. Heyerov. V. IL, "Sintez struktur sisten avto-aticheskogo regulirowaniya
vysokoy tochnosti" [Synthesis of Structures for Syste-s of Auto-atic Regulation
of Iligh Precision], lbscow, Nauka, 1967. 1023 pages.

2. "Ieoreticheskiye osnovy radiolohatsii" [Theoretical Principles of Radar], ad.
by Ya. D. Shirnan, Moscow, Sov. radio, 1970, 560 pages.

3. Hoodrow et al., "Adaptive Mtenna Systems," TIIER (FROG. 1355], No 12, 1967,
pp 78-95.

4. Shir-tan, Ya. 0., "Statistical malysis of Optinal Resolution," MDIO‘IWIRA
l RADIOELEKTRON., No 8. 1961, pp 1237-1266.

WPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stwo "Naullowa dais". 1981

85(05
080: 1863/ 73

62
“WISEONLY
mum SISTDIS

00C 681.3
contains-m 0, “TM” m SYN

m m m WCIIW'IYE srsran in mm
1981 (019106 a lit.“ 19 III: 81) W 2-6. 16-17, 78-910. 103

“mutation, toblo o! cutouts, foreword and excerpts froo chapter 3 (too book
”Configuration of hultiprocsssor Cooputor Systm". edited by V. 1.

Min. udotol'otvo Loniogrodokogo univorsitoto. 10.000 oopios, 104 pogos]
[Ml M1103

rho booic principlos of dooigning nultiprocosoor motor oyst-s oro out-
linodintho handbook. ‘Bnooost invostiqotodtyposofhordvorootcocturssof
ms Imam»: concur systns] ond problns of agonizing control. of
capotor procooooo in th. oro causidorod. nodorn Soviot and farsign motor
syotuo that ”pl-oat thooo principloo oro doocrihod. ‘lho book is iutoodod
for studonto of oonior oonrooo of oloctronics ond radio ooqinooring moo. It
ooy ho dimtto opocioiistsio tho tiold of coupon: toolmology and own-
tor softnro.

cams Pogo

torovord 4
Choptor 1. Intmductiou to Cmfigurotioo of Ouputor W 7
1. Configuration of tho motor systoo. Basic ooocopto 7

2. Inodoctivity ond roliobility of motor systoos u

3. Dovolopiug otmcturo of oinglo-procosoor cooputor systol- 20

4. mitiproooooor motor oysto-s 23

5. classification of mitiprocusor ooqmtor systooo 29
Choptsr 2. Structuro of Multiprocoooor W slou- ﬂorduoro 32
1. Unanimous“ systooo with coo-Ion bus 32

2. won-s with cross-switching 37

3. mltipmcuoor oystuo vith oultieinput ooaory 41

4. Motrix ond voctor systus 49

5. Asoociativo oystno 56

6. slots” with convoyor procsssiuq 64

7. Spociolizod mitiprooosoor col-pom systsns on standard
oodulos 7o
63

MOMMONLY
“In Vl'l'nono. not. why!

Chaptor 3. Organization of nl'btuo-l mltiptocoooor Cowutor Sloto 78

1. General otmctuzo of Bl'hm-l mltipzoceooor 78

2. Organization of intonation processing in control processor 81

3. Minnow: o! cuputor procmoo 87

4. Orgoniution of ma 89

S. Input-output ouheyotu 92
Chapto: 4. Ounctoxiotic Foaturoo ot Organizing Oontzol in

mitiptocoooor ant-o 95

l. argonizotion of nultiptvooeooo: opoxoting oyot-e 9S

2. main took: of controlling oporotion of mltiprocoooor syeto- 97

3. Organization of porollol poocoooing node 101

ethnography 103

ram

This hook is o toxthook for otudonto of higher oducotionol institutions that
are tnining opociolioto in dovolopuont of caputoro, thoi: sottuuo and op-
plicotion in differont fields of ocionco ond tochnology. Ito basis in tho
action of tho couroo of lectures “Digital Cooputoro ona Co-puter ante-3'"
nod ot the Poculty of hutonotioo ond Caputor Equipment. 131': [taningtod
Bloctxotochnicol Institute inoni V. 1. Ul'yonov (union, which io dovoted

to lultipcocoooo: oyot-o.

Tho loot invoctigotod twoo of mums”: cuputor oyotona' ond gononl
Kohl-o or otgonioing tho Imago-oat of cuputo: proceeooo in th- ose con-
sidered in the textbook. Hain attontion is devoted in the hook to ottucturoe
of Initipxocoooo: hood-vote. Doocziptiona of opecific conputoro on emplo-
nontod by genonl data on tho configuration of nultiptocoooor conputo: oyotono.

novholothohookohouldhezogoxdoduonintroductiontooyotaoticotudy
of tho promo-o of tho configuration of multiptocoooor system. It ooy oloo
he of intoroot to opociolioto in tho fiold of cooputo: tochnology out! oomuto:
ooftvoro. ‘

A large clooo of oysteno that contains several procooooro pextorning calcula-
tions by dependont and indopondont moot-o simultaneously oro collod multi-
ptocoooo: coquto: mtona. rho ideo of dovoloping o nultipmcouor structure
initially oppooxed upon develop-ant of :oliahle high-oped! opocioliud coupo-
toro and proceeded (to. tho natural dooiro to provido oinultonoouo fulfill-out
of 'indopondont' ports of tho colculotion procooo to achieve the :oquird
oporotionol procoooing. Invostiqotiono in thio field poovidod on but.» to
dovolop-ont of not otmctm'oo ond principloo of organizing control [2. 3, 12].

 

O

Along with tho tom 'Iultiptocoooor oo-putor oyoton,’ the concept of multi-
procoooo: W mt. ond tho ohhreviotod ton-«mltiprocoooor-are used
oxtenoivoly in tho litoxotuzo. 'l'hooo thxoo tor-o ore aubooquontly uood
interchangoohly.

66
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mfficignt experience has now been accumulated in design of multiprocessor
computer systems. The concept of multiprocessor configuration was formulated.

The variety of structures of multiprocessor computer systm. organization of
parallel calculating processes in them and the characteristic features of us-
ing these systems caprise a new field of knowledge about cowuters in modern
science. The range of problems considered in the textbook determined its
structure. The basic concepts are outlined in Chapter 1 and the main compon-
ents of the configuration of modern computers are given and multiprocessors
are classified. Chapter 2 is devoted to a description of the basic types of
structures of multiprocessor caputer systems and to comparative analysis of
the characteristics and the characteristic features of use. Organisation of
the Soviet tl'brus-l multiprocessor computer system in whose structure a large
number of original solutions is realised. is considered in detail in Chapter
3. The complexity of organizing parallel calculating processes in these sys-
tests is shown on the example of this system. Chapter 4 is devoted to organiz-
ation of calculating processes in multiprocessors. A detailed discussion of
systems organization of the operation of multiprocessors. besides analyzing
the structure of their hardware. would require consideration of a wide range
of problems related to describing the functional conditions of multiprocessor
computer systems. methods and software for them. Therefore, only the basic
principles of organizing the managuent of calculating processes in the indi-
cated system are reflected in the proposed book. Problems related to the
specifics of designing multiprocessor computer systems are also not touched on
in the textbook. The appearance of microprocessors and computer systems based
on them is a significant step in the direction of developing multiprocessor
structures. Most of the structures considered in the book and developed for

"large" systems are reflected in the configuration of nultimicroprocessors
[l3] .

Hultimicroprocessors with canon information mainline and with matrix organ-
ization of communications, regular computer systems based on microprocessors
(vector and matrix systems). conveyor and other structures of multinicro-
processor systems are designed according to general principles of organizing
the hardware of these systems, outlined in Chapter 2. This is also true of
organizing control in the given systems. At the same time there are undoubt-
edly characteristic features in organization of hardware and software compon-
ents of multiprocessor configuration that require special consideration.

The material of the given book is an introduction of the configuration of
multiprocessor computer systems. The authors recounend that readers continue
more extensive study of the considered problms in the following basic direc-
tions: analysis of the configuration of specific systems, organization of
calculating processes in multiprocessor computer systems and characteristic
features of multimicroprocessor configuration.

The textbook was compiled by a collective of authors under the scientific

editorship of Candidate of Technical Sciences V. I. Ti‘okhin. asepter l was
written by the scientific editor and co-authored with Candidate of Technical
Sciences Ye. A. Hetlitskiy (section 1) and O. s. Forlov (section 2) and sec-
tions 3-5 were also written by O. s. Kozlov. Sections 1 and 2 in Chapter 2

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
even VI Osweqea, \Je. vans

were written by Ye. A. Hetlitskiy and V. I. ‘ri-okhin. sections 3-6 were
written by Ye. A. Metlitskiy and A. v. Eula and section 7 was written by
0. s. mlov. idate of Mnicsl Sciences A. V. Halo is theaauttm of

Chapters 3 and 4.

The authors request that all counts and desires on the contents of the book
be sent to the address: 197022, Lettings-ed. 01itea prof. Popovn. No. 5. Chair
of Software and Capote: Application.

 

Teble l.

amputer Year of Productivity, Storage Capacity.
get- Hanufecture million 923‘s thousand words
UNIVAC-Zl 1950-1960 0.008 1

131-709 1958 0.2 4- 32
Risa-2 1955-1960 0.015 2

3:91-6 1960-1965 1 32- 131
CDC-6600 1970-1975 12 65- 512
Ian-370/195 1970-1975 7 131- 524

Altman-470% 1972-1975 7-8 131-l,000

E1 ' brus 1972-1970 1. 5-12 164-l.152

Inprovunent ot the characteristics of electronic circuits and cuponmts during
the past 20 years can be evaluated on the average by a coefficient whose value
varies by 10 unite per decade. than the latest advances are used in the field
of designing the configuration of nodern computer systems due to developnent or
effective algorithms and an increase of their productivity and storage capacity,
it is possible to achieve an approxieately threefold increase in the speed of
performing basic operations (instructions) even in large caputers.

Thus. pedaling addition operations on one of the first caputers. the MARK-1
(1944), occupied 33 us, while in 1964 the ens-6600 expended 300 nanoseconds on
the sane operation, i.e.. the speed of computers had increased 106 tines during
this period. Data that characterize the increase in the productivity and stor-
ege capacity of computers are presented in table 1.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m 3
OWIZA‘I‘ION C BURNS-l. msnmcsssoa W $1872!

1. General Structure of El'hrus-l nultipsocessor

'l‘he El'brusel cmputer complex was the fruit of integral development of hard-
ware and soft‘re. A significant increase in the efficiency of the calculat-
ing processes of the multiprocessor computer couple: was achieved by using a
hardware stack, hardware startup of procedures. non-address instruction systml
and dynamic distribution of high-speed registers.

the multiprocessor computer complex is characterised by essentially unlimited
storage capacity and complete input-output eutonuy. ‘l'he organisational struc-
ture of the system permits programing to be simplified considerably. i'he dy-
namic distribution of resources, context protection of mamry, nor): of several
users with canon date and recursive use of procedures are autuatic in the
considered computer caplex. The instruction system and the structural organ-
ization of the multiprocessor counter ounplex are designed for Wag in
high-level language (mu-60, tom, Plal, noon-68, sauna-67, cosm. and
PASCAL), which permits efficient translation of programs. The programing
system also includes the Bl'brus autocode--a procedures-oriented machine-in-

dependent language comparable in capabilities to high-level languages. The
autocode permits well-structured programs to be constructed.

The overall structure of the Bl'brus-l multiprocessor computer coupler is pre-
sented in Figure 44, where mm and on. are magnetic drue and magnetic tape
control. MB and MI. are magnetic drums and magnetic tapes, [ISO is plug~in disk
control, SD is plug-in disks. M‘s?!) is alphanueric printers, PR is punch card
input-output devices, PI. is papertape input-output devices, A‘l‘sD is alphanumer-
ic displays. an is graphic displays and GP is graph plotters.

67
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O‘VR VI Ia\ ma- s.“— 0"...

 

bop-riding on the makeup. the ayat- Iay include iron 1 to lo cantral procunor
nodules (M). from 4 to 32 intcrnal storage nodular and (rm 1 to 4 input-out-
put procuaor (WV) Danica. Bach central processor and input-output processor
Indula is connected to all int-ml stowage nodules tluough tba crou-owitchim
(DI) nodal-n. m cross-switching nodal. in a C x 14 water and M

four intcrnal atoraga nodules to all «nu-a1 manor and input-output mocca-
oor nodal-o. The Int-bar of cross-witch nodules «an4. on tho internal shor-
aga capacity and may vary tru- onc to eight. According to contimtion. tho

productivity at tho ayatan nay vary fro- l.5 (on. central processor) to 12 nil-
lion operation- por «can! (10 central mam) and internal storago capac-
ity may vary tru- 576 (in: intarnal otoraga nodal”) to 4,608 Rhytan (32 inc

adding mﬂnra with find point 520 no
adding tau-hora with floating point 780 no
mltiplying 32-digit unborn 780 an
lultiplying 64-digit under: 1.300 In
logic operations and opaations

with fiolda $20 no
cross-switching nodule operate with overlapping of access cycles. The cross-
switching modules are designed on integrated circuits with switching time an
order less than that of central processor circuits. The buffer and external
memory, input-output devices and mications lines with users of the systml
are connected to the systea through input-output processors. The given proces-
sors receive assignments for exchange through the canon field of the internal
storage from any central processor and the interaction process itself with the
comunications channels proceeds without the participation of the central
processor. The external storage is connected to the input-output processor
channels by special control devices (00). Several external devices can be con-
nected to one control device through the svitchboards of the external devices
(exchangers 03). The complex works with cumications lines by means of a
data transmission processor (PPD). which has its cum instruction syst. and in-
ternal storage (up to 16 x words each). The coumtications line is connected
to the data transmission processor through adapters (A) and group integration
devices (GUS). The data transmission processor is started by a central proces-
sor (through the input-output processor) and than controls data transmission
and the operating node of the line independently by its own program. The sul-
tiprocessor computer complex may contain up to 16 data transmission processors
-four each per input-output processor.

All the system components operate in parallel, independently of each other. and
are dynamically distributed by the operating system for servicing routine tasks.
All modules of the same type are identical and independent frcm the viewpoint
of switching the power supply. Each nodule of the system. including the cross-
switching modules, has 100 percent hardware verification and if a single error
appears during processing (transmission). it emits a signal on the malfunction
of the given module. The operating systn cuts out the malfunctioning module
from operation by this signal through a hardware-realised reconfiguration sys-
tem. The cutout module goes into the repair configuration, during which it is
repaired by using test-diagnostic programs and special hardware, after which
it can be connected by the operating system to operating configuration. This
system permits redundancy to be achieved at the level of modules of the same
type and ensures given reliability and viability of the entire caplex.

2. Organization of Information Processing in Central Processor

Processing of data in the central processor is organized by the principle of
stack access to the storage and hardware realisation of the stack (14]. The
internal language of the multiprocessor computer complex is similar to reverse
Polish notation and is a sequence of the names of operands placed in the stack
and operation codes performed on operands located in the top of the stack.
References to operands or even references to procedures that calculate the
value of the required operand may also be located at the top of the stack.

The stack mechanism is used extensively for dynuic distribution of muory for
local facilities of program units and procedures. Thus. local variables and
files in languages with block structure (for ample, ALGOL-60) occur at the
basis of their description at the beginning of the block (procedure) and are
retained until emerging from it. In this regard the memory should be allocated
for local data upon entry to the block and should be freed upon output of it.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ton vtd‘luana. toe. tans...

Stack discipline is also used effectively to store control infomtion upon
conversions to deeper levels or procedure .bedding and for storage of infor-
nation about the address snviror-snt of the task during intermptions and
switches tron task to task. The efficiency of using this stack with proce-
dure transitions is determined by the fact that output is achieved rirst fr:-
the procedure which was started last.

The stack principle of sensory access made it possible to realise an acoustic
aethod of addressing—addressing on the dictionary level. i.e.. by the m
of the level of «bedding or the block (procedure) and by shifto-in the El'brus-
l multiprocessor computer complex.

The dictionary level determines the basis of the corresponding procedure \diile
the shift level detersines the index with respect to the base. thus. address-
ing to local procedure entities is accomplished with respect to its base.

The local variable address is an address pair consisting of the nuher of the
dictionary level and the shirt. The procedure base determined by its diction-
ary level is the address of the beginning of the arr-called region of direct-
address data (PAD) (figure 45), corresponding to this procedure. The col-son
region of the direct-addressed data corresponds to each begun but moo-plated
procedure in the stack. The presently existing procedure has its own address
context or region of name access. This region includes the nanes of local
entities of a given procedure and the nuses or global entities contained in the
encompassing procedures (blocks) according to the block structure of the

progr- .

A base table corresponding tothe address envirotnent of the current procedure
is used to convert the address pair of the operand to the internal storage ad-
dress. The base address table is stored in the processor on base registers
(Big) to increase the speed of address conversion. The contents of the base
registers should be corrected with each startup or the procedure and coupletion
of it. Descriptors in which the base addresses of access regions of the corre-
sponding levels. the dimensions of these regions and the protection status are
indicated. are located in these registers. The address environment of the
procedure being executed is determined by the current dictionary level (to)

and by the contents of the base register.

Connecting intonation is torned and used in the central processor to store
the procedure transitions. the block structure of protected procedures and
other intonation required to make the return. This information is located

at the beginning of the region of direct-addressed data or the corresponding
procedure and occupies two words. The connecting intonation contains the
base address encapassing the procedure. the dimensions of the direct-addressed
data region of a given procedure, the base address or a started procedure. the
return instruction address, the dictionary level and sue additional interla-
tion related to the operating node of the started procedure.

The procedure is started in three phases. A place is initially allocated in
the directed-addressed data region for storage of the connecting intonation.

70
ms OFI'ICIALUSCONLY
1. Icon 6. local nun

2. mane: 7. mica of who:
3. Coupling infatuation 8. suck indicator

L Date 30918112! 9. m top o! the):

S . Pmutcn

pants. are many-d L-ndhuly behind the cnnnnctiw intention nod oc-
cupy the beginning of the no region. 1110 m: m amt-trod by and-
a’ng the values of mutton or that: «dream to the top of tho tuck in the
can of manta: truncation by me. And finally, th- ptoeoduto in start“.
It is need-pushed by tho start mama. to the opunnd of which the pro-
codure In): in and. m at); mean- tho trunnion instruction “are“. the
dictionary level and the M00 addres- of tho mung median. 13:. stnrt
instruction (on: the connecting wot-cm.

71

”WISEONLY
NJ“ UPDILIAI. Lbk. 03L)

Thus. two lists are forned in the stack. The first (static chain) contains the
base addresses of the regions of pernissible nenss for each procedure and
serves to fore the contents of the base register and the second (the dynamic
chain) reflects the sequence of the start of procedures and is used to nerge
fron th—. The base address of the anon-passing procedure contained in the
marker nay indicate the beginning of the PAD region of the encapassing proce-
dure located in the stack or the descriptor file. In the second case the ad-
dress content of the started procedure is deternined by the descriptor file.
which nay describe the arbitrary regions in the emery.

The entry instruction to the procedure carries the base address of the started
procedure to the corresponding base register, amines the static chain or de-
scriptor file, beginning with the address in the marker and. if necessary, cor-
rects the contents of the base register so that they addressed the entire nens
access region. mntrol is then transferred to the instruction indicated in the
nerker. In sinilar fashion, return to the started procedtn'e is carried out by
neans of the output instruction and all the required data are taken from the
connecting information. After input has been executed, the started procedure
itself allocates a place in the stack for its cum local naees. which are ar-
ranged in the direct-addressed data region inediately after the para-stars.
when calculating expressions. the operands read fro- the n-ory by insuuctions
of the “read value" type are loaded into the top of the stack. The results of
operations are also left there. The reel depth of this part of the stack is
shallow. At the sane tins access to operands in the top of the stack deter-
nines the operating speed of the processor when calculating expressions.
Therefore. the top of the stack in which mneddressed interlediate results are
placed is realised in the fast registers end is located in the processor. This
is the so-called hardware top of the stack (avs).

The masher of registers in the hardware top of the stack can be selected as
sufficiently large so that there is no need to pump then to the awry because
of overflow. However, during procedure transitions end interruptions, the con-
tents of the hardware top of the stack should be stored in the sunny end they
should he recovered upon returns. This information is located after the region
of the current procedure names. foreing its region of expressions. The stack
indicator (US) contains the address for pulping the next element fro. the hard-
ware top of the stack. (lily el-ents from the region of current procedure
expressions can be located in the hardware top of the stack. The boundary be.
ween the nene region and the expression region is established after initiation
of local variables by neans of a special instruction. ‘nxe boundary register
(R96) indicates the beginning of the expression region of a current procedure
(see Figure 45).

The instruction system of the central processor is noneddress type. It has a
rot-her of advantages over the traditional instruction systee of third-genera-
tion computers. The nest essential of then is elininetion of fast registers
from the address instruction code to store operands and internediate results
when calculating expressions. 'me instructions of third-generation cclputers
contained the addresses of the fast registers in explicit fore. Therefore.
their effectiveness is deternined to a considerable degree b1 the waning
nethod. This is related to Iediur and high-productive nachines in \dtich

72

FOR omcw. USE ONLY
puter productivity is considerably dependent at the utent to which the program
fully utilizes the available potential capabilities of parallelling.

The designation of the registers of the top of the stack is performed dynamic-
ally in the zl'brus-l eultiprocessor computer caplex by the hardware method,
which ensures greater parallellism than with static distribution. The designa-

oi’ instructions. The instruction unit selects and decodes the instruction.

The instruction is than ted in stack forest to the dynamic register distribu-
tion unit (was), which translates it to three-address foreat and then transmits
it to the servo devices. The three-address format is convenient from the view-
point of storing the initial operands and repeating the operation upon break-
down. “No lists are formed in the dynamic register distribution unit: the
list of free registers and a list of occupied registers or the address stack.
the first contains addresses of tree registers and the second contains the ad-
dresses of occupied registered arranged by the stack principle, i.e.. the order
of the addresses in it determines the stack order of registers of the hardware
top of the stack. M lists are used when foraing the instruction of the dy-
namic register distribution unit.

All data in the El'brus-l multiprocessor computer caplex are identified by
tags (features) that determine their type (entire, essential, set, descriptor,
indirect word (address), procedure aarker and so on) and format (32 digits. 64
digits, 128 digits). The presence of a tag permits one to eliminate from the
instruction systu superfluous infatuation that indicates which hardware is
used to process the information (cmtrol slgorith with floating or fixed point,
control algorithm for working on integers and so on). When data are fed to the
central processor, the apparatus identities tho and according to their type
and format dynamically rearranges the algorithms for proce sing these data.

Tags perforu simple and complete protection of programs and data. Unlike pro-
tection by keys where it is applied to rigidly cut regions of the m-ory, tags
protect data rather than the memory.

The address region of the operating procedure is limited by the descriptors
and markers available to it. ally those regions of names who“ descriptors
are in the base registers at a given moment are accessible in the operating
procedure stack. ‘me contents of the base register can be changed only by
procedure transition operations. In this case the new context is molly de-
ternined by the transition marker.

Data addressing outside the stack is possible only through the descriptors and
indirect words. which does not permit access to regions not described by the
address intonation located in the procedure context. The mathematical muory
is separated and the address information is formed only by the operating sys-
tem. All words that contain an address are identified by apparatus by tags
and are protected. The user cannot arbitrarily change the contents of these
words (an interruption is issued). “Context protection' of data is achieved
by this, during which protection is provided with accuracy up to one word.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0‘ Utfltlna. Lat. VAL!

and finally. the use of tags permits senantic verification of calculations,
since a set of permissible operands is determined for each operatic». 'l'his
considerably sinplifies and reduces program debugging.

The sost frequently used instructions of the El'brus-l computer complex has a
length of one, two or three bytes. Hultibyte instructions are usually direct
loading instructions. ‘l'he operands for the next operation are the top elaents
of the hardware top of the stack. Instructions can begin from any byte in the
word and can be transferred to another word. ‘l'he nost frequently used instruc.
tion is “read value.“ It has two fornats (single— and two-byte).

The single-byte format is used for addressing to local nanes and current pro-
cedure paraneters. Three digits caprise the operating code and five digits
comprise a shift. The dictionary level of the current procedure is used to
deter-line the base. If a five~digit shift is insufficient for addressing to
local variables or if one nust gain access to global variables, the two-byte
format is used. Three digits also deternine the operating code mile 13 digits
determine the address pair. 1he address pair is the only type of address con-
tained in the instruction code. The address pair is forned as a result of
progran translation and is actually a name encoded in an optimal runner. This
name is converted to a emery address only at the noment an instruction is es-
ecuted and is deteruined by the contents of the base registers. Accordingly.
addresses in the program code are not dependent either on the position of the
progra- itself in the scary or on the stack position. All variables are ar-
ranged in the stack or in the data file described by descriptors. ‘l'here is
only cue unmodified program code in the progra- segnents. i.e., all progress
in the El'brus-l casputer caplex are repeatedly input prograns and do not
require loading.

Repeated entry permits one to have only a single copy of the prograe for dif-
ferent tasks. Thus. for exanple. the sane translator progran can be used si-
multaneously by different tasks. Bach task has an individual stack and data
file but a single coll-an progran code. It should be noted that realisation of
repeated entry of progress in third-generation cunputers is related to addi-
tional expenditures of programmer labor. Taking into account that a place is
allocated in the stack when starting each procedure for local data and that
the programs are repeated input types, recursive starting of the procedure in
no way differs from starting any other procedure.

Special instructions are contained in the central processor that pernit auto-
nation of access to the elements of nultidinensional files. It is assuaed that
the nultidinensional files are arranged sequentially in the mathematical memory.
Access to the file elements is gained through the file descriptor. which con-
sists of two words. The first word is a purely standard descriptor containing
the address of the beginning of the region. the size of the file. the format of
the element and the status of protection. The second word contains the pro-
ducts of index boundaries. The instruction “Read file eluent" is designated
for single access to the file elmnent. Its operands are the elenent indices
and descriptor address contained in the top of the stack. The instruction is
executed in the following nannerx the resulting index is calculated (in lin-
ear representation of a nultidinensional file) and is verified for its linit.

7!.
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
If the index does not exceed the size of the file given in ﬂue descriptor,

the address of the elegant is detersined and reading is accuplished. since
calculation of the resulting index occupies a comeratively long tine. the
special instruction ”read file elenent in cycle.’ which optimises the described
circuit. is used upon access to the file el-ents during the cycle. O’cle
counters-m each for each index-are used as indices in this instruction.

The address of the file elenent is calculated for the next cycle and access to
the internal storage is gained inn executing the instruction I'read file ﬂuent
in cycle“ sinultaneously with reading the current eleeant. The file el-snt
called for retention is stored in the zero-access n-ory of the central
processor.

3. whmniution of Calculating Processes

with respect to apparatus. the calculating process is usually represented by
the stack in the internal storage. If a processor (active process) operates in
a stack. hardware representation of the process is applied to the base regis-
ters. the stack indicator. zero-access storage and other hardware of the pro-
cessor. The process can be in the status of waiting for one event (passive
process) and is represented with respect to hardware only by the data in the
internal storage.

The adopted structure of organizing the calculating process offers broad capa-
bilities of parallelling calculations [1]. Thus. along with the fact that an
independent stack can be established for each task or capler of jointly trans-
lated progress, each procedure can he realized in a separate stack.

nae sane type nodules of a multiprocessor cosputer couples. specifically cen-
tral processors, ere general-purpose. i.e.. any central processor operates in
any stack or perfores calculations for any task. noreover. since the systen is
nultiprocessor. there can be several processes working on co-an data sinul-
teneously in the active state.

One of the pieces of hardwere in the nl-hrus-l conputer mics to provide
synchronization of the operation of the central processors and their general-
purpose distribution is the use of 's-aphores' (tigure 46). Such operations
as 'open snaphore' end “close s-aphore" are entered in the instruction sys-
tem. The work of the ms. with canon data is preceded by its access to a
cannon cell with a differ-1t progran. called a snaphore, to close it for this
tine. If the sensphore is open (a zero in the corresponding digit of the cell).
the selaphore is closed (a one is written in this digit), otherwise the pro-
cess nust wait until it is open. 1.... it hood-u pas-m. mo processor is
freed of executing this process and carries the address of the stack to the
sensphore cell. Thus, a line of several wait stacks can he for-ed on one
snaphore.

After work with the data has been conpletsd, the process that closed the sena-
phore opens it. setting a zero in the corresponding digit of the cell. If the
address of the wait stack or a line of stacks is in the address field of the

susphore. the process that opens the senaphore places the stacks in the line
of finished processes. If any central processor is freed of nor): (the process

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ovo. ans.-. .— —~ -..~.

 

1. working process 5. “rile

2. steel: 6. waiting processes

3. Se-sphore 1. Line of processes resdy for
4. Address execution

on which it was working is converted to the passive process or is cowleted)
it gains access to the line of tinished processes and begins to execute the
process, standing first in the line of finished processes.

Hark of the process is synchronised in siniler ushion upon access of U: to
data located in the external storage. toning the task for the input~ostput
processor. the central processor closes the s-ephore. This s-sphore is
opened after execution of the corresponding tssk by the input-wtput processor.
Before geining access to die indicated data. the process geins access to the
sesaphore and if the corresponding digit is not e zero. it 'hangs" on this
se-aphure. It is converted to the line of finished processes only after exe-
cution of the corresponding tssk by the input-output processor at the maent
the s-sphore is opened.

mus, the passive stste of the process can be csused by waiting:
a) coupletion of access of another process to canon data:
b) exchange of necessary data with interns). and erternsl storage;
c) freeing of central processor (line of finished processes).
It must be noted that most procedm'es of the opereting systu are executed in

the stacks of those processes which caused thn. Along with this. there are
independent processes of the opersting syst- vhose stacks are subordinate to

76
POI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
cos-on discipline. The place of the process in the line of finished processes
is determined by its priority, i.e.. it can be changed.

4. Organization of Hesory

the efficiency of using the internal storage and accordingly of the external
storage is largely dependent on the basic principles of its distribution es-
tablished in the hardware and operating systn. It is obvious that the method
of nemry distribution which meets the following requir-ents is the most ef-
(active [1] :

a) a data bit with greatest probability of being used at a subsequent
nest should be called to the internal storage:

b) the required data bit should be called at the last nonent. mm the
internal storage should have the capability of being freed at any mo-ent after
access to it:

c) the data inside the wry should be redistributed or reset to the
external storage with the next call:

d) large files should be arranged in different sections of the naory by
individual bits.

Taking these circa-stances into account. the exchange bit of internal storage
with the external storage of arbitrary length (with discreteness up to a word)
is used in the £1°brus~l cosputer couple: and the length is determined by the
descriptor that describes this data file on the basis of the algorithn. 1b
neat the requirmnts fosmlated in its: 'd" to sinify organization of reset
and reuse of the snory, all the data. with the exception of progra- codes, are
loaded into the nathmtical menory. The nathnstical my is divided into
pages of 512 words each. ‘lhe operating syste- deternines one or several pages
of the oath-stical nunory (depending on the file capacity) for each data bit
described by a descriptor and the first word of the file is arranged in the
first word of the page. thus. if the file is less than 512 words. the page is
unfilled and if the file capacity is greater than $12 and less than 1,024
words. two pages are allocated, one of which will be unfilled and so on. If
information is located in the physical maory, its capacity, allocated for
data, is determined only by the requirements of the descriptor: therefore,
packing of the physical salary does not suffer from underutilization of the

mathematical memory.

The variables in the procedure code segments are addressed by means of address
pairs, waile the nathesnatical address of the value is found during the run by
indexing the corresponding base register by shifting the address pair. Rapid
conversion of the mathematical address to an equivalent physical address is
provided by 32 associative registers of each zentral processor. If the de-
sired pair in than is not found. an apparatus search is made by the tabla of
user pages and the associative registers are loaded.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O V“ V. O OMORO' bulb \I-‘~.

W I)!"

um! mack!

3
MM W‘ ) Mm (4’ (5)
km
mm

- —
= - -

I '-
I -
W ”In” (3) “uncouth” 000W
15) _ _'f ____ __._ __

(10)
0 Cam

| =— m
I _
'-

ua) _‘ - comm)

Figure 47.
Key:

1. Zero-access storage 8. Aaeociative my
2. Buffer for calculation of 9. Internal storage

expression: 10. Stack of proceee l
3. local data buffer of proceu 11. Prague segments
4. Instruction hatter 12. File
5. Pile buffer 13. Stack indicator
6. fast regietcre 14. stack of proceee 2

1. Direct-access ee-ory

let us consider in more detail the characteristics of organizing the zero-
accese naory.

The zero-access Imry (SOP) distributed by proceaeore and organized a: the
functional principle (Figure 47) is need in the arm-1 cantor couples.
According to the functional designation. the SOP is divided into five perte:

78

momaALuscouu
1) data of the top of the stack being processed in the processor—virtual
fast registers that execute stack discipline;

2) local data of process l--continuous section of the stack manory from
stack indicator to data (procedure A) cosmn to process II (procedure Q).
Direct addressing to the zero-access memory is possible due to the continuity
of the represented section of snow:

3) cannon data of two processors are represented by the associative
memory:

4) the buffer of instructions to be executed. used to reduce the amber
of accesses to the internal storage dm’ing frequently repeated procedures

(specifically to accelerate access of instructions in the cycle) is executed
on the associative principle:

5) the buffer manory designed for advance hardy are pulping of data files
for maxinum acceleration of nothing with them is executed on the associative
principle.

Design of a local zero-access memory in multiprocessor systaas is related to
the following difficulties. Upon access to comn data of at least two pro-
cessors. a situation is possible when old data are located in the zero-access
memory of the processor while restored data are located in the internal stor-
age. ‘l‘his can be avoided only provided that the writing processor will at
least erase the data in the zero-access memory of other processors with each
writing to the internal storage. The latter invariably leads to a significant
reduction of the information processing speed in the central processor.

Considering each part of the zero-access manory of the :l'brus-l computer com-
plex from the viewpoint of the indicated complex situation, one can note that
the memory of the fast registers. local data and instruction buffer are free
of this defect. he first and second are due to the locality of data and the
third is due to the fixed nature of the instruction codes during their execu-
tion. A conflict situation may appear in the associitive wry of local data
and the file buffer. Upon access to cannon date. the file buffer can be erased
without effect, whereas complete resetting of the global data buffer slows
down the calculating process. Therefore, the write time is fixed in it when
writing infornation in those registers simultaneously with data. The opening
tine is written in its registers when the senaphore is opened. The reliability
of data in each global data buffer cell is evaluated clearly by these times.

the method of designing the zero-access memory, adopted in the El'brus-l. is
econanical since it permits one to reduce the number of buffer cells and makes
it possible to transform many of then to direct-address cells (without associ-
ative nature), thus reducing the volume of equipment and the access time.
Moreover. the adopted organization of the zero-access manory permits parallel-
ling of its operation, which considerably increases the efficiency of using the
SOP and also eliminates conflict situations inherent to the given memory de-
signed by traditional methods.

79
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
run \u’tet u“. tar. "l.‘e.l

5. Input-Output Subsystu

All control functions of the external memory and terminal devices can be real--
ized through comunications lines by one of the central processors. Bowevu,
the specifics of intonation processing (only logic processing of low-digit
data) makes the use of its equipment inefficient. Therefore, special proces-
sors--input-output processors that control external devices and data trans-
mission processors that contml terninal equipment through comeunications

liner-are introduced in the El'brus-l cuputer complex to perform these
functions [1].

The input-output processor controls strictly regulated types of entities. the
number of switching versions of which is ssall. This trade it possible to axe-
cute all functions of the processor and switching of entities by the hardware
method. In this case there is no need for instructions in the local usury end
a small zero-access local Illusory is used for low-digit data processing.

The central processor in the El'brus-l casputer caplex is relieved to the
maximum of interruptions by external devices by transferring dispatcher func-
tions to the input-output processor in which they are realized by the hardware
method. The work of the operating systan perfoaed by the central processor is
completed by canpiling a declaration for access to the external device in which
are indicated the information address within the entity, the internal storage
address where information must be placed (or from Were it must be taken) and
its volume. This application of the central processor is placed in line to the
descriptor that describes the given device. The descriptor is found in the
table by the index corresponding to the ordinal umber assigned to this device
in the systaa. The table of devices is stored in the internal storage. After
the external device catpletes the next assigmnt. the input -output processor
makes the corresponding marks in the declaration, removes this declaration

iron the line to the device and places it in the line of operations completed,
after which the input-output processor takes the next declaration in line and
organizes execution of it.

The list of executed declarations is processed by the operating system in the
central processor. If the declaration is executed without commit. the operat-
ing system opens the corresponding semaphore and performs the required opera-
tions. In this case if the input-output processor indicated defects in exe-
cltion of the assignment (it exercised hardware verification and so on), the
operating systes makes a decision on a second execution of the assigment.

The same external device can operate through any of four input-output proces-
sors. Selecting the switching path is determined with respect to hardware in
the following manner. When the N first declaration is fed to the device, any
input-output processor free at a given lament processes it. The input-output
processor is considered free when it does not execute a declaration to change
the operating nodes of devices. Its work with devices in the multiplex mode
does not hinder initial processing of declarations. Subsequent declarations
to the device 11 are processed in the sane input-output processor. since the
signal on completion of work with the external device comes to the in

output processor that started it. The external control device and the

80
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
corresponding switching channel are selected as it is freed. Individual ex-
ternal devices such as punch cards, printing and magnetic tape that have less
influence on the viability of the system do not have special ccammtatore and
are rigidly connected to the input-output processor.

The input-output system adopted in the El'brus-l that realizes with respect to
hardware all the control functions of the external devices, including dispatch-

ing, redundancy and selection of the working channel, permits a considerable
saving of the operating life of the internal storage and a reduction of the
number of interruptions of the central processor.

Unlike the input-output processor, the data transmission processor controls a
number of entities of different types, the methods of switching of which are
essentially unlimited. This leads to the fact that hardware realisation of

the control function by means of rigidly cos-utated programs of the data trans-
mission processor places considerable restrictions on the operation of the
system in a branched network of terminal devices that function through data
transmission lines. The program method of adapting the data transmission pro-
cessor to the entities controlled by it has been adopted in the El'brus-l com-
plex and measures have been implemented so that no program corrections are
required with variation of switching of the entities and if a new device is
introduced. the change of program would be limited to adding a program nodule
that describes the new entity introduced to the system. Imesa principles could
be realized due to the following organization of data transmission processor
hardware.

Entities operating in the system (including modems. data transmission lines and
so on) were described in the handbook of program modules. The connections of
the entities are presented in a special table. The operating system formulates
a program from the program nodules of the entities that ensure interaction with
the required terminal device. taking into account its connection to the system,
upon access to one of the terminal devices based on the connection table. Thus.
if switching of entities changes. changes must be made frm one of the termin-
als to the entity connection table. since formulation of the operating program
and access to the references are of different types and since the formulated
working program is used repeatedly when working with a terminal. all the ref-
erences and tables are arranged in the internal storage. while a local memry
is allocated to the transmission processor to store the formulated working pro-
grams and their operands. similar processors in traditional canputer systems
have no flexible software of their am: therefore. the operating systmn of the
complex performs adaptation functions. this is usually related to complete or
partial generation of it.

BIBLICSRAPHY

l. Burtsev. V. 5.. ”Printsipy postroyeniya mnogoprotsessornykh vychislitel'-
nykh kompleksov 'El‘brus'” [Design Principles of El'brus Hultiprocessor
Computer Complexes]. Hoscow, 1977.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

5.

6.

8e

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

1‘.

15.

I'm Uf'.klf\& \ .‘K— V ‘LI

Goiubev-Novozhilov. m. 5.. 'moocneshinnyye Impleksy vychislitel'nykh
sredstv“ [mitinchine Capoter (Dc-pleas], Hoscov, 1967.

Yevreinov. E. V. and Yu. G. Ros-rev, 'Odnorodnyye universel'nyye vychis-
1ite1'm0 sisteuy vysokoy pmizvoditel'nosti' [smogenaous nigh-Produc-
tive Universal Canputer mums], Novosibirsk. 1966.

Zhirov. V. P., 'Hetmticheskoye obespecheniye i proyektiroveniye struktur
m [Software and Design of Omputer Structures), Hoecov. 1979.

ZARU'BEZHNAYA RADIOWNW, No 5, 1976.

men, 8. 11.. 'Elektronnyye vychislite1'nyye whiny i sisteuy' [Canpnters
and Syst-ns, Ibecou, 1979.

Rattan. 6., 'Vychislitel'nyye whiny sisteuy 370' (Canter: of the 370
system]. Macaw. 1974.

Korolev, L. N.. 'Strnktury M i ikh mtmticheskoye obespecheniye'
[Cmputer Structures and Their Software]. Hoscov, 1978.

Hednik. s. end J. Donovan. 'Qereteionnyye sisteay' [Operating mtm],
Roscov, 1978.

'Wtsessornyye vychislitel'nyye sistelly" [multiprocessor ecu-pater
Systems], Moscow. 1975.

'Hul'tipxotseuornyye vychislitel'nyye sisteny' [mltiproceeeor Capoter
S’stml, edited by Ya. I. metegnrov, Hoscov. 1971.

'Hul'tipzotsessornyye siste-y i parellel'nyye vychisleniya" [Mtiprocer
so: antenna and Fennel Calculations], edited by P. G. mlov, Moscow.
1976.

Prengishvili. I. V'.. "Hikroprotsessory i nikro-M' microprocessors end
Microccnputers]. Moscow, 1979.

Pshenichnikov, L. Ye. end an. 10:. 5mm, 'Arkhitektura mtsessmo
vychislitel'nogo kaplekse 'El'bms" [Configuretion of the El'btus Multi-
processor Conputer Complex), Moscow. 1977.

RADIOSLSKTRDNIIG 2A mam, No 4, 1976.

comment: Izdetel'stvo Leningredskoqo universitete, 1981

6521
C50:

1863/ 97

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
STWC‘IUE CF “TIMES” cm W

Leningrad mm mm mmm'm 519m in mission
1981 (signed to press 19 Mar 81) pp 32-41, 70-77

[Excerpts {ran chapter 2 ﬁrm book "Configuration of Nultiprocessor Computer
Systems . edited by V. I. Tinokhin. Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo

universiteta, 10,000 copies, 104 pages]
1. mltiprocesaor Systems with Canon Bus

Multiproct ssors vith canon bus include systole in vhich all the functional
units are connected to a canon bus. a connect bus. which is a set of lines
used to transnit infatuation signals. The structure of this system is pre-
sented in Figure 15. Information is transmitted from one unit to another in
this system in batches, each of which should contain, besides data subject to
transmission, contra intonation as well, specifically, the address of the
unit where the data are being sent. here are no conflicts in the oomidered
structure between several batches caing to sue unit simultaneously. The bus
contains and transmits only one batch at each noeent. All other intonation
sources should await freeing of it. Accordingly. infestation is transeitted
in syst-as with col-Ion bus by bus tine-sharing nethods.

 

Key:
1. Channel 3. Processors
2. 9.3.er nodules

This structure of the syst-n and the method of exchanging infatuation between
its functional units envision the presence of special hardware for each nodule

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

connected to the bus. The nodule should contain the required hardware to form
the appropriate response upon identification of the unit address in the data
pack. This response may include, for example. connection to the bus to receive
the information part of the pack if the address in it corresponds to the unit
address.

The structure of a multiprocessor system with common bus is determined by the
type of bus. The diagram shown in Piqure ls assumes the use of a two-way bus.
i.e.. one that permits transmission of information signals in both directions.
The use of airway buses in which signals are transmitted only in one direction
is possible. The structure of such a system is shown in Figure 16. A special
unituthe bus modifier, which. unon receiving signals from the bus of one di-
rection, shapes and transmits than to a bus of another directim--plays a spe-
cial role in the given systn. Comparing the two structures of multiprocessor
systaas with a cos-Ion bus. we note that the difference is actually included in
realization of one two-way or two one-way interfaces.

 

Key:
1. Bus modifier 3. Henry
2. Processor 4. Devices

Let us consider 91-3 and 91-4 canputer couplexes (V10. as an example of a sin-
gle-bus system. 94-3 and 94-4 machines are related to miniconputers. Like
most representatives of this class, they have a low word capacity (16 bits) and
the basis of their instruction system is operations on symbols and numbers with
fixed point. The structure of the hardware and systems software of these com-
plexes reflect the characteristic features of the configuration inherent to
minicocputers.

All sn-J devices, including the processor and memory, are connected to a com-
mon information transmission mainline (Figure 17). This mainline (cannon bus)
is a set of 56 lines (wires) of which 16 are used to transmit data and the
renaining ones are used to transmit addresses, synchronous signals, condo).
signals and so on. ‘rhe given set caprises the nucleus of the interface and
is the only method of information transmission in the systmn.“

 

.‘rhe given complexes are produced in the USSR and are included in the Interna-
tional Small Canputer System. used in the socialist countries.

“Additional lines. the mnber of which is unlimited. can be used in the systu.
These lines have no effect on the functional characteristics of the interface
and are therefore not considered.

8!.
F03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

1. can bus 4. mutual e-ary device
2. Processor 5. Papas-tape input-output device
3. Senory nodule 6. Alphanueric display

The universal netha! of connecting all devices is used in the 91-3 (Si-Ocea-
puter caplex. which pernits a unified algorith- tor their interaction to be
constructed and accordingly nakes it possible to use unified integration hard-
ware. An imortant element of the configuration of SIR-3 (SH-e) nachines is the
cannon schene of addressing the internal storage cells, the internal registers
of the processor and the registers of the external devices. A diagra- of the
address distribution of the Sit-3 cuputer caplex is presented in Figure 18.

This 'general-purpose" addressing syst- has a motor of significant advan-
tages. The processor can perceive the registers of the external devices as
internal storage cells. mus. no special input-output instructions are re-
quired for access to the device and the entire set of address instructions fr:-
the instruction systus can be used for this pinpose. transmission of date fru
one device to anotehr (for ennple, {rm an external device to the am) is
regarded as transnission iron (ll. address to another.

     
     

Jr-a mm: m
5mm dud acme
(Ea-mu W a t)

2550:! “m

Figure 18 .

[m on following page]

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Key continued tro- preceding page):

1. Address zone of device registers. 4 1: words

2. Address zone of nanory cells (progress and data addresses). '28 1: words

3. zone of pereanent distribution of nuory addresses (interrupt vectors
and so on). 256 words

i. ml of 32 It words

Interaction of devices connected to a cannon bus, as already noted. is organ-
ized by tine-sharing of bus utilization. mo devices. one of which perforce
the role of controlling the operation of the bus and the other of which per-
forms the role of the controlled device of bus operation. always participate in
any exchange operation. it is obvious that only one device can control a bus
at the seas ment. A processor. external storage device. video terminal and
so on can be used as the devices that control the operation of the bus. ally
the inteer storage is always the controlled device.

when cone device presents a request to control the operation of the bus. it
must exchange data. with the eenory by using direct mications (data trans-
mission outside the processor) or it cost interrupt a current program to con-
vert to realisation of the interrupt service progra- by the processor with
progran control of exchange.

 

Key:
1. Renaission request lines 5. Priority levels
2. Transmission authorization lines 6. Priority arbitrator
3. Canon bus 7. Processor
4. extra processor level 8. Devices

The bus distribution between devices is controlled by beans of the established
priority structure of the devices and the interrupt systu. The priority dis-
tribution of devices on an 54-3 bus is illustrated by Figure 19. where four
priority levels of program interruptions and one level corresponding to ex-
change outside the processor are indicated.

86

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
an the cevices emerging as those that control the bus are connected to one
of tr..- interrupt request levels. The priority of the levels increases from
bottw to top. Thus. devices that present a request to the “direct access
request' line (exchange outside the processor) have the highest priority.

The priority of devices connected to a single line is established according to
their distance from the processor: the farther fran it, the lover the priority.
his is provided by sequential propagation of signal over interrupt authorisa-
tion lines. If a device was not prohibited to a bus. it receives and relays
the corresponding interrupt authorisation signal to the next device on the

sme line. The first device on the line that interrogated the bus receives and
interlocks the subsequent propagation of the interrupt authorization signal.
Thus. the folloving priority of devices determined by their caunection to the
corresponding line and pr-ution in the systu (as distance increasesl—C. D. A.
B—is established in the diagram in Figures 19.

Taking into account that the processor itself is one of the devices that inter-
rogates the bus. its priority in the system should also be determined. Unlike
all the remaining devices. the priority level of the processor is not fixed but
is established and changed by program.

The considered configuration of a system with cannon bus has all the advantages
inherent to systens of this type. They are distinguished by high flexibility
and sioplicity of addition or renoval of nodules, convenience of organizing
data protection by bus monopolization, relatively low cost and so on.

lam-lever, several disadvantages can be noted in systems with cannon bus. Due to
the fact that all inforuation flows stove in only one direction. the wait tine
when exchanging data packs as the system is expanded and the load on the bus
increases nay be impemissibly long. In systens with comon bus. even with
equal nuober of processors and storage devices. they are unable to function
simultaneously due to tine-sharing of the data transmission paths. The rela-
tively lov reliability of the system should also be noted since there is always
the danger of failure due to bus malfunction.

Sane of the noted disadvantages of multiprocessor systems vith ccmlnon bus can
be corrected if several buses rather than a single bus are used in the systes.
As an example. let us consider a system vith several buses designed on the
basis of the Eli-4 computer couples (Figure 20).

The characteristic features of this systc: arethe presence of a canon internal
storage field. coupon access to external storage devices, the capability of
akin; the processor, memory and peripheral devices redundant and providing
conditions for parallel joint operation of all processors. All this is pro-
vided by special intrasystens cmmications hardware-an interprocessor ca-
nunications adapter that performs cross-communications of processors and a

bus switch for switching counon bus 3.

The structure of the multiprocessor system in Figure 20 approaches a cross-
switched systen in topology.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e U“ V...‘e.eu e .0.- U-VQ,‘

 

l. bury 6. Interprocessor micatinns adapter
2. Processor 7. am witch

3. External storage device 8. External device

4. Terninal 9. Papertape input-output device

5. Gun bus

2. ﬂoss-Switched Systems

mltiprocessor system designed on the principle of micating between and-
ules by scans of a 'rectangular array” of connect lines. which can make contact
at any intersection point. are celled cross-switched systess (Figures 21).

This organization of the system permits caltact to be established between any
two units of the syst- for the ntire tine of intonation exchange. Unlike
tine-shared switching realised in systaes with a canon bus. the considered
nethod of cos-unicetions switching is frequently celled space-shared switching.

The cross-switch is 'non-interlocked“ in the sense that transnission through it
cannot be prohibited due to the absence of transmission paths. There is the
capability of establishing several information transuission paths simultaneous-
lvinthissystas. Attheslastiseoneslnuldbearinaindthattheswitch
can be blocked it one of the connected devices is already «scanned.

me of the early structures in which the cross-switched principle was realised
was the systes which has been called a 'polynorphous computer“ (Figures 22)
[12]. Cuputer nodules that include processor and senory units can cuss-unicate
with peripheral devices through a central switchboard. An att-pt was aade in
the given system to organize connections directly between processors and cross-
access to the salary by short-circuiting the corresponding ntnber of

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
by:
1. Know nodules 3. Controllers
3. Processors

intersections. The conplexity of this nethod ot mications between pro-

cessors and senor? units and the low utilization efficiency of equip-ent (the
processor and unory of one nodule having a single micatione bus 'inter-
fere' with each other) determine the disadvantages of the 'polymphous cc.-

puter' structure diapered to the structure of the syst- presented in Pigure

21.

mm”! (1)

 

Pigure 22.

Key:
1. Coquter nodules 3. kternal devices
2. Central switchboard

Multiprocessor cross-switched systeea, having meant lover flexibility than
systems with a canon bus, nevertheless permit canparatively silple introduc-
tion of new nodules if the switching natrix has adequate capacity. The matrix
is capletely isolated from the other functional units and can also be designed
on the nodular principle. vhich per-its expansion of it. however. due to the
oouplexity of switchboard functions, its structure may be considerably
complicated.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
C vse ". O .\. 0".- ‘v-II— U.‘I..

An additional switching matrix of input-output devices can be introduced in
the syst-n to provide greater ﬂexibility and to increase possibilities for
expansion. This switchboard is connected to the central switchboard through
the innit-output cmtrol processors (tigure 23). and in this case the input-
output devices can be caunectsd to any channel. The considered structure of

nultiprocessor systas is used in large computer cysts-s of the Burroughs Cas-
pany (United States).

Ilslgau mum u,

 

Key:
1. Menory nodules 3. uternel devices
2. Processors 4. Input-output processors

An original version of organising nultiprocessor configuration has been pro-
posed for the Hulti-Interpreter system of the nitroughs Oospeny. in which a
group of processor units with nicroprogran control was introduced. By reload-
ing the nicroprogran sensory units. the some nodules are used as central. proces-
sors or as input-output controllers. Because of this. all the processors. neu-

ory modules and peripheral devices ere connected to a canon switching matrix
(Figure 24).

”II-13W! cow
(1) (2) mummy: Iv:-

: It (3)
May/m muon- ‘“ on WW and. Wage

 

[Kay on folloving page]

90

FOR OFFICIAL ESE 0‘1.“
[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Memory modules
2. Processor units (central processors or input-output controllers)

3 . External devices

Besides the foreign computers mentioned, the El'brus-l high-production computer
systm [8) and the Sit-2 caaputer coupler-one of the mdels of the 94 am [In-
ternational anall Computer Syst-n] are multiprocessor cross-switched systems.
Chapter 3 will be devoted to the El'brus-l system.

Let us consider in more detail the structure of the 814-2 caaputar ample: (Fig-
ure 25). The modular structure of the switchboard is used in this systu.
Bight-channel (1001-8) and four-channel (1001.4) switchboards provide intrasys-
tens comunications between devices of the given caputer euplex. A canon
shared switchboard used to realize total matrix switching of each processor
and the direct canputer access channel (100?) with each internal storage device
(UO?) and input-output matching device (SW) that performs the role of control-
ler. is designed on their basis.

 

Figure 25.

1. Internal storage device

2. Pour-channel comutator
3. Up to four internal storage devices with total capacity of 128 x words

4. 531-2!) processor

5. L'p to two peripheral devices
6. Direct memory access channel
7. Eight-channel commutator

(Key continued on following page]

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Key continued from preceding page]:

8. Input-output matching device 10. Up to four input-output
9. Up to 16 peripheral devices matching devices

The direct memory access channel is a device that provides rapid information
exchange between the internal storage device and the peripheral devices. It
perform input-output operations independently of the processor. The mutual
influence of these devices is manifested only in the attempt at simultaneous
access to the same memory module. In this case priority is offered to the
channel. while operation of the processor is delayed for one access cycle to
the memory. Information can be exchanged with devices connected directly
through the direct memory access channel at a speed up to 1,100,000 bytes per
second. The channel can service one device connected directly through the
direct memory access channel or no more than four input~output devices connec-
ted through the input-output matching device simultaneously. In the latter
case the exchange speed is lower and comprises up to 550,000 bytes per second.

he input—output matching device has 16 outputs per interface, which permits
up to 16 peripheral devices to be connected through one unit. The input-cub-
put matching device is connected by the tom-4 to the processors and direct
muory access channel.

Consideration of the structure of the sat-2 computer complex again permits one
to note the main advantages of multiprocessor cross-switched systems in which
information exchange is possible over several data transmission paths simul-
taneously. In this case the effective transmission speed can be higher than:
for example. in a time-shared system with a coman bus since contact is estab-
lished between the interacting modules for the entire information exchange time.
Because of this system of organizing communications. there are no problems in
parallel operation of processors. The interfaces of individual units are simp-
lified in a multiprocessor cross-switched system since data addressing and
resolution of conflicts occurring upon access to a single module frcn several
sources are accomplished by switching matrix logic.

The occurrence of conflicts in the switching matrix is at the same time the
:rain cause of a reduction in the efficiency of cross-switched multiprocessors.
Delays of access to the memory caused by the fact that it is used by other
processors or input-output devices reduce the speed of the processors and ac-
cordingly of the system as a whole.

7. Specialized Multiprocessor Computer Systems Based on standard Modules

The classification of multiprocessor computer systems presented in [121 does
not enccmpass the large class of specialized multiprocessor canputer systems
which are used extensively in different automated and autmatic control
systas.

The structure of the hardware of specialized multiprocessor computer systems is
effected to a significant degree by the requirements on these systems. deter-
mined by their designation and by their operating conditionso

92
FOR OMCIAL [SE ONLY
Let us consider specialised caputer systems designed on a set of standard
nodules. These syst-s have found application as onboard nultiprocessor cus-
puter systens in aircraft and spacecraft.

Expansion of the range of probleas solved onboard aircraft and spacecraft of
different designation by using digital caputer syst-s would inevitably re-
quire an increase in the m-ber of autonomusly operating onboard computers or
the use of large nultiprocessor W systns that contain one or several
storage nodules.

'(1)

 

Key:
1. Storage devices 3. Processors
2. "ulciposition natrix switch 4. Airborne systns

A nunber ot autononous colputsrs is used Iainly during the first stages to
solve the problem of airborne syst- control. War. the practice of devel-
opnent and operation of airborne control syst-s soon adequately determined the
considerable advantage of the second nethod and eade it possible to reduce the

overall dinensions and use of the syst- and power calsuption. At the sane
tine realization of this direction in practice becene possible due to success-

ful develop-sot of the theory of organization and control of casputsr processes
and the theory of sultiprogran and nultiprocessor intonation processing during
the second half of the 1960s.

One of the possible versions of award organization of an airborne nulti-
processor caputer systen (ms) is illustrated by Figure :40.

The airborne nultiprocessor conputer syste- contains a nmer of nodular units
(processors Pl. 1’2, ..., Pk) of the sane type uhich can be connected to several

storage nodules by neans of a nultiposition eatrix switch.

An increase in the reliability of the given airborne multiprocessor muter
systen is achieved by using reserve processors, which perfor- the volune of
calculations in case of. failure of the min processors or which pertorn the
sore important tasks according to given priority by redistribution of tasks

aong operating processors.

93

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
0 V“ VI 0 0‘ m.oe. 54L. Ve'hl

This structural organisation of the hardware of an airborne multiprocessor
computer system permits ccalputer equipment of the systma to be developed with
given requir-ents on capacity, calculating load and productivity according
to specific tasks and phases of flight.

Introduction of standard plug-in modules (processors and storage devices) sin-
plifies the repair and maintenance of airborne multiprocessor canputer systems
during operation. Having available reserve components on a common basis. one
can design 'self-repairing" assmnblies and units. “Self-repair' is accomplish-
ed by means of special hardware and software (reconfiguration equipment). The
need for manual repair of such an airborne multiprocessor computer systn oc-
curs if the main or reserve components fail or if there is interference that
causes the main or reserve modules to fail. The advantages of autasatic re-
pair consists in increasing the reliability of airborne multiprocessor car-
puter systems and a significant reduction of the maintenance and repair time.

A malfunction and failure detection logic, switching to the reserve module
group and also a catalog of malfunction features are provided in the malfunc-
tion detection programs to ensure the capability of 'self-repair' and repair
of airborne multiprocessor computer systems.

Automatic repair is accomplished by special programs after detection of the
failure. The nature and location of the malfunction are determined on the
basis of data on the failure by examining the catalog.

One of the first airborne multiprocessor computer systems was the aircraft
computer system MDC (United States) [15]. me absence of standardization and
unification in development of the airborne multiprocessor computer system
leads to the appearance of different modules differing by software, which in
turn complicates checking, repair and operation of the caputer systas.

The main requirement in development of the general-purpose airborne digital
counter ms was to develop standard equipment modules and software on the
basis of «rich airborne computer systems of different configuration could be
designed with wide range of basic specifications. All models of the developed
fuily of airborne comuter systems should be compatible with respect to soft-
were. The programs for all models of these systems are compiled in the same
high-level language and are translated to an entity code corresponding to a
specific configuration, while program compatibility is observed only from bot-
tom to top, i.e.. the programs written for any model are suitable for a model
with higher calculating capabilities. For examle, the program for a small
airborne computer systu can be used in an airborne multiprocessor mute:
system. but not vice versa.

Configu'ations that include 16- and 32-digit small airborne conuter systems.
simpler processors and multiprocessor organisation can be develwed on the
basis of the set of standard modules.

men developing the ms airborne cowuter systu. the main tasks were as
follows:

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
figure ‘1.

m:
l. handout-access storage device 4. Input-output boa
2. Input-output bum 5. Main intonation buee
3. Input-output n-ory unit 6. Proceeaore

develop-eat of high and nediu degree of integration of a tally of
functional nodules baeed on integrated circnite mich provide reduction of
the tine and labor erpodituree on design. manufacture and naintenance of
airborne cmter eyetena of future aircratt:

producing airborne mter eyetue of different cqlexity based on a
ninimn nuwer of standard nodulee that neet the require-ante placed on United
States nilitary aircrart cowoter eyet-e during the 1980"

achieving a high level of reliability of these airborne system by using
highly reliable electronic menu. built-in nonitoring devicee and intro-
duction of hardware redmdency:

develop-ant of airborne caputer eyet-e with etorage capacity and pro-
ductivity that exceed the valnee required for a epecific application, which

pernita a considerable reduction of progra-ing expmee:

creationofa libraryot etandardeottvarenoduleeuduichcanbeued in
airborne counter eyetene 0! different aircraft when they are performing
different tanke.

A two-proceeeor airborne conputer eyeten designed on a eat of etandard nodules
of the ms cyst. is presented in Figure 41. One of the basic oonponente in
tnnctional organization or the airborne mltiproceuor cupnter ayat- ie the
tranenieeion bus“ ehovn in the figure. ‘nneee bneee. having redundancy, pro-
vide two-lay infer—tics: exclnnge between all functional melee. Ii‘he even-
neeeot’theneuagecodeienonitoredinallbneeeinuaeenchangenodeand
naeeagetrarsaieeionierepeeted ifanerroriedeteoted. lfadonbleerror
is deter-ined in the neeeage code, an interrupt eignal ia auto-atically

generated.

95

POIOWICIALUSEONLY
t0. \lf’l\. the. VOL VJ‘LI

The data processing manta (processorv) recaive data through the interna-
tion buses fr:- the input-output nanory units, process the data and return
than for storage or output to other subsystans.

A randu access storage device (W) with page organization is provided for
progran and data storage. It page of infatuation containing 256 words is trans-
nittedtotheprocessorbythehardvaretouhichtheprogrmerdoesnothave
access.

(2)

‘v ’ ‘1 , "M
(m ’apamm nah} cat’s- kg? ’

   

    
 
 

      

Figure 42.

1. to peripheral equipment (neseege transmission in parallel code)
2. Digit (byte) data transnission

3. Aritbotio processor

4. Peripharal nodule

S. Rando- accass storage device

6. Progran distribution unit ‘

7. real: storage device

8. Channel

A block diagran of an airborne nultiprocessor comuter synta- with configura-
tion of a einpler processor that includes all the basic conponenta of. a stan-
dard set of nodules is presented in figure 42. The channel provides for in-
tagration or all conponents of the cyst. and contains logic el-anta required
for operation of the buses. In the general case it integrates tun buses.

All the coqonants of the airborne nultiproceasor caputar aysten are connected
to buffer devices through secondary buses, each of which ensures data trans-is-
sion in one direction. mesa lG-digit butter davices integrate the secondary
buses to the slain intornation bum During data transnission. the trananitting
unit trans-its the next nassage only after conrirnation of the correctness of
reception of the previous nessage has been received through the feedback line.
If an error is detected, the incorrectly received nessage is trannaitted a
second tine.

'lhe intonation exchange control functions are distributed between separate
channels. mic design version par-its expansion or reduction of the nunber of
channels without any eqxipent nodification. m. a controller that per-
torso centralized control can be put into operation if needed. In this case

96

“MUSEONLY
the operating reliability of the device is increased with a reduction of the
flexibility of channel use since the total Ins-bar of contacts is reduced.

The data processing element is a general-purpose program controlled processor
which performs logic and eritlnstic operations required when solving sequen-
tially occurring problmss. This module is the main one in a simpler processor
and in an airborne nultiprocessor computer cysts.

'Ihe processor consists of a program distribution unit (an), arithmetic pro-
cessor (AP) and task staregs device (W). The capacity of the storage de-
vice can reach 65 K 36-digit words. The capacity of the task storage device
of a simplex processor is equal tod kvords. “ms lengthof aword caprises
36 digits, of which 32 are informtion digits and 4 are allocated for byte
verification for evenness. The nquirsd pages of progrens to be fulfilled are
requested fromtheZUPVandars entered inthetaskstoragsdsvicsbythesn-

tire page.

‘rhe functions of the program distribution unit include selection of instruc-
tions and operands and also performance of such operations as conditional jusp
and information exchange with other modules through the main information bus.
Arithmetic and logic operations are performed by the arithmetic processor.
Sharing of arithmetic and control operations ensures a high degree of paral-
lellisn in operation

The productivity of the considered processor for a progrma is equal to two
million operations per second, 20 percent of which mists of multiplication
operations and 80 percent of which consists of addition operations.

Several pages of the M may be required to store the pages of the program
related to some specific task. It is not compulsory that these pages be ar-
ranged ssgusntially. Information about the arrangement of pages in the 20W
related to a given task are contained on the first page.

the first page is transmitted by the operating system to the processor task
storage device prior to solution of a rpecific task. All the required pages
are then transmitted independently by uh. processor upon capletion of the
task without participation of the open‘mg systu. ‘l'hs time required for
transmission of a single word through the main information bus in this mode
is equal to 150 nanoseconds.

The W provides only reading of information in the operating mode. It is
written in a given device during preparation of the airborne multiprocessor
computer syst- for operation. Horeovsr, all the information is stored in the
ZUPthenthepowarsupplyiscutoff.

The random access storage device included in the input-output memory unit con-
sists of standard modules with capacity frat e to 16 x 36-digit words. 'lhs
operation of this device is controlled by a program distribution nit. similar
to that of the processor. Date eveiting processing and those already processed
andalsodatapreparedbyonsprogr- foruseinanothsrarsstorsdinthis
storage device. he read-writs cycle of the storage device is equal to 225

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I U“ ”I . l\-lf\h eve-rh- \I.‘~l

nanoseconds in this node. Depending on operating conditions and the require-
nents placed on it, a storage device with or without destruction of infom-
tion when the power supply is cut off can be used.

The task storage device has the sane characteristics. but the require-ants of
information storage when the power stpply is cut off are not placed on it.

In a single: processor the random access storage device is designed on the
basis of MOP [Metallic oxide seniconductor] calponents of I: type with loss of
intonation uhen the power supply is cut off. However, a storage battery is
provided for the case of failure in the power supply circuits.

The input-output control functions are performed by the peripheral module (PM).
Information integration of the airborne multiprocessor computer systas with
airborne and other systmns is provided through this module. i'ho given nodule
also contains a sequential multiplex bus and byte and word transmission uses.
The peripheral module has direct access to the armory. which accelerates ewe-
cution of input-output operations with sininu participation of the operating
.Y't-‘

The AADC airborne computer systu differs from most traditional computers by
the following properties:

instructions progra-ed in high-level language of type an. are realized
directly by hardware:

the type of inforution word is designated by three of 36 digits, one of
which determines the accuracy of achieving the result. Before being entered
into the adder. all the operands on which aritl-etic operations are performed
are converted to a fora-at corresponding to execution of actions with double
accuracy with floating point (64 digits are the nantissa and 8 digits are the
exponent). After the operation is performed. the result is converted to the
initially established format;

virtual addressing and oemory protection is formed. virtual addresses
are converted to physical addresses in the following manner: a lé-digit ad-
dress is dividod into two 8~digit fields. Digits 0-1 of the virtual address
indicate one of 256 cells in the page table. The 20-digit address of the
first word of the page containing the required word is stored in this cell.
adding digits 9-15 of the virtmi address to this address, one can find the
real address of the required word. the pages are addressed in sinilar fashion
with the emeption of adding digits 8-15 of the virtual address. ‘Ihe entire
page is read frost the storage device in this case.

The neeory is protected on the page level. In this case several digits of the
contents of the page table cell determines the accessibility of the pages for
reading or writing information.

A nuber of different configurations of the MDC airborne caputor syston, of

which the nain ones are the small airborne computer oyster, sinplox processor
and nultiprocossor, can be created fro- a standard set of functional nodules.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(8‘) mouthed 1-— n l ‘10:?” 8
I : Hum (11)

 

 

 

 

 

 

pm. 43.

Key:
1. 1b peripheral. equipment
2. 1b peripheral equipueat of other systole
3. Randal aoceee
4. Peripheral module
5. Proceeeor
6. Mada: acceee atorage device
7. to units of airborne Initiproceeeor colputer eyetn
8. 1b peripheral equipment
9. 1!: units of other cyst-e
10. cumu ‘
11. Digit (byte) data minim
12. Program dietribution unit
1.3. Task storage device
14. Mitbetic proceeeor

The “an airborne computer system perform arithutic operations with and
without regard to character: and has a ﬂexible addreeeing eyet- uhich pro-
vides direct, indirect and abeolute addreeeing and indexing. the instruction
mta providee operationa on digits. bytes. half-earn and colplete wrde.
The instruction and data for-ate of this syst- correspond to thou need in
more couple: configuration of airborne aoeputer eyetue. 'lhe lam data
hunt-output speed during parallel operation of an integration devices may
reach 3.3406 thousand operation per second with regard to the capability of

99

FORWUSEONLY
'0‘ UI'I'ILMI. bot. URL!

direct access to the salary. .the productivity of this configuration is
500,000 operations per second.

nae-level organization of awry with virtual addressing of the operands and
procedures is used in the sinlu processor. The processor-a data processing
component—perform functions of the central data processing unit.

an lultiproceuor, e block diagra- ot which is presented in figure 43, is
designed for use in ground or shipboard tactical control system.

More couples configurations of airborne computer systems can also be developed
on the basis of the standard set of nodules. tor en-ple, a decentralised
suall airborne ans controlled by e simplex processor corresponds to the re-
quirements placed on aircraft computer cyst-Is operating in real tine. This
configuration: 0! an airborne ms is characterized by high flexibility and
gradual deterioration of paraleters in case of failures and has a sinple oper-
eting cyst...

cs-4 high-level languages and a special-purpose program and standard necro-
progran file are used to write the programs.

COPYRIGHT: ,udatal'stvo mingradskogo universiteta, 1981

6521
cs0: 1863/97

100

summon“
CONTROL WLTIPROCESSOR um! DISTRIBUTED OPERAIIK; SYSTEM

Kiev KIBERNE‘IIKA in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 81 (unuscript received 23 Feb 81)
pp 138-139

[Article by Robert Israil'yevich Belitskiy, candidate of engineering science,
junior scientific associate, Aleksandr Vesil'yevich Pelagin, doctor of engineering
science, department chief , and Valeriy Iosifovich Sigalov, candidate of engineering
science, senior scientific associate, all with the Institute of Cybernetics.

UkSSR Acadeny of Sciences, Kiev]

[Text] A promising trend in using nicroprocessors is the use of th- as a hono-
geneous element base in designing high-throughput conputing systems. bong the
various types of existing and plenned Isultinicroprocessor systuss (HIPS) with
various functional orientation end architecture [1-3], we can isolate the class of
systems intended for control that operate in real tine. For these systens, relie-
bility end speed indicators are especially inportant. Ihe HIPSdiecussed in this
work is one of these systens. In its architectural and structural organization,
it belongs to the cless of systens with a canon (or tine-shared) bus and a

distributed operating system.

The system is made up of elementary processors, each of which includes a nicro-
processor, local storage (20) end buffer circuits that provide the outlet for the
internel bus of the processor that interfeces the cited asse-blies with the systen
couon bus. By the cannon bus, the elenentary processors ere interfaced with each
other, with con-Ion storage and with the collectivised input/output devices.

The RIPS, operating under control of the distributed operating system (08), can
function in two nodes. In the first node, used when the nicroprocessors hove
sufficient mounts of their own storege, copies of 08 are stored in each local
storege unit. In the second node, used when the nicroprocessors have snell
counts of their own storage, a single copy of OS is stored in cm storage and
tine-shared by all system nicroprocessors. In any node, each nicroprocessor's
storage holds the progran of the current branch, being executed, of the source
parellel program and local data, while co-on storege holds the object code of the
source progran, jointly useble data and control tables.

The HIPS functions es follows. In the first (preparatory) phase, the parallel pro-
gr-I in the nicroproceesor extended assembler is translated by using a cross-

assenbler on an instrumental conputer. The specisl object code obtained that con-
tains the nicroprocessor instructions in machine code and soles additional field is

101
Ml orncw. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL bat; ONLY

loaded into the system cannon storage. Formed at the same time in cannon storage
are the control tables needed for the distributed OS operation. The control
tables consist of three information files: a node table, a list of active nodes
and a table of inoperative processors. The node table is a trilevel structure.
The first level corresponds to all nodes (i.e. PARBESIN statements) in the source
parallel program, the second to all branches or groups of branches (in the case of
parallel loops) subordinate to the corresponding nodes, and the third level con-
tains the addresses of the programs and semaphores of the branches, flags for the
parallel loops. names of expected nodes, etc. The list of active nodes contains
the addresses of the subtable of the nodes corresponding to the statements
PARBEGIN and PAREND, which enclose the branches executable at a given time. The

inoperative processor table contains the names of the branches in the top level,
the execution of which was not completed because of systqs processor failure.

The presence of the preparatory phase is conditioned by the specific nature of the
use of the NS for control problems, the list of which is known in advance
(practically, it does not change during system operation).

The system is started after the progras and source data are laoded into canon
storage. In a special case, the progrma can be placed in col-son storage in
advance, for example when the systee is manufactured.

The microprocessors access cossaon storage for prograns of accessible branches.
After loading the programs found into their own storage, the microprocessors
operate in accordance with the progrus of their branches, accessiu the operating
system module (tine-shared or their own) in executing the special statements in
extended asse-bler.

The HHPS extended assembler includes special statements that permit description of
parallel programs:

PARBmiN, PAREND [6] are the delimiters of the group of branches executable in
parallel;

3mm, END are branch delimiters;
PARALLEL, FOR, END [5] are delimiters of branches executable in a parallel loop;
P (semaphore), V (semaphore) i6, 6] are synchronizing primitives;

Boolean variable

eal variable ' ari I tic expression are vait statements (special cases

WAIT (

of the mm stateaent [7]);
Boolean variable
LET ({eai variable - aritlnetic expression) ‘1'. ass [3 e“ statelents (generali
zation of the SIGNAL state-ant [6]);
iN‘i'ERRUPT is the statement for restarting a branch or the entire parallel loop;

COMM, SW01! are descriptors of data and procedures stored in canon storage
and of binary semaphores; and

TEST, CHECK are descriptors of test branches and groups of test statements.

102

FOIOI-TICIALUSEONLY
The functions of the first six statements are evident. The next six statements
(synchronization statements) allow the programsr to flexibly describe the inter-
action between branches, and the system to efficiently implement these interactions
in the shortest possible time by the structural facilities included in the element-
ary processor. These facilities enable associative exchange of intonation between
the elementary processors executing the prey. branches by the names of these
branches. in particular, this permits implementation of synchronization statements
without a wait queue [6, 6], simplifies the operating system considerably and
speeds up program execution. The P and BAIT statements, just as Hansen's [7]. are
executed each time the wait variables change right up to the execution of the

corresponding conditions. The V and LET statements signal that such changes have
occurred.

The TNTERRUP’I statement (branch name) resets and restarts the processor executing
the indicated branch (in the case of a single branch) or group of processors exe-
cuting a parallel loop with the name specified in the stat-ant. In doing so, if
the interrupted branch has subordinate branches, they are interrupted and the pro-
cessors that were executing them are released for other operations.

As a rule, microprocessors do not have checkability, much less the capability of
identifying their own failure. To enhance the validity of multiprocessor system
operating results, a known check method can be used [8]: time check by timer sig-
nals, self-checking by using tests, hardware redundancy (duplication) or an
aggregation of these methods. Using the first method in multiprocessor systems
leads to the necessity of including a timer in each processor and consequently, to

a considerable increase in the apparatus. Using the second and third methods
results in system throughput reduction.

To reduce throughput losses in the systms, the capability has been provided to
dynamically form pairs of elementary processors backing each other up in executing
program branches specified by the T381 descriptor.

In executing a branch with the TEST descriptor, the two processors exchange infor-
mation only before each output to the comson bus, since only through it can a pro-
cessor disrupt the operation of the other processors and the system as a whole.

if a programter considers it advisable to check not just the statements associated
with the output to the external buses, he uses the CHECK descriptor (label name)
which enans that the statements following it are checked right up to the statement
with the label specified in the descriptor. "hen a mismatch occurs between the
processors, appropriate entries are made in the control tables and the processors
test each other. The faulty processor is removed from the system, and the good one
continues calculation, after finding another partner.

Thus, the described control multimicroprocessor system is general-purpose. With
respect to software. it is oriented to the previously specified concrete algorithm
and operates in real time. System input language is assembler, supplemented by a
number of special statements that permit representing parallel algoriths, speed-
ing up program execution when combinatorial search procedures are available in it,
and ensuring reliable functioning of the system and its dynamic reconfiguration.
The microprocessor's operating system is distributed and stored either in each pro-
cessor's own storage (when it is large enough) or in co-aon storage together with

103

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
P0“ UPPKJAL use. URL!

the translated source parallel program, canon data and other control intonation.
‘Ihe programs are processed in parallel dynnically based on data on availability
of branches and free processors. Optimization in parallel processing is not
perfoned.

1.

2.

3.

“a

5.

6.

7.

8.

BIBLICXBBAPHY

Glushkov, V. IL; Ignat'yev, H. 8.; Hyasnikov, V. A. and ‘l'orgashev, V. A.,
"Rekursivnyye ushiny i vychislitel'naya tekhnika" [Recursive hchines and
Conputer Technology], Preprint No 76-57, utSSR Acade-y of Sciences Institute
of Cybernetics, 1971., 26 pages.

Herchuk, G. I. and Kotov, V. Ye., "Hodul'naya aainkhronnaya razvivaye-aya
slate-a" [Dbdular Asynchronous Developable Systu], Preprint No 86, USSR
Acadeny of Sciences Siberian Branch Capoter Center, Novosibirsk, 1978,-
68 pages.

Enslov, P. IL, ed., "Mlltiprocessore and Parallel Processing," lbscov, Mir,
1976, 383 pages.

Dijkstra, 3., "Interaction of Serial Processes: Programing languages,"
Moscow, Mir, 1972, 87 pages.

Kotov, V. Ye., "‘l'heory of Parallel Programing: Application Aspects,"
KIBBINETIKA, No l, 1971-, pp 1-16.

lloare, C. A. 8., "in Operating System: Structuring Concept,"
cumulus A04, Vol 17, No 10, 1976, pp 549-557.

ﬁanaen, P. 3., “Structured mltiprogra-ing,"
COMUNS AC“, Vol 15, No 7, 1972, pp 574-578.

Rollard, P. R., "Designing Very Reliable Hicroprocessor System,"
ELEK‘I'RONIKA, No 1, 1979, pp 73-80.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'S'NO "NAUKOVA DUN", "KIBBRNE‘I’IKA", 1981, No 6

8545

C80:

1863 I 91

10b

POIOFI‘ICIALISBONLY
somwzs

"DC 681.3

”PROM?" 10 DESCRIBIIB P013110” W DWI"; 10 NEXT "10301387300710" IN
A utcmocm

ibscow PROBLEHY UPRAVLENIYA V MIKE, momma, BIOWII in Russian 1981
(signed to press 13 Aug 81) pp @5409

[Article by B. S. Arutyunyan and G. H. Pogosyants]

[Text] In automating microprograsning, the problem arises of autontic assigment
of addresses to microinstructions when the microprogrmls are placed in control
storage. Naturally, these addresses are far fra arbitrary and must correspond to
the addressing mechanism selected in a given microprograI-ing system. It is known
that when the current microinstruction is executed, the address of the microinstruc-
tion is computed that is fetched by this address from control storage and executed
following the current one. There is exceptional diversity in methods of organizing
computation of the next address. Attempts have been made to classify these methods
[I], but they do not cover the entire diversity of addressing methods since the
addressing mechanism is selected during design of the control device in accordance
with specific requirements that can vary greatly. In the selection, or more pre-
cisely the design, of the addressing method, compromise solutions are often sought
since the different requirements of efficiency have to be met, which presupposes

a certain element of creativity.

All this to a great extent hinders automating the placement of microprograms in
control storage. In fact, writing a program for each inidividual case is very
inefficient, but creating a universal program prevents diversity in addressing
methods.

In this article, an attempt has been made to overcome this difficulty. A certain
regular method for describing the addressing mechanism is proposed (from now on,
let us call the is mechanism the addressing function). This description can
subsequently be interpreted by the appropriate program.

The idea of this method is based on the concept of the branch group [2]. As is
known, the addressing function must correspond to the logical structure of the
microprogram, i.e. if from a given microinstruction In there is a branch to a
group of microinstructions m , m2, ..., mk in microprogrml H, the addressing func-

tion that implements this branch must provide each time the address of that micro-
instruction to which the branch from I has to be lads (see the drawing). Conse-
quently, the addressing function must implement all branches that are encountered

105

“OFFICIALUSEONLY
I508 OH'ILIAL use; ONLY

Branch from nicroinstruction a
to group 6 of successor- ' -
microinstructions

 

in nicroprogru H. Methods of ilplenenting a specific branch may vary greatly.
Analysis of addressing functions encountered in practice has shown that the des-
cription of the method for generating the addresses A' of the successor-niacin-
structions can be limited to the address A of the current nicroinstruction, sale
fixed set 8 of hits in the nicroinstruction itself (the so-called address hits) and
the constants, i.e. the address ofeach success or n of the nicroinstruction a is

1
described by the formula
Aun‘ - It (AID Ben m". (l)
where i - l, 2, ... k.

FOROS language facilities [3] are used to describe the addressing function. The
variables A', A and B are treated as registers with a specified masher of bits. Let
us c'ite emples of addressing function descriptions for clarification.

Example 1. let us consider a certain nethod of addressing that allows effecting a
branch to a group of four nicroinstructions .1, n2, I3 and I“. The control storage

word address length is 13 hits. The zero through seventh bits in the nicroinstruc-
tion are the address bits. Thus, we can define the registers

,. (21:12). 'A' ((21:32). a «a : 1).

The addresses of the successor-Iicroinstructions are generated the following way:

the contents of the bits fro. the eighth through the twelfth latch the contents of
those sue bits of the address of the predecessor-Iicroinstruction; the contents of
the bits from the second through the seventh match the contents of those sale bits
in the address portion of the predecessor-nicroinstruction. Also, the following re-
quirenent must be net: a) if the zero bit of the address portion contains a zero
and a certain condition 1 is net. the zero bit of the address of the next Iicroin-
struction gets the value "zero," and when the condition is not net, the value "one";
if the zero bit of the address portion contains a one, then irrespective of condi-
tion 1, the zero bit of the address of the next nicroinstruction receives the value
"one"; b) if bit one of the address portion contains a zero and a certain condition
2 is net, bit one of the address of the next nicroinstruction gets the value "zero",
and when the condition is not net, the value "one”; if hit one of the address por-
tion contains a one, then irrespective of condition 2, bit one of the address of
the next nicroinstruction gets the value "one."

Obviously, bits zero and one of the address portion have to be zeros for a branch
to occur to the group of four Iicroinstructions.

106

MMGALIBEONLY
A'(8:12)-A(8:12); Ml:A'(Q:i)-QQB;
A’(2:7)-B(2:7); H2:A'(Q:i)'-QiB;
B(Q:i)-QQB= M3:A'(@:i)-IGB;

MiaA'(Q:i)-iiB:

For conpactness in this description, those bits of the addresses of the nicroin-
structions of the branch group that are identical with all four nicroinstructions
are described one tile. The labels ill, )1, H3 and m denote all four nicroinstruc-
tions in the branch group. and the label nubersnust match the nubers of the
corresponding nicroinstructions in the symbolic nicroprogrul [2].

Example 2. Let us discuss another addressing nethod. hue control storage word
address length is also 13 bits. The address portion contains 12 hits. i.e. we have

4' (Q) : 12'). 'A ((2): 12). B (0 = II).

The branch group nicroinstruction addresses are generated the following way:

the contents of the bits from zero through the second of the sddress portion are
010; the contents of trigger T1 are assigned to address bit 12; the contents of
bits 4 through 11 match the contents of hits 6 through 11 of the address portion;
the content of bit 3 is the result of the disjunction of the contents of trigger
1’2 and bit 3 of the address portion; bits 0 through 2 are generated by register R

“(a 1 2): the contents of which are loved into the bits Ientioned.

It is easy to see that if the content of bit 3 of the address portion is "zero,"
the branch group may contain a min- of 32 nicroinstructions, but if it is "one,"
then just 16 nicroinstructions. Let us assme this bit is zero, then the

branch function description looks like this:

8(Q 2 2) - QiQB; A' (Q : 3) - iQIiB;
8 (3) = 08; M5 : A' (12) = 08;

4' (6:3) - 1mm;
mg : A’ (12) - w;

4’ (i : H) - 8(4): II): A' (25 :3) - 11008: A' (a :3) - iQQiB;
M1 = A' (12) - (38: M6 = A' (12) - 08: am :A’(i2) - in;

A' (Q) = 3) = 10008: A’ ((25 : 3) - 11018; 4' (Q) : 3) - wags;
M2: .4' (12) - as; m :A‘ (12) - (an; ma ; 41:2) .. u);

A' ((25 z 3) -1@®18: 4' ((3 :3) - “108: 4' (g :3) - 19113;
”314' (12) 3 QB; M8 : A' (12) - Q53; M13 : A'(i2)- 18;

A' (Q): 3) = lQIQ‘II:
M6 ; A’ (12) = QB:

4(2): 3) - mm;
M9 : A' (12) - 18;

107

”WNMY

4’ (0 : 3) - “ace:
am : .4' (12) _ w;
((9 :3) - 11018:
n 15w (12) -13;
we) : 3) - may;
ms :A'(i2) - w;
4' (a : a) - ms;
PU“ W'I‘JAL use. UNL'

It is easy to see that all the lines for description of the addressing functions
take the form of formula (I), and what is actually described is the structure of
the branch group to a degree that is fully sufficient for automatic placnent of a
symbolic nicroprogram [b] and the technical method for implementation of the
addressing mechanism is disregarded (in example 1, a check of conditions is per.
formed. and in exnple 2, registers 1'1. 1'2 and R are used. but this is not
reflected in describing the addressing functions).

After automatic placaent of microprogrns in control storage, simulation of the
operation of the computer device is performed by the conventional facilities of
F0808 [5]. and hate, naturally. the addressing mechanism is also simulated since it
is implemented in the control unit, which permits checking the correctness of both
nicroprogran placement and functioning of the unit es a whole.

In conclusion. let us give in full form the format of descrining the addressing
function.

amass FUNCTION 1';
4' (...) - I. (A (.7). B (...). com);

A' (...) =1.“ (.I.). a (...). com);
I R (”1) pl;
I F (0.!) pt:

I P (0‘...) A;
I. =A' (us) - f5. (4 (...). B (...). com);

4' (...) 21,,(2 (...), B (...), coast);
M, : .4' (...) - h, (..4 (...). a (...). com);

M“ :41...) - 1.. (i4 (...). :9 (...). mm);
RETURN;

r. : .41...) - 1.. (A (...). B 5...). const);
.4' (...) -1., (A (...). B (...). com):

M, : A' (...) a h.“ (...). B(...). coast):

M._ : A'(...) - 1., (A: (...). B (...). com);
END;

llere in terms of P1, P2, ..., P. are denoted the subfunctions of the addressing

function P or the descriptions of the various types of addressing that are en-
countered in a given microprograslsing system; 01, 02, ..., Us: designate certain

conditions, after checking of vhich a particular type of addressing is selected
that is used for the branch from the current microinstruction; for simplicity.
the periods are used to denote the corresponding bits of registers A', A and B.

108

l-‘OIOFFIGALUSEONLY
Naturally. it is not always necessary to use the full fonat for describing the
addressing function.

With this apparatus for describing addressing functions, one can construct a pro-
grn that interprets a nicroprogran (nitten in synbolic language) and a descrip-
tion of the addressing {motion that is rather simple and entirely standard and
which performs autonatic placenent of nicroprogra-s in control storage [6]. The
addressing function just has to he described the appropriate way for each
nicroprogra-ing systel developed.

BIDLIGBMY

l. Veytas, V. I. and Zhintelis, G. 3., "‘lypical Pragpents of Addressing Structures
of Hicroprogra- Control Units," UPMVLYAYUMIYB 313m I HASllIﬂY, ﬂo It, 1975.

2. Arutyunyan, D. 8., "Problem of Analysis of Structure of hicroprogra-s and
Function of Branching to Next liicroinstruction," VOPIOSY RADIOBLEKTROIII'KI.
No 8, 1977.

3. (Landov, 1. Ya.), "Using Digital Capoters to Design Digital Capoters,"
Hoscov. Energiya, 1971..

lo. Arlazarova, A. V.; Arutyunyan, D. 8.; Yefstifeyeva, 1'. I. et al.,
"Hicroprogru roms-assmmmm." TR. mum [Institute of Electronic Control
rhchines], No 66, 1977.

5. Arlaurova, A. V.; Arutyunyan, B. 8.; Yefstifeyeva, ‘1'. l.; and Pogosyanta, G.
H.. "Sinulating Hicroprogr-s in the 30808 Syst-z Materials fro. the Se-inar
'Developnent, Operation and Evolution of Systens for Conner-Aided Design of
REA [Radioelectronic Equipmentl',” Moscow, Nauka, 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'otvo "Hanks", 1981

8545
(:80: 1863/77

r'

109

MWWMY
FIJI OFFICIAL 055 UNLV

UDC 62-50

TECHNIQJE FOR DESIGN All) 033W!!!) 0? 80mm NR PRODUCTION LINES

Hoacow PROBLDIY UPMVLBRIYA V mm, mm, BIOWII in bacilli 1981
(signed to press 13 Aug 81) pp 96-101

[Article by S. H. Golubeva, l. V. Speranskaya and R. I. Shubins]

[Excerpt] Building automated discrete control systems on a base of small computers
is prolonged considerably because of the complexity of designing end debugging

the applications softwere (P0), which is governed by the necessity of planning the
computing process in reel tine with the limited resources of computer storage.

At the sale time, developers of .all systems often do not possase sufficient pro-
graming skills. In comection with whet hes been said, it is advisable to equip
newly produced nall computers with a complex of problem-oriented progr- and
methodological facilities that facilitate developent of applications software

for clesses of single-type systems.

The aim of this work is to create e complex of thet type of facilities for
production line discrete control systems (SDUPL) and thereby siwlify the transi-
tion from the 800m. algoritl- to the debugged applications progr- when the ”-300
[I] is used as the base computer.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naulte", 1981

85105
C80: 1863/77

110
ms OFFICIAL USEONLY
sauer- runs PRO! mum 'W-m W', AUGUST 1981

noscow mum I NM in Russian lo 8. Aug 81 pp 1-136

[Excerpts]

3193. dethods of debuggiu devices and systens with use of microprocessor control.
Besov, Ye. P.; Golovin, S. 8. and Gokhberg, A. c. VOPl. lADIOELEKTIOlI. 33!. INT,
No 4, 1980, pp 3-14. Bibl.: 8 titles. Proble-s of constructing hardware end
software facilities for debugging progress of licroprocessor syste-s, their
-:-:vanteges and disedventeges.

3231. Method for solving problems on arrangements. Dukhsrsyev, ll. 11.; Litvinov.
I. A. and Tagirov, ‘1‘. S. PBIYDI I OBRAB. mom. V $1.02!. 1100101. stsmm, No
10, 1980, pp 68-77. Bibl.: 3 titles. A1801. progre- is described for calculating
arrangement of geooetric objects by these methods: lbnte Carlo, paired reerrange-
nents and constructive. The latter Isthod yields results closer to the optimal
value with least nechine tine. Thus, the lbnte Cerlo nethod takes 2.5 hours to

solve a problen with a dimension of 10 x 10. while the constructive takes 15
minutes.

3232. LIDA library progran for spproxiaation of functions and processing of data.
Vesilenko, V. A.; lovalkov. A. V. and Zyuzin, H. V. ALGOL-338144 version.
Novosibirsk, 1981, 39 psges (Preprint No 270, Capoter Center, Siberian tench,
USSR Acede of Sciences). Bibl.: 8 titles. The library solves the problens of
interpolation and enoothing by splines of any snoothness in a segpent, in a region
of a type of parallelepiped and in an arbitrary n-dinensionel region with
chaoticelly arranged nodes.

3235. Celculation of three-dinensional taperature pattern «and a pipeline in
frozen ground. Ayzen, A. 8.; ﬂuency. B. 6. end Min, V.'!. ML. an: I

GAZA mural: um.-nm. SI. ‘I'IUDY. MAYA SERRA/ZAP. SIB. N.-I. emu-mm.
NBPT. Iﬂo‘l', lb 1.9, 1981. "Malysis and Generalization of Expertise on Operations
for Oil and Gas in the 10th Five-Year Plan in yestern Siberia," pp 62-64. Bibl.:

3 titles. In ALGOL prong is described for computing temperature pattern around
an oil line with regard to tnperature variation along the pipe.

Keywords: nethodology A1801. 0dre—120lo Yes-10100 teqereture ttern i -
lines, oil lines, frozen ground. ' . P. ’ P P.

3276. ODA nets Processing Nsneguent System. Concepts. capabilities.
Zabavnikov, V. P. VOPR. RADIOELEK‘I'ROI. 838. A30, No 2, 1980, pp Isl-52. Dibl.: 11

111
POI OFFICIAL ”ONLY
'w Uf’WInh \re’b “I‘L.

titles. Ihe ODA system is oriented to processing data in ASUP [automated produc-
tion control systems]. characterized by a large volume of input and output informa-
tion and a small masher of aritlasetic operations and set of operations--logical,
moves, conversions of elements and writing of data sets. The system is implemented
in the ODA language with use of ﬁssion alphabet letters during design of struc-
tures. Operations on elements of records in the system are performed by using
user blocks in the ODA, Assembler and PH]. languages.

3289. Refer layout algoritl- for maximum nuaber of chips. lvanov, V. V. and
Lyangasov, S. I. BLEKTROII. 12mm, 833. #. “MORLEKTRON., No 5(89). 1980, pp
50-54.. Bibl.: 3 titles.

3301. Copying magnetic tapes from "Elektronika-lOO/I” format to Unified System
format. Docharov, A. A.; (h'lova, 1'. 1.. and Popov, Ii. V. Hoscow, 1980. 15 pages
(Reprint/USSR Academy of Sciences. Institute of Space Exploration, No 582).
Bibl.: 3 titles. A FORM program is described that copies data from .gnetic
tapes written in Elektronika-lOOII computer format onto magnetic tapes in us DOS
format.

3306. Facilities for batch debugging in trilevel controllable virtual storage sys-
tem. Konovalov, II. A.; Kol'tsova, L. 1.; Kryukov, V. A. et al. lbacow, 1981, 18
pages. (PreprintlUSSR Academy of Sciences. IPH [Institute of Applied Mathematics],
No 30). Bibl.: ’0 titles. Capabilities of batch debugging of FORTRAN programs in
trilevel controllable virtual storage system in terms of input language.

3308. Trilevel controllable virtual storage for DESK-6 computer. Kol'tsova, 1.. 1.;
Kryukov, V. A.; Lyubimskiy, E. 2. et a1. lbscow, 1980, 21 pages. (Reprint/USSR
Academy of Sciences. IPDI, No 3). Dibl.: 3 titles. Concepts and procedure for

using in FORTRAN progrus virtual storage with a size to lo ' 106 words.

3338. Development of "CADCAN-l" software system for computer-aided design of ship
cable routings. Derdichevsltiy, L. D. and Felin, N. 6. MATERIAL! P0 om arms]
N70 imeni A. h. Krylov, No 325, 1980. "Problems of Caaputer-Aided Design of Slip
Electrical Equipment," pp 17-23. FORTRAN software system for layout and tightening
of main cables introduced during development of ship'designs.

3340. liethod of computer computation of heat conditions of integrated circuits
taking heat removal through leads and package cover into account. Zeke. D. L;
Mere. A. G. and Nagovitsyna, 1.. P. ELECTRON. TBlGlNIKA. SIR. umrmaos..

ho 5(89), 1980, pp 55-59. Bibl.: 8 titles. FORM algoritha for computing heat
conditions of integrated circuits based on tri-parallelepiped model, with local
sources and drains of heat on two of then. Program computes temperature pattern

at 50 points on a chip and on the re package, taking the effect of leads into
account (up to 50). For 12 points on a chip and base of package, with three sources
of heat and six leads of package when five versions are computed, computation time
is 65 minutes.

3361. Software system for computation and analysis of digital-analog devices of
apparatus with use of macromodel of integrated circuits. Zvorykin, 1.. II. and

lbstovoy, D. D. ELBK‘I’RON. mum. SIR. HIKIOILBKTROII” lb 5(89). 1980, pp 36-63.
Dibl.: 16 titles.

112
ms OFFICIAL USEONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3363. Criterion and algoritln for selecting optimal method of analog-to-digital
conversion. Ilyushin, S. A. VOPI. RADIOELBK‘I'IOR. 883. m, No Is, 1980, pp (03-53.
Bibl.: 2 titles.

31%. Organization of software and information support for computer-aided
structural design system. Haleyeva, A. 0.; Solov'yev, V. V. and Fionova, L. P.
vopa. annrostzxrnon. sen. ASU, No 2, 1980, pp 19-27. 3151.: 12 titles.

3357. Computation of xenon transient process in heterogeneous reactor (DEER pro-
gram). Halofeyev, V. 11. Moscow, 1981, 17 pages (Preprintllm [Institute of
Theoretical and Experimental Physics]. No 310). Bibl.: 6 titles. FORTRAN program
is described for computing transient process occurring under specified conditions
of change in capacity, as well as as a consequence of change of fuel channels and
other reactor disturbances.

3365. Computer analysis of thermal conditions of hybrid integrated circuits.
Petroeyants, K. 0. and Ryabov, N. I. MRO“. mm. 83!. nmoruxmu.,

No 5(89), 1980, pp 60-65. Bibl.: 5 titles. [011M program is described for com-
puting stationary heat pattern in substrate of hybrid integrated circuits, created
by heat evolution of elements. lhree-dimensional equation for heat transfer is
reduced to two-dimensional and solved by finite difference method by using the
Gsuss-Seidel iterative algorithm.

3369. Computer computation of topological parameters of HIS L81 circuits.
Roan, G. R. and Shenderovich, Yu. I. ELERTRON. “MIRA. an. HUMBLEKW.,
No 5(89), 1980, pp as-a9. 3151.: 4 titles.

3371. Approximate design of nozzle contour providing minimal loss to friction and
dispersion. Sokolov, B. 1. Beat processes and properties of working media of
flying vehicle engines: HBZEIVUZ. SILIKazan' Aviation Institute, No 3, 1980, pp
77-81. Bib1.: 2 titles. FORTRAN program is described for determining par-eters
of expanding part of Level nozzle with free expansion of axieylmsetric jet with
flat surface of transition through sound velocity. the computation on Yes-1022
computer takes 10-12 seconds.

3372. STRUC‘nJRl-Z software system for X-ray diffraction computations: Description
and instructions. Solov'yeve, 1.. 9.; Ovchinnihov, V. Ye.; Ipatova, Ye. l.“ and
Andrianov, V. I. Moscow, 1981, 58 pages (Automation of Research on Atomic Struc-
ture of Crystals by Diffraction Hethods/USSR Academy of Sciences. Far Eastern
Scientific Center. Institute of Tectonics and Geophysics, Institute of Crystal-
lography, No 7). Bibl.: 7 titles. STRUCTURE FORTRAN software system for deter-
mining and refining atomic structures of crystals by data of X-ray, electron-
diffraction or neutron-diffraction experiments, designed for structures in which
the independent atoms are lees than or equal to 100, the nuber of kinds of stoma

is less than or equal to 12, and the maximum of independent structural factors is
10,000.

3376. Organization of file of models of atmosphere. URAPX program for'vriting to
the file. REAPX program for reading from file: Instructions. Sushkevich, ‘1'. A.
libscov, 1980, 16 pages. ”reprint/USSR Academy of Sciences. IP11, lb 7). Bibl.:
3 titles.

113
POI OFFICIAL USEONLY
I“ Uf'ILIAI. 03¢. IDNLI

3377. Computation of basic paarmeters of resonant and guiding band structures at
high types of waves. Fialkovskiy, A. 1.; Hikheyev, A. G. and Tankikh, N. B.
salmon. TEKIINIKA. SE3. 1. BLBKTRON. SVCll, No 12(32h), 1980, pp 61-62. Bib1.:
(0 titles.

3634. Automated data acquisition and processing system based on "liikro-Nova" cal-
puter. Blokh, H. A.; Knolova, ‘1‘. I. and llechayev, Yu. I. lbscow, 1981, 56
pages. (Reprint/USSR Academy of Sciences. Physics Institute, No 55).

Key words: ang. [English], BASIC, Nova, automated data acquisition and processing
systems.

3635. Interactive information retrieval system for decision-making in imperative
surgery on organs in abdominal cavity. ksent'yeva, A. V.; Zimev, ll. 11.;
msyannikov, A. H. and Khay, G. A. leningrad, 1981, (.7 pages. (Reprint/USSR
Academy of Sciences. Leningrad NIVTs , No 9). Bib1.: 12 titles.

Key words: methodology, BASIC, cyan-172, interactive information retrieval sys-
tmls, decision-making, surgery, abdominal cavity.

3451. Software for system of automated input of tasks into analog processor of
hybrid computer system. leonsnko, V. I. and Rogovtsev, A. A. In book:
"Vychislitel'naya tekhnilta v sistenakh upravleniya letatel'nymi apparat-i: ‘l‘emat.
sb. nauch. tr." [Computer Engineering in Flying Vehicle Control Systems]!

MAI [lbscow Aviation Institute], lbscow, 1981, pp 31-34.

3473. Scientific Research Intonation Based on Facilities of System of ball Compu-
ters, Moscow, 1980, 89 pages. (TL/Ill-‘l' ELEKTRON. UPR. HASHIN, No 83). Bibl. at
end of articles. 188" 0320-3968.

Problems of restoration of usage of pictures of spatial sections of controlled
object in X-ray tomography with a computer. Developent of integrated intonation
systqss and priority service systems.

Keywords: methodology, “-4030, 8-222, $8.6, IBIS DBMS, ANT-2 DOS, X-ray tomo-
graphy, Iaultichannel systene, priority service, input of information, integrated
information retrieval systems.

3490. Pusping of space 0 maser in two-temperature gas. Bolgova, G. 1'.
Scientific InformationIUS R Academy of Sciences. Astronomical Council, Latvian SSR
Academy of Sciences. Badloastrophysicsl (liservatory, 1981, No A7.

Thematic collection of articles on the problu, "Evolution of Stars and Star
“gregationsm pp 9-1“. Bibl.: 6 titles.

Refinement of necessary conditions for colliding-colliding pulping of space “‘0
naser by the method of digital simulation for refinement of necessary physics
conditions.

3695. Package of progr-s for loading intonation into a file in an intonation re-
trieval system. Vishin, V. V.; Zaytsav, s. A.; lhslennikov, A. h. and Potapov,

A. V. BLEKTRON. mm. 53!. 1. Emma. SVCB, lb 12025), 1980, pp 62-66.
Bibl.: 6 titles.

3698. interactive software in DISPOBP system. nefonov, Yu. 8. and bur-snenko,
m. P. van. mxosmmu. sn. asu, no 3, 1980, pp 76-79.

Software structure: control program (interactive monitor), language processor,
body of apckage, service programs, generation facilities. All package progr-s are
written in Ass-bier, service progras are in P141. ‘

114
summon“
3699. Basic operating systen as basis of software for computer complexes of USSR
Gosbsnk automated systems. VOPR. ”131011131010“. Sill. m, No 13, 1980, pp 16-19.
Bibl.: 3 titles.

Described is s set of components of basic OS, developed on basis of YeS OS.

end s method of generating 08 complexes.

3567. Interactive plan generation systel (DISI'OIP). Agafonov, Yu. H. VOPR.
mmuexmn. 353. A30, No 3, 1980, pp 71-75.

The DISFORP system hes been implemented on a base of the Yes-1033 (Yes-1060) with
at lesst 256K of main storage in the 084.0, 6.1 envirotlsent. Job run time in
optimel mode is 3-5 minutes (for a 200 x 20 netrir). Tine of systu response to
request in update node is 1-2 minutes, and in query node (vith regard to solving a
multicriterial problem) is 5-10 Iinutee.

3569. Structurizetion of interaction between decision-maker and computer in
solving plan problems of optilization. lordonoeenho, V. A. and Grebel'sltiy, 8. Z.
VOPR. RADIOELEKTRON. 83R. ASU, No 3, 1980, pp 80-83. Bibl.: 3 titles.

Method of structuriution in developing interaction for decision-usher (Ln-EVE).
for solving optimal problems on generating annual nonenclature plene for product
production in a sector and enterprises (using a package of programs for Isthemsti-
cal programing) and for making multislternative plan celculations on optimizing
the five-year plan for allocation of capitel investment in a sector in the

DISFORP interactive system. Syste- software includes control procedures. optimize-
tion proceduree and user progrens for the Unified Systen of Caputers. Hsin
storage of at least 256K, interactive program is 66K.

3556. Optilizsiion of capital investment allocation in lid-term planning.
Sheynkman, 1.. B. VOPR. RADIOELBKTRON. 88R. A80, No 3, 1980, pp 37-93. Bib1.: 3
titles. Described is an interactive system for generating an alternative for
fscilities of capital construction. System response tine in generating it on the
Yes-1030 in the data update node is about 0.5-1 minute; computstion of analytic
tables takes 2-3 minutes; end in the node of running an optimization job
(dinension 250 x 100), 10-15 Iinutes.

3558. Simulation system for drafting production plane for sector enterprises.
Yampol'tsev. G. H. VOPR. “0103118130“. 8311. A80, No 3, 1980, pp 107-110.

3565. Solving one probleo of co-puter-aided design of printed circuit boards.
Belenko, V. V.; Ioseliani, A. N. and Lordkipanidze, L. L. RUDY/68$! Maday of
Sciences. Institute of Control Systems. lb 20:1. Theory and Devices for
Mtonstic Control Systems, pp 126-132. Bibl.: 3 titles.

Hethods for layout of nicronodules, selection of sequence of connections and their
layout on s printed circuit board. tor electric circuits containing up to 20
microcircuits, computation tine on the li-222 cuputar is 6-5 linutes.

3585. Programs for processing measurements of linen-polarized galactic radio
emission on the "Nairi-K" computer. Arkhsngel'shiy, V. G. and Kucnetsova. I. P.
Cor'kiy, 1981, 63 pages (Preprint/Gor'hiy Scientific Research Radiophysics
Institute, No 165).

115
FOR m1. USEONLY
I“ UP'ILIAI- 0-," VIQLI

3614. Organization of specialized mltiservicing on a large computer (DEC-10).
lvanov, Yo. IL; lvanova, N. 3.; Lsskovoy, V. N. et a1. Serpukhov, 1981, 17 pages.
(Reprint/UV! [institute of High Enemy Physics}. llo 81-27). Bibl.: 13 titles.
Principles of design of the COSDES (Comprehensive Operating System for Divice
Servicing) specialized tine-sharing system, and of organizing mltiservicing of
scanning-neasuring instnuents within the bounds of one job under control of the

020.10 cousputer 08. System is used for servicing basic m-nmo co-puter
for design of rpinted circuits boards.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennaye publichnaya nauchno-tekhnicheekeya biblioteka 8883
(arm sssn). 1981

85105
(:80: 1863/79

116

“WWW?
APPLICATIGS

”DC “1.3.015

BASIC PRIKZIPLES FOR DEVEIDMNT OF DIGITAL “ROUTER mums YOR “TIMI.
PMCESSIK: 0F PULL-SCALE 1381' DATA

Kiev KIBERNE‘I'IKA in linden llo 6, Nov-Dec 81 (unuecript received 8 Jan 81)
pp 35-39

[Article by Grigoriy Ivanovich Korniyenlzo, candidate of engineering ecience.
deputy director of the 8!! RB [Special Deaign Office for Hath-atical hehinea and
Syetena], Inetitute of Cybernetics, “:88! Acaday of Sciencee, Kiev]

[Text] The main purpoae in using on-board and field digital coquter conplewee
(TeVK) for multichannel proceeeing of experimntal data (D) in conducting full-
acele coupler teeta of objecte of new technology coneiate in raieing the overall
effectiveneee of theee teete beeed on data from analyaie of internediete etagee
and of the operational planning and eanagenent of their eubeequent atagea. Being
digital computer conplexee based on nodern electronic digital coeputere eneuree a
high degree of infomtiveneae and control of teats in all atagea of their perforo
eance. Teat efficiency is characterized by indicatore of reduction in the tile
for perforning then, by the capability of perforeing conpreheneive teeta and by
obtaining more valid teat reeulte, Ihicb in the final analyaie eneuree their
considerable national econonic effect.

l‘hie purpoae ie achieved by eolving a m-ber of baeic problae [I] that have a ape-
cific nature cauaed by the perfch of full-acele teete of caplet dyn-ic
ayeteu end objecte. bet on liet thu.

Problee 1. Provide for efficient ecquieiticn, repreaentation, recording and trenc-
nieeion of experimental data to the digital counter couple: input channela from
the eeaauring devices and unite connected to treneducere or convertera of
nonelectrical quantitiea into electrical quentitiee.‘

Problem 2. Provide for continuoue input, aortiu and recording of nultichannel
erperinental data in a broad epectrua of frequenciee from frectiona of a llertz to
tene of kilohertz.

Probl- 3. Provide for the proceea of vieualiration of realization: of the input
data on raeter graphic infomtion diaplaya in real tine an the data conea in.

Proble- lo. Provide for input and proceaeing of half-tone i-agee caing fro- video
recordera and television calerea.

117
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
PW UI'I'ILIAI. bat. ONLY

Problem 5. Define and form basic files of realizations of the experimental data
and perform preprocessing of them.

Problu 6. Perform proximate analysis of the data stream in real time.

Problem 7. Perform digital processing of multichannel experimental data by the
methods of mathematical statistics and theory of probabilities, spectral-correla-
tion and regression analysis.

Probl- 8. Perform general mathematical calculations for evaluation of the basic
parameters of the tested object, as well as calculations associated with the
planning, optimization and control of full-scale tests.

Problem 9. Provide for the processes of display on system displays and panels and
of docinentation on alphanuseric and graphic peripherals of the results from pro-
cessing and analysis .of the realizations of the experimental data, object para-
meters and results of the general mathematical and special calculations.

Problms 10. Provide for storing on magnetic media the results of individual tests
and series of tests for subsequent evaluation, comparison and analysis.

Problem 11. Provide for control of data output from digital computer complexes to
telemetering channels if there is telemetering equipment for data transmission to
earth in the system supporting the performance of full-scale tests.

Problem 12. Provide for efficient operator interaction with digital computer can-
plex for on-line control of its operating modes as well as for developent and
debugging of new user programs.

Problem 13. Provide for co-Iunication and exchange of files of archival data
between on-board (field) digital computer complexes and the large general-purpose
electronic digital computers used in computing centers (V‘l's) and automated experi-
mental data processing systems (A8050) for general and shared use.

This list is not an exhaustive list of the problns that must be solved by the
experimenter in performing full-scale tests. Eowaver, as experience shows, these
probl-s are the most co—om, extremely capacious in their information content and
complicated for solving by the means of on-board and field digital computer com-
plexes. The solution to the listed problems is conditioned not only by their cas-
plexity, but also by the conditions for operating these devices which d-and strict
limitations on the dimensions, weight, reliability and power constmuption for the -
hardware complex, on the bulk of all components in the methodological, mathemati-
cal, progru and information provisioning, and on the cost of the digital computer
complex facilities as a whole.

let us discuss the question of developing a digital computer complex capable of
solving the problems posed.

To date, there have been two basic approaches to the development of computer com-
plexes based on minicomputers. The first approach: the developer creates for

each specific user a unique, narrowly specialized system that solves only the
problems of the given user. In developing subsequent systems, using a considerable
portion of the preceding systms usually does not turn out well. his approach is

118
”WISE”?
used, basically, when there is no need of establishing distribution of the com-
plex version. The advantage of this approach is that the complex need not have
an excess of functions, thereby keeping development costs to the mini-us. The
shortcoming in the developent of narrowly specialized complexes is their complex-
ity and often even the impossibility of making changes and additions to
functioning complexes to extend their capabilities.

The second approach consists in using problem orientation of a counter complex to
a class of problems to be solved. The idea of computer probl- orientation, pro-
posed by V. H. Glushkov [2, 3]. was specifically incorporated at the lass:

Academy of Sciences Institute of qbernetics during the development of second-
generation computers: the "Dnepr," the "Promin'" and the "MIR." The efficiency of
problem orientation has now been recognized by developers in the leading foreign
firms too. Problem orientation [6] permits providing the complex being designed
with maxim throughput for a given class of problems with minimal equipment cost
and creating the most favorable conditions for the user. Before starting develop-
ment of the complex, the developer performs a comprehensive systems analysis of

the sphere of application as a whole, where not only the specific complex, but also
other complexes similar to it, will be used. As a result of this analysis (for
which, incidentally, nuerous problem users are enlisted), the developer outlines
the architecture and structure of a problem-oriented complex. the facilities of
which permit relatively easy construction of many computer systems for the given
sphere of application. This is especially useful in those cases when the problem
to be solved by the complex is relevant to dozens and hundreds of applications,
though each application has a certain specific nature.

The advantage of the second approach compared to the first is the capability of
rapid and efficient adaptation of the developed complex to the problems of a speci-
fic application, which permits solving the problem of establishing distribution.
Let us note that in practice, a complex designed to solve certain problems usually
cannot be used for a new application. Establishing distribution is possible only
under the comiition of modification of the existing complex.

The shortcoming of the second approach is the high labor input both for performing
systems analysis of the applications and for implementing the problem-oriented com-
plex. Such complexes have some excess of functions in individual applications
which can be justified only in the case of extensive incorporation of the
complexes by various users.

Thus, the second approach permits adapting the problem-oriented complex to a spe-
cific application and developing user complexes based on it. Developent of a
user complex based on the development of problem-oriented complexes seems to be
the most promising method of making use of computer hardware for processing of
full-scale test data.

Development of problem-oriented digital computer complexes methodologically com-
bines two groups of aspects (fig. 1): of the user and the developer.

In the operation of a digiatl computer complex, a technique is used that is based
on the use of certain procedures and rules for interaction between the experimenter
and the complex hardware. The main user facilities for controlling the process of
data processing are problem-oriented high-level interactive languages and various

119
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I“ 0".“ Int. ”31'. URL]

functional keyboards. A feature for digital computer complexes is that the experi-
menter operates on the complex. his is necessary because the experimenter, based
on his own experience and intuition, must analyze the results of the proximate pro-
ceasing of data, make conclusions on the experiment performed and plan the next one.
Moreover. a digital computer complex is usually operated under field conditions in
imediate proximity to the object of the tests or on board the object, where

access to attendants is sometimes restricted.

In accordance with what has been presented, let us formulate the first principle
for development of a digital computer complex: A digital computer caplex must be
oriented to the problem user, which is the experimenter or teeter.

me second group of aspects is associated with the developer who is faced with the
problem of developing a problem-oriented digital computer complex that meets the
requirements of all potential users with the minimum possible cost for the
facilities and time for development.

Key:
1 . Level 1
2 . Level 2
3 . laeve l 3
6. Problem user
5 . Developer

6. Main programs for complex

7. Application progrma packages
8. Programing system

9. Operating systems

10. Hardware

11. Structural execution

Let us consider the components of a
digital computer complex (fig. 1).

1. Hardware: processors, main and
passive storage units, input/output
channels, peripheral controllers, non-
standard peripherals, power supplies, 718 1
and extensively applied peripherals: ' ’
magnetic disks, magnetic tapes, video

terminals, teletypes, perforators, etc.,

that provide the necessary speed and high throughput.

 

2. Operating systems, which are the interface between application software and
hardware. They must make full use of the capabilities of both the individual hard-
ware units and their joint operations in the mode of overlapping in time (task
management, job control, storage control, peripheral control. file management).

3. Programing systems: user language translators (Assembler, FORTRAN IV), text
editors, linkage editors and debuggers. They are the facilities for automating
the development of large complexes of programs.

120
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lo. Packages of application programs, oriented to the application problems that

perforn various computations (linear algebra, nathamatical statistics and spectral
analysis). '

S. The main programs which impl-ent all the functions specified by users, based

on the preceding software levels (problem-oriented language translator, modes
nuaber l and 2).

6. Structural execution is the element base, printed circuit boards and connectors,
cable connectors. and other mite.

Selecting the hardware is the most fundamental aspect in the process of developing
digital computer complexes. For digital computer complexes for various applica-
tions. the most widespread approach is to select the SO, sun or 8141, 81¢ series
general-purpose control computer compelxes (INK). In this case, not only the hard-
were is determined, but also the operating systems, programing systems and in
part, the application program packages. The developer's task is to connect to

the computer complex the peripherals not included in the equipment set supplied by

the manufacturing plant and to write the packages of application and main progrm
for the problem-oriented digital caaputer complex.

however. attempts to use series control computer complexes for processing the data
of full-scale tests have not been crowned with success. This is due primarily to
the special requirements imposed on the digital computer complex hardware struc-
tural execution under field and on-board conditions of operation: resistance to
vibration both during operation and while being transported, resistance to the
effect of the envirotlsent, higher than usual huidity and dust content, the capa-
bility of operating fras unstable voltage sources, the necessity of staying within
the dimensions of individual units, software functioning reliability and others.

All this allows formulating the second principle that should be followed in devel-
oping a digital computer complex: newly developed hardware units and their struc-
tural execution must meet the severe conditions of full-scale tests and experiments.

In manufacturing the hardware, the developer is faced with the alternative of fol-

lowing the architecture of «me series control computer complex or developing a
new one.

Following known architecture, at first glance, has advantages over developing a new
one. Thus, since the computer complex is software-compatible with the prototype,
there is no need of developing an operating systen, a progra-ing system and appli-
cation program packages. lbreover, there is the capability of using the prototype
peripheral controllers since the input/output channel interface is identical. How-
ever, as the experience of domestic industry indicates, achieving full software ca-
patibility with a prototype is a very labor-intensive task that requires large

time inputs. The highest compatibility can be achieved with the operating system
progrmss since here an effect is produced by the time relations of the control sig-
nals at the level of the circuits of the individual units and ass-bliss.

Let us 308‘.“ that we have succeeded in building hardware software-compatible with
series control computer complexes and meeting the requirnsnts of structural execu-
tion. Then inevitably the question arises of how much of the architecture of the

121
FOR omaaLuseomv
e vee we ee»..e_ cue- v-Ie—e

hsrdwere end the opereting system for the series control computer complex is
edeptsble to the specific neture of the problems of full-scsle test dete processing.
Anelysis dete show thet in solving the problems, devices should be developed for
comsunicstion between the nuserous peripherels nonstenderd to series control com-
puter complexes (on-bosrd megnstic tspe end other recorders, telnetric msgnetic
tepe recorders. multichennel high-frequency Al's? [snelog-to-digitel converters]

end others) end the input/output chennels in the couplex. To preclude dete loss

in switching input buffers, the opereting logic of the chennel for direct eccess

to storege must differ from thet of the chennel for the series control computer
complexes [5].

Here is whet is required to solve problems 3 end lo: First, develop roster-type
hslf-tone displeys end graphic plotters, controllers for than, end else controllers
for the video megnetic tepe recorder end television cuere. Second, speciel
methods ere required to process imsgee by using the mode of duel-processor opere-
tion and to output moving images to displey screens [6]. ‘Ihe series control com-
puter casplexes do not heve these fecilities.

To solve problem 6, e high processor speed hes to be provided (on the order of
1.5 to 2 million operetions per second) end this csnnot be echioved with the
series control computer complexes [7, 8].

To solve problems 7 end 8, we need e high-speed fleeting-point processor [9] end
we heve to develop speciel herdwere methods for controlling e mein storege of
limited size [10-12].

The most significent limitstion in building digitsl computer complexes is thet
under field end on-boerd conditions, the complex often must operete effectively
even with minimsl configuretions of herdwere. for example without e msgnetic disk.
Hith thet. it must provide for the multiprogra-sing mode, the cepebility of the
experimenter to ectiveiy intervene in the computing process by using job control
lengusge, end the operetion of e compliceted progrsI-ing system in developing pro-
grn complexes. Consequently, the conclusion cen be drewn thet the question of
the efficient use of the mein storege in the digitel computer complex is of
per-mount importence [13].

Opereting series control computer complexes in the multiprogre-eing mode with
reel-time prohlus is ususlly possible only when the disk opereting systems ere
used. Operating systems for minimel configuretions heve insufficient cspsbilities
for implesentetion of digitsl computer complexes.

Smiling up whet hes been presented. let us formulete the third principle for
development of problem-oriented digitsl computer complexes for multichennel pro-
cessing of full-scale test date: an. erchitecture end structure of the hsrdwere
end the opereting system in the digitsl computer complex must be edepteble to the
full-scsle test dete processing probl-s. According to this principle, develop-
ment of en efficient digitsl computer complex is possible only when new erchitec-
turel end structurel solutions ere used in developing the herdwere end ell soft—
were components. ‘lhls spproech is extremely lebor-intensive since in sddition to
the performence of functions specific to the epplicetions, the digitsl computer
complex must heve the cherecteristics end besic cspsbilities of generel-purpose
control computer complexes. Development of digitsl computer complex softwere that
is compsct end sufficiently powerful in its cspsbilities presents the greetest
difficulty.

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’ihe relation between functions performed by hardware and those by software is of
great importance in achieving high efficiency in the digital computer complex. The
most important fragments of components should be identified in the systna analysis
for the design of the digital computer complex and the hardware should be oriented
to implementing them. 1hus, with the input of multichannel intonation, the prob-
lem of unpacking the frames from external media into linear files of values for
each of the specified channels arises. Using special computer instructions permits
solving this problem successfully when the data comes in at a high rate [16].

Frame structure regularity disturbances occurring during input due to a malfunction
are eliminated by devices for cmication with a multichannel recorder.

To increase speed, a digital computer complex must have the capability of writing
and executing microprograms that differ from the basic set of microprograms and
processor instructions. To this end, there have to be facilities for expanding
microprogram control storage both through adding new permanent storage units and
through using main storage for microinstructions. Using microprograsning in prob-
lmn programs and operating system modules permits raising the progr- execution
rate three- to sixfold compared to the write rate by using the basic processor
instructions.

Thus, the fourth principle for developing problms-orientcd digital computer com-
plexes can be formulated: The relationship between hardware and software components
in digital computer complexes under development has to be selected so that the'
maximum speed and throughput during processing of input data streams can be provided
at minimum: total cost.

The principles and considerations presented above have served as the basis in de-
veloping a number of digital-computer complexes for multichannel processing of data
from full-scale tests of intricate specimens of new technology, among which special
mention should be made of the "Ekspress" systems [15], the "Btalon" prom--
oriented cumputer [16], the “Pira” system [17] and some others. Ihe experience of
the development and industrial operation of such problsmooriented digital computer
complexes has shown the high effectiveness and viability of the principles and pro-
positions used as the basis for their design which lent the designed complexes a
number of distinctive features ensuring their high technical and economic par-eters.

3131.100qu
1. Korniyenko, G. 1., "Problems Solved in Automated Experimental Data Processing
Systems in Performing Experiments and Tests on Caaplex Objects under Pull-Scale
Conditions," in "Sistemy ekspress-obrabotki dannylth v real'nom masshtabe vremeni"
[Systems for Proximate Processing of Data in Real Time], Kiev, 1979, pp 3-12.

2. Gluehkov, V. H., "Vvedeniye v ASU" [Introduction to [automated Control Systems].
Kiev, 1972, 310 pages.

3. GLushkov, V. H. et a]... "Some hands in Developent of Digital amputer Soft-
ware Structures,” UPRAVLYAYUSBCBIYE $1819“ 1 HASIIINY, No 1, 1972, pp 79-85.

123

MWMONLY
7.

8.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

la.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

assault, Ya. 1.; Korniyenko, C. 1.; Sergiyenko, 1. V. and Tesler, G. 5.,
"Problem Orientation of Hiniconputers," UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYE 8181!!! 1 mam,
No 6, 1973, pp 1.5-1.9.

Korniyenlto. G. 1.; Dianov, H. 1. and Dianov, V. 1., "Method of Organizing Pro-

cess of Continuous Input in Real-Tine Syste-s Based on Hiniconputers,"
KIBERNETIKA, up a, 1980, pp 122-125.

Korniyenko, 6. 1.: Dianov, H. 1. and Dianov, V. 1., "Organizing the Process of
Visualization of Results in Systems for Proxinate Processing of Pull-Scale Test
Data," UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIVB SISTEHY 1 HASHINY, No 1, 1981, pp 108-112.

Korniyenko, G. 1., "(h-ganizing Intonation Processing in the Proxinate mlysis
lbde in Tests of Conplex Technical Systems," in "Proyektirovaniye i vnedreniye
novykh sredstv vychislitel'noy tekhniki" [Design and Introduction of New
Computer Hardware], Kiev, 1978, pp 11-17.

Korniyenko, C. 1.; Diadov, H. 1. and Diadov, V. 1., "Principles of Design of
mltichannel Digital Proximate Analyzers," KIBBRNETIRA, No 6, 1980, pp 63-67.

Korniyenko, G. 1.; Dianov, V. 1. and Diadov, H. 1., ”Digital Analysis of Signals
in Systems for Processing Experimental Data," UPRAVLYAYUSHCIIIYE 818M 1
HASHINY, No 6, 1980, pp 100-104.

Korniyenko, G. 1.; Disdov, V. 1. and Disdov, H. 1., "Data Storage Control
Hethod for Computers with Limited Size of Main Storage," UPIAVLYAYUSIICRIYE
3131:"! x nasnlur, No 4, pp 29-31. [no yes: given]

Dianov, V. 1., "Problen of Efficient Use of Hiniconputer Hoary,"
UPRAVLYAYUSIICIIIYE SISTEHY I mum, No S, 1978, pp 23-25.

Korniyenko, G. 1. and Shevarda, 0. IL, "features of Dynamic Progra- Maintenance
in Data Proxinate Processing Systems," K183316111“, No 5, 1980, pp 86-88.

Korniyenko, G. 1. and Sheverda, 0. IL, "Resource Control in Pull-Scale Experi-
Ient Data Processing Systm,"'KIB£RNBTIKA, No 5, 1978, pp 51-65.

Dianov, H. 1. and Ti-chenko, C. 1., "ﬁ-genizing Baal-Tine Experinentel Data
Processing Systems," in "Sistelsy ekspress-obrabotki dannykh v real'no- nasshtabe
vreneni," Kiev, 1979, pp 19-23.

Korniyenko, C. 1., "System for Proxinate Analysis of Experi-ental Data for Pull-
Scale Tests of Caaplex Objects (Empress-1), UPRAVLYAYUSBCHIYE SISTER“ 1
HASHINY, up 6, 1978, pp 125-128.

Korniyenko, G. 1., "'Etalon' Robles-Oriented Digital Computer for Real-Time
Syste-s," UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYE 313mm 1 M81111", Ho 1, 1979, pp 106-106.

Korniyenko. C. 1., "Digital Cuputer an1ex for mitichannel Processing of
Experimental Data in Real Tine ("Pirs" TsVK)," UPMVLYAYUSIICIIIYB 818m 1
“SHINY, No 6, 1919, pp 130-136.

COPYRlGII‘l': IZDATEL'S‘NO "WA MA", "xnmrm", 1981, lb 6

8545

650:

1863/91

12‘

mommiussouu
m 62-52:“1030“o“

PROBLEHoORIENTED mm FOR Processnr. arm SHIP WIN BASED ON
mmmm (TASKS AND WINS)

Kiev PROBLDﬂD-ORIYERIIROVANNYY mums DWI OBSBCIIESUDOVOY woman IA
BAZE HINI-EVH (ZADACIII I AlEORITHY) in Russian 1980 (signed to press 31 Dec 80)
pp 2-8, 00-42

[Ismotatiom table of contents, excerpts, conclusion and bibliography from book
"Robles-Oriented Coupler for Processing General Ship Information Based on a Mini-
computer (Tasks and Algorittns)" by Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Dakayev, Vladislav
Sergeyevich Petukhov. Valeriy Luk'yanovich Ievenlto, Al'bert Hikhaylovich Stafeyev
and Nikoley Nikolayevich ‘l'synbnl, Institute of Cybernetics, “1883 Academy of
Sciences. 300 copies, 44 pages (Preprint 80-70)]

[Excerpts] The tasks and algoriths for solving the problems of increasing the
automation of the basic services of modern automobile and passenger ships are de-
scribed. ‘lhese tasks and suggested solutions are novel and superior to similar
foreign systems in their characteristics. The tasks of accounting and registration
of passengers, compilation of lists and muster rolls, and payroll computations are
described comprehensively.

All tasks are combined into three independent problemooriented complexes based on a
cos-on problea task and uniform technology for processing operational, normative
and reference information.

Contents Page
1. DISH/moo Problem-Oriented Complex lo
1.1. Description of Software Implantation of nlsnlomon Complex 11
2. "accounting" Problem-Oriented'Complax ' 23
2.1. Description of Software Implantation of "Accounting" Duplex ' 31

2.2. Description of Statement of Problems of the Problem-Oriented Ocular
"luster Roll and "ages" 33

2.3. Description of Softvare Implementation of "luster Roll and "ages"
Complex 37
Conclusion 60
Bibliography 61
125

”MUSE”?
0V- VOCO~mal~ ~95 “0.“.

"Selorussia" type passenger and car ferries are now equipped with the modern highly
efficient POP-88 minicaputers.

The main goals in automating the management of the vessels and the individual ser-
vices of a vessel are to reduce costs for routine manual labor, improve navigation
conditions and increase the economic effectiveness of vessel operation. To reach
these goals, a high degree of automation is required to process operational and
reporting general vessel information.

In this connection, studies were made to develop algorithms and progr-s to
implement th- on the minicaaputers.

From here on, vhat ve mean by the problem-oriented complex for processing general
vessel information is the set of hardware and sofu'are modules oriented to the com-
mon problem task and unified technology of data processing.

The co-on problem task is determined on the basis of the goals and tasks of each
of the vessel services, which are characterized by uniformity of tasks and data
processing technology. The main services of passenger and car ferries include
passenger service. navigation service, chief mechanic service, hull and mechanisms
maintenance service and the restaurant and accounting service.

Navigation service has at its disposal facilities for determining vessel location.
dead reckoning and anticolliaion measures. The hull and mechanisms maintenance
service provides for the performance of all freight operations and determination of
the parameters and characteristics dependent on vessel load (calculation of dis-
placenent. longitudinal tri-sing. etc.)

The restaurant and accounting service computes wages for crews on dusstic and
foreign trips and performs accounting and monitoring of the utilisation of material
resources, including food stores.

The vessel passenger service is the key on "Belorussia" type passenger and car
ferries; it is expected to provide a high level of service to passengers and
tourists directly on board the vessel. The passenger service standard is shaped
largely by the interrelations and harmony of the operation of all vessel services,
and by the stability, reliability and harmony of the functioning of the large and
mull systems and mechanisms on a vessel.

Development problems were studied vithin the framework of the "Horpasflot" A80 and
a problemcorisnted complex for processing general vessel information vas implemented
on the base of the minicomputer on board. This complex functions on the
"Belorussie" type vessels.

In future. this complex will become the lower level of a "lbrpasflot" A80 subsyst-
will will allow solving the entire aggregate of tasks on passenger service from
ticket sales to debarkation.

The first, or top, level of the 'Qbrpasflot" A80 is located on shore at the
computer center for the vessel line.

126
POI omcw. USE ONLY
The problemooriented complex for processing of general vessel information includes:

the POP-88 minicomputer, the ASK-33 operator consoles, detached terminals and the
Dill firm's magentic tape storage unit.

1. The DISH/0110100 Robles-Oriented Caplex

‘lhe problem task for processing general vessel information and automating the basic

operative functions of the passenger service on the vessel is the DISPl/O‘I'IBOD
complex.

Development of the DISPl/OTKBOD tasks is aimed at producing indicators for opera-
tional reporting that describe the composition and nuber of passengers, the status
of the vessel on a trip and at increasing the economic effectiveness of operation
of the vessels through fuller utilization of vessel passenger capacity.

The composition of indicators included in the 0191/01!le complex is prescribed
by the USSR Hinistry of the Haritime fleet.

As a result of performing calculations. data sets are generated to expeditiously in-
form the interested services on the availability of open and occupied spaces by
cabin categories and on the movement of passengers to vessel ports of call, and a
file of inediate intonation on vessel operation is compiled in DlSPl/M'IBOD form.

The principle of the systems approach is used in solving the problems of the
DISPl/OTKHOD complex. The tasks making up the complex are solved on the basis of
unified entry, inediate and normative-reference information.

The DISH/011010!) complex includes the following tasks: registration of passengers,

keeping track of movement of passengers to vessel ports of call and compilation of
the DISPl/OTKHOD [dispatcher l/departure].

Passengers are registered when they board the vessel upon presentation of a board-
ing ticket. The following data is used as entry information: passenger type.
deck nmber, cabin umber, berth.

The information obtained from passenger registration is used to solve the problem

of raising the vessel passenger capacity utilization factor, to improve passenger
service on the vessel and in solving subsequent complex problems.

Passenger traffic accounting is performed for each vessel port of call by these
indicators: how many passengers got off, hon many got on and total nuber of
passengers on board the vessel.

In addition to passenger data, the task includes recording data on the traffic and
movement of cars and freight transported by the vessel by ports of call.

Used as entry information is data on the number of passengers and cars and amount
of freight on board the vessel. -

Based on the information on passemers and freight and deck log data, an operational

emery report is generated that describes the status of the vessel by its utiliza-
tion and financial status.

127
POI OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL but; ONLY

The documents end infatuation obtsined es s result of solving the problems in the
DISPl/OTKBOD coupler ere used for pessenger cruise vessels on foreign end
coestel trips.

The tesks in the DISH/0m conplex ere run et eech port of cell upon
caspletion of e trip end upon request.

Reports in DISH/mo fora ere eede to the line office end cover the pest 21.
hours (from 1800 to 1800); on the first dey of the nonth, vessels report inform-
tion on operetions free 0000 to 1800 on the current dey, end on the lest dey of
the nonth, the reports cover the period from 1800 on the pest dey to 21000 on the
current.

lnforlstion on the operetions for the 26.hour period ere recorded end sent to the
line office es of 1800 lbscov tine.

Wen e vessel cells et severel ports in the reporting period, e DISH/011300 report
is sent for eech port seperetely.

The infomtion recorded es s result of perforning celculstions is used to solve
the complex of tesks, "lnfornetion on Operetion of Vessels," besed on vhich the
"Inediete Accounting" subsystem of the "Heritiee fleet" Sector lienegenent Inforse-
tion Syste- functions.

All files used in solving this couple: of teeke heve f ind-length records end
contein both digitel end slphem-eric infomtion.

The following don-ate ere used to solve this couple: of tests: boerding ticket,
freight docments. infor-etion on revenues, deck log end trip ticket.

The following indicetors ere recorded: port code, port nae, errivel dete, errivel
tine, deperture dete, deperture tine, pessengers bosrded by ports of cell, cers
bosrded by ports of cell, ordinel nunber of port of cell (cell for teking on
freight), ordinel nusber of port where unloeded, freight code, revenues fras trons-
porting freight in Soviet rubles, revenues fron heuling freight in foreign currency.
type of pessemer, deck nuber, cebin m-ber, berth number in cebin.

Prue this dete, the following files ere genereted: trip stert file (ma).
pessenger file (if). cer file (HA), freight file (K3), revenue file (MD),
plen-chert file (HPK).

ﬂornetive-reference inforletion from the HZ file, ”Clessifier of See Ports," is
used.

The col-position end cherecteristics of the requisites for the IQ file ere given in
tsble 1.1.

128

“MUSEONLY
Table 1.1. coupoeition and Onractarietice of IQ Pile Iaquieitee

File nape: Claaeifier of Sea Porto Pile code: l¢
Baquiaita codea by which thie file ia for-ad: ".1 d "I“.
*
field nae field cabal. ﬁlth Variation rge
Port code 1’ 9(6) up to 30 porta
per trip
Port n-e 1? A02)

The non trip otart file ie filled in at the etart of each trip and containe
intonation in the fora of etatamnta

PI 1Pluumltmntldatedcpltiaedepl .

‘Ihe file any contain up to 30 etatnante. The atatenenta are arranged in veaeel
port of call order. beginning with the firot port of call and ending with the
laet port of arrival.

lhe conpoeition and characteriatice of the non file requieitee are given in table
1.2.

Table 1.2. Conpoeition and Cluracterietice of m File Paquieitce

 

Pile naae: ‘l‘rip Start File File Code: ml

Requieite codea by which thie file ie for-ed: Field Value
#

Field nae Field anhol m Variation ra_n§e

Port code P 9(6) up to 30 porta

per trip

Port naae 11’ A02)

Arrival date date“: 9(5)

Arrival tine tile“, 9(6)

Departure date date dep 9(6)

Departure tine tiara” 9(6)

Conclueion

l. Paeeenger eea traneportation ie a couple: technical and econuic eyetaa
dietinguiehed by ita integrity. coaplexity of roganization, continua». evolution
and the capability of aechanization and autmation of the proceaeea occurring in it.

129

MMWONIX
[here is a need for developing flexible and dyna-ic structures capable of
supporting the rapid asking of resource—balance decisions that provide for its

operation.

2. The "l‘lorpasflot" ASU subsystu is a tvo-level couples designed for automated
preparation for. making and i-pl-Ientation of organizational and technical
decisions that provide for optimal operation of the fleet and perforlance of the
operational processes for serving passengers.

3. “me proble-wriented caplexes for processing general vessel information,
developed on the base to the POP-88 niniconputer installed on "Belorussia" type
passenger and car vessels, are substantially reducing costs of routine naunal
labor and prosting qualitative inproveaent of passenger service.

‘0. The task conplexea that have been developed can be operated on the base of the
domestically produced "Saratov-2" ainicoaputer at negligible cost.

BLDLIWRAPIIY

1. Petukhov, V. 8.; Bakayev, A. A.; Khayrnasov, H. lb. and Sklyerov, A. V.,
"Hodeli A80 norskogo transporta" [Ibdels of Sea ‘k-ansportation Hanaganent
intonation Systelss], lbscov, Transport. 1976. 223 pages.

2. Brusentsov, ll. 9., "Hinikoup'yutery" [Hiniconputers]. Moscow, llauka, 1979,
269 pages.

3. Kutsenko, A. V.; Polos'yants, l. A. and Stupin, Yu. V., "Mini-m v
ehsperilental'noy fizike" [Hinico-puters in Bxperinental Physics]. Hoscov,
Atonizdate, 1975, 283 pages.

Ii. Bakayev, L. A.; Petukhov, V. 8.; Ievenko, V. I... and Bevin, V. A.. "Zadachi i
algoritny avtonstizirovannoy podsistany registratsii i ucheta passazhirov na
baze bortovoy Iini-EVH" [Tasks and Algorithm for an Iantouatad Passenger
Registration and Accounting Subsystem Based on an (hi-Board Hinicaputer].
Kiev. Institute of Cybernetics, less: Acade of Sciences, 1979, pp 23-60
(Preprint 79-32).

COPYRIGRT: Institut kibernetiki, 1980.

8565
050: l863l92

”WISCONLY
UDC 681.32:5$1.46:$3.08

mmormmmnmmlmmsns

Riga AVTGMI‘IIA I WCBISLITEL'IAYA m in Russian lo 1, Jan-Pei: 82
(asnuscript received 30 liar 81) pp 12-21

[Article by 0. s. Zudin. s. I. Doaeratstiy and LLindfors: "Organising the
Interaction of Counting Processes in Variable-Structure System for into-ting
Scientific Research")

[Text] The aost iaportant indicators of the efficiency of nultipurpoee scientific
research vessels for studying the world ocean are the volt-e and quantity of data
collected and processed during a cruise and enpendituree for reorganizing the
progran of the cruise and essential downtiae between cruises. Solving the prob-
lm of data collection and processing is inconceivable today without autoaetion
of research, without installing asaeure-nt and coQuter hardware coﬁined into

a unified eyetea for antoaetion of scientific research (SARI) on the ship. Auto-
aetion of research on mltipurpoee scientific research vessels is aede aore coa-
plex by the unique character of particular eaperiaente. the necessity of collect-
ing data froa large areas over long periods of tins and in a broad range of
studies. the existence of a large nuﬁer of aeeeured pare-tare and aeaeureaent
techniques. the diversity of algorithm for recording and processing data using
deck. towed. and sending equipaent. the necessity of rapidly restructuring the
eutontion systea to confora to the requirements of nu maxi-ants. heightened
requireaents for eyeten reliability. and the like. This task is aede even anre
cleea by the fact that the research contingent is not constant froa one cruise
to another. while the data recorded both during the cruise and after its coole-
tion met he accessible and understandable to a broad range of specialists in
different fields of science who did not participate in preparation for and actual
conduct of the particular eaperiaent.

Iieeting these eoaetiaea conflicting requireaents aehe it necessary to design a
SAIII with flexible and quickly reorganieahle structure, easy to meter. eine
to use, with graphic representation of interudiete and final results.

Hort [1] reviewed the basic principles of constructing sum. for anltipurpoee
research ships using the eaaqle of the integrated systea for autoastion of
scientific research of the research vessel Akadeaik brislev leldyeh, which was
built for the USSR Acadeay of Sciences at the lollaing AD shipyard in Finland.

‘lfhie systea consolidates aeaenreaent and counter instruaentsendhardeere. tie-
vices for sounding the body of water. and devices to aeaeure different parentere
of the environmnt. with subsystem for data recording and pi'oceseing, into a

131

”MIRMY
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY

single integrated coqlex. The final product of recording is files in standard
forut with data in the fore of values of the neasured and counted pareneters.
The infatuation contained in these files nay be subjected to further directed
processing in the ship's processing subsysten and at on~shore counter centers.
The values of the recorded paraneters are fed to the syste- both directly fro-
various sensors. nessnring instruents. and subject anhsystens and nannally. using
a keyboard. by operators of laboratory counters based on the results of visual

observations of the state of the environ-cut or laboratory analyses of “Q1”
taken.

Let us dwell in greater detail on the netbods and procedures which are the basis
for fornulating the software of the sun and sake it possible to restructure the
systen for new experinents in a fairly flexible way with nininnn expenditures.
The basis for this is including the appropriate resources in the recording sub.
systen: systen tables. scans of generating. nintaining. and updating then. and
certain procedures for organising interaction of counting processes taking place
at different levels of the syste- hierarchy. In this case. according to [l], we
will bear in nind that the state of the coqnting processes in the syste- at any
nonent in tine is deternined by the progrsn. the current steps of this progran,
and the state of progra- variables and inpnteoutput units.

One of the nost inortant resources of the systen is the Table of Pars-eter
Descriptions (101’), which cakes it possible to break the full set of para-stars
recorded in the SARI down into subsets assigned to definite laboratories or sub-
ject subsystem and to describe each elenent of then. The TOP is generated or
updated during sdjustnent of the systen for a certain group of experinents. The
recording snbsyatea insures recording of the values of those. and only those,
paraneters whose descriptions are contained in the TOP at the current nonant.

The elenentary TOP entry. describing one parsneter. contains mdatory and op-
tional fields. The nsndatory field includes, as s eini-nn. the neu of the
paraneter and units of neasure of its values, the type of sensor or neasuring
instrnnent. the for-mt and type of values obtained. and a description of its sub-
set affiliation and reference to use in other resources. The subset affiliation
is described by a coqosite code whose first two characters are a laconic abbre-
viation of the subset nane; the next four digits indicate the ordinal under of
the paraneters in the subset, if other nethods of ordering elensnts are not used.
The optional fields appear in TOP's when they are oriented to standard for-ts
for records of finite files with data. Table 1 below shows the forut of the
elementary TOP entry and an exanple of recording one of the para-stern recorded
by the antonatic weather station of a synoptic weather laboratory coqiling a
finite file in a forest close to that of work [2].

As a rule the SARI is restructured for new eaperinents by connecting equip-ent to
it to nessnre new paraneters. which also requires a certain restructuring of pro-
grass at all levels of the hierarchy. To nininise expenditures for reconfigura-
tion the software of the Integrated Systen of the research ship Ahadenih htislav
Keldysh is built on the nodular principle. The functions of prinary processing,
transnission. sorting. and storage of data are distributed anong the coqnting
processes. which are defined by particular prograa nodules so that the required
changes touch the sinis- under of these nodules.

132

MWWMY
Figure 1 shows the structure of interaction of coquting processes during gen-
eration (updating) of the NP, trsnsnitting inforution on s persaeter fron

the recording suhsysten to the inhorstory cowuter at the request of en oper-
etor, end for-listing nev files. The conputing process defined hy the PABLO
progrss receives entries on new or chsngeeble psrsneters fron the terninsl in the
(crust show in Table 1 and structures the my in the ooqauter nenory of the re-
cording suosysten. The volune of the 101’ is defined by the progrsn of the cruise
and does not exceed 300-500 entries in the systen under description. the con-
puting process defined by the PM progrsn. when requested by the laborstory
counter, finds the necessary description by its emits code and sends the
lsborstory oowuter s nesssge which conteins infornstion on the queried peren-
BtCt.

Tshle 1.
Displscenent
Prinry Length, fron Start,
No. Content of Yield Yield bytes bytes
1 Code of psrsneter by clusifier llo ‘ 0
2 Nsne of psrenster Yes 15 4
3 Code of unit of nessure No 3 19
I. Ilene of unit of nessure Yes 11 22
5 Scsle 1 No 8 3S
6 Scsle 2 lo 8 ‘1
7 Attribute 1 Yes 7 £9
8 Definition of sttribute 1 Yes 11 $6
9 Attribute 2 ' No 7 67
[‘l'eble continued, next pegs]
133

MONIQUE]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 continued]
Displacaent
Primary Length. tron Start,
Continent of Yield Yield Bgee sues
Definition of attribute 2 No 11 75
Type of sensor Yes 10 85
Code of neasureaent technique by
classifier No 2 9S
1 97
lluaber of characters after cos-a No 1 97
Total length of value in characters Yes 2 98
For-at identifier Yes 1 100
'rss index Yes 6 101
Cowoaite code of para-eter in SARI Yes 6 105
Reserve No 3 111
word description of nessursnsnt
technique No 29 116

angle of recording the paraneter of air teweraturs neasured with
a incision down to tenths of a degree using a senor of an auto-
natic weather station installed at a height of 20.5 asters fro- the

deck on the starboard side:

000W CAT! 0003: 5000

000001 Pm NAME: AI]! m 83

000002 MIT 0008: 500

000003 031‘! m: 036 C

W SCALE 1: 1.000000

000005 SCALE 2: 0.000000

000006 1113130111 1: 20.5

000007 DBPIIH'IOR 1: HEIGHT, I

000008 am 2: ' -

000009 DEFINITION 2: -

000010 SENSOR: M's-11

000011 moon 0003: 80

000012 LENGTH 01' 080.: 1

000013 TOTAL LENGTH: 06

000016 VAL!!! me: F

000015 STATE mu: 130).: 0059

000016 mosm 0003: 1180021

W017 RESERVED:

000018 1431301) DESCRJ PLAID“!!! RESIST. OP
. mm 81'

136

summon“
The program which provide for transmission of data amg suhayste- of dif-
ferent levels are singled out in a separate group. The forests of the fields
of data of transnitted sessages have heen standardized so that the nodules of
the commications programs can rennin constant when the subsystea is adjusted
for different experisents. The protocols selected for the co-unications lines
between laboratory coquters and the recording subsystess are subsets of well-
known standards 150-1755 and 8.25. while the eo-lnications lines for subject
subsysteas of the autosatic weather station type use signified procedures that
resed>le the use [3].

because the protocols do not affect the essential features of the sessages thee-
selves, we will describe here sose principles of forwulating them that sake it
such simler both as a problem of reconfiguration of software when the cysts-
is adjusted for new experiments and a problen of retrieving recorded data.
Uhereas the water sounding eaperinent cited in [l] changed the set of sensors
and adjusted the work of the submarine and deck units, with traditional pro.
cedures that depersonalize data and give the right to identify it to the co.-
puting process defined by the recording progras it is necessary to sake changes
in practically all program related to the experimt. To avoid this. the eye.
tea being described realizes the principle of data self-identification [b],
where all data being received are given tags that indicate their type. prop-
erties, tine and place of recording, and so on.

Tagging data in the SANI's of mltipurpose scientific research vessels should
be done beginning from the lowest levels of the hierarchy. At each level. as
the result of the operation of the corresponding cosputing process. ‘the data
that are transsitted to the higher level are formulated. Tags are added to
these data. Their principal purpose is to organize the interaction of con--
puting processes taking place at the next hierarchical level of the system.

He will identify two levels of tags conforsing to their purposes. First-level
tags (developer tags) are designated for controlling interaction of coquting
processes defined by known progras nodules in the process of recording data.
Second-level tags (user tags) are designated to give greater inforsational
value to data during subsequent processing and for control of the processes of
sorting and retrieving needed elenents of a set of recorded data. he progress
of these processes are determined by the user and say be mknown in the stage
of systea develop-eat.

The nusber and comsition of developer tags tranasitted with the data fros cer-
tain cowering processes to others at different levels of the hierarchy depends
on systes structure. For instruments and sensors only the sinlest developer
tags are needed. such as the tags for type and quality of data. for crawls the
code of the RR regime and the overflow sign P in the teenage PRRZDDDDDK for
laboratory ph-sillivolt meters [5]. Other tags of this type include the code

of the quantity being neasured or the nuﬁer of the sensor in a set where there
is a large meter of similar sensors. He consider inforaation on plwsical over-
loading of an instrunent and on a quantity going outside the boundaries of

the seasurenent range to be quality tags that descrihe the degree of suitability
of the data for processing; in the case of sore cowl“ aicroprocessing instru-
nents such tags say be data on errors that are recognized. when a new instnnent
is connected to the laboratory level in a laboratory cowputer the toquting
process that receives incosing data sent be deternined. This counting process

135

MWIBEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

say be expanded into a series of sinner processes, each of which corresponds

to one progren nodule and perfor- one particular operation. for eane, for
the laboratory pll-eillivolt neter data nay 5e duped in a dig file based on the
value of quality tag 8 by cowering process No 1 that sales a qmlity check,
while on the basis of the value of an IN type tag the data are transferred to
coQuting process In 2. which receives the data neasured in volts (or nillivolts).
when the processes are expanded by the values of user tags the new muting
process say be defined so that it includes prinrily progran nodules that already
exist. with a snall nuﬂer of new (or Iaodified) nodules. This greatly reduces
the tine required for reconfiguration of software at the level of the laboratory
cowuter. Us should note that at this level in the stage of preli-inary data
processing user tags with values of recording tins are added to then. In our

opinion. this is essential for the SAM's of multipurpose scientific research
vessels.

In order to speed up the reconfiguration of software in the Isssages being trans-
aitted to the recording subsystea, there nust be the following developer tags

at a sininun: the sender tag, which indicates precisely which one of the sili-
lar cosputing processes originated the nessage that has arrived: the type tag.
which describes the affiliation of the process to a certain group of cowuting
processes of the recording subsystem; and. the tag for the nesage function

in the subsystes. In addition. for data fros prolonged neasuresents there sust
be a tag to indicate the nane of the file for recording, while for data froa
one-tine neasurenents a key paraneter tag is needed to show the subset of
recorded paranoters with which the particular nessage should be associated.
Figure 2 shows the structure of a field of data sessages trans-itted to the re-
cording subsysten of the Integrated Systes of the scientific research ship
Akadenik Hatislav Keldysh, while Table 2 indicates the values of the developer
tags for all types of systen nessages. The data in the nessages are encoded
with characters of the standard seven-bit code 180-666 (Soviet analog [01-7 8081'
13502-70. when the cowosition of the available subsystem is changed this

set of developer tags sakes it possible to linit changes in the recording sub-
systes to siny editing the TOP, and when a new subsysten is connected to the
sun the only thing necessary is to develop one sore prograa for receiving
nessages, without significant changes in existing software.

The nost frequently used user tags are parsneters such as the date, tins, and
place (latitude and longitude) of the experinent, the identifier of the researcher,
and para-stars that describe the environment: direction and velocity of wind.

air teeperature and humidity, sea state, direct and reflected solar radiation. and
the like. Second-level tagging requires inclusion of another resource in the
structure of the recording subsystem internal senory. a supervisor Table of the
State of the Ship, systes. and environ-est (TSS). This resource is structured and
eodified concurrently with the TOP and contains the current values of para-eters

that can potentially be used as user tags. Figure 3 below shows the structure of
the 'rss. The names of the monsters whose values for- the m are defined in the

TOP by non-emty values of the T88 index (see Table 1 above). All elements of the
table are put in order according to the value of the index. Because the feast
of para-eter values is not known in advance and say change nany tines in the TOP
during the life of the systes. a two-level structure is used for the TS that
sakes it possible to Iodify its forest and disensions on an operational basis.

1.36

summon»!
Value of
mu ‘1'

l

NOM‘uNO-IO IUN

p

NF.

tion

Control neeeege
Sequential reading of values of 1'88
paranotere
leading value of 1'88 parenter-
Entering the value of 1‘88 pereneter
Setting up data files

- Pile set-up neeeagee -
Position during experiment
Poeition at etart of expert-cut
Poeition at end of experiment
Environ-eat et start of experinent
Environ-eat during expert-at
hvironent at end of experi-ent
Requeat for description of masters
Final reqmt for description of
para-etere
Data fro- prolonged neaeurenente -
perenetere of a cycle
Date tron prolonged neeeurenente -
pare-etere of entry
md of recording data tron prolonged
neaeurenente '
Date iron mine neaeurenente
End of recording of data iron one-tine
neuurenente

[table 2 continued, next page]
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[table 2 continued]

Character
Before
Data Value of Value of
No. Field 17? ‘l'e m Ia tion
19 ST! 6 1 Starting process in recording subsyste-
2 Stopping process in recording subsyste-
20 81'! 7 - Transition of laboratory coquter to
regiae of recording subsyste- tersinal
21 st! 8 o Pol-nation of finite files uitbout entry
in 87.? [possibly locking filter bay]
22 l tot-nation of finite files with entry in
SC? [expansion unknown]
23 st: 3 1 $2? entry for trans
26 2 82! entry for DMCX
25 G 0 Starting M process
26 1 8mm M process
27 11? I'll]! Response neseage on receipt
28 S m M Response neasags on error

 

rigure 3. Structure of the 1'85.

11 are para-stars included in the 1'85.
l¢i¢h<k(listhenu§erofparan-
eters in the TOP)

Key: (1) Identifier of 1’58;
(2) Length [of Ill. 112...];
(3) Indicator of (“dress of ll...];
(0 Value [of 111...].

 

 

The first part of the rss contains lH-l mrds share I is the nder of para-eters
of the Table (for the systes being described I! - 200) and begins at the heading
mam, which occwies one word and ashes it possible to localize its position

in neaory. The l! words that follow contain fields with an indication of length

in nachine words and the addresses of the first word for the value of each 185
psrsneter. The second part has variable length and contains as my sords as

are occupied by all the values of the parameters included in the hble at the per-
ticulsr eoeent of tine taken together. The values of the para-stern in the second
part of the rss are periodically updated. Host of then are assured by abject

138
”WIRONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coulenes during the entire cruise independently of other eaperinents, while the

rest are obtained as the result or laboratory cperinenta and observations. UP-

dating tines are asaiped when the corresponding counting processes are initial-
ised and any be chosen iron the set of pereissihle values for the purpose of in-

creasing systen flexibility.

Figure lo below shows the structure of interaction of counting processes during
generation and updating of the T38. and during recording of data fro- prolonged
neasurenents of para-stars oi the water using the hydrologic laboratory equip-ant
in the eaperinent given in work [1]. Any change in the set of sensors in the
underwater unit necessitates an updating of the TOP. Por the sake of brevity in
describing the interaction of counting processes we sill designate each process
with the nest of its defining progran. After each updating the T0! not be ans-
lysed by the counting process defined by the STD!!! prograa. which constructs the
internal neaory. the supervisory TSS in conforaity with the structure shown in
Figure 3 above. Paranaters are taken fro. the TOP according to the value of the
T88 index. The values of the T88 para-stern are updated using the “V16, VISTA.
ECUOS processes which receive nessages fro- the navigating systen (updated at
periods of 10 seconds). the autonatic weather station (periodicity of 1-10
einutes). the echosounder subsysten of the geophysical laboratory (periodicity of
less than one second), and also fro- the counting processes activated by the
progress of the latoratory counters and seen-mu and sum progress in the
recording snbsysten. for exaule in the case of feeding visual observation data
iron the keyboard of the synoptic neteorology laboratory counter. The counting
processes of the laboratory counters should prepare nesesges that contain the
couosite codes of paranetera and their values accouanied by the values of the
developer £888 TYP-l and FUN-3. when it is necessary to obtain the values of user
tags iron the 155 by the processes of the laboratory counters. the latter are
sent to the nessage recording subsysten with developer tag values of TD-l and
FUN-l, 2 (see Table 2 above). Progran sensphore engineering is used to protect
the T85 against sinultaueous access by different counting processes; in this
case the next counting process receives access to the resource only after the
preceding one has couleted its use and thrown the seniphore [6].

Hhen recording data fro- prolonged neasurenents a file ”at first be set up for
these data in the recording subsysten. This is done by a statensnt fro- the re-
cording subsysten terminal with the help of the Mill process (see Figure 1 above).
Then the counting process of the laboratory counter is activated and. together
vith the man process, shapes the structure of the file and enters its titles.
sending a nessage with the values of the tags TY? - 2. 3. The necessary user tags
nay also be put in the file as para-stern oi the cycle and as recording paran-
eters. This is deter-med by the content of the message on setting up the file
(TY? - 2) which the m process uses to structure the file. The title in-
cludes infornation on the location of the ship and state of the environnent.

Data for a heading are taken fro. the T88 by the m process. The counting
processes defined by the mm: prograas trans-it asasages on col-unications
lines folloving protocol ISO-17‘s. after the file is structured the counting
prograns of the laboratory counters go into operation. In the case of soud-
ing the water with hydrologic laboratory equip-ent GILLAB) they request values of
the assured paranoters fro. the deck sounding unit, perforl preliminary process-
ing and countation of calculated para-stern. fora aessages with data and the
values of the developer tags TIP - 6 and FUN - l. 2. and copy then using the

139
ms omen. WON!)
IVOIOFFIOALUSEONLY

processes shown in Pigurs I. below. the m recording subsysten. ‘lhelAllDY end
ram processes first store the velues of the pen-eters in the heifer file.

then shspe the finite files in the forest chosen. Dots in the Buffer files is
stored in s for. close to thst in shich it is recorded in the finite file. In
this we the necessary values of user tsgs sre sdded iron the rss. They are re-
quested by the run end sun program sccordng to the tsg vslues ‘11P - 1 end
run . 1, 2.

Pigure 6. Structure of Intersction
of Counting Processes During Gen-
erstion of ‘I’SS snd lecording the
nets of Prolonged Mares-us of
Environsntsl Chsrscteristics.

M: (l) whoa“;

(2) Csthode Isy Tube;

(3) Voter;

(h) Lshoretory Cmting
Processes;

(5) Subject Conpleses;

(6) Probe Sub-erged in Voter
(Subnsrine and Deck Units);

(7) Other Lshorstory Conputers;

(8) Coquting Processes of Record-
ing Subsystn;

(9) Buffer File;

(10) Finite Pile;

(11) List of Conleted Piles;

(12) Reedy Pile.

  
 

 

Dots in the for. of nesssges ssy be received by the recording subsystes sisal-
tsneously iron severe]. conputing processes of different lshorstoriee. Accord-
ingly, severe]. finite files csn be constructed end opened for service by the
runs process simitsneously. Dsts fro- sli sources ere recorded first in the
proper file. As necesssry the ishorstory coquting processes output nssssges sco

cording to which dots on the locstion of the ship end state of the environ-sat
are recorded in the siddle snd st the end of the aperi-ent. ﬂan recording of

dsts in s file (t-porsry or iinsl) stops. s nesssge cones fro- the lihrsry with
the tsg vslues m - 6. m - 3, end vhsn it is necesssry to cowiete recording

150
”WIRONLY
FOIOFI‘IGALUSEONLY

and set up a finite file, the tag values are TIP - 8, WI! - 1. These nessages
are transnitted to the MS process. which shapes the finite file in the for-t
selected. putting in it entries fro. the huffer according to the tag value m.
which indicates belonging to a certain file. When a snail mher of sources

are working at one tine and the density of data flows is not great, the software
canbe generated in suchaway that nessagesfron thelIAlDTprocess cango to the
TRANS process. bypassing the stage of storage in the buffer file. In this case,

the values of the no tags are used to record data in the required open finite
file.

Uhen receiving a nessage with the tags 11? - 8, the MS closes the file idenc-
tifiable by an accepted value of the tag no and i-edistely sets up and stmcturee
a nev file. free and ready to receive data. under the sane identifier. This per.
nits nininising the fairly protracted and labor-intensive operations of setting

up and structuring files. The user perforns these operations just once for each
type of file structure.

The interaction of coQuting processes on different levels of the hierarchy is
carried on according to this description. as is interaction when recording data
fron one-tine neaaurenents. but in this case user tags are used as key paran-
eters and play a note inportant role in shaping the finite file. lequests in
the fore of cosposite codes of paraneters to add to the values of the user tags
selected free the T55 are. by the choice of the laboratory operator (user) in-
cluded in nessages received by the processes non-1. The data together with
the values of these tags are first stored in a structure close to the data base
[7). Then, based on requests structured according to different user criteria.
they nay be selected by values of key paraneters and grouped in finite files
sinilar to files with data froa prolonged neasure-ents.

After cospletion of a finite file it any be stored on a nagnetic dish for sole
tine so that the conputing processes of the processing subsystea can request
the data stored in it. when the need for this is over. the nucr process is ac-
tivated and copies the finite file onto ngnetic tape. adding essential inferna-
tion on the cruise. organisation, leader of the expedition and experiment. and
so on to the title. The ready file is stored on nagnetic tape and nay be used
in the processing systen at a later tine or transnitted to shore-based coquter
centers for processing. The LIST! process nakes it possible to output a finite
file to a display screen or print it for visual nonitoring and naintaining the
archives.

when forning the finite file the anus process nabs an entry about it in the
third resource of the systen. the list of coqleted files in the for-t shown in

Table 3 below. when it is necessary to get accees to data recorded in different
finite or ready files. the user scans the contents of the entries in the list

of comleted files on a screen or initiates a counting process that selects the
necessary files according to the contents of the entries. After selecting the
necessary files their contents can he nanipulated Both in the processing anh-
systen and at shore-based coquter centers with the help of cowuting proceeees

defined by applied progress. eating hroad use of the values of user tags re-
corded in the files together with the data.

161

Newman“
M ODOR.” 03.. URL!

 

“table 3.
Mine--
nent tron
Length. Start.
lo. content of Field ”see was
1 Ilene of Station 6 0
2 lane of laperinent 6 6
3 I. of Hedi:- 12 12
6 Inc and Version of File 12 2‘
3 fine of Creation 13 36
6 Tine of Cowletion 1.2 ‘8
7 Latitude 7 60
8 Longitude 8 67
9 Din-her of Para-etere 2 75
10 conceit: Code 111 6 77
ll Cowosite Code 112 6 83
12 0..
M Oowosite Code at 6 77460-1)
llk is pereneter k recorded in the file.
Conclusions

1. The structure of the Sill software of nultipurpose scientific research ships
oust he flexible. easily restructured. accessihle for quick assinilation. siwle
to use. and he able to repth results in graphic fore.

2. The flexibility of software structure and possibility of quickly adjusting
the SA!!! to a new group of «peril-nu can he accoqlished by introducing three
syste- tshles in the recording suheyeten (the table of per-eter descriptions.
the table of the state of the systu. ship. and .vironent. and the list of
comleted files), as veil as neans to generate. update. and usintain then.

3. It is advisable to tag data in the sell of mltipurpose research ships he.
ginning iron the lovest levels of the hierarchy. M levels of tags can he
identified in such systeus. Firstolevel tags are developer tags. designed to
control the interaction of data recording processes; second—level tags are user
tags. designed to give the data greater international value in subsequent
processing and to control the processes of sorting and retrieving elenents of

a set of recorded data.

b. The order of developer tags transaitted with the data fron certain processes
to others at different levels of the hierarchy depends on the structure of the
systen. Ilith an eye to stepping w the reconfiguration of software it is essen-
tial to standardize the foruta of the data fielde of all neeeagee. Along the
developer tags trensuitted to the recording suhay‘stan there should he tags for

the sender. type and function of the neasage. recording file. and hey paran-
etere. The current veluea of user tags should he kept in the state table.

162

“WISE“?
FOR m1. lBE ONLY

m

1. o. s. Zudin. s. a. Donratatiy. I. r. ram, c. l. mm, A. A. W,
L. s. Sitnikov. 0. Laakaoncn. and l. Aarinan. "Integrated syn-n of Auto—
aatic Scientific march on llnltipurpoac Icaurci Vanda.” A". 1981,
No. 6. pp 72-80.

2. "The International Data Hanan-ant Plan for the CARP Atlantic Tropical Bx-
pcrincnt. Part 1. Ganeral Description of the CAT! Data Hanan-ant Selina
and Its Specification." Geneva, 197‘. April. (GATE chort lo 13.“

3. A. Butrintnlw, and D211. Sakaton. ”Protocols in Co-nicationo networks for
Transmitting Digital Intonation." AV‘I', 1978, lo 6. pp 56-65.

A. G. I. Harchuk. and V. 1c. Kotov. ”Problem of Coqutcr Icclnolog and Pure
Research.” A". 1979. No 2. pp 3-16.

5. s. Ii. Donaratckiy. 0. 5. India. and O. Vaynio. ”‘11: Organization of Inter-
action of Inatruncntn and Ooqntcn in Variable-Structure Systems 10 Auto-
natc Scientific Research." AW, 1981. no 3, pp 81-91.

6. B. U. Dijkstra. "Cooperating Sequential Procuua in Drona-in; Languages."
"Acadanic Press". 1968 pp 0-112.

7. J. Martin. "Coqutcr Data-Baud Organization." 2nd Ed. "Prcntiaa—lall Inc.".
Englcvood Press, N. J.. 1977, pp ‘51-‘87.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'ctvo ”Zinatnc". "Avtonatika i vychialitcl'naya tckhnika",
1982

ll. 1 76
CSO: 1863/120

1103

summon“
M ovum wee. ”ELI

IIDC 681.32‘

PODS OP mum scum OMZATIOI

Rise AW 1 WCIISLI‘I'EL'IIAYA 1mm in Bastien No l, Jen-Feb 82
(eenuecript received 8 Jul 81) pp 3-11

[Article by I. A. Yeknheytie: "The Architecture of Iegionel end Locel Canter
letworke']

[Text] Coquter networhe ere e highly efficient heee for the oonteqorery dete
proceeeing induetry. A eingle network coneieting of lerge. eediu, ad enll
cogntere cen provide [1] ecceee to the noet diveree infer-don end muting
reeourcee; it cen proceee work dete. retrieve neceeeery dete end “can".

end control ecientific reeeerch. deein develop-mt. end indoetriel equipncnt.
Aeeocieting (mining) counter net-verb eehee it poeeihle to trenefer end
proceee inforeetion releted to eny object of the neuonel econowy.

Coepwter netwrhe differ by eiee. productivity. nethode of dete proceeeieg, end
typee of equipeent in we. At the eeee tiee they ell heve cherecterletice thet
define then ee the key contqorery neene for dyne-ic dietrihnted proceeeing of
lerge dete erreye. Therefore. the preeent erticle oouidere veriooe clueee of
coqoter networhe constructed on the eene erchitecturel principle.

The fundenentel elenent of the eodel of e counter network in the logicel eyeten.
e group of fuctione reelieed in the counter cowlex couieting of one or
eeverel coqmtere (eee Figure 1 below). The eyet- together with their linee
of interection. which ere celled phyeicel coenectione. torn the logicel etruc-
tore of the counter network. loch of the eyete- ie open it it neete the
generel require-onto [2] for the erchitecture or interection of open eyete-
eetehliehed hy the lnternetionel Stenderde Orgenieetion (150).

All eyete. ere divided into eeven levele. Inch level perform e definite teeh
in the cowuter network end providee eervice to the level loceted ehove it.

The collection of rulee for interection emng objects of the ee- level of dif-
ferent eyetene is celled the protocol.

He will divide ell eyete- into two gronpe. The eyete. thet route end trene-
eit inter-etioe we will cell oo-Inicetione eyeteu. The eyete- thet either
provide or nee the reeourcee of the coqmter network will he euhecriher eyeten.
The etrncturee of e enhecriher eyetee end co-Inicetione eyete. ere ehown in
Figure 2 below. Levele 6-7 of co-nicetinne eyete- do not perticipete in

l“

Iceman“
memossonu

Figure 1. Logical. Structure of e
Coquter Network.

Key: (1) Nations Syst-s
(2) Subscriber System
(3) (Io-nicotine. letuork.

 

 

prinry control relsted to routing dots srrsys. Therefore they srs onittsd in
Figure 2.

(eh-l-
’

3 .
in. tigure 2. Structures of Systsu.
l:-
;“ Key: (s) Subscriber System
(h) Co-nicstions Systng
(c) 91th Internsl Intersction;

I
(c)..— .— (d) Hith uterus). Interaction;
(e) Levels:
(1) Physicsl;
(2) Chsnnel;
(3) network;
(6) Trsmon;
(3) Session;
(6) lepreeentstive;
(7) Applied.

 

M types of structures sre used for co-micstions syste- depending on the
neth of switching. In the first type there is s co-on third level thst in-
sures execution of s11 network functions for the physicnl connections. In the
second structure v identical nets of third-level functions ere forud snd con-
nected with one soother by nuns of uterus}. netuork links. he first structure
ie siwler, but so viii be shove helov. the second snows greater reiishility

of functioning in the co-nicstions system.

165
roe m1. [NONI]
POI omen. USE ONLY

As stated above. each of the eye“. is realized with one or several conuters.
Horeover. several system can be realized in one cosputer. Bach connection

that links tvo systess is realised by a data transsission channel. As a re-
sult, the logical structure of the cowuter network is converted into the physio
cal structure of the network.

Subscriber coalesce pet-fora the functions of subscriber system and there-
fore offer the met diverse intonation and cowuter resources to a broad range
of users. Each cowlex consists of s. where e > 1. counters and the

network adapter. There are three possible variations for distribution of the
fractions of the subscriber system. They are shown in the table belov.

Table. Distribution of Motions letveen Conputerg and let-

sort Adapter
Varia- Pmctions Functions
tion realised ter Perforsed uter
1 Physical. channel, network. and Session. representative. and ap-
transport (levels 14) plied (levels 5-7)
It Physical and channel (levels 1-2) Berserk. transport. section. rep-
resentative. and applied (levels
3-7)
III Physical and part of channel Part of channel. network, trans-
(levels 1, 2a) port. session. representative.

and applied (levels 2b. 3-7)

 

The first variation is preferable because the network adapter in it realises
all functions that depend on the standards of the interface with the counties-
tions network. In this case the coqputer is spared all jobs related to trans-
sitting data arrays and only perforss its prinsry functions. defined by levels
5—7 of the protocols. The newnrk adapter here is built on the basis of a
sssll sinisschine or a grow of sicroprocessors.

because sost of the eowuters that have been produced still do not have network
adapters. in practice variations II and III are soet widely used for the physi-
cal structures of subscriber coqleaes. Variation n is preferable betveen
then. Variation III is used in those cases where the counter in its assort-
not of external mite does not have the adapters necessary for the first two
variations. In this case, the adapter perforss only those functions vhich it
is very difficult or iqossible to realise by progrss scans in the coQuter
(insuring physical connection. perforsance of bit-staffing operations, assign-
ing flags that sark the start and and of a franc. and so on).

The realization of a subscriber system in two units (counter and adapter) re-
quires introduction of a channel (line) (abbreviated ”Insh") desiyled to link

then. l'or this reason, in addition to the protocols vhich define (see Figure 2
above) the logical structure of the subscriber systes. there appear additional

logical levels (1 tab and 2 kah) which are necessary to interlink and control
the channel (line) that links the coqmter and the adapter.

lib
ma m1. MONEY
FOR OFFICIAL [.88 ONLY

Figure 3 below shows an angle of this kind of structure of a subscriber con-
plea (variation 11 fron the table). llere the upper levels of the logical

Figure 3. Structure of Subscriber

Key: (n) Coquter;
(h) Channel (Line) of Con-
puter;
(c) Network Adapter;
(6) Studard Interface of
Co-nicatiou networks;
(5) Levels:
(1m) Physical
(Connection with
Coquter Chanel]
Line):
(2ksh) Channel (Control
of Coquter
Chanel/Line;
(3) Network:
(s) Transport;
(5) Session:
(6) Representative;
(7) Applied.

 

 

structure of the network (3-7) are realised in the coquter, while the lower
ooss (1-2) are realized in the network adapter. No additional logical levels
are introduced in the coqmter and adapter for linking the adapter to the con-
puter through a channel or line. These levels (lksh end Zkeh) provide inter-
linkage with the counter channel (line) and control of this channel.

The two types of co-unications systen (see Figure 2 above) are realised, re—
spectively, in two types of co-Inicatione coqlena (see Figure lo below),
which are often celled co-nications centers. As Figure 6 shows. each center
consists of a nonochannel end the central conutere and network adapters con-
nected to it.

lie will use the ter- aonochennel for the physical audit- and the herdware and.
possibly, software used collectively by a significant umber of subscriber-
adapters. One eonochannel (see Figure 6) can interconnect hundreds of adapters
in central conputers if the latter are used in the structure. of the co-unica-
tions coqlen. The physical udit- of the uonochannel nay he radio, a liﬂlt
guide, coaxial cable. group of parallel wires, or a cable with intertwined
pairs of strands. The size of the nonochannel ranges fro. dozens and thousands
of esters, and sonatines even thousands of kiloneters. The nnochennel is

used collectively by dozens and hundreds of subscriber cowlenas. It is often
also called the line.

167
POI omculuseouut
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure lo. Types of Structures of the Co-micadnna Coqlex.

 
   

(.1 '

--.—.__..-_-

i

 

lay: (a) Central (Fri-ary) Cowuter; (f) Data Tranaeieeion Channels;
(h) Central (Standby) Counter; (g) Network Adapter 2;
(c) letworl: Adapter 1: (h) Interface In;
(d) honochannel; (i) Interface KS.
(e) network Adapter d;

 

 

Uhen transferring iron the co-nicatione eyeten to the Nations comler
it ehuuld he kept in nind that the co-unications cowler is built on a nicro-
proceaeor haeis to increase the speed of data trennission. Therefore. to
link the different processes it is necessary to introduce additional logical
levela (Ink and Ink) which insure interaction with the nonochannel.

The phyaical structure of the co-unicatione cooler which realiree a co-uni-
cations eyaten with internal interaction (see Figure 2 above) is ehovn in
Figure 4.. Here the netuorh (third) level is realized by a central lini-
coquter or eicrocolputer. The lower levels (first and second) are done by
individual adaptere. Hultiplenere are added to the adapter. for channels with
low epeede. Then one adapter can control 6-8 channels at one tine.

The co-Inicationa eyeten with enternal interaction is realized by the phyeical

structure shown in Figure db. In this disgran each adapter perforne the func-
tions defined by three levele (1-3) of the protocols of the conputer netwrk.

multiplexere are added to the adaptere, as in Figure la, for low epeede.

Depending on the type of physical nediu used and the site of the nonochannel,
we receive two typea of co-Inicationa comlexee: concentrated and distributed.

In the concentrated cowler all adapters and central cowutere. if there are
say. are arranged in several rows of stands (cahinete). In this case the size
of the nonochannel is only dozena of eaters.

A. for the distributed coqlex, ite elenente (pdaptere or central coqutere)
can be located at conaiderahle diatancea iron one another. The length of a
coaxial nonochannel connecting then (without repeaters) can be up to one

158
roe m [NONI]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kilometer. when a radio channel is used the elenents of the co-unications
couples may be thousands of kilometers apart free one another.

The structure of the cmications clees has a high level of reliability,
but it does not have one central point that defines the reliability of trans-
mission. And the reliability of the complex with external interaction is par-
ticularly high. In this case (see Figure 6b) there are no central comutere
at all, and a failure by an adapter can (if the systen does not have the
necessary switches) lead to the failure of one or several channels.

Co-mications cowlexes include two types of interfaces. The 2! interface
(see Figure lo) determines the standards for interlinking central cosputers

and adapters with the monochannel. Co-Imications coqlex that fora a single
comications network can we all different kinds of m interfaces. The KS
interface characterizes the standards of interaction between adapters and consu-
nications channels and. through them. with subscriber coqlexes. The KS inter-
faces must neet the standards adopted in the couunications network.

Cosputer networks can be divided into two classes: local and regional. He
will use the term local network for a coQuter network whose subscriber con-
plexes are located close to one another (usually in one building or a far ad-
jacent buildings).

we will call a coeputer network whose subscriber coepleses interact with one
another through a distributed data transmission network a regional network.

Each regional network can cover a large city, an oblast, a republic. or the

territory of the entire country.

Consolidating regional and local coqmter networks sakes it possible to set up
associations of networks that afford an econolically sound base for processing
enormous arrays of infatuation. The local networks are the key elesents of
these associations.

Three types of associations of conputer networks should be identified. The
first comprises networks in which different sets of protocols are used. These
networks are interconnected by internetwork interface convertors (see Figure 5
below) which provide logical data conversions necessary when data is trans-
mitted from one network to another. The second type is conputer networks in
which the sane protocols of levels 1-3 are used, but the protocols of the
higher levels (6-7) differ. In this case the conuter network uses a coma
conunications network. but only those subscriber cowleses which belong to
the sane network can interact directly with one another. Additional inter-
face conversions are necessary for interactions among subscriber cowlexes
located in different networks. Naturally, their structure in associations of
the second type is simler than in associations of the first type.

The third type of association includes coquter networks which have uniform pro-
tocols for all seven levels. These associations provide interaction for any

set of subscriber coqlexes regardless of the cosputer networks to which they
belong. A.‘ ‘. that is required is to indicate the universal address of the

149
roe omen. [MONEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 5. Association of Different
”pee of Counter Networks.

Kay: Cl) Regional Network I;
(2) local Network 2;
(3) lnternetworh Interface Con-
vertor;
(6) Local letmrk Ii;
(5) Regional Network ll.

 

 

subscriber. which includes three suhaddresses: network. sibscriber eagles.
and applied process within this cooler. Figure 6 below shows an examle of
such an association. It includes several local and regional csqmter net-
works. The regional networks in the association may also overlap. that is,
one or several subscriber conleaes of one network nay also belong to another
regional network (for exawle. coqlexes a and b in Figure 6). "hen this is
necessary, any local network can be considered a large distributed subscriber
cleex of the regional network.

The widespread develop-eat of large-scale integrated circuits (LSIc's) greatly
reduced the cost of data processing hardware. At the sane tine, processing
costs are declining nueh were rapidly than the cost of data transmission
channels. The inortance of interactive nethods of solving nany problees re-
lated to collecting, storing. retrieving. and processing various docusnts is
growing every year. The require-eats for flexibility of coQuter netmrks

are also growing. All this supports rapid develop-ant of the processes of de—
centralization of data processing. And if we consider that the pri-ary data
flows are contained within the enterprise or organisations, the reason for the
appearance and rapid develop-ant of local counter networks been-es clear. The
local networks insure greater data processing reliability than large regional
networks; optinization of the processes of data processing are such easier;
software is simler; and, better conditions are created for integrating the
processing of different types of data (nanagesent control, control of indus-
trial processes, processing work docrnents. and the like).

150
roe ormn “ONLY
MOMUSEONLY

Figure 6. Association of Counter
Centers of One type.

Key: (1) Regional Network I;
(2) Subscriber Network A;
(3) Regional network II:
(6) Shared Co-znications
Network;
(5) Local Network 1;
(6) Regional Network III.

 

 

In the local coqauter network. owing to the short distances between subscriber
cowlexes, it is not necessary to use telephone channels and the speed of trans-
nission of data arrays can be increased quite siwly. Became errors occurring
during trananiuion are reduced in this unner. the algoriths for finding end
elininating these errors are simlified.

Local networks are divided into two groups according to functional designation.
The first group is general-purpose conputer networks desined for all possible
types of data processing at large institutions, associations, or science centers.
The second group is ends up of specialised local cownter networks. Amg then,
for exasple, are networks for perforlance of planning work at design bureaus,
networks for financial transactions at state banks, and the like.

Networks are divided into single-center and anti-center networks depending on
the nature of switching of data arrays. The establishment of a large nuber of
co-Iunications cleexes in a local network is an unacceptable luxury. There-
fore. as a rule, in nulti-center networks co-niications systens are realised

in the sane coQuters where the subscriber syste. function. and the result is
the fox-nation of subscriber-continuation coqlexes. In addition. the local
networks establish the required nusber of subscriber coqlenss.

Hulti-center local networks can be broken into three groups (see Pigure 7 below).
The branching network is used nost frequently in those cases where a base (located

151
FOR OFFICIAL USIONLY
”WISEONLY

at the been of the tree) coqlex nuat be connected with a eeriea of other con-
plexea. for mle. the local natworka ahown in Figure 7a include three
euhecriber-co-nicetiona (1-3) and air auhacriher (lo-9) coqleaea. The con-
mnicationa ayatea (logical "itching centers) in the conplexae are arbitrarily
identified by a dotted line.

c; “an. .(1)
Figure 7. Structurae of anti-center
Locel letworke. ‘
Key: (1) Branching network;
(2) Baae Coqlax;
(3) Circular letwork;
0 w “(3) (1.) Cell Network.

Egg .

90.n- 09(5)

 

The branching local networks are fairly aiqle, but they have low reliability
because at the outlet free the baae coqlex ayaten the network hreaha into perte
or coqletely atope work (if the bane cowlex ie a central one). loreover. the
branching network differa iron the othera becauee it coeta note to eat q» long
date transniaeion channela.

The local circular networka conciet of coqlexea oi the cane type: anhacriher-
co-unicetione cowlexea. In other worde. each coqlea containa a logical
switching center. Thua, Figure 7 ahowa e fiveocenter circular network. In
principle infornation can he trenanitted in both directiona around the circle, but
in practice thia in very difficult. ao intonation ie ordinarily trenenitted in
one direction only. Hhen cowering the circular network with the branching net-
work, it aluuld he obaerved that the fornr afforda note econonical nethoda of
connecting coqlem and doea not have a bone coqlea. hut ita reliability in
also low. A break in the circle often neane that the whole network faile m.
In the cell-type local network (ace Figure 7) the large nejority of cowlana
eleo have logical awitching cantata. Only the deedend coqlaaaa (for mle
coqlex a). each of which ie connected with the network by juat one date trena-
aiaeion channel, do not have such a center. In thoae cases where each cowlax

152

”MANNY
”OFFICIALUSEONLY

of the cell network is connected with all other coqlesee by channels. the net- '
work is called a fully linked network.

The fully linked network has high reliability because in a large nejority of
cases a failure of one of the coqleeee does not lead to a shutdown of the
rest of the network. But a fully linked cell network has poor ndular capa-

bility because adding one new cowlex (coqle: 1) to it requires the gradi-
ation of i-l new date traneaieeion channels. Expenditures for a large ne‘er

of logical switching centers in data translission channels are also significant.

In recent years single-center local networks hm hecowe increasingly wide—
spread. (Figure 8 gives an 0th of one.) The efficiency of this network re-
sults fro. the fact that one of the cowlexes (the hachured one in Pigure 8)
specializes in the functions of a miations eyetea. As for the other cow-
plexes. they are subscriber coqleeee end use ell their resources to perfor-
their priaary task: offering or using the resoucee of the ooQuter network.

Figure 8. Structure of a Single-Center
Local Gosputer Network.

 

 

The single-center network is outstanding for sinlicity of realization, diag-
nosis. and adwinistrative control. It also has good nodular capability. Adding

a subscriber cowlex or reeoving one free the network does not change the na-
ture of work of the entire network.

Sone people think that the single-center network has relatively low reliability
because it has just one co-unicatione center. and when it fails the entire
network goes down. This was indeed true in earlier local networks where one cow-
puter served as the co-mications coqles. In recent years. however, develop-
ent of the architecture of co-unications cleeees and broad use of eicro-

processors in it has enabled the single-center network to becowe the lost reliable
type of local coeputer network.

In fact. a reviu of the structures of contelporary co-onications cowlsxes (see
Figure lo) shows that the failure of one active elenent (central cowputer or

153

MWWMY
“WISEONLY

adapter) hardly affects the work capability of the eagle: at all. The nono-
channel is passive and therefore has high reliability. Further-mu. if necessary

all elenents in the center nay have backups.

As pointed out above, oo-nicatinna caters are grouped as concentrated or dia-
tributed depending on the type of nonochannel (see Figure 6 above). In con-
fornity with this the local network nay have s co-sunicstions center installed
at the approxinate geonetric center of the network. The center of this network
can be distributed and have a nonochannel in the for. of a light guide, coaxial
cable. or twisted pair of wires. Figure 9 shows an eagle of such a network.

. Figure 9. Local Network with Dis-
.g—L——g C] tributed Center.

P—DD Key: (1) Coaxial Cable;
(2) Distributed (Jo-“cations

Cowlea.

 

In this case the subscriber coqleaes are connected into the local cowuter net-
work through adapters (a) and coaxial cable.

Local networks where each has one distributed switching center that perform the
functions of a co-mications systen with external interaction (see Figures 6-6)
are becoming increasingly popular. This popularity results iron the fact that
these networks have a nuaber of inortant advantages,chief of which are the
following: high reliability; simplicity of set-w and reconfiguration; and. the
possibility of connecting not only a coQuter but also variom peripheral units
into the network without coqlications. In addition it is imrmt that such a
network is a fully linked one. that is. that every subscriber coqlex in it inter-

acts directly with all other subscriber coqlenss.

15‘

momentum“
2.

3.

6.

mmuaonu

”SLIM

Yauluytu. z. A., "Atkitektuu Vychnhtcl'nykh Satay" [kchttcctuu
of Gown“: networks]. loam, "Sutmm". 1980. 278 paw.

"Reference 119601 of 09.: swun- Incremental," Isa-re Wise. 1979.
Vol 16, lo 227. pp 1-181.

"CCI‘I'T Sixth Plenary My." Gum. 27 $49th «3050:1976.
Dung. Book. 2, Pubuc Dun networks. Geneva. 1977, V01 8, 217 page.

Ban, 6., Kennedy. J., and mm. J.. "been Betwtk Give: In 1713:1-
Mlity to Matrihutd Processing." mermcs, 1980, lo 21. pp 116-122.

mPYRIGIﬂ‘: Izdatel'uvo "2mm", "Ana-nth 1 vycusutel’uya ukhnlh"

1982

11.176

C50:

1863/ 120

155
M omen. NONI]
“I omun. use URL!

PUBLICATIGIS

TABLE 0? mama‘s PRO! JOURNAL 'AD'NIIATIG MID coon-tn rmawcr'.
va-mnnm 1982

Riga AWN I WGISLI‘I‘EL'IIAYA mm in Russian lo 1. Jan-Pct 82 pp 93-9‘

[Text] Table of Contents
Local Informtion-Coquting networks

Iakubaytis. E. A.. "The Architecture of Regional end local
mat.’ hmrb" O 0 O O O I O O O O O l O O O O O O O O O 0 O O O O O 3

Architecture and Iniornetion-Coquting Resources

Zudin, 0. S., Donsratshiy, s. 3.. and Lindfors. 1.. "Organizing
the Interaction of Counting Processee in Variable Structure
System for Auto-sting Scientific Research" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

Zinov'yev. E. V.. end Strehalev. A. A., "Strategy for Controlling
Intonation Processes Considering Detecting end Avoiding Dead-
endsitustions"............................. 22

Ionin. c. I... "Description of Modeled Systeas Using $11." . . . . . . . . . 30
Discrete Structures

Bulatov. Ye. 1).. Grigor'yev, Iu. V., Kai-1m. I. V.. Lonanov. V. 6..
Otlivanchik. Ye. A., Prokhorov. A. IL. Sinchev, ll. 0., end
C. Sisakyan. I. 8., ”The Use of Fiber Optic Oo-nicationa
Lines and neaents of Integral Optics in Coquter Cowlexes
M “mm” 0 I O O O O O 0 O O Q Q 0 O O 0 I Q I O O O O O O O O O O “

Vieirev, I. 8., “Cleetely Self-resting lbnitoring Circuita with
Hini-achatSeta”........................... 63

Ivsnov. Yu., P., and Shagurin. I. 1.. ”Triggers and Sequential
LSICIodesonlistableOellsBithoutGoodControl" . . . . . . . . . . 50

156
H. mm use MY
momauuscomx

Mibalov. 6. P.. Yutmhnko. I. V.. "Characterization of
Canada mutton. and tho lodocibility of Finite Auto-ta" . . . . S7

Lavin. V. 1.. and mum. l. K.. We Phonon-In in
mtmu “tau". 0 0 0 O O O I O 0 O O O O O O O O O O O I O O O ”

Efficiancy and Adaptation

Zak. Yn. A.. and Belikov. s. A.. "Investigation of Statistical Alp-
ﬁll-I for mltiextta‘l Adaptation in hoblant of Diattibntin;
00wuter$yat¢nluonn=u" ...................... $9

lul'bak. L. 1.. btnbnn', I). 1.. and Fromm. S. 8.. Indicator!
for Evaluating the unsung of ultiptoceuor muting Syntan" . . 67

Hartynenko. 0. 31.. "Search Algorithm fat anti-a1 Iocovory Strata”
inniaponiaoflachinoAuociationa”. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . 72

Pavnit'yev. P. K.. "Calculating the loliability of Nation.
Networks by the Algebra of Structural Idem” . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

Brodetakiy, G. I... and Shchctinin. I. Ye.. "Optinnl Organization
of the Proteaa of Storing Intornodiato Intonation in the ”ates" . . . 80

labinovich. In. 6.. ”Tertiary nodding of mIC'a at the Punctional W1" 86

Hate-him. A. A.. "Evaluating lutoration Tint for a (:on
TechnicalSyatu ............................86

'0: Discussion

Yogi. n. 6., and Gcl'b. A. 3.. Mlopunt of Export Examination
mtbdoloyfotmwutethan" .................. 87

”looks

SUyarcvich. A. IL. "Manoaia of (Downtu- mchinu" by V. A. culyayov,
S.H.Haharov.andv.s.liovibv".................... 92

COPYRIGHT: Iulntcl'atvo ”Zinatne", "Avto-ntih i vychiautal'naya takhniha".
1982

11. 176
C50: 1863/12!)

157
N)! omcm. IRWIN
I’U' Wfltma. U” URL.

000 62-50
CYBERNETICS AND W Emlﬂiﬁllm: mscnm (”HTML SYSTEIB

Kiev momma I VYCIIISLITEL'MYA mum: 018W SISTER UPIAVLBNIYA in
Ruaeian No 53, 1981 (aigned to preaa 16 Jun 81) pp 2, 118-120

[It-notation and abatracte of articlea tron collection "Qbernetice and (counter
Engineering", No 53, "Diacrete Control Syetena"; editorial board: V. Ii. (31qu
(editor-in-chief), V. L. Volkovich. G. P. Zayteev, V. Ii. Kuntaeyich (eaaietant
editor-in-chief), A. l. Kulthtenlno (aaeiatant editor-inochief), V. D. larin.

a. Vu. Handrovakiyosaolov (ieaue oecretary-in-chief). V. S. lilthalevich,

Yu. I. Suoylenko, K. G. Snofalov, A. A. Stogniy. B. l. Ti-ofeyev, A. A. Mik,
ll. 5. Pure (eeriee aecretery-inochief) and A. G. Shevelev; Inatitute of Cyber-
netica. IIISSR Acade-y of Sciencea, Iadatel'atvo "llaukova data". 1000 copier.

lZO pagea]

[Text] Thia collection to devoted to the eolution to current probl-a in diacrete
control ayate-a that nine use of specialized caputera and devices. Ooneidered
are problem of anelyaia and ayntheaia of optimal control ayatene with regard to
deter-inate and randol external diaturbancea, aa vell aa of the practical uee of
discrete eyetele to control phyaical experiaenta and technological proceaeee.

For aceintific vorkera. poat-graduatee and otudenta in aenior couraea in VUZ'e
engaged in proble-e of diacrete control ayatena.

UDC 681.516.75

OPTIMIZATION OF PARAMETERS 01" men PERIODICALLY MNSTATIONAIY ammo comm.
SYSTEMS

[Abetract of article by v. I. Goatev and A. 1. ll'nitekiy]

[Text] A graphic-analytical method ie euggeated for optimizing par-etere of
linear periodically nonetationary auto-atic control eyate-a by integrated
criterion. Figa. 5. Bibl.: lo titlea.

UDC 681.511.22
DISCRETE ”TIMI. wmnc SYSTEM “111! CHANNEL SERVICE“: BY HEIGHT
[Abstract of article by A. V. Danil’chenko. G. I. Zaytaev and I. A. leotov]

[Text] A aultichannel euto-atic eyete- ia diecuaeed for correlation proceaaing of
random aignale vi th one correlation feedback connectable to co-peneating channela
by veight criterion. Else. 2, libl.: 1 title.

MWLIISEONLY
UDC 681.3.01:621.372.5

DESIGN TECHNIQUE FOR DIGITAL sauna FILTER HITII FIXED POINT AND IIAXDIAL DYNAMIC
RAISE

[Abstract of article by A. A. Petrovskiy and A. Ye. Leusenko]

[Text] A technique has been developed for designing digital shaping filters with
fixed point that allows preventing overflow of mining units when processiu infor-
mation with selection of maximal absolute value of input signal equal to upper
bound of filter dyn-ic range. Figs. lo, tables 2, bibl.: 10 titles.

UDC 681.5
APPLICATION OI" ERGOOIC Tim ‘I'O ”STATIONARY OBJECTS

[Abstract of article by H. II. liakarchuk]

[Text] For nonstationery nonlinear objects of the class of objects with limited
second moment, that have finite storage, and the variable coefficients of models of
which Iseet Dirichlet's condition, ergodic relations have been derived to

determine the constant models of these objects. Bibl.: 6 titles.

IJDC 62-50

HETIIOD 0F ITERATION mutant 0? LINEAR OBJECT WNTIOL TIMECTORY um! LIIIITED
CONTROL

[Abstract of article by Shcherbashin]

[Text] An economical elgoritb is considered for step-by-step improvement of con-

trol trajectory without violating conditions of two-point boundary problem. based
on methods of linear progra-ing. Boundary probl- is solved by using inverse
matrix computed in advance. Bibl.: 7 titles.

"00 62-50
ADAPTIVE CONTROL OF STATIC OBJECTS HIT“ um PMS VARY!” IN ‘rnn:
[Abstract of article by V. 11. Kuntsevich end 1|. 1|. Lychek]

[Text] Discussed is the problem of control of static objects (objects without
storage), the true parameter vector value of which is unknown before starting con-
trol. The gene approach is used to solve it. In the process. on the one hand.
control is selected in such a way that enables achieving the basic (initial) sin of
control. end on the other, that enables solving the problem of identification of

object parameters to adapt the control system to specific characteristics of the
controlled object. “bid 3 titles.

we 621.319.8519 :
convamzucs or 5111005 or mum onmzzanon or FIRST m sworn) alums
[Abstract of article by s. L. Ivanov and v. Ya. Katkovnilt]

[Text] Discussed are conditions of convergence of iteration algorithu of the
Newton and gradient projection type for solving nastin- extremum problems. The
given conditions are investigated in detail in the case of solvim problems for
the conditional extremal. mininax and regulation. Figs. 2. bibl.: 11 titles.

159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
soon ‘04 a .\m-m~ v.9 v.o~e

IJDC 6813.62.52

ANALm-DIC ITAI. ADMIN: SIGNAL SPATIAL-TIME PROCESSINS SYsm
[Abstract of article by A. V. Danil'chanko. G. F. Zaytsev and I. A. Isotov]

[Text] Discussed is an automatic system for spatial-time processing of signals
with high spatial resolution of jar-ling signal sources with digital optimization of
smapling of signals for correlation-time processing. A mathematical model of an
optimizer that enables priority sapling by intensity of a specified umber of
juning signals has been constructed. Figs. 2, bibl.: 6 titles.

uoc 62.50
on on: noun: or mauve comm or A mmrm snnc ouscr
[mm-«z of article by L. s. Zhitetskiy]

[Text] Discussed is the problem of adaptive control of a nonlinear static object
with a fixed set of control actions when interference is present. It is shown that
under certain sasusptions relative to properties of object and external actions,
the solution to this problem can be reduced to solving a nonfinite system of
inequalities. A recurrent algoritll is constructed for adaptive control and suffi-
cient conditions are formulated for convergence of this algoritlaa within a finite
nimber of steps. Bibl. 6 titles.

UDC 62.50
ADAPTIVE ASSEW 0? 9mm AND STATUS OF STATIC OBJECT
[Abstract of article by 0. ll. Oleksenko]

[Text] The problem of one-time assessment of object status vector and identifica-
tion of its unknown parameters is considered for a static object. ﬁifficient con-
ditions of optimality are applied. Closed expressions of adaptive assessment are
derived in the case of a scalar unknown parameter. Bibl. 3 titles.

we 62.50

SOLVIN PROBLEM OF SYNTHESIS OF OPTIMAL CONTROL OF DISCRETE LINEAR STATIONARY
DYNAMIC OBJECT IN FINITE TIME INTERVAL

[Abstract of article by V. V. Volosov]

[Text] Problem of synthesis of optimal control of linear discrete dynamic object
is solved. Convex quadratic functional is used as optimality criterion. New
solution is derived for problem with free right end, based on using mathematical
programing methods. Problem of synthesis of optimal control for case of moving
right end, belonging to specified spectrum of phase space, is solved. Bibl. 8 titl.
UDC 62.50

SYNTHESIS OF WLTIPOINT DISCRETE MELS OE CONTINUOUS PROCESSES AND THEIR
APPLICATION FOR DESIGN OF OPTIMAL CONTROL

[Abstract of article by L. H. Boychuk]

[Text] New approach is considered for construction of nultipoint discrete models
of continuous controlled processes. lbdels derived are non-local type, but also

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
have some properties of local spline-type models. Their application allows simpli-
fying computational procedure for design of optimal control of dynamic objects,
since it reduces the nuber of limitations in the for: of equalities in the
corresponding mathematical programing problem. Bibi. 11 titles.

UDC 519.8
PMRIC IWOD 07 LIMIZATION FOR MMITIONAL P3031.“ 0' DISCRETE ”HIM
[Abstract of article by V. H. Panin]

[Text] it is shown that with the introduction of a scalar parameter, one can not
only derive the linear rate of convergence of the linearization Iethod. but also
avoid additional costutations when determining the step multiplier. The suggested
method for speeding up convergence is simpler than other known methods. Bibi. 6 ti.

“DC 519.638
FINITE-CONVERGENT ALGORITHM FOR SOLVIK; DWI; SYSTEH (r INEQUALITIES
[Abstract of article by G. H. Bakan and Ye. A. Nizhnichenko]

[Text] Algorithms are suggested that allow obtaining an estimate of the set of
solutions as a whole while finding the solution to a system of inequalities.
Meric experiments with these algoritlns have shown satisfactory results. Bibi. 5.

UDC 62-50
VECTOR UNDEFINED QUANTITIES AND STATIC OBJECT CONTROL um PARTIAL IWOWION

[Abstract of article by A. P. Neseny'uk]

[Text] introduced are concepts of vector undefined quantities. general character-
istics of undefined quantities and operations on general characteristics. ‘ihe con-
cept of undefined quantities is applied for solving the problem of static object
control with partial information. In the process, a priori general characteristics
of unknown parameters of the object are refined in the control process by using

a modified eethod of least squares. and optimal controls are sought in closed node.
Bibliography: 3 titles.

UDC 62-50

ANALYSIS OF STATIONARY MD: IN FREQUENCY-DURATION PULSE SYSTEH FOR CONTROL OF
AUNNOPQUS ELECTRIC DIRECT-CURRENT DRIVE WITH [NDEPSNDENI'LY EXCITED mos

[Abstract of article by i. F. Radchenlto]

[Text] Discussed is stationary node of autonomous electric drive. consisting of
storage battery. force pulse converter and direct-current notor with separate exci-
tation with armature current control. Malysis is made of efficiency function,
sampled in torn of power of switching loss in converter and at active resistances
of equivalent circuit. The optimal relationship of frequency, duty factor and
parameters of drive is derived. which ensures minimu- loss in drive. Recon-ends-
tions are made for selecting type of modulation in converter. Results obtained are
used for analysis of concrete drive equivalent circuit. "80° 3. “bl-3 9 titles.

161
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I \I‘ U. I OSa-e... or..- Us the

UDC 681.3:62-52
INVARIANCE IN DIGITAL-m SYSTEMS FOR 001mm OF VECTOR RANDOM PROCESSES

[Abstract of article by A. A. Tunik and N. I. Ryzhkov]

[Text] Authors discuss effect of precision of operation of analog subsystems on
convergence and precision of functioning of algorithms for control of a digital
subsystem in a hybrid (digital-analog) system for control of vector random process.
Invariance of digital subsystem to interference in anelog subsystems is shown.
Bibliography of 5 titles.

UDC 681.332.5

SOHE DESIGN FEATURES OF DIGITAK SYSTENS FOR AUTOMATIC CONTROL OF SPECTRAL
CHARACTERISTICS OF RAM TIDE SEQUENCES

[Abstract of article by H. A. Gnatyuk, B. Yu. Handrovskiy-Sokolov, A. G. Nechayev
and A. A. Tunik]

[Text] Authors discuss implementation of digital systems for control of spectral
characteristics by using digital computers and specialized processors for various
functions. Features of their operation and some technical characteristics are
analyzed. Figs. 4, bibl.: 12 titles.

UDC 62.50

CORRECT CONTROL OF SPF£TRUN OF RANDOM PROCESSES AT OUTPUT 0F OBJECT NIT}! POORLY
DEFINED MATRIX OF FREQUENCY RESPONSES

[Abstract of article by V. P. Yakovlev and A. I. Savenkov]

[Text] Problem of correct finding of control matrix of spectral densities is con-
sidered. The studied method of solution is based on determining the stable pro-
jection of the unstable solution with a poorly defined matrix of object fre-
quency responses by using methods of reducing it to triangular shape with
subsequent diagonelizstion. Bibliography of 16 titles.

UDC 62-50

DEF INIMS FEEDBACK MATRICES IN AICORITHHS FOR CONTROL OF SPECTRAL CHARACTERISTICS
OF VECTOR RANDOM PROCESSES

[Abstract of article by N. H. Lychalt and N. K. Brovdiy]

[Text] Problem of control of spectrel matrix of vector random process at output of
multidimensional dynamic object is discussed. Technique is given for defining
feedback matrices in matrix algoritlsa of control for matrices of frequency re-
sponses of object of any type (veil shaped. poorly shaped, degenerated).
Bibliography of 8 titles.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo "Naukova dumlta", I981

85“)
C80: 1863/73

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PROBLDiS OF CONTROL IN ENIN’ZERIK}, ENNHICS AND 310W!

Moscow PROBLENY UPRAVLENIYA V Emma, “0M1“, IIOWII in N801” 1981
(signed to press 13 Aug 81) pp 222-223

[Table of contents from book "Problems of Control in Engineering, Economics and
Biology", editorcin-chief Ya. Z. ‘l‘sypkin, corresponding member of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, lzdatel'stvo “Hanks", 1900 copies, 230 pages]

[Text] Contents Page
General Problems of Automatic Control Theory

Some Features of Practical Design of (Calman) Filter.

Grigor'yev, I". N. and Gorovenko, Ye. P. .3
Design of Codes for Sun-ins Channel with “No Accesses.

Kurdyukov, A. P. 7
Sue Problems of Controllability of Quntum Objects.

bepe, N. L. 12
Synthesis of Surfaces of break in Systems with Break Scalar Control.

Luk'yanov, A. 6. l8
Stabilization of Stochastic Systems When There he Restrictions on Control

Actions. Pylayev, A. H. 23
"Fox and Rabbits" Differential One of Pursuit.

Rubinovich, Ye. Ya. 29
Control of Observations and Motion of Object in Stochastic Problem of

Optimization. Serebrovskiy, A. P. 38

Computer System Control

Approach to Describing the Function of Branching to Next Hicroinatruction in
Microprogran. Arutyunyan. B. S. and Pogosyants. G. H. 105
Software for Expandable System for Interpretation of Complex Devices.
Blagov, A. 8.; 2stuliveter, Yu. 5.; Maksrova, 1'. A.; Neyman, A. V. and

ket'yskovs. T. V. 50
Organization of Operation of Asynchronous Input/Output System.

Boguslavskiy, l. V. 58
Implementing Systems of Boolean Functions in Programable Logic Devices.

Zolotarevskaya. H. Ya. 64
CNS-100 Hacrogenerator.

Ponomarev, N. V. 70

163

FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
oboe 9...-..au —.. ~.-..o

Presentation of Digital Automaton by [automata of Least Dimension and
Its Design in Parts. Topol'skiy, I. G.

Control of Industrial Processes

Dynamic Organization of Filling of Zones of Container Terminal.
ktemov, 5. IL; bebedev, V. IL; Haraksnov, I. N.
Study of Hide Strip Hill as Object of Rolling End Temperature Control.
Genkin, A. 1..
Technique for Design and Debugging of Software for Production Line
Discrete Control Systems. Golubeva, S. H.; Speranakaya, I.V.; Shubina, P. I.
Process Control System Simulation on Hybrid Computer Systems.
Danilin. A. D. and Seregin, V. N.
Software Package for Design of Continuous Control Systems.
Klimachev, S. N. and Shabalin, A. V.

Study of Simulation Algorithms for Automated System for Steel Qsality Control.
Minayeva, N. V. and Obolenskaya, L. V.

Software Implementation of Single-Step Adaptive Identification Algorithm.
matafin, R. N. and Tiranovskaya, N. G.

Control in Economics

Analysis of Control in "Demand-Production" Problem by Using Simulation System.
Dleskina. L. N.

Generation of Structural lbdels of Large Systems in Computer Interactive Ibde.
Ganin, I. A. and Solomatin, D. P.

Approximation Method of Analysis of Almost Completely Decomposable Network
of meues. Zuyenkov, H. A.

Approximation-Hethods of Studying Closed mititerminal Systems with Queues.
Kivilafte, T. A.

Guaranteed Evaluations of Quality of Control Hhen There Are Disturbances
Hikhaylov, A. 6.

Model of Time Mechanism for Analysis of Tone Pitch.
Kolokolov, A. 8.

Control in Biology and Robotics Facilities

Use of Adaptive Dynamic Model in loop for Control of Robot Actuator.
lhnolov, 0. 3.

Operational Planning Algorithm for Active Autonomous Systems.
Hatyukhin. V. I. and Sobolev, C. N.

Evaluation of Complexity of Recognizing Language of Speech Intercourse in
Automated Systems. (behelyan, N. K.

Possible Algorithm for lbvement Relative to Point Light Source over
Unfamiliar Territory. Sulkhanov, A. V.

Generation of Programsd Movements of Manipulation Robot.
mlepbayev, V. 8.

Simulation of Dynamics of lbtivation in Animal Instinctive Behavior.
Faydysh, Ye. A.

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

75

85
89
96
102
109
Ill.
11 7

12!.
129
136
142
168
155

162
170
178
186
191
I96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Elements and Devices of Mutation

Capability of Using lav Frequencies of Blectruegnetic Modes of bllov
Systems to Determine Quantity of Arbitrarily Distributed Hatter.

Ivanov, A. V. 206
Hininzation of Sizes of Plane Magnetic Domains in Designing Storage
Devices with Increased Information Deneity. Kasetkin, S. 1.; Suenov, V. S. 209

Effective Scrubbing of Glass Bases.

Knlikova, L. I. 217
Table of Contents 222
COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Hanks", 1981

8545
C80: 1863/77 DID

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY