FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10221
30 December 1981

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 31/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English—language sources
are transcribe] or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRCDUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
POLIIICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(P000 31/81)

Coutaurs

INTERNATIONAL
Soviet Glossary of Islamic Terms

(A. I. Ionova; ISIAH V Yum-WWW“ AZII, PROBLEM!
m0! IMO! EVOLYUTSII, 1981) aooooooaaooooooooooooc

REMOIAL

Roman Catholic-Lithuanian Nationalist Ties Attacked
(L. B. Vileytene, et a1; VESTSI m1 HAWK BELARUSKAI

88R, smnA Wm "Am, "0 5, 1981) .0...‘...........

Book on Social Development, Ethnic Tensions in Moldavia. Reviewed
(6. V. Starovoytova; SOVE‘I‘SKAIA momma, Sap-Oct 81)....

-a- [III-USSR-3SE

l-‘ﬂl! nmmu "CF ONIV
FOR1DFFKJAI.USE(NVLV

INTERNATIONAL

SOVIET GLOSSARY OF ISLAMIC TERMS

Moscow ISLAM V YUGO-VOSTOCHNOY AZII, PROBLEMY SOVREMENNOY IDBYNOY EVOLYUTSII
("Islam in Southeast Asia; Problems of Contemporary Ideological Evolution"), in
Russian 1961 (signed to press 1 June 1981) pp 257-260

[Index of Muslim Terms from Book "Islam in Southeast Asia: Problems of Contemporary
Ideological Evolution," by A.I. Ionova, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka," 5,000 copies, 262 pages]

[Excerpt] Index of Muslim Terms*

Abangan--Indonesian, chiefly Javanese, Muslims who do not perform all of the pre-
scriptions of Islam in the proper way and whose religious ideas include elements
of pre-Islamic beliefs.

Agama--the Muslims of Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore connect the concept of
"faith, religion, belief" with this tern; Philippine Muslims, in addition, identify
it with the designation for the parish of one or another mosque, and also for a
local territorial-administrative unit.

Adatu-ordinary law which takes account of local pre-Islamic traditions.

Amirol Umra--the title of the possessor of supreme political power inan "Islamic
State."

Bids-~an innovation which is incompatible with the Koran and the Sunna.

Bilal-in many areas of Indonesia this is the name given to the mosque attendant
who keeps the mosque in order and summons the Muslims to prayer.

Hakf--property which has been bequeathed by the state or by a private person for
philanthropic-religious purposes and which is not subject to taxation. In various

* In composing the index information was used from the "Islalic Encyclopedia"
written by the Indonesian theologian Husein Munaf (see 129), and also from appen-
dices to individual publications (see 509, pp 199-212).

1
IIMI(MHWCJA1.USE(NVLV
FOIIDFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

places in Southeast Asia there are modifications of this term--wakaf, Hakap, and
Hakuf .

Hali--the first disseminstor of Islam in one or another area of Indonesia, es-
pecially Java.

"all 0111 Amri--the title of the political leader of Indonesian Muslims which,
according to the interpretation of local Blames, does not giveits bearer absolute
authority in purely religious matters. but obliges his to use his personal influ-
ence for the purpose of maintaining and defending Islam.

Guru--a religious mentor who gives instruction in the reading and interpretation
of the Koran.

DaruI Harb--"sphere of war." In Muslim theology this is declared to be a territory
on which there are states whose populations profess or do not profess Islam but
live under the principles of "faithless rulers."

Darul Islan-the "sphere of Islam" which is under the authority of Muslim sover-
eigns and is ruled according to the laws of the Shariat.

Datu-the title of a Philippine feudal lord, the head of an Agama.

Jihadv-a "war for the faith" which is a holy war against the "faithless" that is
included by Islam among the religious duties of Muslims.

Diakat--a term which among the Philippine Muslims means a religious tax for the
benefit of the poor.

Zakat--the name which is customary in Indonesia. Malaysia, and Singapore for mand-
atory alms which are paid to widows, orphans, poor people, and people whose careers
consist of service to Islam.

Zakat Al-Fitrah--religious aims which are distributed at the conclusion of the
Muslim fast.

Ijma--one of the "roots" of the Muslim law which signifies a unanimous decision
by authorative Mujtahid-legal scholars.

Ijtihad—-the principle of independent judgement on the basis and within the limits
of the Koran, and also of the Sunna.

Imam-in everyday use, the intercessor at public prayers in the mosque; with
Philipine Muslims--the cleryman in charge of a chapel; in the everyday notions

of the Sunnites of Southeast Asia-~an authoritative expert on Islam.

Imamat--the dogma regarding the possession of spiritual power in an "Islamic State."

Iman--the term for the designation of faith. It presupposes inner faith (I'tikad),
its profession in words (Ikrar). and good deeds (A'mal').

2
FOI‘OFPIJA1.USE¢HVLY
me (DH-1F“! INF 0N] \'

Kadi--a Sharict judge in lndonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand. In the Phil-
ippines and in the countries of Indochina he is called a Kali.

Kaum Muda--in Indonesian, Malay (Malaysia), Singapore, and Thailand the nose given
by local Muslims to the foretellers of Islamic reform (literally-~"the young
ones") .

Kaum Tua--literally--"old men, older generation"; a term which designates the opp-
onents of "Kaum Muda."

Kafir—-"lacking in faith," a non-believer. a non-Muslim.

Kiyas--one of the "roots" of Muslim law; it means the deduction of a logical con-

clusion on some concrete question on the basis of seeking an analogy in the Koran
or in the hadiths.

Koran--the sacred book of the Muslims, a collection of sermons, precepts, and dic-
tums which the Prophet Mohamed reported at different times to his followers as a
revelation sent to him from God.

I(iyi--the honorary title of a Muslim teacher in Indonesia, chiefly in Java.
Langgam--with Philippine Muslims the name of a chapel.

Madrasa--the name which is widespread throughout all of Southeast Asia for Muslim
schools of the modernized type in which, along with Islam, general educational
subjects are studied.

Mazhab--a legal school in Sunnite law.

Masjad--the nase for a mosque in most of the countries of Southeast Asia, with the
exception of the Philippines where a different ter- is current--Mosgit.

Maulud--s religious festival devoted to celebrating the birthday of the Prophet
Mohamed.

Modin--the clergyman in charge of a rural league in Indonesia, or the junior clergy-

man in a neighborhood and also cathedral mosque. In Malaysia and in Singapore--
the person who maintains order in the mosque and sumons the Muslims to prayer.

Houlviutne title of a Muslim teacher-theologian in Burma.

Mujahid--the uses of a participant in a "Holy War.“

Mujtahid--a representative of the highest category of Muslim theologian-legal ex-
perts who has the right to issue Fetwas.

Hunafik--the designation for "hypocrites," those who formally follow Islam, but
actually oppose it.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10l11CJAl.USEiDNlN

Musynwarah--the principle of the joint discussion of matters with special con-
sideration for the opinion of the "wisest."

Mufakat--a unanimous decision which follows from a preceding Musyawarah, all of
whose participants are regarded as equally responsible for the decision.

Mufti--an official who issues Fetwas and who is officially recognized as an auth-
ority in matters of Muslim law.

Maib--a clergyman in a city mosque; sometimes a junior clergyman in a rural mosque
in Indonesia.

Pesantren--the name of a Muslim school of the traditional type in Central and East-
ern Java; in Madura this kind of school is called a Penyantren, and in Ache-ca
Rongkong.

Pitra--among the Philippine Muslims--irregular charity for the benefit of the poor.

Pondok--the name of a rural Muslim school of the traditional type in Malay (Malaysia)
and Western Java, and also of a modernized Muslim school in Thailand.

Rakat--a specific complex of prayer poses, gestures, and formulas which are part
of the prayer procedure.

Riba--the prohibition against loan interest and other "interest" which is con-
tained in the Koran and the Sunna.

Rububiyat-the thesis concerning God as the "ruler of the worldd'and their pro-
tector.

Sayid--the title of a descendant of the Prophet Mohammad.

Saik--the title of a highlyauﬂrnatstive Muslim teacher-theologian in the Phili-
ppines.

Sadika Mieto--religious alts among the Philippine Maranao.

Santri--the name for pious Muslims in Indonesia, and also for the graduates and
pupils of Islam schools of the traditional type.

Sarip--the title of a descendant of the Prophet Mohammad in the Philippines.

Sultan--the title of a Muslim monarch in pro-colonial and colonial Indonesia, Malay,
Borneo. and the Philippines.

Sunna--Muslim tradition based on the haditha and including the norms of stats.
criminal. property, and family law.

Sura--the designation for a chapter of the Koran.

h
FOIIOFFKJAI.USEIMULY
FINICIWNCJA1.USE(NHLY

Suro--the name for a chapel in individual areas of Indonesia. and also for a tra-
ditional type Muslim school in Malay and Western Sumatra.

Takbil-the custom of kissing the hand of a Sayid which is widespread in Malay
(Malaysia), Singapore, and Indonesia.

Takwa--the thesis concerning the "fear of God" and submission to the will of the
All-High.

Takdir--the dogma concerning predestination and the impossibility of changing the
fate which has been prepared for a person by God.

Taklid--the principle of absolute compliance with the authorities of the Muslim
Middle Ages.

Tarekat--the name of Suffite fraternal association.
Tauhid--the dogma of monotheism.

Ulama--a representative of the strmmm of Muslim theologian—legal experts in the

countries of Southeast Asia, with the exception of Burma where the term Ulems is
used.

Ulil Amri--the title of the political leader of a Muslim community.
Umma--the name of the world religious community of Muslims.
Fakir--a beggar-ascetic devoted to "service to Islam."

Fetwa--a religious-juridical conclusion given by a Mufti and a Hujtahid. In a
number of places in Southeast Asia this conclusion has another name--Fatwa.

Fikh--Muslim canonical law.
Haji--the title of a Muslim who has made a pilgrimage to Mecca.
ﬂadas--the tradition concerning the words and deeds of the Prophet Mohammed.

Halif--the title of the chief of an "Islamic State" who is recognized as the
"deputy and vice regent of Mohammed."

Halifat--the Sunnite postulate regarding a theocratically organized Ummm whose
Halif possesses political (Emirat) and spiritual (Imamat) power.

Hijra--the resettlement by the Prophet Mohammed and his supporters from Mecca to
Medina in 622. An event which is at the basis of the calendar in Islam.

Hisba--the service of supervision over the fact that morals and social life are
in strict correspondence with the prescriptions of the Koran and the Shariat.

Hotba--the sermon which is said during the Friday prayer. In certain places of
the region this sermon is called Hutba.

S
roe omcm. use on“
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hotibuthe assistant to the lean who says the Hotbs. In the Philippines and in
Malay he is sometimes called Katib.

Shariat--the canonical law in Islam.

Syaheda~-the formula for the profession of faith: "There is no divinity besides
Allah. and Mohamed is the Emissary of Allah.“

Syeih--the title of a highly respected Muslin teacher-theologian, or head of s
Suffite 'i'arekst.

Buirat--the principle of the possession of political power over the line.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Nsuka". Glavnsys redaktsiya vostochnoy literstury ,
1981

2959
C50: 1800/82

6
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
HM! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

RONA“ CATHOLIC-LITHUANIA“ NATIONALIST TIES AITACKED

Minsk VBSTSI AKADEMII NAVUK BELARUSKAI SSR, SERYYA GRAHADSKIKH NAVUK in Be1orussian
No 3 1981 pp 137-161

[Article by L. B. Vileytene, K. S. Prakoshyna, and E. K. Darashevich: "Critique of
the Ideology of Catholicism"]

[Text] The importance of investigation of the role and place of religion and es-
pecially the nature and content of its influence on society is increasing in present-
day conditions. The Catholic Church represents the largest segment of Christianity.
It influences the intellect and will of many millions of people throughout the
world, including in a number of socialist countries. Catholicism possesses a power-
ful, centralized hierarchy, at the head of which stands the Pope of Rome with his
state -- the Vatican. The Catholic Church has had a great deal of experience in

the area of exerting ideological influence on people and employs methods of in-
fluencing their consciousness which for centuries have been put to the practical
test of history. It has utilized and continues to employ various means of maintain-
ing its power over people.

The Catholic Church retains a certain influence on a portion of the population of
the USSR, for the most part in the western areas of the Ukraine and Belorussia, in
Lithuania and Latvia. Ideological criticism of Catholicism, its philosophy,

methods and means of religious influence on the masses, and analysis of religious
propagation activities are of particularly current significance in this region. As
a consequence of historical conditions, the Catholic Church exerted considerable in-
fluence in Lithuania, and therefore it is not mere happenstsnce that Soviet
Lithuania has become one of the principal centers of criticism of Catholicism, its
history and present state in conditions of the present-day ideological struggle.
All-union scientific and regional conferences on critical analysis of the
philosophical and sociopolitical concepts of contemporary Catholicism are periodical-
ly held here.1

The Department of philosophy, law and sociology at the LiSSR Academy of Sciences
Institute of History was established in 1969; it became an independent institute in
1977. One of the important areas of its activity is critique of contemporary
Catholic philosophy and clerical anticommunism. Lithuanian scholars have made a

substantial contribution to the elaborationofluny current problems, especially per-
taining to the aspects of the diverse relationship between bourgeois ideology and
religion.2 This is particularly important since contemporary anticommunists view

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

religion in conditions of socialism as the only legal institution which is alienated
from the socialist society, around which they would like to group various hostile
elements.

These problems are studied chiefly by the criticism of contemporary bourgeois
philosophy sector, which was organised in 1975 (sector chief, A. Gsydis), where
problems of criticism of contemporary Catholic philosophy and clerical anticommunism
are handled by B. Kuzmickas, I. Zakssa, B. Deksnis, A. Sverdinlas, Ye. Vasilevskis,
and others. Other scholars of the LiSSR Academy of Sciences also work with this
problem area -- V. Niunka, I. Matsavichus, Ya. Hinkyavichus, Yu. Barzdaytis, A.
Balsis, Y. Anichas, and 0. Rushelite.

Critique of religious cartyovers and the campaign against clerical snticomnunism

is one of the principal areas of focus of this republic's philosophical literature.
Several aspects should be emphasised here. First of all, study of the traditions

of materialist philosophy in Lithuanian social thought. The writings of R.
Plecksitis, Ya. Hinkyavichus, Yu. Barzdaitis, l. Hatsavichus, B. Canselis, I.
Zaksas, and A. Crishka persuasively show that strong materialist traditions were es-
tablished in the history of Lithuanian sociopolitical thought, traditions which were
reflected in various forms and were essentially directed against religious ideology.3
Secondly, diversified critique is leveled at attempts by members of the clergy to
justify religion with the aid of the arguments of ethics and to distort the
materialist world view, which allegedly devalues and levels man (A. Gsydis, l.
Zskaas, V. Deksnis).‘ Thirdly, the specific conditions of this republic give cur-
rent importance to a critical analysis of the relationship between religion and
nationalism. Monographs by Ya. Hinkyavichus and writings by A. Balsis, V. Lazutka,
and L. Shnipas investigate with concrete historical materials the complex inter-
relationship between religion and nationalism.5 The concept of the indivisibility
of the national and the religious originated in the prebourgeois society, but
bourgeois ideologues took it up as a polemicsl weapon.

There arise in the contemporary exploiter society many conflicts of a national and
confessional nature, in the existence and aggravation of which the reactionary
forces of imperialism have an interest. Bourgeois nationalism and clericalism are
unified by the snti~Harxist idea of a ”class peace,” denial of the op-

posing nature 0 f the interests of antagonistic classes. Marxist-Leninist
philosophy rejects the assertion of an inseparable bond between religion and na-
tional forms of societal affairs. Carryovers of the past, however, especially ns-
tionalist and religious, anticommunist forces seek to revive, to preserve, to link
one with the other. Take "clericslized nationalism," for example, with the aid of
which the forces of imperialist reaction seek to profit on national and religious
feelings, to revive nationalist attitudes. supported by religion, and to utilize
nationalist arguments to support religion. The writings of the above-named Soviet
Lithuanian authors present a fundamental theoretical critique of such ideological
actions by anticommunism.

Soviet Lithuanian social scientists carefully analyze the affairs of the Lithuanian
emigre community, especially its ideological currents, their social-class essence,
philosophical and ideological-political orientation. And this is for good reason,
for quantitatively the Lithuanian emigre community is quite large (more than 500,000
persons), and heterogeneous in composition. Groups of various orientation are taking

8
FOR(M"WCJAI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

active part in the contemporary ideological and political struggle. The most sig-
nificant studies on the Lithuanian emigre community have come out in recent years.
These include "Ideological Currents in the Lithuanian Emigre Community" and "The
Baltic Reactionary Emigre Community Today."6 The former presents a well-argued
critique of clerical and bourgeois-nationalist concepts. The authors analyze from
a Marxist position the forming of the Lithuanian emigre community and trace its
history -- class. ideological, and political differentiation- Predominant 1n the
progressive wing of the emigre community were labor and democratically oriented
cultural leaders. The majority of these became consciously involved in the class
struggle and in the socialist and Communist movement in the United States. They
formed their worker organizations, progressive publications (the newspapers
VILNIS. BVALYA, LAISVB (Freedom), and the magazine SVIBSA (Light)). They fought
actively against the oppression of the monopolies and political reaction in the
countries where emigres resided. Today progressive Lithuanian emigrés expose the
inventions of bourgeois propaganda about Soviet Lithuania and disseminate objective
and truthful information on the life of the Lithuanian people today.

The reactionary emigre community consisted of representatives of various class
strata of the middle and pedtebourgeoisie, labor aristocracy. bourgeois intel-
lectuals, and clersy. and aligned with clericals, bourgeois liberals, and rightist
socialists. They have waged and continue to wage an implacable struggle against
progressive emigrés and take part in the anti-Soviet and anticommunist campaign be-
ing conducted by imperialist forces in the Heat.

An important aspect of the ideological struggle of the two opposing groups in the
Lithuanian emigre community is revealed by the authors, discussing the campaign by
progressives against clericalism. The difficulties of this struggle are obvious,
for.it is taking place in conditions of a bourgeois society and anticommunist ac-
tions, which of course are supported by the Vatican. The progressive emigre press
stresses the political nature of clericalism, its link with anticommunism, and ear
poses the reasons for the strengthening of clericalism in the Western countries
and its reactionary role in spread of anticommunist psychosis in some countries.

It reveals the hypocritical nature of clerical slogans and demonstrates that
clericals not only failed to condemn fascist crimes in Lithuania but ever protected
many of the participants in these crimes. The progressive emigre press reveals the
commitment of clerical strata to the encouragement of hostility between religious
believers and nonbelievers in Soviet Lithuania. Clericals disseminate fabricated
concoctions about oppression of believers with the aim of gaining political capital.
The acute, unceasing debate between the progressive emigre community and the
clericals constitutes a contribution to the campaign for peace, democracy, and
social progress.

Soviet Lithuanian scholars have made a critical analysis of the religious-
philosophical modernism of representatives of the clerical wing of the Lithuanian
emigre community (A. Hatseyna, Yu. Girnyus, and others). In their writings these
clericals speak of the decline of the bourgeois society, the crisis of religion,
and see unresolvable conflicts in the process of modernization of Catholicism. All
this leads them to pessimistic conclusions in regard to the future of human so-
ciety; they reduce the basic conflicts in today's world to the opposition between
religion and atheism and its replacement of class conflicts. On this "theoretical"
foundation they criticize traditional conservative anticommunism, adhering to more

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)" Ul'l'l' .IAI. 05!. URL!

flexible anticommunist doctrines. Modernist thorizing is revealed in philosophical
and psychological defense of the idea of the necessity of "God for man." There are
also powerful trends of conservative antico-unism within the Lithuanian clerical
emigre conunity, which oppose any possibility of cooperation and dialogue with
Marxists.

Exposure by Soviet scholars of clerical doctrines from a Marxist position promtss
the current campaign by the progressive emigre conunity against the religious-
philosophical substantiation of anticOIInuniss and helps emigrss understand the
political significance of religious philosophiring. This narrows the base for the
activities of anticonunist emigre organizations. The authors of these monographs
reach a well-substantiated conclusion on the deepening of the crisis within the
Lithuanian reactionary-nationalist eming conunity. New forces are saturing within
this connunity, which are rejecting reactionary currents and groups. They are sin~
cere in their desire for closer contacts and cooperation with the "old country."
And one cannot help but see the contribution of Soviet Lithuanian scholars to this.

In another collective mnograph entitled "The Baltic Beactionary Emigre Conunity
Today," written by scholars from the Soviet Baltic republics, the reactionary role
of the ideological and political struggle of the rightist camp within the Baltic
emigre conunity as "stooges of the most reactionary forces of imperialism" in the
capitalist countries of the Heat in the campaign against peace, the principles of
peaceful coexistence and international detente is exposed. Various falsifications
by the bourgeois-nationalist enigré con-unity of the problems of religion and the
church in the Soviet Baltic are aimed at distorting the guarantees of freedom of
conscience in the Soviet Baltic republics. The methods and techniques of this
falsification, as the authors denonstrate, are standard, based on bankrupt, un-
substantiated stereotypes -- "persecution of faith," "state atheism," "church-
collaborator,” etc. The clerical emigre calamity, which ignores the objective
process of the growth of atheism under socialism, is guided by the "ieperatives of
anticommunism" and preaches the ineradicablaness and persenence of religion; it
assigns the Catholic Church an especially important role as a force capable of is-
peding the formation and inculcation of Coneunist ideals in the consciousness of
Lithuanians, Latvians and Estonians.

Soviet scholars expose acts of ideological sabotage by the clerical Baltic emigre
community, juggling of facts by the clergy, backed up by a wealth of factual
material, which attests to achievement of genuine freedom of conscience in the Soviet
society and the steady growth of atheist consciousness in the Soviet people.

In the postwar period Soviet Lithuanian scholars have thoroughly studied not only
the Catholic religion as a social institution and its psychological prenises,
"mechanisss" of influencing the consciousness of the average individual, but also
its theoretical foundations, its philosophical and sociopolitical concepts and
their corresponding institutions. Here we should mention first of all the writings of
LiSSR Academy of Sciences Academician V. Niunka -- "Pron Vatican I to Vatican II,"
"The Social Myths of Catholicism," "The Vatican and Anticonmunism," "Clerical
Parties and the Vatican," plus a number of other publications.7 The author
analyzes the sociopolitical orientation of the Vatican and its "new Eastern
policy." V. Niunka devotes particular attention in his writings to the genesis and
evolution of Catholic clerical anticomunism, exposes its ideological actions

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE¢DNLY

directed against the socialist countries, and examines the aggregate of organiza-
tions of Catholic clericalism, first of all the clerical parties and their political
and ideological activities. V. Niunka analyzes the social program of these parties
and reveals their true role in the capitalist world which, in spite of all as-
surances that they have no relationship with capital, boils down to defending the
foundations of the capitalist system and drawing working people away from the class
struggle.

The profound sociopolitical conflicts which are tearing apart the capitalist so-
ciety are illustrated in the first encyclical of Pope John Paul II, "Redemptor
ﬂominis." V. Niunka has also analyzed this encyclical in his writings.8 The
author notes the Christocentric character of the first encyclical of John Paul II.
The new pope views as the main task of the Church its influence on the con-
sciousness of all mankind, Christianization of the entire world, and one of the
essential elements of this task is concern over man's earthly affairs. The en—
cyclical acknowledges that in order for "human life to become human," it is neces-
sary "to reform the structure of economic affairs." The encyclical "Redemptor
Hominis," however, essentially advocates reforms which at best could mitigate the
social contrasts of the capitalist society, that is, emphasize the reformist move-
ment which has long been advocated by Catholic social doctrine.

He must also mention some writings dealing with the contemporary problems of
Catholicism in the USSR, in specific regions. of great significance are the
writings of J. J. Anicas, which deal with the history of Catholic clericalism in
Lithuania.9 They present a fundamental, multifaceted. principled critique of the
reactionary essence of Lithuanian clerical anticommunism. One of the most recent
monographs, entitled "Evolution of Catholicism in Conditions of Socialism,"10
written jointly with I. Maciulis, shows how in conditions of aggravation of the
ideological struggle, clerical emigres are attempting to utilise religion and the
church for anti-Soviet purposes. Clerical ideologues attempt to present the ob-
jective process of liberation of the consciousness of working people from the
influence of religion and the church as forced eradication of religion, and the
logical process of secularization in Soviet Lithuania as denationalization. They
attempt to argue that the Lithuanian nation remains Catholic, in the confessional
sense antagonistic in relations with the socialist system. The authors persuasive-
ly reveal the unscientific nature of the methodology of bourgeois science of
religion, which examines religion out of context with socioeconomic conditions and
ignores the influence of objective factors on it.

Discussing the evolution of the sociopolitical orientation of the Catholic Church
in Lithuania in conditions of the socialist system, J. Anicas shows that the
overwhelming majority of the clergy went over to a position of loyalty toward
socialism, but this does not mean that religion has changed. He notes the neces-
sity of analysis of the causes and essence of the processes which are taking place
in the church under the influence of the major changes in the contemporary so-
ciety, and the restructuring of atheist propaganda in conformity with this.
Although the Second Vatican Council did not exert any substantial influence on
religious believers in Lithuania in the sense of activating their religious lfe,
an important task of ideological activity, J. Anicas emphasizes in his writings,
disclosure of the true meaning and purpose of the latest techniques, methods and
forms of defense and renewal of religious views and conceptions.

11

FOI:OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Soviet Lithuanian scholars carefully study differentiation within Catholicism,
revealing the significant inhomogeneity among the social strata of religious
believers. Although there is no fundamental difference in worhiview among different
segments, they differ free one another in methods and view of the tasks of the
philosophy of Catholicism. here, just as in religion as a whole, two trends are
noted: dogmatic and modernist. Investigating the sources of these trends,
Lithuanian Soviet philosophers reveal the genesis of contemporary Catholic Phi-
philosophy. Forexample, in a book by B. Kuzmickas entitled "Contemporary Catholic
Philosophy,"n a special section deals with this question, entitled "Catholic
Philosophy of the 19th Century." Here the author examines romantic Catholicism
(traditionalism), the religious philosophy of A. Rasmini-Serbazzi and V. Ciaherzi,
the irrationalism of J. Newman, social doctrine, Catholicism and its philosophy in
Lithuania in the 19th century. The author correctly notes the principal line of
Catholic philosophy of the 19th century -- strengthening of irrationaliem. Mystical
elements of the most significant cultural currents of the century (romanticism) and
prominent philosophers (Hegel and others) are utilized thereby. In spite of its
conservatism, Catholicism keeps a close watch on the advances of philosophy and
endeavors to utilize them to strengthen its own position. The social doctrine of
Catholic philosophy in the 19th century underwent certain changes, which are due to
social factors, in particular the growing civic activeness of the lowest level of
the clergy. This book by B. Kuzmickas interestingly describes the struggle between
the liberal and reactionary Catholic movement.

One of the principal persona behind renewal of Catholic social doctrine was P.
Lamennais, the activities of whom signaled the beginning of the Christian democratic
movement. Renewal ideas were disseminated by (K. de Kn, F. Azsnam) and others. In
spite of statements which were particularly sharply critical of capital and private
ownership, they remained entirely within the realm of early Christian utopian
illusions. The author also examines the views of German philosophers P. Bader,

(I. Ceres), I. Guenther, and J. Proschammer, Spanish philosopher J. Balmez, Polish
philosophers F. Kozlowski and J. Zachowski, Italian philosophers A. Baanini-Serbazsi
and V. Ciaberzi, and British philosopher J. Newman. The author reveals their bond
with the ideology of Catholicism. B. Kuzmickas deserves particular credit for his
systematic presentation of the content of Catholic modernism of the 20th century.
The author was the first to analyze the modernization of Catholic ideology in dif-
ferent countries. The Catholic modernism movement began at the end of the 19th
century. It involved primarily France, Italy, Germany, Great Britain (especially
Scotland), and Switzerland and "...was of great significance for the history of con-
temporary Catholicism." The modernist movement began with scrutiny of the history
of the Bible and church dogmas; the modernists felt the influence of various
philosophical schools - the intuitivism of h. Bergaon, the irrationalism of P.
Schleermacher, neOrKantianism and pragmatism. This reflected the general trend of
bourgeois philosophy of the era of imperialism toward irrationalism, agnosticism,
and pessimism. This trend was most highly developed, as B. Kuzmickas notes, in
France, where (A. Lauzi), I. Leroi, M. Blandel, and L. Labertanier were its most
important representatives. Their views are inconsistent, often conflictive, and
essentiany eclectic, for they attempt to combine historicism, science and religion.
The lack of a philosophical integrity is the principal feature of this movement.

In contrast to Thomism, the representatives of modernism seek to ground faith not
in rational-mystical concepts but in inner experience, the need of the individual,

12

IWJR OWWNCJAI.IEHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exaggerating the emotional and intuitive elements in perceiving the world. The
element of the individual is raised to an absolute, and personal experience takes
precedence over objective laws. Possible within this movement is a return to the
fold of official Catholicism (H. Blandel) and, on the contrary, movement to the posi-
tion of liberal (bourgeois) atheism (P. Alfarik), which is actually a result of the
unceasing ideological struggle in the capitalist countries. without taking account
of the conflicts within society, one cannot gain a deep understanding of the con-
flicts between modernist thinking and bourgeois thinking as a whole. These con-
tradictions are also characteristic of Italian (B. Labanca, B. Buanaiuzzi, and R.
Mura), German (A. Erhard), British (H. Tyrell) and other modernists. The com-
petent analysis of the modernist movement in Catholicism presented by Lithuanian

Soviet scholars helps one more deeply comprehend the contemporary situation in
Catholicism. '

Modernism as a trend, however, was being undermined by official Catholicism and be-
ing gradually transformed into other philosophical schools, in particular into
"Christian philosophy of values," which is closely linked with the philosophical
school of phenomenology, as well as into religious existentialism and personalism.
A major role was played in this process by the views of certain bourgeois
philosophers (E. Guserl, R. James), and especially the phenomenology of H.
Scheller. We should also note at this point the unique statement of the problem by
B. Kuzmickas. Bourgeois philosophy of the era of imperialism was becoming increas-
ingly more "religious," which was clearly revealed in the system of H. Schsller
(1874-1928). A disciple of Cuserl, he considered the philosophy of his teacher
to be excessiVely "worldly": the idea of God or divinity should form the basis of
philosophy. Scheller, as B. Kuzmickas points cut, seeks to validate the Christian
(Catholic) tradition by returning to the experience of the individual and to the
hierarchy of values. Linking "religious tradition" and sophisticated forms of
philosophizing is a characteristic feature of bourgeois thought.

As Kuzmickas notes, two trends are noted in contemporary Catholicism -- progres-
sivism and integrationism. Representatives of the former seek to modernize cons
temporary Catholicism, but they are encountering opposition by the integrationists.
Others seek to keep Catholicism unchanged. Soviet Lithuanian philosophers, to-
gether with scholars of the other republics in the Soviet Union, are investigating
the ideological evolution of the philosophy of Catholicism, various modernist
trends within it, and attitudes toward them by the Vatican, which seeks to maintain
the traditiomg the essence of Catholicism, and which at the same time is compelled
to maneuver and to take into account the increased influence of science and the
social liberation movement, and therefore to one degree or another accepts certain
modernist theses. The turn to modernism by no means signifies a radical change in
philosophy. It more likely means an attempt to renovate it, to make it "contem-
porary," to adapt it to the era. Such a conclusion is reached by the investigator.

All these complicated processes are taken into consideration by Soviet Lithuanian
scholars in concrete ntheistic propaganda and in studying religion. Investigators
demonstrate how the successes of genuine socialism, socialist democracy and so-
cialist humanism create conditions for the extensive spread of the Communist
philosophy and for overcoming religious belief. The philosophers of the Lithuanian
SSR have accomplished considerable fruitful work in the area of critiquing contem-
porary Catholicism in the various aspects of its adaptation to the modern day and
in an inseparable link with the tasks of the ideological struggle and Communist

13

FINICHH“(JAI.USIZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indoctrination of Soviet citizens. Characteristic of these scholarly investiga-
tions is sound scholarly argumentation, an aggressive character, an inseparable bond
with practical reality, good knowledgeability, "fast response" and, most important,
(kn-Innist conviction, erdor, willingness and preparedness to defend one'a convic-
tiona.

Soviet scholars have accomplished significant achievements in elaboration of the
problems of theory and history of the Catholic Church. At the same time one must
agree with 3. Ya. Ramm'a comment that the problems of contemporary Catholicism have
not yet been adequately studied.12 He notes that "the problems of history of
religion and atheism should not be relegated to a position of secondary importance,
for a lack of serious Marxist studies makes it easier to apply falsification in

these questions by foreign clergymen and does detriment to the cause of atheist
indoctrination."1

An analysis of the multifaceted literature dealing with critique of Catholicism
published in the Lithuanian SSR convinces one that deficiencies in literature
critiquing Catholicism can be corrected to a substantial degree by publishing a num-
ber of studies by Lithuanian philosophers and historians in the Russian language

for more extensive acquaintance with these writings by the scientific community and
propagandists of scientific atheism.

FOOTNOTES

1. “Katolitsism v SSSR i sovremennost' (Haterialy nauchnoy konferentsii,

sostoyavsheysya 17-18 dekabrya 1969 g. v g. anyaulyay)" [Catlwlicism in the
USSR and the Present Day (Proceedings of a Scientific Conference Held on 17-18

’mwwul%9m8wuuﬁLVﬂuu,mn;Wuduuuiswnumwa
ideologicheskaya bor'ba (Haterialy nauchnoy konferentsii, Vilhyus, 11-12
dekabrya 1975 g.)" [Catholicism and the Contemporary Ideological Struggle
(Proceedings of a Scientific Conference, Vilnius, 11-12 December 1975)],
Vilnius, 1975.

2. B. Poskute, "Ateistine literature," Vilnius, 1979, 158 pages.

3. R. Pleckaitis, "Feodalizmo laikotarpio filosofija Lietuvoje. Filosofijs
Lietuvos nokyklose XVI-XVIII amziais," Vols 1-2, Vilnius, Hintis, 1975, 527
pages; 3. Cenaelis, "Svietejai ir ju idejos Lietuvoje (XIX a)," Vilnius,

Hintis, 1972, 208 pages; J. Barzdaitia, “Religijoa kilme ir kitimas.
Ikiproletariniu ateistu paziuru Lietuvoje marksistine analize," Vilnius, Hintis,
1976, 238 pages.

a. "ldeologicheskaya bor'ba i molodezh'" [The Ideological Struggle and Youth],
Vilnius, 1972; "Proyavleniys antikommunizms v litovskoy emigratsii" [Manifesta-
tionsof Anticommunism in the Lithuanian Emigre Community], Vilnius, 1973;
"Kritika sovremennykh burzhusznykh fal'sifikatsiy v osveshchenii sotsialisti-
cheakikh preobrazovaniy Pribaltiki" [Critique of Contemporary Bourgeois Falsifi-
cations in Discussion of Socialist Reforms in the Baltic], Riga, Zinatns, 1976,
272 pages; "Kstolitaizm i sovremennaya ideologicheskaya bor'ba" [Catholicism

1h

FIN!(XWH(JAI.USEIMVLY
5.

7.

10.

11.

12.

13.

HR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

and the Contemporary Ideological Struggle], Vilnius, 1975, 299 pages;
"Ideologine have it jaunimas," Vilnius, 1972, 211 pages; "Antiknmunizmo
apraiskos Lietuviu, burzuazineje emigracijije," Vilnius, 1973, 107 pages.

"Katolitsizn l natsiya" [Catholicism and Nation], Vilnius, 1971; "Religiya v
mnogonatsional'nom mire" [Religion in a Multinational Horld], Vilnius, 1978.

"Pribaltiyskaya resktsionnaya emigratsiya segodnya (Litovsksya, Latyshskaya i
ectonskaya emigrststwlna sluzhbe imperializna)" [The Baltic Reactionary Bmigré
Community Today (Lithuanian, Latvian and Estonian Enigré Community in the Ser-
vice of lmperialisn)], Riga, Zinatne, 1979, 235 pages.

V. Niunka, "Nuo Vatikano Pirnojo iki Vatikano Antrojo," Vilnius, Valet polit ir
moksl. lit. l-kla, 1963, 91 pages; "Socialiniai katalikybes mitai," Vilnius,
Mintis, 1965. 208 pages; "Vatikanas ir antikonuniznas,“ Vilnius, Hintis. 1970,
278 pages; "Klerikalines patijos ir Vatikanas. Krikscioniu demokratu partijos
ir Vatikanas...,“ Vilnius, Hintis, 1974, 80 pages.

Niunka, "Zingsnis pirmyn ar atgsl. Apte pirnajs, Jono Povilo II enciklika,"
uoxsus m cvvwms, No 5. 1979, pp 6-7.

J. Anicas, "Katalikiskasis klerikalizmas Lietuvoje 1940-1944 m.,“ Vilnius,
Hintis, 1972, 256 pages; "Socialinis, politinis kataliku baznycios vsidmio
Lietuvoje 1945-1952 n.," Vilnius, 1972, 212 pages; ”Katalikiskasis kleriknliznss
Lietuvoje pereinamuoja is kapitalizno i socialisna laikotarpiu," Vilnius, Mintis,
1976, 193 pages; "The Establishment of Socialism in Lithuania and the Catholic
Church," Vilnius, Mintis, 1975, 127 pages.

J. Anicas and J. Haciulis, "Katalikybes evoliucija socializno salygomis,"
Vilnius, Hintis, 1979, 127 pages.

8. Kuznickas, “Sinolaikine kntalikiskoji filosofijs," Vilnius, Hintis, 1976,
208 pages.

3. Ya. Rama, "Problems of Philosophy and History of Catholicism in the Writings
of Soviet Scholars (1967-1977)," in the volume "Aktual'nyye probleny izuchcniya
istorii religii i ateizma" [Current Problems of Study of the History of
Religion and Atheism], Leningrad, 1979, page 166.

Ibid.

COPYRIGHT: Vydavetstva "Navuka i tekhnika" Vestsi AH BSSR, Seryya gramadskikh navuk,

1981

3024

C50:

1800/65

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FillClﬂﬂC1A1.lﬂll(l'LY

REGIONAL

BOOK ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, ETHNIC TENSIONS IN MOLDAVIA REVIBHBD
Moscow SOVETSKAXA ETNOCRAPIYA in Russian Mo 5 Sap-Oct 81 pp 184-187

[Review by G.V. Starovoytova of the book "Opyt etnosotsiologicheskogo issledovaniya
obraza zhizni (po naterialan Moldavskoy SSR) ["An Arte-pt at an Bthno-Sociological
Study of a Ray of Life (On the Basis of the Materials of the Moldavian ssn)"], Re-

sponsible Bditor-Yu.v. Arutyunyau, Editors-L.M. Drobizheva and v.8. Zelenchuk,
Moscow, 1980. 268 pages]

[Text] The first thing that one wishes to take note of in speaking about this

new book by a collective of ethnosociologistsis that it establishes a new stage of
research in accordance with the plan "An Optimisation of the Socio-Cultural Cone
ditions for the Develop-eat and Coning Together of Nations in the USSR" which is
being carried out by the concrete social research sector of the Institute of Ethno-
graphy of the USSR Acadesy of Sciences under the direction of Yu.V. Arutyunyan.

At the previous stage the methodological presises and general tendencies of a

study of the processes of the economic, social, and cultural develop-ant of peoples
which are characteristicofthecountry as a whole were mapped out. This stage was
also concluded by the publication of a collective monograph.

During the last decade the multi-national population of the cities and villages of
our country's union republics was the subject of study. The qualitatively new ap-
proach t3 social phenomena which has been esployed in a number of republics (in
Estonia, Uzbekistan, Georgia, and others) is reflected with the greatest fullness
in the monograph under review which is devoted to a study of the present-day way
of life of the population of Moldavia.

The study is of an overall character and embraces the ethnic characteristics of
phenomena both of the base and superstructural spheres of social development. Thus,
with more detail than at the first stage of the realization of the research plan,
there is an analysis of the socio-professional structure of the population, the

phenosena of vertical and horizontal social nobility, and also of the level of the
claims of urban and rural inhabitants in the sphere of labor.

A wide range of sources, including the periodical press, the reports of cultural
institutions and creative unions, and others was enlisted to study activities out-
aide of production--everyday life, leisure, and culture. These materials provided
an important supplement to the data of an ethno-sociological questionnaire on the

16
FOI10FFKJA1.USI(MULX
FOI1OFFKJA1.USEIONIY

behavior of the respondents in the sphere of leisure, including behavior connected
with the consumption of artistic values. The use of these sources made it possible
to compare actual behavior with the preferable behavior which was disclosed with
the help of the "projected situations" that were proposed during the course of

the questionnaire.

In order to characterize the ethno-cultunﬂ.orientations of the respondents a new
concept is introduced in the book--"The Syndrome of the Level of International Ex-
pression in Culture"; this, as the authors conceive it, are "combined orientations
toward the national, extra-national, and international." (page 8) As during the
previous stages of the all-union ethno—sociological study, the questionnaire was
conducted in accordance with a program which makes it possible to construct sev-
eral scales of variables that correspond to continuous of the following ethno-
cultural orientations: national-international, folk-professional, traditional-
modern.

The sphere of family life is examined in the book in no less detail than the field
of cultural consumption. As these spheres were compared during the course of the

study a check was made of the hypothesis regarding a decrease in ethnic uniqueness
on the scale of "labor-culture-family life," and also of the hypothesis regarding
an inter~generationa1 decrease in the role of the ethnic element in culture.

It is important to note that research was conducted for all of the above-named
thematic lines not only among the native nationality--Holdsvians,-—but also

among Russian and other smaller ethnic groups in the population of Moldavia (Ukrain-
ians, Gagauz, Jews, Bulgarians, and others). This is another new feature of the

present stage of ethno-sociological research. Both the urban and the rural pop-

ulations of the republic were studied on the basis of similar programs.

The use of cohort analysis for a study of the dynamics of ethno-cultural orienta-
tions is also methodologically valuable, since "like living historical monuments,
in their habits, interests, and features people of different generations reflect
to a definite extent the dominating tendencies of their time." (p 16)

The monograph under review reflects the main characteristic of the current stage
of ethno-sociology--an attempt to consistently employ at all of the stages of re-
search (from the formulation of its theoretical premises to the operational level
of the development of concrete methodologies) the category of "way of life" which
makes it possible to unite all of the many-sided empirical materials into an inte-
grated conceptual picture. The introduction to the work takes interesting note of
the different approaches of the different social sciences and sciences (including
sociology and ethno-sociolosy) to way of life studies. The authors share one of
the points of view which is widespread in sociology regarding the content of the
concept of "way of life" which is interpreted as the aggregate of the objective
conditions for life and of the very forms of life. In accordance with this un-
derstanding, both materials on the "communal and social conditions of way of life"
and information "characterizing the way of life (behavior) itself of socio—ethnic
groups" was collected. (p 9) Indeed, everyday behavior can be established relat-
ively easily on the basis of mass empirical material. A study of the motives for

17
F0l10FFKJAl.USEIH‘EY
FOI(MHHC1ALl£ﬂEONLV

activity and of the interaction between the psychological and behavioral aspects

of way of life is a methodologically more difficult task; however, the creators of
the program found s way to accomplish it, obtaining during the course of the socio-
logical questionnaire data not-only about the actual state of affairs in the sphere
of labor, culture, everyday life, and interpersonal relations, but also about de-

sires and preferences in these spheres, about the level of satisfaction of the
respondents and so forth.

A detailed consideration of the objectively developed specific nature of economic,
demographic, and other spheres (the predominance of rural inhabitants; a larger
number of large cities than on the average in the country; intensive migrations
into cities; a consideration of the historical characteristics of the development
of Right-Bank and Left-Bank Moldavia, and others) permits the authors to give a
many-sided description of therepublic's population, and also a detailed socio-
ecological characterization of the environment.

An important characteristic of this region is its highest, compared with the other
republics cf the USSR, population density (117 people per square kilometer), and
also its substantial predominance of rural population (in 1979 61 percent of Hold-
avis's inhabitants lived in villages, while in the country as an average the pro-
portion of the rural population is 38 percent).

Proceeding from a three-member typology of urbanization levels (from low, with
substantial differences between urban and rural ways of life, to high which re-
moves these differences :nd decreases the orientation of rural inhabitants to
migrate to the cities), present-day Moldavia can be classified as having an
averagetnbanization level. The transformation of rural life, the assimilation by
rural inhabitants of the values of urban culture, and an increase in their overall
mobility-—a11 of this, in combination with the preservation of the actual cultural
and everyday differences between the village and the city, makes it desirable and,
because of the insufficiency of labor resources in the city, also possible for
substantial groups of rural inhabitants to move to the city. The development of
social consciousness outstrips the actual process of migration into cities, which
is expressed in the appreciation by the respondents of the advantages of an urban
way of life. (p 126) It is not accidental that one-half of the republic'a urban
population has been formed through the mechanical migration of able-bodied ages
from the villages.

Analyzing the dynamics of the aocio-professional structure, the authors demonstrate
the intensive changes in it and a high level of mobility, although this structure
bears the steep of historically developed settlement systems (village-city) and of
an inter-ethnic division of labor. Hith the appearance of a socio-professional
structure of a single type, orientations in the sphere of labor activity grow
closer to one another among the different nationalities. In our opinion, the book
provides a correct interpretation of social expectations with respect to labor and
of the diversity of motives for being satisfied or dissatisfied with work; in add-
ition, account is taken both of the content of labor and of its prestige and of
its dependence upon the level of the claims which have developed among the differ-
ent educational groaps. There is an interesting nation of the differentiation
of the degree of satisfaction with work among the epresentatives of the different
nationalities within a single socio-professional structure. At first glance it is

18
IN)! OFII(JAl.lEﬂI(HVLY
FOR OFFKJALlEiIONLX

a surprise that in the different groups (among low-skill workers and high-skill
workers, and also among the intelligentsia) there was a relatively larger number

of Moldavians who were not completely satisfied with the content of their work
(approximately by 18-25 percent) than Russians, Ukrainians, Jews, and Gagauz

(pp 54-55), and this despite the high rates of social growth among the Moldavian
population which in the past was basically the agrarian. It is possible that this
can be explained precisely by the accelerated urbanization and the social mobility
of the Moldavians, which leads to increased demands upon the content of labor which
in certain cases may overtake the actual possibilities of production technology.

Different rates of vertical social mobility serve as one of the levers for equali-
zing the socio—professional structures of the different ethnic groups, which, in
its turn, is the real basis for increasing the fundamental similarity in ways of
life of all Soviet peoples (p 69) and bringing closer to one another the ethnoses

with regard to the most important cultural-everyday and socio-psychological char-
acteristics.

The section on the psychological aspects of national relations not only reveals the
uxuitions which are characteristic on the whole for the Soviet way of life and
which promote the development of friendly inter-national relations in our country,
but also examines the influence on this process of such factors as changes in the
social structure of peoples which come into contact with one another, the cir-

cumstances of their cultural development, and national-cultural orientations in
each region.

The actual social status of women and their socio-psychological makeup, particu-
larly_thcir values, is a very important emperical indicator of the changes in the
everyday family sphere. With regard to these indicators, the younger generation
of Moldavian women is markedly different from the older women. A higher level of
education strengthens the orientation toward the labor sphere of life and toward
attaining the respect of society, and a withdrawal from narrow family interests.
(pp 88-92) The analysis of intra-family conflicts which are connected with the
changes in the traditional ideas about male and female family roles is very inter-
esting (p 95 and following). The relatively higher level of satisfaction with
family life among men (p 98), it seems to us, is explained by two groups of factors:
a) the partial preservation of the inequality of women in everyday life; b) the
contradiction between the declared rejection of a “double standard" in behavior and
the actually existing inertia of norms which are still different for men and women.

There is no doubt that the part of the study which is devoted to the common socio-
psychological interests of the representatives of the different nationalities
which live in Moldavia is of especial value. It shows up in their selection of the
most important values in life (in their answers to the question: "what is essential
in order to feel happy?"). The ethnic differences in ranking such values as fam-
ily, interesting work, the respect of people, material well-being, conditions for
creativity, and others proved to be extremely negligible, but, in our opinion,

they reflect to a certain extent the historically developed characteristics of the
"national character" of different peoples (see the data on the distribution of
choices on p 151 of the monograph). The differentiated analysis of the choices of
the most important life orientations by the different age and social groups makes
it possible to determine the inter-generational dynamics of social expectations and
their dependence upon professional occupations.

19
FtﬂlfﬂﬂﬂKJAl.USEi0NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The question regarding distinguished people of the past and present who are re-
spected by the respondent is used with wit in the monograph as an indicator of
ethno-cultural and socio-political interests.

One should include among the virtues of this section of the study the presence in
it of data about the level of the religiousness (p 155-156) of the population of
different generations--this information which, unfortunately, is rarely found in
the publications of ethno-sociologists is, in addition to scientific, of great
practical value.

The monograph provides a truly exhaustive review of the cultural life of the re-
public and a deep and full description of linguistic processes. The size of this
review does not allow a treatment of all of these aspects of the study; let us
only note that one of its methodological finds is an analysis of the factors in-
volved in the establishment of bilingualism among the different groups of the urban
population, and also a determination of the "index of the school factor"; that is,
the relationship of the proportion of school instruction in a second language to
the sum of all of the other factors in the develop-cat of bilingualism. Along the
virtues of the work one should name its study of the development of the socio-
linguistic parameters of bilingualism (competence, activity, and orientation to-
ward a second language) among the Moldavians, Russians, Ukrainians, Gagauz, and
other peoples of Moldavia and of the correlation between linguistic processes and
socio-psychological features, production activity, and way of life stereotypes
chapter 5, paragraph 2).

One of the monograph's sections is devoted to the very important question of in-
terpersonal relations between the representatives of the different nationalities
in the republic. It is natural, that the basic arena for inter-ethnic contacts is
the city, since its population is poly-ethnic. The analysis of the national com-
position of the respondents' families and of their attitude toward work in nat-
ionally mixed collectives and toward marriages between their relatives and repre-
sentatives of other nationalities speaks of the existence of solid friendly re-
lations between the peoples which live in Moldavia. A characteristic of inter-
personal associations among peoples which are developing at especially rapid
rates which has been noted by the authors is interesting: the norms for interper-
sonal relations which have been adopted by the youth exercise an influence on the
views of their parents, that is, people of the older generation (p 206).

The two generalized models in the concluding section are striking. One of them--
a graph of statistical relationships and of prospects for the transformation of
the characteristics "nationality" and a block of the characteristics "labor,"
"culture," and "family" (p 266) differ advantageously from the schemes which are
frequently used in sociological texts with their generalness and the graphicness
of the tendencies they illustrate (a weakening of the connection between nation-
ality and the labor sphere, a strengthening of the connection between the sphere
of labor and culture, the great importance of national-cultural characteristics,
and others).

The other model--a conventional socio-cultural portrait of the "comprehensively
developed personality" (p 246) includes five spheres of social activity which are

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIHICHNHCJAI.USE(MVLY

singled out in a conventionally-expert manner as criteria for the comprehensiveness
of development: a rise in educational levels, athletic and artistic activities,
reading, the education of children, and public work. A successful method is found
for employing this five-member description model for disclosing the degree to which
comprehensively active individuals are widespread in the different socio-demograpbic
and national groups.

One also wishes to take note of the completeness and accessibility of the methodo-
logical material which is described in the appendix and which can be used directly
in sociological studies (methods of planning and siting the sample, an evaluation
of how representative it is), or for a general orientation with certain mathemat-
ical methods and indicators (the form of issuing materials from computers, measure
of information, entrophy. the informational coefficient of relations, and others).
Given the present accumulation of the empirical materials of ethno-sociological
studies, it is extremely useful to have the possibility of comparing the indicators
of analogous coefficients for pairs of characteristics--the matrix of relations
coefficients which is cited in the appendix provides this kind of possibility.

The book is not free of certain shortcomings. As frequently happens with collec-
tive monographs, while there is a general thematic harmony, individual sections
differ stylistically--from strict academic style to a journalistic style.

Sometimes an endeavor to throw light on all of the aspects of the republic's life
which are disclosed in this overall study (labor, culture, everyday life, associ-
ation, the socio-political sphere, demographic and ecological conditions, and so
forth) blocks out the very important and chief line--a study of a way of life which
is not simply a component of the processes which occur in different spheres, but

a resultant overall phenomenon.

Despite these individual defects, the book represents an unquestionable success
for the creative collective of ethno-sociologists.

The tendencies which have been studied in the ethnic processes occurring in the
Moldavian SSR testify to the coming together of the most important aspects of the
ways of life of different groups. "At the same time, social community and unity in
way oflﬂebytw means signifies a leveling off of national characteristics. On the
contrary, national traditions make the expression of a single social essence more
diverse, in keeping with the historical forms of the culture of each nation."(p 231)

The general tendencies which are disclosed during the course of the study are syn-
thesized with methodological success in the concluding section by means of the con-
struction of interrelationship graphs for the characteristics being studied. The
monograph's final conclusions once again confirm the correctness of the criterion
of the optimality of ethno-cultural processes which is adopted at the first stage
of the ethno-sociological study: an enrichment of national culture with the ach-
ievements of other cultures while retaining specific progressive elements; and the
realization and embodiment of the general in the special, national-specific.

I believe that this new book by the country's leading ethno-sociological collective
will be a landmark in the development of this interdisciplinary field of knowledge

21
FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(HVL\
FOR OFF“ 1“. USE ONLY

and will be welcoued with interest by a wide range of specialists who will acquaint
themselves not only with the directions of new research, but also with an advanced
methodological arsenal.

LI

2.

3.

FOOTNOTES

See "Sotsial'noye i nstsionsl'noye. Opyt etnoaotsiologicheskogo issledovaniya
[Social and National. Attelpt at an Bthnosociological Study)", Moscow, 1973.

See "Sotsiologicheskiye ocherki o Sovetskoy Eatonii [Sociological Essays on
Soviet Estonia)". Tallin, 1979.

See, for example, "Prognozirovaniye v aotsiologicheskikh issledovsniyakh.
Hetolodogicheskiye probleny [Forecasting in Sociological Studies. Methodo-
logical Problemsl", Ed. I. V. Bestuzhev-Leda, Moscow, "Hysl'" 1978, p. 200.

L. A. Gordon, "The General in the Particular: Sociological Essays on
Estonia", SOTSIOLOGICHBSKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA No 6, 1980, p. 189. Review of book
"Sotsiologicheskiye ocherki o Sovetskoy Batonii [Sociological Essays on Soviet
Estonial". Tallinn. 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Sovetsksya atnografiya". 1981

2959

CSO:

1800/86 END

22
FOR1OFT1C1AI.USEIONLY