FOR. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10174
9 December 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 56/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain infatuation primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. .Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mtion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10174

9 December 1981 .

-HORLDHIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Dnues
(rouo 56/81)

CONTENTS
BIA
“(NC KONG
Briefs
Drug I-‘ight Statistics
wiun Trafficking Sentence
INDIA
Briefs
Opium Production Problem
Orisse Narcotics Arrest
Border Opium Snugglere
Bonbey Opiu- Seizure
MALAYSIA

Flood of Drugs I-‘ron 'Golden Triangle' hated
(R38 Gmtton; BULLETIN TOM, 2 NOV 81)eseseeeeeeeeseeeeseoseeee

Drug Arrests. Seizures in Septenber 1981
(m STRAITS nms, 13 Oct 81)eeoeoeeeoeoeeosoooeesseoeeeeeoeeee

Government Agencies merged With Apathy Toward Drug Problem
(“3" STRAITS um. 12 mt 81)..eseeenoeseeesessseeseeooeo-eeeoo

PAKISTAN

Booking of Iranians Involved in Heroin Smuggling (bnpleted
(mmmc “ms, 11 NOV 81)....0..0.000......CCQOIOOIIQOOIOOOOOOI

Briefs
Smuggling Attempt Blocked
Air Passenger's Heroin

PH

uwNw

\D‘O
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mAlLAND

Cowat, Negotiations With Sua Noted
(SIM RAT SAPPAM HIM, 18kt m)ooooooooooooooooococoooeooc

Narcotics Police Seize Sb Kilogram of Pure Heroin
(11!! NATICN REVIEW, 28 Oct 81, M0 SIAM, 28 Oct 81)............

Arrests After Long Surveillance
'DAo SIAM' Photo

Rising Abme of Thinner Cannes ancem
(Naulnoi 'ma-aaathien; mu NATION, 19. 21 Oct 81)............

Brie fa
m1 Troopa Killed

CANADA

Uee of Write of Assistance by m Criticized
(Edmru1;m GLOBE “D “IL, 31 Oct 81)....OOOOOOOOOOOCOOO.

EAST 8W3
CEOKBLGVAKIA

Briefs
Narcotics mief SIN-ate Policenen
Another Pharmacy Drug Burglary

LATIN “ERICA
BAHAMAS

Police (bniaaioner Cites Reduction in Drug Problem
(Athena “CHOU; m mums, 3 0c: 81)aooooooecooooooooooooooc

Creunen Mamiaeed, Captain Fined in Drug Boat Once
(m mam, 7 0C: 81)....000000OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00....0000

Briefs
Bail in Cocaine Cece

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13

18

19

20
20

21

23

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BERMUDA

Court Told rhrihuana Ia Becoming Socially Acceptable
(m ROYAL Wm. 19 Oct 81)ooo-aoseoooeooosoooooooo-ooooooo

COLOMBIA

Gusto-s Officials Investigated for lethequnlone
(Bl. nmo, 26 8"? 81)....000.00000IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0......

(bcaine, Ehrihuena Seizures Ihscribed
(EL BPEW. 29 sep 81)..IIOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOO0...0..

Briefs
Cocaine Ibegue Area
Ballucinosenic Pills, Equipment Seized

PEXICO

M 'l‘raffickers Seized Hith Cocaine
(BL sol. m Waco, 6 Oct 81)0...0......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Narihuena Smuggling in Municipal Jail Discovered
(EL MARIO D8 PIEDMS NBGBAS, 14, 20 Oct 81).................

Deputy Harden Accused
“traffickers Sentenced

Sabina Harihuana traffickers (hpmred
(BL Dunc 8 Pub“ “new, 7 Oct 81)....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Cocaine, Herihuana Seized in mree Bnida
(EXCEISIOR’ 20 mt 81)..00......'00.00.0....OOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOO

Traffickers Seized with (bcaine
(Bxcalslon’ 22 mt 81)....0.0000000ICOOOOOOOOOOOQOOO000......

Briefs
Heroin Trefficker Sentenced
Confisceted Drugs Burned
Manhuena Trefficker Makes Stetemnt

Prison Counterfeiting. Escape Plot
Confiscated Drugs Removed

PJP Search for Drugs

Drug-(haying Plane Crashes
Officials Arrested so Traffickers
Colombian Trafficker Sentenced
Opium Cargo Seized

Coloubian Drugs Ship Seized

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Briefs
Anti-Drug Operation.

- c -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

EGYPT
Briefs
Hashish Arrest M.
1m
Briefs
Opium Discovery in Ehorasan 65
Khorssan Opiun Find 45
Gachsaran Drug Find 45
Khorssan Drug Ben]. 65
Opiul Bust 65
Opiun Seizure 106
Iorbat Jan Opium Find 46
Heroin in Borszjan 46
Drug Smugglers Sentenced 46
sun-5mm AFRICA
$011111 AFRICA
Briefs
new Haul 47
REST EUROPE
DMRK
Poll: Host Danes Think Narcotics is Biggest Social Problel
(Auger Schultz: 1333mest THEME. 26 Oct 81).................. 68
NONAY
Social Affairs Minister Outlines New Drug mforceunt Plan
(mmsm. suov 81)....0000.......0O...00.000.000.00005000000 ”
SHEEN

Sweden Plans Steps To Interdiec Drugs From (bpsnhngon
(sv‘m whing; mglmnumr' w Oct 81)....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOO 51

Cost Effectiveness of Queens Drug Effort Argued
(an. Gardegsrd, Dag Jonson; svmsu MIAMI, 15 Oct 81)....... 52

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Swedish-Developed Toilet 1'0 Foil Smugglers Installed
(“if Dahlm; DAMS METER, 23 Oct “)000000000Cocos-0000.0...

Drugs Expert Questions Treatnent Success Claim
(Ian “I cue; smsn “GIANT, 4 mt 81)....0000000000000000

Analysis of Drug Fatalities Indicates Some Ilpruvemnt
(Nih‘olof knell; 5mm “amt, ’0 mt 81)....0000000000000

Campaign Against Drugs Among Children, Youth
(Smsu “MT. 11 mt 81)..0.00..0..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIQ'O

Helm Resident Convicted for Smuggling Large haunt of Esshish
(Sme Olofson; SVENSKA DAGBIADB‘I‘. 9 Oct 81).....................

Police Official Discusses Effectiveness of Street Raids
(Per Sjogren; DAGENS WEEK, 25 Oct 81)........................

Police Seize Largest Amount of Heroin Ever in Nordic Ares
(“if Mlm; “ms man, 27 00: 81)....030000000.000.00.00.

Briefs
Tighter Prison Drugs Enforcement

SWITZERLAND

Inalysis of Narcotics Problem in Zurich
(“BUB ZUBRCHER “IMO, 15/16 NOV 81)....oooeeeooooeecess0.00.000

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

55

57

63

65

67

72

73
DRUG FIGHT STATISTICS--The Commissioner of Custons and Controls. Mr Douglas Jordan,
told a Rotary Club of Kowloon East meeting that he was hopeful the local drug prob-
lem had been reduced to 'hunmgeeble” proportions. The nunber of addicts had come

of last year. This could reflect either more snuggling or better detection methods.
he said--the last harvest in the Golden Triangle produced a heavy crop of sons 600
tonnes of opiua. Another trend singled out by Mr Jordan was the growing use of
”diversionary" tactics by drug runners, where they brought narcotics in by way of
third countries-which were not major producers of opiun-such as Taiwan, the Philip-
pines or even China. Mr Jordan said: “In the past few months Thai customs au-
thorities have seized two substantial hauls of heroin, destined for longkong.

which cane froa Canton and Peking." He added that. so far. no substantial quanti-

ties had been found coming direct tron China. [Excerpt] [long long SOUTH CHINA
MORNING POST in English 11 Nov 81 p 11]

OPIUH TRAFFICKING SENTENCE--A construction worker. "has Chi-hung (28), was senten-
ced to 4 1/2 years' imprisonment yesterday after he pleaded guilty to possessing
4,236.8 grans of opium for unlawful trafficking. The court was told that in the
early hours of July 5, as a result of information received, police raided a flat

CSO: 5320/9102
BRIEFS

OPIUH PRODUCTION PROBLDiSnIndore, Oct 22 (WU—A new technique developed in
Australia by the opium cultivatere has narred the prospects of export of Indian
morphine to the world market. A large quantity of raw opium has piled up at
the Neemuch opium processing factory, according to Deputy Commissioner (Narco-
tics) S. Chandra. Talking to new-men here yesterday Mr Chandra said under the
technique, Australian cultivators squeezed out morphine directly from the
poppy, while in India the morphine had to be extracted out of opium, which
escalated the production cost of Indian morphine. Hr Chandra said efforts were
being made by the department to minimise the production cost so that it could
compete well in the world market. The Union Government was. contemplating some
steps to explore the morphine market. Hr Chandra said from this year the Gov-
ernment has decided to restructure the price of opium and the minimi- rate in-
creased from Rs 120 to Rs 130 per kg, while the maximum from Rs 220 to Rs 300
per kg. He disclosed that last year 706,887 kilograms of opium was procured
from the cultivators who were paid more than Rs 13.5 crores. he said the
Government has also decided that any cultivator, who failed to give a yield

of 630 kilograms per hectares, would not be given the patts next year. This,
he said, was being done to check the smuggling of the commodity. A record
1.041. kg of contraband opium was seized in Hadhya Pradesh this year, Dir Chandra
disclosed. [Text] [New Delhi PATRIOT in English 23 Oct 81 p '4]

ORISSA NARCOTICS ARREST—Cuttack, Oct 28 (UNI)-Bxciee personnel with police
help seized 643 kg of ganja and more than 20 kg of opium worth about Rs 3.50.000
in what was described as the biggest haul of narcotics in Oriesa in recent times.
The seizure was made at a den at Barchana near here early today. Giving this
information to UNI excise inspector B. Naik who with the additional district
magistrate Hr U.C. Jens, conducted the raid, said a man and woman were arrested
in connection with the seizure. The contraband was suspected to have been
smuggled from Nepal. [Text] [New Delhi PATRIOT in English 29 Oct 81 p 10]
BORDER OPIUH smGGLERs-~Ferozepore, Nov Gum exchange of fire took place last
night between the jawans o! the Border Security Force and five smgglers coming
from the Pakistan side. After the clash one of then was captured but four escaped
in the dark. Opium weighing about 20 kg, 12 Japanese made transistor-curtain re-
corders and Japanese-made caneras were left behind by the mgglers. [Chandigarh
THE TRIBUNE in mglish 7 Nov 81 p 14]

BOMBAY OPIUM SEIZURB--Bombay, Mather lO--A blind nan frcn Mauritius who calls here
as a tourist was arrested while he was about to fly back hosts yesterday on a charge
of narcotics smuggling. The custom air intelligence unit seized nearly 15 kg. of
narcotics, believed to be opium and valued at Rs. 59,000, a source said today.
Along with the suspect, Mal-mod Rashad lbbaas, his wife, Bibi Aissa aobass, was also
arrested. The contraband was concealed in two large suitcases. The couple's story
is that they had last their baggage and had requested a taxi driver, who was taking
the two round the city, to buy two new suitcases for th . The seizure was effec-
ted by intelligence officers 5. Y. More, Rajyan, ‘l‘. s. mkrishnani and Chandrase-
khar, under the supervision of superintendent D. 9. made, and direction of the
assistant collector, Mr. M. x. chakraborty. [whey '1'!!! nuts 01' INDIA in English
11 Nov Bl p 5)

C80: 5300/7010

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080028-9

DRUG ARRESTS, SEIZURES IN SEPTENBER 1981
Kuala Lunpur NEW STRAITS TIMES in English 13 Oct 81 p 2

[Text]

0‘

CSO:

5300/8309

KUALA LUMPUR;
Mon. —- Six foreignere
were onion; 5
nrreeied lui mom
tor ire/licking i1

d .-

C D dlrccior Dem
Abdul Rehmen Inn-Au
enid two oi iheumvere
Thole while the not were
lrom Singapore. United
Stem. New Zeeiend end
‘hlrkey. .

Thin brim io Q the
number oi ioroignere er-
mied by Holey-inn po-

lice can you (or mum. :

in; in d

Deiui: ohm aid
police eieo deieined 63:
oihore ieei month (or de-
deh oltom

During ihe month po-
lice recovered 12.8 h; o(
heroin end in in; oi gen-

3..
Seizure

The emouni of these
druge eeixod ieei month
we: more ihen in Auguu.
when only 12 It; oi heroin
and 2.1 I: oi genie Iver.
“cove":

Deiuln Rehrnen ei-
iribuicd this to bciior in-
iormeiion (rorn the pub-
lic ennui drug eciiviiiee.

The blunt ecieure oi
heroin me on Sept. 2 oi
the a». mlie .Ieien Kem-
per. Tnpeh. Police

lion recovered iwo
conninin‘ 0.0 I; oi the
drug ei Free School
Rona. They detained e
women.‘

Two nuepecied ire!-

,!iellere were nieo heid ei

n rrnnrim in Penn;
wing“- 31. Polioe re-
covered 1.1 is e! heroin
frorn morn. . ‘

 

VI

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDP82-00850R000400080028-9
PENANG. Sum—'- The
Stetc Umno Youth w
dey Nested minletrlee
end Government

lee Involved In
techli dru ehuu
{or th r epet tic et~
tltude. -

Umno Youth eecurit
hureeu cheirnaen H l
Khelld Yunue eeid noel
o! lheee mlnletrlee end
emiee were not giving

”0“"! oo-operellon to
m?" to tultle the
in
“Then le no eenee o!
mcy In the veﬂm
minletrtee end Govern-

ment exenclee to mint
Pentedeln ln cerr In;

out ecuvitiee to fight

“NI thee.“ he eeld et e
:3“ contet'ence here to-

lle eeid the hureeu'e
member: were hrieled by

Pemedem olllcleie In
Kuele bumpur yesterdey
end whet end wee e
to: from net otutory ple-
ture of the etiilude o!
meny ol the ie In-
volved in tee ling the
mem.

Heji Kheiid eeid ec-
cordlng to Pemedem
there were 33,000 drug de-
pendente In the country
end eech you- the ﬁgure
eteo increeelng.

0/8309

’ilnlee'e‘ if ”one ln-

m“ '2'..." m"?
eln e -
tltudeendincorponlode
eoneeol intohle

eetlone. t e.eituetlon
would .get voree. he
vetoed ,

Urgency :

“The Government
eeye W M to one o!
the inela- minke oi the
”m‘mﬁrﬁ“
to at.
5.1: ""°."'a‘:...““..“"s:

ee

emu to meetghe
reqmunenteotthepoob
Icahn-odd. .:

lieu Kheiid eeld the
preoentJeollitlee e33.»
eble tor tailing
eta-e “cen :Ig‘ :8:
ehwt one
Mir: 5
' Telling the Heﬂth
ulnle ee en ex le.
he teetlltlee .. I-
eble et hoepttele waln-
euttioient to 5"
Peneden‘e neede ,

The Wellere Ilia
hed only tour reheht te-
tlon comes \ehlch oonld
eccommodete onlyﬁu
eddlctl-

‘l‘here wee eteo inﬂa-
cient epece in Jelleqnd
ioch-upe to houee eddjpte

Hejl Khelld eel
Internetioe lllni r
weenotdoln;
euggeeted thet ll
ecnen more {lune

dent-tooth;

tone to mete en the
le en evereneee' ot
he ineptitude otjlhe

er ,1
Khelld eleo old
the undue eet§u
ehould he unusual
eepecieidy et letrlet
level to Inehe it Innate!-
teetlve. amt”. neny
dietrlet-level Penuden

eonuutteee were inoc-
uveqhdtcecuve -

He‘. celled "on
Pemedem to revivefthe
Stete AntIDedeh Com-
mittee. Religious leeden
end youth hodiee ehould
eleo become more: In-
volved in enti-dedeh eo-
tlvttleezhe eeld. '

Hoot Kheltd sold It wee
eteo eeeentiel {or the ' b-
llc to ehenge its ettl ude
end reeliee the reel den-
[or oi drug ehuee. .1

Perhepe. he new:' the
Govetnnmu could etudy
the poeeibliity 0! con-
elderln; eddiote el crun-
lnele end eutnorteln; the
pollcetodeteinend any
out euminetlone. like
urine tents. to determine
whether e aspect wee en
eddlct or not.

At weeent. unleu en
eddlct wee ln'poeeeeoion
0! drugs. he would go
tree. he eeid.

3
BOOKING 0F IRANIANS INVOLVED IN HEROIN SMUGGLING WED

Karachi mRNING NEWS in English ll Nov 81 p 8

[Text]

The Cuctom euthomtee yester-
day aubmltud noel chum
nuns: the too Ironing e
German and and then hits-Int
coatect tn Keruhl invoked In
the annulus or Rs. 6 crore
worth heroin. In the court 0!
session Jud . Mr. Abdul
Gheloor Shel . .

The chellen was sub oitted
alter the ecctmd pom-t: cou-
{cud holore the authorities
ml, yﬂlerdly morrdng :ttor

wo_eeeks ol gruelling thtetrp-_

gallon and imatluum.

The accused werethea re
muted la jodlchl cutody.

Rue Muheehlr. en m ce-
tiooel. who posed hluelt u e
student of Berlin Unlwelty.
Jooette edge. e German beauty.
«to erreeted by the elrport
CLIMBI- on Oct. 1’1. talcum
Howe they «to due to hoerd
on Mr France 015'“. after the

'contrebend heroln m {otmd

conceded to two out tome.

Rm Teoevl e friend of the
Gem-o .lrL who hed come to
one theta on et the airport.
hoover. rnede good tale coupe
end we: later caught et hhore
ole-port while he no ehout to
lone hidden {or ladle.

monomox

leing dell!!! o! the Invent!-
getlon. Mr Abdul WM
Assistant Collector Cultome told
A" the! dunno lnvesllutlon
the Culoms lmoetlcetou Med
to lonte the local count-t o! the
accused.

The ocrutinv of udder‘s Gult
Koul record revealed the of“
”Me a! too new. heme-lo
Khan Bedshlh and "If Gul.
who had clued In the come

hotel end thee too check
when an Muhvw end
Ion the hotel to ﬂy to no
Ram of Intonation:
Wide from the hotel
mu Ari! Col and then ‘1
mode ehout 1.5 to In cm:
MM? number lo net-I
ecmtlnv o! the record

rave-led the: Roz:
hed also undo colt
this Met. A l«
telephone number :
none of one Rachel
an the detected
ever, Bllel could
traced.

A loco]. carpet ‘
wlth whoa Teqevi !
nose tome took a
investiaetors to
dance of one Ghul.
Abtduda in Clift
the some number.
ﬂatly Ahmad. and. 1mm
amt! hr 60mm! or heroin
ta Balm with A!" Gul Ind
nun Mm who «I! dropped
when they could nub. able to
at via [tom the Genus:
“My.

Thu than Aqa nut run
and 1m“: to bﬂn‘ the con.
tub-M Ind promised to pay
mm 20.“ DH and 10.000 DH
mainly.

m c5010 hmory when traced
revenue that Ava-d. «I the
Mutual coordinator 0! the
ticket In Pakuun whﬂn Ruth

M: to 30mm .
(um lama tor! the re-
coma mo and mo

wooun hum from AUM
.hlch Ran Tau-vi m mm
him Mr «but. than. from
Ramble-App
8R1 BPS

SHUGCLINC ATTEMPT BLOCKED--Islenabad--Is1sllsbsd. 23 Nov (APP)-—Pekistani customs
officials have blocked an attenvt to snuggle out to Iran and Europe 80 kilos

(176 pounds) of heroin worth about 120 nillion dollars on the international
market, it was reported today. The drug haul last weekend was "the world's third
biggest and unparalleled in the history of Pakistan," customs officer Khalil
Masud told a press conference in Quetts, Belushistan, today. Costa-s officers
seized the heroin at Naushki-Dalbandan on the Pakistani border with Iran on '
Saturday after an exchange of fire with the snugglers, who escaped unharmed under
cover of darkness. The heroin was recovered inside a truck immobilised by the
shooting. Hr Hssud said the Pakistani haul was surpassed only by the past seizure
of 290 kilos of heroin in Iran and 150 kilos of the drug in the United States.
[Text] [Hong Kong AF? in English 0108 GMT 24 Nov 81]

AIR PASSENGER'S HERO!N-Refined heroin powder weighing 1.200 kilogram worth over
Rs. 10 million was recovered yesterday fron the false button of a suit case of an
air passenger by the Drug Enforcement Cell Staff. According to cutons sources
the passenger was identified as Dr. Rasir Hahnood of Sielkot. lie was booked for
New York by PR 711 when he was caught on a 'spy' intonation by the Drug sleuths.
The doctor is being questioned to know his source of supply and his '1inks' abroad
if any. Meanwhile. the Drug Cell Staff off-loaded a city bminessnsn Mullah '
for carrying US dollars 10500 'illegslly' and let his off on mention of a bond.

The businessman was booked for Hong Kong and u said to be . 'fre uent .
[Text] [Karachi DAHN in English 15 Nov 81 p 3] q traveller .

C50: 5300/ 6566
COMBAT. NEGOTIATIONS HIT“ SUA NOTED
Bangkok sum run was new in mi 18 Oct 81 pp 10-11
[Articlez "Minority Rebellions on the "eatern Front Have Not Changed"]

[Text] 0n 6-7 October, a foreign armed force of 700 people surrounded an RTA unit '
of 39 in the vicinity of the highlands of Ban Raw Phys Samakkhi, Mae Khan Subdiaa-
trict, Mae Chan District, Chieng Rei Province. The latest reports concerning that
fight are that only four Thai troops escaped encircle-cut. Pour foreign soldiers'
bodies were picked up.

Who was the foreign armed force? ‘ihey were Uurnese troops or those of the United
Shan State (SUA [Shan United Arlyl). Lt Gen Son Rhettaphan stated that "we cannot
yet reveal who they were because we are afraid that it could affect international
relations." The SUA are Khun Sa's troops. They are a tribal minority army to which
the Thai Government has issued an ultimatum to withdraw from Thai territory. In
fact, this armed force is still carrying on its activities back and forth between
the borders of the two countries in order to avoid being wiped out. They are still
the armed force that controls the biggest share of the narcotics trafficking in the
Golden Triangle. They control nearly 70 percent of the trafficking in the border
area. "Klnm Sa" himself is the fifth ranking heroin king of the world. His [real]
name is Chang Ch'-fu and the This have issued a warrant for his arrest and have of-
fered a reward of 500,000 baht.

Pol Lt Col Hitthaya Nilaphet, deputy comnander of Border Patrol Police [BPP] Region
5, reports that the area around which the fighting took place is one where Thahan
I’hran Irregulars from the can» at Pakthongchai District, Unit 53 in Nakhon Ratchaaima
Province came for combat maneuver training. This took the form of preventing the in-
filtration of foreign military forces and that of guerrilla warfare. Internal Se-
curity Operations Com-and (ISOC) took charge of the Operation. This took place at
the same time as the Bureese armed forces sent in troops to wipe out the minority
tribes along the Burmese border at Ben Leo Lao-chai, Hes Kham Subdiatrict. Mae Chan
District. The tribal armed forces fled onto Thai territory with a horse caravan of
more then 100 horses. It was thought that there would certainly be fighting.

When the fighting started between the Thahan Phren Irregulars and the foreign forces,
the Region 5 BF? comand was ordered to send the 508th BPP Platoon to meet with

Mr Khandaeng Khemewong. acting as lthun Sa'a representative and that of the SIM,

at Ban Hintaek in order to get them to stop surrounding and attacking Thai troops.

10
This was felt to be a violation of Thai sovereignty and they were asked to release
them and cease the encirclement. Were they to disregard this recast, the Thai
side would send in a large armed force without delay because of the violation of
Thai borders and the provocation against Thai forces. After the meeting with
IGIamdseng, it appeared that Khamdaeng himself could not confirm whose force it was.

In the fighting at Ben Kaw Phys Samskkhi, two Burma patrol planes passed over

Ban Hus Mae Khan and Tang Mae lanes. coming from the north and heading west. A
helicopter flew right over Ban Mae Salong heading for Ban Pan Nun where the fighting
was and then disappeared into Burmese territory. [Against] the presence of a large
Burmese military force and conbat supporting aircraft, the Karen troops [as pub-
lished] have only anti-aircraft weapons.

The Thai-Burmese border problem is one of wealmess and misunderstandings occur
easily. There are no clearly placed border markers and the British-made maps are
still in use. There has at yet been no understanding reached between Thailand and
Burma, although some border markers have been placed. However, there are still
problems in border control. patrolling and control of exit and entry. It is impos-
sible to do these things because of the extremely mountainous topography. lbreover
there are problems with the ninority groups along the border who are resisting the
Burmese Government.

The armed forces of rebellious tribal minorities along the Thai-Burmese border are
based there to conduct resistance operations against the Burmese Government. Since
the end of last year, the Burmese Government has thrown in troops to wipe out the
minority armies along the Thai border in Tak, Chieng Bai. Mae Bong Son and Kanchan-
aburi provinces, especially those of the Free Karen forces. This began in September-
October of last year with a division of 800 men [as published]. The Burmese troops
hired some 2,000 Gurkha: to wipe out the Karena at the lies Prob camp. This met
fierce resistance and to this day. they have not been able to finish the job.

The Karen troops Camp Khareuktee and Calm Mae Proh have improved their bases that
surround the camps on the Burmese side. They dug bunkers along ridge lines for 2
kilometers. The Nae Proh camp has stockpiled food and water in preparation for all-
out resistance against the Burmese. Karen people have been conscripted to construct
firing positions and anti-aircraft artillery has been emplaced on hilltops around
both camps. Anyone refusing this conscription is fined 50 thaep or 96 Thai baht.

In the latest suppression campaign. the Burmese met with losses and were unable to
smash the Karen camps even though they threw into battle the rapid deployment 2d,
5th and 6th battalions of the 66th Division against the Karen 69th battalion of the
7th Division at Ben Bo Leur in Burma. This was west of Ban Che Du Ya. In this
fighting, the Burmese lost 13 men with 77 wounded. Only 3 Karena were killed and
6 wounded. The Burmese sent in lo fighter planes in support.

As for the violence of the combat in the effort to suppress these minority groups'
armed forces, the Burmese Government announced to the people of Thailand's
Thachilek District [as published jithat in the lo months of August-November of this
year there would be no cargo trucks or buses making the trip from Thacbilek District
to Chieng Tung, but that they could travel to The Deua. Buses could go from Chieng
Tung to Thachilek. The reason for this was that Bur-mas military authorities were

11
unable to provide troops to insure safety along those routes and there were Coo-

nunist Party armed forces still located in the area nuﬁering approximately 15,000
troops.

what is going on along the western border is not the only violence of the Burmese
Government which aim to wipe out armed minority groups. Going south along the bor-
der with Prachuap laxirikhan Province, the Free Man have also [been] attacked in each
stronghold which is opposing [the government]. The attacks have resulted in deaths
and woundings requiring hospitalization. Host of the fighting with the Tree Hon
groups is only for the benefit of those with influence who will control the area
around the border at Chang Chi Pass. Bang Ssphsn District. Prachusp Khirikhan Pro-
vince. although the Thai side has sent in troops to push these forces out of Thai
territory. However, there is still fighting and frequent violations of Thai terri-
tory.

These minority groups that have established amd forces in the area of the Thai-
Burmese border, in accordance with Thai policy, are not enemies [of Thailand], but
they are enemies of the Burmese Government. Thailand feels that the problem the
minority groups have with the Bur-see Governaent are the internal affairs of Burma
and Thailand absolutely refuses to get involved. It is feared that the Burmese
minority groups living along the border could becone the enemies of Thailand and
join forces with the comnists. In the view of the nilitary authorities, this
would have an impact on Thai security. It is therefore necessary to be moderate in

confronting them. Thai assistance to these ninority peoples will be limited to human-
itarian aid.

So, the minority groups‘ arned forces depend on the border as a sanctuary from sup-
pression drives. hhen the Burmese attack then, they either resist or withdraw into
Thailand. If Thailand pushes then out, they cross into Burma. The war of the
minority peoples will probably be a protracted one. The battle line on Thailand's
west has not changed.

CSO: (0207/29
NARCOTICS POLICE SEIZE 54 KILOGRAMS OF PURE HBROIN

Arrests After Long Surveillance

Bangkok THENATION REVIEW in English 28 Oct 81 pp 1. 10

[Text]

ANTI-NARCOTIQ police yesterday arrested three men and

seized 54 kgs of pure heroin

- one of Thailand’s largest drug

hauls in years — on Vibhavadi Rangeit Road after a year-long

intensive investigation and surveillance of the tremor;

new Minister Pradwab ammu-
the heroin worth at least 10.8 million

and its rice could to l
t in blapeie marketsigt‘xe 115933

said the three mpecu.oneofthema
ed -toan internatiOo

be t
koonpu
baht

H «I? Sin tametionsh
on; one. upon. urooe.
Locally. nor-rmliy sup d narcotics
horntheﬂmto theSoutK‘bthroughtle
southerndtyofﬂatYaiandtheywere pian-
nine to e and their racket into the United
States po cesaid

Police said the No.4 heroin wee taken to
Bangkok fromthenorthern province oi'iam-
mandﬁwa‘sli‘oundhiddenundertherear
seato a ue ouowaéensedaneauyime -
cence plate No.6 K671 .

The herein was ready packed in 12!

ea.

”ma identiﬁed the leader of the as
Kitti Rungpara. 40. the man er of ifaha lia-
itorn Housing Estate on V1 havadi mat
Road. They said the residence of Kitti who is
its: Chinese was In Soi Nualnoi off Biennial
Two others. Le T alias Koo
45, and Chalo 1'3?“an they mi
been hired to rive vehicles transporting the
dru several times. They said they received
”0&0 baht for card: assi nrnent. 1:30
on Vor alt

also
an ethnic Chinese. liv ad
while Chalons’s residence was in Thun; Maha-

radret for over! r and ___

“ﬂiecomborat' wfitlé _Haw m In the
no m ‘0 $0
an in «5. truafi'rekins: inlnhou ‘ur local mc'ov' «9

13

55! markets.

-. m __mrnen {OW Wm an.

yesterday morning at 5 am when he iei't
ti’s house to i-iualam r3 railway station.

A‘ "W “a I.“ met
with whcue'vasﬁrlm the network»

man they umﬂwﬂmrzmm?
l’ I l’ 8
housins 01 View mar

e country.

herein were found in
the Volkswa en. three were charged with
while Kitti was slapped
tionai drugs of perusing weapon without a

Police said the seiwe was the second biggest

. Police in Me mooﬂsfteags it: of
or

“ owner?“ w "W?

n e a w n one s

‘d Su rintendent of

Unit in Lam.

Pol Col remained
puty Police Director General Pol Lt n Na-
rons, Mahanonde, meanwhile. ordered Zone 3
Pronneial Police Committioner, Pol Lt Gen
Dech Kethapan. to continue the manhunt for
Pol Col Nlrand whose reward was set 33 the
e‘flf‘i‘a of Narcotics Control Board at I .000
Kitti and Chalong with

[Text] The three suspects, left to right, Lerpong,
the seized No A heroin and a .38 revolver.

CSO: 5300/6561

14
RISING ABUSE 0F THINNER CAUSES CONCERN

Bangkok THE NATION in English 19, 21 Oct 81

(Two of three-part article by Naulnoi Thamsathien: ”More Teenagers Turning

to Thinner"]

[19 Oct 81 p 1. Part 1]

[Text] Today
an addiction 0

try's most popular anddangeroue narcotics.

Its widespread usage among the
alarm among health authorities who

we present the first of three-part series
f thinner which has become one of the coun-

teenagers has caused great
are concerned by its

dangers and the way it can be easily purchased at cheap

price.

MEDICAL expert: .

are eatly alarmed
by IR: trend of in-
creasing numbeta of.
teena n mm; to
' “" “Sift?”
pu ae own
33%! at their
new type of narco-

m3.

They aid In the
loggiInIn, thlnnet is
more dange-

fdu: than heroin.
m. Wat-k”;
out, o
thep am But
s'on of the -
ment of“ Set-
v'tcu, said inhalation
of thinner can cause
pemianent damage

to the bath.

“It Will slowly
damage the brain
cells. At one stage
the btain will be pen
manently damaged
and no medical cure
is possible." said Dr

Anant. whohaaheen d with “I“ I“. ~
oonductin resaz- Sow en
die: on we mitt the:- V
of thinner and in {gt a
latliquide . A male
D: Anant. tnt- - - weJnDlnDunt
t: a“ "m ~ mamm- -
ecom a -
la: narcotic; 3:3: “that: mm
-younpten tom m ~ _
can td, a. platted that the
y mam m canton: of duaeata
‘nofthellquldal- mthatheatxawen
:0 came: pleunns. % m and the
Because ﬂit: ea- ‘ M
5, maﬁa“, ".4 lie add dunner
meapenuveneaa, W )0“ pie-
thinner—whiehia mofsponuewiu.
available at arg po- thlnnet and inhaled
cetietln the ty- it while watching
has become pepulat movies.
among teenage“. Mm addicts
ln slum conunu develop the nine ef-
nities, n are facts at addict: of
sometimes seen “in- odmnareotlea.
toxicated" with one haunt
hand holding a bot« 33"” “mt“:
tle :ol' thinnexwhlle W q?»
the othu holding a when ., nee
piece of cotton aoak- m“, Anant
of tho 'ugedtam" Y

The thlnnet addicts walla; elth- mutate: of the
aboukeelthetmetl- u out offuttotun' Thanymk Hoeptul
jumotcdnttvent dunehloefunlly ammmm
meantime. . mu. . old at
Medial expats, bum; past but tum: Id-
howevet. tut! that few years. MM” dlctt m admitted
«autism habeomeﬁuxu- tottte hotpttnl ot-
tullygeteddlcted ty" for dtu “diets mat“
t: tltlnnet. T‘lltlme: been: of tou- who“?
widely It. I! . m “I h '
useful ntlxtm to: 3mm M3.l-|LS.$level.'
other whim, ”N I!” 00' W H
atehu_t,due cotut them-mum
dot and outlet. - that exclu-
Btwlnc. tun po- treat drug .4.
la quite dan- lldut end othee ed- m
that shell dlettve Iquldt have
ﬁlm an pt :6- tlto become handy
dlctcd to the kw sdttlvet {ct ym
by hhtlln; ell stun. -
ubmneet. M Pu (i
went: not he eddlets
mm of den. ttuden tween!
3." themselves," and 1 between
Old 0! Anal. “.8. i 80.8. 3.
[21 Oat 81 pp 1. 10, Part 3]
[Text]
’ ONE m 't’. ' - ofﬁcial: of the'dlvh thto' town at)! .
him in tnyxm. don normally take tnuugnt and :lnbiﬁ the
net addicts ls tb- sudettu cted of Button. ‘ - . ttet
tenee of “tubstltute addlctodto metto In ”I! enter] ho:
addtctlve" thet medlv tee chum n. ttqe, ts wtl "0
eel ex rte can use to then to doctors. that. to collect a
he! t mlddtoﬂthe Howevet, he at. much Mamba a W
b hum. mitted that omchu at?“ about the . fat
"la tmth; hetoln . 0f 9“ ““0" have It mutton be on Iii
addicts" use metht- come acme tllmculo W the sound hm
done a the athetltute ties In connncun pt- sue. Pu
addictive but we still tents of the: mt. “In the second
cannot ﬁnd any tub. dents of the than“ a... paint: will“
mm tot-me sub- theymfadnt. hm'to my «loath!
stance to: thinnet ado Their parents album at! o, m
1': mt r" m “'1‘...” mm Mm;
ant ht item 910 m I - .
or the Rmuehpmn. not: it. The": 00- 3‘13““ °‘ ‘ i:
don of the Medlcal 1M3; "‘th '1' m m medial
Services Deputmeut. 50‘4“ 39¢ ' treatment the 9.. 2
He said thinnet td- M "3‘" mm tlentt Ivlll' through
am; admitted for “3b 9&8ch "a. the regbllhnlon k
tteatment will have to [hi mmdd‘” nt tugs“: , el
ebtu tly stop inhaling f, “f" he 3:. P J“ age ta 0'
the ' uid and at the x “u '“f also important. We ‘1'
same time are given ﬁg“ ‘ 7‘5“?) If send the nhehtlltaed o.
tranquunett when fun?“ ° ‘ mu ' ttlettuhome but stlll tl

the; get nervous.

u: Jutluednl di-

am: of the Stuéent
Patton: Division. said

Thinnet oddlcts ad-
mitted to the Thanyt-
talt H ital will not.
mally vt to m

up a close watch on
how they will adjust
themselvet to the to.
dety." the aid.

0’0
.d5 .8 .58.. on.
E: to 228185.29.
So.“ use ..
BB.

38 8... 9: a 18
p.39... 8 .83 8:.
«as: 2.93 .03.
582.38.... 9.
. .58 9Q 53 .38..
.88 3.... .8

$8.34 .8.
BRIEFS

THAI TROOPS KILLED—Bangkok, Oct ll--Thai officials declined con-ant on a report
yesterday that 210 troops were feared killed in a recent battle with armed tribes-
aen moving a mule train of drugs fro- Burua to Thailand. The BANGKOK POST quoted
a tribesuan witness as saying that he saw my dead bodies, believed to be thoee
of Government forces, near Kor Sanakhi village, a border area frequented by the
rebel Shan United Army (SUA) from Burns. The Thai Goverment two loathe ego
offered a reward of 500.000 Baht (21,700 0.8. dollars) for the capture of SUA
leader Chang Chee-fu, whom both Thai and herican officials described as the
Kingpin of narcotics traffic in the opium-growing area of the '601den-triangle.‘
Officials here have failed to explain why a 39-:an military unit from Northeast

Thailand were secretly dispatched to the uni-Burmese Border on Thursday. REUTER
[Text] [Lahore THE PAKISTAN TIMES in English 21 Oct 81 p 8]

(:80: 5300/ 10561

18
USE OF WRITS 0F ASSISTANCE BY RQ‘IP CRITICIZBD

Toronto Iii! GLOBE AND MAIL, mam II‘I‘ION in English 31 0c: 81 p 6

[Editorial:

[Text]

' ilanotﬂoeroltitokoyIICana-
dian Mounted Police wants to
hmitintoahomeyithoutohtain-
a search warrant irotn a
Egheonndosowlthawritot
Armedwiththisl

sheietonltey,providedundert
Narcotic Control Act and. the

out search
he feels there is Insufﬁcient time
toootaina warrant; andthewrits
arevalidloraslongashehoids
his job.

This blunt instrument empow-
ers an oilioer. without prior appli-
cation to the courts, to break into
hotnesstanytirneoidayor
and search dwellings and
cies lot anything iron to
bootleg alcohol. Such writs ve
been harmed in England lot cen-
turies; they are forbidden in the
United States under the Fourth
Amendment to the Constitution;
yet they have sat on the Canadian

awhooits since 1847.

in 1975. Federal Court Judge
F. U. Collier said he was
"shocked and incredulous" that
theoourt wouldheaslted topro
vide “an unknown government
otilcer with such extensive, un-
limited powcts". Judge Coilier's
cr‘ticisms and the resulting pub-
lic outcry led Justice Minister
Ronald Bastard to tell the Com
mons in February. 19‘". that his

CSO: 5320/11

“The Right To Get You"]

19

5'
i

ggztgi
it
3§§s§

i

8.326
tingevidenoe.

at. "9333‘“

to stagger out at
searchwnrrant.
Yet incredibly
wants to distribul
writs. when he s
nating those still
is makint PM
to the needs at ti
the convenience
police ioroe. is
General incapahi
distinction hem
BRIEFS

NARCOTICS ‘l'llIBP SHOOTS POLIcm-An unidentified thief was surprised by police

during an attenuated theft of narcotics at s poiyclinic phat-lacy in Brno on Monday

night. Before escaping, the armed thief shot and seriously wounded I: police-en.
[Prague ZEHBDBLSKE NOVINY in Czech 26 Nov 81 p 6]

ANOTHER PHARMACY DRUG wRGLARYuAn unidentified drug addict burglarised e pharlncy

in Prague-Km, getting away with larger quantities of codeine, ephedrine and other
drugs. [Prague ZEEDEISKB MINY in Czech 18 Nov 81 p lo]

CSO: 5300/3003

20
POLICE COMMISSIONER CITES REDUCTION IN DRUG PROBLW
Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 3 Oct 81 p 1
[Article by Athena Danianos]

[Text]

POUCE COMMISSIONER
Gerald Bartlett has reported a
' reduction in drug
trafficking at Bimini. North
and lnagtn. At the

beginning of the year these
lshndsweresomeofthelargut

tremhlptnent points in tlﬂs

But the clean-up has created
other problems for at least one
of those islands.

“We have taken action
because of the problems in
Andros and I am happy to say
that there Is no evidence that
the problem is as bad as it once
was." Mr Bartlett said. ...‘ . .-

' ‘We increased our
manpower at North Andros.
Bimini and lnagua earlier this
year. I am happy to say that in
these three areas the problem
doesn‘t exist on the same
volume." he aid.

Glenn Brown. the Drug
Enforcement Administration's
attache in Nassau. said there

had been “considerable
improvement" at the three
islands.

A North Andri; resident
said the problem cleared after
large forces of police were
stationed on the island.

The police presence

continued in North 'Andros
after the roof of the building
they occupied. was
mysteriome destroyed by fire.

Although Mr Bartlett said
there was no evidence to
suggest it. several North
Androslans with whom The
Tribune spoke felt the fire was
started by certain elements
who had reason for not
wanting the police in the urea.

Instead of helninit North
Andros, the decline in drug

. trafﬁcking has left residents

with an even greater problem
how to bolster the sagdng
economy. _

With the‘ flow of drug
money almost out off and no

longer sufficient to artificially.
North-~understsndsfth San Andros

inﬂate --the' cocoon: ' _
Androeians are caught in-the
worst receslon in years.

Bad publicity about drug
trafficking and piracy on the
Nflh seas has led to a sharp
fa -off in tourism to North
Andros. so sharp that the once
busy Andros Beech Hotel
sometimes does not have a
single guest for weeks at a
time.

“We've been running at
zero." Earl Hall. Who operates
the hotel. said.

Two groups of geologists
from Texas on whom he was
depending for business recently
cancelled their bookings with

21

the hotel.

Mr Hall received a letter
from the American Association
of Geoiogists explaining that
the decision to cancel was
made after members learned
that a group of geologists from
the University of Miami were
harassed at. gunpoint by
pirates who tried to board their
boat off North Andros last

year.
The Andros Beach hotel lest
SIS 000 from the cancellation.
hit Hall said business was

just as bad for the other hotel

in North Andros. San Andros,
which is located near the

Mrllallhaslaigloffstxofhis
ll ~staff. members. lie

Hotel has also cut its staff
by about half. '

The Andros Beachelotel has
l4 - guest rooms and four
two-bedroom villas. ' '

Mr Hall said he is able to
stay open because of the
business he gets from- the
restaurant and her. But. even in
this area, money is not floating
as freely as it once did. he said.

“In one way. it (drug trade)
was an advantage. I can tell
you one thing. people were
spending money on food and
liquor and people were staying
in our hotel rooms." he said.

“It (the decline in
trafficking) has affected us
noticeably.” one o! the
' residents with whom The
Tribune spoken: eed.

Mr Hall said the whole
community is being allectcd.
He said cab drivers are out of
work and business is down at
the gencnlstnru.

He said unemployment but
all all time high. He utttmtul
that no more than“I 60
Buhuniiuu u: on male 6C”
Batelco BEC BA 1' and
the vurious other public
departments ntthc island. 9“Most.
of the population eeks out a
living from farming and ﬁshing.

Mr H11] “read that the
police luvs made acct strides
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080028-9

CREUHEN DISMISSED, CAPTAIN FINED IN DRUG BOAT CASE

Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 7 Oct 81 p 1

[Text]

CSO:

-be!ore Magistrate Shim: Edun ;

SEVEN Colombians, the'
new of the Mary Gloria'
arrested Auauet 31 by Russ
Flamingo. were dumbed {tom
drug charges today while their.
captain. who pleded guilty. was
cautioned and ﬁned.37$.ooo..

The seven men' a
today. " '

Jose uquierdo.$7.wlto ieln
hoepltal awaltln; an operation.
In notineoun. - .

All accused were represented
bv Mr Arlington Butler.

Dismissed were Ramon.
Rodriquez, 28; Reyes
C‘andelaa. 30; Jose A lmuierdo.
57. (absent): Luis Masquera.
34: Eduardo Otsrri. 30;
Fernando Iryillo. 29 and
Victor Romero 3|.

Fellclano Rodalleu, 4|.
captain of the vessel, was
cautioned on the first char of
poesesion ol dan rout rugs
and ﬁned $75, on the
eeeond charge of intent to
supply.

According to the roseeutor
at 9 am Monday. uaust 3|.
ntemben ol the Royal
Bahamas Defence Force aboard
Hues Inagua, under the
command of Lt Jackson
Ritchie. on routlne patrol of
Raced Island, intercepted the
vessel 'Mary Cloria'. which was

5300/7513

23

suspected 'of t
drug. A search a
by members of
force and about
mapected mariju:
about 70 lbs eat:
The bales we:
Natau and hen
polloe. All glue
denied any know!
being aboard the
were attested and
Mr Butler. it
Rodallega. said tha
was employed by
whlch tut-leaned:
someone be? A.
certaln -‘ :3:
Colon-Na. not to
but unis United ‘
Butler said the
extreme poverty
such oondltlone
made lteaderlorl

accept such ventur

Butler further a:
boat be released
does not belong to:
or his employer. b
owner as the innot

He said the 5:
run by a diesel
I3-yearsold. whi
its value consideral

“edema Ed
345.000 sum for it

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400080028-9
BRIEFS

BAIL IN COCAINE CASB-Two Colombians were granted cash bail totalling $160,000
when they were charged with being in possession of over 600 lbs of cocaine be-
fore Magistrate George van Sertina today. willie. De-Jesus Ruiz, 35, and John
Jairo Naranjo. 27, (pilot), are accused of having 617 lbs of cocaine aboard
their twin engine Piper when they landed on Norman's Cay Saturday. They are

also charged with intent to supply. The men are represented by lawyer Langton
Hilton. The prosecutor objected to bail because of the large quantity of drugs

and because the defendants were foreign. However, Mr Hilton asked that bail not
be refused because the sen were not Bahamians. Bail was set at $80,000 cash each.
The case was adjourned to January 6. [Text] [Nassau TEE TRIBUNE in English

14 Oct 81 p l]

080: 5300/7513

26
COURT TOLD HARIlIJAllA IS BECOMING SOCIALLY ACCEPTABLE

Hamilton THE ROYAL GAZETTE in English 19 Oct 81 p 1

[Text]

C80:

The drug "cannabis has be-l
come almost socially acceptable"
in Bermudian society, especially)
for those under thirty yeara of
age; la er Mr. Frederick Wade
said at t e weekend. . ' ' ,1

But the ohaewation broudlt ediﬁ,
antl'harah criticism from the Attorney '
General in an appeal before the Chief'
.lmtice in Supreme Court on Friday.

The ammenta came during an aging _

againat aentenee ivy-Kenneth

.e

—————-—d—~
' Fr‘ewell'a Hill. Pemhmhe.

thhin twat eentenped t‘o I6 monthe in
prim «a July [6 for heir-3 in pe-eeeion of
canaahiwithintentmeupply. ‘ ' ' .

"The number 3)! eeeee earning before'the
mum arena to indicate that cannabie hae
hon-me Almost meially were”: “a Per.
rnuda. (mullyd at We under thtlirtn:
veanm ntte." N r. . repreeen
thin. And he likened the current lave
governing cannabis tn the latter etagae d
pmhihitim in the United Statea.

"In halanclna mm (or eoelety a 'net
the righlaotthamonam ~keen

5300/7513

25

munity." aai

in mind the lace of this dnt‘ in the com-
Mr. Wade. . . . .
. But Attorney General Mr. Saul Frootno
kin. Q.(‘.. tank serene emptl .
Wade’a entntnenu.

on to Mr

“ltwhat my friend eayeletrueandthe
thlie in more accepti of the data. then
it aeetna the nominee d be lnereeeed
«hernia-e wu encourage the are of it." eaid

Mr. Pmrnltin.

He characterised drug wehere'ee -
aitea an the community. and if the bland”
wee-not careful it could ﬁnd ltealf in dire .
atraita. _

“The lalnnd may ﬁnd itaelf with more

ve pmhletna than it already hat." eeld
. r. Frmtnltin. “The uee and ehtne of-thia.
drug in a cancer on aoclety."

Mr. Pmmnltin added that had Bhbin
faced trial inSttpreme Court and not in the
latter eaurt. he mixht have found hlmeelt
lacing a lonaenau aentenee.

The Chief Justice. the Hon. Jatnee Aet-
vmntl. ruled that there had been no error in
aentenrinr. and commented that “if -
thing the aentence was a little on the l t
:i‘de ‘. Acmrt‘linlly. the appeal wee turned

nan.
CUSTOMS OFFICIALS INVESTICAIED FOR HEIIAQUALONB
Bogota EL TIEHPO in Spanish 26 Sep 81 p 2-A

[Text] An administrative investigation was opened by the head office of Internal
Customs of Bogota. under the charge of retired Gen Jose Maria Rivas Forero. in
order to establish the presumed responsibility of the personnel of the chemical

warehouse upon discovery. after one year. of a shipment of 2.000 kilos of
methaquslone.

The Judicial Police opened another investigation of a criminal nature to find the

location of those responsible for the importation of the shipment of drugs destined
preferentially for the manufacture of the pills known under the name of ”Jumbo."

Rivas Forero explained that a third investigation might be undertaken if it is
proven that an employee of the Customhouse was responsible in the case. specifically
for not having reported the presence of the shipment of methaqualone in the ware-
houses of the establishment.

The director general of the Customhouae explained that the methaqualona arrived in

Lhc country during the middle part of last year in three shipments coming from
hamburg. Germany on board the airlines of a national company. and that according to

procedures. were admitted immediately into the chemical warehouses of the Internal
Customhouse of Bogota to await the arrival of the importer to claim them in order

to proceed with appraisal.

The drug came in special packaging-barrels-that carried a different name.
maintained Rivas Forero, and in view of the fact that the interested party did not
arrive to claim it. it was declared abandoned merchandise.

In accordance with the regulations. only the administrator of the warehouses or the
director of the Customhouse himself, can order an inspection of the cargo. and this
was requested by the former who asked for the presence of a chemist to open the

barrels and to determine the type of product that they contained.

The expert. according to the Customs director. only counted the barrels and
considered his job completed without stopping to examine the contents of the cargo.
For this reason. shortly after. the Judicial Police of the Eldorado Airport arrived

and after an analysis of the chemical product. discovered that it was methequalone
that they were dealing with.

26
This fact--the chenical being turned over for inspection—resulted in the inediate
initiation by Rivas Porero of an adninistretive investigation in order to determine
if officials of this organization had any conplicity in the illegal business.

The Judicial Police began the crininel investigation based on the name of the
consignee of the shipment.

The 2,000 kilos of nethaqualone were discovered at the beginning of this week by the

Judicial Police when they carried out an inspection of the warehouses of the
Internal Custodlouse of Bogota.

Rivas Forero mintained also that he will grant authorization to other officials of

the Custonhouse so that they can order the inspection of nerchandise that cannot be
renoved on tine. and he said that he will order that these inspections be made

every 8 days at the various warehouses of the Gusto-house in the entire country.

9787
050: 5300/2036

27
Fifteen kilos of high quality cocaine and related equipment for the pro-
cessing of the alkaloid were confiscated by the police in an operation
carried out in a residence in the neighborhood of Palermo in Bogota. An

individual was captured in the operation.

[Text] Thirteen kilos of cocaine of high quality whose value on the black market
is incalculable was confiscated by the National Police in the neighborhood of La
Soledad where the owner of a share of the alkaloid was also captured along with a

luxurious automobile.

The recent blow against the narcotics traffic was carried out at a house at 22—25
alst Street in Bogota in the afternoon last Sunday when the agents apprehended
Alberto Rodriguez Valencia. from when not only the cocaine was seized, but also a

28
Hazdu nutonobile with license plates KD-3003 and other materials. The drug dealer
will he put under the ordinance of the respective judge. and he was ceptured as a
result of intelligenccwmrk which extended over several days end which will continue
with the goal of locating other nelhers of the group.

According to reports by the chief of the DIPBC, Depertnent of Intelligence of the
Coloabian Police. Col Nacin Yanine Dies. in Barranquilla another blow was struck

against the nafia with the confiscation at a house on 16-101 63-3 Street of a
special Panwalt Stokes nschine for the processing of the hallucinogenic drugs called
mndrax and jumbo. During the operation, more than 30 kilos of nethaquelone and
spoo pills of the above-mentioned products were seized and at the sane tine, five
people were captured.

The personnel of the Third Company of Narcotics Officers of the Police confiscated

130 packages of nsrihuena with a weight of 6.800 kilos in the jurisdiction of
Teheco, the municipal jurisdiction of Barrences. Guejirs. The operation wee

carried out at a ranch called Pageril.

978 7
C80 : 5300/ 2036

29
mars

COCAINE IBAGUB AREA-4n an operation set in notion a few hiloneters tron this
capital, pure cocaine was confiscated valued at 65 :11an pesos. In the operation.
three people were captured who were identified as Danilo Rodriguez. Francisco Antia

and a wonan. Maria Mireye Alvarez. ‘l‘he alkaloid was transported in a red Dodge
pickup truck that arrived coincidently at the tine when a nobile reserve corps of

uniforned een was carrying out eaneuvere on the Ihaqus-Alvarado Highway. [Text]
[Bogota EL SIGLO in Spanish 210 Sep 81 p 2] 9781

WUCINOGBIIC PILLS. EQUINE!" SBIZEDo-A complete set of expensive equipment for
the manufacture of hallucinogenic pills was discovered by the police force and a
group of narcotics agents of the prosecutor of the region. The confiscation was
carried out in a residence located in the southern part of the city. 'they sw-
ceeded in confiscating pills, pill-taking machinery and in capturing six people
involved in the business who were identified as Budoro Dara Centre. Antonio Hera

Guerra, Jaine Roberto Galhan and Jairo Alberto Gamcra Sierra. Also detained
was the servant of the residence belonging to Cam Genarra who fled. This
operation took place in the ﬂueneviata neigthrhood in the southern part of
Baranuilla. Yesterday on Friday in the northern: part of Baranquilla in an elegant
residence. a shipeent of 100.000 "jumbo" pills were confiscated which were packaged
and ready for exportation. Orlando David Gonzalez was arrested. [text] [Bogota
EL TIEMPO in Spanish 26 Sep 81 p 3-A] 9787

cso: 5300/2036

30
THO TRAFFICKZRS SEIZED "1TB COCAINB
Mexico City EL SOL DB MEXICO in Spanish 6 Oct 81 p 122A

[Text] Two international drug traffickers were intercepted at this capital's

Benito Juarez airport after already having smuggled in cocaine of excellent quality
valued at more than 90 million pesos.

The interesting thing about this case is that Ian Brungar from Norway carried the
drug ”stuck" to his back with adhesive tape, and he was not discovered when he
passed through customs.

Moreover. Brungar arrived aboard Air Panaaa Flight 502 originating in Lima. Peru.
and accoapanied by the Spaniard Francisco Balcazar Grands.

After being apprehended, the corrupters stated that they net in a bar in Barcelona.
and Balcazar was the one who proposed to the Norwegian that they take the drug to

South America. with the purpose of later transporting it to Los Angeles. California,
where another Spanish thug would buy it from them.

According to Balcazar. he used Brungar as a "donkey.“ that is. as a smuggler of the
drug. for the not inconsiderahle sun of $15,000. corresponding to the quantity of
cocaine handled.

Moreover. he indicated that in his native Barcelona he devoted himself to producing
films. which really was not true. since he used this activity only as a cover for
his crimes.

As for Tom Brungar. he stated that seeing himself bankrupt and without the
possibility of finding work. he opted for drug trafficking. thinking that it would
be very easy. Nevertheless, following his arrival in the Federal

District. when he was preparing to purchase the tickets to travel to Los Angeles,

he became nervous on seeing the federal authorities and decided to return to the
international customs hall where Balcazar was.

Upon doing this. an agent approached his and asked hin why he was returning to
this hall if he had already passed through customs, at the same time slapping him

on the back and discovering that he was carrying polyethylene bags containing
cocaine stuck to his back with adhesive tape.

31
\58
HARIHUANA SHUCGLING IN MUNICIPAL JAIL DISCOVERED
Deputy Harden Accused
Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 16 Oct 81 pp 2, a

[Text] Yesterday the underworld was discovered to be operating in the municipal jail,
when it was found that its deputy warden, Jesus Armando Godina Castillo, was being
paid 5,000 pesos to bring in the kilograms of marihuana to an innate who was selling
the joints and cigarettes to the addicts in the jail.

EL DIARIO was informed of this by Federal Judicial Police sources, when the investi-
gation was being conducted personally by that entity's cox-sander. Mario Espinoza.

It was said that Luis Montemayor. together with a marihuana distributor from Juchi-
pula, Zacatecas, for whom a warrant has been issuedfor his arrest, received the
drugs, subsequently turning them over to the woman Rosa Maria Paz de Hoyos who,

in turn, went to the jail and, in complicity with the dishonest deputy warden,

Jesus Armando Godina Castillo, brought the drugs in without inspection and delivered
them to the inmate Gilberto Chavez Buenrostro. The latter made cigarettes for
distribution, selling them for 50 pesos apiece among the inmates.

The deputy warden, Jesus Armando Codina, received 5,000 pesos for each marihuans
shipment that he allowed to be brought into the jail. It was said that this money
was paid by Luis Hontemayor.

The deputy warden has been completely convicted and has confessed. he said that,
on several occasions, from two to three kilograms of marihuans had been brought in,
withoutany previous problem, but that on Monday specifically, when there were many
people, he chose to wait to receive the package which Rosa Maria Fez had delivered
to him. "hen he did so, his colleagues demanded that he search it and, when he
did, he put on a great display, pretending that he had discovered the marihuans,
and arrested the one responsible.

Yesterday. however. the whole affair was exposed, when the Federal Judicial Police
went to the municipal jail and questioned the inmate Gilberto Chavez Buenrostro.

The latter materially implicated the deputy warden and Luis Hontemayor himself,
indicating the manner and procedure used to bring in and distribute the drugs inside
the jail. -

Coadr Mario Espinoza said that the Federal Judicial Police would continue their
investigation, because they are certain that. although there are still some

33
connections that remain to be established, it is unlikely that the warden alone
could have been responsible for the drug trafficking in the hail.

Traffickers Sentenced
Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PlBDRAS NBGBAS in Spanish 20 Oct 81 Sec D p 1

[Text] The federal judge of the second district court, Carlos Gilberto Canto Lopez,
issued an order for the official imprisonment of all those who were arrested in
connection with the drug trafficking recently discovered in the municipal jail.
This information was released to 81. DIARIO yesterday. upon the termination of the
period for an order of official imprisonment or release of those in custody. It
was said that the four accused who were presumed guilty of a crime against health
in various degrees received an order for official iwrisonment, of which they were
notified yesterday. The four persons against whom the pertinent action was initi-
ated are Luis Montemayor, deputy warden Armando Godina Castellsnos. the innate
Gilberto Chavez Buenrostro, and his wife, Rosa Maria Pas de Hoyos. All of them
were convicted and confessed their guilt. Only the deputy warden continued to claim
that he had nothing to do with the drug traffic in the jail, inasmuch as it was he
himself who had made the search and found the nrihuana, making the report and
arresting the woman responsible. It was said that the federal judge night possibly
reclassify the offenses, so that the order issued yesterday might stipulate the
judge's decision regarding the innocence found as a result of the study made of
each of the inquiries and statements on the part of every one of those arrested.

2909
C80: 5330/5/0-55

36
SABINAS HARIHUANA TRAFFICKERS CAPTURED

Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DB PIBDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 7 Oct 81 Sec A, p 2, Sec 8,
p 1

[Text] Federal Judicial Police forces under the orders of the group chief, Condr
Mario Espinoza, succeeded in capturing two nenbers of the drug trafficking ring in
the coal region who were the very ones responsible for distributing narihuana at
the Capri Bar in the red-light district of Sabinas, Coahuila.

EL DIARIO was informed of this by sources under the comand of Mario Espinoza, with
headquarters in Piedras Negras. It was noted that the captured individuals were
caught with a package of narihuana which they were selling for 500 pesos per joint.

Those under arrest are Jorge Quilantaro Rangel and Rector Saucedo Ronan. Both
said that they were engaged in distributing mrihuana among the addicts in the
coal region, with their headquarters at the Capri Bar, and that they had been
selling marihuana for some ties in Sabinas, Coahuila.

Yesterday, they were placed at the disposal of the Federal Public Ministry agent,
Xavier Elizondo, who was to conplete the pertinent investigation for e remand to
the federal judge within the proper legal tine and occasion.

It was confirmed that there is under way a general search in the entire coal region.
According to reports, drugs have been distributed in certain locations. and this
illegal activity must be ended. There will also be a “conbing” of the mountains

in the northern area in order to detect the presence of clandestine runways and
possible marihuana and poppy plantations, as well as to establish permanent surveil-
lance in that area.

No detail will be overlooked, and sufficient personnel will have to be sent so as
the maintain permanent, uninterrupted surveillance over the entire coal region,
accompanied by the action that is required; because it is felt that this area had
been somewhat neglected.

It was also said that pernanent personnel would have to be sent from Ciudad Acuna
so that the surveillance and antidrug campaign night accrue the success anticipated,
and that it was inpossible to maintain in a single area. The entire capacity and
surveillance must be intensified, and that will be done, with results taken to
their final consequences.

35
It was also reported that good results have been accrued fro: the surveillance
kept outside of achools on the various intermediate and upper levels, where a
high percentage of the drug distribution has been eradicated. The phenonsnon can
hardly be a serious problem in Piedras Negraa, but there mst be absolute control

in this regard and the protection of the young students is one of the lost inortant
points.

2909
C50: 5330/ SS

36
COGINB, HAMHUANA 881230 I" THEE MIDS
Mexico City EXCBLSIOR in Spanish 20 Oct 81 p 6-1)

[Text] Cocaine and usrihuans valued at sore than 130,000,000 pesos were seized by
agents of the Federal Judicial Police in three operatiais carried ant yesterday in

Veracruz, Chihuahua and in the Mexico City internatimal airport during which four
drug dealers were also apprehended.

Felix Espinosa Martinez, Jose Luis Espinosa Pinada and Crescencio nontero Dainguez,
were seized on the '31 Chichcn" rand: in the municipality or has Choapss, Veracruz,
with 12 tens or narihuana, which were to be sold in the northern part of the country
and transported in station wagons.

In Chihuahua. federal agents discovered a hidden runway between Mesa del Oso and has
Esccbas, in the municipality of Hadaras, where they aeised a ten of narihuana which was
in a station wagm with Arizma license plates. There were no arrests, as the drug
was abandoned, but a guard was ordered pated.

Finally, in the ﬂexico City international airport, Jorge Binojosa Ojeds was arrested
with a little more than half a kilo or pure South Aserican cocaine.

Hinojosa Ojeda arrived on flight 502 of Air Panama, caing fra Colmbia. Be stuck
the drug to his ankles and in small bags in his underpants. The Federal Judicial
Police are investigating his true natimality since it is prest-ed that his passport,
issued in Colcnbia, is not genuine.

9670
(:80: 5300/20 57

37
TRAPPICKERS 58125) WITH MINE
Mexico City BXCELSlOR in Spanish 22 Oct 81 1) 7-D

[Text] The locatiai of a stolen car led police to the capture of three Ienbers of a
gang of drug dealers-«m hexicans and a Cola-bianuwho had on the. a kilogras and a
half of cocaine, which they were about to deliver to a hotel in the capital and for
which they were to receive 1.250 million pesos.

The Colanbian, Jose Lubian madros, confessed to colmel Francisco Sahagun Baca,
head of the Investigatim Divisim, that about 10 days ago he arrived at the Federal
District fro: his country and that he had no prdalen getting the drug through at the
airport ”because he took advantage of the carelessness of the custas' and federal
agents."

Here he put hineelf in contact with the Hexicans, Hernan del Castillo Honjarras and
Humberto Hernandez Martinez, to take charge of "placinoy'I the drug.

Also, there are others involved in the drug traffic, but the police chief felt that
to make public their name would hurt the investigations leading to the apprehension
of the other members of the band, whidi has been operating in the Federal District
for about 6 mmths and is composed for tie nest part of Colosbians.

'rhoee arrested said that ft: the most part when they brought in drugs, it was across
the Guatemalan border, where there was no proble- whatever, due to the lack of
surveillance.

Sahagun Baca asserted that when these individuals were captured police agents had been

following them for 6 days, due to the fact that they were using a car which had been
_ reported stolen to the Department of Motor Vehicle Cmtrol.

The Colmbian, Rani rez Cuadros, had been a prismer in the hclusorio Oriente for drug

dealing and it was there that he net the Mexicans, “to were emaged in the sale
activities.

9678
C50: 5300/20 57

38
and trafficking. This woman was arrested in Reynoas. at her resident: in San Luis
Potosi and in Hermosillo. in June 1979. when she was attenpting to sell 179 grams

of heroin, with a negative reaction. including three grams that she was carrying as
a sample. Susana claimed to have purchased the heroin from a woman named Evangelina
Martinez, widow of Cantu. for $1,000 per ounce, with the intention of reselling it
for $1,200. and was about to make the sale. Federal Judicial Police forces who
succeeded in capturing her said that they confiscated from her a bag containing 105
grams of heroin, another with 71 grams and a smaller one holding 3 grams, which she
was going to use as a sample. after they had received information to the effect that

this woman was engaged in drug trafficking. [Text] [Nusvo Laredo 8L MANANA in Spanish
5 Nov 81 Sec B p 7] 2909

morning at the municipal dump the drugs seized some time ago from Chavez Baldazo

and the Olga Briaken los Randall [sic] dancers, Beatriz Huerta Gonzalez and Carlos
Plats. were burned. The burning was carried out by the National Army, public health
officials and district court authorities. including Ht venture and the municipal
police. All of this occurred at noon yesterday. As BL DIARIO was told yesterday
morning on the site of the burning. the drugs which were incinerated consisted of 7
kilograms of marihuana, ll grams of heroin and 14 grams of cocaine, as well as 30
simple Darbon pills. According to venture, there was a syringe containing traces of
heroin which had been diluted. ready for injection, which was apparently seized when
Chavez Baldazo was arrested some time ago, as he was dealing in drugs in the town.
The marihuana and heroin were also seized from the Olga Brisken dancers when they

National Army represented by the major. As BL 014810 was told, the total amount
burned was lb grams of heroin, 11 grams of cocaine and 7 kilograms of marihuana, as
well as 30 simple Darbon pills; and a check was made to insure that no drugs were
missing. Despite the fact that the rain did not stop. the burning took place and
nothing was left. There was a constant watch to see that everything was destroyed,
so that Others could not come later to retrieve what was left._ The duration of the
burning was not reported exactly. because the rain did not stop. The drugs were
seized from the individuals under arrest and, since the proceedings have already
ended, they had to be burned so as not to be kept here. [Text] [Piedras Nagras EL
DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 23 Oct 81 Sec D p 6] 2909
HARIHUANA TRAFFICKER MAKES STATEMENT-Yesterday, Ruben Bmerito Flores made his
preliminary statement to the third district court, after having been remanded by

the agent of the Federal Public Ministry for a crime against health in the degree

of marihuana possession. This individual, following his release, was brought before
the aforementioned court, and declared his partial guilt, while giving the names of
other persona who, he claimed, were the owners and those responsible for the distri-
bution of the drugs. This individual was arrested by federal Judicial Police forces
on 9 October, when luggage containing marihuana which weighed 18,500 kilograms was
confiscated from him. From the outset, the captors omitted the names of the members
of the drug_trafficking ring to which Ruben Emerita Plores belongs, individuals who
are being hunted. The aforementioned court announced that tomorrow will mark the
expiration of the constitutional period when the head of that judicial entity orders
the release or official imprisonment of this person, who is being held in the Social
Rehabilitation Center. [Text] [Huevo Laredo EL HAHAHA in Spanish 16 Oct 81 Sec 3

p 8 2909

PRISON COUNTERFEITIHG, ESCAPE PLOT-Hexico City, 16 October (BlC!LSIOR)-Agents

from the Investigations Division discovered a mass-scale forging of diplomatic,
official and regular passports, credit cards and checkbooks of various institutions,
national and international airline tickets, birth, marriage and death certificates,
driving licenses and invoices of United States commercial concerns, which were being
made in the print shops of the northern prison. In making the pertinent report,

Gen Arturo Durazo Moreno, chief of the Metropolitan‘Police, also announced that the
escape of three international criminals from the same jail had been plotted, with

a helicopter and a small jet ready for the escape. Durazo Moreno said that the

ones chiefly responsible are the Thai drug traffickers Arphchitaty Lonceg Hik

and Romayanda Noa Tazau, and the German Holf Peter Schotea, the latter three of
whom-wencconfined in the prison, as well as the Korean Chang Ok-Hong and the Mexican
Humberto Hernandez Hernandez. According to the assessment made by the agents from
the Investigations Division, the sale of the forged documents may have brought the
forgera $1.5 million. [Text] [Huevo Laredo BL HANANA in Spanish 17 Oct 81 See A

p 5 2909

CONFISCATBD DRUGS REHOVED--At the instruction of the federal judge of the second
district court, Carlos Gilberto Canto Lopez, steps will be taken to remove the 30
samples of various drugs and narcotics which were related to proceedings that were
concluded from 5 years ago to date. The foregoing announcement was made yesterday
to BL DIARIO by Fernando Venture Hernandez. first secretary of the court. He said
that the samples of opium, heroin, cocaine and marihuana will have to be turned
over to the health center for destruction or legal use, indicating that it will be
the health authorities who must decide what is to be done with those drugs. He
said that the various proceedings involving the drug samples have been resolved,
and that all the drug samples still included in the records of proceedings that
have ended would be removed in the proper manner. [Text] [Piedres Negras BL DIARIO
DE PIBDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 17 Oct 81 Sec 3 p l] 2909

PJF SEARCH FOR DRUGS--Sabinas Hidalgo, Nuevo Leon-The Federal Judicial Police, in
their constant battle against the drug traffic, are continuing to take unexpected
action on the national highway, setting up sudden inspection posts with the best
results. Yesterday, EL DIARIO witnessed one of these raids, when a helicopter from
that policy entity landed near the highway, and police officers engaged in searching

40
the vehicles traveling along it in search of law-breakers. Although there were no
positive results. it was evident that this entity is still waging the battle on
behalf of the rest of the citizenry. preventing drug trafficking; something which
was greatly applauded even by the individuals who were searched in their vehicles
and on their person. because it was evident that the Office of the Attorney General
of the Republic is continuing its dangerous battle against the organised drug
traffic. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUBVO LASBDO in Spanish 19 Oct 81 Set

A p S] 2909 .

DRUG-CARRYING PLANE CRASHES-Mexico City, 28 September (NOTIHEx)-This morning, two
small planes crashed off the coast of Sonora and in the mountainous area of the
Cerro de Oro communal farm in the state of Oaxaca. One of them was carrying contra-
band and the other a marihuana shipment. In making the foregoing report. the Office
of the Attorney General of the Republic stated that s two-engine Donates plane with
registration "-3411, white in color with blue stripes,crashed on the snore st huata-
bampo. The plane was carrying several kilograms of packed marihuana and, when an
inspection was made on the site, the engines of the aircraft were found detached,
and in the remains of the plane an individual who has not been identified was found
still wearing a seat-belt. Meanwhile, on the Cerro de Oro farm near Teutepec,
Oaxaca, a two—engine plane without registration crashed to the ground in pieces and
burned. The remains of electronic articles. tape recorders, radios and other apps-
ratus were found. A burned body was discovered in the pilot's seat and, from the
papers half destroyed by the fire that he was carrying it was found that the corpse
was that of Charlie F. houch. an American. In both instances, the agents of the
Federal Public Ministry assigned to the towns where the accidents occurred were
notified so that they could start making the investigations. [Text] [Piedrss Negrss
BL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 29 Sep 81 pp 1, 2] 2909

OFFICIALS ARRESTEDASTSAFFICKERS--Iguals, 9 Oct-Hith the recapture of the inmate
Jorge Carrillo Sanchez. who along with 20 other convicts escaped from the municipal
Jail last Saturday. it was discovered that the prison warden, Carlos Roman Fernan-
dez. and the chief of the preventive police. Roberto Perez Bate, headed a band of
drug traffickers. Those under arrest are being interrogated separately by the
Judicial Police in order to learn the names of their accomplices. The gang was
operating in the municipal jail. The director of the Judicial Police, Francisco
Vargas Najera, said that the recapture of Carrillo Sanchez proved the complicity of
the warden in the mass escape of early last Saturday. Carrillo Sanchez. on being
interrogated, said that the 21.escspees had to take up a collection in order to come
up with the half million pesos that were distributed among the prison guards. the
warden and the chief of the Preventive Police. [By Teofilo Arce Villa] [Text]
[Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 10 Oct 81 p 31-A] 9746

COLOMBIAN TRAFFICKER SENTENCED-The second district judge for criminal matters
sentenced the Colombian Gelson Horses yesterday to 10 years imprisonment for the
crimes of transporting and trafficking in drugs. Horses was also accused a few days
ago of complicity with the German Peter Schotea in the falsification of official
document8. airline tickets andchecks,using the printing press of the North Prison.
For this reason he was resubmitted to trial. The falsification of the documents was
discovered and denounced the previous week by the director of the North Prison
attorney Guillermo Andrade Delgado. The Colombian Gelson Horses was transferred to
Santa Marta Acatitla Penitentiary for securityreasons, since according to the German
Schotes and another inmate named Eric Mendoza he was planning to escape from the
North Prison with the money obtained through the falsifications. [Text] [Mexico
City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 29 Oct 81 p 7-D] 9746

41
OPIUH CARGO SEIZED--A shipment of 3.2 kg of opium. intended for clandestine chenista
operating in the Federal District, was seized by Federal Judicial Police (PJF)
agents along the section of highway between Taxcoco and Calpulalpan in the State

of Mexico, according to that agency. Federal agents arrested Servando Caro
Contreras and Hector Arnoldo Paredes Castro who. riding in a Ford Pairmont automo-
bile with license plates Hus-533 from the State of Jalisco. were concealing the
opium gum under the vehible's front seats. The individuals arrested refused to say
where the gum came from and where they were taking it. They simply said that an
individual asked them to take the package with the gum to this metropolis. In the
colony Lombardo Toledano in Culiacan. Sinaloa. other PJR agents discovered an
improvised laboratory for converting opium gum into heroin. The agensts seized
almost half a kilogram of already refined heroin and all the utensils of the clan-
destine laboratory, where the chemists Juan Rivera, 0dilon Rodriguez Carvers and
Lihorio Rivera Alarcon were captured. [By Manuel Campos Diaz] [Text] [Mexico
City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 8 Oct 81 p 7-D] 9706

comm»: owes sarp ssrzm—nanzanino, Col., 26 Oct--Vice admiral Luis Ruano Angulo.
commander of the Tenth Naval District, advised that the Sl-ton Ccnombian ship
'Cafetero,‘ fitted to transport drugs, was seized in Mexican waters by the Coast

Guard cutter, 'Ignacio I. Vallarta.‘I The captain of the ship, Edgar hrdila Nunez

and seven crew members remained in custody of the judicial authorities or this port.
The ship ostensibly was engaged in fishing, but on being inspected by personnel of the
submarine command. it was discovered that the hold had a false bottom and in the hull
there are spaces {or hiding drugs. Commander Ruano Angulo stated that various con-
tainers of marihuana and marihuana seeds were found in the disguised compartments of
the ship. The otiicial report on the seizure of this ship customized for the transport
of drugs indicates that the Coast Guard cutter. 'Ignacio I. vallarta,‘ under the
command at Corvette Captain Roberto Gomez Carranza and the second in command.
Nicodemus Villegas Roca, intercepted it in Mexican waters. Those arrested are: the
captain, Edgar Ardila Nunez and the crew members, Policarpo Garrido, Miguel Dukkmand,
Antonio Aguirre Estupinan, Demetrio Gonzalez, Coicn Ortiz, Jose Octavio Tavares and
Pedro Nell. [Text] [Mexico city EXCELSIOR in Spanish 22 Oct 81 p 1bdn 9678

C90: 5300/2057

42
BRIEFS

ANTI-DRUG OPERATIONS-Jive persons were detained at Waterloo Beach in Central
Trinidad early yesterday morning after Central Division Police. under Sup. Sar-
ston Griffith, and members of the Trinidad and w Coast Guard seized some

25 bags of marijuana carrying a street value of more than one million dollars
yesterday morning. A boat from which the marijuana was allegedly being unloaded.
was also seized. Following the recent spate of robberies. the Co-issioner of
Police. Mr Randolph Burroughs, called an emergency meeting on Wednesday with his
senior officers. These included acting Deputy Conissioner (Inspectional Serv-
ices (Sampson Phillip and Assistant Comissioner (Crime) Winfield Hinds. The
Commissioner mapped out an anti-crime operation which he codenamed "AJLA." (Arms,
Narcotics and Ammunition). The Operation, which was immediately successful,
embraced members of the Tactical Unit, Flying and Narcotics Squads, Operations

' Branch, Division Detectives and Task Forces throwing up road blocks. spot

checks, see patrols and land-see coastal surveillance. The police were able to
recover a stolen motor-car from San Fernando which had been abandoned after a
chase off the Princess Margaret highway. It had not yet been reported stolen.
[Text] [Port-of-Spain TRINIDAD GUARDIAN in English 23 (Jet 81 p 3]

cso: 5300/7513

43
unsmsu ARREST-"Morning hooeter,’ Beirut ﬂower” and 'axtra Prino" are new brande
of haehiah which police eeized earlier this week in natnia, near hl-Azher dietrict,
Cairo sourcee in the General Security DepertaaI-nt annomced yeeterday. In a crack-
down on narcotic deelere, the eourcee said, police eeized a quantity or nerootice
valued at about 1.8 1 million and arreeted a girl called tarida, Aliae m'anaeha.‘
or refreshment who was leading a ring of drug traffickers. Police inveetigetione
revealed that 'rarida" had taken over the family bueineee after the dieappearance
of her father, (who is being eought by the police to eerve ntneroua prison een-
tencea on similar charges), the death of her brother in a claeh with the Anti-Nar-
cotic Squad laet month, and the arreet of her elder eieter currently facing trial
on charges related to haeieh eauggling. A tip-of! to the police revealed that the
girlhadpurchaeedalargeguentityotnerooticeendwaehidingiteceeudxerein
Batnia, the dietrict alwaye vieited by the police in pureuit of narcotioe dealere.
Police discovered the hiding-place of the girl and her ring of haehieh tratfickere,
General Security Deparhent emcee eaid and they etorned the place earlier thie
week. “We faced no reeietance', eaid a we: of the Anti-Narcotic Squad ee the
girl never expected that they would know the place and eurpriee her. "helped by a
umber of her ring ehe wee proceeeing haehiah when we cane upon that red-handed"
the policeman added. 0n interrogation, a newer o! the ring Marten]: m ﬂue-a
teetitied that the seized narcotice were owned by the girl, Parida Hanna. Both
were put in cuetody pending trial. [Cairo m norm cm in mglieh 18 Nov 81
p 2)

C80: 5300/5005

lob
BRI BPS

OPIUM DISCOVERY IN KNORASANnQayen revolution guards have discovered a total of
19A kg of opium on three individuals and arrested them for possession of narcotics.
A person was arrested in Mashhad for possession of 7 kg of opim. [61?231615
Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 11.30 GMT 23 Nov 81]

KHORASAN WIUM FIND—An Afghan citisen with 2.3 kg of opiu- in his possession
has been arrested in Birjand. A band of narcotics dealers were also arrested
in Darreh Gaz and 5 kg of opium was confiscated. [GP261751 Mashhad Domestic
Service in Persian 1530 GMT 2!. Nov 81]

GACHSARAN DRUG FIND—'Nenty-five grams of heroin, 86 grams of burned opium, 56.5
grams of opium, 5 [word indistinct] hashish. 87 gran of opium juice and a colt
together with sane drug parQbernalis have been discovered on pushers and addicts
in Gachsaran during the past week. [Tut] [62251815 Shiraz Domestic Service

in Persian 1500 GMT 25 Nov 81]

moms: DRUG HAW-Members of the Mashhad revolution guards have arrested an
individual for possession of 7.5 grass of heroin. Personnel of the Borazjen
police antinarcotics division have discovered 1.13 kg of drugs and some drug
paraphernalia in a house and arrested the owner. [@26le7 Mashhad Domestic
Service in Persian 1&30 GMT 26 Nov 81]

OPIUM BUST—According to a report by the PARS News Agency, the public relations
office of the police headquarters in Khorasan Province's cities has announced:

With the vigilance and efforts of the police personnel in Mashhad, one opium

dross smoking house and 1.103 kg of narcotics have been discovered and confiscated.
In this connection the owner of the aforesaid house has been arrested and has been
handed over to the '~;lqmic revolution public prosecutor's office in Mashhad together
with a file on his case. Also in this connection five narcotics consumers have
been arrested. [Text] [Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GM! 26 Nov 81]

105
OPIUM SEIZURE-According to the Central New Sunit, the public relations office or
the gendarmerie of the Islamic Republic of Iran announced that gender-eerie personnel
of tho Sarasyah-G Post in Kerman have seized 395 kg of opium buried in a pistachio
garden. Three people have been arrested and the search for others involved contin-
ues. [Text] [LD220536 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 22 Nov 81]

TORMT JAM OPIUH FIND-~Gendarnerie personnel of Torbat Jan have discovered 1 kg of
opium juice on two bus passangers and 500 grams of opiua on another individual.
They arrested all three for possession of narcotics. [GP221639 Mashhad Domestic
Service in Persian 11.30 GMT 22 Nov 81]

HEROIN IN ROWAN-«embers of the Borazjan antidrug squad have discovered 5.5 grams
of heroin on three drug dealers and arrested than. [GP221639 Shires Domestic Ser-
vice in Persian 1500 GMT 22 Nov 81]

DRUG SMUGGLERS SENTENCED--The public relations department of the Islamic Revolution
prosecutor's office. for the central province dealing with drug smuggling charges,
announced that the office's first and second branches Iron 23 October-21 November
investigated the files of 177 persons whose cases had been referred to them and had
passed sentences. According to these verdicts. 18 were sentenced to death. 12 to
life imprisonment, S to 20 years imprisonment. 10 persons to 15 years in prison, 3
to 12 years in prison and 198 others were sentenced to prison for 1-10 years.
[Figures as heard] A number of others vere sentenced to prison for less than 1
year and a number were freed after given written undertakings. Piles of those sen-
tenced to death were sent to the supreme judicial council for final coniirnation.
{Textl [1.0230840 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1030 GMT 22 Nov 81]

050: 5300/5325

'46
BRIEFS

DAGGA HAUL-~Durben.-Polics heve destroyed nore then 16 tons of dsggs in s nessive
operation in the Pongols end illuhluwe districts. Assisted by s South Africen Air
Force helicopter, they first loved in to the Cosini den eres nee: the Ponsols
River and destroyed 17 000 sq metres of degss fields. About 8 tons of desss.
worth thousands of rend. were destroyed and six tribesnen arrested. The police
used the helicopter to spray the concelsed fields from the sir. In the ﬂluhluue
district. they egsin used the helicopter to destroy shout 6 tons of dsggs. They
are still in the urea looking for note degge fields, which are nor-ally cleverly
concealed. [Text] [Johannesburg m CITIZEN in English 24 Nov 81 p 9]

080: 5300/5609

47
POLL: MOST DANES THINK NARCOTICS IS BIGGEST SOCIAL PRCBLDI
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE Tim-mos in Danish 26 Oct 81 p 7

[Article by Asger Schultz]

iExcerpts) It is often maintained that prostitutim, besides being a moral problem
and demeaning for those who practice it, is also a social problee and therefore an
expression of or a result of the fact that society is not functioning as it should.

In order to determine what people think about this problem, the Gallup Institute
presented a representative cross-section of the adult population with a series of
questions having to do with prostitution, and prostitution compared with two other
social ills, drug abuse and alcohol abuse. The following question was used as an
opener:

“No society is problem-free. Which of these three problems do you think are the most
significant here in Densark, the drug problem. prostitution, or alcoholism?“

The answers were as follows:

 

Item Drugs Prostitution Alcohol abuse Don't know 'i‘otal
e t O 6 t

Total: 67 3 26 9 104

Education:

Grade school 71 3 21 9 104

Middle school 62 2 32 10 105

Finished high school 54 7 38 7 106

The drug problem is clearly what most people consider most significant. Two-thirds
(67 percent) emphasize this problem. while mly one-fourth (26 percent) emphasize
alcohol abuse, and in this context prostitution is not seen as significant (3 percent).

In this survey there was agreement mmg all categories of persons except for persons
of varying educational levels. In contrast, the differences of opinion were significant
in this instance. The best educated respondents consider alcohol abuse a significantly
bigger problem than those with the least academic training. Since the question could

be seen as having two dimensions, having to do both with the innediate damage to the
individual as well as with the number of alcohol abusers. it is quite likely that

more of the best educated respondents would consider this second dimension in giving

their opinion. But in all cases drug abuse is still seen as the most significant
problem.

48
If black market trade activity is used as the moral and social caparative factor,
prostitution is valued with a considerably higher social significmce. But still

one in five (20 percent) considered prostitution acre objectionable. while nore than
half (53 percent) chose black market activity. There is a definite and not insigni-

f icant difference between the opinions of men and mm wonen considered prostitution
more demeaning, conpared with the black market. Differences in education generate
significant differences of opinion; respondents with the lost education easily con-
sider the black narket the worse of the two.

May be reprinted only if BERLINGSKS moms; and Gallup are cited as sources.

9584
C50: 5300/2049

109
SOCIAL AFFAIRS MINISTER OUTLINES NEH DRUG mm PLAN
Oslo APTENPOSTBN in Norwegian 3 Nov 81 p 5

[Text] "The narcotics situation is alarming. The governannt believes that counter-
efforts must be increased. The work of the police and customs service not be .
strengthened. At the same tine, an effort must be aade to reduce the demand and to
prevent social acceptance of narcotics." Leif Arne neloe emphasized in the parlia-
ment last night. Beloe made known also that the government will propose changes in
the alcohol law before Christmas.

The minister for social affairs did not provide any details as to what the changes
in the law will be involved but he said that the proposals are being made against
the background of parliament's handling of the resolution on alcohol at the spring
session this year. In regard to an increased effort against the use of narcotics,
the minister for social affairs said that further esphasis will be placed on overall
information and on attitude-creating work. The cabinet minister emphasised that or-
ganizations should take a more active part in the work and the apparatus to help
people should get increased resources.

"It will be necessary. moreover, to find new and different kinds of methods for treat-
ing and rehabilitating young people who misuse the stuff ," Social Minister Heloe said.
The cabinet minister said that he anticipated that the expenditures in the health
care budget would increase annually by 3 percent without any change in the present
rules. "That means that we must look closely at the established provisions so that
those with the highest priority will continue to be carried out. It can also be nec-
essary to re-evaluate the system whereby health care is financed. the relation be-
tween the state budget and the health care budget and their relation to other public
budgets." “else said.

He repeated that the government wants to push a proposal for a new law for health

and social services in the coeuunities early in the spring session of parliament. _
The chairman'of the parliamentary comittee for social affairs, Gum-Vigdia Olsen-
Hagen (Labor). said that this revision of the Labor Party's law proposal will delay

investment in the primary health service. "Rhea at the same tine the tenporary law
regulating physicians is also ended, distortions in the health service will appear,"

Gunn-V igdis Olsen-Hagen maintained.

6893
050: 5390/2056
SWEDEN PLANS STEPS TO INTBRDICT DRUGS FRO“ COPENHAGEN
Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 30 Oct 81 p 11
[Article by Sveinn Dybing]

[Text] The Swedish authorities do not want to tolerate any longer the increasing
narcotics traffic from Copenhagen to the'towns along the Oresund. This traffic is
blamed on the open dealing in narcotics in the free port Christiania.

.Karin Soder, the Swedish minister for social affairs, informs ARBBIDBRBLADBT that
she will discuss the problem with the Danish minister of internal affairs, Kenning
Rasmussen. at a meeting in November.

"I know that this narcotics business also has repercussions in Norway. Hence, the
problea will be discussed at the Nordic Ministers Meeting in January," says Karin
Soder, who is also minister for Nordic cooperation. She is in Norway in connection
with a health and social seminar at Jeloya near Moss, arranged by the Nordic Coun-
cil of Ministers.

Karin Soder informs ARBBIDBRBLADBT that the Swedes have mounted an offensive against
narcotics, especially hashish. She is of the opinion that the misunderstood liberal
view of hashish is to blame for the problem.

In practice, an individual can be arrested with up to 100 grams of hashish in the
free port Christiana and escape with a fine. In contrast the police in Oslo and
0stland set a level of 5 grams. '

Karin Soder says that especially the towns along the Oresund are being overwhelmed
with hashish from Copenhagen. Involved are Hallo, Lund, Helsingborg and Landacrona.
Even if Social Minister Karin Soder asks that the free port of Christians be closed,
such a proposal will encounter massive resistance from the Danes. Many Danes, in-
cluding responsible politicana, believe that it is better to have hashish concentra-
ted in Christiana subject to some control than to spread it over a larger area. The
Danes believe one thing is certain. Closing up Christiana only neans transferring
the problem to another place.

Karin Soder has confidence in the big offensive against hashish. In this connection
she points to the comparable offensive which was nounted 10 years ago. That resul-
ted in a decrease in the consunption of alcohol by between 15 to 20 percent.

6893
C80: 5300/2056

51
COST-EFFECTIVENESS 0F CUSTOMS DRUG EFFORT ARGUBD
Stockholn SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 15 Oct 81 p 3
[Article by Hils Gardegard and bag Jonson]

[Text] Nils Cardegard is a mental hospital attendant at Sidajon
and a member of the Cultural Front Board of FOLKET I BILD. Dag
Jonzon is a journalist and director of the Timra Collectiv.

Ninety- two percent of the Swedish people want, according to a public opinion poll
released in June, to give the narcotics police increased authority for their task.
Narcotics was the societal problen which the Swedish people clearly regarded as the
most important. The counternarcotics work has been intensified in the Social De-
partnent and in the schools. For example, during the spring factual material on
hashish was distributed to all school children in the country.

It is excellent if the work against narcotics is given priority. It is significant
if more officials and organizations try to fight narcotics before they are ultim-
ately accepted in our culture. But we wonder what kind of a plan the government
and parliament has for its work when it accepts at the same time that customs' pro-
tective net around the country becones increasingly thin.

The protection of our borders today is clearly too small in scope in relation to
the extent of the drug problem and its international character. The possibilities
of customs' counteracting narcotics appears to be even less with the government' a
proposed econony program.

Tlxe work of the customs at our largest airport Arlanda was depicted in FOLKBT I
BlLD l5/81. Each day 100 planes, five to six thousand passengers, 30 tons of mail
and 120 tons of freight land there. The 73 customs officals have to provide ser-
vice around the clock priaarily to the legitimate traffic but also to control and
investigate the smuggling, primarily, of narcotics which is taking place.

Unbeatable hunters

The most effective help which custoas has had in its work on the borders is the dog,
that is, a narcotics dog and its master. The dog's hunting instinct has been di-
rected through training to narcotics. The dog, with its well-developed sense of
smell. is an unbeatable hunter of narcotics no matter where they may be hidden.

52
Although the effectiveness of dogs is well documented, there is an exceedingly small
number along the borders. Customs has today 22 dogs, even if there are about 300
larger points of entry. Arlsnda has only one team despite the very extensive traffic
described above. The dog and his master work, according to the schedule, 36 of the
168 hours in the week.

To be sure, Arlanda at times has the help of the other three teams in Stockholm, but
their common service area goes all the way down to Norrkoping and includes, among
other things, all ports, ferry slips, postal and rail connections with foreign coun-
tries. No matter how capable and conscientious customs may be, hunting for narcotics
is like looking for a needle in a haystack. ‘

Incomprehensible Neglect

It is incomprehensible to us that the protection of the borders against narcotics is
allowed to be so neglected. The customs and the police confiscate today equally
large quantities of narcotics, but the police make three times as many confiscations.

The customs take of course the wholesale quantities which are divided up after com-
ing into the country. The customs has greater authority to check suspected people,
freight or cars. The authority of the police to check suspects is, on the other
hand. significantly more restricted. Consequently, the work of the narcotics police
is considerably more difficult with lengthy surveillance and planning before inter-
vening. This is money well spent to hinder and make more difficult the smuggling

of narcotics over our borders.

In the customs service the 22 dog teams are involved in half of the confiscations.
But at the big points of entry such as Helsingborg, Malmo and Arlanda there are no

possibilities except for very superficial inspection. An airport such as Landvetter
in Goteborg still is without dog teams, even if it is known that there is narcotics
traffic.

Low Cost

Host of the confiscations by custoss today are by chance and not a result of tips.
This naturally increases the requirement for quick and effective facilities for the
customs officials so they can make the inspections they regard as necessary. Here
the dog is beyond comparison. (Those people who don't believe us can make an exper-
iment. Borrow 11 cars. Ask a friend to hide half a kilogram of flour in some of
the cars. while the search is going on, you can remind yourself that during the
summer a ferry completely loaded with cars arrives at Helsingborg every 12 minutes.)

The customs and police calculate that together they confiscatr at the most 5 percent
of the narcotics on the Swedish market. In 7 years number of confiscations and the
quantity of narcotics seized at the customs hes quadrupled. The number of dogs cus-
toms hns is increasing by one to two a year. This is wholly inadequate in view of
the rapid expansion of narcotics. -

The cost of a narcotics dog is low. 50,000 kronor or about 20 kronor per day during
the period of service. Host dogs even in the first month make confiscations exceed-
ing in value many times the cost of training the dog. There is a capacity to in-
crease the training of dogs greatly if there is a demand.

53
The authorities for the state dog training school at Sollentuna, the Social Depart-
ment. has nevertheless made no efforts whatsoever to expand this effective means of
combating the drug traffic, traffic which causes large expenditures by the Social
Department in other aspects of its work.

Stopped at the Border

.Naturally, we do not think that reliance upon custons' border surveillance will
solve the narcotics problem in Sweden. For that a large number of different but
integrated measures is needed. We support also drug abusers being treated in a
well-thought-out program. the police having the resources for trying to suppress
narcotic crimes, and the schools adequately providing infatuation on the harmful
effects of hashish.

But it would be wise if parliament put aside funds equal to a small percentage of
what all this costs and put it into increasing the number of narcotic dogs at the
borders. That would be a real reinforcement. Narcotics snuggling would not be as
easy as it is today. The chances of narcotics being stopped at the border before

they could do any harm would be considerably increased, and other efforts would then
be more meaningful.

6893
C80: 5300/2047

54
SWEDISH-DEVELOP. TOILET 1'0 FOIL SHUGGLERS mm
Stockholn DAGBNS NYHBTER in Swedish 23 Oct 81 p 24
[Article by Leif Dahlin]

[Text] The snuggling of narcotics in the lower abdomen has become so col-Ion that it
is causing customs great problens in each suspected case. A "narcotics toilet" of
Swedish manufacture, which has been patented in several countries and which can be-

come a worldwide item in the fight against lower abdonen snuggling, will soon be
.found at all customs inspection points at our borders. The toilet has already been

a success at customs at Heathrow airport in London.

So far this year thirty cases of lower abdomen snuggling have been detected by cus-
toss. The suspect, after a body search, is usually taken to the nearest hospital

by three custona' esployees. There a doctor emines the suspect. In one case sev-
eral months ago the doctor reaoved no less than 91 capsules of hashish oil from the

lower intestine of a man. Honen snuggle narcotics vaginally.

"It is not only that each case ties up two or three customs officials for several
hours. But it is unsatisfactory to both parties from the esthetic point of view,“
says Ulf Persaon, chief of the custols security office in Stockholm.

"Most people who are detained for investigation becone nervous, whether they are
clean or not. They want to go to the toilet, and the custons' inspectors can't al-
low that just like that. The person being checked out could flush away any narcotics.
Inspections in connection with visits to the toilet is deneaning for both the travel-
ler and the customs official." says Olle Jacobsson, a section chief.

The new stool. which was shown to moms may. on Thursday. is an easy-to-handle
thing which can be used in mobile inspections (it can be driven by a 12 volts bat-
tel'Y). and it can be plugged into the electric circuit in fixed inspection stations
at airports and in harbors. A person suspected of lower abdonen snuggling is di-
rected to a room where the toilet is. The evacuation goes into a plastic bag which
is automatically sealed electrically.

Everything is very hygenic, and the wstons' official can quickly determine if it

contains any foreign objects without opening the package. If something happens dur—
ing the visit and the suspicion rensins. there can be an emination at the hospital.

55
Customs hopes that this facility will have a psychological effect. In any case no
one can go to an ordinary flushing toilet.

The first toilet stool which costs about 9.000 kronor will be installed at customs
in Malmo. There has already been interest in it in West Germany, Australia and the

United States.

6893
C80: 5300/20h7

 

56
DRUGS EXPERT 0.185?st TREATMENT SUCCESS CLAIMS

Stockholm SVBNSKA DAGBLADET in Swedish 4 Oct 81 p 3

[Article by Lars H. Gunne, professor of psychiatry and medical superintendent at
Ulleraker Hospital]

[Text] From tine to time' newspapers feature reports on various drug treatment centers.
These reports deal with treatment philosophy and prograss. daily routines and, some-
times, a little bit about problems and difficulties. To be sure, such reports are
justified and. indeed, treatment centers personnel should be credited for devoting
themselves to this difficult work. But, of course, mly if it leads to acceptable
results in the longer term. How many drug addicts will change their lifestyle after

spending time in such drug treatment centers-what are the treatment results over
the sceewhat longer term?

Nowadays. journalists do not fail to inquire about "results,“ which they then report
in terns of a percentage figure of 'wred' drug addicts, generally without any further
analysis. Reported results are usually around 70 to 90 percent. When scme treatment
centers report particularly good results, they usually sake the headlines, but a

success rate of about 80 percent is beginning to be considered “normal' nowadays
among the treatment centers.

At the same time. treatment centers are complaining about how difficult their job
can be. how often their work meets with ingratitude, how we relapse follows another
and how street drug addicts view the entire process with great skepticism. Over
the years, the Ministry ’of Social Affairs has also reported that drug addiction in

our society cannot be “treated away.‘ Why not if the results are as glowing as the
newspapers keep reporting? '

Addicts Disappear

The answer lies in the treatment centers‘ reporting system--which we sight refer
to as treatnent center mathematics. Based at our drug treatment reports--be they
from hospitals. treatment centers. boarding homes or other-sane addicts disappear
all the time. Sosetimes they want to discontinue treatment before the therapist
considers it advisable. saletimes they run away withait further discussion.

When treatment results are later canwted, researchers do not include this group,

which remains untreated. At best. they report how many of these addicts have been
excluded, but scletines they even neglect to do that. Based on experiences in

57
Sweden and abroad. the number of dropouts from voluntary drug treatment centers is
fairly well established. It is approximately 60 to 70 percent, mich means that

only about 30 to 40 percent of those admitted are included in the treatment research
figures.

If, for the sake of simplicity, we say that 35 percent remain in the centers long
enough to be "counted" as far as results are concerned, an 80-peroent success rate
means that 28 percent of the original number of clients has been treated successfully.
Now we can better understand Why the problem of drug addiction cannot be treated

away. It also explains why work in treatment centers is often considered difficult
and thankless.

Escapee Criticism

Which is the correct figure, 80 or 28 percent? Both are correct, of course, in their
proper context. In my opinion, presenting only the higher figure, 80 percent, is
confusing. The public naturally believes that 80 percent of the drug addicts who
undergo treatment come out of these centers changed and no longer dependent on drugs
to begin a socially acceptable existence. Indeed, it is being stressed, and to sale
extent somewhat correctly, that such treatment takes time and that anoever runs away
after a couple of weeks has hardly been treated and should thus not be counted.

The argument against this is that escape is the drug addict's usual way of criticizing
the treatment and that this protest should be noted rather than neglected. Sometimes
the reason is given that when 'everybody else” reports in this manner, one treatment

center cannot submit less favorable results; that would not be good for the per-
sonnel's morale.

Avoiding the Problem

A troubling thought may sneak up if we consider the less favorable figures: it the
cure rate is 28 percent, how much of it is due to treatment? We know that sale '90
off' drugs by themselves without the help of therapists. Unfortunately, Swedish
treatment research has been avoiding this problem. As long as researchers can report
an 80 percent cure rate, they tend to dismiss such troubling questions.

To further defend their position, some researchers have criticized all experimental
or comparative treatment research and suggested that research which only includes
the number of completely cured drug addicts is pointless and meaningless. "We are
not about to organize a Swedish drug treatment championship,‘ say the researchers.
Instead, we should be more interested in how the clients feel inside, how they
develop as human beings, what are the tensions and conflicts between clients and
therapists or within the two groups, the institution's therapeutic “climate,” etc.

Uncomfortable Questions

I can agree with the fact that the number of drug addicts who remain cured is not the
only result that is of interest to the treatment centers, but that that must be the

primary one. If a sufficient number of addicts cannot manage to break the habit,
all other treatment analysis is rather uninteresting. If the treatment does not help,
the amount of splendid philosophy or inner conflict makes no difference.

58
With that, however, I all not saying that drug-free treatment centers are ineffective.
But we do not know when we are talking about effective treatnent or how often we
treat unnecessarily. And treatment center mathematics help or push aside these
uncanfortable questions.

8952
C50: 5300/2046

59
ANALYSIS or DRUG FATALITIES INDIG‘I‘ES 8043 new
Stockholm SVBNSKA warmer in Swedibh G Oct 01 p 3

[Article by Nils-Olof Danell, physician commissioned by the goverment to study drug -
fatalities]

[Text] In 1975, a study of drug fatalities was made in the greater Stockholm area

(the State Medical Office is located in Stockholm). The study, which was initiated
by the Ministry of Social Affairs and followed up until 1900, is perhaps the most
reliable intonation for the time being concerning the development of the drug problem
in Sweden.

I have followed the debate from my vantage point and want to add scme facts which
eay be useful and even lead to sane thought. Despite the subject's sensitive nature
in every respect, I believe it should becme public knowledge so as to provide a
basis for further debate. with the permission of my employers, I have decided to
present seas of the data gathered in our study.

widespread Misuse of Terms

1 would first like to say that terms such as 'drug addiction' arr! 'drug abuse" are

by no means unambiguous concepts as far as public opinion or the more sophisticated
debate terminology is concerned. In as: study, these terms have therefore been
limited to include the so-called heavy drug abuse-~i.e. abuse which at least partly
involves injecting drugs into a muscle or a vein. 'rhese heavy drugs primarily include:

Opiates (morphine, heroin)
Centrally stimulating drugs (other than cocaine)
Cocaine.

Even the so-called hallucinogens are usually considered heavy drugs because of their
very powerful effect relative to the -Glnt of drugs taken. The study did not find
any cases of pure hallucinogenic abuse. But it is important to note the widespread
use of mixed drugs anmg addicts.

The lack of one drug an the market results in increased demand for a substitute.

So talk about opiate abuse or central stimulant abuse is thus often a simplification
of the problem. Addicts often mix these two main types of drugs.

60
Enormous Death Rate

The drug addict is usually young. Therein lies the great social tragedy. The death
rate along drug addicts is enormous within the affected age groups canpared to the
normal death rate. Some studies show that the death rate .4119 drug injection addicts
is about one percent. Les one addict in a hundred dies every year as a result of his
habit. Bowever, the cause of death varies. Among the lost cos-on are:

Acute
Secondary illnesses
ani romntal causes.

The first group includes elements of draaa when the drug addict dies inediately
upon an injection. lie is usually found with the paraphernalia at his side and not
infrequently in a public restrocn and the like. As far as the nortician/forensic
physician is concerned, this is a case of i-ediate circulatory collapse with signs
of excessive fluid on the lungs. so—called lung death.

There are differences of opinion as to whether the drug itself caused the reaction
or if the reaction was due to so-called anaphylactic shock-~i.e. a very powerful
reaction which prevents blood supply to the lungs. The latter can also be caused by
drug additives designed to reduce the concentrated effect of the substance. Such
additives can be found in large quantities such as powdered sugar. but also in con-
siderably more uncomfortable substances as far as the body is concerned such as
potato flour and talcum powder.

Result Is Cell Death

There is also the fact that what say be considered a normal dose for an addict in a
given situation may be an overdose in a different situation. This depends on the
addict's tolerance to the substance in question. By increasing the dose to get the
desired effect. the interval between dosages may also have to be adjusted and, in
addition to that, he is faced with debilitating organic changes as a result of the
drug abuse. Cell death is such a serious organic change affecting those who use cen—
trally stimulating drugs because it restricts blood flow and causes an acid buildup
in vital organs like the heart. for instance.

The secondary illnesses which a drug addict may experience often lead to death. but
when the death is undraaatic, the underlying cause often escapes us. Such fatal
illnesses include inflaanation of the lungs, heart muscle daaege. brain henorrhage.
blood poisoning, liver and pancreatic diseases, etc.

In addition to that are various causes of death resulting fro! the unhealthy
environment in which the drug addict lives. These deaths are often caused by the
effects of taking drugs or during a period of withdrawal in the for- of accidents
or suicide (or nurder).

Drug Fatalities for the Period 1975-1980 Acute/Total

1975 1976 1977 1978 . 1979 1980
11/25 18/“ 22/49 38/60 36/66 26/55
Obscure fatality study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (29) (28)

61
Average Age Below 30

This study attempted to include as many of the different kinds of drug-related deaths
as possible, but for obvious reasons, the cases that sort under the first category
are the most verifiable. Obscure death fatalities remain an unknown quantity, i.e.
cases of narcotics—related deaths that do not cone to our attention but are caused
by drug abuse. An attempt to track these cases was made in a widely publicized
retrospective study for the year 1979. '

If we exclude the obscure fatalities study with its factors of uncertainty, approxi-
mately so percent of the drug-related deaths can be attributed to persons dying as a
direct result of injecting drugs. Furthermore. a scant 15 percent can be attributed
to drug addicts who died from secondary illnesses caused by drug abuse, while the '
remaining approximately 35 percent constitute addicts who, under the influence of

drugs or in a period of withdrawal, fell victim to the life-denying enviromaent in

which they lived (through accidents, suicide etc.). About 70 percent of the addicts
included in this study were known to police for their abuse and possession of drugs.

Those studied were between 16 and 57 years of age and the nest frequently abused
drug was opiate (heroin). Over 80 percent of the addicts were men, averaging 28.5
years just prior to their death. The average age tor wouen was 26.1 (these figures
are from the period 1975-1979). ‘

8952
C80: 5300/2046

62
CAMPAIGN AGAINST DRJGS MGR; calm , YOU'D!
Stockhohl SVENSKA DAGBLADET in Svedlih 11 Oct 81 p 2

[Text] Despite government efforts of various kinds, the drug problen among children
and youth is far from being solved.

The reason Action Against Drugs, spearheaded by the Kinistry of Social Affairs, is
now being initiated is that the use of cannabis (hashish and marijuana) is becoming
more canon. both at home and abroad.

A study by the Department of Social Services for one. entitled the Extent of Nar-
cotics Abuse (0ND), shows it is possible to fight the use of drugs.

One in five persons entering the military service used drugs during the period
1971-1980. Some 2.4 percent of them used drugs at least five tines during the
month prior to their induction examination.

The study also shows that in nest instances youth start out taking cannabis. Mmg
those who had tried drugs, a total of 97 percent of those entering ailitary service
had first used cannabis.

It is usually not difficult to obtain such drugs. Contrary to what many believe, a
young person is most often introduced to hashish through a friendpnot a dealer.
Most school children who had tried cannabis did not have to buy it; they were offered
some at a school dance, for exaaple. ‘

Some 4? percent of all youth between 16 and 19 years of age know where he/she can get
cannabis. As far as centrally stimulating drugs are concerned, like anphetaaine

and cocaine, one of five youths in that sane age group know where they can buy these
substances. The figures are the sane for opiates (heroin, morphine). One in eight
can get [50 or other hallucinogens. Sale 28 percent of all 22-year olds have tried
cannabis. '

These figures are alarming and clearly show the need for information about the
harmful effects of drugs as well as other efforts to proaote a drug-free environment
for youth.

But what are the more concrete efforts to counter drug abuse?

63
Supporting popular movements is one way of trying to provide meaningful leisure
alternatives for youth. It would have been helpful if UNO had tried to find out to
what extent cannabis and other drugs are used by youth who belong to various organi-
zations as well as those who are not affiliated with political organizations or
sports clubs. One can only hope that the study's in-depth investigation of 19
youths is not representative of all youth who belong to organizations. Of the five
of those who habitually used drugs. two were members of an organization.

Another confusing item is that among youth between the ages of 12 and 15 who are

affiliated with sports or athletic organizations, half of then have tried alcohol
and one in five have tried cannabis.

This is not the place to draw cmclusions about these imperfect statistics, but
keeping in mind what an important role youth organizations play in the government's
work against drugs and how much money they get to do that, it would be reasonable
to investigate to what extent youth organizations are fit environments for youth.

. 8952
C80: 5300/2046

6‘
W0 RESIDENT CQNICT. FOR SKIGGLIN use: moon-r C WISH
Stockholm SVBNSKA DAGBLADBT in Swedish 9 Oct 81 p 7

[Article by Sune Olofsml

[Text] The two who were arrested earlier for American Express

card forgery are now also suspected for snuggling a large
amount of hashish.

Two years ago. a 41-year old man chartered a sailboat worth 252,000 kronor fro- Halos
Boat Charter.

A canpanion of this 41-year old man has aduitted that the boat was to be used for
smuggling narcotics from Morocco to Rolland.

In August 1979 the 41-year old and «sway, among then a Swede from ‘raby, stepped
into the office of Halmo Boat Charter. Giving false nase and a forged American
passport, the 41-year old was able to charter the sailboat.

After a bank in Tripoli, Libya paid the registration fee, the party sailed off and
never returned.

After a month went by, the Malno Boat Charter reported the sailboat missing. In

February 1980, 6 aonths later, International Police (Interpol) came across the sail-
boat in the Strait of Gibraltar.

The 41-year old and his 31-year old culpanim are now under arrest in Stockhola for

using a forged American Express card. The suspicion of snuggling cane up in the course
of the investigation.

Smugg ling Offer

Before leaving Hallo, they had contacted a large narcotics dealer in Alsterdam by the
name of "Hulst."

The 41-year old said he had been missioned by “Bulst' to snuggle 400 kilograms of
hashish, having a street value of approximately 10 aillion kronor. Thereafter, they

were ordered to sink the sailboat, owned by Halno Boat Charter, in the Mediterranean
Sea.

65
The police are not yet sure whether the smuggling was carried out.

One of the American Express card forgets continues to remain silent while the other
has admitted the iorgeries. He said a Swedish printing company was used to forgo
the docunents.

According to American Express, the specially forged cards could have cost the colpany
about 275 nillion kronor had they gotten out on the market.

Pound Printing Press

' In a raid on the torgers' possible hiding places, police found a hydraulic press

that was used to make the plastic cards and a steeping sachine used to imprint the
card holder’s name and number.

Furthermore, one of the forgets has been doing business stealing and selling a large
number of cars. The charges against them are: gross deception, gross forgery of
docusents and gross theft.

The 11-year -old was earlier sentenced to 6 months in prison on a gross narcotics
violation charge.

3952
C80: 5300/2046

66
POLICE 0P?ICIAL DISCUSSES EFFECTIVENESS 0F STREET IAIDS
Stockholl DAGENS “YESTER in Swedish 25 Oct 81 p 10
[Article by Per Sjogren]

[Text] The big campaign against street pushing of narcotics in the whole country
has been set in notion under the direction of the National Police Board. In the
spring the police districts will initiate a period of intensive search. The purpose
is to destroy the pusher networks. This is regarded in Sodertalje as more or less .
wasted time. Street searches give lisited results and take tine iron more important
tasks.

'ﬁmis action can indeed be good in police districts where up to now not much time
has been devoted to the traffic in narcotics. It can lead to a better survey of
what is actually going on." Detective Inspector Bengt Inesus informs DAGENS “YIETER.

He is chief of the Investigation Division, and in Sodertalje six policemen work full
tine with narcotics questions. It also takes most of the time of Bengt Ineaus him-
self.

"It is like an old house." he says. "It can look nice but when you begin to tear
into it, you find that it is rotten and decayed. It is the same with search for
narcotics when you begin in an area.

Quick Results

It began in Sodertalje in the spring of 1979. Bengt Inaeus came back to Sodertalje
after 3 years with the Huddinge police where he was a member of the provincial nar-
cotics team.

He and a colleague began the search for narcotics. They found out quickly that they
could not cope with it by themselves, and the police authorities decided to provide

reinforcements.

Previously, the police in Sodertslje had about 130 narcotics cases a year. In 1979
it increased to 200. Last year the number rose rapidly to 1300. The concentration
on narcotics gave quick results. At the sane time the number of burglaries and rob-

beries decreased.

67
The pace of the work abated this spring. The narcotics test: had to devote itself to
other criminal investigations. But after the sunset vacation the pace has acceler-
ated again. Bengt Inaeus reckons that the final result this year will be the sale
as last year.

Spread Uneasiness

"If you apprehend a pusher with one or two grass on the street in the morning, you
have to let him go in the afternoon, and he doesn't say anything. In that way you
can create uneasiness in the traffic, but after a tine new channels are organized,"
Bengt lnseus says.

"Then you can do the same thing the next day. A lot of people will be involved in
this task, but it won't lead very far unless you move up to the next link in the
chain," he continues.-

His experience is that three-quarters of the work consists of investigation, and one
quarter of searching. from within and on the outside. According to the pattern of
the National Police Board the greater portion of the work will be devoted to external
search one month in the fall and in the spring.

"But the police action may be able to get the social authorities to come to grips
with hashish," Bengt Inaeus says.

Hashish by the Kilogram

In general. he regards the required month of street search as an interruption of the
real work. After it the police in Sodertalje can go back and work as before.

There is at the moment in Sodertalje an abundance of hashish fron North Africa. It
comes via Spain and Hest Germany. Last year the investigations involved hashish by
the hectogram. This year it is by the kilogram.

The importers are usually 20 to 30 years old. Narcotics abusers go down to the
ages 16 to 17. There is no pushing outside the schools. Reports that it has occur-
red have turned out to be runors without a basis.

But every week the police come upon new sources hitherto unknown. It is often Ger-
mans who bring the poison into Sweden. and Swedes who pass it on.

Difficult Background

The younger addicts with whom the police come into contact often have poor social
hakcgrounds. Bengt lnaeus emphasises that this is not the complete truth. If the
social background is better, the possibility that the police will never know about
it increases.

"we have heroin fairly well under control," he says.

Many sellers are imprisoned. The latest thing the prosecutor has been given is a
case of an organization of seven people. They are Turks and Libysas. Six lived in
Sodertalje , and the head man was in Stockholm.

68
The head man has been active since 1977 without getting caught. That is a long time
in the business. according to Bengt Inaeua. The provincial team in luddinge spotted
him in 1978 and last spring he appeared in Sodertalje.

The police know that the gang paddled a kilogram of heroin, worth 2.5 million kronor,
on the street, but it can well be actually more.

The heroin in Sodertalje comes from Iran, Turkey and Lebanon. Sole comes via West
Germany, some by transit air via Moscow and East Berlin.

Quick Money

There are no longer any fixed smuggling links with foreign countries, Bengt Inaeus
thinks. The traffic is so profitable that there are people in Sodertalje who travel
home to countries where it is easy to get heroin. Then they smuggle it in to Sodar-
taljc. Easy money.

Bengt Inaeus figures that his group has now cleared up the most of the heroin traffic
in Sodertalje. They know who stands ready to take over if the traffic is reorganized.
There are between 15 and 20 known in Sodertalje. The municipality has 80,000 inhabi-

rants.

Hashlsh and heroin are an international matter. Amphetamines are almost solely a
Swedish matter. Up to now things have been quiet in Sodertalje in the eighties, but
a new season has started. Those who were imprisoned for trafficking have been out
for 6 months. and there is an ample supply of amphetamines on the market. It has
been noted that robberies have increased; they finance the misuse.

This group consists of about 30 people, mostly older types who have been to jail
many times.

Constant Level
New people join, but the bottom level remains constant,“ Bengt Inaeus says.
Cocaine has not yet appeared in Sodertalje.

That is how it is in a municipality 24 miles from Stockholm. The picture is quite
clear after the police have begun to rummage in the house.

6893
050: 5300/2047

69
POLICE SEIZE LARGEST AMOUNT OF HBROIN EVER IN NORDIC AREA
Stockholm DAGENS NYHETBR in Swedish 27 Oct 81 p 14
[Article by Leif Dahlin]

[Text] Heroin, worth perhaps almost 50 million kronor may have been smuggled into
Sweden by a Libyan gang which has been uncovered by the provincial narcotics group
in ﬁuddinge in cooperation with the customs at Arlanda. The police got their first
tip already 2 years ago. but it was only over the weekend that the police made the
biggest narcotic'catch yet in the Nordic area. Almost 5 kilograms of heroin were
seized. and 25 people arrested.

Most of they are Libyans, many of them small entrepreneurs with outwardly irreproach-
able lifestyles in Sweden.

Heart-tending scenes occured when the police, in cooperation with social authorities,
renovcd children from outwardly secure residential environments in Stockholm and its
suburbs. Several families have been involved in the narcotics traffic (seven women
have been arrested).

In recent weeks the police were so close to the goal that for security reasons per-
sonnel was mobilized in Stockholm so that at least 25 men watched Arlanda and strat-
egic places in Stockholm.

without Sleep

The members of the successful provincial group in Huddinge, as well as the leader of
the preliminary investigation. Narcotics Prosecutor Jerry hartinger, have been more
or less without sleep the last 3 days, and several people in the group say that this
surveillance work has been more of a strain than much other heavy work.

Pinpointing

Three of the arrested Libyans left Sweden on 15 September and since then an "inner
circle" has, figuratively speaking, pinpointed a number of regular flights from the
Near East to Arlanda via Copenhagen. According to Carl Magnus Adner, police chief
of Huddingo, the Copenhagen police have been of inestimable help.

"The results would not have been so good without their contribution," the police
chief says.

70
Chessboard

A Libyan cane to Arlanda early last week by air. he had 500 grams of hashish in a
Persian chessboard. On Friday the three couriers came with slightly more than 2
kilograes of heroin in a suitcase made out of wardrobe material. Then one thing
followed the other quickly. About 3 kilograls of heroin were found in Sollentuna in
the apartment of the leader, a 3h-year-old artisan.

Three hundred thousand kronor in cash was also found in the apertnent. Throughout
Sunday there was a feverish search for and pursuit of the other nenbere of the gang.
Five Swedish pushers were caught. A car with five sen was forced to stop after a
draeatic auto chase on Gotegatan in Seder in Sotckholn. With drawn pistols, the
narcotics sen surrounded the car. and all were apprehended. four hundred grams of
heroin was found on one of then. During the continued house searches weapons were
seized and hidden money found, so that now over half a nillion kronor has been con-
fiscated. a

One of the chief Libyana in the gang has lived here a year. another 5 years. Sever-
al of the arrested individuals have. in order to maintain their disguise, taken Labor
Market work; others have had steady work, or been on social welfare without reveal-
ing that they were sitting on a "golden egg."

Several years ago close to 13 kilograms of heroin was confiscated by the customs at
Kingsangen airport outside Norrkoping. There was never any clarification as to who
had sent it or who the recipient was. Everything indicates that it was an incorrect-
ly addressed shipnent. Hence, the current confiscation is described as the largest
on the Swedish market. The Huddinge group also nade the last coup. That was the

2.5 kilograms heroin of the Turkish gang, found at an address on Kocksgatan in Stock-
hole.

6893
CSO: 5300/2067

71
BRIEFS

TIGBTER PRISON nwcs ENFORcm-w-Stocklwln. 15 Oct — Let it be the rule to prose-
cute prisoners who have on their persons lore than 0.2 gram hashish. The Board of
Prisons proposes this to the chief public prosecutor. There are at present different
rules in regard to this in the country's institutions. This in turn has lead to un-
certainty anong the directors of the institutions. Several courts have now render-
ed judgments in such cases. The Board of Prisons writes to the chief public prose-
cutor. "Accoding to our interpretation of the actual holdings, the line of demarca-
.tion has been that possession of nore than 0.2 grans of hashish should lead to prose-
cution. The courts appear to be of the opinion that disciplinary punish-eat is
sufficient for the possession of lesser amounts." The Board of Prisons continues,
"The guidelines which have been given appear to be properly balanced. nevertheless,
the possession of hard narcotics should always result in prosecution, irregardless
how much is involved." [Text] [Stockholn DAGENS ITIBTIR in Swedish 15 Oct 81 p 32]

6893

cso: 5300/2007 ‘

72
mmsxs or mnemw memes IN zuuca
Zurich m zuzxcum zermm in Como 15/16 New 81 p21

[vi-«37 Consumption of narcotics in Zurich is constantly increesine. In 1970,
there were Just 273 persons under investigstion by the criminal police in connec-
tion with vﬂetione of the narcotics law within Zurich proper. In 1980, 10 yeers
later. their amber had increased to 894. Events of the pest few months point to
still another record in drug-related legal actions. Up to the end of October. no
less than 1,008 violetions of the nerootics lew were reported in Zurich proper.
10 years ago, Just two criminal police investigators sufficed to deal with the

problem. By the surest of 1981. 21 city police officials were working full-tine
on the drug problen. But despite these efforts end despite renerknble success,

the police hsve not been eble to get the dmg prchlm under control. It lest he
admitted, em Robert Schoenheechler. the city police cfficiel in charge of the
anti-drug squad. that it has not been possible to leg hsnds on the drugs prior to
distribution or to institute preventive neesures mint the cossuption of ner-
cctics. Addiction is reflected not only in the growing number of persons dying
from drug ehuse, but also in the growing nulsber of druabreleted win-which see
getting more vicious ell the tine end thus constitute e direct threet to the

general public.
Eeshish end Heroin

lhe lea-.1 tern drug elmse includes ell nnlewful ccnsupticn of nercotice speci-
fiedes suchunder the narcotics lee. It is dsmdmlewml, ifnot epprovedby
s doctor or for sons officisl reescn. lhe acmel heeding of nercotics includes
opiates, cumsbis, cocaine. hsllucinogens end enphetenines. he opintes include
norphineendheroin, enjordrnginuse inZurichendtheunericter-cembis
includes heehish. neridusns end heshish oil. LSD. which wee mmh telked sheet 10
years ago is pert of the hellucinoeen group. During the pest peer. 1.459 181)
teblete were seized in the centon of Zurich; but over the peers, this perticuler
drogheslostmchof itseppeel.heacrdregeinuseinz\michereheehishend
heroin with cocaine consunption increesing but not yet reeching the level of
heroin. -

Heroin in powder ton, brownish-red to white in color. is either stuffed or in-
Jected as as liquid. Since the toxic effect of inhaled heroin is fer less potent
than if it is indected. noet heroin users ere fixers who prefer to shoot the
drug beceuse it is less expensive thet wear. in. drug hardly ever reeches the con-
sumer in e chemically pure state. In nest ceses. the heroin is edultereted with

73
sons cheaper substance like confectioner'e sugar which helps the drug peddlers
nabs greater profits. On more than one occasion, however. poisonous additives
have been used in Zurich and these can lead to the death of the addict.

Marijuana, the dried leaf of the cannabis plant, is often called "grass“ by

drug users because of its green color. Bashish, on the other hand. is the sap of
the hempplant. It is usuallytradedontheblacknrket bothinthe fonnotun-
like that of a chocolate bar and in powder fora as well. Cannabis products are
sacked in most cases. -

Plain Problem Heroin

0f the 1,954 persons under investigation for violating the narcotics law in the
canton of Zurich in 1980. 721 were heroin users and the renaming 1,233 were
haehish addicts in the min. The police have assiped absolute priority to con-
bating heroin traffic because of the dengerousness of the drug itself and be-
cause of the exceptional ruthleseness which attawes both to the business end

and to heroin-related criminal acts. 'nae European nrket is being inundated with
heroin. Last year, nn-opean police autkwritiee were able to seize 1,122 kilograms
of heroin overall, a tenfold increase over 1973. During the sane period, 6 kilo-
grams of heroin were seized in the canton of Zurich. Doreigi drug dealers consi-
der Zurich to be a lucrative narket. While one gran of herein will fetch up to
700 Swiss francs on the Zurich mint, it will fetch only 200 francs on the Milan
ornament-bet. The policebothintheoityandthe cantononuriohhavehad
to deal nore and more with gave and sosetimes ertneaely serious cases of drug-
related crime. It is striking that a large proportion of those involved are
foreigners. a year age, for example. a narcotics ring consisting of 18 had. and
two Gen-ans was rounded up which had sold at least 3.5 kilograms of herein in
Zurich alone.

The numberofheroin userswhodiedfrondregahueereaehedanswpeakthieyear.
In 1980, the anti-drug squad arrested 397 heroin users in Zurich proper. 229 of
these were under 22 years of age. The youngest resale addict was 14; four others
were 15 and all five were recidivous. Anong heroin addicts. recidivism is a udor
problea in am event. Most (78 percent) of the heroin users 1mm to the police
inZurichproperhave not lesrnedatrade, nordotheyattend schooloreerveas
apprentices.

Cigarets and Hashish as Conditioning m

In 1978, the university psychiatric clinic conducted a study among young men (as
part of their am induction processing) and women in the omton of Zurich which
provided information on how young people come into contact with dmge. Ellhe 1918
findings showed that almost 20 percent of the nan and about 17 percent of the
women had had experiences with hashiah. 'mere had been less exposure to opiates
but the relevant figures. were 3.3 percent among men and 1.9 percent among weaen.
These statistics take on water importance once they are related to the findings
of the Zurich city police anti-drug squad according to which alnost all Zurich
heroin users started out on hashish and mrijuana. 19 of the 22 children cited

76
for violations of the narcotics law in 1980 were said in the same report to have

suckedmorethsnapackofcigaretsadayﬂnntism
nerSohoenbseohlerthinksthstyomspecplewhodenot smoke standthebestohsnce

of not becoming addicted to drugs.

crime as a Consequence

It talcss a heroin user at least 300 to 400 francs to satisiw his daily need for
drugs. Those are the prices that prevail on the market in Zurich for a so-called
half street gram of heroin. A “street gram” is not a mu gram of heroin because
it is not chemically pure but adulteratsd with other substances. The guess is that
aheroinaddicthseto ”shootup"uptofourtimesadsnviththemberofin~
Jeotions also depending on the relative purity of the narcotic.

E
E

One look at the non-existent professional education of the average addict proves
thstthemoneyhemuethavetosatisfyhisneedfordrugsvillnotcomsircmre-
gala: employment. More and more drug users are booming socially uprooted end
vinduptumiuetoorimeorprostimucmhwusersgainsocess tothestuffby
becoming dealers themselves. Last year, 577 persons who doubled as drug addicts
and drug dealers were under investigation in the canton of Zurich. i'he number of
mlaries and attempted breskins in plumaoies had declined somewhat hst year as
against the year before as a result of heightened security measures; but other
crimes oomitted by drug addicts rose sharply. The police blotter lists one case
of manslwghter as well as robbery. theft, larcew, embezzlement end traffic in
stolen goods. m manslaughter case is one of a kind, but the other infractions
registered a marked increase. luring the past year. 14 prostitutes were new]: re-
gistered who hsd timed to prostitution as a result of dams addiction and during
the course of this year. smother 10 were added. 1310 actual number is likely to

befar higher.

Various Locations

Until the mtstrssse youth center was shut down temporarily, the heroin dsalers'
sales channels flowed into the autonomous youth center-(U2). When this outlet was
no longer available, the dealers returned to the Hirschsmplatz end the so-oalled
Rivieraalomths Limat uhichhsdbeenknmhsdrugbassarsbsycndtheoity
limits before the uz was opened. m1. naming checks. the police have found that
there has been no lotup on the drug scene. In fact, Robert Sohoenbssohler we rue-
fully, new heretofore unknown faces have been turning up among the old-time users
of late.

9478
cso: 5300/2073 mo

75