FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10282
26 January 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(P000 2/82)

CONTENTS

REIGN“.

Tajiks Evaluate Natural Resources Conservation
(K. Sn. Dzhurayev; IZVBSTIYA AKADEHII NAUK TAIBHIKSKOY
SSE! mm omcmmmm NAUK, Mar-Apr 81) 00.0000.

- a - [III - USSR - 35 POU

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

tAJIKS EVALUATE NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION

Dushanbe IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NADK TIDZHIKSKOY SSE: OTDELENIYE OBSHCHESTVENNYKH
NAUK in Russian No 2. Mar-Apr 81 (manuscript received Apr 81) pp 34-69

[Article by K. Sh. Dzhurayev, Dushanbe State Pedagogical Institute imeni T. G.
Shevchenko]

[Text] The "Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th Congress of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Upcoming Tasks of the Party in the
Fields of Domestic and Foreign Policy"-the address delivered by Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev. general secretary of the CPSU Central Committee-and "Basic Directions
for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR Over the Period of 1981-1985
and up to the Year 1990" represent a new historic stage of communist construc-
tion in our country.

The CPSU teaches and requires that all issues concerning communist construction
be resolved on a strictly scientific basis both in the country as a whole and
also in each union republic. "The Party of Communists takes for granted that
construction of the new society is simply unthinkable without science." L. I.
Brezhnev pointed out.1

The practical and theoretical questions concerning harmonious interrelationship
of science and nature--the optimum geographic location and development of the
productive forces, economic and administrative regionalization, the shaping of
seccoral and general geoeconomic complexes and so on—-have been and are a driv-
ing force behind birth and development in the geographic sciences as in other
sciences.

"One of humanity's most ancient sciences--geography, is helping to speed up sci-
entific-technical progress in many branches of knowledge and production. Geog-
raphers of various countries are conducting extensive research on our planet's
nature, economics and population and are thereby making an appreciable contribu-
tion to the cause of peaceful cooperation among states. The Soviet Union is in-
terested in expanding and strengthening international scientific relations amnnn
geographers of all countries aimed first of all at optimum utilization of natu-
ral resources. economic development. and protection and improvement of the human
environment."2 stated the greetings of the Soviet Government to participants in
the 23d International Geographic Congress in Moscow.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e was w. e o» 0.... ~ no. one...

In the Soviet Union. on the basis of subject matter methodology and scientific
research methods, Decree No 231 of the State Coundttee of the USSR Council of
Ministers for Science and Technology. dated 25 Hay 1977. includes the following
in the system of geographic sciences:

11.00.01 Physical Geography. Geophysics and Topographic Geochemistry;

11.00.02 Economic and Social Geography;

11.00.04 Geomorphology and Yaleogeography;

11.00.05 Biogeography and Soil Geography;

11.00.07 Hydrology of Land, of Hater Resources;

11.00.08 Oceanography;

11.00.09 Meteorology. Climatology and the Physics of the Atmosphere;

11.00.10 Hydrochemistry;

11.00.11 Optimum Utilization of Natural Resources and Environmental Protec-
tion.

Other fields of geographic science which are developing successfully include the
following: population geography. glaciology. medical geography. recreation
geography. political geography. historical geography. space geography and so on.

I

Comprehensive development of the productive forces and economies are the basis
for the gradual movement of Soviet society toward communism. V. I. Lenin said:
"We value communism only when it has an economic basis."’ The CPSU is guided by
V. I. Lenin's instruction to the effect that scientifically sound economic con-
struction of our multinational state is the party's main policy.

The supreme goal in the CPSU's economic strategy has been. is now and will be to
raise the people‘s material and cultural standard of living. In his address to
the 26th CPSU Congress L. I. Brezhnev noted: "SPGCifiC concern about 8 partic-
ular person. his needs and requirements, is the beginning and the end of the
party's economic policy."

The geographic sciences. especially the economic and social geography of ad-
vanced socialism in the USSR. occupy the place they deserve in the scientifi-
cally sound conduct of the CPSU's economic policy. Under the conditions of ad—
vanced socialism economic and social geography, along with the other social aci-
ences. political economy first of all. serves as the methodological foundation
of economic planning. management and development. furnishes the scientific sub—
stantiation of policy in the field of economic assessment of natural conditions.
natural resOurces and labor resources, environmental protection. optimum geo-
graphic locrtion of the productive forces. economic regionaliraticn, the shaping
of regional-industrial and agroindustrial complexes. of the combined economic
and social development of the country, of the regions and union republics, of
intraregional and interregional economic relations and so on.“

The history of society is above all the history of the interaction among men.
nature, the geographic environ-cut. the development and location of the produc-
tive forces. and economic relations. It is well known that the mode of produc-
tion of material goods, the sum total of economic relations. is the decisive

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [18th ()NL\'

factor in historic development. Society and economic relations develop on an
economic-geographic foundation.

K. Marx specifically pointed out: "The local life of Spain. the independence of
its provinces and communes. the lack of uniformity in the development of society.
which originally resulted from the country's geographic configuration. but which
thereafter developed historically because the different provinces had freed

themselves of more domination independently. in so doing forming small indepen-
dent states...."s

Production in the broad economic-geographic sense is the process of man's life
and economic activity in a particular geosystem. bound together by particular
production relations and creating material goods in the form of means of produc-
tion and consumer goods necessary to the existence of human society.

K. Marx writes: "In order to produce men enter into certain connections and re-
lations. and only within the framework of those social connections and relations
do relations exist tovnrd nature and does production take place."‘

The questions of the division of labor. the location and development of the pro-
ductive forces. the growth of cities and rural areas and the prosperity of the
people are closely bound up with the size and diversity of the economic-geo-
graphic foundation. "The level of development of a nation‘s productive forces
is detected most vividly of all from the degree to which division of labor has
developed in it."’ K. Marx wrote.

Mature. the economic-geographic base. is not only the prime source of human life.
but also the field of its conscious activity. That is why these words have a
particular relevance today: "Labor is the father of wealth. but land is its
mother."

V. l. Lenin pointed out that achieving higher productivity of labor is the fore-
most and most important thing for the victory of the new social order.’ Raising
the productivity of labor urgently requires a comprehensive scientific-technical
and economic-geographic approach. The division of labor. economic-geographic
regionalization. the knowledge of natural and economic conditions and peculiari-
ties of localities. and the planning and management of the harmonious interrela-
tionships of society with nature are an indispensable factor for a full-fledged
general rise of labor productivity. As K. Marx wrote, the productivity of ener-
gies and labor is determined by diverse circumstances and "natural conditions."’
For example. while capital investments. the amount of labor. technology, chemi-
calization and so on have increased. the gross harvest of grain crops in our
country has varied from year to year (Table l).‘°

The influence of a favorable or unfavorable geographic ye~r. of natural condi-
tions on the productivity of labor. can also be illustrated by other sectors -f
the country's economy and by economic regions and republics. There is a parvf'~
ular need. then. not only to study natural conditions and resources. but slsn to
take into account the peculiarities of geosystems. to make economic assessme':s
of them and to make geographic forecasts of favorable and unfavorable years 0;
regions and zones. This approach would be beneficial to the dynamic and

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
proportional development of the productive forces and to a grouth of the na-
tional income and resources of the country and of the union republics.

Table l
Favorable Ceo- Gross Harvest. Unfavorable Gross Harvest.
graphic Years millions of tons Geographic Years millions of tons
1973 222.5 1971 181.2
1976 195.7 1972 168.2
1976 223.5 1975 140.1
1977 195.7 1979 179.2
1978 237.5
1980 220.0

"Geography-the oldest science. which studies the world and the various coun-
tries--is at the present time performing an important social function in serving
in every way humanity's optimum utilization of diverse natural resources. re-
gional economic development and the location of the productive forces and set-
tlements.

"Social changes in the world and the present-day scientific-technical revolution
have confronted geography with crucial new problems. Important among them is
the problem of the protection and purposive transformation of the environment.
which constitutes an organic part of a still broader problem-~the interrelation-
ships between nature and society."11 A. P. Aleksandrov. president and member of
the academy. has written on behalf of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

II

On the basis of the theoretical and practical requirements of communist con-
struction. policy-making documents of the CPSU Central Committee and Soviet Gov-
ernment, and the USSR Constitution. the plans for environmental protection and
optimum utilization of natural resources have in our country become an integral
part of annual and multiannual plans of economic and social development. In the
age of scientific-technical progress the socioeconomic importance of environmen-
tal protection and of judicious utilization and reproduction of natural re-
sources, will increase steadily.

The 26th CPSU Congress pointed out the need "to improve the effectiveness of
measures in the field of natural conservation. optimum utilization of the re-
sources of the biosphere ...". The documents of the party forum pointed out:
"Improve natural conservation. step up the effort to preserve farmland. combat
erosion of farmland, increase the pace of efforts to bring land back under cul-
tivation. provide protection of such land from torrents, landslides. cave-ins.
and the processes leading to snlinization. bogginess, submergence and aridity.

"More comprehensive development of mineral deposits. preventing at the same time
losses in mining and processing.

"Intensified protection of sources of water to prevent depletion.

h
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Continuation of the effort toward protection and optimum utilization of unique
natural complexes....

"Develop efforts to create and improve a system of survey registers of natural
resources and to improve state management of exploitation of natural resources

and environmental protection. Broader involvement of the public in natural con-
servation."12

Diverse micro- and macro-economic and geographic conditions and peculiarities of
localities. geosystems and the population have created and are creating a multi-
tude of different types of production and economic and cultural relations.

Since in spite of the geographic and historical similarity "between individual
countries. regions and even localities. there will always be a certain inequal-
ity in the conditions of life. which can be reduced to a minimum, but will al-
ways be beyond complete elimination. The inhabitants of the Alps will always
have different living conditions than those who live in the plains." as F. En-
gels noted.l3

Everything depends on the conditions. the place and the time. L. I. Brezhnev
noted: "Tajikistan ... is a mountain republic. The highest peaks in the coun-
try stand beneath the Tajik sky. And judging by the proportion of undertakings
and thelplans for the future. the republic is on a level with its high moun-
tains."

"Even though I have seen a great many places, starting from Sicily to the Arctic
Circle and from Transbaykal to the Pyrenees, here in Tajikistan I have seen
much that is new to me ..." (D. N. Pryanishnikov. member of the academy). "As
an object of study Tajikistan is an interesting country in itself" (8. P. 01'-
denburg. member of the academy).15

"Discovery of the original cultivated flora in Tajikistan. unknown to science up
until that time, has served as a point of departure for all future geographic
explorations ..." (N. I. Vavilov. member of the academy).16

L. I. Brezhnev posed the task of a comprehensive approach to drafting a program
for development of the productive forces of regions in which economic; sociopo-
litical. geographic and many other factors would be linked together.1

The CPSU and Soviet Government. taking into account the unique historical-eco-
nomic-and-geographic conditions and peculiarities of this mountainous region.
sent to Tajikistan an interdisciplinary scientific expedition for comprehensive
study of the productive forces after the republic was formed. Participants in
the expedition included the following outstanding scientists: A. Ye. Persman

D. V. Nalivkin, D. I. Shcherbakov. N. I. Vavilov. D. N. Prysnishnikov, V. L. as-
marov, S. P. Ol’denburg. N. P. Gorbunov, I. P. Geraaimov. members of the acad-
emy, and others.

On the basis of the expedition's results in April 1933 the USSR Academy of Sn!
ences, jointly with the Council of People's Commissars of Tajikistan. held a
scientific conference in Leningrad on the problems of studying the productive
forces of TaSSR. The country's most important scientists. headed by A. P. Kar-
pinskiy. member and president of the USSR Academy of Sciences. took part in the

5
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
proceedings of the conference. The conference summed up the results of scien-
tific research which has been done in Tajikistan by scientific expeditions and
offered recommendations to the republic's government concerning the compilation
of plans for the development of the economy and science. The conference's mes-
sage to Tajikistan's scientists specifically remarked that "the new method (that
is. the method of interdisciplinary work) of a broad geographic coverage must be
carried over to the entire effort of studying the whole Country of the soviets,
its productive forces and their utilization."1'

The conference stated the problem in the economic study of Tajikistan as well.

The resolution pointed out: "Economics research can be divided into two groups
:of projects: regional economics and topical economics. In Tajikistan the two

lines of research should develop simultaneously and uniformly.

"In the first case it is indispensable to set up the economic-geographic study

and description of Tajikistan's principal regions. This work should be done ac—
cording to a definite plan, and the first thing needed is to provide a descrip-
tion of the most important economic (khozyaystvenno-ekonomicheskiye) regions."u

Unfortunately, after the Tajik-Pamir Expedition there were no further major com-
prehensive general-geographic and especially economic-geographic studies of the
natural conditions and natural resources. the population. labor resources. cit-
ies and rural areas. nor the economic and social problems of development of the
republic and the economic regions.

Studies devoted to the economic problems of the development of the sectors of
the economy of Tajikistan and the South Tajik TPK [Regional Industrial Complex]
are now under way in the Economics Institute. the Council for the Study of the
Productive Forces of the TaSSR Academy of Sciences, Gosplan and other scientific
and project planning organizations of the republic. Among the projects along
this line of research we should mention "Configuration of the Development and
Location of the Productive Forces of TaSSR Over the Period 1971-1980," ”Shaping
the South Tajik TPK." and others, as well as the projects of I. K. Narziktlov.
R. K. Rakhimov. Kh. H. Saidmuradov, I. M. Kleandrov, Ya. T. Bronshteyn. A. G.
Khadzhibsyev and others.

These studies will be of great help in solving the numerous scientific problems
of economic geography related to optimum organization of the development of
TaSSR's productive forces.

Even the participants in the Tajik-Pamir Expedition noted that the problems of
the geography and geology of Tajikistan-Pamir were boundlessly broad and fasci-
natingzzAs the nexus of Central Asian problems and of Asian problems in gen-
oral."

Tajikistan's historical, economic and geographic position, its conditions and
its peculiarities. the building of the country's major fuel and energy base
here. the republic's present condition and prospects for location and develop-
ment of its productive forces necessitate further comprehensive study of the
general geographic problems and especially of the problems of economic geogra-

phy =

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

1. Economic-geographic problems of the history of the Tajik people and of the
location and development of TaSSR's productive forces.

2. Optimum utilization and reproduction of natural resources and natural con-
servation. Identification and economic assessment of natural geographic com-
plexes (geosystems).

3. The economic—geographic aspects of population: interrelationships between
man and nature. the size of the republic's population and its dynamics in gen-
eral: by oblasts. by rayons. by vertical zones. and by cities and settlements.
Density. dispersion and regionalization with respect to dispersion criteria. 1a-
bor resources by calculation and by count. diversity in the supply of labor re-
sources to economic entities and the labor force participation rate. migration,
the city, rural dispersion, the size of cities. rayons. kolkhozes and sovkhozes
as a function of the economic-geographic context. urbanization. population map-
ping and so on.

a. Multipurpose industrial regionalization of Tajikistan. Comprehensive de-
scription of the systems of existing industrial centers. industrial parks. in-
dustrial districts and their peculiarities: structure. production relations,
ascertainment of the economic-geographic reserves and prospects for their over-
all development.

5. Comprehensive agricultural regionalization of the republic and of economic
regions. subregions and vertical zones. Study of the pattern of differences in
the specialization of agriculture and establishment of the optimum relationships
among the different branches of agriculture in particular geosystems.

6. Comprehensive agroindustrial regionalization of the republic and of economic
regions. Identification of regions. subregiona and zones where industry and ag-
riculture approximate that level of development of the productive forces where
their synthesis becomes possible.

7. Development of comprehensive recreation surveys of the republic and economic
regions. Descriptions of rayons and zones aimed at development of health re-
sorts. medical geography. medical-geographic forecasts and so on. The impact of
the economic-geographic context on the shaping of health and the development of
diseases. human adaptation to various geographic conditions. The geographic
recreation resources of rayons and zones. the medicel-biological-geographic na-
ture of the therapeutic effect of geosystems on the organism and so on.

8. Study of the problems of the social geography of Tajikistan and of the eco-
nomic regions--differences betveen city and country. determination of optimum
systems for location of the institutions of public education. science. culture.
health care. trade and the food service industry. consumer services and munici-
pal services and utilities; study of the influence of the economic-geographic
context on the productivity of labor and so on. Compilation of a scheme for the
comprehensive social development of the republic. the oblasts, the rayons and so
on.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. Historical-geographic studies of the political-administrative division of
the republic and the oblasts. Administrative division should in time conform to
the economic-geographic regionalization.

10. Economic-geographic regionalization as the basis for optimum location and
development of the productive forces. for specialization and concentration of
production. and for economic planning and management. The building of economic-
geographic models of each rayon and microrayon. and models of interrayon rela-
tions. Use of economic-geographic models for optimum mutual location and combi-
nation of the productive forces of the republic. of the economic regions and so
on.

III

The problem of optimum utilization and reproduction of natural resources and na-
tural conservation is becoming an especially acute one from the standpoint of
Tajikistan's overall economic and social development.

The scale of the planning. development and location of the productive forces and
the rise in the people's material and cultural standard of living depend on the
size of the geographic foundation--on the diversity and effective utilization of
the natural and economic conditions and the natural and labor resources. It is
for that reason that V. I. Lenin regarded the task of optimum utilization of na-
tural resources as an economic problem.

Tajikistan's geographic foundation (143,100 square kilometers) has a distinctive
shape and a complicated border configuration. reflecting the historical-economic-
geographic peculiarities of the Tajik people's dispersion in Central Asia.

The typical features which define the peculiarities of the natural-geographic
context of its regions. its geosystems and its zones are conditioned by the fact
that Tajikistan is typically an area of high mountains. With respect to hypso-
metric position and the pattern of relief it is divided into several levels:
eminences up to 700-800 meters. foothills up to 2.009-2,100 meters. the middle
mountain level up to 3.100-3.200 meters and the high mountain level up to 4,600-
4.500 meters. Mountain districts higher than 600-700 meters comprise more than
93 percent of the republic's total area.

Tajikistan's mountainous relief has a strong impact on the economic-geographic
organization of the productive forces and in some places creates formidable ob-
stacles to cultivation of the land and industrial and road construction. They
set conditions on location of the branches of agriculture. they restrict the
possibilities for the use of machines, for irrigation of the land, for increas-
ing the yield and so on. For example. on the raised (elevated) portions of
fields cotton plantings suffer from drought. while in the low places and small
hollows they suffer from too much water. In both cases the crop is of low qual-
ity. and the cotton yield is in places 5-6 quintala per hectare less than on
uniformly even plots.

It is especially necessary to study and understand the relief when hydroelectric
power stations. roads, bridges and canals are being built. when irrigation and

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reclamation projects are being carried out. when sites are being chosen for con-
struction of industrial enterprises. when cities and settlements are being laid
out and so on.

Earthquakes. avalanches of snow, slides. torrents, severe soil erosion and other
effects are related to Tajikistsn's mountains. 0n the one hand the mountainous
nature of this region accounts for the presence of a great number of glaciers.
rivers and large reserves of hydroelectric power resources. They indeed create
a large potential for development of health resorts. tourism, mountain climbing
and for making these activities a sizable source of income. Scientific organi-
zation of the geographic foundation and determination of the most purposive use
of each type of relief are now taking on great practical importance for the de-
velopment and location of the republic's productive forces, since they have a
direct influence on the cost of erecting any project. This can be illustrated
by construction of the Nurekskaya and Rogunskaya GEs's as well as by other con-
struction.

The mountainous character of the relief and the altitude of the natural dis-
tricts and geosystems give rise to climatic differences and division into verti-
cal zones. Climatic differences have an essential impact on the regional orga-
nization of production. For example, in the northern part of Tajikistan the an-
nual rainfall is 150-550 mm. Host of the districts there accumulate less than
5.000° of temperatures above zero during the year. As one goes into the noun-
tains. this total drops to 2.000°. Accordingly. cotton, orchards and vineyards
are being located in the valleys. and grain crops, potatoes and so on in the
mountain districts. In the southwest portion of the republic (Vakhsh. Kabadian)
the annual rainfall is 150-350 mm and 5.000-6.000' of above-zero temperatures
are accumulated. In this region the mean temperature is high enough for fine-
fiber varieties of cotton and subtropical crops to mature. In the Gissar geo-
system the annual rainfall is 600-700 mm. and total above-zero temperatures
5.000-5.500°. It is there that cottongrowing. fruitgrowing and grapegrowing are
mainly developing. Scientists long ago predicted certain cyclical changes in
the climatic conditions of the country and regions. Where this is not taken
into account a large economic loss is suffered.

The study and assessment of sunlight. heat. moisture. wind force and so on have
great economic importance. For example. west winds. which bring rain. often
with severe hail, mainly predominate in the cotton-raising districts of the re-
public. Almost every year hail inflicts sizable economic losses on agriculture,
especially the cotton-growing districts of the republic.

The time has come to compile climatic descriptions and the agroclimatic condi~
tions of each economic region of Tajikistan. And methods of influencing cli-
matic conditions need to be developed for districts with adverse physical-geo-
graphic conditions (Eastern Pamirs, etc.). For example, bringing water to the
plateau geosystems of the Eastern Pamirs could transform this district into a»
important basis for livestock raising. especially sheep raising and so on.

Thjikistan's flora and fauna are highly diverse. According to the data of b-t-
anists and zoologists. there are more than 500 plant species and 10.500 animal
species here. The higher spermatophytes (6,500 species) predominate among the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plants. Among the animals there are 86 mamal species. more than 365 species of
birds, 1.9 reptile species, 100 species of fish and more than 10.000 insect spe-
cies.

"The wild flora of Tajikistan is extremely abundant in species, and in spite of
the comparatively restricted area, represents one of the most interesting areas
within the Soviet Union, an area equaled only by certain districts of the Trans-
caucasus"; and "the abundance of the cultivated and wild flora is a distinguish-
ing characteristic of Tajikistan."21 N. I. Vavilov, member of the academy, re-
marked.

Five principal plant zones are distinguished in the republic: the desert and
transition to the steppe. the steppe and the transition to the forest, the for-
est. the subalpine and the alpine.

Porests have great economic importance. In 1932 they occupied 1.17 million hec-
tares, or more than 8 percent of Tajikistan's entire area. The area of forests
has decreased in recent years; they have been destroyed for fuel and building
materials, and they now occupy an area of only about 250,000 hectares. These
include the following: 115,000 hectares are juniper, 42,000 hectares of broad-
leaf forest. 32,000 hectares of sparse xerophilous forest. 16,000 hectares of
tugs, 3,000 hectares of birch and poplar and 62,800 hectares of other species}2
As for destruction of Tajikistan's forests. we should recall F. Engels' state-
ment: "The people who uprooted the forests in Mesopotamia, Greece. Asia Minor
and other places to obtain plowland did not even dream that in so doing they had
initiated the process of the present desertification of those regions. since the
forestgathey took away were their centers for collection and storage of mois-
ture."

Taking into account the sizable economic importance of forests in the republic's
economy. V. L. Komarov, member of the academy, wrote: "... the problem of af-
forestation is one of the most important problems for Tajikistan. one which must
be resolved at the earliest date."n Conservation of nature and development of
the productive forces require that the republic undertake broader efforts at ar-
tificial raising of juniper forest. commence regulated grazing of livestock,
cultivate more valuable plantings of juniper. walnut and pistachio in parks and
forest preserves. improve the quality of cuttings done to combat pests and dis-
eases and the clearing of forests, and begin to wage an intensified effort
against pests and diseases of forest plantings in the light of the conditions
anll peculiarities of each of Tajikistan's geosystems. "It can be said without
:my exaggeration that the state of fruitgrawing in Tajikistan is closely bound
up with preserving the zone of juniper forest."25 V. L. Komarov. somber of the
academy, noted. '

The expanses of the republic's pastureland and meadowland have great economic
importance. especially to livestock raising. Futures are divided into autumn-
winter-spring pastures and sunset pastures. The expanses of autuan-winter-
spring pastures are concentrated mainly in the low-mountain areas of southwest,
west and northern Tajikistan. The sumer pastures are located mainly in the
high mountain zones with subalpine and alpine meadows.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present time the relative share of natural animal feeds in the republic's
animal feed base is very high. The adequacy of winter and summer pastures for
livestock varies from one natural-agricultural district to another. The pros-
pects for development of livestock raising in the republic are closely bound up
with solving the problem of winter feed. The problems of winter pastures can be
solved to some extent by intensifying the management of pastures for the raising
of livestock on outlying pastures on the basis of a study of the natural and
economic conditions of each district.

The diverse conditions of Tajikistan's geosystems make it possible to use pas-
tures one after another as they become ready in the course of the year. But
both winter and summer pasturage is used unsystematically. As a consequence the

pastures are highly exhausted, and this reduces the amount of animal feed they
produce from year to year.

Taking into account the important role of forests and pastures in water conser-
vation and protection and their climatic role, it is indispensable that a de-
tailed natural regionalization of the republic be conducted for these purposes.

Optimum standards of forest cover and natural sources of animal feed accordingly
need to be ascertained for all geosystems.

The republic's mountainous relief makes its soil cover highly variegated and
puts a limit on the amount of farmland available. The share of farmland is
4,330,500 hectares. or about 30 percent of the area. But the area suitable for

irrigation (including steep slopes) comprises about 1 million hectares, once ir-
rigated land has been deducted.

At the present time the present vertical soil zones are identified in Tajikistan:
Sierozem (from 300 to 1,000 meters), the zone of brown soils (from 1.000 to
2,800 meters), mountain-meadow and mountain-steppe zones (from 2.500 to 3,600
meters). the nountain-desert--steppe zone (from 3,000 to 4,500 meters), the
high-mountain-—desert and desert-steppe zone of the Eastern Pamirs (from 3,500
to 6,800 meters) above sea level). The high-mountain zone of eternal snows and
glaciers, rocks and talus occupies a sizable area of the republic above 3,800
meters (western and central portions) and 4,700—4,800 meters (Pamirs).

Various types of Sierozem soils, which occupy almost one-fourth of the repub-
lic's area and are the principal zone for location of cottongrowing. fruitgrow-
ing and grapegrowing, are of the highest economic value to the development, lo-
cation and specialization of agriculture. The brown soils are used for grain,
legume. oilseed and other crops. Mountain-meadow, mountain-steppe and mountain-
desert soils and rocky expanses occupy more than 60 percent of the republic's
area. The shrinking of the timbered mountain geosystems and the unsystematic
use of pastures, summer pastures especially, are the principal cause of inten-
sified soil erosion. According to incomplete data, land subject to soil erosion
comprises more than 70 percent of the area of the republic. Approximately 50
million tons of soil of varying geochemical composition is annually carried away
from plowland alone. "That is why the issue must be raised sharply of a car~
paign to consolidate the woody vegetation and preserve the mountain soils,"2‘

V. L. Komarov, member of the academy, remarked.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The limited amount of land and intensification of agriculture urgently require
not only a soil survey of all farms. but also creation of a land register for
each of the republic's economic regions. It would be an objective basis for
raising the scientific level of geographic organization of agriculture both of
the entire republic and also of each kolkhoz and sovkhoz.

Tajikistan. thanks to its geological and geographic conditions, abounds in min-
erals used as raw material. Regional surveys have now identified more than
5.000 deposits and occurrences of minerals. 0f the 50 types of minerals which
hav: been found at approximately 350 deposits. the following have been studied
and turned over for industrial exploitation: coal. petroleum. gas. polymetallic
ores. lead. zinc. tungsten. bismuth. antimony. tin. floorspar. ozokerite. opti-
cal fluorite. common salt. various building materials and others. The republic
occupies one of the leading places in the country with respect to reserves of
antimony, strontium and common salt, and in Central Asia with respect to re-
serves of lead. zinc. bismuth and fluorspar. More than 70 deposits are being
worked in the republic. and more than 25 types of minerals are being mined.

The present practice of extracting from ores only the principal components and
dumping other valuable metals in piles of tailings is exhausting natural re-
sources and inflicting a huge loss on the economy and on the republic's geo-
graphic environment. D. I. Shcherbakov, member of the academy. has written:
"The rapidly developing mining industry of Central Asia is raising a number of
new issues concerning the fullest use of the raw mineral mined. It is not just
a question of extracting all the components of the ore. but also of a combined
production operation in which use of the particular components of the ore opens
up the opportunity to build on the site new industrial enterprises to take up
the ores of other deposits or their individual components."2

The problems of optimum location of the productive forces and the further indus-
trialization of the republic as a whole are also closely bound up with compre-
hensive study and utilization of its mineral resources in a regional context.

At the present stage of economic and social development. taking into account the
economic-geographic conditions. we can designate the following mineral regions
in the republic: Leninabad. Zeravshan. Gissar. Yavan. Vakhsh. Kulyab. Surkhob-
skiy. Darvaza, Western Pamir, Eastern Pamir and Northern Pamir.

Thanks to the physical-geographic conditions and peculiarities, hydropower re-
sources take the leading place among natural resources. The largest glaciers.
mountain lakes and rivers in Central Asia (the Ann Darya. Pyandzh. Vakhsh.

Zcravshan, Kafirnigsn. Kayl—Su and others) are formed in the republic's moun-
tains (Table 2).2'

Table 2

River length. km More than 401- 301- 201- 101- 51- 26- 10- Total
500 500 600 300 200 100 50 25

Number of rivers 6 -- 1 3 13 28 124 776 947

A study of the potential energy of watercourses and the possible differentiation
by sections of the large rivers has shown that the potential of the republic's

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rivers is 32.6 million kw. The basin of the Vakhsh River accounts for almost 50
percent of the hydropower potential, the basin of the Pyandzh River about 25
percent. and all the other rivers account for the remaining 25 percent.” There
are a large number of lakes in the republic which could in time became natural
reservoirs for seasonal regulation of the flow of many mountain rivers which
have a high fluctuation in their discharge.

In almost every gaosystem of Tajikistan there are more than 70 mineral springs
of exceeding value in their therapeutic powers: Khodzha-Obi-Garm, Obi-Germ.
Shaambary, Germ-chashma and others.

Under these natural conditions the rivers and lakes constitute a large produc-
tive force mainly as sources for irrigation, a source of hydroelectric power and
the basis for sanstoriums and health resorts.

Utilizing the water resources for construction of hydroelectric power plants.
irrigation. municipal and industrial water supply is developing at an excep-
tional pace. Resolution of the major water management problems began with the
building of a succession of hydraulic engineering systems on the Vakhsh River.
According to the data of A. P. Nikitenko, the Vakhsh River has a potential of
14,500 kw for every kilometer of its length, whereas the comparable figures are
6.700 for the Yenisey, 5.300 for the Angara, 6.600 kw for the Lens and so on.3°

As a mountain river the Pyandzh is of particular interest for hydropower and ir-
rigation. There are good economic reasons for building hydroelectric power sta-
tions on it. and the capital investments will be paid off very quickly.

Scientifically sound solution of the water problem in Tajikistan is one of the
most important of the acute economic problems confronted at the present time.
Even now intensive consumption of water resources that does not have an eco-
nomic-geographic justification has brought about a water shortage in the irriga-
tion regions in the northern and southwestern parts of the republic.

The total discharge of all the rivers passing through Tajikistan is more than
80.6 billion cubic meters. For that reason life urgently requires that the com-
prehensive study and optimum planning of utilization of water resources in the
interest of all the Central Asian republics should begin here. Tajikistan needs
to have a water management register showing all water resources in quantitative
and qualitative terms and also the economic geography of all the present-day wa-
ter consumers.

A survey of the components of the natural-geographic context is being conducted
in the republic mainly by geological. botanical. zoological, hydrological. soil
science and other scientific institutions.

All components in nature. in the geographic context-the relief. the climate,
hydrography. flora. fauna. the soil and all living organisms--are organically
interconnected and interdependent. It is they which shape every component at!
nature. the geographic context as a whole. If, then. one of them is changed,
the others and the geographic context as a whole will gradually undergo change.
This is an inviolable law of nature and of the geographic environment. Underne-
timation of geographic patterns results in extremely serious geoecological

13
FOR OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consequences. Destruction of the forests in mountain geosystems, for example.
destroys centers for collection and storage of moisture, soil erosion begins.
torren '. avalanches and slides become more frequent and so on.

Thanks to its geographic position and physical-geographic conditions, Tajikistan
is a separate georegion of Asia. The general economic importance of optimum
utilization and reproduction of natural resources and natural conservation ex-
tend outside the economic-geographic limits of the republic and are having a

definite impact on the pace and proportions of development of the productive
forces of the Central Asia georegion as a whole.

In the interest not only of the republics of Central Asia, then, but also of the
country as a whole. it is important that the effort be made here to develop the
scientific foundations for comprehensive study of natural conditions and natural
resources, to forecast their change, to evaluate them in economic terms, and to
develop constructive strategies for natural conservations, in some places for
transformation of nature. for prevention of natural destructive processes (ero-
sion, torrents. avalanches, etc.). and to identify natural complexes for optimum
location of production and for the population's life and activity.

We should note that the interdisciplinary scientific problems related to perfor-
mance of these tasks are hardly being worked on at all from the standpoint of
the requirements imposed by the needs of conomic and social development. It is
a mistaken opinion that the natural resources and potential of the geographic
foundation of Tajikistan are inexhaustible.

Construction of economic and cultural facilities is growing rapidly over 5-6
percent of the republic's area, especially in the foothill zone. V. L. Komarov.
member of the academy. wrote as follows about this: "The foothill zone is from
the economic standpoint the most important zone of Tajikistan both as a source
of food and also as an area for production of the products of fruitgrowing for
export. It is the country's principal task to see that it is preserved and de-
veloped and to increase the yield of its high-quality crops."3

In order to minimize production costs. planners and project designers often use
for various types of construction areas which have a flat terrain and where the
total annual temperatures above zero are 4.500-S,500°. i.e., at precisely those
places which are more indispensable for development of valuable agricultural
crops and for building up agroindustrial complexes.

For the sake of optimum development and utilization of natural conditions, natu-
ral resources and location of production it is indispensable that the natural
complexes--Tajikistan's geosystems--be regionalized. Taking into account the
geographic position. orography. climate. hydrography. and the diversity and use
of physical-geographic conditions and natural resources within the republic. one
can identify at least 1,000 geosystems of varying size.

There is a need at the present time to direct the research efforts of the repub-
lic toward elucidation of natural-economic capabilities of geosystems. espe-
cially in the area of construction of the succession of hydroelectric power
plants on the Vakhsh and Pyandzh. which is of great importance to the national

1h
son omcm. use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economy. L. I. Brezhnev has remarked: "Stewardly and thrifty use of natural
resources. concern about land. about timber. about rivers and about clean air.
about the flora and fauna-~all of this is a vital matter for us as communists.“2
This also makes it especially necessary in the present stage of socioeconomic
development that there be coordination of scientific research for correct solu-
tion of the numerous problems of optimum utilization of the geographic environ-
ment and natural and labor resources. of selection of the most effective lines

of scientific-technical progress. of effective solution of vitally important
problems in theory and practice. and of harmonious interrelationship among na-
ture. man and production.

0n the basis of practice in socialist construction these problems can be formu-
lated as follows:

1. Not only the destiny of funds allocated to irrigation. but also the future
rise in the yield of farm crops and ultimately the economic development and rise
in the material prosperity of the republic's workers depend on optimum utiliza-
tion of nature. of natural resources. That is why it is indispensable to make
an economic (in money terms) assessment of the republic's natural resources (es-
pecially land). and this should in turn be taken into account in the planning
and location of production and in production incentives.

2. In the interests of not only the republics of Central Asia, Tajikistan in
particular. but indeed of the country as a whole it is indispensable to work out
the scientific foundations of an interdisciplinary study of natural conditions
and natural resources. to make forecasts of their change. to make economic as-
sessments of them. to work out constructive strategies for natural conservation
and in some places transformation of nature and prevention of natural destruc-
tive processes (erosion. torrents, slides. etc.). and to identify natural com-
plexes (geosystems) and zones for optisum location of production and settlement.

3. It is indispensable to use biochemical and geophysical methods to study the
present state of the geographic environment. population. production. cities and
anthropogenic transformation.

4. Research needs to be widely organized on the basis of interdisciplinary
study of the natural environment of the regions and the republic, and methods
need to be developed for preventing the adverse effect of elements of scien-
tific-technical progress on the geographic environment and on human health.

5. The peculiarities of Tajikistan's economic-geographic position and condi-
tions show that all steps need to be taken-organizational. scientific. techni-
cal. etc.--in order to gradually convert production to a closed cycle. There is
no other way.

6. The territory of the republic and the natural complexes need to be organized
scientifically. and a determination made of the most correct use of each type of
relief and locality for development and location of production. settlement and
cities. since the relief has a direct impact on the cost of building any proj-

ect.

15
ron OFHCIAL usr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

7. Organize interdisciplinary study. use and economic assessment of mineral re-
sources and mineral resource conservation for the republic as a whole and for
each geoeconomic region.

8. Take into account cyclical changes in climatic conditions. Ignoring these
indicators results in large economic loss.

The time has come to compile climatic descriptions and assessment of climatic
conditions and resources of each economic region and of the republic. Methods
of exerting an impact on the climate need to be worked out for regions with ad-
verse physical-geographic conditions (the Eastern Pamirs and elsewhere).

9. Given the acute water problem. at the present time there is no accurate rec-
ord of how much water is being used, say. in cottongrowing. and how much is be-
ing lost without any benefit whatsoever. The future development and location of
the productive forces. of cities and of rural areas are organically bound up
with water problems: the water exchange and formation of the water balance, and
the bases for management of the water regime. water resources and water quality.
There is a need to work out a method of forecasting the flow of water from gla-
ciers and a theory of glacier fluctuations. In order to increase the yields of
farm crops and to combat secondary salinization of the soil. especially in cot-
ton-growing districts. a method needs to be worked out for annually forecasting
standard rates of irrigation for each farm and for the republic as a function of
climatic fluctuations. There should be a water management register describing
in quantitative and qualitative terms all water resources and the economic geog-
raphy of all water consumers. The problem of multiple use of water resources
needs to be solved.

10. Solutions have to be found to the problems of biogeography. ecology. opti-
mum utilization and reproduction of the flora and fauna, to the problems of in-
terdisciplinary study and development of the timber industry of the republic as
a whole, of each natural complex and especially of the basin of the Ann Darya.

11. There is a need to compile scientifically sound charts. and then also an
atlas. of optimum utilization and conservation of natural resources. land. tim-
ber, water, flora and fauna, natural complexes, zones and the republic as a
whole.

12. There is a need to forecast the impact of production and especially of ma-
jor hydraulic engineering systems on the natural environment and on preservation
of the geographic-ecological balance of the republic and of each natural com-
plex.

l3. Tajikistan is the principal physical-geographic factor in shaping the cli-
mate, hydrography. soils, flora and fauna, and natural peculiarities of the gec-
system of Middle Asia and in general of Central Asia. That is why it is indis-
pensable to organize the Institute for Problems of Interdisciplinary Research
and Use of Mountains.

14. It is indispensable to reorganize the division for natural conservation and
optimum utilization of natural resources of the TaSSR Academy of Sciences as the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USP. ONLY

Institute of the Geography and Ecology of Tajikistan with a division of overall
and regional problems in which the relevant specialists in the natural sciences
would on a basis of cooperation and interaction work on the scientific problems
of natural conservation, optimum utilization and reproduction of natural re-
sources and optimization of the environment of man's life and activity.

15. The need has arisen to reopen the School of Geology. Soil Science and Geog-
raphy of the State University imeni V. I. Lenin.

It is indispensable to undertake the training of specialists in the following
fields: economic geography. climatology. hydrology. glaciology. soil science,
geomorphology, physical geography. biological geography, geophysics. geochemis-
try. cartography and other narrow and broad specialized fields, since solving
the problems indicated above depends mainly on those specialists and on the rel-
evant institutions.’s
Unless solutions are found for the problems on this list, which is still incon-
plete, it will be difficult to achieve the optimum utilization and reproduction
of natural resources and the conservation of nature as the prime source of Ta-
jikistan's economic and social development.
FOOTNOTES
1. KOHHUNIST. No 4, 1981. p 36.
2. IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. SERIYA GEOGR.. No 5. 1976. p 6.

3. Lenin. V. 1., ”Polnoye aobraniye sochineniy" [Complete Works], Vol 38.
p 179.

6. KOHMUNIST, No 15, 1979. pp 91-92.

5. Marx. K.. and Engels, F., "Sochineniya" [Works], Vol 10. p 432.

6. mm. Vol 6. p (.41.

7. ma” Vol 3, p 20.

8. Lenin. V. 1.. "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy." Vol 29, p 21.

9. Marx, K., and Engels, F., "Sochineniya." Vol 23. p 48.

10. "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979 g. Stat. yezhegodnik" [The USSR Na-
tional Economy in 1979. Statistical Yearbook], Moscow. Statistika. 1980,
pp 219-220.

11. IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. SERIYA GBOGR., No 5, 1976, p 7.

12. "Osnovnyye napravleniya ekononicheskogo i sotsial'nogo razvitiya SSSR na
1981-1985 gody i na period do 1990 gods" [Basic Directions for the Economic

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

and Social Development of the USSR Over the Per1od of 1981-1985 and up to
the Year 1990], Moscow. Polit1zdat, 1980, pp 69-70.

Marx. K.. and Engels. P.. "Sochineniya," Vol 19. pp 5-6.
PRAVDA, 7 Harch'1981.
KWIST TADZHIKISTANA. 3. 4 December 1932.

"Problemy Tadzhiklstana" [Problems of Tajikistan]. Vol II, Len1ngrad, 12d.
AN SSSR. 1934, p 13.

Brezhnev, L. 1.. "Len1n3k1m kursom. Rechi 1 stat'i" [0n Lenin's Course.
Speeches and Articles], Vol 3. Moscov. Politlzdat, 1972. p 386.

"Problemy Thdzhlkistana." vol I. Leningrad, Izd. AN SSSR, 1934. p 236.
Ibid., Vol II, pp 236-237.

Ibld.. Vol I, p 6.

Ibid.. Vol II, pp 14-15.

"Atlas Tadzhikakoy SSR" [Atlas of Tajlk SSR], Dushanbe-Moscow, 1968.
Marx, K., and Engels. P.. "Sochineniya." Vol 20. p 496.

KOHHUNIST IADZHIKISTANA, 3 December 1932.

"Problemy Tadzhikistana." Vol II, p 34.

Ibid.. p 37.

PRIRODA. No 116, 1966, p 41.

"Atlas Tadzhikskoy SSR," Dushanbe-Moscow. 1968.

"Nurekskaya CBS 1 zndachi nauki" [The Nurekskaya CBS and the Tasks of Sci-
ence]. Dushanbe. 1961. p 16.

Nikitenko. A. P.. “Prospects for Development of Tajikistan'a Electric
Power.“ 1n the book: "Narodnokhozyaystvennoye znacheniye Nurekskoy GES"
[Importance of the Nurekskaya ass to the National Economy]: Dushanbe.
Irfon, 1964. p 75.

"Problemy Tadzhlkistana." Vol II, p 34.

Brezhnev. L. 1., op. c1t.. Vol 2. Moscow. 1970, p 103.

33-34. [Omitted both 1n text and at bottom of page]

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35. USSR Academy of Sciences. "Osnovnyye upravleniya razvitiya yestestvennykh
1 obshchectvennykh nan “ [nun Lines of Development of the Natural and So-
cial Sciences], Moscow. 1975, pp 286-295.

COPYRIGHT: Izvestiya Akadenii nauk Tadzhikskoy $83, 1981

7065
CSO: 1830/ 136 END

10