FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10088

3 November 1981

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 5. May 1981

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOI.0F11C]AI.USE‘DNLY

JPRS L/10088

3 November 1981

USSR REPORT
METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 5, May 1981

Translation of the Russian-language monthly journal MBTBOROLOGIYA I

GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by Gidrometeoizdat.

Comeurs

Climatic Variability of Total Monthly Precipitation in the Northern

Hemisphere sseeoeoesseeeoeeeeonDee000.00000I0000.00.00000'OOOCOOOeOee'Ieee

Climatic Characteristics of Vertical Wind Shifts in the Ground Layer of the
Amsphere over the USSR COO...0.0.0....CODIIIOICOOOOOIOOC0.......|..ODUOOO

Simulat10n of Thermals cocoon-0.000sssaossassesssosossosseesseseesssesssassss
Peculiarities of Variations of the Microstructure of Arid Aerosols ..........

Effect of Station Network Density on Interpolated Value Variability
Cmracteristic. O00....000......0....O0.0.0.0...IDIOIOOOOIOOOOOI.DOOO'IODOO

Relation of Mean Annual Values of the Albedo and Shortwave Radiation
Balance to the Same Indices in Early Spring ...............................

Brightness Variations of Cloud Fields "hen Observed Prom Different

Altitudes ssass-oss-assessoeosseeeseIessessssnsseesesseseeasseessetoss-oee-

Forecasting the Novaya Zemlya ﬂora by the Method of Canonical

Correlation es..-ssessseessssssseseseeeeoeseeseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeee-ease-eeees

Hydrocarbon Distribution in Freshly Fallen Snow and Ice at 'North Pole-22'
I Station (1977-1978 Observations) assesaeeseeseesseeeeeeeeeeeeeaeseeseeseses

Joint Determination and Reduction of Statistical Parameters to a
Period of Many Years, Extension and Modeling of Time Series ...............

Mechanism of Lifting Solid Particles off the Bottom of a Turbulent

stream asseases-sasssseessse-seeseseesaeeaeeeoeeeeeeeeossoeeesee-assessssee

Effect of Temperature on Soil Moisture Potential and Its Availability

to P18nt8...........o..u.......-............o.-o...oo...oo...--o...o.......

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analysis of Synoptic Scale Have Disturbances in TROPBX-72 and GATE.........

Informativeness of Meteor Radar Used To Measure the Rind in the
Upper Amsphere O.I..00OIOOIOOOOOQIOCOO0.0.0.0000...OOOOOOOOOOIOOQOOCOIO

Calculating the Humidity of the Air Above the Sea by Air and Utter

Temperature oooooeoooeooeeess-seeoeeesooeeeseoesoooseeeeoosooaoeeoeooesee

Application of a Computer Graph for Visual Representation of
Hydroseteorologicel Data Archives .......................................

Review of Monograph by V. V. Bogorodskiy and V. P. Gsvrilo: 'Led.
Fizicheskiye Svoystva. Sovrslennyye Metody Glystsiologii' (Ice.
Physical Properties. Modern Methods of Glaciology], Leningrad,
cidrmteo1zd‘t’ 198°. 38‘ Page. 00......0.0.00000IOIOODCOOOOOIOIOOOOO...
Seventy-Fifth Birthday of Yevgeniya Senenovns Selsznevs ...................
High Award OOI.I...O....00.0.0.0000!0..OIO.IO.IO..00...OOOIOIOOOIOOOOOCOIOO
Conferences. Meetings. semi-Mr. esseso.Isoooeoeseotoeteesoesoloosstecceosso

Notes From Abroad OItoOnO0.0-OOOOOCOOOOOIOIII.OOOOOOOOOQOOIIOOOIOOOIO.to...

Obituary of Iaay Grigor'yevich Outer-en ( 1911-1981) ......................

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.577.21(217.17)
CLIMATIC VARIABILITY OF TOTAL MONTHLY PRECIPITATION IN THE.NORTHERN HEHISPHERE

Moscow umeonomcnn I cmaotoern in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 5-16

[Article by Professor 6. V. Gruza,Candidate of Geographic Sciences Ye. G. Apasova,
All—Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometeorological Information--Horld
Data Center, manuscript received 16 Sep 80]

[Text] Abstract: A study is made of variability characteristics of total
monthly precipitation anomalies with respect to individual regions and
latitudinal belts of the northern hemisphere in January and July
1891-1979 in the 0~85° north latitude zone.

By comparison with the temperature, the total monthly precipitation is characterized
by much greater spatial variability. Accordingly, and for other generally known
reasons, climatic conditions have long been studied by station observation data.
However, the necessity for evaluating the precipitation climate for an entire
hemisphere, similarly to how this has been done in a number of global temperature
studies (the last of which [1], also contains recommendations on the forms of
representation of empirical characteristics), leads to the conclusion of

expendiency of using a data which are smoother and more regular in space. In

the present paper, the original maps of [h] have been selected as the source

of information from which by visual interpolation, an archive of precipitation

the anomalies in percentages of the ”Cline" norms (1931-1960) compiled at the
USSR Hydrometeorological Center were used for 1976-1979.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By comparison with the Lola]. precipitation field, the mmaly field is more
uniform in space inasmuch as the division by the "norm" smooths the regional
singularities. Additional smoothing is accomplished by visual interpolation. 0n
the whole, the quality of the archive data varies as a fmction of the method of
measuring the precipitation and processing the measurement results, the accuracy
of which is determined by the methods of calculating the norms, reproduction of the
uniformity of the series, anomaly mapping, and also visual interpretation from the
maps, and so on. Without discussing the measurement procedure, which has been
sufficiently discussed in the specialized literature, let m try to evaluate the
quality of the preparation of the archive which will naturally be approximate in-
asmuch as it does not appear possible to define exact quality criteria as yet.

The precision of the interpolated anomaly fields depends primarily on the density
of the network, approximately characterized by the nuber of stations used when
preparing the maps (Figure l).

a

g

  

~s

m
m
on.
”9m m nu 1m m

Figure 1. Variation of the number of stations in 1891-1979.
1 -- northern hemisphere, 2 -- foreign territory, 3 -- USSR

Until 1910 the network was two or three times smaller than at the present time,
and during the world wars, the nmber of stations diminished abruptly. On the
whole throughout the hemisphere 1600 stations have been recently used. Is this
many or few? Obviously, it is not so simple to answer this question, for caICula-
tion of the required mnber of observations is complicated by the anisotropicity
of the spatial correlation function which is still unknown to us.

.-

 

Figure 2. Quantity of data at the nodes of the coordinate
grid, 1891-1979

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Oll (ll-1"“ 'Ml. USE ONLY

Let us use a map of the number of observations at each node for 89 years to
characterize the completeness of the data (Figure 2). Its distribution with
respect to the hemisphere is far from uniform. The blank spots are the central
parts of the oceans; the series is insufficiently long in the polar and equatorial
regions and in the Tibetian Highlands. The existing gaps, generally speaking, can
be filled in, as has been done, for example, in [10] for precipitation over the
Pacific Ocean. At the present time it is possible to use satellite observations
for this purpose. Establishment of this type of relationis a subject for indepen-
dent research .

As for uniformity of the series, an indirect characteristic of which can be the
value of 6R-R-100 characterizing the difference between the ideal anomaly norm
(1002) and the actual long-term mean R for the investigated period. judging
by the maps of GR the uniformity is disturbed in the American sector of the Arctic,
the oceans and at the boundaries of arid zones which have different locations in
January and July. The latter include regions where precipitation does not fall
annually (Africa, Central Asia). In the temperate latitudes of both continents

6R does not exceed 152, including the territory of the USSR where, as is known,
the ueasurement procedure and norms have changed many times. Thus. it is possible
that the norms calculated over 50 or more years do not depend on the limits of the
period [8]. The procedure for processing the initial data for anomaly maps is
discussed in more detail in [4].

An idea of the accuracy of the interpolation can be obtained when comparing the
spatial correlation of the total monthly precipitation in the central regions of
the European part of the USSR with interrelation between the anomalies in Moscow
and the grid node close: to it, the distance between which was 176 km (Table 1).
In the first coluun of the table the autocorrelation of the station observations
is presented for this distance (according to the data of [6, 7]). In the winter
this autocorrelation turned out to be higher, and in the summer, lower. then the
precipitation correlation at Moscow Station and at the nearest node of the grid
included in the investigated archive (the second column. It is possible that
the summer precipitation is smoothed to a higher degree by visual interpolation
than the winter precipitation.

Table 1. Correlation Coefficients of the Total Monthly Precipitation

Precipitation at the stations Precipitation at the node o-SS
according to the data of [6, 7] north latitude, X-AO' east and
at Moscow Station

_—_—_————————-——_—_—————_—

Janua Jul Janus Jul
0.75 0.5h 0.73 0.62

In order to check the correspondence of the archive data to the actual fields, a
comparison was also made between the behavior of the deviations from the norm of
the :ong—term averageprecipitation for America takenfrom [9] with the curves in
Figure 6. which demonstrates their similarity.

Considering the rounding (102) used when preparing the archive and the maps of
6R that we obtained, the conclusion must be drawn that the errors connected with
nonuniformity of the series and other errors do not go outside this limit in the
temperate zone. Over the American sector of the Arctic and the shipping lanes

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJA1.USE¢DNLY

of the oceans the errors increase, and the data become unreliable. 0n the whole
it is possible to consider that the archive data reflect the basic laws of
precipitation and can be used in the first approximation to estimate the climatic
parameters.

The statistical precipitation characteristics, including smoothed over large terri-
tories, have been investigated many times, but the global field is the initial
subject only in a small number of papers [3, 5, 9]. The University of Colorado

is conducting a planned study of the precipitation conditions over the continental
zones " American, Eurasia, Africa [91- The precipitation spectra averaged

over lO-degree latitudinal zones in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres are pre-
sented in [112.

having more complete data over a longer period of time than in [9] and data that
is more reliable than in [11], we are able to obtain a number of important varia-
bility parameters, the procedure for the calculation of which was developed in

[2] and used in [3] to process part of the archive. All further conclusions per-
rain to precipitation anomalies in January and July characterizing the degree of
disturbance with respect to the long-term mean monthly total precipitation field.
Let us remember that these values, just as the total precipitation, have positive
asymmetry of distribution (the mean is greater than the mode), and the lower limit
of the anomalies is zero. '

The trend of the anomalies over many years can be characterized approximately by
the linear trend factor 8, that is, the tangent of the slope of the approximating
straight line calculated by the time series data at each point of the grid
(Figure 3). A visual estimate of the areas indicates insignificant predominance
of the regions with increased precipitation in January and decreased in July. 0n
the whole, 3 does not exceed 11 per year. The 8 field calculated by the data for
the last 19 years looks different (Figure 6). The order of the values increases
to AZIyear. and alternation of the regions of opposite signs takes place more
frequently. Let us remember that in accordance with the va1ue of 6R the informa-
tion is reliable everywhere with the exception of the oceans. It is also necessary
to consider that on the equidistant projection maps in the polar regions, the
scale with respect to the parallels is enlarged, and in the equatorial regions,
reduced by comparison with the actual scale, which distorts the representation of
the proportion of the corresponding areas on the maps.

In order to obtain a more definite idea of the secular variability, let us cal-
tulate the mean anomalies over enlarged regions distinguished by certain typical
features. The averaging over two continental zones of the hemisphere, as was

done in [9], appears to be too generalized. for along with the continental precip-
itation it is useful to have information about precipitation in individual regions
of Asia which have at the present time been distinguished with respect to predom-
inant direction of river runoff and also with respect to the central area where

the rivers flow into inland bodies of water. In Table 2 a list of regions is pre-
sented, and the number of nodes,by the data of which the weighted mean (weight --
cosine of the latitude) was calculated, is indicated. The information at the

nodes falling in the arid zones (in Asia, America. Africa) where AR-O is excluded
from the analysis. Analyzing the variability by individual segments of the 89-year
period (the data for 1976-1979 calculated short-series and therefore unrepresenta-
tive "Clino" norms are excluded from them in the first four intervals) in the
regions with most reliable data (Table 3% it is possible to arrive at the following

conclusions.
I.

INJR‘OFFKJAl.lﬂﬂE(MNLY
FOR40FFKJAL.USE1DNLY

 

 

”sti‘vf-mm

  
    

’//, '/ " ’//

 
   
 

Figure 3.

Linear trend factor (Zlyear). 1891-1979.
a - January, b -~ July

;SV A“.

eysmeaaxagiii liflﬁ ,
. 7. .
W ‘9'" ’7'.£)’.-

1" pr €

 

Figure 4. Linear treqd factor (Z/year), 1961-1979.
a - January, b - July

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Regions of the Northern Hemisphere for Calculating
the than Precipitation Anomalies

 

 

Region No of mints
Eurasia 1098
Northern Asia 391
Central Asia 180
Southern Asia 205
Eastern Asia 165
Europe 235
Africa 285
North America (.14

l. The long-ta‘m average precipitation m; are, as a rule, <100%, which
is probably connected with reducing the local maxima during interpolation

(Southern and Eastern Asia in January, Central Asia in July, Africa). If we
assume that the reduction is systematic, then the conclusion can be drawn that the
fluctuations of the means reflect the actual variations in the precipitation con-

di tions .

2. The data for 1976-1979 obtained by the 30-year "Clino" norms are included in
the analysis only in two periods out of nine to avoid distortiom caused bv the
nonuniformity. At the same time it is possible to propose that the sharp increase
in the precipitation anomalies in the last 16 years and, especially, the last

10 years, is connected with a decrease in the long-term average participa-

tion during the 1931-1960 period by comparison with 1891-1975.

3. On the whole in January data is larger than in July for all periods, including
for the last decade, when a sharp increase in the anomlies took place in both

months .

lo. In two periods (1956-1975 and 1966-1975) a decrease in the January precipita-
tion is noted in the Eastern Hemisphere, and an increase in the Western Hemisphere.
In July, on the other hand, a negative trend is observed for the greater part of

Asia.

5. The relative dispersion o (the contribution of the linear trend to the total
dispersion) increases with a decrease in length of the series, but it is on the
whole small and obviously reflects the fact that there is no simificsnt, well—
defined linear trend in the precipitation over the 85-year period.

Confirmation of some of the indicated singularities can be found on the graphs
of the behavior over many years of the anomalies in a number of regions and for
the 0-85° N belt as a whole matched with the third-order trend lines (Figure 5).
It is difficult to distinguish any regularity in the alternation of the maxima
and minima; therefore the conclusions of [11] of insignificant guarantee of the
spectral frequencies of the mean zonal precipitation within the limits of 2 to 6
years appears to be convincing. Peturning to the problem of uniformity of the
series, let us note that in the long-term behavior of the January anomlies
in Northern Asia. including the greater part of the territory of the USSR, there

6
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

is .1 positive disrontlnulty in the 1950's after which the norm tumed out to he
low. It is possible that this is a consequence of changing instruments. the
effect of which could not be avoided, in spite of the carefully developed method
of preparing the initial data [lo]. The stable increase in anomalom nature was
reflected in the largest of all the regions in the 85-year period of positive
linear trend (B-ZL9Z/10 years) and also in the value of (1-162 corresponding to it.
It is obvious that in order to obtain reliable estimates of the variability, the
uniformity of the time series has primary significance, and from this point of
view retaining the initial method of measuring the precipitation, in spite of its
imperfection, would be more useful.

(1) “Ian: bu

 

m (3) “ "‘
.w
n

N

7'
m (5) Mum non-our ‘

1M "1! 7M ”0 I" ”I! 1m 7” "U 1.

Figure 5. Long-term behavior of the third-order trend and anomalies.
8 -- January, b -- July.

Key:
1. Northern Asia
2. Africa
3. America

1., Eurasia
5. Northern Hemisphere

As has already been pointed out above, in reference [1] recounendations are pre-
sented with respect to the uniform representation of the empirical data on
climate variability. Accordingly, in Table 4 estimates are presented for the
trend in the precipitation anomalies with respect to five latitudinal zones, in-
cluding, in addition to the precipitation over the dry land, data on the oceans
where they exist, that is, in the coastal zone and regions of intense shipping.
It is possible to see that the variation of the sign of 8 takes place to some
degree comparatively with respect to all zones. Thus, in January against a back—

ground of insignificant positive trends, there was an increase in pre pitation
for the entire period in 1940-1966, after which came a decrease in 191. 1975 and a
sharp increase at the end of the period. In July the pattern of the sign

*[(sic) -- translator's note: probably 1964.]
7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a. 4 n . ow a. v v

. *9
S 8 8 8 8 «o 8 8 wk
2 a... a. 9:. 3. an 21 .3 9a 2:: Mocha €82
. a a a o. 8 . x e 4.:
z 2. .8 2. 3 3 :. 8 .5.
as .6 3 93 gal «2! «.21 .6 3:? 23... 3E:
. z o a. 8 2 _ o is
S. 8. 8. 8. 8 3. 8. .2 .5.
a.» 3 a... as . «8| 3.... cal to 2.». 233 £85
a . a a. s : a. c 2.:
us an no as n* n» no «a in
3 «.n a... .6. 0.3.! oil «.2! «.9! a; 23... 3.2 538»
2 o e t e a u e a...
2 8 on r. $ .2. R 2 in .
22 as! ... So eel v.2... . 2| 3| an» at: 33 Eoﬁaom.
«. o a 8 o o o . as
x: 8 a 8. 8 8 8 3 in
no . 5.. 3.. 0.8 2 «6.. 3.. a... an» 23... . ._
e S . a. a a v o. in 33‘ 13:8
8. 8 8 8. 3. S. a. 8 in
96! Q2 ... «.«u QRI ed! 3” a.“ a; 23.: 3a< 505.32
o 2 a. «v 3 a _ o as
8 a 8 8 3 8 8 3 9m .
S .3 .6 3 9.81 no... 5,: a. 9; 23.3 33.5w

.02.sz

         

              

      

 

        

P; o:

P; mm.
7.8.

8. lo;-

m; S.

nuuaee.
velao.

@8- love

5 m a: .
221.8. 3395.5»

 

833—

  
  

      

    

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

_«
so

Q0

2“
z.

96“
'-

v.9

.0—

8—
v...

96
2

m6

0
3

56'

ch
96

a.—

O—
.a

I, .
22~62°g

«-
8—

«Jul.

QOI

«
co

Vb
v. _

.6

2-3” 23' :3- 33° 38°

8
8

6.2
_v
«s

«.3

o-
«a.

5.2

8—
ed

n6“

ad.

8“ 33:38"

068

 

hdl

vdl

no
«.0

3
_.ol

4...
in
on» 23.:
or:
.5»
on» 232
86
in.
a; 2):
$6
in
*6
am
a: 23.:

is
«.R
9;. 23.:
«.3
42M.
P; a}:
is
$m
9; 2}:

3 «u 82 5.32

. . «3...:

39:5

33¢ Futuaau

33¢ Suzuaom

32 25:3

.32 5.05932

38.5w

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.; a:
.5732

 

«v
ha
12

v._«

.6 -

.o.=.l

«N_|

     

 

an» on.
salsa.

in
9;. 2}:

  

9:59.8qu

a.» . [QB

wﬁnlﬂso

aimless

wdhledc

Qtlodn

   

wen .ohau
Iwumn zuhoz

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5 a. a B a o. 8 z is
2. 8 8 8 R 8 8 S ta
9.: 3| 3| «3 3 «T 3.. SI 8...” 2:: 3T3."
. o e 8 8 a a a .2.
.a 3 «a 8 8 8 8 a an
3 2.! no «a no! 3| v.7. El 8% 23a «SIRS
o e o o a. n o . in
8 8 8 8 8 3 8 .8 «.k
3| .6 _ 3| . .3! 3| 3! «.«I no 8». 2:3 Enid.
8 . a 3 o a o . « ﬁe
8 S 8 a 8. 3 8. . 8 . 8m
3.! q... 3.. 3n! 5! an a... 2 9; 23... 379.8
a. . o a. 2.. 2 «a . e...
a a «a S 8 8 8 8 am
3 3| .61 3... 2T 2! «al «a! a; 23... 3.10.8
33.

            

won
.393qu 5.32

 
 

no: a:
3218.

can a. 3:8.
coo-lea. evelac.

 

 

 

 

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJAL.USE(JNLY

alternation and magnitude of B with respect to zones and periods becomes more
spotty. Analyzing the long-term behavior of the anomalies by the graphs matched
with the five-year sliding means (Figure 6), it is possible to distinguish
approximately the same features as in Figure 5.

The basic experimental results consist in the following.

1. The archive of precipitation anomalies created by visual interpolation by the
originals maps of [4] has precision sufficient for estimation of the climatic
variability of the precipitation on the continents.

2. The representation of the precipitation data in the form of anomalies in per-
centages of the norm permits us to achieve spatial smoothing and thus convert
from analysis of the point observations to a study of the precipitation field in
the hemisphere.

3. The parameters of the field variability vary significantly in space and time;
therefore in order to distinguish the characteristic features it is recommended
that the anomalies be smoothed on the scales of the subcontinents.

 

“.0- 11 I
III I”

"00 I!!! "6! I!“ ma I!” I!“ i!" I”

Figure 6. Long-term behaVior of anomalies by latitudinal
zones and 5-year sliding means (I).
a - January. b -- July.

a. The growth of the anomalous nature in January and insignificant decrease in
July are observedon the whole for the hemisphere in 1891-1975.

S. The primary problems of future research must be restoration of the uniformity
of the series by converting to a united long—term norm and na1cu1ation of the

climatic characteristics of the total precipitation. It is also possible to note
the necessity for analyzing the trends of the continuous (in contrast to monthly)

12

FY)R OﬂWﬁC1A1.lEHE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

normalized precipitation series and to calculate the interrelations with the
air pressure and temperature variations.

In conclusion, the authors express their sincere appreciation to G. '1'. Gnevko for
the organization and performance of the work of creating the archive and
E. Ya. Ran'kova for the library of computer programs put at our disposal for the

calculations.

1.

5.

9.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vinnikov. K. Ya., et a1. "Modern Climate Variations of the Northern
Hemisphere," HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA [Meteorology and Hydrology], No 6,
1980.

Gruza, G. V.; Ran'kova, E. Ya. "Empirical-Statistical Analysis of the
Structure and Variations of the Observed Climate," TRUDY VNIIGHI-HI'SD

[Works of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Bydrometeorological
Information -— Horld Data Center], No 68, 1980.

Gruza, G. V.; Ran'kova, 8. Ya.; Apasova, Ye. 6. "Statistical Characteristics
of the Anomaly Field of the January Precipitation in the Northern Hemisphere,"
TRUDY VNIIM-VISD, No 77, 1980.

KART? HESYACHNYIO! I comm SUE?! OSADKOV V O’l'NOSllBNII K WOWETNIM

SRBDNIH SEVBRNOM POLUSHARIYA [Maps of the Monthly and Annual Total Precipita-
tion with Respect to the Long-Term Mean for the Northern Hemisphere], Nos 1-3,
1964, Leningrad, Main Geophysical Observatory.

Kuznetsova, L. P.; Nekhocheninova, V. I. "Time Variations of Temperature
and Precipitation Averaged for the Continents (Europe and North America),"
MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDMLOGIYA, No ‘0, 1977.

Polishchuk. A.l. “Problem of the Statistical Structure of the winter Precipi-
tation Field." TRUDY (:00 [Works of the Main Geophysical Observatory], No 215,
1968.

Polish chuk. A.l. "Statistical Structure of Sumner Precipitation," TRUDY 600,
No 268, 1972.

SREDNIYB lNOCOLE‘l'NIYE PESYACRNYYE I GODOVYYE SUNNY ATMOSFBRNYIGI OSADKOV P0
ZARUBEZ‘HNOY TERRITORII SEVERNOGO POLUSHARIYA [Long-Term man Monthly md
Annual Total Atmospheric Precipitation over the Foreign Territory of the
Northern Hemisphere], Leningrad, Gidrometeoirdat. 1972.

Corona, T. J. "Further Investigation of the Interannual Variability of
Northern Hemisphere Continental Precipitation," ENVIRON. RES. PAPER
COIDR STATE UNIV.. No 20, 1979.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Dorman, C. 3.; Bourke, R. B. "Precipitation Over the Pacific Ocean,
30°S to 60°N," M. WEATHER REV., Vol 107, No 7, 1979.

11. Xanthakis, J.; Tritakis, 3. "Analytical Expression of the Mean Annual
Variation of the Precipitation within Various Latitude Zones of the Earth,"

PRACI'ICA OF THE ACADEMY OF ATHENS, V01 51, No 47,1976 (1977).

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551. (5105225535510) (474-57)

CLIMATIC CHARACTERISTICS OF VERTICAL WIND SHIFTS IN THE MD LAYER OF THE
ATPDSPHERE OVER THE USSR

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No S. May 81 pp 17-23

[Article by P. F. Bryukhan'. Professor 1. G. Guterman. All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Hydrometcorological Information -- World Data Center,
manuscript received 18 Aug 80]

[Text] 0n the basis of the data from four-time radiosonde observations
in the boundary layer at 166 stations in the USSR for the
period from 1961 to 1970. the climatic characteristics of the
vertical wind shifts were calculated. The spatial climatic
pattern of the wind shifts was obtained. An analysis is made
of the shifts on the scale of the USSR in the 0-100 meter layer
and over individual stations vertically. The diurnal behavior
and probability characteristics of the shifts are considered.

The consideration of the vertical wind shifts in the ground layer of the atmosphere.
as emphasized in the resolutions of the Fourth Meeting of the Committee on

Aviation Meteorology of the Horld Meteorological Organization (RAH-IV VHO) [16].

is very important to supporting safe takeoff and landing of aircraft. The study

of the vertical wind shifts is also important for more thorough representation of
the wind conditions in the ground layer of the atmosphere inasmuch as the magni-
tude of the wind shifts depends both on the thermal stratification of the
atmosphere and the interaction of the air currents with the relief of the under—
lying surface.

The study of wind shifts is the subject of a comparatively small nuber of papers.
for interest in this problem began to be shown only 10-20 years ago. The study of
the wind shift in the ground layer has been primarily based on the measurement
data on a meteorological tower at one station (in particular, on the meteorologi—
cal tower in Obninsk) [1-2. 12. 18, and so on]. Balloon data which permit a
detailed study of the wind shift conditions in individual regions have been used
more rarely [9]. In references [16. 15], generalized data from temperature-wind
sounding in the boundary layer for one station were used to analyze the wind
profiles and shifts. In [8] a detailed analysis is made of the wind shift dis-
tribution in the free atmosphere by radiosonde data. In reference [10] an
analysis was made of the shifts in the territory of the USSR based on the results
of radiosonde observations in the 1000 to 850 mb layer. However. maps constructed
in [10] for the indicated layer are of no practical significance in view of the
great thickness of the layer, although they are of interest in climatological

respects.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to study the shift distribution laws and methods of predicting these
shifts to promote flight safety it is first necessary to investigate the basic
climatic features of the wind shift distribution. Such a study is made in this
paper.

In the paper four-time radiosonde observations over a 10-year period (from 1961
to 1970) at 146 stations distributed uniformly throughout the territory of the
USSR, were used. Do the average approximately 250 observations were made at each
station at one time of day over the entire lo-year period. Multiplying by four
we have a total of 1000. The initial wind data were taken on the windvane
level (8-12 meters), at altitudes of 100, 200, 300, 500, 600 and 900 meters
reckoned from the station level and at altitudes of 200, 500, 1000, 1500, 2000,
and 3000 meters reckoned from sea level.

The described data take up significant space, and for effective use at the
VNIIGMI-Hrsb, an archive of observations with respect to the boundary layer was
created on magnetic tapes on the Minsk-32 computer and the unified system of conr
puters. Information is packed on these tapes with maximum recording density,
which permits the data from three stations to be recorded on one tape. In the
phase of formation of the archive, a rough check was made of the initial data by
the procedure described in [3]. By cooperation between the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute and the Foscow Division of the VNIIGHI [All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometeorological Information], under the
direction of K. Ye. Chernin, a set of programs was written for processing the
indicated data, in particular, the programs for calculating the characteristics
of the vertical wind shifts.

As a result of the fast rise of the radiosonde, the accuracy between the wind

speed and direction is greatly inferior to the accuracy of measuring the wind on
meteorological towers and masts. During mast or tower measurements it is possible
to obtain a detailed vertical structure of the wind at several points in the USSR.
Although the radiosonde data are less accurate, they offer the possibility of
obtaining a three-dimensional picture of the wind in the boundary layer of the
atmosphere. A large number of observations and a quite large set of altitudes
obviously permit us to obtain reliable climatic characteristics of the wind shifts.

The calculation of the characteristics of the vertical wind shifts based on the
velocity differences of two adjacent levels contains a double random error. There-
fore, the magnitude of the shift is calculated with less accuracy than the values
of the velocities themselves on the levels. In addition, the accuracy of
determining the wind shift depends on the thickness of the layer for which it is
determined. Thus, the shifts calculated for layers of different thickness can not
be compared to each other. Thus, by the results of the calculations presented
below, a maximum shift is easily detected in the 500-600 meter layer comparable

to the values in the lower (300-500 meters) and higher (600-900 meters) layers.
The problem of the relation of the layer thickness to the wind shift in the

ground layer is investigated in detail in [a], and in the free atmosphere, in [8].

The most important of the characteristic shifts used in aviation is y'-- the mean
value of the modulus of the vector shift. Therefore in the given paper basically

a study is made of the characteristics Y (the monthly mean over many years) and
the recurrence of individual values of the modulus of the vector shifts.

16

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Figure 1 the climatic maps of the modulus of the vector shifts in January and
July are presented for the 0-100 meter layer over the USSR; In January and also
in July the maximum shifts are observed over Northern Kazakhstan and western
Siberia, over the Central part of the European Territory of the IESR, and over the
Northern part of Kamchatka. The minimum shift regions in January are traced west
of the Urals, over the Eastern Ukraine and Eastern Siberia.

In July on the whole throughout the USSR, the wind shifts are less than in
January. The peaks are located almost in the same regions as in the winter, over
Central Asia and Western Siberia. Over the other regions the wind shifts are
basically minimal.

A comparison of the maximum and minimum shift tones both in January and in July
indicates that relief has the predominant significance in their formation. In the
annual behavior the latter acts on the nature of variation of the wind with alti-
tude in practice uniformly in contrast to circulation or, in particular, the
horizontal nonuniformity of the temperature field. Both the latter factors, as
is known, have significant annual variation.

The powerful shift maximum over Northern Kazakhstan in January is connected with
the influence of the Ural. Mountains and the exit of the air currents to the
Western Siberian Plain. The Southwestern Currents, which prevail over the
European territory of the USSR, flow around the Ural Mountains, change direction
to the south and partially cross over the mountain range. Additional turbulence
with unstable stratification or lee waves with lifted inversions cm occur depend-
ing on the thermal stratification of the air after the mountain obstacles [17].

In the case of stable thermal stratification the current lines on the lee side of
the mountains are clustered toward the ground surface. The indicated factors lead
to large wind shifts.

An analogous phenomenon occurs in July. The difference consists only in the fact
that the winds blow from the north and northwest and flow takes place around the
Urais from north to south. During movement of the air current toward the south
over the Western Siberian Plain and Northern Kazakhstan the wind intensifies, as
a result of which powerful shifts are observed over this region. The powerful
shift maximum in July is also caused by mesoscale circulation.

In the center of the zone of greatest mean monthly shifts over Northern Kazakhstan
they reach 7.10’2 sec'1 in January; over the central regime of the European
Territory of the USSR they reach 5°10‘2 sec'l. In the minimum shift zones, for
example, in the foothills of Central Asia, the Baykal region, over the northeastern
part of the USSR in the center of the Siberian winter maximum (Verkhoyansk,
Yakutsk) they amount to only 2.10"2 sec'l.

The field of the modulus of the vector wind shifts in July, as can be dete_r_mined
by Figure lb is less uniform with respect to territory, and the values of 1 them-
selves are smaller. In the regign of maximum shifts over the northern part of
Kazakhstan they reach only 5'10' sec-1. Over the central regions of the
European Territory of the USSR in July their values decrease to lo-lO'2 sec‘1 in
January. At the same time it is characteristic that in Transbaykal, the belt of
increased shifts 5°10“2 sec"1 is retained in both January and July.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
   
  

    
   

W.”
194:. §¢7QI.
i .- ' '5' '4'!“ '4’ '
i3. -3wi‘}§3§§'§
t . - .

  
   

Figure l. Climatic maps of the modulus of the vector wind
shifts y in the 0-100 meter layer (10"'2 sec'l).
a - January, b -- July.

In the ground layer, near the underlying surface, the wind and shift characteris-
tics have significant diurnal variation. It is known that over the plains the
growth of the modulus of the wind velocity at the surface of the earth from night
to day and some righthand rotation of the wind vector predominate. At the

100 meter level, that is, on the upper boundary of the layer, inside which a
study is made of the vertical shifts, on the contrary, there is a decrease in the
velocity modulus in the afternoon hours. Here inversion of the diurnal behavior
is characteristic [10, 12, 15]. The diurnal variation of the wind shifts is

formed accordingly.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Diurnal variation of the modulus of the vector shift
in various layers in January (a) and July (b). szl-Orda.

Figure 2 shows an exanple of the manifestation of the diurnal behavior of the
wind shifts. It is clearly expressed in the lower part of the boundary layer.
The shifts decrease from night to day as a result of a decrease in the wind
velocity at an altitude of 100 neters during the daylight hours. The author of
reference [18] arrives at the same conclusion on the basis of using the observa-
tions at the Obninsk Tower. with an increase in altitude of the investigated
layer the diurnal behavior danps, and at altitudes on the order of 500 meters and
higher the shifts are insignificant.

In the table the July distribution is presented for the differences of the moduli
of the wind vector shifts in the 0—100 meter layer between night and day observa-
tions. This distribution was obtained by analyzing the results of the observations
of all 146 stations. The analysis demastrated that in the 0-100 meter layer a
decrease in the magnitude of the Inodulus of the wind vector shift from night to

day predominates. 0n the average in July the shift decreases by (0.8 to l.0)-lO’2
sec’ . The predominant number of cases (36.515fa11 in the gradation (1.1-1.5)010'2
sec‘l. As was already noted earlier, this takes place as a result of an increase
in the wind velocity from night to day at the surface of the earth with a sinul-
taneous decrease in it at the 100 meter altitude. However, the table data indi-
cate that at some of the stations, a different diurnal behavior of the vector
shift modulus is observed. A detailed analysis shows that this diurnal behavior
is characteristic of stations over which local circulations are imposed on the

air currents such as mountain-valley, breeze, foehn, and so on (Nagayev Bay,

Ayan, Chita, Yuzhno-Kuril'sk, Dzhalal-Abad, Ust'-Barguzin).

For estimates of the degree of flight safety in practice frequently the probability
characteristics that the shifts will exceeda given value are med. The authors
constructed maps of the probabilities of the moduli of the vector shifts exceeding
values of 8-10"2 sec"1 and 12-10"2 sec’ . The shifts of the values of 12.10'2 sec‘1
by the KAN—IV VH) scale [16] are considered strong. They can be recognized as

still stronger if we consider that in the ground layer the wind gradients decrease
rapidly with altitude, and for aviation the most sensitive is the shift in the
lower GO-neter layer. The corresponding maps are not presented in the given paper.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Distribution of the Differences of the Wind Vector Shift
Moduli Between Night and Day Observations

 
 
 
   
 
 
 

 
  
  

-—l,l -l.0 —0.5| 0,0l
—0.6 -0.l 0.5

Recurrence, 2

It must be noted that these maps are to a great extent analogous to the maps pre-
sented in Figure 1. For the majority of stations in the USSR the recurrence of
the shifts greater than 12~10'2 sec"1 can be estinated in 2-32 of the cases in
January and in 0.5-1! of the cases in July. In the regions of the largest
vertical shifts, shifts larger than 12-10'2 set"1 can be observed in January over
Kazakhstan with a probability of 7X and in July over Central Asia with probability
of 22 and more. The fact of the appearance of strong wind shifts over Central

Asia is confirmed in reference [9] on the basis of the analysis of balloon obser-
vations.

In Figure 3 the envelopes of the profiles of the maximum moduli of the vector
shifts for 10 years are presented for the szl-Ords station. As is obvious in this
figure, shifts.on the order of 20-10.2 nec’1 and more can be observed in the lower
layers. The probabilities of such shifts are small - less than 0.5!; however,
such shifts present serious danger on takeoff and landing of aircraft and by the
KAN-Iv VHO scale belong to the category of very strong shifts.

[In
a) 1:)
I”!
l .
J In I!

:‘I 1 F].
Figure 3. Envelopes of the profiles of the laximum vector
shift moduli in January (a) and July (b).

    

l

The calculation of the probability characteristics of the wind shifts (recurrence.
qunntiles, and so on) directly from the observation series is very labor-consuming;
therefore indirect calculation of them beginning with the use of hypothetical
distribution laws and their parameters is of obvious interest.

Let us assume that the vector of the vertical wind shift is distributed by a
normal law

20

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. . _ I
N... .,)-———ﬁ—q-2"‘m _,_ x _
' | ( -')a 2r(1:-7.e)(1,-?,)
Xexpl-T—.._,e, [43“: - m, +

+ (”q-y). ]| (1)
—_'i_- -

where Yx. V), are the tendon shift components in the zonal and meridional direc-
tions;

 

Ix» $3, are the components of the mean resultant shift;

ax, u are the mean deviations of the component:

9
r is the correlation coefficient between then.
Let us further assume that o -o and r-O. Then the shift vector is scattered by a

circular law. In this casg the joint density of the nodulus Y and the direction
of the randon shift 8 in polar coordinates assmes the for:

3.. .—
[(1.p)=T:;—exp[__lL_ﬂ'L”.Tﬂ—M—]" (2)

where a: a" + 05, :9, 1/2.: 9, V'f is the vector mean square deviation.

By corresponding integration of (2) it is easy to obtain the distribution densi-
ties of the direction and modulus of the shifts:

F m 9;". +Ww’ll mum. <3)

cm: %exv(‘ " ‘%)°"(’-t‘)' (6)

Here I: 1,!3, z = l (0‘ (F — Fr)»

7: = I .1" +371,- p": arclg Gd?!»

Yr and Br are the modulus and direction of the mean resultant shift. The angles

8 and 8r are reckoned fron the north clockwise.

Distributions of the type of (3) and U.) are known from the literature on the
wind statistics [7, 11]. The distribution of (lo) is known as the generalized
Rayleigh law.

In order to use the distributions (2)-(lo), in addition to the resultant shift
vector it is also necessary to know its dispersion. The mean square deviations

of the shifts usually are not calculated,a1d they are presented extremely rarely
in the literature. Therefore it is necessary to use another distribution parameter

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

analogous to the parameter of the climatic wind stability. It is determined by
the ratio of the modulus of the mean resultant shift vector to the mean value
of the vector shift modulus:

_ 1r
‘ " T (s)
This parameter proposed by 6. Ya. Narovlyanakiy, N. V. Kobysheva and
M. Ye. Kaulina [13] characterizes the degree of variability of the wind shifts
with respect to directiOn. For recalculation of s to X (this permits determina-
tion of o), it is possible to use the functions relating the analogous wind
parameters [11]. Then it is possible to use relations (2)-(4). Thus. in order
to know the distribution function of the shift vector, parameters Y. 7,. 81. must
be known. Fer calculations of the probabilities and quantilea of the vector
shift moduli, it is sufficient to know two parameters: Y and Yr'

The calculations made by the authors in the example of the stations of the USSR

demonstrated that, as a rule. the hypothesis of Rayleigh distribution of the
vector shift modulus does not contradict the observation data for the 52 level of
significance of the Pearson nunber.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Abramovich, K. 6.; Glszunov, V. 0.; Stepins. M. P. "Vertical Wind Shifts
in the Lower Layer of the Atmosphere." TRUDY GIDROMBTISENTRA SSSR
[Works of the USSR Hydrometerological Center], No 70, 1970.

2. Borisenko, H. M. "Peculiarities of the Vertical High Wind Profile According
to Measurement Data on High'rowers,"TRUDY 600 [Works of the Main Geophysical
Observatory]. No 2101, I969.

3. Cavrilova, Z. 1.; Guterman, I. 6.; Krylova, L. H.; Popkova, L. F.;
Khanevskaya, I. V. "Basic Steps in the Development of Aerological DataUnder
the Program for the New Aeroclimatic Reference of the USSR," TRUDY VNIICH'I-
MTsD [Works of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometeorolog-
ical Information -- World Data Center], No 50, 1978.

a. Clazunov, V. 0. "Vertical Wind Shift with Different Layer Thickness in the
Ground Part of the Atmosphere," TRUDY GIDKJHETI'SBNTRA SSSR, NO 70. 1970.

5. Glazunov, V. 6. "Vertical Wind Shifts for Different Temperature Stratifica-
tion in the Lower JOO-Meter Layer of the Atmosphere," TRUDY GIDROWSENTRA
SSSR. No 60. 1972.

6. Glazunov, V. 6. "Conditions of Occurrence of a Strong Vertical Shift in the

Lower Part of the Ground Layer of the Atmosphere," TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA
SSSR, No 62. 1975.

7. Cutennan, I. G. RASPREDELENIYE VETRA NAD SEVBRN'YH POLUSIIARIYEM [Wind
Distribution over the Northern Hemisphere]. Leningrad, Gidromegeoizdat. 1965.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Guternan, I. G. "Vertical Wind Shifts." TRUDY NIIAK [Works of the
Scientific Research Institute of Aerocliutology], No 56, 1969.

Isanukhanedova, U. "Powerful Vertical Hind Shifts in the Aircraft Takeoff
and Landing Zone at the Airports of Uzbekistan." TRUDY SANIGMI [Works of the

Central Asian Scientific Research Hydroaeteorological Institute], No 25(40),
1966.

"Cliuate of the Free Atmosphere and Boundary Layer Over the Territory of the
USSR," edited by I. G. Guternan, TRUDY WIIGHI-IHsD, No 60, 1979.

Harchenko, A. S. "Circular and Elliptic Forms of the No-Dinensional Nor-a1
Law in the Aeroclinatology of the Wind," TRUDY NIIAK, No 25, 1964.

Hashkova, G. B. "Problea of the Gradient Hind Velocity in the Boundary
Layer," HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA [Meteorology and Hydrology], No 12. 1971.

Narovlyannkiy, 6. Ya.; Kobysheva, N. V.; Kaulina, h. Ye. "One of the
Possible Methods of Calculating the Maximum Vertical Hind Shifts." TRUDY
NIIAK, No 38, 1967.

Orlenko, L. R. "Procedure for Processing the Temperature-Wind Sounding Data
in the Boundary Layer," TIUJDY 600, No 257, 1970.

Orlenko, L. R.; Shklyarevich, O. B. "Vertical Hind Shifts in the Boundary
Layer of the Atmosphere (According to the Experimental Data) ." METEOROIDGIYA
I CIDROLOGIYA, No 10, 1976.

Petrenko, N. V. "Resolutions of the Fourth Meeting of the Commission on
Aviation Meteorology of the World Meteorological Organization." METEOROIDGIYA
I GIDROLOGIYA, No 6, 1968.

Smlt, K. OSNOVY PRIKLAINOY METEOROLOGII [Fundamentals of Applied Meteorology],
Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat. 1978.

Tsvcrava, V. C. "Studies of the Vertical Hind Vector Shift by Observations
on a BOO-Meter hteorologicalTower."HB‘1'BOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA. No 2. 1967.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.(558.1+509.6)
SIMULATION OF THERMALS
Moscow HEIEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 24-32

[Article by N. K. Didenko, V. N. Ivanov. Candidates of Physical and Fathesatical
Sciences V. Ya. Korovin and V. V. Smirnov, Institute of Experimental Meteorology,
manuscript received 26 Aug 80]

[Text] The results of studying the evolution of thermals obtained
during volunetric conbustion of aerosuapensions in a pure
atmosphere and under conditions of a model cloud environment
are presented. The proposed model of a thermal takes into
account the efficiency of the conversion of the chemical
energy of the smpension to buoyancy energy and also the
conversion of a spherical thermal to a turbulent vortex ring.

Examples of the practical application of the results are
presented.

Thermals on the order of a meter in size and with a height of rise on the order of
tens of meters were simulated by creating local sources of volmetric heat
release in the atmsphere.

The study of the ordered vertical movements of air in the form of thermsls and
plumes is of interest from the point of view of constructing quantitative models
of the development of convection [l]. and it has a number of important practical
applications in aviation and atmospheric process modification technology [13].

It is also inportant for the removal of impurities from atmospheric air [16], and
so on. Some of the laws of the evolution of the structure of thermals with differ-
ent initial parameters have been investigated theoretically [1-3, 14, 15] and
experimentally (see, for example [1, 12] and the bibliography referenced in them).
Nevertheless, there is no strict quantitative theory of the evolution of thermala
with high initial buoyancy energy. Such thermals (hereafter called intense) are
characterized by conversion to a spherical vortex during movanent and then to a
vortex ring [2. 12. 14]. The laws of the temerature distribution and variation
of the rate of ascent of intense thermals with altitude under turbulent
atmospheric conditions also require further study.

The purpose of this paper was an experimental study of the dynamics of the
development of intense thermals created both under laboratory conditions and in a
real atmosphere on igniting an aerosuspension based on a metal aerosol.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experimental Procedure and Results

Analysis shows that for the simulation of artificial thermals with comparatively
large initial volumes the use of the reaction of volumetric high-temperature
oxidation of fuel, in particular, based on metals of the aluminum and magnesium
type with high heat of combustion and high (by comparison with gas and liquid-
drop fuels) combustion rate of their aerosuspensions turns out to be effective.

An air-atomizing burner with an output capacity of about 100 g of powder per

pulse was used to spray the powder. Spark and remote laser techniques were used
to ignite the aerosuspensions [6]. In order to insure continuous flame propaga-
tion in the aerosuSpension, a concentration by mass of the fuel particles was
created no less than some limiting value. the so-called lower concentration limit
which for metallic aluminum is 45 g/m3, but no more than a maximum value defined
by the stoichiometry of the oxidation reaction (for aluminum, 300-310 g/m3). In
the experiments the concentration by mass of the reagent was 100-200 g/m3, and the
mean square particle diameter was 10 microns.

 

Figure 1. Television (a) and infrared (b) images of a thermal
inhomogeneity for the lO-second time mark

The experiments were tin under the conditions of indifferent and stable stratifi-
cation at an air temperature of 290-300K and relative humidity of 60-1001. Using
temperature gauges [6], television and infrared imager, the variations with
time or the temperature, geometric dimensions and speed of the thermal were
recorded. In order to obtain the infrared images (heat profiles of the thermal)
on wave lengths of 2-5.6 microns, the ASA-680 model IR imager was used. On
conversion of the IR-imager readings to the temperature of the thermal it was
assumed that the radiation coefficient of the target is equal to one as a result
of the large optical thickness of the cloud of combustion products. The value of
the initial temperature of the thermal obtained in this way was 1300K. After com-
pletion of the combustion process (0.1-0.12 sec), a spherical cloud of heated air
with a radius of R :1 meter with admixture of finely-disperse particles of com-
bustion products was formed, which rose quickly.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 3. Variation of the mean
temperature of a rising artificial
thermal (a) and the temperature in
the vicinity of the thermal for

t-l sec, 2-0 (h):

1 -- infrared imaging; 2 — contact
measurements; 3 -- calculation by (2)
l-‘Oll OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure a. Effect of a radiation source on the spectrum of
fog drops.
1 - spectrum before modification; 2 - after modification;
3 —- calculation by (6) for t-3 sec, AT-0.5K
Key:
a. microns
b. f-lO'3 cnr3 micron"1

An analysis of the television and IR images of a thermal inhomogeneity similar
to those presented in Figure 1 demonstrated that in the initial phase of ascent
for t‘0.8 sec, its shape is close to spherical. For 0.8 aec<t<l.6 see, the
spherical thermal is transformed to a vortex ring.

The variation of the basic parameters of the thermal with time is illustrated by
Figure 2. The presence of two peaks previously not noted in the literature on the
curVe of the variation of the rate of ascent in Figure 2a is of special interest.
The first peak is reached at the 0.8 second time mark. At that time conversion of
the spherical thermal to a torus begins. The second peak (t-l.6 sec) coincides
with the time of completion of the formation of the vortex ring. In Figure 2b,

by the radius R for t<0.8 seconds we mean the radius of a sphere, and for t>0.8 sec,
the outer radius of a torus. Figure 3 shows the results of measuring the tempera-
ture difference T (1 —- maximum, 2 -— average) of the inhomogeneity and the
teuperature of the medium I. in different stages of ascent of the inhomogeneity

(a) and also maximum superheating of the medium beyond the limits of the thermal
in the z-O plane. The altitude z.is reckoned from the center of the thermal at

the time t-O. The maximum values of the air temperature outside the thermal are
reached a time on the order of 1 second after the time of its formation, and in

the absence of wind they decrease to the initial temperature in the time 10—15 sec.

27
FOR Ol-‘I-TCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As follows from what has been discussed above, the simulated inhomogeneity is

an intense source of thermal radiation. Accordingly, it was of interest to study
the evaporation of fog under the effect of such sources. Experiments in the
simulation of thermals in a cloud chamber 3200 m3 in size were performed for this
purpose. The experiments demonstrated that under the effect of a local radiation
source such as a hot cloud of metal powder aeroauspension, in the vicinity of the
combustion zone the liquid drop fog evaporates. Using the "Hats" aerosol particle
television counter [9], the variation of the mierostructure of the fog was
recorded at a distance of 1 meter from the combustion zone. The differential
spectra of the sizes of the fog drops before and after modification averaged
after 3 seconds are presented as an example in Figure 4. As a result of modifica-
tion by radiation of the combustion zone, the water content of the fog during the
first 3-5 seconds decreases by 2-3 times by comparison with the initial content
(amounting to about 1 g/m3). During the subsequent 10-15 seconds, however, the
drop spectrum acquires a form close to the initial form, which is connected with
the mixing of air in the chamber caused by rise of the heated air.

Discussion of the Results

As is obvious from the presented results, an intense spherical thermal is con-
verted to a torus already in the initial phase of ascent. The known models of a
spherical thermal [1. 3, 12, 15] describing its evolution in terms of the
temperature To. radius 80, velocity U0 and entrainment coefficient a thus become
unacceptable.

Qualitatively, the mechanism of conversion of a spherical thermal to a torus can
be characterized as follows. In the initial phase of ascent a vortex circulation
current similar to the Hill vortex arises in the thermal under the effect of fric-
tional forces. As the rate of ascent increases, the pressure and density gradients
at the boundaries of the thermal lead to the fact that the thermal begins to
flatten out, acquiring the shape of a torus, the air inside which rotates around
a horizontal annular axial line, and a circulation current is formed outside the
torus. As a result of the existence of a velocity circulation around an element
of the vortex ring. it is affected by the Zhukov force directed perpendicularly

to the direction of the velocity ofthe ring element. The horizontal component

of this force stretches the ring to the sides, and the vertical component brakes
the rise of the ring somewhat. Obviously, the effect of this force explains the
decrease in the rate of ascent of the inhomogeneity observed in Figure 2a for

0.8 second<t<l.2 seconds.

0n the whole. during movement of the obtained thermal inhomogeneities, we observe
three phases of development: Ascent of the spherical thermal. transformation of
the thermal to a torus. ascent of the formed vortex ring. Let us consider the
evolution of the thermal parameters in more detail.

From the experimental data that we obtained it follows that the dimensions of the
nonuniformities of sufficiently large initial volume (on the order of l m3 or
more) increase linearly with height: R-Ro+uz. It is important to emphasize that
in the initial section of the territory of motion (before conversion of the
thermal to a torus) the entrainment coefficient 0 turns out to be less than in
the phase of movement of the nonuniformity in the form of a vortex ring. The

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corresponding values of a were 0;ljp.03 for t50.8 sec and 0.1919.03 for t31.6 sec.
The fact that in the vortex ring phase the value of a is close to values usually
recorded for thermals obviously is a consequence of the generation of the vortiC°
ity in it as a result of buoyancy [12].

Using the known models of the spherical thermal [3, 15] and also the vortex ring
[11], the functions R(t) and the rates of ascent C(t) of the thermal inhomogeneity
with initial parameters Ro-O.9 m, T0=1300K, 00-2 m/sec were calculated numerically.
The results of the calculation by a model of a spherical thermal [1.5] rising in

a uniform medium and by formulas of [3] for the ascent of a cloud of light gas in
the air are presented in Figure 2 in the form of curves 2 and 3, respectively.

The variation of the dimensions of the thermal for times of more than 1.6 seconds
is described satisfactorily by the semiempirical formula obtained in [11] for
floating vortex rings

0 D ‘l‘
. Hark)!" ‘ «U3

where t'-t-l.6 sec;

“9.6 Vo', Uo', 00' are the radius, volume. speed and density of the torus for
t=:

a” is the density of the medium at an infinite distance from the thermal.
The rate of ascent of the ring is found from (1) by the formula
I all?

06)“???
In formula (1). n-S.S is the proportionality coefficient in the expresssion for
circulation r-nUR. As follows from Figure 2 (curves 4). formula (1) satisfactorily
describes the process of ascent of the thermal inhomogeneity. although not all of
the assumptions made when deriving it are completely justified in our experiments.
Thus, in the initial phase of ascent. the evolution of an intense thermal is
described well by the model of a spherical thermal; hereafter, the model of a
floating vortex ring. The laws of ascent in the phase of transformation of a
spherical thermal to a torus require more detailed investigation.

The mean density and temperature of the rising thermal can be calculated by the
formulas derived from the quite simple expressions

mum: . T332, (2)
pm=9~ "7.77m?- ' v

where Re(t) is the radius of a sphere of equivalent volume;

Tm is the temperature of the medium at an infinite distance from the inhomogeneity.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Inasmuch as the value of Re(t) is determined from experimentation with large
error, n(t) is calculated under the assumption that a spherical thermal with
Ro-0.9 m and o-0.]9 rises. The results of the calculation are presented in
Figure 3a (curve 3). The dispersion of the experimental points 2 (averaging
with respect to 30 experiments) is caused by the nonuniform temperature distribu-
tion in the thermal and the random position of the measurement point in the
coordinate system connected with the moving target. On the whole, it is possible
to note satisfactory agreement of the calculated and measured temperatures.

The heating of the medium in the vicinity of the thermal observed experimentally
(see Figure 3b), as analysis shows, cannot be explained either by the processes
of thenmal conductivity or by evaporation of the drops directly under the effect
of the radiation of the flames and the combustion products. Obviously,

the basic factor of the heating of the medium in the chamber is radiation heating
of the aerosol particles contained in the air, in particular, particles with
effective size on the order of 10 microns and concentration of 10 cm‘3. The
evaporation of the fog in the cloud chamber (see Figure 6) takes place as a result
of a rise in the temperature of the medium.

From a solution of the heat and mass transfer equations for an individual drop

it follows that as a result of the rise in temperature of the aqueous aerosol by
the amount ATBT-Tm the drop will evaporate by the law

zip-$57537. q=p.(rt)(7,‘7;';-u)il

where R1 is the drop radius;
D is the diffusion coefficient of the water vapor in the air;

1 is the thermal conductivity of the air;

cl, L, "l are the density. the heat of vaporization and molecular weight of
water;

n“(Tm) is the density of the saturated water vapor at a temperature T,.

Then the equation of the evolution of the spectrum of the drop sizes in the heated
air can he represented in the form

0/ A AOI_. ___9_¢ 57'
7-frgi'm7a-0-A~ .W ‘3’

Here f(R1, t) is the distribution function of the drops by sizes at the time t.
Using the Laplace transformation with respect to the time variable. let us
represent (3) in the form

sf+ A 7"; (%;)=/.(R.): in. R.) = jitt.R.)e-"dt- (4)

Here [9(R1) is the distribution function of the drops by sizes in an undisturbed
mrmo.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In general fonm the solution of equation (4) is written as follows:
’” §§ao (5)
7=R|ivT 5‘“ )e 3.
«n
where c(s) is an arbitrary function of the argtment a.

From (S) in accordance with the theorem of inversion of the Laplace transformation

we have
(R: R 89 R?
f“?!- t)_,,'+5"7e’17m(:f.(=)e13 d:e"ds= R1,: (Rut‘ ﬂ).

ln-lo

R?
where F(R.. t-ﬁ) is an arbitrary function of the arguments R1 and t-(R§/2A).

By direct substitution of the expression found for £011, t) in (3), we find that
. ' Rf‘ Ri'
f' (Ru t-ﬂ) l¢ t, '"TA' - Considering, in addition, that f(R1,0)-fo(R1),

we obtain the solution of equation (3):

hWﬂ—w . (w

f(R..:)=R. .4“

Curve 3 in Figure 4 corresponds to expression (6) for t-3 sec and AT-0.SK

(the value of or for r-1.5 a, see Figure 3b). Considering the error in determining
the characteristics of the nicrostructure of fog (about 302), the correspondence
of curves 2 and 3 must be recognized as quite satisfactory.

Practical Applications

Delivery of Reagents. One of the methods of delivering the reagent or inpurity to
the given region of the atuosphere is use of ascending movements of air (thermls,
currents. vortex rings) [5, 7, 10, 13]. In real situations the maximum height of
rise of the vortex rings is basically determined by the degree of turbulence. The
vortex ring is destroyed when its energy becomes cat-parable to the energy of turb-
ulent pulsations in the atmosphere on a scale on the order of the size of the
vortex R. Then in order to estimate the maximu- height of rise of the vortex
ring under the conditions of local isotropic turbulence it is possible to me the
equation
. .. u 2
mint)— ‘8 I Rug“). (7)

where c is a constant on the order of one;

c is the dissipation rate of the turbulent energy.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From (1), (7) we obtain

’ I 06.12 in R3
1
Key: 1. buoyancy ‘ 29"}.n' “ . '
(l) 4
where Q“ =c,. (T.— 7-)? ‘ RSFo is the energy of buoyancy of the thermal
inhomogeneities; Key: 1. buoyancy

Rr is the universal gas constant;
p, is the atmospheric pressure:
u is the molecular weight of the air;

cP is the specific heat capacity of the air for constant ressure. Then
R 0-1.75 m; R0-0.9 m; T0-1300K; T.-293K; t-IO'2 to 10‘“ m /sec3: znax-30 to 80 m.

According to the experimental data, 2333330 to 50 meters. The estimates obtained
using the equation of motion of the thermal indicate that the presence of a
reagent in the thermal leads to variation of ”max by no more than 101 if the
reagent concentration does not exceed 50 g/m3.

Penetration of Blocking Layers (Inversions). One of the problems of dynamic
modification of atmospheric processes is penetration of inversion layers. It is
known, in particular, that under the conditions of large industrial cities
inversions lead to the occurrence of snogs and vapor trails over the cities, and
the lifted inversions can prevent the occurrence of convective clouds. For the
penetration of such layers intense thermals and currents can be used [8, 6]. The
minimum energy release in a thermal inhomogeneity required to penetrate the
inversion layer by it, can be estimated using the approach of [12] for determining
the height of rise of the floating element in a stably stratified atmosphere:

Q = Iunq = Hﬁrl‘c. - no.9...»

where k and k1 are coefficients taking into account the incompleteness of combus-
tion of the fuel and combustion energy losses to radiation;

q and m are the heat of combustion and mass of the aerosuspension;
21 is the thickness of the inversion;

c(a) is the coefficient taking into account the effect of entrainment and
structure of the thermal, equal to One with respect to order;

ya and y are the dry adiabatic and true vertical temperature gradients in the
atmosphere.

For 21-150 meters; 1 -y-2.s-io-2 K/m; 1,-273x; r-o.3; rl-o.7s; c(o.)-2.66
(a spherical thermal?, energy expenditures Q=b.6-108 joules and fuel consumption
m=50 kg for q-3.l-106 joules/kg are necessary. Here the initial size of the

3
thermal no will be close to R.=-}/ 5'33; ‘z 5,5 g.
..

32

FOR OFFKJMI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Creation of a Clearing Zone in Pogs and Clouds. From the results of experimenta-
tion (Figure 4) and theoretical investigation it follows that the effect of a
scores of volumetric heat release on a cloud medium is mnifested in the creation
of a cleared zone in its vicinity. Using formulae (3) and (6) and also the
experimental data it is possible to make estimates of the corresponding variation
of the integral coefficient of attenuation of the radiation in the medium. The
attenuation factor of visible radiation in fog is defined by the expression

3.0. n=5umxmm t. meme 1;?- >> I). (9)

where K0=2 is the efficiency factor of the attenuation for one drop;

xn=0.8 microns is the wavelength corresponding to the maximum spectral distribu-
tion of the flame radiation.

For fogs with initial attenuation factor ooﬂ=0.226 m'1 (RIG microns, N3103 cm’3)
the calculation by (6) and (9) for t-S seconds; r-1.5 meter; AT-0.5K gives a
value of “Ow-50'0“. This agrees satisfactorily with the data obtained from
measurements of the fog microstructure during the modification process. The time
of existence of the clearing zone, as has been pointed out, is on the order of
10-15 seconds, which is sufficient for a number of practical applications, for
example, for observation of astronomical targets. It can be increased by
periodically repeated "launching" of the thermals.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Andreyev, V.; Panchev, S. DINAFIRA AMSPERNYR'H TBRHIKOV [Dynamics of
Atmospheric Thermals], Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1975.

2. Andrushchenko, V. A. “Formation of a Vortex Ring During Rise of a Heated
Mass of Air in a Stratified Atmsphere," WANIKA ZHIDKOSTI I GAZA
[Fluid and Gas Mechanics], No 2, 1978.

3. Gorev, V. A.; Gusev, P. A.; Troshin, Ya. K. "Ascent and Codaustion of a
Hydrogen Cloud in the Air," DOKLADY AN SSSR [Reports of the USSR Academy of
Sciences], Vol 222, No ’0, 1975.

lo. Didenko, N. K.; Smirnov, V. V. "Equipment for Measuring the Paramters of

Weak Air Currents," TRUDY IBM [Works of the Institute of Experimental
mteorology], No 9, 1970.

5. Didenko, N. K.; Ivanov, V. 8.; Korovin, V. Ya.; Rusakov, Yu. 8.;
Smirnov, V. V. "Possibility of Transporting a Reagent Using Vortex Rings,"
HATERIALY VSESOYUZNOY KONFERENTSII P0 FIZIKE OBLAKOV I AKTIVNY‘H
VOZDEYSTVIYAH NA NIKE [Materials of the All-Union Conference on Cloud
Physics and Modification of Them], Obninsk, 1979.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Ivanov, V. N.; Korovin, V. Ya.; Petrushin, A. 8.; 'Smirnov, V. V.
"Energy Threshold of Nonlinear Attenuation of Laser Radiation in an
Aerosol," HATERIALY VSESOYUZNOOO SOVBSHCEAN‘IYA PO RASPROSTRANENIYU
OPTICHESKOG) IZLUCHENIYA V DISPERSNOY SREDB [Materials of the All-Union

Conference on Spatial Optical Radiation in a Disperse Nediun], Ibscou,
Cidromteoizdat, 1978.

Lavrent'yev, N. A.; Shabat, Ye. V. PROBLEM GIDRODINAHIKI I IKE
HATEMATICHESKIYE HODBLI [Problems of Hydrodynamics and Their Mathematical
Models], Moscow, Nauka, 1973.

Pshenay-Severin, S. V.; Rudneva, I. A. "Conditions of Penetration of the
Blocking Layer by a Theml with Large Condensation Centers," TRUDY IBM,
No 6, 1969.

Smimov. V. V.; Yaakevich. G. 17. "Application of Imaging Equipment for
Studying the Hicrostructure of CIouds," METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA
[Meteorology and Hydrology], No 5, 1979.

Struchayev, A. 1.; Yershov. V. A.; Salov, V. A. "Simulation of the Delivery
of Hygroscopic Reagents into the Atmosphere Using a Turbulent Vortex Ring,"
FIZIKA AERODISPERSNYKH SISTEM [Physics of Aerodisperse System], Kiev-
Odessa, Vishcha shkola, No 18, 1978.

Tarasov, V. F. "Movement of an Ascending Vortex Ring," DINAHIKA SPLOSIINOY
SREDY [Dynamics of 3 Continuous Medium], Novosibirsk, Nauka, No 23, 1975.

Terner. J. EFPEKTY PLAVUGIBSTI V ZHIIXOSTYAKPI [Buoyancy Effects in
Liquids], Moscow. Mir, 1977.

Lane, G. A. FOG ABATEMENT, USA patent No 38010328, 1972.

Simona, G. A.; Larson, R. 8. "Formation of Vortex Rings in a Stratified
Atmosphere," PHYS. FLUIIS, Vol 17, No 1, 1974.

Shui. V. H.; Weyl. G. H. "mtion of a Rising Thermal," PHYS. FLUIDS,
Vol 18, No 1. 1975.

Spurr. G. "The Penetration of Atmspheric Inversiona by Hot Pluses,"
J. METEOROL” V01 16, No 1, 1959.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551. (521. 3:593. 52) (575.4)
PECULIARITIES 0F VARIATIONS OF THE HICMSTRUCI'URE OP ARID AEROSOLS

Moscow mreommcru 1 atomican in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 33-38

[Article by V. P. Ivanov, P. A. Haslennikov, V. I. Sidorenko. Candidate of

Physical and Mathematical Sciences V. L. Filippov, Kazan', manuscript received
on I Sep 80]

[Text] This paper contains the results of studying the variability of
the disperse composition of aerosols in the ground layer of air
in an arid zone (Karaktny). The data from the indicated
experiments are generalized on the level of studying seasonal
differences in the particle size spectra.

The results of the studies indicate strong variability of the concentration field
of an atmospheric aerosol. 0n the other hand, the disperse phase of the air is
one of the prinary factors defining the variations of the heat exchange conditions
in the atmosphere. These facts are defined as one of the basic problems of the
coupler GAREX Program [3], the performance of regular observations of the varia-
tions of the aerosol particle size spectral during the (max-77 and cam-79
expeditions. The data fro- the indicated observations are presented in this
paper, the generalization of which is carried out on the level of studying seasonal
differences in the size spectra N, in the ground layer of the air of an arid zone
(Karakumy) by the results obtained on the two indicated expeditions: in
Septenber-October 1977 and February-March 1979. that is, the fall (the number of
spectra investigated Wall-221) and winter (Dz-107).

The masurements of N, were nade by the procedure of [2] with the application of
the "Kant-902M" aerosol classifier [7]. Here we only note that in the interests
of obtaining more reliable information and in a wide range of particle sizes with
respect to radius r two instruments were used in the experiment simultaneously
tuned to different (but overlapping) ranges of Ar in accordance with Table 1.
Here the conditions of taking the aerosol saIples of different fractions and the
nunber of gradations N, in the resultant spectrum are defined in the table.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Table l
3 o I n u L E
2:: 52°. as f.“ ”a 533
human "86 ~32 “3: h: “33. go
"0 Date “6.9.83. °3E “so? “658.» “a?“énwﬁ
aka: us a can owsur
0H 8 Eco an. 0000 00;»8
conga .43 w a 980.5 3'3“3u°33
55303" on: 9.2”: gﬁga nun-no.3 °Iﬁ
1 September- 0.l-lo.lo 5 S 1.8-2.7 0.1-“ 25
October 1977
2 1.8-66 200 2
1 February- 0. 1-5 5* 5 0.6-0.85 0. 1-15 22
March 1979
2 0.6—15 1500 2

*‘l‘he operating conditions of the imtrunents on the second expedition were changed
without losses to subsequent analysis of the results considering the experience
of the first measurements, and they permitted the reliability of the obtained
data to be improved.

The qualitative analysis of sets of spectra (Hm) obtained in the fall demon-
strated that in the investigated region it is necessary to distinguish two aerosol
conditions: "normal" for wind velocities V357 n/sec and "dust scorn" conditions
for V3” n/sec which is observed, as a rule on passage of atmspheric fronts.

The quantitative base supporting the indicated principle of separation of the
aerosol conditions was the data from the subsequent statistical analysis of the
interrelation between the particle concentration and wind velocity -- the wind
erosion characteristic -- which under desert conditions is one of the basic
mechanisms regulating the turbidity of the boundary layer of the atmosphere.
During the winter the wind velocity did not exceed 6 n/sec, and here it is
necessary to consider only the conditions which we provisionally called "normal."

In accordance with the adopted subdivision of aerosol conditions of the arid zone
for autumn two sets of particle size spectra were formed, the first of which con-
tained a sample (V357 m/sec) including 202 separate realizations; the second sample
(VB> m/sec) included 18 realizations. The third sanple combined [:12 particle size
spectra recorded during the winter.

The isolated sets (Nr) were subjected to statistical analysis. The result of this
analysis was to obtain average aerosol particle distribution profiles by sizes

——

ﬂ
nu) L“??? ‘71:”. which are illustrated in the figure. The particle distribution
with respect to size for the fall period (curves 1 and 2) has the form of a
descending curve with a decrease in concentration toward the region of large
particles. 0n the particle size distribution curves n(r), independently of
weather conditions, two inflections are observed which are centered in the regions
r=0.3 to 1.5 microns and S to 15 microns. This nature of the spectrum can be

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interpreted as a reflection of the superposition of three partial distributions ‘
Junge distribution [8] uith the index B-lo (background distribution) and two
game distributions with nodal radii of 0.4 and 6-8 microns.

nil/)Mmr '

 

Mean particle size distribution spectra during autumn (curve 1 -

V357 m/sec; curve 2 -- VB>7 n/sec) and winter (curve 3)

Key:
s. cm‘3 micron‘1
1). microns

The background distribution is the result of intraatnospheric nucleation and
subsequent coagulation and heterogeneous condensation growth of the particles

from low-volatile components of the gas phase.

For subsequent distributions. the coarselv disperse particle fraction of

mechanical origin -— products of eolation from the soil surface
—- is; described. ' The first of then obviously describes the aerosol

traction vnicn is made up of secondary products of fragmentation of the soil
particles.

37'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFHCMLIBEONLY

Nomalized Correlation

Table 2.

Illllllllllll

mmmmmmmmxxm

00000000001

MmﬂmﬁMM&mm

0000000001

muuwumxww

mmlmmlmmh

wmumﬁwww

 

Normalized Correlation

Table 3.

 

.nluluulnln
”mummmﬁmmmm

0000000000'

mmymnmmmmm
QWODOOOOOI .
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII

mmmnxxnmm
oooooooo‘

mMWﬁmmmm
00000001 .
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII'IIIII

2
nuns

 

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

atrix or

 
       

I oooooooooooooooo-

mmoMMMMMMMMMmmmmmmmxwm
0—0— 0000000000000000001

      

                 
   

mum mwmwwmwmuwumﬁuﬁﬂw

.QQGQQEQEQlelmllmmmL

_
mmmmmmwwmwmuuumunnmm

0..0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.l
mummnuﬁxnummunﬁmnam
OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOWQL

 
     

        
       

  
   

«wamwmmmﬂmamwwﬂﬂw

0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.L

mammﬂﬂﬂﬁmwﬂm&»xwm

                  
                

umumnunnnnuwnuww

Qmmmmmmmmmmmtmmh
mmmmxaxmmmwmmmm
00000000000000...
mmgmmxmmmnmmmm
ooooooooooooogl
anywaﬂnnnnmﬂw

mmmtmmmmmmmmh

mmmmmmmmmmﬁm

oooooooooool

  

  

Matrix 9 rirk

.mxmmmmmmmﬁmmmmmnmmmmm
44 44444440o444444401

    
  

  

   

                    

 

nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn

         
    
        

   

wwwnmmnmmumwmmw

444444444040444 om‘

unnamnuummmamunmmml;

nnnnnnnnnnnnnnn

4444w44400444 40°-
mmmnmmmwmmuouuuuw

4JJ4444444444440-

    

        
             

 

 

uwﬁwmuﬁwnﬂnﬂﬂﬁw

0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.I.

          
  

   

nummum nwwumww

0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.l.

wﬂxmwnﬁmﬂnwﬁw

mmmmmmmmmmmmL

      

‘III'IIIIII‘I'II

ﬂmuﬂﬂﬂﬂmnmﬂm

0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.l.

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It must be noted that the profile that we obtained for a dust storm is distorted
somewhat in the particle size range of r>10 microns, for usually a reduction in
the concentration of particles of the indicated sizes as a result of a decrease
in the aspiration factor with increasing wind velocities is observed in the opto-
electronic spectrometers of the type described in [7] for a number of technical
reasons. For the winter season the particle size distribution n(r) (curve 3) is
described by the Junge distribution with index 8-3 which corresponds to the con-
ditions in temperate latitudes [8].

Seasonal differences in the investigated particle size spectra obviously have a
stable nature and must be explained by two basic causes:

1. Karakumy belongs to the subtropical climatic zone: in the fall, tropical
air predominates here, but in the winter the air from the temperate latitudes
becomes predominant in the given region.

2. A no less important event for understanding the results is the condition of

the underlying surface. In the fall, as a result of sharp heating of the soil in
the presence of high winds, as a result of grinding and fragmentation of the coarse
grains in the eolian sands characteristic of the region of investigation, soil
particles are formed with sizes of less than 50 microns. In the presence of winds
with velocity of V3>4 m/sec. the latter are sucked off the earth's surface and
carried by the ascending currents from a state of rest to motion in the suspended
state [S]. In February-March 1979, the sand surface was wet, and above the wet
surface the sand moved near the surface and did not rise into the air [5], that is,
conditions were observed under which the transformation of the aerosol content of
continental temperate air was not attenuated by the effect of a local particle
source.

The aerosol particle size distribution spectra obtained during the fall period
were compared with the results of measurements under the CENEX-7O program [1] and
also with the data of I. Blifford [9]. It is possible to confirm good correspond-
ence of the compared materials, which, first of all, indicates representativeness
of the presented materials and, secondly, indicates the usefulness of the hypothe-
sis of similarity of processes regulating the state of the dispersed material in
the atmosphere within the limits of like geographic regions.

The normalized correlation matrix of °r1r defining the spectrum sample {n(r)}
for "normal" conditions in the fall is pr sented in Table 2, and for the winter,
in Table 3. The correlation matrix prirk characterizing the spectrum sample
{n(r)} for a dust storm was not calculated in view of its statistical uncertain-
ty. During the [all a quite strong correlation (nr fk'0'9 to 0.2)was noted
between the particle fractions in the range of 0.2<r<§0 microns, which, according
to the authors of [10], is primarily responsible for the visibility under arid
zone conditions. According to our data some decrease in the coefficient 914. 'k
is observed. the interpretation of which is complicated at the present time.

In the range of re20-60 microns the coefficients decrease sharply, approaching
zero. The attenuation of the correlation between the variations of the number

of particles with dimensions of r<10 microns and r>20 microns arises from the
important fact that particles smaller than 10 nicronsform the aerosol fraction,
the variations of which in the region of observation are regulated by the relative
humidity of the air and advective factors, for the aerosol can exist for a long
time in the suspended state. At the same time the particles with dimensions of

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more than 20 microns settle out quickly, and generation of then from the soil
surface is determined by the fluctuations of the thermal and wind conditions of
the layer of the atmsphere m rt to the earth.

For the winter season the correlation between the variations of the number of
particles of different size "35 appreciably weaker with the exception of
the narrw range of particle sizes r80.11-0.78 micron, where pr1m>0.7.

In the range of r>3.2 microns the correlation coefficients prim pass through zero
and become negative. The correlation matrix of the winter season is similar with
respect to its structure to the corresponding correlation matrix for haze in the
spring in temperate latitudes (see, for exuple [10]).

Thus. the seasonal variability of the aerosol size spectra in the arid zone is
determined by the condition of the underlying surface and the circulation condi-
tions in the given geographic region.

In conclusion the authors express their appreciation to G. Naksinov for help in
performing the calculations on a computer and also the members of the GAREx-77
and GAREX-79 expeditions and K. Ya. Kondrat'yev for making it possible to partici-
pate in joint work.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Dmokhovskiy, V. I.; Ivlev, L. 5.; Semova, L. Yu. "Aerosol Measurements in the
Layer of the Atmosphere Next to the Earth in Karakuly," TRUDY 600 [Works of
the Main Geophysics Observatory], No 276, 1972.

2. Ivanov, V. P.; Pilippov, V. L.; Sidorenko, V. 1.; Maslennikov, P. A.
"Statistical Characteristics of the Aerosol Particle Size Spectrum Variations
in the Arid Zone," IZV. AN SSSR. l-‘IZIKA ATIDSF'ERY I OKEANA [News of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean], 1980, in press.

3. Kondrat'yev, K. Ya.; Vasil'yev, 0. 8.; 'Ivlev, L. S. GLOBAL'NYY AEROZOL'NO-
RADIATSIONNYY EKSPERIIENT (GAREKS) [Global Aerosol-Radiation Experiment
(GAREX)]. Obninsk, VNIIGMI-MSD, 1976.

4. Laktionov, A. 6.; Lyubovtseva, Yu. 8.; Kalkevich, M. 5. "Some Statistical
Characteristics of the Aerosol Microstructure in the Layer of the Atmosphere
Next to the Earth," IZV. AN SSSR. FIZIKA AMSFEIH I OKEANS, Vol 9, No 2,

1973.

5. Pctrov, M. P. PUS‘I'YNI ZEHNOGO SHARA [Deserts of the Earth], Leningrad,
Nauka, 1973.

6. Filippov, V. L. "Atmospheric Aerosol Formations. Morphology and Seasonal
Gradations," IZVESTIYA VUZOV. FIZIKA [News of the Institutions of Higher

Learning. Physics], No S, 1976.
7. Filippov, V. L.; Kazakov, V. IL; Hirullyants, S. O. "hunt-902! Aerosol

Classifier," I VSESOYUZNOYE SOVESHCHANIYE PO AMSFBRNOY OP‘I‘IIG [All-Union
Conference on Atmospheric Optics], Part II, Tousk, IOA SO AN SSSR, 1976.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. Junge. H. KHIHICHESKIY SOSTAV I RADIOAKTIVNOST‘ ATPDSFERY [Chemical
Composition and Radioactivity of the Atmosphere], Hoscou, Mir, 1965.

9. Blifford, I. H.; Ringer, L. D. "The Size and Number Distribution of Aerosols
in the Continental Troposphere," J. ATMOS. 801., Vol 26, No 6, 1969.

10. Patterson, E. H.; Gillete, D. A.; Crane, G. H. "The Relation Between

Visibility and Size-Number Distribution Soil Particle," J. APPL. HETBORO‘I...
Vol 15, No 5, 1976.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.316

EFFECT OF STAIION NETWORK DENSITY 0N INTERPOLATED VALUE VARIABILITY
CHARACTERISTICS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No S, May 81 pp 39-47

[Article by Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences R. L. Kagan and
Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences Ye. I. Khlebnikova, Main ﬁeophysics
Observatory, manuscript received 2 Sep 80]

[Text] Abstract: A study is made of the problem of distortion
of meteorological field variability characteristics
during spatial interpolation of them. Evaluations are
made of the underestimation of the dispersion and over-
estimation of correlation for fields of different
statistical structure. The distortions of nongaussian
value ~ distribution are also considered (in the
example of logarithmic-normal distribution). It is
demonstrated that different station network density
in different parts of the earth can lead to significant
nonuniformity of the interpolated value field even in
cases where the investigated field itself is uniform.
Increasing the station network density during instrument
observations can lead to a fictitious secular behavior
of the variability characteristics of meteorological
fields.

when investigating climate variations values of the meteorological elements
interpolated to the nodes of a regular (for example, latitudinal-longitudinal)
grid are often used instead of values actually measured at the stations. Naturally
the variability characteristics of the investigated values must be distorted. The
distortion can be different depending on different factors. including the station
network density. For a comparatively sparse network used when studying climate
variations, underestimation of the dispersion and overestimation of the spatial
correlation of the interpolated values by comparison with the corresponding
characteristics of the initial field, underestimation of the gradients and over-
estimation of the precision of the interpolation, and distortion of the non-
gaussian value distribution must occur.

The possibility of such effects has been pointed out many times (see, for
example. [4, 6]), but the majority of specialists use the data at the grid nodes
under the assumption that in quantitative respects the variability distortion is

43

FOR*0FFKJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comparatively low. In this article we shall try to illustrate how significant
this distortion can be and how important it is to consider this distortion when
invest igat ing cl imate variabili ty .

Nunerical experiments were performed for this purpose in which the following were
given: the statistical structure of the investigated meteorological field,
mutual arrangement of the interpolation nodes and stations at which observation
data are available for the value of f, and also the method of interpolation of
the values from the stations to the grid nodes. Such field characteristics as
the dispersion (02) and spatial correlation (r) were determined by these data,
evaluation of which with an interpolation of the type of

l
= 2 P‘f o
It ,,, a h (1)
where fk are the values at the stations,

fi is the result of the interpolation at the i-th node of the grid.

p' is the weight of the interpolation,

k
can be performed by the following simple formulas:
n I n
" I
'11-'57, (IFIIIEIP‘.M’“ + 1,'E.p‘,pL ) . (2)
”—3-" ' W'é 'r (3)
°.—"’ — 2 P‘.P{'n" '1 (Pa .
" .I’ III III!

Here n2 is the measure of the errors in the initial data (see, for example [3]),

rki is the correlation coefficient between the actual observation data at stations
k and 9,,

£1; is the correlation coefficient between the interpolated values at the nodes
{ind j,

52 is the dispersion of the interpolated values.

These fomulus pertain to the case of a uniform, isotropic field which, generally
speaking, only roughly corresponds to reality, especially for large-scale areas.
however, this is not basic; the indicated estimates can be performed also for a
nonuniform field, but in the given step it is more significant to show that in

the case where the actual initial field is uniform, the field of the interpolated
values turns out to be nonuniform.

An estimate was also made of the distortion resulting from interpolation of the
nature of the distribution of nongaussian meteorological fields. A statistical
simulation of the values of the meteorological field at the stations and at the
nodes of the given grid was performed for this purpose with subsequent estimation
of the distribution of the interpolated values and its moments and comparison of
these characteristics with the characteristics of the initial meteorological field.

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the described experiments, station networks of different density were simu-
lated. Here. along with the reference station network, for which a regular
square network was given with grid spacing H, a study was also made of irregular
networks characterized by the same average station density with respect to area
for which the coordinates of the stations were simulated by introducing random
shifts in the reference network coordinates. Inasmuch as the characteristics of
the interpolated values depend on how close the interpolation node is to the
reference station, and in this sense. the interpolated value field obviously is
nonuniform, in order to discover the regular differences of this field from the
initial field we performed estimates for a group of dense interpolation nodes
with subsequent deterndnation of the average characteristics. The calculations
were performed as applied to correlation functions characterizing the fields of
different meteorological elements. Two procedures were used as the interpolation
algorithms: optimal interpolation, for the application of which data are needed
on the statistical structure of the initial field, and bilinear interpolation

not requiring that information be supplied, for which the field is formally
approximated in the vicinity of the node by a first-degree polynomial with respect
to each of the coordinates. Interpolation to the grid nodes was carried out by
the data from four stations, for the selection of which the newest station was
faund in each of the quadrants.

Let us present some results obtained for the case of an expOnential correlation
function of the type

r ex "Eﬁﬁ.
(9)8 P( (4)

where c is the distance between points,
90 is the field correlation scale.

The estimates show that the interpolated value field dispersion is significantly
underestimated by comparison with the initial field dispersion. In the case of
optimal interpolation for distances between stations not exceeding 200. this
underestimation is approximated well by a function of the type

§=eu _ wax: —0.23H/p.). (5)

Thus, for h-Zpo the mean square deviation of the interpolated values 0 turns out
to be half the true values of 0. Comparison of the two interpolation nethods
shows that for hilinear interpolation when H50 underestimation turns out to be
approximately the same as for optimal interpolation. For a sparser network

(">no) hilinear interpolation understimates the field dispersion less than optimal
interpolation, which in some sense compensates for its lower accuracy.

65

INJR OFIWCIAL USEZCquY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘ Table 1. Correlation r(p) of Interpolated Values for Different
Methods of Interpolation and Values of the Measure of the
Observation Errors n2

(to) - exp (— pin): H - 0.” M

l (I asses or H)

Cnotod nu-

"ems-syn

 

Key:
1. (in fractions of H)
2. Interpolation method
3. Optimal
a. Bilinear

Values of the correlation functions of the variables obtained by optimal and
bilinear interpolation of the initial field are presented in Table 1 for the
given grid size of a regular station network a, for presence and absence of
observation errors. From these data it can easily be seen how much the interpo-
lated value correlation is overestimated by comparison with the initial field
correlation. where the optimal interpolation distorts the correlation function
more than the bilinear interpolation. However, the difference of the correlation
functions of the values obtained by different nethods of interpolation, is small
by comparison with the deviation fron the true correlation function. The struc-
tural characteristics of the interpolated values also depend comparatively little
on the measure of the initial data errors. Along with overestimation of the
correlation as a result of interpolation. the nature of the correlation function
changes significantly for small spacings: in contrast to the initial function.
the correlation function of the interpolated values is characterized by differ-
entiability at zero, which can lead to high distortion of the estimates of the
field difference characteristics.

As has already been noted, the estimates of the distortions of the statistical
structural characteristics of the field as a result of interpolation were made
also for nonuniform arrangement of the stations. It was discovered that with
averaging over large territories the statistical structural characteristics of
dx-interpolated values calculated by the data from nonuniformly arranged stations
turn out to be more distorted than the sane characteristics obtained by a
regular station network.

#6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The calculations performed for the correlation functions of the type differing
from (6) lead to conclusions analogous to those presented above.

Table 2. Distortion as a Result of Interpolation of the

Distribution of a Logarithmically-Normal Value (mean equal to 0;
un-uﬂ-hhhﬁ-h)

nupoqusuasauna

Qymn

 

Key:
1. Interval 5. Standard
2. Differential distribution function 6. Asynmetry coefficient
3. True values 7. Excess coefficient
6. After interpolation

Some estimates of the distribution of the interpolated values are presented in
Table 2 for a logarithmically normal value with exponentially decreasing correla-
tion coefficient (let us note that this model in many cases satisfactorily
describes the statistical structure of the precipitation totals). From a compari-
son of this distribution with the true distribution it is obvious that the
spatial interpolation leads not only to underestimation of the dispersion, but
also to sharp distortion of the nature of the investigated value itself, making

it rapidly approach normal.

The estimates show that the optimal interpolation underestimates the field dis-
persion more than the bilinear interpolation. just as it does with other methods
of interpolation. Accordingly, the question arises of to what degree it is
expedient to use it for various purposes. However, it turns out that it has a
number of advantages by comparison with other methods of interpolation. Let us
only point out that there is a unique relation between a and the mean square rela-
tive interpolation error to described by the simple expression

a=V_1--:. (a)

The value of c is calculated automatically during the process of optimal interpola-
tion. and the singularities of its spatial distribution have been studied quite

well for various meteorological fields [1. 3]. This permits estimation of the
geographic distribution of the measure of underestimation of the standard in

various parts of the earth for many meteorological elements, using the previously
performed estimates of the accuracy of the optimal interpolation.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Quantilur've estimates of the distortion of the variability characteristics for
fields of Specific meteorological elements depend both on the form of the correla-
tion function and on the relation between the density of the station network and
the correlation scale. For example, the spatial correlation function of exponen-
tial type (b) is characteristic for a number of meteorological elements, including
the precipitation totals, radiation, total ozone content, for the monthly values
of which the correlation scale is several hundreds of kilometers, about 1000 km
and 1600 km, respectively. As applied to the precipitation field the estimates
show that in more populousareaSHMerethe average distance R between precipitation
gauging stations is about 50 kn, the underestimation is within the limits of 102.
For sparsely populated areas of the USSR, for which a value of H2150 kn is
characteristic, this underestimation is different for different areas and in dry
regions, it reaches values of 20-301. The total radiation has significantly
greater connectedness: inasmuch as, however, the actinometric station network is
much sparser than the precipitation measuring network, even in continental regions
there are broad expanses for which the underestimation of o exceeds 202. The
situation is still worse in the oceans in which the actinometric network is in
practice nonexistent. For total monthly ozone contents in Western Europe where
the distance between stations H is about 600 ha, the underestimation of o is also
within the limits of 101. For values of “-800 km, characteristic of the arena—
metric network of the USSR, it is about 202. For “-2000 km, which approximately
corresponds to the station density in the North Atlantic, the underestimation of
a is about 402. For such regions, of course, the overestimation of the correla-
tion function is very large.

 

Figure 1. Measure of the underestimation of the standard (a)
for the mean annual air temperature.
I) «"0.6; 2) n»0.95.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Estimates analchus to those presented can also be made for other correlation
functions. In all cases significant dependence of the measure of underestimation
of the mean square deviation a on the station network density is characteristic.
Inasmuch as the general nature of the network distribution of stations that
measure various meteorological elements on the earth is approximately identical,
the geographic distribution of the measure of underestimation n for the interpo-
lated values of different elements have analogous form: namely. regions of the
largest values of a close to one are located in the populated areas of Western
Europe, the European territory of the USSR, North America, and Japan. In addi-
tion, there are broad expanses in the polar and equatorial zones and in the oceans
characterized by small values of o, 501 and less.

As an example, a distribution map of the value of o is presented in Figure. l

for the mean annual air temperature constructed on the basis of estimates per-
formed by K. H. Lugina at the State Hydrological Institute of the accuracy of
optimal interpolation by the data from a network of 776 stations in the northern
hemisphere used to investigate climate variations [2]. On this map the differ-
ences can easily be seen between the values of a in the different regions of the
earth. It is natural that for meteorological elements with less connectedness
these differences are more expressed.

Thus, using the data at the grid nodes to estimte the variability of the meteor-
ological parameters without the necessary consideration of the properties of the
interpolated values and different station network density in the various regions,
it is possible to arrive at a false conclusion regarding the spatial differences
of the variability characteristics comparable with respect to order of magnitude
to the actually observed values.

It is possible to expect to an equal degree that the variation of the station
network density (and it increases monotonically during the instrument observation
period) must lead to regular variation of the variability characteristics of the
interpolated values with tine. Let us present two examples giving a quantitative
representation of how significant this effect can be.

Let the spatial structure of the field be described by an exponential correla-
tion fmction (4). Then the measure of the underestimation of the variability a
is described by an approximate formula (5). Knowing the average network density
for different time periods. it is possible to estimate the behavior of a.

Lot. for example. the nunber of stations be doubled in some region during the
investigated time period. This appears to be quite realistic for regions with
a sparse network. In this case. at the be nning of the observation period the
average spacing between stations was "0' 2H; correspondingly, the measure of the
underestimation of the variability was

.,=1-V§(l—a)- (7)

Hence. it is easy to see that for regions in which n-0.7 at the present time,
doubling the number of stations led to an increase of 201 in this value; for
0-0.6, the increase was 1:02; for (1-0.7, it was 702. Of course, these estimates
are quite rough inasmuch as formula (5) is insufficiently exact for such values
of a, but the formula does permit estimation of the order of the corresponding

anomaly variations.
1.9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Still greater variation of the station network density can be felt in the
characteristics of the gradient of the interpolated value which in practice is
estimated as the difference in the values of the element at different points.
Specific values of the possible underestimation of the gradient characteristics
depend on a number of conditions, including the method of interpolation. Let us
consider, for example, a uniform linear interpolation

?(x)=fo+(fl"fo";r (8)

between values of f0 and £1 at the stations located a distance H from each other.
Hhen determining the gradient by the interpolated values at the nodes x1 and x2
located at a distance h in the interval begween_statigns, the true value of the
gradient F(h) is replaced by the value of T(h)-f(x2)-f(x1)-(h/H) (fl-f ). In this
case the measure of the underestimation of the mean square deviation 0? the
gradient can be estimated bv the formula

 

7m _ k / 1771711

"""‘-‘or.., " V TtTm (9)
Some estimates made by formula (9) are presented in Table 3 as applied to the
mean monthly and mean annual air temperature when using data on the spatial corre-
lation of this element obtained by K. H. Lugina [7]. From the table it is obvious
that for the regions where the distance between stations exceeds by several times
the distance for which the gradient is estimated, its value even for this ideal-
ized interpolation scheme and with such a bound field as the air temperature
field, can be underestimated by more than a factor of two. Nevertheless, for
certain regions such large distances between stations are a reality.

Table 3. Measure of the Underestimation ur( ) of the Air
Temperature Anomaly Gradient Calculated for 1888 km

 

2000 2500 3000 6000

H,km 1000 1500

Mean temperature for 1.00 0.87 0.78 0.70 0.6a 0.54
the month of

January
Mean annual tempera- 1.00 0.83 0.73 0.63 0.59 0.49

ture

Let us note, for example, that for the zone north of 70° north latitude in this
century it is possible to expect an increase in the interpolated value anomaly
gradients by more than twofold if we consider that at the beginning of the
century regular observations were performed in this area only by three stations,
and they were located around the periphery of the polar basin, and at the
present time there are almost 100 such stations. It is possible to expect a
significant increase in the temperature gradients for the instrument observation
period as a result of an increase in the station network density also in the
equatorial zone. In temperate latitudes where the increase in station network
density in noticeably less, the growth of the gradients as a result of this fac-
tor must be comparatively small.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the light of these arguments, the data presented in [5] on the variations of

the values of the air temperature anomly gradient modulus in different latitudinal
zones for the 1891-1976 period calculated by the data at the nodes of the latitude-
longitude grid, are of interest. From Figure 2, in which the graphs of the
gradient standards of the mean nonthly temperature anonalies (averaged for the
year) taken from [5] are reproduced. it is obvious that an increase in the gradients
with tine is characteristic of all zones, but it is most significant (by several

times) for the Arctic Basin (the vicinity of 80' north latitude) and near the
equator (20° north latitude).

I, 2‘91.
u I
a:
1.5 u
z:
5:
I
J
I t:
J I
J
u
+
2 — 1

once,

W
I!” 1!!! 190! I!” I!”

Figure 2. Standard (°C/10' meridian) of the anomaly gradient
modulus of the mean monthly air temperature averaged for the
year (according to the data of [5]).

l -- initial time series; 2 —- result of approximation by ;.
third-degree polynomial
Key:
n. 20° north latitude

Without rejecting the possibility of the existence of a trend, let us note that the
discovered behavior of the gradients. generally speaking. can be explained by
variation of the station network density over the course of the investigated
period. It is obvious that to draw a conclusion about the actual increase in
climate variability (or, let us say, about intensification of the meridional

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transport) based On such secular behavior of the anomaly gradients, a careful

estimate and exclusion of that part of the secular behavior which is determined by
causes of a procedural nature. are required.

In conclusion, let us note that the authors are far from stating that the presented
estimates are accurate and can be used for direct correction of the characteristics
obtained at the grid nodes. The variety of interpolation schemes used in practice
is too great, and the structural peculiarities of different meteorological fields
are too complex for it to be possible to fit them in the very simple schemes that
we have used. If, however. even the order of the obtained values corresponds to
reality, it is necessary to consider the investigated factor in climate studies.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Belousov, S. I... et al. OBRABOI'KA OPERATIVNOY WETEOROIDGICHESKOY INFORMATSII
S POHOSHCH'YU ELEKTRONNYKH VYCHISLITEL'NYKH HASHIN [Computer Processing of
rwtcorological Data], Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1969.

2. Borzcnkova, I. 1.; Vinnikov, K. Ya.; Spirina, L. P.; Stekhnovskiy, D. I.
“Air Temperature Variation in the Northern Hemisphere from 1881 to 1975."
METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA [Meteorology and Hydrology], No 9, 1977.

3. Borisenkov, Ye. P. "Physical-Statistical Methods of Analysis and Overestimation
of the Heteorologicai Fields," TRUDY AANII [works of the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute], Vol 263, 1963.

4. Gruza. C. V.; Polyak. I. 1.; Shakhmeyster, V. A. "Time-Space Statistical
Structure of the Mean Monthly Geopotential of the 500 millibar Surface,"
METEOROLOGIA I GIDROLOCIYA, No lo, 1979.

5. Gruza, G. V.; Ran'kova, E. Ya. DANNYYE 0 STRUKTURE I IZHENCHIVOSTI KLIHATA
[Data on the Structure and Variability of Climate], Obninsk, VNIIGMI-HTSD,
1979.

6. I’olyak, I. I. PIETODY ANALIZA SLUCHAYNYKH PRUI‘SESSOV I FOLEY V KLIMATOLOCII
[Methods of Analyzing Random Processes and Fields in Climatology], Leningrad,
Cidrometeoizdat. 1979.

7. STATISTICHESKAYA STRUKTURA PETEOROLOGICHESKIKH FOLEY [Statistical Structure of
Meteorological Fields], Budapest, 1976.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.52+630:551.5

RELATION 0F MEAN ANNUAL VALUES 0? THE ALBEDO AND SHORTWAVB RADIATION BALANCE TO‘THE
SAME INDICES IN EARLY SPRING

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No S, May 81 pp 58-52

[Article by Doctor of Biological Sciences Kh. G. Tooming, Estonian Agroneteorologi-
cal Laboratory of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Agricultural
Microbiology. manuscript received 16 Sep 80]

[Text] Abstract: A close relation was detected between the
mean annual albedo and shortwave radiation balance and
the albedo and shortwave balance in snow-covered areas
in the early spring. The parameters of the regression
equations of these relations are presented.

The annual behavior of the albedo of the underlying surface has been well investi-
gated by Soviet scientists [2, A, S]. Albedo distribution naps have been compiled
for the territory of the USSR in various seasons, and the mean annual albedo has
been established as a function of the tine of existence of the snow cover [1, 3, 4].
0n the basis of data from Tartu station we found that the mean annual albedo depends
on the albedo of the early spring months -- March and April [6].

At a number of points in the USSR the total and reflected radiation have been con-
tinuoualy recorded for a number of years, and at Tartu station these values have
also been integrated. Thus, we have the possibility of a more detailed study of
the albedo questions. In this article we have set as our goal the discovery of the
dependence of the lean annual albedo on the albedo in the early spring season at
certain points in the USSR and also the dependence of the mean annual shortwave
radiation balance (SURE), that is, the shortwave radiation absorbed by the under-
lying surface in a year, on the shortwave radiation absorbed in the early spring
season.

In this paper the mean annual albedo and the albedo for the early spring season are
defined as the ratio of the corresponding suns of the reflected radiation to the
sum of the total radiation. The shortwave radiation balance is defined as the
difference in the sums of the total and reflected radiation.

The relation we detected between the mean annual albedo and the spring albedo is
expressed by the following regression equation:

Ar --zr + Ry]! (A. -I.)o (1)

53

FINI¢NHNCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

"' W 4" Mb)

Figure 1. "can annual albedo Ar as a function of the early
spring albedo AB.

1 -- Moscow march-April), 2 -- Voyeykovo (March-April),
3‘" Irkutsk (February-March). lo - Verkhoyansk (April-Hay),
5 —— Petropavlovak-na-Kamchatke (March—April), 6 - Tartu
(Hatch-April), 7 -- Borispol' (Kiev) (February-March),
8 -- Kishinev (February-Hatch).
Key:
a. Ar
b. An

where Ar is the mean annual albedo.

Kr is the man perennial value of the mean annual albedo,

AB is the albedo in the early spring season,

in is the mean perennial value of the early spring albedo.

“NJ/x is.the regression coefficient.

The parameters of this equation for certain places are presented in Table 1.

By the data from the Verkhoyansk, Voyeykovo and Tartu stations (Figure 1, Table 1)
it turns out that the relation of Ar to A3 is the closest, especially in northern
regions. For these stations the dependence of the neon annual albedo on the )‘arch—

April albedo is in practice functional (1-0.92 to 0.96, p-0.99). For ‘l‘artu station
the mean annual albedo can be calculated by the equation

4,-0.274-03! (Alum —0.39) . (2)

for Voyeykovo

A,-0.25+0.l9 (Allmv 4.“). (3)

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

('0 r Vo rkhoyansk

1,-0.35+0.30 (Ann-v -0.50) . (4)

The relation of the mean annual albedo to the March-April albedo is also close by
the data from the stations at Petropavlovsk-na-Kamchatke, Kuybyshev. Roscow and
Arkhangel'sk (Table 1). Since beyond the Arctic Circle in Verkhoyansk and in
Kamchatka. the snow goes off in May, a close relation is noted between the mean
annual albedo and the April-May albedo. The relation is also comparatively good
by the data from the stations at Kishinev, Borispol' (Kiev) and Onsk. A relation
of Ar to the February-March albedo is noted at these stations. The relation is
weaker in Irkutsk, Vladivostok and Tashkent (Table 1), where the snow disappears in

February at the last-mentioned station, and a relation is noted between Ar and the
January-February albedo.

Table 1. Parameters of the Regression Equation (1), the Correlation
Coefficients r and their Probability Levels p for Certain Points in

 

the USSR
No of _
Station years Ar Period ‘8 Ry/x r p
of ob-
servation
Verkhoyansk 12 0.35 April-Hay 0.50 0.30 0.96 0.99
Arkhangcl'sk 12 0.28 March-April 0.48 0.18 0.77 0.99
Yakutsk 11 0.31 The same 0.57 0.16 0.61 0.95
Voycykovo 12 0.25 " 0.41 0.19 0.93 0.99
Tartu 26 0.27 " 0.39 0.21 0.92 0.99
Moscow 11 0.30 " 0.43 0.20 0.70 0.95
Petropavlovsk-na- 13 0.33 " 0.53 0.27 0.83 0.99

Kamchatke
Petropavlovsk-na-

Kamchatke 13 0.33 April-May 0.31 0.30 0.72 0.99
Kuybyshev 14 0.24 March-April 0.30 0.17 0.81 0.99
Vladivostok 12 0.26 The same 0.25 0.23 0.50 0.90

(Sad-gored)

Omsk 12 0.25 February-March 0.63 0.16 0.75 0.99

Irkutsk 23 0.20 The sale 0.32 0.21 0.62 0.99
Borispol' (Kiev) 11 0.23 " 0.43 0.09 0.77 0.99
Kishinev 24 0.19 " 0.28 0.11 0.78 0.99
Tashkent 24 0.24 January- '0.37 0.07 0.41 0.95

February

It is possible to see that the relation of the mean annual albedo to the early
spring albedo in southern areas is weaker than in northern areas (Table 1. Figure 1).
As a rule. in the northern regions the sensitivity of the mean annual albedo with
respect to early spring albedo is higher than in the southern regions. This is
indicated by the high slope of the straight lines and higher regression factor of
the dependence of A? on in Verkhoyansk, Voyeykova, Tartu and in Petropavlovsk-
na-Kamchatke by comparison with these indices for Kishinev, Borispol' (Kiev) and
Tashkent (Figure 1, Table 1). It is also possible to note (Table 1) that the

55
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regression factor of the relation Ar'f(AII+II ) is higher for Siberia (Irkutsk,
Omsk) than for the European territory of the 558R (Borispol'. Kishinev).

The main cause for the relation between the mean annual albedo and the early spring
albedo consists in the fact that the total and reflected radiation some in the
early spring months are comparatively high. The total reflected radiation can
vary within large limits depending on the duration of the snow cover and its
reflectivity. The variations of the albedo in the winter and fall months do not
have great significance in the formation of the annual albedo, for the total and
reflected radiation sums are small in these months. In the summer and fall months

the albedo of the grass cover varies comparatively little and has no significant
influence on the variation of the annual albedo.

The shortwave radiation absorbed in a year. that is, the suns. is in a compara-
tively satisfactory correlation with the absorbed radiation for the early spring

season. The regression equation of the mean annual SHRB with the early spring SHRB
is the following:

8" = E! + R," (8‘. —§Is)' I (5)

where Bkr is the mean annual SWRB.

Epr is the mean perennial value of the mean annual SHRB,

BkB is the SHRB for the early spring season,

3&8 is the mean perennial value of the SHRB for the early spring season.
Ry/x is the regression factor.

The correlation of the values of the SVRB is close in certain regions (Table 2).

For example. in Verkhoyansk and Petropavlovsk-na-Kamchatke the relation of the mean
annual SWRB to the suns for the early spring season is also closer and more signif-
icant (r-0.68 to 0.73, p-0.9S to 0.99) than the relation of the mean annual SHRB

to the annual total radiation sums (r-0.30 to 0.40, p<0.90). The correlation
between the values of the SWRB is also close in Borispol' (r-0.72, p80.99) (Table 2).
At the rest of the locations. the relation of the mean annual SHRB to the SURE of
the early spring season is somewhat weaker(Table 2). In Tartu, for example, the
mean annual SHRB depends more on the arrival of the total radiation (r-0.77,

p-0.09) than on the suns of the early spring season (r-0.61, p-0.99).

in the territory of the USSR in a number of regions (Voyeykovo, Tartu, Moscow,
Petropavlovsk-na-Knmchatke). the relation of the mean annual SURE to the SHRB of
the early spring season (Figure 2) can be expressed by a common regression equation
for all these points

Bgt=60|0 + 1'2 (B‘IIH'V —' 9’2)‘ (6)

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-TCIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Parameters of the Regression Equation (2), Correlation
Coefficients r and their Probability Levels p for Certain Points

 

of the USSR
No of
years _ _
Station of ob- Period R r p

servations Bkr Bkn y/x
Verkhoyansk 12 51.9 April-May 13.0 1.05 0.68 0.95
Arkhangel'sk 12 50.5 March-April 6.7 0.99 0.34 0.90
Yakutsk 11 61.8 The same 8.2 0.56 0.42 0.90
Voycykovo 12 58.5 " 8.1 1.37 0.54 0.95
Tartu 26 60.4 " 9.8 1.14 0.61 0.99
MoscOw 11 58.5 " 9.0 1.00 0.41 0.90
Petropavlovsk-na- 13 62.1 " 9.7 1.03 0.73 0.99
Kamchatke
Kuybyshcv 14 74.1 " 12.5 1.05 0.49 0.90
Omsk 12 70.5 February-March 4.3 1.77 0.40 0.90
Irkutsk 23 79.5 The same 8.9 2.63 0.54 0.99
Borispol' (Kiev) 11 72.2 " 6.0 1.72 0.72 0.99
Kishinev 24 83.6 " 7.8 1.52 0.58 0.99

The regression equations (Table 2) have some forecasting significance. They pernit
approximate prediction of the values of the mean annual SHRB in the early spring.

The variations of the mean annual albedo and the SHRB of the early spring season
must have some climatological significance. A detailed role of the albedo and the
Suns of the early spring season during climate formation is difficult to establish
as a result of the predominant significance of advective heat exchange in the major-
ity of regions. We have been able to detect only a weak, but significant correla-
tion of the sums of the effective telperatures before the end of June and July with
the early spring albedo.

a. not/m‘

   

5'
5 7' '1. "OI/W (3)

Figure 2. Mean annual SHRB Bk as a function of the suns in the
early spring Bk . F
a -- Verkhoynnsa (April—Hay); b - Tartu (1); Petropavlovsk-na-Kamchate
(2), Voyeykovo (3). rbscow (4) (March-April); c - Borispol' (Kiev)
(February-March); d -- Kishinev (February-March)
Key:
A. nk_, kca1/cn2
B. Bk'. kcnl/cm2
B

57
FINIC”3H(1A1.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, for Tartu, the regression equation will be

1.2:» 5°C) = 520- 290 (Mm - 0.39); r - 0.52. p = 0.99; (7)

for Petropavlovsk-na—Kamchatke
vzutt> 5° C) - 335 —250(A.v.v — 0.31); r = 0,40. pa: 0,90, (8)
2 :(> 10° C) = as — 220(A|v+v - 0.31); r = 6.45. p = 0,90. <9)

At more southerly points, it was not possible to detect significant correlation of
the early spring albedo with the thermal conditions of atbsequent months.

Conclusions

1. A relation of the mean annual albedos and SHRB to the same indices in the
early spring is noted in all snow-covered parts of the USSR, but it is more sharply
noted in the northern regions.

2. Knowledge of the early spring albedo permits the mean annual albedo to be
predicted well in the northern regions, and knowledge of the suns in the early
spring makes it possible to judge the mean annual SHRB satisfactorily.

3. In some northern areas of the USSR. the early spring albedo has some influence
on the thermal conditions of the subsequent spring and early aummr months.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Berlyand, 1‘. 6. "Radiation and Heat Balance of the European Territory of the
UFSR," TRUDY 600 [Works of the Main Geophysics Observatory], No 10(72), 19108.

2. audyko, M. I. TEPLOVOY BALANS ZEWOY POVERIOINOSTI [Heat Balance of the
Earth's Surface], Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1953.

3. Yefimova, M. A. RADIATSIONNYYE FAKTORY PRODUKTIVNOSTI RASTIIEL'NOGO POKROVA
Radiation Factors of Productivity of the Vegetation Cover], Leningrad,
Gidmmeteoizdat, 1977.

lo. Kondrat'yev, K. Ya. AKTINOIﬁ-ZTRIYA [Actinometry], Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat,
1965.

5. Mulchenberg, V. V. "Albedo of the Underlying Surface of the Territory of the
Soviet Union," TRUDY 660, No 139, 1963.

6. Tooming. H. "Daily and Seasonal Variations of the Albedo of Some Natural
Surfaces in the Estonian SSR," ISSLBDOVANIYA P0 PIZIKE AMERY [Research in
the Physics of the Atmosphere], No 2, 1960.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC S51.(521+576)
BRIGH'INESS VARIATIONS 0F CLOUD FIBLN "HEN OBSERVED 5301‘. DIFFERENT ALTITUDES
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLDGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 53-58

[Article by Candidate of Technical Sciences L. I. Chapurskiy, Leningrad. manuscript
received 9 Oct 80]

[Text] Abstract: The isophots of cloud fields are presented
as applied to observation conditions from altitudes up
to 9 and above 36,000 km. It is demonstrated that for
observations from high altitudes the brightness of the
global cloud fields varies within smaller limits than
the sine of the solar angle at viewable points of the
visible earth's disc as a result of nonuniform altitude
of their upper boundaries and structural peculiarities.

When solving certain problems connected with remote sounding of the atmosphere, it
is necessary to estimate the dynamic brightness range of clouds falling into the
field of view of the equipment located at different distances from the earth's
surface. The cloud brightness depends on the optical thickness of the clouds, the
albedo of the underlying surface, the observation configuration, radiation absorp-
tion and scattering effects in the atmosphere above the clouds and other factors
[7]. In this paper a study is made of the influence of indicatrix effects on the
formation of the brightness fields of clouds observed from different altitudes
with different values of the solar radiation scattering angle y. The angle 1
depends on the sun altitude angle at the observed point on the cloud surface h3
(or the zenith distance at the sun i-90°-h¢). the azimuthal sun angle ¢"included
between the sun vertical and the viewing (scanning) plane and also on the angle of
the zenith distance of the direction of the observer 9 with apex at the viewed
point of the cloud. In the case of a "flat“ cloud, the angle 0 is equal to the
nadir scanning angle.

In reference [2] it is demonstrated that for solar angles of more than 30° the
variations of the observed cloud brightness as a function of the solar angle
angle for 0-0 are well described by the theoretical _brightness indicatrix of
stratiformis presented in reference [7]. Pork _<30’according to the experimental
data the claud brightnesses exceed the analogous values obtained when using the
tabulated data from reference [7]. It must be noted that in [2] the results of
integral measurements by a television unit based on the LI-IoOB tube and measure-
ment data using the SPI-ZM spectrometer installed on the 11-18 flying laboratory
of the Main Geophysics Observatory were used to check the theoretical model of

Ye. M. Feygel'son.

$9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The spectral brightness indlcntrices of cloud fields were measured in flights in
the years of 1967-1972 [5. 6]. The flight data were used to construct bright-

m-m: Indiratricc: for slraiifurmis. Figure 1 shows stratiforms isophocs
in the visible range of the spectrum for observations from altitudes up to 9 kn.

0n the graphs in Figure 1 the brightnesses for different angles 9.¢£;and three
values of the solar angle ﬁg; are normalized with respect to the brightness in the
nadir. From the figure it rollows that for lowsolarand scattering angles close to
mirror, the brightness coefficients of the clouds exceed a value of 6, for the
brightness coefficients in the nadir for these sun altitudes are on the average
from 0.6 to 0.7. In the near infrared region of the spectrum and also when observing
crystalline clouds the brightness anisotropy of their upper boundary can be one and
a half times more than in the visible range of the spectrum. The indicated
indicatrix effects are one of the causes of the experimentally known increase in
cloud albedo with a decrease in sun altitude above the horizon [10].

The relative variations of cloud brightness in the nadir are presented in reference
[9] as a function of the solar angle in the visible and near IR regions of the
spectrun. An analysis of the materials of this paper shows that in the spectral
ranges of 0.4 to 0.75 micron and 1.35 to 2.55 microns the cloud brightness in the
nadir is proportional to the cosine of the zenith distance of the sun. but for hgj<|0°

deviations from the cosine function are observed in the direction of an increase
in brightness.

 

Figure l. Isophots of the upper stratiformis boundary according
to the SPI-ZM data on a wavelength of 0.55 micron during observe-
tions from altitudes up to 9 kn

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The angular structure of the brightness distribution of cloud fields with vertical
development differs frOm the brightness distribution of the upper boundary of
stratiformis presented in Figure 1. Just as when observing vegetation cover [6],
in the case of cumulus, the maximum brightnesses are observed for azimuthal angles
of the sun close to 180°. As an example, the spectral brightness coefficients are
presented in Table l for developed cumulus in the nadir and on different azimuths

for a scanning angle 0-75' by measurements from an altitude of 7.2 km on 8 July 1971
during the CENEx-7l expedition [6].

Table 1. Spectral Brightness Coefficients of Cumulus by Measurements
Using the SPI—ZM for a 5013; Angle of 59'

 

Key:
1. Wavelengths, microns
2. Azimuthal sun angles, deg

The presence of vertical components of the upper cloud boundary (altitude variations
of the upper boundary) leads to the fact that the actually observed brightness of
the cloud fields, as a rule, differs from the isophots presented in Figure 1. For
calculations of the brightness of stratiformis more frequently observed in polar
regions and in the winter over the continents, it is necessary first of all to con-
sider the solar angle at the viewed point, and for calculations of the brightness
of cumulus fields which arecharacteristic of tropical and temperate latitudes in
the daytime, it is necessary to consider the scattering angles of the solar radia-
tion from the surface of the cloud formations not arranged horizontally. The
latter fact, as will be demonstrated below, is significant when calculating the
brightness of claud fields observed from great distances above the earth's surface.

Figure 2 shows the variations in brightness of the stratiformis uniformly covering
the entire earth as applied to observation conditions from an altitude of 36,000 km
above the earth's surface. The curves in Figure 2 are constructed using the results
of aircraft measurements of cloud brightness indicstrices using the SPI-ZM
spectrometer. for three values of the phase angle A: 0, 45, 90°. The angle A
corresponds to the angle with the apex at the center of the earth included between
the directions of the sun and the vehicle from which the observation is made. From
the above-described definitions it follows that for A-O' at all points of the
visible disc of the earth o=180°, and the equal solar angle lines (cosines of the
zenith distance of the sun) are concentric circles. For A-90‘ the lines cos i-const
appear to be straight lines. When constructing the isophots of Figure 2 attenuation
of the reflected signals in the atmosphere shove the clouds was not considered.

61

INDR 0511(1AL USEICNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Stratiformis isophots on wavelengths of 0.55 micron
(1) and 1.6 micron (2) according to aircraft measurement data

using the SPl-ZH as applied to observation conditions from an

altitude of 36,000 km.

From Figure 2 it follows that the equal brightness lines of stratiformis constructed
by the experimental data are located on the whole in accordance with the direction
0" the equal solar angle lines. For AI90',-03=0°, the isophots are at an
angle to the lines cos i-const as a result of the appearance of indicatrix effects
at scattering angles close to mirror angles. For a-45° in the region of cosines of
the zenith distance of the sun from 0.2 to 0.4 there are sharp bends in the iso-
phots caused by altitude nonuniformities of the upper cloud boundary and errors in
determining the scattering angles.

Analogous graphs were constructed using the brightness indicatrices of stratiformis
presented in [7]; here the isophots lay strictly parallel to the cos i-const lines
for all values of the phase angle A. However, for 0.2<cos i<0.8, the theoretical
calculations gave a significantly larger range of variation of the brightness than
the experimental data. The graphs for the variation of the mean values of the
stratiformis as a function of the cosine of the sun's zenith angle at the viewed
point according to experimental and theoretical data are presented in Figure 3 for
three values of the angles A Fron the figure it follows that for phase angles of
45 and 90° and all values of cos i. and also for A-0°, cos 150.6 the measured
brightness is proportional to the cosine of the sun's zenith angle. The brightness
variations. depending on thesolarangle variations, obtained by the calculation
results, are not subject to the cosine law. At the same time the calculated data

coincide with the measurement results for A-O°, i>60°.
62

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

' 5’ as"

Figure 3. Brightness of the stratifornis upper boundary on a
wavelength of 0.55 micron as a function of the cosine of the
zenith distance of the sun according to the SPI-ZH data (1-3)
and the data from reference [7] (4-6) for different values of
the phase mgle of the sun as applied to observation conditions
from an altitude of 36,000 km.
A-0° (1, lo), A-45° (2. S) and a-90° (3, 6).

Key:

8' Brel

It is obvious that if the results of aircraft measurements of cumulus. part of
which are presented in Table l. were used to construct the graphs of the isophots
of the upper cloud boundaries, the range of variation of the cloud brightness with
respect to the visible disc of the earth for all phase angles would be less than in
the case of the stratiformis observation [8}.

The latter thesis is confirmed by the results of photometric measurements of the
earth obtained from on—board the "Zond-S" interplanetary station on 21 September 1968.
for a phase angle of 15-63“ froa a distance of about 90,000 In! [3, 4]. In

accordance with the measurements, the brightness of the part of the visible disc of
the earth illuminated by the sun varied by sixfold. where the sea surface had

minimal brightness, and the cloud fields, maximum. Analogous results were obtained

during complex studies of this survey performed at Leningrad State University
imeni A. A. Zhdanov [1]. Table 2 shows the results of photometric measurements of

images of claud fields located in equatorial latitudes. The maximum brightness was
obtained from clouds located within the limits from 0 to 15' east longitude; for

a mean value of cos 1-0.84. The minimum values of the cloud brightness, amunting
to 0.31 of the maximum value, were observed for three passes of clouds within the
limits from 38" west to 15° east. For the same cloud nasses, identical mean bright-
nesses were obtained amounting to 0.109 of the maximum brightness. It is
characteristic that in scanning along the equator froa the terminator to the edge
of the visible disc of the earth, the range of brightness variations of individual
cloud sections initially increases, reaching a naxinua for cos 1-0.84. and then it
decreases. Near the edge of the disc the clouds have no brightness fluctuations.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Relative Brightness Variations of Clouds Located in

Equatorial Latitudes (by the Results of a Photometric Survey
Obtained from the "Zond-S" Station)

Longitude of the location on the photograph. deg

38-18 11-9 0-15 20-30 more than

west west east east 60 east
Cos i 0. 37 0.64 0.81. 0.96 0.95
Angle Y, deg 122 116 115 110 113
Minimal: brightness 0. 31 0. 31 0. 31 0. 35 0.54
Mean brightness 0.69 0.69 0.49 0.61 0.56
Maximum brightness 0.57 0.70 1.00 0.90 0.56

Analyzing Table 2, it is possible to see that if the values of cos i vary by

2.6 times, then the mean values of the cloud brightness vary by only 1.3 times.

and the. maximum, by 1.8 times. that is, the mean cloud brightness varies half as
much-'3 the cosine of the angle with variation of the zenith distance of the sun.
Thus, the results of the photometric survey confirm the thesis advanced above re-
garding the presence of equalization of the visible brightness of cloud fields when
observed from high altitudes as a result of vertical nonuniformity of the altitude
of their upper boundary. From Table 2 it also follows that within the investigated
part of the visible disc of the earth. the angles at which the sun's rays are
scattered by horizontal sections of the cloud fields varied from 110 to 122° in
spite of the large variations of the zenith distance of the sun.

In conclusion. it is possible to note that when observing global cloud fields at
great distances from the earth's surface as a result of the structural (vertical)
nonuniformities of the upper cloud boundary, the dependence of their brightness on
the cosine of the zenith distance of the sun at the viewed points is disturbed,
that is, the effect of equalizing the brightness of the cloud cover within the
visible disc of the earth is observed.

BI BLIOGRAPHY

1. Vinogradov, B. V.; Kondrat'yev, K. Ya. "KOSMICHBSKIYE HETODY ZEHLBVEIENIYA
[Space Methods of Geography]. Leningrad, cidroneteoizdat, 1978.

2. Klemin, V. V.; Chapurskiv, L. 1.; Fantikov, 0. 1. "Method of Experimental
Testing of a Theoretical Calculation of the Brightness Characteristic of the
Cloud-Atmosphere System," AKTINOJ‘ETRIYA I OPTIKA ATFOSFERY [Actinometry and
Optics of the Atmosphere], Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1968.

3. Lavrova, N. P.: Sandomirskiy, A. B. "Photometry of the Planet Earth from the
'Zond' Space Station," IZVESTIYA WSSHIlGI UCHEBNY'KH ZAVEDENIY. mom“ I
AEROFOTOS'WEPKA [News of the Higher Institutions of Learning. Geodesy and
Aerial Photographic Surveying], No lo, 1972.

lo. Lavrova, N. 9.; Sandomirskiy, A. B. "Brightness Maps of the Earth Comiled by
Photographic Data from the 'Zond' Automatic Interplanetary Station,"
IZVESTIYA WSSHIKH UClIEBNYKH ZAVEDENIY. (EODEZIYA I AEROPGI‘OS"YEM<A,
No 3, 1973.

66
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S.

10.

F0! OFFICML USE ONLY

Saydenova. K. A.; Chapurskiy, L. I. "Application of the Algebraic Approach
for Automatic Classification of Natural Subjects," PROBLEM! FIZIKI AMSPERY
[Problems of Atmospheric Physics], No 15, 1978.

POLNYY RADIATSIONNYY EKSPERIPENT [Total Radiatim Experiment], edited by
K. Ya. Kondrat'yev, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1976.

Feygel'son, Ye. M. RADIATSIONNYYE PRUISESSY V SLOISTOOBRAZNYKH OBIAKAKH
[Radiation Processes in Stratiformis], Noscov, Nauka, 1964.

Feygel'son, Ye. H.; Krasnokutskaya, L. D. Paton somsmnooo IZUICHENIYA I
OBIAKA [Solar Radiation Fluxes and Clouds], Leningrad, Gidronteoizdat, 1978.

Chapurskiy, L. 1.; Klemin, V. V. "Aircraft Studies of Spectral Brightness
Characteristics of Clouds and Backgrounds in the Wavelength Range of 0.6 to
2.5 microns," AKTINOM-ZTRIYA I OPTIKA ATWSFERY [Actinometry and Optics of
the Atmosphere], Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1969.

Chel'tsov, N. I. "Cloud Albedo." METEOMLOGIYA I GIDROLOGZYA [Meteorology and
Hydrology]. No 6, 1952.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509(329+3110)(98)
FORECASTING THE NOVAYA ZEHLYA BORA BY THE mon 01" CANONICAL (”RWTION
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 59- 66

[Article by Candidate of Geographic Sciences A. P. Polkhov, Murmansk Branch of the
Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute, manuscript received lo Aug 80]

[Text] Abstract: A study is made of the possibility of
asynchronous computerized mapping of a multi-
dimensional space of meteorological signs (surface
pressure, surface temperature, geopotential heights
of the 850 and 500 mb surfaces, temperature at the
850 mb level) into values of the easterly and south-
easterly storm winds (boras) at Novaya Zemlya.

The canonical correlation method is used for this
purpose. The performed study demonstrated the
possibility of successful forecasting of the
Novaya Zemlya bars 21. hours in advance.

It is hown that in the presence of easterly and southeasterly storm winds on the
west coast of Novsya Zemlya a dangerous meteorological phenomenon - the bora --
occurs in the cold part of the year. According to [10, 8], the storm wind velocity
during a bora often reaches 30 to 40 m/sec. Therefore successful forecasting of
these storm winds from the indicated points of the compass is a highly urgent prob-
lem.

The procedure followed in forecasting the Novaya Zemlys born is the subject of only
one paper [8], according to which future values of the baric and thermal gradients
at the 850 mb level and also the future position of the thermal frontal separation
are used as the initial data. Naturally such initial data are the limiting condi-
tion of a successful forecast, for they automatically contain the forecasting error.

In the present article a different approach to forecasting the bora phenomenon at
Novaya Zemlya is proposed. The new approach is based on using asynchronous rela-
tions between the wind field V at the earth's surface and the surface pressure
field P, the surface temperature field Teartho the geopotential heights of the

850 mb surface (8850), the geopotential height of the 500 at surface (H500) and the
temperature at the 850 mb level (T850) characterizing the state of the atmosphere
at a defined point in time and space.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Each field is described by a random vector, the components of which are values of
the meteorological variable at q discrete points of two-dimensional space. 0n

the time scale it is possible to characterize the field by a set of realizations of
the vector X. Thus, a two-dimensional meteorological field can be represented by

a vector function of the argument t

Xm - law. mo. . . .. x,(!) 1. (1)

In accordance with the indicated interpretation let us express the wind field as a
reaction of the state of the atmosphere in the form of a linear stochastic model

(:5
X.(c+«)=2x,mk,+:.. k=1.2; /=1.2..'...s. <2)
[ml
where Xk(t+1) for k-l, g assumes the values of the fields of the components Vx,
Vy of the vector field V;

Xf for f=l, 2, .... S has values of P, H850, H500, Tearth' T850;
r la the gsven positive shift;

Rf is the vector of the parameters to be estimated;
‘k is the model error.

The validity of expression (2) was investigated for the Halyye Karmakuly station
located on the west coast of Novaya Zemlya (see the figure). The material of the
investigation was the synoptic archive of the hydrometeorological library of
Murmansk UCKS for the cold period (October-March) of 1960 to 1965 and 1975 to 1977

in the form of surface and high-altitude weather maps for the basic synoptic times
of 0300 and 1500 hours.

The predictor fields of P, H350, H500, Tearth’ T350 were given by the values of the
corresponding variables at 30 nodes of a regular grid, the spatial discreteness
of which was h-600 km (see the figure). The indicated grid is a fragment of the

grid (h=300 km) of the two-parametric scheme of the Main Geophysics Observatory [31]
used operatively at the Murmansk Weather Bureau. The values of the meteorological
characteristic at the nodes were obtained as a result of synoptic (manual) interpola-
tion. For this purpose observations by the coastal and marine stations for 0300

and 1500 hours were used. The predicted field V was.presented by the value of the
wind velociéy IVI and wind direction d at one point (the Malyye Karmakuly station);
the vector was subsequentl expanded in the components vx, Vy. The wind data
sample included values of IVfalo m/sec for 0300 and 1500 hours in the easterly and
southeasterly directions.

In order to reflect the climatic peculiarities of the bora phenomenon, the data
sample forthe wind was organized separately with respect to each of six investi-
ated (October-March) months. The size of an individual sample was 150 values of
5 It is natural that this volume of realizations was provided for with respect to
each predictor field.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWCJAL USEZCNﬁLY

 

Fragment of the grid 0‘ *E two-parametric system of the Main
Geophysics Observatory.
1 -- grid nodes which the values of the meteorological
fields were taken.
Key:
n. Halyye Karmakuly

According to the stated goal of finding asynchronous relations, provision was made
for the diurnal positive shift I of the predicted value with respect to the pre-
dictor.

Hhen performing the investigation, information about the predicted value and the
predictors of model (2) was involved in aligned and normalized form. This offered
the possibility of obtaining the property of atationarity in the broad sense [7],
which. in turn. permitted optimal application of the apparatus of the correlation
theory of random functions for analysis

R"-X’,(t+1)X,(f). kif. (a)

where (3) is the matrix correlation function;
(a) is the mutual time-space correlation function.

The analysis (a) of the statistical structure of the interaction of the predicted
parameters xk(t+r) with the predictors Xf(t) revealed weak relations r-0.25 to 0.35.
Consequently, for prediction of the vector V the necessity for maintaining the
adOpted dimensionality (q-JO) of the predictor fields is obvious. Hence, as a
consequence, model (2) becomes awkward and computationally unstable.

Accordingly, to eliminate the indicated deficiencies a search was made for

analogs of the given predictor fields which would combine high asynchronous
informativeness with respect to xk(t+1) with minimal dimensionality. The q-dimen-
sional vectors Y¥(t) of the new variables ykf(t), (1-1, 2, ..., q) obtained as a
result of conversion of the initial meteoro ogical fields using the statistical
apparatus of the canonical correlation [1. 5] became such analogs.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The generalized problem of eigenvalues A and eigenvectors L was solved for this
purpose

A— -
( .\ B)L 0. (5)

Here A-Rfk ‘1ka, B-Rff (k-l, 2; f-l. 2, .., S with respect to the number of
predicted v lues and predictors, respectively). where -1 as a result of
X'k(t)xk(t): ka is the mutual time-space correlation function (lo) of the k-th
predicted parameter with some f-th predictor field; R” is the matrix correlation
function (3). It is easy to see that the matrix A is obtained as a result of the
product of the column vector times the row vector, the elements of which were
values of the mutual tine-space correlation function (3).

When solving system (6), actording to [2]. it turned out that the relation between
Xk(t+1) and some xf(t) will become the most indicative in me direction of the first
eigenvector lkf of the matrix LR. The given fact follows from the value of the
elements (analog of the square Sf the multiple correlation function) of the diagonal
matrix Al in which the first element lkf has a maximum value, and the remaining
elements in practice do not differ fro‘ zero.

Then as a result of the linear transformation
Y;(t)=X,(!)L}. f=l,2.. . ..5 (6)

redistribution (compression) of the information of the f-th predictor field takes
place for Xk(t+1) such that it is concentrated in the first component y‘ff (t) of
the vector of the new variables Yf(t).

From Table 1 where the informativeness of yk (t) for X (t-H) (January) is presented
in the form of eigenvalues 1“ it follows thit the f-th new variable y'l‘ (t)
describes a significant partlsf the dispersion Xk(t). The given fact 11 become
entirely explainable from a comparison of the time-space fields of the predicted
parameter and the predictors. Consequently, the Novaya Zemlya bora is caused by
atmospheric processes already on the eve of its occurrence. Therefore the time-
spz-ce scale of the predictor fields was selected from the calculations such that

it reflects the elementary synoptic process above the investigated region (see the

figure).

Table l

\

A
H
"_.

.. _(2)006ctseuume unca-

——-———-—

Ktmmmcur

v

 

 

'I. I
I r,

21,,”

 

 

'- 'P ‘ ‘”.'ll

  
   

  

0.36
0.55 .

0.34

0.49 0.46 0.43 0.-'-|

 

 

Key: a
1. Component V
2. Eigenvalues

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An analysis of the statistical structure of the new variables yk (t) and the
structure of their interaction with Xk(t+1) according to (3), (k; made it possible
to arrive at the conclusion that the canonical values yk (t) are analogs of the
field gradients of P, H 50' H50 , Tear h' T85 characteflzing the zonal and
meridional components 0 atmospgeric c rculatgon in the near S-kilometer layer of
the atmosphere over Novaya Zemlya and the regions adjacent to it. Therefore
instead of the awkward predictor fields it is possible to use a total of only five
new variables characterizing the intensity of the atmospheric processes which

offers the possibility of obtaining physical substantiation and statistical
acceptability of the model (2).

As has already been noted above (Table 1), every new variable y¥,(t) describes a

significant part of the dispersion Xk(t), but duplication is 0589”“ here (888

Table 2), that is. the new variables are mutually related to one degree or another.
In order to discover the contribution of each predictor yk (t) to the dispersion
Xk(t), the partial correlation coefficients reflecting the estimate of the true
relation of the predicted parameters and the predictors were calculated according
to the expression from [7]

.. H = —F-"——— (7)
' ’ ' 1-7 (a: ”2'4 +19}?

where k=1. 2; f-l, 2, ...; d-S with respect to a number of new variables y§f(t);
F f, F(d+ki(d+k)' Fff are ttc minors of the correlation matrix R(d+k)(d+k)
u all var ables Xk t+1), y (t) corresponding to the like -named elements of the

indicated matrix. Accordinéfto the data in Table 2, yk (t). yk (t), that is,
T a
earth 850

the thermal factors, have the greatest informativeneas with respect to Xk(t+1).

From the new variables y§f(t) it is possible to organize the predictor vector
(Table 2)

Mn =Is-im. yawn). ﬁw(t).'y;,(tl; ”mun.

Accordingly, model (2) assumes the form

x.<t+u= mom + e... k = I. 2. ' (a)

where the vector of the parameters Rk is estimated by the least squares method
using the pseudoinversion [6]

R. ZIY;(I) Y.(t”"l".o (9)

where (+) is the sign of the pseudoinversion; M is the mutual correlation column
vector of Xk(t+1) with Yk(t). The operation (9 offers the possibility of avoiding
the influence of the poor conditionality of the correlation matrix Y'k(t)Yk(t) on
R .

k

According to (9) and the data in Table 2, the numerical values of Rk are equal to
R1=(0.l9777l, 0.085369, 0.203391, —0.353029, 0.318305). The multiple correlation
coefficient and the mean square error of the model (8) were in this gaseAR1-0.93;
c1=2.k, respectively. Analogous results were also obtained for R2, R2, 02.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2

Koppusuoanu names R“+.N‘§.)I l-l

Neptune"

 

Key:
n. Variable d. earth
b. Correlation matrix

c. Partial correlation coefficient Dkfod-l

Using eXpressions (3)-(7) and (9), high asynchronous relations (the results of
training the model (8)) were obtained for each month of the cold part of the year,
permitting use of the actual weather maps as the initial data for the forecast.
The entire procedure of training the model (8) was implemented on the "Minsk-32"
computer.

The above-described model (8) was tested (examined) on independent material for
the cold period of 1978 to 1979. The results of an objective analysis of the
fields P. H850, H500. Tearth’ T8 0 for to-0.3 hours according to the system of the
Main Geophysics Observatory [3] aken at'30 nodes of a regular grid (see the
figure) were used as the initial data for forecasting the wind for the time t0+1
(1-24 hours).

The wind vector V was forecasted according to the expressions

 

414
we“): 2x,(t.)t:,r;. k=l.2: I-m- - -.°- <10)
[-4
. (11)
3 - A A ._
IV! (I. .L 'J = 1/?" (Km, + :):x.+ X.)'.
' (12)
-/ A .
'! Chm “"5“
| I
' f. c A A .5 :
ﬁu.+¢-==T* 1'“ mun-“W. x"
where r5 is a compcn-n- s. Lu: «eccor a; of the estimates of the parameters of

the modél (8) p

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A

oxk is an estimate of the mean square deviation of the variables Xk(t).
2k is their mean value.

6 is a coefficient assuming the values of 5-1 in squares I and II and 5-3 in
squares III and IV of the righthand cartesian coordinate system,

d is the estimate of the direction of the vector V.

The sign of the second term of formula (12) is defined by the ratio of the signs

of the estimates of the components vay of the vector V.

The entire forecasting procedure was implemented on the "Minsk-32” computer, and
it takes several minutes.

When testing the proposed procedure, 75 cases of a storm hora were predicted with
iVI315 m/sec; in reality, 83 cases of easterly and aoutheaaterly storm winds were
observed. The success of the forecast with margins of [VI-S m/sec, d-ZO° was
912.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Bagrov, N. A.; Mertsalova, N. I. "Thermal Interaction of the Ocean and
Atmosphere," TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR [works of the USSR Hydrometeorological
Center], No 64, 1970.

2. Bryleva, L. 1.; Chernin, K. Ye. "Finding Proper Elements for the Generalized
Problem with Symmetric Matrices," HATEMATICHESKDYE OBESPECHENIYE EVM "MINSK-32"
[Software for the "Minsk-32" Computer], No 8, 1973.

3. Bushkova, T. A.; Il'in. B. M.; Kbbyshev. G. A., et a1. "Description of a
Numerical Analysis and Operative Forecasting Scheme at the Northwestern UCHS,"
TRUDY 660 [Works of the Main Geophysics Observatory], No 353, 1975.

4. Vize, V. Yu. "Novaya Zemlya Bore," IZV. TSENTRAL'NOGO CIDROMETEOROLOGICHBSKOGO
BYURO [News of the Central Hydrometeorological Office], No 5. 1925.

S. Gandin, L. S. "Application of the Canonical Correlation Method in
Meteorology," TRUDY 660, No 208, 1967.

6. Gantmakher, F. R. TBORIYA HATRITS [Matrix Theory], Moscow, 1966.

7. Jenkins, 6.; Watts. 0. SPEKTRAL'NYY ANALIZ I YECO PRILOZHENIYA [Spectral
Analysis and Its Applications], Moscow, Mir, No 2, 1972.

8. Hasterskikh. M. A. "Prediction of a Frontal Born at Novaya Zamlya,”
TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR. No 199, 1978.

72
FORIOFFNJAI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.(322:53+578.46:53)(268)

HYDROCARBON DISTRIBUTION IN FRESHLY FALLEN SNOW AND ICE AT 'NORTH POLE-22' STATION
(1977-1978 OBSERVATIONS)

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 65-68

[Article by F.A. Dmitriyev, S. V. Pivovarov, Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute, manuscript received 15 Sep 80]

[Text] Abstract: Procedures are discussed for taking and
analyzing ice samples, and a study is made of the
hydrocarbon content and distribution in underlying
surface objects in the vicinity of the "North Pole"
drift stations.

A1008 With the fact that a larger and larger number of environmental subjects
are being subjected to analysis for hydrocarbon content (water, soil, bottom sedi-
ments and representatives of the animal world), insufficient attention is being
paid to the study of organic substances contained in snow and ice [5]. In
individual papers on these forms of underlying surfaces, studies were made of the
organic carbon content [2, 3]. The interest manifested in these subjects is
entirely based on the fact that, first of all, we are dealing with a specific
environment in which the hydrocarbon breakdown processes will be inhibited, which
can lead to accumulation of hydrocarbons; secondly, the study of the hydrocarbon
distribution both over a small territory and in a broad expanse can reveal a possi-
ble source of pollution; thirdly, in certain areas where ice and snow are to be
found over a long period of time, it is important to consider the problem of hydro-
carbon conversion in the atmosphere-snow—ice-wator-bottom sediment system.

In the given paper a study was made of the hydrocarbon content and distribution in
samples of freshly fallen snow and ice taken while the "SP-22" ["North Pole-22"]
station was drifting out of the Arctic Basin into the northern regions of the
Beaufort Sea. Observations were made from June 1977 to March 1978 which made it
possible to characterize the hydrocarbon distribution as a function of seasonal
behavior. Thaw water extracts were prepared at the location where the samples were
taken. and an analysis was run at the Water Monitoring and Hydrochemistry Labora-
tory of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute. The purpose of the
study was not to discover individual groups of hydrocarbons to use them as an
example in demonstrating the possible influence of pollution sources. It is

obvious that organic compounds of anthropogenic origin are part of the total sub-
stances released from subjects. The study was performed by the method of gas-
liquid chromatography.

73

I1)R‘OF1WCJA1.IEHE(MNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sample Taking and Analysis Procedure

Considering the importance of the information on the pollutant content in snow and
ice covers, the Water Monitoring and Hydrochemistry Laboratory of the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute proposed a method of taking samples pre-
supposing reliable protection of the samples taken from materials capable of dis-
torting the actual hydrocarbon content. Special attention was given to the
cleanness of the instruments and containers for taking samples.

The ice and snow samples were taken at a distance of 1-2 km from the station to
avoid inclusion of the products of combustion of the diesel fuel used to heat the
living quarters. A one or two-cintimeter layer of freshly fallen snow was
collected from an area of 5-10 m . ice samples were drilled out by a 120-mm
diameter circular bore. Cores 15-20 cm long were broken off and extracted from

the hole. The upper laver of ice 5-10 mm thick was cleaned away. The samples
were melted in a tightly covered enamel bucket over an electric stove in a facility
not subject to contamination with fuel vapor or the products of its combustion.

The samples were extracted by distilled hexane in a 1-liter separating funnel.
which was rinsed out twice with 25 m1 of hexane and twice with 200-300 ml of thaw
water before beginning work. One milliliter of chemically pure sulfuric acid and
15 ml of hexane were added to 1 liter of water in the separating funnel. The
contents were mixed vigorowﬂyfor 15 minutes, then allowed to stand until complete
separation of the layers. The extract was transferred to a container corresponding
to the transport conditions. Extraction was performed four more times in the same
manner. The extracts obtained were combined, adding 25 m1 of hexane used to rinse
out the separating funnel after extraction.

Chromatographic separation was performed on the "Tavet-104" chromatograph with a
45-meter capillary column with 0.25 an inside diameter; the dynamic phase was

0V-17 silicon. The initial column temperature was 80°C with heating to 145°C after
4 minutes; thereafter heating took place at 5°C/min to 235°C. The carrier gas was
helium at 3.0 atmospheres pressure. A ﬂame-ionization detector was used with
hydrogen pressure of 0.65 atm and air pressure of 0.75 atm. The evaporator and
detector temperature was 300°C. The n-alkanes were identified by a standard n-Cl3-
n-C35 hydrocarbon mixture by comparing the holding time; a quantitative estimate
was made by comparison with a standard mixture of methane-naphthene hydrocarbons.

Discussion of Results

Chemical analysis made it possible to draw a number of conclusions with respect to
hydrocarbon content in the underlying surface of the Arctic Basin.

All of the chromatograms of the samples have similar nature of hydrocarbon distribu-
tion: the presence of a sum of unsolit peaks -- "humps" -- and also n-alkanes

and carbon isomers. The presence of peaks, the areas of which exceed the sum of

the areas of the n-alkane peaks (Figure l). is observed for all the chromatographic
spectra in the sz-Cza n—alkane region. These "predominant" components can be
considered to be hydrocarbons of biogenic origin, for technogenic hydrocarbons are
not characterized by the presence of individual compounds with concentrations
differing significantly from all the rest. At the same time, the compounds of
biological origin are not characterized by the formation of a series from a set

of isomers -- "humps."
74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

(2)

 

Figure 1. Chromatograms of snow samples No 6 (a). No 3 (b)
and ice sample No 6, middle layer (c)
Key:

1. Signal, millivolts

2. n-alkane

3. minutes

4. Isotherm

5. 5°C/minute

The "humps" on the chromatograne begin with the n-alkanes from n-Cn-n-c1 and

end in the region of n-CJ3-n-CJ7. Individual representatives of normal alkanes
clearly appear from n-616~n-C13 and to n-033-n-035. In samples where n-C17 and
n-C18 were discovered, isoprenoids, pristane and phytane are also present. For
some snow samples taken during the winter, the presence of a "hump" on the chroma-
tograms with the peak in the n-Clg-n-Cly region is characteristic. The super-
position of the spectrum of a mixture of relatively highly volatile hydrocarbons,
for example. diesel fuel. on the general chromatogran is entirely probable.

Snow sample No 6 is an exception to the general nature of the hydrocarbon distribu-

tion. The chrouatogran for snow sample No 6 does not give clearly expressed
n—alkanes or components which we consider to be hydrocarbons of biogenic

origin (Figure 1).

Now let us discuss the quantitative estimate of the hydrocarbons contained in the
different ice layers (middle and lower) and in freshly fallen snow (see the table).

Comparing the ice data, it is possible to note that the hydrocarbon concentrations

are close to each other both for individual samples and for different layers. The
average hydrocarbon concentration for the ice samples in 0.038 mg/liter, and for
snow samples, 0.017 mg/liter, that is, it differs from the similar characteristic
for ice samples by more than twofold. The increase in the hydrocarbon content

75

INJR OFIHCJAL USEZ(”ULY
FOR 0FTﬂC1Al.USE|0NLY

Results of Determining the Hydrocarbon Concentrations in Samples
of Freshly Fallen Snow and Ice

 
     
 
  

Cyuuapun Onlocarus-
. Ioeco - Ornuarun»
““6"" none :3- uoo mew

nea(1)
l c. c. l3 VI 77 01-41' 3150’ 0054 1.3 I
4 c. c. as 17: 77 790: 23230 0.026 10.9 443
s a. c. 06 IX 77 7900 20230 0.031 40.0 10.2
7 c 4:. on x 77 7900 22400 0.035 10 2.0
a m c 03 X 77 1906 23400 0362 250 65
n c. 4. 24 x1177 mo 22720 on 210 I04
42 u. c. 24 xu 77 7010 22720 0.02: 30 9:45
I7 70. c. I2 Ill 79 7513 22227 0.021 120 20.4
Cner(j)
2 19 w 77 0an m 0072 135 44
a 04 4x 77 7205 23200 0.017 21.0 0.5
e 30 IX 77 79 04 233 as was - 0.3
9 on x: 77 77 42 22940 0.052 2.7 09
IO 20 xn 77 70 II 22727 0.020 2.2 5.7
13 02 l n 7612 22647 0.020 — I0.0
I: 20 l 70 7s 49 227 10 0.019 LG 7.0
I. :3 n 70 7529 22644 0.024 — 9.0

Key:
a. Sample number
b. Date taken
c. Coordinates
d. north latitude
e. east longitude
f. Total hydrocarbon concentration, mg/liter
3. Relative biogenic hydrocarbon content, I
h. Relative n-alkane content. 2
1. Ice

j. Snow
Note. c.c. -- middle layer of ice, H.c. -- lower ice layer.

in ice is connected with longer contact of the ice with organic matter which can
be transferred to it from surface seawater and from melted snow. When calculating
the average hydrocarbon concentration in snow the concentrations for sanples No 6
and No 9 having "anomalous" characteristic by comparison with the other chromato-
grams, were thrown out in accordance with the methods of data evaluation used in

[a]. The hydrocarbon concentration in snow sample No 6 taken at the end of

September 1977 exceeds the concentrations in the other samples by an order.
Sample No 9 taken a month after No 6 is also isolated; the hydrocarbon content in

sample No 9 is two or three times higher than inthe remaining samples.

76

FOR'OFFNJA1.USE(MWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Data are also presented in the table which reflect the predominance of the propor-
tion of UHSPlit peaks -- "humps" - over the sum of the n-alkanes, that is,
Salk/Stotal- For snow samples the average value of Salk/stotal is 7.53. whereas
for sample No 6 this value is 25 times less than average. This hydrocarbon dis-
tribution in sample No 6 is explained by the fact that the snow used for analysis
was taken during a period of abundant snowfalls which, as the synoptic situation
demonstrated. were connected with the inflow of warm. wet air masses from the
southwest from the continent of North America, which carried a significant quantity
of hydrocarbons by comparison with the average amount, the greater part of which
are obviously of technogenic origin. One of the proposed products can be the sun
of the substances formed during the combustion of fuel (motor vehicles, heating
units. and so on). It is possible that this can explain the high hydrocarbon con-
centrations in sample No 9 which was taken under similar synoptic conditions. In

amount of hydrocarbons. Assuming that the presence of biogenic hydrocarbons in the
ice and snow samples is connected with the vital activity of marine organisms, we
compared the values of the relative biogenic component content in the total mass

of hydrocarbons sb/stotal"“d the s1mple taking time.

 

t . n
D 1117 E'l’ I 17 1 i E’d’

Figure 2. Distribution of the proportion of biogenic hydrocarbons
with respect to total hydrocarbons sb/Stotal as a function of the
analysis sample taking time.
1 -- snow, 2 -- middle ice layer, 3 -— lower its layer

Key:

"‘ sh/stotal 77
FOR‘OFFHHAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

figure 2 shows a relation which indicates that the maximum of sb/stot for all
three types of investigated subjects (two ice layers and snow) comes fh September
- the time of greatest productivity of the most widespread representative of the
biota - Aretic plankton [1]. It is obvious that ice takes on such components as

a result of contact with water and. possibly, with snow. Biogenic hydrocarbons

can get into freshly fallen snow from atmospheric air to which they are trans-
ferred when the air masses make contact with the water surface. The contribution
of hydrocarbons of technogenic origin to the overall chromatographic picture offers
the possibility of monitoring atmospheric pollution in the Arctic.

Conclusions

1. The average hydrocarbon concentrations in ice and snow amount to 0.038 mg/liter
and 0.017 mg/liter, respectively. Smaller concentrations in freshly fallen snow
samples obviously are explained by the formation of precipitation from local Arctic
air masses and short-term contact of the precipitation with the environment.

2. The "hump" of unsplit peaks begins to form in the region of the C13-015
n-alkanes and ends in the n-C33-n-C37 region. Normal alkanes are distinctly
released from n-616 to n-C35. on the average accounting for 1/10 of the total hydro-
carbon content.

3. On almOSt all of the chromatograms peaks were discovered for components con-
sidcrcd to be of biogenic origin. The maximum relative content of these substances
was analyzed in samples taken during an increase in Arctic plankton activity.

A. with comprehensive study of hydrocarbon synthesized biogenically (identification
of the waterinls, distribution characteristic in a large body of water), they could
become indicators providing information about the complex metabolic processes in

the water surface-atmosphere-ice cover system.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Bogorov, V. c. PLANKTON HIROVOCO OKEANA {Plankton in the world Ocean],
Moscow. Nauka, 1974.

2. Volokitina. L. A.; Shuklin. V. 8. "Effect of the Direction of Transfer of Air
lhsscs on the Organic Hicroimnurity Content in Atmospheric Precipitation,"
METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOCIYA [Meteorology and Hydrology], No 2, 1980.

3. Mci'nikov, I. A.; Pavlov, G. L. "Peculiarities of the Distribution of Organic
Carbon in Waters and Ice of the Arctic Basin," OKEANOLOGIYA [Oceanology],

Vol xvuI, No 2, 1978.
a. Ford, R.; Gordon. A. SPUTNIK KHIHIKA [Chemistry Handbook], Moscow, Mir, 1976.

5. Herrmann. R. "Regional Patterns of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons to
Anthropogenic Influence and Air Flaw," CATENA. Vol 5, No 2, 1978.

78

IWJR OFF1C1Al.USIZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.011

JOINT DETERMINATION AND REDUCTION OF STATISTICAL PARAMETERS m A PERIOD OF
MANY YEARS, EXTENSION AND MODELING OF TIME SERIES

Moscow METEOROIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 70--81

[Article by Professor G. A. Alekseyev, State Hydrological Institute, manuscript
received 8 Sep 80]

[Text] Abstract: For the development of the known grapho-
analytical method [1, 2, 10], a generalized analytical
or graphoanalytical method is proposed for joint
determination and reduction of statistical parameters
(the mean. CV, Ca) to a period of many years using
several (2, 3 or more) paired straight lines or curves
for the relationship of equally guaranteed values
during joint observation periods at the reduction point
and at adjacent point-analogs with longer observation
periods (nuber of years).

Just as joint modeling [3], the time series are extended
by the equations of the normalized conditional distribu-

tion curves using unconditional distribution curves
reduced to a period of many years.

Itis known that river runoff . precipitation and other hydrometeorological char-
acteristics vary significantly with time and territory. This variation is most com"
pactly described statistically in the form of unconditional and conditional dis.-
tri‘mtion curves simultaneously reflecting the correlations between the investi-
gatzd characteristics [6].

In order to improve the reliability (stability) of the statistical characteristics
and consider all possible versions of time-space joint fluctuations of the investi-
gated hydrometeor logical characteristics during hydrological study and substantia-
tion of water management projects it is necessary to solve four statistical
problems: determination and reduction of parameters (the mean, CV, C8) to a period
of many years, extension and modeling of time series. Scientific and technical
progress in the methods of hydrology, climatology, and all-around water management
planning depends on proper, scientifically substantiated. mathematically correct
joint solution of these four interrelated problems.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With respect to the available time series of observations

XI'EXI', Xp. . . . . X13, (1)

at points with the numbers 1-0. 1, 2,..., i and with respect to the corresponding
number of years of observations (in increasing order) '

no<n.<n,<...<n, (2)

the paired interseries correlation coefficients between the eigenvalues (:01, x i)
at the reduction point with the nunber 5-0 and at adjacent points with the nunbera
3-1. 2. ..., i are calculated for joint observation periods n01

a” - .-
2(‘ol’lo)(lli-‘ﬂ _ (3)
r,l=%==:;=l=. j-I,2.. . ..l.
1/ {(101 - :0" 2 (tn-3'):
i=I I-I

'lhe mean square errors of the correlation coefficients of (3) are calculated

_ "01' (1')
”Vi-17:73:. j=I.2,. . ..I-

Only the observation points for which the correlation coefficients of (3) are
essentially significant are taken as point-analogs,

r", a,- 31"‘I' [1:1, 2, . . . o l: (S)

that is, for which the correlation coefficients exceed three-times the mean square
errors of their determination (lo). Hereafter we shall consider that the observa-
tion points with nunbers j=0. 1, ..., i satisfy condition (5).

Smoothed empirical overestimation probability distribution curves are constructed
for all 1+1 observation points satisfying condition (5)

p=p(x,) or x,,,=F,ip). i=0.l. 2.. . ..1 ‘6’

using the empirical overestimation probabilities [2, lo]

_ - _Iu-0.25 . - (7)
pn-‘p(x,n)—mo m='. a!" o a. n,

of the ranked term of the series in decreasing order x'm

xhaxha'. . .le'_ i=0, I. 2.. . ..1- (8)

II

It is expedient to approximate the empirical distribution curves in the form of
the Goodrich equations

.r‘—u'.‘3 l

i __
(T) . ‘In-(11+’I(“IDP) ‘I,]-0. 1" ' "1' (9)

PUD = ‘-

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FI1C1AI.USEI)NLY

the parameters of which a , all. 81 are related to three standard statistical
parameters —- the mean vs no

I
_ ~ l’
x,=x,=-n-IZJ‘/u (10)

 

Z “I' ' "P (11)

the asymmetry coefficient

 

g (XII-HP M
C,,=E,,= "' :3 m (12)
I
-- by the following equalities [S]:
a,=;,—s,l‘(l+-;I-). (13)
=,=-/[r('+%)-r'(w++,)1""-
I:r(l+%)-2r(I+-5'I-)r(l+%)-2n(l+i—)=HH (15)
.r('+17)-r’(‘+17) ' ' '

From equation (15) the parameter B1 is defined as the inverse function of the
asymetry coefficient

ﬁI—9-1(C‘,)z§-l (c’l)' 1:0, L , . . ' l, (159)
1V0 other parameters (:1 and a:] are defined successively from formulas (16) and (13}

Ihe empirical or analytical distribution curves (6) and (9) are used to determine
the curves of the relationship of the values of equal guarantee (:0 . x1 ) of the
investigated hydrologic characteristic 1: at the reduction point (3-8) and at the
point-analogs (j-l, 2, ..., 9.):

 

X” = F0|P(x]p)l' j: '0 2n o I 0 D I: (16)
in particular. according to the Goodrich equation (9)
.‘1
x —c ’o
‘»=“0+‘°(»., ’) . 1:1.2... ..l. (17)
81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For identical asymmetry coefficients
c,,=c,,. p,=p., 1:1,2. . . ..l, (18)

the curves for the relationship of the values of equal guarantee (17) are straight
lines

xw=a.+ %(‘I'— a’). (17')

which, according to equalities (14) and (13), can be represented as follows:
x.,=}.+§:-(x,,—x‘,). j-l.2.. . ..l. (19)

It must be kept in mind that when approximating the empirical distribution curves
(6) by the Goodrich, type III Pearson and logarithmically normal distribution
equations, the curves of the relationship of values of equal guarantee (l6) cmnbe
expressed by the equation

— 0 .C -' _.
x.,=n+%r3‘t3“»-‘D- 1—1.2“ ‘ "1’ (20)

where 0(p. Cs)=(x -;5/o are values of the normalized quantiles presented in the
form of the tableg in references [2, 5. 10].

It is important to note that under condition (18), equation (20) coincides with
linear equation (19).

In reference [7] it was shown that for any given structure of the equation of
the relation of values of equal guarantee (xp, yp)

y,=f(x,.a.b.. . .). x,=/-'(y,.a.'_o.. . .) (21)

the parameters of the equation a, b, ... can be determined by the method of "least
deviation rectangles" of the empirical points (x1, y!) from the curve of relation-
ship (21). namely, from the condition of minimum of the function

S(a.b....)..--,'1-2ly.—/(.r,,a.b....)|>(

lal

(22)
X ”5'05. a. 0' o o . )_X‘l = mm,

where x=f'1 (y, a, b, ...) is the inverse function. The problem reduces to solving
the system of equations

dS(a.t....)__ 03(ao....)_ 2
——a.——-°- _o,, ,, (3)

with respect to the parameters a, b, ...

82

FOR 0FFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FORIOFFKHAI.USE(NVLY

Let us note that the "least rectangles" method gives a unique curve of the rela-
tionship (21) between the values of equal guarantee (xp, y ) at the same time as

two regression curves y with respect to x and x with respegt to y are obtained by
the "least squares" method:

9“"! (x, a. 'b. ...). (21.1)

2-1m. a. a. ...). (242)

which coincide only for a single-valuedfunctional relation between x and y.

The statistical parameters (mean, CV, 0,) are jointly reduced to a period of many
years by the following method. Using the curves (or straight lines) of the rela-
tionship of values of equal guarantee (16), (17). (19), (20) with respect to three

reference quantiles at the point-analogs x19, for example, with guarantee of p-S,
50. 951

xl'= x]. ’9 XI. ”a x]. “r I: 1| 2. s o o ‘1' (25)

the corresponding 31 partial reference quantiles :65) at the reduction point j-O

reduced to a period of many years are defined P
Wat's. ‘2’... 12'... 1:1.2. - .J ‘26)

and by these quantiles, three calculated weighted mean quantiles ;bp at the reduc-
tion point are calculated:

I
3. = 2 1,42. p = 5, so, 950/, (2 7)

III
The weight coefficients Y1, Y2, .... Y2! which add up to one, are calculated by the

formula
“:4”— W. j=1'2“ . ..I.

2,r},th.,-hn; (28)

[SI

where r are the pair interseries correlation coefficients calculated by formula

(3) forojoint observation periods no1 at the reduction point (1-0) and the point-
analogs (i-l, 2, .... 1). '

Formulas (27) and (28) are central in the method of joint determination and reduc-
tion of the statistical parameters to a period of many years. The inverse dependence
of the weight coefficients of the point-analog y on the mean square errors (4) of
the paired interseries correlation coefficients 10 and on the mean square errors of
the partial reference quantiles (25), which decreaAe inversely proportionally to

the square root of the lengths n of the observed time series (1) at the point
analogs j-l, 2, ..., 2, is considered in formulas (27) and (28).

83
FOR OFTTCJAI.US£1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The desired statistical parameters reduced to a period of many years are calculated

by three weighted mean quantiles (27) for the reduction point 3-0 (see [1, 2, 10]):
the distribution bias coefficient

5.: ‘M‘3' ’en‘ﬁew _
’es‘1eu

 

' (29)
¢(4S.C.)+¢(95S.C v—2msos C)

 

the distribution asymmetry coefficient

ego-v" (so) -I (so).

(30)
mean square deviation
a..= TIM-3.... ‘3”
mean value
imam-«meow c”). (32)
variation coefficient
C‘.=-% (33)

1he statistical parameters (mean. CV. C3) are successively reduced to a period of
many years at the points 3-1, 2. .... 1-1 in an analogous manner, taking the
points with longer observation periods as the analogs, that is, successively, with
the numbers

i-L
i-ll '—'v
i-l, l—I. l-—2

and so on.

By the statistical parameters reduced to a unique period of many years (n2 years)
at 2+1 observation points

El. 0’, C”. 1-0.}. . ¢ . .1. (34)

using the Goodrich equation (9) or the existing tables of normalized quaniiles
[2, S. 10], the analytical cellular probability guarantee curves are constructed

p=P(XI)O xI=FIIPID 1:00 In. ' '0’. (35)

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the observed time series (1) are normalized according to these curves by
double functional transformation (see [2, 3])

a": ?-' (P‘xj‘)l ' "(Xu), I: ‘o 2. o o s p “1;! = of}: o o c u (I (x)
where 9"[1’ (”I'M is the inVerse function (quantile) of the normalized
normal overestimation probability distribution

a P
- ‘ 'Tdt- Mn] (37)
x _ e 9
P( ) m “SI"

(see [2], pp 284 and 287).

The normalized pair interseries (spatial) correlation coefficients are calculated
by the normalized obserVed time series (36) for joint observation periods an at

the j-th and k-th points

a].
rain" ”ll
rI.-L:,T—z2u,,u,,. k+j=0. 1.. . ..l; (38)

a [ml
2 u;
III

the nunber of these Coefficients

for rjksrkj.

The intraseries (time) normalized autocorrelation coefficients for adjacent terms
of each normalized time series are also calculated,

'I
l§“ﬁ”I.I-l a, (39)
fI=—.;—.=I=_I=|l=-z taunt—1. 1:0.1. . . . .L
. I.)
2U;‘° z I}.
(I? lrl

In the case of significant inequalities of the observation periods (number of
years) at four points j-O, l. 2, 3

ﬂo<ﬂl<ﬂ3<ng (2*)
we shall consider three versions of extension of the normalized observation series

(36) at point [-0 success1vc1y
- ' o I I O
u..' no] “no “to (

with respect to longer normalized observed series (36) at the points 1-1, 2, 3
wing the normalized conditional distribution equations or, in brief. according to

the rcduct ion equa t ions:

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) by the observations at one point 3-3

 

ll“:ro_-_ﬂ,,~+VI-rﬁ, It". l‘n.+l. n.+2.. o ..n; (40)

D

where r03 is the pair correlation coefficient between normalized observed series at
the points 1-0, 3-3 calculated by formula (38).

Ch: ?" (I'd are the quantiles of the normalized normal distribution defined by
a special table (see [2]. p 287) or determined directly by computer as inverse
functions from equation (37) for random values of the conditional overestimation

probabilities p1 defined by a random number table (see [2], p 3310) or generated by
computer;

2) by observations at two points 3-2, 3

”w=kn2“:l+ku“u+I/l-ﬁfm “1,. I=M+Luo+2n . um: (41)

3) by observations at three points 5.1. 2, 3
u. = k,',,u,, + my + Rana + (62)
+IIi-Ig‘u “1,. ‘=no+‘.n.+2oo - 0-,“:

where k02' k03 are the coefficients in the regression equation “01 with respect to
“21v “31

:91 = he. “a. + *0: “an

(1.3)
which is the determinant term in equation (101). I001, “02’ k'03 are the
coefficients in the regression equation “Oi with respect to "11’ u”, u31

8., = ‘3‘ It" +ké1uﬂ + k;; a." (“1.)

which is the determinant term in equation (42).

The regreSSion coefficients k0

, k and k' , k' , k' are defined by solving the
systems of linear normal equationsozs 05]) 02 03

ee [2,

ken-Ha: 1300““: l (45)
’32 bm+kusfas I.

kg" + ruff” + hits: I! r..
’ukol + *3? + rut?” = r”
rau‘én+'n*&.~+"éu=’n - (106)

The summary set correlation coefficients 8023 and R9123 for joint observation periods
at the points 1-0, 2. 3 and j-O, l, 2. 3 entering nto the reduction equations (41)

and (1.2), are calculated by the formulas (see the righthand sides in equations
(45) and (1.6))

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ran-fog hog-Fro; k”.
(67)
R3”): 7“ k6, +r..h;2+ rogkfu. (as)

The transition from the normalized terms of the series 1 reproduced by equations
(tom-(42) to the initial values ‘Oi'f(“g1) is made by us ng the distribution curves
(35) reduced to a period of many years y double functional transformation

x..= new.» I: n. +1. n.+-.. - .. n1. nl=n.- a» "u “'9’

where ﬂu) is a normalized normal distribution function (37) (for the values of
which see [2], p 281.). Let us note that the transformations (36) and (49) are
reversible with respect to each other.

Joining the observed series (1) and the corresponding reduced series (49) together,
we obtain extended time series

4-“ = x," x". . . . , In“, x., n. + l, . . . , 4'“,nt -= 11,, m. 11,. (50)

Analogously, according to equations of the type of (hm-(69) it is possible to
extend the time series at the points 1-1. 2 with respect to longer observed series
at the points 3-2. 3.

The extension of the proposed method for joint extension of four or ante time series
does not encounter any theoretical difficulties.

The reduction equation (40) represents the normalized conditional distribution of
all possible values of “01 at the reduction point 3-0 for any fixed observed value
of u31 at the point analog j-3 and permits quantitative estimation of the relation
of the values of the regression (statistically determined) tern

nary = ”n ([001)

and random term

"a._;0£=| "rg3“'l

(40;)

vi th respect to the corresponding weight (unnornnlized) coefficients rm and

ll-r203:

r." I‘) 0.2 0.3 0.‘ 0.6 0.8 0.9 0.93 0.98 0.99 [.0

 

VI «3. 1.0 0.93 0.96 om 0.90 0.60 0,44 0,3: 0,20 o," 0

Hence, it is obvious that even for very high interseries correlation coefficients
(ro3-O.95-0.99), the addition of the random term to the regression line still
remains highly significant. his important fact can be detected only for normali-
zation of the time. series. It falls out of consideration when extending (and
modeling) the tine series without proper consideration of the random term and

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

without application of normalization [8, 9]. The method of reduction of time
unrirﬁ in a period of many years used in references [8, 9] leads to a distorted
structure of the extended series and high or low mean value, depending on the
relation of the mean values of the terms of the series at the point analog for
long and short (joint) time periods. These deficiencies of the methods of [8. 9]

disappear only for a single valuailinear relation between the corresponding terms
of the investigated time series.

It is expedient to generalize the spatial regression equations of the type of (43)-

(44) by introducing one more time argument “0.1-1' that is, the observed (for iano)

or reduced (for i>no) normalized values at the point 1-0 for the preceding 1-1
years (or another calculated time interval):

i
3.,=k.uu..-n + 2‘01"!" 1=n.+i. n.+2.. . .. .. (51)

[:I

where the regression coefficients Ito, k0“, kOm-hl’ ... k0: are defined by solving
a system of t-m+2 linear normal equations

*0 4' ’OronkOnI + font-who...“ 1- . . . + riﬂe”: r.
’c’mo‘o + *0. + '-.a+lko.n+l + - - - + ’au'o: = ’0. (52)
rerun-I «k. + fq¢|_ ‘kOn 4' km .44 + . , . + rﬂ‘HulkOl: '0..+.

....... aloe-cecalotoooloooo

............ a. ooaaooaeoaoo

'r'lﬂko +r1-k0u +’l.a+lk0.-+| + . . . + ku=r“

Here to is the intraseries (time) normalized autocorrelation coefficient calculated

by formula (39) for the point 3-0; the interseries (spatial) correlation coefficients
r01. 'jk are calculated by formula (38).

For the generalized time-space normalized regression equation (51), the square of

the set correlation coefficient R3“...l is calculated by a formula of the type of
(48):

I
Riln...l=’nko:"z ’olkop M=1.2,. . ..l—l. (53)
I.

The man square errors of the regression coefficients 1‘01 are calculated by the
formula from [2] '

/W‘.T ,
nc-il-qupm' /=M.m+l,...l, (5")

 

O. = I,’

where “c is the joint observation period at the points with the numbers 0, m, t,

000 is the determinant of the system of equations (52),

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

! I r u" a ’9’0. n+1 If“
I for" ' hum-Ll - I“,
D ! "ﬁn” a“... I - “+1:
“‘g. ......... .. ..... .......' (55)
’0’" I’m new . . I

Aj is the minor obtained by plotting the j-th row and the j-th column in the
determinant D00.

Regression values of {:01 are calculated by the generalized space-tine regression
equation (51) for values of i-no-O-l, n2+2, ..., “n' Then the reduced terms of the
normalized series are determined by t e equatim

”0:=;a.'rl ‘—]:M__'Iu"' l=no+InnO+2t' ' 't")! (56)

and the reduced terms 3:01 for extension of the observed short series at the point
j=0 corresponding to then with respect to expression (69)

Xunvi-I. 30.5“. - - . . Xan.- (57)

In the absence of analogs (l-O), equation (56) has the fora
“u=’~“o.1-I+Vl-rgu,‘. l=n.+|,n°+2“ ' ..N. (58)

This recurrent equation lakes it possible to model a normalized time series of any
length N of interest to us at the investigated observation point 1-0 and any other
point with the number 1 taken individually:

8|
ul‘="u[_g—I+V|—;Ia’l. l=lll+l.lll+2.. - ..N. (5 )

ioint modeling of the time series is carried out by the procedure discmsed in
reference [3]. All possible pair normalized correlation coefficients are considered
here —- spate (38). time (39) and span-tine r P between the terms shifted by one
number of every two (j-th and k-th) normalimd tine series defined in [2, 3] as

the product

r}... '5 r'll'DJ—l 'rl'no "l'j=0' 1' ' ' ’ 'l (59)

of the time (rj) and space (rjk) correlation coefficients. It is necessary to con-
sider that

r}? ,g r}; = “r”, r” I r". (59.)

The total matter of space-time correlation coefficients rig) and :8) is equal to
t(t+1).

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us remember that for total symmetry purposes joint modeling of 1+1 time series
at points with numbers j-O, l, ..., i must be carried out by the rule of cyclic
permutation of points using (2+1)2 recurrent equations of normalized distribution
conditions for 2+1 adjacent modeling steps 1. 1+1, .... i”. (see [3]).

For the case of joint modeling of three time series in reference [3]. nine (32)
normalized conditional distribution equations (21 )-(219) are presented in which the
first terms represent the regression values calcuIated by the equations (221)-(229)
as a function of the last observed or modeled terms in each time series.

Considering the last terns “J“j in the observed normalized series (36), the follow-
ing normalized time series are modeled according to the procedure of [3]

“uni-,9:- "We“ . ”um. I=0,I.. . ..1. (so)

supplementing the observed normalized series (36) to the length N of interest to us.

The transition from normalized modeled series (60) to the series of the investi-
gated variable (x11) is realized using the distribution curves (3S) reduced to a
period of many years by double functional transformation of the type of (69)

x,i=F,|9(u,,)|. i=n,+l. n,+2.. . ..N; /=0,l.. . .,l. (51)

Joining the observed series (1) in the corresponding modeled series (61) together,
we obtain long, jointly modeled time series at 2+1 points:

x,,=x,,, x,,.. . .. n.1, rm”... . .. rm. [=0.l.. . ..l. (62)

in conclusion. let us emphasize that the proposed method of joint reduction of the
statistical parameters to a single period of many years is applicable on satisfac-
tion of conditions (5) for pair correlation coefficients (3) and the errors in
determining them (a).

0n extension or joint modeling of time series. conditions of the type of (5) must
be satisfied for the normalized pair correlation coefficients (38). and analogous
conditions must be satisfied ft' normalized set correlation coefficients of the
types of (47), (48):

l-IF

R > 33,. 0,, = T—‘m (63)

Uhoft n is the joint obserVation period (number of years) at the investigated
points (j=0. l, 2, ... l;n'0.1. 2, ...).

The effectiveness of joint reduction of statistical parameters to a period of many
years. extension and modeling of time series increases with an increase in the
pair and set correlation coefficients and with a decrease in their mean square
determination errors for joint observation periods.

Bases on the observed time series (1). it is possible to perform all of the calcula-
tions and graphical constructions both manually and (more expediently) with the
help of a computer.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It must be noted that as a result of the interseries correlations, the random
"recoilling" points at the ends of the empirical distribution curves (6) correspond-
ing to rare extremal phenomena are not, as a rule, the reeoilling points on the
empirical curves of the relationship of values of equal guarantee (16). Therefore
the latter are more stable and are subject to more reliable extrapolation beyond
the observation limits than the empirical distribution curves (6).

Actually. in the equations of the relationship of the values of equal guarantee
(16), as a result of_the interseries_correlations, the empirical parameters of the
distribution curves "0’ 00, CsO and x . a , 681 calculated for joint short observa-
tion periods no , are. as a rule. deflect d to one side of the general values of
the parameters lorresponding to 1mg joint observation periods (“0j“)' Accord—
ingly, the empirical estimates of the ratios

.i'L @U’.Cnl i="2" _ _'l. (610)

entering into equations (16) are, as a rule. close to the true values of the ratio
(64) corresponding to long, joint observation periods (“03'”).

It is necessary also to consider that statistical parameters (29)-(33) reduced to
a period of many years do not have systematic bias and do not require correction
for short observation periods at the reduction points (see [2], pp [09-50. 149).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Alekscyev, G. A. "Graphoanalyticsl Methods of Determination and Reduction of
the Observations of the Distribution Curve Parameters to a Long Period,"
TRUDY 661 [Works of the State Hydrological Institute]. Ho 73, 1969.

2. Alekseyev, C. A. OB"YEKTIVNYYE METODY WRAVNIVANIYA I NORMALIZATSII
KORRELYATSIONNYKH SWAZEY [Objective Methods of Equalizing and Normalizing
Correlations], Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat. 1971.

3. Alckscycv, G. A. "Joint Modeling of Time Series Based on Normalization of
Distribution Laws," VONYYE RBSURSY [Water Resources], No l, 1979.

a. Alekseyev, G. A. "Problem of Determining Bupirical Quantiles and the Correla-
tion Coefficient," METEOROIDGIVA I GIDROLOGIYA [Meteorology and Hydrology],
NO [0, I963.

J. Aleksoycv. C. A. "Application of the Goodrich Distribution Curve to Hydrologic
Calculations." TRUDY NIU (315 [works of the Scientific Research Administration
of the Hydrometeorological Service], series IV, No 29, 1966.

6. Alekscyev, G. A. "Proper Statistical Description and Consideration of Time-
Spacc Factors of River Runoff," MEZHDUNARODNYY SIMPOZIUH P0 SPETSIFICIIESKIH

ASPEKTAM GIDROIDGICHESKIIOI RASCHETOV DLYA VODOIGIOZYAYSTVENNOGO PROYEKTIROVANIYA
[International Symposium on Specific Aspects of Hydrologic Calculations for
water Management Planning], Moscow. Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\‘clikanov, M. A. OSIIIBKI IZIERENIYA I MIRICHESKIYE ZAVISIHOSTI [Measure-
ment Errors and Empirical Relations]. Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1962.
(see Appendix II, C. A. Alekseyev. Finding the Form of the Relationship
Between Random Variables by the Quantile Method).

VODNYYE RESURSY REK ZONY BAH [Hater Reserves of the Rivers in the BAH [Baykal-
Amur Railroad) Region], Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat. 1977.

Rozhdestvenskiy, A. V.; Lobanova. A. 6. "Reduction of River Runoff Series to
a Long Period by the Method of Set Linear Correlation," TRUDY 601, No 163, 1968.

RUKOVODSTVO P0 rJ’R‘EDELEN‘IYU RASCHETNY'KH CIDROLOGICHESKIKH WWERISTIK
[Handbook for ‘etemining Calculated Hydrologic Characteristics]. Leningrad,
Gidromteoizdat. 1973.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDc 627.157
MECHANISM OF LIPTING SOLID PARTICLES OFF THE 30110“ 0? A TURBULENT STREAM
Moscow PETEOROIDGIYA I GIDROWGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 82-91

[Article by Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences N. N. Grishin, Hater
Problems Institute, manuscript received 23 Sep 80]

[Text] Abstract: A study is made of three basic hypotheses
with respect to the mechanism of lifting solid particles
off the bottom of a turbulent stream of water: the
effect of gradient lift, the bottomleddy effect, collision
of particles with bottom roughness elements
and with each other. Results are presented from an exper-
imental investigation of saltation of bottom particles
indicating the effect of the elasticity of the particles
on the probability of their being lifted off the bottom.
A qualitative comparison is made between the discussed
hypotheses and experimental data, and a quantitative
estimate is made of the probability of the realization
of these hypotheses under specific hydrodynamic conditions.
It has been established that in the investigated eXperiIents
collisions of the particles with bottom roughness
elements play the predoainant role in the mechanisa
of. lifting the particles off the bottom.

In the opinion of many researchers, bed load migration plays a very
important role in channel processes. Various probability schemes which differ in-
significantly from each other from the mathematical point of View, are widely used
at this time to describe this phenomenon. They can be considered either as repair
processes within the framework of queueing theory [3] or as versions of the prob-
lem of random walk of a point on a segment [32]. One of the basic parameters of
any stochastic system of movement of sediment particles is the probability of lift-
in the particles off the bottom. Accordingly, it is necessary to have a clear
idea of the physical laws of this phenomenon.

l[‘i‘ranslator's note: the Russian text actually says "natural eddies." but the
subsequent text indicates that this is a misprint.]

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F "(1“. USE ONLY

At the present time there is no united point of view regarding the cause of lift-
ing the particles off the bottom. Therefore we shall consider the basic hypotheses
of the mechanism of lifting hed load off the bottom, and we shall first per-
form a qualitative check of them using experimental data. Then we shall make a
quantitative estimate of the probability of realization of the discussed hypotheses
under specific hydrodynamic conditions.

As the experimental data confirming or refuting one hypothesis or another we shall
tsc the results of a study of saltation of spherical particles in a turbulent stream
of water [7]. Let us present some characteristics of these experiments with indi-
cation of the mean square error of the values: particle radius ll-(Zi.50;Iv_0.02)-10"3 m;
density 01-(1.[0010.01)'103 kg/n3; steady-state free-fall speed in a liquid
W-O.283_0.01 m/scc; size of the bottom roughness elements equal to

(1.0010.02)°103 [Si-Climate. The dimensionless index of the bed load transport
stage (according to Francis [26])

V.r=(V, V”) -3.7 to 4.5,
where V* is the dynamic velocity,

v*0 is the value of this velocity for which the particles begin to mve. The
kinematic parameters of the experiments are presented below (see the table).

The particle trajectories were obtained by the movie photography method with a
speed of 1.0 frames/sec. A computer was used to determine the Velocity components
of the particles at different distances from the bottom by the trajectories. The
mean square error in determining the vertical coordinate of a particle was
5lzl-2.S-10'4 meter. The relative error in determining unit values of the vertical
velocity of particles lifted off the bottom corresponding to it was quite large:
(rSIUzl/Uz)-0.12. We could not be satisfied with this accuracy; therefore in the
numerical estimates we used values of the kinematic parameters of the particles
averaged with respect to a set of trajectories. Hereafter, this averaging will be
denoted by the symbol <...>, and a value averaged in this way will be designated by
a circumflex For example, <a>-a; <a2>-(a)2+02[a], where o[...] is the syabol
for the mean square deviation.

The average nuuber of trajectories N in the described experiment was no less than

I“; therefore the relative error of the average data was no more than a percentage
[11]: A A _.
(aim-U.) = (8 IU.I'U.- l’ A >504"-

 

l[‘I‘ran.~:lator's note: probably 10'3 is meant.]

9!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l-lewrlua-utal data m Ilw movement of spherical particles (lb-(3.501
0.02)-10'3 m, pl-(l.4019.01)'103 kglma) near the bottom of a
turbulent stream and estimation of the probability of realizing
the mechanisms of lifting particles off the bottom corresponding to
hypotheses A and B

  
  

ll: 9

< 09> ' LOG L25 1.43 16 :5
<1 u,> 1.03 1.19 1.32 IO-” 10-"
N 164 154 no l 10-9 10-”

Key:
3. Experimental data
b. Experiments
c. Probability estimate

Notes. 1. All of the dimensionless kinematic parameters of a liquid and particles
(except acceleration <dUz/dt>A normalized by the amount of gravitational accelera-
tion 9.81 m/sec ) are normalized by the amount of the steady-state free fall speed
of the particles in the liquid “-0.28 misec.

2. The provisional notation: Vx is the mean longitudinal velocity of the
liquid near the bottom; ale], ole] are the mean square deviations of the longi-
tudinal and vertical couponents of the velocity of the liquid near the bottom;

"D is the speed of rolling of the particles along the bottom; “x is the longitudinal
velocity of the particles after lifting off the bottom (in the layer le-O to 0.5);

N is the number of particle trajectories processed in the experiment; the remaining
notation is explained in the text of the article.

Basic Hypotheses and Some Experimental Data on Lifting Particles Off the Bottom
Hypothesis A: A particle lifts off the bottom as a result of large instantaneous
values of the lift caused by asymmetry of the flow of liquid around the particle
as a result of a significant longitudinal flow velocity gradient near the bottom.
Apparently thishypothesis is most widespread (see, for example, [1, b, 12, 17, 29,

34]), which raises some doubt inasmuch as the experimental checking of it more than
40 years ago by Concharov [2] gave negative results.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I"! ”I OFF-VIM. “SI-I ONLY

The experimental data on saltation of bed load particles moving along the bottom
know to us contradict hypothesis A, for exanple. the fact of a decrease in long-
itudinal velocity of the particles averaged over a set of trajectories (Fig 1)

when they are lifted off the bottom. It is obvious that the lifting of the particle
wider the effect of gradient lift must in the general case take place at instantane—
ous velocities of the liquid simificmtly exceeding the average value and no less
than this amount [16. 17]. Consequently, in accordance with hypothesis A, for the
liquid particles the longitudinal velocity on the average must increase and not
decrease as was observed in the described experiments and also in the experiments

of Francis [26].

      

1/1! . ,
Ly?! Z \
2 . "’I .
1 K '
_.
.I a: 1,0 «(n/r;

Figure 1. Velocities of lifted saltating particles at different
distances from the bottom averaged over a set of trajectories.

1 -— vertical. 2 -- longitudinal, 3 -- speed of rolling along the
bottom.

The vertical velocity of the particles averaged over a set of trajectories on
lifting them from the bottom decreased monotonically (Figure 1). This result
indicates absence of acceleration of the particles in the vertical direction at
least outside a thin bottom layer (to the first experimental point from the bottom
at the level 2-0.5 R). There is little probability that the gradient lift, the
average value of which usually is much less than the weight of the particle in

the liquid, could not only lift the particle off the bottom, but accelerate it so
significantly in the vertical direction in the time it takes to pass through this
thin bottom layer. The numerical estimate of this probability presented below con-
firms the correctness of this argument.

Let us note that in the general case the asymmetry of the flow around the particle
causing lift can arise not only from nonunifomity of the velocity field of the
liquid, but also the peculiarities of the form of the particles (the Joukowsky
force) or their rotation (the Magnus force). For spherical particles investigated
in this paper. their form obviously cannot cause asymmetry of the streamlining
flow. As for the Magnus force, numerical estimates [7, 8] demonstrated that under
the investigated conditions for bed load. this force, although it promotes

lift, is not its cause.

Hypothesis B: The separation and lift of particles from the bottom are caused by
the effect of bottom eddies or, in other words, positive pulsations of the vertical
camponent of the liquid velooi ty near the bottom.

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to this also quite widespread [2, 13, 23, 30] point of view, the particles
can be lifted and undergo saltation only in turbulent flows. This is contradicted
by the experimental results showing that saltation of particles occurred in the
case of almost completely extinguished turbulence [25] and even in a laminar flow
[26].

In the case of developed turbulence, the lifting of the particles off the bottom was
observed both for positive and for negative vertical velocities of the liquid wash-
ing over these particles [6]. The results of experiments studying bed load
saltution n): different particle sizes but the same density [6, l7] demon-
strated that under other equal conditions on the average the larger particles rose
higher than the fine particles. These facts are also unexplainable within the
framework of hypothesis B.

thn processing one of the experiments we tried to consider the movement of parti-
cles with respect to the liquid surrounding them directly when they are lifted.

This is not a simple problem, for it is necessary that an indicator particle of
neutral density used for visual representation of the stream of liquid be located
near the particle (at a distance not exceeding the diameter) when the particle lifts
off the bottom. In the experiment 170 trajectories of saltating particles were
obtained. and in only 14 cases was an indicator particle near the saltating particle
when it lifted off the bottom. Let us note that it is impossible significantly to
increase the concentration of the indicator particles inasmuch as this complicates
their identification on adjacent processed frames.

Out of the described 14 cases of lifting, in only two did the vertical velocity of
the liquid exceed the vertical velocity of the lifting particles, and in the remain-
ing cases the particles rose more quickly than the liquid surrounding them (see
Figure 2). It is obvious that in this situation it is hardly possible to consider
Vertical pulsations of the liquid velocity responsible for lifting the bed

load. A numerical estimation of the probability of realizing hypothesis 3 will be
presented he10w. . ‘

 

Figure 2. Example of lifting of a particle off the bottom for
negative vertical velocities of the liquid.

1 -- sultating particle, 2 -- indicator particle with neutral
buoyancy, 3 -- bottom.

Hypothesis C: Particles are lifted off the bottom as a result of collisions with
bottom roughness c-lcmcuts or collisions with other particles.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me ("11! I“ l'Nl‘ 0N} \

The given hypothesis is not so widespread as the first two, but it also has its
proponents (for example [7, 14, 26, 33]). All of the above-presented experimental
results fail to contradict hypothesis C, and some confirm it. Thus, the decrease
in longitudinal velocity of particles lifted off the bottom is easily explainable
within the framework of this hypothesis: on lifting as a result of recoil, the
vertical velocity component of the particles appears as a result of a correspond-
ing decrease in the horizontal component.

Checking hypothesis C, we tried experimental determination of whether the elastic
properties of the collisions of the particles with bottom roughness

clemenis influence the mechanism of their lifting from the bottom. For this
purpose a study was made of saltation of two types of spherical particles in a
turbulent stream of water. They had the same size R1-R -(3.5019.02)°10'3 m and
similar density ol-(l.4019.01)‘103 kg/m3, oz-(l.3519.01 .103 kg/m3, but they differed
significantly with respect to elastic properties —- magnitude of the relative
velocity recovery coefficient after impact e1-0.6519.07. e2-0.3219.06.

For the experiment 100 particles of each type were selected. They were coated with
nitro paint, which insured equalitv of the dynamic friction coefficients. Therefore
the average speed at which the particles rolled along the bottom were similar for
particles of both types (“01'0'36519'003 m/sec; U92-0.37Q:9.003 m/sec).

By taking movies of the particle trajectories, the probability distributions that
particles of both types would be at different distances from the bottom of the
stream, including the zero distance (the particle on the bottom) were obtained. It
turned out that for the more elastic particles the probability of being on the
bottom is lower, and the probability of beiagat greater height is higher than for
the less elastic particles (Figure 3).

 

Figure 3. Probabilities that two particles of different elasticity
will be at different distances from the bottom of the stream.
1 -- more elastic particles; 2 -- less elastic particles

Consequently, in spite of the greater density, the elastic particles lifted off
the bottom more frequently and with greater vertical velocity than the less
elastic particles, which confirms hypothesis C regarding the role of collisions
in the mechanism of lifting bed load off the bottom. 0n the other hand.
within the framework of hypotheses A and B, elasticity of the particles should
have no defining influence on the probability of lifting.

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. the only hypothesis which qualitatively does not contradict the presented
experimental data is hypothesis C. In all fairness, let us note that under other
conditions, for example, in the case of bed movement of the sediments, not only
particles moving along the bottom can saltate. but also particles that at first
appear to be stationary. Consequently, hypothesis C does not appear to be abso-
lutely valid, but only as applied to the conditions of the analyzed experiments.
For greater substantiation of our conclusions regarding the laws of the mechanism
of the lifting of particles off the bottom. let us perform a quantitatiVe estimate
of the probability of realization of the investigated hypotheses under the specific
hydrodynamic conditions of our experiments.

Probability of Different Lifting Mechanisms

Let us estimate the probability of the realization of different lifting mechanisus
as follows. Let us determine what instantaneous values the horizontal (or vertical)
component of the liquid velocity must have near the bottom in order that particles
lifting off the bottom be accelerated in the vertical direction within the frame-
work of hypothesis A (or B), as was observed in the experiments. Then, knowing the
values of the mathematical expectations and mean square deviations of the values

of the components of the bottom velocity of the liquid from the experiments, let us
determine the probabilities that the liquid velocity can assume values required by
hypothesis A (or B). These probabilities will also be considered probabilities of
realization of the indicated hypotheses.

It is possible to write the equation of motion of a single spherical particle in
general form as follows [9, 19, 28]:

‘ 'I
—-,4,-'=R'[.'J. -%+ 19%;(U— V) = 2r” (1)

where o is the density of the liquid;

t is the added mass ratio;
U and V are the particle and liquid velocities, respectively;

F1 are the forces: F1 is the hydrodynamic drag; F is the gradient lift; P? are
the effects of interaction of the flow with the so id boundary (displayed, or
example, with an increase in the values of the drag factor and added mass ratio
[15, 24]); F4 is the force of the excess pressure gradient for accelerated movement
of the liquid (the acceleration force, according to the terminology of reference
[9]): F is the force caused by rotation of the particle (the Hagnus force);

F6 is tne force considering deviation of the stream of liquid from the steady state
(Basset force); F7 is the external potential force (in our case the gravitational
force considering the Archimedes force).

Analysis of equations of the type of (l), which is fruitful to a defined degree for
Stokes particles which, as a rule, in the case of bed load interact non-
linearly with the liquid (Re-ZRIU—VI/v>l), presents significant, if at the present
time generally surmountable, difficulties [22, 27]. However, we have grounds for
significant simplification of this equation when used for our purposes.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’nie previous qualitative conparison of hypotheses A and B with the experimental
data indicates low reliability of them. Therefore it is sufficient for us to
estimate only the upper values of the reliability of these hypotheses. Here, we
can adopt a number of very significant simplifications of equation (1) under the
condition that each of them clearly favors realizations of hypotheses A and B. If
even with such simplifications the probabilities of the existence of the discussed

lifting mechanisms turn out to be small (and this does occur). they can be taken
as unreliable.

Hypothesis A: The following simplifications are assumed: a) the added mass ratio
is equal to zero; b) the gradient lift does not decrease with distance of the
particle from the bottom; c) the total effect of the forces directed toward the
bottom does not exceed the Magnus lift. Then the equation of acceleration of the
particle in some layer A by the gradient lift can be written as follows:

%=mp.‘7ﬁ:i’=JI—c‘=R'p(V,—U,r‘. (2)

Here CL is the lift coefficient; the index A denotes averaging with respect to the
hypothetical acceleration layer A.

Performing the averaging operation over a set of particles of equation (2)

%=R'p. %>J='—.‘7cixR'.ol< V,>‘.+s'lV.l+ <U,>‘.+

+°2[L:Il '- 2' < v.rU.r>«| 4' < Vg>a<U,>iI|

and neglecting the terms in the righthand side of the averaged equation, the value
of which is two orders less than the value of the lefthand side of this equation,
after elementary transformations we obtain an estimate of the longitudinal velocity
of the liquid in the vicinity of particles lifting off the bottom:

-—-7___—Tﬂ-'
.;V,>.=<U,>i+l/%:T'<‘—a=>,. (3)

we took only a positive value of the radical as physically more realistic. Thus,
if hypothesis A is valid. then when the_particles are lifted the speed of the
liquid must differ from in mean value Vx by .. <V,>a —-V(

VI"! K,‘ =—mtl—
of the mean square deviations HIVx].

The probability of this event will be defined using the existing representations
of the bottom velocity of a liquid as a variable, the components of which are
distributed according to a normal law [1, l7]:

P‘=P(%>K‘)=,T'ﬁ=j exp[--;-t‘]dt. (a)
A

c .r

100

FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For numerical estimation of the upper bound of the probability PA it is necessary
to estimate the known acceleration in the acceleration layer entering into the
expression for the velocity <Vx>A (3). For this purpose let us consider the
motion of particles in the bottom layer 0.5R thick - from the time of lifting off
the bottom (level 2-0) to reaching a height of 2-0.5R.

If inside this layer 0.5? thick there is a layer of acceleration of particles in
the vertical direction A, it is obvious that the vertical acceleration of the
particles averaged over the acceleration layer cannot be less than their accelera-
tion averaged over the 0.SR layer, that is, <dUz/dt> ><dUz/dt>o.5k. In the case of
constant acceleration which is favorable for realizaeion of both hypotheses. its
value is expressed trivially in terms of the average velocity and thickness of the

1 : -' 4
ayer <%>053=T< 03>”...

As is known [5]. the square of the mean value of a random variable is less than
the mean value 0fthc squareof this variable; the final estimate of the hypothetical
acceleration <dUz/dt>A has the form

(‘7?!) 3—}<U§>au>%<ua>zun~ (5)
I

For determination of the value of <Vx>A (3), in addition to estimation of (S), a
triple value of CL-0.6 favorable for realization of hypothesis A [18, 31] and a
value less than <UX>A'<UX>0.SR determined egperimentally were used. The values of
<vx>A calculated in this way and a[Vx] and Vx determined experimentally indicate
that in accordance with (3) for realization of hypothesis A instantaneous values of
the longitudinal velocity of the liquid near the bottom must deviate from their
wean value by KA'9 to 12 of the mean square deviations (see the table).

The probability of such events PA (6) estimated with the help of [21] is negligibly
small. less than 10'19 (see the table). Thus, inder the investigated conditions
hypothesis A appears to be unrealistic.

Hypothesis 3: Simplifications of equation (1) favorable for realization of this
hypothesis are similar to the ones assumed earlier: a) the added mass ratio is
zero; b) the total effect of forces preventing lift does not exceed the effect of
the lift forces (gradient and Hagnus). The equation for the hypothetical accelera-
tion of a particle in some layer A by ascending liquid flows simplified in this way
has the form

%am.‘7‘j: ‘zvz-CDRR'Pﬁ’r' (4%.

where CD is the frontal drag.

Just as when discussing hypothesis A, let us perform the averaging Operation with
respect to a set of rising particles and neglect the small terms in the averaged
equation. Here we find that if hypothesis 8 is valid, then on lifting of the
particles off the bottom the vertical velocity of the liquid volumes surrounding
them must have values no less than

101

FOR OFT1C1Al.USEiJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

’37FE"'7DT"'

<v,.>,=<u,>.+ ~¢op<77>“ (a)

that is, it must deviate from its mean value of zero by KB-(<Vz>A/0[Vz])-l3 to 16
Mean square deviations (see the table).

The probability of such events. that is, the probability-of validity of hypothesis B
is still less than the negligibly small probability of realization of hypothesis A.
and it is equal to [11]

p,.=p(th>xs)=ﬁjupieqm 10-».
5

For numerical estimation of the vertical velocity (6)3emoirical values of
<Uz> =<Uz> . R (see the table), the acceleration estimate (5) and the high value of
the frontaq 3rag CD-J favorable to hypothesis 8 were used.

Let us note that if the instantaneous values of the bottom velocity components of
the liquid are distributed not by a normal law [10, 20], then the validity of our
conclusions is maintained. This is connected with the fact that the values of K
and K3 are so high (see the table). that we can in general not make any assumption
about the form of the distribution of the liquid velocity components, and for
estimation of the probability of the discussed hypotheses, we cmiine the
Chebyshev inequality

p( ‘3" a: K) 6K"-

which is valid for any distribution law of the random variable [5].

Even for such an estimate (using a very weak inequality) hypotheses A and B turn
Out in practice to be unrealistic inasmuch as the probability of their realization
is on the order of 10-2. which is an order lower than that observed experimentally.

A numerical estimate of the probability of realizing hypothesis C similar to the
ones performed for hypotheses A and B is procedurally impossible. However, inasmuch
as under the investigated condition hypotheses A and B are clearly unrealistic, we
«nut adopt the third hypothesis -- that lifting of the particles from the bottom
occurred as a result of their collisions with bottom roughness ele- '
mean. Let us remember that even qualitatively only hypothesis C does not contra-
dict all of the previously investigated experimental results.

Our conclusion, however, should not be understood as meaning that the factors of
the dynamic effect of the flow on a particle (gradient lift, Hagnus force, effect
of the liquid velocity pulsations. and so on), not being the primary cause of lift
under the investigated conditions, in general play an insignificant role in

bed loud dynamics. Lifting of the particles from the bottom is the
result of the interaction or all of the enumerated factors, and possibly certain
others which have not been sufficiently clearly revealed at the present time.

102

INDR OFIWC1AL USEiCHULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The degree of significance of each of these factors in the lifting phenomenon
depends on specific hydrodynamic conditions.

In conclusion, let us note that the lifting mechanism in which the primary role is
played by collisions of the particles with bottom roughness elements
and with each other has as its corollary the possibility of greater turbulization

of the flow transporting saltating bed load Aparticles by comparison with a
pure liquid flow.

9.

10.

11.

12.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Velikanov, M. A. DINAMTKA RUSLOVYKH POTOKOV [Dynamics of Channel Flows],
Vol 2, lbscou, GITTL, 1955.

Goncharov, V. N. DVIZHENIYE NANOSOV V RAVNOHERNOM POTOKB ['Bed Load
Motion in a Uniform Flow], Leningrad-Moscow, ONTI, 1938.

Grishanin, K. V. "Bea Load Motion as a Renoir Process."
TRUDY 661 [Works of the State Hydrological Institute], No 190, 1972.

Grishanin, K. V. DINAMIKA RUSLOVYKH POTOKOV, Leningrad. Cidrometeoizdat,
1979.

Grishin, V. K. STATISTICHESKIYE HETODY ANALIZA REZUL'TANV IMRENIY
[Statistical Methods of Analyzing Measurement Results]. Moscow, MGU, 1973.

Crishin, N. N. "Kinematics of Solid Particles in the Bottom Region of a
Turbulent Flow and the Probability of Their Collisions," VINITI (DEP.),
RZH MEKHANIKA [Mechanics Abstract Journal], No 8, 1977.

Grishin. N. N. "Some Physical Laue of Motion of Solid Particles in the
Bottom Region of a Turbulent Flow," VTNITI (DEP.), RZH MEKHANIKA, No 7, 1978.

Grishin, N. N. "Magnus Effect for a Spherical Particle Lifted Off a Solid
Surface," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA [Meteorology and Hydrology], No 11. 1979.

Kashcheyev, V. M.; Muranov, Yu. V. "Problem of the Effect of Magnus Pulsation
Forces and Acceleration on the Motion of Particles in a Turbulent Gas Flow,"
TEPLOFIZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERATUR [High Temperature Thermal Physics], Vol 13.

No S, 1975.

Klein, 8.; Reynolds. H.; Straub. P.; Ranstedler, P. "Structure of Turbulent
Boundary Layers," MBKHANIKA [Mechanics], No 4, 1969.

Kramer, C. HATEMATICHESKIYE moor STATISTIKI [Mathematical Methods of
Statistics]. Moscow, Mir, 1975.

Levi, I. I. INZHBNERNAYA GIDROLOCIYA [Engineering Hydrology], Moscow,
Vysshaya shkola. 1967.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

l8.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mikhaylova, N. A. PERENOS TVERDYIGI OIASTITS TURBUIENTNYHI POTOKAHI VOUY
[Solid Particle Transport by Turbulent Streams of Hater], Leningrad,
Gidroneteoizdat, 1966.

Olevinskaya, S. K. "Experimental Study of the Saltation of Gravel in a
Turbulent Stream," author's review of dissertation for a scientific degree.
Moscow, MGU, 1976.

Rimn, I. 8.; Kreps, R. 1.. "Additional Masses of Bodies of Different Shapes,"
TRUDY TSACI [Works of the Central Institute of Aerohydrodynanics], No 635,
1947.

Romanovskiy, V. V. "Study of Bed Load Displacement Velocity."
TRUDY 661, No 2102, 1977.

Rossinskiy, K. I.; Lyubomirova, K. 5. "Basic Laws of Motion of River Bed
Load " VODNYYE RESURSY [Water Resources], No 1, 1972.

Rossinskiy, K. 1.; Arbudiyeva, K. M. "Flw Around Bodies in a Turbulent
Stream Near a Solid Surface," VODNYYB RESURSY, No 6, 1977.

Sou. S. GIDRODINAMIKA MNOGOI’AZNYK'H SEED. [Hydrodynamics of Multiphase Media),
Moscow, Mir, 1971.

Ihragimov, M. Kh.; Subbotin, V. 1.; Bobkov, V. P.; Sabeyev, G. 1.;
Taranov, G. S. STRUKTURA TURBULENTIDGO POTOKA I MEKIIANIZM TEPLOOBHENA V
KANALAKH [Structure of a Turbulent Flow and Heat Exchange Mechanism in
Channels], Moscow, Atomizdst, 1978.

TABLITSY VEROYATNOSTNYKH FUNK'I'SIY [Tables of Probability Functions]. MOSCOW,
VTS AN SSSR, Vol 2, 1970.

Fidman, a. A. "Theory of the Motion of Suspended Bed Load " DINAMIKA I
TERHIKA RECHNYKH POTOKOV [Dynamics and Thermics of River Flows], Moscow,
Nauka, 1972.

l-‘omenko, c. 5. "Study of the Kinematic Structure of a Flow and the Motion of
Particles in Its Bottom Zone," author's review of dissertation for scientific
degree, Moscow. MCU. 1975.

Huppcl. J.; Brenner, G. GIDRODINAMIKA PR1 MALYIOI CHISLAKH REYML'DSA
[Hydrodynamics in the Presence of Small Reynolds ﬂutters], Moscow, Mir,
1976.

Bagnold, R. A. "Some Flume Experiment on Large Grains But Little Denser
Than the Transporting Fluid and Their Application," PROC. INST. CIV. ENG,
London, Vol lo, No 1, 1955.

Francis, J. R. D. "Experiments on the Motion of Solitary Grains Along the
Bed of Water Stream." PROC. ROY. 806., London, A332, No 1591, 1973.

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2].

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Herring, R. A. "On the Motion of Small Spheres in Oscillating Liquids,"
CHEM. ENG. J., Lausanne, No 2, 1976.

Hinze. J. 0. "Some Problem in the Study of Turbulent Transport," PROC. XV
GONG. IAHR, Istanbul, Vol 6. 1973.

Jeffreys. H. "0n the Transport of Sediment by Streams." PROC. CAME. PHIL.
soc.. Vol 25, 1929.

Hitauhire, S. "Ekhine Daygaku Nogakuby hie," HEM. COLL. AGR. ERIN! UNIV.,
Vol 22, No 2, 1978 (referenced by R21: HEIOIANIKA [Mechanics Abstract Journal],
No 9, abstract 8 1095, 1978).

Shen, H. IL; Hans, A. "Einstein's Contribution in Sedimentation," JED ASCII,
No 5, 1975.

Todorovic. P.; Nordin, K. "Evaluation of Stochastic Models Describing
Movcmnt of Sediment Particles on River Beds," J. RES. US GEOL. SURV.. Vol 3.
No 5. 1975.

Tsuchiya, Y. "0n the Mechanics of Saltation of Spherical Sand Particle in a
Turbulent Stream," PROC. XIII GONG. IAHR, Kyoto. Vol 2, 1969.

Yalin, H. S. "An Expression for Bed Load Transportation," JED ASCE, Vol 89,
No 3. 1963.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551. 579
EFFECT OF TEHPERATURE ON SOIL MOISTURE POTENTIAL AND ITS AVAILABILITY 10 PLANTS
Moscow NETEOIDIDGIYA I GIDRODOGIYA in Russian No 5, Hay 81 pp 92-98

[Article by Candidate of Biological Sciences N. A. Muromtsev, Soils Institute,
manuscript received 3 Sep 80]

[Text] Abstract: A study is made of setting up experiments to
study the effect of air temperature and soil on the
capillary potential of soil misture under controlled
(laboratory) conditions.

he soil temperature distribution laws were established
as a function of the soil water-physical properties and
air telperature. The relation was established for the
capillary potential of soil moisture as a function of
temperature in two soils differing with respect to
granulonetric composition and water-physical properties.
An interpretation of this function is presented. A
theoretical explanation is offered for the laws of
temperature impact on noisture potential in different
soils.

‘lhe hysteresis phenomena of the soil misture as a
functim of soil temperature consisting in disagreement
of the values of the moisture potential for a decrease
and increase in temperature were established.

The soil moisture potential characterizes the water-tetanus forces of the soil and
the availability of moisture to plants. In practical respects the potential is
widely used to diagnose the irrigation of far. crops and evaluate their moisture
utilization [1-3], when studying moisture and salt transport processes [3], when
substantiating ' optimal drainage parameters. and so on.

Temperature as an environmental factor is the nest important thermodynamic parame-
ter functionally related to moisture potential. Hence, it is necessary to perform
a careful study of the influence of temperature on the moisture potential and
consider this influence when developing recommendations for hydrotechnical
amelioration measures. However, the effect of temperature on soil moisture,
especially in the optimal soil moisture range. has been studied very little. The
scientific literature available on the given subject [2] is meager, and the

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

information contained in it is highly contradictory. Thus, Richter [6] performed
studies on four soils differing with respect to clayey fraction (from 9.4 to 1.8.61),
and he established that the air temperature has the strongest influence on the
capillary moisture potential (Pk) in argillaceous and sandy soils: with a rise in
temperature from 15 to 65°C, Pk increased by 50 to 10 kPa in both soils. According
to Gardner's data [4], an increase in temperature in the range from 0 to 50°C leads
to an increase in Pk by 0.9 kPa for each degree in coarse-grained sand, fat sandy
clay and mountain-meadow humus soil. In Taylor‘s opinion [7], the temperature
effect in the high soil moisture range is low, and it increases a the moisture
content decreases, reaching a maximum for moisture corresponding to the lower limit
of moisture available to plants, that is, for maximum hygroscopicity. Kedziora [S]
adheres to an analogous opinion, but he points out that the effect of temperature
on Pk is felt more sharply in sandy soils than in argillaceous soils.

The primary deficiency of some of the referenced papers is the use of air tempera-
ture, but not the soil temperature, inasmuch as the dynamics of the air telperature
cannot coincide in time with the dynamics of the soil temperature. 011 the other
hand, a number of experiments have been performed under uncontrolled conditions,
which complicates discovery of the effect of the temperature on Pk in pure form.

In this paper a study is made of the effect of the air and soil teweratures on the
capillary moisture potential using information obtained under laboratory (controlled)
conditions. The procedure followed in the studies is as follows. Soil weighing

10 kg was placed in metal pots, in the centers of which a tensiometer and thermometer
were located. After establishment of the required moisture in the soil, its surface
was mulched with a Z-centimeter layer of coarse-grained sand, and the entire pot was
sealed with three layers of polyethylene film. An upper (0-25 cm) layer of alluvial
loamy and dern—podsolic sandy-loam soils widespread in the floodplain of the Moscow
River (the Odintsovskiy Rayon of Moscow Oblast) was used in the experiments.

The upper layer of alluvial loamy soil is light loan with respect to granulometric
compoaition and is characterized by the following properties: density 1.3 g/cm3,
porosity 45%, specific weight 2.70 g/cm3, least water capacity 22%, humus content
2.8%, granulometric composition sandy loam. No moisture level were created for each
soil: moisture on the H8 level (25.0% for alluvial loamy soil and 222 for dern-
podsolie sandy loam) and 0.7 H8. The studies were performed in the fall-winter
period of 1978/79; the air and soil temperature variations were created by alter-
nately placing the pots in heated and unheated room.

The nature of variation of the soil and air temerature, the temperature gradient
(between the air and soil) and Pk can be determined by the data in Figure l
(alluvial meadow soil, 0.7 HB). 0n the whole, during the study period, the air
temperature varied from 31 to 0°C; the soil temerature also varied within the

same limits. The maximum temperature gradient is observed in alluvial loamy soil
up to H8 moisture; for both soils with 0.7 HB moisture the tenperature gradients are
approximately the same. Analysis of the temperature dynamics indicates that all
the soil tenperature variations are synchronous with the air temperature variations.
Here, some delay in the soil temperature variations with respect to air teaperature
variations is observed for entirely understandable reasons in all versions. In
accordance with the temperature dynamics, the moisture potential gradient dynamics
were found which, however. correlate more with the temperature gradients than with
the temperatures themselves. This is explained by some "inertia" of Pk by

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

       

II

 

2 1’5 J11 10” I5

Figure 1. Behavior of the air temperature (1) and soil temerature
(2), the tewerature gradient between the air and soil (6) and the
soil moisture potential gradient (3) in alluvial meadow loamy soil.
1978/79.
Key:
3. P, kPa

comparison with the soil temperature (the more so by comparison with the air
temperature). Table 1 gives a visual representation of the nature of the soil
temperature variation and Pk as a function of the air temperature variations.

Three cases of soil temperature distribution with tithe presented in Table l as a
function of. the air temperature variation were selected from a large data file,
because the most frequent temperature determinations during the course of the
experiment were made on these days, and they can be considered random rather than
especially selected. Analysis of the data indicates that in each case on reduc-
tion of the air temperature from maximum values to minimum (lo October 1978 and

“ February 1979) and with a rise in air temperature from minimum to maximum

(6 October 1978), the variation rate of the soil temperature is different and depends
on the type of soil and its moisture. The temperature drops and rises most rapidly
in Version 10 (sandy loam, 0.7 HB) and mat slowly, in version 3 (sandy loam. “8).
With higher moisture (versions 1 and 3). although the rate at which the soil tem-
erature drops is insignificant, it is still lower than for low moisture. This is
explained by the high heat capacity of water by comatison- with the heat capacity

of the mineral skeleton of the soil.

with an increase in the soil temperature (and the air teuperature) the moisture
potential decreases. and with a decrease in teuperature, it increases. This takes
place because the surface tension (0) of the water decreases; a rise in temerature
from 0 to 50°C causes a decrease in surface tension by 7.73 dynes/cm [2]. Inasmuch
as an increase in temperature causes a decrease in a. the energy expenditures on
extraction of a unit mass (volume) of water from the soil consequently decrease,
that is, the water becomes more active. However. the degree of variation of the

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OII OFFIC 1M. USE ONLY

Table 1. Soil temperature (T“°C) and capillary potential of the soil
moisture (Pk. kPa) as functions of the air temperature (TB°C) in
alluvial neadow loamy soil (for 143 -- 1; for 0.7 113 - 2) and in
dern-podsolic sandy-loam (for 113 — 3; for 0.7 113 -- l.)

    

q.
—u
3’
':’
3

I. October 19 78

       

111.6 22 3.32 31.8 46.82 21.4 4.26 21.4 42.36
27.0 2 3.32 23.0 44.02 22.4 4.52 22.0 36.”
10.0 21.2 3.32 21.0 46.02 21.0 3.72 20.2 43.89
8.2 19.0 3.32 ”.0 47.88 21.0 3.72 16.0 45.88
7.0 16.8 3.32 16.8 50.27 16.9 3.59 15.6 47.48
6.8 14.6 3.32 14.5 52.1!) 14.8 3.46 13.4 48.15
6.8 10.4 3.32 10.6 53.86 12.4 3.46 11.2 48.41
6.4 10.4 3.32 10.3 53.60 10.8 3.46 10.4 48.41
7.8 9.4 3.32 9.2 55.15 9.2 3.48 9.6 47.86
6 October 1978 ,
9.6 9.1 3.32 9.1 46.15 8.6 4.26 8.4 44.82
is“: 211.5 10.0 3.72 10.4 46.95 ' 9.6 5.72 10.0 41.10
10" 24,6 11.0 3.46 11.7 44.67 11.0 6.65 12.9 37.90
11* 25.7 11.4 3.46 15.2 42.41 14.8 6.92 15.6 $.31
12" 2.1.3 115.11 3.40 17.5 42.56 16.: 7.0- 18.0 35.51
13" 23.3 16.7 3.40 10.1 38.70 18.4 7.15, 19.6 5.24
14h 24.5 20.0 3.46 20.7 37.37 19.6 7.00 ”,7 35.24
13" 25.8 20.8 3.32 21.8 30.31 216 7.05 21.6 35.24
IN' 23.0 21.6 3.32 22.2 335.78 21.4 7.05 22.2 35.24
21" 26.2 24.0 3.32 23.8 35.24 23.4 1.45 24.0 35.51
25!" 26.2 24 .8 3.32 24.2 35.24 24.0 a .85 24.2 35.51
19 February 1979
9" 19.1 17.4 3.99 17.5 41.69 17.4 5.45 17.4 53.21
10" 0.2 16.7 4.65 17.2 | 45.15 16.6 3.12 16.1 51.74
11" -1.2 13.9 4.65 15.0 ' 50.01 14.0 5.05 12.9 54.53
12-" -l.b 11.1 4.65 19.8 53.73 11.3 5.19 9.9 55.46
13"- -1.0 8.3 4.65 9.8 56.39 0.2 5.32 7.6 5:».73
11‘7"- 0.-‘1 4.6 4.63 5.8 57.99 4.9 5.45 3.6 50 ﬁ

            

capillary potential of the moisture with variation of the telperature differs and
depends: strongly both on the moisture content and on the type of soil and its
eater-physical properties. The data in Table 1 indicate the magnitudes of the
moisture potential variations with variation of the soil telperature. It is
obvious that the maximum influence of the soil temperature on the potential is
observed in version 2 (alluvial loamy soil for 0.7 118), and the minim. in

version 1 (the same soil, but for 118). In the first case the maximum decrease in
Pk occurred on 19 October 1978 and ammted to 13.3 kPa (100 mm Hg) for 18°C;

in the second case the temperature variation of the alluvial loamy soil (version 1,
for 118) by 13°C (4 October 1978) did not cause potential variations (3.32 kPa).
The data characterizing the variation of Pk per °C are presented in Table 2.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

12-1th 1. lnrrmm- in l’k Pvl' ”C on variation of the temperature in
alluvial mndow loamy soil ("3 -- l, 0.7 KB -- 2) and dern-podsolic
sandy loam (llB -- 3 and 0.7 HB -- lo)

 

 

n... l ' L2—

    
 

 

        

 
      

0 0.0g 13 0.30 0,00 12 5.05 0.49
.21 0.71 14 0.40 0.24 10 0.31 0.58

.40. 0.71 12 2.11 0.17 12 8.25 0.03

.0; 0.72 12 2.00 0.20 12 0.92 0.07

a 41’ 3'33 '3 $0 8'}; ‘3 'l'i’. 3'3”

19111979 12 .00 0.00 12 0.10 0 14 2.00 0.10

Note. AT is the soil temperature gradient, '6; (Wk is the moisture potential
gradient , kPa; APR/AT is the increase in moisture potential per ‘0, kPa/°C.

The data contained in Table 2 were calculated by tvice-daily ‘ observations. They
indicate that the temperature gradients in all versions are close to each other.
but the potential gradients differ. In versions 1, APR are insignificant, and
they are frequently in the masurement accuracy limits. The maximum value is
0.065 kPa, and the minimum is close to zero. In version 2. which is an analog
with respect to moisture content (H3) of version 1, AP IAT are also insignificant.
but nevertheless, noticeably higher than in version 1 ltfrcan 0.01 to 0.210 ltPa).

The values of APR in versims 2 and lo (0.7 HB) are appreciably higher than in the
investigated cases. In alluvial loamy soil (version 2), APk/A‘i‘ are in a narrower
range of potential values by comparison with version lo (0.60-0.84 kPa and 0.19-0.88
kPa per °c, respectively), and the absolute values of Pk for in practice identical
temperature gradients are appreciably higher for alluvial loamy soil. Thus, for
example, for T-18°C, Pk was 13.3 We and 8.25 We, respectively, in versions 2 and lo.

Consequently. the data in Table 2 indicate that the nature of the effect of the
temperature on P1, is identical in soils that differ with respect to granulometric
composition and with different moisture. However, the degree of the tewerature
effect differs and depends both on the granulaaetric composition of the soil and
the moisture content in it. The strongest tewerature effect with ma moisture
(BB) is obserVed in sandy loam dem-podsolic soil; in lousy alluvial soil this
effect is very low, and it can be neglected for practical purposes. Hith a decrease
in the moisture content to 0.7 1-13 the greatest reduction in Pk with an increase in
temperature takes place in alluvial loamy soil.

The relations for the capillary moisture potential as a function of temperature are
presented in Figure 2 (alluvial loamy soil, 0.7 HB) and Figure 3 (dem-podsolic
sandy loam. 0.7 HB). It is obvious that in the first case (Figure 2) the relation
constructed by observations on different days is expressed by a straight line and
can be approximated by the empirical equation yum-PB. In the second case

(Figure 3) the function is expressed by a parabola type curve, and it is approximated
by an empirical equation of the type y--Ax+llx+c. Here the experimental points
corresponding to observations of T and Pk on different days, for alluvial meadow

110

FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

55

J:

95

9'

  
      

”; u n V:

Figure 2. Soil moisture potential as a
function of temperature in alluvial
meadow loamy soil.
1 -- with an increase in soil temperature
from 9.6 to 25°C; 2 -- with a decrease in
soil temperature from 30 to 4’6 accord-
ing to observation dates: 3 -- 4 Oct 78,
a -- 19 October, 5 - 1 November, 6 --
14 November, 7 -- 25 December, 8 --
19 February 1979 and 9 -- 6 October 1979.
Key:

3. P, kPa

      

o , w . n rt

Figure 3. Soil moisture potential as a
function of temperature in dern-
podsolic sandy loam.
1 - with an increase in soil tempera-
ture from 8 to ZO'C; 2 - with a
decrease in soil temperature from 20
to 9°C: 3 - with a decrease in soil
temperature from 30 to 6°C by observa—
tion dates: 3' -- 4 October 1978,
b -- 6 October, 5 - 19 October, 6 -
14 November, 7 -- 25 December, 8 --
19 February 1979.
Key:

a. P, kPa

loamy soil are characterized by less dispersion than for sandy loam dern-podsolic

soil.

The relations reflecting the effect of temperature on Pk with an increase in temper-
ature (from minimum values to maximum occurring in the experiments) do net coincide
with the relations (Figures 2 and 3, lines 1, 2) Pkf(T) with a decrease in tempera-
ture, forming the "plsnd' Pk hereafter called hysteresis. The function P f(T) for
both soils with higher moisture content (moisture for BB) is characterized by

very low closeness of the relation (a correlation coefficient of about 0.1).

Thus, the studies reveal the following interesting characteristic features. For
the same range of temperature variations (increase or decrease) the variation of Pk
is different and depends both on the moisture content in the soil and on the prop-
erties of its solid phase, primarily the granulouetric composition. With a high
moisture content the effect of the temperature on Pk in loamy meadow alluvial soil

is in practice absent, and in sandy loam it is insignificant.
111

FOR OFTWCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For moisture corresponding to 0.7 NB, the effect of temperature on P is signifi-
cant; The function Pkf(T) for loamy alluvial soil is expressed by a straight line,
and for sandy loam. by a parabola type curve.

The function Pkf(T) is characterized by hysteresis, that is, the dependence of the
potential on temperature during a reduction of it from the provisional maximum to
the provisional minimum does not coincide with the dependence of the potential on
temperature when it increases.

The discovered laws of the effect of temperature on the capillary potential of soil
moisture arise from the peculiarities of the water-retentive forces of the soil
determined by the prOperties of its solid phase and the water content in it. For
high moisture content in the soil (RB and higher) a significant part of the moisture
is held by the soil as a result of capillary forces and it is characterized by
comparatively high activity (the free energy of the soil moisture is relatively
high). In this case the temperature effect leads to an insignificant increase in
its activity; here the absolute magnitude of the increased activity depends on the
temperature variation rate, as a result of which the potential variation per °C is
different in time. In this soil moisture range the properties of the solid phase
of the soil are poorly manifested.

With a decrease in moisture content to 0.7 as the forces of its retention by the
soil increase. the moisture becomes more bound (the thermodynamic potential of the
moisture increases). its activity decreases, and viscosity increases. In this
case a rise in temperature leads to a significantly higher degree of increase in
activity of the soil moisture and its free energy.

With a decrease in temperature from 30 to 10°C in sandy loam dern-podsolic soil

the potential increases progressively to 55.9 kPa; with a further decrease in teap-
erature to 7°C, the rate of increase in the potential drops noticeably, and in the
7-4°C range the riSe in Pk in practice stops. Here the rate of increase in the
potential depends on from what uaxiuum level the temperature begins to decrease,
which causes significant fluctuation of AP IAT. In loamy alluvial soil the moisture
(with the same moiSture content) is bound hy high matrix forces; its activity is
lower than in sandy loam. The different rate of decrease in temperature has a
lesser degree of effect on the potential variation, as a result of which the values
of APR/AT are in a narrower interval (Table 2). With a decrease in temperature
from 30 to 4°C, the moisture potential increases progressively in the entire temp—
erature range. As for the hysteresis phenomenon of the function P f(T), its nature
and mechanism are still not entirely clear. It is possible that t is is connected
with different variation of the surface tension and viscosity of the water with a

rise and fall in temperature.
Thus, the data obtained indicate that the variation of the capillary potential of
soil moisture in the temperature range from 0 to 30°C is highly significant. The

decrease in potential connected with an increase in temperature in this range is
different and depends on the soil properties and the water content in the soil.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1M. USE ONLY

Up to now all scientific research, design and production work (the latter includes
the diagnosis of farm crop irrigation, estimation of availability of soil

moisture to plants and prediction of their moisture utilization) has been done in
practice without considering the potential variations. Ignoring this phenomenon
leads to serious errors in all hydrophysical, hydrologic and land improvement
calculations and in the plans and designs. Accordingly, it becomes obvious that it
is necessary to introduce the corresponding corrections to the potential in all

cases where a noticeable decrease or increase in the air and soil temperature
occur.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Muromtsev, N. A. "Diagnosing the Irrigation of Plants by Tensiometers,"
POCHVOVEDENIYE [Soil ScieIICe], No 1. 1974.

2. Muromtsev, N. A. ISPOL'ZOVANIYE TENZIOHETROV V GIDROPIZIKE POCHV. [Use of
Tonsiometers in Soil Hydrophysics]. Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

3. Sudnitsyn, I. I. DVIZHENIYE POCIIVENHOY VLAGI I VIAGOPOTREBIHIYE MSTENIY

[Movement of Soil Moisture and Moisture Consunption of Plants], Moscow,
Izd-vo M00, 1979.

4. Gardner, R. "Relation of Temperature to Moisture Tension of Soil," SOIL SCI.,
Vol 79, No 4, 1955.

S. Kedziora, A. "leyv Znizn temperatury i wilgatnosci gleby na vartose
potenejalu kapilarnego uody glebowei," PR2. GLOXIZ, Vol 18, No 1-2, 1973.

6. Richter, J. "Zur Abhandingkeit dcs Bodenuassertessides von der Temperatur,"
Z. PPLANZBNERNKHR UNI) BODONK, V01 131, No 3, 1972.

7. Taylor, S. A. "Measurements Soil Water Potential," ARID ZONE RES., No 26,
1965.

113
FOIIOFFﬂﬂAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.313(-062.S)
ANALYSIS OF SYNOPTIC SCALE HAVE DISTURBANCES IN TROPEX-72 AND GATE

Hoscow METEOROIOCIYA I GIDROLDGIYA in Russian No 5. May 31 pp 99-108

[Article by Professor Ye. M. Dohrvshman. Candidate of Physical-Mathematical

Sciences l. C. Sitnikov, Atmospheric Physics Institute, USSR Hydrometeorological
Scientific Research Center, manuscript received 11 Nov 80]

[Text] Abstract: An analysis is made of the characteristic
features of the wave nrocesses in the tropics by Soviet
research data gathered on the TRDPEX—72 and GATE
expeditions. The methods of determining the wave dis-
turbances are discussed, and a brief description of the
results of their application is presented. Waves with
previouslv knOwn period (a day. half-day) are determined
directly. Otherwise the periods are determined by the
spectral density. Examples of long-period oscillations
detected in GATE are indicated. An analysis of the
quasibiannual zonal wind cycle is presented. Some

characteristics of the tradewinds circulation are dis-
cussed.

One of the knotty problems of GATE was the problem of establishing the interrelation
of processes at low latitudes with processes in the rest of the atmosphere. There-
fore from the very beginning of the preparations for GATE in a number of the
national programs, in particular, in the national program of the USSR, the problems
of studying the large-scale processes in the tropics were considered as separate
items. In addition to the general problematics, individual aspects of studying
various circulation mechanisms were specified. Thus, one of the goals of the
TROPEX-72 expedition was "... determination of the phase of the quasibiannual
cyclicity of zonal flows in the equatorial atmosphere" [7, p 12]. on the TRDPBX-7A
expedition one of the goals was "... estimation of the wave disturbance parameters

in the GATE region and, in particular, in the intratropical convergence zone"
[8, Vol 1, p 8], and so on.

The primary concern during the TROPEX expeditions and all of GATE was compilation

of synoptic and aerological maps with maximum detail, the analysis of which was

not only to confirm the results of the observation data processing at various points.
but also to give impetus to subsequent analysis of the characteristic features of
the processes in low latitudes. For these purposes the basic data are the atlases
of synoptic and aerological maps [2] and the cloud photograph atlas [10].

114
FORTOF11CJAL.USEIDNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Before proceeding with a descriotion of the characteristic features of wave pro-
cesses in the tropics, it is necessary to determine what is to be understood by
disturbances (often identified with waves) in low latitudes and what the character-
istics of these disturbances are. Usually, by a disturbance we mean an object of
synoptic scale, that is, a scale of 1000 km detected against a background of a

zonal pattern, in other words, disturbance of the zonal distribution of the
corresponding meteorological element or parameter. Here the dimensions of the dis-
turbance from west to east and from north to south approximately coincide. This
understanding is unacceptable for the lowest latitudes: large-scale disturbances
are anisotrOpic here. and they are sharply elongated in the zonal direction. The
clearest example is the intratropical convergence zone (102): its length is several
thousands of kilometers with a width of a few hundred kilometers. (The structure

of the 1C2 is highly varied and closely related to the nature of the processes in
the converging flows [9], that is, the processes occurring on different sides of the
ICZ). The anisotropy of disturbances at low latitudes should not be forgotten,
especially in cases where the characteristics of disturbances of light nature are
compared with those for temperate latitudes.

As is known, GATE lasted 100 days; on 58 days of these 100 days (three phases) more
frequent observations were made by special programs. The disturbances having more
or less periodic nature, a period of T days, were manifested approximately

n:100/T times. If T is several days, then n will be sufficient to talk confidently
about the corresponding disturbance and its characteristics. For T310 to 30 days
the confidence in the results will be low. Analogous arguments are preperly
applicable also to space data: the GATE region is elongated longitudinally, approx-
imately 4000 km long; latitudinally it is 2500 km long. Disturbances more than
2000 km in size rust be interpreted quite cautiously. This is especially true in
that the African continent has a strong influence on the processes in the GATE
region; the conditions in the Indian and Pacific Oceans are different. Therefore
one of the next goals of studying the characteristic features of atmospheric move-
uents in the tropics is a careful comparison of the results of GATE and the Monsoon
experiments in order to discover common features and, primarily, differences of the
processes in these regions.

1. Methods of Detecting Have Disturbances

Characteristically. disturbances having a periodic nature can be divided into two
groups. The first group includes those, the period of which is equal to the natural
period detcrnuned by external factors: the diurnal and annual rotation of the
earth. 0n the basis of the peculiarities of the equations of atmospheric dynamics,
in a number of cases a semidiurnal period appears as the natural period. The

second group includes waves prOpagated with defined phase velocities not connected
with the mentioned natural periods. These phase velocities, that is to say, the
periods are defined as eigenvalues of some operator describing the dynamics of the
corresponding atmospheric processes. In the general case the operator is complex,
and to facilitate analysis of the broad spectrum of wave movements in the atmosphere
simplifications are introduced permitting isolation of waves generated by a defined
nechanism: Rossby waves (the gyroscopic effect), gravitational waves (gravita-
tional force), mixed Rossby—gravitational waves (the name itself defines their
genesis), and so on.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vurluun prlnrlplrx air lmvd an the bnsls for wave classiflcullon. The mentioned
types of waves are defined by defined physical factors -- rotation of the earth,
gravity, and so on. For analysis of the mechanism of atuospheric processes, the

cause of the occurrence of certain types of waves plays a no less important role.
The occurrence of waves frequently is connected with disturbance of the stability
of some process. Three basic mechanisms of loss of stability of the zonal flow in
the tropics are distinguished: a) barotropic and baroclinic instability, b) in-
stability caused by the release of heat during cloud formation (for examnle, CISK).
c) instability caused by the presence of heat sources in a flow that is nonuniform
with respect to coordinates. especially with respect to z.

  

4.:
(2) ”I; In» (!3)
an 3

 

,7,
o I I: n to"

Figure l. Diurnal behavior of meteorological elements.

a) pressure at sea level; b) modulus of the horizontal wind
velocity in the tradewinds zone (the dotted line represents two
harmnics of the Fourier series); c) tt-nperature (solid curve)
and salinity (dotted curve) on various levels according to the
TROPEX-72 and TROPEX-WI data.

Key:
1. millibars 6. 0 meters
2. m/sec 7. 20 mters
3. phase I 8. 30 meters
6. phase II
5. phase 111

l 16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This division is conditional for two reasons. First, it is not always possible
clearly to isolate only one factor causing the generation of a wave. let us say,
baroclinic instability (the velocity profile with respect to z or the horizontal
temperature gradient). Secondly, other principles can be used as the basis for
the classification. for example, the occurrence of disturbances as a result of
OTOSYBPhy, as a result of a sharp temperature gradient along the flow (land-sea),

and so on.

Here, if the appearance of an almost periodic disturbance of the wave type is
interpreted as a result of loss of stability of some (or several) mechanism. then
the systematic appearance of disturbances must be interpreted as a stable process.

For detection of periodic processes basically two aethods are used: 1) direct
determination of the amplitude (and sometimes the phase) of the fluctuation of an
entirely clear a priori known period (diurnal, annual, semidiurnal). 2) Obscure
periods are defined by the application of the appropriate procedure based on using
statistical characteristics of a sufficiently long series of observations. These
methods are often combined —- the period (quasibiannual zonal wind cycle in the
uupcr troposphere and lower stratosphere) is established approximately by empirical
data, then the fluctuation parameters are determined on the basis of statistics.
The most widespread method of discovering periodicities is the construction of a
spectraldensity graph (directly or as the fourier transformation of the correlation
function); the peaks are interpreted as the presence of oscillation.with the
corresponding frequency.

Oscillation with given frequency in the spectral function theoretically corresponds
to a "spike" of the Dirac 6-function type. 0n the spectral density graph this is
never obtained either on the basis of the limited volume of the initial data or
because there is no "pure" oscillation with an exact period in nature. An auto-
oscillatory mode with variable parameters can exist; the parameter variation alters
the oscillation period. (Obviously, this is the situation with the quasibiannual
cyclicity of the zonal wind and its three-five-day wave. The nature of these
oscillations is still to a great extent unclear.) These facts -- limited nature of
the sample and absence of a clear physical period —- lead to ”blurring" of the peak
on the spectral density graph. Frequently it is very difficult to estimate the
effect of each of the factors separately; therefore conclusions about the presence
of one clear period or another must be taken with a known degree of precaution.

When processing the data from the TROPEX972 and TROPEX-76 expeditions and all of
GATE, both methods of determining the characteristics of "purely" periodic and
quasiperiodic fluctuations of the meteorological element fields were used.

2. Brief Description of the Results of Studying Have Disturbances

a) Direct Determination of Characteristics (Diurnal and Semidiurnal Periods).
According to the data from the stepped-up observations during the expeditions

graphs were constructed of the diurnal behavior of in practice all the meteorologi-
cal parameters. These parameters can be divided into three groups. The first group
(Figure 1) includes those which are measured directly -- pressure, temperature,

modulus of the horizontal wind velocity. and so on. The second group includes
those which are obtained from observation data as a result of processing these data

117

FOR 0F11C1AI.USE(MNLY
H DR (WI-1‘ ’Ml. IZ'SF UNI."

(aw-raging, isolation of Individual components, sumation over defined time inter-
vals) -- zonal and meridional wind velocity comonents, hourly precipitation totals,
and so on (Figure 2). The third group (they are presented in Figure 3) includes
parameters calculated by the equations of hydrodynamics. In all of the figures

GMT time is used. In order to obtain local time, 2 hours must be subtracted.

     

7! _ _ .
, @
I . p,
H HMN’NM

(B)

 

it!!!”

Figure 2. Diurnal behavior of meteorological elements.
a -- meridional component of the wind velocity (1 -- for a latitude
of 12° on the 200 millibar level, 2 -- for a latitude of 5’ on the
200 millibar level, 3 -- for a latitude of 12° at sea level,
a -- for a latitude of 5° at sea level); b) zonal component of the
wind velocity (1 -- on a ship located at 6.5° north, 20° west;
2 -— on a ship located at 6.5° north, 27° west); c) diurnal behavior
of the amount of precipitation in the convergence zone 7°30' north,
20°50' west, the hourly totals were obtained for the averaging period
of 10—25 July and 6-21 August 1974. The smooth curve is a representa-
tion by three harmonics; d) the hourly sums of the total radiation
in the synoptic test area 6-27 August l97é (cal/cmz). ' If vertical
sections are taken’thcn a wave with a period of 3 to 5 days is
clearly manifested. The wave amplitude will be low during the
naming and evening hours and comparatively high at midday.
Key:
A. V, m/sec
8. hours

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Diurnal behavior of the vertical couponent of the
wind velocity at the 1:00 ab level (1 -- phase I, 2 -- phase II,
3 - phase III) (a); diurnal behavior of the divergence (106 sec”)
(1 -- on the 200 his level; 2, 3, lo -- at sea level for phases I,
II and III, respectively) (b); diurnal behavior of turbulent heat
exchange (cal/an-minn at different latitudes (l - 10° north,
2 -- 7.5“ north, 3 -- 5° north) (c); diurnal behavior of the ocean-
atmsphere heat exchange (cal/(cmz-ninn (l -- phase I, 2 - phase II,
3 -- phase III) (d) and diurnal behavior of the energy variation as
a result of large-scale noVements in phase I in the test area A-B
(l -- in the 1000-200 Ii: layer, 2 - in the 1000-700 Ii) layer,
3 —- in the 700-200 Ii: layer).

Key:

A. w. cm/sec

Analysis of. the diurnal behavior demonstrates the presence of a close relation
between the meteorological parameters, which makes it possible more .precisely to
define the measurement procedure and the procedure for calculating various values
and the construction of theoretical models of the circulation mechanism at low
latitudes. As an illustration it is possible to present the following fact. The
diurnal behavior of precipitation in the vicinity of cloud accumulations has two
peaks: during morning hours (0700 to 1200 hours) and evening hours (1900 to 21.00
hours); here the morning peak is more intense than the evening peak. 0n the
graph of the diurnal behavior of the divergence (calculated for phase II of GATE)
at 1000 and 2200 hours (local tine) there is a madam divergence at sea level.

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "VHF!“ “SF ONI \

 

Figure 4. Meteorological element spectra.

a -- Spectra of the measured parameters (1 -- ground pressure (peak
in the semidiurnal period region is shown in a different scale as a
separate peak), 2 -- wind velocity modulus averaged by the data
from three ships located at 7.5' latitude: 3 - temperature fields);
b) -— spectra of the zonal (1) and meridional (2) components of the
current velocity and temperature (3) at a depth of 500 meters.

III

 

Figure 5. Spectra of the zonal (I) and meridional (II) components
of the wind velocity and temperature (III) at different altitudes
in the atmosphere (the altitudes are indicated in kilometers on
the left) (a) and geomagnetic index spectrum (b)

days

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b) Discovery of Periodic Spectral Density Components. The construction of the
spectra for different paramenters was started immediately on completion of the
TROPEX-72 reconnaissance expedition using data obtained from 11 to 25 July 1972.

in the mesometeorological test area (the "Cross" formed by five ships at the fol-
lowing points: 4°56' north, 23°S3' west; 9°3lo' north. 23°39' west; 7°37' north,
18°35' west; 7°31’, 23°22' west; 7’19' north, 20°52'). Then the previously con-
structed spectra were more precisely defined during GATE. and the spectra of other
meteorological parameters were determined. As usual. the spectra were constructed
in the coordinates fS(f)/oz, ln f (f is frequency, 8/02 is the spectral density re-
duced to the total dispersion (03)). In addition to "compactness" of the graph.

in these coordinates the area under the spectral density curve is proportional to
the proportion of the dispersion which means it characterizes the proportion of the
energy reduced to the corresponding frequency interval.

Figure 4 shows the pressure, air temperature, ocean surface temperature spectra.
and the wind velocity modulus. (The periods are indicated in days on the x-axis

in all figures where the spectra are presented).

Since one of the key problems of GATE was to study the interaction of the ocean
and atmosphere, spectra were constructed for different hydronhysical paraneters
measured during GATE. Figure 4b shows examles of the spectra of the horizontal
couponents of the current velocity at a depth of 500 meters. The semidiurnal

wave in the velocity field is expressed very clearly, mre clearly than the diurnal
ane; in the temperature field these periods are expressed very weakly.

Figure 5 shows the spectra of different values in the atmosphere.

Attention is attracted by the peak near lo to 5 days detected in practice on the
graphs of the spectral functions of all the parameters, including those not purely
meteorological such as, for example. the geomagnetic index (the local characteristic
of the magnetic field disturbance). If the 4-day waves in the wind, pressure, teap-
erature and precipitation fields are interpreted as the result of loss of stability
of the zonal flow. then why is the geomagnetic index here? Ooviously, we are
dealing with something more complicated: the 4-day oscillation probably reflects
the internal autooscillstory mode characteristic of the atmosphere (and ocean) at
low latitudes. If this is so, then it is necessary to obtain it theoretically fror.I
the general equations of hydrodynamics, possibly using "magnetic" interactions.
How this is done is still unclear. On this level further careful processing of
the empirical data for longer time intervals appears to be quite necessary. Per-
haps, it will permit clarification of the general mechanism of the autooscillatory
mode and formulation of the problem of theoretical research store clearly.

it is also necessary to note that the maximum in the vicinity of T-30 days
correlates well with the 27-day zonal circulation index and that the maxim
corresponding to 15-16 days is traced at all altitudes to 95 km.

Inasmuch as the 4-day period appears in each element, it mist also appear on the
mutual spectrum graphs. This is obviously confirmed in Figure 6 in which examples
of the mutual spectra of different meteorological parameters are presented.

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0l~'l-'|( 1M. USP. ONLY

 

Figure 6. Mutual spectra of meteorological parameters in the layer
next to the water.

a -- according to TROPEx—72 data (1 -- precipitation and air tempera-
ture. 2 -— sea surface and air temperatures); b) according to
TROPEX—74 data (1 -- meridional and zonal wind velocity coaponents,

2 - meridional wind velocity and air temperature).

c) Approximate Determination of the Characteristics of Long-Period Disturbances.
Fluctuations with a period of 7 to 8 days or more cannot in practice be detected by
objective methods for a series length of 100 days. Nevertheless. in a number of
cases they were observed quite clearly. Let us present three examples. During
GATE, especially during phase II (28 July to 16 August), variations in the wind
direction from ESE to NE and back with a period of 7-8 days were regularly observed
at altitudes of 6-10 km. Possibly, this is a consequence of the passage of inertial
gravitational waves with a basic period of 3-6 days. Figure 7a shows graphs of the
behavior of the mean diurnal water temperature at various levels. At depths of
50-100 meters a periodicity of 7-8 days is clearly traced. Figure 7b illustrates the
time behavior of the latitudinal component.at the 75-meter level. A monthly rhythm
is to be seen.

It is highly necessary to accumulate a long series so that spectral analysis
methods can be accurately applied.

d) Determination of the Phase of the Quasibiannual Zonal Hind Cycle. The study of
the quasibiannual cycle requires a special procedural approach. Therefore let us
briefly describe the procedure for determining the parameters of this cycle.

Figure 8 shows the mean monthly zonal wind velocities at different altitudes accord-
ing to the data from several stations located at low latitudes. The periodicity is
clearly visible. but one harmonic is inadequate for description of it. The curves
can be considered as a realization of a complex random process consisting of

periodic companents U(t) and noise x(t). The periodic components are "useful"
signals.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N K 2.
a“)- 2 2(‘ll‘°"'::“

nnlﬁil
"nun-2,54). -m

where tm are the basic periods (which can be incompatible uith each other);

an“. bﬂ‘ are the coefficients of the Fourier expansion in a series with respect to
these harmonics.

”U

  
 

~
‘ -a '

12.2 J "151.721-”; 0 u

    

I

Figure 7. Time behavior of the mean diurnal water temperature at
different depths during phase I of GATE (a) the zonal component of
the current velocity at a depth of 75 meters (b)

Key:
1. V, cm/sec

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fill! ()I-‘FNIAI NSF ONIV

The spectral density was calculated by the formula

where

[(-1
tam-11v 2w (Mom

:31

is the correlation function. (It is more correct to insert the factor l/(n—r),
and not UN in front of the summation sign. In this case the estimate of B will be
unbiased and consistent. However. first, in this case 3(1) decreases more slowly
than the true correlation function; secondly, the presence of r in the denominator
creates additional difficulties when calculating the spectral function as cos-
Fourier transformation of the correlation function),

rum is the maximum value of 1' up to which it is possible to consider the values of
the correlation function reliable. Usually r is determined empirically until

u m n
the correlation function begins to shake sharp y.

2‘.“

"'T A! is the period; At-l month.

For smoothing, a "hanning" (sic) filter was used:

HI“)-
I a
- T(I+C05ﬁ) for .‘5w
0 for A)“.

Figure 9 shows the correlation functions for 11(1) and noise. Ihe noise is the
difference between u(r) and the sum of the oscillations eliminating the. greater
part of the dispersion. The results of calculating the most probable oscillations
for certain points are reduced to a table where the following notation is used:
U is the mean value of u; 02 is the dispersion of the deviations u' in m2/sec2;
u (tm) is the. dispersion of Qhe value of u—U(r) corresponding to an oscillation

with period tn; D(tm)= (ﬁg/0391001 is the proportion of the decrease in the dis—

persion as a result of oscillation with a period of t,; Mt“) is the oscillation
amplitude of the period tn in m/sec.

From the table it is clearly obvious that Do increases with altitude. that is, the
east wind becomes stronger: at 9° latitude the energy of the annual oscillation in
practice is equal to the energy of the 28-month oscillation; at a latitude of 118°
the quasibisnnual cycle is almost not felt at all; only the annual behavior is
clearly manifested; at the equator oscillations with periods of 26-27-28 months
take in practice the same proportion of the energy (the calculations demonstrated
that for tm-ZS months and tm-29 months the "draoff" of energy decreases sharply.
by 2-2.5 times).
. 12!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2: (2)

“mm“ .
.5553:

51"“ WI» 17L; in u m r 2"»

‘74" "VY'IV WWII,
z .51 .u :u Illa/0(p

'W’Vvvv‘vvv: '
:2 u

MWM
''70

I“ I. A 5-2! ’

mm .
AV- 1" V' :0”

lo I: 'u u I am

11

 

Figure 8. Time behavior of the zonal component of the wind
velocity (mean monthly values) for stations located at low
latitudes.
I -- Canton Island (23' south latitude), 1956-1967, Gan Island
(:2" south latitude), 1964-1974; II -- Howard (39’ north latitude);
III - Kingston (218' north latitude); IV - Nandi (218’ south
latitude): V -- Trivandruu (28° north latitude); VI -- Vozneseniya
Island (3 8° south latitude).
Key:
1. 20 n/sec
2. Mllibars

In Figure 8 the dotted line shows the results of representation of the initial data
by several terms of a series of the tyne (*). For example, let on present the
formula for u on the 20 at surface at Canton station:

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'3s
m - 7.! ”Jun-V‘-

2
—- 12.2sia-3-t—23cos-551-

—l.1ﬂa%;t.

5’ ’l’
M" t (1)

  

I! rm (2)

Figure 9. Correlation functions for U(1) (1) and "noise" (2).
a -- Canton, b -- Nandi, c - Howard, d -- Kingston
Key:
1. mzlsec2
2. 1, months

of course, the sample volume is insufficient and obviously there is no mechanism
realizing an oscillation with an exact period of 26, 27 or 28 months. However, the
fact that for this spectral interval there is a clear peak should not raise any
doubt. Within the limdts of accuracy of the measurements and reliability or the
numerical characteristics obtained it is reasonable to assume that the amplitudes
of the annual and quasibiannual cycle are equal at latitudes of 6-10'. It is also
difficult to consider that it is a random fact that for all three probabilities

(SO. 30, 20 mb) a period of 27 months turned out to be the most probable. Since
the quasibiannual cycle is traced over the entire equatorial zone, this means that
this is a manifestation of the global-scale circulation mechanism which can hardly
exist independently of other elements of the GAC [general atmospheric Circulation].
Therefore, it was important to determine andmore precisely define the phases of

the quasibiannual cycle during the TRDPEX-72 and TROPEx-7b expeditions. A careful
analysis of the field u in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere demonstrated
that "... westerly flows of the western phase of the quasibiamnual cycle with max-
imum velocity of about 20 m/sec at 2° south latitude were observed in the 18.5-
20.8 km layer. In the 20.8-34.5 km layer there were easterly currents of the

126

FOR 0FFNJA1.USE‘DNLN
H»! \‘H I\ I“ |\I> “\I \

Some Characteristics of Oscillations of the Zonal Component of the
Wind Velocity in the Stratosphere

 
  
  
 
 
 
 

Observationl
point, [Par
coordinates ieter
Canton
(is land) ‘1'
2N6'S W
I7I"3'H

  

quasibiannual cycle with maximum velocities of 40 and 42 m/sec at the 32 and 28 km
levels in the vicinity of 7.5' north latitude and 4.S° north latitude, respectively.
In the 34.5-38.0 km layer, westerly currents of the new phase of the quasibiannual
cycle were noted, which were replaced by easterly currents above 38.0 km. In

July and August the westerly phase in the lower stratosphere deteriorated, and only
the easterly currents remained in the layer from 18 to 34 km. The rates of descent
of the boundaries of the westerly and easterly winds of the quasibiannual cycle

are close to normal [7, p 36]. A similar picture was also observed in the summer
of 1975: easterly winds in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere were
expressed quite clearly within the boundaries of latitudes 5-12'.

3. Some Guaracteristics of Tradewinds Circulation

The tradewinds circulation is one of the main elements of the GAC manifested at low
latitudes. A detailed analysis of the aerological material obtained during the
TROPEx-72 expedition made it possible significantly more precisely to define the
structure of the tradewinds circulation both vertically and horizontally. It is
especially necessary to note the following facts. In the tradewinds zone in the
600-500 uh layer, a temperature inversion is observed whid: is called the second
tradewinds inversion. This fact is extraordinarily important, for it determines

the layered moisture distribution: under the first and second tradewinds inver-

sions are layers close to saturation,and the relatively dry layers are above the
inversions.

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculation of the magnitude of the wind divergence also demonstrated a layered
structure -- the presenCe of two divergence layers immediately under the inversion
layers and two convergence layers above these layers. This determines the labile
energy and latent heat transport downward - to the subinversion layers. The
materials of the TROPEX~74 expedition fully confirmed the existence of three block-
ing layers -- two clear inversions and a layer close to isothermy. It turned out
that the second tradewinds inversion and the thirdblocking layer are propagated
quite far; they are traced to 15° north latitude and 50° west longitude.

It is characteristic that on approaching the .8X15 of the ICZ, the recurrence rate,
intensity and thickness of all three blocking layers decrease. These blocking
layers are connected with the general circulation mechanism of tropical latitudes.

The [act that the altitude spectra of the lower boundary of the first tradewinds

blocking layer have sharp peaks in the region of diurnal, two-day and h-S—day periods
(Figure 10) speaks in favor of this statement.

 

Figure 10. Altitude spectrum of the lower boundary of the first
(1) and second (2) tradewinds inversions

Thus, the study of wave disturbances of a synoptic scale during GATE demonstrated
a close interrelation of the different mechanisms (tradewinds circulation, ICZ,
quasiregular wave movements with a period of a few days. quasibiannual cycle) and

the necessity for further study -- complex and comprehensive -- of each of these
mechanisms.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Dobryshman, Ye. M. "Have Motions and the Equatorial Belt (Zonal Model),“
.‘IETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA [Meteorology and Hydrology]. No 1, 1977.

2. KARTY POOODY ATLANTICHESKOGO TROPICHESKOGO EKSPERIMENTA AIEP [Weather Maps of
the Atlantic Trapical Experiment GATE], edited by B. s. Chuchkalov, Nos I,
II, III, Obninsk, 1977.

3. Lyscnko. I. A.; Petrosyants, M. A.; Portnyagin, Yu. 1.; Svetogorova, L. V.
"Periodic Variations of the Wind Velocity in the Lower Thermosohere,

Stratosphere and Troposphere in the Winter," MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA,
No 10, 1974.

4. Petrosyants. H. A.; Snitkovskiy, A. 1.; Fal'kovich. A. I. "Air Circulation
in the Intratropical Convergence Zone," HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA. No 5.
1977.

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S.

7.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REZUL'TATY lETEOROLOGIClIESKIKﬂ ISSLENVANIY P0 MEZHDUNARODNOY PROGRAMME
TROPEKS [Results of Meteorological Studies under the Internatimsl 1110an
Program], edited by V. S. Samoylenko, Moscow, Institut okeanografii AN SSSR,
1975.

Sitnikov. I. 0. "Problem of Scale Analysis of the Equations of the Dynamim
of the Tropical Atmosnhere," TRUDY GIDROMB'HSENTRA SSSR ['dorks of the USSR
Hydrometeorological Center]. No 197, 1977.

TROPEKS-72. TRUUY HEZHDUVEDOlSTVENMY GEOFIZIGESXOY EKSPEDITSII P0

PROGRAMME NATSIONAL'NOGO ATLANTIGESKOGO TROPICHESKOGO EKSPERIMENTA [TROPEX-72.
Works of the Interdepartmental Geophysics Expedition under the National
Atlantic Tropic Experiment Program], edited by M. A. Petroayants. et sl.,
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1974.

TROPHiS-Wo. TRUDY HEZHDUV'BNFSTVENNOY EKSPEDITSII PO PROGRAMME HEZHDUIARODNOGO
ATLANTICHBSKOGO TROPICHESKOW EKSPBRIHENTA. T. I. ADDSFBRA [TROPEX-Wo.

Works of the Interdepartmental Expeditions under the International Atlantic
Tropical Experiment Program. Vol I. Atmosphere]. edited by H. A. Petrosyants,
et al., Vol II, OKEAN [Ocean]. edited by V. A. Burkov. A. A. Rybnikov,
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat. 1976.

Fal'kovich, A. I. DINAMIKA I ENERGB‘I‘IKA VNUTRITROPICRBSKOY ZONY KONVBRCBM'SII
[Dynamics and Energetics of the Intrstropical Convergence Zone], Leningrad,
Gidromteoizdat. 1979.

GATE REPORT NO 17. REPORT ON THE FIELD PHASE 0? THE CARP ATLANTIC TROPICAL
EXPERIMENT. METEOROLOGICAL ATLAS. 1ICSIJ 8 "m, Geneva. 1975.

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.557z621. 396.96

INFORMATIVBNESS 0F METEOR RADAR USED 10 MEASURE THE WIND IN THE UPPER AMSPRERE
Moscow HBTEOROIDGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 109-1110

[Article by A. A. Gavrilov.- Institute of Experimental lbteorology, manmcript
received 8 Jul 80]

[Text] Abstract: A study is made of the problem of the informative-
ness of meteor radar (HRLS) used to measure the wind in the
upper atmosphere. An algorithm is proposed for evaluating
the informativeness of the MRLS radar. An informativenesa
calculation was performed for specific primary data pro-
cessing algorithms used on the radar measurements of the
drift velocities of meteor trails. It was demonstrated
that the most informative for investigation of the mean
hourly wind velocity components out of the investigated
four primary processing algorithms are the reference fre-
quency transport method and the phase variation rate do/dt
measurement method. The informativeness of the phase-
time method and the method with fourfold multiplication
of the frequency of the received and the reference signals
depends on the measured mean values of the wind velocity
and decreases with a decrease in them.

The radiometric method of determining the wind velocity is one of the simplest and
most convenient. According to the data of [8, 12], radiometeor studies of wind

conditions in the lower thermosphere are performed at more than 30 observation
stations.

Unfortunately. the use of the results of wind measurements obtained in the MRLS net-
work for meteorological purposes presents defined difficulties inasmuch as up to now
no criterion has been proposed for comparing the reliability of the radiometeor
measurement data for the wind velocity at the various observation points. and the
estimates which have been encountered in the literature [8, 11] are for the most
part of a subjective nature.

The development of quantitative criteria for comparing the wind velocity radiometeor
measurement data and estimation of the informativeness of the MRLS used to measure
the wind in the upper atmosphere are the purpose of this paper.

130

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE|JNLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY

For selection of the quantitative criterion let us consider the method of process-
ing the meteor trail drift rate measurement results. The basis for the majority

of the procedures [8] is harmonic or spectral analysis of the wind velocities V(t)
averaged for a defined time interval At. The choice of the corresponding averaging
interval requires a compromise solution with respect to the random error and bias
error.

According to [2], the bias error AVI of the function V(t) for the averaging inter-
val At

all, .3”? Wu). (1)

where v"(t) is the second derivative of the velocity, and the random error for the
same averaging interval

5v:- m— VP-ij (2)

where D? is the sample dispersion,
Dv is the dispersion,
N is the size of the sample.

Traditionally, At-0.S to 1 hour is taken as the averaging interval in the existing
procedures.

From (1) when V=V0 sin (w2t+¢2), V0160 m/sec, u I2n-2/T, T-Zé hr, we obtain
AVJ=0.S m/sec. For equipment of average sensitivity. for At-l hr the sample
size NIIOO, and according to (2) for Dv-900 mzlsec2 we obtain AV2=3 m/sec.

The sample mean velocity is calculated for the interval At

2V.

 

_ I (3)
V‘T-
me dispersion
2(VO-V”
0v“ ' N (a)

and considering (b) by formula (2). the sample dispersion.

Arcnrdlnn tn (2) D; depends both on the dispersion of the argument gv and on the
sumplv size N. Therefore it is reasonable to take the sample mean V as the basic
null of comparison of the measurement results obtained at the different stations.

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘UII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In probability theory [10] in order to estimate the measure of indeterminacy of

the random variable x, the concept of entropy H(x) and also the concept of informa-
tion Ix connected with it are introduced.

I, In”. (Ky-”3(1): (5)
where H1(x) is the entropy of the system before obtaining the information;
ﬂz(x) is the entrony of the system after obtaining the information.

Using (2). (5). and considering that the distribution of the wind velocity com-
ponents for the meteor zone over the course 0fan hout’ofobservatiog is subject to
a normal law [9], for the quantity of information about the value V we obtain:

P (
slog W 5:! (6)

where P1(V) is the a priori distribution density V with dispersion D1 caused by
the random structure of the wind field in the lower thermosphere;

P2(V) is the aposrerioridistribution density with the dispersion DIN-(D1+D2)/N;
D2 is the dispersion introduced by the measuring system.

For calculation of the dispersion D-D1+D2 let us use the formula obtained in [3]
for dispersion of the horizontal component of the wind velocity Dr'

D-D,-(D.+D.V;+ OM’D.)+I.3DR. (7)

where no is the dispersion of the distribution of the azimuth of the reflecting
points of the meteor trails;

vy is the mean value of the square of the orthogonal component of the wind velocity;
Au is the vertical gradient of the horizontal component of the wind velocity;

Dh is the altitude distribution dispersion of the reflecting points;

is the dispersion caused by the algorithms used to determine the doppler frequency
5 ift.

An estimate was made of the first term of the righthand side of (7) in [13]. In

the above-referenced paper [3]. the Contribution of the second and third terms of
the righthand side of (7) to the dispersion of the horizontal component of the

wind velocity D was estimated. In order to estimate the contribution of the fourth
term or the righthand side of (7) to the dispersion D let us write the formulas

for calculating the radial wind velocity component VR rand the dispersion for the
most widely used aiyorithms for determining the doppler frequency shifts [5, 8]:

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I. C. )3

V’s-:17. D's-7;),— (8)
for the time-phase method;

I ) ‘2

In lam. Dl-ﬁi’ (9)

for the tine-phase method with frequency multiplication;

wee-a). me; am

for the method of reference frequency transport or the "Stanford" method;

, I.

‘ _. ‘ 2 A, D (.1 2 I
R 29:1’ (n—l) [Tf' '- (ll-“‘5’; ‘ 4U!) (11)

 

for the method of measuring the phase variation rate do/dt; the linear approxima-
tion algori th- (LM) .

Here A is the "31.8 wavelength.

1‘ is the doppler period.

K is the frequency multiplication factor,
c1 is a constant.

To is the shift period,

q-A/s is the relative amplitude of the signal.
A is the amplitude of the aimal,

S is the noise amplitude,

t is the radio echo duration,

AT is the pulse following period,

n is the nunbot of pulses. M’n'°n'°n-l’
°n is the discrete value of the phase.

Averaging ”R in (8) with respect to all values of ‘1' and q and considering that
'1' and q are independent. we obtain

DR ___ SS0,(T,¢)P(T)P(4)47“- (12)

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Herc P(T), P(q) are simple distribution densities.

Using the formula obtained in [1, 15] for the amplitude distribution density of
the meteor radio echo. for the distribution function of the relative amplitudes
we obtain the following expression:

P (0)-O"- (13)

Considering that the distribution of the wind velocity cowonents for the meteor

zone hianhourof observation is subject to a normal law. using (8), we obtain
the following expression for the distribution density P('l‘)

. 15 VA (14)
Inna VH- exp-.gr-exp— mck— 2,“.

 

As was demonstrated by Manning [15], for measurements by the radar method the
I'"noticeableness of the slow and fast drifts of the meteor trails is different.
Considering the known dependence of the duration of the radio echo t on the rela-

tive smnlitude of the signal q: t-r ln(q/qo ), where q is the threshold signal/
noise ratio with respect to voltage, let us proceed 9n (13) from the distribution

of the relative amplitudes P(q) to the distribution of the durations of the meteor
radio echo P(t):

I l
P(l)uT‘eXD—T. (15)

where 1-1203/1632 is the decay constant for an unpacked trail;

D3 is the ambipolar diffusion coefficient.

Integrating (15) from T to m. we obtain F(T) -- the selectivity function of the
equipment for various drift velocities

Fiﬁ-exp—é. (16)

An experimental function F(T) was obtained in [4].

The experimental function and the function calculated by (16) agreed satisfactorily
for "0.25 second.

Substituting values of [’(T), 17(1'). P(q) in (12) we obtain

R'(V, t. DI‘ . (17)
0::

 

DR-

Performing analogous calculations for other methods of determining the doppler
frequency shift, we obtain the expression for the dispersion (DR)i

(11,), a _—‘1L. (18)
'u

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here the coefficients Bi characterize the accuracy of each of the methods. For
.1 sample size Nl for each of the methods used to determine the doppler frequency
shift considering (1.3), (1’0). (16), we obtain the following expression:

N
N. - (SP(T)P(0)F(T)deq--;#_)
h (19)

Key: 1. noise

where the coefficient A1 reflects the variation of the "noticeability" of the radio
echo responsible for the drift.

"noise is the number of cases of radio echo on the noise level qo-l.

Substituting values of D . D . N from (18), (19) and (7) in (6), for the informative-
ness I— we obtain the follw¥ng expression:

V
"v - '°c- /-m;—"'-'-‘—— 2., (20)
I! T + mo, 4— 0,73 4- MD.)
I;
u
U
15
19
a!

 

: I 9 5 0 q,-

Infonuativoness L as a function of the threshold amplitude q for
thr- lee-phnse method (1), the tine-phase method with fourfol
frequency multiplication (2). the "Stanford" lethod (3) and the dd/dt
measurement method (A)

In the figure the relation calculated by (20) for the informativeneas 1% in rela-
_t_ive units is presegted as a function of the threshold value of qg for

V=5 m/sec, 01-600 m lsecz, Au-O, 2-0.25 sec for four radiometeor ata processing
algorithms for the drift rates.

As folloVs ﬁrm: the figure. for all the processing algorithm the curve for the
informativeness L as a function of <10 is characterized by the presence of one

peak for small values of ‘10 and quite slow decrease in Ivvith an increase in do.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

l‘lu‘ maximum value u! I-- 1:: reached when the denominator in (20) approaches the
minimum. From the condition of the minimum of the denominator it is possible to
find the optimal value of the relative threshold qo. The values of ([0 that are
optimal for several values of the wind velocity distribution parameters and two
values of the decay constant of the meteor radio echo amplitudes are presented in
Table 1. For example, for the method of measuring do/dt. the value of qo of the
optimal relative threshold varies within the limits of 1.23 to 2.4, which differs
significantly from the value of qc-S.9 presented in [6, 7].

Per the same paraueters for a value of 110-2 according to (20), the informativeness
Ii was calculated. The values of L1. in relative units are presented in Table 2.
A! is obvious from this table, the host informative are the "Stanford" method

and the method of measuring do/dt. The informativeness of the time-phase method
and the methods of frequency multiplication depends on the measured man values
of the wind velocity and decreases with a decrease in them.

Table l
”1’ sec
Processing algorithm ”400 1600 400 1600
Radio echo with Radio echo with
"0.25 sec “0.125 sec
Measurement of d¢ldt (LM) 1.94 1.23 2.4 1.49
"Stanford" fo-40 hertz 1.49 <1 1.5 <1
Time-phase <1 <1 <1 <1
Time-phase with frequency 1.36 <1 1.38 <1
multiplication K34
Table 2
_ D1. ghee:
Processing algorithm V, m/scc WT—
Radio echo with Radio echo with
t-0.25 sec 1-0.125 sec
Measurement of deldt (LM) - 1.0 1.06 0.93 1.05
"Stanford" 5 1.02 1.06 1.0 1.04
fo-40 hertz 50 1.02 1.06 1.0 1.05
Time-phase with 5 0.89 1.01 0.82 0.96
frequency multiplication 50 1.02 1.04 1.0 1.01
K=4
Time-phase S 0.65 0.83 0.48 0.73
50 0 96 0.94 0.87 0 87
136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Table 3
' Processing'algorithm
D1, mzlsec2 Measurement of Stanford .Tineephase with Time-
d dt LM rz-zao hertz 'multinlication'K-4 hase
DProcedural/Dennerimental
400 54 31 28 18
1600 31 21 20 17

Using (7). it is also possible to estimate the contribution of the horizontal
component Dr to the dispersion as a result of procedural factors. The results of
the calculation by (7) for Au-O are presented in Table 3. In this table the value
of Dproceduralloexperimental reflects the contribution resulting from procedural

factors to the esperimentally determined dispersion.

From the data in Tables 1, 2, 3 and the figure it is possible to draw the following
conclusions:

1) For defined mean values of the wind velocity it is preferable to use the
"Stanford" method and the method of measuring doldt.

2) For determination of the wind velocity dispersion it is preferable to use the
time-phase nethod of determining the doppler frequency shifts.

In conclusion, it must be noted that the proposed method of estimating the informa-
tivencss is being introduced into scientific research practice at the Institute of
Experimental Meteorology. The developed algorithm for calculating the quantity of
information about the measured wind velocity based on calculating the increase in
entropy of a random variable can be used to estimate the reliability of the data
from observations of other meteorological elements.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Bel'kovich, 0. I. STATISTICHESKAYA TBORIYA RADIOIDKATSII METEOROV

[Statistical Theory of Meteor Radar], Kazan.
Izd-vo KCU, 1971.

2. Bendat, Dzh.; Pirsol, A. IZMERENIYEI MALIZ SLUCHAYNYKH PROTSESSOV
[Measurement and Analysis of Random Processes], Moscow, Mir, 1974.

3. Cavrilov, A. A. "Wind Velocity Dispersion in the Lower Thermosphere by the
Results of Radar Measurements of the Meteor Trail Drift,“ GEOMAGNETIZM I
AERONOMIYA [Geomagnetism and Aeronomy], Vol 19, No 6, 1979.

4. Gavrilov, A. A.; D'yachenko. V. A.; Il'ichev, Yu. D.f Portnyagin, Yu. 1.
"Estimation of Systematic Errors in Mind Measurements by the Radio Meteor
Method," TRUDY IEM [Works of the Institute of Experimental Meteorology],

No 2(47), 1974.
137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

1].

12.

13.

14.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘Kashcheyev, B. l..; Nechitaylcnko, V. A. "Problems and Means of Automating
observations and Processing Radio Meteor Data," TRUDY VSESOYUZNOCO
SOVESHCRANIYA P0 ISSLEDOVANIYU DINAMICHESKIIG! PROTSESSOV V VBRKHNEY ATlDSl-‘ERF.
[Works of the All-Union Conference to Study Dynamic Processes in the Upper
Atmosphere], Moscow, Gidrometeoizdat, 1976.

Lizogub, V. V. "Phesometric Studies of Radio Signals and the Problems of
Automating Their Processing in Meteor Doppler Radar," author's review of

dissertation for the scientific degree of Candidate of Sciences, Khar'kov,
1977.

Lizogub, V. V.; Nechitaylenko, V. A. "Optimal Threshold of a Digital Phase
Meter in a Meteor Doppler Radar," RADIOTEKHNIKA [Radio Engineering]. No 42,
Khar'kov, 1977.

Portnyagin, Yu. 1.; Shprenger, K.; Lysenko, I. A., et al. IZMERENIYF. VETRA
NA WSOTAKH 90-100 kn NAZEMNYMI ME’I‘ODAMI [Measuring the Wind at Altitudes of
90-100 km by Ground Methods], Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1978.

Pokrovskiy, c. 3.; Starostin, V. M.; Teptin, G. M. "Distribution of the
Pulsating Hind Velocities in the Meteor Region of the Atmsphere,"

IZV. AN SSSR. FIZIKA ATmSPERY I OKBANA [News of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean], Vol 5, No 6, 1969.

l‘ugachev, V. S. VVEDENIYE I TEORIYU VEROYA’INOSTEY [Introduction to Probability
Theory], Moscow, Nsuka, 1968.

Spizzikino, A. "Measuring the Wind by Radar Measurements of Meteor
Trails over Europe," TERIDSFERNAYA TSIRKULYATSIYA [Thermospheric Circulation].
Moscow, Mir, 1975.

Barnes, A. A. "Status Report on Radar Meteor Hind and Density Measurements,"
BULL. AMER. HETEOROL. 5°C., Vol 5’6, No 9, 1973.

Justus, C. C. "Distributions and Structure of Irregular Winds Near 100 km,"
J. CEOPIIYS. RES., Vol 75. 1970.

Kaiser, T. R. "Radio Echo Studies of Meteor Ionization," PHIL. MAG. SUPPL.,
Vol 2, 1953.

Manning, L. A.; Peterson, A. N.; Hillard, 0. G. "Ionospheric Wind Analysis
by Heteoric Echoes Techniques," J. CEOPHYS. RES., Vol 59, No 1, 19514.

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC SSl.(501.77l+507.2)
CALCULATING THE HUMIDITY OF THE AIR ABOVE THE SEA BY AIR AND WATER TEMPERATURE
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 114-117

[Article by T. F. Masagutov, Institute of Experimental Meteorology. manuscript
received 30 Jun 80]

[Text] Abstract: On the basis of analyzing marine hydro-
meteorological data from the TROPEX-72 expedition
(about 1500 observations) the relation was obtained
for the relative humidity of the air as a function of
the water-air temperature gradient in the presence
of unstable stratification. It is demonstrated that
considering the relation obtained it is possible to
construct a more exact method of calculating the water
vapor pressure in the air by comparison with the
known ones.

The existing manuals for weather stations and outposts on merchant vessels [2]

do not provide for measuring the humidity of the air. At the same time it is known
that knowledge of this value (or at least estimates of it) is extraordinarily
important to studying many atmospheric processes over the ocean in tropical lati-
tudes.

The methods of calculating the humidity of the air by indirect data can be found
in references [1, 3]. However, as will be demonstrated below, the accuracy of
these methods of estimation turns out to be quite low as applied to tropical lati-
tudes. In this paper an improved procedure is proposed for calculating the humid-
ity of the air over the ocean in tropical latitudes.

Calculation Procedure

The enpi rical fact of the existence of a correlation between the temperature 0a
and the humidity of the air ea has been established in reference [1]. If we

begin with the formula

8,, If'.("u). (1)

which is in essence a determination of the relative humidity of the air, it is
clear that there will be a high correlation between ea and 0a only in the case of
approximate constancy of the value of f. Here the value of 9H(°s) is the

139

FOR OFIHCJAI.USE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

saturated water vanur pressure in the air. The correspondence between the water
vapor pressure in the air ea and the air temperature 08 is illustrated by the

graﬂn presented in Figure l. The curve on this graph is taken from reference [1]
and approximately corresponds to the value of a relative humidity f-81X.

In the figure it is obvious that for a typical air temperature over the ocean in
tropical latitudes of 27°C, the error in determining the humidity of the air ea

by curve 1 will be 15~mb. At the same time, the characteristic value of the
water-air water vapor pressure gradient, according to the data from the TROPEX-72
expedition, is about 8 mb. It is clear that the accuracy of determining the
huuudity of the air by the procedure of [1] is insufficient in the case where non-
averaged data on the nature of variation of the humidity field in the water layer
of the atmosphere are needed. In practice. calculation of the water vapor pressure
in the air also by the method proposed in [2] leads to the same errors. Therefore
we shall limit ourselves to referencing it.

 

Figure 1. Empirical dependence of the water vapor pressure in the
air on the air temperature according to the data from the TROPBx-72
expedition

Results Characterizing the Mean Value of the Relative Humidity as a
Function of the Hater-Air Temperature Gradient

fpaaauuu nepenana reune arypu.‘C
:‘.’*= | 5 5 | :- lIT-"l'“.-".
i . . .

    
 

 

IG—t
|_
1&4

    
 

 

  
      

 
  

 

 

(a) 76.1 7.6 73.7 ' 34.5
70-35 $-91 66—92'65-94 93 Isa—96
rycra) mm mu (m). (19)

   
   

  
 

I
37.6 g 39.0
67—96.80—96
(94) - (an

    
     

NJ
W-M

782 6&5
w—m M-ﬂ u—m
(an) (4H) um»

(5) 3a at man

    

   

 

 

   

Key:
1. TROPEX-72
2. Temperature gradient gradations, °C
3. Phase II (11-25 July)
a. Phase III (6-21 August)
5. For two phases

140

FORloFFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFKWAI.USEI)NLV

let us show how it is possible to increase the accuracy of calculating the air
humidity somewhat by indirect data. It is known that when precipitation falls

in the trepics, the air temperature drops. As a rule, the relative humidity of
the air rises, and the water temperature changes insignificantly. It turned out
that the indicated behavior of the relative humidity of the air in general depends
not on the variation of the absolute air temperature but only on the water»

air temperature gradient (the water temperature varies very little).

In order to establish the quantitative nature of the function f(A6). the correspond-
ing analysis was made of about 1500 pieces of data from standard hydrometeorological
observations on the TROPEX—TZ expedition. The obtained results are presented in

the table. The gradations for the waterbair temperature gradient at 0.S°C were

taken from the condition that the errors in determining be are :9.2°C when measur-
ing by an aspiration psychrometer on ships. For each gradation the uean value of
the relative humidity and the extremal dispersion within the limits of each interval
A0 were determined; the latter was indicated in the tables as the mean- value.

The nunber of cases falling into an individual gradation is presented in parentheses.

Beginning with the results presented in the table, it is possible to draw the conclu-
sion that the most probable value of the relative humidity for A0}l.5 to 2.0°C
depends to a significant degree on the maximum recurrence rate of the water-air
temperature difference in the given region.

The results obtained permit us to propose the following procedure for calculating
the water vapor pressure in the air: the most probable value of the relative humid-
ity is deternined by the measured temperature gradient A0 from the table, and
corresponding calculations are performed by formula (1).

Comparison of the Calculation Procedures

The proposed procedure for calculating the humidity of the air is suitable only in
the case of unstable stratification in the water layer of the atmosphere (A9>O).
Otherwise (A9<) and for neutral (or close to neutral) stratification (AG=) it is

not possible to establish any laws between the relative humidity and the temperature
gradient. Therefore for A6<0 to calculate ea it is recommended that formula (1) be
used, setting f=812 (that is, the Malevskiy-Halevich procedure be used [1]).

Let us compare the calculations of ca by the Halevakiy-Malevich method and by the
given procedure. Independent (not used when obtaining the enpirical function f(Ae))
data from the "Typhoon-75" and TROPEX-72 (phase I) expeditions were selected for
comparison. considering what has been stated above, only cases were used where the
condition An>l.5°c was satisfied during the measurements, and the minimum distance
of the ship from the shore was about 300 km.

The results of the calculation by the compared and given procedureare presented in
Figure 2. As can be seen from the figures, the dispersion of the data decreased
during the calculation by the proposed procedure by approximately twofold and, in
addition, the systematic error in determining the value of ea occurring on the
basis of specific peculiarities in the behavior of the relative humidity of the air
above each specific region in practice disappeared.

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

17 27 :5 u 17 n :5 :9 0,,

Figure 2. Graphs of the correlation of the water vapor pressure
in the air calculated by the procedure from [1] (a) and by the
given procedure (b)

20

 

10
5;

1

Figure 3. Nomgram for calculating the humidity of the air by the
water-air temperature gradient (A0) and the air temperature 0a

The nomogram for calculating the water vapor pressure in the air ea by the assured
tellperaturo gradient A0 and the air temperature 6a is presented in Figure 3.

In addition. for calculating ca with the same accuracy it is possible to use the
approximation formulas

0.760 : ammunmuy for 30>o

r_, -

Nit-W.) for “<0.

1102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They can turn out to be useful in the case of the necessity for computer processing
of mass observation data.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Malevskiy-Malevich, S. P. "Determination of the Bowen Ratio Above the
Ocean," HE‘I‘BOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA iHeteorology and Hydrology], No 9, 1973.

2. NAS‘IAVLENIYE GIDROMETBOSTANTSIYAH I POSTAM [Manual for Hydrometeorological
Stations and Outposts], No 9, Part III, Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1971.

3. Snopkov, V. G. "Calculating the Humidity of the Air Above the Sea by the
Hater-Air Teuperature Difference," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA, No 2. 1980.

1103

FOR OI-‘HCIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE¢DNLY

UDC 551.501

APPLICATION OF A COMPUTER GRAPH FOR VISUAL REPRESENTATION OP HYDRDMETEORDIOGICAL
DATA ARCHIVES

Hoscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 117-119

[Article by R. I. Kofman. Candidate of Geographic Sciences A. V. Honakhov,
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometeorological Information -
World Data Center, manuscript received 29 Sep 80]

[Text] Abstract: A general description is presented of the
hardware and software making up the developed output
system for producing hydrometeorological data micro-
film on the EV" Yes [Unified Computer System]. For
graphical representation of the data, the "Karat"
microfilm unit is used which is distinguished by speed
of obtaining the image, precision, and short machine-
time requirement. In practical work graphical
displays of archive data can he used to monitor the
data and represent the data or calculation results in
visual form when performing scientific research work.

Two examples of visual display of data taken from the
archive magnetic tapes are presented.

With the development of computer engineering. a trend is being observed toward the
accumulation of large volumes of archive hydrometeorological data on magnetic tapes.
Here certain problems usually connected with the accumulation, storage and process-
ing of archive data, for example, monitoring the data, are complicated and require
additional efforts for their solution.

The computer graph must be considered as a useful tool when solving these problems.
In many cases it is expedient to represent the data contained in the archive
visually, in the form of specially selected displays. Inspection of these displays
permits detection of some of the errors in the data.

Graphical displaying of data can be useful also in other respects. Data (initial
or the results of calculations) which is represented graphically, frequently is
more viewable than the same data represented in the form of tables with numbers.
It is passible that the methods of visual (graphical) representation of data will
help in generalizing the materials from hydrometeorological observations which
already are available and continue to be accumulated in large quantity.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHK'IM. USE ONLY

in this article some of the results of the work done at the VNIIGHI-ii'l‘sD
[All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometeorological Information-World
Data Center] to improve the data representation techniques are discussed. In
particular, a system has been developed for outputting hydrometeorological data
on microfilm. This system will make it possible to output data in graphical and
text forms on microfilm from the EVN Yes [Unified Computer System].

The system includes the following:

The Yes-1022 computer, Minsk-32 computer;

Karat microfilm output unit;

Standard equipment for photochemical processing of microfilm;

A set of graphical program "GRAFOR-Yes";

Applied programs for outputting hydrometeorological data on microfilm.

The image is output on a 24XI8 mm frame at a speed of 6-12 frames per minute depend-
ing on the complexity of the image. During the operation of the system it is
possible to see the image on the screen of a cathode-ray tube (a special graphical
display). and also after developing the photographic film,on the microfilm
reader or simply by the naked eye; it is possible to obtain enlarged images by
ordinary photographic printing and to obtain originals for offset printing. The
high resolution of the "Karat" unit makes it possible to obtain images with a large
number of fine details. It is necessary to note the high output rate
which permits us to obtain a large nuuber of images on microfilm -- on the order of
hundreds and thousands in a few hours of operation. This property of the equipment
is especially useful for graphical representation of hydrometeorological data
archives. for these archives contain a large volume of materials. Another method
which also permits the problem of graphical representation of large volumes of
archive hydrometeorological data to be solved -- output on a graphical display --

is more expensive than output on microfilm, and it does not permit the images to be
retained.

Let us discuss the used hardware and software in more detail. The EVM Yes 'Computer

is used in the system to perform calculations and assemble the image constructing
program in "Karat" instructions. Direct output on microfilm is

handled by a "Minsk-32" computer. to which the "Karat" is connected. Commun-
ication between the computers is realized by magnetic tape. The operating principle

and characteristics of the "Karat" are presented in [1]. Standard 35~mm "Mikrat—
100“ perforated photographic film is used for taking the pictures. The film is

chemically processed in accordance with the All-Union State Standards on series
equipment which usually is used for microfilming.

The basis for the software of the system is the set of graphical programs GRAFOR
adapted to the EV" Yes computer [2]. The GRAFOR complex consists of a large number
of subroutines which execute various graphical functions, for example, the construc-
tion of a segment of a straight line, symbols and more complex elements. The
CRAFDR complex for the EVM Yes computer is constructed so that almost none of

the programs depend on the device which is used to construct the images. The

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristic features of this output device are taken into account in a special
driver program. Therefore the software includes the "Karat" driver. The
driver converts the operators of the GRAPOR machine language to instructions for
the "KARAT." As a result of production necessity (obtaining of aerological informa—
tion tables TAE-léA) the "KARAT" is at the present time connected to the "Minsk-32"
computer. Therefore two auxiliary routines have been developed, one of which
converts the instruction format and magnetic tapes of the EVM Yes to the "Minsk-32"
format. and the second directly controls the output to the "Minsk-32" computer.
that is, it finds the file and frame nuuber on the magnetic tape indicated in the
assignment, it reads the data off the magnetic tape and outputs the data to the
Karat."

 

Fragments of two computer-synthesized microfilms: a) with bathythermogram
images, b) with graphs of the annual behavior of air temperature

Since the GRAFOR complex consists of individual subroutines. a master program is
needed to output the data in the form of an image. Input of the assignment, input
of the data and calling of the CRAFOR subroutines to construct the images are
organized in the master program. The programs for constructing the figures pre-
sented here are such master programs. The package of programs (and GRAFOR sub-
routines) for constructing the image of archive hydrometeorological data is still
umle ran in); development .

let us present two examples of visual representation of data from two different
archives. The first example pertains to oceanographic data. A magnetic tape with
an archive of bathythcrmographic observations performed during GATE was taken for
visual display. Each bathythcrmogram is represented in the archive by a group of
numbers corresponding to the water temperatures at defined depths.

146

FOR OFIWCIAI.US£1DNLY
ma (Wﬂi 1M USP. ONLY

A program was written which mnde it possible to obtain microfilm with images of
individual bathythermograms, as shown in Figure a. The arrangement of the data
on the graphs, that is, the form of the bathythermograms and also the form and
content of the accompanying text were selected arbitrarily and theoretically can
be different. On the bathythermogram in the upper part of Figure a, distortion
caused by an error in the data on the archive mgnetic tape can be seen.

Thus, data contained in the archive on the magnetic tape were converted to micro-
film containing a graphical representaoion of the same data.

As a result of oceanographic operations under the GATE program. magnetic tapes were
obtained for the materials of approximately 10,000 bathythermgraphic observations.
These data are stored on three magnetic tapes in accordance with the three GATE
phases. Considering the speed of output of the images to microfilm and the compact-
ness of such data representation, it would be possible to obtain all of the data
from the bathythermographic observations of the three phases of GATE in graphical
form without extraordinary expenditures.

For the second example. climatic data were used —- the mean values (norms) for

many years of the mean monthly air temperature on the earth's surface at nodes of a
SXlO" grid of the northern hemisphere in 1931-1960. These data are a component part
of the archive of monthly air temperature anomalies for the earth's surface. Part
of the data in this archive containing the norms for the mem monthly air tempera-
ture were entered on the magnetic tape of the BVH Yes computer. Using the written
program, the data were output to microfilm in the form of graphs of the annual
behavior representing variations of the mean monthly values of the air temperature
for each node of the coordinate grid. Thus, a microfilm was obtained with 664

graph frames (see Figure b). Each frame, in addition to the graph, contains the
required reference information. Examination of the microfilm makes it possible to
ascertain regular variation of the form of the graphs 3 a functim of the geographic .
position of the corresponding node of the grid. Significant distortions are not
seen on the graphs; this indicates absence of gross errors in the data. A total of
about 1.5 hours of machine time were required to create this microfilm, that is.
output the data from the computer.

The "Karat" microfilm output unit is manufactured in small series. but it is possible
to use already existing units. For this purpose, by using the software described

in the article (or other software providing for the assembly of the "Karat" program
in the required format) a magnetic tape must be prepared on the WM Yes computer and
sent. for example, to the computer cente;.at the VNIIGH'I-lfrsb, where the "Karat"

is located for output on microfilm. It mat be added that the program for shaping
the image can be checked out on a plotter (for which the "Karat" driver is replaced
by the plotter driver during checkout). It is natural that this method is expedient
only when it is necessary to construct a large number of images, but the created
system is also designed for this use.

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

l-‘UIC OFFICIAL "SF. ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Avdeyev, V. 8.. et .31. "'Karat' Output Unit for Outputting Graphical

and Alphanumeric Data from a Computer to Microfilm," ELH‘I'RO‘IETRIYA
[Electromtry], No 1, 1976.

Bayakovskiy, Yu. M.; Mikhaylova, 1‘. N.; Mshakova, S. 1‘. "GRAl-‘OR: Set of

mRTRAN Graphical Programs," No 1, preprint No 41, Institute of Applied
Mathematics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow. 1972.

148
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REVIEH 0P MNOGRAPH BY V. V. BOGORODSKIY AND V. P. GAVRILO: 'LBD. PIZICHESKIYE
SVOYSTVA. SOVRMNNYYE HETODY GLYATSIOLOGII' (ICE. PHYSICAL PROPERTIES. PDDERN
METHODS OF GLACIOLOGY], LENINGRAD, CIDROMBTBOIZDAI, 1980, 384 pages

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 p 120
[Review by 0. V. Boykova]

[Text] The science of ice developed in the 19th Century. In the middle of the 20th
Century considerable information was ancumlated on the glaciation area. the mess
and properties of ice. The first large paper that generalized the accumulated ma-
terials was the monograph by B. P. Veynberg LED [ICE], which was published in the
1940's. Books were later published by N. N. Zubov, I. s. Peachanakiy. V. V.
Bogorodskiy, Yu. P. Doronin and D. Ye. Kheysin, P. Khobbs and other authors in which
the studies and analysis of the properties of ice found reflection.

In the reviewed reference monograph by V. V. Bogorodskiy and V. P. Gevrilo, an entire
series of new data on ice has been classified, on the basis of which many physical
phenomena originating in the ice covers such as the propagation of electromagnetic
waves, sound emission of deforming ice, characteristic infrared and nicrowave
radiation, and so on are deeply and comprehensively explained. The monograph re-
flects the results of research performed using modern physical methods based on the
achievements of radio engineering and electronics.

The book consists of eight chapters. Seven of them actually discuss all of the basic
properties and characteristic features of the structure of ice: geographic location
and morphology, atomic-molecular structure. thermodynamic and mechanical properties,
seismoacoustics, electrical and optical properties. One of the chapters is on
modern radiophysical methods of investigating ice covers and the peculiarities of
performing experiments and observations. Ice terns, the principles of standardizing

methods of testing ice and extracts from the Construction Norms and Rules (SNiP) are
presented in the Appendices.

The new book on ice by V. V. Bogorodsltiy and V. P. Gavrilo is a timely, necessary
publication. This book. which generalizes recent achievements in studies of the ice

covers by Soviet and foreign scientists, is a valuable reference which will help
everyone involved in studying the problems of ice science to become oriented with

respect to the new information on ice for use of this informtion in present and
future practical solutions.

149
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It must be noted that tln- paper contains not only broad, vaned I'eteluuru ulct‘lJI
on the parameters and properties of the ice covers. but also a qualitative theore-
tical analysis of the investigated phenomena which is combined well with specific

characteristics and a large number of figures.

The reference monograph undoubtedly will be useful to meteorologists, hydrologists,
oceanologists and specialists involved in planning, design and construction in

polar regions.

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SEVENTY-FIFTH BIRTHDAY 0F YEVGENIYA SEHENOVHA SELEZNEVA
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 p 121
[Article by Colleagues. Friends and Students of Yevgeniya Semenovna Selezneva]

[Text] Yevgeniya Semenovna Selezneva. doctor of geographic sciences, professor,
famous specialist in the field of atmospheric physics, celebrated her 75th birthday

on 12 December 1980.

Ye. S. Selezneva began work at the Main Geophysics Observatory imeni A. I. Voyeykov
in 1927. In 1934 she completed her post graduate studies under the direction of
professor P. A. Holchanov; then for a number of years her scientific activity in
the field of agroclimatology developed at Pavlovakaya Aerological Observatory. The
problems of cloud microstructure, the physical processes of cloud forlation, the
structure of the wind field. aerological research - this was the basic sphere of
her interests.

In 1957-1960, Yevgeniya Semenovna was an active participant in the 18! [International
Hydrological Year] and the IQSY [International Year of the Quiet Sun], organizer of
new types of observations of the chemistry of precipitation and condensation nuclei.
Underltm gpddync and with her personal participation a great deal of work was done to
organize observation station networks to observe condensation nuclei and gather
atmospheric precipitation samples. for analysis and generalization of the obtained
material. She created the presently existing network for observations of precipita-

tion chemistry. numbering about 70 stations. The results of this work are used for
many practical purposes. The studies in this area have acquired special significance

in connection with studying the global background of atmospheric pollution.

Ye. S. Seleznev is the author of more than 100 scientific papers. including five mono-
graphs, one of the co-authors of the well-known KURS HETEOROLOGII [Course in Meteo-
rology] edited by P. N. Tverakiy and the book ATHOSPBRNYYE AEROZOLI [Atmospheric
Aerosols] -- a generalization of research in the field of condensation nuclei con-
taining unique material on the distribution of the nuclei in the free atmosphere

over various parts of the Soviet Union.

Yevgcniya Semenovna has trained dozens of specialists, who have graduated frou
Leningrad State University where she successfully combined pedagogical activity with
scientific research work for more than 20 years. More than 10 people have defended
their candidate's dissertations under her direction.

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The combination of enormous theoretical knowledge with large-scale experimental
work has made her a respected scientific authority and won her recognition not only
among Soviet meteorologists, but also abroad. For many years Ye. S. Selezneva was
a member of the International Commission on Atmospheric Chemistry and Global Air
Pollution of the International Geodetics and Geophysics Union and a member of the
working group of the HMO. Yevgeniya Semenovna has been awarded three orders and
several medals for many years of fruitful work.

At this time Ye. s. Selezneva, who is enjoying a deserved rest, is continuing to
publish her scientific papers. She maintains scientific relations with the observa-
tory. she directs the work of postgraduates, and consults with co-workers on the
problems of atmospheric chemistry and general meteorology.

We wish Yevgeniya Semenova good health and active scientific work for many years
to come.

152
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HIGH AWARD
Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 p 121
[Unsigned Article]

[Text] By order of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR, 13 March 1981,
the rank of Hero of Socialist Labor was conferred on Soviet Antarctic Expedition
Chief, Deputy Director of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute of
the USSR State Comittee on Bydroneteorology and Monitoring of the Natural Environ-
ment. Doctor of Geographic Sciences Yevgeniy Sergeyevich Korotkevich with presenta-
tion to him of the Order of Lenin and the "Sickleand Hal-er" Gold Metal for great
service in the study and exploitation of the Antarctic.

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COHPERENCES. MEETINGS, SEMINARS
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 121-126

Article b V. G. Azanovskiy, A. P. Zhilyayev, Yu. G. Slstinskiv. V. B. Kiselev,

- R. SO“' in, N. A. Shestakova]

[Text] The fifth conference of directors of the computer subdivisions of the USSR
State Committee on Hydrometeorology was held in Rostov—na-Donu from 30 October to
3 November 1980. Its work was participated in by 37 people from 2h scientific re-
search institutions and the UCKS administration.

The conference was opened byGKhIdirector A. M. Nikanorov. N. A. Yakshin (USSR
State Connittee on Hydrometeorology) gave a report on the preliminary results of the

1980 and the prospects for creating an information computer center network in 1981-
1985. L. A. Timokhin (VNIICHl-HTsD) told about the principles and plans for the
construction of an automated base and data bank on the environment. V. P. Krylov
(ZapSithI) shared experience in creating an automated data processing system for
the regional hydrometeorological center using modern cmmnnucation media and compu—
ters. G. Ya. Venetskiy (TsKB GHP) analyzed the operation of the automated system
for delivering data to the branch ACS. L. A.Tinokhin told about starting up a new
phase of the system for operative current and forecasted weather information support.

In the reports by the participants in the conference it was noted that the work
started several years ago on creatinganINTs [Information Computer Center] network
is continuing successfully. In 1980 alone. three new IVTs were converted to inde-
pendent budget -- in the Transcaucasus. Polvozh'ye [the Volga region] and the Far
East. Planned work has also continued on reequipment of the information compu-
ter centers that have already been built with hardware and procedural materials.

A number of new documents regulating work planning, hardware and software for the
activity of the information computer center have been developed and prepared for in—
troduction. In order to increase the operating efficienc , a branch procedural
seminar was held on problems of the production-finance activity of the information
computer centers of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology on independent

budget.

At the same time. the conference participants noted that a number of N10 and UGKS
are giving insufficient attention to the problems of the creation and support of the
activity of regional algorithm and program libraries. The quality of the developed
programs still does not always correspond to the requirements of the current stan—

dards.

15h
FOI.OFFNJAI.USE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

1n the adopted resolution, a number of primary goals were formulated with respect to
the further development of the information computer center network and improvement
of the operation of these centers. In particular, it was recommended that the UGRS
and NIU directors introduce a production quality control subsystem for the Output of
the computer subdivisions of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology in the
first half of 1981 with the help of the VNIIGMI-HTsD.

The expansion and publication of a collection of computer subdivision certificates
in which the basic activity of the subdivisions, for example, the data volume, list
and processing times, would be reflected. It was recomended that the computer cen-
ter of one of the republic UGKS be charged with the functions of a base center for
problems of the development, experimental operation and introduction of automated
operative data processing systems.

V. G. Azanovskiy, A. P. Zhilyayev,
Yu. G. Slatinskiy

An interational WHO conference PA-VI on the development of methods of forecasting
unfavorable meteorological conditions leading to high atmospheric pollution levels
was held in Leningrad from 17 to 20 November 1980. The conference was held in
accordance with a resolution of a meeting of the European Regional Organization (PA-
Vi) of the HMO. The Main Geophysics Observatory imeni A. I. Voyeykov was responsible
for holding the conference. The USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology organized
an organizational committee (chairman Ye. P. Borisenkov), and the HMO secretariat
organized an international program committee (chairman M. Ye. Berlyand).

The work of the conference was participated in by 69 specialists from 14 countries:
391810m. HUngarian PB°P19'5 RcPUan’German Democratic Republic, Denmark, Italy,
Norway, Polish Peoples Republic, Portugal, USSR, Federal Republic of Germany, France,
Czechoslovakia, Sweden and Yugoslavia.

660 [Main Geophysics Observatory] director Ye. P. Borisenkov opened the conference.
Vice Chairman of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology V. G. Sokolovskiy and
HMO representative A. S. Zaytsev welcomed the participants to the conference.

During the work of the conference 25 reports were heard, including ll from the USSR.

1n the report by H. Ye. Uerlysnd (USSR) "0n basic principles of forecasting atmosphe-
ric pollution” a study was made of the great possibilities for forecasting develop-
ment connected with the use of the results of theoretical and experimental studies

of the propagation laws of impurities from various types of sources as a function of
meteorological factors. Two basic approaches are noted, one of which is based on

the empirical-statistical models of the impurity distribution, and the other, on the
solution of the atmospheric diffusion equation. In the report it was demonstrated
that the second approach is more prospective. A study was made of the results of the
developments “anumerical and statistical forecasting methods at the Main Geophysics
Observatory. A discussion u:;presented of the papers on forecasting meteorological
conditions defining high atmospheric pollution levels, and the prospects for their
development were investigated. M. Ye. Berlyand also stated arguments to the effect
that further development of the methods of pollution forecasting is to a significant
degree connected with the joint use of various methods when developing the forecast-
ing schemes. In particular, it appears prospective to combine forecasting methods

155
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0F11f1AL USEIDNLY

based on numerical integration of the diffusion equation and atmospheric boundary
layer theory with forecasting the characteristics of background air pollution and

the mean diurnal concentrations, and the use of statistical and synoptic develop-
ments.

H. Klug (Federal Republic of Germany) investigated two types of meteorological situ-
ations leading to an increased air pollution level. The first type included epi-
sodes with low wind velocities and stable stratification. This situation is fre-
quently caused by the presence of a powerful anticyclone. Low sources located near
the sampling point make the primary contribution to pollution. Another situation
is characterized by high wind velocities, wind direction that is stable in time,
absence of precipitation and powerful precipitation inversion. This arises on the
periphery of a stationary anticyclone. Here the impurity is transported from re-
mote industrial sites.

M. Ye. Berlyand, Ye. L. Genikhovich and R. 1. Onikul (USSR) devoted their report to
calculation of the integral concentration distribution characteristics over the
territory of a city and their use in short range atmospheric pollution forecasting.
This report contained a discussion of the results of analyzing the impurity propaga-
tion process from an area source. Here, an area source is understood as a set of a
large number of point sources having approximately identical altitude and discharge
parameters. A study is made of the meteorological conditions for which high air
pollution levels can form in the city.

in a report by K. Ye. Gronskey (Norway) a study was made of the basic requirements
on the dangerous air pollution warning system in areas of various types; the prob-
lems of predictability of impurity content in the air were discussed.

The participants in the conference held a broad discussion of the problems of de-
veloping statistical and synoptic air pollution forecasting methods for cities. A
survey of the papers in this area was presented in a report by L. R. Son'kin (USSR).
Papers on statistical forecasting from various countries of the world were investi-
gated. The conclusion was drawn that the most prospective were schemes which take
into account the physical laws of the propagation of impurities in the atmosphere
and the actual manifestation of relations between concentrations and meteorological
parameters by observation data in specific cities. Such schemes have been developed
in the USSR with the application of pattern recognition and successive graphical
regression techniques. It was noted that it is very useful to utilize synoptic
analysis in forecasting air pollution in cities.

6. Finzi (Italy) demonstrated a statistical atmospheric pollution forecasting scheme
developed for Milan. The autoregression model and logarithmic regression method for
determining impurity concentrations in the air based on meteorological predictors
were used simultaneously in this scheme. A generalized characteristic of air pollu-
tion for the city as a whole was investigated as the predictant. Synoptic situations
are taken into account. Conclusions were drawn that it is expedient to make

broad use of meteorological predictors in the schemes and that the application of
the autoregression model alone is not effective. In another reportby G. Finzi (co-
authored with G. Bakki) a study was made of the possibilities of more precise tore-
casting of wind velocity under complex orographic conditions of Milan considering
atmospheric circulation at the 500 gPa surface level.

156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The report by V. B. Kiselev and T. P. Ivlevs (USSR) was on the method of formation

of most informative complex predictors for forecasting increased atmospheric pollu-
tion levels. The maximum informative predictors obtained were used for the construc-
tion of a scheme to forecast harmful impurity content in the air of cities based on
successive graphical regression.

Yu. Bubnik and P. Gesek (Czechoslovakia) discussed a statistical atmospheric pollu-
tion forecasting scheme developed for various parts of Czechoslovakia based on a set
linear regression technique. The regression equations were calculated for given

meteorological situations which obviously determined the relative success of the
schemes.

V. K. Petrenko and V. l. Chernyayeva (USSR) presented results from the development

of an atmospheric pollution forecasting scheme using the method of successive graphi-
cal regression by data for a large city. Sets of meteorological parameters formula-
ted by the authors were presented which define the growth of the concentration of
impurities created by individual sources within the city.

L. H. Neronovaandln V. Tikhomirova (USSR) devoted their report to the problem of
synoptic forecasting of meteorological conditions determining atmospheric pollution.
Assuming that the atmospheric pollution level is determined by three factors -
synoptic processes, thickness of the thermodynamic mixing layer and wind velocity

in this layer, the authors consider the possibilities of forecasting these condi-
tions. They gave primary attention to forecasting the vertical wind velocity and
temperature distribution in the boundary layer of the atmosphere. For this fore-
cast, the 925 mb map introduced into practice by the USSR Hydrometeoro-
logical Center was used.

in the report by L. R. Son‘kin, et a1. (USSR) results are presented from a study of
the synoptic conditions of the formation of long periods of increased atmospheric
pollution. Situations are isolated which in the overwhelming majority of cases de-
termine the growth of the impurity concentrations over the course of several days.‘
B. B. Goroshko (USSR) investigated the problem of regulating harmful discharge into
the atmosphere. The scientific grounds and primary principles of the development of
measures for short term reduction of discharge during periods of unfavorable meteoro-
logical conditions are discussed.

R. Berkovich and L. Pram (Denmark) familiarized the participants in the conference
with the results of modeling diffusion in the boundary layer of the atmosphere using
the turbulent diffusion coefficient which depends on the wave number (that is. on
the size of the vortex). The proposed method permits explanation of some of the
fine effects observed in a flume, for example, an increase in maximum concentration
in the spray with removal from the source.

0- Sepeshi (Hungarian Peoples Republic) discussed an air pollution forecasting
model for a city based on consideration of discharge from two basic types of sources
-- area (less than 50 m high) and high-altitude. First a study was made of the
qualitative relation between the discharge and the ground concentration by data on
the discharge, the air pollution and meteorological measurements. The model was
tested for prediction of the propagation of sulfur dioxide discharge under the con-
ditions of the city of Pécs (1n the southern part of Hungary). The transport of the
sulfur dioxide from area sources was simulated using a quasistationary box model.

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a report by G. Dietze (German Democratic Republic) a study was made of the short-
range air pollution forecasting technique presently employed by the Meteorological
Service of the German Democratic Republic. This technique considers the wind direc-
tion and velocity and the Ulig stability classification.

A number of brief reports were also heard given by A. A. Gorchiyev and R. H. Rafiyev
(USSR). 1. A. Shevchuk, L. l. Vvedenskaya and 0. P. Andrakhanova (USSR), 1. V.
Koroleva and K. E. Tserfas (USSR). 5. Bodin (Sweden), L. Pram and R. Berkovich (Den-
mark).

The participants in the conference discussed a "NO technical note prepared by M. Ye.
Berlyand "Atmoapheric Pollution Forecasting." This document, which contains more
than 300 pages of text, discusses and generalizes studies of the given problem in
various countries of the world. Consideration is given to results discussed in more
than 250 publications. The physical principles of atomospheric pollution forecast-
ing, numerical. statistical and synoptic forecasting methods, problems of predicting
unfavorable meteorological conditions determining intense concentration growth and
also regulation of atmospheric discharge were investigated. The prospects for fur-
ther development of research were formulated.

0n the final day of the meeting; its participants discussed a draft of proposals for
the development of methods of predicting unfavorable meteorological conditions lead-
ing to high atmospheric pollution levels. In the draft an analysis is made of the
modern state of the art with respect to research in atmospheric pollution forecast-
ing. and the direction of future research is defined. The necessity for concentra-
ting efforts on the development of methods of operative determination of meteoro-
logical parameters important to atmospheric pollution forecasting, pollution poten-
tial forecasting, the development of combined forecasting scheme and methods of
regulating discharge during periods of unfavorable meteorological conditions was
noted. The conference requested that the secretary take the necessary steps to
organize an international conference on problems of atmospheric pollution forecast-
ing in 1984.

The conference promoted the expansion and strengthening of international cooperation
and development of mutual understanding among the specialists of European countries
with respect to one of the urgent problems of environmental protection. The con-

ference participants came out in favor of further expansion of international coope-

ration in the field of the development and introduction of atmospheric pollution
forecasting methods.

V. B. Kiselev, L. R. Son‘kin

A concluding meeting of specialists of the USSR and the Peoples Republic of Bulgaria
participating in the joint development of a procedure for general evaluation and
prediction of the quality of water coming from the territories of cooperating coun-
tries was held in Yalta from 11 to 16 November 1980. At the meeting the results of
many years of joint work were investigated, and the structure of the final joint '
report was agreed on. Representatives of the Sevastopol' division of the COIN [State
Institutetﬂ 0ceanography],the Odessa division of Economics and Ecology of the Sea

of the Marine Hydrophysical institute of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, the
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Economics and Control of Water Manage-
ment and the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hater Protection of the

USSR Ministry of Hater Management participated in the conference on the Soviet side.

158
FOR,OFFNJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the meeting it was noted that the efforts of specialists from the USSR and the
Peoples Republic of Bulgaria have done a great deal of work to implement the working
plan of scientific and engineering cooperation in the field of environmental pro—
tection and efficient use of natural resources. The participants in the meeting
discussed the materials obtained and final versions of the developed water quality
forecasting procedures. The methods of estimation and prediction of the chemical
runoff of rivers flowing into the Black Sea were also investigated. A great deal of
attention was given to a method of forecasting water protection measures to prevent

negative effects on the quality of water flowing into the sea from the territories
of cooperating countries.

A substantiation of the criteria for evaluating the physical chemical characteris-
tics of the water of the Black Sea, including the salinity of the water in the west-
ern part of the sea, the gas regime elements (oxygen. hydrogen sulfide, active pH
reaction) and nutrient salts (phosphates, nitrites, silicates) was prepared within
the framework of joint cooperation by the Sevastopol' division of the State Insti—
tute of Oceanography. A description of the water by individual areas of the west—
ern part of the sea was also compiled. The Odessa division of Economics and Ecology
of the MCI [Marine Hydrophysical Institute] of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences
presented procedural principles of economic-ecologic normalization of the discharge
of pollutants into sea water. The scientific research institutions of the USSR
Ministry of Water Management developed procedures for forecasting water protection
measures to prevent negative effects on the quality of water coming from territories
of cooperating countries as a result of implementing a number of ameliorative
measures. Procedures for predicting the quality of discharge into the sea from
Soviet and Bulgarian enterprises were also investigated. The Bulgarian side also
presented a chemical runoff forecast for the umube river into the Black Sea and a

procedure for general evaluation of water quality in the Black Sea region for in-
clusion in the joint report.

In the adopted resolution the participants in the meeting expressed satisfaction with
the wo:k done.

A. P. Zhilyayev, Yu. G. Slatinskiy

A meeting of the Scientific Council of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center was held
from S to 9 January 1981. The results of the scientific work of the institute in
1978-1980 were summed up at the meeting. The plenary session was preceded by sec—
tional meetings at which more than 40 reports and communiques were heard.

Primarily the results of the work under the GKNT coordination program were reported
at the plenary session.

In the report by corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences Ye. N. Blinova,
a study was made of a method of hydrodynamic long range forecasting of meteorological
elements based on a more precise description of heat influxes from radiation. A pro-
cedure for predicting clouds and albedo for the Northern Hemisphere improved by in-
eluding PGEP data and artificial earth satellite information was discusse . Results
were presented from numerical experiments in long-range forecasting of deviations

of the mean monthly ground air temperatures and the temperatures of the 500 mb
surface for the Northern Hemisphere from the norm.

159
FOR¢0FFHJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Improvement of the methods of long-range forecasting based on expanding the exchange
of information about the state of the atmosphere and ocean was discussed in a report
by Sh. A. Husayelyan and V. P. Sadokov. The authors developed the theoretical prin—
ciples of including nonadiabatic factors in the simplest thermodynamic model of the
atmosphere and ocean. A study was made of the possibilities of improving the analy-
sis procedure and the method of adiabatic forecasting of the mean monthly temperature
of the middle troposphere averaged over large regions. The prospectiveness of asymp-
totic methods in problems of long-range weather forecasting was noted.

5. A. Hashkovich and I. V. Trosnikov discussed the results of numerical experiments
with respect to finite-difference and spectral models of general atmospheric circu-
lation. Using the finite—difference model, experiments were performed in reproduc-
tion of the atmospheric circulation of the Northern Hemisphere for different seasons,
and the energetics and spectra of atmospheric movements reproduced by the model were
analyzed. Numerical experiments in the study of the effect of vertical and horizon-
tal resolution in the model, inaccuracies in the initial data. the role of waves of

a subnetwork scale, and so on were performed on a spectral model using the complete
equations.

A report by N. I. Zverev was devoted to the synoptic method of weather forecasting
for the month based on considering heat exchange of the underlying surface with the
atmosphere and empirical laws of general atmospheric circulation. A procedure was

proposed for predicting the five—day temperature anomaly for all five—day periods
of the month.

D. A. Ped' reported on the results of studies aimed at developing objective prin-
ciples of a seasonal weather forecasting technique. A procedure for determining the
seasonal boundaries, calculation of their expected beginning and establishment of
predictors of future seasons were proposed. In addition, a statistical method of

forecasting the air temperature anomaly for the seasons in the cold part of the year
for Siberia and the Far East was developed.

N. A. Bagrov told about the studies made of irregular fluctuations of atmospheric
circulation over the territory of the USSR. Large temperature and precipitation
anomalies were isolated, their characteristic features and conditions of occurrence
were analyzed. The report discussed the construction principles, and results were
presented from evaluating statistical schemes for forecasting the height of the 500
mb surface H5 0’ the temperature and precipitation for the month and the season up
to one year agead.

A. A. Vasil'yev, K. G. Abramovich, N. P. Shakina investigated a procedure for semi-
automated calculation of the forecasting map of special phenomena. The study of the
processes of the occurrence of turbulent layers and zones, convective belts in at-
mospheric fronts was investigated, and more exact statistical relations were pre-
sented for predicting glaciation.

M. Ya. Ratsimor and H. V. Rubinshteyn reported on the results of improving the pro-
cedure for automated forecasting of the height of the lower cloud boundary and the
meteorological visibility for 1 to 3 hours at Moscow airports.

V. D. Zhupanov, Yu. K. Fedorov and N. A. Shestakova discussed the basic aspects of
constructing an information system to support automated forecasting of aircraft
landing conditions developed as applied to minicomputcrs.

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A report by Yc. S. Ulanova was devoted to the development of a method of forecasting
grain crop yields in the basic economic regions where they are grown three to four
months ahead and also the writing of a “Handbook for Agrometeorological Forecasting.“

Ye. G. Popov and P. Yu. Kharchenko reported on a refined method of calculating water
inflow into the Vilyuyskoye reservoir and a developed method of predicting the side

inflow into the planned CBS-Sh hydroelectric power plant.

Co-uorkers of the VNIIGHl-HTsD, the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of
Agricultural Microbiology, the Voronezh Higher Military Aviation School, the Far
Eastern Scientific Research Institute, the Main Geophysics Observatory, the Institute
of Applied Geophysics and the Central Aerological Observatory participated in the
concluding session of the Scientific Council.

N. A. Shestakova

161
FOR 0FF1CJAI.USHE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD

Moscow HETEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, May 81 pp 126-127

[Article by B. I. Silkinl

As is reported in SCIENCE, Vol 209, No 5662, 1980, Stanford Research Institute (Palo-

Alto, California, USA) has developed a new method of tracking hurricanes using a
high-frequency wave, large-aperture radar.

The instrument has high resolution. It operates in the frequency range between 6
and 30 megahertz. The rated azimuthal beam width of the radar on a frequency of

15 megahertz is 0.5’, which is achieved by an antenna assembly consisting of 256
individual antennas arranged over a space of 2.5 km.

Ionospheric reflections of the signal offer the possibility of receiving an echo

from targets more than 3000 km away. A target 3 by 15 km can be picked up about
2000 km away.

The received signal, after being converted, gives 86 individual doppler spectra for
each of the specific time intervals from which the average spectrum is derived.
By the doppler frequency shift of different echos it is possible to determine the

speed of the surface current in the sea and the wind direction above it and also
the wind velocity and wave height.

The first such experimental device made it possible to track hurricane Anita with
high precision across the Gulf of Mexico for about 5 days. This led to the construc-

tion of detailed maps of the surface wind field with respect to individual sections
up to 200 km from the center of the hurricane.

The trajectory of the hurricane was calculated. The calculation was verified with
sufficient accuracy by data from the National Hurricane Study Center gathered by
complex traditional methods. When the hurricane was traveling in the vicinity of
26° North Latitude, it approached the 35-71 meteorological buoy installed there by
the National Administration for Ocean and Atmosphere Studies. This made it possible

to compare the measurement data gathered by the meteorological buoy equipment with
the information obtained by the new high-frequency radar.

The differences in measuring the wind direction were only 7', the differences in

its velocity were 0.4 m/sec, and in wave height, 0.5 meters. which in general does
not exceed 101 of the measured value.

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

The new procedure confirmed its advantages, which consist in a high degree of reso-
lution, the significance of the area encompassed by it and continuity of information
flow. By using this procedure it is possible to gather data (and what is especially
important, data on the initial phase of development of the hurricane) which serve
as a valuable supplement to the meteorological data received from satellites, ground
stations and laboratory aircraft.

M1310, Vol ix, No 5, 1980, reports that as a result of the industrial revolution, the
amount of lead entering the earth's atmosphere from industrial sources has increased
from approximately 20 to 400,000 tons per year in the last century. During the same
period, the industrial discharge of sulfur dioxide into the air increased approxima-
tely from 13 to 190 million tons/year. The content of such heavy metals as zinc,
copper, cadmium, silver and mercury in the atmosphere has also increased to a signi-
f icant degree. The greater part of all of these polluting agents enter the natural
environment from the economically developed regions of the Northern Hemisphere --
North America and Europe.

It was recently established that even in such regions remote from industrial areas
such as Antarctica, the mean atmospheric concentration of a nutter of heavy metals
coming from anthropogenic sources is lo to 10 orders higher than aerosols coming from
two basic natural sources -— dust of land origin and sea foam. The study of this
problem became possible as a result of developing a method of analyzing snow and
ice layers deposited in the glaciers of Greenland and Antarctica since the beginning
of the industrial age, The relation between their chemical composition and the
composition of the atmosphere has been proven. A comparison of the data on these
two regions is especially significant in view of the fact that 902 of the discharge
of anthropogenic pollutants into the air takes place in the Northern Hemisphere and
must be felt first of all in Greenland, for the equator plays the role of a barrier
for tropospheric exchange of air masses between the hemispheres.

It has now been discovered that the lead concentration in the surface layer of snow
in Antarctica is only about 20 X 10"12 g/g of snow (that is, 20 mg of lead per _13
thousand tons of snow). For silver the corresponding value is a total of S X 10
8/3 of snow, which is 500 micrograms of silver per 1000 tons of snow. Even in
samples of especially pure snow obtained artificially under laboratory conditions,
the pollution level usually is higher.

Reliable data on the pollution of the ice and snow of Greenland with lead, zinc and
cadmium and also sulfates now encompass the last 800 years, and with mercury, 250
years. They demonstrate that the content of all of the substances remained approxi—
mately on the same level until about 1940. Then judging by everything, the lead
content tripled. and the zinc content possibly doubled. At one Greenland station,
evidence of tripling of the sulfate content after 1960 has been noted.

however, it is necessary to consider that samples were gathered at remote points
from each other, and pollution as a result of recent expeditionary activity is not
entirely excluded. Finally, some distortion of the data under the effect of volcanic
activity in Iceland is possible.

Analysis of one sample of Greenland ice, the age of which is estimated at 3000 years.

indicates an extremely low lead content in the atmosphere of that era; it is less
than 1 x 10'12 g/g.

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For Antarctica there are reliable data on the lead, zinc. copper, cadmium and silver
and also sulfate content in its snow and ice gathered at one point of the deep region
of the southern part of the continent. They encompass the last one hundred years.
In spite of significant fluctuations vithin this time interval, the present content
of all of the mentioned substances in the snow is very close to that observed 100
years ago. Thus, the proposition is confirmed that the heavy metals and sulfate
concentrations in the atmosphere over the remote regions of the Southern Hemisphere
have not in practice changed as s result of human activity in a hundred years.

Among the natural causes of fluctuations of the chemical composition of the atmo-
sphere, volcanic activity is noted in first place. In Anarctica, just as in Green-
land, the lead and zinc content curve for the last 100 years coincides closely with

the curve characterizing volcanic activity. Variations in the sulfur concentration
in the snow and ice of Antarctica immediately after the largest eruptions in the

Southern Hemisphere -- the Krakatau volcano in 1883 and Agunga in 1963 -- are
especially noticeable.

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OﬂITUARY 0F ISAY GRIGOR'YEVICH GUTERHAH (19llv1931)
Moscow HETEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian N0 5, May 81 pp 127-128
[Article by Colleagues of Isay Grigor‘yevich Guterman]

[Text] Soviet aeroclimatology has suffered a severe loss: a great scientist, doctor
of geographic sciences, professor Isay Grigor‘yevich Guterman died on 26 February
198L at the age of 71.

I. G. Guterman was born on 18 February l9ll,in the city of Pochep in sryansk Oblast.
where he began work as a weather station observer. 0n graduation from Moscow hydro-
meteorological Institute in 1937, he was recommended for postgraduate studies, and
for a number of years he successfully combined study with work on Arctic expeditions.
he participated in the rescue of the "Chelyuskin," in the first high-latitude expedi-
tion on the icebreaker "Sadko." A student of P. A. Holchanov, he organized the

first regular launches of radiosondea under polar night conditions. The cold front
study that he made by sounding at increased frequency became a classic and became a

During world ”at II I. c. Guterman headed the hydrometeorological division of the
operative section of army headquarters.

From 19k5 to 1955, I. c. Guterman directd the observation section at the Central
Aerological Observatory. with his characteristic energy and inquisitiveness, he
became involved with the improvement and introduction of new methods and means of
aerological observations, especially radiosonde observations. He was initiator and
author of the application of the active target in the radar system for tracking
radiosonde flights. organizer of launching sonde meteorographs to an altitude
of 35 km with three temperature gages, as a result of which the conditions of over-
heating of the temperature receiver in the middle stratosphere were established.

In 1955 I. G. Guterman was invited to the newly created Scientific Research Institute
of Aeroclimatology, at which the innovative and organizational talent of the scien-
tist was fully manifested for a quarter of a century. The first aeroclimatic refer-
ences and atlases in 22 volumes in the country were created here with the most active
participation of I. G. Guterman. There were 65 publications studying air currents
above the earth out of his total of 110 works. The monograph on this topic RASPRED—
LENIYE VETRA NAD SEVERNYH POLUSHARIYEH [Wind Distribution over the Northern Hemi-
sphere) became thesubject of a doctor's dissertation, and for successful scientific

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m omcut use ONLY

pedagogical activity, 1“ 19611‘GvGuterman received the rank of professor. During
the flourishing of I. c. Guterman’s activity a cycle of reference publications
"Materials on Climate and Circulation of the Free Atmosphere" and aeroclimstic
atlases of different regions of the earth and also a new aeroclimatic reference for
the USSR, the first phase of which was concluded by the publication of 12 volumes.
was created under his direction.

In the last decade I. c. Guterman worked on the creation of a model of the earth's
atmosphere. The unique archive of aeroclimatic characteristics collected under his
direction competes successfully with foreign analogs with respect to completeness
of content, cost effectiveness and popularity.

A distinguishing feature of the scientific activity of I. G. Guterman was his close
relation to practice evolving from profound knowledge of the requirements of
various national economic organizations.

I. G. Cuterman generously shared all of his many years of experience and knowledge
with numerous students and colleagues, the exactingness for which was based on the
special exactingness of himself. I. G. Guterman was an example of wholehearted
devotion to the cause which he served until he drew his last breath.

The party and government valued the services of I. G. Guterman in World War II and

in peacetime work highly, awarding him the order of the "Symbol of Honor" and a
number of medals. '

Everyone who knew I. G. Guterman mourns the death of this great scientist, a man of
inexhaustible energy and great modesty. They will remember him that way forever.

COPYRIGHT: "Heteorologiya i gidrologiya", 1981

10,845
CSO: 186b/10 - END -

166
ms omcm.‘ use ONLY