FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10456

14 April 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
IV“ VIO.~_~-~ y..— 9. ~’.

14

WEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND Tscuuomsv

(2000 7/32)
Coursu'rs

WICS

Briefs
Siemens, Fujitsu Plant in Luxembourg

INNSTRIAL TECHNO“!!!

British Government V111 Promote CAD/CAM
(W, 22 Jan 82) .O...‘....I.....C.....OOO

Preview of Exhibits Expected at Machine-Tool, Robotics
Shove
(Nicole Beaucleir; AIRI': 003403, 6 Her 82) .........
TRANSPORTATIGI

Rails-Royce Seeks American Partner for RJ-SOO mgine
(Am& mm, 6 m 82) 0.0.0.0...0000000.00000000I

Briefs
AIR-1:2 Program

- a - [III - WE -
roe omcuLussonu '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS

BRIEFS

SIEMENS, FUJITSU PLANT m LUXEMBOURG—Japan's largest manufacturer of elec-
tronic controls for machine tools. Fujitsu Panuc. will open a branch factory
in Luxembourg in association with Siemens AG. Starting in August. 1982, the
factory will produce prograning units for numerical controls targeted for sale
in 3G countries. Siemens will have 25.1 percent participation in the fully
automatic factory. Si-ens AG, which has worked with Fujitsu Fanuc since
1965, expects to increase its market fraction in Western Europe by partici-
pating in the project. [Text] [Duesseldorf vm-z in Geri-an no 1/2, 1982 p VI]
(COPYRIGHT: VDI-Vetlas mm. Dusseldorf 1982] 9160

cso: 3102/175

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

BRITISH GOVERNMENT HILL Pam can/can
Munich CMUTERHOCHB in German 22 Jan 82 p 17
[Article: "Mechanical Industry Rides Point for CAD")

[Text] I.ondon--The British market for CAD/CAM will triple
in the next three years. According to information from
Secretary Kenneth Baker, the British govement plans

to initiate a support program.

The supporr program for CAD/CAM systems, which are expected to improve the
competitiv: capability of Great Britain, has a value of 6 million pounds.
According to Kenneth Baker, secretary for information technology in the
British Ministry of Industry, it includes seminars, information and demonstra-
tion symposia and the awarding of financial grants to small and medium-sized
businesses which want to acquire a CAD/CA)! system. Under the program, each
company receives a grant of 2,000 pounds to defray the costs for consultation,
research and development associated with installing a CAD/CAM system. The
three-year program will start imediately.

According to infatuation from the minister of industry, large astronautics,
electrical and electronic companies have worked out figures based on exper-
ience which show that the application of CAD/CAM systems in technical
development programs can increase the productivity of a design group by a
factor of 3.5. Also, certain British industrial branches have shown that

a time savings of up to 25 percent can be achieved from the start of product
development to production maturity.

The basic equipment of a CAD/CAM installation consists of minicomputer, a
data display device or CRT processor and the associated input keyboard. The
present price in Great Britain for an installation suitable for a group of
20 designers is about 25,000 pounds. Thereare, however, higher-capacity
installations costing 60,000 to 250,000 pounds. These include zoom effects,
more powerful central processors and larger memories.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The total market for CAD/CAM cyst-s, which increased in Great Britain by 88
percent in 1979. expended by an additional 65 percent in 1980. 1981 is
expected to show a further increase of 50 percent. The projected growth rate
until 1986 is 46 percent.

COPYRIGHT: COHPUTERHOCHE 1982

9160
080: 3102/175

3
FIHICMNHCJAI.USB(NVLY
Ft”!(ﬂﬁﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂEiMﬂLY

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

PREVIEH OF EXHIBITS EXPECTED AT MACHINE-TOOL, ROBOTICS SHOWS
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 6 Mar 82 pp 28-29
[Article by Nicole Beauclair: "Machine-Tool '82: Three Interdependent Sectors“)

[Text] The 12th French Machine-Tool and Mechanical Equipment
Biannual, the Assembly and Fastening Techniques Exhibition
and the International Industrial Robotics Exposition will be
held simultaneously at the Porte de Versailles next 9 to 17
June. What trends are encountered in these three sectors, as
the machine-tool industry awaits application of the restruc-
turing plan of the same name? However it may turn out, the
builders are making their technical preparations for this bi-
annual show.

"The French machine-tool industry finds itself today at one of the great turn-
ing points of its history." These are the terms in which Michel Courtois,

president of the Association of French Machine-Tool Manufacturers (SCFMO), ad-
dressed the industrial press on 25 February.

It is difficult to draw up a balance-sheet of the machine-tool industry in a
transitional period, and at press time, no official decision had yet been taken
regarding the machine-tool development plan, which, as we recall, should make
it possible to triple machine-tool production in the next 3 or 4 years.

"Hhile some horizontal restructuring measures are practically fully prepared
and while certain enterprises have got into line with them, nothing is definite
yet," confirmed Jean Chauvet, general director of the SCFMO, "and while defini-
tive measures are awaited, no aid has been furnished yet."

Trends in Evolution of Machine-Tools

Despite these uncertainties, the 12th French Machine-Tool and Mechanical Equip-
ment Biannual should take place in a favorable context and reflect the growing
part played by automation in the industrial sector. Thus a trend that started

several years ago will take concrete form wzth the arrival of digital control,
then of tool stores at the machining centers, and robots of all kinds.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'al plant of Bourges. The origi—
ument).

   

ACB Loire 600-:on
in the Aerospatiale plant of St.—

This press is used for
ge panels,

press installed

  

eration in Toulouse
bly of Airbus

jet-engine struts (Michel Isaac
photo).

Nazaire.
iorming Airbus fusela

(Aerospatiale document)

Machine, in op
designed for assem

FOR OFFICFAL USE ONLY
FINI¢HHNC1A1.USE(MVLY

But in order to succeed in automating the means of production rationally. it
was necessary to make the machines and their environment coherent, it was nec-
essary to make the machine, the digital control, the loading-unloading system
and the automatic tool-changing compatible, while at the same time obtaining
high-quality production.

The contribution of electronis and microprocessor technology has helped a
great deal in putting everything together. In the area of turning, this has
taken the concrete form of an impressive number of flexible production modules
presented by the lathe manufacturers. Some have themselves gone into the de-
signing and fabrication of a robot and its supply system; other have developed
their modules with the aid of robotics specialists.

But their lathes are not the only machine-tools worthy of interest. The ma-
chining centers are not escaping the automation phenomenon--quite to the con-
trary, since they have been the precursors by adopting the automatic-changing
tool stores. There are very few machining centers not equipped with a palet-
tized table, which permits masked-time loading of work pieces, and also the
palettization carrousel, providing for continuous machining-for many hours
without surveillance.

In terms of flexibility, it appears that four groups should be considered.

First of all, the flexible fabrication module. This is composed of a machine
for automatic and continuous fabrication. The continuity is achieved on the
basis of a machining center tied to a two-palette to six-palette palettization
system or to a CN [digital-control] lathe equipped with an automatic loading-
unloading system--in other words, a robot. The module must, of course, have
automatic-centering devices, monitoring of tool lifetime, surveillance of tool
breakage, an automatic tool-changing system, autodiagnosis, large memory capac-
ity, etc.

In the second phase is the flexible fabrication unit, which, while possessing
the same characteristics as the module, runs two or three machines of the same
type: two or three palettised machining centers or two or three robotized CN
lathes, the purpose of the unit being to do two or three machining operations
on the same piece.

The flexible production system, for its part, operates more than three machin-
ing centers using a single palettization system linking the machines with one
another, the whole being managed from a central computer. This system permits
the planning of production from the introduction of the rough piece to its fin-
al machining, achieving considerable reduction of machining time as well as a
decrease in the quantity of materials in the shop.

Finally, the fourth group inherent in flexible production consists in a com-
plete shop comprising machining centers of more or less large capacities (ver-
tical or horizontal) as well as lathes if production requires them. The entire
shop thus constituted is managed from a central computer that keeps track of,
among other things, the transport of pieces of different types, management of
the tools and their lifetime, changes of tool stores, resharpening, introduc-
tion of new data after resharpening, etc.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
After this definition of several terms, one easily sees that the 12th Bisnnual
will provide the best occasion for bringing out the flexible machining units
and modules, unless certain manufacturers decide to exhibit a flexible mini-
shop: machining center and lathe that would have common loading-unloading. He
will have confirmation of this only at the opening of the exhibition, and we
hope that a French builder will take up this challenge.

Still in the area of machining by removal of material, considerable development
of the electroerosion machine is noted. Hithout going so far as to review the
fundamental principles of this process, it should not be forgotten that it is
applied by two methods that result in two very different utilizations. First
of sll--and this was one of the first applications--there is machining by
pressing or recessing: an electrode-tool impresses its form into an electrode-
workpiece. Next there appeared machining by wire: a wire-tool cuts into an
electrode-workpiece. Blectroerosion has undergone a spectacular evolution in
recent years, but it has essentially involved mastery of the process and per-
fecting of it; thus, the current generators have reached a high technical lev-
el, and they too have benefited from electronics, and incidentally from digital
control, which is now taking charge of--in addition to the spark parameters--
the speeds of advance of the electrode-tool for both pressing and cutting.

Electroerosion is a slow process, and therefore. perhaps more than any other
process, it needs to be automated to increase output. But there is also an-
other thing to be noted: electroerosion is no longer the appanage of the tool-
makers (cutting tools) or of the molders (injection tools, pressure-casting
tools). Electroerosion machine-tools are now appearing in production opera—
tions, for they make it possible to solve machining problems which, though they
could be handled by conventional processes, entailed very high fabrication
costs. This is particularly the case in the aeronautical industry, where EDH
(Blectro-Dischsrge Machining) machines are appearing for production of pieces
considered difficult to machine, either because of their configuration or be-
cause of the material to be machined. Rough machining and finish machining by
automatic changing of the electrode and digital-control accomodation of para-
meters, automatic rethresding of wire for series cutting of pieces--it looks as
if EON machines will be adapted for use in phantom work units. The demand
seems to be there, and the manufacturers will certainly respond to it at the
Biannual.

Deformation of metals raises the same concern to automate production. The
working rate of the presses is being increased, but there is also a change in
their feed systems: depending on the type of machine, feeding is being done by
transfer systems or by robot. Here too, digital control is involved: it makes
it possible to control alltheparameters, such as high dead center, low dead
center, speeds, etc; on folding presses, CN controls the folding angle, the po-
sition of the stops. Punching work benefits from digital control as well as
from advanced technologies such as laser and plasma techniques.

And Assembly Exhibition

Thanks to the assembly and fastening-techniques exhibition that will take place
jointly with the 12th Biannual at the Porte de Versailles, one of the most im—

7
F0R10FFNJAI.USBINVLY
FOR 0F11C1Al.lEﬂE(HVLY

portant phases in all the construction industries will be taken up this year.
In the fields of aeronautics and space, it is well-known that assembly in gen-
eral is crucial, for screwing, riveting, setting, gluing and welding are not
decided on'arbitrarily-and even less, the combining of these various tech-
niques for constructing one unit comprising several components that are made
monolithic by these very processes.

This sector is being developed because of the aircraft-builders' constant con-
cern toput reliable products on the market while at the same time adhering to
cost and energy-saving criteria that inevitably lead to savings of raw materi-
als, implementation of new technologies, and modification of existing compo?
nents and products. All these developmental trends lead to the designing of
machines for different specific types of assembly, and quite naturally, the
concern to automate the operations is not neglected.

It is therefore not a simple matter to make choices both at the level of the
mode of assembly and as regards its implementation. The exhibition should make
it possible to visualize the various solutions proposed to the users, and to
enable one to make a judicious choice and to keep better track of the develop-
ments in this field, four half-day technical sessions will be held from 14 to
17 June, with these general themes: screwing and bolting; industrial glues and
adhesives; fasteners; and automated assembly.

Industrial Robotics

In view of the preceding, one will readily note the predominant position that
automation is taking in the transformation sector. Therefore, for the first
time in France, industrial robotics will have an international exhibiton that
will complement the 12th International Congress on Industrial Robots, to be
held not far from the Exposition Park from 9 to 11 June.

Industrial robotics is a fast-developing sector that encompasses both the mani-
pulators (handling arms) and the robots with 6 or 7 degrees of liberty. Be-
tween these two extremes lies a whole more or less complex range.

The handling of work pieces is certainly the area that benefits most from the
contribution of robotics. In simple handling, there are the robots for load-
ing-unloading of machine-tools (lathes, cutting-stamping presses, molding ma-
chines, injection machines), for measuring machines, through end-of-line palet-
tization of work pieces. Furthermore, certain of these robots or palettized
systems are integrated with the machines, and direct control of them is done by
the machine's CN. Remote manipulators with assisted manual control are used in
forges and foundries. Also in the area of handling, there are more and more
electrically commanded assembly robots; they are generally found in the elec-
tronics and electrical industries.

Welding is one of the special fields for robots. First to come were the spot-
welding robots, replacing the transfer machines specific to a product, or if

the welding was done manually, the robot made it possible to improve the work-
ing conditions. More recently, the arc-welding robots'were developed. Appli-

cation of paints is certainly one of the special fields for the robots with 6

8
FOR OFFICIA1.USIZ(ﬂULY
or 7 degrees of liberty, as are also fin-removal. cutting or poliahing--tasha
that can be automated by robot. In thele latter caaea, the robot is equipped
with a tool that novea with the ahape of the piece: being worked on (welding.

painting, cutting, polishing, etc). Theae robots are called "advanced," and
there are said to be 650 of then in France.

As one sees, the interaction among the three ahowa that will take place from

9 to 17 June can only be beneficial and repreaenta the majority of the means of
production necessary to all induatrial sectors.

COPYRIGHT: A. 5. C. 1982

11267
080: 3102/185

FOR OFFNJal,USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

ROLLS-ROYCE SEEKS AMERICAN PARTNER FOR RJ-SOO ENGINE

Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 6 Mar 82 p 9
[Article: "Rolls-Royce Seeks 0.8. Partner for RJ-SOO"]

[Text] Ralph Robins. Rolls-Royce coInercial director, announced last week
that his company is conducting negotiations with both Pratt & Whitney and
General Electric in an effort to bring a third partner into the 10-500
program. Rolls-Royce officials hope that a decision will be possible before
the end of the month. Robins explained that developments costs of new engines
are between $1.5 billion and $2 billion. This means that launching

a new program is beyond a single manufacturer's financial means. Rolls-Royce
has also held discussions with Reach officials about expanding participation
in the RJ—SOO progrma.

Rolls-Royce and its Japanese partners--Kawasaki, Mitsubishi, and

Ishikawaj ina-Ilarumanhave each already spent 20 million pounds sterling in
designing and building two technology demonstrators. The first such prototype
engine recently began its tests in England. The second is to begin its tests
in Japan within a few days. But the total cost of the 33-500 development
program is between 750 million and 1.1 billion pounds sterling. To finance its
share—-st lease 250 million pounds sterling—Rolls-Royce will have to call
upon its owner, the British government, but the latter will first have to

be convinced of the project's profitability.

The fact is that three British firms are simultaneously seeking government
assistance: Rolls-Royce for the RJ-SOO, British Aerospace for the A320, and
Westland for the "6.30. In a speech to the SBAC [Society of British
Aerospace Companies], Norman Lamont, the secretary of state for industry.
sumarized the government's attitude toward these requests as follows:

"The government has, in fact, indicated it 13 prepared to consider any
request for support in the form of investments reimbursable by payment from
sales earnings. It has also clearly indicated it would do this by taking
into account its resources available at the time the request is submitted,
and also the merits of the project under consideration."

Rolls-Royce was nationalized 11 years ago after the dismal bankruptcy of the
former Rolls-Royce Company. The firm has been in the red during the past few
years, and last year the government "poured" some 50 million pounds sterling

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
into the company. Rollo officials expect the comany to begin showing a
profit once again by 1983. Nevertheless, the goverment is not planning to
denationalize it in the near future. Lamont said he considered this to be a
long-range goal. According to him. the financial assistance given
Rolls-Royce during the period April l981-April 1983 will total 365 million
pounds sterling.

To be denationelized, Rolls-Royce will first have to increase its productivity.
To this end it will have to reduce its employee force again by 6,000

persons this year after having already slashed it by 6,000 during the past

15 nontha. Robins estimated the market for the 30-211 and 10-500 engines at
5.000 unite over the next 25 years.

The Americanengina manufacturers, Pratt 5 Whitney and General Electric, are
pondering the feasibility ,of launching a new technology lO-ton-thrust
pawerplant. Pratt & Whitney seems to be more prepared to proceed with such
a project than does General Electric. In the event of a cooperation
agreement on develop-ant of a 10-ton-thruat engine, it would be surprising.
however, to see one of the two najor American engine nanufacturers allow
Rolls-Royce to be the prime contractor.

comma: A. 8 C. 1982

8061
cso: 3102/186

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF-10M. USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

BRIEFS

ATR-loz PROGRAM-Jollowing the official signing of necessary agreements,
Aeritalia has loved rapidly into the initial production phase of the
French-Italian ATR—ltz [commuter transport] program at its plants in
Ponigliano d'Arco near Naples. This phase is scheduled to end in June with
the aircraft's structural drawings. Cutting of metal will begin on 1 July.
Completion of the overall drawings is scheduled for March 1983. Full-size
wooden mock-ups are under construction at Aeritalia's plants and will be
used to test the flight compartssnt's internal space and layout. They will
be shipped to Toulouse [Aerospatiale] in September. Aeritalia is also
currently building a class 1 mock-up of the aircraft's section 15 which
houses the landing gear well, plus a class 2 (metal) mock—up of section 11
(flight deck). This mock-up of the forward part of the aircraft will be
shipped to Toulouse on 15 June. First flight of the first aircraft is still
targeted for August 1986, with certification expected 1 year later. By that
time, six ATR-bz's will have been built. Delivery of the second aircraft

is planned for November 1986. [Text] [Paris AIR 5 cosmos in Reach 6 Mar 82
p 9] [COPYRIGHT: A. & C. 1982] 8051

(ISO: 3102/186 END

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY