FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10134
23 November 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 43/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(FOUO 43/81)

CONTENTS

EGYPT ‘

Speculations on Future Political Scene After al-Sadat' s
Assassination
(AL-“ATM ALP'ARABI, 16-22 wt 81) cc'coccoOcocoooooooooo

IRAN
Knomeyni Fanaticism Seen Hastening Doom
(Abou smeh; AFRIQUE-ASIB, 11‘ sep 81) ooooooocccocouooccc
LIBYA
Former Diplomat Accuses Regime of Misrepresentation
('Abd-al-Salam 'Ali 'Aylah Interview; AL-HATAN AIo-‘ARABI,
h-lo sep 81)....0I.0......0.00..00.00.00.000...00.0.00...
MOROCCO
Status of Opposition Examined
(Siradiou Diallo; JEUNE AFRIQUE, 7 Oct 81) ..............
SAUDI ARABIA
Egypt's Ghurbal Says No Break in Saudi Contacts
(REuTER’ 1N°V 81) O'COOOOIOOOOOO0.00QCOIOOIOOCOOOCUCO'.
TUNISIA

Opposition Leader Assesses Domestic Politics
(Ibrahim Tobal; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 12-25 wt 81) c c o o o o c o o o o o o
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

EGYPT

SPECULATIONS 0N FUTURE POLITICAL SCENE AFTER AL-SADAT'S ASSASSINATION
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABi in Arabic No 26a, 16-22 Oct 81 pp 34-38

[Article: "The West Created Him, and the West Laid Him to Rest; Egypt wants
To Forget"]

iText] The moments that stood between Anwar al-Sadat and life were the
actual celebration of the 6th of October anniversary. Those moments were
tantamount to ”a new crossing" for the Egyptian army which has begun
revealing its innermost secrets.

What are the questions that Egypt, the Arab world and the whole world are
facing after al-Sadat's departure from the scene? How will Egypt's new
president, Husni Mubarak, handle what he inherited? Who are the heirs to
al-Sadat's regime? What changes are looming on the horizon?

AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI which has closely followed recent developments in
Egypt--in recent months we followed them hourly--and observed them from
inside the country and abroad. is opening today the Egyptian file from the
first crossing to the new crossing. It is trying to answer the questions
that are being raised by means of conducting a historical inquiry also
through a series of articles. The title of the first installment in the
series is "Made by al-Sadat: Who Has with Him and Who Has against Him?“

The Egyptian event deserves more than a few pages devoted to it in a single
issue. we will return to it in future issues.

He was buried quietly.
it were as though Egypt wanted to forget him quickly.

Cold sweat poured down [the bodies] of senior officials who had gone to
Cairo to take part in his funeral. Police security measures were more than
alarming.

The foreign guests who had come [to Cairo] to pay their last respects to
their former ally did not dare accompany him to his final resting place.
The distance that separated the procession from the burial site was less
than I kilometer. Nevertheless, they did not dare accompany him.

1
FOR‘OFFK]AL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The funeral was a western. military funeral. it was by no means a popular,
Egyptian. Arab funeral. It began at 11:15 a.m. on Saturday with a brief
prayer service at the mosque of al-Ma'adi hospital before the body was
taken away {from the hospital]. and it ended with six military men and six
civilians carrying the coffin on their shoulders to its final resting
place. husni Mubarak, the new Egyptian president was among those men.

Al-Sadat's son. Jamal. as well as his in-laws and close relatives attended
the iuneral. Near the hospital. on one of the banks of the Nile, a few
teary—eyed men and women were seen. Here they weeping for the man who had
departed. or were they weeping for Egypt which wasted years of its history
following a mirage?

The coffin was carried to a military ambulance and then to a helicopter
which carried it to al-Nasr City where al-Sadat had been shot and where

he was buried. The city was built by Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir. al-Sadat's former
companion in the revolution. whose memory he had tried to obliterate during
the years of his administration. From the helicopter the body. wrapped in
the Egyptian flag. was carried to a military Jeep which proceeded slowly to
the site of the ceremony while six officers carrying the late president's
medals marched in front of a horse—drawn caisson.

In a question-filled atmosphere [mourners marched] to the beat of military
music which was followed by a funereal tune (Chopin's symphony). Jamal
Anwar al-Sadat. Husni Mubarak. "the heirs" to al-Sadat's legacy and Sudan's
president Ja'far Numayri marched in the funeral. Numayri walked directly
behind Mubarak. In the second row [behind them] French President Francois
Hitterand, conspicuously surrounded by bodyguards walked amidst a large
group of mourners. Beside him was Menahem Begin who was surrounded by body-
guards also.

0n the same platform. where a few days earlier the Stunning operation had
been carried out. officials sat under the eagle of the Egyptian Revolution.
Husni Mubarak stepped forward to offer his condolences to the late presi—
dent's widow, who broke into tears. Her three daughters and al-Sadat's
sister were attending to her.

Everything took place amidst security measures that turned al-Nasr City
into an iron city which only Egyptians who had passes could penetrate.
Thousands of policemen in their white uniforms were lined up to prevent
any "violation" and to observe every action that took place nearby or at a
distance. Meanwhile. hundreds of people gathered at a distance, far from
the barricades set up by the security forces.

A military band saluted the late president while Jihan al-Sadat was heard
sobbing loudly. A 21-gun salute proclaimed the death of a man and the end
of an era.

Journalists counted eight heads of state who came to mourn the president.
Among them were the heads of state of France. Hest Germany, Italy. lreland.
Liberia and Sudan. The King of Belgium and the Duke of Luxembourg were

2
FIHR()FF1(JAL.USEZCMNLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

there also. Among the heads of government who attended were Chancellor
Helmut Schmidt of west Germany, Calvo Sotelo of Spain, Menahem Begin of
Israel, Falldin of Sweden and Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore. Mrs Simone Heil,
chairperson of the European Council; Gaston Thorn, the chairman of the
European Committee; and another number of European officials also attended
the funeral. It was the 0.5. delegation that stood out among other delega-
tions because of the number of people in it. It included three former presi-
dents: Jimmy Carter, Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford. In addition, Henry
Kissinger, "the godfather" came to the funeral too.

What will Happen Now?

After the Egyptian president was buried, all of Egypt, all the Arabs, in
fact, the whole world was asking the question, what will happen now?

The question is primarily an Egyptian question. Al-Sadat's legacy is a
burdensome one. The Egyptian-al—Sadat experience had yielded. even before
the man was laid to rest, scores of dead and wounded and several hundred
new prisoners who were arrested in Asyut. In the meantime, all Egyptians
were seized by uncertainty over their feelings, beginning with officials
and including the military establishment and the "heirs" themselves.

In answering the question, what will happen now, attention turned first to
Husni Mubarak whose "fate" brought him to the top of the power structure
after members of the al-Sadat regime itself who had been vying for power
{dropped out of the race] one right after the other. 'Uthman Ahmad 'Uthman
dropped out; then Mansur Hasan dropped out; and then al-Sadat was over-
thrown and Mubarak remained in the forefront, ready to assume respon-
sibility for the period of transition.

Creating an image of the period of transition with the possible surprises
it may bring can be confined to making a few points, which in turn remain
subject to any shakeup.

--An announced Egyptian commitment to pursue the course which al-Sadat
pursued so as to preserve "the gains" of Camp David with regard to the
evacuation of Sinai next April. This commitment with which Mubarak inaugu-
rated his term in front oi Uashington and Tel Aviv was linked to the state
of emergency in Egypt; to the state of alert in the Sixth Fleet in the
east Mediterranean; to the joint military naneuvers that are to take place
soon: and to an invitation for Mubarak himself to visit the United States
so he can be tested once again. In addition, Mubarak was invited to visit
Israel which he has not yet visited.

Inside the country the new president is expected to make a series of
decisions that will require first and foremost broad changes and reorganiza-
tion at the top of the military establishment. In this regard it is pos-
sible to imagine changes that will include the principal leaders, beginning
with Field Marshal Abu Chazalah, the minister of defense; the director

oi military intelligence; and senior military leaders in the various corps

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oi the army. The military figure who is a candidate to succeed Abu Ghazalah
[as minister of defense] is Maj Gen Muhammad Nabih, present chief of
operations.

It has been noticed so far that Mubarak still appears to exercise almost
total control over the armed forces. However. he did not wish to start his
term by using the armed forces in operations to curb the violence that
Egypt had been experiencing in more than one city and one area. These acts
of violence peaked in the incidents of Asyut. Then there was an attempt to
seize the home of the minister of interior. al-Nabawi Isma'il and to hold
him as a political hostage in return for the release of detainees.

Mubarak's concern for not mobilizing the armed forces to confront the domes-
tic violence is principally due to his fear that these forces with their
various inclinations may join each other in solidarity and turn against the
regime. This is a state of lack of confidence in which the regime must

tread softly, in the aftermath of the shots that were fired on the 6th of
October.

if the Egyptian armed forces will see this radical change in their leader-
ship in the next few days. the police, on the contrary, will not be sub-
jected to any changes to speak of. This is not because al-Nabawi lsma'il
rushed to declare his allegiance to Musni Mubarak in the first moments that
followed the assassination of al-Sadat, but rather because the police
agency in particular has been prepared for years for [operations] to curb
domestic unrest. For many months the police have proven their competence in
repressing secret and public religious and political organizations. The
police also proved their competence in pursuing the leaders of the oppo-
srtion.

--Speaking of the opposition. al-Sadat's assassination and the reper-
cussions of that event will result in keeping detained Egyptian opposition
leaders in prison for a long period of time where they will stay without
trial or hope of being released next April, which is the date that al-Sadat
had set for opening their files after he would have completed the Sinai
negotiations.

Since the activities of the Egyptian opposition parties (the Labor party
and the Grouping party) are presently suspended, and the Liberal party has
declared its loyalty to ﬂusni Mubarak. this situation will remain unchanged
for at least the next 6 months. The ruling party (the National Democratic
party). which nominated Mubarak for the presidency. remains the only politi-
cal force on the domestic scene which is taking action without being
checked. Mubarak is supposed to take action next spring to change the party
leaders whom he had no hand in appointing. such as Kamal al-Shadhli. the
secretary general of the party. who was appointed by Mrs Jihan al-Sadat;
Fikri Makram 'lbayd: and Hilmi 'Abd-al-‘Akhar. Mubarak knows a great deal
about the suspect deals and the operations in which they were involved as
middlemen.

--Regarding the "working team" which can assist the president, the name

h
FOR OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
3i Sayyid Mar'i is being proposed as that of the man who will more likely
mead the new government if Mubarak does not want to keep that responsi-
3ility for himself. 'Uthman Ahmad ‘Uthman could have been a candidate had
it not been for the fact that his name is tied to the impoverishing "open—
ioor policy" which al—Sadat pursued. No change is expected in the presi-
1ency of the People's Assembly [now held by] Dr Sufi Abu Talib or in the
aresidency of the Advisory Council [now held by] Dr Subhi 'Abd-al-Karim.
Both men are proteges of the First Lady; they were her professors at the
Jniversity.

iubarak's desire to cooperate with Abu Talib and with 'Abd-al-Karim in
:articular is due to the same reason that forces him to seek the aid of
Sayyid Mar'i in the next era. He wants to give evidence that he has not
ieviated from al-Sadat's policy and has not gotten rid of his men. He is
ioing so to reduce the intensity of the struggle in the upper echelons of
>0wet.

Chief among the new names that are likely "to shine" in Mubarak's new
administration is Maj Gen Sha'ban. Husni Hubarak's office manager. He is

I candidate for one of the sensitive positions in the cabinet. Another
:andidate is Usamah al-Haz. present undersecretary of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs. and a close [associate] of Mubarak. He is a candidate for
:he position of minister of foreign affairs. [Another candidate] is Safwat
al-Sharif who is expected to assume the position of minister of infor-
nation, considering that he is first and foremost a constant friend.

Zopyright: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

5592
:50: 4504/52

FOR 0F1ﬂ€£il.USE(MVLY
KHOMEYNI FANATICISE SEEN HASTENING DOOM
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French No ak8 1h Sep 81 pp 30-31
[ﬁrticle by Abou Sameh: "The Regime's Death Knellﬁ?

ZE°¥£7 Khomeyni has chosen to lean on a feudal-minded cler-
gy. From this will spring the inevitable confrontation in
which the Iranian revolution will know those on its side,
and will reject those who cling to a medieval ideology.

A death struggle is henceforth clearly joined between the absolutist and
backward regime of Khomeyni and the opposition, which has shifted from self-
defense to the offensive. There are serious indications that the Tehran
regime has set out on the path which must lead to its downfall. The at-
tempt which cost the lives of President Raja'i and Prime Minister Bahomar
attests to the determination and strength of those who wish to have done
with a regime built on imposture.

Hithin a few weeks, "Islamic courts" have officially ordered the execution
of over 900 persons. most of them 0MPI [franian Khalq Hojahedin Organiza-
tio§7 militants.

This wave of legalized assassinations indicates both the terrorist ideology
which animates the ﬁmdanmtalist clergy, and their distress. The new minister
of justice Hohammed Ashghari has described those courts as "effective ins-
truments." He has declared to the newspaper ETTALAAT that he plans to in-
tegrate the courts into his ministry. From the viewpoint of the present
leaders, that would lend more legality to the summary executions which
invariably follow the quick parodies of trials given those arrested--in
certain cases after simple denunciation without proof.

Khomeyni, for his part, is content to multiply speeches in which such terms
as "saboteur," ”counter-revolutionary," "hypocrite," etc.. serve to desig-
nate all those who in fact oppose the unleashing of terror. Thus, in the
speech made at his residence on 22 August to a delegation of police offi-
cers, he asked that “the whole population mobilize against them." Raising
to highest pitch the frenzied fanaticism he represents, he has exaltedrto

6
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the rank or "heroine" a mother who, having handed over her son to the Is-
lamic courts for being a marxist-leninist, was filmed for television with
her son just before he faced the firing squad. The viewers, aghast, saw
her say to the youth of 20: "You ceased to be my son when you left the path

of Islam, the path that leads to God, and I thanked God when I learned that
you were to be executed!"

Under what pressures, threats, or blackmail was she led to bless her son's
agony? Someday, no doubt, history will tell us.

Fanaticism

"We are 36 million RaJa'i" was the slogan chorused by demonstrators gathered
by the Islamic Republic Party for the mourning ceremony held at Tehran uni-
versity 1 September.

That fanaticized mob, alas! recalls that the disinherited people of Iran

has been conditioned over centuries by an idealizing and medieval image of
Islam, and that today it is continually invited to regenerate the revolu-
tion with its blood, and to "raise up martyrs." It is virtually hypnotized
by that appeal, which prevents it from becoming aware of the true facts in-
fluencing its daily life. To attain the kingdom of God on earth, the be-
liever, so galvanized, must then accept, as does the "Soul of God"-for that
is the meaning of Khomeyni's given name. Ruhollah --that the country be en-
gulfed in a sea of blood.

We are thus witnessing the undoing-~conscious or not-of a revolution un-
leashed in the last quarter century, by recourse to a Shiite ritual exalted
by tendencies nursed since the Middle Ages in the imagination of a people
doomed to misery, illiteracy, injustice, and the cruelest of despotisms.

Bani Sadr, a son of that people, has indeed tried to rise above those back-
ward trends, and--as few others have done-~to set forth the problem, in his
books, in terms of opposition between "imperialism, on the one hand, and
young developing nations on the other." He was the first to pay for Khomey-
ni's fanaticism.

Bani Sadr particularly tried to explain how the American superpower and its
allies have sought, through militarization of third-world countries, a solu-
tion to their structural economic crisis, so true is it that arms deliveries
to countries--ci1 producing or not—~such as Iran under the Shah, or Saudi
Arabia as at present, is the only possible means of absorbing the oil income
of those countries and maximizing the power of the multinationals which dic-
tate their will to other third-world countries and influence their economic

policies.

The true Iranian revolution has never been the work of Ayatollah Khomeyni,
for the masses well and truly rose up against an order at once royal and
imperial, which was always denounced not only by Bani Sadr, but also by an

7
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
opposition very active since 1963. At that time clandestine organizations--
Khalq Fedayin and Hojahedin, and dissident groups of the communist Tudeh
party rebelling against its "bureaucratic militantism," and known as the

Nationalist Progressive Movement, created conditions necessary for effective

mobilization of the masses, the intellectuals, and the urban petty bourgeoi-
sie.

The "White Revolution" of the Shah, decided on in the early 1960’s under the
pretext of introducing technology and modernizing socio—economic structures,
meanwhile aggravated the condition of Iran's economic and industrial struc-
tures. The country had by then become the Middle Eastern relay point for
the products of the multinationals. It has thereby been placed under the
direct management of the American military-industrial complex.

The first consequence was destruction of the structures of the mercantile
lower middle class encompassed by the Bazaar, whose traditions go back to
the 11th century, and which was traditionally linked to the parallel author-
ity imposed by the ayatollahs as early as the Middle Ages. The latter in-
deed derived all their power from taxes paid by Bazaar merchants. In addi-
tion to the tenth of his income which all Moslems must pay into the Islamic
treasury, the Bazaar merchants contributed a fifth of theirs. This had set
up the Shiite clergy as a veritable parallel institution. They had their
say in everything, from teaching in villages and towns to marriages and the
varied dealings arising from the social life of most of the forsaken of this
world in Iran. The ayatollah even made Qom a rival capital to Tehran.

But the "White Revolution," by clearing the way for an Iranian capitalism
dependent on the American multinationals, and by transforming the army into
an adjunct of the 6th Fleet with the intention of providing "the Gulf's
policeman” with the most sophisticated equipment, has been the source of a
social mutation fatal for the clergy. The merchants and people of the towns-
ruined, disintegrated, and unable to compete with the products of the Amer-
ican metropolis-~had no choice, short of rallying to their traditional aya-
tollahs, but to join the underground. In this way the resistance, in which
the Hojahedin have become preponderant because they have linked Islamic
principles of social justice to the necessary struggle for national inde-
pendence, has found among workers, peasants, and small merchants thousands
of allies and partisans.

Recovery

Caught off guard, the Shiite clergy from that moment made the tactical

choice of allying itself with the revolutionaries. But until Khomeyni's
arrival in Tehran, all mass demonstrations were truly revolutionary actions
whose Islamic character, owing to Iran's culture, was their most striking
aspect. However, from the moment of Ayatollah Taleghani's assassination--
and he had served as the link between the traditional clergy and the revolu-
tionary movement, being on that account known as "the Red"-the die was cast.
Khomeyni chose to lean not on the popular revolution but on the members of

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a feudal minded clergy. To that end he used his spiritual authority to re-
capture the explos:ve subjectivity of the masses in revolt--most of them
illiterate--and to set up a dominant and dictatorial political party.

From that moment, the split took on the aspect of a conflict between revolu-
tion and reaction. It could only degenerate into the ruthless confrontation
which we now see. There is no doubt that in such conditions the Iranian re-
volution will know how to identify its friends, and reject those who cling
hopelessly to :1 redieval ideology.

COPYRIGHT: l931A1‘rique-Asie

61t5
CSO: l+619/5

9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
|W3R 0F11C1AL USEfMNLY

LIBYA

FORMER DIPLOHAT ACCUSES REGIME OF HISREPRESENTATION
Paris AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 238, h-iO Sep 81 p 37

[interview with 'Abd-ai-Salam 'Ali 'Aylah; date and place not specified:
"Hashington Remains the Libyan Regime's Primary Economic Partner"]

[Text] 'Abd-al-Salam 'Ali 'Aylah. former charge d'affaires at the Libyan
embassy in India is considered today one of the most active figures in

the Libyan opposition abroad. Following the announcement of the Libyan-
South Yemen-Ethiopian treaty and after the two Libyan airplanes were shot
down over the Gulf of Sidra we interviewed him about the difficulties of
the Libyan regime and the opposition's reactions to the new factors on the
scene.

:Question] What is the Libyan opposition's evaluation of the trilateral
treaty between Tripoli, Aden and Addis Ababa. and what are the effects of
that treaty on existing conditions in the Red Sea area?

[Answerj The conclusion of the trilateral treaty between Tripoli, Aden
and Addis Ahaha affirms the tart that the Libyan regime is involved in
the Soviet Union's plan in the Arab region. The principal motive behind
this complicity with the Soviet Union is to hide the internal crises that
al-Qadhdhafi's group is being exposed to in government. Al-Qadhdhafi and
his people have been draining the Libyan treasury, squandering the
Country's funds abroad and upsetting the status quo In the region in the
interests of the Soviet Union.

[Question] Some western political circles are saying that the treaty was
a response to challenges from Washington and that the confrontation in the
air over the Gulf of Sidra may have been one episode in a lengthy series of
[such] episodes.

[Answer] This analysis {of the situation] is tantamount to "verbal fraud.“
The United States is the Libyan regime's primary economic partner. This is
confirmed by oil sales to Washington. by the freedom of U.S. firms working
in Libya and by the profits that are reaped and amassed in foreign banks,

not to mention those that are used in areas that benefit the Libyan people.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

And here I wonder. how can the power of America be affected by small
countries like South Yemen, Ethiopia and Libya? When the rulers [of such
nations] become involved in a strategy that goes beyond their modest capa-
bilities. they are gambling with the future of peaceful nations. who told
al-Qadhdhafi that the Libyan people want to become involved in blood baths
in which innocent people lose their lives to serve the interests of Soviet
imperialism? The incident of the airplanes in the Gulf of Sidra is actually
no more than an operation to distract the Libyan people.

Simplified Strategy

[Question] Arab diplomatic sources are saying that the Libyan president
has given up on the effectiveness of the Steadfastness and Confrontation
countries and that he decided to expand the ”strategic compass" towards
Addis Ababa? What do you think of that?

[Answer] This goo-political perspective is as far as it can be from the
colonel's mind and from his ability to distinguish between what is white
and what is black in Middle East alliances. His strategy may be summarized
in selling the oil of his country to the United States of America,
receiving its price in hard currency and then turning to the Soviet Union
and purchasing from it complete arsenals of weapons for which he pays cash
because Moscow accepts only cash payments in hard currency. Then he
recruits skinny African mercenaries in the army and sends them to the
Western Sahara. to Lebanon and to moderate Arab countries. Thus all the
various interpretations advanced by some analysts to add a few cosmetic
touches to the colonel's practices become invalid. To affirm the extem—
poraneous and affected nature of the trilateral treaty. let me ask. what
was the magic tool that enabled Aden, Tripoli and Addis Ababa to overcome
their thorny disputes with regard to the Eritrean question? It is known
that Addis Ababa never made a truce with the Eritreans despite its oppres-
sive attitude. The fact of the matter is that the Libyan president once
again ignored all his obligations, covered up all the existing problems on
the earth and opened the treasury of the Libyan people to Hengistu
Hailc-Hariam so he can stand on his feet again. And here too we hear the
old worn-out tune about the treaty being the outcome of an awareness of the
serious nature of Ethiopia‘s location on the western shores of the Straits
oi Bah al-Mandab and an awareness of Ethiopia's new role in driving away
imperialism and its inlluence in Africa. This is gross misrepresentation
and a serious obfuscation of facts and events.

;Question: [it's been said that] the Libyan opposition has only one pers-
pective on things: it focuses on the regime's faults and ignores the fact
that Libya is a small cauntry whose population does not exceed 3 million.
The Libyans have turned themselves into a strong army, well armed and well
prepared. -

[Answer] This statement is one of the false statements promoted by the
spokesmen of the Libyan regime to cover up the regime's domestic crisis and
to silence those who speak against the [ongoing] process of impoverishing
and starving the Libyan people. The Libyan people are living in a vacuum of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economic and social standards. Furthermore. the number of illiterate people
in the ranks oi the population is growing. This is a deliberate objective
pursued by the regime to keep people unaware of its numerous flaws. 1n the
meantime al-Qadhdhafi empties his pockets to more than 100 organizations
and agencies in Beirut that receive monthly allowances from him. Is there
a transgression greater than that of eliminating the opposition abroad out
of fear of them and their continued efforts to reveal the truth?

[Question] Are you not afraid of being eliminated? There are numerous
precedents in this regard.

{Answer} I am not afraid of death. My guiding principle is to expose this
regime. and my death would be for the sake of the people I love. I ask
that they be spared from the glittering ievolutionary slogans.

Copyright: l981 .-\L-WATAN AL—ARABI

8592
C30: 4504/10

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
STATUS OF OPPOSITION EXAMINED
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1083, 7 Oct 81 pp 20.22
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Morocco: In the Kingdom of the Unexpected"]

[Text] Morocco has not been spared - far from it -- by the economic crisis affect-
ing nearly all the nonoil-producing countries of the Third World. Unemployment and
shortages, combined with a deafening refrain of labels, gave rise, in the Moroccan
kingdom, to the June riots, which were mercilessly put down. Trials and sentences
decided upon and handed down in the shadows caught even the most seasoned observers
off guard. Such was the case of the trial of five members of the Political Bureau
of the USP? (Socialist Union of Popular Forces), which resulted, on 24 September

in Rabat, in the sentencing of three of them, including party leader Abderrahim
Bouabid (JEUNE APRIQUE, No 1082), to a year in prison without possibility of parole.

Assuming that the time of pardon and oblivion is not, in spite of everything, so
far off, as some whisper, sunny days nevertheless do not appear to be right ahead.
Hundreds of political and trade union militants, members of supporters of the USFP,
are still parading before the courts, if not already sentenced to long terms in
Casablanca and the main provincial capitals.

And yet, in the midst of this wave of repression, it is less the arbitrariness than
freedom that strikes the observer used to the political mores in Africa in the
southern Sahara. Absolutely! The astonishment is first of all manifested in the
court, where both attorneys and the accused make use of a freedom of tone, style
and manners which, apart from Senegal, has disappeared from the tropical scene at
the same time as the colonial helmet and the white uniforms of the eercles com-
manders.

furthermore, the relatives, friends and militants authorized to attend the sessions
do not hesitate to express their opinions noisily. At the trial of Bouabid and his
friends, their supporters massed in the courtroom applauded every speech by the

socialist leader, while nearly 200 lawyers from all the bar associations of Morocco
were anxious, dressed in their robes, not to conceal their severe disapproval of

this "trial of opinion."

The same freedom can be seen, it would appear, in the opposition press. AL-BAYANB,
the daily newspaper of the PPS (Party of Progress and Socialism, communist) harshly
criticized the official policy and even challenges the government. During the

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trial of the leaders of the USFP, that newspaper published the statements of
Bouabid before his judges and numerous accounts of solidarity. In one of its
editorials signed by Ali Yata, secretary general of the PPS and a figure in the
international communist movement, it went so far as to state that "acquittal is
absolutely essential."

But while that ideologically advanced newspaper is free, the USP? press itself has
been banned since the bloody riots in Casablanca in June: "We are journalists re-
duced to unemployment because of the will of the people," explained the colleagues
of AL-MOHARRIR (daily in Arabic) and LIBERATION (weekly in French), with a humor
that in no way —- quite the contrary -- alters their militant convictions. Cur-
iously enough, while the newspapers are "arrested," the journalists themselves
circulate "freely" (except for Karchaoui, editor of ALPHOHARRIR, arrested follow-
ing the 20 June riots). They can even express themselves elsewhere, I was told by
one source close to the government, for everything here is as if it were not so
much the agents as the media that were to blame.

Moreover, while freedom of information is watched and limited depending on the
whims and oreoccupations of the sovereign, freedom of speech is total. In the of-
fices. factories and on the jobs, civil servants and workers neither whisper nor
check their discontent. it is not rare for supporters and adversaries of the
government to come to blows over arguments, without fear of being called in for
questioning.

At home, whether they be among friends or in the presence of a foreign visitor,
Moroccan intellectuals spend hours analyzing and criticizing the decisions of the
government, without fear of consequences. Evenings in Agdal, the residential

area of Rabat where most of the leaders of the USP? live, have nothing to envy of
the Latin Quarter. Lacking the Parisian cafes, the comfortable salons of the
fillas and the apartments provide a framework, mint tea and tangerines at the same
type of encounters. Not only do they endlessly discuss the burning issues of the
day, but they weigh and analyze the men in government, going over their slightest
deeds and gestures with a fine-toothed comb.

Nor are the leaders of the other African countries spared. How much is Nyerere
worth? What does Nigeria want? Bourguiba is.a great statesman! Let's talk about
Houphouet-Boigny. But the only one on whom there is unanimity in these circles

of freedom is undeniably Leopold Sedar Senghor. After listening to my colleagues,
I believe that I better understand the love that the poet president feels for
Morocco, the first country where he went after he voluntarily gave up his office.
He knows or undoubtedly feels that it is the only country in Africa where both

the government and the Opposition have unbounded admiration for him. Paradoxes
flourish here and at every turn of the road. While a police officer constantly
watches the headquarters of the USFP in the Agdal district, while plain-clothes
men are permanently camped in the cafe across the street, even having, it is said,
an apartment in the next building, members and visitors come and go freely, without

paying the slightest attention to the surveillance.

what is more. while with the sentencing of five out of the eight members of the
Political Bureau, the USFP was decapitated, its cadres still free nevertheless

continue their feverish activity. They meet, debate and decide. They probably

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
bring increased vigilance down upon themselves. They keep the party machine in
operation, maintain the necessary connections with members and receive journalists.
They even sit on the terrace of the Hilton or the Tour Hassan in the company of
representatives of the foreign press, warning their interlocutor about a given
customer sitting nearby, saying in the most relaxed manner: "He is a cop that

our movement knows, but what do you expect? He has to earn a living."

Nor does the government harbor any particular animosity toward the opposition.
While hiding behind the infallibility of His Majesty and while constantly referring
to quotes from some royal speech, the speaker admits with good grace the worth of
such and such a member of the opposition. However, "they are not realistic,"

one hears. "They have to understand that they can't have the moon," we were told
by one high official, irritated by criticisms of the spiraling prices in recent
months.

Another minister told us that he was not only surprised, but sincerely pained by
the sentencing of Bouabid and his friends. "Abderrahim is a good person and very
respectable," the minister continued. "Unfortunately, he let his troops drag him
too far. 1 hope that in the future, he will manage not to let himself go so much.
Furthermore, I am convinced that with his great goodness, His Majesty will not

be long in granting a pardon so that Abderrahim will regain his freedom, because
prison is not the place for a man like him.“

In other words, the break between the government and the opposition does not seem
to have reached the point of no return. "of course, we are not far from the irre-
parable." admits Fathallah Oualalou, USFP deputy from Rabat and professor of
economics. "But," he hastens to point out, "we shall explore every possible way
to safeguard and, if possible, consolidate the democratic experiment." we heard
the same language from Radi Abdelouahed, head of the socialist parliamentary group
in the Chamber of Deputies, whom we asked whether his comrades and he would resume
their place in Parliament for the session beginning on 9 October.

We know that the USFP. which has 14 deputies and which was opposed to the extension
of the legislature ratified by the 30 May 1980 referendum, had threatened to boycott
the Chamber.

In that case, Hassan [I replied, that group would declare its own illegality. "No
decision on our withdrawal from Parliament has yet been made," Rodi told us, then
added: "In any case, we shall do everything to safeguard the democratic experiment,
of whose benefits and limitations we are well aware.”

All Horoccans agree that this democratic experiment must be pursued, even if they
believe that it resembles a fragile plant that deserves to be protected and watered
with love and delicacy. Naturally, government and opposition disagree on the nature

and content of democracy. The former believes that it is above all the expression
of the goodness and greatness of the sovereign, who was in no way forced to promote

it. The latter thinks that democracy quite naturally stems from the evolution of
the country and more particularly, from the struggles that preceded and hastened

independence.

15
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This difference in analyses and sensitivities naturally gives rise to different
forms of conduct, but everyone defends the democratic experiment. "It is something
dceply anchored in the spirit of our fellow countrymen," said Mahjoubi Aherdan,
minister of state in charge of posts, telegraph and telephones and declared cham-
pion of the Berber cause. "Democracy is in keeping with the spirit of tolerance
and openness that characterizes the Moroccan people," Dey Ould Sidi Babs, president
of the Chamber of Deputies, told us in his slow and barely audible voice.

Government and opposition are also side by side in defending the sovereignty of the
kingdom. They also seem resolved to prevent Morocco from being cut off from any

part of its historic territory. All look as if they had been burned alive as soon
as the delicate problem of the Sahara is brought up.

The Moroccans believe that their country is the victim of a true conspiracy aimed
at gradually dismembering it, a conspiracy at the heart of which is Algeria. now
the scapegoat of all the evils afflicting Morocco. "Just look at the map of
Africa," says Aherdan, "and you will see that by swallowing up Moroccan territory,
Algeria is like a pregnant woman."

Calmer but equally convinced, Dey Ould Sidi Babs, who looks more like an old retired
teacher than a political leader, uses pedagogy to show us the grounds for the Moroc-

can position on the Sahara. Opening a Laronsse dictionary published in 1923, he
shows us a map of Morocco indicating that the kingdom, whose area is now 660,000

square kilometers, had 800,000 at the time! He explains that Morocco was eaten
away by France and Spain. It is that philosophy, inherited from the colonial era,
Dey Ould Sidi Baha says, which pushes Algeria to act as it does. And, he concludes
peremptorily, "He shall not let any more be taken away from us by anyone."

One USFP leader and not the least important one states that "the pro-Algerian
tendancy of the French PS reflects both a mercantile spirit - oil and gas oblige --
and the guilt complex from which every French person suffers regarding independent
Algeria." Going further, he said that even in the support it gave the 08?? at

the time of the recent trials of members of its leadership, the French PS acted in
an "offhand and irresponsible manner," demanding the release of Bouabid and his
friends. "The French have no right to demand anything from Morocco because our
country is an independent, sovereign state!" '

It is an astonishing kingdom where, despite the controversies between the govern-
ment and the opposition, everyone joins together in a bloc as soon as it is a
question of the essential thing: the nation and its institutions. It is true that
Morocco is one of the few nations on the African continent which, having survived _
the colonial intrusion, has remained faithful for 13 centuries to its monarchic
foundations, with pride but without excessive chsuvinism because Rabat is without

a doubt the African capital whose streets bear the greatest number of names of
countries, heroes and martyrs on the continent.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRDPJIA 1981

11,464
C50: 4519/23

16 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SAUDI ARABIA

ECYPT'S GHURBAL SAYS N0 BREAK IN SAUDI CONTACTS
JN011428 London REUTER in English 1315 GMT 1 Nov 81

[Text] Beirut, 1 Nov (REUTER)--Contacts between Egypt and Saudi Arabia have never
stopped despite the severance of relations between Riyadh and Cairo, the Egyptian
ambassador to Washington said in an interview published today.

Ambassador Ashra Churbal told the Beirut weekly magazine MONDAY MORNING: "Let
me say that contacts between us and our Saudi brothers have never stopped. We
have had continuous contacts at all time." He declined to give details.

Saudi Arabia, along with most other Arab states, cut off ties with Egypt in 1978
because of the Egyptian-Israeli peace agreement.

Asked about prospects for a rapprochenent between Egypt and Saudi Arabia following
the assassination of President Anwar al-Sadat, Hr Ghurbal said he thought the
"misunderstanding" by the Saudi and other Arabs of Egypt's intentions was now
beginning to clear up. "I look forward to that relationship being strengthened
continuously." he added.

The Saudi press has called on the Arabs not to force new Egyptian President Nusni
Mubarak into abrogating the peace accord with Israel and has said he should be
given a 1-year period of grace to set the Egyptian house in order.

Mr Churbal also told MONDAY MORNING he did not believe the tension between Egypt
and Libya and between Sudan and Libya would develop into an all-out war.

”We hope that (Libyan leader Hu'amnar) al-Qadhdhafi will see the light and simmer
down in his policy and his action," he said.

CSO: 4400/62

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OPPOSITION LEADER ASSESSES DOMESTIC POLITICS
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 250, 12-25 Oct 81 pp 29-31
[Article by Ibrahim Tobal: "Bourguibism at an Impasse")

[Text] [Text] In this article, Ibrahim Tobal, leader of the Tunisian Na-
tional Opposition Movement (MONT), a prestigious figure in the entire
Tunisian national movement and the author of numerous works and stu-
dies on his country, examines the regime's achievements and presents
to progressives in his country proposals that might serve as a basis
for a revolutionary alternative to Bourguibism, which is rejected by
the people as a whole.

At all times and in all places, the old palace formulas are definitely the only
responses that the Destourian regime in Tunisia is still capable of providing for
the economic, political, moral and cultural crisis through which Tunisian society
is passing. The king, queen and their courtisans amuse themselves and their
gallery, for whom only life at court counts.

As a result, the deeds and gestures of First Lady Hassila Bourguiba are the bases
for the analyses of commentators on national political life and diplomatic reporters
who spend most of their time on the lookout for his slightest movements, watching
over her meetings and receptions in order to learn who is now in favor and who has
lost that spot. She knows this and since she has more than one card in her hand,
she orchestratea scenarios of imaginary power only to destroy them immediately and
spreads the most unlikely rumors the better to deny them later. Finally, she
occupies the scene and the pack of social-climbing courtisans, while her husband
reigns and governs with the same arrogant scorn for his lauders, the same faith in
his star and the same vigorous subtle and selective repression aimed at his adver-
saries.

Bourguiba's facetious remarks and enigmatic phrases now take the place of "orienta-
tions," which are pompously reproduced as such in the headlines of newspapers. If
he should wish to snap his fingers at the world and prove that his health is back
to normal, he shows off with a "vigorous dive" in his private swimming pool at the
Skanes Palace before television cameras, like Mao crossing the Yangtze River or...
Idi Amin taking a bath fully cloted, under the amused (and gently mocking) eye

of his guests. This is vulgar childishness and outward serenity for idle tourists
who bring government down to the level of a circus, where the audience vies with
him in absurdity. '

18
INDI‘OFF1C1AI.U8E2CM€LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is the way the government goes, while the drama of an inevitable succession
continues, pitting, not the regime's cliques and clans against one another, but

all of the people against that same regime established by violence.
Everything From Bourguiba

The so-called factional struggles that one witnesses daily -- and those of which
nothing is seen -- actually serve only to veil the total paralysis of the government
in each of its component parts and taken as a whole, with the blockage stemming

from a political system imposed on the Tunisian people over 25 years ago.

The last congress of the Neo Destourian Party, made to order for the new prime min-
ister, Mohamed M'Zali, aimed to kill two birds with one stone: first of all, mak-
ing people forget another congress held 2 years earlier, a congress that confirmed
the action of Hedi Nouira, whose 10 years in power ended with two blood baths (Jan-
uary 1978 and January 1980); and giving H'Zali and his team a political machine
that couldsupportand second the government in its task.

Actually, the political choices were made before and outside the congress, which

then had but to ratify them: just another way of making people believe that a page
was being turned.

The brief period of time separating the two congresses is less the manifestation of
internal quarrels within the party or the government (such quarrels are always

swept aside when the perpetuity of the regime is at stake) than the result of
political exhaustion, fear and confusion in the face of the unknown, an unknown

that is now being forged in the increasingly obvious meeting of the political opposi-
tion and the growing social opposition.

Consequently, the Destourisn regime is at a deadend, after having exhausted all the

traditional means to last, from petty tactical maneuvers of recovering the unde-
cided to the use of the army against the UGTT [Tunisian General Federation of

Labor] demonstrators.

is it not an ingenius idea that he proposes to us for emerging from the crisis?
His idea can be summed up in three points:

I) the establishment (against his will) of pluralism, which we see as a way of
getting rid of ballast before the rising peril. That is why it remains limited,
selective and subject to review. It can deceive only the blind about the monopo-
listic ambitions of the Neo Destourian Party with respect to power.

2) the evolution toward an electoral list including more candidates than the num-
ber of seats to be filled, then toward freedom offered to political currents to
present their own lists, with the bonus promise of being recognized as such and
legalized if they passed the threshold of 5 percent of the votes cast; and

3) the release of political prisoners, stemming more from the fear of the same
perils and the desire to appease in order to remain than from a sudden awareness

of the ineffectiveness of systematic repression. However, this attitude is not
general because Tunisian prisons are now overflowing with political prisoners.

19
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEINVLY
The release of certain members of the opposition was planned with a taste for
spectacle, but a spectacle for nothing insofar as no one is unaware that, far from
being the fruit of a presidential pardon, the release was the result of social
struggles that had never attained such intensity and of constant and effective
international pressure.

Naturally, the image of clemency that the government and its leader wanted to give
of themselves conceals great Hachiavellianism. Of all these ups and downs, one
essential thing remains: Everything comes from Bourguiba and everything goes

back to him, no matter what is said about his sickness and distance from affairs
of state. He assumes direct responsibility for the repression and the massacres,
even if, like Pontius Pilate, he does not miss a chance to wash his hands of them
and to find the necessary alibis. Nouira, Sayah and now H'Zali are but the execu-
tors of the master's will, in the good Destourian tradition consisting of distri—
buting roles in order better to manage the system's crises. Bourguiba's retire-
ment and the death of his reign will inevitably coincide, no matter who the heir
is to be. He knows this himself, repeating: "I am the system!"

Basing a strategy on a future "continuator" means heading straight for failure,
in our opinion. For us, taking responsibility for what comes after Bourguiba
means impugning all pretenders from the regime, whoever they might be.

Social Peace

This being the case, while the problem of the succession to Bourguiba at the head
of state and its different agencies constitutes the background against which the
internal struggles of the Neo Destourian Party take place, the crucial problems
affecting the Tunisian people remain whole.

The Nouira government, strengthened in December 1977 by technocrats, did not succeed
in mastering the economic and social crisis that raged. It was unable to make a
precise diagnosis of the nature of the crisis and its political effects. Today,

the H'Zali government is getting mired down in the same morass. The causes are
attributed to the world economic depression, the frantic consumption of the Tuni-
sian people (two-thirds of whom are now on the brink of malnutrition) or...
meteorology. It has to observe, however, that neither the wage freeze (correspond-
ing to a clear cut in the purchasing power of the masses), nor the transit facili-
ties granted by the EEC to textile exporters, nor even the influx of petrodollars
from tourists from the Gulf and Saudi Arabia has helped solve the crisis.

M'Zali is doomed, in short-range terms, to make to "the good people" the same con-
fession of failure as his predecessor: "The day will come when those who have a
job, however minimal and poorly paid, will be happy compared with those who have
no job at all."

This is a joyous prospect when one realizes that Tunisia already has some 500,000
unemployed, real or disguised, that plans now being carried out coldly leave
50,000 job applications unfulfilled a year, that some 100,000 children are sent
away from the schools each year, while nearly 300,000 immigrant workers are -
despite the temporary, and highly illusory, bright spot - about to undergo the
fate of the umnigrant Arab workers in Europe: massive deportation.

20
FIN!(HHW(1AI.lEﬂ£(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lurr of the Vru-DuﬂlvurlJn political line in cmnpletely due to the conscious.
ed refusal n: workers to let themselves be subjugated to the national and

plans. in Jaaaarv I973. the government's objective was to obtain, by brutal,
repression -- with the help of a plot carefully hatched by Mohamed Sayah and

h l-‘t-ihat, but with the benevolent complicity ot' Nouira. and all under Bour-
peruonal umbrella -- what it could not obtain by political pressure on
odors: social peace. in other words. the zeal of the movement for demands
stifling of the workers' aspiration to the autonomy of their organization.
IT must defend work more than workers." This watchword of Hedi Nouira is

en frmn him by his successors. whose verbal liberalism poorly conceals the

to curb the trade union federation, hut gently this time, because the results
enrc turned out to be mediocre.

antic search for "social peace" is but the required political pendant of
nomic line followed since 1970 by the regime and consists, under the aus-

r thv l972 and l974 laws. of making Tunisia "a fiscal paradise for foreign
rs," mainly French and West German, of giving more and more room to imperial-
ncocoloniallsm and of hurrying the Tunisian economy into the world capital-
ket through industrial subcontracting and export industries closely con-

hy the multinational finms.

ension of the war in Lebanon and the transfer of the headquarters of the
ague te Tunis constituted a historic opportunity and an unexpected backing
Tunisian commercial and financial bourgeoisie, which took advantage of it

the doors to foreign banks, with the aid of legislation. A proposed
underlies the whole: building a "median society." it should be noted here

e terms ci "class" haa been banned from the official political vocabulary,
it necessary to quickly invent this neologism in order to avoid talking of

le class society."

0 years of the Nouira government and 2 years of the H'Zali government.
the laborious transition going? It is definitely not blocked, but it is
time and time inevitably plays against the completion of the regime's

design."

aye registered in all fields. the deficit in the trade balance and payments,
ernal fiscal pressure that weighs heavily on national producers and the exor-
roxts paid hv the covvrnment, out of public monies, to fareign investors,

any counter-art. and so on, are the obvious signs of the exhaustion which
.ime can fight only by yielding a little more on government sovereignty and
pic's means.

lcial explanation of the economic stagnation by the effects of the world

do not exhaust the subject. Today as yesterday, those in government want to
ople believe that it is a blind process. For us, we are seeing the results
liherate choice made in 1970 and even slightly before that date. Not all
via: countries endure the world crisis in the same manner. That manner de-
reciselv on the choices of economic policy made in preceding years.

e of the official explanation, a traditional one at the outset, stems from
t that they try to attribute to a "foreign phenomenon" that which should

:1
FIHICHNWCJAI.USE(HNLY
be blamed on internal decisions made to serve precise interests of class and the
strategy to dominate. The fruit of this disastrous policy is that we are now wit-
nessing the withdrawal of some foreign investors with juicy profits in their pock—
ets and the failure of local entrepreneurs.

"Hot and Cold"

More than ever, the "median society" is part of the illusions maintained by official
propaganda. There has never been such an obvious split between the mass of impover-
ished Tunisians (this is not a metaphore) and the minority of the privileged who
became rich in the euphoric business climate of 1972-1976. There has never been
such a gap between workers and management, local or foreign exploiters.- Even the
most rights to retirement pay, social security and family allowances are now the
object of bitter attacks by management and the government, which finds them exor-
bitant and deems that they check productivity and the self-financing of enterprises.

if one reads the official speech between the lines, one finally comes to the con-

clusion of failure and bankruptcy. The government's main concern is to put an end
to the resistance of the people and the unions, blowing alternately hot and cold,

with savage repression one day and sweet promises the next.

The smokescreens will no longer deceive militants, who are now hardened and deter-

mined to give a political and economic content to the struggle of the Tunisian peo-
ple for their total independence. The working masses and militants who restored

its autonomy to the UGTT will make it a powerful, democratic, fighting, representa-
tive union.

Let there be no mistake! The independence of the country and trade union autonomy

are the cardinal stakes of all the active or passive struggles taking place under
our very eyes.

It is as a result of this double task that the crisis grew and will inevitably
continue to grow, on the battlefield and not with an implicit or explicit agreement
between a dying regime and a reform.st opposition.

As on the eve of every new factor, feverish activity reigns in the corridors of
government. Hassila Bourguiba, a past master at this game in the shadows, tries
to give the impression that great changes are underway. That is how the regime
has survived for over a quarter of a century, avoiding the worst every time that
the menacing streets raised their voices. Some politicians out of favor with the
masses and leading splinter groups, whose legislation has just revealed their
limitations, fall into the subtle but sterile game of Dane Machivelli and a regime
with its back against the wall.

The inability of the Socialist Democratic Movement (MDS), the Tunisian Communist
Party and the Popular Unity Movement (MU?) to create organic and historic links

with the masses to fight repression and wage the struggle for the country's indepen-
dence and social justice now leads them to compromise. They were unable to propose
a healthier, more dignified way out to the Tunisian people. But their path will
lead to the most total failure because only the consciousness and assiduousness of
the social and anti-imperialist movement are able to deal with the future of Tunisia
and its people. For the Tunisian National Opposition Movement, that future will

begin to take shape in a revolutionary alternative defined in six points:

9?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

l) abrogating the institutions of the current system through the dissolution of
’arliament and the Constitution; promulgating general amnesty, followed by an imme-
diate release of all political and trade union prisoners, the return of political
exiles and the rehabilitation of all martyrs of the Tunisian opposition;

2) instituting effective pluralism with no trade-offs;

3) forming a unity government emerging from a national front, to be in charge of
affairs until the election of a president of the republic; during that period of
transition, creating a council of sovereignty in charge of overseeing the government

and the establishment of new institutions, which council could be dissolved follow-
ing the election of the new president of the republic;

5) electing a constituent assembly in charge of drafting a new constitution to be
submitted to the people;

5) electing a National Assembly and a president following the principles of the new
constitution, with their prerogatives clearly defined by the new constitution.

b) As the fundamental law. the new constitution must also express the economic,
social and cultural orientation of the people in their aspiration for real indepen-
uence. The option can only be socialist. and it must affirm the desire for unity of
the Maghreb and of the Arab nation, the African vocation of Tunisia and its decision
to take its place among the nonaligned countries engaged in the anti-imperialist
struggle.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie.

11.1.6".
(:30: 4519/20 mm

."5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY