FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10637
6 JULY 1982

Sub-Sahardn Africa Report

FOUO No. 779

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mm“. USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 10/106:
6 July 198:
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT
r000 80. 779
CONTENTS
noon '
Renevel of Trede Tiee with Snail Discussed
(mum muss, Jen 82) 1
CHAD
Kenoucue bpcrtedly undertaking Secret legotieticne with Kebre
(m2 AFRIQUB. 28 Apr 82) 3
Go‘touni Seid To Be Seeking Alliance Betveen PAT. 1-1!)an
(Ginette Cot; URINE-A812 26 Apr-9 May 82) ................. 1|
60860

hunch-Congolese trade Increases in 1981
(means TNPICAUXE'I' BMW, 21 Hey 82) ............. 1

French Aid to Agriculturel Reeeerch. bachenizeticn
(um TmPICAUX‘BT mm. 21 May'82) 9

Brief!
Reguleticn- or Public llerkete
Office of Industrial Development
Cenedien Cooperetion

tit-1t:

“mm mm

President Hopes tor Increased Spenieh Aid
(mass TROPICAUX n WW8, 21 my 82) '12

French Economic Cooperation Deecribed
(mam TROPICAUX ET mm. 7 Div 82) 1h

Briers
Diecovery of Quality Petroleum 16
mom
Solidsrity Cos-ittees Vith Cube. DGR, Vietnen Porned

(v1mrue cm“; 9”“.me 82) OOOQOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
GAE)!
Political Crisis Seid To Be Persistins. Worsening
(mam-A813, 26 Apﬁg M 82) esseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeeeee
President Ws Cornerstones tor W Development Projects
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX m mums, 21 May 82)
Caceo Cultivstion To Be Revived
(mm macaw 3r mzmmns. 7 May 82)
GAlBIA
Genbiens Accept Pbmstion or Senegsnbis in Principle
(David Sharp; mm: AFRIQUE, 28 Apr 82)
GAIA
Tribelisn Issue Analyzed, Accepted Concepts Modified
(mum mum, Jan 82)
GUINEA
Accomplish-ants and Prospects of Econonw Described
(mes TROPICAUXEL‘ maximums. 1 May 82)
Erie“
Serou Toure's Visit to France
Presidential Election Results
an Industrial Sector Credit
MR! COAST
Role of Scientific Research in chonic Recovery Examined
(1Com Dianne; AFRIQIB ASIB, 10-23 May 82)
mmmua
Campaign Amsinst Police Abuses Produces Results
(mm mam, Apr 82) OOOIIOOOOOQOOOO0.00000000COOOOOIOOOO
HER

Kountdae Apparently Moving Toward Restoration of Civil Rule
(Sindiou Diello; mm; Al-‘RIQUE, 28 Apr 82)

17

19

2h

26

28

816k;

31

39
SENEGAL

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Proposed Shipping Line R111 Aid Exports

Briefs

(MARCHES 'I'ROPICAUX IT MEWS.

Two New Parties

Agreement Signed

Belgian Cooperation Program
Rice Stalls Set. Up
Argentine Hydraulic Bqu1_

FOIOFFICMLISIONLY

21 m &) 0000000000000

131

$5655
MAL 0!? TRADE ms HITS MIL DISCUSSD
London AMCAN AFFAIRS 1n Radial: V01 81. No 322, Jan 82 pp 15-16

[Tut] The end of the slave trade between Brazil and Angola in woo practically
severed trading links between the two countries for over one hundred
years. There remained an intermittent circulation of Portuguese capital from
Brazil to Angola and Mocambique, which involved a few wealthy Portuguese
families lntheotherdirectionmroﬁtsftomcolonialhankswerenaedtohance
banking operations in Brazil. In the 1970s there has been a renewal of trade
between Brazil and Angola, and Brazilian capital has begun to enter
Angola. Brazil's economic links with Angola have developed more rapidly than
those with Mozambique, partly heuuae Brazil wished to diversify her oil
imports The presence in Mocamhique of Brazilians, who opposed the military
regime and assisted Frelimo in the struggle against Portuguese colonialism may
also have been a factor. The Angolan government, on its part, does not exclude
economic relations with countries like Brazil, whose regimes are ideologically
opposed to its socialist model, since it needs technology and capital from these
sources.

Brazilian exports to Angola have gown from negligible amounts in the early
seventies to 889 m in l979. A breakdown of Brazilian export: for the years
I978 and I979 shows that vehicles make up over half the tocaL Since [979, a
wide variety of food items have been imported from Brazil (328 m in
1979). Agricultural output fell after independence and food now accounts for
about a quarter of Angola's import bill. In the wake of the Portuguese
withdrawal, the food distribution system collapsed The food processing
industry is also in poor condition In addition large scale immigration to Luanda
has forced the government to increase food supplies and other services to the
city. The Brazilian supermarket chain Pan dc Acucar has a management con-
tract to assist state supermarkets in Luanda, and food is distributed through
people's shops and a huge jumbo supermarket. A private Brazilian construction
and consultancy company, Sisal, has contracts of 32mm with the Angolan
National Directorate of Tourism and Hotels for the construction and improve-
ment of hotels.

Brazilian imports from Angola are small. but an agreement signed between
two state oil companies has long term implications for the expansion of bilateral
trade. Petrobras. has a contract to buy 7.000 barrels of oil a day, and the value
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080011-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ol'oil expom m 1900 waa 835m Peuohtaa, has a 175 pee eent cake in one
comicaandanctheriabeingnegotiated. Peuohtasiealaomptovide
technialaaaiataneeforAngolaitaﬂaapeeuoftheoilinduatry. Ooewayin
which Brazil has actively panned close: relation: with lusophooe countries in

- Mtica'tsthxough technical assistance Hete thePomcnceelanmgim
Bmﬂaﬁatduaadvantage. BmilisaleadinaexpooentofSouth-Smth
relations and advertise: he: ‘tropical technology'. The Brazilian government
has tuppotted technical coopentioo between developing construe:
(TCDC). In 19m. anil set up a fund fot the promotion of TCDC
activitiea Such activitiea involve Africans viaiting Brazil on study touta and
trainingptommcetofamﬂhtizethemwithanﬂiaotechnolouaodknov
how. latheloogetmothieaeneatopmtennzﬂianteehuolocyandcoo-
sultahcy aetvieee. In I919, UNIDO contracted a Bruiiao consultancy am no
moutaameydfoodpmmgplmuhAnMandalamescaleptoiectto
assist these plants will, ifaccepued by the Angolan govetoment, he canted out by
Bmiliancompan‘ace.

mum: m Royal Mum Society and Coneubueoea 1902
cs0: woo/ms

2
MWUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0005000800‘l1-6
KAMOUGUE REPORTBDLY UNDERTAKING SECRET NBGOTIAIIORS WITH BABES
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1112, 28 Apr 82 pp 26, 27 '

[Text] "hat is Lt Col thal Abdel Kader Kamougue looking for) Vice president
of the Transitional National Union Government (GUNT) and, as such. number

two in the Goukouni Heddeye regime, the southern leader never loses an
opportunity to evoke the need “to crush hussein nabre's rebellion." Logical.
But this sane Kamougue, when he leaves the capital (where, it is true, his
appearances are rather infrequent nowadays) to reach his stronghold of Houndou.
curiously multiplies statements that are strictly opposed.

Thus, he stated, on 17 April, that "everyone is tired of the war," and that

it was urgently necessary "to work for peace.” As early as 4 March. the
"Standing Comittee responsible for abiniatering the southern none" (political
administrative headquarters of the south, over which he presides), had
advocated, in a memorandum, a "general cease-fire.” No lore, no less.

At Ndjamena, where Guy Penna, Hitterrand's adviser for African and Malagasy
affairs, just made a flying visit on 18 April, Kanougue's attitude is
considered pretty demoralizing. Those on Habre‘s side, on the other hand,
are rubbing their hands, but without building up any excessive illusions.
For no one is unaware in Chad that wadal Abdel Kader Kamougue, even if he
rules as uncontested master in three of the fivesouthernprovinces (the two
Logones and Moyen-Chari), is very much opposed in Tanjilet and ecpecially in
Mayo-Kebbi.

Moreover, his most recent stands have provoked a general outcry on the part
of several southern personslitites, such as his former companions Naianbaye,
Ngangbet and Kassire. who do not hesitate to advance the hypothesis of secret
dealings between him and Hussein Babre. Lastly. it would be wrong to believe
that Kamougue, who carefully avoids participating directly in the clashes
between the GUNT troops and those of Habre. represents the only military
force south of the Cheri: in fact, he controls directly only the forces of
the gendarnerie, the former menbers of the Chadian National Army (ART, formed
under Tonbalbaye and Malloum) having preferred to keep themselves, for the
moment, "in reserve."

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

91.31.
cso: 4719/896

FOIIOIIICIAI.IIII(IULN
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GOUKDUNI SAID TO BE SEEKING ALLIANCE BETWEEN PAT, £301.11“!
Paris APRIQUE-ASIE in French No 266 26 Apr-9 Bay 82 p 32

[Article by Ginette Cot: "Kanougue's Conspiracy"]

[Text] The vice president of the am [Transitional
National Union Governeent] broke unanimity on behalf
of a rapprocheuent with hissein Habre. But the PAT
[Togolese Areed Forces] deny him any right to speak
in their nets.

While urgent threats are once again building up egainst Chad, Colonel Kanougu,
who claims to represent the south of the country, has Just broken the maninity
demonstrated by the GUN'I‘ in its rejection of Nairobi's dictate, in which,

last 11 February, a group of African states had celled on hie to negotiate

with hiseein Hebre.

0n 6 March, the GUN? vice president, without even interning his govermaent

in advance, issued a neuorsndue which he addressed to the DAB end the United
Nations. calling for a cease-fire end an "overall political settle-cut.” he
thus agreed with and supported the wishes of an 0A0 pressure group favorable
to the return of the chief of the EAR [Northern Areed Forces] to the Chadian
political scene and, ultimately, the installation of s ”muscled" dictatorship
in Ndjansne. For, in spite of the sidestepping and contradictory explanations
of the GUNT vice president, no one is deceived as to the leaning of his opera-
tion. Everyone knows that supported by the United States, certain French
business and financial circles, as well as by the nest reactionary African
states. and considerably enriched by the revenue co-ing free the economic
activity in the southern region of the country, which he has largely diverted
to his own benefit, Colonel Kanougu is in the process of negotiating with the
FAN, with a view to en econoeic alliance, and is working to destabilize, from

within, the coalition forces of the 60!“.

It goes without saying that these eeneuvers have had serious consequences in
the field, without creating confusion or sharpening the contradictions within

the governeent forces .

It is known how, while new arguments were thus furnished hissein Babre‘s
supporters, the last government offensive. launched against the PAH turned
sharply at Ou- lladjer. At the sense tine, if the resolutions of heirobi 111

”WWW!”
were for the moment kept in the dark, the 0A” nevertheless is still continuing,
through its present force on Chadian territory, to "work" in the same direction.
The staffs of the pan-African force would reportedly be indulging in dangerous
blackmail. It might thus have been decided that the government forces would

no longer have the right to launch military offensives from places where 0A”
soldiers have established themselves. At Ati, some 30 kilometers distant from
Oum “adjer. occupied by the PAN, Zairians and Senegalese from the pen-African
force mightthreaten to leave the locality if government forces did not leave
the field.

Lastly, while, in spite of financial aid from France, the state coffers--still
deprived of the revenues from the south--ere hopelessly empty, the hypothesis
of an economic blockade is far from being set aside. Everything is happening
as if it was the intention to drive the president of the GUNT and the patriotic
forces of the country to the brink of a fatal impasse.

However, paradoxically, the backwash provoked by the Kamougue affair has laid
the foundations of a possible clarification of the situation. Far from having
a following, as he expected, in his region of origin, the GUNT vice president,
whose initiative was immediately denounced as a "betrayal" by political and
military personalities from the south of the country, appears to be a men more
and more isolated and discredit.

At the conclusion of a meeting held from 31 Hatch to 3 April last, the officers,
noncommissioned officers and enlisted men of the PAI--on behalf of whom Kamougue
signed the various Kano and Lagos agreements in 1979, and was named vice
president of the GUNT--made public a resolution in which they deny the latter
any right to represent them and to act on their behalf or in their place.

In this document, the FAT states, in particular, that the standing committee,
a deliberative and executive body set up in the south following the first
Ndjamena war in 1979 and of which Kamougue still claims to be chairman, is
doing a bad job of managing the public finances of the state. that it has be-
come unpopular and, in addition, no longer has any representativeness. The
PAT stresses, at the same time, the need for "an energetic takeover by menf
to meet the situation prevailing in the east of the country, occupied by the
PAH.

In conclusion, the FAT advocates a series of measures whose implementation might
facilitate a spectacular rectification of the situation. It states, in perti-
cular. that the standing committee should be forbidden to use public funds and
calls on the GUNT to set up, in the southern zone, a joint territorial admin-
istration composed of soldiers and civilians.

Lastly, it demands representation within the GUNT by a military men other
than Kamougue.

Like an echo, the FROLINAT [Chadian National Liberation Front], politically
reunified, published a statement on 3 April in which it denouced Kamougue's
initiative as part of a long-ongoing attempt to undermine the GUNT's authority.
At the same time, the PROLINAI welcomed the position taken by the PAT, which,
it pointed out, should serve as an example to all the forces not yet integrated
into the national army.

itlICINNCIAI.lIIE(H'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is in this context. in which anything nay yet happen—the worst as well
as the best—that President Goukouni Heddeye was willing to grant us an
exclusive interview in hdjanens last 3 April. As will be seen. the GUN!
president insists. in the course of this interview, on the need during this
phase. in which it is a question of saving the country from the complication
of war and the threat of disneabernent, to pronote a solid alliance between
the patriotic forces of the PM and the progressive-leaning forces of the
PROLIRAT. Indeed, only such an alliance my sake it possible to foresee

a positive outcome.

COPYRIGln': 1982 Afrique-Asie .

9436
CSO: (0719/89?

l-‘OINFIGALISEONLY
PRERCﬂ-CONGOLBSE TRADE INCREASES IN 1981
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET ﬁﬁblTRRRANEBNS in French No 1906, 21 May 82 p 1346

[Text] French-Congolese trade increased spectacularly in 1981: 137.5 percent
in one year (2.89 billion French francs. compared with 1.21 billion in 1980).

It was Congolese exports to France that rose the most in value in a year (up
486 percent), from 121.4 million French francs in 1980 to 711.7 million in

1981.

French exports to the Congo rose 98.9 percent at the same tine, going from
1.09 billion francs to 2.18 billion.

The trade balance remained favorable to France in 1981 and Paris' rate of cover
became much more reasonable than in the past (306 percent compared with 904
percent in 1980).

Congolese Sales

The enormous growth in Congolese sales to France is explained by the overwhelm-
ing predominance of oil (78 percent). Uranium also reappears in Congolese ex-
ports, but these are actually re-exports, with the metal coming from Gabon
(Mounds mines).

In contrast, the other exports dropped 15 percent in 1981 (103 million French
francs. compared with 121.4 million in 1980). The value of wood exports
dropped 6 percent in 1 year, totaling 69.4 million French francs. However.
the relative share of wood increased, making up 67.4 percent of all exports.
excluding uranium and oil. wood sold abroad mainly includes rough tinber and
some re-exports frOm the Central African Republic.

French Exports

The doubling in value of French sales is not linked to any modification in
exports. In 1981, France sold the Congo machinery (388 million French francs,
up 150 percent on an annual basis); iron and steel (387 million, up 100 per-
cent); ocean and river navigation equipment (186.2 million, compared with 6.5
in 1980); electric machinery and apparatuses (180 million, up 183 percent);

7
FOI:OII1CLA1.IEHE(MVLY
FOR‘05FKJAI.USE(NVLY

automobiles end cycles (15k million. up 110 percent); pharmaceutical products

(101 million, up 28 percent). All these products take up 70 percent of French
exports.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
CSO: 4719/1037

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FRENCH AID TO AGRICULIURAL RESEARCH, HBCHANIZATION
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 1906, 21 May 82 p 1346

[Text] On page 1286 of our 14 Hay l9§2 issue. we briefly mentioned the grant-
ing of French aid to Congolese agriculture: tuo financial grants of 2 million
French francs (100 million CPA francs) each, given through the PAC (Aid and
Cooperation Fund).

The first agreement just signed in Brazzaville concerns the first phase of
agricultural research completed in 1981. It has made it possible to equip
the Loudima power plant and to set up two regional branches at Kinda-be and
0driba. Above all. it made it possible to rebuilt the genetic resource pool
for food production and also to obtain better yields and thereby better meet
the food needs of the population. From 1977 to 1981, French participation in
the project amounted to‘285.5 million CEA francs.

The project has two phases: The first. totaling 94 million CPA francs, should
make it possible to set up the third regional branch at Boo; deve10p programs
undertaken in recent years and complete the training of national research
workers called upon to take.the place of expatriate. It therefore involves
technical assistance, training, equipment and certain operating expenditures
(mainly analyses). the latter generally borne by the Congo. The second phase
will make it possible to complete equipping of the CTPT [Technical Center for
Tropical Forestry] in vitro laboratory in Points-Hairs. to be used for forest
research.

The second agreement has to do with development of small-scale mechanization.
In 1980, the diagnostic results of the experimental phase of the mechanized
farming project in the Congo, a project lasting a total of six years (1976-19
1976. training phase; 1976-1978. experimentation phase essentially based on
government farms; 1979-1980, pre-extenaion phase in rural areas and for which.

the PAC financial aid was 320 million CIA) were drawn up. Their conclusions
made it possible to launch a mechanization program in rural areas. This '

grant. following the opening of a lOO—CFA-franc credit in 1981, is for the
second year of the development initiation program.

The economic advantages of_mechanization have been understood in the rural

areas, which have for 2 years borne part of the expenses involved in operat-
ing machinery. In its current phase. the Small-Scale Agricultural Hechaniastion

ll!!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.U§l|liLY
FORMALUSZONLY

Operation (OHM) involve. the .eectore of Wool: end luau-be 1n the region
of Pool. end Bouenre and Houyondrt 1n Mean. A etudy will beﬁnderteken to
redefine the role of Iechenmtion vithtn the £1:er of e region“ develop-

ment program no u to net up cooperetive etmcturee bued on necheniution
(cultivatore or cell tractors). -

COPYRIGIT: Rene Horeux et Cie Peru 1982

11 .1061.
880: 6719/1037

10
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

REGULATIm OF PUBLIC MARKETS-Within the framework of nsasures acconpanying
the Congo's 5-year plan, three presidential orders have just been published

in Brazzaville. the CONGOLRSB INFORMATION AGENCY (AC1) announced on 12 Hay.
According to the ACI. these orders concern regulation of public narkets, the
powers and operation of the central nanagenent of narkets. contracts concluded
with the governnent and the establishnnt of a central cosmittee .for narkets
and government contracts. [Tent] [Paris HARCNES TROPICAIIX 2T storm
in French No 1906; 21 May 82 p 1366] [COPYRIQ‘D Rene Koren: st Cie Paris
1982] 11,466

OFFICE OF INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT-4t the request of the People's Republic of
the Congo, the UNIDO (UN Industrial D'svelopnent Organization) representation
in France to strengthen industrial' cooperation and the pronotion of invest-
ments has since 26 April 1982 hosted Franck Pernand Dibas. Dibas. who was
industrial adviser in the Hinistry of Industry and Tishing, has just been
entrusted with the responsibility for setting up the Industrial Development
Office of the Congo, of which he has been named director. During his stay.
Dibas was to make the necessary contacts with the French institutions and
organizations concerned and becone faniliar with techniques of pronoting invest-
nents used in France. [Text] [Paris HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET HEBREW in
French No 1906. 21 May 82 p 1367] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris
1982] 11,461. . .

CANADIAN COOPERATION-Jollowing the visit of a Congolese nission to Quebec

*nd that of a Quebec mission to the Congo in 1981. Canada and the People's
Republic of the Congo have decided to take measures leading to the establishent
of assistance projects in the mining. petroleu, drinking water. forests and
forestry industry sectors. To give concrete shape to the wish expressed by

the Congo, Hydro Quebec has also provided its expertise in evaluating. selecting
and planning the layout for a transportation line, an electric power distribu-
tion network and the adaptability of certain materials on African terrain.

The Quebec Hinistry of Energy and Resources has also offered its Congolese
counterpart assistance in preparing the 5-Year Plan for lining exploration.
Finally, SOQUIP [expansion unknown] has accepted into a training program a

high Congolese official who is a hydrocarbons expert. [Text] [Paris MARCERS
TROPICAUX 3T HBOITBRRANRBNS in bench No 1904. 7 hey 82 p 1221] [comm-r:
Rene Moreux st Cie Paris 1982] 11915

030: 4719/863

11
FOIOI’I'ICIALUSEONLY
PRESIDERT HOPES FOR INCREASED SPANISH AID

Paris MARCHES TROPICABX ET MBDITERRARESNS in French No 1906, 21 May 82 pp 1364-
1345

[Text] During the official visit which President Theodoro Obiang Mbasogo made
to Madrid from 12 to 15 May, the discontent resulting from the deterioration
in relations between Spain and Equatorial Guinea since 1979 was closely exam-
ined by the two partners.

According to the AF? correspondent in Madrid, the visit made it possible to
clarify certain misunderstandings. without thereby solving basic problems
hindering relations between the two countries.

President Obiang, who was received by King Juan Carlos and the head of the
Spanish Government, Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo, met with his hosts to discuss the
continuation of Spanish aid. Estimated at nearly $110 million (in the form of
gifts or loans at very low interest) since the ouster of Macias Nguema in
August 1979, the aid should remain at the same level for the next two years

to come.

Bilateral discussions made it possible to clarify the status of Spanish tech-
nical advisers and to emphasize the desire of the government in Malabo to at-

tract private investments.

The precise role of the Spanish technical advisers, long suspected by Malaho
of getting in the way of the authority of the Equatorial Guinean administra-
tion. remains the main stumbling block between the two countries, the AF?
says. Malabo recently refused the appointment of three Spanish experts who
would have had broad executive powers in the economic and financial fields.

Nevertheless, at a conference held on 16 May in Madrid. President Obiang
recognized that Spain "cannot send money to Guinea for its development if it
has no guarantees concerning the use of that money)“ The Equatorial Guinean
chief of state therefore accepted the presence within his country's adminis-
tration of Spanish officials who are to "study the country's economic situa-
tion."

This concession was actually indispensable, given the desire of the Mslabo

government to see private Spanish firms contribute to the reconstruction of
Equatorial Guinea.

lilltlﬂﬂtlhl.ﬂ§l(lﬁl¥
”WMONIN

”Spain does a great deal in Guinea, but it can still do much more," Preaidant
Obiang eaid at his preu conference. vhile giving aaaurance that it would not
be replaced by France. Nevertheleaa. diplonetic circles in lladrid do not
totally rule out the poaeibility of a return of the Sovieta to the forefront.
despite the role played by ﬂoacw under the Macias regile.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paria 1982

11 ,666
080: 6719/1037

13
mmmouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

800mm

FRENCH BCOWIC COOPERATION DESCRIBE)
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1906. 7 Kay 82 p 1219

[Text] As part of the economic cooperation between the two countries. the
governments of the French Republic and Equatorial Guinea have drawn up a draft
agreenent for the nutual pronotion and protection of invest-ants. The agreement
will be concluded for an initial 10-year period and is renewable unless can-
celed by either party.

Under its laws. each country recognizes and encOureges the investments made
by the other country's nationals and coqenies within its territory and nsri-
tine tones. Such investnents are assured of fair and equitable treat-ant.

in accordance with the principles of international law. Such invest-ems,
and their associated activities. are also granted the treatnent granted to
noet-favored-nation nationals and conpaniea. however. such treat-eat does
not extend to privileges granted to nationals or conpanies of a third country
by virtue of its participation or association in e free-trade zone. a custols
union. a canon narhet or any other fern of regional econonic organisation.

Investeenta esde by nationals or companies of either contracting country shall
enjoy. within the other country's territory and naritine tones, full and cleete
security and protection. Neither country shall take neasuree for expropriation
or nationalisation or any other neaaure resulting in direct or indirect dis-
posaession. except for reasons of public interest and provided that such nea-
sures are neither discrininatory nor contrary to a particular collitnent.

The disposseesion measures which could be taken nust provide for pay-ant of
pronpt and adequate coepensation for an munt calculated fron the real value
of the invest-ants in question and based on a normal econonic situation prior
to any threat of dieposeeasion. Such comensation is freely transferable.

The agreement guarantees the free transfer of interest. dividends. profits.
earnings. fees for use of patents and tradensrks. repsynent of loans. proceeds
frets assignment or total or partial liquidation of the investment. including
appreciation of the capital invested; transfers shall be node at the official
exchange rate.

Nationals hired or authorized to work within the other country's territory
shall also be entitled to the free transfer of an appropriate percentage of
their renmeration to their country of origin.

15
POI OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the absence of an anicabls settlenent of differences regarding inveatnents.
the agreenent provides for recourse to arbitration by the International Center
for Settlement of Differences Regarding Invest-ants (CIBDI). established by
the Washington Convention of 18 March 1965.

The agreement is intended to create favorable conditions for French invest-ants
in Equatorial Guinea and Equatorial Guinean inveatnenta in France by encouraging
transfers of capital and technology between the two countries.

Since 1979. trade betwen Frace and Equatorial Guinea has had a positive balance
in favor of France. Its developnent since 1978 can be smarised as follows,
in millions of francs:

1978 1979 1980 1981

French Purchases L3 2.5 1.5 5.4
French Sales 3.7 3.1 11.6 17.7
Balance -0.6 +0.6 +10.1 +12.3

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena: et Cie Paris 1982

[1915
C80: 4719/863

15
MOFFICIALUSEONLY
BRIEFS

DISCOVERY OF QUALITY PMOLM-According to reports circulated in Madrid on

28 April. the petrolau from the nearby deposits on the island of lioco. in
Equatorial Guinea. is of excellent quality. aiailar to that of Libyan oil,

based on saianic and geologic eurveys conducted by GEPSA [Guinea-Spanish
Petroleus Conpsny], a nixed Spanish-Equatorial Guinean company. This field

was discovered a5 a depth of 70 a and is located within a sandy zone vith an
area of 1.600 In , extending toward the northveatern part of the island. How-
ever. the sire of the reserves has not yet been calculated. According to GBPSA.
the continental shelf near the Huni River. where prospecting is being conducted.
also contains a deposit of high-quality petrolem. [Text] [Paris mans
TROPICAUX 8'1“ MEDITERRANEBIS in French 80 1906. 7 Kay 82 p 1219] [COMIGH'R
Rene Horeux at Cie Paris 1982] 11915

CSO: 6719/8623

16
POROFI'ICMLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ETHIOPIA

SOLIDARITY WIRES WITH CUM. DGR. VIETNAM mm
PAlZl9SO havens PM in E31181! 1850 GE 12 Jul 82

[Report by Victor M. Cerriba]

[Text] Addie Absba, l3 Jun—The Ethiopia-Cubs Solidarity Co-itteo was
constituted here in o ceremy held in the Ethiopian Con-ittee for Peace
and Solidarity.

The new organization is chaired by lhru Tesfaye. ninister of housing and
urban develop-cut, and nude up moreover of the dean of the law faculty of
the lhiversity of Addie Ababs. the nanaging director of the national air
line (Ethiopian Airlines) and a node: of the Intonation]. Relations
Department of the Conittee To Organise tho working Party of the People of

Ethiopia (COM) .

me executive board of the new solidarity co-ittee is also node up of two
representatives of the Youth Association of Revolutionary Ethiopia, and

another from the Hinistry of External Relations.

In the founding cerenony of the Ethiopia-Cubs Solidarity Co-ittee. its
chairnan expressed tho new entity's satisfaction due to the setting up of

"this between both countries" and he stressed its imrmce for expanding
relations between Cubans end Ethiopians.

For his part, the Cuban sdnssedor in Addie Ababa, Buenaventura Reyes,
expressed the gratitude of. the Cuban Govern-at to the Ethiopian people for
the constitution of the co-ittee.

'lhe diplosst also referred to the threats that Cuba is subjected to by 0.8.
inerialisn and to the Cuban people's decision to stand up to these attacks.

"Ethiopia's support to Cuba, expressed through the constitution of this
conittee, encourages us to continue the struggle and to construct socialise

in our country." said the Cuban adsssador.

he added that "(hubs will always be at the side of Ethiopians and that an
example of that solidarity is the recent opening of two roads built by Cuban
internationalist workers in the western part of this African country."

17
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Ethiopia-Vietna- Solidarity and Ethiopia-Dementia Gunny Solidarity
Oomtteu, which are chaired by ch. niniatera of public health and inform-

tion. Tefari Honda Ind 1113 Gina, respectively, were .100 coutituted in
«pirate «rennin.

680: 4700/1‘18

18

FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
POLITICAL CRISIS SAID TO BE PBRSISTING, HORSBNING
Paris APRIQUE-ASIB in French No 266 26 Apr-9 May 82 p 40

[Text] Despite President Bongo's soothing statements, the political crisis is
persisting and worsening in Gabon, while concern is growing in Libreville's
upper circles. Proof of this is seen in the tour-the first of its kind in
more than 10 years of rule-~which Omar Bongo agreed to make to the interior
of the country, where in 3 weeks, last February. he visited the chief towns
of all the country's provinces. Officially this tour was aimed at enabling
the chief of state to ask directly about the grievances of the Gabonese
citizens. Indeed, what was going on, at one and the same time, was a flashy,
demagogic operation and an enterprise of intimidation. For, as always, the
Gabonese president's speeches were punctuated, on that occasion, by generour
promises mixed with threats against those “degenerates” who dared to take

the risk of abandoning the right road.

In reality, Omar Bongo is aware that his regime is increasingly losing speed,
and he is so panic-stricken that he distxusts his own shadow. Everything
works toward demonstrating that the disturbances which broke out last December
in Libreville were far from constituting a cyclical mishap. The politico-
social climate is becoming more oppressive, and repression is continuing to
strike blindly. even in the ranks of those who, until now, could have been
considered faithful allies or servants of the Bongo regime.

Only very recently was the attention of public opinion focused on these
faithful allies, with the arrest, betweenll and 16 March, of several persons,
among them, Samuel Nguema Hba, editor-in-chief of the Libreville daily -
L'UNION; Francois 0ndo Edou editor-in-chief of National Radio; Jean-Baptiste
Asse Bekale, journalist from Radio-Africa No 1; Hr Ekoh, former national educa-
tion ninister; Michel Ovono, lining engineer; and Marguerite Eya “heme.
According to some testimony. several of these prisoners were horribly tortured.

Even though the Gabonese Ministry of Information has stated that this testimony
was born in "fertile and one-sided imaginations," it nevertheless confirmed
that these arrests had taken place within "the framework of the investigation
opened following the disturbances in December 1981." Disturbances caused,
according to the Gabonese authorities, by "manipulated" students. As if to
believe that the 'hmnipulators" were particularly numerous and that they
benefited from wide and deep ramifications in the system.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AFRIQUB-ASIB.

9434

cs0: 4719/89? 19

FOI!0llIClALIIIIIIULY
POIOI'I'IGALUSEONLY

PRESIDENT LAYS CORNERS?“ FOR mama nmmm'r mum
Paris HARCEBS TROPICAUX ET mlnnmms in trench No 1906, 21 May 82 p 1365

[Text] On 5 Hey, President Bongo traveled to Hayuba in southern Gabon to

lay the cornerstones for a barytine plant, a tourist complex. water and elec-
tricity supply programs and a microwave relay teleco-Iunicstioms systus. '

BL? Gabon [Gasoline and Lubricants Company of France], which has major oil
operations offshore from hayumba, will contribute through PID (Diversified
Investnent Program) to the financing of these different projects.

with respect to the tourist project, the choice of hayumba is justified by its
setting (50 kiloeeters of beaches). In July, the call for bids will be issued.

constituting the effective startup'of work, as the feasibility study was
satisfactory.

The cstablistnent of a microwave relay system will cost 6 billion on francs

and financing will be provided by the Gabonese Govern-ant. 81.1? Gabon and
Shell Gabon within the franework of the P11).

The SBBG (Gabon Power and Hater Company) projects include completion of an
electric power plant (three generators), as well as a B-kilometer-long
mediun-tension network and a lie-kilometer low-tension system. The water
supply will be provided by a processing plant and nine outlets.

working the barytine will require an investment of 6.5 billion CPA francs

and CODEHIN (Nyanga Mining Company) will be set up by the Gabonese Goverment,
nu Gabon. ammo [Ogooue Inning Company]. the saw [Geological and Mineral
Prospecting Office] and an Anericsn mining firm.

The breadth of the Hsyumba development progrees and their symbolic launching
at the same tine are explained for partially political reasons, as Ryanga
Province has recently turned out to be one of the most turbulent in Gabon.

In his 5 May speech in Msyumba. President Bongo spoke out against those in the
province who criticised this series of projects.

With respect to the Hayumbs tourist projects, the Gabonese newspaper L'UNIOII
pointed out that Georges Rawiri, first deputy prine minister of Gabon. min-
ister of transport, tourism and development of the territory, had met with

20

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Jean Snoeck. oirsctor of narksting and foreign relations of Sauna. in Libre-
vills to discus; the role which the Belgian conpsny could play in the trans-

port of European and American tourists for the Hayuba vscstion and .rssort

village." The joint operation of s Brussels-Librevills line by Air Gabon
and Sabena was also reportedly discussed in Librsvillc.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horsux et Cis Paris 1982

11,464
080: 6719/1037

'0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

CACAO CULTIVATION TO BE REVIVED
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX 8T MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1904, 7 Kay 82 pp 1220-21

[Excerpts] As we noted briefly in our issue of 30 April 1982, p 1159, a con-
ference held in Oyem recently examined current problems of growing cacao in
Gabon and ways to revive national cacao production, which has only declined
since 1971. when maximm production of 6,000 tone was recorded.

Gabon's Third 5-Year Plan, which could not be carried out because of the finan-
cial crisis which developed in 1977 and the ensuing austerity policy. provided
for raising Gabonese cacao production to 15,000 tons annually. A more realistic
goal has now been set: According to participants in the Oyam conference. this
goal will be 10,000 tons in 1992. due in particular to the extension of cacao
cultivation to provinces other than Holeu-Ntee. to which it is presently limited.

Cacao growing has declined again today for reasons identical in principle to
those which caused it to decline for the first time more than 50 years ago.

The population of Holeu-Ntem, where there are no forestry operations. was former-
ly sizable in comparison to other regions of Gabon. A dynamic farming population.
backed by constant government support, knew real prosperity thanks to cacao.

Presently. following the economic predominance of timber and then of petroleum,
the ensuing urban prosperity and the related rural exodus and the educational
effort. a disturbing decline in woleu-Nten's farming population can be observed.
Cacao plantations have become outdated and the average age of planters has

also risen, currently 55 years old, since the vast majority of men between

the ages of 20 and 35 are drawn to the cities.

The action taken, at government prompting. by SONADECI (National Company for
Development of Industrial Crops) several years ago seats to have had only very
minor results, based on the remarks made during the 0y- conference: According
to some, SONADECI has suffered a partial failure. However. it was acknowledged
that the company had completed a good number of works. infrastructures in par-
ticular, and that its actions would have to be backed with new investments.

In the compendium docunent which will be submitted to the Gabonese Government,
the conference participants pointed out two kinds of measures apt to increase
production: the creation of industrial blocs (6,500 hectares). within which
the wage-earning system would be practiced, and integrated zone operations
(village blocks of 3.000 hectares and 500 hectares of traditional plantations)

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

utilizing groups of farmworkera in cooperatives. These two types of action,
assigned to SONADBCI. are expected to attract and keep young people on the
land. since raising the purchase price from the producer and various grade-
classification measures appear unable to bring about an increase in production.
which is stagnating at around 3.000 tons. although in 1981-82 the purchase
price of "superior" grade cacao is 320 CPA francs per kg (as opposed to 115
francs for "scrap“ grade).

Pricing is today considered the way to keep young people on village plantations

and the Oyen conference participants considered various types of aid (for pulling.
planting. housing) as well as indirect assistance for pulling. field maintenance
and fungicides. Farm loans, repayable when the cacao is sold. are also recs-ended.

In his speech. the representative for Holeu-Ntem planters, Mr Samuel Anla.

noted that aid to planters should be grated directly. at least in the case

of those who are recognized to be owners of large plantations. He also hoped
that the planters would now be included in certain missions undertaken by the
general directors and experts in the case of visits to state-owned or cooperative
plantations in countries such as the Ivory Coast and Cameroon. They couid

thus learn from the experience of planters in those countries. which are large
producers of cacao.

In sum, the conference participants recemended the following basic neasures:
the creation of agro-industrial blocs and village blocs; maintenance of current
assistance as well as strengthening the Center for Propagation of Superior
Cacao Trees (C303) and ways to improve quality. Significant measures regerding
the creation, improvement and maintenance of fields and roade. as well as
socioeconomic infrastructures. were also requested.

Looking over the list of Cabonese exports. cacao's contribution seems minuscule.
But Gabon is currently rediscovering its agriculture, which has been neglected
for too long and which now appears to be a basic factor of socioeconomic balance
and of the country's real development. This is why the Oyem conference. which
could mark a turning point in the development of cacao growing in Gabon. will
have to be followed with measures which will be a test of the national ability
to manage the agricultural problem.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

[I915
080: 4719/8623

23
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GAMBIMS ACCEPT FORMATION 0! salesman IN PRINCIPLE
Paris JEUNB AFRIQUB in French 30 1112, 28 Apr 82 p 31

[Article by our special correspondent David Sharp: "Scenes fron Confederal
Life"]

[Text] "When the Senegalese want to annoy us, they
speak French."

"The curfew." Hy wife finds it fantastic. It has been nonthe since I cane
hone after midnight!" Stretched out on a bench, the sen looks at the lights
of the little Ganbian city of Jenoi approaching slowly in;the night. The
antiquated ferryboat which ensures the crossing of the Gasbia River at
Parafenni--end which. accordingly. links Casanance to the rest of Senegal-
labors in the current with its load of trucks, beasts and passengers. "ren-
thirty. He should arrive in tine at Banjul. lot that they would fire on us,
but it is annoying to be taken away to the station by the Senegalese soldiers.
There is always a penalty: cutting the lawn in front of the chief's house

or jumping in place for an hour at a stretch."

Not too bad, apparently. this curfew. Nor very nenacing, the three or four
young soldiers seated beside us in the ferry, who are obviously fighting
sleep. I ask then: "Are you far from hone?" ”Indeed not. We are fron
Kaolack, a little further down the road. And then we all belong to the seas
ethnic groups and speak the sane languages as the Ganbisns."

To see these young Senegalese, disciplined, but also very relaxed, talk with
the local people, it is indeed ridiculous to believe that Senegal and Ganbia
are two different countries. "Not that the Senegalese don't bother us
sonetines," explains ny Ganbian friend, who coeplains in particular about
the behavior of sane custons officers: "When they want to annoy us, they
speak to us in French. Now they know very well that we all speak Wolofl"
But the majority of the Ganbians certainly do not feel. as an occupation,
the presence of sone hundreds of Senegalese soldiers seat to Cable at the

end of July 1981, following the att-pted coup d'etat against Sir Dewda
szara.

For Hbaye libengue. Senegal's jovial ambassador to lanjul, the problu. if
there is one. would rather be on the part of the civilians. "Sane of ny fellow

2h
Immunoassay
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1'" lzcnu seem to have decided that the confederation had already becoee a
fact.“ he tells us. To put it plainly. the taxes and customs duties inpoaed
on either side of the border are even less respected than in the past. "That
shows that the people are often ahead of government plans,” Hbaye Hbengue
adds, with an amused smile.

Should we conclude from this that the confederation agreement, which became
official on 1 February. has passed through like a letter dropped in the nail?
"No," numerous Ganbians explain. "We are entirely in egreement with the
principle of confederation," affirns a young student fron Brita-e. who

readily admits to being an opponent, "but we would have vented to be
consulted beforehand."

With the approach of the Gambian presidential and legislative elections,
envisaged reswctively for 4 and 5 May (LA. [Jeune Afriquelmo 1111), the
handicap of the tragic events of July 1981 seens far from being lifted.
Obviously, for Sir Jawara's compatriots, it is much more a question of a
samba-Gambian matter than a samba-Senegalese problem.

COPYRIGHT: Jeane Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

943i.
080: (0719/896

25
“MUSIONLY
TRIBALISH ISSUE ANALYZBD, ACCEPTED MOMS mom
London AFRICA]! AFFAIRS in hands Vol 81, No 322. Jan 82 pp 67-69

[Text] Since Independence. Ghanaian governments have faced a series of economic
and political problems which have threatened to undermine their legitinncy and
power. One response. employed even by time governments like the present
one which claim to have no use for ideology, has been to identify ‘enemies’ on
whom the blame can be put, or who can be used to divert attention from the
problems and provide a rallying point for national unity. The governments
havehadrealchoicesastotheidentiﬁcationol‘theseenemies Thethemeof
'external sabotage' has been frequently employed in the form of, for example,
attacks on foreign intervention, nee-colonialism, and the activiies of alien
minority groups in Ghana. notably the Lebanese and Nigerians. ‘lnternal
subversion' has also been repeatedly identiﬁed, both in the form of cultural traits
like corruption, self-interest and ideological misguidednets; and in the form of
attacks on particular groups like the civil service, ‘middlemen'. market traders,

and‘the politicians'. The employment ol‘ ideological attacks on onmmunalism

and tribalism, and the identiﬁcation of particular communal minorities as the
main agents of these threats, is thus only one of several options available to
governments.

There has been a tendency in recent literature on African politics to blur the
distinction between the political and the social Politial tensions and policies
are assumed to reﬂect the 'underlying‘ social structure; and the area of govern-
mcnl choice, options and initiative is thereby onderplayed. By the same token,
it is frequently assumed that social cleavages must somehow naturally emerge as
poiiucally salient, and if the evidence is not there. then the political manifestation
is said to be either latent, emergent, or imminent)” The literature on
Ghanaian politics has not in fact seriously examined the role of communalism in
goscrnment ideologies. but to the extent that it has been discussed, the political
salience of the Eve threat' has been explained as a government 'reTpot'i's'e'oo the
Ewes' own political behaviour, deriving from their 'persecution nomplea' ,
their character as a 'close-ltnit clannish group' and a 'latently suspicious sort of

us The tendency has been evident in both the Lusaka and the 'political economy litmuse
one or the me obvious manifestations has been I {tenancy ol’ssaeruons that the
maturation of the masses must "sarely pose a threat to the communion o! bourgeoue elite do u
Attica, anthout the evsdence oltrends in misdirection. Theteaoe was ofthisinthe cbaptenon
Ghana. Guinea.lvory0nauandLiber'anann. Warm-seam; AlsosesAhe.
Reeduwrvl’msines.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080011-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

people’. Thieisindeedthemeaugeofﬁéﬁfnﬁt'propapndaﬁutdihot
supported by the resettch which has been done. It seem: likely that the Eve
mifmythingleet'uihdhdc'intheipereeptiouofthemselmnndothenthan,
forenmple,theAhnn. More'unportantlyhoweverﬁtmightbearguedthetitit
mmtheAhnuonpentherthanmequthata‘peoeeuuoncomplex'nuy
hefound, andthatitittheemergenoeot‘disoontentamonpttheoeeoonomhally
andpoliticslly dominsntyoups whiehprovidesthelteyoothedevelopmeotof
u'ibolistningovernmeotideologies.

In at article published in 1979, Fred Hayward attempted to measure
“perceptions of well-being’ in Ghana by comparing objective and perceived
poeitionantlststus.m He foundthettheohieetivelywealthieotnndpoliticllly
dominantpwpgthehkammdtheGgfeltthemoetdeprived;whiletheEves
andthemott disadvantaged :roup,thenortheruers, felt reasomhly satisﬁed with
theirlot Hiserpltnntionwasthstthedonunanteouthernershadhilher
expecmions of henehs from government Ind economic growth, and thus
became moot disillusioned when successive governments encountered political
andeoonomicprohlems Thitoondusionteemstohempportedbythebdinp
ofDonaldRothehild,whichthowedthemoredisadvantsoednonhetneom-
munitiestohavethelowestexpecudonsofﬂndhethekmdisiﬂusinnedwih,
centralgovernment'"

lfindeeditittheAltsnandG-whohovel‘eltthemoetdisillmionedend
unfairlytreatedintheIWOguoouldseemlihelythatithubeentheirattemptto
ﬁtdexphnetionsforthefaﬂuretofthegovemmenuendtheeeonornyvhichlies
behindmuchoftheethnicscnpegoetingwhichhasoocurtednndheen
promulgatedhythepredominantlympveroments. Despitetheirapporent
dionurdfunorthemen,theAhangroupeoouldhrdlyisolaoethemuthemiot
threetsineetheirvery‘beehnrdnees‘beliesthecredihilityot‘suehnn
allegation Thmifoommnnnlhootilitieawereoobeemplnyedntamtheﬁwes
were the obvious wt; not because of major ohketive disparities between the
mmhutmbeauuoftheitveryviﬂtﬂitymdmtothem,
which Ienteredencemnlleptions that theyverednrupnvermls.

Thisparticular unethasbeensol‘requently enployed heeause,oomparedto
other ideological enemies, it has the virtue ofperformin; multiple functions at
apparently low political coet. It promotes annual unity (and thence reg‘une
suppon)apinubothtmin«hy:roupondanaﬂegedthreat(teeeeuonhm)mthe
nation‘sterritorialhounartea hmmappamdyelplahandthutto
eitherdefuseorpromote, eliterivdriee;dependin;onhnvitieemployed.
Fmﬂyﬁthumuslforoeheaueeofthepeiorativeeonnoutimof‘IW’.
whichtllmtytal’elyeondemn. Thepolitioalooetappearstobelow'mthetthe
useofthe‘Ewethreat’hunotpmvokedaunitedhottieretponeefromthemaet
group;partlyheoaueeofanﬁweeenteofveahneetwhichheengendereddir
appointment and apathy rather than hostility, and partly became ofthe very
extent of Ewe integration into Ghana'ssocialandpolitieal life which haehoth
muudthecomundhoetilitiesnndinhbiteddndieoaﬁoowhichmkhtothu-
wisehsvedeveloped.

m r M. Hayward, 92mm of'eﬂ mi in on... nm'ﬁmsﬂm'm
m M622“, 1919 pp too-n

oththdd. 'Comporouve Puhhe M Ind ' Patterns: The Glens
Esperieore', Murmur“. 22.1. ms pp. 1214: ’ smoounotooveren
Bueerenothan

comm: tho Royal Aidan Sociaty and Contributor. 1902
080: 0700/1015

27
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500080011-6
ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND PROSPECTS OF ECONOMY DESCRIBED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MﬂIITBRRANEENS in French No 1906, 7 May 82 pp 1208-1209

[Text] During 1973-1980. the Guinean economy recorded. in current terms. an
average annual growth rate of +3.4 percent, which exceeded the increase in
population (+2.8 :ercent).

The recovery of the Guinean economy. beginning in 1973. was exclusively the
result of the exploitation of two deposits of bauxite (Guinea Bauxite Company
and Kindia Bauxite Office, the latter under Soviet control). which provides
nearly 96 percent of export revenues. At the same tine. exportahle agricultural
production has collapsed.

In 1979. the agricultural sector (80 percent of the population) accounted for
no percent of the gross domestic product (as opposed to 66 percent in 1968).
while mineral exploitation contributed 18.5 percent (6.2 percent in 1973),
industry and construction-public works accounted for 7 percent and the tertiary
sector provided 31 percent.

Growth has slowed since 1978 due to the peak reached in iineral production.
the restriction of public invest-eat expenditures for lack of adequate contri-
butions of foreign capital and the necessity of allocating increased resources
to offset the balance of payments deficit.

Foreign Trade

with the development of its aineral production, Guinea became the leading world
exporter of bauxite: 11.2 nillion tone in 1980. not counting ore converted
into eluninun locally: 0.7 million tons in exports.

For several years the balance of trade had a surplus balance. The development
of trade can be summarized as follows. in millions of dollars:

1976 1977 1978 1979
Imports 264 233 303 367
Exports 253 293 328 . 390
Deficit -ll - - -
Surplus -- +60 +25 +63
28

INJI!OIFIC1A1.IISEi(MVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The estimated value of exports for 1980 was $657 million. Beuite and alumina
sccounted for note than 96 percent of Guinean exports and 78 percent of sales
were in convertible currencies, with the retaining 22 percent represented by
the production of the Kindia Bauxite Office, operated by the Soviets. who are
entitled to set aside shipments for themselves under a clearing agreement.

Inports have increased sharply since 1972, from 3.8 billion sylis ($190 million)
to 6.6 billion in 1979 ($347 million), corresponding to 26.5 percent of the
gross domestic product assessed for 1979.

In value. petrolem products represented more than 20 percent of imports in
1979, while capital goods needed for Development Plan operations and for mining
companies declined somewhat; consmer goods represented a significant item
because of the inadequacy of agricultural production (100,000 tons of rice

and 20.000 tons of flour were imported in 1980).

Among suppliers. France is first (nearly 45 percent in 1981), followed by the
United States. USSR. China, Great Britain. etc. (In its issue of 12 March
1981, p 734. HARCHBS TROPICAUX B‘l’ museums publist a study on: Franco-
Cuinean Economic and Financial Relations.)

Officially stopped in 1975, the exploitation of dinond mines (which seems
to have continued clandestinely) was resumed in 1980. About 6.000 carats were
exported in 1980, representing $1 million in value.

0n the whole, exports of agricultural produce have declined considerably. being
limited to cabbage-palm almonds (15,500 tons in 1980), coffee (2,880 tons)

and pineapples (1,630 tons). Bananas. which Guinea supplied to the French
market before 1960, have completely disappeared.

The United States is Guinea's leading customer, followed by the USSR, France.
Canada. Spain. etc.

Deterioration of Balance of Payments

Although foreign trade, as a result of bauxite and alminum exports (equivalent
to $650 million in 1980), showed a surplus. since 1975 the balance of payments
has shown a deficit of more than $100 million, reaching $120 million in 1980.

Thus in 1982. Guinea finds itself facing the problem of foreign exchange re-
sources. At the present time and until 1985. when mineral production should
register new growth. net foreign-exchange revenues are estimated at approxi-
mately $220 million, with $195 million from bauxite and alt-im- sales and
$15 million from exports of agricultural produce.

For the same period. annual foreign-exchange expenditures. which cannot be
reduced. represent approximately 3250-270 million. with $100 million for
petroleum products. $100 million for imports of capital goods and $30 million
for imports of foodstuffs.

The deficit resulting from revenues and expenditures approximately corresponds
to debt servicing. two-thirds of whose coverage is provided by renewal of
matured loans and one-third by short-term loans.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In late December 1980. the total outstanding foreign debt was estimated at

$1.5 billion. with an available margin of $0.2 billion not yet paid. The for-
sign debt includes contracted cousitments with Eastern countries. anme the
USSR. whose percentage is estimated at more than half of the total indebtedness.

During 1980. Guinean use of available foreign loans was estimated at $70 million.
while servicing (interest and amortization) represented $95 million. including
clearing operations with Eastern countries. Excluding such clearing operations.
Guinea's drawings in 1980 amounted to $65 million. as opposed to $35 million

in payments.

The deterioration of the balance of payments appears to be long-lasting as
a result of increased debt servicing, due to greater indebtedness to Western
countries since 1976. granted in the form of media-term co-odity credits.

Starting in 1979. the Guinean Government took various measures to get the
economy back on its feet: official authorization of private trade. formula-
tion of an investment code to encourage the establisInent of semipublic corpora-
tions with foreign partners. monetary reform by changing the monetary system
without devaluation. 1981-85 5-Year Plan totaling $10.5 billion.

Rich Economic Potential

At the present time. no samipublic corporation has yet been established and
the plan's measures imply extensive use of foreign credits and a large increase
in international aid.

However. Guinea's economic potential is one of the greatest on the African
continent: agriculture. livestock breeding. fishing. hydroelectricity. mineral
resources. etc. But Guinea seems unable to utilize such potential before

many years because of limitations deriving from its net available foreign-
exchange resources and the nature of its economic system.

The shortage of foreign exchange constitutes the major obstacle to development.
The Guinean economy cannot presently manage to save any foreign exchange for
investment. whose financing can be provided only by further indebtedness.

but a higher and higher percentage of new indebtedness (estimated at 25 percent)
is used to pay for current imports and to cover the balance of payments deficit.

Exportable agricultural production apparently will not be able to grow before
several years. grain imports will still be necessary (rice and flour inports

in 1981 represented about 10 percent of all inorts. in addition to free food
assistance), imports of petroleum products are becoming burdensome despite

aid from several Arab countries and new development of the mining sector cannot
be considered before 1986-85.

Favorable factors include the renewed exploitation of diamond mines (diamond
exports should be significant starting in 1984) and the ﬂout limbs iron-ore

extraction project (15 billion tons of high-grade reserves of as much as 60
percent). whose implementation. under the auspices of 0.8. Steel with financial
aid from the world Bank, should produce results only beginning in 1986.

30
FOR OI-‘I-‘ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nature of the economic system also constitutes an obstacle to development.

The Guinean economy is presently a juxtaposition of various airtight compartments.
vithout any connection or coordination. Thus the otticial government sector.
mining comaniea, the parallel comercial narket and the rural self-subsistence
economy exist side by side with each other. The country is underadministered.

the public sector nuet be reorganized at various levels and become morally
responsible in a spirit of awareness of the national interest. Horeover.

the state of existing infrastructures would not allow rapid expansion of.

economic operations.

The strategy reaffirmed by the Guinean Government also does not encourage
foreign investment in eemipublic corporations benefiting from a certain
ecomaic liberalin.

Eventually. around 1990, a better overall balance can be expected with the
launching of major new nining projects. For the 1982-85 period. the burden
of debt servicing constitutes a major problem.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

11915
C80: ”19/863

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

$2300 TOURE'S VISIT ro FRANCE—Mud Sekou Tours, president of the Republic of
Guinea. recently hinted during an interview granted to special correspondents
from the French press that he would sake an official visit to France this
year. Such a visit. Sekou Toure essentially said. would be the best opportun-
ity for dissipating all misunderstandings. while restoring and strengthening
trust between our two governments. The Guinean chief of state emphasized that
after a year of socialist goverueent in France, "nothing inportant" has been
done about relations between the Guinean and French parties. "However," he
said. "we still have hope for a better future because we believe that the
president of the French Republic intends to invite us for a visit to the French
people." The Guinean chief of state hoped in particular that "relations of
sincere and lasting cooperation would be established and solidified” between
the French and Guinean governments and between the French Socialist Party and
the Denocratic Party of Guinea. Relations between the two parties deter-
iorated 5 years ago following criticises against Conakry regarding respect

for hunan rights. Previous to that tine, relations between the Socialist
Party and Guinea had been good. Francois Hitterrand has 'gone to Guinea four
tines since the country's independence in 1958. [Text] [Paris memes TROPI~
CAUX B‘l‘ mnlmmmus in French No 1906, 21 May 82 p 1338] (COPYRIGHT: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11.466

PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS-ﬁn 16 May, the Suprele Constitutional Assembly
(AC8) of Guinea officially proclained the final results of the 9 May presiden-
tial elections. confining the reelection of Aimed Sekou Tours with 100 percent
of the votes cast. According to the AGS, Aheed Sekou ‘l‘oure obtained 100 per-
cent of the votes cast, representim 98.82 percent of the 3,100,110 persons
registered. In the last elections in Bees-her 1976, he also obtained 100 per-
cent of the votes, but the figure then was 99.86 percent of the 2,636,129
persons registered. The A08. recently set up in Guinea. has 600 nabers. It
is responsible for proclaining the final results of the presidential elections
and for swearing in the elected chief of state. Sekou Tours began his fourth
7-year term by clemency neasures for a number of persons held in Guinean pri-
sons. however, neither the nunber nor the names of those chosen are known.
[Text] [Paris mains TROPICAUX ET norms in French No 1906. 21 He

82 p 1338] (WRIGHT: Rana horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,1064

”MEWS
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY

IDA INDUSTRIAL SECTOR CREDIT-«mime will nabs use of a credit fro. the Inter-
national Develop-eat Association (IDA. an affiliate of the world Bank) for

$19 nillion to revive its industrial eector by strengthening industries of

the private sector through the supply of credits. equipnent and technical
assistance. inprovenent of the results of certain public industrial enter-
prises and increasing the capabilities of certain government agencies to
establish a policy for the industrial sector. [Text] [Parie means TROPICAUX
B‘l‘ mums in French No 1906. 7 May 82 p 1209] [OOPRIGB‘R Rene Horeux
et Cie Paris 1982] 11915

(290: 6719/863

33
ROLE OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN BCOWIC RECOVERY MIND
Paris AFRIQIB A81! in French 10-23 May 82 pp 30-31 ”
[Article by Koffi Hansne: "Scientific Research: Driving Power for Development"]

[Text] The Ministry of Scientific Research is playing a key role in the econo-
mic recovery policy being implnented by the Ivory Coast Covert-ant to lift the
country out of its economic crisis (AFRIQUB-ASIE No 266. 26 April 1932).
Established in 1971 and headed by Dr Balls [site since February 1981. the minis!
try has become one of the prime movers of what is being celled the "Ivorian
economic miracle."

Under Della Keita. who for a long time performed the duties of director general
of scientific research, the ministry is on the way to becoming a true super-
ninistry, whose activities reach into many sectors as varied as agriculture.
education. health and planning. In short, as Dr Xeita himself puts it, this
ministry "is playing the role of coordinator between several departments."

This young veterinarian. who was born in 1938. after outstanding studies in

the PRC, was appointed director general of scientific research in the ministry
of the one name. Bella Keita was not long in bringing attention to himself.
For some, he is an innovative spirit; for others. he is an enfant terrible and
an authoritarian. In any event, shortly thereafter he went to New York to the
Ivorian office of UN Economic Omission for Africa (BOA). Recalled to Abidjan
in ﬂovember 1980, he was appointed by Chief of State Felix Bouphouet-Boigny to
become a member of the political executive cosmittee of the Dnocratic Party

of the Ivory Coast (PDCI-RDA [African Democratic Rallyl) before being named to
head the Ministry of Scientific Research.

Breaking what was becoaing a tradition, Dr Della Keita traveled through the
Ivorian bush, visited institutes and worked to make his department a house of
glass: this eloquent man is open to the press of which he is the darling in
Abidjan. Recently, he was asked to appear on "The Great Debate" program on
national television and was a huge success.

If scientific research is being called upon to play a pace-setting role in
economic recovery, that is because it is giving priority consideration to the
pillar of the Ivorian economy. agriculture, which is founded on scientific and
technical bases. This prompted Dr Ball Keita to say: "In the cacao-coffee

"MINORS
MWLMONLY

sector. we have obtained fabulous results. considering the tine it has taken us
u. nrrlvn at that point. Production is currently about 500.000 tone I»! year.“
A total strategy was implth to end the stagnation which has been threatening
production for close to 2 years. Thus. instead of annual growth of about 7 per—
cent which characterised cacao-coffee production in the past decade, the 1981-
1985 Five-Year Plan anticipates an annual growth rate of 5.5 percent. 0n the
other hand. new varieties of products are under study and, according to the
authorities. promise satisfactory results. A hybridization of Ivorian robusta
coffee and arabica, which produces notably arabusta, should have a good future.
as its yield per hectare and its quality surpass by far those products now being
grown.

If , in a few years time, the Ivory Coast has stopped importing rice as the
result of rising production, according to Dr Keita it was because: "The quality
of river rice has been improved as well as its resistance to drought. There is
also reason to be satisfied with the results obtained in such varied sectors

as aquiculture. pisciculture and the fight against bilharsiasis and rabies.

On another subject—new kinds of energy—peasants are being initiated into the
use of biomass.“ (Biomass consists of vegetable and animal matter which can be

transformed into fuel.)

Peasants, a not unimportant factor, are showing increasing interest in the
ministry's spearhead activities in rural circles. namely the "technical com-
mittees" which bring together both technicians am! agriculturists who do not
hesitate in criticizing and formulating solutions.

"We have shattered the myth according to which the African peasant has no
feeling for progress and science, which, I might add. is a racist myth," Dr
Keita emphasized.

Of course. if this ministry conducts research in all sectors, it is because the
state is giving it the funds to do so. Thus its budget was raised from 4
billion CPA francs to 15 billion CPA francs in 2 years. however, there is
above all a philosophy which transcends all national political choices. When.
ll years ago, houphouet-Boigny decided to establish the hinistry of Scientific
Research, his action was greeted by a shrugging of shoulders. "A gadget for
the rich." "a privilege of the industrialized countries,” were the consents at
that time in Africa, where to this day there are no ministries of scientific
research per as. as this sector is generally placed under the ministries of
industrial or rural development. At present. in the Ivory Coast. this ministry
is making every effort to a large amber of African researchers from other
countries. "For us scientific research is a way of lifting the Ivory Coast out
of the charlatanism represented by the construction of development through
improvisation and obscurantism," Dr Keita said. Thus, some 60 research insti-
tutes are attached to as many development companies to improve vegetable pro-
ducts and to do the pre-familiarisation work before moving on to "really large-
scale" production.

35
”MUSIONLY
POI Oﬂ-‘IOAI. USE ONLY

Rural Exodus

It is true that this research is doing great things for Ivoriane and, according
to Dr Keita, "aims to create the conditions for the scientific legitimatization
of the African continent so that we will lose our complexes vie-a-vis the
whites."

' It is also true that research has benefited from political stability and, above
all, frou the coherence of political choices, which in other respects are such
debated. These political choices have resulted in the production by fewer than
6,000 rich planters of all Ivorian coffee and cacao, while slall planters,
victims of unequal—and often unfair-competition are forced into rural exodus,
which is one of the results of national policy. This exodus basically affects
young people and results in an average age for planters of 50 years.

Keeping the young people in the countryside is certainly one of the objectives
of the ministries of agricultury and scientific research; however, their
success is not guaranteed. This is a general policy question!

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AFRIQUB-ASIE

8143
CSO: 4719/957

36
MWUSEOULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum
CAMPAIGN MAINS? POLICE 8308' PRODUCES 83801.75
London AFRICAN AFFAIRS in $191th No 128’ m 82 pp 31-32
[ﬁcmm ECAUSEofpanic .__ "'u.’ " “ mini: '"’—pouce‘ih‘anmia 6‘
BmmofMom‘ ' my: and team ”the

net

' ' havebeenacke und 6011.
mem “am-gum mg“ __.._i m
comeanatoncemuthave spread P0556. the Gun: m ‘ (at u” m.
ovetmonthana .Thcympnnof m m M“! m: . .
aumque‘hw order'cnmpmm. In nude! me'mtyml

gmmnd‘iepuwcmllwg; post to deal with mum;
encomqged dgoommo ”I'Iupw“’of '. can

“id- _'_‘ EheGovemlgnemisnouimply'
But'the accident recognized that °" . ‘9 come '0 '3

mmbenofSNASPrepmdwed 90m ,B—I! Btauﬂymom

theaweandmemodsotmam “"0 ”WW In Mtpmo.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m

m mm

mm

m

mm
m 3%

ﬁﬁwm

Journals Ltd

38

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ROUNTCHB APPARENTLY MOVING TOWARD RESTORATIOﬂ OF CIVIL RULE
Paris JEUNB AFRIQUE in French No 1112, 28 Apr 82 p 75 4
{Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Soon Civilians?”

[Text] Toward a constitution prepared by all citizens.

Niger has taken a small step toward the "civilization" of power. In the
traditional speech he made on the eve of the eighth anniversary of the taking
of power by the army (15 April 1970), President Seyni Konntche announced a
political decision which breaks with the practices current since the fall of
Hanani Diori. The National Development Council, a body grouping all social
levels in the country, Eros country people to senior executives, by way of
youths and city workers, will not be a corporatistic type of chamber.
Crowning the institutions of the Development Society (J.A. [Jeune Afrique]

No 1110), it will be set up as a Constituent Assembly.

"The aim." the chief of state recalled, "is to associate all coapetriote

with the responsible management of Niger's affairs." In this spirit,
precautions have been taken to avoid having the new institutions become the
monopoly of city dwellers (intellectuals, tradesmen, etc.), with regard to
whom the military remains somewhat niatrustful. Thus, to allow for strong
representation by the masses, the country people in particular, 50 percent of
the seats will be occupied by members of the Samariya (youth associations)
and of cooperatives, which constitute, it should be recalled, the two pillars
of the Development Society.

What are the broad lines of the draft constitution which the CH5 (Supreme
Military Council, the highest state body) is getting ready to place before
the future Constituent Asseably? Is the CH5 itself destined to disappear?
"hat will be the major organs of power? These are some of the questions we
have the right to ask, the day after the chief of state's announcement.

All the more since the authorities have always stressed their intention to

set up "an original type of society, authentically Nigerian in its values,

its foundations and its practice." “hat is certain is that Col Seyni Kountche
is a supporter, undoubtedly prudent but convinced, of the normalization of
power. to say nothing of its return to civilians.

INIICIHHCIAI.UBIGNNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Started scarcely 2 years after the army's accession to power, this process
appeared with even greater clarity in February 1981.

The eighth ministerial reorganization which took place on that occasion was
not without significance. It aarked the departure of inportant nesbers of
the as: only two out of the 10 who had taken power remained in office. A
sharp preponderance of civilians was assured at the ease tine. Col Seyni
Kountche would have wanted to go even further and entrust to a civilian the
prine minister's post, a decision which would have. nore than any other.
sanctioned the wish to give civilians a share in power.

But. although co-snder in chief of the any, President Kountche is obliged to
take into account the resistance he encounters in the barracks. Being unable
to oppose directly those in the military who. having tasted power. no longer
intend to share it, he is bypassing then. by nobilizing the ssns-culottes

and giving than the possibility of expressing themselves within the frauwork
of legal and representative institutions. Will he be better understood by
proceeding in that sanner? It will not by easy. Nevertheless, the setting

up of s Constituent Assembly 8 years after the army's accession to power. is
a step in the right direction.

COPYRIGIT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9636
(:80: 4719/896

ho
POI 0W“. USE ONLY
PROPOSED SHIPPING LINE HILL AID EXPORTS
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French No 1906,.21 Hay 1982 p 1335

[Text] On 12 Hay. Senegalese Prime Minister nabib.Thiam presided over a Cab-
inet meeting for the second.time in 6 months, a meeting devoted to the esta—
lishment of a single shipping company. At the meeting, he recalled the reasons
behind such a move, emphasizing the need to promote Senegalese exports in
order to save on foreign exchange. revive foreign trade while ensuring its
security, and create jobs.

The prime minister confirmed the establishment of a single shipping company.
to be responsible for operation of the two lines. the Atlantic and Mediter-
ranean, and made the following decisions: to ensure effective startup of the
new firm by 30 September at the latest; to open up the stock in the new entity
to all companies in the sector recognized before 30 November 1980, dissolving
shareholding companies: to grant shareholder status to any Senegalese firm
whose participation in the capital is at least 15 percent; to see that all
shareholders in the single shipping line have previously liquidated their
debts and balanced their books; and to use as the framework for constitution
of the company's capital the following proportions: government. 10 percent;
national owners, 65 percent; related companies. 15 percent; and private parties,
10 percent.

National shipping company owners and related companies will fairly divide up
the proportion of capital reserved for them.

In setting up the capital of the single company. priority will be given to

contributions in cash, while not excluding those in kind whose appraisal must.
be fair. A foreign company 'will be designated as technical partner of the new

firm. It will not compete with it and the foreign firm' s experience will be
profitable for entering other lines. The Ministry of Equipment will update

the profitability study of the new line. based on the 40-60~20 rule and on bulk .
transport. The guidelines of the new line on equipment must be precisely

spelled out and include only that which is useful and effective. Future

activities of_the new unit must be reviewed and the line's capital must be
established based on them.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux at Cie Paris 1982

11.664

080: 6719/1037
kl

FOI‘OFFHJAI.0811MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

11:70 NE! PARl'Ils-Jhm new political parties will be recognized in Senegal and
will bring to 16 the amber of political groups in this country. They are

Masses (which claims to be based on "scientific socialise"). [Text] [Paris
HARCHBS TROPICAIH E‘l' unimmnms in French 80 1904. 7 Hey 82 p 1206]
(comma: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11915

mama-rs SIGNED-411$ Senegalese chief of state. Hr Ahdou Diouf, returned

to Dakar on 28 April following a 12-day tour which took his to Niger (acconpa-
nied by his wife). Oman and the Federation of United Arab hirates. with two
stopovers in Paris. During his Parisian stopover. ﬂr Abdou Diouf held talks
with French officials. in particular Kr Jean-Pierre Cot. sinister for coopera-
tion and develop-eat. and Hr Guy Penna. special adviser to President Mittsrrand
on African and Malagasy affairs. In Olen. the two chiefs of state decided to
negotiate and sign agreaeents for cultural and economic cooperation. for despite
excellent relations between the two countries. there was no for-a1 legal ﬁne-
work until now. Mr Abdou Diouf said that the Senegalese delegation has subnitted
proposals to the Nani delegation and with the next visit of the nultanate's
foreign affairs ninieter to Dakar, the two delegations will be able to sign the
two agreements which will constitute the legal fraeework for cooperation between
the two countries. In the case of Abu Dhabi, the legal franework already partly
existed. since Senegal had signed a cultural agreement with that country. Thus
it was a setter of proposing a plan for econonic cooperation and a plan for
prelieinary inplenentation of the cultural agreement. The principle of conclud-
ing the agree-ant and the preliminary agree-ant was approved. In this instance
as well. Senegal subaitted proposals to the Federation of United Arab hirates
and discussions will begin soon to lake it possible to negotiate and conclude
such agree-eats ae quichly as possible. [Text] [Paris HAICEBS TROPICAIJI l'1'
surname in French No 190‘. 7 Kay 82 p 1207] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Koren:

et Cie Paris 1982] 11915

BZLGIAN OOOPSRA‘IION PROGRAHuA 3-year prograe for cooperation between Belgiu-
and Senegal was approved on 29 April during a seating in Dakar of the Mined
emission for Cooperation, which the two countries have established. It was
also decided that Belgian would sake 16 drillings in Senegal as well as provide
a refrigeration ayeten and processing installations for hall-scale fishing

at Joel. According to the neeting's final con-unique. Belgian will also provide
scientific and technical assistance to Senegalese agricultural, livestock-
breeding and renewable energy sources sectors. In the area of health care,
cooperation will continue under the basic health-care projects of vikine “and

1:2
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hatan. Hith regard to training. Belgiu will continue to provide assistance

to the following projects: Advanced Teacher Training School. Institute of
Sciences and the Environment, Basic Institute of Black Africa (IVAN). A Belgian
expert will also be assigned to the future National Institute for Rural Develop-
nent. which should be opening its doors soon. Belgiu has also pledged to
provide scholarships to Senegalese, who will thus be able to gradually take
over Belgian technical assistance. In the industrial sector. finally, a line
of credit will be granted to SOPISEDIT [Senegalese Financial Cowany for the
Development of Industry and Tourisn] to enable it to continue its policy of
support for seall and medial-sire businesses (PHI). [Test] [Paris HARCIIBS
TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1906. 7 May 82 p 1207] [oomrcm
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11915

RICE STALLS SET UP--The Senegalese Government has given the National Distribu-
tion Conpany of Senegal (SONADIS) the task of setting up rice stalls at the
nain narketa in Cape Verde and throughout the rest of the country on a gradual
basis. According to Tafsir Ibnou Diop, assistant administrator of SOﬂADIS,
the move is part of "the fight against hoarding and speculation on basic
couoditiea." Future expansion of the nunber of stalls will couplets the
action of the 12 wholesale and small wholesale outlets and. the 11!. retail
branches which SONADIS has been opening up in Senegal since 1965. [Text]
[Paris W WPICAUX ET HEDI‘I'BRRANEEIIS in French 110 1906, 21 May 82 p 1335]
[COPYRIGH'rz Rene Horeux ct Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

ARGENTINE llYDRAULIC EQUIPMENT-m 3 Hey. the "Rio Gualeguay," fro. the Argen-
tine ocean shipping line Blnu, arrived at the port of Dakar frail Buenos Airss,
carrying the first 600 tons' of hydraulic equip-ent purchased by Senegal fro-

the Argentine Republic within the fruaework of the -815-nillion line of credit
granted to Senegal by the Argentine Government. The equip-ant includes wind-
mills. water punps, water tanks and other accessories. The rest of the equip-
ment will cone in two note shipments. with conplete delivery scheduled by the

end of June. [Text] [Paris NAMES TRGICAUX ET MEDITBWS in trench
No 1906. 21 May 82 pp 1335-1336] [COPYRIaTz Rene Koren: et Cie Paris 1982]
11.666

080: 4719/1037 HID

h3
roe omcut use ONLY