APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00080R000200030080-1
Near East/North Africa Report

No.2061

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other charac teristics retained .

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-montth by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, u.s. Government Printing Office, ﬂashington, D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell & Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
u. Datum-ill Mow n Dmnum

 

j£_Inter-Arab Affairs _3LL1bya
_Jgﬁaurltania
___ﬁorocco
___Peoplc's Deno-

Pollticn] Science

Sociology

Economics

CulLure (Social
Sciences)

Ethnology

Geography

___ﬂorth African
Affairs
_Afghanistan
_Alge ria
_Bahrain

_Esypt

cratic Republic
of Yemen

_Pers ian Gul f

Techological
Military Sciences

_x_I ran
_§_Iraq

Area

___Qatar
___§audi Arabia

___Spanish North

___Israel
X Jordan

_Kuua 1. t
Lebanon

Ix

Africa
Sudan
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2061

Census

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Top Liberation Organization Official Delivers Views
(Marwan Hazin; AL-SIYASAB, 13 Now 79) .............

IRAN
Background of Ambassadors to Western Europe Reviewed
(DIE WELT, 30 Nov 79) .............................
IRAQ
; Government's Ambitious Agricultural Plans Detailed
(THE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY, 17 Nov 79) ................
Briefs
Asbestos Pipes Plant
Aluminum Plant
Electric Projects
Paper Plant Cost
Textile Production
JORDAN
Briefs
Furnace Expansion
Magnetic Screening for Minerals
KUWAIT

Fu'ad Matar Sees Dire Consequences in Hostage Situation
(Editorial, Fu'ad Hntar; AL-WATAN, 8 Nov 79) ......
CONTENTS (Continued)

Embassy Seizure Seen Damaging to Iran's Reputation as Well as
Hopeless

(Editorial, Ahmad al-Jarallah; AL-SIYASAH, 14 Nov 79)...

Iranian-Libyan Relations Hinge on Investigation of Iman's
Disappearance

(Editorial, Fathi Sharif; AL-SIYASAH, 15 Nov 79) .......

United States Attacked for Exploitation of Arabs, Iranians
(Editorial; AL-QABAS, 9 Nov 79) ........................

Iranian Ambassador Speaks on Threat to Gulf Security
(Ali Shams Ardekani Interview; AL-HATAN, 9 Nov 79) .....

'AL-QABAS' Sees Military Action Remote
(Jasim Ahmad al-Nisf Editorial; ALPQABAS, 13 Nov 79) ...

Iranians in Kuwait Vigil Demand Solidarity With Teheran
Students

(Pathi Sharif; ALPSIYASAH, 16 Nov 79) ..................

National Oil Company Cites Year's Achievements
(AL-SIYASAH, 12 Nov 79) ... ..... ....... ........... ......

Nation's Food Subsidy Program Detailed
(AL-SIYASAH, 12 Nov 79) ""'°"°""°°“""""°""".

National Petrochemical Company Issues Annual Report
(AL-SIYASAH, 12 Nov 79) .............. ..... . ........ ....

LIBYA

Secretary of Justice Speaks on Security, Courts, Rumors
(Muhammad 'Ali al-Jadi Interview; AL-USBU' AL-SIYASI.
9 Nov 79) .......... ................ .............. ......

MAURITANIA

Eight CEAO Financing Agreements Signed
(CHAAB, 16 Oct 79) ................................ .....

Saudi Fund Section Chief Visits, Announces Plans
(CHAAB, 15 Oct 79) .............................. .......

Minister Discusses Progress of Educational Reform
(Yahya Ould Menkouss Interview; CHAAB, 22-23, 2b Sep 79)
CONTENTS (Continued)

SULTANATE CF OMAN

Development Being Made in Transportation Facilities
('UHAN, 18 Nov 79) ...................................

HESTERN SAHARA

SDAR Prime Minister Reviews Saharan People's Struggle
(Mohamed Lamine Interview; AL-SHA'B. 6 Nov 79) .......

Briefs
Military Shift Favors Horocco
M annou OIGANIZA‘I'ION 0016141. plum VIEWS
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 13 Nov 79 p 5

Izrticle' by Harwan Basin: "At a l’rees Conference in ruguc, Abu Iyad
warned of Atteapts To Cause Despair nong Palestiniansﬂ/

/1'ex_t_/ Hr Saleh Khalaf. Abu Iyed. the second nan in the Palestine nation-
al liberation nova-ant urn. warned several Arab intonation nsdia against
diaseninating ru-ors which stteqt to detract from the Palestinian people

or seek to make the:- despair. He said that it is absolutely not per-issible
for sone Arab countries to try to create problens, no natter how snall,
among the ranks of our Palestinian people.

Abu lyad was talking at a press conference held yesterday norning at the
site of the PM?! office in Kuwait. he stressed that the Palestine Libera-
tion Organization would set out sons of the problems fro. which the Pales-
tinian people have been suffering in the Arab countries, such as travel
docuncnt. vise, residence and work.issues at the 10th Sun-sit Conference,
and would explain the purpose behind these. lie said that if there is any
fear on the part of officials in these countries. the organisation could
set forth guarantees assuring that this fear will be eliminated.

He said that while there were attewts to lake the Palestinian people des-
perate, this people would never experience despair. He added "The core
this people is oppressed the more its heroism increases." He said, "we do
not want to be the cause for the distress of certain Arab countries. Re
are anxious to be quiet and do not want to talk about what is giving us
trouble, because of our concern for Arab solidarity." he added, "he do
not want to raise any problen now lest our people be defa-ed more than it
is being now." Abu lyad did not nention the names of the countries the
Palestinians are having trouble with but he did stress "He. as leaders,
have been able to control our staffs so far."

In his press conference Abu Iysd raised five other points. He talked
about the subject of the Palestinian state. the south of Lebanon, the
subject of contacts with lurope and the visit by Abu 'A-ner. the head
of the Executive Council, to a number of Buropean countries, and than ad-
dressed himself to the issue of Iran and the talk of Palestinian sadistion.

The Palestinian State

aegarding the Palestinian state, he said that the notion of establishing
the Palestinian state was presented after the October war, early in 1971.
specifically, as part of the conditions which have not changed or been
transformed, either via the 10 points or the political platform of the
Palestine National Congress, all of which denand an independent Palestinian
state on any portion of the land which has been liberated, without any con-
ditions. he said that one of the necessary attributes of the Palestinian
state will be nilitary and economic power, Arab solidarity, and the gaining
of allies from the socialist easy and other luropean countries, and added
"Without these attributes one cannot establish a state or quasi-state."

"Th. aw"

Abu Iysd referred to the Can David Agree-ants and said that the Palestin—
ian revolution has stood against the Canp agree-ants not because it wants
to enter peripheral conflicts but because these agreements will not realize
any national rights for the Palestinian people.

Palestinian Mediation and Iran

Abu Iyad talked about what was desired of Palestinian mediation in Iran in
order to save the hostages in the Anarican Bnbassy, which Iranian students
occupied 8 days ago. lie vehemently denied that there was any mediation in
this regard and stressed "What happened on our part was not mediation but
an attewt to understand what has happened and is happening."

he added that the Palestinian revolution had the right to understand the
objective of the operation and asserted that everything which has been
said about the Palestinian delegation's departure to Iran, whether it is
repeated talk about winning America's smathy or talk of gaining American
recognition of the organization through deceit, is to be rejected and not
accepted by our revolution "because we reject sylpathy just as we reject
acting through deceit. Thus there is no nediation between us and the
Anerican agents." lie said, "The Palestinian revolution can do everything
and we are with Iran in every struggle it wages."

Abu al Valid

Abu Iyad pointed out that Brig Gen Sa'd Sayil reached Damascus on his re-
turn from ‘l‘ehren 48 hours ago after the termination of the nediation be-
tween the Iranian and Palestinian revolutions.
An Honor He Are Not Claiming

In another area, Mr Salah Khalaf denied that the Palestinian revolution
has offered ailitary support to the Iranian revolution "Because the Iren-
ian revolution is an unarnad one, indeed is one of the few rare revolutions
in which blood has triumphed over the sword." Abu Iyad wondered about the
arms the Palestinian revolution offered to Iran and consequently about the
armed people who were trained, and said "however, that is an honor we are
not claiming." He said "The Palestinian revolution has been betting on
the success of the Iranian revolution since lhoneyni announced the fall of
the Shah, and we have stood beside him." He added, "As I conceive it, had
al-Sadat'e Egypt stayed in the Arab ranks when the Iranian revolution oc-
curred, the situation in our area would have been conpletely different."

The shah and Khouayni

Abu Iyad referred to the fact that the Shah had been threatening the secur-
ity of the Gulf and Saudi Arabia, turning Iran into an arnad arsenal. He
added that the Shah had been supplying Israel with oil, raising the Israeli
flag over the biggest spy center and in addition threatening Arabs, and
that he occupied three islands in the Gulf. Had he stayed, he would have
occupied more, because that was hie intent. Khoaayni, however. cane and
did away with all this, cutting off the oil, removing the specter of fear
from the area and raising the Palestinian flag over the Israeli embassy.

The Ideology of the Two Revolutions Is Different

After Abu Iyad had reviewed the difference between the Iran of today and
the Iran of yesterday, he said that concurrence certainly did not exist
between the two revolutions in everything. he stated that the ideology of
the Palestinian revolution assuredly differed from the ideology of the
Iranian revolution for a nuaber of reasons, among which he aentioned the
fact that the Palestinian revolution did not believe in factionalisn and
that it was prepared to coexist with all religions. he emphasized that
the Palestinian revolution did not allow itself to be the instrument of
any revolution and consequently was not subjected to the guardianship of
the Iranian revolution and that "We refuse to be its guardians and consid-
er it to be an assisting revolution and accept that there be solidarity
between the two revolutions but not to the extent of concurrence over
everything."

Palestinian Contacts and Europe

Mr Selah Khalaf, Abu Iyad, turned to talk about the visits Abu 'Anaar aade
to a number of European capitals, describing these visits as achieving
political successes and victories which did not cone from a void. He warned
against anyone's trying to create doubts over these contacts and said that
anyone standing in their way "does not want our revolution to set forth
toward the horizons of the world."
lie asserted that the Palestinian revolution knows the volume of these con-
tacts and whether they would attain a great triuwh or should be put in
their true context.

The South of Lebanon

Concerning the south of Lebanon, Abu Iyad, the second nan in PATH, said
that the south of Lebanon was to a large degree connected to the coming
sun-nit and that the issue of the south wae not one of the entry or non-
entry of the any but one related to an American plan which sought to have
the Palestinian revolution face a new Can: David via the south so that the
Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty could be saved and the autonomy conspiracy
could be deviously introduced into the bank and Gaza. Abu Iyad said that
Philip Habib brought this plan on his recent visit to the area and that in
essence it called for the establishment of a teaporary truce which would
be transformed into a permanent truce as well as the transfer of the guer-
rillas north of the al-Litani and withdrawal of their weapons, then the

convening of a conference to be attended by Syria, Jordan, the organization
and Israel "as a bribe."

He stressed that the organization rejected the plan because it realized
how serious it was, just like the autonony plan which has ache-ed at
settling 500,000 Palestinians in Lebanon, 300,000 in Kuwait, a further
large number in Saudi Arabia and the rest in remaining Arab countries. he
added, "however, we will fight this sattlenent from a patriotic standpoint."
Abu Iyad expressed his hope that the issue of the south of Lebanon would
be subjected to discussion at the 10th sun-it in a nanner which would not
disrupt the conference. he also expressed his hope that a single Arab
stand would be declared against America. he repeated the statement that
the Arab countries had fallen short in performing their duties toward the
south and -”.d not give it its due-~indeed, did not give it enough due to
survive .e said that the boobs were being used in the south of Lebanon
which had not been used in the Viet Nae: war and that there was not a house
or village left which had not been hit.

Relations with the Arabs and the Oil States

Abu Iyad turned to talk about the relationship between the Palestinian
revolution and Syria, eaphasizing that relations were good. He said that
the Syrian resistance was a basic elenent in the development of the eastern
and northern fronts. In his discussion of the relationship between Syria
and the Palestinian revolution, Abu Iyad criticised Libya's position and

added, "He hope that Libya will have a specific political position on which
basis it will deal with the revolution."

Abu lyad stressed "The oil countries have accustoeed us to the fact that
they take the interests of the Palestinian cause into account." However,
he said that he hoped for a new relationship between the Palaetinisn
revolution and the Gulf press and added that there were soae shortcomings.
He warned against the "press of the rich," stating that their concern was
to distort the revolution and turn people to despair.

Heat Ger-any and the Palestine Revolution

‘l‘hen Abu lyad talked about West Geraany. saying that its release of two
guerrillas recently was not an indication of proof of good will because
"There are more than 20 .000 Palestinians in Heat Germany against who. op-
pression and psychological acts are being practiced." He added ”Then Heat
Germany should prove that it is a country which is not occupied by Aasrica
and Ierael."

Concerning what is said about the Syrian-Lebanese-Palestinian action paper
to be presented to the 10th Arab Su-it Conference, Hr. Khalaf said ”There
is an ntteapt to cone up with such a paper so that the conference will not
be disrupted and involve iteelf in probleu we do not want." He said that
statements by the Lebanese foreign ainister Pu'ad Butrus are stirring up
the hope that a tripartite working paper will be set forth. although a
Syrian-Palestinian paper is preferable. lie said. "This will aesn that
there is s Syrian~Paleatinian axis to the degree that it will mean setting
out a conception of what could be unaniaous Arab action."

Hr Salah Khalaf expressed his desire that the Arab suit would succeed
and said that whoever tried to make it fail was trying to strike out at
Arab solidarity and bring the Arabs back to the era of blocs.

The Palestinian Rifle

he said that it was in the interests of the Arab states that theirs be a
Palestinian position; otherwise, the settlement would be inpoeed on the
whole Arab region. Re streased that when the Palestinian rifle fell that
that would aean the inposition of the settlement on the Arab countries.

He eaid that abrogation of the Cairo agreement was absolutely out of the
question. He stressed that the Palestinian revolution would not allow
itself to be sacrificed for Lebanon nor would it allow Lebanon to be sacri-
ficed for the cause. He pointed out that many weapon. now being sent to
Lebanon were now returning to the Arab countries from which they cans. in
order to help destroy those countries. He said that Mr 'Arafat's visit to
Paris would take place only in accordance with an official invitation not
masked by ulterior motives outside the scope of the Palestinian cause.

he added that a meeting between 'Arafat and French President Giscard
D'Bstaing outside France would not be useful or desirable.

Then Mr Halanud 'Abbas, Abu Hatin, who came to Kuwait the day before yester-
day. talked about the joint Jordanian-Palestinian co-nittee to support the
resistance of the people of the occupied territories and denied that he
had withdrawn from the connittee. He said that the con-ittee was extant
and still functioning. He said that the Liberation Organization's decision
to support the municipalities in the west Bank cause as a result of the con-
tinuous vexations to which these municipalities had been exposed under
Israeli military rule, as a consequence of the success the organization

had attained in bringing national forces to leadership centers in the occu-
pied territories. He said that the organization had produced a platform

to create sisterly relations between occupied territory aunicipalities and
Arab ones, and that 17 of the existing 31 municipalities in the bank as well
as 64 village and local councils have been made sister towns. lie pointed
to the sun which the Ninth Arab Sualnit Conference in Baghdad had allocated,
totalling $150 million, to support the resistance of the people of the oc-
cupied territory, including the sun of $100 million to be under the super-
vision of Jordan and the Liberation Organization. He said, "The instalments
of this sum have not all reached us; the first to reach us was toward the
end of August. This was spent domestically in accordance with the priori-
ties of the municipality, public welfare organization and higher and inter-
mediate education projects, with wheels on the city of Jerusalem." he
said that there was a desire to build the Jerusalem University in order to
establish the srabhood of the city and to merge the four universities in
the occupied territories into one. lie said that the joint coonittee had
met three times and studied the projects in accordance with priorities,
giving loans to 12 housing societies to help them build dwellings for their

people.

He said that the projects presented to the bank were being presented to the
Gaza Strip. He pointed out that the organization had succeeded in signing
agreements with some Arab countries to sell Gaza Strip citrus in their
markets. 0n the project for a Palestinian university abroad, Abu Hasin
said that that project had been bruited about for some time and had reached
the point of serious discussion. He pointed to Israel's attenpts to de-
stroy Islamic sacred places, foremost the sanctuary and the Dome of the
Rock, and said that occupying authorities had excavated seven tunnels un-
derneath these sacred places on the excuse of looking for the skeleton of
Solomon and that that had threatened these sacred places with collapse.
BACKGROUND OF AMBASSADORS TO WESTERN EUROPE REVIEHKD
Bonn DIE "BLT in German 30 Nov 79 p 7

[Text] Khomeyni's new man in London. Ali Afrouz. 29 years of age, clamped
down strongly on his staff when he entered office 2 months ago. He dis-
missed 22 of the 50 embassy employees who appeared to him to be "anti-
revolutionary" or unnecessary. The former psychology university lecturer
did not know the first thing about diplomacy. Already persecuted during
his schooldays by the secret police of the Shah. the SAVAK, he quickly
advanced to the five-member steering cadre of the Revolutionary Guard
after the revolution in February. Afrouz has on his desk in front of him
a_ sign which says in Farsi: "I represent the 1,000 sacrifices of the Shah
regime. I represent the Iranian people."

Mahdi anab, 31 years of age. the Iranian ambassador to Bonn. has stated:
"My activity in the opposition to the Shah suffices as the basis for my
work." He is a skilled machine engineer and former Bosch correspondent

to DIE "BLT. In 1967. during the visit of the Shah to the federal
Republic of Germany, he was an incensed opponent of the Persian coronation.
Today he loudly ch—ers the Ayatollah Khomeyni: "A lirsculous man."

Amir Entezam. 67 years of age. Iranian ambassador to Stockholm, is not
exactly publicity-shy. The trained engineer and a member of the Freedom
Party during the Shah's time was elevated by the revolution to the rank of
vice premier and government spokesman. On 13 June he announced his own
appointment as ambassador to Sweden. Norway. Finland. Denmark and Iceland.
He was accredited to the Scandinavian countries on 28 August. He
prophesied a "new Vietnam" for the Americans should they plan an invasion
of Iran. However. the moral threat of approximately 3.000 Persians who
are allowed to study "together with women" in Stockholm appears to be more
important to him than this political confrontation.

Shamseddin Amir-'A1a'i, 77 years of age, the ambassador to Paris. is a full-
blooded diplomat in the squad of the new Iranian representatives to West
Europe. The holder of a doctor's degree, a lawyer and author of several
law textbooks, one on capital punishment, he has decades of experience

in practical politics. He was minister of agriculture, minister of
interior. and police perfect in Teheran. In the beginning of the fifties
he was appointed,fo.r the first time,ambassador to Brussels. In 1953 he
returned home and. as an opponent of the still young Shah regime. was im-
prisoned. After his release, Amir-‘Ala'i began his political fight

against the Shah. 7

Pen - l- [-01
GOVERNMENT S AND IT IOUS AGRICULTURAL PLANS DETAILED
Beirut THE ARAB WORLD HEEKLY in English 17 Nov 79 pp 3-6

[Text] The ruling regime in Iraq, turning to the soil with ambitious plans
to make the country self-sufficient in food by 1982, has allocated 10 bn
dollars for mammoth projects ranging from irrigation dams to model farms
and resettlement.

A chain of model farms dot the landscape along the highway between Bagh-
dad and Basrah. while efforts are underway to bring vast tracts to the
north under the plough. Compared with other countries in a world of food
production inadequacies, Iraq is confirmedly lucky.

The uphill battle against salinity persists, while efforts to establish
irrigation and drainage systems appear won. Saline waters leave white
patches that erode fertility in what couhiotherwise be rich land. Short-
age of expertise and manpower also have been sharply reduced.

During the current five-year development plan, the Government has been
investing at the rate of two bn dollars a year, with a total allocation of
three bn dinars (about ten bn dollars) has been earmarked for agricultural
development under the plan.

The sum amounts to nearly 10 times the size of investment in agricultural
under the previous development plan, which ended in 1976. The plans indeed
are ambitious, for a country still importing a great percentage of its
staple foodstuff needs. Iraq can afford to import, but its leadership has
opted to invest into the future.

In pursuing their agricultural expansion projects, the leadership of the
ruling Arab Socialist Baath Party have been true to their basic ideals of
policy—to spread a socialist mode of life throughout the country, starting
with a boost in farm production by means of collectivization. Farmers have
been responding positively to government efforts to set up cooperatives and
collective farms, with the government contributing money and housing units.
Baghdad has spent more than 1.7 bn dollars on rural housing projects since
1976, building simple brick homes that are complete with water and electricity.
grouped in villages.
In its drive to expand cultivable farmland horizontally as well as verti-
cally the government realizes that at present only 3.6 mn hectares are
being cultivated of which 1.8 mn hectares are in private hands. This is to
be incorporated into collective cooperatives by 1980. Officials underscore

their policy to make the cooperatives a step on the road toward complete
collectivization.

The peasant retains the ownership of the land. but once collectivized the
ownership acquires a collective shape. Official statistics show that 1,900
cooperatives are operating in Iraq, along with 79 collectives and scores of
state farms. By 1980, there are to be another 785 cooperatives.

The Tigris project now underway envisages a total investment of ID 133 mn.
Peasants enrolled under the cooperatives have been increased from 63,000
to 337,000 tilling farms covering 22 million donums.

Capital of the AgriCultural Cooperative Credit Bank has been raised to

ID 50, with the rate of interest on credit lowered from 52 to 31. The
government has launched the Fruit and Vegetable Marketing Administration,
whose storage capacity has reached 13,100 tons. Grain storage capacity

has reached 262,000 tons and, by 1980 the total storage capacity is expected
to reach 730,000 tons.

Water storage has been increased from 12.3 bn cubic meters to 86.8 bn. Two
dams now abuilding are to hold back a total of 20.7 bn cubic meters of
irrigation water, in addition to 1,150 megawatt electric power to run
factories and extend to rural regions.

Reclaimed farmland has been increased from 19,000 donums to 200,000. and
mechanical tools and vehicles employed have been increased from 10,000 to
22,000 units. Chemical fertilizers now in use amount to 233,000 tons, or
eight times the quantity used during 1968.

A1 Hahda is a model farm on the edge of Baghdad, standing out as the van-
guard of the agricultural development drive. Two similar farms are
abuilding east and south of the capital, and about 120 more are envisioned
in northern and southern regions.

Heat Germany, Dutch. French and East European firms have been engaged to
carry out land reclamation projects, build a string of dams, drill for
water, provide dairy and other farming equipment and supervise poultry
raising. animal husbandry and artificial insemination centers.

"Al-Hahda is meant to be a model, after which other farms are to be
patterned,“ said the farm manager, Hehdi Hassan. "Although it cost us

20.6 million dollars, the farm already has proven its commercial viability.
We are now making money, selling farm produce and multiplying cattle, sheep
and poultry."
The West German contractors Schmidt Ankum provided technical know-how,
personnel and equipment, including air-conditioned units for automatic
milking chambers. Nearby, the 19.2-nillion-dollar "April 7 Farm" is near-
ing completion, with contractors coming from the Netherlands, the DBPCO finm.
The 41,000-acre farm holds 757 peasant families operating under a collective
farm system. DEFCO also is busy cultivating a 2,300—acre forest on the
farm's eastern fringe.

Al-Khalis, the third farm in the vicinity, is rich with 800 Frisian cows,
a chain of dairy plants and animal husbandry centers. The 20-million-
dollar Farm was built by PEC Engineering of France. The farms are
complete with elementary schools. housing units, sporting clubs, clinics
and veterinary centers. A limited tract within Al-Khalia has been given
to the Arab Liberation Front, a Palestinian cammando organization, to till.

Income from the tract goes to the ALF command to "finance commando opera-
tions against Israel."

Robert Jenning of Hamburg, told the Arab Economist that agricultural devel-
opment in Iraq is "sure investment, just like money in the bank." He con-
ceded that the nature of terrain a somewhat difficult and problems of
salinity require constant treatment. Nevertheless, he said, once these
problems are contained, fruit from the model farms. which required vast
investment, "will show unlimited profit and prove to be economically viable."

Jenning was employed by the West German firm Schmidt Aknum, builder of the
Hahda model farm. Iraqi men and women are employed by the model farms.
and Dr Sabah Taha lives at April 7 with her agriculture engineer husband.
Dr Sabah is a "happy veterinarian, because I love animals and nature."

"Frisian cows, a breed that flourishes in the Netherlands, can adapt per-
fectly to conditions here," said Dr Sabah. "But initially, these cows
suffer from some diseases during their first year here. Afterwards, they
fit well in the farms." Aziz Beithoun, the resident engineer at Al-Khalis,
also said the model farm experiment has been an "example of perfect
success, technically as well as economically."

He keynoted the "high living standards" of the peasants and the enormous
costs involved in providing hospital care and schooling for their families.
Nonetheless, he said, income from the farm has been "more than rewarding."

The Haditha irrigation scheme, one of the biggest in the country. is to

cost a total of 210 million dinars. There also is a vast project underway
with Soviet assistance--a canal from Lake Trarthar, north of Baghdad, to the
Euphrates. The Lake takes water from the Tigris through a flood-control
canal. The new canal will enable Iraq to raise the level of the Euphrates
by taking water from the projected lake, thereby improving irrigation.

Beyond Al-Khalis, a new settlement has been cropping up on the main highway
between Baghdad and Basrah, on the alluvial plain near the Tigris. The

10
The settlement looks neat, with burned brick houses and feder roads. The
peasants hoeing the fields are naturalized Iraqis imported from the over-
crowded Nile Valley in Egypt. They are leading the stream of Egyptian

emigrants to what might turn out to be one of the most impressive experi-

ments in the Arab world--a mass shift of peasants from overcrowded Egypt
to underpOpulsted regions in Iraq.

Officials said it is still very much an experiment. the first resettlement
of some 2,500 Egyptians from eight Nile Delta provinces. The initial stage
took a relatively short time in 1976.

Egyptian peasants going to Iraq could mitigate problems of overpopulation.
if carried out on a broader scale. Iraq, which has only 12.7 million
people. extends on an area that once held and supported 65 million. Short
of farmer as it is, Iraq still has to import food.

Egyptian peasants are, indeed. better accommodated in Iraq than they were
at their impoverished villages at home. The idea behind this was to ensure
an easy transition for those families. They are not integrated into the
Iraqi lifestyle as yet, but have been exerting themselves to assimilate
Iraqi ways. "I can't help wondering about these Egyptians,“ an Iraqi
official said. "They are extremely nice and obedient. They are hard work-
ing and faithful. But the men often are apt to take more than one wife

if they can afford it." These Egyptians are given the Iraqi nationality and
are permitted to coexist with the local peasants. But they have simply
transferred Egyptian village ways to Iraq. These Egyptians have the ten-
dency to do things their own way. unless some official with authority dic-
tates a change of styles. Cooperatives, for instance. are on the plain

and provides unlimited technical assistance and expertise. the Egyptians
have ignored them and have been pursuing traditional ways of tilling the
soil. The land has been divided into small tracts cultivated by hand.

"I tried to get them to explain why. but no one would give me the reason
behind their aversion against tractors." the same official said. "However,
I must say that my problems with those Egyptians are minimal, and I'm
looking forward to a greater cooperation with them."

050: 4820

ll
BRIEFS

ASBESTOS PIPES PLANT--An asbestos pipes plant in the Taamim governorate has
neared completion, (due in the first quarter of 1980). A source of the
State Establishment for industrial design and construction announced that
the project aims at meeting local demand for asbestos pipes that are widely

used for irrigation. [Text] [Beirut ARAB WORLD WEEKLY in English 17 Nov 79
p 11]

ALUMINUM PLANT--The Iraqi government has agreed to buy 150.000 tonnes of
aluminum oxide annually from Jamaica to be used by a new aluminum plant
which is underway and is due for completion early next year. The announce-
ment made by the Jamaican government in Kingstown did not specify the exact
date on which export of the Bauxite will start. The Jamaican Prime Minister
was recently in Baghdad. [Text] [Beirut AKA! WORLD WEEKLY in English

17 Nov 79 p 12]

ELECTRIC PROJECTS--The State Establishment for Electricity in Iraq has
completed over the past 9 months, a number of electric projects and the
installation of several generating stations, in the various governorates.
The Director of the Establishment Mr Hareth Jamil recently announced that
the first phase of the high tension project for the southern district

has been completed at a cost of ID 70 million and has a capacity of £00,000
volts. The central generation stations have also been completed in Eartha.
The Director Mr Jamil added that during the sme period the Nassriya station
was completed. The second phase of that station will be put on experimental
operation next month. Other units will also be put on experimental operation to
generate a 130 volt current while the Establishment has started work on the
first phase of the high tension project connecting the north and central
regions. This is in line with Iraqi plans to connect all areas to the high
tension power grid. Hr Jamil finally said that so far this year electric
power has been connected to 730 villages and the technical teams of the
Establishment has started work on preliminary plans for spreading electric
power to 6000 villages. [Text] [Beirut THE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY in English

17 Nov 79 p 12]

12
PAPER PLANT COST-~The Iraqi daily AL JUMHOURIYA recently reported that the
Iraqi Planning Board has raised the cost of the Baarah paper pulp plant
covered by the current year's development programme. The cost of the plant
expansion works have been raised by ID 368 thousand thus reaching

ID 46,198,000. The board also agreed to raise the annual appropriations

for the plant by ID 2.5 million to reach ID 6,086,000. The planned capacity
of the project is 136,000 tonnes of paper punaequivalent to 30,000 tonnes

of quality paper, 17,000 tonnes of printing paper, 8,000 tonnes thin light
typing paper and 6,000 tonnes of toilet paper. The plant provides employ-

ment for 1320 workers. [Text] [Beirut THE ARAB WORLD WEEKLY in English
17 Nov 79 p 127]

TEXTILE PRODUCTION--The State Establishment for Textile Production has achieved
92 percent of its targeted production of carpets, 89 percent of its plastic

bag production targets and 56 percent of its jute textile production tar-

gets over the past nine months. This was announced by the Establish-ent's
Director Mr Yaasine Abdullah Jassim who said a new carpet plant will start
production next year with an annual capacity of 1 million meters and at a

total investment cost of ID 4.5 million. [Text] [Beirut ARAB WORLD WEEKLY
in English 17 Nov 79 p 12]

080: 6520

13
lead to positive results. [Text] [Beirut THE ARAB HORLD WEEKLY in English
17 Nov 79 p 3}

380: 4820
14
FU'AD HATAR SEES DIRE CONSEQUENCES IN HOSTAGE SITUATION

Kuwait AL-HATAN in Arabic 8 Nov 79 pp 1, 10

[Editorial by Fu'ad Hater: "Fear of Iranian Deversoir")

[TNz Deversoir Is Point of Israel: Suez Canal Breakthrough in 1973 liar]

[Text] As long as the U.s. administration insists intentionally on not
acknowledging that there is a people whose land has been usurped, whose
citizens have been displaced and who have been replaced by a racist state--
a state which the United States supplies with money, weapons and experts
and with which it coordinates at the security level--as long as the U.S.
administration insists on following this course, then there is no har-

if this position is reassessed as a result of a deal, even if some will
consider this deal a form of blackmail.

Until the detention of the hostages in Tehran by the green guard of Khomeini.
no Arab weapon employed as an instrument of pressure on the U.S. position
has achieved the required purpose, perhaps because the weapons have not

been used well and perhaps because they have not been used fully.

If we examine these weapons one by one, this fact would become very
obvious to us.

The weapon of deposits has not been used at all, except for the fact that
some people have stopped depositing their funds [in U.S. banks] while
others have continued to do so. The justification that the depositors
whisper in the course of analyzing and defending this position is that
the United States will not return anybody's deposits because these de-
posits are [not]. to start with, in a strong box whose key is in one of
the drawers of the 0.5. president but are employed in businesses and
establishments and are not easy to collect and deliver to their owners.

The weapon of Arab investments has also not been used at all. An evi-
dence of this fact is that the latest official statistics in this regard
show that the volune of these investments has anomted to 43 billion
dollars.

lS
when a debate is held with some of the Arab officials who supervise the
transfer of deposits and who approve the measures for the conversion of
funds for the purpose of investment, we are surprised to find that their
argument is based on the logic that the more funds we deposit in the United
States and the more money we invest in it, the greater will be the degree
by which we can influence the 0.5. decision. But this explanation which

is more of a reading than of an explanation, has been proven invalid by
evidence of the fact that we have not yet been able to notice the impact

of the Arab thumbprint on the 0.8. decision. Meanwhile, we discover
something that is a lot more serious, namely that some of the deposits

and investment go to Israel. Statements made a few days ago by the new
Israeli minister of finance confirm this fact indirectly. The Israeli
minister announced that Israel's foreign debts amount to 5.5 billion
dollars. In view of the fact that the United States is the only country

in the world that advances loans and aid to Israel without any reservations
and in view of the fact that a big percentage of the Arab deposits and
investments is in the United States, then it is natural to assume that

the source of Israel‘s debts, or of a large percentage of them, is Arab
money deposited or invested in the United States.

Thus, it is not only that the investments weapon has not been used but
rather that the United States has employed this weapon in a counter Arab
direction.

The oil weapon has also not been used in the manner that could hurt the
u.s. administration and make it reassess its position. At the outset,
there was some kind of a threat to use this weapon. when the threat de-
veloped and entered the phase of implementation, the 0.8. administration
began to plan for a counter blow instead of planning for what may appease
the oil owners. The counter blow was embodied in the Camp David deal
which could have, had it not been confronted with the Baghdad summit,
caused a complete Arab collapse. Perhaps such a collapse was what the
U.S. administration had been seeking.

Even though most of the Arab decision makers are convinced of the evil
U.S. intentions, they have not yet brandished the weapons of pressure in
the face of the United States. The only weapon brandishing has continued
to be the threatea of an oil embargo--threats that have lost their
credibility among the Arab citizens.

Practically, using the oil weapon after the Camp David deal was more
strongly required than its use in the preceding periods. It is definite
that if this weapon had been used, the deal would have fallen through
immediately, and with it the parties involved or some of them.

"hat is said about these three weapons can also be said about the weapon

represented in the Soviet card which has not been played the way the rules
of the game require it to be played. Had this game been played skilfully,

l6
the 0.5. adninistration would not have been able to continue to flout
the Arab will.

Now it seems that the detention of the U.S. hostages by Khomeyni's green
guards is a weapon that can be used well and bear fruit.

Regarding this event. there are a umber of observations from which the
answer can be concluded.

First observation: we wish that the Palestinian move to rescue the hos-
tages had not been staged before a public contact on the part of President
Carter with Yasir 'Arafat, the Palestinian revolution leader. Now that
the move has been staged in the wake of a secret U.S.-Pa1estinian contact.
Imam Khomeyni is required to take charge of the matter.

Second observation: It is enough for Imam Khomeyni to order, while
squatting on his blanket in Qom. that detention of the 0.8. citizens con-
tinue until the 11.8. administration pledges to recognize the PLO and to
permit it to open an office in Washington with the Palestinian flag flying
over it--it is enough for Imam Khomeini to do this to cause an unprece-
dented stir in all states of the United States.

It is well known that Imam laxomeyni does not bargain and that the secret
of his strength .‘uies in this quality. Had the imam demanded instead of
making it a precondition that the ailing shah be handed over to him for
the release of the hostages, he would have shown the world that his belief
in the Palestinian issue is strong and that this issue, compared to the
issue of the ailing shah, is the fundamental one.

Moreover, to take advantage of the fearful ongoing struggle in the United
States for the presidency in the wake of Edward Kennedy's decision to
declare himself a candidate. it is enough for Khomeyni to say that he will
hand over the citizens [hostages] to the candidate who declares publicly
that he will recognize the PLO and will exert efforts to realize the
Palestinian people's aspirations--it is enough for Imam Khomeini to say
this to cause unprecedented confusion in the u.s. ranks.

Third observation: He will be surprised if [mam Khomeyni does not do this
because such a thing needs a historical leader who has come to power from
beyond the framework of the conventional endeavors and premeditated plans,
as proven by the fact that his rise to power has surprised even those who
draw up the equations and develop the plans.

Moreover, this leader has nothing to fear for--not throne, not age and not
the pleasure of life and the joy of living. lie is content from life with
his blanket and with a little bread and water that keep life going in

his heart.

We say that he has nothing to fear because the 0.5. retaliation for these
days in which America's face is slapped with unprecedented violence by

17
the ayatollahs ruling Iran will be fearful.

Fourth observation: Complementary to the preceding observation is the
question: What can President Carter's administration do?

Interfere militarily?

The United States, which preferred not to interfere to strengthen the shah,
which preferred not to permit the shah to take political asylm in it after
his fall and which has received the shah only after he got sick with cancer,
will not ed>ark on military action so as to avoid entaglement [sic].

Will it work to overthrow the regime in Iran?

Is there a regime in Iran for the u.s. intelligence agencies to topple?
Hmver, we feel, while asking Imam Khomeyni to use the hostages weapon

in the interest of a change in the U.S. position toward the Palestinian
issue. anxiety and we fear that a gap will develop in the xituation if
settling the issue of the hostages is prolonged. It is m' essential that
the gap be of the type of the Entebbe operation. However, 't may be of the
type that achieves what the Deversoir gap achieved.

8491.
680: 4802

18
EMBASSY SEIZURE SEN 0mm: TO IRAN'S WHION AS HELL AS HOPEIES
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 1“ Nov 79 P 1

[Editorial by Ahmd al-Jarallaha ”the only Thing New in Iran Is Increased
boss of International Reputation"]

[Text] when late President Jml 'Abd-al-Naeir was defeated in 1967. his
main excuse was. "I had expected the- from the east. and they cane froe the
west."

Perhaps soeething of this sort has happened and is still happening now be-
tween Teheran and Vashington. The resins in Iran was convinced that oil

would be the decisive weapon. and that nerely talking about cutting it off
tron Hashingtou would be a frightening thing to the American people ain the
administration. The resins in Iran has to have realized by now that Aler-
ica itself doesn't want Iranian oil. More than that. what happened in To-
heran is still unacceptable to the oil-producing states, who are against it
although they haven't said so. In fact, the people of this region don't

see any exemplary denands or goals in such acts. especially since they have
cone to desire to deal with the peoples of the world in understandable,

more persmsive language.

It eight lave been possible to accept conduct such as hijackim an Aeerican
plane. but kidnapping a. diplontic eiesion with the support of the politi-
cal leadership is a contains. reprehensible letter.

How 10 days have passed since the operation, and the question is: what
have those who kidnapped the American nission acoonplished, except hopeless
attempts, containing assurances that the nission is well, that they are
eating and drinking three Iranian seals a day. that they have water. and
that they are not suffering any unpleasantnees? Why do all this. inasmuch
as it is now certain that the Shah will not return to Iran. or. if he re-
turns, would be accoepanied by the fleet of a major power, to repeat what
happened in 1953? Hho knows if there have been sons emngenents eade over
the red line between the Russians and the Aeeriosns--to do soeething?
Neither one would lose a thin if the new regine in Teheran disappeared.
Iran doesn‘t need the world's ambassadors and the press of other countries

19
to confirn that the hostages are well. as if the intention were to lessen
world reaction to an incident the calculations for which were inpreciee and
the results of which are not guaranteed or known. There are thoee who eaid
in the past, "If I wanted you to obey, I would ask the poeeible.” what
is happening now is that Alerica doesn't want Iranian oil, and surely there
are any countries ready to sell Anerica oil as long as the circunetances

deund humane. Justifiable coapeneation for an incident rejected around the
worlde

Finally, nothing new has happened up til now except an increase in Iran's
loss of international reputation.

8559
(‘50: “8‘2

20
IRANIAN-LIBYAN RELATIONS HINGE cu INVEI‘IGATION 0F IMM'S DISAPPEARANCE
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 15 NOV 79 P 17

[Editorial by Pathi Sharifs "The Iranian Revolution—Has the Right Tine
Arrived for Cooperation with the Libyan Revolution?']

[Text] we don't know it Iran's decision to establish diplomatic relations
with Libya was conditional on the forntion of a couittee to investigate
or exaaine the facts in the disappearance of Ina Husa aer. The Iranian
leadership still believes that the Libyan government is responsible for hie

disappearance .

The decision announced yesterday by Iranian Foreign Minister al-Hasan Bani
Sadr see-e ambiguous and in‘lei‘initeo-to the point ofgivixu political circ-
lee here the impression that the establishaent cd‘ diplontic relatione be-
tween the two countries is conditional on the fomticn of this coalittee.
In fact. these circles have cone to think that the establish-out of these

relations will not be declared until this couittee finishes its aiesion
and Libya is acquitted or! this charge Just as the wolf was acquitted of the
blood of Jacob's son!

This is a unique way to establish diplontic relations between two countries:
This surprise decision by Iran stirred up other questions. sons of which
pertained to the tiaing of the announcement-dust before the Arab suaait
conference-4nd the anticipated Libyan reaction. um it accept this con-
dition on the establishaent of relations with the Iranian revolution and
wait for the verdict of the coaaittee. which might put the Libyan revolu-
tion's Arab and international regard and trust to this critical test?

Libyan sources coraented on this decision to AL-SIYASAH. saying that it was
a positive decision aimed at taking the first step on the road to official
political action, since relations between the two cantriee do not go be-
yond the popular level. These sources said that during the exchange of
popular delegations between the two countries. the latest of which was the
visit by an Iranian sass delegation representing the revolutionary youth.
headed by a revolutionary leader, hehaaed Huntasari. to Tripoli for the

1 September celebrations. the need and possibility of the two revolutions'
concurring on the ease goals was stressed.

21
Libyan sources indicated that there are no complications on the Libyan side
with respect to the establishment of diplomatic relations with the Iranian
revolution. and that it welcomes any Iranian decision aimed at strengthening
and establishing these relations. Iranian sources stress the need to ob-
tain precise information about the disappearance of lean Husa al-Sadr be-
fore establishing any relations with Libya. since the revolutionary leaner-
ship in Iran still believes that the Libyan leadership is responsible for
this disappearance. Therefore. the truth mmt be arrived at if these dip-
lomatic relations are to be established on sound bases.

But, sore important than all that. and what has attracted the attention of
political circles, is the tiling of the Iranian decision's announcement.
since those circles believe that the Iranian decision cannot be isolated
free the political and psychological climate in which the Iranian revoluti-
on nov exists.

In the opinion of these circles, the Iranian revolution has becone the ob-
ject of particular feelings of displeasure on the part of lost Arab states
for its political actions and ideas and their effects on the region. There-
fore. its turning to the Libyan revolution night greatly help it to build
strong bridges with the Arab Kaghreb in Libya and Algeria. since the Lib-
yan and Algerian revolutions are waging a struggle against American power
in the region.

Therefore, some of these circles believe that sending an Iranian conittee
to Libya to investigate the disappearance of IIaII al-Sadr is a foml ques-
tion requiring a bold act. with which Inaa Khoseini has promised to estab-
lish diplomatic relations with Libya. If matters go as expected, these
circles anticipate a visit by Col al-Qadhdhai‘i to Teheran at the end of the
year to announce the cleaving together of the Iranian and Liban revolutions;
a visit which the colonel has wanted to lake ever since Maj 'Abd-al-Salaa
Jallud visited Teheran several sonths ago but which the Iranian revolution-
ary leadership postponed to a tise it felt sore suitable.

It appears that now the Iranian revolution has found the right tine!

8559
CSO: new.

22
UNITED STATES ATTACKED FOR EXPEDITATION 0F ARABS, IRANIANS

Kuwait AL-QABAS in Arabic 9 Nov 79 p 1
[Editorial: "U.S. Superman Detained in Tehran")

[Text] The road to the U.S. mind and heart is closed to the Arabs. Israel
has gotten used to closing it by a "flying roadblock" every time an
opportunity presents itself in this sphere.

The United States itself has the characteristics of ingratitude. Its
morals are its dollars, its faith is its election votes and its friend

is whoever succumbs to it, strikes with its sword and is content with
whatever share it gives him without questioning and without arguments. Its
enemy is whoever maintains his dignity in its presence, raises his head in
front of it and does not shirk arguing with it. Against such an enemy,
the United States quickly raises its weapons either directly or through
its accredited agents in the Middle East, Europe, Africa and Southeast
Asia. The United States then feels astonished when the side which it
attacks resorts to defending itself by raising its weapons in the face of
the United States.

The United States is now perplexed and is looking for a leans to rescue
its citizens who are held hostages in its embassy in Tehran. It will not
hesitate to resort to any solution to resuce them, even if such a solution
undermines it as a super power and even if such a solution calls for
snuggling them aboard a helicopter from the roof of the embassy, as its
last ambassador in Vietnam was smuggled.

This U.S. superman is surprising. It provokes wars in the world, it
digests the rights of peoples, it fans the fires of domestic and regional
seditions and it sheds the blood of people in tens, hundreds and thousands.
The U.S. superman has turned into an angel of death harvesting the lives
of peoples in the third world to keep busy the U.S. plants producing

weapons, instruments of destruction and annihilation and all the munitions
they need.

But this U.S. superman gets perplexed if an angel of death produced by the
third world and not by the U.S. factories of evil appears to him. This

23
superman does not know how to act when confronted by an act like the
seizure of the U.S. embassy in Tehran.

Hill the solution come to this super-an from the Iranian revolution itself,
from the Palestinian revolution or frou the cooperation of both and at
what price will this solution come?

8496
C80: 6802

24
IRANIAN AMBASSADOR SPEAKS ON THREAT T0 GULF SECURITY
Kuwait ALPHAIAN in Arabic 9 Nov 79 p 11

[Interview Hith Dr Ali Shams Ardekani, Iranian Ambassador to Kuwait;
"Iranian Ambassador Answers 'Innocent Question;' We Call for Replacing
Balance of Fear by Balance of Love; United States Is Danger Threatening
Gulf"]

[Text] In reply to what was published in 'Innocent Question' column of
ALPHAIAN edition of last Monday, Dr Shams [Iranian ambassador] said: The
answer to the person who wondered who threatens the Gulf security and why
this security is threatened can be reached by logical conclusion founded
on scientific bases.

Before anything else, we must survey the dynamic forces operating in the
Gulf area and the interests operating in the area, must find out where
these interests get entwined and then determine the identity of who wants
to interfere to protect his threatened interests.

Before proceeding. I would like to turn back to the recent past. Before
the inception of the Islamic revolution in Iran, the Gulf area particularly
and the Middle East generally were the stage for the equation of fear and
terror which was patronized by the Americans and the shah.

This balance of fear and terror was operating to protect the interests of
the United States directly and the interests of its ally, Israel. Those
interests were two-sided:

A. Military and political.
3. Economic.

Economically, I say that because of the low U.s. production growth rate

in comparison to the European, Soviet and Japanese production, the United
States was doomed to a partial loss of its military and political influence.
But the imperialist character of the U.S. economy did not permit the U.S.
administration to accept this fact. This is why we saw this administration
get embroiled in a brutal war in Vietnam in the 1960's.

25
But losing the Vietnan war taught the Americans a lesson and, consequently,
produced the "Nixon Plan" which was built on the basis of the following
concept: If we do not want the Vietnam mistake to be repeated, then we
must solve the problems to which the U.S. interests are exposed in any

area by exploiting the peoples of that area to guarantee the U.S. interests.

This led, the Iranian ambassador goes on to say, to the selection of puppet
rulers in every area to perform this task.

Each of those rulers had smaller puppets revolving in his orbit.

The former shah was chosen to be the puppet in this area and he performed
the role drawn up for him very accurately. That role peaked with the
involvement of Iran and the Iranian people in the war that took place in
Oman between Sultan Qabus and the Dhofar revolutionaries.

The shah also cooperated with the Israelis militarily and economically
through cooperation between the Hosad and the Savak on the one hand and
through supplying Israel with 70 percent of its oil needs on the other.

Then came the Islamic revolution, supported by millions of people, and
changed the balances after offering hundreds of thousands of martyrs.

This revolution did not erupt with the aim of expelling the shah and
instating another person in his place but to strike the interests of the
United States and of its main ally, Israel, especially since the United
States and Israel had been working ceaselessly to strike the Iranian people's
interest from the time when Hosaddeq's revolution was foiled.

Economically, the shah played the role of the policeman protecting the U.S.
interests because he used to collect money from the rivals of the U.S.
economy, namely Japan and the Europeans, and then delivered what he col—
lected to the United States through the purchase of unnecessary weapons
and through fruitless investments in the United States itself.

Those positions which the shah adopted forced other countries in the area
to purchase weapons from the United States and to invest a part of their
monies in it with the aim of countering the shah's influence in Washington.

In other words, the United States took, as a result of the presence of the
shah and of Israel, a large part of the assets of the area's countries

and of the European comtries and Japan and added it to its own assets.
The outcome of every oil price increase used to go to the U.S. treasury
indirectly.

It is natural to say that the capitalistic struggle between the United

States on the one hand and Europe and Japan on the other always ended with
the triumph of the United States because of the presence of the shah.

26
Cake

But now that everything has changed, how can the United States protect its
interests?

Here I would like to project a simple visualization. If we liken the
international non-communist economy to a cake, then the center of this cake
and its sweetest part must inevitably exist in this area.

This is why any action seeking to foil the Islamic revolution in Iran will
inevitably lead to serving the 0.5. interest in the international balance.

This is on the one hand. On the other hand, the failure to foil this
revolution will open the eyes of peoples in the rich countries to the
importance of their resources and will motivate these peoples to strike
the 0.8. interests that oppose their own interests.

After this presentation, we can of course determine who the enemy is. The
0.3. interests conflicting with the popular interests point out by them—
selves who the enemy is.

Just for a reminder, I must point out that 0.8. Senator Henry Jackson has
said that it is the duty of the 0.8. administration to protect the 0.8.
interests in the Gulf, even if by military intervention.

Therefore, I call for replacing the balance of fear and terror that pre-
vailed under the reign of the shah by a balance of love and understanding
so that we may work together to exploit all our resources and our capa-
bilities to develop our countries and to strike our common enemy, repre-
sented by the 0.8. imperialist interests and by the interests of Israel,
the main protege of the United States.

He Are not Ones Causing Hisunderstanding

[Question] As long as you call for establishing a balance of love and
understanding in the area, then why do you, I mean your government. allow
some of those considered your supporters to engage in acts or to circulate
rumors that create misunderstanding between you and other states in the
area?

[Answer] We are not the cause of the acts leading to misunderstanding.
The cause comes from those who create imaginary persons and then attack
them.

One of those imaginary persons has been Mr Rohani. I can say that if there
was no Rohani they would create one because they need such characters.

I was extremely surprised when I read in the Arab papers that Rohani is
a member of the Iranian Revolution Cou1cil. As a journalist seeking the

27
truth, I suggest that you embark on a fact-finding investigation to find
out who was the first person to say that Rohani is a member of the
Revolution Comcil. Rest assured that this person will be an agent of
either the U.s. intelligence or the Israeli intelligence.

[Question] But don't you think that the presence of a constitutional
vacuum insofar as the position of the head of state in Iran is concerned
and that the multiplicity of the authorities currently existing in Tehran
will prevent reaching the desired understanding and harmony between the
area's states on the one hand and the Iranian revolution on the other?

No Constitutional Vacuum

[Answer] There is no constitutional vacuum or what is called in political
science the duality of authority in Iran. The domestic Iranian conditions
reflect the revolutionary momentum and not a duality of the authority and
this is an indication of strength and not of weakness.

The problem is that some people compare the post-revolution Iran with other
countries after military coups are staged in them and where tanks occupy
the streets and impose a curfew. In Iran. everybody can say what he wants.
except for those who cooperated with the Savak and those who are now
cooperating with the imperialist interests.

After the revolution, all the papers published under the shah's reign were
allowed to continue and new papers were also allowed to be published. Only
those papers that had dealt with the Savak were banned.

United States Planted Hind So Let It Reap Storn

[Question] Don't you think that the government's failure to protect the
0.8. embassy when it was attacked and then occupied by Iranian students
reflects the absence of government in Tehran?

[Answer] Not at all. The government is present and it exists throughout
Iran. The Iranian Government could not have protected the enbassy and
those present inside it without shedding a lot of blood.

It must not be forgotten also that the masses' storming of the 0.5.
embassy has been meant to vent intensive wrath because the masses are
aware that this embassy has been the center of corruption, of corrupting
and of plotting against the Iranian interests throughout the past 25 years
and that it represented the devil itself insofar as the Iranian people
are concerned.

The blame must fall on the shoulders of the engineers of the 0.5. policy
who f louted and insulted the Iranian people when they sent a person like
Richard Helms, a former CIA director, to be an ambassador and to plot
against the Middle East peoples. Considering that the United States planted
the wind in the past, then let it reap the storm now.

8491. 28
CSO: 10802
mL-QABAS SEES MILITAR! ACTION REMOTE
Kuwait ALrQABAS in Arabic 13 Nov 79 p 1

[Editorial by Jasim Ahmad al-Nisf: “Tightrope of Nerves Between Tehran
and Washington“]

[Text] Will the United States gamble with a military action to free its
hostages who are detained in its embassy in Tehran? Can the world public
opinion accept such a dangerous venture and what are the likely consequences
of such a military venture, should it take place?

These are questions that have projected themselves sharply in the past few
days as a result of the tightrope of nerves between Washington and Tehran.
Host speculations, if not all, have been stressing that the 0.8. military
gamble, should it take place, will lose 100 percent and that its conse-
quences will be deeper and graver than many people imagine.

The 0.5. administration may be thinking of what the Soviet Union did in

1968 when its forces swept through Czechoslovakia overnight to impose by
military force the continued presence of Czechoslovakia within the socialist
camp and to make sure that Czechoslovakia did not exit from the fold of
world communism.

But the geographic, strategic and ideological difference between the two
cases is big.

Iran is different in various aspects, rather in all aspects, from
Czechoslovakia which believed, and continues to believe, in the Marxist
doctrine and which is linked to Moscow by the Warsaw Pact and by other
bonds that make Czechoslovakia's movement and policy fully tied to the
wheel of the Soviet policy. Moreover, the geographic adjacency between
the two countries made the outcome of the Soviet invasion of Prague
guaranteed in advance and made it possible to complete the operation
swiftly and before the world public opinion could awaken and before the
western reactions could act.

The situation is fundamentally different insofar as Iran is concerned.
The geographic distance between Washington and Tehran is vast and

29
resorting to the use of the nearby U.S. bases and fleets is engulfed by
dangers. Moreover, the Soviet Union will not at all permit any U.S.
military operation against a country such as Iran whose cannon borders
with the USSR extend for vast distances.

Added to this is the fact that the popular roots of the current Iranian
regime depend on a firm Islamic religious belief that enables the regine
to confront any rash nilitsry venture, especially since Iran is surrounded
by a group of Islamic countries. contrary to Czechoslovakia which is
surrounded by the socialist camp countries.

It is also difficult for President Carter to gentle with a rash and
uncalculated action or any action with no guaranteed results while
approaching the presidential elections which, all signs indicate, will
take place in an semaphore of sharp rivalry.

At the sane time. the oil factor is an important factor that tips the
scales in favor of Iran in the tightrope of nerves [in the tug of war]
between Iran and the United States, especially since it is difficult for
Hashington to make up for its Iranian oil imports from other OPEC countries
for technical and economic reasons connected with the oil production of
these countries.

Moreover. Iran nay eabark on withdrawing its deposits in the U.S. banks
in a daring move that may lead to a sharp decline in the value of the
dollar.

The military possibility for ending the seizure of the U.S. embassy in

Tehran is, therefore, a remote and losing possibility by all the military,
political and economic criteria.

8491.
C80: 6802

30
mums IN MAN VIGIL DEMAND SOLIDARITY wrru TERM srunawrs
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 16 Nov 79 pp 1, 1a

[Article by new Sharif: 'The Vigilistsl 'we Rant The Iranian Revolution
to Take Hare stringent measures Against Anerica"']

[Text] At noon today. after the Friday prayer, ended the vigil by aore than
200 Iranians—-aen and wonan stuients. workers, enployees and sons religious
nenuwho began their vigil at 1200 yesterday in the courtyard of the Iranian
enbassy in Kuwait.

It was decided that after praying inside the enbassy. the vigil participants
would burn the Anerican flag and a picture of Anerican President Carter. and
then announce their resolutions and dennds. which they would then distrib-
ute to infomtion agencies in Kuwait and a copy of which they would send to
Teheran.

One of the vigil organisers told AL-SIYASAH that they will announce sons of
the east important denanis toaorrow: coaplete solidarity with Iran Khoneini
and the Revolution Conan! Council in its deaand that the Shah and his fan-
ily be handed over: support for the neasures and resolutions adopted by the
revolution to combat American inparialisn in Iran and the Gulf region: denun-
ciation of the stands of Anerica and its agents towards the Iranian revolu-
tiom support for the Iranian stuients' revolutionary occupation of the Amer-
ican eabassy; solidarity with Islanic revolutions throughout the world; and
support for the Palestinian people.

The resolutions will also ask the Iranian revolution to take harsh stands
towards dealing with America and its agents.

One of the vigil participants, who works as a supervisor in one of the
schools, told AL-SIYASAR that he was participating in this vigil and in the
political fast out of support for and solidarity with his stuient coarades
in Iran.

He said that he was noved to participate after he heard, over Iranian Rev-
olution Radio. a call for all overseas Iranian students to declare their

31
solidarity with the students in Tehersn. One of the resale psrticipente.

11 secondary school student, said that she was supporting her colleagues in
Tehenn. When asked whether she supported the continued detention of sole
nosen inside the Asericsn esbsssy in Teheran. she said. "l‘he Anericsn noun

beers the use responsibility as the son. and therefore I support uhst the
stu‘lents in Iran did.” -

The zeal and excite-cut of these vigil psrticipsnte. especially groups of
stulents sons of uhos are no older than 12 or 13 years at the lost. use gen-

erated as a result of the delivery by s group 03‘ Iranians of fiery speeches
against Aserics and foreign domination sll dsy long yesterday.

8559
080: “8‘2

32
NATIONAL OIL comm CHIS M's mama-rs
Kuweit AL-SIYASAII in Arebic 12 Row 79 p 8

[Zrticlu "In luweit Oil Coupeny'e Annual Report: leeuqtion of Deep
Drilling in the lurgan Held; Kuweit Oil Coepany Inloyeee Increeee to
6.6372]

any The cheirnen of the board of directore and eeeher-deeignete of
Kuwait Oil cheny. Hr dbed Ja'fer, eeid that the couree of work in the
gee project wee proceeding eccording to the progre- eet forth end thet

the coupletion of engineering work ee well ea procuremnt of neteriele wee
lOO percent reeliced et the end of leet year, while the coqletion of con-
etruction etood et 96 percent. Thie wee eteted in the introduction to the
Kuweit Oil Coweny'e ennuel report for 1978, which ie the report ieeued
yeeterdey. Hr Je’fer deecribed laet yeer ee a year filled with evente in
which en ieportent change occurred in the organization of the oil induetry
in Kuweit. One reeult of thie wee thet the cowany'e operetiona expended
in the wake of the ieeuence of Hinieterial Decree 20 dated 9 Hey 1978, by
virgue of which oil production operetione cerried out previouely by the
American Independent Oil Coqeny in el-wafreh have been treneferred to
luweit Oil Coqeny. ‘l‘he coneu-etion of the tranefer cone nonthe after
the etart of the fiecal year celled for the aeeignnent of an independent
heading for "el-Hefreh Operatione" in thie report.

Aeide from the al-Hei’reh operetione, the coupeny neinteined the deeired
crude oil production levele without interruption during thie period. Ite
output during the yeer wae 1,893,791 berrele per day. Crude oil exporte
were 1,606,le berrele per dey.

Developnent ectivitiee in the new field in the north of Kuwait continued
end the cowletion of eight producing welle had been eccoqzliehed by the
end of the yeer. Dewelopeent activities to eeteblieh the production fecil-
itiee neceeeery for the field will begin in the eerly part of 1979.

in Burgen, the enploretion drilling program feced e teqorery eetbeck when
the deep teet well blew out on being drilled to 9,817 feet end the drilling

33
rig above the well was destroyed. The cowpany has tried to obtain replace-
aent equipment as quickly as possible; this will arrive in January 1979

so that we may begin resuning our program of exploring for hydrocarbons in
deep geological formations early.

in addition, work on ieproving export tanker loading facilities has con-
tinued. In the second half of the year, the perfor-ance of nodificatione

on the artificial island and construction of the single buoy rotating aoor-
ing facility were begun. It is anticipated that these two projects will

be carried out in 1979 and thus that it will be feasible to load very large
carriers with a capacity of up to 500,000 deadweight tons. Excavation ac-
tivities have been carried out to deepen the floor in the craft harbor be-
longing to the coapany and as a result it has been possible for the country':
vessels in our possession to enter and leave the harbor whatever the tide
level may be.

The new bitusen plant was constructed during the year and the celebration
inaugurating it was held on I: October under the supervision of His liighness
the Crown Prince and Prime liinister Shaykh Sa'd al-‘Abdelleh al-Sebah. Ilia
lxcellency the Minister of 011 Shaylth 'Ali al-Khelifah al-Sabah perforaed
the dedication.

It is expected that this plant, with its design capacity of 250,000 tons

per your, will meet the country's need for bitumen and sore. Planning is
now underway to construct export facilities.

In addition the company has continued to build houses for its eqloyees,
to improve existing housing, to develop uedicai and social facilities. and
to support athletic and cultural activities. The new building for preven-
tive medical services was constructed in the early part of the year and
services have begun to be provided there. In addition the sporting center
was built toward the end of the year.

The conpany also kept up activities of training and developing experts on
a large scale, in various fields and at various levels, with an enphasis

on the training of Kuwaiti citizens. Besides the large numbers of workers
who received training in the worksitee and trainees who were organised in

sessions inside the caspany, 290 workers and 36 trainees enrolled in train-
ing courses abroad during the year.

The total workforce in your company cans to 4,637 at the end of the year.
49.56 percent of whoa: were Kuwaiti citizens.

11887
080: 4802

34
NATION'S PM SUBSIDY PROGRAM DETAIL”
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 12 Nov 79 p 6

lgrticle: "Government Food and Building Haterial Subsidy Valued at 11.6
Million Dinarsﬂ/

Ilexgl The value of the subsidies paid out by the govern-ant of Kuwait
for certain building materials and foodstuffs totalled 14,601,277 dinera
in fiscal year 1978-79, an increase of about lo million Kuwaiti diners over
the preceding fiscal year; most of this was for foodstuffs.

This was declared by the assistant undersecretary of con-erce and industry
for supply and coosuner protection affairs, Hr 'Ahd-al-Rahnan al-‘l‘uwayjiri,
at a meeting Kuwait News Agency held with his.

Hr al-‘l‘uwayjiri said that the Kuwaiti government was very anxious to allev-
iate the burdens of price rises and costs of living on the consulaer's
shoulders.

He added that the total spent on subsidizing foodstuffs was 10,8l6,950
diners, an increase of about 3 nillion diners over the fiscal year 1977-78.

Heanwhile the value of building eateriale subsidies came to 3,785,372
diners.

Hr al-‘l‘uwayjiri said that the Kuwaiti government provided the Kuwait Supply
Cowany with a subsidy of 5,625,79l diners to provide the following coe-
nodities:

A. Category one supply card co-oditiee; these are Peehawar rice, Aeerican
rice, sugar, lentils, vegetable oil, powered milk, tomato sauce, and get-
bage begs; the value of the subsidy for these co-nodities was 2,933,367
diners.

B. Category two ca-odities: these are packaged cheeses, cheeses in
glasses, baby foods, baby silk, canned fish, frozen chicken, canned veget-
ables, yoghurt, jams and oils; the value of the subsidy on these co-odi-
ties case to 386,647 diners.

35
c. Fodder; this is barley, corn, inorted bran, and the costs of transport-
ing barley to the Society Federation warehouses; the value of the subsidies
on these couodities came to £88,338 diners.

D. Building materials in the form of cement and iron; the subsidies on
these materials came to 2.01.1,655 dinars.

Hr al-Tuvayjiri pointed out that the government provided subsidies to the
federation of Consumer Cooperative Societies totalling 108,011 diners in
value. It also provided the Fresh Dairy Product Producers‘ Federation a
subsidy to provide fresh milk worth 276,526 dinars. it provided the Kuwaiti
Flour Mill Coupany with 895,186 diners. He said that the government pro-

vided subsidies to bakeries (ovens) and Arab bakeries valued at 1,017,322
dinars.

The government also allocated the sum of 4,286,965 diners in subsidies for
slaughtered and fresh meat in the form of lamb, beef and camel. It pro-
vided the Livestock Trading and Transport Germany, the Heat and Foodstuffs
Cowany and the Nasir sl-llusayn al-lbrahie Coqsny subsidies of 650,577
diners to provide meat from live sheep. Hr sl-‘i‘uvayjiri edded that the
government had given the Kuwait Cement Cowany a subsidy of 1,079,970
diners to provide ordinary local black cement and had provided the National

Industries Coupany with subsidies worth 331.347 dinars to provide limestone
tile.

11887
050: 10802

36
NATIONAL "‘1'!me mm ISSUES ANNUAL moat
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 12 Ilov 79 p 8

[Zrticlez "In the Petrochenical Omany'a Annual Report: Eng 'Ahd-al;3aqi
al-Nuri: Petrochemical Profita for heat Year are 12.9 Million Dinaraj/

may The Petrochemical Coepany'a profita for the peat year totalled 12.9
nillion lumiti dinara. Thia waa atated in a tall: by the chair-an of the
board of directora and nanher-deaignate lng 'Ahd-al-Baqi alouuri ea he pre-
aented the coQany’a annual report for laat year, 1978--the report which
waa iaaued yeaterday. The report referred to the coapany'a achievenanta
in the iielda of production, expogt and narketing, where the coqany
achieved new recorda aurpeeaing Ishoee cg] peat yeara and preaerved ita
poeition in world narketa, proving the nerit of the coqany'a eqloyeea,
their graap of the require-ante of thia induatry, with the advanced indue-
trial technology it requirea, and their awareneaa of the viciaaitudea of
the world narketa. In addition the report carried the following liat of
achieve-ante in the peat year and future projecta:

Pirat

The coqetent authoritiea' agree-ant waa given to iqlenentation of the
fourth anaonia train project, whoae productive capacity will total 1,000
netric tone of a-onia per day.

Second

An international conaulting fire ha been aaaigned to make a cowlenentery
atudy to pet-fore a detailed economic feaaihility atudy of the olefin con-
plex project in order to aacertain the project'e economic feaaihility in
the event feedatocka other than ethane, on which the econonic teaaihility
study wee baaed, are uaed. preparatory to adoption of a auitable deciaion
concerning the project.

Third

in accordance with the coupetent authoritiea’ deaire, the cowany ha

37
brought the figures contained in the economic feasibility study on the
aromatics project up to date.

Fourth

The coqntent authorities have agreed in principle to enter into a joint
project with Bahrain National Oil Conpany to establish a coqany to exploit
gas derived from the liquid gas project in Bahrain. An international con-
sulting firm has been assigned to make the preliminary study of this pro-
ject to ascertain the type of product whose production is preferred.

Fifth

The cospany has made a study of the possibility of erecting intermediate
and semi-finished petrochemical industries in Kuwait. In the light of this.
it has been able to determine a number of projects which, when established,
will help industrial integration up the petrochemical processing ladder.
Establishment of these industries will guarantee a local market to consume
part of the basic petrochemical products (such as olefins and aromatics)

as well as their use for certain raw materials produced in Kuwait. such as
urea and melamine, in processing products. In addition studies bearing on
these industries have been presented to the cowetent authorities.

Sixth

‘l'he coepany has continued to study certain projects presented to it by cer-
tain Arab and foreign countries, in which they would participate in the
context of the strategy to diversify the cowany's operations.

Seventh

The bid concerning inplementation of the "conveyor belt" project to trans-
port and load solid fertilizers by eechanical means has been awarded to an
international coqany for the sum of 3,415,730 Kuwaiti diners (three mil-
lion, four hundred fifteen thousand and seven hundred thirty Kuwaiti diners).
The contract was signed on 16 Septenber 1979. This project consists of two
conveyor belt cleexes. One is to convey unconsolidated solid fertilizer
with a capacity of 250 metric tons per hour which can be converted to car
veying bagged fertilizer.

The second belt project is to convey bagged fertiliser only, with a capac-
ity of 120 metric tons per hour. It is hoped that the project will be car-
ried out within 17 months of the date of the signing of the contract.

Eighth

work is still going on on the project to treat polluted water emerging
from the urea plants in order to recover urea and e-onia from the water

38
end provide weter suitsble for irrigetion purpoees. It should be borne

in mind thet thin project is the lest stege of the coepeny'e speciel enti-
pollution projects.

Ninth

The coupeny hes conducted field experiments in cooperetion with the Agri-
culturel Depertnent of the Ministry of Public Hbrks on the use of e uree

end eemoniue sulEete solution for irrigstion in the el-Uefreh end el-‘Abdeli
ferue. These experiments hevs provided encoureging results end the coupeny
ie new eernestly engeged in studying the econoeics of using this project in
s commerciel feshion.

Tenth

The coupeny, in cooperetion with the Ministry of Public works, hes conducted
successful experiments on the possibility of using uree ee e eource of pro-

tein for livestock fodder. The coepeny will cerry out more of these tests
in 1979.

Bleventh

A speciel nedicel industriel reseerch section hes been estebliehed in the
Medicsl Affairs Depertnent of the coepsny.

Twelfth

An internetionel consulting firm hes been essigned to etudy probeble bot-
tlenecks in production operetions in the sslt end chlorine unit plents; it
is hoped thet this will be coepleted in 1979.

Thirteenth

A contrect hes been signed to build e hydrochloric scid plent in the eelt
end chlorine unit with e productive cepecity of 5 metric tons of 100 per-

cent scid per dey. It is hoped thet the plant will be put into operetion
in 1979.

Fourteenth

The eelt end chlorine unit hes finished signing contrects for the inporte-
tion of equipment to peckege teble selt in speciel plestic conteinere.

Fifteenth

The sslt end chlorine unit hes mede e contrect for the ieportetion of neth-
inery to peckege sodium hydrochlorete solution (chlorsel) in speciel con-
teinere, end it is hoped thet operetion of the project will etert in 1979.

11887
080: 6802

39
SECRETARY OF JUSTICE SPEAKS 0“ SECURITY, COURTS, EMORS
Tripoli AL-USBU' Ab-SI'YASI in Arabic 9 Nov 79 pp 10-13

[Interview With Muhammad 'Ali al-Jadi, Secretary of Justice. by 'Ali al-
Jawashi; "We Have Eliminated Black Cat Incidents But Rumors Have Persisted;
Bxperinent of People's Judiciary Has Succeeded in Our Country; Decree
Organizing People's Security Will Be Issued Shortly; Citizen Has Exagger-
ated Incidents Cos-titted by Some Youth"]

[Text] Where has people's security reached in terms of implementation?
What are the problems facing the people's justice connittees? How is the
theory of the people's judiciary and its jurisdiction embodied in reality?
The security situation, the types of crimes and the role of the people and
of the security agencies in confronting then: Hhst is the truth of the
Black Cat gang and of the runors circulated about this gang? How true are
these rumors?

How do we confront smuggling crimes and what is the people's role in this
war against crime?

The masses are wondering why the traffic laws have not been amended until
now.

Hhat cases after abolition of the law offices and of the Supreme Judiciary
and Police Comcil? These are the questions that AL—DSBU' Ab-SIYASI has
addressed to brother Huhanlnad 'Ali al-Jadi, the secretary of justice.
Following is the text of the interview:

At the outset, the secretary of justice explained the importance of forming
the people's justice conittees, saying:

Before the last session of the General People's Congress. there were no
people's justice connittees and the committees were confined to some
secretariats, especially service secretariats and production secretariats
within a limited and narrow sphere. What happened afterwards to complete
declaration of the people's authority was that the need developed to have
collective and not individual leaderships so that we may not act and decide
according to the individual intellect but according to the collective

40
intellect. This is what the third international theory decided upon and
what has been underlined clearly in the "Green Book." especially in the
first chapter pertaining to the people's congresses and committees and
other matters.

Recently, the Secretariat of the Interior was merged, as you know, with
the Secretariat of Justice under the name of the Secretariat of Justice,
considering that the Secretariat of Justice carries out a common function
with the Secretariat of the Interior and that the side that previously
helped the Secretariat of Justice and cooperated with it in performing
its tasks was the Secretariat of the Interior which did so through the
police and through its various agencies. To complete the picture and to
eliminate duality--a duality whereby a defendant or a court case or a
certain issue was first undertaken by the Secretariat of Interior, then
referred to the Secretariat of Justice and then followed by correspondence
and other steps to complete the procedure-—the two secretariats have now
become two integrated wings in one body.

This has in fact resulted in complete coordination. The security agency.
or the concept of public security, has come to mean reassurance, stability.
the elimination of criminals. curtailing the spread of cries and correcting
the individual's behavior. This concept and this need have now been
definitely confined to one authority and the same people's committee is now
in control of these various agencies.

[Question] To what degree has the citizen comprehended the concept of the
people's security, such as taking part in the people's resistance forces. in
the strugglers [al-mujahidin] battalions, in night guard. in self-security
and in guarding installations?

Self-Security [al-amn al-dhati]

[Answer] The General People's Justice Committee decided that the masses
should [be allowed to] participate in the people's security out of their
awareness of this responsibility and that this security is divided into two
kinds: Suif-security in the installations, factories and other vital
utilities and people's security which pertains to ordinary guard and to
protecting the citizens and their property from those tampering with self-
security. A decree was issued by the secretary of the General People's
Justice Committee in implementation of a recommendation made by the second
session of the committee. The decree entrusta the installations, factories
and some other vital utilities to form their own security, guard and pro-
tection agencies under the supervision of the municipal people's justice
committee. This is the committee that provides these agencies with
training, weapons and with all the rules that are necessary to facilitate
performance of the task entrusted to these agencies.

This decree has stipulated certain measures and certain rules that do not
leave the security issue to anybody. whoever undertakes this duty must

41
meet certain conditions--precautionary security conditions that are
necessary for any important work like this work. The decree also stip-
ulates that the setting up of this system, i.e. the self-security
system, must not result in obstructing production.

The people's justice committees and the installations have been notified
of the decree and it is my belief that the people's committees have begun
to implement it.

People's Security

The other decree which we are preparing and which has not been issued yet
is the people's security decree. The stipulations of this decree will be
very close to those of the self-security decree. However, this decree is
connected in fact with the police station. The first decree concerning
self-security is connected with the installation or the utility whereas
this decree is connected with the police station. let us take as an
example a certain police station--let us assuae it is al-Nahdah police
station. This station has certain sections under its jurisdiction. These
sections have their people's committees. The people's justice committee
can, in cooperation with these sections, assign persons to take up night
watch duties in rotation, perhaps to safeguard the security of the vital
installations and utilities within the section, under certain conditions
that are coordinated and arranged by the police station concerned, which
also provides training on these conditions. These guards will be under
the jurisdiction of the police center which will supply them with weapons
and instruct them on their use and which will observe the behavior of
these guards so that no flaws may develop in this regard. The guards will
collect their weapons from the station and return them to the station at
the end of their shift. These guard duty shifts will only be night shifts,
will begin at definite hours that they [guards themselves] deem suitable
and will be under the supervision of the people's justice committees in
their capacity as the executive committees that implement the resolutions
of the people's congresses or the resolutions of the General People's
Justice Committee that promulgates the resolutions issued by these con-
gresses originally.

This decree will be issued shortly and will be complete and we will launch
the experiment. The purpose will not only be to provide a people's guard
but will also be to get the citizen accustomed to self-reliance.

Why People's Security?

This means that the policeman that we get to perform guard duty is an
individual from the section and belonging to the section. Therefore, it
does not make a difference if his work is temporary. he participates and
feels that he shoulders responsibilities and, consequently, will not
remain negative. He will feel that he must participate in performing

42
these duties and that he does not have to be a regular policeman wearing
a special uniform, with special qualifications and working on specific
hours to participate. The policeman will continue to carry out his
duties but he must be left to devote his time to certain work, such as
investigation and apprehension and to guide these people [guards] as
assistants. This is what is meant by the people's security. We are
explaining this so that people may not imagine that our thinking of the
people's security came as a result of our feeling that there is unrest or
security troubles.

[Question] He, and the reader, would like to know the tasks of the civil
defense and the goals behind it.

Whose Responsibility Is Firefighting?

The civil defense consists of two elements. One is a purely technical
element and this element requires, no doubt, long experience, technical
preparation and people with experience and with certain qualifications.
,The second is an ordinary human element in which anybody can participate.
This often happens in cases of fire. However, technical preparation is
the element predominant in civil defense. what I mean is that there has
to be specially equipped fire trucks and specially trained people who can
use special materials, either water or chemicals, to extinguish fires and
to save lives. In case of certain catastrophes, the civil defense carries
out its duties through the various security agencies. Civil defense needs
traffic police to open the way for it when proceeding to a certain place,
needs policemen to investigate whether an incident is premeditated or
accidental and even requires thumbprint experts and experts to analyse
such incidents. Therefore, as a section the civil defense cannot be
complete except with the presence of these components. This work is
difficult for ordinary people to perform because it is many-sided and
requires many things. But they [the people] may not need the rescue [squads]
and others because they can get any incidents under control before these
squads arrive.

We are about to strengthen the civil defense which needs to have many gaps
filled. Part of our plan, which is included in the resolutions of the
General People's Justice Committee, calls for providing these components
with what they need and for training people to carry out this task. Thus,
there will be integration in each municipality insofar as civil defense

is concerned .

[Question] Let us move to another question. what are the tasks of the
people's judiciary and what are the cases that this judiciary deals with?
"here has the General People's Justice Committee reached in implementing
the resolutions concerning this issue?

What Is People's Judiciary?

63
[Answer] We have the people's judiciary but not according to the general
concept of the people's judiciary. The people's judiciary follows several
ways in the cOuntries that adopt this system. There is the joint people's
judiciary which is comprised of specialized and unspecialized judges.
There is the purely people's judiciary which has jurisdiction over certain
crimes and certain cases. There is also the general people's judiciary
that deals with all levels of litigation. The fact is that the people's
judiciary has several aspects and several concepts in the countries that
adopt the system of the people's judiciary. However, these countries

have recently become small in number because the crimes have become diverse
and the criminals themselves have become capable of skilfully hiding and
concealing their crime. Therefore, the presence of specialized people

to unravel these problems and to discover the criminals has become nec-
essary.

In the Jamahiriyah, we launched nearly 4 years ago the experiment of giving
the section people's committees jurisdiction over the issues of reconcil-
iation and arbitration. This jurisdiction deals with the simple adminis-
trative and shari'a issues, including divorce. alimony and similar cases,
and with civil issues, whether simple or not. In the jurisdiction con-
cerning the first type of issues. consideration was given to simplifying
and facilitating the procedures and to creating a group of people capable
of performing this duty within the section itself. When any problem occurs
in a section, this committee, which is elected by the section people them-
selves, can summon the plaintiff and the defendant. The committee has a
special register and a special clerk and records the incident. It seeks

to reconcile the two sides. If the committee manages to perform its task
by persuasion or if it manages to end the problem either by arbitration

or reconciliation, then the problem becomes insignificant and there will

be no need to resort to the courts in this case.

But if the committee fails to end the problem and if one of the parties
concerned is intransigent or dissatisfied with the committee's opinion or
decision. then he can sue in the courts. But before resorting to the
courts, the law commits the citizen to resort to this committee and he
must resort to it. However, we do not confiscate his right to resort to
the courts if this cornurtee fails, i.e. after the citizen provides a
certificate from this committee that it has examined the dispute and has
not been able to settle it. In this situation, the case can be presented
to the ordinary judiciary. This beginning was limited, i.e. it was
confined to the lowest courts or to the simple cases pertaining to misde-
meanors entailing a sentence of no more than a 3-year prison term, civil
cases involving no more than 250 dinars and other cases such as alimony
and child custody, as I have already pointed out.

Last year, we raised the level of this jurisdiction. Before moving to the

higher level, the results in some municipalities were very good and
encouraging and the committees were able to settle 50 percent of the cases

64
that would have had to be presented to the [ordinary] judiciary. In some
municipalities, the results were small. Generally, the committees were
able to settle 30 percent of the cases. This encouraged us to raise the
level of their jurisdiction. We have said that the committees are now
empowered to consider the civil cases. previously restricted to 250 diners.
without limitations and up to thousands of dinars. we have also given the
committees additional powers so that they may consider felony cases, even
if they are cases of killing or of assault and battery or others. These
committees are now empowered to deal with, examine and decide on such
cases. The decision reached by the committee is then presented to the
authority concerned which approves and ratifies it, thus making it binding
to all the parties concerned. Even though we have given the committee
these powers concerning felonies, we have not tied the hand of the police
or of the prosecution in conducting investigation because if we prevent
these committees or the individual concerned from resorting to the courts
or to the prosecution in a case of felony until after the committee ends
its work, then we may miss the evidence and the committees may not be

able to reach a solution to the problem. As a result, we may not be able
to pursue the case and to punish the criminal. Therefore, in the cases

of felony the prosecution and the police begin their investigation, their
gathering of evidence and their interrogations. If the case ends with
reconciliation [on the hands of the people's justice committee], then all
is fine. If not, the case will continue in the courts.

The wisdom behind the first law [sic] and behind the latest amendment is
to eliminate compulsion in such cases. There is no doubt that any sentence
issued against a citizen will have a psychological effect on this citizen.
This is natural. Therefore, all the cases that end with reconciliation or
arbitration end with them all grudges and problems. In such cases, every-
thing is discussed, everybody states what he has to say and feels that

the reconciliation or arbitration has been reached with his desire and
absolute freedom. Thus, all negative effects come to an end. The proof
of this is that the sentences issued by the lowest court without bringing
about a reconciliation are appealed before the higher courts and may

move in one way or another from court to court, thus starting an endless
whirlwind. Under this system [of the people's justice committees], the
citizen's efforts are saved, the number of lawsuits is reduced and many
problems are lifted from the shoulders of the [ordinary] judiciary. There
is no doubt that the committees will produce good results that realize

the desired goa1—-results not achieved yet.

[Question] How are the crimes of smuggling, rumor mongering, theft, etc.
eliminated? How can the citizen be motivated and enlightened to under-
stand these issues and to participate positively in eliminating them?
Smuggling Wolves

[Answer] Smuggling has its causes and its means. Its causes are, and I
say this with utter confidence, that the goods smuggled from the Jamahiriyah

45
are the least expensive in the entire world. All the essential commodities
are the least expensive in the world. These inexpensive goods can turn a
profit for the smuggling wolves. This smuggling and this profit are not
small. If the prices in the neighboring countries were not high, there
would be no call for anybody to engage in smuggling. The low prices of
these goods [in the Jamahiriyah] is what has led to and encouraged committing
these crimes. This does not mean that I am demanding that the prices of
these goods be raised. I am only pointing out the reasons that make

people commit these crimes. "hat I mean is that the low prices are the
main reason urging them to commit the crimes. He now come to the means.
There is a certain type of vehicles (Toyota Land Cruiser) that is used

for smuggling and that enables the smugglers to engage in this kind of
work. I am not saying that smuggling is confined to the use of this kind
of vehicles. Animals and trucks have been used. He seize the means used
and may think that we have wiped out smuggling. However, smuggling will
continue through the use of similar vehicles in neighboring countries for
smuggling operations. This is something over which we cannot remain silent.
We have initiated numerous measures to wipe out this phenomenon. We have
also begun to prepare special vehicles fitted with special equipment and
with radio communication to watch our borders. These vehicles have not
been put to use yet. When used, we will be able to control all the outlets
and to wipe out, or at least curtail, the smuggling activity. Moreover,

we are inclined to use helicopters to watch the borders constantly and to
discover the snuggling caravans, be they animal or vehicle caravans. We
will be thus able to wipe out this phenomenon after a short time.

Citizen's Role

There remains the citizen's role. As I have already pointed out in my
statements ab0ut the people's security, the issue cannot be kept in the
hands of the executive agencies alone and cannot fall on their shoulders
solely because such a thing happens when there is a barrier separating the
government from the peOple. In such a case, we say that there is a gov-
ernment that shoulders the responsibility for everything. The people

take a certain position toward the government and the government continues
to be the side which has to do everything. But in the Jamahiriyah, the
government is the people and the people are the government. Therefore,
every citizen and every official—-whether he is in the political wing of
the people's congresses and of whatever pertains to them or in the exec—
utive wing of the people's committees and of whatever pertain to them--

is ultimately responsible for following up these matters. I will say

this with utter honesty, had the citizens and the officials, especially
those present on the border checkpoints, exerted full efforts, they

would have wiped out this phenomenon, regardless of the personal motive

of the smuggler. The smuggler is undoubtedly a thief. He steals the
citizens' food and takes it to other people for a limited material gain.
There should be no mercy and no compassion for such people and they should
be fought relentlessly either by the executive agencies or by the citizens.

A6
He will thus be able to control the snuggling activity with utter ease.
Harding of Goods Is Crime

There is another kind of smuggling that takes place within the Jamahiriyah.
This kind of smuggling is equal in its danger to the first kind of
smuggling. This is the hording of goods unjustifiably. I believe that
this kind of smuggling is not different from the first kind. The first
type is committed by a certain individual motivated by greed to make
certain material profits. As for hording of goods, I have heard recently
that there is a big demand for the purchase of sugar and other goods.

This is not done by a good citizen or even by anyone who merits the title
of citizen. I mean that the selfish and greedy individual is the one who
emits such an act and I--this is, at least, my personal opinion-«rill
no: give such a person the title or the honor of belonging to the
Jamahiriyah because he has no patriotism. A believer wishes for his
brother what he wishes for himself. How can you horde goods, half of which
will perhaps perish, and deprive of them other people who are searching
for such goods in the markets? There is no supply crisis but there is in
fact a crisis of ethics. This is an ugly form of smuggling comitted by
sick and greedy people and is no less serious than the act of the others
who smuggle goods outside the Jamahiriyah. This leads us to the answer
concerning the rumors.

Black Cat

It may be rumored, for example, that sugar and other kinds of goods are
not available. The fact is that rumors are a malignant disease that is
disseminated by people with no morals. Often we cannot fight the ruor
except by eliminating its causes, i.e. by providing nothing to be used as
a source of rumors. The problem with a runor is that it turns something
small into a big issue and that it exaggerates. A certain incident may
occur but a runor follows two courses: It exaggerates the incident and
gives it dimensions beyond its real ones on the one hand and then fabri-
cstcs similar incidents.

Frankly, this has happened recently regarding the so-called Black Cat.

1 have heard frequent rumors on this issue: So and so contacted the
Black Cat and so did such and such a person and the Black Cat contacted
such and such a school. Very frankly, there may have been one or two
incidents. But this doesn't mean that the incidents are so many or that
they are this big. The incidents were exploited by small children, whom
we have caught. I am not talking about them as a rumor because the
children are actually under detention [msqbud 'alayhum] now. These
children contacted others in other houses and various other contacts were
made by individuals related to the children, such as the one who contacted
his uncle. These incidents have been exploited and the rumor has spread
among the people. The truth that what 53 are talking about is a rtnor
is proven by the fact that nothing has turned out from all the notifi-
cations and contacts that have taken place because they are nothing

but jokes among friends. The fact is that such jokes should not be made.
Unfortunately. the jokes have been made. The hiy'l economic and living
standards have enabled many citizens to get their telephones. I also
do not exclude the fact that calls have been made from offices and from
the telephone booths in the streets.

Incidents Ended and Rumor Persists

while talking about these incidents, I am not denying that some actual
incidents did take place but these incidents were controlled on the spot
and those perpetrating them are either before the prosecution, in jails
or before the courts. All the incidents have been eliminated but the
rumor persists through contacts and telephones. I remember that one of
the incidents took place in a school. What happened there is that a
student got into an argrnent with the school principal. Then threats
reached the school and this caused the parents of the teachers and of
the students to stop sending their daughters to school. The student who
got into the argument with her principal was ultimately arrested [pre-
sumably for being the source of the threats] and is now in jail. In the
final analysis and regardless of whether the security agencies are
present or not, the duty of protecting a home is the responsibility of
its owner. He who cannot protect his home does not deserve it. In any
case, we will perforu the duty entrusted to us, namely to safeguard the
citizen's security and to give him reassurance. we will not shirk this
duty of ours.

We now come to the question of thefts, particularly car thefts.
Car Thefts

The problem is that car thefts are a special kind of theft. It is of
course impossible to guard every house, especially now that there is a
car or more in front of every house. We cannot station a policeman in
front of every house all the time, even though Tripoli has 20 police
patrols at night. We are about to increase the mnber of patrols, both
in Tripoli and outside it. Car thefts are easy and all people know all
the cars [sic]. All that is needed is to break the glass and to have a
special key and the thief can then turn on the car engine, drive it to
do whatever he wants to do and then leave it in any place. I can say
that we have been able to find most of the stolen cars. But some of

the cars may have been damaged. The thefts have their causes. A
citizen who has a garage and fails to park his car inside it exposes

his car to theft. The other thing is that there are some people who
steal the cars to perforn private errands, especially people who are
caught in certain situations and who have no moral or religious deterrant.
If such people ask the car owner to take them to the place they want, the
owner would respond to their request. This is in addition to the pres-
ence of groups of wanton youths who commit such acts. Another kind

of people steals the cars to get spareparts. There are numerous reasons

(08
for such thefts), in addition to the large nunbers of cars and the ease
with which they can be opened.

Traffic Law Being Amended

[Question] Let us turn to the traffic police. What new provisions have
been added to the general traffic laws and how will these laws be amended?

[Answer] In its latest meeting, the General People's Justice Committee
found that many of the traffic laws, in addition to other laws, are
inadequate and tmdeterring. The municipal people's justice comitteea
have been entrusted to examine the obstructive provisions and the pro-
visions that are incompatible with the declaration of the people's
authority and, consequently, incompatible with the new status of the
Secretariat of Justice-i.e. with the formation of people's committees
in this secretariat. Ha have asked the municipal people's justice com-

the provisions that they deem fit and to send us these visualizations

and bills so that we may examine them, try to draft them in a certain
form, present them to the General People's Con-ittee in its entirety and
then refer them to the promulgating authorities. Some committees have
begun to send their suggestions on the traffic law and the Central Traffic
Department has begun to coordinate and prepare these proposals, even
.hough they are not complete yet. He will amend the traffic law. However,
this does not prevent us from adopting certain measures and from imple-
menting very strictly the maximum penalties stipulated by the existing

law provisions. I do not think that they [provisions to be amended] are
numerous but in their present form, they are incompatible with the new
situation. In any case, there are deterring penalties at present and I
hope that they will be implemented soundly and correctly. We will amend
not only the traffic law but all the laws that are incompatible with what
is being projected now.

[Question] In his latest meeting with the General People‘s Justice
Committee, the revolution leader dealt with the issue of the free-of-
charge lawyer, the Suprene Judiciary Comcil and the Police Concil. What
has been done in regard to abolishing these issues?

Abolition of Supreme Judiciary Council

[Answer] The police and judiciary system laws stipulate the presence of
the Supreme Judiciary Comcil and the Police Council, considering that
these councils were essential for coordination among the various agencies.
The Police Affairs Council coordinated the efforts of the various control
departments existing in the Jamahiriyah previously. To establish coor-
dinat ion among these control departments, they had to be tied to a certain
council including controllers [muraqibun] so that each controller may
know what is happening in the other control departments. Moreover, the

49
security plan adopted by one controller could be used by another. So,

it was necessary for this council to be present for the purpose of
coordination, in addition to examining the affairs and needs of a control
department. The judiciary council was also necessary, considering that
the men of the judiciary are distributed throughout all parts of the
republic. It was also necessary to have an authority to coordinate and
select people with certain qualifications to fill the positions of chair-
men of the courts of first instance and chairmen of the courts of appeal.
It was also necessary to have such an authority to select people with
certain qualifications to form a judiciary council to supervise the
members of the judiciary, to study their affairs, to determine their
appointment and promotion and so forth. Then came into existence the
municipal people's justice committees. Each cosmittee has a secretary
and each secretary is a saber of the General People‘s Justice Committee.
Thus, coordination came into existence and there was no further need for
the presence of these specialized councils which had been previously
formed for this same purpose [coordination]. This objective is now
realized by the fact that the committees meet, represented by their
secretaries, in the form of the General People's Justice Connittee. As

a result, we are all familiar with the picture. The resolutions adopted
by the General People's Justice Comittee are distributed to the [municipal]
comittees to implement them. A bill has actually been drafted providing
for the abolition of the judiciary and police councils and for transfer-
ring their powers to the General People's Justice Comittee. The [powers
of the] judiciary council and of the police council have been actually
transferred. The General People‘s Justice Committee has issued numerous
decisions which used to be previously issued by either the judiciary
council or the police affairs council—decisions concerning the appointment,
promotion or transfer of members of the judiciary and decisions concerning
the appeals made by some members of the judiciary. They [councils] have
been actually abolished for all practical purposes. They will be
abolished family when the decree is issued in the future.

Pree-of-Charge Lawyer

As for the free lawyer, the elements of trial are, as you have heard from
the leader, three: (The plaintiff against the defendant is the prose-
cution and a third neutral person that strikes a balance between the two
[the judge]). The prosecution is against the defendant. It is not
against him in the narrow sense but in the sense that it is against the
criminal. It is not in the interest of the prosecution for the defen-
dant to be a criminal or to create a criminal out of him. But it is in
the prosecution's interest to protect society from vice and crime and to
produce the evidence that condemns such a person so that he may get his
punishment and become a deterrent to others. So. there is a side against
the defendant, even in the narrow sense of the word. Therefore, the
defendant needs a person to stand by him. This person is the lawyer.
The side against the defendant says what it has to say and the side

50
supporting the defendant says what it has and the judge then settles the
argument between the two sides. The third element, namely the lawyer

who supports the defendant. is actually missing, as the revolution leader
has said. The defendant may bring a lawyer at his own expense and of his
own volition or he may bring a comsellor who is not a lawyer or he may
defend himself. But his defense cannot rise to the level of that of the
prosecution attorney because this attorney is experienced and can refute
whatever the defendant says in his own defense.

Therefore, justice must be truly established. As the leader has said,
there must be a person with the same level of qualification and
knowledge of that of the prosecution attorney and with the ability to
refute the arguments that this attorney cites so that we may ultimately
reach one result, namely the truth. It is true, as I have already said,
that the defendant or the plaintiff could select a free lawyer to defend
him in return for a certain 31- of money. This situation existed. But
to achieve justice and to complete the elements of justice, this lawyer
must be available to every citizen. This is the instruction that the
leader issued at the meeting of the General People's Justice Committee.

we have actually formed a committee to draft a decree that realizes the
goal of having the [defense] lawyer as one of the complementary elements
of the court. This means that we should not imagine the presence of a
court without such a lawyer. It also means that such a lawyer should be
available to all. both those who can afford and those who cannot afford
to pay. Such a lawyer will be available free of charge to everyone. In
return for the lawyer's performance of this task, society will take care
of his needs. We have actually begun the measures to bring this -_to
existence and, consequently, to realize the goal of having the defense
lawyer next to the prosecution attorney and to the judge. Justice will
be thus realized. This means that as long as there is a defense lawyer
with the same ability as that of the prosecution attorney, then the
suspicion of faults and of mistakes disappears and all the elements of
[fair] trial are realized. A man is thus tried while feeling reassured.
I believe it is the epitome of justice that a perpetrator of crime should
find somebody to defend him [sic].

[Question] The question before last: What are the problems that confront
and encounter the people's justice committees?

Concerns of People's Justice Committees

[Answer] The people's justice committees are. as I have already pointed
out, newly emerging committees. The other secretariata had control
departments [muraqabat] and before these departments they had directorates.
The directorates turned into control departments and then became people's
committees. Thus, the other secretariats have places, vehicles. furniture
and everything else available to then. When they first emerged, they

51
were like us. But after their emergence all resources became available

to them. As for the Secretariat of Justice, it is now beginning from
scratch. It is true that many of the people's committees that are not
lodged in the headquarters of the previous control departments experience
shortages in many things, both material and human. Insofar as the material
shortages are concerned, the General People's Justice Cummittee adopted
several decisions in its latest meeting and we are in the process of
providing these shortages. It is easy to supply the material things. As
for the human elements. we hope that the municipal people's committees
will provide these elements to the congresses through recruitment. People,
such as a policeman or a civil servant, cannot be purchased from the
market. we can get the material things and we have actually taken mea-
sures to supply these needs. However, the emergence of these needs does
not mean that they are not available to the people's committees. Every
people's committee is present in a municipality and this municipality used
to provide security. court and judiciary services. 30. there is a founda-
tion. What has been introduced is the presence of the people's committees.
I am not talking about the management of the people's committees but

about the means through which they offer their services to the masses
within the jurisdiction of their municipality. As a result, there are
still shortages because the services that used to be offered by the
municipalities did not have the same ambitions as those that are now
present in the people's committees. This is why the need emerged for a
person to face the congresses and to make an account of the services he
has offered. As long as he is going to be brought to account. this person
will take the precautions that do not make it possible to throw the blame
on his shoulders or to condemn him before the masses. This is why we
have exerted ceaseless efforts to provide these resources for which the
need emerged after formation of the committees and after the committees'
assessment of the services offered previously and of their own ambitions.
The bringing to account will take place. regardless of whether we provide
the needs or not because we may provide the needs but not use them well.
This operation is not one of providing assistance. The motive is to
establish and provide services to the people within the jurisdiction of

a municipality.

[Question] Our last question: He would like the citizen to know his
role and what he can offer in regard to what you have said.

Citizen's Responsibility

[Answer] First, I will say that if the citizen feels and believes that he
will be brought to account and punished for any faulty action or failure,
then I am certain that all these problems will come :o an end. Even if
the thief can steal, the smuggler can smuggle and the rumor manger can
spread rumors and even if such a person is not caught, this person still
knows that this act has been recorded against him and that if he doesn't
get his punishment in this world he will get it in the hereafter. But

52
what I would like to stress is moral comitment among people and their
steering clear off the perpetration of such crimes because they are
unjustifiable. If such crimes are comitted in a needy society, there

may be a just Afication whereas those who conic such crimes here are
people who are well off economically. Those who steal cars own their

own cars. So. the issue is an issue of ethics and of moral and religious
commitment. There is no call for a man to commit such acts when he doesn't
need them. On the other hand, these sick persons should not be given the

opportunity and every citizen must be alert and must make known whatever
he sees.

Finally, we are ready to explain matters. When anything develops. I am
ready for all kinds of meetings and I will be frank with you and will
conceal nothing from you. He are now in a jamahiri [pertaining to the
masses] system and everything is presented to the congresses and to the
masses so that they may solve their problems. I have been frank with
you and have concealed nothing at all from you. I have said everything
and I pledge to always be frank with you.

8494
C50: 4802

S3
EIGHT CEAO FINANCING AGREEMENTS SIGNED
Nouakchott CHAAB in French 16 Oct 79 pp 1,8

jfex§7 Ahmed Ould Zein, minister of finance and commerce,_and Houssa N'Gom,
secretary general of CEAO [West African Economic Community/, with their assis-

tant, yesterday signed eight financing agreements in the total amount of 185,
970,755 CPAP. or 37,196,151 UH.

By the terms of those agreements the CEAO will contribute to the financing

of several projects in our country, with the resources of the Common Develop-
ment Fund and through subsidies. Involved is the creation of:

--a national seed center in Kaedi, the cost of which is estimated at 6 mllion,
--a national soil laboratory that will cost 4 million UM,

--applied research in rice growing lat a cost oil 5 million UH,

--a coordinating center for the management of small rural areas, and logistic
support for those areas, at a cost of 6,196,151 UN,

--14 million UH will be invested in the fields of pathology and animal nutrition,
--2.2 million in research for the creation of a craft-type plaster works,

--800,000 UM will be invested in scholarships for agricultural training, and
--1 million UN in research on new energy sources.

In addition, the finance and commerce minister and the secretary general of

the CEAO initialed addenda to two financing agreements signed on 16 July 1979
concerning:

--a study on the H'Bagne 1 natural equipment unit.for a 17,097,960 UH-backing,
--and help in acquiring logistic resources for the Mauritanian Cereals Office
in the amount of 4,382,290 UH.

It should be noted that the overall amount for the totality of those financing
agreements made between our country and the Rest African Economic Community
(CBAO) during the year 1979 comes to 58,671,401 UM.

In the name of the CHSN lfhlitary Committee for National SalvatioE/ and the
government, the minister of finance and commerce expressed his satisfaction

with this contribution of the CBAO to developmental activity in our country.

11936 54
CSO:4400
SAUDI FUND SECTION CHIEF VISITS. ANNOUNCES PLANS
Nouakchott CHAAB in French 15 Oct 79 pp 1, 8

15357 .‘lr Ja'far Usamah, director of the capitals department of the Saudi
Development Fund, arrived in Nouakchott late yesterday afternoon.

Mr Usamah issued a statanent upon his arrival pointing out that the purpose
of his visit to our country is. first, to sign an agreement within the frame-
work of the financing of the Guelb project and, second. to join the World Bank
mission in Mauritania in examining this country's chief economic projects.

0n hand to welcome Hr Ja'far Usamah as he arrived was Mr Armedou Ould Hm
Khatter, secretary general of the Ministry of Planning and Fisheries.

It must be pointed out that a delegation of the Saudi Development Fund has
been staying in Nouakchott since last Monday in order to research the execu-
tion of several projects in Mauritania.

With that purpose in mind the delegation has embarked upon a series of talks
with the heads of the departments involved in carrying out those' projects,
including those in the Planning Ministry.

Signed Saturday morning with the directors involved were idocuments concerning-I
the nature and terms of the projects which the Saudi Development Fund intends
to carry out for the benefit of our country.

Thus the Fund estimated the cost of the work to be accomplished at 1 billion
400 million ouguiyas. The work to be done includes among other projects:

--construction of 1000 classrooms,
--drilling a number of wells,
--construction of a police academy, and
--construction of a dispensary in Nema

1l936
cso: 4400

55
MINIS'IBR DISCLBSES PROGRESS OF EDUCATIONAL REFORM
Nouakchott cam in French 22-23, 24 Sep 79

[Interview with Minister of Civil Service and Professional Training. Mr Yahya
Ould Menkouss. by D. o. Hamden]

[22-23 Ssp 79. p 3]

['next] Following its accession to power, the CHSN [Military
Comittee for National welfare) established several special
missions to reorganize all sectors of national life. One
of these comissions is assigned to educational reform and
has just suspended its proceedings after several meetings
which did not produce any concrete results. But despite the
differences of opinion which emerged in the course of these
meetings, Mr Yahya O. Henkouss, minister of civil service
and professional training, informed us during this interview
of his total optimism concerning the success of this conis-
sion, for as he said, it is composed of national officials.

CHMB: Hr Minister, you are the chairman of the commission assigned to
educational reform. which has already met several times. What are the
results which you have already achieved? Do you believe that this consis-
sion will succeed?

ANSWER: This comission has been working for some time. In its most recent
meetings. it has taken up all the issues concerning education in our country.
It is an advisory commission which receives directives and it has suspended
its proceedings in order to acquire more intensive information so that it can
continue its work.

with regard to its success, this is certain, since it is composed of competent
national officials.

CHAAB: According to certain rumors, there is some question of two separate

educational systems, one in Arabic and another in French. What is the real
truth, It: Minister?

56
ANSWER: The man on the street is not a source of reference. What I can
tell you--and which is tonally natural when a national cause is discussed--
is that everything was discussed and views were divergent.

Foreign languages can be studied without that affecting national languages.
In this regard, the comission has not yet reached a decision. However,
several views were expressed. In any case, no decision has yet been made
for the single reason that the comission has not completed its work.

CNAAB: Does the establishment of this comission mean that certain short-
comings have been noted in the case of the previous reform?

ANSWER: The previous reform has its good points as well as its drawbacks.
The government and the CHSN therefore considered it necessary to review it,
which is completely normal, since every reform is subject to continual
review.

CHAAB: We are on the eve of a new academic year. What provisions have
already been taken in this connection? Has the ilprovement of students'
conditions been considered?

ANSWER: For the time being, no increase in student aid is being considered
because of the country's current particularly difficult situation. However,
we have insisted that a proper administration be set up to make students as
comfortable as possible and to eliminate their material worries, which could
negatively affect their studies. 11:13 is a functional improvement which
could eliminate the problems which we faced last year. This does not rule
out the possibility that a future improvement may take place.

With regard to the opening of this academic year, all necessary provisions
have been taken.

CHMB: Mr Minister, what do you think of the rumor according to which our
students in Morocco could be turned away, especially now when you are holding

talks with a delegation from that country? Is it possible to get some idea
of these talks?

ANSWER: Our students in Horocco have been there under excellent conditions
and will continue to be. They will by no means be turned away, contrary to
any rumor. Proof of this is that we have been holding talks since Thursday
with a delegation from that brother country, a delegation led by the general
secretary of AMMCO [Mauritania-Morocco Cooperation Agency], with which we
have studied all possibilities for strengthening our cooperation in all areas.

But in general, it is absolutely natural that we have to be vigilant and to
expect any eventuality. '

Concerning our talks with the delegation from the brother kingdom of Morocco,
they have dealt with the excellent relations uniting us with that country and
the possibilities for tightening those relations.
CHMB: After conpleting their studies, most of our students remain unem-
ployed for a long time before finding a job. that measures have been taken
to solve this problem?

ANSWER: The government has always worked so that our students who have com-
pleted their studies will be accommodated as they should be. But as you know,
sometimes there are more of them than available budgetary positions. This
means that they are often uneuployed for a long time. mis situation is
mainly due to our limited means of recruitment. Thus our recruitment possi-
bilities are by far inferior to our educational possibilities.

We will spare no effort to alleviate this situation, which will be ended as
soon as the country completes this critical stage in its history.

[24 Sep 79, p 3]

[Text] In our previous edition, Mr Yahya o. Henkouss.
minister of civil service and professional training, spoke
with us about the results of the proceedings of the national
omission assigned to educational reform and expressed his
optimism concerning its success. In this second part of the
interview. the minister talks about the situation of civil ser-
vice and believes that this sector's major problem is that
civil servants and government officials are totally ignorant
of current laws and regulations. He also evaluates for us
his recent mission to Assaba and Guidmkha to explain and
popularize the peace and austerity policy adopted by the
GEN and the government.

CHAAB: Hr Minister, you are also minister of civil service; can you tell us
a little about this sector, which is not very familiar to the public?

ANSWER: civil service is experiencing several problems. In this regard, it
must be said that its major problem is that civil servants and government
officials are totally ignorant of current laws and regulations. In fact,
the texts of laws are not disseminated.

Therefore, to solve this information problem, on 9 May the government approved
a decree establishing a translation service assigned to translate all texts
and to distribute them to the various government departments, which are in
turn assigned to distribute them to their divisions.

In fact, we have translated the civil service regulations. But problems are
not limited only to information. There is also a spirit of negligence that
characterizes civil servants and the slow pace of administrative measures
(decisions, recruitment. etc.). The austerity policy recomended by the
government has solved most of these problems. Civil servants have in this
way been compelled to render the service demanded of them and thus to work
in conpliance with current laws and regulations to help as much as possible
with the country's economic development.

58
To tell you how this situation has been handled in practical terms, I need
only point out the dismissals, reprimands and warnings issued to civil scr-
vants not complying with regulations.

Regarding the second point, I want to take this opportunity to say that civil
service is not responsible for the slow pace of administrative measures, par-
ticularly the decision-making process. In fact, the files of civil servants
themselves are often nonexistent or inconplete.

am: The relatively large gap between government officials' wages and
those paid by government and private companies is due to the continuous
movement of government officials to companies of a connercial or industrial
nature. “at has been done so far to arrest this problem or at least to

alleviate it? Hasn't an imrovement of civil servants' situation been
considered?

ANSWER: In this regard, we have conducted a study to determine how it is
possible to reduce this gap between euployees of the public sector and those

of the private sector. However, a small gap--due to the nature of the pri-
vate sector's activities-will persist.

An you know, in the private sector employees have many obligations, such as
working beyond normal hours and strict job precision. In contrast, in the
public sector a certain degree of flexibility can be noted and employees
work very definite hours. In applying the austerity policy, the decision
was made to reduce the gaps between the two sectors, but that will be to
the disadvantage of elployees of the private sector.

In reply to the last part of your question, I will say that since our only
solution is to strictly apply the austerity policy, no imnediate improvement
in the situation of civil servants is anticipated.

CHMB: You have just presided over the government mission assigned to popu-
larize the peace and austerity policy in the regions of Assaba and Guidimakha.
What are your impressions of the outcome of that mission?

ANSHER: I was actually the head of a large delegation in the regions of
Assaba and Guidimakha to explain the viewpoint of the CMSN and the government

concerning the peace and austerity policy which our national leadership has
proposed.

During this visit, we found only understanding and support among the people
of those regions. Thus we were given a warm reception. At the same time,
the people explained to us their problems and complaints, which we will con-
vey to the national leadership. mis meeting was especially important, since
it enabled us to make contact with the mass of the people and to inform them
directly, as our information media are as yet very limited.

Gm: Getting back to speculation concerning the proceedings of the national
commission assigned to reform, do you have an appeal to make to the people?

59
ANSWER: As I said previously, the role of the national commission for edu-
cational reform is purely advisory. It makes no decisions, but simply dis-
cusses the country's cultural problem in order to make suggestions to the
CMSN, which alone has the power to make a decision. However, it may already
be said that all answers of the comission have unanimously acknowledged that

in the future only national languages must be taught. But no decision has
been made as yet.

'me cultural sector is a sector as important as that of the economy and that

is why I urge all Mauritanians to discuss problem concerning this sector,
as they do concerning other sectors.

11915
C80: 4400

60
DEVELOPMENTS 351m MADE IN TRARSPOKI‘ATION FACILITIES
Olan 'WAN in Arabic 18 Nov 79 pp 29 8 30

[Excerpts] The ministry of co-Iunications. which was created in 1972,
has made the following accomplish-ems in recent years:

Civil Aviation
The decision to create the Muscat Aviation Infomtion District.
Al-Sib International Airport

The directorate general of civil aviation has undertaken to develop the
services of aerial navigation. It will extend runway 26.08 by 1,760 feet
to a total length of 11,760 feed to encourage more aviation companies to
use the airport or to increase the nuaber of their direct flights. The
project includes the construction of a new taxi strip about one-half mile
long, as well as improving the existing runways and adding shoulders to
them.

The aviation information and regional supervision center (a joint unit)
is to be equipped so' that it will soon be able to perform the services of
air traffic control in the Muscat Aviation Information District.

The sultanate is to be covered with a network of aerial routes served by
the mat modern navigational aids and comnications for the safety of
air traffic.

Navigation aids are to be installed in the airport to help create unified
air lanes.

A draft is to be prepared of a guide which the sultanate intends to issue
and distribute internationally before the beginning of operation of the
Muscat Aviation Information District.

Radio and Telegraph Conunications and Aerial Navigation Aids

Aaong the nest outstanding aoooaplishlnents which have been made in the

61
field of conwnications and aids are the following:

The installation of a network of navigation aids in several locations to
serve the existing and proposed air lanes and air fields in the sultanate.

The installation of a VHF communications system in Timrit to be controlled
remotely from al-Sib.

The installation of three new lO-kilowatt BF transmitters and antennas.

The installation of eight new VHF transceivers and antennas to meet the
requirements of the Huscat Aviation Information District.

The installation of a computer.

Working to set up an electronic system which will deliver all telegrams
immediately.

Heather Observation

Providing transportation for the weather observation and forecasting
service to its new headquarters in the technical devices building.

Developing observation and forecasting activities and providing training.
Introducing improvements in devices and equipment.

Expanding the observation services for maritime affairs in the coastal
district from Khasab to Raysut.

Cooperating with the world weather organization and participating in the
execution of the seasonal weather observations project (Honex), which was
organized in the Arabian Sea district.

Providing the section with a new facsimile transmitting device and begin-

ning for the first time to broadcast information and maps received from a
facsimile receiving device and a cloud picture receiving device for fol-

lowing the course of weather satellite 'l‘iros-N.

Installing equipment for measuring clouds by light and measuring wind
speed.

Ground Services

Work has begun on the new aircraft fueling building, which is one of the
largest in the Middle East and the most modern in the Gulf area.

Completing the construction of the two aircraft repair hangars.

62
A comprehensive program has been introduced for training and development
and providing opportunities for qualified citizens to assume supervisory
posts in the field of aircraft service and maintenance.

Salahah Air Field

This air field was constructed because of the development and expansion of
comercial aviation in Oman. it is equipped with electronic and other de-
vices for weather observation and radar traffic control. The following
enlargements have been carried out there:

The construction of a taxi strip parallel to the runway.

The completion of a system for indicating angle of descent in visual ap-
proach.

The installation of an automatic switchboard. a reserve power source. and
a remote control device for outdoor lighting.

Anticipated Expansions of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation

The activation of the Muscat Aviation lnformtion District and the begin-
ning of operation of the new traffic control center.

The 20-hour operation of all weather observation stations and the opening
of new weather observation stations in Fuhud. Timrit, and Suhar.

The construction and activation of a civil air field in Khasab and another
in Sur.

The expansion of the traffic control services throughout the sultanate.

Harbors

On 25 November 1976, Sultan Qabus issued a decree incorporating the Qabus
port authority and the Oman Harbors Service Conpany into a single estab-
lishment bearing the nane of Harbors Services Establishment, Limited.

There is a plan to adapt two of the andiorages in the harbor for handling

containers. and studies are also in progress to carry out numerous im-
provements in the harbor.

At the present time. Raysut harbor accomdates ships of not more than
3,000 tons displacement and sailing vessels. The ministry intends to
improve and develop this harbor by constructing deep anchorages and equip-
ping them to accompdate vessels with capacities of up to 15,000 tons of

cargo and 35 tons of petroleum. Work is expected to begin on these ac-
tivities in March 1980.

63
Roads

There are about 1.500 kilometers of paved roads and about 21,000 kilo-
meters of graded roads in the sultanate. Among the most important roads
which have been constructed is the road between Hatrah and Khatnat
Halahah. linking the sultanate with the UAE.

work was begun early in August 1979 on the construction of a road between
Nazuah and Timrlt. a distance of 790 kilometers, to link the southern

region with the north. The completion of it is expected in February 1983.
3 months ahead of schedule.

C50: 6802

64
SDAR PRIME MINISTER REVIBUS SAHARAN PEOPLE'S STRUGGLE
Algiers AL-SHA'B in Arabic 6 Nov 79 pp 1, 5

[Interview with SDAR Prime Minister Mohamed Lamine by Bl-Hedi Benyakhlef:
"The Saharan Peeple Face an Army of Mixed Foreigners; In October 1975 We Had
Only ﬂorid I weapons and yet He Paced Hith Them Moroccan Tanks and P1anes"-
Date and place not given]

[Text] 0n the occasion of the fourth anniversary of the
Moroccan armed invasion of western Sahara, Mohamed Lamine,
the prime minister of the Saharan Democratic Arab Republic
(SDAR), answered questions by AL-SHA'B reporter Bl-Hedi
Benyakhlef on the present status of the Saharan people's
struggle and evaluated that struggle which has imposed
itself on the international scene and made the supporters
of the Saharan people's cause around the world grow day
after day.

[Question] The "Green March" was the unmasked face of the plot aimed at the
Western Sahara. Can you shed some light on the nature of the plot from its
very beginning?

[Answer] The question which is being constantly asked by the Saharan people
is: If the rulers of Morocco believe that this country was originally theirs.
why then had the Moroccan kingdom failed to act when Spain colonized the
Western Sahara? Without trying to review past history, and by confining our-
selves to modern history, we note that Ibrocco gained independence in 1956
and made no move whatsoever against the Spanish colonialist presence in the
Western Sahara. Indeed, it was satisfied with it.

However, the sudden [Moroccan] action in 1974, with the collusion of the
Spanish government, proved that the intention was not to liberate territories
belonging to Morocco but to try to stifle and abort an armed liberation
movement which had emerged to wage a foracioue war against Spanish colonialism.
This struggle, however, was not fairly treated by the international media.

Had the Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia El-Hanra and Rio De Oro
(POLISARIO) succumbed to Spanish demands, namely. to set up an artificial

65
mini—state akin to other states in the Third World, the Moroccan government,
not to mention the Arab states, would have been the first to acclaim that
mini—state. The conspiracy is, therefore, clear. The same thing has be-
fallen Mauritania. Although our Arab morals prevent us from disparaging
persons who are historically finished, we believe that Mokhtar Ould Daddah
would have been a victim of Moroccan ambiitons, although he later allowed
his country to fall prey to those ambitions.

Strangely enough, everybody was claiming the Sahara. Morocco claimed all of
the Sahara and so did Mauritania, while Spain said that the Sahara was Spanish.
Overnight, the claims turned into a plot to divide a people and their land,
as if that was a land without owners. Even at the International Court of
Justice, the question that was posed before that tribunal involved a trap.
Answering it would have led to a preconceived conclusion. The question

Spain posed was: Is the Sahara inhabited by a people? Given the insinuation
intended here, it is strange that a people had suddenly materialized during
the era of Spanish occupation. The Moroccans and Mauritanians had acknow~
ledged that the Sahara was inhabited, but why have they failed to respect

the will of those inhabitants?

The [POLISARIOJ front was a weak liberation movement, and the Saharan people
were pslgued by ignorance, homelessness and division. But a bane might well
turn out to be a boon: the division of the Sahara soon became the genesis of
the unification of the Saharan people under the banner of national unity
proclaimed on 14 October 1975. Meanwhile, the International Court of Justice
ruled that neither Morocco nor Mauritania has had a relationship of sovereignty
with the Sahara. The king of Morocco, however, clung to the court's con-
tention that there had been a pledge of allegiance. As an Arab and Ibslem
people, we know what an act of homage involves and entails. Assuming for

the sake of argument that, indeed, a pledge of allegiance had been made to

one of King Hassan's ancestors, such a pledge expires and lapses with the
death of the person to whom it was made. The modern age necessitates the
existence of sovereignty relationships and associations, and the International
Court of justice was clear in its view that no such association had existed.

The "Green March" was not prepared and planned just before it took place.

It had been in the making for a long time in collaboration with (Salas),

who used to be a minister in charge of the affairs of France's party. Mokhtar
Ould Daddah did not have prior knowledge of the march and he first heard about
it from the radio. The Saharan people, however, were aware of what was being
schemed against them. The "Green March" was launched on 6 November, but it

had been planned long before that date. The Moroccan forces had entered (Al-
Farisiyyah),Echedeiria and Hausa on 31 October 1975. and there was coordination
between the Spanish and Moroccan forces whereby the Moroccan forces moved in

as soon as the Spanish forces withdrew from it.

The king openly told the participants in the march: "If you cone across
Spaniards, embrace them and share whatever you have with them. But if you

66
find others. then the army is there to protect you." Who. we wonder, would
those "others" be but the Saharan people? This means that the march was
principally targeted against the Saharans.

Since the Moroccans are citing hi torical evidence and claims, we can counter
their arguments with arguments of our own. In 1968, Spain sold a part of
Saguia El-Hamra and Rio de Oro, and the Saharan people chose not to take any
action or raise the issue, because it believes in Arab unity. But the Saharan
people does not believe in unity by coercion-—the unity imposed by tanks and
the killing of the elderly, women and children. Our people also kept quiet
when Spain sold the Tarfaya province in 1958 without consulting them. Spain,
the Moroccans and the Ould Daddah government thus thought that the Saharans
would sit still when their land was sold in 1975. But things had changed over
the years. Going by the wrong calculations and speculations of the competent
Spanish authorities, everyone thought that the Saharan pe0p1c's resistance
which had begun to impoae itself would be a transient and temporary one. But
these calculations neglected to take into account that our people have time-
honored traditions and Arab and Islamic customs and that, because of such
traditions and customs, our people were bound to confront the new plot in a
manner which they [the adversaries] have not expected.

[Question] Rabat's propaganda campaigns claim that, historically speaking,
there has never been a Saharan entity. The king today wants to manipulate
such a loophole by calling for an "extended cooperation" among all the states
bordering the Sahara. How would you respond to those new maneuvers?

[Answer] If the Saharan people had had no entity in the past they would not
have been able to wage a liberation war that has been going on for 7 years.
Only an organized people with an entity can organize such a liberation war.
Throughout its presence in our country, Spanish colonialism was unable to
impose its full control and faced continuous resistance which crystallized
into a well-knit political organization backed by a time-honored and old
tradition of struggle and guided by a long-term goal of building a real home-
land. All this should prove to those who are trying to seek the facts about
the Western Sahara that there is a people who have an entity like all other
peoples who have struggled against foreign occupation, such as the Algerian
people and the Moroccan people as well.

ﬂue enemies of the Saharan people go beyond ignoring those facts. They are
now saying that they are fighting an international army, or a legion of
mercenaries. The question that should be asked of them is: Can a force of mer-
cenaries sustain a struggle for 4 years? Is it logical that a soldier of
fortune would continue to fight a savage battle for all that time?

The charge that there is no Saharan entity is being principally used to mask
the fact that the Saharan people are in fact facing today an international
force--an army of mixed foreigners. Regrettably, the Moroccan Army has

become a polyglot foreign legion led by foreign experts and intelligence ser-
vices--French, Egyptian and American. That is to say that the Moroccan officer
no longer has any value today, since he receives orders from foreign officers.

67
As for the king's call for "cooperation," the Sahara is not an ocean, a sea
or a river. There is a specific area called Western Sahara which has a
people with an entity, history, customs, traditions and morals.

The file of truth is a large one. and those allegations are an attempt to dis-
tort reality. Morocco and a few other states are the only states in the world
which claim that there is no Saharan entity, despite the fact that the entire
world recognizes the Saharan people's right to self-determination and inde-
pendence. Witness the recent United Nations (resolution) which acknowledges
that the forces presently stationed in the Western Sahara are colonialist
forces which should withdraw to their positions. Moreover, the UN fact-
finding commission which visited the region in 1975 not only recommended that
the Spanish colonialist forces should withdraw but also reconmended withdrawal
from the Saharan border area in southern Morocco. The king's call is a
fallacy which can only dupe the naive.

[Question] The royalist propaganda has been saying that its military presence
in the cities is only part of a war plan designed to contain the Saharan
resistance, and not due to the mounting and intensifying blows of the Saharan
fighters. How would you comment on those allegations?

[Answer] No one who claims a country would forsake one inch of it. Even

the cities which the Moroccan regime claims to control have had their gates
rattled, not only in the Western Sahara but also in southern Morocco. There
are now Moroccan cities and towns which have no troops. The plans that they
talk about confirm the colonialist nature of the Moroccan rulers. Such plans
had been applied in Algeria, Vietnam and the Portuguese colonies in Africa.
Some of the practices carried out by the Moroccan Army are similar to those
undertaken by colonialist armies in many countries. I don't think that any-
one who claims a country would vacate any part of it. If he were to do so,
it must be because he is breathing his last. The vacating of Bchedeira, Hausa,
Bir Lehlu, Tifariti, Mshbes and Buirat and 25 localities in southern Morocco,
an area sold by Spain in 1958, suggests that the Moroccana do not really con-
sider thOSe areas to be theirs. Even the king himself shares this belief.
Southern Morocco, for example, is under military rule and a military admin-
istration that does not fall under the jurisdiction of the army but that of
the royal gendarmery. Take the small town of Mahbes. It has no civilian
population and, therefore. the presence of royal gendarmes there is unneces-
sary. We have, however, captured a number of those gendarmes during the
victorious attack launched by the Saharan fighters against the town.

[Question] The colonial powers have gradually recognized the popular liber-
ation struggles wages against them. Yet after 6 years of war, the Moroccan
regime still refuses to ignore the essence of the struggle. How would you
explain this attitude?

[Answer] Hitler, of course, clung to his obduracy to the last breath. This
is in the nature of all fascists. Spain clung to its intransigence in the
western Sahara, America in Vietnam, France in Algeria and so forth. The
French can be intransigent because they are a major military and economic

68
power with old and venerable institutions. 1 do not deny the civilization,
struggle and strength of the Moroccan peOple. They have demonstrated those
qualities throughout history and against the throne itself. They have had
activities agalnst the corruption of the rulers since the time of the Almor-
avides and Almohades. But any nation, regardless of its civilization, will
court failure when its civilization turns into colonialist ambitions. There
was wild jubilation in Morocco in 1975, for example, when the king declared
that he wanted to dring tea in (L'yun). It seems, however, that the tea is
still too hot to drink. The situation in Morocco is moving from bad to worse.
For 3 years, news of the war remained bottled up in the palace and among the
officer corps. The people did not know that a war was raging in the Hestern
Sahara except from the Saharan radio and the prisoners of war who were making
statements over that radio. The (Tantan) unveiled the war [in Morocco] as
the Nouakchott operation had earlier unveiled the war to the Mauritanians.

You also have the Moroccan soldiers who do not believe in the war which they
are fighting. If they really believed in it, they would fight us fiercely.
because the Moroccans are brave and heroic. But the Moroccan soldier's lack
of belief in the fairness of the cause-the fairness of the war--forced him
to surrender before the Saharan fighters who are imbued with a deep belief
that the land is Saharan land.

The Moroccan regime's intransigence is the result, deep under, of a weak
position. As the regime becomes more intransigent, its pillars become shakier.
In fact, we are helping the national forces in Morocco--if any--so that they
may take the initiative in order to extricate the Moroccan people from a

war that poses a serious danger to their future--a war that is equally dan-
gerous because it drives a wedge between the Saharan and Moroccan peoples.

[Question] The Saharan people's revolution has smashed the walls of isolation
that has been imposed on then internationally. Do you expect this to have

an impact on the position of the king of Rabat, and is there hope for a ne-
gotiated settlement?

[Answer] The Saharan people are a modest people. War is not a hobby of theirs
but was imposed on them. They are fighting today to preserve their existence,
because this is a destructive war. Our people were not known [to the world]
because of the large prison-the Spanish prison-in which it was placed. The
Saharan people have been subjected to unparalleled massacres. They fought
silently. Hhen they first began their struggle, the Saharan people were
isolated on the African, Arab and international levels. But thanks to their
tremendous sacrifices and to the heroes who fell in the thick of heroic
battles, from Echedeiria to Mahbes, and thanks to their combat and stead—
fastness, the Saharan people were able to earn the sympathy of all the demo-
cratic forces in the world-—the peace-loving forces which are opposed to the
perpetration of genocide against small or large nations.

Our people are facing a great colonialist force consisting of 150,000 soldiers
seasoned in colonial wars. He have POH's who had fought in World war II,

69
the Indochina war, the Algerian war, both before and after liberation, and in
Zaire. The international respect commanded by our people-~a people numerically
small but morally strong in their belief and determination-is the byproduct
of great sacrifices. No colonialist power, big or small, can manufacture
that kind of belief and determination in its factories. This is what the
Moroccan soldier lacks--indeed, what the king himself lacks. That king does
not believe that the war is his war and the land is his land. It is this
belief and determination which have enabled the Saharan people to comand
respect in Africa, Europe and the Arab world, although our Arab brethren
have not been able thus far to rise up to the level of Arab ethics and
dignity in order to support the just struggle of the Saharan people.

Strangely enough, even those states which are threatened with extinction by
some of its neighbors in the Arab world are regrettably on the other side,
that is on the side of the aggressor. Saudi Arabia, for example, which has
been touted by the press, is undertaking a "mediation" endeavor, and yet it
stands with the other side at the United Nations. This support nevertheless

would not engender a conviction among the Horoccans that the land is their
land.

As I said, we are peace lovers. For example, we have not taken the Hauritanians
to account for the massacres their soldiers have wreaked upon our daughters

and sons, but turned the page although it had been recorded in history and will
be repeated by the coming generations. We made nobody account for anything
because we sought peace and sought to close the rift which the war was about

to create between the Saharan and Mauritanian peoples. This is the direction
we are taking in our attitude toward the lbroccan people. In the future,

we are bound to reach common grounds with the Moroccan people, if they share
the same intention. Otherwise, the war will continue and expand. It is easy
to start a war, but it is difficult to control its size and its consequences
and results.

The Moroccan people are today suffering a severe economic and social crisis
which will eventually explode, if not today then tomorrow, as a result of the
present war in the Sahara. A negotiated settlement is the only way to re-
normalize relations among the peoples of the Arab Maghreb.

[Question] The Saharan question has scored a major victory in the United
Nations. "hat is your comment of the nature of the vote on the resolution?

[Answer] The resolution per se is normal and the vote in favor of it was a
logical one. I cannot but thank the African, Asian and Latin American
countries which supported the resolution for their courage. Right, like
truth, can be sweet to some and bitter to others. No doubt, the majority
favored the sweet taste of right. As for the states which have opposed the
resolution, I cannot comment on them individually. I would only say that some
of them have expansionist ambitions. Guatemala. for example, claims Belize
and its people. Zaire's identity is well-known and Saudi Arabia's direction
is equally well-known. As for Gabon, we leave it to Equatorial Africa to tell

70
about its ambitions. The [U.N.] recommendation is responsive to the struggle
of the Saharan people and to the fairness of their cause, and is in keeping
with the other resolutions adopted by the world organization since 1964.

All those recommendations can be implemented, thanks to the struggle of the
Saharan people, because the law of the jungle is no longer in keeping with
the logic of our present age. If the Moroccan rulers wish to continue to
operate according to the law of the jungle, we are operating with the sup-
port of [international] legitimacy.

[Question] A meeting has been held in Bamaku between some of the king's ad-

visors and representatives of the POLISARIO. Can you tell us about that
meeting?

[Answer] Re have referred to that meeting on a previous occasion. .The
Moroccan regime wanted that meeting to be one of the secrets of the palace.
But it became apparent that the king's advisors had not come to Bamako to
seek a peaceful settlement with the POLISARIO but to affirm their intention
to carry on with their colonial war one way or the other. Our representative
took the position that we are for peace, brotherhood and cooperation, that
this is our war. He told them that as long as you prefer the other war-~the
war of destruction, dispersal and rifts among peoples, then we have no choice
and will answer you in the fashion that you have come to know and expect from
us, either in the battlefield or in international forums.

At one time, the Horoccans denied that such a ﬂeeting was ever held and lied
to the people and to their officers--the officers who are being killed either
in the battlefield or by execution. There are two forces in lbrocco today:

a force that seeks to get rid of the army and its factions-because there is
no real opposition and because everyone is either in the government or the
parliament; and then there is the army whose members are dying in the Sahara.
i can assure you that for the first time in history, fully operational tanks
have been seized as a result of the soldiers' lack of belief in the war which
they are fighting. And yet, Dlemi, Rida Chadira and Ibn (Sudah) come and tell
us that "we are ready to continue the war."

[Question] Do you believe that the increasing armament of the Moroccan re-
gime will have an effect on the course of the struggle, particularly since
the equipment Rabat will receive are reconnaisance and detection equipment,

that is to say that they will restrict the chances of mounting surprise
attacks?

[Answer] Toward the end of 1977 and in the early part of 1978, french Jaguar
aircraft intervened, but France announced its intervention after the fact.
The first intervention caught us by surprise, and hundreds of victims fell.
And yet, France, with all its capabilities (Brequet Atlantique, (Nour Atlas)
Jaguar aircraft), could n0t stop our operations in Mauritania. Therefore,

France and some Mauritanian officers opted for an end to the war, although
the Brequet aircraft can fly day and night for 18 hours.

71
We are fully aware that psychological warfare is part of war. The introduction
of new equipment will not affect the battle, since the Moroccan ground force,
as I have explained earlier, does not believe in the war, while the Saharan
fighters constitute a force that has a deep belief in victory. No weapon

can defeat such a force. If some Moroccan officers are saying today that the
war has started, we reply that the war started on 31 October 1975 when we only
had old weapons dating from World War I. And still we faced tanks and planes
with them. Today, we have in our possession American and French weapons which
we have captured from the Moroccans. With them we can face the most modern
weapons.

[Question] What is France's real position, as can be seen on the ground, not
in international forums?

[Answer] I believe that there is imperialist coordination against the Saharan
people, and France is undoubtedly part of it. How else can we interpret the
American decision which came at a time when the UN General Assembly was on
the verge of addressing the Western Saharan question. The decision was an—
nounced on a Monday, and the UN coamuttee was scheduled to take up the issue
on the next day. At the same time, French forces moved into Mauritania
(Nouadhibou), and there were moves by Arab "mediators" who have not been able
to aceept the main issue, namely, the existence of a Saharan people. All
those moves indicate that there are premeditated designs against this numer-
ically :mall people who are fighting with rare courage and bravery in an open
land that has no water or trees.

We have ended the war with Mauritania, so what is the reason for the presence
of French troops in Nouadhibou? Are Mauritania's 1960 borders threatened?
The Moroccans cannot wage war against Mauritania without an OK or a green
light from France. There are arguments contending that the new weapons are
being delivered to Rabat to encourage it to enter into negotiations. I be-
lieve that the king refuted those arguments when he stated on the day the
American decision was made public: "We will exercise the right or pursuit."
What negotiations are they talking about then? It is a process of continuing
and expanding the war. If the Americans believe that the continuation of the
war will save the king, we tell them that it will shorten his life. A com-
mander of national liberation wars once said that the imperialists are stupid
students. They are also stupid teachers. -

[Question] Have you started considering the establishment of an independent
state, and what measures have you taken to prepare for the cadres of the
future, prior to waging the battle of construction?

[Answer] The Saharan people are no exception to the general rule. We already
have instutions and ministries which are functioning normally. Thousands

of our children are studying in friendly and sisterly countries, such as

Libya and Algeria and other states. We have done all that to avoid the
problems gripping Third World nations which suffer a shortage in such cadres.

This is essentially our future outlook as a liberation generation which will
gradually pass on. To mobilize all the energies of the people and dedicate

them solely to the liberation war would involve the Saharan people in a
future trap so that they would not be able to avoid the use of foreign ex-
pertise.

9254 72

C50: 4402
BRIEFS

MILITARY SHIFT FAVORS MOROCCO—Military observers in Europe say that the
Saharan war between Moroccan and POLISARIO forces began to shift in favor
of Morocco after POLISACIO forces failed to take the town of Bu Craa which
is the main center for the production of phosphates. Military people at-
tribute this shift to the steadily increasing capability of the Moroccan
forces in mobility, rapid movement, lightning strikes, and total control.
That has strengthened the norale of the Moroccan soldiers because observers
are noticing that Moroccan fighting capability has increased remarkably.
The Moroccan Goverment has been busily engaged in a program to increase
the mbility of its forces through the purchase of fast troop-carrying
vehicles which are suitable for desert warfare. Among then are 600 Land-
rovers which were purchased from the United Kingdon this nonth. [London
AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 30 Nov 79 p 8]

080: 61002

END

73